A DISCOVRSE OF MIRACLES WROUGHT IN THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHVRCH, OR, A full
refutation of Dr Stillingfleets unjust exceptions against Miracles, together
with a large discovery of the Doctors unexcusable frauds, Manifest in his many
false, perverted, and impertinent Quotations.

BY E. W.

printer's or publisher's device

ANTWERP, Printed by MICHAEL CNOBBAERT, at the Sign of S. Peter. 1676.

Permissu Superiorum.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
A Year and more is pas't, since it pleased Doctor Edward Stillingfleet to move
some difficulties about Two main points in Controversy, and to Show his Skill
in Both. The one speculative relates to the Churches Infallibility, and the
Resolution of Faith. The other, in the Second Part, touched upon a plain Matter
of Fact, the Miraculous Translation of the H^ly house of Loreto from Nazareth
to the place w(...) now stands, honored by a frequent Concourse of People from
all Parts of Europe. In my last little Treatise, I endeavovred to Satisfy the
Dr in the Speculative Part, and, as I think, cleared all Difficulties objected
against that Miraculous Translation, And did this to please the Dr, though
hitherto He never gave me thanks for my pains* much less returned any Word of
Answer. Having ended that short Treatise, I promised a Satisfactory Reply to
the rest of Dr Stillingfleet's many Cavils carelessly thrown out at Miracles
wrought in the Roman Catholic Church; And here comply with my Promise, where I
show that never man had worser luck in any Engagement than the Dr in this
undertaken Enquiry. His chiefest Aim was, as every one see's, so to manage
matters as not only to cast a blemish upon some latter Miracles, but to
disgrace all wrought in the Church, though in the Pursuit, he shrinks so far as
never to meddle with the true State of the Question proposed, or rationally to
oppose one clear and approved Miracle, as you shall see hereafter.

The Method held by me in this Treatise is as follows. I first Evince the
Truth of our Saviors Miracles by Arguments drawn from rational Principles, For
we may (I hope) suppose this to be a rational Princiciple, That some Books of
History universally received are for the Substance true, and not wholly forged.
Thus much only granted. I Discourse, and require no more. 2. I prove upon the
same rational Grounds hereafter alleged, true Miracles to have been wrought in
the Roman Catholic Church, and produce many most clear ones seen by
Ey-witnesses, whereof none ever yet doubted. 3. I wait on the Dr in his other
Pilgrimages made to Compostella, and S. Maximin's in France, and upon that
occasion defend Pope Evaristus his VVritings. 4. I produce the Testimonies of
Ancient Fathers so manifest and pregnant for the Churches Miracles, that no
Catholic Writer of this Age ever yet did, or can speak with greater Energy.
5. I examine such Authorities (and herein have taken some pains) as the Dr
thinks, make most against the vvorking of new Miracles since the Apostles
Days. And I did more willingly engage in this particular upon the Dr's own
Provocation. I desire them, says he, in his Epistle Dedicatory, not to spare
me in this present subject of Miracles, wherein I profess to rely on their own
Writers. If they show me any wilful mistakes therein, I will endeavor to give
them public satisfaction. Stand to your word Mr Dr, And if I do not shovv a
whole large List of many gross mistakes driven on by Malice Ignorance, or
both, I Will crave your Pardon, and willingly own my Error before the whole
world. Reader, in this Contest, there can be no long debate, the comparing
Authorities (after you have opened the Dr's Book and mine), will clear all,
and afford Great Store of Mistakes.

Now Seeing the Dr relies on our own Writers, and hopes he err's not, my Demand
is, In what does he rely on them for? Has be any Catholic Author that opposes
approved Miracles? So it is, says the Dr. The Testimony of those who Dr p. 440.
deliver Miracles has been contradicted by men of greater Authority than
themselve. I Say contrary. The Proposition is manifestly untrue, Such men of
greater Authority were never yet heard of (nor can one be named) as is made
out in this Treatise, where you will se, that the Dr fraudulently introduces
Authors contrary to Miracles, who with all might and main in express Terms
allow them. It is true, Dr John Launoy (one of little credit as appears
afterward) quibbles at many matters of Fact reputed Miraculous, yet never
hitherto durst deny the Church to have had true Miracles wrought in it. What
the Dr Quotes from Melchior Canus and Ludovicus Vives relating to a suspension
of all latter Miracles, is more than most profoundly simple, as you may read C.
10. n. 16. Now if the Dr in Lieu of relying on true Miracles, lean upon this
fallacious Principle, That there have been Many forged by ungodly men, and will
list these among the Churches true Signs, he is unworthy to be dealt with, and
does not only Mistake, but most grossly Calumniat's.

Some (who they are I know not) thought the Dr not to deal fairly in his
Quoting Authors, whereof be seems very sensible in his Preface, and deem's it
so groundless a Calumny, yea so void of Proof, that he desires no better
Argument of a bafled Cause, than such impertinent Clamours. Soon after follows
a Brag of a larger Size. Do they indeed think me a man so void of Common sense,
as to expose my self to the contempt of every one, that will take pains to
compare my Citations? Have I Books only in my own keeping? Or are they so rare,
that they cannot get a sight of them? How then come they to know them false
cited? Reader, I have be^ me, Thanks be to God, the Books the Dr remits me to,
I have compared with my own eyes his Citations, and after that pains taken
certainly know, that the Dr has grossly erred, or to use his own words, exposed
himself to public Contempt. For Proof hereof I must speak plainly (though
little to the Dr's comfort) and do make my Assertion good in the ensuing
Treatise. Not one only, but all the Dr's Citations produced against the
Churches approved Miracles, are either very falsely Quoted; Or peevishly
perverted to a sinister Sense; or finally wholly impertinent to the matter here
debated. False Citations are many, perverted ones more, and the impertinent
almost numberless. To prove every part of my Assertion in this place, were to
bring back one great Piece of this whole Treatise into the narrow compass of a
short Preface. However a few hints at some cannot take up much room. It is
false (though the Dr assert's it) That Gerson Says in a certain Epistle, That
now the working of Miracles is wholly taken away, and none but false Christians
Dr p. 688.
pretend to it. It is salse, That according to S. Gregory, whatever Miracles we
Suppose to remain in the Church, we do not look on them, as wrought for the
confirmation of any necessary Part of Christian Faith. All is Dr p. 613.
Contrary. The Saint as you may read C. 3. produces a stupendous Miracle done
upon a Roman incredulous Matrone to confirm the Doctrine of the Real Presence.
It is false, That Didacus Stella (who expressly ovvn's great Miracles) says,
That the Power of Miracles is ceased. It is false, That according to Suares,
Dr p. 686.
such Miracles as were wrought upon Father Mastrilli, and the young Man of
Zaragoza, were only done for the Benefit of those who received them, and not
to confirm the Churches Infallible Doctrine. It is false, That Maldonate
confesses, That since Christian Religion has been confirmed Dr p. 687.
by Miracles in the Churches beginning, there is no necessity of Miracles for
that End. It is false That either Josephus Acosta, or S. Hippolitus teach, That
Antichrist shall do far greater Miracles, Dr p. 688,
than the Cures wrought upon F. Marcellus, or on the restored Leg at Zaragoza.
It is false, That the bleeding vvounds of S. Francis imprinted on his Dr p. 504.
side, hands, and feet, were so concealed, That no, man could ever fully
discern them in his life time, only Friar Ruffin once thought he espied the
vvound in his side. Thus much of false Citations for an Essay only, the
Treatise will afford many more.

Should I now trace the Dr though his gross perverted Quotations quite contrary
to the meaning of Authors, the work would be long. One or Two only at present
shall suffice, The remainder you have afterward. And first, what man in his
Wits would ever have cited S. Augustine as one that opposes latter Miracles,
when he could not but know, that no Catholic Author in this Age said more in
their Defense, as appears by his large Dr P. 582.
prosecuting this Subject in his 22. Book de Civit. C. 8, ^ yet forsooth,
Miracles are no Proof of the true Church (though the Saint plainly professes,
Miracles held him in the Church) Nor in rigor to be called Miracles, But some
extraordinary Things among them in their time: That is, the Dr would have us
believe, Dr p. 584.
the restoring Sight to the blind, raising the dead to life, curing incurable
Maladies (for of these S. Augustine expressly speak's) are not like the
Apostolical Miracles, but of an Inferior rank, Extraordinary things, forsooth,
and no more. Is nor this a plain Corruption of an Authors significant words and
meaning?

None hitherto in any Age maintained the Churches Miracles with greater Zeal
than S. Chrisostom, Abbulensis, and our learned Bishop Fisher, as is amply
proved in this Treatise, yet the Dr by the help of an open Cheat depraves their
meaning, and will needs persuade us that they teach, Miracles to have ceased in
the Church. Reader the Cheat is thus. As S. Chrysostom and the other Authors
now cited, grant a special Prerogative to the Twelve Apostles, in Writing
Canonical Scripture by Divine Inspiration, so also (and most truly) they yield
them a power of working all manner of admirable Miracles, particularly in
laying hands on the lately Baptized, and visibly giving the Holy Ghost (the
like Privilege the Primitive Christians participated in some measure). These
singular Graces say Authors annexed to the Twelve, were never entailed upon any
like set number of men, though Prelates and Pastors in the Church?, and
therefore ceased. Whence the Dr would conclude, That all other Miracles
whatever, as raising the Dead, and curing desperate Infirmities had a stop in
after Ages, and ceased also. Which is to tell us, because God honored not the
Churches Prelates with the very like, or so great a Prerogative as he did the
Apostles, All Miracles Seem so suspended, that no more are wrought, A foul
Cheat (worse than a Mistake) quite contrary to the Quoted Authors words and
Doctrine. See C. IX. from n. 11. and C. XI. from n. 7. The impertinent
Citations, or such as look from the matter now disputed, are innumerable. All
those whether true or false produced against forged Miracles, known as forged,
no more concern the present Controversy, than the Dr's pretty Verse cited out
of Virgil. Speluncam Dido etc. His other Testimonies Quoted from Paulus
Zaccheus, Fortunatus Scacchus, and Contelorius, are mere insignificant Ciphers,
take up room, and that is all the good they do. These and the remainder you
will have laid forth in the Treatise. It is therefore needless to insist on
more at present.

Another grand Mistake or gross Error, you meet with in the Dr, where He
says. The greatest number of Miracles in the Roman Church have been believed
upon the Credit of Fables, and uncertain Reports; And this he offer's to show
upon strict Examination. I Answer first. Were all Fables which the Dr deem's
so, the Proposition confutes it self, For Miracles upheld by Fables, are no
Church Miracles, But I boldly assert, that Mr Dr through his whole Book has not
proved so much as one received Church-Miracle, (much less the greater number)
to have had their Origin from Fables, or ever gained repute in the world upon
uncertain Reports, nor shall he hereafter in any low degree make his Assertion
Probable. His strict Examination falls first upon the Miraculous Translation
of the House of Loreto from Nazareth, thought by him fabulous, whereof I spoke
largely in my last Treatitise. Here I require that all diligently observe
whither this rigid Examination is brought at last? Reader, it comes to two or
three Idle Questions attended with some Saucy Schoffs, and there is all. What
says the Dr (after he had recounted Teremanus his Table concerning the
Translation) Is not this a pleasant Story to be matched in point of Credibility
with the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles? Again, what do these men think in
their hearts, that dare avouch such ridiculous Fictions as these? Such simple
Demands, Reader, which have neither weight, nor Bottom, nor Principle to stand
on, set forth with Bobs and Ieers give force to our Dr's Swinging proofs,
finish his fearful rigid Examination, and must be thought powerful enough to
throw down the House of Loreto. The like strain He hold's through his whole
Book. It seems by the Dr, that our Venerable Bede relates some strange
Miracles wrought upon S. Cuthbert. One is (to be brief (that Angels appearing
to the Saint on horseback when he was young, prescribed a Poultess to cure his
Sore Knee. Another is of his Seeing a Troop of Angels conveying the Soul of S.
Aidan into Heaven. The Dr to perfect his strict Examination; only Asks (there is
all) what must we think of these Angels appearing, And that he is of a good
easy Faith that can believe them? He might as wisel^ have demanded, what shall
we think of those Visions of Armies fighting in the Air over* Jerusalem forty
Days together. Machabees. 2, C. 5? What must we think of the Angel Raphael,
that prescribed (No Poultess but) the gall of a Fish for the Cure of old Tobias
his Eyes. Tobit. 11. Such Wonders recounted in History never contradicted, are
wholly as strange as what Bid Writes, though most lamely cast off by the Dr
and refuted by asking. What shall we think of them? Much less can such trifling
Questions, imply any thing like a strict Examination. A strict Examination,
Reader ponder's first, what Strength the Authors have which are produced for a
Thesis, The Dr weigh's none, nor alleges any, that calls the Translation of
that House, or these other Wonders now recorded, Fabulous. It supposes. 2.
That whoever denies an Assertion plainly proved (and what can be more plain
than my alleged proofs for the Translation) Is obliged to give measure for
measure, and either show his Adversaries Testimonies unconcluding, or infringe
their force by some contrary Reason or Authority. The Dr Strangely forgetful of
this Duty, does neither, But as far as Huffs and flurts hurry him on, lays
about him lustily. You have no more: However such faint empty stuff must pass
for a strict and rigid Examination. May this Procedure hold, a Jew or Heathen
needs only to Huffe and tell us. We Christians are all ridiculous in believing
a Crucified man to be our Redeemer, whereunto if he give an Overplus of Ieers,
easily cast out of an Infidels mouth, he proves every whit as much against
Christ, as our Dr does against the House of Loreto. There is yet more of this
ill Nicknam'd strict Examination in the Dr. Reflect a little. I Quoted Reas:
and Relig. C. 8. n. 5. as grave and learned Fathers as ever wrote, S, Irenaeus,
S. Basil, S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine so clear aend express for
Miracles, that no Testimonies can be plainer. It seems the Dr durst not jerk
these great Authors with his usual Taunts and Scoffs, but betakes himself to
another Subterfuge (men who live by shifting can do no better), I Will tell you
what it is. Very vvisely he waves all, slip's by these Authorities, and though
provoked to reply, return's not one word of Answer to any. May not this think
ye pass also for another Strenuous proof of his Strict and careful Examination?

Two things may be considered in the Dr's wild Enquiry. The one what he hold's
of substance in it. The other relates to his pretty Mode and odd way in
writing. To the First, I say in a word (plain Dealing is best) and more amply
prove it in this Treatise. There appears nothing like Substance through his
whole Enquiry. And first, if the Dr shift's off all I required Satisfaction in,
or rather, if he wholly wave what the world look's on as most Material in our
present Controversy, He is far from meddling with that, which deserves the
name of Substance: But, this is Evidently so. Fray Reader, reflect a little. My
desire was, and is still, (This all men look on as Substantial) that the Dr
would upon solid Principles Shovv but so much as one approved Miracle, forged,
false, or fabulous: In Lieu of doing this, Mountebank like, he step's upon the
Stage, and would beguile us with a varnish of mere painted vvares, Idle
Stories I mean, concerning Miracles feigned by ungodly People, altogether as
impertinent as if he had told us so many Fables out of Aesop: For no more can
forged Miracles disparage God's true Wonders, than Counterfeit Scripture the
Verities revealed in the Gospel. Again (And here once more we find a want of
Substance) Who would not have expected from this Man of Words after so many
brisk Attempts, and flurts at Miracles* Some clear Testimonies taken from the
Ancient Church, from Ancient Records, from Tradition, Councils, Doctors, and
Divins? But herein he is as mute as a Fish, and neither does nor can attaque us
this way. You have heard how the ancient Fathers and Modern Authors renowned
upon the account of their Learning and Virtue, plead in Defense of Miracles,
And all the right the Dr does such men, is not to believe them, Yet requires,
that we credit his Philostorgius, his Hazenmiller and his false Daniel de
Dieu, Vile Outcasts and detestable Heretics. Are we not thus think ye
Substantially Matched with Authorities? I produce Miracles Seen and attested
upon Oath, wrought by Saints and great Servants of Almighty God, And He to be
even with me, makes a flourish with the golden Thigh of Pythagoras, and
Aesculapius his cure done upon a dead woman, Both false and fabulous, or at
most works of Necromancy as is proved in the Treatise. I all along insist upon
such Miracles as have been known and owned by the Very best of Christians And
he to retaliate (like one that had Vowed never to meddle with what is
Substantial) trifles away time, in telling long Tales of the Prioresse of the
Annunciada at Lisboe, and of one Fulco cried up for a worker of Wonders,
who, as the Dr will have it, proved an Impostor. I bring to light Miracles so
clear and illustrious that none upon the Sight of their Evidence, ever yet
could (though Critics, wise, and learned call into doubt, And this Dr to
Eclipse their glory, fob's me off with such as are either dubious, or at most
but in a mean Degree probable. Most fitly did S. Augustine Writing against
Faustus lib. 5. C. Vltimo, once blame this unjust Proceeding in his Adversary.
Vestrum oculum malevolus error, Says the Saint. Thy Peevish and perverse
Error draws thy Eye, Faustus, to regard nothing but chafe in our standing
Corn, whereas had thou looked about thee, thou might have found wheat,
both pure and precious. Reader, Miracles only doubtful (much more forged ones)
pass for Chafe, the Church relies not on them, yet with such Deceiptful
Baits the Dr like Faustus, would fain vvhedle us into a mean conceit of
God's certain great Wonders, Whereas the Contrary is evident, for false and
forged Miracles when discovered (as the most have been) are so far from
fouling the Glory of God's true Wonders, that they confirm their Truth and
make them more Illustrious; Had the Inquisitors or Prelates of the Church
(think ye) who left no stone unturned to find out such Forgeries, and
discovered many, upon that Sight a less Esteem of God's Certain Miracles, that
passed the Churches Tribunal with all possible Applause? No. All thereupon
extolled the Churches zeal and Vigilance, having Long since learned from S.
Augustine, That as Evil has its Good, and gives a Grace to Virtue, Error add's
Beauty to Truth, So these feigned Signs set forth the Glory of true Miracles.
The Dr therefore get's nothing by his long list of forged Wonders.

Reader, you will find hereafter the Dr's Arguments in this Controversy, drawn
from Reason, as lame and bare as his Instances and Authorities. Whence I
conclude, that if he bottom his Discourse upon the forementioned Principles,
And these fail or yield him no support, I rightly insinuated above, and here
again Say it more plainly, That his whole Book is nothing but a Rapsody, or a
Work too unadvisedly set forth, in real Truth not worth Notice, or Answer.
Howeuer, because once engaged. I have undertaken a Confutation, not ill thought
of by good Divines, Though the Dr, most likely, will not allow me so favorable
a Censure.

The Dr's way or mode in writing, whilst Substance fails, cannot but be
worthless, unsavory, and distastful. Peruse him, Reader, page after page you
will find the man all along in a peevish Humor, when you see his Book brim
full of tare biting Ironies, Drolleries, Comical Expressions, impertinent
Demands, Idle Stories etc. As if the disgorging a little Gall, were enough to
bring into Contempt the Clearest Miracles God ever wrought. Had he had but
common Prudence, He might well have thought, that for one Petit private man hid
in a corner of the world, pertly to rise up against all ancient Fathers,
Doctors, and Divines, without Manifest Proofs reduced to sound Principles,
would never take, But appear to every Judicious Reader) as it is) an unluckly
Management of an ill cause. Herein, without all doubt Passion blinded the man,
And I am sure left him no clear Ey-Sight when he too boldly tell's us above,
That be relies on our own Writers in this Controversy, and thinks himself not
mistaken, I say once more the Pretense, is most false, having not so much as
one Catholic Author that opposes approved Miracles. But suppose one or two
could be racked to his Sense, (hitherto I never met with any) might not the Dr
have called to mind his own Apology made in behalf of Mr Thorndick, Who as
Zealously clear's the Catholic Church from Idolatry, as the Dr fondly lays
that foul Aspersion on Her? If we should grant (They are the Dr's words in his
General Preface) That He (Mr Thorndick) held some things singular in this
matter, what is that to the constant Opinion of our Church? So say I, should we
grant (which I shall never yield) that some one or other Catholic Author were
singular in this matter now debated, what is that to the contrary Judgment of
all other Writers, and the Sentiment of a whole Church besides? But now when
the Dr has none that sides with him, His only course will be to sit down
silent, and talk no more of our Writers.

By what is hitherto said, TO is hard, methinks, to conceive what moved the Dr
to quarrel with our Miracles. Has God angered the man in Showing so many clear
Legible Characters Written by his own powerful hand, intending thereby to make
his Church glorious? I say many, For there is no Kingdom (Says S. Chrysostom)
no Country, no common wealth, no famous City in the world, where innumerable
have not either seen or heard of Miracles attested by most faithful Witnesses,
and upon that Account have rendered humble thanks to God for so signal
Testimonies of his favors. It may be the Dr thinks that those who have
Written of Miracles are but a few only, Vulgar and ignorant. It is a Cavil.
Many stout Champions, inferior to none in knowledge have defended them, These
are our Combatants, and Conquerours in this Controversy. But perhaps these
learned only recount some Trivial matters, or as the Dr speak's a few
extraordinary Things. Quite contrary. They mention most Signal Works, great
Wonders, as raising the Dead, restoring sight to the blind, and curing
incurable Infirmities, clear effects of God only Omnipotent. But stay, have not
our Learned Writers, willing to wave pains, slightly passed over such Matters
of Fact? No. Never any were, or can be more accurate in laying forth the
Substance and all Circumstances relating to Miracles, than S. Irenaeus, S.
Hierom, S. Augustine, S. Gregory Thaumaturgus, and S. Bernard. These Admirable
Saints (to omit latter Authors) have either wrought great Miracles, or Written
of them with so much care and diligent Study, That one with half an Ey may
perceive; As They themselves never doubted of what they wrote, so they
purposely strove to fix a firm Belief of them in the minds of others. Hence S.
Augustine cited afterward Lib. 22. de Civit. Cap. 8. assures us, He vvrote the
Miracles there specifyed for this End, that they might be publicly read before
the People, and known to all; For says the Saint. Such was my express will,
Because when we saw the Signs and Miracles wrought frequently in our time, like
those which God anciently evidenced to the world, I endeavovred that their
memory should not perish. If therefore Miracles have been frequent, If known
the whole world over, If seen and attested by Many Ey-Witnesses, if legible
Characters Written by God's own hand, if great and prodigious; If finally
wrought for this End, that their Memory might be preserved and known to all;
What could induce our unadvised Dr most rashly to publish his lame and
imperfect Enquiry against Miracles? This to me appears a Paradox, or rather a
Riddle which no Oedipus can solve.

Had not this man shown Spite enough in his former Treatises, where he set's
that Vile and Infamous Mark of Idolatry upon our Ancient Church, though She
drevv whole Nations from Idolatry to the Christian Faith? But thanks be to
God. He has not, (as I hear) gained three Judicious men of his own Profession
to believe him. Had He not spit out Venom enough in stiling the most Learned
with in this great Moral Body Rebel teachers, and Sowers of Divisions? Had he
not in some Frolic gnash't his teeth enough in his more than bold presumptious
railing at the Saints in Heaven? How could a renowned S. Benet, S. Dominick, or
S. Francis, fall under his lash, and raise up so much unruly Passion in a Dr?
Could he not he have left these happy Souls in their eternal Rest free from
his Scratches, Taunts, aend bitter Obloquies? Without doubt he looked on them
as some of old did on the wild beasts in Theaters, publicly exposed to be
bated, and furiously encountered. Yet to make the burden of his sins more
heavy, he sports himself with all that can be serious. Do but mention the
Sanctity and Austerity of thousands yet living in the Church, all with him is
thought Hypocrisy. Speak of our Catholic Doctrine, taught his Progenitors for a
thousand years and more, it Led them, forsooth, into so many abominable
Errors, that it is hard to say, whether they are saved or damned. Bring to
light the clearest Miracles God ever wrought. what are they? Nothing but
painted Strawes and Counterfeit Trances. And thus he add's Sin to Sin without
remorse or check of Conscience, upheld by no other Principles than Drollery,
vain Florishes, loud untruths, and Calumnies. Dr John Avila, a man of great
learning and a renowned Preacher hearing, soon after the death of a Priest, of
one sole neglect and it was, that but once only he had offered up in his whole
life time the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, spoke these few but weighty words.
Multum defert ad Iudicem This man upon that Account, carries much with him to
be answered for before his Judge. What was this little small Omission compared
with Dr Stillingfleet's enormous Commissions? Down Cries He with their
Sacrifice, away with their Mass all is Superstition, and the highest
Idolatry, He might yet have called to mind that the very gravest of the English
Clergy pretend (whether truly, I dispute not) to have received the Order of
Priesthood from the hands of our Catholic Bishops, and I am sure the Dignity
of a Priest necessarily implies the Power of offering up Sacrifice, though the
Dr has been so far from complying with that one duty his whole life long,
that had his power equaled his Malice, neither Priest nor Sacrifice, had now
remained in the world. Believe it Reader, for this and many other Clamorous
Sins. Multum deferet ad Iudicem. The Dr without Serious Repentance, will have
much to Answer for at his dying Day.

Had He in Lieu of opposing Miracles told us, that his beloved Puritanisme,
though lately brought into the world may notvvitstanding be bugg'd by him as
his Dearest Benjamin, or owned as the sweetest Religion, being never invented
to Curb Passion, or trouble any with Austerity, but chiefly to pamper up a
fevv Ministers with their Feminine followers, None could have wondered. The
very most might have said the man spoke as he thought. Nay more; had he been so
wise as to leave this Bustle of Polemicks to others far above him in learning,
or only kept within the Bounds of Speculative Matters, and there blundered and
erred, as he has done, The subtility of that knowledge, and his little skill in
speculation, would have born out an excuse, and pleaded in his behalf. But to
run headlong, and proclaim open war against plain Matters of fact seen by
thousands, and furiously to encounter God's own Signal wonders clearly shovvn
to the world, is an Offense of so high a nature, and so contrary to common
Prudence, that though the Dr lived Ages, he shall never vvash off the stain
which his unruly passion has cast upon him.

One word, and I end. My hope is, Mr Dr will take courage and Answer this
Treatise, if so; I heartily vvish he talk no more of dravving off the whole
Substance here set down into the narrovv compass of a fevv lines, That Is
impossible, when so many plain Matters of Fact as are now offered him to
examine, necessarily require no doging, but a full and serious Reply. Neither is
it enough to tell us, he hold's not himself obliged to take notice of every
Idle Book that comes forth, and bear's his name in the Title; That will
bewray his Ignorance, and too plainly confirm the Opinion most have of him,
which is, That he cannot Answer. But above all, let him not run to one of his
Hocus Pocus Tricks, or Say; He would fain fly at his Adversary, but now
cannot, being wholy taken up with some other great work against Popery. Such
far fetched excuses Argue a cowardly Proceeding, For, Reader, ever to be
brandishing his sowrd, and threaten (without hurt to any) and never to defend
himself, when attacked, is contrary to the Style and strain of all Writers
ancient and Modern, who first endeavor their Adversaries Satisfaction, And
then begin with what new attempts they please. The Dr, I am sure, has work
enough cut out for him. First those particulars clearly laid forth in the
Preface to my last Treatise (all waved by the Dr) are many: That excellent
learned Book entitled Dr Stillingfleet against Dr Stillingfleet, lately
printed, highly, methinks, deserves an Answer, and I am sure (to say nothing
of others) he is yet behind hand with his worthy Adversary N. O. We live in
hopes these Debts will be paid at last, And that the Dr when his Passion is
allayed, may give such honest men as have taken pains for him some reasonable
Satisfaction. Now in case he turn's all off with Quibbles, pretty Ierks, and
such like Artifices, The world will Judge as I do, that Dr Stillingfleet was
most unfortunate in beginning a Quarrel about Polemicks, which as he has not
hitherto* so never shall be hereafter, End with Credit.

Farewell, Courteous READER.
THE CHAPTERS IN ORDER.
CHAP. I. VVat is meant by a true Miracle? God only, the cause of supernatural
Miracles. Of their absglute necessity, Whether the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles can be rationally proved against Jews and Gentiles? Dr Stillingfleet
hit's not on these rational proofs. You have them hereafter clearly ser down,
against all exceptions and Cavils. 1 Chap. II. The same rational Arguments,
whereby the Miracles of Christ and the Apostles are proved, evince also true
Miracles to have been wrought in the Roman Catholic Church. Other clear proofs
for Church Miracles. A contest between Antichrist and Dr Stillingfleet. The Dr
is worsted. If the Church does Propose Forgeries for true Miracles, none can
believe Christ's Miracles upon the Universal humane Testimony of all called
Christians. True Miracles distinguish the Church from all false Conventicles,
page 26 Rational proofs For Miracles alleged in my other Treatises. 35
Chap. III. Some Choice Manifest Miracles proved upon the Deposition of many
Sworn Eywitnesses. Of a Late famous Miracle wrought at Calais in Picardy. None
can call into doubt the Authentic Miracles done by S. Thomas Cantilupe, our
renowned Bishop of Hereford. Other great Miracles yet obvious to all men's eyes.
S. Bernard's known Miracle, proved most* certain. 46 Two great Miracles wrought
by Saint Thomas. 59 A fourth Miracles. 60
Chap. IV. How true Miracles may be discerned from false Wonders. Whether
Heathens and Heretics ever wrought true Miracles? For what End true Miracles
are wrought? Of the difference between Antichrist's Miracles, and those wrought
by Christ and in the Church. 77 The Judgment of Authors Concerning Miracles
wrought by Christ's Adversaries. 86
Chap. V. In what manner the body of S. James was translated to Composlella.
The Conversion of Hermogenes and Philetus by S. James. Of Pope Calixtus his
VVritings* Miracles wrought by S. James manifestly proved against Dr
Stillingfleet. 98 Chap. VI Of the Dr's Pilgrimage to the Vial of S. Mary
Magdalen in France. The Truth of that Miracle Proved. Cavils answered. Holy
Relics vindicated from the Dr's Calumny. Whether Protestancy be a grave
Religion. Of Dr John Launoy's Virulency. 117 Chap. VII. Of Dr Stillingfleets
rude, hold, and shameful vilifying two renowned Saints, The Glorious S.
Dominick and the Seraphical S. Francis of Assisium. 156 Chap. VIII. The Dr's
large Muster-Role of the British and Irish Saints Showed a mere Parergon* or a
weightless Cavil against Church Miracles. Several Degrees of certainty observed
concerning Miracles. 168 Chap. IX. Whether impartial Authors in former Ages
ever taught that Miracles ceased in the Church? S. Chrysostom most plain for
latter Miracles. Whether there be no comparison between our Savior's Miracles
and those wrought in Latter times? Of Dr Stillingfleet's frivolous Distinction
between Sings, and Miracles. 187 Pretended Objections taken out of S.
Chrysostom Answered. Dr Still. grossly abuses John Gerson, Chancellor of Paris.
195 None more stoutly Defend's Miracles wrought in the Church, Than blessed S.
Augustine. 207
Chap. X. Of De Stinllingfleet's shuffling and unworthy dealing with S.
Augustine. Not one Testimony produced by the Dr makes so much as probably
against great Miracles wrought in the Church. The like Account we give of other
Authors falsified by the Dr. 215 Chap. XI. A brief Account of the Dr's large
Excursion from his Page 595. to Page 664. Of his false Quotations and
fallacious way in Arguing. The rest Showed a long list of impertinencies. 236
Of Dr Stillingfleets Flawes in his false and faulty citing Tostatus, Roffensis,
Didacus Stella, and Josephus Acosta. 24
Chap. XII. Of S. Xaverius his admirable life* and most glorious Miracles.
VVitnesses of these Miracles and undoubted Testimonies produced. The Dr's
simple Exceptions against them demonstrated vain and frivolous. His unjust
Aspersion laid on Jesuits. discovered. 259 Chap. XIII. The Dr's unjust Calumny
laid upon F. Hierome Xaverius, proved False. Of his lost labor in telling
impertinent Tales of forged Miracles, His famous Story of twelve English
Jesuits Showing Tricks in feigned Exortisms rejected, as improbable. A Word of
Hazenmillers loud Lies. 277 Chap. XIV. An Answer to one of the Doctors
Exceptions against Miracles, Whether Miracles in the first Age of Christianity
were but few? How Miracles are proved by true Doctrine and true Doctrine by
Miracles? No counterfeit Miracles can pass the Churches Tribunal without
censure. Of a late VVriters exceptions against Miracles. The admirable
Propagation of Christian Religion convinces that Miracles have been wrought.
296 Chap. XV. How Miracles are to be examined? Christ wrought not his Miracles
by natural Magic or Necromancie, by strong Imagination, or the different
Aspects of Stars. Whatever rational Argument proves Christ to have wrought
true Miracles by Divine Virtue, as forcibly proves Church Miracles to proceed
from the very same cause. Though Devils nay work some strange wonders, they
cannot raise the Dead, or cure desperate Infirmities. Of the Egyptian
Magicians Feats. A word of the witch at Endor. Other matters handled* 313
Chap. XVI. Why Miracles are wrought in the Church? Of their two fold End.
Miracles rationally prove the Doctrine of Christ, and the Church infallible.
Clear Miracles have been wrought in confirmation of every Doctrine taught by the
Church. Of Dr Stillingfleets simple Reply to two known and renowned Micles.
Whether Aesculapius cured a woman in the Temple of Epidaurus. The Dr's Story of
Pythagoras his golden Thigh examined, found a fourb, or at most Necromancy. 326
Chap. XVIII. Of many other Quotations partly impertinent, partly false produced
by the Dr, Arguments against Miracles Answered. page 345 Chap. XVIII. Whether
it be reasonable, to have Missionaries now sent into England, and work
Miracles there? The Dr vvishes this done. More of the Dr's many false, and
impertinent Quotations Antichrist's Wonders, no true Miracles. Miracles known
upon Moral Certainty, sufficiently induce to Faith. 358 Chap. XXIX. The
Conclusion. 373
COURTEOUS READER.
THe Erratas in this Impression, however small, are many. Wonder nothing,
better could not be expected from a Printer that knows not a word of English.
The very most, I hope, of these faults are Corrected. In case the Reader
discover more (which is likely) He will, I am confident, either pass by them,
or charitably amend them.

A DISCOURSE OF MIRACLES WROUGHT IN THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHVRCH.
Or, a full refutation of Dr Stillingfleets unjust exceptions against Miracles,
together with a large discovery of the Doctors unexcusable frauds, Manifest in
his many false, perverted, and impertinent quotations.

CHAP. I.
What is meant by a true Miracle? God only, the cause of supernatural
Miracles. Of their absolute necessity. Whether the Miracle, of Christ and his
Apostles can be rationally proved against Jews and Gentiles? Dr Stillinfleet
hit's not on these rational proofs. You have them hereafter clearly set down,
against all exceptions and Cavils.

1 By a true Miracle we understand not every wonder that causes admiration, but
an effect or supernatural work of God far surpassing all created power, which
neither Angel, Devil, nor man can do by their own forces, and therefore
necessarily depends on God infinitely powerful. Whence it follows, that a
Miracle has a necessary connection withtruth, and when known as such, gives us
Infallible certainty of that for which it is primarily intended. The reason
hereof seems clear, because God speaks by his works, as men do by words.
God infinitely wise, yea truth it self, and as we now suppose the sole
principal Author of Miracles, can no more attest a lie by his own supernatural
works, than by the words he speak's in Holy Scripture. Now that he speak's by
works is manifest out of Holy writ. The Heavens Psai. 28. Romans 1. 18. Austin
Egist. 49.
declare his glory. The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven. And S. Austin
confirm's it, as we (says he) speak's by words, ita Divina potentia factis
loquitur, so God does by his works, and if he speak's by works (Miracles for
exemple) he delivers truth: God says the Apostle, to show the Heb 6. 17. 18.
heirs of his promise the stability of his Counsel has interposed an Oath,
that by two things unmovable, whereby it is impossible that God should lie, we
have a most strong comfort, who have fled to hold fast the hope proposed etc.
Pray you reflect, would an Oath in a mortal man, though liable to deceit, be
horrid if taken to depose a falsehood? None doubts it. Much more say I, would
the exhibiting a Miracle, whereby God, as it were, swear's he speak's truth, be
hor^^d, could he, that cannot deceive, work one; (for example, raise the dead)
to testify a loud untruth. Hence also follows a second impossibility, and
it is, The power of working Miracles, not tied to men's fancy.
that God cannot give the power of working Miracles to any when and in what
manner man's fancy likes best, for could this be done, He would not only
deprive himself of his own absolute Dominion, but also rashly subject it to
the will of another, who by malice or ignorance may abuse it, and publich
error in stead of truth. As great an impossibility is it, if not greater, that
an infinite wisdom ever work a Miracle to confirm a false Doctrine, because an
Infinite truth cannot contradict himself, or give Testimony to a lie, nor force
an error upon rational creatures subject to him, by his own noble and glorious
works.

2. Hence also it is, that none of our late Reformers in Germany, or England,
ever wrought a Miracle to confirm one of their Novelties. No wonder, says
Petra Sancta, Desertores Silvest. Petra Sanct. Tom. 2. Thaumasiae c. 3. Page 26.
verae fidei etc. The singer of God whereby Miracles are wrought, leaves
Sectaries that forsake God, and his Church. Here you have also the true reason
why Dr Stillinfleet, though without success, sett's so briskly against
Miracles. Alas! the poor man has none to embellish his new faith with, and
therefore would fain have those glorious wonders valued of as needless
superfluities, worth little but contempt. He may yet remember how earnestly
Luther endeavovred to work a Miracle in freeing one possessed with a Devil, and
also call to mind, how the Devil had like to have strangled him in the attempt,
had not violence been used to rescue Luther. The story written by Staphilas,
Luther's Luther's and Calvin's Iugling.
own Scholar, is known, as well as Calvin's fourb who suborning one Bruleus to
feign himself dead, pretended to raise him from death, crying out Adolescens
tibi dico Surge, Young man, I say, rise up, when behold a just punishment of
God manifested the double fraud, Bruleus was dead indeed, and Calvin Shamed.
You Bosius de signis Ecclesiae li^sig. 11.
have another fearful story recounted by Bosius of a chief man among the
Anabaptists near the borders of Polony that Called, many to be present at his
Baptism, and said they should see wonders that day, the Holy Ghost descending,
and what not? No sooner had the wretch set his foot in the Bath, but in place
of the Holy Ghost, a fearful Devil appeared, and first carried him into the
air, then to the horror of all the Spectators, strangled him in the water.
These things I briefly relate out of approved Authors, chieflly to show how
different the genius of these men was from our Drs, they fancied Miracles so
strong a support to their new Gospel, that nothing could set it off better, or
more advance it, our Dr contrary to his Progenitors spirit, will have all later
Miracles blasted, or of no account, because, forsooth, he has none to glory in.
Thus much only in passing.

3. We now go on in our discourse, and show an absolute necessity of Miracles
chiefly at the first propagation of the Gospel, because the high Mysteries of
our faith, which require a firm assent, and an humble submission to the first
Verity revealing truth, cannot stand fast, unless it rely upon a most certain
foundation, and this must either be an Evidence of the truth revealed (not
granted in this life) or the most Supreme Authority imaginable, I mean the
Divine veracity which neither can deceive, or be deceived. To advance By what
Motives God induces to belief?
therefore our faith to the highest certitude and infallibility, whilst God
gives us not Evidence of the sublime Mysteries believed (far above our reach
and natural Capacities) it was necessary to lead us on by Sign's and Motives
suitable for that end, but no external Sign or Motive can be more persuasive,
or make a stronger impression upon minds, than Gods own Seals and Signatures of
truth, undoubted Miracles. By these great lights he raises us out of our
natural drowsinesse, and by them, as most attractive Inducements, prepares
hearts to believe without hesitancy, though the Mysteries of Faith seem strange
to nature, and would be rejected, unless set forth, adorned, and confirmed by
prodigious Sign's. Hence all De Lingend. Fer. 4. Domin. 1. quadrag P. 7.
acknowledge a mighty force in Miracles, nay some Authors observe that God
never proposed any new Doctrine without rational Inducements, in making it
credible by manifest Sign's and wonders. Who, says De Lingendes, is ignorant
of the stupendous Miracles wrought by Moses? All How and when Miracles were
Sho^^n?
know when the Law was published in the Mount, how many new and great Miracles
were exhibited. The new Priesthood of Aaron had its confirmation by Miracles.
Solomon's Temple gained great repute upon the sight of Evident Miracles, when
S. John the Baptist preached the Baptism of Penance, himself was the Miracle,
Miraculously conceived, Miraculously exulted in his Mothers womb, Miraculously
loosened his Father's tongue, and many years lived in the desert more like an
Angel than a man, without house, cloths, meat, or humane conversation. Thus
Miracles strengthened and made every new Modern Sectaries never wrought Miracle.
Doctrine truly proposed, credible, only our Sectaries are the privileged
persons, that without Mission or commission brought a new learning into the
world, yet never had the good luck (I use Erasmus known words) to cure a Lame
horse much less to work a Miracle on man, woman, or child.

4. Courteous Reader, please now to consider a little. Is it true that God
endued his Prophet Moses with the grace of working Miracles? Did he manifest
great Sign's at the Promulgation of the law in Mount Sina? Did he the like,
when Aaron was ordained Priest? Did he show wonders at the Baptists preaching
Penance? Did he ennoble Solomon's Temple with illustrious Miracles? Ecce plus
quam Solomon hic. We are now to mind you of a more miraculous Prophet than
Moses, of a more Miraculous Priest than Aaron, of a more Miraculous Preacher
than the Baptist, of a Lawgiver as Miraculous as ever published law, finally of
a more Miraculous Edifice, than Solomon erected, I mean the noble house of God,
the Militant and Triumphant Church of Christians, founded by no other than our
great Thaumaturgus, our ever glorious and renowned Lord JESUS, God and Man,
whose Miracles manifested here on earth, surpassed in true worth and excellency
all the wonders of men and Angels. Of this subject I am now to speak, and will
endeavor so to clear our Saviors Miracles, and those the Apostles wrought
from all doubts and Cavils, that none shall hereafter oppose them upon any
rational Principle. This performed, we will proceed to the Miracles done in the
Church.

5. Dr Stillingfleet Seems to make short work Dr Still. page 66.
with the Miracles of our Savior and his Apostles. It is says he, agreed on
both sides, that the Miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles did
sufficiently prove, that they were Teachers sent from God. Then he insist's
something of the assurance we have for them by the universal Testimony of all
Christians, and that Christ and the Evangelists declared, they were wrought for
this end, that men might believe Dr. Still. Slip's by the main difficulty.
Christ was sent from God. It is agreed, says our Dr, on both sides etc. But,
Sr, give us the rational Ground of this agreement, otherwise you prove nothing
against Jews and Heathens, who here undervalve the agreement of Christians,
neither are the passages of Scripture produced by you in behalf of those
primitive Miracles, or the end they were wrought for, of any account with these
Aliens from Christ. You tell a Jew, that our Savior cured one born blind, and
did it for this end that men might believe he was sent from God, the Jew
answer's, the Divinity of that Scripture cited, has no more weight with him,
than the Miracle has you would prove by it, yet you know, a Proof should be
always clearer, than the thing proved; Here is an equal uncertainty, for no
more does such a man believe your alleged Scripture to be truly Gods word,
than the Miracle to be a true Miracle. Whoever therefore pertinently handles
this matter, must in a contest with these Adversaries of Christian Religion,
first distinguish between the different Principles of Jews and Heathens, those
admit the old Testament as true; Heathens no true Scripture at all; Next he is
to prove our Saviors Miracles and the Apostles to have been really wrought by
Arguments not taken from Scripture, or if he make use of the new Testament
against the Jew, he is to lay aside that Question, wether it be God's word or
no? Unless before the dispute, the Book be evinced written by Divine
inspiration. Thus much premised.

6 I argue against a Jew and ask, whether he Christ's Miracles proved against a
Jew.
allows the Historical part of the new Testament where the Miracles of Christ
and the Apostles are recorded, to be as good and as true a Story, as the
relation made in the old Testament of Mose's Miracles? And now I trouble not
his head with the Question about the Divine Inspiration of either book but only
enquire after their truth: In case he yeild's equal truth to both he must
grant, that Christ cured the blind, raised the dead, and that the Apostles
wrought such Miracles, as S. Luke recount's in the Acts of those blessed men
etc. If, as is most likely; he bluntly reject's the Gospels relation, as not
true, I ask what answer will he give a Heathen, that no less boldly cast's off
the Story of Moses Miracles as false, and plainly assert's, that the same
reason (let it be what you will) whereby he attempts to discountenance the
truth of one Narration, will every whit as much enervate the truth of the
other, and thus all Miracles related in Scripture go to wreck, which is to
say, God never wrought any by Moses and the Prophets, by Christ and his
Apostles. This the man of the Synagogue proves, or nothing. In case he reply,
Christians that admit Mose's Miracles are tongue tied, and cannot plead against
them, I answer we plead not against any, for we hold all most true, yet justly
tax a Jew of a gross Inconsequence, (which a Heathen lays before his eyes)
and once more say, the same proofs and reasons, whereby he endeavour's to
reject the Miracles of Christ and the Apostles, destroy at one blow the truth
of the greatest Miracles which Moses or the Prophets ever wrought, that is in a
word, there is neither proof nor reason to deny either, all are most true and
Strongly made out by reason, supposing this one rational ground which none can
deny viz. That books of History known and received all over, deserve credit
upon humane faith.

7. In discoursing with a Heathen about Miracles Heathens also Convinced.
recorded in Scripture, a rational demand is, whether he yeild's as good credit
to the History of this Book, as to Titus Livius, Caesar's Commentaries, or any
other ancient writer? If he affirm, the Miracles there set down are with him
upon moral certainty believable, in case he denies, I am not to take his bare
word, but must know the ultimate reason of his denial, which will ever be
Petitio Principii, or in real truth no reason, but a self conceipted fancy,
just as if one should sencelesly reject, what ever Livy or Caesar has written,
because he will bluntly A reply answered.
do so upon no reason. The Heathen may reply. There is a great difference
between all natural history and the Miracles registered in Scripture, for these,
because strange and unusual, so strongly check and abate belief, that reason
cannot but boggle, and hold all forged by a few simple men that wrote them,
whereas no such extravagant wonders, are found in natural History. I answer
first, we read of innumerable great wonders in natural History, as of Mountains
rising up and justling together, of certain Cities in Syria seated on hills,
and thence violently thrown into a Plain some miles off, without any damage
etc. Things certainly unusual, though not so strange as a true Miracle. I
answer 2. All matters of Matters of fact in Scripture not feigned, but
manifestly proved true.
fact recorded in Scripture most evidently are not feigned, however admirable
and above the force of nature, therefore its highly against reason to hold the
Miracles of Christ and his Apostles forged because strange and wonderful. I
prove demonstratively that matters of fact recorded in Scripture are not
feigned upon this ground. The Prophets long before Christianity was
established, foretold clear matters of fact, which some thousands of years
after evidently proved true, as that Christ should be born of a Virgin, that
the old Priesthood should fail, and a new Priest and King reign forever, that
the greater people, the Jews, should become the less, and the Gentiles far
lesser become the greater, all strange and wonderful Predictions, whereunto we
may add our Saviors most certain Prophesy, in that known Parable of the
vineyard, where speaking to the chief Priests and Pharisees, he clearly
foretold their ruin and rejection before it happened, and no less clearly the
destruction of Jerusalem. These Prophesies the whole world has now seen for
many Ages fulfilled and verifyed. Hence I discourse, whoever fortel's wonderful
future things long before the event, which afterward visibly come to pass,
speak's truth, and cannot forge nor feign, because Facts exactly agreeing with
the Predictions take away all suspicion of forgery, but this you see is
evident, if you compare the Prophesies of the old Testament with what the
Writers of the new have expressed, and we se fulfilled with our eyes, therefore
all wonderful matters recorded in Scripture, however strange, are neither false
nor forged. A Heathen cannot deny the evident and now known fulfilling of these
Prophesies, because the Book of the old Testament was extant, and read by
Jews, long before the Evangelists wrote their Story.

8. I argue 2. with Lingendes, and rationally Ling. cited* page 44.
evince the truth of our Saviors Miracles by the Testimony of Writers in
several nations most different from one another, and further Ancient writers,
and Public Fame prove the primitive Miracles.
ground my discourse upon an universal public Fame received the whole world
over, which own's those primitive Miracles as undoubted. For ancient Writers
this Author first remit's us to Joseph the Jew, who speaking of our Savior
says. Eodem tempore, etc. In those days, Jesus a wise Josepus l. 18*
Antiquit. c. 4.
man lived, if yet lawful to call him man only, that wrought strange wonders,
and had many followers both Jews and Gentiles. This Christ, whom the chief of
our Nation accused, Pilate condemned to die upon a Cross, Eusebius. lib. Hist.
Eccles. c. 11. Hieron. de Script. in verbi Josephus.
rose again the third day, as the Prophets had foretold, and as we read in the
Jerosolimitanian Talmud named Gavoda Zara, Miraculously cured innumerable
diseased, though the latter Jews attribute this power of working Miracles not
to any virtue in Christ, nor to the Devil (as their Progenitors impiously did)
but say, they were wrought at the pronouncing of an ineffable name called by
them. Sem Hammaphoras, or a name expounded. The Turks Alcoran witness de
Lingendes recount's at large the Miracles of our Savior, where you read of his
clea^sing the Lepers, his restoring sight to the blind, raising the dead, and
curing all manner of jnfirmities. And though both this and the other Testimony
solely considered, may seem to Some of less Account, yet added to the true
attestation of all called Christians they have weight, and avail to illustrate
the glory of our Saviors Miracles.

9 The Testimony of Gentiles alleged by many Beda Basil print, Anno 1563. Tom.
2* in fine Page 351.
ancient Fathers, you have in the writings of those Prophetesses called
Sibylls. Our venerable Bede recounts one well worth the Readers knowledge. It
happened, says this Author, that a hundred Senators of Rome had every one the
same strange dream* or saw an unusual vision of nine Suns in the Heaven. The
various Sign's and different lights appearing in these Suns Bid What vision a
hundred Senaters at Rome saw.
amply set's down. The Senators moved with the wonder, hearing great renown of
the Sibyl Tiburtin as gift in Prophesy (named Cassandra) by Messengers invited
her to Rome, whither she came and was honorably entertained. Upon her arrival
the Senators meeting together declared their dream. She adswered, it is best we
retire to the Mountain Appenine (here is no fit place) and there I will
interpret the whole Mystery, and did so. The nine Suns you saw said she presage
the future Generations, and because various in their aspects, point out the
different lives and manners in men to come. The first Sun was splendid, casting
beams all over the earth, which shows The Sybils ^nterpretation.
people in that generation, will be candid in their dealing, mild, and benign.
The second Sun yet more luminous represent's the second Generation, when men
will much increase, live splendidly, and converse here on earth without malice.
The third Sun all fiery and flaming, portend's, that Nation will rise up
against Nation and cause great strife in this your City of Rome. The fourth Sun
expresses the fourth Generation, when men will openly deny plain truth. But
then an Hebrew woman, called Mary, will arrise having a Spouse A Prophesy of
Christ, and his Virgin Mother.
by name Joseph. Of this Mary Jesus Christ true man will be born, and she
before and after his birth remain Virgin; At the birth of Jesus Angels shall
appear and sing Glory to God on high, a voice also will be heard from Heaven.
This is my beloved Son hear him. Jesus will change the Jewish ceremonial Laws
and establish his own in lieu of them, and his Kingdom shall last in secula
seculorum.

10 Certain Priests among the Jews being present grew angry, and wished the
Sibyl to surcease from such terrible words, but she courageously checked their
incredulity, and went on with her Prophecy relating to our Savior. In the
days of Caesar Augustus, said she, Jesus will appear in mortal flesh, and like
other Infants come The Sibyl sortell's our Saviors Miracles, his buffets* and
Crucifixion.
to perfect growth. Great Opposition will he suffer from the Kings and Princes
on earth, but those who honor him shall have eternal life. Then she laid forth
our Savior Miracles: of his curing the blind, deaf, and lame, of his feeding
five thousand with five barley loaves, and specifies his other admirable wonders
there recounted. Soon after she foretold how barbarously the Jews would use
him, in buffeting and spitting on his sacred face, and finally crucifying him
on a Cross, but all in vain, said the Sibyl; for the third day he shall rise
from the dead, visibly show him self to his Disciples and in their sight
Ascend to Heaven. Here you have some part of our venerable Bedes relation, what
is omitted you may easily find in the Author together with a larger description
given of the other five Suns, now not pertinent to my present purpose.

11. To this Testimony you may well add what Eusebius Histor Eccles. lib. 1. c. 2.
Eusebius writes of the Emperor Tiberius, where we are told, that He hearing
of the Miracles wrought by our Savior, and upon the clear informations given
by Pilates letter of Christ's rising Tiberius the Emperor Striving to honor*
Christ, was opposed.
from the dead after three days, Tiberius would have placed him amongst the
Gods, but the Senate opposed the design, as a Novelty contrary to their Laws,
notwithstanding, says Tertullian, in his Apology for Christians, Tiberius was
so far from altering his judgment concerning the Sanctity and Miracles done by
Christ, that he ever thought most honorably of them, and more over threatened
punishment to all that accused Christians, or hindered the Propagation of their
Faith. If therefore Jews, Turks, and Heathens highly valued our Saviors
Miracles as you have heard, and all Christians conspire in a truth so openly
received, we may well conclude that their Fame is very universal, and upon
humane faith (for still we keep within the bounds of arguing rationally)
morally speaking, most certain.

12. Hence I proceed to the second part of The force of public Fame.
my Assertion and prove that a Fame so universal concerning matters of fact,
grounded upon sense or Ey-sight, and never rationally contradicted, is upon
humane faith Without further debate most undoubted. But the Miracles of Christ
and his Apostles were once thus objects of sense, seen by many distinct
persons, and at different times, who cannot be supposed either Maliciously to
feign innumerahle horrid Lies, or clancularly to agree by common consent in
avouching such matters to have been truly seen with eyes, which never were
seen, this, I say is morally impossible, and observe my Proof. Allow the
Historical part of the new Testament so much worth, as both Jews and Gentiles
grant to any ordinary good Historian; I require no more; We read there, that
many saw Lazarus raised from the dead, others the blind man cured, others the
Lepers cleansed, others the infirm made whole, No forgery in those who saw
Christ's Miracles.
by a word of our Saviors mouth etc. I ask whether any can prudently conceive,
that these different Ey-wisnesses at some time or other met together, and
conspired thus foolithly among themselves. So many of us shall avouch (and
falsely) they saw Lazarus raised to life that was not truly dead, so many shall
say, they saw the Lepers cleansed, the Sick restored to health, though no such
wonders were ever done by Christ, yet let us boldly blaze these things abroad,
and stand to the hazard, follow what will. Is such a forgery likely or
believable? No, it is improbable, upon this convincing reason. Forgery and
fiction usually plays tricks in obscure matters a far of, (as in feigned
visions or pretended Revelations) not obvious to sense, but in things sensible,
near at hand, public, and visible Fiction, because most easily discovered,
becomes its own ruin, and point blanck, like witless policy, frustrat's the end
aimed at, as plainly appears in many pretended false Miracles, which, when
made manifest (as often falls' out) have not only brought condign punishment,
but more-over Shame and disgrace upon the Authors.

13. Upon this ground also, we evidently Nor in those who writh the Gospel.
clear our sacred Writers of the new Testament from all fraud and forgery, in
their plain Narration of our Saviors Miracles. Reflect I beseech you, what man
endued with common prudence can work him self into this persuasion, that the
four Evangelists, who heartily set down the sufferances, the opprobrious death
of their Lord and Master (wherein, as all confess, they speak truth) in some
strange Frolic or other, met together and agreed to tell a false lie of
Lazarus raised to life, of infirm restored to health, that were never What
prejudice fraud would have done the Evangelists.
sick etc; Had this fraud been invented, they had not only notoriously
prejudiced their own cause, but the Interest also of their great Master; nay;
the very Jews would have decryed all the Miracles they wrote of, as public
impostures, and, if feigned, might justly have pleaded. No eyes ever saw them
wrought whenas the contrary is manifest, for they highly dreaded our Saviors
Miracles, and held them so attractive, that if permitted to go on, the whole
world would follow him. Hence it is that, that ungodly People, never dared in
any Tribunal juridically to call into doubt the truth of his greatest Miracles
(though some whisperers said he cast out Devils by the help of Devils) No; all
knew they condemned him to death (not because the cure of the blind man, or
raising Lazarus from death were judged Impostures) but upon this account, that
final Sentence was given, because he made him self the Son of God.

14. By all hitherto said we se. 1. How and in what manner true Miracles,
objects of sense, gained repute in the world, and became credible. First
witnesses worthy belief not suspected of By what means Miracles gained esteem.
Guile saw them wrought, and upon their faithful word communicated with other's
the wonders they had seen, as certain and undoubted. 2. Those first Hearers,
finding no reason to question the fidelity of Ey-witnesses (justly reputed
honest,) prudently yielded assent to the Narration, and imparted to others what
they had received from those who saw the Miracles, In Process of time the
Report of those wonders spread far and near, gained more ground, till at last a
public Fame owned them certain. This Fame held on Age after Age, handed down
by constant Tradition, never, as I said, rationally contradicted, is now
general the whole Universe over, and every way Comparable with the Fame we have
of Alexander, the great, Julius Caesar, and other known Heroes, whereof no
prudent man ever doubted. Observe I beseech you, how equally the Parallel run's
in both cases. Caesar and Pompey (plain Objects of sense) are proved to have
had once being in the world, because seen by many; But Christ our Lord and his
Apostles, no less objects of sense, were as visible, the parity therefore
hold's good. 2. The Gests and noble Acts of Caesar first seen, Records
afterward preserved, None can force himself to deny a truth owned upon
Universal Fame.
and as good Records are extant for the admirable works and Wonders of our
Savior. 3. The Fame of those Heroes and their Gests taking its first rise from
Sense became in time Universal, and handed down by Tradition, lives yet so
vigorously in the minds of all men, that no owner of this public Fame can by
any violence force himself to judge, that Caesar never was in being, never
fought battle, the whole Story of Alexander is a fourb etc. Thus also the Fame
of Christ, of the Apostles and their Wonders, once sensible, and yet upheld by
a perpetuated Tradition, still remain's so fixed in all minds, that unless this
public Fame perish, which is impossible, the matters of Fact supported by it,
are without Contest undeniable. Hence I propose this Question, whether a Jew or
Gentile can by violence force his intellectual Power to judge, Such a man as
Christ, such men as the Apostles, were never in the world? You will say No,
because they are Truths Universally received, notwithstanding the very most of
Unbelievers boldly deny the Miracles we speak of, and why should not their
Authority as much evince A Negative, or prove no such Miracles done, as the
contrary Testimony of Christians avail for the Affirmative, in saying Christ
really wrought Miracles.

15. To Answer the difficulty, you have here an undoubted Principle. Clear
Positive proofs manifest for an Affirmative, quite bear down, overweigh in true
worth, a contrary Negative bluntly maintained without semblance of Proof.
Should therefore the greatest part of men now living barely deny without Proof
Alexander or Caesar ever to have been, or done any memorable Action, the
contrary Positive Arguments alleged for their being would manifestly Show that
ungrounded Denial to be not only weightless, but senseless also, and
improbable. And thus I discourse in our present case. Positive Ground's
irrefragable reasons, (whereof you shall have a few hints) rationally prove our
Savior and his An objection answered.
Apostles to have wrought true Miracles, therefore all contrary Opposition,
without Grounds and proofs, appears frigid, senceless, and improbable. Some
Critic may object. Had as many from the first rise of Caesar opposed his being
and Heroical Acts, as have gainsaid the Miracles of Christ and the Apostles
from the beginning of Christianity, that certainly would have much abated the
humane Belief all have now of Caesar, of Alexander, Cicero, or who you will. I
answer no Abatement at all, while on the one side (and this is ever to be
noted) the Positive grounds for the Affirmative stand in vigor, as they now
stand, and the Denial rigidly examined for want of proofs, comes to nothing,
but to this vain empty, and Idle Assertion. Caesar, forsooth, never was, or did
any thing worth a man, Christ never wrought true Miracles. Positive proofs
therefore brought to light in behalf of these Miracles, enervate the contrary
unproved Assertion, and show it void of Strength, futile, in a word worth
nothing.

16. Now if you enquire after these Positive Reas. and Relig. Disc. 1. cap. 3.
proofs, all clear and convincing, whole Volums might be written. Some as I
argued, Reas: and Religs: remonstrate the Cause by its real effects, and set
before us a manifest Truth, the known Conversion of the world, made by Christ
and his Apostles without force of Arms or any earthly Allurement, Nay, upon the
greatest disadvantages imaginable, because however poor and despicable in the
eyes of all, yet They prevailed against the rich, and powerful; and brought
innumerable to believe in a Crucified man. Was it not now, that the greatest
Philosophers, the most Eloquent Orators, were deemed less wise than twelve
unlearned Fishermen, and did not God set a mark of folly upon humane wisdom in
the noble Conquest made by the Divine Spirit, that speak in these very men,
reputed Idiots? This prodigious Work most certainly A Proof taken from the
Miraculous Conversion of Nations.
done (whereof see more in the place Cited above) was either brought to pass
by Virtue of true Miracles, or not; if by Miracles, we have our intent, if not;
plain reason, (witness S. Austin) teaches that no greater Miracle can be
conceived, than to behold a sinful and unbelieving World converted without the
Miracles we plead for, Answerable hereunto others Argue, and methinks
pertinently. These Blessed men who wrote the History of the Gospel and
registered our Saviors Miracles with their own, at last, as all know,
courageously endured violent deaths, to Testify that the Doctrine and Miracles
they wrote of, were no Leger-demain but sincerely true. In doing this, we must
either judge them horridly impious, or stark mad, if they registered matters of
Fact that never were, or contrariwise own them Divinly inspired, and faithful
Ministers of their great Lord and Master. Say they were impious, besotted, or
mad, you utter the greatest Paradox that ever mouth spoke, and must confess
that whole multitudes, wise, and learned, were converted to Christ by wicked
and mad Impostors; which proves him or them impious and utterly bereaved of
Judgment, that dare upon no ground avouch a Fiction so shamfully incredible.
These first followers of Christ therefore, proceeded with all Sincerity, and
registered their great Masters Doctrine, and Miracles most faithfully.

17. A third Proof, methinks Very convincing, may be thus proposed. Should a
Stranger come amongst us from the furthest Parts of the world, and tell us he
has heard much in his Travels of great wonders done by a man called Jesus
Christ, as also of Strange Miracles wrought by some poor followers Christ had,
named Disciples, and very willing he is to be better informed concerning the
truth of these divulged Wonders. To give this man rational Satifaction, I would
in the first place put into his hands the History of the Gospel, where these
Matters of Fact are recorded, and next demand, whether he can more rationally
call into doubt the truth of that History (owned by innumerable How a Strager
may be satisfied that doubts of Christ's Miracles.
multitudes a true Book, at least upon humane faith) than in prudence Question
the verity of any other History he own's true? In case he boggles at the
History, I must know Why, and upon what rational ground he boggles? Now this
ground, after some little discourse, will appear so remote from being rational,
that it can come at last to nothing but a self conceipted Fancy because it is
utterly impossible to make any more just or reasonable exception against the
plain History of the Gospel, than against any other known or received true
Story. Thus much cleared, which no Enemy of Christ unless most unreasonable
can deny, our Stranger casts his thoughts upon Jews and modern Sectaries, and
finds these by their own confession so destitute of Miracles, that none among
them can pretend to any, since Christianity began. Next he peruses the Gospel,
see's with what Candor the Evangelists recount our Saviors Miracles, and
seems willing enough to hold all true upon humane Faith, because he finds no
reasonable exception against them, yet stick's much at one Passage, where we
are told of greater works to be John. 14. v. 12.
done by those who believe in Christ; than he had wrought. If this can be made
out and verifyed, says the Stranger, Christ did not only foretell, future
things, which is proper to God, but it follows also, that after his death and
leaving the world, He did, (as if present with some choice Servants) empower
them to perpetuate the like visible Wonders, he had wrought. Christ therefore,
Says he, was either very unwise in promising so largely while he lived, if he
never performed it, or if he really made all good, he worthily deserves credit,
and ought to be believed before any that hitherto taught the world, for though
we read of some Heathens, who gloriously set forth their own Wonders, yet none
of them dared to Prophesy of doing Miracles after death by others, neither did
they, (for ought I know) work any by men of the like Belief or Profession with
them. Thus the Travaller discourses, and urges to have these latter Miracles
wrought by Christ's Servants rationally laid forth to an unbyassod Judgment. To
Satisfy the difficulty here proposed.

18. All know that matters of Fact as Miracles, where of we now discourse, are
not proved by Principles taken from natural Causes, or the deep knowledge of
Metaphysical learning, for who will go about to show that Caesar was a glorious
Warrier, or Cicero an Eloquent Orator, by Metaphysics or natural reasoning?
None can attempt this? All therefore that Argue pertinently, must rely upon
other proofs and plead, as we have done, for Apostolical Miracles by the
public Fame of them, spread the whole world over, or finally Reason thus. It
is manifest that those first Blessed men, however weak in them selves, without
force of Arms ruined the Idols of the Gentiles, and converted innumerable to
Christ, Ergo, they wrought great Miracles answerable to that Ruin, and the
admirable Conversions done by them.

19. To give more force to these and the like Upon what Principles Miracles are
proved.
Proofs, I do not only, as S. Chrisostom advises, take into my hands the
Apostles Acts written by S. Luke, where we read of stupendous Miracles, but I
also reflect upon our Saviors antecedent Promise concerning greater Works, and
further evince the real truth of that Prophesy, by the consequent visible
Wonders which those first blessed men wrought here on earth. And first I might
tell you, it is clear from the Prophesies of the old Scripture, that the
ancient Priesthood among the Jews was to fail, and a new King and Priest reign
for ever, that a Church once barren, should have many Children, as we proved
above. It is again clear, that these Prophesies were fulfilled when Christ our
Lord established his own glorious Kingdom the Christian Catholic Church, and
though Jews seek to darken the light of those clear Predictions, yet it is
evident that Christ has had a glorious Church in the world above Sixteem Ages,
which as Tertullian observes, stood not confined to one Tertull. lib adversus
Judaeos cap. 8.
or more places, like the Empire of Nabuchodonosor, or Alexander, but Vbique
porrigitur. etc. has a vast extent, is believed every where Reign's every
where, and is reverenced in all places. Hence I Argue. When innumerable worthy
How Worthy Credit those VVitnesses are who defend Miracles*
Witnesses within one only Kingdom (against whom never just exception was or
can be made) unanimously averr a matter of Fact, assented to as an undoubted
Verity, That is held Unquestionable. So all prudently judge, such a Prince as
Henry the. 5th* to have once gloriously reigned in England, because many worthy
Witnesses (never rationally excepted against) Avouch, it as a certain Truth,
but a far greater cloud of worthy Witnesses, members of Christ's glorious
Church (against whom their was never any Just exception) openly declare and
unanimously teach, the Apostles to have wrought stupendous Miracles, when at
their preaching the Idols fell down, and innumerable Believers were gained to
Christ, therefore the truth attested stand's uncontestably certain. That these
Witnesses are mighty numerous, and without dispute worthy credit is undeniable,
being justly listed amongst the most wise, learned, and virtuous that ever
lived. Such are our Austins, Chrysostoms, Gregory's, Damascens, Bernards, with
innumerable others, who if occasion had offered it self, would have willingly
dyed for the truth of Apostolical Miracles. Now if these Givers in of Evidence
Seem not Satisfactory, you have yet more. viz. The whole humane Authority of
Christ's Kingdom, I mean his Church, She both tell's us what our Savior
promised of these greater wonders, and upon the Evidence had, never ceased to
preserve them in the memory of all her Faithful Children to this day.

20. And thus you see, that when we took one Proof for Miracles from public
Fame (which some may say is fallacious) we argued not so pressly as now, while
we evince their truth by the Testimony of the most choice, learned, and
creditable Witnesses that ever spoke since Christianity began. And if our
supposed Stranger find's not a Pregnancy of reasoning in this Discourse, I
shall soon dismiss him, and deplore his condition as one in whom the light of
reason (if not utterly extinct) seems more then a little Eclypfed. It may be
some Critic will Object, we have not yet shown how the Apostles Miracles are
said to be greater than In what Sense Apostolical Miracles are called grea^^r,
then our Saviors.
those wrought by our Savior. For an Answer, all know that a Miracle may be
considered with a double respect, first to God an Infinite Power, and so taken,
the greatest ever done cannot be called a Miracle, because the greatest
Transcend's not an Omnipotent Power. Again, consider a Miracle as done by one
that has no more force to work it than to move the Heavens, under that Notion
it justly acquires the denomination of an effect truly Supernatural, because
far beyond all force in nature. You may se what I aim at by this plain
Instance. Should a Giant lift up a weighty burden, all would Judge he work's
proportionably to his Strength, but if a weak infant did so, who would not
justly proclaim the wonder? The Miracles of Christ our Lord (rightly compared
to a Giant in Holy Writ) were effects easily and Connaturally flowing from the
Omnipotent Word, united to humane nature, infinitely, in themselves, more
valuable than all the works of men and Angels, but yet less wonderful than the
Apostolical Miracles, if on the one side we regard the mighty Power of our
great Thaumaturgus, and on the other, cast an eye upon those weak Instruments
that did them. The weakness The weakness of the Instrument, hightens the
greatness of a Miracle.
therefore of the Instruments whereby they were wrought, much heightens the
greatness of their Miracles. Again the Apostles Miracles may be said greater,
because all summoned together, were more numerous than our Saviors. 3. They
are greater in the Effect, witness the glorious Conversions of Nations which
followed upon the Apostolical Signs and wonders, whereas Christ our Lord
reserving that Honor to his first Choice and elected Ministers, converted not
half the number, while (...)ived on Farth.

21. Thus much of the Primitive Miracles, and if any think I have stayed too
long upon a known Subject. My answer is, All that know and own these Miracles
as true, rationally prove not their truth against Jews and Gentiles, wherein I
hold Dr Still. very deficient. Again, if I show, and it is my chiefest Intent,
that Miracles wrought in the Roman Church are not only Defensible, but every
way firmly proved upon the same rational Grounds as those now mentioned, none
can deem my labor lost. I Say upon the same rational Grounds, for hitherto we
have waved Proofs taken from Divine Revelation, and only pleaded by Reason.
This therefore we endeavor to Demonstrate.

CHAP. II.
The same rational Arguments, whereby the Miracles of Christ and the Apostles
are proved, euince also true Miracles to have been wrought in the Roman
Catholic Church. Other clear proofs for Church Miracles. A contest between
Antichrist and Dr Stillingfleet. The Dr is worsted. If the Church does Propose
Forgeries for true Miracles, none can believe Christ's Miracles upon the
Universal humane Testimony of all (...)ed Christians. True Miracles distinguish
the Church from all false Conventicles.

1. THe Parallel of these rational Arguments easily drawn from the precedent
Chapter, may be thus compendiously laid forth to every Reader. Is a Heathen, as
we said, to admit the Historical part of Scripture where Christ's, Miracles are
recorded to be as morally certain upon humane Faith, The first proof alleged,
applied to Church Miracles.
only; as any other known History he yields Assent to, and if he denies this,
will he not soon be driven to ground the Denial upon his own perverse will, or
self conceipted Fancy? Nothing can be more clear. Say then, I beseech you, is
not a Sectary when he read's the Writings of Holy Fathers, and other known
Historians where the approved Miracles of the Church stand upon Record, in
reason obliged, to hold these as morally certain upon human Faith, as he does
innumerable other Passages written in the English, or French History, or a Jew
ought to own the History of the new Testament? In case he boggles, we shall
hereafter so overcharge him with the express Testimonies of Fathers, and other
choice approved Writers that his bogling will appear, as it is, Perverseness,
Francy, or plain dotage.

2. Is it again true, that some Gentiles and The second proof applied
Jews, also though Adversaries to Christ, frankly owned his glorious Miracles?
Nothing can be more clear, But we have far more professed Enemies that
acknowledge Miracles to have been wrought in our Catholic Community, the
Parallel therefore hitherto fail's not. To produce a list of all would be
tedious, a few only borrowed from Englishmen, shall suffice; His Majesty Rex
Jacobus lib. 3. Daemonolog cap. 4.
King James hold's it true, that the Papists really free popossessed Persons of
Devils, because Orthodox men say so, and Ey-witnesses have seen such Miracles
done; Mr Covel in his Answer to John Covel cited by Brerely Protest, Apology
Page with me 529.
Burges says: No man can deny, but that God after the death of his Son
manifested his Power to the amazement of the world in the contemptible Sign of
the Cross, which has been the Instrument of many Miracles. Brerely again
produces a clear Testimony taken out of Dr Board a Physician who Se Protest.
Apology. page 348.
in his Extravagants annexed to his Breviary of health, after many bitter
Invectives, against the Pope, and Clergy of Rome, reports himself to have been
an Ey-witness of a Gentlewoman possessed with Devils, brought from Germany to
Rome, and there freed from those evil Spirits, yea perfectly cured; The course
whereof, says Board, was so Stupendous and above all reason, And the cure so
evident, that it cannot but be attributed to the virtue of those Holy words,
which the Priest did speak over that Daemoniack. Thus our professed Adversaries.

3. Is it true that the Miracles of Christ and the Apostles (plain Objects of
Sense) were first proved by the Testimony of those that* beheld them, and that
those who saw them (distinct Ey-witnesses) at different times, cannot be
imagined willingly to have conspired in a Forgery, or basely given out Lazarus
for a dead man, raised to life, that was not dead? Is it also true, that the
Evangelists, who afterward registered these seen Wonders, had they told so many
horrid Lies in matters of Fact open and public (where fiction has not easily
place) would not only have prejudiced their own cause, but also been liable to
Public infamy, and the disgraceful Clamours of Jews and Gentiles? If these
Truths be undeniable, we have the like rational Evidence for Miracles wrought
in the Roman Catholic Church. Reader consider An application of the third Proof
things seriously. Was not that Miracle wrought by the Relics of S. Gervasius
and Protasius in Milan, witness S. Ambrose, an Object of S. Ambros. Epist. 85.
Sense, and seen by many? Were those stupendous wonders effected by the
glorious Martyr S. Stephen, whereof S. Austin speak's largely, S. August. lib.
22. Civit. cap. 8.
done in the dark without the Attestation of innumerable that saw them? Was not
S. Bernard's Miracle after his blessing certain loaves of bread (whereof we
shall speak presently) so memorable, and manifest to Sense, that whole
Multitudes having eaten of the bread finding themselves cured, ran forthwith to
the Saint, and with all submission praising God, owned the Favor? John
Clements cure at Montagu, the young youths restored Leg at Zaragosa, and the
Miraculous cure of F. Mastrilli at Naples, were all Sensible and visible Works
of a Divine power. Say now I beseech you, (to go on with the Parallel,) can
any Imagine, that either those who saw, or wrote these Miracles, damnedly
conspired among them selves, to delude the world with open Lies? It is
impossible, because Spectators or writers of such matters lived far more
distant (for time and place) from each other, than the Apostles that registered
our Saviors wonders. If therefore those blessed men cannot be supposed
wickedly to have feigned Christ's raising Lazarus to life, or cleansing the
Lepers, it is more impossible to conceive, that S. Austin (for example)
persuaded those who lived many Ages after with S. Bernard, to tell a forged
Story of his miraculous Loaves. Did those. think you, who saw the youth's
restored leg at Zaragosa suborne the Ey-witnesses of John Clements cure at
Montagu, to feign that matter of Fact, which happened many years before the
Miracle at Zaragosa? It is Folly to Judge so.

4. O but, say Sectaries, we doubt much whether the supposed Ey-witnesses of
Latter Miracles, and the Writers of them spoke truth, in what Those first are
said to have seen; That is They Will doubt, whether any saw the Miracles recounted
by S. Austin, and S. Ambrose, and Question as much these Saints Sincerity in
writing them. And cannot a Jew or Heathen move all these doubts Concerning to
Eywitnesses of our Saviors Miracles, and the Evangelists Sincerity that wrote
them? Yea every whit as wisely. Reader in this place, we only compare the
humane Testimony of those who saw Christ's Miracles, before Scripture registered
them, with the humane Testimony of latter witnesses, that visibly beheld the
Miracle at Milan, at Montagu, or Naples, and say no more rational exception can
be made against the latter Ey-witnesses than the first. Now because in
discoursing with the Adversaries of Christ, and his Church, it were folly to
suppose the Gospel God's Divine Word, we clearly evince by reason, that the
Book at least deserves as great Credit, upon No exception can be made against
those who write of approved Miracles.
humane Faith, as any other true plain History, And then tell Sectaries, that
they in reason can-no more except against the approved Writers of our Church
Miracles (S. Austin for example or S. Ambrose) than a Jew or Heathen against
the Evangelists that wrote Christ's Miracles, and hence you have the Primitive
Miracles, and those in the Church prove alike. Lastly would not the Evangelists
(now supposed to write heartily their Story, without any fraudulent
Combination) have justly exposed them selves to public Infamy in setting down
matters of Fact, had they (singly considered) recorded things newer Seen or
heard? No less public Infamy, Censure, and Clamours those would have justly
Incurred in relating Church Miracles, had they brought to light strange
Wonders, never known in the world. Would public Clamours think ye, or Censures
have spared S. Austin, or those that recorded John Clement's Cure, if forged
and feigned Stories? No certainly, men both wise and prudent would have
excepted against them as Impostures, had not Evidence cleared their Truth.

5. Is it true that the Miracles of Christ first seen by Ey-witnesses and
afterward recorded, raised them to a Public Fame the whole world over, which
hitherto continues in force by a never interrupted Tradition? The like public
Fame, say I, first grounded on Sense and hitherto continued by Tradition, we
have for Miracles wrought in the Church. Speaking of Fame alone, or of a humane
universal Report. these The fourth Proof above applied to the Churches
Miracles.
Miracles are as certain, as that the Historry of the Gospel recorded by the
four Evangelists, is Gods word, or written by Divine Inspiration. Sectaries, it
is true are found, that Question the Truth of some Church Miracles (none for
ought I know, unless Dr Stillingfleet denies all) and no few Desertors of the
Church, Question also whether many Parts and Passages in the new Testament are
God Sacred Word: But the great Fame of clear Miracles, and the new Testaments
Divinity, is even upon the Churches humane Authority upheld, as indubitable by
all called Catholics, and therefore very universal, yea answerable to the Fame
of Apostolical Wonders.

6. Is it true that Positive proofs alleged for this Affirmative. Christ
truly wrought Miracles, quite discountenance and bear down the contrary
Negative, barely vented without any appearance of proof? Christ never wrought
any. The Principle is undoubted, and clearly evinces, that God has wrought many
true Miracles by the Professed members of the Catholic Church. Our Positive
proofs you shall have afterward more fully, and the contradiction of those who
deny Miracles demonstrated an improbable Attempt, yea void of Sense, and
ridiculous. In this place we only Argue as we did above, and show the cause,
Miracles I mean, by the real Effects which followed in the Conversion of
Nations, far more numerous after the Apostles days (and all those wrought by
The fifth Proof applied to our Churches Miracles.
the Roman Catholic Church) than before. Such remarkable Works of God over
Italy, Germany, France, Spain, England and the Indies to the Catholic Faith,
were, as I pleaded, done by Miracles or not, if so done, we have our Intent, if
not; it was the greatest Miracle of all, to see so many Aliens from Christ
gained to the true Faith, without Miracles. Again, those painful Missioners
whom God made his Instruments to work so many admirable Conversions through the
whole world, were in the vulgar esteem of the Nations converted, held Sots,
Impious, and Cheats; or contrariwise, Loyal and faithful Messengers of Christ
and his Church; if loyal and faithful, none can cast a blemish on them; if
judged Impostors, Sots, or impious, you utter the most shameful Improbability,
that ever Tongue spoke, or heart harbored, and must say that the wisest
Nations of the world were all stark mad, when listening to the Doctrine of these
supposed Fools, they abandoned their Errors, believed in Christ, and ever
afterward lived and dyed in the Roman Catholic Faith. This Argument alone is
so strong that twenty Dr Stillingfleets shall never break it in pieces.

7. Lastly for a Close of these rational Arguments, I introduced a Stranger yet
far from yiedling assent to our Church Miracles, and because he knows that
Jews and Sectaries lay no claim to that gift, nor ever did any since the
Apostles days, this man, much of Dr Stillingfleets mind, stand's earnestly for
a cessation of all Miracles, though if misled, he is willing to quit his
error. My endeavor is to unbeguile him, and therefore I ask, whether he
denies or grant's the Miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles? In case he
stumbles here, you have his full refutation already set down, if contrariwise
he owns those as true, upon public Fame, and the great Conversions God wrought
by them. I put into his hands the best and choicest Records, whereby we prove
prodigious Miracles to have been wrought in the Church, and am content to
undergo public Disgrace before a whole learned University, if I make not this
Assertion good. viz. No other rational exception shall this An application of
the last Proof insisted on above.
man bring against the verity of these Catholic Records, than a Jew or Heathen
produces aginst the Truth of the four Evangelists, where our Saviors Miracles
are recorded. That is to say, as a Jew or Heathen shall never speak rational
word against the first wonders, registered in the Gospel, so our supposed
Stranger will be as much silenced in his undertaken quarrel against latter
Miracles, recorded by Authors of unquestionable Fame. The Fame of these Wonders
by reason of the larger extent of the Church now, than anciently, is more
Universal, and the Conversions made by Her laboriours Messioners sent up and
down the world in latter Ages, are far more numerous, than those the Apostles
wrought. Now if we appeal to Witnesses as we pleaded above for the Apostolical
Signs and Miracles, there is no Kingdom under the Sun, that ever brought to
light so many grave Writers (against whom no exception can be made) for any
matter of Fact, that happened in it, as we produce in the present Controversy.
For all the learned Doctors, and vigilant Pastors of Christ's own far extended
Kingdom, no less numerous than worthy credit, teach and have ever taught, that
true conspicuous and undeniable Miracles have been wrought in this great moral
Body, and the Church Herself, upon her own humane Authority (still we abstract
from Divine Relation) asserts the same, and to this day, preserves a Memory of
her long since past, and present Wonders, in the minds of all her Children.
Therefore he or they who undervalve so many incomparable clear Give^^ in of
Evidence, never excepted against by Orthodox Christian, (what Gods Enemies and
the Churches Adversaries babble out upon no rational Proof, carries little
weight) I say, such men ought to be dismissed without Reply, as unworthy to be
dealt with, and reckoned among Protest. without Princ. Dis. 1 cap. 1. Reason
and Relig. Dis. 2. cap. 8.
those in whom the light of reason i^ fearfully eclipsed. I quoted many of
these approved Witnesses in my two Treatises, and am now less willing to
transcribe all again. You shall have more and choice ones hereafter. And thus
much of the Parallel of Arguments.

Rational proofs For Miracles alleged in my other Treatises.
8. We are now as the Title promises to insist upon other proofs, and these
following I chiefly urged in the Treatises cited. 1. We find by experience a
strange confusion of different Sects in the world, and se that all pretend to
serve God in Spirit and Truth, whereas, most certainly, one only Society does
so, for as there are not many Gods but one true, so there cannot be many
Religions (dissenting Miracles denote and mark out that Society wherein God
teaches truth.
in Fundamentals) true, but one only, or none at all. In this horrid Confusion,
while every one lays claim to Truth, it is, as I said, absolutely necessary to
have that happy Society clearly marked out, wherein Divine Faith is taught,
but no Mark can be more palpable, or better avail to discern this Society from
false Sects than glorious Miracles, Gods own Seals, Christ's own Cognisances,
and the clearest Characters of Apostolical Doctrine.

9. I Argued. 2. A Church not marked with these illustrious Signs, is as dark a
thing as a Sun without light, whence it is, that though. Two unlucky Rebels,
Luther and Calvin, labored with might and main, to set a false Gloss of
Miracles upon their new Doctrine, yet God crossed their design, made the
Authors of the fraud infamous, and would have the new Monster appear as it
truly was, dark without light, dull without life, and so totally stripped of all
Supernatural Signs, that Shame and ignominy only covered that naked nothing;
whereas his Sacred Providence for the quickening of Faith, and Devotion in the
Church, both inwardly plyes our hearts with Divine grace, and outwardly also
excit's us to fervor by a frequent sight of such visible wonders as made the
world Christian. I Argued. Jews and Infidels gained to the Church by the force
of Miracles.
3. If Miracles, as all confess, were necessary for the Conversion of Jews
and Infidels when Christ and his Apostles taught the world, it is a Paradox to
hold them useless, or unnecessary in after Ages, when Jews as hard hearted,
and Gentiles as barbarous and uncivilized (that never knew Christ) have been
instructed, and innumerable gained to our holy Faith, not because they barely
heard Verities preached, but upon this Inducement, that they often saw all
confirmed by Evident Signs and wonders from Heaven.

10. To go on in this discourse, I would know whether Dr Stillingfleet can
allow the Devil liberty to ranger up and down, and to do much mischief upon
innumerable possessed with unclean Spirits, and whether he will grant also that
Christ our Lord like one careless, The freeing possessed Persons from Devils,
proves Miracles.
leaves his Militant Church destitute of all help, and means, whereby such
enslaved Persons may be freed from that bondage? That many have been thus
possessed, and released also out of thraldom, is an evident Truth proved by
experience, and that the ejection or restraint of evil Spirits transcend's all
force in nature and consequently done by Gods Omnipotent Power, is no less
certain, and therefore a work truly Miraculous.

11. Again, shall Antichrist sit in Pomp, and dazzle men's eyes with a false
luster of wonders, and shall not the Orthodox Church of Christ, think ye, be
able when that Monster appears, to oppose one true Miracle against the Divel's
pride vaunting by Antichrist of great wonders? Shall he glory in false Signs,
and the Church show none that are true? So it is says Dr Stillingfleets, your
Church Miracles are cheats, and no better than what Devils have done, and
Antichrist will do by his Charms. Is it so indeed, are all cheats and works of
the Devil? One word To grant some Miracles wrought in the Church will much
abate Antichrists pride.
Mr Dr. A moderate man in granting some Miracles true, would much cheer up the
comfortless hearts of poor afflicted Christians in those future days of
Tribulation, and teach every one how to withstand Antichrist, by setting true
approved Miracles against his juggling Tricks. Might not one then living, though
none of the strongest Combatants, encounter that false Prophet thus? I am
assured of undoubted Miracles wrought in the Church wherein we Christians live,
but have no certainty of the Truth of thy Wonders, which I Judge mere
Illusions, and therefore ought to be accounted most imprudent, if I prefer thy
suspected Signs before those I hold certain.

12. Most, I think, will Judge this discourse reasonable, though Dr Still.
makes it faint, and senceless, for if all the Miracles done in the Roman
Catholic Church since the Apostles days have been Illusions, and works of the
Devil, Antichrist upon our D(...) concession, will so stop the mouths of
Christians, that none shall then speak a rational word against him, for may he
not plead and pertinently thus. The great wonders I evidently Now Antichrist
may plead upon Dr Still. Concession.
set before your Eyes cannot be worse than cheats and works of the Devil, Dr
Still. tell's you (and you must believe him) that your Miracles are nothing but
cheats and works of the Devil (thus far he and I stand upon equal Terms)
therefore in reason, you may as well credit my strange Wonders as your own,
which are every whit (upon the concession of a Dr) as juggling and fallacious.
Hence it follows, that you are either obliged to believe me upon the present
Sight of my wonders (which, for ought you yet know may be true and from the
highest Power imaginable) or, which I would have done, utterly renounce all
claim to your past Miracles, so much cried up and down the world. Dr Still.
may reply. Though all Miracles wrought in the Church be truly deemed Cheats,
yet there have been other most clear ones, powerful enough to Curb
Antichrist's Pride, and these are the glorious signal Wonders of Christ, and
his Apostles alone sufficient, to discountenance that false Prophet's Sign's,
though never so Specious.

13. Have at you, Mr Dr, says Antichrist. Grant me first as you do, that the
Miracles wrought in the Church are forgeries and the Devils works, and I Will
soon enervate the strongest Rational proof you have for Christ's Miracles. Your
only rational ground comes to this, that the Gospel where those primative
Miracles are recorded, is owned upon the humane Testimony of all called
Christians a true Story, but this common Testimony in your Principles is
evidently worth nothing, and mark my proof. If such vast Multitudes of
Christians Christians who have fathered false Miracles upon God, deserve not
Credit, in Saying Christ wrought Miracles.
have been so shamefully wicked, as to make a clamor of Miracles when none
were wrought, That is, to tell the world open Lies, nay more, publicly to
avouch Forgeriers and works of the Devil, to have been done by the Power of
Almighty God, which God never did, but both disclaim's and hates. I say upon
this Supposition, no man in his wits can credit these men's Testimony, though
they swear a hundred times over, that Christ and his Apostles wrought Miracles,
and that the Gospel truly recount's them, for if they have falsely imposed upon
mankind Matters of Fact so near at hand, or forged Miracles of a latter date
(seen a^ they Say by innumerable, that were never seen) who can believe these
mistaken Multitudes, when they talk of Christ's Miracles a far off, only seen,
(if yet ever done) by some few Ey-witnesses, about sixteen Ages past? This
Discourse stand's upon a certain Principle, which is, that all the Miracles
Christ wrought, are not Selfe-Evident Truths or known as Truths ex Terminis,
though registered in Scripture, therefore the first rational knowledge we have
of them arises, as Dr Still says, from the Universal humane Testimony of all
called Christians, (though fallible) which excludes a Possibility of reasonable
The reason why their Testimony i^ weightless.
doubting; or, as Catholics speak, from the Infallible Testimony of the Church
made evidently Credible by glorious Miracles, But neither Testimony is of any
weight, Nay both are utterly blasted, if these Givers in of Evidence ^be proved
public Liars, and constantly cast upon God Iugling cheats, and works properly
belonging to the Devil.

14. Some may reply. This Argument seems indeed to take off much Authority
from Papits in their defense of Christ's Miracles, because men once proved
perjured, or public Liars (as they are now supposed in their false
attestations given of Church Miracles) deserve little credit in any other like
public affair, but Protestants, forsooth, who on the one side oppose latter
Miracles, and on the other, stiffly defend those wrought by Christ and his
Apostles, An Objection answered.
cannot but raise all, upon their humane Faith, to a high rational Credibility.
A most pitiful Put off, which proves, if of any force, that before Protestants
got footing in a few scattered parts of Europe, Christ's Miracles could not be
owned rationably credible, upon the humane Authority of a whole ample learned
Church. But here is not all; I say in a word the humane consent of Protestants
in this matter, (or of any other precedent Sectaries) stand's like an
insignificant Cipher not worth a rush, without the Testimony of our Evidenced
Church I prove the Assertion. Who ever takes the first Report in matters of
fact from others both false and beguiled, is as much cheated and beguiled, as
those Original witnesses are. But Protestants (the like is of all former
Sectaries) first received the Report of Christ's Miracles from the ancient
witnesses of the Catholic Church, here supposed false, and grossly beguiled in
relating their own Miracles, (neither God revealed to Sectaries, nor did Devil
ever truly tell them what Miracles Christ wrought) therefore if those Primary
witnesses are beguiled, Protestants also remain fast in the like Error. O but
Says some one, we Protestants credit Papists when they tell us, that the
Gospel is a true Story and believe them also in the Report they make of
Christ's Miracles. Most unreasonably done, for if those men never told you true
word of Miracles wrought in the Church, but quite contrary cloyed your ears
with forged Stories, their credit utterly lost, deserves nothing but contempt,
as to Christ's Miracles, if false in the one of mighty consequence, hold them
boldly fallacious in the other.

15. What will you say, if Dr Still. to help himself in a present Exigency
draw back a little, and tell us, He never yet plainly denied all our Church
Miracles. Very good news if true; whence it follows that unless he will quite
suspend his Judgment as doubtful of all, he must necessarily grant some great
Miracles, those chiefly approved by the Church, my desire is to know, which,
and how many he will yield us, having upon his Concession certainty of so many,
I shall thence infer, that either All approved Church Miracles are to be
admitted, or None. Some perhaps Either all approved Miracles must be allowed or
none.
may here propose this Question, what if the Church had never had Miracles done
in it, would not our Saviors admirable Wonders either written in the Gospel,
or conveyed down by Tradition have been sufficient to check Antichrist's pride,
and the legerdemain of that false Prophet? Were this supposed, Christians would
have been in no worse condition than now, though the Church tell false Stories
of her Miracles. I Answer, the Supposition which notoriously impaires the
Churches humane Authority, and consequently takes off that high respect all
bear to Christ's Miracles, is a mere Impertinency. Observe my reason. It is one
thing to Argue upon a false Supposition, by imagining no Miracles wrought in
the Church, and another What follows if the Church had been without Miracles?
to make this Oracle an upon Liar. In the first case, had none been wrought,
the Church would never have divulged any, but in the other Supposition, She is
perfidious, while she ascertain's us of Miracles which Sectaries say were never
done, and therefore loses all credit, and can gain belief of none.

16. We come at last to the true fundamental Ground of Miracles wrought in the
Church, and prove them absolutely necessary. None upon a bare owning those
ancient Wonders wrought by Christ and his Apostles, true, can show who among so
many dissenting Christians in the fundamental matters of Faith, make at this
day Profession of Christ's Doctrine. Therefore other Miracles are absolutely
necessary to mark out, and distinguish Miracles proved necessary in the Church.
she true Professors of Christ's Doctrine from false Sectaries. Whoever denies
Miracles absolutely necessary for this end, must either say that the Christian
Societey where Christ's Doctrine is truly professed, cannot be known or
distinguished from false Sectaries, though it gives in Evidence of undoubted
Miracles; Or, which is as bad he must grant, that all Heretics are here-upon
proved true Professors of Christ's Doctrine, because, forsooth, they
acknowledge, Christ and his Apostles to have wrought such and such Miracles,
and this is evidently false, for condemned Heretics as Arians and Pelagians,
easily assent to that owned Truth, but are not therefore to be listed among the
true Professors of Christ's Doctrine. Much more therefore is required, and it is
that Christ's true Society does not only talk of primitive Miracles, or own
them true, but besides really show you the like admirable distinctive Signs, as
raising the dead, curing the blind and lame (manifested by Christ and his
Apostles) peculiar to it self, not Common to others of a contrary says. But
this Prerogative whereby Faithful Believers are marked out and differenced from
Heretics, belong's only to one living Oracle, the Roman Catholic Church,
which took its rise from Christ and his Apostles, and ever since stood Age
after Age gloriously illustrated by known and renowned Miracles; And thus we
have it clearly distinguished from all Heretics Whenas Sectaries, men utterly
forsaken, like dirt cast out of the house of God, lie under disgrace altogether
unable to confirm their Novelties by one true supernatural wonder. Thus
Providence shows, them no less naked and bereft of true Miracles, than cold,
inefficacious and unlucky in their Conversions, and drawing Infidels to Christ.

17. By what is now Said, you may discover Dr Still. p. 665.
no little lamenesse in Dr Still Discourse. The Doctrine of Christ, says he,
being confirmed by the Miracles wrought by them, there cannot be any such
necessity in succeeding Ages, to confirm the Much Lamenesse in Dr Still.
Discourse.
same Doctrine by Miracles. The same Doctrine, Sr You speak at random, pray you
tell us in this confusion of different Religions while every one lay's claim
to Christ's Doctrine, who are proved the true Professors of it, by avouching
Christ to have wrought great Miracles? Or make this Consequence good. Christ
Cured the blind, lame and deaf, Ergo Arians who contradict Protestants in the
Essentials of Faith, or, Protestants that contradict the Arians, are proved the
faithful Professors of Christ's Doctrine, because both Judge well of Christ's
Miracles. If so, Catholics may come in with the best, and show themselves
sound in Faith upon this account; But, thanks be to God, we can say more for
our cause, and rest not only in a bare Belief of those ancient great Wonders,
but, as I noted above, demonstrate a Church Characterized and gloriously marked
out by the like supernatural Sign's, which those first great Masters evidenced
when they preached to the world, and thus our Church is distinguished from all
false Conventicles.

18. There is no shifting of the force of this Argument but by one of these two
desperate evasions. Either it must be said, that public Miraculous works
evidently done by one or many Authoritively sent to teach Christ's Doctrine, are
not at all marks of Truth, and this is contrary to the Gospel. Our Lord working
with them (the Apostles) and confirming the Mark. 16. ^. 19. John 20. 30.
word with Signs that followed. These Signs are written, add's S. John, that
men might believe that Jesus is Christ, the Son of God etc. Or 2, You are
flatly to deny the Church ever to had one true Miracle wrought in it, which is
evidently false as has been proved, whereof more presently. The only owning
ancient Miracles Maintain's any Religion.
In the mean time you se, that to plead for Christ's true Doctrine by only
owning those ancient Miracles true, licenses all dissenting Christians in
Fundamentals to maintain any Religion true or false, as they please. The Arian
may teach as he teaches, and so may the Monothelit without Reproof, if he tell
us, he hold's Christ's Doctrine confirmed by primitive Miracles, though he
cannot say upon a bare owning those Signs, what Christ's Doctrine is, whether,
for an Instance, the Divine Word truly assumed Flesh, or that God is one
Essence and three distinct Persons etc. And thus all dissenting Christians
stand, as it were, equally balanced in their Plea for Truth, one is no more
advanced than another, nor shall any ever know where Christ's Truths are
taught, unless he first find out a Church evidenced by Christ's own
Signatures, I mean glorious Miracles.

19. Some may here Ask, whether God cannot set other Marks on a Church besides
Miracles Sufficient to distinguish it from all false Conventicles? I answer the
Question by another like Demand. Could not God have set other Marks on Christ
and his Apostles, excluding Miracles, sufficient to distinguish them from all
false Prophets? Reader, we enquire not in this place what God can do (his Power
is Omnipotent) but speak of what he has already done, and Say, that as his
Power and Wisdom marked Christ, Apostles and the Church, marked by Miracles.
out our blessed Lord and the Apostles by many clear Signs, as great Sanctity,
Purity in Doctrine, admirable Conversions, and one most choice, (Gods own
Signatures) glorious Miracles; So also he has set all and every one of these
Signal Marks upon his own Oracle the Catholic Church, the chiefest and
choicest whereof, are illustrious Miracles, by these she is clearly
distinguished from all false and misled Teachers.

CHAP. III.
Some Choice Manifest Miracles proved upon the Deposition of many Sworn
Ey-witnesses. Of a Late famous Miracle wrought at Calais in Picardy. None can
call into doubt the Authentic Miracles done by S. Thomas Cantilupe, our
renowned Bishop of Hereford. Other great Miracles yet obvious to all men's eyes.
S. Bernard's known Miracles, proved most certain.

1. MIracles being Matters of Fact and Objects of sense, cannot but gain credit
when Authors of unquestionable Fame produce many faithful Ey-witnesses, who
upon Oath attes^ed they saw them done? Of these I shall chiefly speak in this
chapter, and remit the Reader to my former Book as also to some ensuing
Chapters in this Treatise, Reas. and Relig. Dis. 2. cap. 8.
where I bring to light a whole Torrent of most ancient Fathers, not lightly,
but upon set design teaching. That God in all Ages, has adorned his Church with
renewned and undeniable Miracles. Cardinal Bellarmin begin's from the Bellar.
lib. 4. de notis. Ecclesiae Cap. 14.
first Century, with the known Miracles wrought by Christ and the Apostles, and
shows a continuance of them ever after to the 16.th Age, when that learned man
lived. The exact Brerely Protes Apol. Tract. 2. c. 3. Sect. 7. Sub. 3. page 534.
having proved a confessed want of Miracles in Luther, and Calvin, and other
Sectaries, lead's you from the eight Century downwards, and points out Miracles
so manifestly attested by approved Authors, that our very Adversaries, as
Osiander, the Centurists, and others, cannot for shame either Question the
sincerity of these Witnesses, or deny the matters of Fact, but shamefully
recurre to a desperate Plea, and say plainly, God had no hand in them, No. All
were done by the Divel's power. Now to the Task we have undertaken.

2. One glorious and most certain Miracle being but lately done at Calais a
Town in Picardy near England, shall first give the Reader entertainment. The
whole Process whereof, the rigid Examination made, the Depositions taken from
many Ey-witnesses, and every particular at last confirmed by Episcopal
Authority, those two laborious Writers, Godefridus Henschenius, Acta Sanct.
Men's. April. Tom. 1. 2. April. page 229.
and Daniel Papebrochius, have amply drawn out, to whom I must remit you, for
further Satisfaction, and briefly recount the Miracle visibly wrought upon a
Gentlewoman in Calais, by the intercession of that great Servant of God S.
Franciscus de Paula; Founder of a most Holy Religious Order, Vulgarly called
Minims.

3. In the year 1661. the forenamed Gentlewoman The nature af Peronna's
Infirmity.
about 30. years old, by name Peronna Raoult, daughter to an honorable man
called Lewis Raoult, had been 13. whole years griveously afflicted with a
violent cough, and stoppage at her lungs, caused by a continual Defluxion of
humors coming from her head. Physicians though often consulted, found no
remedy, saying ingenuously, they well knew not the cause and nature of her
strange Asthtmatical disease, which for the four last years more and more
increasing, brought frequent and fearful convulsion fits upon the afflicted
Patient, whence followed such a contraction of nerves and Sinews in her left
Leg, that first it became four fingers, soon after, half a foot shorter than
the other. This innumerable Witnesses saw, and gave Evidence of, as also that
the bone of her right Leg and Hip put out of joint; gave her such intolerable
pain, that the could not sit without drawing her body into a round lump, in
which Posture she suffered many Sowing fits, and unexpressible Torments. When
the most Christian King came to Calais, anno 1658 His Majesty's chief Physician
Monst Valet, and three other expert Doctors were there also, and several times
visited the infirm creature, which done, all unanimously concluded the
infirmity to be incurable, and that poor Peronna was to remain Paralitick all
the days of her life.

4. Thus left confortles, still enduring excessive Torment, she thought it high
time to implore help from Heaven, and resolved to make a Novens, or nine days
of prayer by her Peronna implores assistence from Heaven.
self or others, to the glorious Saint Francis of Paula, and began it in the
Minims Church at Calais the fifth day within the Saints Octave. Now because of
her great weakness, she could not repair thither without much pain, she often
sent her Maid servant to perform the Devotion for her, yet encouraged to do
some thing herself during the Novens, though usually carried to the Church in
a chair, she called that day for her Crutches, and with the help of her Maid to
hold her up, after many a wearisom step and stop in drawing breath, at last got
to the Church, where she heard Mass, (said for her intention) and
communicated. When behold at the reading of the last Gospel, Peronna felt an
excessive pain all her body over, but chiefly in her left Leg and both hipps,
then all her nerves were violently stretched out by a humor, as she thought,
dispersing it self through every member, and heard the noise of her bones long
out of joint brought again to their natural posture. Immediately after these
Torments, Peronna Cured in an Instant by Miracle.
the vigor and agility of her whole body were perfectly restored in a moment,
in so much that without help, or the least sign of weakness she rose up, and
knelt before the Altar to the great admiration of all the Beholders. The Priest
who said Mass, by name F. John de Beaumont, when he saw her kneeling wondered
at it, and because he yet knew nothing of the Miracle, advised her to fit down.
O Father said she, blessed be God, that is now needless for I am perfectly
cured, and as well as, if I had never been infirm. Then she went to the
Sacristy door and desired another Mass to be said by way of Thanskgiving, for
the wonderful cure wrought upon her, F. Peter Hullin said the Mass, whereat
she knelt the whole time, though, as the custom is, rose up by her self
without difficulty, at the reading of the Gospel. Mass done, She left her
Crutches in the Church, and walked home as sound and strong, as ever she had
been in her life. All these particulars Peronna deposed upon Oath as most true,
when she was most rigidly examined and obliged by Oath, to speak nothing but
Truth of the state, and continuance of her malady, as also of the cure,
whereunto she subscribed her name Peronna Roault.

5. Now if any suspect Fiction or juggling in this Deposition made by the
Gentlewoman (though methinks it is very unlikely, that one who stood in no need
of any temporal relief, should juggle so long, or feign an Infirmity for
thirteen years together) I answer all fear of fraud is taken away upon the
manifest proof of these two things. 1. That the disease was such in the main
particulars as the Patient her self deposed. 2. That she was restored to
perfect See these witnesses named in the first Tome of April, already cited.
health, as is now said. But no fewer than 16. or 17. sworn Witnesses, all
named in the Process (or full information of this Miracle) gave in Evidence of
these main particulars. To produce every one in order would be needless, while
hundreds yet living in Calais conscious of the Miracle, are ready to Testify
it. These few therefore shall suffice. One, a maid Servant, deposed she was
present when Peronn'as Limbs were so violently racked out of joint, that she
heard a noise much after the like manner as if bones had been broken in her
body, and swore also she had often handled and seen one of her Legs much
shorter than the other, the like Attestation other Witnesses gave. Fr. John
Beaumont appointed to hear the infirm Gentelewoman's Confession at her own
house the last Lent before her cure, deposed upon Sworn Witnesses of this
Miraculous Cure.
Oath, that her voice by reason of the obstruction in her breast (often
intermitted by continual coughing) was so low and inarticulate, that, though
most attentive, he had much A do to understand her. Others gave Testimony of
her frequent Convulsion fits. Others present, when the Kings Physicians visited
her, after a long consultation had upon the disease, deposed they heard those
knowing Doctors say no Cure could be hoped for. So Monst Valet Judged, and the
Ordinary Physician then of Calais Monst Crocque deposed, that after many
frequent Visits made, he had often discovered Peronna so fearfully assaulted
with sharp Accesses of her malady, and the corrupt humors of her strange
distempered Body, that he Judged her incurable by humane Art, and therefore
left all to God's Divine Providence, and assistance. Now for as much as
concern's the Truth of Peronna's speedy recovery perfectly wrought in the
Church of the F. F. Minims by the Intercession of the glorious S. Francis de
Paula, not only the forementioned Witnesses, but innumerable other Inhabitants
of Calais, can and will depose to this day. So that if humane Faith be not
utterly extinct, or of no account among rational men, the Relation here briefly
set down, is upon moral Certainty most indubitable.

6. The whole Process and Information of the Miracle, (the Original whereof is
yet extant in the Convent of the FF. Minims at Calais) two worthy Priests
Robert Feubre Bachelour in Divinity and Curate also in Calais, and John
Tiffaine, Cantor in the great Church there, by Commission of the most Reverend
Lord Bishop of Bologne, presented to his Lordship, which done, his Lordships
Approbation, is as, follows.

7.

Having seem and examined the Information* given by our command, which Mr
Robert Feubre Curate The Miracle approved by Episcopal Authority.
and Dean of Calais offered us, concerning the cure of Mademoiselle Peronna
Raoult, wrought in the Church of The FF. Minims this present year 1661. the
9.th of April, within the Octave of S. Francis de Paula, we willingly
acknowledge the Cure to have been truly Miraculous, and obtained by the merits
of that great Saint. And because God requires that his Glory be manifested for
favors done above the ordinary course of Nature, We, to stir up Devotion in
all faithful People toward the blessed Saints in Heaven, and mereover to
Convince the Heresy of those, who forbid Saints to be invocated, have permitted
and do permit, this Miracle to be made public, and thanks rendered to God and
the Saint, in what ever Solemn manner shall be Judged meet and convenient. In
VVitness hereof we set our hand and Seal.

Given at Bologne April 29.th in the year 1661. subscribed. FRANCISCUS EPIS.
BONONIENSIS.


8. From Callais we pass into England, once a happy Nation no less shining
with innumerable glorious Saints and Miracles than now, God knows, made dimne
yea fearfully dark by Sin and Heresy. Two monstrous Evils. The Sinner want's
goodness, and seldom cast's a thought on the Saints in Bliss; But Heretics
want Justice and honesty, who violently Rob the blessed in Heaven of those
Wonders, which God Manifestly works by them here on Earth. While Heaven and
earth abhor's this open Plagiary, I call for Justice, and due Restitution, if
any be found so graceless, as to deprive one English Saint of those very many
most certain and clear Miracles, which God wrought by him in life, and after
death, I mean our ever renowned S. Thomas Cantelupe, Cambden in Brita^nia. page
461. London. print 1607.
that worthy Bishop of Hereford, nobly born says Cambden, speaking of
Herefordshire, who for his Sanctity was Canonized, and publicly held so pious
a man, that he came not short of King Ethelbert Martyr in virtue, Nay perhaps
excelled him. Thus Cambden, who it seems had heard of the Saints glorious
Shrine or Monument, but saw it not, being before his time destroyed by impious
hands.

9. You have also an exact account of some Entitled the life and Gests of S.
Thomas Cantelupe by R. S. printed at Gant 1674. Chap. 20. Surius de S. Tho,
Here. in a manuscript I have by me.
great Miracles wrought by the Saint in a late English Book with many excellent
Observations made upon his admirable life. I esteem the Book, and shall
hereafter make use of it. I likewise much value what Surius recount's of our
renowned Bishop's Miracles, who made his Collections out of approved
Manuscripts yet exstant in Rubra valle (a Convent of Canon Regulars near
Bruxels where many learned Volumes are preserved) and brings to light almost
innumerable done after the Saints death. He raised to life, says Surius,
threescore dead, and restored sight to 41. blind, He cured 21. stricken with
Palsies. I saw (add's this Author) in one Volume kept in the forenamed
Monastery a Relation of other wonderful Miracles, which altogether amount to.
425.

10. But Reader, the Records I most rely On what Records we most rely in this
enquiry.
on, liable to no exception are certain, and no other than the very Authentic
Depositions of Faithful Witnesses rigidly and severely examined in the Process
of our Saint's Canonization. The Original Records I mention, carefully
preserved to this day in the Vatican Library at Rome, sent thither by our King
and all the Bishops then in England, Those two worthy men often cited,
Godesridus Henschenius and Daniel Pap^brochius, after their visiting many
Libraries up and down the world, in order to their great Work now in hand, had
License granted by Pope Alexander the VII, freely to make use of what
Manuscripts they pleased, extant in the Vatican, and about 14. years past
(besides other Collections) gathered sincerely out of the Original there all
the juridical proved, and approved Miracles which God wrought by this glorious
Saint, in number about, 429. This Extract or Copy I have now by me, very long
it is true, Yet pleasant to read, where you may see an ingenuous candor and
plainenisse on the one side Through the whole Process; And so rigid a Search
made to find out Truth on the other, as if Damnation had been concerned, and it
was no less in case of Perjury or giving in false Evidence. Not one past for
an approved Miracle But under Solemn Oath, which the examined Witnesses deposed
to be most true upon the Holy Gospel laid open before them. Some Choice ones
mong many, most clear and Evident, you shall have presently. In the mean while
it will not be amiss, for the Readers better Satisfaction, to touch briefly
upon a few Particulars whereby more light may be had of the whole Procedure in
the Process, concerning our Saints Canonization.

11. No sooner had those many Signal Miraculous Wonders, wrought upon the
living and dead by the Intercession of S. Thomas, raised his Sanctity and
Miracles to a public Of the address the English made to the Sea Apostolic,
For the Canonization of S. Thomas.
Fame all England over, but the whole Nation, as well Prince as People, the
learned Bishops also with the Clergy, and Religious, jointly concurred, and
petitioned the Sea Apostolic to have their Bishop declared a Saint in Heaven,
by whom God had certainly wrought Innumerable Miracles here on earth. The most
active in this pious Enterprise was the Lord Bishop Richard Successor to S.
Thomas, who had long lived with the Saint, and knew much of his Virtues. The
Other was Henricus a Schorha, deputed Procurator by the Chapter of Hereford,
that presented a Writing to the Lords Commissioners, containing the great
respect and Veneration all had of the Saint, grounded upon his Virtues and
frequent Miracles wrought in a manner daily at his Monument. To this Transcript
or Writing, ten Bishops, all named, set their hands, where upon the public
Process in order to his virtuous life and Miracles began. The Commissioners
appointed by the Popes Holiness for the hearing all that passed in the
Process, were first two Bishops ( Mimatensis says my copy, and Londinensis)
and one Archdeacon, called Wilhelmus de Testa, besides four Authorized
Notaries by the Sea Apostolic. The Notaries Authority stood without limit of
time, but the Lord's commission Dated the 13. July, 1307, lasted only 4. Months
and Therefore no more were examined by them, The depositions sent up to Rome
obtained the Canonizatio^
but 39. Miracles, whereunto they subscribed. The Notaries Commission
continuing irrevocably, brought the whole Process to an end. Depositions made
and exactly reviewed by the Commissioners, a clear Information of every
particular was in due and Legal Form sent up, as the manner is, to the
Congregation of Rites for a Further Trial, if necessary, whereupon says the
Relation, his Holiness Pope John the XXII. having had, by what was done, full
Satisfaction, at the Instance of our King and Prelates procedeed to a Solemn
Canonization, which was Celebrated at Rome with great joy, with greater in
England, chiefly in the Carhedral Church of Hereford. Thus much premised.

12. The mainest Point remain's, and it is The depositions made by sworn
Witnesses are many.
to give the Reader satisfaction concerning those innumerable Depositions made
by sworn Witnesses, who brought in Evidence of our Saints Virtuous life and
Miracles. The Work would be Immense, and not suitable to a short Treatise,
should I run throught all the Depositions with their Circumstances as they are
in my Manuscript, I must therefore content my self with a few only, And if
these, most undeniably manifest, prevail nothing upon our Sectaries
Incredulity, the whole Manuscript I have, though I should Transcribe all
particulars with their Circumstances as they lie in order, would prove
inefficacious, and do them little, or no good at all.

13. The first Deponent or sworn Witness The first deponent was the Lord Bishop
Richard.
was no less a man than Richard Lord Bishop of Hereford, and it is a Wonder to
see how rigourous an Examination passed upon him in this Tribunal, had he been
one of the Vulgar sort, the Lords Commissioners could not have used, greater
Severity. The Holy Gospel (as my Manuscript has it) laid open before him, with
the form of an Oath presented to every one, rich or poor, Noble or ignoble, He
swore according to that Tenor, that his Answer to all Interrogatories in this
weighty matter, should be without fraud and fiction, exactly true. The very
most of the Questions proposed Bishop Richard, (being one who had long
conversed with S. Thomas) chiefly concerned the Sainct's Charity, Sanctity,
Prudence Mortification, Sobriety, abstinence etc. where in the Commissioners
received full Satisfaction? That done, the Bishop also gave in Evidence of 3.
or 4. Miracles wrought by S. Thomas, after his bones had been translated from
our Ladies Chapel to his other Sepulcre, But because I find the Relation of
these Miracles very long (having no time to run over The life and Gests of S.
Tho. Cantelupe c. 20. from p. 238.
the tenth part of all) I wave them, and pitch upon Some more compendiously set
down, no less choice and clear; They are an Overplus to those Six or seven,
you have already very faithfully recounted, by Mr R. S. Cited.

14. One clear Miracle was wrought by S. Thomas upon a Child about two years
and three Months Old called Roger Son to one Gervase, One memorable Miracle
wro^^ h^ by S. Thomas upon a Young Child.
that served in the Castle of Coneweye in Walrs. The Child unfortunately fell
down in the night time from a Bridge belonging to that Castle into Ditch under
the Bridge, distant from it 28. foot, the mischance happened* in the year 1303,
and 6. of September. The Mother of the Child called Dionisia, living in a
little House near the Castle, thought her little one had lodged that night with
his Father in the Castle* but next morning making enquiry after him* the found
to her Sorrow, the Child half naked, and dead* upon a hard stone in the bottom
of the Dith, where there was no water at all, or earth, but a hollow rock from
whence stones had been dig'd to build the Castle. Simon Waterford Vicar, who
had Christened the Child, John de Bois, John Gyffen, all sworn Witnesses, took
their Oaths upon the Gospel, that they saw and handled the Child dead, the
Kings Crowners (Stephen Ganuy and William Nottingham) presently called for,
went down into the Mote found the Child's body cold and stiff, covered with a
little hoary frost, stark dead indeed. While the Crowners, as their office
required, began to write what they had seen, one John Syward, a Neighbor not
far off, went down into the Grot, gently handled the Child's body all over, and
finding it as dead as ever any was, made the Sign of the Cross upon it is
forhead, and earnestly prayed after this manner. Blessed S. Thomas Cantelupe
you by whom God has wrought innumerable Miracles, show mercy upon this little
Infant, and obtain he may return to life again, if this grace be granted, he
shall visit your holy Sepulcre, and render humble thanks to God and you for the
favor. No sooner had Syward The dead Child restored to life.
spoken these words, but the Child began to move his head and right Arm a
little, and forthwith life and vigor Came again into every part of his Body.
The Crowners, and a world of other Standers by saw the Miracle, and in that
very place with great Admiration, returned humble thanks to God and S. Thomas,
for what they had seen. The Mother now overioyed, taking the Child in her
arms, went that day to hear Mass in a Church not far off, where prostrate on
her knees, she with a greatful heart, Justly attributed the Life of her Infant
to God and S. Thomas. Her Devotions ended, She returned home, and the Child,
feeling no pain at all, merry and joyful walked as he was wont to do, up and
down the house, though a little Scarr Still continued in one cheek, which after
three days quite vanished away. All these Particulars with many more (the
lesser I omit) were proved upon Oath before the Lords Commissioners, who
subscribed to the Miracle a Truth not to be doubted of.

Two great Miracles wrought by Saints Thomas.
15. Robert Russel brought before the Lords Comissioners by the Procurator of
Hereford, was commanded to depose upon Oath, what he knew true concerning a
Miracle said to be wrought upon his Son Galfrid? Robert depossed, that three
years past upon wednesday in the Passion Week, he drove a Cart heavy laden with
earth drawn by four Oxen, and passed through a Court-yeard, where Galfrid his
son (about a year and an half old) lay sleeping upon the ground. His wife
Letice then present, by chance espying the danger Galfrid was in, cried out
(though too late) O Stop, Stop, or you kill the Child. Robert, not able to stay
his Oxen soon enough, the misfortune happened, for one cart Wheel passed over
Another great Miracle wrought upon a dead Infant.
the Child's very head and Temples, and downright killed him, in so much that he
neither groaned, or ever made noise. The afflicted Parents, fearing some
trouble might follow, in case the ill Accident were known abroad, laid Galfrid
on a bed in their house till Evening, and often that day sought for Signs of
life, but found none, neither Pulse, breath, nor Motion. With in night they
measured the Child, (as the custom was) and piously addressed Themselves by
earnest Prayer to S. Thomas Cantilupe, still hoping that God who had very
lately wrought many great Miracles by the Saint, would hear their Petition, and
restore life to the dead Child, And thus they continued in Prayer all night
long, when Behold at the break of Day they heard a small childish wailing* as
Infants use in pain, or Sickness. The Parents drawing near with their Candles
burning all night long saw the Child open his mouth, draw breath, and move his
Eyes. The Mother taking him into her Arms, gave him her Breast to suck, which
he did, and three days after was perfectly well. Some wanness remained about
his Eyes bruised by the Cart wheel, but that also in a short time ceased. This
Miracle attested upon Oath, was approved by the Lords Commissioners as an
undoubted work of God, above the force of Nature.

A fourth Miracule.
16. John Alkin brought before the Commissioners, to give in Evidence of a
Miracle wrought upon one John Holourton, having first laid his hand upon the
Holy Gospel and taken his Oath, that he would depose nothing but Truth, then
Said, He had known Holourton (always reputed an honest man) ten whole years
before the Miracle I shall now relate, happened, And that during so long a time
he was much afflicted with a fearful Wen or red Bunch of flesh hanging down in
his neck, fully as big as a great goose Egg, which not only he had seen and
handled frequently, but knew also that many more had done so. He said more
over, that the distressed Patient hearing of the great Wonders wrought at S.
Thomas his Shrine repaired to Hereford, and lodged in the house of one Agnes de
Port, where he uncovered his Wen and Of a Wen or a great bunch of flesh
Miraculously taken away upon Prayer Made to S. Thomas.
showed it to many hanging at his neck. The next day being monday in Easter
week, Holourton accompained with Alkin and others, went to the Church, and
there with tears falling down before the Bishops Shrine, petitioned the Saint
to take away that troublesome Bunch, and for that end, like the poor Widow in
the Gospel, offered up a small piece of silver (my Manuscript calls it
Denarius; that is a penny of English coin) which Mr Gilbert, who had then care
of the Monument (a sworn Witness also) took from him in the Presence of Alkin
and other Standers by. That done, Holourton put his whole head and neck into an
open Passage close by the Tomb of S. Thomas, and there held it while one might
Say three times over, Pater noster, and Ave Maria, (thus old de Catholics
spoke, and so do I.) Then in the Presence of all those VVitnesses, twice or
thrice, Proetentans manu, groping with his hand for the Bunch, to his great
joy, found it not. Next he sought for it in his Gap or Hood (worn perhaps to
cover that deformity) but no appearance of it there, neither in his Coat, which
he put of, nor any where else. In a word Holourton was perfectly cured, and in
that very place, both he and all the other present, very numerous, rendered
humble Thanks to Almighty God, and glorious S. Thomas for a Miracle so
palpable, that malice it self stricken dumb, shall never speak probable word
against it.

17. A world of People had seen this Deformity hanging in the poor Patients
neck for many years together, and many Ey-witnesses present at the cure in the
Cathedral Church of Hereford saw it quite taken away there, immediately after
Holourton had made his earnest Prayer to S. Thomas. The certainty of this
Miracle being known to the Canons of the Cathedral Church, the Bells rang out,
and (the People assembled together) a Te Deum was sung, Sol^mne thanks given to
God for the Cure seen by Many.
with a Solemn Procession made by the Clergy to the Shrine of S. Thomas, at
which time, whole Multitudes heard the Miracle published, and beheld with their
eyes Holourton (the man cured) present, who lived many years after, and Usally
once a week came to Hereford Market, and, which is most memorable, so perfect
was the Cure, that there remained not the least Scarr, Mark, or token of that
Bunch at all. This particular deposed also upon Oath before the Lords
Commissioners, took all doubt away and made the Miracle most certain.

18. Reader Should I entertain you with other Stupendous Wonders wrought by
our glorious Bishop, I could give you a long Catologue, and Show every
particular proved by Oath. I might tell you how one William One hanged and
certainly found dead, restored to life.
Crah, a Malefactor, hanged upon the Gallows many hours, and certainly found
stark dead, was revived at the Interce^sion of three or four devout People (all
named in the Process) who petitioned S. Thomas for the man's life, and obtained
it. The Eyes of this Crah, says my Manuscript, violently forced out of his
head by strangling, hung down upon his face, and were by the devout Prayer of
these pious Persons, Miraculously in a moment of time, replaced where nature
had first set them. This very Crah then living, and in perfect health (brought
before the Commissioners at S. Catherin's, and examined upon Oath) was proved
to be the same Person that dyed upon the Gallows.

19. I might also recount here those innumerable Lame, blind, deaf, and dumb
cured, with their due Circumstances; the many drowned, both men and women,
brought to life again by S. Thomas, But this would require a just Volume, and
therefore am forced to wave them. These few you have already with one more
which happened at Wallingford Castle (related afterward) are abundantly
sufficient to silence Dr. Still. while Impudence it self, can make no
Exception against them. For who is there unless above all measure Why no
exception can be made against these registered Miracles.
frontlesse, that dare say, so many Witnesses, having touched the Holy Gospel
and sworn that they spoke Truth, were all damnable perjured Persons? Who dare
aver that the Lords Commissioners, empowered by the Sea Apostolic to examine
every particular most rigidly (as was done) perfidiously betrayed their Trust,
and contrary to the Law of God and Nature, approved Miracles (as most certain)
that never were attested by Oath, or ever done? Who finally can be so Shamlesse
as to avouch, that the King of England and all his learned Bishops, when they
sent these Records to the Sea Apostolic conveyed nothing thither, but
Fictions, dreams, or in plainer Language, vast bundles of Lies, and hideous
Impostures. Reader, such horrid enormous Knaveries done and practiced by
Christians (and These English men, more just and pious than hundreds who live
now) would, I think, be rejected as desperate Improbabilities should they enter
into the thoughts of many Jews or Turks, yet Dr. Still. to the eternal
Disgrace of our Nation, must either swallow down all these absurdities, or,
openly Confess that God has wrought most glorious Miracles by our renowned
Bishop. S. Thomas Cantilupe. Of other great Miracles wrought in England, we
shall have occasion to speak afterward.

20. In the mean time that Miraculous wax Of the Miraculous Wax Candle yet seen
a^ Arras.
Candle yet seen at Arras, the chief City of Artois, may give the Reader
entertainment, being most certain, and never doubted of by any. Though
thousands have seen the Candle burn, and distill little drops of Wax into an
Urn, or Guilielmus Ga^aeus Pastor S. Mariae Magd. and P. Syl de Petra Saucta
^om. 2. sub Titulo, Miracula perpetua c. 8.
Basen full of water, (not at all wasted by its burning, or ever in the least
diminished,) yet because all know not the true Origin of the VVonder, thus two
approved Authors have set it forth in Print.

21. In the year 1105. that is much above 569. years, (of so great Antiquity
the Candle is) a merciless Plague raged in Arras, and sent forth Loathsome
Ulcers, or hideous swelling Botches, full of corrupt Blood, which grievously
afflicted all that were tainted, No humane Art, though remedies upon remedies
had been ^s^^, could cure them. The whole City, ever devout to the Mother of
God, experienced Her in this their Necessity, to be a true Mother of Mercy. The
manner was thus. The Blessed Virgin first showing her self visibly to two
different Persons, the one called Itierus, the other Nortmanus, enjoined them
to tell Lambert then Bishop of Arras, that the next Saturday toward morning,
she would The blessed Virgin appeared, and gave the Bishop a Wax Candle burning.
appear in the great Church, and Put into his hands a wax Candle burning. from
whence drops of wax should fall into a vessel of water prepared by the Bishop.
She said more over, that all the diseased that drank of this water, or powered
any drops of it into their Ulcers, should forthwith be cured. This truly
promised, truly happened. Our Blessed Lady appeared all beautiful, having in
her hands a wax Candle burning, which diffused light the whole Church over,
this She presented to the Bishop, He blessing it with the Sign of the Cross,
set it in the Urn of water, when placed there, drops of wax plentifully fell
down into the Vessel. The water given to the diseased, They drank of it, and no
sooner had they done so, but all were cured, about one hundred and fifty, then
were expecting the Miracle. Hereupon the Violence of the Contagion presently
ceased the whole City over, and All gave humble thanks to Almighty God and his
Sacred Mother, for the singular favor.

22. This Miracle gave beginning to a Sodality The Candle to this day burn's,
not at all consumed.
called, Sodalitas Ardentium, into which the very first and best of the City
entered, and there Enroled their names. The Candle to this day preserved with
great Veneration, spend's it self, yet loses nothing, that is, like the Bush
which Moses saw, burn's, not at all consumed, and therefore remain's still in
the same length, and greatness it had five hundred years ago. A vast quantity
of wax, made up of the many drops which fall into the water upon those Festival
days when the Candle burn's, may be justly called (as Petra Sancta who saw it,
Writes) Perpetuum Miraculum a Standing indeficient Miracle.

23. If from Arras we pass into France and Spain, we shall find Miracles there
as clear as the Sun, whereof I shall give a large Account in the ensuing
Chapters of this Treatise, as also of the Stupendous Wonders wrought by S.
Xaverius in the Indies: Here I will only touch (and very briefly) upon one or
two Miracles evidently laid before all men's Eyes in Italy, and the famous City
of Naples.

24. Bolognia, all know, where you have an Archbishopric and a famous
University in the Popes Dominions, is renowned over Christendom, and had its
Fame much increased by the life and happy death of a most Holy Virgin, called
S. Catherine of Bolognia, who dyed S. Catherin's Body at Bolognia, still
preserved entire.
there about three hundred years agone, and l^es not in any Sepulcre, as the
dead are wont, but still sit's up richly clothed in a Chair as if she were
living. Her whole Body, entrails, Lungs, and all, never touched or cut open,
remain entire, and her flesh is yet as supple, soft, and delicate, as when she
lived. By no Ointment but her own Sanctity, by no perfumes but by her Holy
Prayers, by no Balsam, but her Virgin Purity, by no Myrrh, but by her own
frequent Tears, is that Holy Body (in appearance living without a Soul)
preserved as if it were Immortal, nothing decayed, nothing putrifyed.

25. The Religious Virgins of S. Clares Holy Order (whereof S. Catherine was a
member) often change the Garment she wear's, and when The hair of her head
growing long is cut and reverently preserved.
the hair of her head grows longer (as sometimes it does,) they cut it, and
Reverently keep the exsect Parcels, as precious Relics. Reader, These things,
though strange, are most evidently true, seen by Thousands, not only the
Inhabitants there, but also by innumerable Travelers, who passing through
Bolognia, have with great admiration beheld the Saint enthroned in her Chair,
more like one living, than a dead Carcass. I have spoken with many
Ey-witnesses of this wonder, And perused that larger Relation Written by
Albergatus, whom Petra Sancta cited above c. 12.
Petra Sancta cites, and wish Dr Still. after his other two Pilgrimages,
courage enough to undertake a third toward Bolognia, where if his Eyes dazzle
not at the sight of a Saint's Body, he will find, what I here write, most
certain. That done, I would have him dive into the Secrets of nature, and show
me those natural causes, whereby a Body dead three hundred years since, though
exposed to the open Air, yea often handled (when clothed and uncloathed) can
without Incision ever made in it, or any Balsam applied, last so long wholly
entire, as sound and incorrupt, as when the Soul was in it.

26. That other Miracle seen at Naples, where the head and blood of S.
Januarius (a most Holy Bishop and Martyr) are preserved with great Veneration,
is so certain and famous the whole world over, that to write more of it, than
is known, were only to tell you, the Sun shines at noon Day. In a word, the
Miracle is thus. When the Martyrs head (enclosed in a Sylver shrine) is taken
out, and placed on the right end of the high Altar, and the blood likewise
(usually concrete and thick (shut up in a little glass Cruet or viol) stand's
directly Opposite at the other end, the blood visibly Liquifies, Bubbles,
Mount's up, and cover's all the sides of the glass to the very top of the
Cruet, the Another known Miracles seen to this day in the liquifying blood of
S. Ianuarius.
head removed it falls down again, and remain's concrete as before. Thrice
every year, you have this Miraculous liquifying Blood exhibited to a world of
People, to wit, upon the first Saturday in the Month of May, kept in Memory of
S. Januarius his Translation, and the 19.th of September, the very day he was
beheaded, And finally upon the 16.th of December, yearly solemnized at Naples
by way of Thanksgiving, for a most Signal and memorable favor obtained by the
Saints intercession, in delivering the City from the burning flames of
(Vesuvius, when some years past it threatened ruin to all. Thus much for the
usual showing this liquifying blood.

27. But the extraordinary Occasions of seeing it, are more frequent, as when
Persons of quality, or Strangers from remote places come to Naples, then with
leave of his Eminence the Archbishop, the Miracle has been often, and is to
this day shown to many. I When and upon what occasions Shown.
have treated with four or five of these Ey-witnesses, and found all agreeing
in one and the same Relation, though none more exact than F. Godefridus
Henschenius, and F. Daniel Papebrochius, to whom we may justly add that large
and full Relation penned by F. John Rho a great Preacher, who after his Lent
Sermons ended at Naples anno 1644; was so singularly favored by the Archbishop
for a reward of his labors, as not only to se the Blood boil up (which he
diligently observed,) but also to hold the glass Viol in his hands for a long
time together, and show the Motion of it to a world of People then present. You
have F. John Rho's ample Silvester Petra Sancta, Cited under the Title Miracula
perpetua p. 118.
Relation in Petra Sancta, where he call's God to witness, that he Writes
nothing in his letter to F. Silvester, but what his own Eyes with many other
Spectators beheld, and most carefully took notice of, and whoever, Says he,
had seen the stupendous bubling up of that Blood, as we saw it and had not
been stricken with a Sacred horror, would have been thought no man, but a
block, or stone unworthy humane Conversation.

28. F. Rho also tell's a strange Accident, which happened that very day he saw
the Miracle. Some of the prime Nobility, says he, brought along with them two
Turks Captives. Then in the service of the Noble Princess Squillaci; These two
by the Cardinals command, placed near the Altar, attentively observed the
Miraculous motion of the blood, and returned home with many sad and pensive
thoughts. The one next morning came to the Jesuits Convent in Naples, and told
the Fathers, What once happened upon the sight of this liquifying blood.
he had a strange Vision the night past, and a Command also forthwith to become
Christian, having seen enough the day before to work that change in him, for
said he, the stupendous motion of that Blood I clearly saw, has made so deep
an impression in my Soul, that I cannot rest* until I be Baptized, and profess
my self a Christian. The other of a harder heart, ingenuously confessed he had
clearly seen the blood rising up to the top of the Viol, there boiling and
bubling, but that he could not desert Mahomet's Doctrine, because he thought
both Christians and Turks may be saved, though of different Religions, Quid ego
hic, mi Silvester dicam. What shall I say here, dear Friend, add's F. Rho', but
that according to our Saviors words, one was assumed, and the other left,
abandoned, because negligent, when called to Repentance?

29. Great Multitudes have been co^^erted to the true Catholic Faith by the
Sight of Great Conversions wrought by it.
this undeniable Miracle, which works so powerfully upon the minds of all who
se it, says Franciscus Petri, in his excellent Poem set forth in the praise of
Naples, that no Scythian Incredulity can gainsay the Evidence of this clear
matter of Fact.

Aspice: palpa haec: stat longum post Martyris aevum
Incorruptus adhuc, and sine tabe Cruor.
Immo hilaris gliscit, consurgit, dissilit, ardet
Ocyor, extremae est, impatiensque tubae.
Perfidus an cernis Capiti, ut Cruor Obvius ante
Frigidus, and durus, ferveat and liqueat?
Caute vel asperior, vel sis adamantinus Afer
Sanguine quin duro, Sponte liquente liquet?
Thus FRANCISCUS PETRI.

30. Some to lessen the Miracle would, forsooth, ground the Motion of the blood
upon a secret natural Sympathy between that and the head standing close by it.
It often falls out, say These, that one barbarously slain by natural Antipathy*
(seeking revenge) bleeds afresh at the presence of his Assassinate. I answer,
were this experiment true, I would rather ascribe that shedding of blood to the
just Judgment of God, who usually discovers Murder, than to a strange occult
Antipathy, never yet found out by any, I know of.

31. However grant all, our case is quite Petra Sancta cited. page 103.
different, for S. Januarius blood often liquifies, witness Petra Sancta, when
a great Calamity is at hand, though the head be far distant from it. This
Liquefaction was seen some days together, before the last fearful Flames of
Vesuvius, which threatened destruction to the City of Naples, though the head
still remained in its silver shrine, not at all exposed. Again, though the
Neapolitans deem it a wonder, in case the blood placed by the head moves not
(this Motion being constant and usual) yet some Page 131.
years since, says Petra Sancta cited, after a great injury done to
Ecclesiastical Immunity, the blood present with the head, stood still concrete
without the least Sign of Motion, though the Sympathy was the same as ever. It
No secret Sympathy can cause this blood to move.
is thought, God showed this unexpected wonder in vindication of the Churches
honor, willing to maintain its Dignity by remonstrating a Public Sign of
displeasure.

32. I have met with Sectaries of a more moderate Temper than Dr Still. who
thought that no man unless frontlesse Can deny true Miracles to have been
wrought in the Roman Catholic Church, But said these, though done and often
done, They are only wrought to prove the common Tenets of Christian Religion
owned by all called Christians, and not in Confirmation of your particular
Popish Doctrins, the Sacrifice of Mass (for example) Transubstantion,
Purgatory, praying to Saints, for the Brerely Prot. Apol. Tract. 2. c. 3. Sect.
7. Page with me 524.
dead, Images, Chrisme etc. No, said I, please to Peruse with me one learned
Writer the industrious John Brerely, Examine well the Quotations he remit's you
to (as I have done) and you shall find every one of our Catholic Positions
excepted against, plainly Confirmed by undeniable Miracles. They read and
seemed not dissatisfied. Nay more said I, you have one great Miracle done by a
Saint whom Brerely Brerely cited p. 536.
mentions, and yout Protestants deservedly call a true Saint indeed, a very
good man, a worthy Father, and one of the Lamps of the Church* most clear and
express for our Purpose, I mean the renowned S. Bernard, who by God's
Assistance wrought a Miracle, whereby the Sacrifice of the Mass,
Transubstantiation and all those other Articles you cavil at, were proved and
confirmed.

33. This one Miracle, Reader, (to the Confusion of our English Sectaries) I
shall briefly relate, because it is most certain.

34. There is in the Country of Tolosa in The relation of S. Bernard's most
certain Miracle.
France a place called Sarlacum, where the Henricians (so named from one
Henricus, otherwise called Apostolici) half Frantic made a great Noise, and
sideing with Protestants preached against the real Presence, the Sacrifice of
the Mass, Purgatory, Prayer for the dead, Invocation of Saints, and other
Tenets of our Catholic Faith. Hither was S. Bernard sent to reclaim them from
their Errors, and God blessed his endeavors by the Evidence of a most Signal
Miracle. Sermon ended (say my Authors) Those of Sarlacum offered S. Bernard (as
the custom then was, and yet is in Several Countries) many Loaves of bread to
bless, which the Saint did by lifting up his hand and making the Sign of the
Holy Cross, Blessing them in God's name, said. In this you shall know, that
those things are true which we teach, and those other false, which these
Heretics labor to persuade you (viz no Transubstantiation, no Sacrifice of
the Mass, no Prayer to Saints etc.) In this I say you shall know us to be the
True Ministers of God, that whoever is sick and diseased among you that tast's
these Loaves, shall be healed. The Bishop of Charttes then present, willing
somewhat to moderate the Proposition (which he thought too large) told the
People, if they eat of those Loaves with Faith and confidence, they should be
cured. S. Bernard presently replied. My Lord, I do not mean so, my meaning and
saying is, that all sick and infirm Many sick Cured by eating of the Blessed
bread.
who eat of these Loaves shall recover their health, to the end it may be
known, we are God's true Ministers. What the Saint said was done, and really
fell out, for vast Multitudes of sick People eating of the bread were perfectly
cured.

35. The Miracle divulged over the whole Country and proved real by its
effects, brought innumerable People to S. Bernard, who all with thankful hearts
admired the Powerful hand of God working by him, but the number daily
increasing S. Bernard to decline them, left the common Road to Tolosa, and
sought Bywayes thither. In passing he wrought another great Miracle on a
Paralytick Priest, that lay a dying called also Bernard, and by only giving his
Holy Benediction forthwith restored the dying Another Miracle wrought by S.
Bernard.
man to perfect health, in so much, that he then rose out of his bed, followed
S. Bernard, and was upon his humble Petition admitted among the Religious of
that Holy Order. These two Miracles converted many of the Henricians, and so
confounded their Impostor Henricus that finding no Refuge among those he had
seduced, he kept close out of sight for a time, till at last apprehended, they
brought him fast bound in chains to the Bishop.

36. For that First great Miracle wrought by Godefridus in vita Bernard^ lib.
3. cap. 4.
the Loaves you have the express Testimony of S. Bernard's own Scholar,
Godefridus living at the same time, who could not (as Brerely cited well
observes) set down a matter of so great Importance known a whole Country over
with such Variety of Circumstances, had all been Fiction, or fraudulent
juggling. Nay, which is more S. Bernard himself in one These c. 1. 4 Bern.
Bonevall in vita S. Benn. lib. 2. c. 2. 3. Guliel Abbas S. Nicodor. Rhemensis.
lib. 1. cap. 10. Petra Sancta Thaumas Tom. 2 sub Titulo Miracula perpetua.
of his Epistles to the Tolosians tacitly insinuat's what he had done amongst
them, where modestly like the Apostle to the Thessalonians, he remind's them of
his Preaching, and Says, it had not been in word only, sed in virtute, but in
the Power of Miracles, and the Holy Ghost. Read also Bernard the Abbot of
Bonevallis of the same Age with the Saint, and William the Abbot of S.
Nicodoricus, and you shall find most glorious Miracles recounted of S. Bernard.
And thus much of a few choice and most clear Miracles; You have innumerable
more, excellently well set down by F. Silvester in his Book often cited, And as
great Ones most certain (if not greater) Del Techo Historia Provins. Paraq.
Soc. Jesus. L^^dy impressa anno 1673.
you have likewise faithfully recounted in the late History of Paraquaria
Written by Nicolas Del Techo, a long time Missioner among those Barbarians. The
admirable Conversions wrought there, the painful labors of those Missioners,
and the Miracles which God pleased to Manifest for the reducing that
uncivilized People to our Catholic Faith are so Prodigious, that unless they
were attested by innumerable Ey-witnesses, as all have been, some of a far
easier Faith than Dr Stillingfleet (the most obdurate man I ever met with)
might perhaps at the first reading boggle a little; But their Evidence clearly
laid forth takes all doubt away, and makes them certain. Besides Miracles and
innumerable Conversions, you have often a Relation of strange Wonders in
Nature, which may seem to some as incredible, as true Miracles do to Many
Sectaries.

CHAP. IV.
How true Miracles may be discerned from false Wonders. Whether Heathens and
Heretics ever wrought true Miracles? For what End true Miracles are wrought?
Of the difference between Antichrist's Miracles, and those wrought by Christ
and in the Church.

1. I Here Suppose, that true Miracles have been wrought by Moses, Christ our
Lord, and his Apostles, and consequently are discernable from all false Signs
done by Devils and Impostors, or if they be not discernable by some clear
Marks, but still remain Equivocal, or lie so far out of sight, that none can
difference them from juggling Charms, They are useless, unworthy God, and
worthless to all rational men.

2. The reason hereof given in another Treatise Protest. without Princi. Disc.
1. c. 8.
was much to this Sense. God by working Miracles in behalf of true Religion
engages (as it were) in a Dispute against the Devil and all Adversaries that
oppose it, and after such an Engagement, cannot but Convince and Conquer by the
strength of rational Motives, but his own Miracles justly and chiefly numbered
among these Perfwasive Motives, are upon that Account known and made
discernable from all False and fallacious Signs. Hence I also said, No false
Sect can either surpass or match the true Religion, in the Evidence of
rational Motives.
that no false Sect can either surpass true Religion in the Evidence of
rational Motives, or so much as match it in the luster of Signal Miracles. For
had a false Religion more glorious Miracles wrought in it (or the like equal
Signs all things considered) God would not only Stand guilty of arguing less
efficaciously for his own Verities, but natural Reason also would be left in a
state of Indifferency, no more determined to embrace what is true, than false.
And thus you se, if true Miracles ever more speciously set forth true Religion
(and cannot with the like splendour belong to any false Sect) They are upon that
Account distinguished from the Legerdemain and all illusive Signs of injust
Pretenders to Truth.

3. I hold it here time lost to insist long upon the pretended Miracles done by
Heathens and Heretics, you shall not produce one wrought by them (as Infidels
and Heretics) that goes beyond a Legerdemain trick, an ordinary Conjures
juggling, or at most what Spirits can do by natural Causes. Wherefore S.
Augustine Medina de recta in Deum fide lib. 2. p. 65.
cited by Michael Medina expressly teaches, that neither men nor Devils can by
Virtue of Magic effect any other thing, Quam id quod antea in utero naturae
per Seminales rations delituit, than that only which before lay as it were hid
in the womb of nature. Now as God limit's these Evil Spirits, so in like
manner* he stint's the Power of Infidels and Heretics; when assisted by Devils
they show wonders. Again examine rigidly the Authority alleged for these Signs,
you will find nothing besides this or that Single Writer, who talk's upon bare
Hear say only, which is far different No Authority for the pretended wonders of
Heathens.
from our Proceeding, for we allow no Miracles but such as have been attested
by the Solemn Oaths of Ey-witnesses, and made good upon all other Proofs
possible for mankind to require in a matter of greatest Consequence. Observe
well the Comparison.

4. The Miracles wrought in the Church (as we have already proved, and shall
hereafter demonstrate) have been innumerable, the pretended wonders of Heathens
and Heretics quite contrary, penurious and very few. The first wrought by men
of eminent Virtue, and members of that Holy Society which God in all Ages has
illustrated with Miracles, have gained renown over all the world: Those other
dull Works (if yet ever done) had their being either from no Christians, or
very bad ones, and to this day lie buried in Obscurity. The How different our
Catholic Miracles ars from others, were those pretended ones true.
first, far above all force in Nature show a Majesty in the Resuscitation of
the dead, and the known cures of desperate Infirmities. The other mean and
Slender are not (when true) above the Power of invisible Spirits. The First
rigidly examined we find, as I said, upon humane Faith most certain, Those
other done by Infidels and Heretics without Oath or Examination are not only
doubtful, but Judged by grave Authors, false, Counterfeit, or at the S. Greg.
lib. 1. 6. Regist. Epist. 31.
most works of Necromancy. Wherefore S. Gregory plainly averr's that Sozomenus
related many false things of the Novatians Miracles, the like Judgment others
make of Socrates, whether Novatian or no, little concern's our S. Austin. lib.
10. de Civit. c. 16.
present Controversy.

5. S. Augustine having summed up the Wonders of Gentiles (of dead Images moving
from place to place, of a whetston cut in two by a rasor, and such like Trash)
speak's conformably to what is now said. Haec ergo atque alia hujuscemodi,
nequaquam illis quae in populo Dei facta legimus virtute and magnitudine
conferenda sunt. These and other like Maruels, are not at all comparable with
the Miracles wrought amongst God's People, either in Power, Virtue, or
Greatness. Then the Saint add's. Though there be some Wonders that look like
things done by Holy men, yet the very End for which they are done shows our
Christian Works (he means Miracles) to be in all respects far greater.

6. I say therefore the Miracles of Christ our Lord, of the Apostles, and all
those certainly wrought amongst God's People, or in the Now true Miracles are
distinguished from false wonders.
Church (These I always join together) are easily distinguished from the
slight Signs of Heathens and Heretics? First by their Strength, or powerful
virtue manifest to all unbyassed Judgments. 2. By their vast Number and
incomparable Greatness. 3. By the Quality of the Persons that did them. 4. By
the End for which they were wrought. All and every one of these distinctive
Marks, the Signal great Miracles wrought by Christ, the Apostles, and in the
Church, ever had and will have; And I chiefly speak here of great Miracles.

7. Call now to mind all the Wonders done, or thought to be done by Heathens,
lay by them the Donatist's Dreams and Visions (suspected, says S. Augustine, of
fraud even Aug. de unit. Eccl. cap. 19.
by the most prudent and Judicious.) Grant (which many think false) that the
Novatians had some slender Miracles among them. Sum up, I say, These and many
more like Greater Miracles wrought by two Saints. than by All Heathens and
Heretics.
them, what have we but the lowest sort of wonders Imaginable, for none
surmount's the Power of good, or Evil Spirits. I dare boldly avouch, that only
two blessed men S. Thomas Cantilupe, and S. Francis Xaverius, have by Gods
assistance wrought not only more, but far greater Miracles, than all the
Heathens and Heretics that lived since the creation of the world, were all
true that is Written of them, whereas God knows, more than the half is false.

8. Look on the Condition of Persons among Heathens and Heretics that pretend
to Wonders, you find them all suspected, and of little Credit. Infidels knew
not Christ, and Heretics like shameless Fugitives deserted his Church. If
Therefore such wicked men do any thing like a Miracle, it is done as S. Austin
prudently Observes, per Signa publicae Iustitiae, Lib. 83. Quest. 78. and 79.
that is illegally, or by no Lawful but a usurped Power, as wrought by them. So
naughty Soldiers do, says the Saint, when Contrary to Military Discipline
they extort from honest men what is Publicly forbidden. On the other Side the
Just endued with supernatural Faith work Miracles by lawful Commission which
God's Divine Justice approves, because as those others were out of Christ's
Church, so these are professed members of it; See S. Petra Sancta volum. 1
prologom. p. 27.
Austins Quotations further enlarged by Petra Sancta, and Judge whether God's
Servants that truly do Miracles, are not very differently qualifyed from
others cast out of the house of God.

9. The end of Miracles ever intended for the Good of others, is chiefly to
strengthen* Faith and increase Charity, whence it is, that S. Gregory the
Great, writing to S. Augustine S Greg. lib 9. Epist. 58.
our Apostle of England, gives this prudent Admonition. For as much as
concern's the working of Miracles, know that whatever gift you have received in
this kind* it is freely bestowed on you for the Good and Salvation of those
souls committed For what End Miracles are wrought.
to your Charge. To this end all our Saviors Miracles and those likewise
wrought in the Church were ever, and are still chiefly directed. Contrariwise,
Those supposed Wonders done by Heathens, were most for a Show only or
Ostentation, without benefit to soul or Body; for what good could the walking
of dull Images up and down, or the cutting of a wherstone in two produce in
any? Neither can Miracles, as done by Heretics (if yet ever wrought) avail one
Whit for the increase of Faith or Charity, for how can men that have made
Shipwreck of Faith and torn Charity in pieces by Separating themselves from
Christ and his Church, help to perfect these Virtues in others? I say, as done
by Heretics, for if any good ensues when so wrought, That' merely Accidental,
and cannot be ascribed to the Heretics Faith, or any Merit in them.

10. Now we Argue further, and show by the real Effects which true Miracles
have wrought, John. 15. v. 2. 4.
their worth and visible Difference from those other dispirited dead Signs done
by Heathens and Heretics. For the Readers better Satisfaction, I here make use
of our Saviors Powerful Argument against the Jews, whom he told If he had not
done greater works among them, than any other, they had been without sin
excusable, but now having seen his Miracles, and after all to hate Miracles
proved by real effects.
him and his Father, no Excuse could be made. Pray, Ponder seriously. The Jews
had once great Miracles among them wrought by Moses and the Prophets, yet our
Savior plainly Assert's, he had then done greater, (and these words I conceive
were spoken before the Miracles shown at his sacred Passion, and Resurrection.)
Is it true, had he then done greater than Moses and the Prophets? Far greater
Therefore were they, by much did they Surpass in true weight and value all the
pretended Wonders of Heathens then living or that afterward should appear in
the world. This our Savior Assert's or nothing.

11. Some Jew or Infidel may reply. Christ said here much of his Miracles, but
how prove we that he spoke Truth? I answer, we prove this manifestly, by
Arguing from known Effects to the cause, that is, we evince the Cause,
(Christ's Miracles I mean) to be more vigorous, Strong and attractive than all
others, by those real Admirable effects (palpable to all Eyes) which ensued
upon their being wrought by the Son of God. Cast therefore your Eyes upon the
known Conversions made by Christ and his Ministers the blessed Apostles, look
also What these admirable effects are?
upon the large increase and strange Growth of the Militant Church, during the
first Age of Christianity call to mind the Ruin and destruction of Idols
(Signal Effects of the primitive Miracles) and you will find by these and the
like innumerable Wonders, that the Miracles then done (never exhibited to be
gazed on) had Influence upon all. Could ever yet Heathen or Heretic show you
the like Miraculous Works following the Wonders they boast of?

12. Hence we proceed to Miracles wrought in the Catholic Church and show also
by many real Effects their Worth to be far above all the pretended Wonders done
by Infidels and Heretics. Tell me, did ever any of these (or all together)
show you by Virtue of their Signs such a united Society of men in one Faith, as
our Church shows? Did ever any fast, Effects real and palpable prove the
Churches Miracles.
pray, and curb their Passions like those in this Christian Society? Did ever
any show the like Contempt of the world their whole life long, as thousands and
thousands have done amongst us? No God knows, so many noble Heroic Actions
fruits of Divine Grace, and known Miracles (Grace working inwardly Miracles
more outwardly) were never seen or heard of with the like Perseverance and
constancy in any other Society, but in the Roman Catholic Church only. Most
reasonably Therefore may we apply our Saviors sacred Words to this Church, and
say. Had She not done greater Works, had She not exhibited more glorious
Miracles in the Open view of the world than any other, those rebellious Spirits
that oppose Her, would not have committed so heinous a sin, but having seen the
palpable Wonders wrought in Her and by her, their sin is, supra modum peccans,
enormously great, and unexcusable.

13. Thus much said of true Miracles, I would willingly know to what purpose
does Dr Still. produce the Wonders of Infidels and Heretics against the great
Works of God Manifest in our Church? Can he hope by these lesser Signs to
extinguish the Light of great Miracles? Or will he suppose the Heathens
Miracles true and ours false? If so; he is above measure blamable, unless he
first prove their Records Authentic, and ours forged? Will he say that all the
Miracles pretended by Gentiles, Heretics, and the Church, are a like false and
feigned? He Speaks at random without proof, and dos open wrong to Manifest
Truth. You will better understand what I would An Instance Showing that no
comparison can be made between the Churches Mirucles, and those done by
Infidels.
Say by this one clear Example. Imagine it were certainly known to us all, that
it pleases Almighty God for the ending of debates about Religion, to have
matters decided by a visible sight of Miracles in an open Contest between two
men. Suppose likewise that God should say these men shall appear among you to
Morrow: The one a false Prophet, a great Magician, The other my Servant
commissioned to work in my name, but none before hand shall distinguish between
them, save only by the Strength and greatness of their Signs. Upon these make
your Judgment. The one having without violence set open a prison Gate fast
shut endeavors to resuscitate a man stark dead, but cannot, The other by a
Word only spoken? recal's him to life. The one after he had shown an Image
walking up and down, Offers to cure the born blind, but in vain. The other
presently gives him perfect sight, and thus the Strife goes on in exhibiting
many like Wonders. Is it not, think ye, as easy to distinguish the Magacian
from the other in this contest, as is to discern between a Blazing star and a
glorious Sun? The very like is our Case in the Comparison made between Miracles
wrought in the Church, and those other done by Infidels and Heretics, when
Devils have a hand in them.

The Judgment of Authors Concerning Miracles wrought by Christ's Adversaries.
14. The ancient Irenaeus expressly denies Iren. lib. 2. cap. 56.
Heretics the power of working true Miracles. Nec enim donare possunt, says
he etc. They cannot give sight to the blind, nor hearing to the deaf, nor cure
the Infirm, the Lame or Paraliticks. S. Augustine S. Aug de unitat Eccles.
speak's more plainly. Aut figmenta mendacium hominum, aut portenta fallacium
Spirituum, They are either the Fictions of lying men, or monstrous things done
by Fallacious Spirits; And elsewhere. Aut falluntur aut fallunt. Heretics Aug.
Hom. 13. in Joan.
either deceive by their Miracles or are deceived. Thanks be to God, our modern
Sectaries who pretend to no Miracles herein easily quit themselves of Fraud.

15. Other Authors grant a Power of working some weak kind of Miracles to
wicked men, to Heretics and Heathens, and chiefly ground themselves upon
several passages in Holy Writ presently laid forth, and explained. In the mean
while.

16. I say first. God never wrought Miracles God Cannot work a Miracle to
confirm false Doctrine.
by Heathen or Heretic in confirmation of any Doctrine opposite to his own
revealed Verities, which Christ, the Apostles, and the Church have delivered.
The reason given above, is clear. The first Verity cannot contradict himself,
but God would Do so could he by clear Signs establish a Doctrine Contrary to his
own known and received Truths, if, as we now suppose, he speak's as well by
Signs as by words. Hence it also follows that in case he permit a Miracle to
be done by any out of the Church, as was by Balaams Ass (no member I hope of
the true Church) that ever yeild's in worth and Greatness to his own glorious
Miracles.

17. I say. 2. The Devil that brought in The Devils Power in doing wonders
Limited.
this Confusion of Signs between false and true Miracles, and would fain do
something like God, can work no wonder but either by dazzling man's fancy, or by
a swift and subtle Application of natural Agents together in order to some
unusual effect, as is already noted. All true essential Transmutations
therefore, All Generations of perfect living Creatures, as of men, horses, and
the like, not subject to any Magic, are above the Devils Power, hence says
Medina cited above, what some Write of men changed into Wolves, is to be
accounted feigned and fabulous. The Devil you know is called the Prince of the
Air, and can, as Ludovicus Vives tom. 2. lib 2 de unit. fidei page 379.
Vives well observes, afflict men with Infirmities, speak in an Idol, Assume an
Airy Body, and exhibit himself visible etc. God permit's no more. Good I am
sure he never did to any, without a Cheat at the end.

18. I say. 3. No Passage in Holy Writ, Nothing in true Ecclesiastical History,
or in any approved Author, ascribs the like Power of working real Miracles to
faithless men ( assisted by the Devil) as have been wrought by Christ, the
Apostles, and in the Church.

19. Some Argue out of Scripture, and too Thessalon. 2. v. 9. Apocaly p 13. v.
13.
much extolling Antichrist's Signs, produce the Apostles words concerning that
false Prophets appearing in all Power and lying Wonders. S. John point's at
these Signs, as bringing down fire from Heaven, and seducing the Inhabitants on
the earth. I Answer, if we speak of the great Antichrist Antichrist's wonders
no true Miracles.
that shall appear before the end of the world, his Wonders will be great, but
far from the worth of true Miracles; whence it is we are forewarned of his
lying Prodigious Signs, and one Loud Lie is, That he will deny JESUS the Son of
MARY to be true Christ, and consequently endeavor to enervate the Truth of the
whole Gospel. He will come says Holy Scripture, in his own name, showing
himself as John 5. 45.
if he were God, yea extolled above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; But that man 2. These. 2. 4.
losses all reason, that can be brought by a sight of foreknown lying Wonders
to deny the true God, JESUS CHRIST and the Gospel, when he has at hand not only
more, but far greater Miracles registered in Scripture, and evidently wrought in
the Church, to confront the Devils pride Vanting by Antichrist.

20. In this weighty matter therefore, when the Change of an ancient Religion
is intended (for this Change will be aimed at in those days) the whole Contest
lies here, whether false Wonders previously known, as false, are false Signs
previously known as false, Seem weightless.
to be set more by* than all the certain Miracles God has wrought. I say again,
that man is stupid, or stark mad, that will quit his ancient Faith and yield
himself up Captive to the Devil at a sight of Wonders which he knows are
mere Illusions. Hence Antichrist, I think, with all his Legerdemain will never
seduce faithful Christians in so great number^, as some imagine. Wherefore
Scripture speaking Matthew. 24,
of false Christ's and false Prophets showing great wonders, (Antichrist may
pass for one among them) says not, that the just shall be seduced, but that
the Elect (if it were possible) may be led into Error.

21. What Jews and Gentiles will then do, others Dispute, our modern Sectaries
(if any at that time be in the world) are to look to it, for most certainly
Antichrist to inveigle them, will show far greater Signs than ever they saw
done by Luther, Calvin, or any at their unfortunate Change from Catholic
Religion to Protestancy. If that Monster have them all at his beck the Wonder
will not be great for it is very consequent after a shameful deserting Christ's
Church, to abandon God, Christ and all that good is.

22. Some may Say. Antichrists Signs (though not true Miracles) visibly
exhibited cannot but as present Things are wont to do, move much, when the true
Miracles wrought by Christ and in the Church only registered, ( then not seen)
may have less Influence upon minds, and perhaps persuade little, while
Antichrist with his Power and Threats will certainly dismay many. I Answer, How
Antichrist's Signs will be discountenanced. Apoc. 11*
Those present fallacious Signs will be then discountenanced, when the living
shall behold true and far greater Miracles shown by Those two witnesses Enoch
and Elias pointed at by S. John, who shall not only Preach against Antichrist's
Doctrine, and invite both Jews and Gentiles to Penance, but also wearing
Sackcloth Prophesy, with Power given to shut the Heavens, and convert waters
into blood. Finally slain, God will raise them to life again; And here you have
Aug 20 de civit c. 29. and tract. 4. in Joan,
Miracles incomparably more illustrious, than all that Antichrist can do, or
show. Read S. Austin of Enoch and Elias appearing and preaching in those last
days, who says it is a Verity Notoriously known, and so innumerable other
Fathers speak cited in the Annotations upon the Rhems Testament. From all now
noted you may gather that Antichrist shall not work one real true Miracle.

2^. Another Passage is quoted out of S. Mark 9. 38
Mark, where S. John told our Savior. We saw one casting out Devils in your
name, who fallows us not, and we prohibited him, and JESUS said, do not
prohibit him, for there is none that does a Miracle in my name, that can soon
speak ill of me. I answer. 1. It is not here said, that this man cast out
Devils, but only endeavored it, led on most likely with a good intention to do
as the Apostles did, And this, as Maldonate well Maldonate in hunc locum.
observes, seems intimated in the Text. Vidimus eum e^icientem daemonia, That
is, we saw him busy about that work, but nothing yet effected. 2. Much less is
it said, that he wanted Faith, or was an Infidel, for his working in Christ's
Name That is, as some interpret, by virtue given by Christ, insinuat's the
contrary. O! but he followed not the Apostles. The meaning may be, faith
Maldonate cited, though a Believer, and a follower of Christ's Doctrine, he was
not of the Apostles Company, College, or Corporation, or ever publicly
Authorized to cast out Devils as they were, However by particular Privilege he
might do so, now chiefly at the beginning of Christianity to make Christ's
Name, and Virtue known among Unbelievers. 3. It is no Wonder that Miracles are
sometimes wrought by the Holy Name of JESUS, though the man that does them be
wicked, for Julian the Apostata, witnesses S. Gregory Nazianzen and Theoderet,
drove away S Gregor. Naz. orat. 1. in Julian. Theod. lib. ^. c. 3. Hist.
Devils by the Sign of the Cross; Would our Modern Sectaries leave off their
ease a little, would they run among Pagans and preach only the true Doctrine of
Christ, God, perhaps, might work Miracles by them, but never will he do any in
proof of their erroneous Opions.

24. S. Matthew yields a third Testimony. Matt. 7. 21.
Many at the day of Judgment will say to Christ. Lord Lord, have not we
Prophesied in thy name and in thy name cast out Devils, and in thy name wrought
many Miracles? Christ Answers; I never knew you depart from me ye workers of
Iniquity. Hence it follows that wicked men cast out Devils, and did true
Miracles. I Answer, but it follows not, they did so empowred by the Devil, or
by the help of Christ's Enemy, and of this Power I speak in my Assertion.

25. To say that faithless wicked men assisted by Devils can cast out Devils,
contradicts our Saviors Argument proposed before whole multitudes in S. Luke.
If says Christ, I cast Luke 11. v. 18. Our Saviors Argument Strong against
the Jews.
out Devils in Beelzebub, how shall his Kingdom stand, for every Kingdom divided
against it self is desolate etc.? Our Savior in this Passage either proved
that Devils cannot cast out Devils by their own power and wicked Instruments,
or Argued less efficaciouly against these multitudes, who might have replied,
Lord you are deceived, Devils can cast out Devils and therefore your Argument
drawn from a Kingdom divided in it self seems weightlesse. No Christian I
hope will Say the Jews had reason on their side, in this Plea against Christ.

26. Now for as much as concern's the main Controversy. Viz. Whether wicked men
can by God's permission and Power ( not by the Devils help) work true Miracles?
I see many distinguish between wicked men endued with Faith, and other, both
wicked and Faithless. Those that cried out, Lord Lord, and wrought Miracles in
Christ's Holy Name are supposed to have had true Faith, though impious, And
that such by God's permission and Power did Wonders in the beginning of
Christianity, to make Christ's name and Virtue more famous, seems nothing
strange, for God who has perfected Matt. 21. 17
his Praise out of the mouth of Infants and sucklings, can also, when it is for
his Glory, make himself renowned by the works of wicked men; And this he has
done though the particulars related in Scripture are but few, done I say, upon
high Designs, ever tending to his own, and the Churches honor. For example.

27. Balaam an Infidel Prophesied of a Star that should rise out of Jacob, and
a rod from Israel. The Prophecy tending to the Honor why God wrought Miracles
by Balaam* and Caiphas.
of our Savior was perfectly fulfilled in him, rightly called the bright
Morning star, that illuminated the world. And God most wisely would have this
Truth made known by an Infidel for the Conversion of Infidels. Caiphas an
unjust man being, says S. John, high Priest Joan. 11. 51,
of that year Prophesied, that JESUS should dye for the Nation and not only for
the Nation, but to gather into one the Children of God that were dispersed. Two
great Things were here intended, the one, to set forth the glorious effect of
our Saviors Sacred death; the other to teach us that God can preserve Truth in
the Church as well by an unworthy as a worthy Prelate, his special Assistance
following not the merits of the Person, but the Order and Office.

28. If therefore Judas the Traitor who received Power of working Miracles with
the other Apostles wrought any (as most suppose he did) though a Thiese, had
the purse, and carried John: 12: 6
the things given, yet the Gift only followed his Dignity, and proves that,
Dona Dei sunt sine 1: Regum: 19* 24:
poenitentia, God's favors once given, are not easily recalled. But what shall
we say of Saul deserted by Almighty God, when stripped of his Garment he
Prophesied with others before Samuel, and sang naked all that day and night. I
Answer with S. Augustine, that Gift in Saul S. Austin ad Simplic. l 2. quaest. 1.
(though above all Power in nature) was not permanent or Inherent, but only
Transitory (granted because he was among the other Prophets) granted I say,
then once only, but never afterward.

29. By these few and the very like few Instances taken from Scripture the
Reader may discover a vast disparity, between Miracles done by wicked men and
those others far more Numerous wrought by Christ, and in the Church. Lay them
together, you will find, no comparison at all, so true it is, that Miracles
wrought by faith and faithful men, ever carry with them more strength, a
greater VVorth and value. If you ask why then does not God always make use of
these Instruments to show his Power by, with exclusion of Sinners from this
Favor? I Answer, this is to teach us, that Miracles derive not their worth
from the weak Instruments whereby they are done, but from God the Principal
cause, that does them. Now should they always and only be wrought by holy men,
some less Considerate might mistake, lib. 83. quaest. 79.
and ascribe them to the merit or Sanctity of him that does them, which is an
Error, for Gratiae gratis datae, are Gods free Gifts, not ever imparted to the
most holy and virtuous. S. Augustine speaks much to this Sense. Sed ideo non
omnibus Sanctis ista tribuuntur; ne errore decipiantur infirmi, existimantes in
talibus factis majora dona esse, quam in operibus Iustitiae etc.

30. Yet some perhaps may think, the glory of Miracles much lessened, if done
by Infidels and wicked men. I answer not one whit, when as I said, they are but
few, and not comparable either in worth or greatness to those innumerable
Miracles, which have been wrought by men famous for virtue and Sanctity.
Suppose therefore, that Vespasian the Emperor, as Suetonius Writes, cured the
blind and lame, That one Wonder is not comparable to the many blind and lame
cured by blessed S. Thomas Cantilupe. But Bellarmin citing Tacitus removes
Bellar: de notis Eccl: lib: 4 c: 14: Si Ad quartam
all scruple, and says, that Physicians being Questioned whether the Infirmity
(in those two pretended miraculous cures) was naturally curable, Answered, that
was very feasible, and Consequently not Miraculous. Tertullian there also
cited' thought the Devil, who had placed himself Tertullian's Judgment of
V^spasian's two Cures.
in the Eye of the one, and Leg of the other (and so hindered their use) would
seem, forsooth, to cure them by the Emperors juggling, when he left off to do
them more mischief. The like flawes we shall find in other Wonders, when done
by the Devil (always mean and of a lower sort) because as I said, his Power*
is limited and can do nothing, but only by a dexterous use of natural Agents
applied together, and this (when God permit's) for Reasons best known to
himself, not otherwise. Of pretended Miracles done by Heretics we shall speak
more hereafter. I never yet read any worth the scratch of a pen, the least
Notice, or Refutation. Or if Miracles be supposed frequent among Heretics, how
falls it out, that our Modern Sectaries work none at all?

31. Others Say, if wicked men by God's Miracles wrought by wicked men nothing
lessen the Credibily of the Churches Doctrine.
permission and Power work Miracles, How can we prove Christ's and the Churches
Doctrine Credible by an Argument taken from Miracles? I Answer very easily. 1.
Because all done by wicked men (when God concurr's) tend, as I said at last, to
the Glory of Christ and his Church. 2. Such Miracles are but few, Christ's
Miracles and the Churches many, great and most illustrious. From these we
Argue, and show how Powerful they have been by their admirable effects,
manifest in the conversion of whole Nations to Christ and his Church, And hence
rationally conclude with Richardus de S. Victore, that a Doctrine propagated by
the Luster of so many known Signs cannot but be from God, and Consequently true.

32. Though therefore this Inference be Null; One work's a Miracle, Ergo his
Doctrine is true, yet this other way of Arguing convinces. I see a whole ample
Society of Christians, constantly privileged Age after Age with the Grace of
working innumerable great Miracles, in so much that the Power granted seems in
a manner, Ordinary, This Inference I say hold's good. The Doctrine taught by
that Society is from God and sound. Thus we was never yet, nor will be
permitted, because rationally Argue for the Truth of Apostolical Doctrine and
the Churches also, and further evince, that no Society of men since Christ's
time, whether Heathens, Jews, Heretics, wicked, or smooth Pretenders to
Piety, has been in any low Degree (much less constantly) favovred, with the
like Grace in working Miracles as our one only Roman Church, Therefore, her
Doctrine is from God and Orthodox. Wonders done by the Devil are no Miracles.


33. By what is hitherto said, you may easily distinguish three sorts of
Miracles. Those done by the Devil as the Principal Agent (ever of the meanest
rank) are not properly Miracles, because they Surmount not some hidden virtue
contained in natural causes, and such, by the Devils malice or his Instruments,
may be said to prove a false Doctrine, contrary to Christ. Those other which God
wrought by Balaam and impious men, were true Miracles, and can neither be
intended for a proof of false Doctrine, nor perverted to a sinister End. The
Third sort wrought by Christ, the Apostles, and the Church have upon a double
account an incomparable Value. First they depend on God as the sole Principal
cause, and secondly proceed Ex fide, being ever done by Persons endued with
supernatural Faith, and for the most part, very Holy and Virtuous.

34. Here upon we briefly solve one difficulty which may occurr. If false
Prophets like Balaam, empowered by Almighty God, can Prophecy or cast out
Devils, why may they not also raise the dead, convert nations, restore sight to
the One difficulty solved.
blind and do all the other Miracles which Christ and his Apostles wrought? I
Answer all this, if Providence, to set forth the worth of Faith and to honor
the faithful in his Church, will have their Miracles great, glorious, and many,
Those wrought by faithless and impious very few, and of less Account. Perhaps
the four or five already mentioned and registered in Holy Writ, are the very
most (or rather all) that have been wrought since Christianity began, and
therefore prove not, that the like Shall be done in future Ages.

35. Having hitherto spoken of many undoubted Miracles, and further declared,
how they differ from Antichrist's Signs and all lying wonders, I might here
fitly bring in Dr Still. weak Objections, and also insist upon his strange
Answers, returned to two or three great Miracles, clearly set down in another
Treatise, But because the Gentleman most busies himself about these matters,
toward the end of his Enquiry, we shall, God willing, meet with him there, and
in the mean time (to make innumerable most glorious Miracles better known) will
condescend to his humor, and follow him as he lead's us on in his other
Pilgrimages to Compostella, S. Maximins, and so on forward, till we have
traveled through all the rubbish which lies between his 465 page, and page
665. That done, we proceed to the end of his Book. I call it rubbish, it
deserves no better name, because you neither have one Argument proposed against
approved Miracles, nor one Authority, which is not either openly false, wholly
weightless, or wholly impertinent. If I make this out in the ensuing Discourse,
Dr Stillingfleet will have little cause to glory in his empty Pamphlet; if I do
not, Let all the shame He or any can wish, fall upon me. Now to S. James of
Compostella.

CHAP. V.
In what manner the body of S. James was translated to Compostella. The
Conversion of Hermogenes and Philetus by S. James. Of Pope Calixtus his
VVritings. Miracles wrought by S. James manifestly proved against Dr
Stillingfleet.

1. TWo things may be controverted concerning S. James the Son of Zebedee, and
Brother to S. John the Evangelist. The one, whether he ever preached in Spain,
and this Cardinal Baronius seems less Baronius Tom. 9. Antwerp. print. ad
ann. 816. Number. 67.
to approve, grounding himself upon a Contest in the great Council of Lateran
between Rudoricus Ximenius Archbishop of Toledo, and the Bishop of
Compostella; The latter thought the Archbishop of Toledo had no right to lay
any command upon him, by reason of the Pre-eminence the Church of Compostella
had above all other Churches in Spain, which he endeavored A Centest between
two Bishops.
to show, both because the body of S. James is preserved at Compostella, and
upon this Account also, that the Apostle yet living preached in Spain.
Rudoricus opposed his preaching in Spain, and urged the Bishop of Compostella
Number. 69.
to make that out, verum Succubuit, says Baronius, herein he failed, and gave
no Satisfactory proof in that great Council.

2. The second thing called into doubt by Dr Still. is the Translation of this
great Apostles venerable Body to Compostella, which happened that very year he
was beheaded by Herod at Jerusalem. For this you have an Epistle Number. 71.
of Pope Leo the third Cited by Baronius, where it is said, that the dead body
being thrown out to dogs and ravenous foul, was Put into a Ship carried first
to Iria Flavia, and thence to Compostella. The manner of its Translation I have
now by me, which is taken out of an ancient M. S. Cited afterward; The
substance whereof is as follows. When the Holy Apostles according to the
Command of our Blessed Savior resolved to Preach the Sacred Gospel to an
unbelieving world, they made choice of S. Tesyphon, ordained him Bishop, and
sent him with other associated Bishops to Preach in Spain, then wholly
Heathenish and Idolatrous. These God inspired to take along with them the The
martyred Body cast into a small Vessel, Came safe to the Frontirs of Galicia.
martyred Body of S. James, which they decently placed in a small Vessel, and
more by the guidance of Divine Providence, than by the help of any Pilote
safely arrived in the last Frontires of Gallicia, where then a great Lady
called Luparia Lived. To her these wearied Passengers addressed themselves, and
earnestly begged to have a Plat of ground allotted, where they might decently
bury the Apostles Body, But She, says my Relation, savage and barbarous, in
dirision fent them to a Mountain called then Illicinus, where a number of wild
Oxen ran up and down; Go, said the Lady, and take of these as many as you can,
and then bury your Apostle. When the Servants of God drew near the wild beasts
their fierenesse ceased, and they became gentle like Lambs, much after that
manner as S. Ambrose in his Haexameron recount's of those beasts that were
designed to devour S. Tecla.

3. Upon this Sight and another wonder which S. Tesyphon wrought in destroying
a Cruel Dragon that ravaged there about, by making only the Sign of the Cross,
the Lady Luparia, or Lupa was converted to Christ, and turned Her Palace into a
Church. Dr Still. cites Joannes Dr Sill. page 470.
Beleth a learned man and Dr of Sorbon in confirmation of this Story concerning
Lupa, and when he has done, as his fashion is, refutes it very learnedly, by a
simple Demand. Is not this a Miracle as great and as well attested, as any
wrought by Christ and his Apostles? Good Mr Dr. though we are far from judging
either this or any other like Story, to be as well attested as Miracles in Holy
Writ, yet by your leave, we may discourse and conclude, I think, upon grounded
Principles, that all such Stories deserve not contempt. Pray, Sr, reflect, we
have in Scripture, that Christ our Lord commanded his Apostles to spread his
Holy Gospel Mark 16. v. 20.
the whole world over, we have that they did so, we have upon Known History
that some preached in the Indies, others in England, others in different Parts
of the Universe, and made great conversions justly accounted Miraculous. We
next enquire, how or by what means these great Missioneries got into so remote
places? Do Dr Still. refutes the Story by Laughing at it.
not you think Mr Dr, were all particulars known that we should discover many
great favors Shown those blessed men in their Travels, which might justly seem
extraordinary, and Miraculous? Here Sr, you have one strange Passage related of
S. Tesyphon and his Associates who transported the Holy Body of S. James to
Spain, Can you persuade your self, that to laugh at the Story, as you do, is
a weighty refutation, though all this while I propose it not as Gospel? What I
find besides in this Relation, is that S. James's Body was buried near to the
Mountain Illicinus, now called Mons Sacer, not far from a Fountain and there
left by those Holy men, who carried it thither.

4. Thus much said, we return to Baronius Number. 71.
where we are told, that by reason of the great persecution raised against
Christians in those parts of Spain (All long since dead, who Conveyed the
Sacred Body thither) the Sepulcher likewise where the Treasure lay being hid,
and all the Memory of it, forgotten, Behold, says Baronius, Number. 72. Magno Dei
beneficio Factum etc.
by a Special Favor of Almighty God, after a large Circuit of Ages in the time
of Alfonsus Castus, a most pious Prince, the Apostles long concealed Body
discovered it self by clear Signs of light shining over the Briars where it
lay. The light was seen for many nights together, not by one only but several
By-witnesses, Episcopus Iriensis.
Chiefly by Theodorimus Lord Bishop of Iria, who like another Moses approaching
the burning Bush, found the precious Body of the Son of thunder, (so our
Savior named S. James) which God in due time revealed to free Spain How the
Body was discovered.
from the thraldom of Infidelity, as the happy event of great Wonders wrought
there has made manifest, For ever since the Discovery, People from all Parts of
the World flocked to the Apostles Sepulcher which God had enobled with the
singular Grace of innumerable stupendous Miracles, And these great Works of
Divine Power as Baronius notes well, are better proofs than all that can be
Written.

5. Now comes Dr Still. with a simple Objection. You have, says he, a Body
buried among thorns and Bushes, What then? must this without any Inscription or
Characters upon it, needs be S. James his Body and none else? I Answer, Gods One
Objection answered.
own characters (glorious Miracles) were then and still are upon it, these
Written by a Divine hand, surpass in real worth all other humane Inscriptions
imaginable. Pray you tell me, had the other Apostles when they preached to
remote Countries carried this or the like Inscription upon their Breasts. We
are Apostles of JESUS CHRIST, and done no Miracles, or wrought Miracles, as
they did, without such Inscriptions, Tell me I say, whether of these two, think
you, would have drawn Infidels sooner to the Belief of JESUS CHRIST? I hold
God's own Characters far more prevalent, and so they are in our present case.
O! but we yet prove not that it was S. James his Body, why may it not be the
Body of some other? I Answer first, it is a Body whereby God is pleased to work
prodigious Miracles evidently seen by innumerable Eyewitnesses, and Miracles
are the Scar-Crowes our Dr fear's most, whether done by S. James or any other
makes nothing for his purpose. Again, supposing the Evidence of Miracles
wrought at Compostella, which is undeniable, why should we not rather ascribe
them to the Power of God working by the Apostles Body, than to any other
unknown Saint that may perhaps Lie interred thereabout. And thus much the
Proofs for the transporting of S. James his Body to that place, seem to evince.
3. Joannes Mariana tells us, the Signs Mariana lib. 10 de ^eb. Hispani c. 10.
n. 10.
we seek for were known, and shows by whom, and in what manner; yet what they
were in particular after so many Ages, and the former cruel persecution raised
against Christians in that Part of Spain, there is now says he, little certain
memory of them.

6. Dr Still. Page 471. Quotes Mariana and Mariana de reb Hispan. lib 4, c. 6.
thinks he find's no Argument for S. James's coming into Spain but Tradition
only; Again, the Dr cites his 5.th Chapter de Adventu Iacobi. In my Book
printed Anno 1605. I find nothing like these Testimonies in either place, but
quite Dr Still. p. 473.
different matters handled. Lib. 4. c. 6. He speaks of Antoninus Pius and
add's; Quid rerum gesserit in Hispania, Clam est. What things he did in Spain
is not known, and it is certain, that he treat's of S. James his coming into
Spain, not in any fifth chapter of my Edition, The Dr err's in his quotations.
but in the 10.th now cited. As blind a Quotation the Dr gives us where he
referr's us to Mariana. Cap. 12. de Adventu Iacobi. That is you must run over
thirty whole books (so many Mariana wrote de Rebus Hispaniae) and find out, if
you can, that 12.th Chapter. If Mr Dr have 25. July
any newer Edition of Mariana, it will be no great labor to say when and where
it was printed. The most Mariana has of this subject is in his own Epistle
sent to Pope Paul the V. (a M S. I have now by me) where with great Submission
he mentions many weighty Arguments collected by him concerning the coming of
S. James into Spain, which he hoped with leave to make public, and cast both
Himself and labors at the feet of his Holiness; More I have not.

7. A word now of Hermogenes's strange Dr. Still. p. 465.
Conversion to Christ by the endeavor of the B. Apostle S. James. The Dr
relates part of it, and after his manner jeer's at all. Briefly the Story is
thus. After S. James had visited Judea and Samaria, and proved by Scripture in
several Synagogues that JESUS CHRIST is the true Son of God, Hermogenes a
Magician sent his Disciple The Conversion of Hermogenes and Philetus.
Philetus to the Apostle, who told him that his Master Hermogenes could
enervate all he had said of Christ, But Philetus seeing the strange Miracles S.
James had done in restoring sight to the blind, and cleansing the Lepers, and
hearing also of his raising the dead, upon his return told Hermogenes what he
had heard and seen, and that now he resolved to be one of S. James Disciples,
whereat the Magician highly enraged, commanded the Devils to bind Philetus so
fast that he could not stir, But the Apostle who sent his handkerchief to
Philetus soon released him, and enjoined the Devils to bring Hermogenes without
hurt fast bound to him. This done, Hermogenes clearly seeing the wonderful Power
of God working with S. James, much humbled and confounded, became Poenitent.
Accipe, said he, Poenitentem quem invidentem and detrahentem hactenus
sustinuisti. Accept of me, great Apostle, whom you have hitherto patiently
borne with as a most spiteful and unworthy Detractor. If replied S. James, thou
be truly poenitent burn all thy books of Magic, Go from house to house, where
thou have wrought mischief, and recall all thou have done, restore the money
unjustly got by thy Charms, follow JESUS CHRIST, seek to please him whom thou will find merciful, if thou ceasest not to be faithful in his Service.
Hermogenes overjoyed embraced these wholesome Admonitions, and Promised to
comply with every one most faithfully, then falling down at the Apostles feet,
I know (says he, the wrath of the Devils will tear me in pieces, unless you
give me something to S. James defend's Hermogenes from the rage of Devils.
secure me from their rage. Take this my walking Staff replied S. James, and
no Devil shall annoy thee. Much more follows of Hermogenes his working
Miracles with the Apostles Staff, of his Zeal in preaching JESUS Christ, and
proving Christ out of the old Testament to be the true Son of God, the long
expected Messiah, and converting many to the true Faith. Some days after these
great Conversions wrought, Abiathar the Priest of that year Seditiously raised
a storm of persecution against S. James, who violently haled to Herod the Son
of Archelaus, was by his command beheaded.

8. Will you briefly hear what Sport our Dr makes with this Relation? First
says he. You must never ask from whence they had it, it is fully enough, that
the name of Hermogenes and Philetus are in the new Testament. I answer, the Dr
had more for the small parcel he relates than these two bare names set down in
Scripture, otherwise he will be thought the first Contriver of it. In a word,
the Story is collected out of so many Manuscripts dispersed up and down several
parts in Europe, that unless you say all conspired to register a Fable you
ought upon humane The whole Story, proved Authentic.
Faith, to yield assent. First it is extant in Codice Osnaburgensi, and
Mendensi: 2. In the Queen of Swedens M. S. preserved yet at Rome. 3. It is
taken out of the ancient Manuscripts of S. Audomarus. 4. Out of certain M. S.
in Marchia, and lastly (to omit others) out of Cardinal Mazarins Manuscripts.
An Extract or collection of all these and many other particulars gathered by
two worthy Judicious men about 14. years Since, I have now on the Table where I
write, and hope this comes to more than a proof taken from the two names of
Hermogenes and Philetus recorded in the new Testament.

9. The Dr's Objections proposed against this Story are so profoundly simple,
that they deserve nothing but contempt. One is, the mention made of Hermogenes
in the present Roman Breviary seems very lean and bare. That is, he would have
had the fifth Lesson there enlarged, which some, who are obliged to their
Canonical hours might perhaps have thought too long, and well content
themselves with the substance of the Story there expressed. Viz. S. James
returned to Jerusalem, when among The Doctors simple Objections.
others he had instructed Hermogenes a Magician in the Truth of Christian Faith
etc. Another Objection takes all its force from the Drs memory who, forsooth,
remembers no Abiathar high Priest since the Days of King Solomon. Had he had
but a small portion of Solomon's wisdom he might have reflected, that many things
are now out of his remembrance which were once in it, and far more there are,
which never got thither. One Abiathar was in Solomon's time, and why might not
there be another in Herodes days? The Relation expressly says it, and That Is
enough for me. I said just now, that the Apostle to secure Hermogenes from the
rage of Devils lent him his walking staff. Is not this says our Dr (very
wisely) like one of the Apostles Miracles to give men Instruments for the
cudgelling of Devils? Pray, Sr, tell me, when a Saint, as Eliseus the Prophet
was, gave his staff to Giezi, did that necessarily imply any Cudgelling
Business? I hope not, though if by Cudgelling in this place you mean nothing
but a lessening of Power, I wish the Devil for your sake, soundly cudgelled.
Ludovicus a S. Carolo Bibliothe. Pontifiprinted at Lions 1643. lib. 1. page 36.


10. A word now of Pope Calixtus his Writings, where you have the Miracles of
S. James largely recorded in five Books. Ludovicus Jacob a S. Carolo testifies,
that the Miracles Written by Pope Calixtus the second, are also preserved in M.
S. at Oxford, in Bibliothe. Balliolensi n. 213, and at Cambrige in the College
of S. Benedict. Moreover that a Book is kept there concerning the Translation
of S. James Body. Bellovac. spec. Hist. lib. 26. a cap. 26. usque ad cap. 41.
n. 41. The most of them add's Ludovicus, we find in Vincent. Bellovacensis.

11. The five Books now mentioned of Pope Calixtus are had also in M. S. in the
Library of S. Peter's Church at Rome over the Sacristy, belonging to the Canons
of that Church, whereof a Collection was made some years agone by two worthy
learned men, Godefridus Henschenius and Daniel Popebrochius, famous all over
the world upon the Account of their industrious labors. These Writings I have
before me, And shall to the honor of this great Apostle briefly select some
few of the choicest matters there contained, To transcribe all would swell to a
larger Volume, than this whole Treatise is.

12. The Argument of the Preface of B. Pope Calixtus to his second Book of 22.
Miracles wrought by S. James, begins thus. Summopere pretium est, S. Iacobi
miracula etc. It is a thing of great worth to set down in Writing the Miracles
of S. James the Son of Zebedee, and Patron of Gallicia, because they highly
conduce to the Honor of our Lord JESUS CHRIST and the Advancement of his
Glory. Soon after, says the Pope. What I have attentively taken From whom
Pope Cali^tus gathered his writings
notice of (as I past through several Nations) relating to the Apostles
Miracles wrought in Gallicia; what I have learned of others, and seen with my
own eyes, I here commit to VVriting. Some of these great wonders I took out of
Books in France, some out of Codicills found in Germany, in Italy, Dacia, and
in other remote Parts of the world, yet I recount not all (for that Task would
be immense) but only such Miracles of this great Apostle as are undoubtedly
certain, and proved true by Authentic Books, and most faithful VVitnesses.
Reader, Observe in passing, that a whole Book of S. James his Miracles related
by Calixtus, is approved in a Breve of Pope Innocent directed The approbation
of his writings.
to all faithful Christians, where the Book is styled Authentic and of
undouhted Credit. In confirmation whereof, the Subscription of eight Cardinals
follows adjoined to the Breve, And the first is Albericus Bishop of Ostia,
with these words. Ad decus S. Iacobi etc. To the Honor of S. James, I do
testify, that this Book is approveable, and praise worthy. The original
Testimony of the Breve and Subscriptions also, you have in the Library of the
King of France, n. 1815. What thinks Dr Still. of this? Will he say what I
quote is false? Let that be proved, which shall never be, and I have done? Will
he grant what I cite is true? He is evidently convinced, and must yield that
the Writings of Pope Calixtus stand firm upon an Authority which passes without
exception amongst the best and wisest of Christians. I wish the Dr were one of
them.

13. Now follow the two and twenty Miracles of S. James related by Calixtus in
his second Book, but I only touch upon five being most remarkable, and above
the force of nature.

14. One is, Chapter. 3. of a young youth whom the Apostle found dead in a
Wood, and raised to life.

15. A second. Chap. 5. of a Pilgrim hanged up by Thieves 36. days dead, and
brought to life again by S. James.

16. A third. Chap. 20. of a Soldier by name William, not in the least hurt
though his fellow Soldier fiercely struck at his bare neck, and endeavored
with a sharp sword to cut off his head.

17. A fourth. Chap 21. is of one contracted or monstrously lame, perfectly
cured by S. James at Compostella.

18. A fifth. Chap. 22. of one and the same man, Thirteen times sold and made
Captive, whom the Apostle so often released, and set at Liberty. These and the
other 17. remaining are still preserved in the Manuscripts of the Vatican
Library, as we have related. Show you Mr Dr. fraud in these particulars, or
grant them as they deserve to be reckoned of as true matters of Fact.

19. Dr Still. recount's five or six Miracles Dr Still. page 474.
more Written by Pope Calixtus, will you hear how profoundly he refutes them
and proves all Fabulous? Anno Dom. 1090. certain Germans clad like Pelgrims
were going on Pilgrimage to S. James, it happened that in the City of Toulouse
their Host by forceing upon them Variis potibus, says my relation gratia
hospitalitatis inebriavit, Scyphum argenteum in manticam eorum posuit.
several drinks made them drunk, and in the night time thrust two silver cups
into the Portmantues of two of them, (I read of one silver cup only.) Next
morning the avaricious man following in all have the Pilgrims (now traveling
on) accused them of Theft. They innocent Answered, that he with whom the Cup
was found, should be held the guilty Person. In fine, upon examination it was
found in the Portmantue belonging to a Father and his Son. Both were brought
before the Judge, who mercifully gave Sentence that but one of them should dye,
and after much complementing between them (says our Dr) the Son was executed
(By the way, the complement was, that the sorrowful Father offered himself to
die in place of his Son) which the Judge not approving, the Father held on his
Pilgrimage, and after thirty six days returning to the place where his Son
Still hanged, wept bitterly over him. When behold, on a sudden, the young man
Spoke, and said. O Father weep not for me, but rather rejoice for all hitherto
is well with me, because S. James has comforted me with Heavenly delights.
Whereat the Father overjoyed ran forthwith to the City, called whole multitudes
to behold the Miracle, who took his son down from the Gallows, and after a
Juridical Trial made hanged up the wicked Host in his place. This Miracle twice
related in the VVritings I have on my Table, is taken out of the Vatican
Library. N. 1198. Hear now in a word, how manfully the Dr refutes it. Was,
says he, our Sauviours raising Lazarus after four days to be compared to
this? Was ever a more simple Question proposed by a Dr? I Answer, A Simple
question proposed by the Dr.
Christ's Miracle was greater upon this Account that he wrought it by his own
Power, S. James did the wonder here mentioned by Power given from Christ, for
whom he dyed. Ask therefore, Sr, no more such simple Questions, but either
prove the fraud, or confess the fact.

20. Anno 1100. when William Count of Poictou reigned under Lewis King of
France a great Plague raged in that Country, in so much that whole Families
dyed if it. At which time Heroes quidam.
a certain Gentleman much affrighted with the mortality, purposed to make a
Pilgrimage to S. James, and set his wife with two small Children upon a horse
or mule, but coming to Pampelona his wife dyed in an Inn, where the ungodly
Host robbed the Gentleman of all he had, who notwithstanding that double loss
of wife and Goods, held on his Journey, carrying one child in his arms and
leading the other by his The Apostles singular favor to a distressed Traveller.
side. Not far from Pampelona, a Stranger decently clothed met him, with a
strong Ass and bad him make use of the Beast for the help of his Children to
Compostella, which he accepted of with hearty Thanks. Once in the night, while
he was devoutly at his Prayers in a corner of the Church at Compostella, S.
James very glorious appeared, and asked him. Numquid mi frater me nosti? Dos't
thou know me Brother? The devout Pilgrim answered, No. I said he, am James the
Apostle of our Lord, who lent the Ass near Pampelona, make use of it in thy
return home, when thou shall find that hard hearted Host who robbed thee dead,
And this he found verifyed. With much joy the Gentleman went back to his own
house, and no sooner had he taken down the Children, but the Ass disappeared.
This Miracle written by Pope Calixtus, and recorded in the Vatican Manuscripts
Dr Still, P. 475. relates, and all he has against it amount's to a mere
nothing. Prove the fraud or grant the fact.
This says he, is an Instance of S. James's kindness by land, but Calixtus
tell us he was as kind by Sea, First to a Captain that tumbled with his Armor
into the bottom of the sea and was brought safe to his ship again by S. James.
2. To a Pilgrim that had the like mischance, whom S. James held by the hair of
his head and kept above water for three days, till he came to his Port. Thus
the Dr.

21. Shall we perfect the Dr's short Story a Quidam nauta.
little. Both these Miracles Pope Calixtus relates; The first happened Anno
1191. to a Mariner by name Frison, who with his Ship full of Passengers went to
visit the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, and was set upon by a Sarracen called
Avit Mainon, that endeavouvred to make him and all the Christians Captives.
While the Sarracens and Christians were close together hard at Fight, Frison
the Capitain laden with a Coat of Mail, a Helmet, and a Buckler by chance
slip't between the Vessels, into the Water when in his heart he called upon S.
James, and implored the Apostles Assistance for himself and fellow Christians.
S. James appearing took him by the hand, safely placed him in his own Ship, and
to the great Terror of the Sarracens conducted the Christians safe to the End
of their* Voyage. The other Miracle concerning the pious Pilgrim that returned
from Jerusalem happened Anno 1104. who casually thrown into the deep sea,
forthwith called on S. James for Succor, when behold, another of his
companions cast his Buckler after him, and cried out, Glorious S. James free
this man from danger. The Passenger Per capitis verticem.
cast over board, laying hold of the Buckler, received speedy assistance. S.
James took him by the crown of his head, followed the ship through the water
three whole days, and brought him safe to the long wished for Haven. A Domino
factum est istud, and est mirabile in oculis nostris. Thus my Manuscript.

22. All the Dr replies, is soon ended. These, says he, were pretty odd things
done at sea. As odd as they are, Sr, prove you the fraud or grant the Facts.
Next he demands? What shall we think of S. James making a man to leap from a
Tower forty cubits high, without any hurt? Marry, Sr, I hold it a great
Miracle, and Ask what you have against it? To make it greater, my Book tell's
me the Tower was three score cubits high, and the Story is thus related by Pope
Calixtus. Anno 1105. One called Bernard, kept close Prisoner in a Castle of
Italy was fast bound Two great Miraclrs wrought by S. James.
with chains under ground. Night and day the afflicted Person prayed to S.
James for his freedom. The Apostle appearing graciously heard his Petition,
loosened his fetters, and said; Come and follow me to Gallicia. Presently the
imprisoned man went up to the highest part of the Castle, and by one leap
escaped without hurt at all. Yet the Dr has not done, but ask's what we shall
say to a more Courteous Miracle of a high Tower stooping to the ground? Answer,
Mr Dr, was not the standing of the Sun in Josues time a more courteous Miracle,
than the stooping of this Tower? Or did Holy Joseph except against the Vision
he had of the Sun, Moon, and stars bowing to him, for their being over
Courteous? What a strange Humor is this, Our Dr will have Miracles related,
and when that is done, nothing contents him unless that be taken away which
makes them Miracles.

23. In a word. This Miracle of a Tower stooping Written by Pope Calixtus
concerned a Merchand, who fraudulently cheated of his Goods by a great Person,
was injuriously cast into Prison. In this sad condition he addressed himself
to S. James by earnest prayer; The Apostle appearing to the Prisoner while his
Keepers were awake, commanded him to go up to the height of a Tower which bowed
so low that the top of it seemed to reach the ground, and the man went off
without hurt or danger. The chains wherewith the Prisoner was bound, are kept
to this day in the Church of Gallicia, as a Testimony of the Miracle.

24. The last Miracle the Dr jeers at, is of a Country man in Spain that
presumed to Thresh on S. James's Feast, and going into a Bath at night, the
Skin of his back from the Shoulders to his Legs (a Punishment for profaning
that Day) stuck to the wall of the Bath whereupon he dyed. The Miracle is taken
out of a Book kept in the famous Monastery of S. Victor in France n. 287. The
man lived near Tudel, or Tudelion in Spain, where many Ey-witnesses saw him
dead, and his skin sticking to the wall of the Bath. As great a wonder Gregory
Turonensis Turonensis Mirac. lib. 2. cap. 11.
recount's of a Husbandman, that went to plow upon a Sunday, and taking his Axe
to fit something amiss in the culter of his Plough, the Helm of the Axe stuck
more close to his hand, than the Threshers skin to the wall of the Bath. There
it remaind two whole years, and could not by force be parted from his stupifyed
hand and fingers. Two year's expired, ^he went to the Church of S. Julianus
Martyr, and there after earnest Prayer made to the Saint, the handle of the Axe
gently slip't down, and his hand recovered its former Strength. A great Number
of the like Punishments we have faithfully recorded, laid by Divine Justice
upon such as violate Feast, days commanded to be kept Holy.

25. One, to omit many other, prodigiously Strange, I shall briefly mention,
most plainly Krantzius lib. 4. Hist. Saxou. c. 3^ Bell. de Scriptor Eccles.
verbo Albertus.
recorded by Albertus Krantzius, a man diligent in Writing History, says
Bellarmine. In a Village called Colbecke within the Diocese of Halberstade
certain wanton rude People on the Sacred night of our Saviors Nativity,
disturbed with their clamours and dancings the Divine Office, then celebrated
in the Church of S. Magnus. The Priest hearing their Revelling went forth, and
wished them to desist, they slight^d his Admonition, and danced their round
still. Seeing, said the Priest, you contemn me and Religion also, Sit vobis
circuitus annalis. Dance ye in that round a whole Twelvemonth together, which
happened, for they were forced to Skip and iump there night and day without
Intermission so long a time; At the years End, most of them dyed, some few
lived, and did great Penance. Thus Krantzius relates the Story, which seems to
me as great a Wonder as any hitherto taken out of the Writings of Pope
Calixtus. Now if Authors never stained in repute, must lose all credit, because
some who believe nothing (but what they feel, or se) wantonly jeer at them,
Tell me what is become of Humane Faith?

26. To End this matter, consider first, courteous The proofs where on we rely,
and Convince Calixtus Writings Authentic.
Reader, on what grounds our Proofs rely, for the Authenticalness of Pope
Calixtus Writings. Ponder. 2. That several Copies of these Writings are
dispersed up and down the whole Christian world, Italy, Spain, France, Germany
and England yet preserve them. Consider. 3. It seems more than morally
impossible that so many different Nations should keep them as Treasures, were
all, or the most of the Apostles recounted Miracles, Fables or mere Fictions.
Consider. 4. That all sorts of Christians to this day flock with great Devotion
to Compostella, And, as many have seen great Miracles wrought there, so many
also have experienced the like favors done upon themselves after earnest
Prayer made to S. James. And what shall we Judge all these witnesses either
mad, or deluded in plain matters of Sense, really seen, felt, and experienced?
Consider lastly, what a strange Adversary we have of Dr Still.? We produce our
Authors for every particular hiherto plainly laid forth; He to Oppose us, has
not one living or dead, that ever called into doubt what I quote, or, excepted
against my Testimonies. We to advance the Glory of a great Apostle, seriously
relate Matters as we find them recorded; He to dishonor this loyal Servant of
JESUS CHRIST, spitefully endeavors to render all ridiculous, And thinks,
forsooth, because an Ass (a contemptible The Dr opposes nothing against us.
creature) enters one Story, and the stooping of a Tower another, the real
Miracles ought therefore to be slighted. We finally raise upon humane Faith
every Wonder hitherto recounted to a high Credibility, the Dr, brings nothing
against us, but his own peevish Incredulity, while he tell's us with a jeer of
the pleasant tastes of S. James his Miracles. That is, as I said, you must first
take off all Marvel from a Miracle, and it is fit Lettice for the Dr's lips,
otherwise not tastable, much less digestable. Tell a Heathen of Elias dividing
the waters of Jordan with his cloak, and passing over the dry Sand with
Elizeus, will he not think ye follow the Dr's strain, and say. Here is a
pleasant Tale of an old man's cloak? To such feeble shifts Incredulity leads
men, that reject all faith humane, and Divine.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Dr's Pilgrimage to the Vial of S. Mary Magdalen in France. The Truth of
that Miracle Proved. Cavils answered. Holy Relics vindicated from the Dr's
Calumny. Whether Protestancy be a grave Religion. Of Dr* John Launoy's
Virulency.

1. NOte. 1. We enquire not in this place whether S. Mary Magdalen whose Vial
is kept in the Church of S. Maximin, be that Poenitent and once sinful Magdalen
or another, Sister to Martha and Lazarus raised from the dead by our Savior?
Caesar Baronius cites Origin, S. Chrisostom, S. Baronius Ann. Christi. 32. n.
20.
Hierom, and S. Ambrose, who seem to make them two distinct Women, though
Origin (says the Cardinal) retracted his Opinion. S. Austin speak's doubtfully
in this point. Ecce, S. Austin de consens. Evang. lib 12. c. 79.
says he, Sorror Lazari si tamen ipsa, See the Sister of Lazarus if yet She be
the same that anointed the feet of our Lord; and wiped them with the hair of
her head. Some Authors quoted by Joannes Ferrandus favor much the Opinion
Ferrand. l. 1. Disq. Reliq. Cap. 1. a. 1.
which admit's two different Magdalens, the one out of whom, our Lord cast
seven Devils, The other a Virgin, and Sister to Martha, and she it was that
brought the Christian Faith to the Province of Marseils, and with it (may the
Tradition of a whole Nation gain belief) the Vial we shall now speak of.
Baronius Baron. n. 22
cited learnedly opposes those who admit two distinct Magdalen's, and Says
there was but one only, who with her tears washed the feet of our Lord, Sister
to Martha and Lazarus.

2. We enquire not how or by whom, the Vial yet preserved in S. Maximins Church
was conveyed thither, yet have thus much upon Record, that when our Savior was
crucified, and one of the Soldiers pierced his sacred side with a Lance so
violently, that blood and water in great abundance gushed out, the Blessed
Virgin and other women present, gathered up with great reverence as much of it
as they could, though mingled with the earth or sand under Metaph. 15 Augusti
Baronius Ann. Christi 34. n. 127.
the Cross. This Metaphrastes recount's out of Very Ancient Monuments, And
Baronius approves, who speak's much of the Admirable courage of the Blessed
Virgin in taking down her Son from the Cross, pulling out the nails from his
hands and feet, embracing his Sacred Body, and bathing it with her Tears, as
the Church Sing's. Stabat Matter dolorosa juxta crucem lacrymosa etc. Moreover
we know, that as after the death of S. Stephen the first Martyr, the number of
Christians increased, so also the Persecution against them raised by Jews
raged most violently, whereupon the Disciples of Christ, were sent and
dispersed up and down several Parts of the world, to preach the Gospel. See
more hereof in Baronius, who add's Baron. Anno 35. n. 4. and 5.
that in this dispersion of the Disciples Ananias went to Damascus, and at the
same time Lazarus, Mary Magdalen with her handmaid Marcella (bitterly hated by
the Jews) were not only banished Jerusalem, but barbarously also cast into a
Boat without Oars, yet by God's special Providence arrived safely at Marseils.
For this Baronius cites in his Margent. Manuscript Baron. n. 5.
Histor. Angl, yet preserved in the Vatican Library. Reader, for your greater
Satisfaction Bellavo. Tom. 4. Spec. Hist. cap. 9. 95.
in these particulars, please to peruse at leisure Vincentius Bellavocensis,
that done, you will find no great difficulty in yiedling S. Mary Magdalen the
singular honor of carrying with her that precious Relic of our Saviors
Sacred blood enclosed in a little Vial, and leaving the Treasure to the
Inhabitants in Marseils, whereof they have good assurance by Tradition
perpetuated from Age to Age. These matters waved.

3. My task is now to prove what I asserted Disc. 4. c. 8. number. 1^.
Reason and Religion, to this Sense. Viz. That the Sacred blood contained in
the forementioned Vial, though at other times hard, black, and congealed, yet
every year grows red, liquifies, and visibly boyl's up on the day Sil. tom: 2.
c. 12. p. 105 under the Title Mira. perpet:
of our Saviors Passion, Usually called Good Friday. The like Wonder is seen,
says Silvest. Petra Sancta the first day of January on our Lords Circumcision,
and on the Feast of the Holy Cross May 3: Silvester moreover observes that
upon the Change, or correction of the Calendar made by Pope Gregory the XIII.
this Miracle which before was seen on the now named Days answerable to the old
Account, keep's yet the same days. Viz. Good Friday, the Circumcision etc. But
according to the new Change, or correction of the Calendar.

4. I proved the visible liquifying or manifest boiling up of this Blood. 1. By
the consent of a whole ample Nation, the Kingdom of France. 2. By the Testimony
of thousand Ey-witnesses, who have seen it, And what Proof can be greater? 3.
Laurentius Surius tell's us That when Anno 1497, He went cut of pure Devotion
to visit the Cave where S. Mary Surius to. 4 ad 22. July.
Magdalen lived in high Contemplation, Her Venerable head was shown him very
grear, bare, without skin to the Skull, excepting only one little Particle of
flesh upon her forehead, which our Savior is said to have touched. I saw
moreover, says Surius, a glass Vial with blood in it of a middle color
between black and red, and this the Saint standing near the Cross when Christ
suffered, took up mingled with the earth it fell upon. All, add's Surius, I
conversed with, plainly avouched without hesitation or doubt, that the Blood
shut up in the Vial Visibly boyl's every Friday in the Holy Silvester cited p.
99.
week of Lent. I saw also says Silvester Petra Sancta S. Mary Magdalen's Head
in the Town of S. Maximin, had it in my hands, and admired the gracious
Symmetrie of it. Whereby one may Conjecture what great beauty and Comeliness
once adorned that Countenance. This Skull and the particle of flesh yet
cleaving to the fore head, Clichtoveus also beheld, witness Clichto. de trib.
Magd. part. 1. p, 34 Ferrand. l* 1. c. 4. Art, 1. post medium Silv. p. 106.
Joannes Ferrandus cited.

5. Now to rescue the Truth of this liquifying Blood contained in S. Mary
Magdalen's Vial from all doubt or opposition, please to hear what F. Silvester
quoted, recount's as a most clear Evidence of the Miracle. For his own greater
Satisfaction He wrote a large letter to a Religious man, then Prior of the
Dominicans Convent Called S. Sixtus at Rome, who before had been Superior of
the Monastery where this admirable Miracle of the liquifying blood is yearly
seen. The Substantial Contents of his letter are as follow.

6. Diva Maria Magdalena etc. S. Mary Magdalen, a Guest, a Teacher of Faith,
and of Holy Conversation in the City of Marseils, where; God directing the
Vessel that carried her, she happily arrived, is said to have brought with her
not an Alablaster Box full of precious Ointment, but the price of mankind,
Enquiry made by letter after this liquifying blood.
the Sacred Blood of our Redeemer, or at least sand embrued with that Blood,
gathered under the Cross at Christ's Sacred Passion, And that She being to
depart this life, left the precious Treasure as a legacy to that Province, in
reward of her Entertainment.... In the first place, this is thought very
strange, that the Blood there, or earth mingled with blood, thrice every year
grows red, melt's and bubbles up, though the rest of the year it be concrete
not ruddy, but rather of a dark color. This Enquiry I here make being weighty
and worth knowing, I consult you who have lived on the place, attentively
beheld the Miracle, and Therefore cannot but be so prudent in this matter of
Fact as to persuade us that your Eyes were not deceived. This favor I Ask from
you, what soever you Say for Truth, shall be esteemed by me a great benefit.

The Answer to this letter follows thus.
7.

The Relation you have had of that stupendous Miracle every yearSeen in the
Sacred blood of our Lord by the People of S. Maximin, and there honored, is no
vain or lying Story, but exactly so as you have told it..... This therefore is
to be seen upon Friday in the Holy week (not every hour of the day) but near
Noone, about one of the Clock (the time to is thought when our Savior
suffered) you may see, I say, that sand or earth mingled with our Redeemers
Blood, (which all the rest of the year remain's thick and hard together) by
little and little move it self, grow red, liquify, and boil up. Now it is,
that the blood having left that thicker matter in the bottom of the Vial,
becomes pure, refined, Thin, like a light cloud, or subtle vapor; And first
rises up to the middle Parts, then to the Top of the Vial, soon after falling
down, beat's upon the sides of the glass as it falls, and presently ascend's
again. This Motion visible The answer to that letter.
to all, continues about an Hour, that time expired, it leisurely return's to
its first place, color, and state as before. And thus that sweet and pleasant
Spectacle cease to be seen in the Vial, but the Sight of it will ever live in
man's Memory, while not only the Kingdom of France, but the whole world both
admires and approves the Wonder. These things I write, not only as a prudent
Esteemer but also as a diligent Spectator and a most faithful Witness of this
Miracle, and to Authori^ze this my Answer for you, I here set my hand.

Given at Rome in the Convent of S. Sixtus. May 20. 1641. Subscribed. Ita est,
Frater Ioannes Richeome, Prior Conventus S. Sixti Ordinis Praedicatorum.


The Dr has here a hard Task, for he must either prove this Religious man an
Impudent Liar, and all those innumerable Spectators of the Miracle to have had
their eyes dazzled, when year after year they palpably see the Motion of this
Blood, or he is obliged to crave pardon for his rash and inconsiderate Writing
against a manifest Truth.

8, The Objections he let us fly at this visible Work of God are mere empty
words, not worth mentioning. Our Saviors Blood (says he) was Page 477.
never shed to show tricks with. Tricks Mr Dr! A most ungodly Expression,
uttered without Proof in contempt of Christ, who, if the best Authors that ever
wrote may gain Belief, has left upon earth some quantity of his Sacred Blood
to the comfort of faithful Christians, whereof more presently. He goes on.
Certainly there were never more shameful Impostures than about Relics and
Miracles in the Roman Church, whereat some of the Wiser abroad, shake their
heads, and are ashamed of. Doctor you may here justly hide your head, and be
ashamed of this Talk at random, no less boldly spoken than coldly made out by
you. Produce me but one of those called Wise men of our Church, that slight
Relics, or Miracles Authoritatively approved, and No Catholic Author denies
Miracles, or Relics of Saints.
I will either show he is no Catholic, or a very bad one like Launoy, your
much esteemed Author. Next comes in the Dr's Exclamation. Gentlemen, Religion
is a grave and serious Thing, and a severe Account must be given to God of any
thing we Say about it. Sr, my Account of this Miracle is already given, I
produce Ey-witnesses and most approved Authors, What have you against them?
Nothing but a few vain insignificant words much to this Sense. We magnify
Miracles still, as though the People of England were as capable of being made
fools, as ever, That you abhor the Hypocrisy and fraud of our Church, which
cannot be upheld, without Abusing mankind, and the most excellent Religion in
the world.

9. One word Mr Dr, Because you are so much upon giving Account of grave
Matters, Satisfy me in this plain Question. Which among so many different
Religions call you the grave, Serious, and most Excellent one? If you say, as I
think you must, it is Protestancy, You know, Sr, and your own Judgment tell's
you, that Protestancy despicable all over Christianity
the whole Christian world look*s upon it as a most despicable and contemptible
Novelty. Abyssins, Gracians, Georgians, Arians, Monothelits, laugh at the folly
of your more than ridiculous Reformation. Catholics compassionate your
deplorable Fate, and never cease to wonder, that an Ingenious Nation as our
English is, can be fooled (to use your own word) into a Belief of this
Protestancy, which never yet did, nor shall hereafter do Good to Christian or
Heathen, yet, all, forsooth, must be thought grave and serious. We seriously
enquire after your Unity in Faith (the life and soul of Religion) and you show
us the ghastly Spectacles of endless Divisions amongst Protestants, Quaquers,
Latitudinarians, and no man knows who besides. Is this fine, grave, and
serious? We Luther and Calvin.
demand who commissioned you to preach a Novelty never heard of before two
Libertins broach't it, and your Patents are nothing but a Blanck, or white
paper without License from God or man, to teach as you do. Yet all is Grave
and serious. We ask where are the indefatigable Missioners sent by you for the
Conversions of Heathens and Gentiles to the remotest Parts of the world, a noble
Function where in the Catholic Church only, and most justly glories? You like
lazy Drones (not daring to wet a foot) sit at home, well clad, and better fed,
dallying with your Wives and Children,) Yet all must be thought Grave and
serious. Let any impartial man cast a serious thought upon our Nation one Age
since, unfortunately divorced from Christ and his Church, and compare its
present condition with that it once was, when Catholic Religion flourished
there, he is blind and besotted, who see's not a Notorious difference, What
ruins followed Protestancy.
and now much to the worse. More Atheistical Principles have poisoned men's
hearts, more Fantastic Opinions have been vented, more Kingdoms undone, more
temporal Lords deprived of their Soveraignity in Germany, France and
Netherlands, more Churches overthrown, more Bishops banished, more havoc made
of all that Good is, more Innocent blood shed, since this new Tragical Gospel
troubled Christendom, than a thousand years before had shown in time of Popery.
These are evidences clearly laid forth by Br^rely, whether Grave and pious, let
the world Judge, And. Brerely Protest. Apol. tract. 3 sect 2. But chiefly in
his Preface to the Reader. As also in a little Book printed at London 1653.
called Jerusalem and Babel. The II. Edition.


10. Here, Mr Dr, because you tell us a severe Account must be given to God of
what we say concerning Religion, I hold with you, and am sure, That no less
severe account is to be given of What you and men of your Gange have done
against it. Our Eyes (as I told you in another Treatise) yet se the horror,
and our hearts bewail the sad Doings of your impious and worse than barbarous
Reformation. You have turned the Ancient Bishops out of their Sees, Religious
out of their Cells, Nobles out of their Estates, and men out of their Wits. You
have turned unity into Schism, Religion into Policy and Virtue into Hipocrisy,
You have defaced Our Churches, demolished our Monasteries, pulled down our
Altars, as if the memory of Christ, and the Temples where God was once
worshipped, were hateful and abominable to you. Yet contrary to all The
Reformation of Protestants, barbarous.
conscience and Justice; you enjoy the Incomes, devovre the Substance left by
Ancient Catholics to those only, who said Mass, adored the Sacrifice of the
Altar, Prayed for the Dead, honored Saints, and served God in the Religion
called by you Idolatry. How can you do this without public Cor. 1. 8. 7.
Scandal and open Injustice? S. Paul in one Epistle tell's us of some much
Scandalized, when they saw others eat meat offered to Idols, and ye
Gentleman, make no Scruple to feed upon the temporal Goods given, as you say,
by Idolate^^ (our Ancient Catholic Benefactors) to maintain Idolatry. These
Goods never (God knows and you know well) left to you or any of your race (by
express will and Testament of the Doners entailed upon the Catholic Clergy and
Religious) you unjustly appropriate to your Selves, And thus, forsooth,
Idolothyta Things offered to uphold Idols (such are our Images, say you and the
blessed Sacrament we adore) relish well and please your Appetite; The
Procedure, Mr Dr, is not only Scandalous to your weak Brethren, but besides, as
I said now, plain Theft and open Injustice. Of this Injustice as also of all
your impious Sacriledges, you are to give a strict Account before an Impartial
Judge in the Vale of Jehosophat where it will appear, whether you have wronged
those Bountiful long since deceased Catholics, whose bread you eat, I or you
in drawing up this dreadful Charge against you.

11. To conclude the Point hitherto pressed, Nothing in Protestancy, either
grave of serious.
Tell me, Sr, I beseech you, what is it that appears Pious, Grave, and Serious
in this your new nothing of Protestancy? Where are your mortifyed Religious,
that keep strict Abstinence? and Spend their time in Prayer day and night ^
Where are now your retired Hermits, your Solitary Virgins, shut up in Cloisters
without hope of enjoying Friends or acquaintance any more? How many have you
drawn by your Protestancy not only from Heresy to Faith, but from vice to
Virtue, from a Sensual Life to Austerity, and mortification? Catholics give
you yearly, yea Monthly, a large Catalogue of such self Deniers; The Rich
freely become poor, the avaricious Liberal, the Proud humble, the Impatient
meek, the Secular Religious, and often quit amples Fortunes to enjoy God in a
retired Cell. These real and generous Actions the old Catholic world (and we
yet) highly esteemed Things Pious, Grave, and serious, as known and owned Marks
of true Religion, but your Dull and barren Protestancy yeild's no such Fruits,
wherefore Erasmus cited by me in another Treatise (one of great account with
you) Speak's home and pertinently. Give me the man (says he) whom this new
Gospel of a Gurmandizer has made abstinent, or sober, of Fierce and cruel,
Tractable, of an Extortioner Liberal, of an unchaste Liver, continent, and I
will Show many that are grown worse than they were before.

12. But there is none I ever read, that with Catholic Apology from p. 259
greater Energy lays forth the known Virtues (obvious to Sense) in Catholic
Religion (never practiced or heard of among Protestants) than that noble Person
of Honor in his late incomparable Book, entitled the Catholic Apology, with
a Reply etc. Reader, peruse this excellent Authors discourse directed to Dr
Sill. Here (in The gravity and piety of Catholic Religion, laid forth by a
Person of Honor.
Catholic Religion) we shall find (Says he) great Generals and Captains (who
being made sensible that after all their Victories, they were not^withstanding
Cowards and Captives to their own lusts and Passions) turning presently their
fury upon the new discovered Enemy, and retiring to some Desert or By-place,
there to begin a Cruel combat, never to be left of till by God's assistance
(for whom they fight) they become more than Conquerors. Here we shall see a
delicate Courtier clad in soft Clothing, and abounding in all excess
Imaginable, awakened on a sudden out of his Sensual Lethargy, and then instead
of accustomed indulging Passion etc. We shall hear that he is become a Servant
of the most Abject, and that his dwelling is in Lazarettos, Pesthouses, and the
like loathsome places, no service being waved by him of Comfort, to those
distressed, whether it be to dress their stinking wounds, or to receive their
last infected breath whilst he hear's their Confessions, and prepares them for
another world. What have we like this among Protestants. Here we shall see a
rich Merchand adding house to house and field to field for many years, opening
in the End his Eyes, and selling all he has for the relief of the poor and
needy, To purchase that inestimable Jewel so often recommended to him by his
Savior, and so after incessant labors he lays up a certain Treasure in
Heaven; where neither Moth nor Rust can Corrupt, nor Theives break through and
steal. Was ever the like example Shown by Protestants? Here we shall have a
lewd Lais or Messalena that own's no God but Pleasure, that dream's of nothing
but Dressing, Balls, Feasting, and what may seem to satisfy her unsatiable
appetite..... We shall have such an one, I say, wounded to the Soul in the
height of her glory, throwing into the fire her Bracelets and tinkling
Ornaments etc. Nor does this Penitent Magdalen rest thus, but taking haircloth
for her Attire, and a sharp Discipline for her Companion, call's her self
often to account for her past Abominations, and with bread and water, or a poor
Claresses diet, daily blesses her merciful Father, that she has time to repent.
Long may you search all the Annals of Protestants, before you find but one only
of these Penitent Magdalen's, whereas most certainly Catholic Religion gives
in Evidence of many.

13. Our Person of Honor goes on. There is no English Traveller but will
Affirm, that in any one Popish Town of our Neighborhood, as in Paris, Gant;
Antwerp, Liege etc. there is more Praying, more Receiving more Fasting, more
watching, more Almes-giving, more visiting of Prisoners, more exposing in time
of Infection, and in short more of any thing else, that either Revelation or
reason call's Piety, than in all the Protestant Countries they ever saw in
their lives. Yet more. Did ever any of those sublime Wits (here the Noble
Person alludes to the very Poets of Dr Stillingfleet's own Religion) When they
are to represent a Holy and heavenly man speak of a Minister, or bring him on
the Stage? No certainly. It Is his part to be there if they intend to make the
Auditors merry; But when they express Sanctity and devotion in its greatest
Luster, we then hear of nothing but of Ancorits, of Hermits, of Capucins, of
Carthusians, or some such mortified Religious men, all great Strangers to
Protestant Religion, however Dr Still. will, forsooth, have this Dull stupefied
Protestancy to be thought a serious Business, and Popery (God wot) a hindrance
to Good life; That is, when Monarks and Princes quitted their Crowns and
Scepters to live in a poor little Cell, when Emperesles and Queens exchanged
their Palaces contenting themselves with an humble private Oratory; These and
the like Heroic admirable examples of Virtue, are in the Dr's opinion to be
looked on as hindrances to a Good life. Now since the Dr will have Popery so
destructive (add's this Person of Honor) and his Religion so conducing to good
life, I defy him to show one Conversion or Mortification in his Church, that
would move the least Wonder in any one, whereas the Primitive Christians struck
the very Infidels with admiration by their Heroique and pious Actions, most of
which have been equaled in every Age by their Catholic Successors, and
sometimes Outdone.

14. Thus and much more the Person of Honor, once a University man, whose Wit,
I am sure, and most excellent natural Abilities fully reach as high as the very
best the Dr can glory in, and should we mention the known Improvement gained by
his great Travels etc. we may with modesty say, there is no more comparison
between the Dr and this noble Adversary, The great natural Talents, an^
abilities of this Person of Honor.
than between a Owl close in an Juy bush and a Soaring Eagle, that sees what is
done in other Nations. All the Dr can reply for his Protestancy when we produce
these Evidences of Mortification, and contempt of the world in Popery, comes at
last to this (so some have pleaded) that the Protestants mortification and
contempt of earthly things is, forsooth all Inward, lives in Souls, though not
seen outwardly. This pretty Shift remind's me of a pleasant Story related not
many years since. A Virtuous simple man, I knew well, lent his horse fat and in
Good case to one that borrowed him for a Journey of nine or ten days, the poor
horse returned to his Master, quite changed was very lean, little remaining but
Skin and bone. The Owner much wondering at the Change Asked how his horse became
so meager? O said the Traveller, Sr, though the poor beast outwardly appears,
as you see, very thin and starued, yet he is fat, and well to pass Within. The
Story (whether true or no import's little) well expresses our Protestants
Mortification and Virtues kept (from appearing) within doors, though our
savior command's quite Contrary. Sic luceat lux vestra etc. Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your Good Works, and glorify your Father
who is in Heaven. A Dunce may defend his Duncery, and the most griping Userer
in the world his Liberality, if the one by saying he is learned Within, and the
other interiourly liberal, may serve the Turn.

15. In a word, Reader, summon up the very most or best that bears a Semblance
of Religion amongst Protestants, it amount's only to much Vain and Idle talk
now and then bawled out on Sundays, whereof you have Instances Good store in
those late Books Written by one that want's neither Wit nor Judgment, I mean
that Ingenious Author of the Contempt of the Clergy. One, says he, preaches
Observations upon the Answer page 125.
of Christ and tells his Hearers; That Christ was the Christ, that we must lay
out for Christ, close with Christ, rest, and lean, role, toss, tumble and
vvallovv on Christ etc. Another preaches of Meditation, and makes great
Discoveries. Meditation Page 125.
is like chevving of the cud, like climbing up into a tree, like digging
Spiritual gold out of the Mine of the Promises, like the Selvidge which keeps
the Cloth from ravelling, like a Hammer that drives the nail to the head, like
going to Plough, like a Gun full of powder, with much more. A third takes for
his Text. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and gravely observes an
Emphasis in every word, and that the first Word, But, is a But indeed, or a
Hogs-head full of Spiritual wine, he will broach it, taste a little, and then
proceed, But I leave him to his broaching and tasting, and must tell you
briefly of a fourth great Preacher, who taking that of Genesis 42. 2. Grounds of
the contempt of the Clergy page 69.
And one told Jacob, and said, Behold thy Son Joseph comes to thee, presently
made it out, that his Text was a spiritual Dyal, for here, says he, are
twelve words which represent the twelve hours, and the word (Behold) is
the hand of the Dyal that point's at every word in the Text. Now as it must
needs be one of the clock, before it can be two or three, So this Bawler will
handle this first word And, (a small Particle,) but small things says he, are
not to be despised. Matt. 18. 10. Take he^d you despise not one of these little
ones. For this, AND, is as the Tacks and loops amongst the Curtains of the
Tabernacle, the Some Preachers ridiculous.
loops did couple the Curtains, So this, AND, being put into the loops of the
words immediately before, does couple the Text to the foregoing Verse, and
sevves them close together. To tell you more of this stuff; how Souls ought
constantly to gape after the Lord, even as Oysters gape, how they are laid a
bleaching, or how the Sun of Justice (CHRIST) passed through the Twelve Signs
of the Zodiac to vv^iten them, would be no less ridiculous and sportive to the
Reader, than these rare gifted men's Sermons were to their Hears, yet
Gentlemen, says the Dr, our Religion is a grave and serious thing, and a
severe account must be given to God of any thing, we say about it. If what is
here briefly hinted, be grave and not in a high measure Comical, all Notion of
gravity is lost with me.

16. It will, I know, be replied. The most of the English Clergy preach not
thus. Very true, for many do it much worse. Such are those who after a half
years hammering on a Sermon, briskly mount the Pulpit as if it came by
Inspiration, and thunder out little but hard Others worse.
Greek words, and Vengeance against the Pope and Popery, who with one hours
Breath, idly spent, thought to Preach down twenty old Catholic Positions by
a pretty Twirl, or eftsoons saying in Greek. From the Beginning it was not so.
Such are those who more preach Themselves, than Christ Crucified. That is, feed
the Phansy with a Gingle of words choicely laid together* but touch no hearts;
These they leave as cold and frozen as the Stones they stand on, yet all must
be thought grave and serious, Though Heb. 4. 12
the Apostle tell's us, that the Word of God is lively and forceing, reaches to
the Division of the Soul, and Spirit etc. Such finally are those, whom the
Gospel boldly rebuk's. Dicunt sed non faciunt talk on, but blast all That Is
said, in doing quite Contrary. I have both heard and read of no mean Clergy man
amongst Protestants, who upon Proofs taken out of Scripture and Fathers, showed
that Abstinence from flesh on Days appointed, ought to be observed, yet the
very next Friday no Hypocrisy Scandalizes,
( Christmas day) was found by a Friend with a good Capon and some Partridges
before him. The Divine after a little Pause said, Sr, let not this Scandalize
you, for you know Fasting and Abstinence, are only Self denials. In reallity
there is nothing I love like fish, and therefore to chek the lust of my
Appetite, I am content with these fevv Birds. What Is this, but Saying and not
Doing, in a word plain fraud and Hypocrisy, Those evils Dr Still. pretend's to
abhor? Would he did so seriously, but all is not Gold that Glisters, for what
we often read proves too often true, Sunt multa fucis illita quae luce
purgentur tua. Much that naught is, and rotten at the root, lies under a fair
Outside of foul Works, which God at last discovers.

17. Mr Dr, did our Catholic Divines either Preach, or do like these, They
would become hateful but (Thanks be to God) all is Contrary. One preaches
every day in Lent, and as occasion falls out highly commend's, and pioussly
exhorts to observe that Duty of a long Abstinence. But is here all? No To
persuade the more efficaciously by good Example he abstain's himself from
Flesh, not only during the time of Lent, but some, the whole year long, yea all
the days of their life. Such men I know. Have you, Mr Dr, any that Preach and
do like them? Have you any that undertake a whole Advent, when by reason of the
approaching Feast of Christ's Sacred Nativity, every Orator has occasion to lay
forth the Poverty, and Obedience, of our Infant God? Our Preachers do this with
great Benefit to their Hearers, and work strongly upon hearts, by good Example,
by real deeds, and laudable Effects. They insist much upon the Contempt of the
In what manner our Catholics preach.
world* and in good earnest contemn it, using nothing as their own. They preach
Christ's Poverty and practice it, their Cloths, Diet, Lodging (despicable in
your eyes,) are so poor, that in case they reach to what is necessary for life,
It Is enough and deemed Plenty, And their Obedience is so riged, that
notwithstanding the Eminent parts wherewith God has endued many, They cannot
see a Friend, or They practice what they preach.
stir a foot abroad, but with leave given by Superiors. Add hereunto their
many other Laborious Employments, as is the due attending Penitents upon
Sundays and Holidays, their frequent visiting the sick; Though called on at
Midnight, no delay made, they run in the cold of Winter, And, which may be an
eternal Confusion to your uncharitable Lazy lives in England, if a Plague or
great Mortality by God's permission seize upon a Town or City, These very men
willingly Hazard health, and life, and no few of my acquaintance, have dyed in
that hot Service. This, Sr, is to Say and Do, and I hope both Grave and
serious. If you have any Thing like it Speak out, and shame us, otherwise to
Tell us; Gentlemen, Religion is a grave and serious Thing, while you show us no
real effects of Gravity, but These and the like barren Negatives. No Austerity,
no interior Mortification, no Fasting, No converting of Souls to the better,
No practice of Poverty, No strict Obedience, No quitting your Beds to visit the
sick, No assisting the Infected, and which undoes all, nothing like a Miracle
amongst you, neither when you began your new Whinsey, of Reformation or ever
since. To talk I say, as you do of Gravematters without grave Substance, is
mere Hypocrisy, a Canting Language, odious and offensive to God and man. Thus
much of a short Digression, it remain's that we solve some Objections proposed
against the Miraculous Vial at S. Maximins.

More of the Miraculous Vial. Holy Relics defended. Of Dr Launoys Virulency.
18. Dr Still. Object's first. If we must believe S. Mary Magdalen's Vial, why
may we not as well admit the rest of your Church Relics, for example, Dr
Still. page 474.
the Foreskin of Christ, which as Cardinal Tolet says, has wrought great
Miracles at Calcata in Italy, and yet Ferrandus tell's us that Germany,
Flanders, Lorain, and France boast of having it? Answ. Where we have the like
Authority for other Relics, as for this of the liquifying Vial, we prudently
yield the like assent upon humane Faith, and therefore own what grave Authors
Write of the Sacred Prepuce. Ferrand, lib. 1. Disq. Reliq. sect. 1.
Viz. That as Ferrandus witnesses, the Blessed Virgin a little before her
Assumption, committed that Relic to S. John with some of our Saviors
precious Blood* which She sorrowful Mother, when her Son was taken down from
the Cross, carefully gathered out of the Wounds of his Crucified Body. And
shall we call this into doubt says Ferrandus, when the Queen of Heaven in
after Ages gave Assurance of it to S. Brigit Revel. 6.
S. Briget, yet living upon earth? The Dr replies not at all to this Authority
but only frigidly Says, it were Good to understand where the Prepuce is? It
would, Sr, be likewise Good to understand where your Protestancy was two or
three Ages since, make you but thus much out upon any Revelation imparted to S.
Brigit, We will yield it once a Being in the world, yea and more, a longer
Continuance; But never yet could you or any say, where or in what place it was.
The Sacred Prepuce Mr Dr once committed Why the sacred Prepuce cannot be
Supposed lost?
to S. John, cannot while so many lay claim to it, be supposed lost, In case
some be mistaken in judgeing they have it, and have it not, the Error arising
out of invincible Ignorance, is pardonable, and in Justice not imputable. O but
Says our Dr, The same worship is given to all those places where its thought
to be, And, (as he pleases to Suppose) Miracles likewise equally wrought there.
Answ. Where God vouchsafes to work true Miracles by that Relic, there I say
it is, and therefore will sooner grant it multiplied by Divine Power in many
places, than unreasonably dare to deny the Miracles. I know Ferrandus solves
the Difficulty Ferran. lib. 1. c. 2. sect. 2*
another way, and thinks those several Prepuces are only so many divided Parts
of the Umbelical Reins, yet preserved in Italy and other Countries; But I
willingly wave this Authors long discourse, and in lieu of it Propose a second
Objection.

19. S. Athanasius cited in the 2. Nicene Synod Athanas. lib de Passione
Imaginis Domini.
seems to assert, that no other Flesh or blood of our Savior remain's now on
earth, besides that in the Holy Eucharist. I wonder the Dr makes use of these
words, because as Quoted by him, they necessarily prove the Blood in the
Blessed Sacrament to be truly and really Christ's Sacred Blood, For if none
really remain on earth but that in the Holy Eucharist, that most certainly is
Supposed to be the true real Blood of our Savior; So if any truly say, none is
in the house but Peter, the Assertion necessarily implies Peter to be there.
Briefly; Cardinal Bellar. de Ecc Scrip. Anno 340. S. Athan.
Bellarmine Answer's, that the Book cited is not held the Work of the Ancient
Athanasius, but of some other Author much later. Again, Says he, the late
Quoted words are not all extant in the Greek Copy of the Nicene Council nor
recorded in the Version of Anastasius Bibliothecarius, Therefore seem an
Addition foisted in by some, after the debate had before Pope Pius the second,
concerning the Sacred Blood of Christ. Moreover says Bellarmine, to Assert
that none of our Saviors Blood remain's on earth besides that in the Holy
Eucharist, contradict's the Tradition of the Church of Mantua, which glories in
preserving part of the Blood, which truly issued out of our Saviors Side, and
Pope Leo the third, (then) eight hundred year's past, declared it to be so, who
as many French Writers recount, went at the Instance of Charles the Great to
Mantua, with Intention to be informed of the Truth, as likewise of the Miracles
wrought there by Virtue of that precious Treasure, where the Pope receiving
full Satisfaction, approved all by a special Bull as Baronius cited by Bellar.
witnesses. For a Baron. tom 9 ann. 804 Parisiens. in Henrico 3. Rege Angliae p.
717.
Conclusion of this whole matter Bellar. quotes Matthew Paris who Says, that
the Patriarch of Jerusalem sent to Henry the third King of England a little
Vial containing a rich Present, the Very true Blood of our Savior, which was
received with great joy and Veneration all England over. Our Catholic Bishops
then preaching in their several Districts, highly esteemed the Gift, and showed
of what worth it was, with much Zeal and fervor.

20. Ferrandus Quots these words out of Pope Ferran. sect. 1.
Pius his Bull. Veritati fidei etc. It is no way against Faith to affirm, that
our Savior in memory of his Sacred Passion left here on earth some parts of
his own precious Blood, whereunto, (besides Leo the third) two other Popes
Sixtus the Fourth, and Julius the Second accord with a whole Legion of
Catholic Divines, says Ferrandus. The Testimony also of Euthymius Euth.
Monachus Zigabemus in coufut. Sectae Saracenicae.
in his Confutation of the Ismaelits or Saracens is here most memorable. Non
umbram Christi etc. The Blood, says he, which ran down from the Body of our
Crucified Savior, proves, that we have not a bare Shadow or Semblance of
Christ, but Christ really Crucified in mortal Flesh, This Blood is yet kept
amongst Christians, and visibly boiling up, cures many Diseases, and that it is
our Redeemers Blood, most clear and uncontestable Miracles make manifest. I
hope These few Authorities and many more alledgeable, may happily teach the Dr
to rule his Tongue better, and to Surcease from his roaring out against our
abusing Mankind with Vials, and turning the most Holy Religion in the world
into a mere Show and Ceremony. Mere empty and peevish words, void of weight,
and all shadow of Reason.

21. A third Objection. All the Blood of our Savior Shed in his Sacred Passion
was as many hold, reassumed at his Resurrection, Answerable to an old Maxim.
Quod semel assumpsit non demisit. The Dr to his shame blindly stumbles upon the
Difficulty, after he had (as it seems) read Ferrandus his clear Solutions, but
was willing to Ferran. cited sect. 7.
conceal what he would not have a Reader know. Briefly; None Says Ferrandus,
can Assert that our Savior reassumed all the Parts of matter added to his
Sacred Body by continual Nutrition, without making it of a monstrous Bigness,
yet those particles once were united to his Divine Person, though never
reassumed, Why Therefore may we not Say, that as our Redeemer left on the one
side great Quantity of his Blood as a Testimony of his dear Affection to
Mortals, who reverently preserve it; so on the other, when he rose from death
He resumed so much Vital Blood (perhaps, says Ferrandus, taken from some other
matter) as was sufficient to constitute his Glorious Body in a perfect State of
Immortality. Again, were it needful, Why might we not assert, that, that
copious torrent The Dr may think this Doctrine Strange But that is no matter. Let
him read Divines.
of Blood which fell from Christ in his bitter Passion, remain's yet
Hypostatically United to the Divine Person? His dead Body lying in the Grave
retained still, (all confess) the Hypostatical union, and so did his glorious
Soul in Lymbo, Though all that time far distant from the Body. In like manner,
that precious Blood which plentifully gushed out of his Veins, may, to verify
that Maximin both be reassumed, and yet still remain on earth in Mantua, in S.
Maximins Church with the Xantons also, and some other Parts of Europe. And thus
the Divine Blood now shut up in our Saviors Body in Heaven And here on earth
in the Blessed Sacrament, may without Prejudice to Faith, be thought
Individually the very same, yea (and were this certainly known) adored likewise
with Latria, or Divine worship. I am Sure the Doctrine is held sound by the
learned Gregory de Valencia, and maintained by many other great Divines.

22. Yet Ferrandus Cited.. Addo Sudorem. Valent* in 3 P. Disp. 1. quest 5.
punct. 1. Dull. 3. Lucae 22. v, 44.
Pondering that Passage in S. Luke. And his sweat became like drops of blood
trickling down to the ground, curiously observes, that the Greek word (...),
properly signifies grumos (...), that is concrete, or little clottered Balls of
Blood, which condensed by the Cold of the night, trickled down in that Agony,
And however mixed with earth, were afterward gathered up by careful hands,
though the Dr simply tell's us* S. Magdalen had no time at our Saviors Passion
to do that service to her Lord and Master. Now these very Particles, or
precious drops may well augment that Treasure, whereunto so many lay claim, and
prudently Judge, they yet have in keeping some Quantity of our Saviors sacred
Blood. And truly, when, no meaner a man than Pope Clement the V. earnestly
solicited Henry Bishop of Claremont, to have but a small Portion of our
Saviors Blood sent him (then in that Bishops custody) This fact alone,
recounted by Ferrandus, Shows (methinks) what high esteem the greatest Prelate
upon earth had of that highly valuable Treasure.

23. It is Strange to see what slight Stuff follows Lib. 1. c 2. sect. 3
lacrymas.
in the Dr. When Ferrandus Proves out of excellent Authors, that our Saviors
Tears (perhaps more copioufly Shed than those of the Poenitent woman Luke 7.
37.) are yet preserved in France, and moreover Shows out of Antiquity, that
Tears have been kept very long. The Dr Medles not with his Proofs, but wonders
at the matter, and thinks it a pretty competent Miracle, that tears should
last so long. Again, when he Assures us upon undeniable Authority, that some
Locks of our Saviors hair, some parts of his swaddling bands, with his Seamless
Coat (Relics easily kept without Corruption) are yet in being, and tell's us
where, and in what places, The Dr still wondering Answers no Authority, Lib. 1.
c. 2. sew. unica.
But jeers at all. Lastly when he makes it clearly out, that a considerable
quantity of the Blessed Virgins milk (naturally more liable to corruption than
hair or cloths) continues yet preserved with great Reverence in Judea, Italy,
Spain, and France, the Dr got into a Jocular humor, laughs at the Author, but
finding his Reasons and Arguments too hard, very wisely as his fashion is,
waves them, in a word replies to none.

24. Here is one attested by as grave Authors as ever wrote, and well wroth the
Readers knowledge. In the time of Baldwin King of Jerusalem, a mere handful of
Christians, Three thousand in number and no more, totally routed and overthrew
forty thousand Saracens. If you Ask how the Victors came armed? Baronius,
Robertus a Monte, Marianus Siculus, Baron. to. 12. ad ann. 1124. A monte
Append. ad cron Sigl. anno eodem Mari. Sicu. lib. 5. Rerum Hisp.
and other Writers Answer. The Patriarch carried our Saviors Ensign, or the
Banner of the Holy Cross, an other great Prelate a Lance, And lastly the then
Bishop of Bethlem marched on, bearing before him some Quantity of the Virgins
Milk, enclosed in a little Pyx of Gold. To these, armed with sacred Relics,
God gave that known and most signal Victory. Joannes Mariana, a man of great
repute for Learning and Judgment, recount's how nobly Lewis, Joan. Mariana
lib. 13 De reb. Hisp. cap 8
the most Christian King of France, enriched the Cathedral Church at Toledo
with most precious Relics, to this day carefully preserved in the Holy
Sanctuary of that Church, together with the Kings own Authentic letter. The
Substance whereof set down by Mariana is, as follows.

25.

Lewis by the grace of God King of the King Lewis his letter to the Canons of
Toledo
French, sends Greeting to his beloved the Canons and the whole Clergy of the
Church of Toledo. We desirous to gratify you with a Present of great Value,
moved thereunto by the earnest Petition of John our Venerable Archbishop of
Toledo, have taken out of our own Sanctuary choice and selected Relics, which
were sent us from Constantinople, and freely bequeath them to you. Viz. Some of
the wood of our Saviors Sacred Cross, with one of the Thorns which crowned his
blessed head, some Quantity also of the Milk of the ever blessed Virgin Mary,
parts likewise of the purple Garment, wherewith our Savior was clothed, as
also of that Linen which he girded about him at the washing of the Apostles
feet, and some of the Sindon wherein his Sacred Body; when it lay in the Holy
Sepulcre, was wrapped. We Therefore ask and require in our Lord JESUS, that you
receive and conserve these Holy Relics with all due respect and Reverence in
your Church, That you be often mindful of me in your daily Sacrifices, and
devour Prayers.

Given at Estamps Anno 1248. May the 8.th

Thus that pious and most Christian King, whose high esteem of Holy Relics,
and amongst the rest of the Virgins Milk yet preserved, sufficiently, methinks,
Check's the Dr's boldness, when he rashly tell's us without any semblance of
Proof. Dr Still. page 484.
There can be no sussicient credibility in the Testimony given to the Relics
of the Roman Church. There are, Dr, already most credible Testimonies produced,
Ergo they can be given And are so persuasive to our Intent, that no Foolhardy
Spirit of incredulity amongst you, whereby you would fain obliterate all memory
of our Savior, (besides a little bare talking of him) shall ever abate, or
Discredit, while humane Faith is in the world.

26. The Dr in the next place return's once more to the Vial at S. Maximins and
hopes with Page 485.
another throw to break it in pieces. This Vial, says he, is supposed to be of
S. Mary Magdalen's own bringing into France, and its worth the while to know
how it came thither? Answ. It is well worth the while (when to purpose) to
write whole Volumes, as have been Written upon this subject, Sure all are not
to the purpose, for I find no little Confufion among Authors, though no one I
ever yet read, Opposes what I formerly asserted, and still defend, as a Truth.
Viz. That at S. Maximins in France there is a Miraculous Vial, called by the
name of S. Mary Magdalen's, which Liquifyes and boyls up every year seen by
thousands, and owned the whole world over, an undeniable Miracle. This Mr Dr,
(the only Thing I insisted upon) page 478.
you shamefully wave, and neither grant, nor The Dr waves what I insisted upon.
plainly deny, well content to cheat your Reader with a few dull dark words of
Miracles done in corners, and showed to ignorant People, who have no skill in
Optics, nor Judgment to difference the boiling up of a thing from a natural
cause, and by a Miracle. What Is here but one witless Calumny after another?
Have all, who for so many Ages have Shown the Vial to others, practiced (like
Rogues and Impostors) False dealing* or Legerdemain? Were there never any
Spectators all this vast while judicious enough, to discern between juggling
with an Optic (if yet such a juggling be possible) and the real boiling up of
concrete Blood? But above all, Mr Dr Satisfy my Curiosity in one doubt, Point
me out that natural Cause, whereby Blood mingled and congealed with earth,
boyles up upon good Friday in the Holy week at such a precise Nothing in nature
can cause congealed blood to boil up at such an hour on good Friday.
hour, and you will show your self more skilful in Nature than ever Aristotle
was. There goes a pretty story of Galen the Physician, who once meeting with S.
Mary Magdalen understood by Her, that Christ restored sight to one born blind;
If so, replied Galen; Christ knew well the Virtue of metals fetched out of the
veins of the earth. No sooner, Sr, shall you find out the Natural cause of the
boiling of this Blood, but Galen will be ready with his Minoral that cured the
blind man's Eyes; which is to say never. Yet upon this fourh, and the now
mentioned Calumnies, you vainly exhort. For Truths sake, if your Church has
such Miracles as Christ and his Apostles had, never send us to Loreto, or
Compostella, or S. Maximins in France.

27. Thus much noted concerning the true State of the Question between the Dr
and me, which is whether there be such a Miraculous Vial at S. Maximins, we
might were we minded to Write, as I said Volumes, further enquire how it came
thither, whereof I shall give some few hints leaving the Decision of the whole
matter to Authors, who have largely handled this difficulty.

28. Joannes Launoy, a learned Dr of the Launoy de commentitio, Laz: Maxim:
Mariae, and Martha, in Provinciam appulsu. Dr Still: page 486
Sorborn, says our Dr, has proved in a set Discourse that for a thousand
year's after Christ, it was the constant Tradition of the Greek aod Latin
Church that Lazarus, Martha, and Magdalen all dyed in the Eastern parts, and
not a word of Maximinus, and that the whole Story is taken out of a fabulous
Book pretended to be Written by Marcella the Servant to Martha in the Hebrew
tongue, translated by one Synthex into Latin. Hence follows a gross Forgery
not only in the whole Story of these Saints coming into Provence, But this is
also consequent* as Launoy and the Dr pretend, That the fourth and fifth Lesson
in the present Roman Breviary, of S. Martha are mere Fables, unworthy to be
registered, and so likewise is all, that Vincentius Bellovacensis recount's of
this Subject, Vincen: specu: tom 4: Histor: lib: 9: cap: 94: 95: and more in
the ensuing Chapters:
out of the Gests of S. Mary Magdalen, of Lazarus, and that whole Holy Company.

29. Courteous Reader, Note in the first place the fraud of Dr Still. who
guilfully Seems to content you with relating a Story by halves. He tell's you
indeed what Launoy Says, without The Dr's fraud:
the least mention of three other grave Authors who have made it their work, to
refute Launoy. This Dr Still. could not be ignorant of, if he ever read Launoy.
One is, Joannes Baptista Guesnay, otherwise called Peter Henry, in his
Elaborate Annals printed at Lions. Anno Guesnay Annal: sive Masilia, Gentilis,
and Christian:
1657. Toward the End of this Tome you will find the Authors close
Observations, made upon a Decree set forth by the Supreme Senate of Aix against
Launoy, implying a full Condemnation of all he has Written against the Arrival
of S. Mary Magdalen at Marseils, calling it false, impious, and pernicious
Doctrine, and finally commanding, that his Writings be suppressed, that no
Stationer sell them, nor any read Them, for the future. All this was done upon
long Deliberation and consultation had with the most learned of the University
at Aix. John Launoys second Antagonist is Monsieur Denis de la Saint Baume in a
French Treatise, entitled. Le Triomphe de la Magdaleine en la creance and
veneration Denis Gentil* homme Provancal. second Edition.
des ses Saints Relics ^n Provence, suivie and embrasse par toutes les
Nations du Monde etc. The last Adversary Launoy meets with upon this Subject is
Theophilus Raynandus, potens opere and Sermon, one that can both Write and
speak home, when justly provoked, and occasion requires. Raynaudi Polemica.
Tom. 18. sub Titul^ Hercules Commodianus. page 332.
As it is not, (says Raynaudus, citing Irenaeus, necessary for any to drink up
the whole Ocean, to know whether that Water be salt, so it is needless to
cloy you with too much of John Launoy's Elucubrations, a taste only of them,
rudely disgested by this turbulent and seditious man's Wit born to make discord
in the world, will be enough. Thus Raynaudus.

30. Have you ever heard, says Launoy, of Se Rayn. quaesito 1,
old women sitting by the fire side in a long winters night, and telling Tales?
No better is the Story of Mary Magdalen and Martha recounted in the Roman
Breviary. Again, As Dr Still. slights the Relation of S. Mary Magdalen's
preaching to the People at Marseils, because, forsooth, S. Paul allows not a
woman to preach, so Dr Launoy deeply reproves the Roman Martyrologe Rayn.
quaesito 2.
15. December. where we read that S. Christiana a Servant woman preached to the
Iberians and converted many to Christ. Raynaudus tells you how this frontless
man Opposes no less than twenty Popes, who approved the Relics at S.
Maximins Church, Saying they all erred and were f^lthily deluded by the
Dominicans gross Lies and Impostures. Launoy's unworthy dealing with general
Councils, chiefly the Councils of Florence and Trent, you have Rayn. quaesito 3.
laid forth by the same Author. Of his vilifying Saints Canonized by the
Church, se Raynaudus Rayn. quaesito 4.
cited, where he calls S. Antoninus Archbishop of Florence, pecus and mulus, a
beast, sheep, or Mule, as you Please. Speaking of S. Lewis Launoy's boldness.
the IX. the Gem of Kings, who devoutly came to visit the Solitary place called
the Holy Balm where Blessed Magdalen retired herself in the height of
Contemplation. Sic, says Launoy, Mendax fama incepit. Thus the loud Lie of
Magdalen began, imposed on the too credulous King by the Dominicans. Whoever
desires more of Launoy's siding with Heretics, of his high contempt of
Religious Orders approved by the Church, of his gross undervaluing Baronius,
Canisius, Lorinus and other more learned than himself, may please to Peruse
Raynaudus in the following Quaeries.

31. Yet half is not said of Launoys virulent Launoy's strange contempt of
Authors.
Spirit, who accounts all, lying Impostors, petulant Scythians, Divulgers of
old wives fables, sellers of Trifles, that dissent from his perverse and
crooked Judgment, in so much that the Censure of Julian the Apostata fits him
right. No Savage beasts seem more deadly Enemies to man, than some Christians
are in their Writings against Christians, whom they seek not only to Torment,
but if possible, to tear in pieces. And thus much of John Launoy, our Dr Still.
learned Sorbon Ds, as like to like, as an Egg to an Egg, Launoy worse in this,
that he bear's the name of Catholic, whether really so, is best known by his
Writings.

32. Who desires more of this Subject may please to Peruse the two Authors
already cited, Ioannes Guesnay, and Monsieur Denis, Both go hand in hand
together, build upon the same Fundations, and dissolve Launoys Arguments much
after the same manner. Their Assertion is, That S. Mary Magdalen, Lazarus,
Martha, and S. Maximin arrived, as you have heard, at Provence in France, where
Blessed Magdalen dyed. One Proof hereof is taken from a never interrupted
Tradition, received not only in France, but all over Italy, Germany, Spain and
Rome also, And it seems hard that a Consent so Universal should be grounded on
a Fable. The general Approbation of Popes yields a second and most convincing
Proof. You 28. Popes* have approved the Relics at S. Maximins.
may reckon, says Monsieur Denis, in the Bullarium of S. Victor at Marseils,
and the Monastery of the Holy Order of Preachers at S. Maximins 28. Popes that
by several Bulls have approved the Relics in those places, and some in
express Terms honor them by the name of Blessed Magdalen's Relics. Boniface
the VIII. Charles the second King of Sicily and Count of Provence, speaking of
S. Maximin's Church, plainly Say That S. Mary Magdalen's Body lies buried
there. Pope Benedict the XI. uses the like expression in his Bull. In qua
quiescit corpus Mariae Magdalenae. Et apres, says Denis page 10 n. 18. at
these words. La cinquieme. L'Authorite etc.
Denis, nommant La Saint Baume, makes mention of a Holy Grot or Cave, where
the Saint lived a Penitential life. The work would be long for my short
Discourse to name other Popes recounted by Denis upon this matter, Please yet
to know, that Clement the VII. coming to Marseils, would not return to Italy
before he had done his Devotion to S. Magdalen's Holy Cave, and the Church of
S. Maximin, where he said Mass, and imparted an Indulgence to all those who
upon the day of her departure out of this life, and her Translation the 16. of
June, should visit the said Church of S. Maximin. This great Prelate moreover
desires, That the Church of S. Maximin where the Head of S, Mary Magdalen is
seen upon the high Altar, (and we, says the Pope, Celebrated Divine Mass) be
frequented with all due respect and Honor. Gregory the XI. who removed the Sea
Apostolic from Avignion to Rome, enriched S. Maximin's Church with great
Gifts, before his return to Italy. Benedict the XIII. in time of the Schism,
visited S. Mary Magdalen's Holy Cave, and the Church of S. Maximin, said Mass
there, which done he gave an Indulgence annexed to the day of the Saints
Translation, to Friday also in the Holy week when the Miraculous Vial visibly
liquisies and boyls up, as is already noted. I am forced to omit much collected
by this industrious Author, who exactly point's at the year, the day of every
Bull, and Visits made by these now named, Number. 19.
and other Popes there mentioned; Whence he concludes upon those clear matters
of Fact, That the Relics preserved at S. Maximin's are the true and
Authentic Relics of S. Mary Magdalen. Now if so many Popes have both
reverenced and approved these Relics you must either rashly impeach them of
Oversight and knavery in their approving Fables for Truths, or ought prudently
to acquiesce in their Judgment with the rest of the Christian world.

33. A third Proof is taken from many Synodes and Provincial Councils held in
France, Another Proof taken from Provincial Councils.
where the fore mentioned Relics have been approved, And S. Caesarius
Archbishop of Arles at the Instance of Theoderick Count of Narbon and Provence
presided, after that Prince had built a Monastery of Canon Regulars at Pinance,
and Nobly enriched it with the Relics of S. Denis number. 20.
Mary Magdalen. Monsieur Denis mentions other Synodes. His 4. Proof is deduced
from many Martyrologes extant in France, That of S. Francis his Holy Order, has
these express words. Decimo Calend. Augusti: At Marseils, The birth day of S.
Mary Magdalen, who after Christ's Ascension cast into a Bark, was by Divine
help carried into France, and there made a happy End. Se more of this Number. 22.
Subject at the number here cited. A fifth Proof is taken from Signal great and
most evident Miracles wrought at S. Maximins by the Intercession of S. Mary
Magdalen. The blind have received then sight, the stark deaf their hearing, the
Lame their Limbs, the dumb their Speech, and incurable maladies have by God's
Assistance been cured in that Holy place. See Denis cited. Number. 26.
A Sixth Proof, this Author calls the Magdalen's Triumph, exhibited not only in
Provence Number. 27.
But all Nations over, as appears by the Honor which the greatest Persons in
the world have given and still give to S. Magdalen's Holy Relics at S.
Maximins. See a large Catalogue of powerful Kings, and Princes, of Queens,
Dukes and Dutchesses, of Cardinals and Prelates, that have gone on Pilgrimage
to these Holy Relics, and honored the place, where they are, with most rich
and noble Presents. It is also Number. 14.
memorable what my Author Writes of the People within the Territory of Arles
accustomed upon People yearly repair to the Seaside, and thank God for the
happy arrival of the Saints.
Thursday in the Holy week after their Visiting the Parish Church, and Two
little Chapels, To repair to the sea side, where prostrate on their Knees,
They offer up their Prayers, and Thanks to God for his careful Providence had
over the little Bark that conveyed the Saints Magdalen, and Martha, with the
rest to their Coast where they safely landed. This Custom has been ever since
They arrived, and the Continuance of it from Age to Age, handed down by
Constant Tradition, seems a convincing Proof, while no man can Show it began
in any latter Century.

34. Hence we Discourse. If Popes, Kings, Princes and Prelates, if whole
multitudes of People rich and poor, noble and ignoble account, as we have
heard, the arrival of these Saints to Marseils an undoubted Verity; if all
still reverence Blessed Magdalen's Relics; if several Synodes assembled
consisting of most Virtuous and learned Prelates, have approved them; if they
remain still recorded in many Martyrologies. If finally Almighty God has
declared for S. Magdalen and her Relics by his own clear Signs from Heaven,
unquestionable Miracles. If these particulars, I say, be manifestly made out,
long may Mr John Launoy and his weak Partizan Dr Still. attempt to Eclypse the
Magdalen's glory, but in vain, Whilst She and the other Saints now mentioned,
live renowned in all Virtuous minds to the great Confusion of Heretics. Thus
you have, Courteous Reader, some part of S. Mary Magdalen's Triumph here
Epitomized, more largely set forth in the Authors quoted.

35. For as much as concern's the Sorbon Paris print: 1659.
Dr's Objections tediously Spun out in a whole Book, it is sufficient, that I,
who only Defend the boiling up of that Blood in a Vial at S. Maximins, remit
you to the Authors cited, F. Launoy's Objections answered. Denis n. 11
John Guesnay and Monsieur Denis. Monsieur Launoy Says first without any
regard to ancient Tradition, that the whole Story of Blessed Magdalen, want's
the Testimony of Ancient Writers within the first Age of Christianity. No
Wonder at the want, replies Monsieur Denis, if we consider the many Saccages,
and ruins fallen upon Provence and particularly upon Marseils by the Goths,
Vandals, and Saracens nine several times, to Say nothing of other sad
Disasters. Mr Launoy Objects. 2. What ever we Launoy page 228.
produce for S. Mary Magdalen's arrival at Provence, is taken out of a fabulous
Book composed in Hebrew by S. Marcella, Servant to S. Martha, the Book, says
Launoy, is of a Denis n. 43
very late date about five hundred years since, not older. Monsieur Denis
Answer's, some strange Phrensy seized on Launoy in this Discourse, For in
another place he grant's, that Book to have been extant twelve whole Ages past,
though neither here nor there, he brings Proof, Author, or Witness for any
thing he Says, but his own bare and proofless Word. In the same place,
Monsieur Denis Shows, we rely not only upon those Acts of S. Marcella, having
other both grave and Ancient Authors that Write of this Subject, and recount
many Particulars not expressed in Marcella's Acts. Monsieur Launoy Objects 3.
The Tradition of the Greek and Latin Church, whereby it appears, that S. Mary
Magdalen dyed at Ephesus, for Proof whereof he Quotes Modestus Bishop of
Jerusalem (recounted by Photius) Saying Magdalen, out of whom our Lord cast
seven Devils was a Virgin, went to S. John at Ephesus, and there ended her
Days. Monsieur Denis Answer's, its a shame to see how this Dr contradict's
himself. In one Pamplet he will have Magdalen to Dye at Ephesus, in Another he
produces Martyrologies that say she dyed at Jerusalem. In one Writing he
find's Martyrologies Launoy contradict's himself.
for her death upon the 16.th of January, in others that day is Transferred
till. 22. of July: In one place Magdalen must be a Sinner dispossessed of seven
Devils, in another, a pure Virgin, Yea and Martyr also. In a word, says Denis,
non erant convenientia Testintonia eorum, and therefore worth nothing. Launoy's
Plea taken From the Tradition of the Greek and Latin Church you have amply
refuted by Denis and Guesnay, who hold Modestus his Testimony Denis n 32
cited, an unsound Apocrypha. Dr Stillingfleets little rubbish, gathered out of
Launoy (he has no more) is easily Swept away by the labor here performed. To
say more seems needless.

36. Now we proceed to another Question, having again told you that it is far
from my intention to dissolve all difficulties Proposed in this matter (not by
Monsieur Launoy, much less by Dr Still) but because I meet with strange
Confusion among Authors in their debates concerning two Mary Magdalen's,
thought by some distinct Persons, and a Third, if yet distinct, Luke 7. 37
not called Mary by S. Luke but Peccatrix a Sinner who watered the feet of our
blessed Lord with her Tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head, Had we
more light in this and some other particulars much might be cleared, which yet
lies in obscurity. And what shall Monst Launoys most dim, abstruse, and mistie
Discourse, without Decision of matters necessary to be known, be thought able
to Contest with the whole Gallican Church, Her Tradition, and the Authority of
Popes, Kings, Princes, and People, already mentioned? It is no less than a
high Degree of pride to attempt it.

CHAP. VII.
Of Dr Stillingfleets rude, bold, and shameful vilifying two renowned Saints,
The Glorious S. Dominick and the Seraphical S. Francis of Assisium.

1. I Stand astonished at the Spite and Envy of our unconscionable Dr, who
could not but know before he put pen to paper, the great Wonders Authors of
unspotted fame have recorded of these two glorious Saints. He could not but
know in what Strange manner Divine Providence Propagated the two Holy Orders
founded by S. Dominick and S. Francis, and this without the help of Arms,
humane Enticements, or any earthly commodity. The Propagation of Christian
Religion gained much in the minds of men, by it is spreading over all Nations,
and upon that Account was deemed by the great S. Austin, Miraculous, And shall
we S. Austin lik. 22. de civit. cap. 5.
think the large streaming out of Religious Orders, visibly before our eyes,
altogether destitute of Divine Assistance? The Dr could not but know, if ever
he perused History, how many painful Missioners have been sent out of these
Religious Orders into several parts of the world for the Conversion of Jews,
and Infidels, as also of the happy success they had in drawing innumerable
Souls from Infidelity to the Profession of Christianity. Finally he could not
but know, that never Protestants (to their Shame be it) did any thing like
them either in the nearer, or further Parts of the large Universe, and yet,
Forsooth, these Holy Saints, must be laid at, and reviled by a Petit Dr, though
he neither refutes one Miracle Written of them, much less, can cast a blemish
upon their Innocent and Virtuos Lives.

2. I Say he cannot for stark shame deny one Of the Doctors fraud and Iugling
Miracle Authentically recorded of S. Dominick, or S. Francis, having none of
Authority to side with him, should he desperately attempt a Denial, what does
he Therefore? Il' tell you, he proceed's fraudulently, and juggles all along.
First he slily passes over the greatest Wonders whereby the glory of these
Saints is most advanced, not a word spoken to this purpose, and here Lies his
Fraud. 2. He pick's out some few Miracles recorded by Authors most capable, at
as he thought of bearing Jests, and these he set's forth with huffs and Scoffs
hoping by that pretty varnish to make all ridiculous. Here you have his
Juggling. And cannot an Atheist or Heathen, think ye, would he try his Ieering
Faculty upon Scripture Miracles (the whole Story of Samson for example, or of
Eves conference with a Serpent) render those in like manner contemptible?
Nothing seems more easy than to flout, (it is the Dr's Usual strain) where
there is no gainsaying Truth.

3. I Say the Dr waves S. Dominicks great Sanctity and choicest Miracles, and
never tell's you of his fasting a whole Lent together with bread and water
only; of his admirable Charity, of his desire of Martyrdom, of his profound
Humility, in rejecting Ecclesiastical Dignities, three Bishoprics one after
another, He Says nothing of the blessed man's Patience, in enduring the
affronts of those wicked Albigenses, when they spit upon him, cast dirt in his
face and tied straw upon his back, to make him Contemptible. But did he
Therefore repine? No, he went away as the Apostles did, rejoicing in being
thought worthy of suffering these reproaches for his Lord and Master Christ
JESUS. Not a word have we from the Dr of the Saints admirable Power over
Devils, though by making only the Sign of the Cross he cast seven unclean
Spirits out of one woman, that afterward consecrated herself to Almighty God.
Not a word The Dr Waves the greatest Miracles ^rought by S. Dominick
of his ardent zeal for the Conversion of Souls, not a word of his great
Austerity, when most frequently he made choice of the bare ground for a bed to
lie on, Finally you have nothing of his stupendous Miracles though it pleased
God to make the Saint renowned by raising three dead Persons to life again.

4. These and innumerable other certain Surius de de S* Domin 4. Augusti.
Wonders, Authors of great credit have recounted of S. Dominick, and are
faithfully collected by Laurentius Surius, but our Dr neither daring to deny
the greatest, nor to discover fraud in any (for that is impossible) guilfully
waves all, and content's himself with breaking a few Jests upon the Devil, who
as the Dr will have it, Twice Still. page 491.
vexed S. Dominick in the shape of a Sparrow while he preached to Religious
women, and once in the guife of a Monky. The sparrow, pitifully abused, and
insulted over by S. Dominick had all his feathers plucked off, and the Monky
that played some Monky Tricks before the Saint, when he wrote late at night,
was nodded at to hold the candle till his Toes began What things the Dr picks
out And laughs at.
to burn. With these two Stories merrily told, the Dr sport's himself, and
his jocular telling them must be thought an ample confutation of all S.
Dominicks Miracles, Though he can neither blame the Saint for using the Devil
hardly, much less evince that such matters of Fact, are false or forged. I
wish the Dr would peruse the life of the great S. Antony, January the 17.
Written by S. Hierom, where he will find what different Shapes the Devil
assumed to vex the Saint with.

5. It is time merely lost to follow the Dr through the rest of his senceless
and weak Efforts against S. Dominick, For your Satisfaction here is one. All
Authors recount that his Mother near the time of her Travel, had a Vision that
She bore a whelp holding in his mouth a Torch, which set the world on fire, a
true Presage, as the real effects Showed, of his illuminating the world with
the light of his Doctrine, and burning Charity. No, says our The Dr's virulent
words uttered against S. Dominick
virulent Dr, misconstruing all that Authors Write, S. Dominick was a true
Firebrand, having not near so much light, as heat in him. And thus he
misinterpret's others, that call the Saint a Lion upon the account of his
undaunted courage in preaching boldly Christ's Doctrine to those pernicious
Albigenses, and how effectual his Preaching was, manifestly appears by the
innumerable Conversions wrought upon them. This Truth confessed by all Writers
is a clear Testimony of the Saints light and ardent Zeal, prognosticated by
that burning Torch, which his Virtuous Mother saw before his Birth.

6. Again, says our Dr, Lewis of Granada Lud. Grana. Con. 1. de S. Domin.
recount's that S. Katharine of Sienna had by Revelation, or saw in some
Vision, the eternal Father producing his Son out of his mouth, and S. Dominick
out of his Breast, and said, the one is my Son by Nature, the other by
Adoption. The most Blasphemous comparison of all other, says wise Dr
Stillingfleet, Yea horrible blasphemy, to se a Firebrand compared with the Son
of God. Answ. The most ignorant Cavil that ever came from Dr. Pray you tell me,
when Divine Wisdom, the Second Person of the B. Trinity, The First begotten
before all Creatures, avouches of it self. Ego ex ore Altissimi Prodivi. I
came out of the mouth Eccl. 24 5.
of the Highest, and the most learned Expositors upon this Passage, teach with
Lyranus, that by The Dr's ignorance discovered.
Os, the mouth of the Highest, is meant, Men's Divina, the Divine understanding
whereby the Eternal Word is produced, as our sensible words are by the mouth,
Tell me I say what blasphemy lies here? Now, that the word, Mouth, according to
the Phrase in Scripture properly signifies, Men's, or the Intellectual faculty,
is manifest Psalm. 39. 30.
by the Royal Prophet. The mouth of the just shall meditate wisdom, id est, The
mind, or understanding Meditates, not the mouth that only speak's what the mind
conceives. Neither is there the least shadow of Blasphemy in the other Part of
the Vision, where S. Dominick is said to be produced out of the Breast or
charitable heart of the eternal Father, Answerable Hier. 31. 3.
to that of the Prophet. Charitate perpetua dilexi te. I have loved thee with
everlasting Charity, and the manner is signisicantly expressed by S. John. Sic
Deus dilexit mundum etc. So God Joan. 3. 16.
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son for us. If the Dr tell us,
God has neither Breast, nor heart, he bewrays his ignorance and knows not
that even Scripture it self (and so may Saints) often speak Anthropapathws.
For example, Cor meum ad Moab, says Jerem. 4^. v. 36.
God, Tactus dolor cordis, with a hundred like Expressions. O* But the
comparison between the Divine word and S. Dominick seems horrid. Pitiful.
Adopted Children by Grace are rightly called filii Dei, Sons of God, and the
increated Romans 8. 17.
Word is also called the Son of God. Filius meus es tu Ego hodie genui te. Does
this comparison offend? No; Because there is no comparison between Infinite and
Finite, Eternal and temporal. Know therefore, Mr Dr, that the Generation of the
Divine Word, was is, and ever will be Infinite, necessary, natural to God, and
Eternal. The Filiation or Generation of No comparison between the eternal
Generation of the Divine Word and the filiation of adoptive Children by grace.
God's adoptive Children by Grace, is quite contray, purely free to God, not
due to man's Nare and lastly temporal, Sicut modo geniti Infantes etc. As now
new born Children, Writes the Apostle. These things are so plain to every young
Student in our Schools, that the meanest Wit would be ashamed to propose them
as difficulties, yet our Dr magnifies all as great matters, yea high
Blasphemies. Much Patience, believe it, and no little labor is necessary to
rectify half Scholars, when the matter concern's a Speculative point above
their skill.

7. More trash follows in the Dr, not worth mentioning. The Devil says he,
once threw a stone at S. Dominicks Head, and hit only his Cowle. That is much
like you Mr Dr, the Devil missed his Mark, and would have hurt or killed the
Saint, you would decry his Miracles, neither throw succeed's, both Casts are in
vain. Another time the foul Fiend came to Confession to S. Dominick, But the
Saint, says our Dr, presently smelt him out. And so may any soon smell out your
Spite against the Saint, that slightly ponders your new strange way of
impugning his Miracles. It is worth the while, Courteous Reader, to have this
one point briefly laid forth.

8. Who ever will peruse Fr. Munio his command, Munio 7. Generalis Ordinis S.
Dominici Apoldia in vita S. Dominici.
laid upon Theodericus de Apoldia, and Apoldia's letter to Nicolas the IX.
General, may find the life and Gests of Blessed S. Dominick Written by three or
four Generals of that Holy Order, men famous for Sanctity. The Venerable B.
Jordanus, S. Dominick's Immediate Successor, Great Authors who have Written of
S. Dominicks Miracles.
was the first. Fr. Constantinus another, S. Humbertus a third, to say nothing
of Fr. Gerardus Provincial, who returning from a General Chapter held at Luca
in Tuscany, brought with him Authentical Testimonies of S. Domincks Miracles,
many were sincerely attested by a Person that lived with that Saint, Others
were collected out of most credible Authors. These collections presented to
Pope Gregory the IX. (certainty being given of their Truth by sworn Witnesses)
prevailed so far with his Holiness, that he approved all, as rare Examples of
Virtue and clear Signs of Sanctity. All approved by the Sea Apostolic.
Hence I argue, He that takes on him to impugn Miracles Written by grave
Authors, and hopes to decry all by only relating what is said without producing
one Witness against them, Shows neither Wit nor Learning, and thereby
becomes ridiculous, but Dr Still. evidently proceed's thus, Ergo he shows
neither Wit nor Learning; No Wit; because he only tell's us, what Authors
have Written of things known before he ever set pen to paper. No Learning;
because he refutes none of these matters of Fact upon any Authority or reason,
but only tell's us his incredulity is so strong, That he will not believe them.
Observe his Proof. He, says the Dr, that can believe those Miracles reported
of Dominick, need's not stick at any of the rest, Viz. Of the Saints Books
being preserved dry in the midst of water, of his VVritings kept dry in Surius
cited.
the midst of Storms, of his earnest Prayer in behalf of forty English
Pilgrims going to Compostella, Surius p. with me 533.
unfortunatly cast away in a River near Toulouse, whom the Saint Miraculously
rescued from drowning, by his Tears and Prayers before whole multitudes, Of his
raising from the dead the Cardinals Nephew called Napuleon Surius page 540.
seen and attested by innumerable Spectators; of the Miracles wrought by S.
Domnicks Rosary etc.

9. Now having said thus much, that is barely related what great Authors
recount of this blessed Saint, our Dr that never wrote any thing solidly in his
whole life, very wisely end's thus. He that sees susficient reason to believe
the reports The Dr's simple exceptions against these Miracles.
of these things upon their bare words, must rest satisfied, that S. Dominick
wrought Miracles. Can any thing be more bare, Blunt, and simple? Ey-witnesses
saw these Miracles, many have been attested upon Oath, Saints and learned men
have left them upon Record, the Sea Apostolic never proceeded to Canonize S.
Dominick for a Saint, without great Moral certainty first had of his Miracles,
No Author of credit ever contradicted them, yet all this Moral Evidence
grounded upon humane Faith, our Dr, unworthily call's Reports, and bare words.
Judge, Courteous Reader, who Word's it The Dr cheats his Reader.
most, those Witnesses or the Dr? They, (as you have heard give in their
Proofs, The Dr without the least hint taken from Authority or reason, tell's
you upon his own Parole (not worth a rush) you are not to believe them,
Therefore he (and not they) cheat's you with bare Words. I never yet saw
Sectary like the Dr, mighty bold in asserting, but most cold and faint at his
Proofs, when called on to make his Assertions Good. He must therefore either
Judge those he Writes for horribly simple, and reckon of them as Sots; Or like
one puff't up with a vain Opinion of himself, persuade us that his bare word
is to be taken, while he run's on in an endless Tattle, and proves nothing.

10. In the next place our Dr has two or three blows at the humble Seraphical
S. Francis, but so unhandy or little dexterous, that I am ashamed to read him.
The humble Saint is said to have tamed a wolf by making the Sign of the Cross
upon him, and S. Tecla witness S. Ambrose, tamed wild beasts ready to devour
her. What greater hurt in either VVonder than in What tri^sl^s the Dr Produces
against S. Francis.
Daniel's asswaging the fury of savage Lions? Again, says the Dr, whereas
Christ and his Apostles; thought it enough to Preach only to men and women, S.
Francis his Charity went beyond theirs, and by the Counsel of Brother Sylvester
and Sister Clare, goes to Avagna, and finding there great multitudes of Birds
preached to unreasonable creatures, Saying. My Brethren (such was the language
of the humble Saint) you ought to praise your Creator who has given you wings
and provided for you, without your care. The humble Saint assures our Dr that
long before he preached, those three blessed men in Daniel, Sidrach Misach and
Abednago taught Daniel 3. 77.
him to exhort as he did, who invited not only the Birds of Heaven but the
Mountains the fountains, the Sea and all the fish in it to bless and Praise
their Creator, And is this either heinous or Criminal in the Dr's Divinity? O
but but the Birds stretched out their necks, clap't their wings, opened their
Bills, and looked earnestly upon S. Francis. To satisfy the Dr I Will tell you a
Certain Story attested by innumerable Ey-witnesses; You have it in the life and
Gests of that Admirable Saint S. Thomas Cantilupe, Bishop of Hereford, cited
above.

11. It happened that Edmund Earl of Cornwall once invited S. Thomas to say
Mass at his Castle of wallingford on the feast of Pentecost, whereunto the
worthy Bishop condescended, and while he was preparing himself to offer that
unbloodly Sacrifice by Singing the Hymn. Veni Creator Spiritus (suitable to
the A certain VVonder of birds singing with S. Thomas Cantilupe.
Feast) behold upon the Intonement of the first Verse, a flock of birds beating
their wings and opening their bills, sang their musical Notes over against the
Chapels window, jointly with the Bishop. When he began the second Verse, the
birds with voice and wings applauded as before, and so continued their music,
strophe after strohe, till the whole Hymn was ended. The Earl and all (who
were many) that heard and saw the VVonder going out of the Chapel, got a full
sight of the Birds, Judged them to be about forty in number, and prudently
thought them Ordered by Almighty God to VVitness, how acceptable that Oblation
was, whereunto the Holy Bishop then prepared Himself and piously performed.

12. What says the Dr, to this Story taken Se R. S. Chap. 23. page 292.
out of the Authentic Gests of our worthy S. Thomas (called in my Manuscript
the 25. Miracle) and faithfully related by the Collectors of those Gests Quoted
above? Will he grant or deny? If he own's all as true, well might those little
Birds to whom S. Francis spoke by some Secret and Divine impulse stretch out
their necks and clap their wings at the Saints Preaching, as these other did at
a worthy. Bishops intoning a Sacred Hymn. If the Dr think's to Discredit the
Relation by one of his Jeers, have at him. I will prove it upon humane Faith
far The Dr cannot quilble at this Miracle.
more creditable, than that Calvin wrote his Book of Institutions, Or that Mr
Dr ever took Degree in any University I say if we rely on Records only. We
should have Good Sport would it please him to Put what I now hint at, to a
severe Trial.

13. The last exception made by the Dr against the Seraphical S. Francis,
concern's the bleeding VVounds in his side, hands, and feet, Paris Hist. Major.
Tigur. in print. 1589.
so wonderfully concealed (says our Dr) that no man could discern them. Shall
we silence this Talker by the Testimony of Three irrefragable VVitnesses? The
famous Matthew Paris highly esteemed by Protestants for his faithful Diligence;
Se protestants Apology tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 1 subd. 4. page with me 538.
and Sincere Narration of Truth (Nay one whom these new Gospellers challenge as
a member of their Church;) Writes thus of S. Francis: Before the day of his
death there appeared wounds in his Body, hands feet, and side, freshly
bleeding, such as appeared in the Savior of the world hanging on the Cross,
whereupon many Cardinals repairing to him demanded what this strange Sight
meant; He answered this sight God Visibly shows in me, that you may believe in
him whom I have Preached, Christ Crucified. Yet more. These wounds you see in
me so open and bloody shall soon after my death close up, and be whole like my
other flesh. Thus this exact Historian, and if exact, Judge Reader, whether the
Dr err's not, in Bonaveo. in vita S. Francisci cap. 18.
saying No man could discern them. S. Bonaventure a great Doctor and Cardinal
speak's largely both of the reallity of these VVounds, and likewise of their
Visible appearance, adding that the wound in his Side, pierced as it were with
a Lance, often sent forth Blood so copiously, that his Coat, and Under-wear,
became wet by it. All this was Visible. Much more you have in S. Bonaventure
which I Omit for brevities sake, and only note that the Saint indeed
endeavovred by all possible means to conceal his VVounds (which perhaps
occasioned Mr Dr to Say ut eorum occulta and mira vis stigmatum manifesta
pateret claritate signorum S. Bonav.
no man could discern them) But in vain, says S. Bonaventure, For God who to
his own glory had stamped the Marks upon S. Francis, made them manifest by
their own clarity. Moreover, this admirable Miracle attested by certain
VVitnesses, Two Popes Benedict the XI. and Paul the V, (here is a Third
Testimony) have approved, Whereof a yearly Memory is kept by an Office ad
Libitum, upon the 17. of September. I find (it is true) some little difference in
Authors concerning the precise time when these Marks were imprinted upon the
Saint, but hitherto never met with any man of Credit that Questioned the matter
of Fact, their Truth I mean, and visible Appearance.

14. Hence I challinge Dr Still. to give The Dr returns no answer to these
Proofs.
weight for weight, That is, to prove upon Authority equal to mine now
produced, that my Allegations are false, if he fails in this (and fail he
must) what can be more demonstrable, than that he speak's at random, while by
way of Contempt, he calls this great wonder upon S. Francis, a doughty Miracle?
Observe Reader Two idle words of Contempt ( Doughty Miracles) the Dr (not able
to cite one Author contrary), manfully Opposes to our Popes and other
Witnesses, and Thinks that strong enough to weaken all we have said, though
thousands and thousands believe the Miracle upon the Authorities already set
down, he cares not one whit. Is not this a doughty Dr?

CHAP. VIII.
The Dr's large Muster-Role of the British and Irish Saints Showed a mere
Parergon, or a weightless Cavil against Church Miracles. Several Degrees of
certainty observed concerning Miracles.

1. IT seems our Dr (much Put to it) flags extremely, in waveing the main
Question proposed in my former Treatises, where I required an Answer to such
Miracles as have been demonstrably done in our Age, as also to others approved
by the Church. These I urged. The Miraculous cure of John Clement at Montagu,
and largely insisted on that known Miracle wrought at Zaragosa, and no less
fully set down that glorious Miracle manifestly done by S. Xaverius upon F.
Mastrillo at Naples. I have more over, to Silence the Dr, related the many
clear Miracles wrought by S. Thomas Cantilupe, adding likewise that much famed
and certain wonder, of S. Januarius blood Visibly boiling up and seen by
Thousands and Thousands with many more mentioned above, all attested by
undubitable Witnesses and approved. He Shift's off the main difficulty.
Now our honest Dr without any tolerable Answer given to these Manifest
Evidences (which should have been his Task) wisely shift's of all, (though
provoked to reply) and fills one and thirty leaves at least, from his Page 513.
to page 546. with a List of Miracles, which however true in themselves, yet
their Truth comes not near to the Evidence of these other great wonders: And
thus he would remove the Trial of our cause while we produce certain Miracles,
to the Examination of some less clear, and certain.

2. Before I touch upon some few (a few will serve the turn) of the Dr's long
Muster-Role, collected for the most part out of Mr Cressy, Ioannes Capgrave,
Ioannes Colganus, and Ioannes Bollandus, it will not be amiss to Preacquaint
the Reader with a notorious cheat that run's through his one and thirty leaves.
Pray observe it. These Authors now mentioned, though vilifiyed by the Dr, (even
Colganus most laid at,) produce their Records, Testimonies, and Manuscripts in
behalf of every Miracle asserted, or at least say, they are Producible,)
whether true or false is the only matter in Question. Should not the Dr, Think
ye, had he intended to Satisfy a judicious Reader, have showed these alleged
Records and Manuscripts forceless, or of no Account? Should he not according to
the Method of all Writers, have proved them contradicted by other grave
Authors, or at least made their Flawes (if any were) apparent by Cronology, or
some other Circumstances worthy a Readers entertainment? Thus Bollandus'
Henschenius, and Papebrochius whom he cites, seriously go to work, and have
Discovered upon mature Examination no few mistakes in matter of History? But
our Dr content only with a bare Relation of what those Authors say, wholly
waves this necessary Labor, and most simply perswad's himself, that the
Extravagancy of The Dr makes the wonder in a Miracle the only Proof against it.
the Wonders (so he speaks) or the seeming Ridiculousnes of them, is full Proof
enough against their being so much as probable. Alas! your Atheists and
Heathens may (taught by the Dr) upon the same Ground deride and jeer at the
very most of the Miracles recorded in Holy Scripture. I say therefore, Though I
am not of so easy Faith as to believe all that Captgrave and Colganus recount
to be manifest Truths (if they reach to Probability it is well) yet thus much I
Assert, that for any thing the Dr Opposes, they may be most true, so Pitifully
and miserably he handles this whole Matter.

3. You shall see by a few Particulars (for I intend not to accompany the Dr in
his long Carrier all through) whether I speak not Truth. Mr Cressy's, whole
Book, though once perused, I have not at present, speak's as the Dr tells us of
many Saints, S. Iustianus, S. Ositha, S Clarus and others, that walked, as the
Report goes of S. Denis in France, with their heads cut off. Mr Dr in this
place should have confuted the Legends this Author relies on, he ought to have
proved them counterfeit, by some Authority, greater, or of equal poise with
these Legenders. He might at least have said upon no improbable Guess, as the
more exact Writers do, that many Saints had indeed their Heads cut off, and
that to Show they were Martyrs, our Ancestors painted them like S. Denis
carrying their heads in their hands, which afterward, Some perhaps, over
credulous without due examination, mistaking the Painters intent, made a Story
of. Thus I say Judicious men Discourse, whether well or no, I am not to Define,
yet know that our Dr who waves all reasoning in this matter, too Dr Still. page
508.
rudely refutes Mr Cressy, with these few boisterous words. What can be
imagined more absurd, and be supposed to be done to less purpose, than such
foppish Miracles as these? Is not This, as I noted above, to Decry Miracles
because they seem wonderful, to a vulgar Fancy, and may not a Heathen laugh as
loud at Elias dividing the River Jordan with an old Cloak? I am sure Elias his
Action considered in it self, is altogether as Extravagant, and, if well set
forth with an Atheist's Jeer, may be made every whit as ridiculous. Pray you
Tell me, when the Dr after a leaf or two jeer's at Cap Many Miracles in
Scripture as Strange, as those are, the Dr Laughs at.
grave and Colganus, who say that S. Aldem and S Deicola hanged their Garments
on the Sunbeams, tell me I say, Whether of these two Miracles may seem the more
odd and extraragant. Viz. That the Sunbeams supported wet Garments, or that
Elias his cloak divided Jordan? I think the Wonder is much a like in both, and
this the Dr only sport's with, for he wholly leaves the matter of Fact
unexamined. O but Scripture relates what we read of Elias, and old Legends
(perhaps very doubtful) give these other Stories Credit. A simple Reply; For
here we Parallel not humane Authority with Divine, but Ask whether Scripture
makes the Miracles there recorded Less Wonderful than these other? Most
evidently No. Therefore the Doctors whole Confutation of These Miracles taken
from their seeming Extravagancy, becomes a senceless Plea, while Scripture in a
hundred Passages forces on us the Belief of Things as Strange to Fancy, or
natural Discourse. What can be more Extravagant than Samson's taking two Judges
16. 29.
Pillars, whereon a house rested and holding the one in his right hand, and the
other in the left, brought ruin by the fall of that Fabric to three Thousand
Philistiens? It is hard to conceive the placing of these Pillars so fitted to
Samsons reach, and the Ruin so universal that none of the three Thousand
escaped; More Instances of the like nature you have above.

4. Out of all I conclude, that as long as A Miracle necessarily implies Wonder.
the Dr weakens not the humane Authority produced by Catholic Writers in
behalf of Miracles (and this he never attempts) so long he feed's his Reader
with an empty sound of words, in rejecting Miracles because of their Wonder
(for a Miracle necessarily implies a wonder) and most justly in curr's a
Censure for his tedious Tattle seasoned with nothing but Jeers, and reproachful
Calumnies.

5. Innumerable Instances he has just of the some Strain, not worth refuting.
Capgrave Capgrave.
it seems relates the Miraculous feeding of S. Kined Son to a Prince of little
Brittany by his own daughter, to whom an Angel brought a Brass bell which the
Child sucked, and received nourishment sweeter than any milk, and this makes
the Dr great Sport. Soon after Colganus is cited for a strange Miracle wrought
upon Colganus.
S. Berach Abbot, said to suck in his Infancy the right Ear of his Uncle, ut
quidam fingunt, add's Colganus in his notes, as some feign. For although
Colganus.
such a Miracle be not impossible to God, that can fetch oil out of a hard
rock, yet Divine Providence could well give Nutriment to the Child by some
easier means as he fed S. Macarius, Witness Surius Dr Still. page 517.
Palladius in his Life, and S. Giles by the milk of a Hind. See Surius 1.
Septem. The Dr excepts against the long lives of some Saints related by
Colganus. S. Mochaius lived 150. years (much about the Age of old Thomas Parr
in England) But Kieran S. Abban and S. Mochteus out went Them not falling much
short of 300. In all which time S. Mochteus neither Spoke idle word nor eat
meat, Nay others (says our Dr) will have it, that in one hundred years he eat
nothing. What These others not named say, imports little, Colganus I am sure
uses Colganus 24. Mart. Page 734.
this Expression taken out of old Verses there cited, Nec quidquam opsonii
intra admisit. He eat no meat, which is not to Say he eat nothing. for he
might well feed upon bread, Fruit and such like things. Now, if as some
Critics note, Opsonium properly signifies, Piscis assus, broyled Fish, there
needed no Miracle to refrain from that a whole hundred years. For as much as
concern's the long lives of many not only mentioned in Scripture, but in known
History also, see Colganus his large Notes where, Colgan. in vita S. Kieran. 5.
Mart. page 466. number, 42.
you have his Authors Quoted, and here he meets with a Dr who repeats much of
what he Writes, and thinks to refute all by a simple Narration or barely
telling us He writes so and so. Was there ever such a way of impugning Authors
found out before this new Invention of Mr Dr? Yet thus he hold's on Page after
Page, now he makes sport with the raising of a dead Robin-redbreast to life,
now with S. Juo's boots. Now he brings in a Story of a Bull giving Still. page
527.
as much milk as any Cow, And, which I casually omitted, Ask's whether any
thing was ever done by Christ and his Apostles like the turning of Butter into
a Bell, as S. Oudoceus Capgrave in vita S. Oudocei page 258.
Bishop is said to have done, VVitness Capgrave? Yes Mr Dr, both you and I have
heard of as great Changes. Viz. Of Lot's wife turned into a Pillar of Salt, and
water changed into wine: In case these Examples satisfy not, you shall have
more, Authentically recorded.

6. Here, methinks, being quite wearied in following the Dr thus far, it is
high time to An Atheist may reject the Miracle in Scripture upon the Dr's
Principles.
leave the remainder of his Collections to the Judgment of every prudent
Reader, with this true Observation upon them, that if Jeers and Derisions can
do it, the Dr has behaved himself manfully, and taught every Atheist by his
Procedure to slight all the Miracles God has done, upon this principle.
Miracles seem wonderful to his short Knowledge ergo ought to be vilifyed, If he
has any better Argument, blame me boldly. Hence proceeds his frequent and no
less impertinent Interrogatories where speaking of S. Mochteus long
Abstinence, he Ask's whether it be not a pretty reasonable Fast, for a man?
Mentioning some that speak in their Mothers womb, he would know whether the
Baptist Leaping in his Mothers belly was comparable to this? And in recounting
other Miracles he wisely Demand' s are not these now pregnant Instances, how
such Saints exceeded Christ and his Apostles? And this Question comes over and
over. Did Christ and his Apostles any thing like to these Miracles? Pitiful,
Impertinent, neither he, John 20, 30. John 21. 25.
nor I know what Signs and Miracles Christ wrought, Witness S. John, Nay more;
were the many other things, says the Apostle, Christ did Written in
particular, the whole world would not contain the Books that might be Written,
notwithstanding the Dr remit's us to what Christ and his Apostles did.

7. For an upshot of this whole matter, the Still. p. 565
Dr leaves the Reader to Judge, whether the Testimony on which these Miracles
have been received, ought to be compared in point of Credibility, with that
Testimony on which the Christian Church has believed the Miracles of Christ
and his Apostles? I Answer, the Dr cheats the Reader, For the true Christian
Church believes the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles upon Divine Testimony
by How the Dr cheat's his Reader.
a certain act of Faith, These other Miracles mentioned by Colganus and
Capgrave, rely at most upon humane Authority, And If they force from us a
probable Assent (wherein there is a great Latitude) That Is all and abundantly
enough, because I am apt to think, that when Cronology and other main
Circumstances come to the Test, chiefly about the long Lives of some Saints,
and other strange Wonders, much may occurr to a diligent Searcher not too well
grounded, But to Decry all as the Dr does whilst he Examins none, is foul play,
and above measure blamable, For it seems morally Impossible, that after so
great pains taken by Authors who carefully remit you to Their Manuscripts, and
other Testimonies, all should prove Forgeries, though some Perhaps may be
doubtful, or in a mean Degree propable; If evinced False, we utterly reject
them.

8. The Dr in the Close of his Discourse to gain credit for his pains, Tell's
us, he has not raked the Kennels of Iacobus de Voragine of Cantipratanus, and
such like Writers (of no Account it seems with him) But made choice of latter
Authors praised and highly approved by learned men. Capgrave, says he, was
esteemed one of such excellent parts, that he had scarce any equal, none
Superior to him in England, in his time. Colganus his first Tome, containing
the Acts of the Irish Saints, was published with great Approbations from the
General of his Order, the Professors at Lovain, from the Ordinary Censor
Librorum, and four Jesuits, having, besides the commendatory Epistles of
Vernulaus and Erycius Puteanus. Now says he, the Jesuits collections at
Antwerp begun by Bollandus, and continued by Henschenius and Papebrochius, were
Published with as much Ostentation of care, and Judgment, as any thing can be
set forth in that kind. Thus the Dr.

9. Reader I would willingly know what harm is done to these Authors by Mr Dr?
wherein, I beseech you, has he lessened rheir credit? Has he clearly shown the
Original copies from whence they took Miracles, Forged? Has he disparaged in
the least Degree the Authenticalness The Dr disparages none of these Records,
but is apt to think something may be a miss in them.
of those Records? Has he upon any good Authority proved so much as one of
these Miracles false, or improbable? No, he never falls upon this solid way of
reasoning. What then dos he? I told you he barely relates what Authors write,
and there forces in a Jest or an impertinent Question, leaving every matter of
Fact unexamined, just as it was before, If true then, it is true still, if
doubtful, it is yet doubtsul, if probable, still probable. Here is all you have
from our Doughty Dr, who confesses his own lost labor plainly enough; So that
what ever, judgment, says Still. page 567.
he, be passed upon the Miracles, they cannot deny the Books I have made use
of, to be of greatest Authority of any extant in this kind, and yet after all I
am apt to think, they will meet with a great deal of Infidelity from all, that
have not captivated their understanding to the Obedience of the Roman Faith. I
am apt to think. Mr Dr! What a faint Expression is this? Who holds himself
obliged to captivate his understanding to your Thoughts? Had you truly told us,
that these Miracles upon due Examination have been proved false, or improbable,
had you shown their Original Records unauthentick, you had done like one versed
in Antiquity, But to turn off with a lame I am apt to think they will meet etc,
While no flaw is found in the Manuscripts produced, makes your Enquiry after
Miracles ridiculous; And no other is your earnest urging home the Authority and
Approbation of those Books, you tax of Forgery. Say, Sr, I pray, What
advantage gain you to your cause in telling us those Books are highly approved,
if that for which they are approved be no further discountenanced by you, than
by barely saying. You are apt to think, they will meet with a great deal of
Infidelity? This Supposed Infidelity, should have been plainly made out, but
instead of complying with that hard Task, you wave the whole matter, and only
Think many things are amiss. I think many things amiss in your Voluminous
Account, But is this enough to refute it?

10. Now because you insist so much upon the Approbation of these Books, please
to know, Two things considerable in the approbation of Books.
Two things may be Questioned. First, whether all the particular Miracles
recorded by Capgrave and Colganus be in them selves exactly true? And to Assert
this, the Truth of those Records, and Manuscripts made use of, is to be
maintained as undoubted, which very few, I am persuaded, (no not Colganus
himself) will affirm, For to ascertain the unquestionable Verity of such
Records much more is required, than to find them Written in old Characters, or
in a simple Style, In like manner to prove them False or forged, much more is
necessary, than to jeer or laugh at them, as the Dr does. The second thing
observable in the Approbations, is the exact Diligence or Fidelity of the
Collectors of Miracles, so far the Approbations given by learned men reach and
no further, as you may se by the Censure of those who have approved Colganus
first Tome, Which is to say, They approved his Fidelity in relating what he
read in some Ancient Martyrologies, Though none of these kind Censurers dare
Swear, that all he read there, ought to be owned manifestly true without
further Examination. Thus Mr Doctor you must Discourse, when afterward you
tell us out of Aelianus, Vopiscus, and others, of strange Wonders (like
Miracles) wrought by Heathens. If these Authors speak as you quote, you are
quit of Blame, and so far speak Truth, But it does not therefore follow, that
either Heathens did Miracles or that the matters of Fact were so in themselves,
as those Authors recount. Just so it is our present case, Capgrave and Colganus
bring to light, I confess, Quotations may be approved as Exact, though the
matters quoted be not true.
many strange Things, and quote their Manuscripts for every particular, the
Quotations are approved as exact, but whether those Ancient Manuscripts (which
may be Written by too slight hands, or in a long time perhaps altered from what
they once were) punctually relate Truth is another difficulty, and cannot be
approved without more Trial, and further Inspection into matter so Prodigious
as we find there.

11. The Judgment of those two learned Bolland. Henschenius tom. 1. Febr. c. 3.
Writers, Ioannes Bollandus, and Godefridus Henschenius differ's nothing from
what is here noted, For speaking of Colganus they first praise his great
labor, amply shown in his many Collections made of Irish Saints. 2. They
prudently advised him first to set forth such Martyrologies and Ancient Copies
as he had by him, which being once Public, and approved by men versed in
Antiquity, would give both force and light to the Saints, and Miracles there
mentioned. 3. Though Colganus did not (upon Reasons set down) follow that Good
Counsel, yet he courteously granted F. Bollandus two Martyrologies belonging to
the Month of February, whereof, says Bollandus, we made use, But How? We only
Transcribed the Lives of such Saints taken out of those VVritings, as we had
sound approved in the Lives of other Saints Minimae suspectae fidei, not at all
doubted of, And Purposely refrained to own those stupendous Miracles, perhaps
done, Though often so unsl^ilfully pack't together (without Notice given of the
Saints Virtues) that a Reader may rather smile, when he peruses them, than
Reverence the Saints Colganus Writes of. Thus Bollandus speak's warily, and it
is worth the Readers knowledge.

12. Moreover Bollandus and Henschenius Act^ Sanct. Bolland. and Hensch. mense
Ian. in Praefa^. Gen* c. 3.
observe, that in recounting the lives and Miracles of Saints, the like is in
all other History. There are several Degrees of certainty, or great
Probability. First, if Ey-witnesses liable to no exception attest upon Oath,
that they saw such a VVonder, The matter of fact related cannot be prudently
called into doubt, For thus our Saviors own Miraclcs gained credit, (and I
think without Oath) from innumerable, before Several degrees of certainty for
Miracles.
Scripture recorded them. But we, as I noted above, have the like clear humane
Testimony for Miracles done in the Roman Catholic Church, seen by
Ey-witnesses, and openly attested, as that was wrought at Naples upon F.
Mastrilli, and all those were, which God did by our glorious Bishop S. Thomas
of Hereford, Seen I say by many Ey-witnesses, attested by Oath, still preserved
upon Record, and conveyed down by Tradition, as most clear, and undoubted
Truths. If therefore the Dr's Discourse, when he tell's us that fallible
Tradition alone, which supplies the want of our Senses in Conveying upon moral
certainty the Miracles of Christ to the Primitive Christians and to us also, be
without exception Good, The Tradition of these now specifyed Miracles and
express Records besides, may well serve to convey them to men now living, and
to Posterity hereafter.

13. Some may Reply, the humane Tradition in behalf of Christ's Miracles (the
Dr own's no Tradition Divine and infallible) is both for time and place very
Universal, and received by all Christians, The Tradition for this or that
particular Miracle of Saints, though seen and attested upon Oath, never yet
gained the like General Assent, and therefore Cannot be Paralleled with that
other more Universal. To Answer a An objection Answered.
simple Objection, I ask first, whether this way of Arguing be solid? Some
particulars related of Caesar and Pompey, (as that they were men once in being,
Courageous, and gallant Spirits etc.) are received upon Tradition more
Universal than our Saviors Miracles, For all Heathens, Jews, Turks, and
Christians, easily Swallow down These, yet Jews and Heathens boggle at
Christ's Miracles, Ergo they are less certain than those other, because not so
Universally assented to? Every rational Christian will deny the Consequence
upon this Ground, because our Saviors Miracles being wrought before many, are
apt, (did not malice or some other accidental Cause hinder) to beget in all a
Universal Assent. This is our Answer, which will better appear if we examine
things to the bottom. Our Savior raised Lazarus from the dead, cured the blind
man, and wrought other great Wonders in such and such particular places, These
done before Ey-witnesses were spread abroad, some few first hearing of them,
held all upon humane Faith credible. Passing further from hand to hand, They
became more known, and induced many to Assent upon this Motive* that prudent
men, not suspected of Guile, said they had received them by word of mouth from
Persons very pious who saw such matters of Fact, or at least had them from
others that conversed with those Ey-witnesses.

14. Now further; This humane Tradition Why our Saviors Micles became more
famed than others.
(for Still we abstract in our Discourse hitherto, from Divine Revelation)
concerning Christ's Miracles, which at first took its rise from Few, as the
multitudes of Christians increased, became more Universal and generally
received, because all that owned our Savior to be the true Messiah, and most
deservedly the greatest Thaumaturgus that ever was, held it their Duty to make
his admirable Wonders known all over, Fathers preserved them in the Memory of
their Children, These, Age after Age, left them to Posterity, the Christian
Doctors and Pastors every where spread them abroad in their Writings and
public Sermons before whole multitudes, Both Jews and Heretics also,
concurred not a little. Here in brief (though much more might be said) you
have the true Reason why our Saviors Miracles were famous the whole world
over, and therefore handed down by Universal Tradition, which, you se, cannot
be so General in behalf of Miracles wrought in the Church afterward, Though
they be most unquestionable. So Providence has ordered, so Reason also
Dictates, That God and man should be more Universally honored for his
admirable Works, than man only, the Lord of all, more than his Servants. Thus
much premised.

15. You shall see, how far the Parallel goes between our Saviors Miracles,
and those wrought by Saints. S. Thomas Cantilupe, for example, most certainly
raised many from the dead, So did S. Dominick as is proved above, Others
restored sight to the borne blind etc. These like our Savior's done before
many Spectators in particular Places, were Divulged abroad, and upon humane
Faith gained at first Credit with those who saw them not, Because prudent
Persons of unspotted Fame, boldly avouched they had seen the Wonders. Thus our
Saviors Miracles became at first famed, and induced others (no Spectators) to
believe them upon humane The fame of Miracles, first grounded on sight and
experience.
Faith. From this Fame first grounded on Sight or experience, Tradition took
its rise, and ever since Those Miracles were wrought, preserved a memory of
them among men, Very Universally, as to our Saviors, though less general in
behalf of Saints, for the Reasons now given; But this, as I said, impair's
nothing the Moral certainty of latter Miracles, seeing the first Ground where on
all true Miracles rely (if we keep within the bounds of humane Faith) is one
and the same, That is, They were manifestly seen, and most faithfully related
to others.

16, If therefore our Saviors Miracles became thus Public before Scripture
registered them, and the Miracles of Saints (seen and attested by Ey-witnesses)
were in like manner spread All true Miracles apt of their own Nature to gain
Universal assent
abroad before Records preserved them, It follows, that all, of their own
Nature, are apt to gain an Universal Assent, had all been alike Famed and
Universally Published, but because this Publication ( an effect only of the
Wonders) by Accident, (or Providence rather,) was different, very general for
some, not so general in others, Hence our Saviors Miracles (as they highly
deserved) gained credit Universally, others not so Generally, which, as I said,
nothing abates their certainty, while the foundamental Grounds. (Viz. Sight and
common Humane consent) make all alike morally certain. And thus I argued Page
1. c. 9. number. 16.
against Mr Dr in the last little Treatise. If the common humane Consent among
Ancient Christians, supposed neither Divine Revelation nor infallible, raised
our Saviors Miracles to an Evident Credibility in those Days, why should not
the like common Consent of Christians now advance our approved Miracles to the
same certainty, or Evident Credibility? O but many boggle at the Miracles of
the Church! And did not more boggle at those wrought by our Savior? The
Procedure in both cases is alike Blameable, While clear Evidence taken from
Sense, and common consent, makes either All, or none credible, and morally
certain.

17. A second Degree of certainty and less, Two other degrees of Certainty.
is had, when Those who write of Miracles received not Information from the
Ey-Witnesses Themselves, but (as we say) at the Second hand from such, as
Treated, and often conversed with them. Of this nature, Bollandus cited says,
many are recounted by John Moscus, S. Gregory, and our Venerable Bede. A third
Moscus in^. prato Spirituali. S. Gregory in Dialogis. and Beda in Historia
Anglicana,
Degree of certainty depend's on such Historians as either made their
Collections from those who Saw Miracles, or Testified they had heard of them
from others that had seen Them, or finally from undubitable Monuments,
Attestations, and Commentaries published by Ey-witnesses, Or at least from
prudent Persons who said, They wrote nothing of Miracles, But what they had
received from such as had conversed with the Spectators. Hence you se, That
when these matters of Fact are examined, The last Proof, while we plead by
Humane faith only, is brought to those who were Ey-witnesses. Now whether
Capgrave and Colganus ever rely on so sure a Foundation, (unless we had a View
of their Monuments and Martyrologies) cannot, I think, be easily decided;
However, to End all that relates to their strange Wonders, you shall se how
fairly I deal with Mr Dr.

18. Let us Suppose, that the Very most are more than doubtful, or that many
(for all cannot Though particular Authors fail in the account they give of
Miracles, yet the Church is at no loss, and why?
possibly be so) far recede from the Purity of Truth, or finally that a great
number of Colganus his recounted Miracles appear not to a Judicious Reader
Probable, I say (notwithstanding so many foul, either real or imagined Blurrs)
The Roman Catholic Church is yet at no loss, while She can make an exact
Inventory of a thousand other Evident Miracles wrought only in Her, and by Her
faithful Children, which neither Dr nor any, Maugre all the Spite in Hell,
shall once dare to gainsay by Authority and reason, So ponderous They are, and
so powerfully convincing, that the more Malice strives to Eclipse their Glory,
they more glorious the appear. Of these I have given you many above though not
half of all; The Tenth part whereof would require volumes and large ones too.

19. Most justly Therefore may I stand astonished Reas. and Relig. Disc. 2. c
8. from n. 3. to n. 31. and. c 9.
at the Dr's strange Proceeding with me upon this Subject. I pressed him again
and again to Deny if he durst such plain Miracles as were set down in my former
Treatises; These he shamefully waves, or lightly skip's over, Thinking it
advantage enough to treat matters, which no man gave him Occasion to handle,
And therefore fill's page after page with a long List of other Wonders, which
he would fain blow away with the breath of a few Jeers, for he refutes none by
Authority and reason: I say Contrary could he do so, (though he never hit's on
this solid way) he proves nothing against the certain Miracles wrought by
Saints in our Church, unless this weightlesse Consequence be looked on as
conclusive: Some Miracles recounted by Private men seem doubtful, or
disputable. Ergo all other, Though manifest upon humane Faith, deserve the like
Censure, and are to be vapour'd against as unvaluable. Is this Procedure
tolerable, or any thing like fair Play? Judge Reader.

20. Now because our Dr who flurt's at every one, seems less satisfied with
the Collections of Saints Lives, and their Miracles set forth at Antwerp and
published, as he Says, with much Ostentation etc. Those two worthy Writers
Godefridus Henschenius and Daniel Papebrochius, yet living Petition Mr Dr
rigidly to examen what ever he deem's amiss in the three Tomes of April
already printed, And if after an attentive Inspection any one particular
appears to him erroneous, false or improbable, Their earnest desire, I say, is
that it be plainly represented in Latin; This done they engage if a full
Satisfactory Answer be not returned, to acknowledge their Mistakes: The
Challenge here made is modest, will our Dr accept of it? Will he decline
hereafter mere empty words that signify nothing. He is apt to think there is
much amiss, a great deal of Infidelity, though as yet, he never had the Grace
or face to tell us, where, or in what particular This much Amiss lies?

CHAP. IX.
Whether impartial Authors in former Ages ever taught that Miracles ceased in
the Church? S. Chrisostom most plain for latter Miracles. Whether there be no
comparison between our Savior's Miracles and those wrought in Latter times? Of
Dr Stillingfleet's frivolous Distinction between Signs, and Miracles.

1. MR Dr to make his Assertion good of page 568.
Miracles ceasing in the Church, produces in the first place the Authority of
S. Chrysostom, whereat every Reader may justly wonder, seeing it is more than
evident that the Saint upon Several occasions so stiffly defend's what
Catholics now hold, that he cannot by Violence be wrested to a contrary Sense.
A few clear Testimonies only shall be sufficient, to allege all he has upon
this Subject, would be both tedious, and needless.

2. The Saint pondering those words of the Psalm. Memoriam fecit etc. Says God
never ceased to work Miracles. For this is to make a memory of himself. He
never intermitted, never desisted in every Chrysostom. in Psalm. 100. in Edit. Pa^is
1588.
Generation to show Miracles, and by admirable things to stir up and encourage
the duller sort of People. For those who are endowed with a noble mind and
given to the Study of Philosophy. (...), stand in no need Miracles never ceased
in the Church.
of such Signs or Miracles, because it is Said, Blessed are they who have not
seen, yet believed; Now Seeing God has not only care of such, but of duller
Capacities also, his Goodness surceased not to work Miracles frequently in
every Age. Then S. Chrysostom set's down the Miracles wrought by Divine power
while the Jews were Captives in Egypt, at their leaving Egypt, in the Desert
also, in Palestine and Babylon. Next, he enumerat's the Miracles done after our
Saviors coming, and Such, says he, are wrought among us this present Day.
Finally, he add's. If you will hear of those Wonders done in our Age, the
Translation of S. Babylas Holy Body to the Temple of Daphnis, when the Devil
was manifestly silenced, conquered, confounded, and the worst of wicked men
Julian the Apostata Miraculously stricken dead, This Translation, I say, of
that Holy Body abundantly testifies. Thus and much more S. Chrysostom speak's
to our present Purpose of Signs and Miracles showed in his Age; And can any
believe that so great a man ever contradicted himself in a Doctrine so plainly
delivered? Mark his significant Expressions. God never desisted, never ceased,
never was vvanting in Working Miracles, Generation after Generation, And
though he did them not for wise Philosophers, or the learned Believers Yet they
were useful, profitable and necessary to others whose faith (as I noted) else
where, would have grown cold, had it not been sometimes excited by Powerful
Signs from Heaven.

3. Another Testimony pregnant and convincing Chrysostom. contra Gentil. lib. uno
Tom 5. Paris print.
is taken out of S. Chrysostom, where he relates at large the life and glorious
Miracles of S. Babylas Bishop of Antioch, a most renowned Martyr. Christ our
Lord, says the Saint, the night before his Sacred Passion calling his
Disciples together forewarned them of many Things, and Prophesied thus. Verily
I say unto you, He who believes in me, the Works which I do, he shall do,
and greater than these (A plain Passage produced against the Dr in confirmation
of latter Miracles, whereunto he never replied.) But some perhaps, will demand,
where are our Saviors words verifyed? S, Chrysostom Answers. If any take into
his hands that Book of Scripture called the Acts of the Apostles, he shall find
Persons lying sick in bed, cured by the Shadows of the Apostles, many also
Possessed with Devils* This reason produced by the Saint proves latter Miracles
wrought in the Ghurch.
and furiously raging, freed by a touch only of S. Paul's Garments, which
things, if any Say were Fictions or legerdemain. The Wonders (Mark his words)
now seen, are more than enough to stop the mouths, and tie the Tongue of so
impudent Blasphemers. Observe the Saints Reason. For there is no Country, faith
he, no People, no City of the world, where these new Miracles have not with
Apostolical Miracles in found S. Chrysostom.
Praise been famed, and publicly divulged. That is to Say. All have heard of
the infirm cured, of possessed Persons freed from Devils, in a word of such
Apostolical Miracles, which would never have filled men's minds with Admiration
(as we se done) had they been Tales, or feigned Stories. Thus S. Chrysostom
(after he had reproached the Gentiles upon the account of their licentious
feigning Wonders) discribes at large the undoubted Miracles wrought by S.
Babylas both living and dead, so clear and admirable, That they verifyed our
Saviors Prediction of greater to Se S. Chrysostom. with me p. 873.
be done in ensuing Ages. Yet more, consider, says S. Chrysostom, what Pomp
that wicked Emperor assumed, And do not slightly pass it over. Here you might
have seen his Royal attendance, his armed Soldiers, and the Monarck in the
midst of his Courtiers entering the Temple clothed in Purple and Princely
Attire; richly adorned with Jewels and innumerable precious Stones; Besides, a
refulgent Crown on his head gave mighty luster to all his Pride and glory? When
behold the Servant of God, S. Babylas, like another Elias or S. John Baptist,
with an undaunted Spirit confounded his folly, suppressed the Tyrant, and drove
him, though Majestically attended, out of the Temple. Thus S. Babylas stopped
the mouths of the impudent, who think, forsooth, the Power we asscribe to the
Apostles nothing but vain boasting; Thus he proved by Laying forth the like
Signs, that what those first Blessed men did, was from Power given by God,
above the force of nature. Much more S. Chrysostom: page 878.
S. Chrysostom relates to the eternal glory of this renowned Martyr while he
lived, to set down all particulars would seem over long to the Reader.

4. A few words therefore of S. Babyla's manifest Miracles done after his
death, For as S. Chrysostom notes, the daily Miracles wrought by Martyrs now
glorious in Bliss are many, and amply proved by the frequent Concourse of
People to honor them with the like honor as is ^^ven to S. Babylas.

5. When S. Babyla's Martyred Body was by the Emperor's command brought near
to the S Chrysostom. page 884.
Temple of Daphnis, a place where all Debauchery and wickedness reigned, Behold
a certain small and gentle Air, breathed out on all sides where the Martyr lay,
wrought so Powerfully Miracles wrought by S. Babylas after his death.
upon the minds of those formerly Debauched, that they loathed their past
Wickedness, and after they had been where the Saints bones were, found in
Themselves a strange Alteration, now thoughtful of nothing, but of living a
Virtuous life for the future. Dismissed from S. Babylas's Shrine, a strange
amendment followed this stupendous Miracle, not easily read of in the lives of
other Saints. An eternal silencing the Devils, that used to give Laws in the
Temple of Daphnis was so Prodigious, says S. Chrysostom, S. Chrysostom. page 885.
That if any doubt of the admirable Wonders of Christ's Apostles, he or they
ought to desist from that Impudence, and cannot but be induced to a right
Belief, upon a serious View of those Miracles wrought by S. Babylas. But
wonder nothing, says he, the Power of Saints is so great, that Devils cannot
endure their Very Shadows, Nay, fear the very Shrines and Garments page 882.
of Martyrs, whence it is, that God has left us their Holy Relics. And then
further tell's you, How S. Babylas discovered the Gentiles Impostures, laid open
their cheats, and gained by the Miracles he wrought immortal praise and glory.
Thus much I have faithfully collected out of S. Chrysostom's long Discourse,
Judge Reader whether the Saint be not a strong Maintainer of Miracles?

6. Judge Reader also, whether our Dr Dr Still. page 578.
Shuffles not, when to cast a Mist before a vulgar Reader, he distinguishes
between (...) and (...), wonders, and Signs, Wonders the Dr calls those
Extraordinary things the Martyrs did. (...) or Signs, with him are such
Miracles as gave Testimony to the Infallible Commission, which Persons had
from God to deliver his Doctrine, And S. Chrysostom, says our Dr, expressly
Assert's that (...) were ceased. First I see no Distinction between Wonders and
Signs either to our present Purpose, or in S. Chrysostom's Sense, For if the
works whereof he speak's be (as they are done) by the Power of God above the
force of Nature, you may Promiscuously The Dr's distinction between Wonders and
Signs useless in this place.
call them now Wonders, now Signs as you please, and boldly aver, that God
thereby commissioned S. Babylas and the other Martyrs faithfully to deliver
Divine Doctrine.

7. Now that their wonders were Signs from Heaven and proved them commissioned
to Propagate God's revealed Truths is evident out of S. Chrysostom's whole
Discourse; For first He applies our Saviors words of greater Things to be done
by those who believe in him, Than he had done, But our Saviors Miracles were
not only wonders in the Dr's Sense, but Signs also of his being sent from God
to teach the world, Ergo the Martyrs Miracles if Christ's Prediction belong to
them, are both Wonders and Signs of their being commissioned to deliver the
Verities revealed in Holy Writ. Say I beseech you, had any one seen the
Miracles done by S. Babylas and other Martyrs, would he not have exclamed as
that poor widow did, after Elias 3. Reg. 17. v. 24.
had raised her Son from death. Now in this I know thou art a man of God, and
that the Word of our Lord is true in thy mouth? 2. S. Chrysostom cited above,
uses the very word (...) or Sign, when he tells us that such Signs, or
Miracles, though not so necessary for the Learned, avail much to strengthen the
Faith of weaker understandings. 3. As you have heard, S. Chrysostom Argues
thus. If the Apostles Miracles had not beer* Conviction enough to beget true
Faith in men then living, the Signal Miracles of S. Babylas had so much
efficacy as to reclaim them from their Impudency. Behold, says he, the
Gentiles and the Devils Power utterly conquered, became so mute and Silenced
after our Saint (as a Master, or Commander) had stopped their mouths, That they
never spoke word, though most busily loud before in that Temple of Daphnis.
Tell me Reader whether this admirable Miracle may not bear Parallel with the
like done by the Apostles? Lastly, and this Reason convinces; The blessed S.
Chrysostoms convincing Argument.
Apostles in their curing the sick, casting out Devils etc. Manifested by such
Signs or extraordinary Miracles, That Christ our Lord gave them commission to
preach the whole world over. But, says S. Chrysostom, there is no Country, No
People, or City, where such new and unlook't for Signs have not been wrought,
and publicly divulged (though not in the like ordinary manner as we shall note
presently) Therefore unless the Dr can make it out, that the very same Miracles
wrought by an Apostle and a Saint of a latter date (S. Paul for example, and S.
Babylas) are Signs in the one, and not in the other) which is impossible) he is
obliged to retract his Doctrine.

8. By all hitherto said, you see first, that the word Miracle used by the
Latins and the Church, more significantly expresses the Nature of Works done by
the Infinite Power of God, than that word (...) or Sign; For a Sign taken in a
General way belong's to Things not all wonderful, (smoke is a natural Sign of
fire, our words by Institution are Signs of the speakers mind, and the matter
spoken of) whereas the word, Miracle, lead's every one to a clear Perception of
works done above the force of nature. You se. 2. The Dr's beggarly Put off, or
empty dissatisfactory Gloss brought to nothing, when he says, that the
extraordinary things done by Martyrs were only attestations of their Sanctity
or being highly in Gods favor, and Therefore it was meet in those days, when
Paganism recovered Strength, to vindicate the Innocence of Martyrs. Mr Dr, Ex
ore tuo te judico. The whole cause shall be decided by your own words. Were the
Martyrs then Innocent, Holy, and Virtuous? None doubt's it; That Innocence and
Virtue therefore, supposed them endued with the true Faith of our Christian
Verities, And is it not most evident that they lived and dyed in that true
Faith, which they openly professed before the People, and the worst of Tyrants?
No envious heart can Deny this. Say then, and you touch the Miracles wrought by
Martyrs as well witness their faith, as Innocence.
point in Question, whether the Miracles wrought by them when persecuted, might
not as well (to use your word (be Signs whereby they testified to the world
that their Faith was true, as that they were Innocent and virtuous? Why
therefore do you, Sr, without any reason or Authority (nay contrary to clear
Evidence) mince matters so, as to make their Martyrdoms Attestations of their
Innocence only, and not of their Faith, as if, Forsooth, either Like the
silenced Devils mentioned, they could not Speak, or would not open their mouths
to Profess Christ's Doctrine for which they dyed, and God empowered them to make
Public?

Pretended Objections taken out of S. Chrysostom Answered. Dr Still grossly
abuses John Gerson, Chancellor of Paris.
9. It is now high time to examine our Doctors S. Chrysostom. in 1. Epist ap cor.
Homil. 6. Epit. Graece and Latin Heruch Aurel. Interp. Henr. Savil. Graece*
Edit Pariens. and Basiciensi Latin.
Quotations found, as he thinks, in S. Chrysostom against Church Miracles, And
first we are remitted to the Saints Commentary or exposition set forth in three
or four Editions upon S. Paul's Epistles. Reader, I have exactly Perused every
Edition, and can never sufficiently wonder, how it came to pass that the Dr
Saw not his own fraud, or had the face to produce S. Chrysostom against S.
Chrysostom, when it is evident he owned, as you have heard undeniable Miracles
done in his Days, and in all precedent Generations.

10. I say first. It is far more certain, that true Miracles have been wrought
in the Roman Catholic Church than that S. Chrysostom wrote this very Homily
the Dr quotes, For all Universally, the Fathers Greek, and Latin, yea S.
Chrysostom himself, all Christians Generally, even Heretics and Turks
likewise, ever owned latter Miracles as most unquestionable, but there is no
such Assurance had of S. Chrysostom's penning this Homily, And far less
certainty that the Dr hit's upon it is true meaning, wherein S Chrysostom in the
Homily cited one Word against latter Miracles.
if there be a mistake, the Dr's labor is lost. I say 2. S. Chrysostom in this
whole Homily has not one word contrary to the common Sentiment of Catholics,
who positively Assert true Miracles to have been wrought in the Roman Catholic
Church, over and above those done by Christ and his Apostles.

11. To prove my Assertion, Know Reader that S. Chrysostom's chief Aim in this
Homily is to Show the wonderful work of God in converting the world by Twelve
Poor unlearned Fishermen, which yet his Alseing Providence effected, as the
Saint Demonstrat's in the precedent Chapter, when God made choice of the weak
and most abject (so the Apostle speak's) to evacuate and destroy the Pride and
wisdom of 1. Cor. 1. 19
the world, to the End, no Flesh might glory in his sight. Hence it is, that
the Apostles were honored with two great Privileges, the one, says S.
Chrystom, was to receive by Divine Inspiration The Apostles honored with two
special Privileges.
what ever they taught; We now living (not so privileged) want that particular
Prerogative, and deliver Christ's Doctrine set down in Scripture which we
received from those first great Lights of the Church. The 2. Grace granted the
Apostles was to work Miracles, as the Gospel expresses? Having called the
twelve Disciples Matthew. 10. v. 10.
together, he gave them Power over unclean Spirits, to cast out Devils, to cure
all manner of diseases, and all manner of Infirmities. Observe well the
Privilege conferred upon all, and every one. That is as They had ample Power
to preach the whole world over without restraint, to write Canonical Scripture,
to constitute laws for Christians, so likewise they had Power to cure all
manner of diseases, and all manner of Infirmities. Now this Se Prot. Apol.
Tract. 2 c 3 sect. 7. subd 2. p. with me 530. n. 2.
Power, as Authors observe, being made an ordinary Gift to the Twelve, or then
annexed to that set number of Blessed men only, was never granted to any other
like multitude since Christ's time, For as Brerely cited, notes well, the Gift
of working Miracles after the Apostles Days was never ordinary or common to
the Churches Pastors, But peculiar to certain Persons and at certain times,
according to the special Dispensation of Gods Pleasure, sometimes granted,
often denied. Thus much premised.

12. Read S. Chrysostom, and begin with that Question (...)? For what cause is
it, That the Apostles Signs are now forbidden? (The Saint expressly speak's of
the Apostolical wonders, not a word there of any like Power given to particular
Persons in the Church) Does thou ask this Question, says the Saint, not yet
believing those Apostolical Wonders or as One desirous to learn the true Cause?
If as an Unbeliever, Tell me how those blessed men neither rich nor Eloquent
nor noble, but contemptible in the Eyes of the world, gained so many to the
Christian Faith contrary to their natural Inclination, when pampered up in all
Delights and Pleasures, How did they accomplish this admirable work? Speak
plainly, By doing Miracles or not; If by Miracles, I have my intent, if not;
This is the greatest Miracle of all other that they persuaded to Christ's
Doctrine without any Miracles. He goes on. That therefore such Apostolical
Miracles (for upon these his whole context falls) are not done now, is no
Argument that they were not then done, for (...). Then it was expedient and
profitable they should be done. (...). Now not expedient, useful, or
profitable. Why then Expedient and profitable? He Answers, because God then
manifested both Power and wisdom in reclaiming whole Nations from Infidelity,
by Choosing out twelve poor unlearned Fishermen to do an admirable work in
converting the ^e the Apostle cited.
world, and humbling the pride and greatness of it; No wonder Therefore if
those blessed men had Privileges above all other Teachers. Why the Apostles
special Privilege in working Miracles w^ once useful, and now not.
But why not now either Expedient or useful? S. Chrysostom Answers, Because,
were such evident Signs annexed to Twelve men now, and publicly shown, the
merit of Faith would be much abated, for the more manifest a Miracle is, Faith
(though still Faith) loses something of its reward, witness our Saviors own
words. Blessed are those who have not seen and yet believed, All this is to say
in plainer Terms, answerable to S. Chrysostom's true meaning. Had God now
(after those first Apostical Signs, and all other conspicuous Miracles wrought
in the Church) sent Twelve rude, unlearned men to Preach the whole world over,
had he made them Ordinary Thaumaturgi, or empowered them to work Miracles
publicly in all Nations, and to cure all manner of Infirmities as the Apostles
did; Had he, I say, done this after so great precedent Evidence manifested both
Anciently and in latter Ages, the minds of men overwhelmed (as it were) with
too much Light, would have lost much of the reward due to an humble and
obsequious Providence has ordered that a mean be held in the Motives to Faith.
Faith, which ever implies a Captivation of the understanding. So Providence
has ordered, that a Mean be held in the Motives inducing to believe, not too
Luminous on the one side, For that would entrench upon the obscurity of Faith,
yet on the other side most prudently Persuasive, for the gaining our Submission
to what ever God has revealed.

13. Thus much I boldly averr is S. Chrysostom's chiefest Aim in this Homily,
if the Dr reject's the Doctrine, let him once please to give weight for weight,
and reduce his Assertion to as sound Principles as mine opposite to his,
stand's upon. I show first that Chrysostom own's Miracles wrought in the Church
above the force of nature, not only here, but in a hundred other places. One
only Passage, because it bear's the Look of a Popish Miracle you shall have
taken out of his own undoubted Writings, where the Saint largely lays forth
the Dignity of Priesthood. When, says he, the Priest invok's the Holy Ghost;
and Offer's that dreadful Sacrifice full of S. Chrysostom. de Sacerdo. lib. 6. c. 4.
horror and Reverence, and daily hold's the Lord of all in his hands, my
Demand is in what Order or Dignity shall we place him, what Purity and
integrity of life shall we require of him? Much more follows to this purpose?
Then he add's. At that time of the Sacrifice, the whole Order of Celestial
Spirits are present with the Priest, in honor of him who lies Sacrificed
upon the Altar. Yet more. I have heard says S. Chrysostom, a Venerable old man
to whom God revealed many high Mysteries, faithfully recounting a Vision he
once had in time of Mass. He saw on a sudden whole Multitudes of Angels in
most resplendent Garments round about the Altar, where the Priest Sacrificed,
bowing down their heads, as Soldiers Two Popish Miracles related by S.
Chrysostom.
are wont to do, when the King is present. And this, says the Saint, I easily
believe. Another man also of most worthy credit told me (they are S.
Chrysostoms words) what he had seen and heard, and it was, that those who depart
this life, if they have worthily and with a pure Conscience received the Divine
Mysteries, being ready to dye. are accompanied straight to Heaven by Angels,
that like troops of Soldiers attended their Bodies, lying sick in bed.

14. What says the Dr, are not these clear Miracles above all natural force,
done to the Honor of our Sacrificed Savior upon our Catholic Alters, And
much like such Miracles as we read of in other approved Authors? However, if
you believe Mr Doctor, S. Chrisostom denied all Miraculous Signs which is to
say, the Saint Contradict's himself, for as we have evidently Shown he hold's
and defends true real Miracles through out his Writings* Therefore it is most
improbable that he Denies them in this place.

15. The second Reason of my Assertion relies upon S. Chrysostom's own
Discourse prosecuted in the Homily cited. If, Says he, you now seek for Signs
and Miracles, you have innumerable Predictions of admirable thingt done in our
Age. You see the Conversions of Nations, The saint proves other great Miracles.
foretold plainly, set before your Eyes. You see our Saviors Prophesy of being
ever with the Church to the End of the world, hitherto verifyed. You se that
Hell gates, maugre all attempts, were never yet able to Prevail against the
Church built on a firm Rock; which had never been, had not Christ stood with
it, and Powerfully opposed all Enemies. Finally the Saint exhort's all to Piety
and a Virtuous life. O were our Duty herein faithfully complied with, we might,
says he, Convert the world without Miracles. But who amongst us now retires to
the Desert? Who goes on Pilgrimage? Who of our Doctors takes pains to supply
the want of the poor and needy? Thus S. Chrysostom.

16. The last Ground of my Assertion, is the main Drift of the Saints whole
Discourse, To assert that the Apostles singular prerogative ceased proves not a
Cessation of all Miracles in the Church.
who never through this Homily utter's one word against Church Miracles, but
only Shows how and in what manner the Twelve Apostles were singularly
Privileged with two particular Prerogatives, the one, as I noted, to teach by
Divine Inspiration, The other, to have the Ordinary Power of working Miracles
in curing all manner of Infirmities etc. And this Power we may truly Say (never
since granted to any set number of Persons in the Church) ceases, or is taken
away, But can any one hence infer, that because that Ordinary Gift ended with
the Twelve, Therefore none in the Church by Special Dispensation work's
Miracles now? The Inference is lame and just like this, The blessed Apostles,
as S. Chrysostom observes singularly Privileged taught Truths by Divine
Inspiration, and by that Grace faithfully delivered our Christian. Verities:
The Pastors and Doctors of the Church in after Ages taught not Privileged with
the like Apostolical Inspiration, Ergo none of them ever since delivred one
Christian Verity, For Though we grant them Divine Assistance in their teaching*
yet because that falls short of the Apostles Inspiration, they never taught
Truth. I say if this way of Arguing be most weightlesse, The other is no
better. Viz. The Apostles singularly privilege were made Ordinary Thaumaturgi,
as is already declared, but many great Servants of God though not endued with
that Apostolical grace, yet Now and Then, as it pleases Providence to Dispense
his favors, raise the dead, restore sight to the blind etc. However such
Wonders must not, forsooth, be called Miracles, because They are not Ordinary
to any Person in the Church. The The question proposed is whether Miracles have
been wrought, not how, or in what manner.
Question therefore is, whether such Miraculous works have been done in after
Ages, and not how, and in what manner they were Wrought ( whether by ordinary
or extraordinary favor) wherein, as S. Chrysostom well observes, lies the
Difference between the Apostolical Signs, and latter Miracles? Note well this
Difference all along, and you will find the Dr's Arguments weak, and far from
the Purpose.

17. The Dr's next Quotation taken out of Chrysostom. in 1. ad Timo. (...). 1. that
is Hom. 10.
Chrysostom is more forcelesse, where the Saint Demands, From whence shall
Christians now be moved to believe? From Signs or Miracles? (...), but these
are not wrought. Here the Dr fraudulently leaves off. To unbeguile the Reader,
know that the Saint inveighs against the reprehensible Manners of many then
living, who too much loved Themselves, desired to appear great in the World,
and had a horror to think of Death. Then he Ask's how can these men be brought
to Believe? What by Signs or Miracles? But these are not now wrought. By the
Holy and Saintly lives of others? Alas! they are not now seen. By laudable
Works of Charity? There is no Vestigium of them amongst men, And we, says the
Saint, are the cause of these Evils, whereof we must give account to God, Let
us therefore awake out of this drowsiness, and amend our lives etc. Say now, I
beseech you, can any Infer hence, when S. Chrysostom speak's like a Preacher)
that he really Judged, there were none the whole world over that loved God in
those Days, but sought them selves, Honors, or Dignities? None the whole
world over, that gave Evidence of a Virtuous life? None the whole world over,
that did any works of Charity? It is highly senceless, and no less is it
improbable, that the Saint Judged no Miracles were then done in any part of the
whole Christian world, when he knew not what passed the Tenth part of it. All
therefore he says is, that God ceased to show new Signs to such lewd Livers,
who (if Christians) had Miracles enough, partly recorded in Scripture, partly
known by the History of all Ages, abundantly sufficient to awake them out of
their Dullness, and draw them to a better Life.

18. Another Quotation contain's nothing like S Chrysostom. l. 4 de Sacerd. cap. 4.
a Difficulty where S. Chrysostom speak's worthily of S. Paul, and prefer's the
Apostle before men then living. Though, says he, I speak not this to insult
over any in our time, yet I cannot but wonder at their boldness, who dare
compare Them selves to this great Doctor. Alas! were all our men assembled
together in one place, and should with a thousand Prayers and tears, beg the
favor, they would never do so much as S. Paul's hanker-chief did. Most true
Doctrine, because Miracles Miracles are not infallible wrought at the Prayers or
tears of pious men.
being God's free Graces bestowed upon what Persons Providence pleases best
knowing our Necessities, are not infallibly wrought at a Call, or when men,
though most Pious and devout would have them done. Whence it is, that many
great Saints have wrought fewer Miracles, than others, Perhaps, less eminent in
Virtue. Saints may humbly pray that God manifest his Power, when and as often
They Judge Circumstances require it, But still with a perfect Resignation to
his Pleasure; but to pray, to shed tears for more, would be insoleney, and
justly deserve reproof.

19. The Author of the Imperfect work Author. oper Imperf. Hom. 49. in Matt.
Bellar. de Script. Eccles. verbo Chrysostom.
Quoted also by the Dr has little credit with us. First, because, an Heretic
either composed it, or at least corrupted the Work as Bellarm in Witnesses. 2.
Upon this Account that it contain's Evident contradictions, for there the
Homousiani are called Heretics, and yet to affirm that, the Son is less than
the Father, is held an Heresy. Se Bell. cited. 3. In this very 49. Homily An
Author quoted by the Dr that speak's Contradictions.
it is said, that formerly true Christians, were Differenced from the false by
the Miracles which they wrought, false Christians, Says he, showed nothing but
empty Signs, the true Christians wrought true Miracles, soon after we are told,
that this working of Miracles is wholy taken away. A plain Corruption
contrary to S. Chrysostom's express Doctrine above where he Says, that God
never ceased to work Miracles in every Age, And such as the Apostles wrought,
Yea more numerous in after Ages, and in that Sense greater, though inferior to
the Apostles Signs, if we respect the singular Privilege of the Ordinary Power
granted those first great Masters, whereof enough is spoken already.

20. Our good Dr having done with S. Chrysostom, methinks unseasonably enough
return's to Capgrave, and Colganus, and after a Rehearsal of some strange
Wonders related by them, debates a Question little to our Purpose. Whether any
since the Apostles times had the Gift of speaking diverse Tongues, or were
understood? Some say, Yea, others No, which proves, if the Writers be truly
Quoted, that some have erred, light where you will (whereof more hereafter) it
little import's our present Controversy. I therefore wave the Parergon, and
will Examine other Testimonies alleged by the Dr, proving, as he Thinks, that
all true Miracles ceased after the Apostles time, and one cited by Mr Dr, is
the Chancellor of Paris, Gerson contra sectam flagelantium tom 1. page 641.
John Gerson, who favovred not that Sect of men, whipping themselves to blood,
neither liked he Those that spoke of new Miracles to confirm the near Approach
of the Day of Judgment, or the speedy coming of Antichrist, But call's them
Phansies and old men's Dreams, Thus far the Chancellor speak's with great
Reason, And most judiciously add's; That Miracles now a days are to be held
much suspected, Nisi prius facta examinatione diligenti, Unless first rigidly
examined, which Exception implies no Denial of Miracles, but rather Supposes
them wrought. Soon after follows Gerson's Letter to S Vincentius.

21. Reader, I have perused that Letter twice, and find that Dr Still. most
injuriously imposes two things upon Gerson which he never wrote in this
Epistle. The one, That he expresses no great Admiration or esteem of S.
Vincentius, whereas the contrary is evident, For he calls him a most famous
Doctor, and one that Zealously sought the Good of Souls, That he had heard much
of his renown by the report The Dr deal's most unworthily with the Chancelour
John Gerson.
of the General of his Order etc. The Second falsity is intolerable, which yet
the Dr, Writes in a different Character. This Author, says he, (and he alludes
to Gerson or to none) makes no other Difference of Signs, Than that the
Miracles of false Christians were only in appearance, whereas the Miracles of
true Christiant were real and benefical to the world. But now (and this I
except against) This vvorking of Miracles is wholy taken away, and only
false Christians Pretend to it. Thus the Dr, and brag's when he has done of his
Quotation being so strong, That he expects no other Answer to it, than calling
the Author of it Heretic. Reader, all is most false, there are no such words
in Gersons Epistle nor any thing like them. How the Dr will clear him self
from worse than Juggling here, I know not, while he made use of the same Edition
I have before me, as appears by the very Page he cites 641. Answerable to
mine, Paris print 1606.

22. Now Reader, you may Bless your self with the Sign of the Cross at a
strange Wonder* Dr Stillingfleet will needs have it sink into our Heads, that
no less a man than the great S. Austin much opposed the Continuance of
Miracles in the Catholic Church. Should we slightly pass over this gross
Error without reproof, There can be no Paradox, no Improbability so
monstrous, which our Dr. may not ere long hope to fashion better, to varnish
over, and set forth as sound and saleable Doctrine. In a word the Error is
Gross, and in plain English more than intolerable.

None more stoutly Defend's Miracles wrought in the Church, Than blessed S.
Augustine.
23. For your better Satisfaction turn to S. S. Austin lib. 22. de Civit. Dei
c. 8. petrotum.
Austins Treatise entitled the City of God, where in the first place he
Asserts Twice over, that ^tiam nunc, even in those days glorious Miracles were
wrought in the name of Christ our Savior, by the Sacraments, by the Prayers
and memory of Saints departed, And although, says he, They are not so famed
the whole world over, as Those we read of in Holy Scripture, yet They are
manifestly clear, and cannot be denied. And he does not only Assert this in
general Terms, But proves the Assertion by so many Examples, that a Reader must
either give S. Austin the Lie, or confess himself evidently convinced.

24. When I was a Milan, says S. Austin One Miracle wrought at Milan.
the Emperor being then there, that Miraculous cure was wrought upon a blind
man at the Holy Bodies of S. Protasius and Gervasius, and this innumerable
People who flocked to the bodies of those Saints, were Witnesses of. I omit
that great Miracle there largely set down wrought in Carthage upon a pious
woman called Innocentia, who had a Cancer in her breast Judged by all
Physicians incurable, yet after She had powered out her earnest Prayers to God
for assistance was in a moment of time heard, and Miraculously cured. This I
pass by, with Intention to recount yet greater Wonders, and Ask what the Dr
thinks of an other Popish Miracle there related? Hesperius, says S. Austin,
Another on a house infested with Devils.
one of the Tribunes, had his House much hanted with Evil Spirits to the great
molestation of his Servants, and desired some of our Priests to repair thither,
who did so, one taking with him a Piece of the Holy Earth which was brought
from Jerusalem, where our Lord was S Austin's own Relation of this Miracle.
buried, hung that up in the Chamber to secure himself from the danger of
those Devils. He said Mass, offered up the Sacred Body of our Savior, and
earnestly prayed, that the Vexation, Very afflictive to that whole family,
might cease, And by Gods great mercy it ceased. The house thus happily freed
from Devils, Hesperius out of Reverence, not willing to keep that Holy Earth
longer in his chamber, Ask't me, Says S. Austin and another Bishop, whether it
were not best to preserve it in some place, and erect an Oratory where
Christians might meet together and serve God, we condescended, says the Saint,
And all was done accordingly. A third on a young man* stricken with a Palsy.
When behold a young man stricken wlth a Palsy hearing of this Oratory,
petitioned his Parents to carry him to the Oratory where the Holy earth lay,
and after earnest Prayer made to Almighty God for his recovery, in a moment
stood upon his legs, wholly sound and perfectly cured. Reflect Reader, how
many Points of Popery we have here approved by S, Austin? Undoubted Miracles,
the unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass, and the use of Relics pass here for
sound Doctrine. Had Colganus, Capgrave, or any other Modern Writer told these
wonders now related, would our Dr, think ye, have spared his Jeers, and not
rather scornfully laughed at all? Let us se whether he dare deal so rudely with
S. Austin.

25. There is yet one Miracle more which A fourth done for a poor Tailor.
may perhaps make the Dr sport, done for Florentius a poor Tailor of Hippo. The
Virtuous Good man, says S. Austin, had lost his Cloak, and not having
wherewith to Buy another, addressed himself to the Twenty Martyrs, whose
Memory was there Very famous, and begged with a loud voice that those blessed
Saints would supply his want, and procure him a cloak. Certain young men then
casually present, hearing that simple Petition Jeered, and followed and poor
Tailor with biting words, But he quietly went away, and happily found a great
Fish newly cast upon the Shore, which he took and brought to a Cook called
Carchosus, a very good Christian, who cutting the Fish open, found in it a
golden ring, which he partly out of Compassion, partly for conscience sake,
gave poor Florentius, with these comfortable Words. Ecce quomodo viginti
Martyrs te vestiverunt, se how the twenty Martyrs have clothed thee.

26. S. Austin soon after recount's the famous More Miracles recounted by S.
Austine.
Miracles wrought upon many at the Relics of the glorious Martyr S. Stephen.
I only set down (and briefly) Three or Four most remarkable. There at S.
Stephen's Relics a blind woman who brought with her flowers and presented to
the Martyr, soon after applied them to her Eyes, and protinus vidit, and
forthwith had her sight restored. There also Eucharius a Priest of Spain lay
dead, and by the help of this blessed Martyr, was raised to life, God wrought
this Miracle by the Priests Tunick cast upon the dead Body. There a little Boy
playing in his Mothers Court-yeard, had his tender Body so bruised by a
cartwheel, that he presently dyed. The sorrowful Mother carried the Corpse to S.
Stephens Relics, where the Child, says S. Austin, not only recovered life,
but appeared perfectly sound without Bruise or Scarr, as if he had never been
hurt. There one Bassus of Hippo having his Daughter mortally sick, hastened with
the sick woman's Garment to the Martyrs Relics, and earnestly prayed for her
recovery, while he was on the way, or at his Prayers, The daughter dyed,
returning home he found his whole Family lamenting the deceased. What did he?
He cast the Garment presented to S. Stephen upon the dead Body, which, done,
She without delay revived, and so also did another there mentioned whose dead
Corpse being anointed with the Martyrs Oil, came to Life again.

27. S. Austin goes on. What Shall I do says he? I promised to commemorate the
Miracles wrought by blessed S. Stephen, But cannot set down all, and am sure,
no few when they read these will grieve, because I have passed over many more
known to me. I Ask their pardon, for if I should enumerate all the Miracles
wrought by the Martyr S. Stephen (to say nothing of others) in the Colonie of
Calama and here also, many Books might be Written, These I specify (all upon
Record) to the End, they may be publicly read before the People. Now S. Austin
relates these Miracles to the End they might be publicly known.
Reader observe well S. Austins ensuing words. Id namque fieri volumus, for it
was my express will, that they should be publicly read, mark his reason Cum
videremus etc. Because when we saw the Signs and Miracles wrought frequently in
our time, just like those which God anciently manifested to the world (He
means when the Apostles Preached) I endeavorred that the Memory of them should
not Perish. Here S. Austin plainly Assert's Miracles to have been wrought in
his Days, in true worth, Answerable to the Apostles Signs: For if the raising
of Eutichus from death effected by S. Paul, justly deserved the name of a true
real Miracle, I see no reason why the Resuscitation of three or four Persons
wrought at S. Stephens Relics, may not also be called works truly Miraculous.
I wish the Dr would give any Disparity* if we precisely attend to the wonders
in Themselves and moreover desire, he would not so slightly One grand Miracle.
highly esteemed by S. Austin.
pass over, as he does, that Grand Miracle whereof S. Austin makes an high
Account* at those words. Vnum est. One Miracle more* wrought among us was so
clear, and illustrious* Says S. Austin, that there is none at Hippo who have
not either seen or heard of it* It cannot be forgotten. The Substance is thus.

28. There were seven Brothers and three Daughters born in Capadocia of honest
Parents; who cursed by their Mother, then a widow, for some great wrong She
Conceived done her by these Children. It pleased God (after the Mothers curse)
to add his severe Punishment also. A horrible fearful shaking Seized on all the
members of their Bodies, whereby their Eyes and countenance appeared so ghastly,
that none could endure their deformed Looks. In this sad Condition they wandered
from ^o place place, and at last two of them, a Brother called Paulus, and his
Sister by name Paladia* came to us, a little before Easter and daily frequented
the Church, where the Memory of the glorious Martyr S, Stephen is celebrated,
humbly praying that God would take off that Punishment, and restore their
former health. Young Paulus entering the Church on Easter Sunday, when many
People were present, praying at the Lattices of the Holy Place, on a sudden
fell flat down, and lay there without Trembling like one fast a sleep. Some
would have lifted his Body up* others desirous to see the Event, said No. Soon
after, he stood up of himself free from Trembling, because, says S. Austin,
he was perfectly cured. The joy, Paulus and his sister Paladia Miraculously
cured.
the Clamours, the Gratulations, the Thanks given to God upon the Miracle
resounded the whole Church over, no man held his peace, all praised God, and I,
says S. Austin, giving thanks also, rejoiced with them. This done the
recovered Patient came to me, fell on his Knees, and then all again cried out
with a louder voice. These Clamours ceasing, the Divine Scripture was read, and
I spoke upon one Passage a few words, not many, for I thought it best in so
Public a Joy, that all should rather consider the Wonder God had wrought, than
hear me speak. Paulus dined with me that day, and related the whole Story of
his own and his Brothers Calamity. Much after the same manner his Sister
Palladia within a few days falling down at the Cancels by Gods great mercy,
recovered perfect health.

29. See more of these Miracles in S. Austin, the few here mentioned I
purposely set down, to unbeguile the ignorant whom our Dr plainly cheat's, when
he produces this learned Father, as one that Opposes latter Miracles, or at
least such as the Apostles did. I appeal to the Judgment of all learned men,
and Ask, whether the restoring sight to the blind, raising the dead, and curing
incurable Infirmities, may not be parralleld with the Apostolical Miracles? I
Ask again, whether S. Austin after so ample a Relation of God's wonders done in
his days filthily forged Stories, told lies to deceive the world, or
contrariwise Spoke Truths well known to himself and innumerable others then
living? It is horrid to Judge (nor dare any man in his Wits avouch it) That all
the Miracles recounted in this one eighth Chapter are loud lies, or forged
Tales, what then can be said, but that they Must ^^ be owned Truths sincerely
set down, upon as great humane Authority as may seem Satisfactory to the most
prudent and Judicious. Yield this, and the Dr must admit Miracles of the first
Magnitude to have been done in the Church, distinct from those the Apostles
wrought.

30. To producc other Testimonies out of S Austin de utilit. cred, c. 17. and
contra Epist. fund. cap. 4.
S. Austin most home and pregnant for Miracles, would be too large a Task.
These few quoted in the Margent which steadfastly held that great Doctor in the
Catholic Church, afford light enough. Viz. The fulfilling of Prophesies, the
laborious Travels of the Apostles, the Reproaches and blessed death of Martyrs,
and besides great Universal and puissant Signs, glorious Miracles. Pro
opportunitate temporum, when it best pleased God to work them. And shall we
then fear, says S. Austin, to hide our selves in the Lap or Bosom of this
Church after so special Divine Assistance shown us, and great Fruit done by it?
Shall we doubt to do so, when we se the Church raised to the height of
Authority, while all Generally acknowledge it descended to us by Miracles held
S. Austin in the Catholic Church.
a continued Succession of Bishops from the Sea Apostolic; Heretics who in
vain snarle at this Oracle, are condemned by the common Judgment of men, by
the wisdom of Councils, as also by its glorious Miracles. I say (add's the
Saint) not to give supreme Authority to this Church, is, in Good earnest
Notorious impiety, a headlong Pride, and Arrogance. Judge Reader (and I wonder
Dr Still. trembled not when he reads these words) whether S. Austin owned not
Miracles wrought in the Church, as a main Motive to believe in it. Twice over
he recurr's to Miracles as his Proof in the Passage now cited, and repeats the
same in his Book against the Epistle, which Manichaeus called his Foundation.
Yet, forsooth our Dr would persuade us that S. Austin opposed all signal and
remarkable Miracles, Those only excepted which Christ and his Apostles
manifested to the world. Most untrue Doctrine. We now proceed to the Dr's ill
Account given of S. Austins Opinion in this matter.

CHAP. X.
Of Dr Stillingfleet's shuffling and unworthy dealing with S. Augustine. Not
one Testimony produced by the Dr makes so much as probably against great
Miracles wrought in the Church. The like Account we give of other Authors
falsified by the Dr.

1. TO proceed clearly I say first. No No Catholic Author denied great
Miracles wrought in the Church.
Catholic Author ever yet denied great and most Signal Miracles to have been
wrought in the Orthodox Church of Christ. None of them ever hitherto brought in
S, Austin, as Opposite to our Catholic Miracles. Many it is true assert, That
false wonders have by abuse often passed for true ones, which all willingly
acknowledge, and Say the Church upon their Discovery has severely punished
those who gave the scandal. and upon this unsteady Topic, the Dr unworthily
ground's the most of his whole Discourse, as will appear afterward. Now to S.
Austins Testimonies.

2. The Dr quotes his Book of true Religion, S. Austin de vera Religion c. 25.
where it is Said, that the working of Miracles since the Church is now
established, and diffused over the world, becomes Unnecessary, yet God (thinks
Mr Dr) might do them, out of extraordinary kindness to his Church in a time
when many Pagans were yet unreclaimed. Reader here Dr Still. page 581.
is not all, for S, Austin in his Book of Retractations (and the Dr saw it well
enough) declared his own meaning thus. When, says he, I S Aust lib. 1.
Retract, cap. 1 3.
taught in my Book of true Religion, That after the Churches Establishment
Miracles were not necessary, that is very true, because now when hands are
laid upon the Baptized, They receive not so the Holy Ghost Observe what
Miracles S. Austin speak's of.
as to speak with the Tongues of all Nations, neither are the Infirm now
healed by the shadows of Christ's Preachers, that pass by them. These and the
like Wonders cease. But what I said then, (mark the words,) is not to be
taken, as if no Miracles were now wrought in the name of Christ, for I had
assurance of a blind man cured at Millan, and of many other great Miracles
done in These times, that I neither know them all, nor can enumerate those I
know Thus S. Austin. Say Reader, does not the Dr egregiously juggle in raising
a Difficulty out of S. Austin, which the Saint had solved long since, and
plainly laid before all men's Eyes?

3. The next Quotation in S. Austins Book S. Austin de utilit. credendi c. 16.
of the Usefulness of believing, is nothing at all to the Dr's purpose. There
we are Told, what great Miracles were frequently done by God made man, while he
lived on earth, then S. Austin Demands? Why they are not done now? He Answers,
because they would not move, unless they were wonderful, for Says he, were
they Things common or usually Shown, they would not seem wonderful, and he
explain's his meaning by an excellent Instance, vvaved by Mr Dr. Should one,
says the Saint, who never yet saw the Vicissitude of day and night, the
constant motion of the Celestial Orbs, the four various Seasons of the year,
the mighty efficacy which lies in seed, the Beauty of light, of Colors etc.
Should such a man, I say first behold these wonders, He would be overwhelmed
with a Sight of admirable Miracles, Yet We. not because we know the Causes of
these things (for nothing is more obscure) But because they are common and
daily seen make little or no Account of them, And so it would Were Miracles
vulgar and common they whould not move.
happen, were the Miracles wrought by our Savior continually shown, or often
laid before our Eyes. S. Austins whole Drift therefore is to Demonstrate, that
if Christ's Miracles were so common or continually wrought amongst us, like the
incessant Motion of the Heavens, or those other wonders already mentioned, They
would (to use the Saints words) grow contemptible, Yet hence contrary to all
Logic and rational Discourse, the Dr would infer that Miracles are never
wrought, though God often vouchsafes, Pro opportunitate temporum (That Is also
S. Austin's expression) to do them by his Servants here on earth, That is, not
so frequently by any one man, or in any such manner, as our Savior did, in the
first Promulgation of the Gospel.

4. Here the Dr to his own confusion remit's S. Austin. lib 4. Retract. c. 14.
us again to S. Austin. When, says the Saint, I mentioned in another place the
Miracles our Lord JESUS wrought in his mortal flesh, I asked why the like are
not done now? And ansvvered, They would not move unless they were
wonderful, and this I said, because neither so great Miracles, nor all the
Miracles wrought by Christ, are now done among us. Non quia nulla fiunt etiam
modo, And not because God works no Miracles among us now. in this present
Age. These last words which prove that Miracles cease not in the Church, our Dr
vvisely conceal's, and adds to S. Austins Text another Expression not extant
there. Viz. As were wrought by Christ and his Apostles, whereas, the Saint in
this Passage, speaks only of our Saviors Miracles without mention made of the
Apostles. However, after this double fraud you must hear the Dr triumph. And
can, says he, any Sayings be more contradictory, than this of S. Austin's and,
E. W.s asserting That as many and as great Miracles (yea greater) are wrought
since, as were in their Days? Mr Dr deal plainly, read in lieu of your words.
As are done in their days, as were wrought by Christ, and your supposed
contradiction vanishes into smoke. For do not I expressly Part. 2. c. 1. ^um. 3.
say in the last Treatise, That Christ our Lord proved himself the greatest
Thaumaturgus the world ever beheld, and far surpassed all Angels and men,
Patriarks, Prophets or Apostles in working Miracles all nature over, which none
ever did before, or shall do hereafter? None but Christ commanded a new Star to
shine at their birth. No man like our Savior, darkened the lights of Heaven,
split the rocks, rent the vail of the Temple, moved the earth, or rose again to
Life like Christ our Lord. Therefore Gh^ist our Lord, for above all men and
Angels in working Miracles.
S. Austin says well, and I also assert it, that neither so admirable, nor all
the Miracles wrought by Christ, are now done amongst us. Notwithstanding to
verify that certain Prediction of greater wonders, I said, more blind have
seen more dead have risen to Life again, more poor have received the Gospel in
the later Ages of the Church than before, while our Savior was upon earth, and
this is undeniable, unless S. Austin's Authority and all humane Faith be
banished the world. Hence I often Paralled Miracles wrought in the Church with
those done by the Apostles, ever giving Pre-eminence to our Saviors glorious
Wonders, and withal yielded, as you may see above, a singular Prerogative
granted the Apostles in working Miracles by Ordinary Commission, which none
(known to me) in the Church ever had since, or if any had it, the favor was
singular and not common.

5. The Dr goes on. Its true indeed S. Austin says there were some Miracles
still left in the Church, and he produces several Instances else where, but in
the same place, he Denies the Necessity of these Miracles since the large
Propagation of Christianity in the world, and account's him a Prodigy, that
yet seeks after Prodigies to confirm his Faith. Reader, note first how faintly
the Dr speak's. Some Miracles forsooth, but durst not name them, fearing they
might appear Great ones, For so They truly are in S. Austin, if raising the
dead, and restoring Sight to the blind, be rightly accounted Great. Thus much
S. Austin. de civit. l. 22. c. 8. initio.
noted. Turn to the Dr's Quotation, you have it above, where S. Austin's
Adversaries proposed this Question. Why are not the Miracles you preach done
now? He Answers. Possem quidem dicere. I might say, Miracles were necessary
before the world believed to the End it might believe, And that whoever now
seek's after Prodigies to believe, when the world believes, is himself a great
Prodigy, if he believes not with the believing World. Thus I might Speak,
says S. Austin, which Expression, as every one see's, exclud's not Miracles
from being thought useful now, but rather supposes them useful, when God, as S.
Austin Testifies, manifestly wrought them among Believers in those Days, And
therefore soon after concludes in the same context, Etiam nunc fiunt Miracula
Even now Miracles are done in our Age. Neither could S. Austin plead against
those vain By what Argument Austin convinced his Adversaries
Adversaries by Primitive Miracles, for he Says expressly, They believed none
were wrought, Therefore he confutes them by S. Chrysostom's excellent Argument
used above and known to every one, The substance whereof is, Either men
believed our Christian Verities induced thereunto by Miracles, or not; If by
Miracles, God manifested them to the world, If not; the greatest Miracle of all
is, that the world believed the hard Mysteries of Faith without Miracles. Thus
S. Austin in this place plainly Discover's our Dr's fraudulent Proceeding.

6. S. Austin next quoted upon the Psalms S Austin in Ps. 130. v. 1.
speak's of Simon Magus his pretended Miracles, But has nothing like those
words the Dr cites, Though should the Saint either there, or else where Say,
that the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles were wrought for the benefit of
future Ages, he delivers a great Truth confessed by all, neither ought any to
complain had he done no more, But humbly thank God for showing so many
admirable Signs already manifested to the world, whereunto none could lay just
Claim, much less rationally find fault, had they never been wrought. In like
manner, had God not Redeemed mankind by sending his only Begotten Son, but done
the work by an Angel or Some other way, none could have justly complained, or
Challenged as Due that greater Mercy, S. Austin deuitate Eccl cap. 16. Reason
and Relig. Disc. 2. c. 9. n. 4
showed by JESUS CHRIST.

7. Much lost labor follows in the Dr, when he cites S. Augustine against the
Donatists, whereof I spoke largely in another Treatise, and cleared every
Difficulty he falls upon in this place, yet you must have it again like a fresh
Objection. Wonder nothing, Sectaries will never leave off an old Idle Cowardly
Trick, nauseously to repeat what they once laid hold on, though they see it
solved Twenty times over. Well, but what Says S. Augustine? He bid's Donatus
and Pontius plead no more by the Visions of this Brother or that Sister,
because all are Fictions, Lies, and monstrous fallacies. Then he discourses.
Either these visions spoken of among you are false, Or if any wonders be
wrought there, we are the more to beware of them, our Lord having foretold us,
that false Prophets should arise and work Signs, which if possible, might
deceive the Elect. Here you see S. Austin would not in this place debate the
Question with the Donatists, whether God for reasons best known to himself,
work's true Miracles by Heretics, Jews or Heathens, but prudently abstract's
from that Controversy, though he accounted them Lies and monstrous Fictions.
As who should say be they as you will, true or false, They are all worthless
upon a Ground laid forth afterward. Viz. Ye Donatists have not Christ your
head, because you are not of his Mystical Body the Catholic Church.

8. The Dr replies, S. Augustine bring's If the Church approve Miracles, thoy
are wrought there.
not the Evidence of Miracles to prove the Church by, nor any visions or
Revelations, For he says such things are to be approved because they are done
in the Catholic Church, not that the Church is proved Catholic because they
are done in it. Tell me Reader, does not S. Austin here plainly Suppose
Miracles to have been wrought in the Church, for if they require the Churches
Approbation, They are first wrought there? Does he not also assert above, That,
maugre the spite of Heretics, Miracles held him in the Catholic Church? Thus
much is Proof enough against the Dr, who denies Miracles. Now if you Ask in
what sense S. Austin teaches, that the Church is not proved Catholic, because
Miracles are done in it? I answered fully in the Treatise cited above: He did
so most prudently in his Contest with the Donatists, who pretended as well to
Miracles as S. Austin, And therefore The saint waved that Argument, not because
Miracles are inefficacious to prove the Church by, But upon this ground, That
the latter wonders chiefly, such as Optatus Melivitanus, and S. Ambrose
mention, are not the first Sure Principle to manifest the Church against those
Heretics. Hence the Saint appealed to Scriptute, to the Testimonies of the
Law, of the Prophets, and Psalms, which the Donatists willingly admitted
(though they Cavilled at Miracles.) Haec sunt, says he, Causa nostrae
documenta, haec firmamenta. We plead why S. Austin pleaded not by Miracles, but
by Scripture.
by the strong Documents of Scripture, where we have the Unity, the Visibility,
and large Extent of the Church over the world fully expressed; These
Testimonies you deny not, though you slight our Miracles. Produce therefore but
one clear Passage of Scripture, says S. Austin, without your Idle Glosses and
interpretations, whereby it may appear, that the Church is only confined to
Africa and you speak to the Purpose, but if you fail herein, and fail you must,
conticescite, hold your Prattle, believe the Truth etc. In this Discourse the
Saint Declares how grossy the Donatists strayed from the genuin Sense of those
words in the Canticles. Show me where thou feedest and lies't ^ Cant. 1. 6.
Noon, most simply made use of by them, to prove the Church confined to Africa:
Much more S. Austin has in this Chapter pertinent to the Controversy now in
hand, and further explained in the Treatise already cited.

9. Some may Object. 1. Miracles that need the Churches Approbation, cannot
prove her Doctrine Orthodox. Why not I beseech you? Christ's Miracles as seen or
heard of by Report morally certain, rationally induced the first Christians to
believe his Doctrine, and so I hope latter Miracles may much avail, to
corroborate the Faith of Believers now. The Churches Approbation impaires not
in the least the Doctrine of the Church, where they are wrought. But of this
more afterward. You will Say again, if Miracles wrought in the Church make her
Doctrine credible, S. Austin did not well in omitting to plead by Miracles. I
answered, the Saint proceeded most wisely in taking his recourse to Scripture;
For had he insisted upon Miracles not owned by those Heretics, The whole
Contest would have been, whether such as Optatus and S. Ambrose attested, had
been true or no, which would have caused an endless Dispute, and Therefore he
falls upon an undoubted Principle. The Testimonies of the Law, and Prophets
owned by the Donatists, and upon that Ground strongly refutes them, leaving
Miracles to their own weight and Efficacy. The Dr having very lamely cited this
passage out of S. Augustine vainly Triumph's; and thinks, that never two more
plainly contradicted each other in this Point, than S. Austin and E. W. who,
says he, appeal's to Miracles for a Proof of the Catholic and infallible
Church, and such as are equal to those of Christ and his Apostles. Of this
Equality I have treated already, and told Mr Dr wherein Church Miracles The
Dr's vain brag.
(as raising the dead, curing the blind, and healing the infirm) are equal, and
how* they differ from the like wonders done by Christ, and his Apostles. As for
your Triumph Mr Dr, before the least Shadow of Victory, all I say is, if it
comfort your heart, hold on, Till you have better perused S. Austin, and these
my short Notes upon his Doctrine, That done, you will I am sure, have little
heart to brag the second time.

10. The following Quotations our Dr gathers out of S. Austin are either not
found at all in the Passages he cites, or so wholly impertinent, that I verily
believe he never read S. Austin, or set them down at random, to the great
vexation of a Reader; For who would not be vexed to se an Author magnificently
cited in different Characters, and when he turn's to the Dr Still. page 582.
place pointed at, find's nothing like it? Thus the Dr Quotes S. Augustine to
this purpose Viz. That Miracles are no Proof of the true Church, for S: Aug.
trac, 14. in Joan. cap. 3.
though Pontius and Donatus might do wonders, and see visions, yet Christ has
forevvarned us not to be deceived by Miracles. First there are no such words in
this place, or any thing like that Sense. 2. Were the sense found else where,
you have thus much only Asserted, and it is very true. False Miracles are no
Proof of the true Church.

11. The Dr's next Quotation is nothing De verbis Dom. sermon. 18.
to his purpose. Briefly S. Augustine in that place compares the Miraculous
cures wrought by our Savior on Souls now, with those which he anciently did
upon Bodies here on earth, and calls these the lesser cures, grounding his
Discourse upon this Principle. As the Soul is more excellent, than the Body, so
a cure wrought in that nobler part of man, is greater than Miracles done upon a
Body, which our Lord did to draw men to Faith. Now, says the Saint, when Faith
is spread all the world over, He work's those greater wonders in Souls, And for
Spiritual Cures esteemed greater, than Corporal.
that cause showed those lesser done on Bodies. Now he open's not the Eyes of
the blind, yet open's the blind hearts of men by the Preaching of his Doctrine.
Now he raises not dead Bodies, yet brings a foul, that was dead to life
again. Now the deaf hear not, yet the hearts of many shut to his sacred word,
are so opened, that they Believe and live in obedience to his Laws, before
neglective of that duty, Thus S. Austin, whose main Drift is not to deny
Miraculous cures wrought upon the infirm, (for these he evidently own's above)
but to give Pre-eminence to our Saviors own proper Spiritual cures daily
wrought in the Church of God by Divine Grace and the preaching of his word,
which the Saint deservedly esteem's greater wonders.

12. To the End you may see this was the S Aug. l. 22 de Civit. c. 8.
only thing S. Augustine aimed at. Turn once more to his eight Chapter, where
you read of the dead raised to life, of the blind restored to their sight, and
of desperate diseases perfectly cured. You read moreover of one Martialis a
Prime grave man most averse from Christian Religion, Martialis cured in soul
and body.
who by the earnest prayers of his Pious Sonin-Law made at S. Stephen's Altar,
from whence He took some Flowers, and in the night time laid at his Fathers
head, With the success he wished. The very next morning He was found a
Paenitent Convertite called for a Priest, and was reconciled, having ever
afterward S. Stephen's words in his mouth to his last breath. Lord JESUS
receive my soul. Thus you see that both corporal and spiritual cures were
wrought in those Days.

13. The last Testimony our Dr Quotes out Quaest. ex novo Testam. c. 63.
of S. Augustine, may pass for one of the most famous, (or infamous rather)
That ever man cited; You have the place pointed at in the margent, where the
Saint is supposed to Assert (and he speaks fully to this Purpose says the Dr)
that Signs and Miracles were wrought by the Apostles to bring men from
Insidelity to Faith etc. (No harm hitherto) then follows this Addition for
the Dr's purpose. Amongst Believers Signs and Miracles are not necessary but a
firm hope. If this Author speak of an absolute Necessity it might be answered,
All latter Miracles are not so necessary, though God of his great mercy has
pleased to show them for other Reasons, and a main one is, to distinguish the
true Church from all Heretical Conventicles. Yet I have not said all. Know
Reader. 1, These Questions out of the old and new Testament full of gross
Errors, are not S. Augustin's, but the work of some Heretic as Bellarmin
observes, Perhaps of one Hilary a Roman Bellar. de Script Eccl. verbo Aug.
Bell. verbo Ambrosins
Deacon, who wrote many Books and propagated the Luciferian Schism. See
Bellarmin cited. Hence it is, that these Questions in the Lovain Edition of S.
Austin, printed in a different Character, are there also taxed of many gross
Errors, the like you may se in Frobens The Dr's quotation, not found at all.
Edition. Yet here is not all. Worse follows, And it is my greatest Exception
against the Dr. Reader, I have perused that 63. Chapter as the Dr Entitles it
(others call it the 63. Question, which is very short) and do assure you there
is not so much as one word or syllable, like that which the Dr imposes upon
this Author. Is this fair Dealing think ye?

14. From these Testimonies of S. Augustine, Dr Still. page 584.
says our Dr laid together, we observe six or seven things of no little
Importance. Sr, when you have more faithfully laid S. Austins Testimonies
together, hitherto horridly out of order, and far from Truth, you will find
your self at a loss, and much short in your Reckoning. But what are these
Observations? The first is. That the main intention of Miracles was to
convince Unbelievers; Add likewise, to increase A word to some Observations
may by the Dr.
Faith and devotion in Believers, as also to benefit them spiritually and
corporally, and you speak with S. Austin, otherwise not. 2. That Faith being
established, there was no longer any Necessity of the Power of Miracles. For
proof hereof, the Dr must either make use of S. Augustins Fall speaking in that
63. Question demonstratively proved a fourb, or will be forced to sit down
silent. 3. That though Miracles were not of any such Necessity, yet God out of
his abundant kindness pleased to do some Extraordinary things among them in
their time. Mark how the Dr, not daring to spea. Fully minces matters, ( some
extraordinary things) that is, the raising of the dead, and restoring sight to
the blind etc. (for of these S. Austin speaks fully) must, Forsooth, be called
Extraordinary things, but by no means down right Miracles. 4. That in Disputes
about the Church they never appealed to the Power of Miracles. Very false, for
S. Austin already cited speaks fully, and tell's us that most glorious
Miracles, though Heretics spi^ghfully opposed them, held him fast in the
Catholic Church. 5. That those out of the true Church might make as great a
Pretense to Miracles, Visions, and Revelations, as those who were in it, as
appears by the Donatist's, To what End this Observation is made no man A
pretense to Truth only little beneficial.
sees, much less how it is gathered out of S. Augustin's Testimonies. Did ever
S. Austin teach that the greatness of a Pretense to Truth, entail's Truth upon
the Pretenders? Certainly no, for all know, that as the Donatists laid claim to
true Miracles, they also pretended to be the only true Church. Was that so,
because they Pretended? There is a vast difference, Mr Dr between a great
Pretense, and a strue Pretense, the first those Heretics might have, but not
the second, unless you will say (and I am afraid you would fain be at it,
durst you speak Fully.) That the Donatists Miracles and Visions were every whit
as Good and sound, as those which S. Austin recount's in his 8. Chapter cited.
If this be meant; your Observation has Sense in it, without it there is none,
though I see not how this Sense agree's with your own Concession. Viz. That God
out of his abundant kindness, pleased to do some extraordinary things, among
Orthodox Christians in those Days. Extraordinary favors wrought by Almighty
God, Mr Dr, were most surely real, and not Phansies like the Donatists
pretended Miracles. Thus much of these Observations, the other two scarce worth
naming, you have already refuted.

15. We are now, as the Title requires, to give account of other Testimonies
produced by Mr Dr against the Miracles of the Roman Church and because S.
Gregory the Great, one famous for Sanctity and Learning the whole Christian
world over, And our Venerable Bede, a man highly renowned every where, relate
many particular Miracles wrought by God's favor, near, The Dr strangely rude
with S. Gregory and Bid.
or in the Ages they lived, our Dr to blast the Credit of These two eminent
Authors, more like a Scold than a Scholar, rudely taxes both of want of
Judgment, and tell's us, they were the men that gave encouragement to all the
Monkish Tales, and impostures afterward. Who durst have spoken thus
irreverently, but Bold Dr Stillingfleet? After Dr Still. Page ^86.
venting this Passion, please to hear a strange Proposition. The credibility of
their Miracles in the Church of Rome, says the Dr, is destroyed by the
Testimony of their own more Judicious Writers, and to prove the Assertion, he
first produces Ioannes Ludovicus Vives, and Melchior Canus, as if forsooth,
these two Writers, let them be greater then they are, ought to be esteemed in
the public Opinion of the world more judicious, than S. Gregory and our worthy
Country man Venerable Bede. Believe this who will, Christians hitherto never
thought so. Ludovicus Vives one of Florence, may pass for a Gramarian, of his
soundnes in Doctrine, I say nothing. Melchior Canus one of S. Dominick's Order,
was certainly very learned, But free enough in his Censures given of others as
learned as himself, And this Licentiousness his Master Franciscus Victoria S^
Canus l. de Hum Histor, Auctorit. in proaemio
foresaw, when he feared that Canus would tread under foot the good Precepts,
he had learned of him.

16. To confront the Dr's wild Proposition, I say, neither Vives, nor Canus,
nor any Catholic Author ever destroyed the Credibility of Miracles in the
Church of Rome, no Catholic Author ever yet denied true and most glorious
Miracles to have been wrought in this great Body of Christians. The Dr's
Testimonies therefore not faithfully Quoted, (were they as he would have them)
are mere Impertinences, and prove nothing against Miracles. Observe Reader his
simple and fallacious Proceeding. Canus, says he, and others recount Miracles
Written in the lives of many Saints, which in their Judgments were no
Miracles, because Written upon very uncertain reports. Ergo, these Authors
doubt and deny all true Miracles which they openly profess to have been
wrought in the Roman Catholic Church. Is this way of Arguing tolerable? Can
any man infer, because one Questions or denies some things, he therefore
Questions or denies matters whereof he has certain assurance? I certainly know
Dr Still has quoted many Authors amiss, do I therefore say he Quotes none
right, when I find (though seldom) the passage entire he remits me to?

17. Turn now if you please to Canus whom Canus de Hum Hist. Anct. l. 11. c. 6
Coloniae impres 1605. p. 533
the Dr cites, De locis Theol. but means ( or he err's) his 11. Book concerning
the Authority of humane History. (His loci Theol. contain only two Books) There
you shall find, that Canus admit's what ever Approved Historians testify to
have seen Themselves, or received from other credible Persons who were
Ey-witnesses, as many things are recounted in the Epistles of S. Ambrose, of S.
Cyprian, S. Hierom, in S. Austin's books De Civitate Dei, S. Gregory's
Dialogues, And for the most part in all other approved Ecclesiastical Writers.
To suspect, says Canus, that such page 535.
men would convey Lies to Posterity would be a grievous sin, a heinous
offense. Canus also receives with Canusplainly admits great Miracles.
all honor and veneration (as Pope Gelasius did) the Lives of S. Antony, S.
Paul, S. Hilarion, and all the Ancient Ermirs set fo^th by S. Hierom where you
have innumerable Miracles recounted. These he admit's, and therefore own's
great Miracles wrought by Saints.

18. Soon after he gives his Judgment of our Venerable Bede and S. Gregory.
The first, Says he, in his English History, The other in his Dialogues, have
recounted some Miracles, vulgarly thrown abroad and believed, which the
Aristarchi, or Critics of our Age hold uncertain, And says, he would more
approve their Histories, had they taken greater care in producing Authors
according to a right prefixed Rule, and weighed matters more severely. Canus
speak's modestly.
Then he add's. Sed quoniam modeste etc. But because we are to speak modestly,
and with all wary circumspection of men so renowned as S. Gregory and Bid, I
say that even in these two Authors, many things are not to be rejected. For let
any one rigidly bring Ecclesiastical Story to a severe and most judicious Test,
the matters are but few wherein they seem blamable. And therefore says, I
would rather approve all written by them, than reprehend many. Thus Dr Still
page 588.
Canus, though our Dr fraudulently conceal's this moderation, and in a Huff
tell's us; Canus charges them with relating Miracles upon common Reports. The
charge is most unjust, and unworthy a Doctor, For Canus only says some
Critics in this Age, will not like all they have Written, Bellar. de Script.
verbo Beda.
though the very most ought not to be rejected. Had the Dr proceeded sincerely,
He Should have noted this, and also reflected upon Bellarmin's third
Observation, where we are told, that there are some things found in the third
Tome of Bid concerning the lives of Saints which Bid never wrote, as the life
of S. Patrick, S. Columbane, and others, But the Dr thought best to wave such
matters, and once more referr's us to Canus.

19. Canus, says he, tell's us, That the lives of Philosophers, were more
severely written, and with greater integrity by Laertius, and the Gests of
Casar by Suetonius, than the lives of Martyrs, Virgins and Confessors are by
Catholics, not to he named in this place. What then I beseech you, is
therefore nothing truly Written? Or does it follow that because Canus thought
so, his Judgment is to be proferred before the Sentiment of those unnamed
Authors?

20. However gratis admit, that some have less circumspectly recounted matters
in the Lives of Saints (I never yet went about to defend all that is Written.)
Have you here any thing like a Consequence. Ergo, God never wrought Miracles
Canus Page 54.
by Saints, or all true Miracles now cease in the Church? This, and it is pure
Nonsense must be the Dr's Inference, or nothing. Again, when Canus says, as
our Dr cites, that S. Antonine and Bellovacensis made it not their work to
write what was certain, but rather to let nothing pass they could meet
with etc. The only doubt is, whether S. Antonine or Melchior Canus ought to be
creditted in this Contest (for the one certainly err's)? When the Dr decides
that point yet in Dispute Dr Still. page 589.
upon Good Principles, he may twit me for speaking honorably, as I do, of S.
Antonine, but not before. In the mean time, he may see with what high respect
Theophilus Raynaudus Raynaudus Tom 18. Titulo Hercules commodianus pege 335.
speak's of S. Antonine, where he taxes John Launoy for his Boldness vented
against that Modest Prelate, and Canonized Saint. My wonder is, that Canus
durst speak in so slight a manner (without any Proof) of S. Antonine, a most
learned and Holy man says Bellarmin, not only a Dominican as Canus was, but
much also above him in Dignity being Archbishop of Florence, Bellar. de Script
Ecclesi verbo Antoninus.
the other, it is true, had his lot to be Bishop of Canaria a Town in the
Canary Islands, where there is Good wine, that is all I know of it.

21. One word more to Ludovicus Vives his Testimony, which both Canus and the
Dr quote very confusedly. Vives, you must know, Canus p. 514. The page 586.
Ludov. Vives de trap. Discip. ^0. 1. l. 5. p. 511
has Two Tomes where different matters are treated, and the Dr following Canus
blind Quotation, thought it enough to cite him. De tradendis Dis^^plinis lib.
5. Both methinks, might have cited his first Tome where this Author says, The
Lives of Saints are fouled with many Comments, or feigned Stories, and
somewhat more to that Purpose. I have answered, were all true, which Vives
proves not but upon his own bare word, it is wholly impertinent, unless this
senseless Inference may pass current. An Author Judges many things not
sincerely related in the Lives of Saints, therefore he denies all true Miracles
wrought in the Catholic Church, whereof never any doubted, You know, Mr Dr,
that Vives in his Notes upon S. Vives tom. 2. de veritat. Fidei page 378. and
p. 379.
Austins eighth Chapter De Civit. Dei, Makes Comments upon those great Wonders
there related. You should know also, that Vives in several Parts of his works
is so far from opposing Miracles, that he plainly both supposes, and own's
them. Our Blessed Savior, says he, certain of what he said, promised great
Wonders to be done by himself, and in the Church afterward. He distnguishes
also in the next Title, between true Miracles wrought by Almighty God, and the
false Signs of the Devil, And says, whoever Ludovicus own's true Miracles.
imprously feign's Miracles for gain, cause men, when the fraud is discovered,
to doubt of true Miracles. Finally he set's down the true Marks whereby the
Miracles of Christ and his Saints, may be discerned from the cheats and
counterfeit Wonders of the Devil. For what End Therefore does our Dr tire his
Reader with Testimonies, that look a Squint, quite another way, from the main
Question here debated?

22. You must yet have more patience, because what follows in the Dr from his
Page 589. to his Page 595. is nothing but an impertinent Excursion seasoned
with some few unsavory Jeers scornfully thrown at S. Gregory and Venerable Bede. He tell's you what Miracles These two recount, and hopes because they
appear ridiculous to his fancy (you have no other Proof) to make them
contemptible in the Opinion of every Reader. A Story of Angels appearing to S.
Cuthbert on horseback when he was a Boy, and prescribing him a poultesse for
the cure of a sore knee, and some like Wonders, entertain the Dr for three or
four. Pages, and seem matters of sport and merriment. My old Principle has
here place again Mr Dr either Show you the fraud in these particulars, or grant
the Facts, Jeers you know well, are far enough from Solid Proofs. The other
Miracles our Dr excepts against, are for the most part such as have been
wrought by the Sign of the Cross* it would be time ill spent to insist upon
all particulars the Dr brings to light. My only Wish is, he had better
considered what the Ancient Epiph, to. 2 l 1. contra Hae^es Basil. print. page
with m^ 61.
Epiphanius Writes of Miracles wrought by the Sign of the Cross in the place
here cited. He tell's us that fire made by enchantment unactive, and contrary
to its nature burned not, was freed from the Witchery by casting Holy Water
upon it, blessed with the Sign of the Cross, whereupon the People (and many
Jews were present) cried aloud, there is one God that Epiphan. cited in the
precedent page 60.
help's Christians, and departed satisfied. Another like Miracle He relates of
a raging man possessed by the Devil, that was presently delivered from the ill
Spirit by Holy water cast upon him, blessed with that Holy Sign. The
Testimonies of the Learned Theodoret, seem here very remarkable. Theod. l. 5.
Eccl Hist. c. 21 Coloig. print 1577. page 312,
The Devil, says he, hindered fire from burning when Fuel was applied, the
Pastor hearing of the Charm Forthwith blessed Holy Water with the Sign of the
Cross, gave it to Equitius a Deacon, commanding him to sprinckle the water upon
the enchanted fire, That done, says Theoderet, the Devil ran away, the water
burned like Oil, and the fire consumed the vvood in a moment. Had the Dr I say,
considered these and many other Miracles wrought by that Holy Sign, which most
worthy Fathers, and far more Ancient than S. Gregory recount, He S. Gregor.
lib. 1. c. 11.
would certainly have spoken with more respect, and not scorned S. Gregory
because he tell's you of one Martirius that signed a cake in the Embers, with
the Sign of the Holy Cross.

CHAP. XI.
A brief Account of the Dr's large Excursion from his Page 595. to Page 664.
Of his false Quotations and fallacious way in Arguing. The rest Showed a long
list of impertinencies.

1. REader you have three things chiefly in the Pages here noted, First, Many
Testimonies taken out of latter Authors quoted most unsincerely, some, as the
Dr thinks, prove great Miracles to have ceased in the Church, And all those are
false. Others much inveigh against the forging of Miraracles, which though
truly Quoted are nothing, as I now said, to our present Purpose. A Second thing
and most blamable, is the Dr's fallacious way of arguing, who would fain draw
his main Document of Miracles ceasing, from this unsound principle. Some
pretended Miracles have been proved counterfeit, Therefore none ought to be
owned true. The last thing worth reflection relates to many Notorious
Impertinencies. Of these in order, and first we begin with the Dr's Quotations.

2. He cites. 1. John Gerson, and partly Gerson declaratio veritat tom. 1 page
415,
conceal's, partly pervert's the genuine Sense of this Author, who relies on a
certain Principle (waved by the Dr) and delivers most true Doctrine. As, says
Gerson (citing Aristotle) it matters not that some things false in themselves,
are more probable than others true. So import's not if somethings false in
themselves be piously believed, not as false (for if known as false) it is far
from the Piety of the faithful to believe them. The Estimation or pious
credulity therefore falls not upon the verity or falsity, but only upon the
appearance and probability, while the falsity or verity is unknown; Hence S.
Hierom prudently said, it is better in such matters piously to doubt, than
rashly to define. Two Gerson's Doctrine, here faithful^y set down
contradictories may both be probable, and the one well stand's with the other,
not in Truth, but in Probability; Thus under different Respects, both may be
believed without Prejudice to Faith, so that the mind be free from pertinacy.
Reader, what is hitherto amiss in Gersons Doctrine, while he teaches nothing
(the Dr conceal's this) but a Truth known the whole world over? For who is
there, that believes not matters only probable in appearance, whereof there is
no absolute certainty? Has the Dr I beseech you, certainty of all things that
pass his head, or believes upon humane Faith? Gerson goes on. This Degree of
certainty respect's the Legends and Miracles of Saints, the Lives of Fathers,
and the Visions of devout Persons etc. Which the Church embraces and permit's
to be read, not that it determin's them to be believed as necessary for
Salvation, But because they conduce to move the pious affections of the
faithful, so long as nothing in such matters is known to be false, although
also nothing is known upon certainty to be true, so in those things, that by a
pious consideration might be done, is more to be regarded, than what was done.
Thus Gerson.

3. Now hear the Dr's own words Written in a different Character. Gerson says
he, honestly confesses, this to be the End of the Legends and Miracles of
Saints, and their Visions and Revelations so much talked of in the Roman
Church. Viz. To stir up the Piety and Good affections of the People: For these
things, says he, are not proposed by the Church to be believed as true, but
they are rather to consider them, as things that might be done, than things
that were done. Reflect Reader in passing how the Dr condemn's himself by his
own words, for if Gerson speaks, as most certainly he does, of Miracles and
visions read in the Lives of Saints, not proposed by the Church to be believed
as true, but only permitted to be read, He opposes no Miracles, no Visions,
approved by the Church, or owned as true; Nay, these he plainly supposes in his
precedent words Priusquam elucidaretur alio modo Gerson impugn's not approved
Miracles.
per Ecclesiam vel rationem certam, ipsa veritas, before the verity be cleared
by the Church, or upon some other certain reason. Let therefore approved
Miracles stand firm without control, we have our intent, and will while the
Dr loses both his time and cause Do as S Hierom prudently advises, rather
piously doubt of these Legendary Miracles, than rashly define any thing. The Dr
end's his Harangue thus. Gerson says, it is no matter, if some things that are
really false be piously believed, so they be not believed as false, or known
false, at the same time. The Dr thought this word False would rattle loud in a
vulgar ear, whereas had he distinguished as Gerson does, between Truth in
appearance or Probability, and perhaps no Truth in re, the noise would have
ceased. Has not many a man upon great Probability, been deemed honest and so
proceeded with that really was otherwise, and many an one probably thought
dishonest, who deserved not that Censure? Thus the Judgment of men are often
regulated by Appearances; Men's Judgments often regulated by Probalities.
without having Truth clearly laid before them. Miracles Judged probable, or in
appearance only, have their End which as Gerson says, is to stir up Devotion,
though no man goes about to prove the Church infallible by them, as the Dr too
simply Imagin's.

4. Three or four Quotations yet remain taken out of Lyranus, Cajetan, Launoy,
and Luke d'Achery as weightlesse and witless here, as if the Dr had told you a
tale of a Tub. These Authors, Reader, worthily blame all forgery in Miracles,
and so do I, They moreover tax some Writers off Errors, in recounting the
Gests of Saints, and I highly applaud them when they speak Truth and prove it,
yet all are far from denying true Miracles to have been wrought in the Roman
Catholic Church, wherein lies the whole Debate betwixt the Dr and me. Observe
I beseech you; The Dr makes a great Account of one Testimony produced out of
Luke D'Achery, who set forth the Lucas d'Achery lib. 1. c. 1. 2. 3. de
pignoribus Sanctorum Paris print 1651.
works of Venerable Guibertus Abbot of Novigento, where some things, thought by
the Vulgar, great matters, (though mere Illusions) are much reproved. For an
Instance. A Boy belonging to a Soldier chanced to dye on good Friday, the
People because he dyed that day, made resort to his Tomb, offered wax candles,
and other little Donaries as Testimonies of their Devotion. Some feigned
themselves deaf, others lame, and the Abbot of that place, (willing enough to
have men think that Miracles were wrought there) gave encouragement to a
belief of these Fopperies. Two or three Stories of the like nature Achery
relates out of venerable Guibert. Immagin all be faithfully told, And ask as I
did above, whether this Consequence be tolerable? False Miracles have passed
among the Vulgar for true ones, Ergo never true Miracles were wrought in the
Church? I Ask again whether this Argument be not a clear conviction ad hominem?
D'r Still believes the venerable Abbot of Novigent in the Relation he gives of
feigned Miracles, which some by abuse judged true, Ergo if we plead by the
Abbots Authority, Dr Still is obliged to believe him, when he plainly set's
down and own's true Miracles to have been wrought. But most An Argument ad
hominem against the Dr.
evidently the Abbot confesses a hundred times over, that God has done
innumerable great Miracles in the Church, Therefore if he deserves credit in
his Relation of Cheats, why should he lose it in the other part of his History?

5. Now to point at all the true Miracles D'Achery Lib. de Laud B. virg. c.
10. 11. a page 302.
owned by this Abbot would be a long Task, Two or three set down in D'Achery,
whereof one most prodigious wrought upon a woman called Theodeberta by the
assistance of the blessed Mother of God, may give Satisfaction to every Reader.
In a word, this Theodeberta condemned to Die for having Slain a young man that
solicited her to Lewdnes, after earnest Prayer made to the blessed Virgin,
humbly confessed her fault, and upon her Public confession was to be burned in
a great Pile of wood. There tied to a Stake half naked, A Stupendous Miracle
seen by many Eywitnesses.
(the wood wholly consumed) the bands also wherewith the was bound burnt to
Ashes; Theodeberta stood still in the middle of the Flame without any hurt at
all. Her Enemies seeing this, furiously heaped more wood upon her, set that on
fire, and barbarously struck the poor Penitent with their long Poles, but all
would not do, not so much as one hair of her head, nor the Linnen-wear she had
on, much less any part of her Body, received Damage. This Miracle recounted by
Guibert in the place now cited, was seen and attested by innumerable
Ey-witnesses. What says our Dr, must the Abbot be believed, when he Tell's us
of Cheats, and lose all credit while he recount's true and undoubted Miracles?
Had the Dr dealt ingenuously, he should have Said, Abbot Guibert ('it is true)
speaks of many Impostures practiced in that Age, But withal own's
unquestionable Miracles. This latter, Mr Dr fraudulently omit's, and therefore
notoriously trangresses against sincerity in setting down one half of a Story,
without the other.

6. What follows in the Dr to his Page 610. is such flight stuff as you have
heard, little worth notice; So is that too often babbled out Flaw imputed to
Baronius, who it seems mistook the Signification of the Greek word (...), and
therefore is mercilesly handled, though the Cardinal corrected the Error
before Mr Still. was borne. Such trash as this out of wearisomnes I pass by,
and will examine other Quotations, where you shall see far greater flawes on the
Dr's part, than the mistake of a Greek word comes to.

Of Dr Stillingfleets Flawes in his false and faulty citing Tostatus,
Roffensis, Didacus Stella, and Josephus Acosta.
7. Our Dr first Quotes Alphonsus Tostatus Tostat. in c. 9 Levit. cited by the
Dr.
the learned Bishop of Avila, and so unworthily pervert's his whole Sense, that
I am scandalized at the Proceeding. Tostatus demand's why God in the
consecration of Aaron the first high Priest, sent fire from Heaven to consume
his Sacrifice? And Answer's, the Miracle was not done principally for Aaron,
but to testify how the Sacrifice of any Priest, became acceptable to Almighty
God, And therefore, says Tostatus, there appeared no necessity of having the
same Miracle renewed at the consecration of other Priests. In like manner
(add's this Bishop) at the beginning of the Primitive Church, clear Signs
appeared to those who were Observe the Miracles whereof Tostatus speaks.
baptized, and converted to Christ, The Holy Ghost Visibly fell upon them in
the form of a Dove, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles (These words which
explain the whole drift of Tostatus our Dr fraudulently omit's) But now, says
he,) Such Miracles (and Mark the Expression) are not wrought upon the
converted, neither does the Holy Ghost descend Visibly on the baptized as he
then did. Afterward, He gives the reason why these great Miracles were
necessary at the beginning of Christianity, Because the Mysteries of Faith are
not Demonstrable, and therefore when the Gospel was first preached, Fuerunt
ista necessaria, those visible great Signs were necessary to introduce it, but
now being established, there ought not to be any such Miracles. Thus most
faithfully Tostatus true Doctrine laid forth, with the Dr's juggling.
Tostatus, if you doubt turn to the Place cited, and believe your own Eyes.
That done, you may justly admire the juggling and too open fraud of this Dr,
who, forsooth, because Tostatus Says, (and truly) that those Visible Signs of
the Holy Ghost descending upon the converted, newly baptized, are not seen in
this Age, will needs thence infer, that he Denies all other Miracles. Is this
either Conscience or any consequence? God shows no more some kind of Miracles,
Ergo he works none at all? May not I truly assert, that God in the latter Ages
of the Church never wrought so many prodigious wonders at once, as he did at
our Saviors Sacred Passion, when the Sun was darkened, the Rocks were split,
the Dead came out of their Graves etc. Can any hence infer, That I therefore
Deny all other Miracles wrought at Loreto, at Compostella, and Sichem?
Certainly No. Because though I grant not such admirable Wonders ever to have
happened since our Saviors death, I may yet assert the latter to be as they
are, manifest Truths.

8. To lay yet more open the Dr's fraud, I Argue thus. If the learned Tostatus
plainly acknowledges true supernatural Miracles wrought in the Church after the
Apostles time, different from those which he says, ceased, The Dr grossly
abuses this Author; But Tostatus most evidently own's such true Miracles in the
Church Therefore Mr Dr grossly abuses Tostatus. For proof of my Assertion, turn
once more to this Author, where he expressly teaches. 1. That Tostat. in c. 10.
Mart. Quest. 12. John 14.
Christ empowered all that believe in him to work Miracles, yea and greater than
He wrought. He teaches. 2. That both Martyrs and Confessors long after our
Saviors death preaching up and down the world, Multa Miracula fecerunt, did
many Miracles, though Christ spoke not to them, nor Specially gave them the
Power wherewith the Apostles were privileged. He says Tostatus plainly grants
true Miracles.
3. That all believing in Christ, by invoking the Holy name of JESUS, may work
Miracles, with much more that follows. Tell me Reader, is it not prodigiously
strange, that the Dr remit's us to this Question, while he Wilily slips over
all here noted point blank against him? Is not Dr Still. page 611.
this Fraud and worse than juggling manifestly perceptible, when upon this
Principle, Some Miracles have ceased, he would conclude, there are none at all
wrought?

9. If you Ask what it was that beguiled the Dr in a right understanding of
Tostatus? Thus it is. Tostatus in the beginning of the Question now cited,
demand's, why our Preachers in the Church who suceed the Apostles, do not such
Miracles now, Talia Miracula Viz. By ordinary Commission, as the Apostles did?
He Answer's most profoundly, that ordinary Power was readily given the Apostles
to work Miracles every where in confirmation of Christ's Doctrine; so it is
said. They went forth, and preached in all places ubique Deo concurrente, God
Cooperating with Signs that followed. Now says Tostatus that ordinary Power,
was not only annexed to those first Apostolical men, but also to the newly
converted and baptized, For these after their Baptism and conversion, were
empowered to work Miracles, whereby the Truth and Holiness The Dr's Cheat,
discovered.
of Christ's Doctrine received much light, And this Ordinary certain Power of
working Miracles every where, ceases in the Prelates of the Church. Whence our
Dr would infer a cessation of all Miracles, which, as I said, is worse than
juggling, and most opposite to the express Doctrine of Tostatus. O but the Bishop
says Tostatus cited a. Tertio fit.
this Power of working Miracles would not be profitable in the Church but
rather serve for curiosity; Very true; For if, as he observes, Miracles were
daily wrought amongst us by the Prelates of the Church, and new Convertits, the
merit of Faith would be much lessened, and Therefore Tostatus. secundo
says first, it is unworthily done by a true faithful Believer to seek after
Miracles to confirm the Faith which he actually believes as certain, For this
were to require a further probation of that, which he hold's most undoubted. 2.
Though Miracles are not necessary when faith is preached to Believers yet they
are profitable, when its preached Tostatus cited. autem.
to Infidels or Heretics. Thus Tostatus.

10. One may yet object. The Doctrine of Christ, of the Apostles, and the Church
is one and the same, if therefore no Believer ought curiously to desire new
Miracles to confirm the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, why should they
require new Miracles to confirm Church Doctrine, Or to what End has God wrought
Miracles in every Age? I Answer first; No Catholic Believer ought to ask for
more Miracles than Divine Providence has already manifested, because the Truth
of Church Doctrine by what is done, is made Evidently Credible, notwithstanding
God out of his abundant mercy may at his good pleasure illustrate this Oracle
with new Miracles, as we have proved above, The Utility Miracles wrought in the
Church much abate the Impudence of Heretics.
whereof gathered from Tostatus last cited, avail's much to convince Heretics
that impudently calumniate the Church, Saying She has changed the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, God therefore to repress this Impudence, as he made
the Doctrine of Christ Evidently Credible by the Miracles which our Savior
wrought, the Doctrine of the Apostles Evidently Credible by the Miracles They
did, so also he set's forth the glory of his own Oracle the Church, and makes
her Doctrine evidently credible by innumerable Miracles wrought Age after Age.
And this I conceive to be a main reason, why Providence will have Miracles
continued in the Church to the worlds End.

11. The Dr once more referr's us to Tostatus, Tostatus in cap. 3. Matt 9. 10.
where we are told, that those visible exterior Signs of the Holy Ghost
descending upon the baptized in the form of a Dove, or Fire, showed in the
Primitive Church, cease now in such as receive baptism, Though, says the
Bishop, Original and actual sins are as well taken away by that Sacrament in
this present Age, and Grace as well given to the baptized now, as it was in the
Baptism of the Primitive Christians. Here is all the Dr has for his Purpose
(and it is Dr Still. page 612.
a very Cheat) though he bragg as if he had done Wonders, What, says he, shall
we say to the Testimony of this learned Bishop? Had he never heard of S. James
of Compostella, and the Miracles pretended to be wrought there? And could he
believe them and write these things? Had he never heard of Vincentius Ferrerius
etc.? Mr Dr, you still juggle, still run on in your old mistake, and
Distinguish not between one sort of Miracles, and others. The Miracles wrought
at Compostella and by S. Vincentius, are quit different from the visible
appearance of the Holy Ghost upon the Baptized, and the Imposition of the
Apostolical bands whereof Tostatus speak's, And says, though many others might
work Tostat. q. 10. citat. p. 164 E. Luc. 10.
Miracles in raising the dead, and curing diseases (which Power our Lord gave
the Seventy two Disciples, who were distinct from the Apostles^) yet, to give
Visibly the Holy Ghost by Imposition of bands, was a Privilege granted the
Apostles only, whereby Christ showed them singularly favovred above all others.
Reflect, Reader, once more on the Dr's fraud, and weak fallacy. Was the seventy
two Disciples Power in curing diseases and raising the Dead any way limited,
because they could not visibly give the The Dr's fraud discovered.
Holy Ghost by the imposition of hands, as the Apostles did? Most certainly no,
says Tostatus. Why then should the Saints in God's Church be denied the favor
of curing diseases and raising the dead, because, forsooth, they have not that
Apostolical Prerogative of showing visibly the Holy Ghost in form of Fire? Yet
this is the unsound Discourse of our Dr. Hence his far fetched Instances from
Compostella, and S. Vincentius are ushered in to no purpose, save only to show
his Ignorance, and to traduce an unwary Reader. Roffensis contra cap. Baby l.
c. 10.


12. The like couzenage we have in three or four Quotations following so
palpable, that in real Truth I stand amazed at the Dr's insincerity. He first
referr's us to our worthy and learned John Fisher, Lord Bishop of Rochester, as
one opposite to Miracles wrought in the Church, and does it with so great
confidence, that he boldly Asks, whether any Testimony can be more plain and
Still p 613. Roffens. contra Oecolampad. lib l. c 16. and 17. p. 801 802.
weighty than this in our case, it being from one, who undoubtedly knew all the
Pretenses to Miracles then made? I beseech you, Reader, turn first to
Roffensis, where he shows, that true Miracles are not to be rejected, because
some have made pretense to false ones, and tell's Oecolampadius that for one
feigned Invocation of a Magician the Sectary urged, we Catholics can produce
innumerable true Miracles whereof, says the Bishop, I shall speak more in the
Preface to my second Book. Again he says, though a Magician may dazzle our Eyes
with his Charms, yet all true Miracles undoubtedly done by good Angels, are not
therefore to be rejected. Absit istud a piorum mentibus, far be this Error
from the minds of pious men. Lastly he appeal's to the Miracles related by S.
Austin, and urges one which he call's Insigne Miraculum, a famous Miracle,
Roffen. cap. 17.
wrought by the prayers of S. Gregory upon an incredulous Roman woman. These,
says Roffensis, if thou Oecolampadius weighest diligently, and yet do
continue in thy obstinacy, thy heart is hardened, but because thou durs't not
contradict the Powerful hand of God who did these Wonders, Thou help's on our
Catholic cause.

13. Again says Roffensis Ponder well, and page 804. fine.
tell me, why God has wrought so many, yea far more Manifest Miracles, to
Confirm the Verity of the Holy Eucharist, than he has done for Roffensis most
plain for Miracles.
any other Sacrament? The reason is; This Mystery being Sublime and difficult,
Providence to facilitate our Faith, gives light, and support's the real Verity
we believe by the Evidence of innumerable known Miracles. Great Authors, highly
deserving credit, recount these famous Miracles, And no man in his Wits can
deny them. Thus our worthy Bishop, who in a hundred other Passages of his works
stoutly defend's Church Miracles. What think ye, is the Dr likely to prevail
much against Miracles by the Testimonies here alleged, when the Author he
cites most professedly own's them? How could so learned a Prelate oppose
Miracles in one part of his Works, and vigorously maintain them (as you see
done) in the places now cited and many others? How durst he check the Heretic,
and tax him of Obstinacy in case he omitted to weigh diligently the Wonders
recounted by S. Austin, by S. Gregory, and those other supposed evidently
wrought in confirmation of that Truth we all believe, I mean the Sacred
Eucharist?

14. We are now to clear the Testimony produced by the Dr from that false
Gloss he cast's upon it. In a word the Bishops whole Drift is to show ( and
mark well his Drift, for it clears all) that the bare words of Scripture made
use of without the Interpretation of the Church, or the unanimous consent of
Fathers, are easyly perverted. To prove the Assertion Roffensis tell's us
first, That as our Savior cast out Devils, illuminated the Roffen: contra
capt: Baby l: c: 10: page 227: Mark 16: v. 17.
blind, and cured diseases, so likewise, calling the Apostles together, he gave
them command over unclean Spirits, and Power to cure all diseased, as Christ
our Lord did. Hitherto no difficulty. But says our Bishop, There is another
Promise made by our Savior, (here begin's the Dr's juggling) when he foretold
these Signs should follow in all the faithful that believed in him. In my name
they shall cast out Devils, speak with new Tongues, take Serpents away, and if
they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them, They shall impose hands
upon the sick* and they shall be cured. Observe well, Says he. This large
Promise made to all Believers in Christ, we se not so amply performed, for now
common Believers cast not out Devils, nor cure all diseases, yet there is no
doubt but that many had, and have still true Faith. In the next place the
Bishop proposes this Objection. Some perhaps will say Christ's promise
therefore, was in vain, He Answer's, no Roffensis^: sed dicet page 229:
such matter (and his Answer clearly discover's the Dr's fraud) our Savior
says he, would not have the Efficacy of his promise to be perpetual, but only
at the Rise and the growth of the Church. Observe his reason. Commonly at the ^
Observe well of what Miracles the Bishop speaks;
beginning of the Church, all true Believers to advance the Faith laid forth in
the Gospel, had the grace of working such Miracles as are now specifyed, But
after the Gospel was diffused the whole world over, There was no need of the
like Miracles wrought by all the faithful, However, if we precisely stand to
the bare words of Christ, there should not be any believing Christian in this
Age, without the Privilege of working the Miracles now mentioned. Thus our
worthy Bishop. And do not And learn thereby the Dr's Iugling:
you hereby see an Intolerable Juggling in Dr Still. Who out of a misapplyed
Principle, Viz. All true Believing Christians in the following Ages
dispossessed not Devils, cured not all diseases, spoke not different Languages,
as the Primitive Believers did, Will hence conclude, There was no longer need
of Miracles, They are the Dr's own word's. Had Dr Still. page 613.
He said, it is now needless, that all good Christians work the like Miracles
in the present Age, as the Primitive Believers did (which is all Roffensis
affirm's) he had spoken Truth, But because he shift's off this main
Circumstance, I must once more accuse him of Notorious Juggling, and can never
sufficiently admire the man's boldness in corrupting Authors as he does.
Almighty God forgive him.

15. Another Testimony I find taken out of Stella in c. 11. Lucae p. 104.
Didacus Stella, where the Dr says, we read, that the Power of Miracles is
ceased. What man but the Dr, durst have told so loud an untruth? Reader believe
it, Stella in this very place assures us* that about thirty years ( then past)
the Stella defend's great Miracles:
Holy Martyr Andreas de Espoleto being in Mauritania was cast three times into
the Fire, where he prayed in the midst of the flames without hurt, not having
so much as a hair of his head scorched, And though, says Stella, this great
Miracle happened in the sight of many Lucitanians then present, yet none of the
Mores were converted upon it. Does this condemning the Mores Incredulity imply
a Denial of all Miracles? Stella in c. 16. Lucae page 292. 1. Colum:
Certainly no. But to take all doubt away read Stella, where he says, there
are very many Miracles wrought which for number and greatness are admirable,
and far surpass all those Signs granted to unbelievers, and therefore the
faithful are easily discerned from Infidels by Miracles, God's own certain
Seals, and known Characters of Truth. Yet more. Those, says he, who believe
not the Roman Catholic Church, will believe no Miracles, Though the Dead were
raised to life again. Is this to tell us as the Dr falsely imposes on Stella,
that the Power of Miracles is ceased?

16. The Dr replies. Stella does not only Say, 2. Colum: ibidem:
that the Power of Miracles ceases (now proved false) But moreover affirm's,
that the receiving of it, would do more hurt than good, For men would Say,
that the Christian Faith was not sufficiently confirmed before. I Answer. The
Dr once more egregiously cheat's the Reader, For Stella speak's not of all men,
But only of such as are actually Believers, And says, that all fully
persuaded of the Truths they believe and firmly embrace, need not to seek
after new Miracles for this End (and mark the words) to confirm that Faith they
hold most certain, which is true Doctrine. Then presently He More of the Dr's
Iugling:
adjoyn's, if such believe not Moses and the Prophets, (he means the Doctors
and Pastors of the Catholic Church,) neither will they believe though they saw
men raised from the dead. Hence you see how the Dr would Trapann you, while out
of this true Principle. A faithful man actually Settled in a firm belief of all
the Catholic Church teaches, ought not to require or desire more Miracles to
confirm that faith, From this Principle, I Say, he would infer that Miracles
cease, and conclude, That God out of his great mercy will show none in order to
the Conversion of Infidels, Jews, and Heretics. Is this consequence good
think ye? Miracles for such and End, as is specified, are not now necessary,
Nay for that End, would do more hurt than good, Ergo it is not convenient that
God work them upon other Design's Viz. For the glory of his Church, for the
confusion of Infidels, or as Stella notes, for a clear Mark, whereby Believers
may be distinguished from the professed Adversaries of Christ.

17. Our good Dr in the next place Quotes Victoria Relect: 5: p: 100: with me
printed at Lions 1557:
^anciscus de Victoria in his Relections, who says, he heard of no Miracle or
Sign wrought for the Conversion of the Indies. Never was there the like blind
Quotation foisted in by any Dr. Reader, Victoria has two Tomes containing
twelve Relections, six in the one, and six in the other. The fifth Relection in
the first The Dr's Quotations dark and blind.
Tome, is de Indis posterior, sive de Iure belli, where I find no 200. page,
That 200. page went before under the Title of his second Relection, De
potestate Civili, or Civil Power. In the second Tome, one Relection is, de Art
Magica, neither have we there any 200. page, nor a word in either place like to
that which the Dr cites. But Suppose Victoria says, he had heard of no
Miracles wrought for the conversion of the Indies, that only proves, all truths
came not to his ears, while others have both heard, and expressly mentioned
most glorious Miracles. But this is evidently true, And,

18. To prove my Assertion, I will here only Josephus Acosta Histoire naturelle
des Indes, tant Orientalles qu'occident Live. 7. c. 27. Dedie au Roy 1595.
produce two most worthy creditable Authors, Josephus Acosta in his natural
History of the Indies, is one, Where he recount's several great Miracles
wrought by Almighty God in the open View of those Barbarians, forceable enough
to convert the hardest heart. What can be more admirable, says he, than to
hear that three or four Poor Travelers, Cabeca de vaca, and his companions,
passing along with some enraged Indians, were threatened death, unless they
cured the Infirm and diseased among them. The distressed Captives, having no
other medicine at hand, made use of Spiritual Physic, the Sacred Prodigious
Miracles wrought among the Indians.
Gospel and the prayers of the Holy Church. In a word by only Saying those
devout prayers, and making the Sign of the Cross upon the Sick Infidels (much
like the Apostles) they instantly cured innumerable. The Bruit whereof running
abroad, They were forced to go up and down, and to do the like wonders in many
Villages, where they healed all sort of diseased Persons. Thus Josephus Acosta.
Who likewise tell's you of a strange Miracle done by a Soldier of Peru called
Lancero, upon a desperate wound, which he cured by Saying some Holy Words, One
by a Soldier of Peru.
and making the Sign of the Cross upon the wound. No less admirable is his
relation of those Barbarians that besieged the Spaniards in a place called
Cusco, and by casting fire on their little Cottages covered with straw, so
sorely pressed them, that without assistance from Heaven all had perished, had
not a certain Lady (the Blessed Virgin) visibly appeared over those Cottages;
and quenched the Fire, as it fell upon the straw. This the Infidels saw, and
afterward recounted as a prodigious Miracle.

19. Yet more. It is known for certain, says Acosta, by the relation of many
Historians, that in the several Battles the Spaniards fought against the
Indians, (as well in new Spain as Peru) those very Infidels saw in the Air one
like a Cavalier mounted upon a white horse with a Sword in his hand, chasing
away their forces Another by S. James.
and fighting for the Spaniards; Whence proceed's that great veneration the
Spaniards bear to the glorious Apostle S James. These few Testimonies (I omit
others) may suffice to confront Dr Still. who cites Josephus Acosta, as one
that says Miracles were only necessary in the beginning of Josephus Acosta de
procuranda Indorum salute l. 2. c. 9. and 10.
Christian Religion. And not to wrong the Dr, his words are these. Acosta at
large debates this case, why God does not now give the Power of Miracles among
those who preach to Infidels, as he did of old, and he offer's at several
reasons for it, of which this is the Chief that Miracles were necessary in
the beginning of Christian Religion, but not now.

20. Reader, I have perused with great delight this pious and curious Author,
both De natura novi Orbis, and likewise De procuranda Indorum observe well of
what Miracles Acosta speak's.
Salute, and after a serious reflection made upon the two chapters quoted, dare
boldly averr, that the Dr contrary to all conscience grossly abuses Acosta, and
every unwary Reader. The Question proposed in the beginning of the 9. Chapter
is thus. How happens it, that in this latter Age, When the Gospel is preached
to Infidels, Illa vis Miraculorum non cernatur, The like force and efficacy of
Miracles are not now seen as our Savior promised to the Primitive Christians,
who had, as you have heard; the Gift of Tongues and wrought other great Wonders
after Baptism. The Question proposed by Acosta implies only a comparison
between those Ancient Signs then usually seen (and necessary), and These in our
days, and he gives not one only but many excellent reasons thereof. Here
begin's the Dr's Dr Still. page 614.
juggling. If, says he, such Persons who are Employed upon the work of
converting Infidels do want the Testimony of Miracles, I know no reason to
believe, that God Imployes it for other Ends. Mark those words. Do want the
Testimony of Miracles, and to the Dr's confusion, turn once more to Acosta
Acosta c. 9. page 219.
Cited, where he first recount's the Miraculous cures of four men, Cabeca de
Vaca, Dorantes, Castillo, and another, wrought in their strange Travels through
Florida, and more remote places. These God favovred with a singular Gift of
Curing all infirm and sick Persons, much after that Strange Miracles wrought by
four Travelers.
manner as the Apostles did. Ten whole years they spent in this Peregrination,
being ever attended with innumerable Multitudes, who no less admired the
Evident Wonders wrought by them, than their most innocent and spotless life.
In fine they gained so much renown among the Barbarians, that they were almost
adored as Gods, and all their commands looked on as Oracles from Heaven.

21. Hence Learn, says Acosta, that Innocence of life adorned with glorious
Miracles, is the easy and certain means whereby Infidels are converted. Soon
after he demand's, How it comes to pass, that such Miracles as the now
mentioned Travelers wrought, were not so common, but rather grown Scarce in
the days, when he wrote his Story? This Acosta lament's, and humbly Petition's
Almighty God to glorify his name, by showing the like admirable Signs and
Miracles, Cum videatur tam effusa necessitas, when now, says he, there
appears so great necessity of them for the Conversions of Barbarians. Is this,
Reader, to tell us, as the Dr unworthily Writes, that Acosta says Miracles
were necessary in the beginning of Christian Religion, but not now, When he
deplor's the want of those admirable Signal Wonders already specifyed, and
beg's Almighty God, once more to work them in the sight of those incredulous
Infidels? Again, does Acosta deny all great Miracles, because he complain's of
the want of Eminent Wonders granted the Apostles by Special Privilege, and
those others in their Peregrination through Florida? No. The Dr may justly
blush at his Juggling and manifest suppressing Truth if he read Acosta, where he
Says. Though the Apostles were enriched with a Acosta c. 9. page 220.
more Plentiful Gift of the Holy Ghost, and had the first fruits of the Spirit,
yet the Power of vvorking Miracles vanished not with the first Age. Which is
to say, the Age passed, but Miracles still continued in the Church, and he
proves the Assertion. Ecclesiastical History (says he) relates, that Acosta
owns latter Miracles as undoubted.
in the time of Constantine the great, the whole Province of Iberia next to
Armenia, was converted to Christ, by the admirable works and Miracles of a
Christian woman, taken Captive. We read also (they are his words) in the
English History of many and great Miracles done by Austin, Iustus, Melitus, and
other Monks. Alas, what is England compared with those Immense Regions of
Infidels? Not so much as a little cottage, matched with a vast City. How then
happens it, that these times we live in seem to be deserted, or not to afford
greater plenty of Miracles? Thus Acosta, who next endeavors to show, why God
did not work so many Miracles, but his reasons are too long for this place,
where I am only obliged to note the Dr's fraudulent Dealing, which Acosta does
home, and to the purpose. Look, says he, upon one blessed man in this our Age
Acosta c. 10 p. 226.
S. Francis Xaverius, of a most Apostolical life, who wrought so many admirable
Miracles (all attested by innumerable sound, and substantial Witnesses) that
scarce the like are read of in any since the Apostles days, (whereof more
presently,) What shall we say of Wrought by S. Xaverias and others.
F. Gaspar and his fellow Laborers in the East Indies, whom God favovred with
the grace of working innumerable great Wonders, and the like blessing he
bestowed upon many worthy Missioners of other Holy Orders. Neither is it at all
unusual, says Acosta, in these our West Indies, to see and hear of great
Miracles done among the Barbarians.

22. Was not Dr Still. think ye blind, or A great Oversight in the Dr.
grossly overseen, in remitting me to Josephus Acosta as one opposite to all
Miracles, excepting such as Christ and his Apostles wrought? Had he his Wits
about him when he tell's us, that the Persons employed upon the work of
converting Infidels vvanted the Testimony of Miracles, while you see this
Author he cites, decryes the folly, and to the Dr's eternal Disgrace,
acknowledges many famous Miracles wrought in the Church after the Apostles,
though that Special Apostolical Privilege in working them (in some measure
granted also to the Primitive Christians) was not, as you have heard, Usual in
after Ages? Hence the Dr's Inference of Miracles not being now necessary among
Heathens, or ceasing upon this Ground, that the primitive Prerogative in doing
them seems very seldom granted any in latter Ages, is nothing but a foul
cheat, and an open fraud. All I will say now, is, that either Mr Dr thought his
produced Testimonies would never be examined, or that all would believe what he
scribles upon his bare word. He is grossly deceived in both. And thus much of
Josephus Acosta. We go on.

23. The second Author perused by me concerning E manu. Acosta Hist. rerum in
Orie^^ge. starum Parisiis typis data 1572. Ema. Acosta l. 1. p 72. p. 74. lib.
2. p. 109. Acosta l, 3. page 132.
Miracles in the East Indies, is Emanuel Acosta in his History of matters done
there. Not far from Bungo, says he, a blind youth 13. years old immediately
after Baptism, had his perfect sight restored. Another sick of the Palsy and
Dumb when Baptized, rose up sound, and spoke without the least impediment. If
you desire to hear other Miracles wrought by Holy water, and reciting the seven
Poenitential Psalms, as likewise of the strange Punishments God inflicted upon
some profane Barbarians that strove to cut down a Cross erected by the
Christians, you may peruse this Author. To insist on more particulars would be
too large a task. and needless, Finally, if you require an Answer to Dr Still.
wise Question. What shall we Dr Still. Page 614.
say to the Miracles pretended to be wrought by Xaverius and others in the
East Indies? I will first remit you to Emanuel Acosta ^ited, and next evince
upon unquestionable Authority, that S. Xaverius his Miracles are so clear and
manifest, that none, unless utterly stupifyed, can call them into doubt, or
least Question.

CHAP. XII.
Of S. Xaverius his admirable life, and most glorious Miracles. VVitnesses of
these Miracles and undoubted Testimonies produced. The Dr's simple Exceptions
against them demonstrated vain and frivolous. His unjust Aspersion laid on
Jesuits, discovered.

1. PLease Reader to review Acosta at the Eman. Acosta page 3.
beginning of his Treatise, where you have a short compendium of S. Xaverius
austere life and most undoubted Miracles. No fewer, says this Author, than a
hundred and thirty thousand were drawn to Christ by the indefatigable Labors
of this one blessed man, in the Coast of Comorinum. In the Kingdom of
Travancore and the places Adjacent, he wrought great conversions also, in so
much, that the very Heathens speaking of Xaverius, usually called him by no
other name, but Sanctus Pater, the Holy Father. The rumor of the Conversions
coming by the attestation of many certain Witnesses to the knowledge of John
the third then King of Portugal, both while S. Xaverius lived, and after his
death, His Majesty expressly commanded, that the Miracles Page 3.
of the Saint should be diligently examined, Written down, and sent him. A copy
of the Kings letter you have in Acosta. Strange likewise were the Conversions
and wonders done by S. Xaverius in the City of Tolo, the Moluccy Page 6.
Islands, and Amboinum, No less wonderful is that which Acosta recount's of S.
Xaverius, who Page 7.
by one and the same Answer given to ten or twelve Persons proposing different
Questions, was so well understood by all, as if he had answered one after
another* or every one apart. Admirable also are the Miracles wrought in Japan,
Page 7.
where S. Xaverius, says this Author, cured the Dumb, deaf, the lame; restored
perfect health to Persons desperately infirm. In the country of Commorinum he
cured innumerable, quite Page 7.
deserted by Physicians freed many possessed of Devils, and most certainly
raised the dead to life. See Acosta cited at those words. Mortui ad vitam
revocantur etc. He had moreover the Page 10.
gift of Prophesy, Acosta relates the particulars foretold by the Saint, which
afterward came to pass. He recount's also memorable Things Page 11.
of his austere and poenitential way of living. Two or three hours of sleep
after most wearisom labors S. Xaverius allowed himself, and this short repose
he took when oppressed and Acosta's relation of the Saints Miracles.
ready to fall down, often resting upon a Board or the bare grownd, with a stone
under his head. Of his spare Diet, and poor clothing, se Acosta cited. And thus
much (not the half of what S. Xaverius did) I produce out of this one Author,
a long time Missioner in the East Indies, Writers of a latter date have more
amply set forth the glorious Miracles of this great Saint.

2. VVonder therefore nothing at the great De Lingendes tom: 2: concion:
Quadrag: Feria 4: Domini prima Quadrag:
Elogium, Claudius De Lingendes gives of S. Xaverius. What shall I say of the
great Apostle of the Indies, the sun of the Orient, the Dr of Gentilism, the
Miracle of the last Age, the Star of Iapan, and Prodigy of India. the Honor of
the Society, Enlarger of the Church, and delight of the world? Those who hate
us, love thee, who despise us praise thee, who set us at naught highly value
thee. The glory of thy Virtues, out-lives Envy, and is above reproach. Thus he
with much With much more. Soon after Ligendes qis Elogium of S Xaverius.
he enumerats the Miracles done by the Saint. Xaverius, says Lingendes 1.
Cured all manner of infirmities, nay more, when he could not be present with
all sick persons, he sent Children to them, who by reciting the Apostles
Creed, cured many 2. He had the gift of Tongues, and was understood as the
Apostles were, when he spoke to men of different Languages. 3. God endued the
Saint with the gift of Prophesy, and had things absent discovered long before
they happened. 4. He made by a Miracle the salt water of the sea fresh and
sweet, at which vvonder many Mahometans were converted. 5. In the Promontorie
of Commorinum, he raised a youth one day buried to life again, where upon
innumerable were converted, And in the Process of his Canonization, it was
proved, that he restored life to no fewer, than twenty dead Persons. Thus F.
Lingendes, where also he recount's other great Miracles wrought by the Saint,
and Ask's whether Heretics that glory in their extraordinary Mission, did ever
any like wonders, as these now briefly pointed at.

3. But, Courteous Reader, hitherto I have said little of this glorious Saint
and his stupendous Miracles. Whosever therefore desires more ample Information
of greater Wonders, and the greatest Satisfaction that can be given to men on
earth, may peruse that accurate Bull of Pope Urban the eight, which begins.
Ration^ Bulla Canonizationis S Francisi Xaverii Ann. 1613, 8. Idus Augusti.
congruit and convenit aequitat^, published after the Canonization of S.
Francis Xaverius, where you have all and every one of the Miracles already
noted, exactly set down, as his gift of tongues, the gift of Prophesy, and his
innumerable and admirable conversions; Many hundred thousands, says the Pope,
who sat in darkness and in the shadow Miracles of S. Xaverius attested and
approved by the Sea Apostolic.
of death, were by the industry of this great Servant of God, drawn to the
light of the Gospel. To enlarge my self upon all the Miracles in these
Apostolical Letters, would, because they are long, be too great a Task, yet a
Few among many I must not omit. At Comorinum, where Xaverius preached in a
Church to a great multitude of Infidels, and by reason of their obdurate hearts
seemed to effect little, He first betook himself to Prayer, and then commanded
a Grave wherein one the day before was buried, to be opened. To prove, said the
Saint, the Verity of our Christian Faith I now Preach, you shall behold with
your eyes this dead man raised to life. Praying again, he commanded the lately
buried to appear in the sight S. Xaverius ^aises the dead.
of all his Auditors, who in a moment of time came out of his Grave, and to the
admiration of the People stood up among them Living, as he was before. This
visible and manifest Miracle so changed those stupefied Infidels, that not only
the then present Unbelievers, but innumerable others hearing of the Wonder,
embraced our Catholic Faith.

4. In the same place, not long after a poor Cures one full of ulcers.
Beggar full of ulcers and ghastly wounds, meeting S. Xaverius implored his
help, the Saint upon his Petition washed his ulcers, which done (to the horror
of all the Spectators) he presently drank of the water, wherewith he had
cleansed the wounds, then taking recourse by earnest Prayer, he petitioned the
Father of mercy to show mercy upon the poor afflicted Patient, and presently, e
vestigio, says the Bull, he rose up perfectly cured, freed from all his
corrupted Botches, and loathsome ulcers. A young youth at Mulanum in the east
Indies died of a pestilent fever, and wrapped up in his winding Sheet, lay in it
24. hours, then carried to his Grave, S. Xaverius beheld his disconsolate
Parents* weeping over him, and moved with compassion, fell on his Knees,
devoutly praying that God would restore the dead to life. Then cutting open the
Linen wherein the Body Restores life to a young man dead.
lay, he cast Holy water upon it, signed it with the Sign of the Cross, took
the dead by the hand, and in the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, restored him
living and sound in health to his late sorrowful, but now overjoyed Parents. In
memory of this certain known Miracle a Cross was there erected, and afterward
had in great Veneration by all.

5. The length of many other famous Miracles recorded in these Apostolical
letters concerning B. S. Xaverius, And the short time allowed to recount them,
forces me to pass by that strange cure, wrought upon a Japonian Merchand And
Sight to a Merchand many years blind.
many years blind, who was restored to his perfect Sight in a moment of time
after the Saint had begged that favor, and signed his Eyes with the Sign of
the Holy Cross. When this Holy Servant of God was bound for China in a great
Vessel with five hundred Passengers, an unexspected Calm detained them all in
one and the same place fourteen days together. Among Salt water Miraculously
made fresh by S. Xaverius.
other sad Accidents fresh water failing, many of the Passengers cruelly
tormented with Thirst began to languish, whereupon the Saint commanded all the
Vessels in the Ship to be filled with salt water ready at hand, And having
spent a short time in prayer, made the Sign of the Holy Cross upon the water,
which suddenly became sweet, pleasant* and drinkable* Many Infidels, seeing the
wonder were converted to our Christian Faith. Some quantity of the water thus
blessed by the Saint, being carried up and down several Provinces of the Indies
restored health to innumerable weak, sick, and infirm Persons. See yet more
Wonders in the Apostolical Letters.

6. Now to Show that the Miracles hitherto briefly summoned up, are no
pretended Fictions (as our wise Dr simply speak's) But undeniable Truths,
please, courteous Reader, to peruse Pope Vrbans Bull toward the End, where you
shall find, how, and in what manner the forenamed John, King of Portugal,
piously moved with the report he had heard of S. Xaverius* his admirable
Sanctity, and Miracles, endeavovred All suspicion of forgery taken away.
to be informed of the Truth in all particulars, And therefore gave express
order to several Prelates, that a rigid Process, and a most faithful Enquiry,
should be made after them, which was exactly performed according to his
Majesty's Command, and Sincerely presented to Pope Paul the V. who at the
Instance of PHILIP the III. the Catholic King of Spain (that much promoted the
Canonization of S. Xaverius) deputed several Cardinals there named, to consider
what ought to be done in so weighty a matter, and to declare their Judgment to
his Holiness. Whereupon for greater Assurance, the deputed Cardinals sent back
Letters to several Prelates in Spain, Portugal, and the Indies, and in the
interim examined new Witnesses in the Court of Rome.

7. This Duty performed with all care and diligence, after a long time and
great Deliberation, They made their Report to Pope Paul How the Process
concerning the Canonization was carried on.
and Judged that according to the Canonical Constitutions the Servant of God
Francis Xaverius, highly deserved (upon the Account of his great merits,
Sanctity, and Miracles wrought alive and dead) to be registered in the Catalogue
of the Saints Confessors, and Canonized. Soon after Pope Paul dies, and Gregory
succeed's in the Sea Apostolic, when not only PHILIP the IV. the Catholic
King of Spain, but many other Princes, Prelates and the whole Clergy of India,
where S. Xaverius had been a long time Missioner, pressed earnestly the Saints
Canonization.

8. Gregory proceeding warily in a matter of so great weight, commanded the
whole matter not only to be reviewed, but most rigidly reexamined by several
Cardinals there mentioned, amongst whom Pope Vrbane the VIII. who published
this Bull (then only Cardinal Barbarin) was present. This Examination accuratly
performed, all the Cardinals, none dissenting, still stood for the
Canonization, The Report of the whole Process being made by Cardinal
Franciscus Maria de Monte to his Holiness. That done, when Julius Zambeccarius
Advocate of the consistorial Court, had in a public Consistory said much
concerning the Holy life and Virtues of S. Xaverius, and further declared the
humble Petition of the Catholic King for the Canonization, Pope Gregory
answered, he would Pope Gregory proceeds warily.
consult the matter once more, with all the Cardinals and Bishops of the Roman
Court, And in the mean time exhorted them humbly to pray that God, who is the
Way and Truth, would so direct him, that nothing might be done but what was
true and acceptable in the sight of the Divine Majesty, from whom he craved
light and Assistance.

9. In the next half public Consistory the Pope commanded not only the
Cardinals, but the Patriarcks also, Archbishops, and Bishops to be present,
with the Notaries of the Sea Apostolic, and Auditors of the Sacred Palace,
where many things were again spoken of S. Xaverius his admirable life and
glorious Miracles, as also of the stupendous Conversions he had wrought among
most Barbarous Nations. Moreover; a rehearsal being made of the Catholic Kings
earnest promoting the Canonization, which other Kings and Princes of the
Christian Republic, instantly likewise urged; His Holiness required of every
one then present, freely to deliver their Opinion, and all (none dissenting)
with one unanimous voice (blessing Almighty God) declared for the Canonization
of this admirable Saint.

10. All ceremonies thus exactly performed, according to the custom and
Constitutions of the Roman Church, his Holiness Pope Gregory in the 2. year of
his Reign the. 4. Ides of March, in presence of the Cardinals, Patriarchs
Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, and other Officers of the Roman Court, when a
mighty Concourse of the Clergy, and Regulars were assembled in that Magnificent
Temple of the Prince of the Apostles* His Holiness, I say, after Litanies sung,
and other Prayers said, begging again the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, openly
declared, and defined. That Francis Xaverius S. Xaverius Canonized.
of whose Holy life, Sincerit^ in Faith, and admirable frequent Miracles, full
proof and undoubted assurance had been given, was a true Saint, to be registered
in the Catalogue of Saints Confessors, and under that Notion honored the whole
Church over by all faithful Christians.

11. Thus much you have briefly collected out of these Apostolical Letters,
which Pope Gregory prevented by death could not finish, and therefore his
successor Urban the VIII, exalted to S. Peter's Chair of no less Power than
Gregory, both confirmed, and published, commanding all by Apostolical Authority
to receive the Bull, as certain and Authentic.

Subscribed. Ego Vrbanus Catholicae Ecclesiae Episcopus. Whereunto is added
the Subscription os XV. Cardinals.

12. What says Mr Dr now, are S. Xaverius Miracles only pretended? Or does he
here find a want of sufficient attestation? Is it not, Reader, more than a
little Impudence to question the Attestations already produced? You have heard
first, how King John of Portugal commanded these Miracles to be severely
examined by several Prelates in the Indies, Spain, and Portugal. You have
heard. 2. That these Prelates after an exact complying with their duty, made
Report to the King, and deposed that the Miracles were certain and undeniable.
You have 3. out of Acosta, that the VVitnesses brought in to depose what they
knew in their Conscience true, were very many sound No want of Witnesses for
the Saints Canonization.
and substantial men. You have heard. 4. How the whole Process advanced thus
far, was represented to the Sea Apostolic, when other Witnesses were examined
in the Court of Rome. You have heard. 5. That the two Kings of Spain and
Portugal with other Princes of Christendom made it their Business to further
the Canonization, upon the Account of. S. Xaverius Holy life, and glorious
Miracles. Now judge Reader (and this reason convinces) who of all these great
and wise Princes would have dared, think you, to propose a matter of so high
consequence, as the Canonization of a Saint is, to the Sea Apostolic, had they
not had in readiness the main Proofs always required at hand, in such a case
Juridically carried on viz. Great Sanctity, and manifest Miracles?

13. These Princes knew well and all know (excepting men like the Dr who never
set foot out of England) how rigid, vigilant, and wary Popes are in things of
this nature, which concern the public Honor of a Saint, and the good of the
whole universal Church. The Italiens say, and it passes as a Proverb amongst
How rigorously the Church proceed*s in the Canonization of Saints.
them. It is a Miracle to have a Miracle approved at Rome, where an Opponent
(one excellently well versed in matters of this Nature) stand's up. when such
Causes come to Trial, and vigorously denies all proofs, that appear not
convincing, or most morally certain. Those who know the Court of Rome can
testify that many proofs brought in for Miracles have been rejected as
weightlesse, upon severe Examination.

14. Reader, you have heard enough of this rigorous Proceeding through the
whole Process concerning S. Xaverius, till at last the Cardinals, Patriarks,
Archbishops, Bishops* etc. Saw all matters clear, And his Holiness declared,
that full and unquestionable assurance had been given in of S. Xaverius his
great Sanctity, and admirable frequent Miracles. Yet after all the Dr guided by
fancy or malice, cries out for Attestations, and would, forsooth, be more
inclined Dr Still* page 615.
to believe these Miracles (we are much beholding to his Worship) Than those of
the Lady of Loreto, were it not, that the want of Witnesses much retards his
belief; This is only to say, Mr Dr will remain in a state of Incredulity
though the whole Christian world rise up against him, and yield assent to these
clear matters of Fact, strongly attested, and made indubitable. And who can
help it, if his belief be as faint as his few objections are against the
Miracles wrought by S. Xaverius.

15. One stand's thus awry, or rather on no foundation. The Saint had not the
Gift of Tongues Epist Japan 3 p. 30.
as appears by one of his Letters for, He could not reach in Japan for want of
Language. Suppose this were true, does it therefore follow that he never had
that Gift? The Depositions alleged prove he was endued with it, which perhaps
God denied at the beginning and to manifest his Power the better, afterward
imparted the Favor. I would willingly have perused that Epistle Iapan 3. p.
30. but cannot meet with it, Antwerp print. 1657.
though I have 4. Books of the Saints Letters, where I am sure there is no such
third Epistle mentioning what the Dr refer's me to, nor any thing like it in
any third Chapter through the whole 4. Books, much less in the 30. page I am
remitted to. If the Dr has any other Epistles, I would know where they are
printed.

16. A second Objection. The Dr finds not that S. Xaverius in any of his
Epistles made Pretense to the Power of Miracles, Though after his death the
Jesuits told many Stories of them. Answ. The humble Saint learned that silence
from his great Master Christ JESUS, who after cleansing a Leper said, nemini
dixeris, Tell none what I have done; And this way S. Xaverius Mark. 1. 44
followed; when urged to declare the Miracle wrought by him in raising a young
man dead to life in the Promontory of Comorinum, He Se this in Emanuel Acosta
immediately before the 8. page.
blushed, and declined an Answer, But pressed further, said. O Sinner! What I
raise a dead man? God did the Miracle; When I begged for his life, He rose up,
and This is true:

17. A third Objection. The Preservation of S. Xaverius's dead Body cast into
quick Lime was not Miraculous, But an ordinary Effect of Nature says our Dr,
because learned Phisicians have declared, that Bodies may be preserved
incorrupt by salt, Nitre, or Lime. The Dr it seems has so much Kindness as to
believe this matter of Fact, whether Miraculous or no, because Authors relate
it, Why does he not also believe those others forementioned Wonders, as raising
the dead (for an Instance) upon the Testimony of Authors altogether as
creditable? By no means will the Dr Say, For in doing so he must admit
Miracles. Reader, mark the Genious of this man. When a Miracle is clear the
Authority of those who assert it, is Decryed, when disputable (as he would have
it in this present case) the Attestation passes for good, but the Miracle
(shifted off by another trick) must be none. Thus Authority rises and falls
according to the Dr's fancy, for had he truly Judged this incorruption
Miraculous, would he not think you have said, it want's sufficient Attestation?
You shall se him driven to this Exigency at last, after you have heard the
Relation briefly set down by Emanuel Acosta cited. Ema. Acosta immediately
before the 13. page.


18. S. Xaverius's Friends says Acosta, buried the dead Body decently composed
in his Priestly Vestments, And (as he desired) cast both Corpse and Vestments
into burnt Lime. This they did with intention to have his Flesh consumed, and
bones transported to the Indies. Three Months after they open the Coffin,
hoping to find the naked bones only, When Behold contrary to all expectation,
not only the whole Body, but his Priestly Habit likewise, were then as fresh
and free from corruption as when first laid in the Coffin, and moreover, says
my Author, sent forth a most fragrant and delight some Odor. Could Lime give
this good Savior? The Body again placed in the same Chest, and transported to
Malaca, was received with all Veneration of the People, when another Miracle
happened, S. Xaverius his Body Miraculously preserved in corrupt.
For upon its entering the City a violent Plague which had Cruelly raged there
before, wholly ceased and gave great comfort to the afflicted Inhabitants. Had
Lime such virtue in it? Some Months the Holy Body remained at Malaca, and
thence carried to Goa, by Gods special favor did strange Wonders in that
Navigation. The Vessel wherein it lay, Twice in great danger of Shipwreck by
running upon Quick sands, caused both Mariners and Passengers to implore No
virtue in Limes to work these Miracles.
the Saints Assistance, which was no sooner ask't, than obtained, in so much
(that presently freed from all danger) they sailed on joyfully to Goa. The Lime
I think, did not this Miracle. You may read in Acosta Cited, with what great
Celebrity and Pomp the Body was received at Goa, where it remained to that day
without the least Sign of Putrefaction. To God's glory and the Saints honor be
it. Tell me Reader, will the Dr yield assent to this short Relation made by the
same Author that recount's the Miraculous Incorruption of the Body? If he does,
he grants Miracles; If not, I said right, he is forced to quit Authority, and
run to his old Plea a want, forsooth, of sufficient VVitnesses, that is, There
are sufficient when he likes, when not; there are none.

19. Hitherto I have born much with Mr Dr Still. page 617.
Dr, but am now almost at an End of Patience in the perusal of his uncivil and
rude Calumnies. First he tell's us, that the Relation of S. Xaverius his
Miracles comes from the Jesuits in the East Indies, as if, forsooth, none had
attested them but Jesuits. A vast untruth, when King John of Portugal, as you
have heard, caused them to be examined by several great Prelates. Were all
these Jesuits? Did the deputed Cardinals at Rome, who ordered another new
strict Trial, commit the charge to Jesuits only? No. Did his Holiness when he
published his Jesuits not the only Informers of the Saints Miracles.
Apostolical Letters, and declared that the matters of Fact ( plain Miracles)
had been attested upon undoubted certainty, rely wholly on the Jesuits
information? Evidently no. What then shall we say of this Dr, But that without
regard to Truth and honesty, he cares not what he Writes? Yet worse follows.
Jesuits, Says he, are men that think it lawful to Lie for a good cause (as no
doubt the Honor of the Society is such with them) And how can we with any
tolerable Discretion, rely upon their word? Answer Dr, I call you to account
before God and the world, I here accuse you of a Malicious Detraction. Speak
out if you Jesuits Calumniated by the Dr.
can, poduce me but one Jesuit, that ever wrote or taught, it is lawful to Lie
in any occasion, either for a good or bad cause, and I will will proclaim you
Victor. In case you shift This one Spiteful Calumny contrary to Evident Truth,
Shows the Dr cares not what He Writes,
off this just Challenge, the Reader shall Judge, whether you or Jesuits
deserve the foul Imputation of Liars.

20. Your Error, Sr, lies here, And proceed's from malice, ignorance, or both,
in not distinguishing between a Lie, always sinful, and the ambiguous use of
words in certain Cases of danger, and other vveightr Concerns, whereof I
treated largely in my Book against Dr Tailor. This ambiguous use of words, yea
and some kind of mental Restriction also, most grave and learned Divines (no
Jesuits to is well known) A discovery of Dr Tailors untruths c. 26. p. 184.
printed anno 1665
maintain as Lavvful, (which is as remote from a Lie, as your Calumny (Dr)
imposed on Jesuits is from Truth) though never to be made use of (say Divines)
but when Necessity and just reason requires. And this both you, Sr, and Dr
Tailor, with his Excellent use of Confession in England must acknowledge, as
is proved in the Discovery now cited. I say when Necessity and just reason
requires: For example, if a Judge ask a Priest whether a Paenitent, confessed
such a Sin, (truly confessed) and be further urged to Answer directly, Yea, or
No: If he says, Yea, he betrays the Penitent, and sacrilegiously breaks the
Seal of Confession; If No; in your Divinity he tell's a Lie. Learned Divines
deliver contrary Doctrine, and Therefore find out a way, not to Lie on the one
Side, and on the other to keep the Seal of Confession sase and inviolable. If a
Confessor says S Austin lib uno de mendacio ad consent. c. 13. post medium.
nothing in such an Exigency, S. Austin rightly observes in a like case of
Danger, the Secret is too openly discovered. By all now said, you see, that to
use mental Restriction in Contracts, Leagues, Promises, Vows or Oaths justly
tendered is impious; Yea and a horrid Sin in those who attest Miracles in
public Tribunals, before Popes and Princes known false and forged, or never to
have been as the Informers declare.

21. One word more. Suppose (which is utterly false) that the relation of S.
Xaverius his Miracles had come only from Jesuits a long time Missioners among
those Barbarians, can any one without shame, or the deepest Malice Imaginable
Persuade himself, That men who went upon a most generous Design, left Country,
Relations, Friends, and whatever is dear to Nature; That ran to the furthest
Parts of the world, where they knew they should endure Hardship, misery,
contempt, neglect, imprisonment, And besides live in continual danger of dying
upon Gibbets, as many did, And all this to reduce Souls to Christ; can any man,
I say of Common sense, persuade The Dr's Calumny cast on Jesuits, highly
Improbable.
himself, as our unconscionable Dr does, That such laborious Missioners after
so many Heroical Acts performed, would down right Damn their own Souls, tell
Loud and abominable lies, Feign Miracles, which they knew were never wrought
(just matter of Damnation), And avouch these (now supposed fourbs) as real
Truths* before Kings, Princes, the Court of Rome, and the whole world? I say
the Imputation is so extravagant, the Calumny so horrid, that no man's head
would once have harbored it, but only Dr Stillingfleet's. Had the Dr said, S.
Xaverius was never in the Indies, King John of Portugal never made Enquiry
after his Miracles, The Catholic King of Spain never promoted the Saints
Canonization, the Apostolical letters cited above were all feigned etc. He had,
Methinks, gone every whit as wisely to Work as now, while he admit's these
Testimonies and attestations, and denies the Miracles attested by them. For
example.

22. He believes upon humane Authority, that King John gave Order that the
Saints Miracles should be rigidly examined, And hold's it true, because Writers
of good credit say so, But the very same Authors say also, that the Miracles
already mentioned were really done in the sight of many Spectators. Why does
the Dr boggle at this, having no greater Evidence of the Truth of that Order
given by the King (For it may be a fourb) Than he has of the Truth of those
Miracles attested to have been really done, which he must Say are false and
feigned? Nay more, why is not all that is Written of S. Xaverius far from Truth,
feigned, false, and counterfeit?

23. F. De Lingendes cited, proposes this De Lingendes Feria 4. Domin. 1. Quadr.
Question. What could move those Iaponians most averse from our Christian
Laws and manner of living, to forsake the vvayes they had long follovved etc?
What humane Interest could induce them to feign innumerable Miracles wrought
by S, Francis Xaverius, a poor, needy, and unknown Priest, Who God knows,
brought them no worldly Advantage, yet they boldly asserted his Miracles, and
did it with so great Zeal, that many of their Barbarians Converted by Miracles
feigned not. Much less could those Pious Missioners forge any.
own accord dyed willingly in the Fire, to Testify our Christian Faith sucked
into their Breasts, by the force of clear Miracles, partly seen, with their
Eyes, and partly experienced in Themselves? The like, add's De Lingendes, I may
say of innumerable other Barbarians converted to Christ by the efficacy of
glorious Miracles? Now if these Barbarians did so upon no humane Interest, much
less could these worthy Fathers a long time Missioners amongst the Indians,
after so much Zeal shown in propagating the Gospel, when all had an Ample share
in Tribulation, and many dyed to attest our Catholic Verities, avouch horrid
Lies, and Damn their Souls, by forging Miracles that never were.

CHAP. XIII.
The Dr's unjust Calumny laid upon F. Hierome Xaverius, proved False. Of his
lost labor in telling impertinent Tales of forged Miracles, His famous Story
of twelve English Jesuits Showing Tricks in feigned Exorcisms rejected, as
improbable. A Word of Hazenmillers loud Lies.

1. MR Dr, is yet pleased to continue Dr Still. page 617. fine.
his Harangue, and Asks, what will Jesuits stick at in matter of lying, who
have had the Impudence to insert fabulous Miracles, and Stories into the
History of the Gospel? For proof hereof he tell's us, that Hierome Xaverius a
near Kinsman to S. Francis (with his Associat's) was permitted by Acabar
Emperor of the Mogols to live in Agra, the Residence of that great Monarck,
and to give Account of the life and Miracles of Christ, But says Mr Dr, the
Subtle Jesuit well understanding their own Doctrine about the insufficiency of
Scriptures, durst not put into the Emperors hands the four Evangelists, but
framed an excellent Gospel of his own, declaring that he took it Historia
Christi Persice a Hier. Xavier conscripta, latin reddita a Ludov. de Dieu,
out of the Gospel, and Books of the Prophets, To make this Good, the Dr
remit's us to one like himself of the Ministerial Brood Ludovicus de Dieu, son
to Daniel de Dieu a new Gospeller, who banished Bruxell's upon the account of
his Pestilent Errors after the Duke of Parma had taken that City, fled into
Holland and there Preached 22. years. I have perused this Book Written first in
the Persian Language by F. Hierome Xavier, Ludov, de Dieu. Epist. Dedicat.
which this De Dieu afterward turned into Latin, and verily persuade my self,
that never worthy Missioner was more grossly abused than the Zealous F. Hierome
Xaverius is by this false Dieu, and our fraudulent Dr. The Story briefly is
thus.

2. F. Hierome having gained the Favor of the forementioned Emperor to live
in Agra, offered to his View the life of Christ in the Persian language, For
the substantial Part, exactly taken What F. Hierome offered to the Emperor.
out of the Prophets, and the Gospel, But willing to make the Relation full,
and acceptable, he first used different Expressions from the precise words of
Scripture, which all Preachers and Interpreters do in their further
Explanations of Holy Writ. 2. As Occasion required he added many pious
Considerations most Suitable, as he thought, to beget in the Emperors mind a
high Respect and honor of our blessed Savior. 3. After he had laid the
foundation of his History upon the Gospel, and recounted exactly the Birth, the
Infancy, the Circumcision, the Miracles, the Doctrine of Christ etc. (the
substance, I say according to Scripture) for the perfecting of his History,
here and there he introduces other ancient Testimonies, not Divine. Now mark
the Fraud of these two Adversaries, Dieu and the Dr; Because the Father kept
not always close to the exact words of the Gospel, and made his pious
Additions, as is noted, Dieu cries out in his Title, Historia Christi, sed
contaminata, the History of Christ, but defiled; The Dr as loud, Dr Still. page
623.
the very Story of the Bible horribly adulterated. It is a flat Calumny Mr Dr.

3. I say contrary. F. Xavier neither adulterated the Sense nor any one word of
the Holy Gospel, For to deprave and adulterate the Gospel is either to Propose
some thing as Gospel, or, as revealed by Almighty God which God never Spoke in
Scripture (This the Father did not): Or to Produce a true Revelation there
expressed and to Pervert, or contradict it. Now Show me, Mr Dr, by the Help of
your false Dieu, where F. Xavier either pervert's a Revealed Truth, which is
The Father depraved not the Gospel. And why?
in Scripture, or proposes that as the Revealed word of God (and mark my
Expression) which is not in Scripture, and you touch the Point, But this is
impossible, the Father being far from such Transgressions, Therefore prudently
Entitles his Book, not the Revealed word of God, but the History of Christ,
partly much enlarged by Circumstances which easily might occur to every Pious
mind (yea and probably happen), and partly augmented with the Testimonies of
other Authors.

4. For an Instance of the first. The Father De Dieu page 41.
cited by De Dieu, supposes our Lady devoutly on her Knees about Midnight
bowing her head toward the ground, when the Angel came to Salute her, This no
more but a pious Circumstance, was never Proposed to the Emperor as a Truth
revealed by Almighty God. Again, when he relates upon humane Authority that in
De Dieu page 74.
the night of our Saviors Birth, the great Temple of Peace at Rome fell down,
and that much about the same time, three Suns were seen in Spain which closed
at last together like one Sun, He tells us, Sapientes dicunt; Wise men Say the
Vision pointed out the great light of the world, then appearing in Bethlem.
Observe the Expression, wise men, (whether then living or afterward, imports
not,) Judged so, Therefore he never proposed this as a Truth revealed by
Almighty God in Scripture.

5. And thus Reader you have briefly the intolerable fraud of De Dieu and our
Dr discovered, who will needs impose upon F. Xavier what he never said. They
avouch, he told all these Particulars and more, as Verities revealed by
Almighty God, and words contained in the Holy Gospel. Whereas it is evident, by
his manner of Writing And own Expressions, no such thing can be meant, Though
desirous to make the History of Christ complete, he grounded himself first
upon the exact Truths recorded in the Prophets, and the Gospel, with a further
Enlargement, as you have heard. The Dr therefore yet living is obliged to
recall what he has falsely said. And to take off his foul Aspersion unjustly
laid upon a most laudable Missioner.

6. In like manner I Answer to the Exceptions made against the Story of the B.
Virgin, Dr Still. page 618.
where the Dr (as God would have it manfully refutes himself). F. Xavier,
says he, took what he had out of a Silly Book attributed to S. Hierome,
rejected by Baronius and others. Is it so? Did he take Baron. Appar. n. 44.
what he had out of a Silly Book? Prove you Sr, that he presented the contents
of that Book to Acabar under the Notion of God's revealed Wherein De Dieu and
the Dr fail.
Word, or as Written in Scripture, and you Satisfy us, But this neither De Dieu
nor you shall ever make Probable.

7. In the next place our Dr falls foul upon the Father for asserting Issachar
to have been High Priest, when S. Joachim offered up his Sacrifice in the
Temple. It is true, Baronius cited says Issachar could be no high Priest,
Then, But tell me, Reader, is not this a pardonable fault in a poor Missioner
(who if mistaken) thought he had S. Hierom's Authority for his Assertion, And
then neither did nor could know what Baronius had Written of this Subject. Were
the Dr's gross Errors when he Quotes Authors falsely as I have Demonstrated;
When he produces Testimonies for the ceasing of Miracles in the Church, though
he saw those very VVriters he cites most express for glorious Miracles in
latter Ages; When he looks back upon his Juggling and foul perverting the plain
Sense of Authors; When he call's to mind his unjust Calumny Laid on Jesuits as
men, Forsooth, who think it Lawful to Lie for a good cause etc. These and many
more Abominable frauds I have discovered in the Dr, (though to use his own
words upon another Occasion,) he little thought they would ever come to light.
Were such gross falsities, I say, as minute and pardonable as that one small
Oversight is of F. Xavier, Mr Dr might rejoice, And read these my Writings over
with a merrier heart, than he is like to do, But his Errors are horrible, and
without serious repentance, unpardonable. The rest that follows in the Dr of
the Blessed Virgins retired life in the Temple, of her vow of Virginity, which
grave Authors affirm (The Baron. Appar. n. 47. etc. 56.
Dr laughs at all) you have plainly asserted and proved in Baronius.

8. Our Dr willing to make his Imputations cast on F. Xaverius relishable, and
to gain his precious Author De Dieu credit, cites Philip Alagambe, who says
the Text of Dieu his Translation, is not unfaithfully done, some few things
Alagambe Biblioth. Scrip. Societatis page 188. Animadversiones De Dieu page 537.
excepted. It is very true; But Alagambe add's, That De Dieu's heretical
Observations, or Animadversions, (one great part of his Book coming from a
naughty heart) deserve to be burnt, with his Preface and marginal notes. This
Mr Dr conceal's, yet Methinks, if Alagambe merits credit in the one, his word
also may well be taken for the other. The Dr at the close of Dr Still. page 623.
his Discourse thinks he has said enough, not only to stop the mouth of E. VV.
for the future, but even of impudence it self. An idle brag of a defeated
Adversary; Peruse, Reader, this Treatise and you will see to whom Impudence (as
due) belong's, in this place I say no more.

9. The Dr from his Page 624. to 663. afford's little worth reflection, or any
Reply. In a word he seems much like some poor Fellows in our Cities, that go
up and down the Streets, and cast into nasty Carts all the filth and Dirt they
meet with, And I verily think, gain more by that Sordid Employment, Than the Dr
gets Forged Miracles introduced by the Dr. wholly impertinent.
by his long and tedious Narration of forgeries and false Miracles impiously
Pretended to have been wrought, when none were. This I call Dirt busily Scraped
up by the Dr, and cast into the Pages now mentioned, But for what End or
Purpose is hard to say. Is it to tell us that Cheats and Counterfeits have
sometimes played their prancks, and abused others? No great Doctorship is
required for that which the whole world knows. Is it to Decry true Miracles
because false ones have been forged? A plain Degree of Madness, For so we should
decry true Scripture, because false Scripture has been Fathered upon the very
Apostles. Is it to prove a Religion naught because some that profess it, Se
Eusebius Hist. lib. 3. c. 19. and l. 6 c. 10. And S. Austin contra Adversar.
Legis and prophetar. lib. 1. c. 20. Se Reas. and Relig. Disc, 2. c. 8. number. 11.
counterfeit Miracles? By this Art and Arguing, Protestancy is ruined, For not
only Luther and Calvin, as I showed, feigned Miracles, but others also of the
English Ministry have done so, Witness that egregious fourb practiced by John
Dorrell in his pretended Possessions, and Dipossessions of William Summers at
Nottingham, of Thomas Darling, the boy of Burton, of Cadwall, and of Katharine
Wright at Mansfeild etc. Whereof whole Books have been Written, laying open the
frauds as you may read in Brerely, who also introduces Dorells notorious cheat
of a Spirit Brerely Tract. 2. c. 3 Sect. 7. subd. 5. p. with me 546.
speaking in a wall against Queen Mary, with the sleeping Preachers forgery,
Discovered by his Majesty King James. Were it worth the while to gather up
more of this filth justly attributed to Protestants, we could easily match Mr
Dr, and bespatter as many Pages with it as he has done. But who (besides the
Dr) can endure this Nonsense? Some of such a profession have played the Knaves,
and forged Miracles, Ergo, the Religion that decryes the Forgery, is naught; Or
true Miracles, whereof Christians never doubted, are to be looked on as False.

10. Mr Dr after two tedious Stories, of Falco, and Joannes de Vincentia held
by many Impostors, by others not so hardly thought of, But rather freed from
the guilt (for our purpose it imports not to know on whom the blame lies, Dr
Still. page 635.
the Accusers or the accused.) Mr Dr I say, demand's. What credit these
Reporters of Miracles in the Roman Church deserve from us, when such Persons
who are by their own Order cried up (he alludes to Joannes de Vincentia) for
workers of Miracles, are by others of their own Church condemned as Seducers? I
Answer, in such Opposition when How we Proceed when Authors contradict Authors
in their relation of Miracles.
Authors contradict Authors, the gravest and the more rational ought to Sway
most with every prudent Reader. In case Testimonies stand equally poysed on
both sides, both Assertions will in a rational appearance have their
Probability, as Gerson cited above observes, Though the Truth of the Miracle
considered in it self lies yet out of a clear sight, Perhaps it was, and
perhaps not. In such cases, S. Hierom cited, prudently advises, rather piously
to doubt than rashly to Define any thing, which all Authors do in their
contradictory Judgments concerning probable Opinions. Now if the Authority be
far more pregnant for the denying Party, than the other, the Miracle in contest
will be prudently esteemed little worth, because very doubtful, and the
Reporters of it Can never gain much credit. But Say Reader, How does our good
Dr advance his cause by railing at the Reporters of false and doubtful Miracles
decryed by all? How does he hence prove, that Miracles never called into
Question by the wisest of the world, are in like manner to be accounted fourbs,
or listed with those other doubtful? This he aims at, or speak's nothing to
the Purpose.

11. Upon this Ground all those other Bundles of trash in the Dr's following
Pages, appear in their own likeness mere Impertinences. Grant then, That the
Dominicans at Bern were Impostors in forging Miracles, which is yet denied by
many, Admit upon Sleidans word (worth little) that the Franciscans at Orleans
counterfeited a mute Spirit acting the part of a dead woman's Soul, as if She
had been damned for being a Lutheran. Say truly (for so it was) That Maria de
la Visitation Prioresse de la Annunciada in Lisbon, deceived many by her
feigned Sanctity, and false wonders, And for that cause, Nothing more
impertinent, than to decry true Miracles, because some have forged False* one.
when the Truth came to light, was condemned and severely punished by the
Inquisitors: Add hereunto more of the like stuff, Written long since by
Catholic Authors. I Ask and require an Answer, what Advantage gain's this Dr
by his painful heaping up so much Filth together? Are therefore true Miracles
owned by the best of Christians, never boggled at, never called into doubt,
prejudiced in the least, because Fools have forged false ones? It is too lame a
Consequence for any rational Discourser. Thus much truly follows, that such
abominable Hypocrisy most justly call's for Vengeance, and unrepented, infer's
Damnation. Therefore the Prelates of the Church highly deserve commendation,
who when such frauds are discovered, both rigidly condemn and inflict severe
Punishment on the mischievous Impostors.

12. O but (says the Dr) many wise and learned men set forth the Praises of
this Mary de la Annunciada. No wonder at all, wiser men than Dr Still. have
often met with Cheats, and been beguiled. How many Princes gained by a fair
Demeanor, have placed their Trust upon false hearted Subjects, that afterward
turned Traitors, and sought their Princes ruin, while God Very often and in
good time, unmask's the Treason, And brings the Traitor to condign Punishment?
By this you se the Dr's pretty Dr Still. page 626.
cheat detected, where speaking of Fulco he says, that Persons found guilty of
Impostures, have been countenanced and encouraged by some in the Roman Church.
Pray, Sr, reflect a little, was ever any one countenanced after a clear
Discovery of their wickedness, though when supposed Innocent, they might be
favovred? Was ever any one encouraged to play the Hypocrite and forge Miracles!
No, The Church and all her Prelates execrate That as horrid and impious;
Therefore, Mr Dr though your words of countenancing and encouraging, seem to
sound big in a Vulgar ear, they are in real Truth without edge, and void of
Substance.

13. The Dr Quotes Elias Hazenmiller, a D^ Still, page 648.
frontlesse, graceless fellow, twice over an Apostata from his Order, wherein
he lived about Who Hazenmiller was?
18. Months, Then ran away, hid himself and, soon after fell from the Church.
The Book we are referred to, entitled Historia Ordinis Iesuitici, was
published after Hazenmillers death by one Policarpus Leyserus a Lutheran
Minister, probably thought to have added and changed many things. It is all
over so stufft with horrid impudent Lies, that some Sectaries near us cry shame
upon the Author. F. James Gretser in his refutation of Hazenmiller Gretseri
refut at Hazen. Ingol stadii Typis data Ann. 1594.
and Policarp, is forced upon the account of their shameless Lying to court
them in no better Language than, Impudentissime mentiris, Impudentissime
Calumniaris. Vides, Lector, os and frontem hominis Mendacissimi etc. I will not
foul my paper with the hundredth part of these Gross and palpable Lies, which
Gretser cal's unexcusable in his Answer to Millers Eleven chapters. A few only
shall serve for an Essay.

14. This frontlesse man says. 1. That Gretses page 40.
when S. Ignatius was in France, he said his Masses gratis, or for nothing.
Gretser Answers, a shameless and most filthy Lie, for at that time he was no
Priest, and therefore could say no Mass. He says again, that the Jesuits wrote
not their own Rules. A manifest Hazenmillers loud Lies.
Lie, says Gretser, as appears by the very Original of their Rules yet
extant. He says 3. That the Jesuits in their Constitutions and Rules call
their Order Venerabilis and laudabilis Iesuitarum Societas, The Venerable and
laudable Society of Jesuits. Utterly false, says Gretser. There are no such
words in either Rules or Constitutions, S. Ignatius ever gave the Order a more
humble Title, Minima Societas, The least Society. He says. 4. If any one among
the Jesuits break a Rule, it is held a greater sin, than if he had broken God's
commandments. A loud Lie says Gretser, for Page 81.
the Jesuits Rules, as all know, oblige not under sin. He says. 5. Some
Jesuits teach, that Page 269.
Faith is naturally bred and born with men. Most false, as Gretser shows.

15. But no Lie can be more infamous than that told of S. Ignatius, who, says
this false Elias, called to a possessed Person, went not himself, but sent a
Brother with a Grain Se Gretser page 217.
consecrated by Pope Pius the V. the Grain no sooner touched the Energumena, but
the Devil fled away. A long loud Lie. S. Ignatius, as every one knows dyed in
the year 1556. under Paul the IV. yet this Miller says he lived in Pius the V.
Reign and made use of a Grain blessed by Pius, who was created Pope long after
S. Ignatius his death. And Dr Still. page 649.
Still. cheated by Hazenmiller was so grossly blinded, as to Tell the Story over
again, and will forsooth have one Bead of the Rosary consecrated by Pius the
fifth, sent by a Brother, at S. Ignatius his command. That is, S. Ignatius
either rose from the dead, and sent the Brother, or Dr Still. shamefully err's
in his Story.

16. Another Lie follows. Ribadineira, Still. page 647. Gretser page 218.
says this Sycophant, denied S. Ignatius to have wrought Miracles (and Dr
Still. has much to the same Sense.) Gretser Answers; Mentitur turpiter. Miller
tell's a filthy Lie, Produce the passage where Ribadineira writes so. The
contrary is Manifest; For the Title of the last chapter in his V. Book, is of
the Saints Miracles, And in the 6.th Chapter, he recount's many wrought by the
merits and Prayers of S. Ignatius. O but, says Dr Still. They were only such
as are liable to fraud and impostures (Viz. page 648.
casting out Devils in their way). A flat Calumny without Proof; Show you, Sr,
the fraud, or retract your false Aspersion. The way was pious; by Austerity and
earnest Prayer, works laudable before God and man. Who ever doubts of S.
Ignatius his Miracles may peruse Ioannes Maffeius, where you have many and
great Maffeius lib. 3. c. 14.
Miracles recounted.

17. For an Upshot, another abominable Lie told by Hazenmiller or Policarp, may
pass after the rest (and our wise Dr Still. sets it forth in English)
Ignatius, says he, is said to Page 648.
have freed a possessed woman from the Devil, by rehearsing this profane Verse
out of Virgil.

Speluncam Dido dux and Trojanus eandem etc. Gretser Answers, it is a wonder
that Policarp fancied not that other Verse more proper. Tytere, tu patulae
recubans sub tegmine fagi? Then add's; It is a shame to hear these black and
blockish Calumnies. Could the Calumniators ever persuade Themselves, that
prudent men would yield Assent to such paultry intolerable Lies? Away with this
Miller and his associats, neither worth memory, nor Answers, What they might
justly expect for their folly; They have, Contempt and Derision.

18. There is yet more of the like stuff in another fearful Story the Dr tell's
of the Jesuits in England, who under the Chief Contriver one Weston, or Edmonds
(the Jesuits Provincial, forsooth,) employed twelve Exorcist's to show Tricks
upon certain hypochondriacal men, and hysterical women, falsely pretended to be
possessed, though all at last proved Impostures. Dr Still. page 650.
This, says our Dr, happened in the year 1585. and 1586. when I believe very
few Jesuits had entered that Isleland, And am sure, that neither, Then, nor ever
afterward, was there any Weston or Edmonds Provincial of the Jesuits,
Guileilm. Weston a great sufferer in persecution but no Provincial. se Morus
lib. 4. His Provin. Angl. number. 215.
for the first Provincial of the English Jesuits long after, was Richardus
Blondus, a Grave Venerable, and most pious man, of whose great Prudence and
virtue F. Henry More gives a large account. Anno 1619.

19. Our Dr goes on. The Forgery hitherto mentioned making a great noise, the
Persons concerned were rigidly examined, and their Examinations entered upon
Record in the Court of High commission, were soon after published, with A Story
as false as fearful told of English Jesuits.
a particular declaration of the whole Imposture; Whereunto is added a loud
confession of one Antony Tyrell a Priest, who says the Dr, was fully
persuaded, that Sara Williams, and Friswood her Sister, Anne Smith, and
Richard Mayney deposed the Truth in such Points as concerned their false
pretended Possessions. Nay more. This Tyrell says the Dr, knew that all was
Counterfeit and Judged so of the rest, However to gain the Catholic cause
Credit, They held it lawful to do as they did, That is to cheat the world with
loud Lies. Thus Mr Dr.

20. Courteous Reader, I justly require a Pro of this foul Calumny laid upon
worthy men, hitherto never blemished in their Fame, and Ask, upon whom may I
rely for Satisfaction? Must I trust the Dr? No; He is a broken reed, I have
found him faulty in a hundred other Particulars, and herein rationally suspect
his Fidelity. Shall I credit that supposed Court of High Commission? To me it
is yet a thing in the Air our of my reach, Nor can I examine the Records, or the
whole Process, if ever any such Court was in being.

21. For as much as concerns Antony Terryl the Priest, The true Story, which Dr
Still. tell's by halves, and thereby egregiously cheat's his Reader (in
relating the man's abominable sin, but concealing his humble and hearty
repentance) Concertatio Eccles. Cathol. in Anglia. printed at Triers by Henry
Bock. Anno 1588.
You have amply set down in a known Book entitled Concertatio Ecclesiae Catho.
in Anglia. There at the Very End of the second Part, you will find the guilty
Terryl his own Accuser bewailing his false and detestable Calumnies most
unjustly laid not only on noble men, but on many Innocent Priests also. And he
recals all Terril his own Accuser bewail's his unjust Calumnies.
with so much Zeal and fervor, that I never read the like humble confession
publicly made by any. He acknowledges himself a horrid Sinner, unworthy to
appear before God, Angels, and men, deserving nothing but God's just
Indignation and hatred from every one, upon the account^ of his impudent Lies
and malicious Detractions, virulently vented against Catholics most pious and
Virtuous. Then he Descend's to particulars and names the Persons he had
injuriously slandered. The whole Relation some what long, deserves the Readers
perusal, Some perhaps will shed Tears when they se it.

22. To be short, Antony Terryl was brought Brought to S. Paul's Cross, he
Professed himself Catholic.
by the Protestants to S. Paul's Cross in London, the last day of January, being
Sunday Anno 1588. in hope he would there ratify all those false Calumnies and
unjust Informations whereof we now speak, and withal openly abjure Catholic
Religion. But the Penitent Soul came thither with another Design. For no
sooner had he begun his Sermon, but he publicly Professed himself a true
Roman Catholic, and would have retracted his unjust Accusations, had not some
Standers by commanded him silence, Whereupon he quit the Pulpit, and was carried
again to his Prison, yet found means to disperse Terrils humble recantation,
and the Dr's unjust Dealing.
some Papers Written in his own hand, called Palinodia Antony Terrylli
subscribed. Per me Antonium Terryllum Presbyterum, Manu propria. Where you have
this Penitent man's most humble Recantation, and Justice done to those he had
wronged. Read it in the Author now cited and tell me, whether Dr Still. has not
played the Cheat in aggravating the Crime, without saying one word of Terryls
hearty Repentance.

23. Some may reply. Though the Proof hitherto taken from Tyrrel may seem
deficient. Yet the confession of those three women rigidly examined, takes away
all doubt. Answ. The weakest Plea imaginable, had we certainty of any such
acknowledgement, For how easy was it in those Days when England swarmed with
innumerable virulent Adversaries that acted most Tragically against Catholic
Religion, and made it a Sport, falsely to calumniate, to persecute, imprison,
and hang up Priests and Jesuits; How easy, I say, was it for Those most
unconscionable Accusers, and Judges of a like Temper openly unjust, harsh,
rough and cruel, either to forge such a Confession, Or by threats, Torment sand
other means to extort it from two or three poor simple women?

24. Reader, peruse at leisure the Author Morus Histor. Prove. Angli. l. 3. number.
23.
I quoted, and you will find forgery enough (which came at last to an Extremity
of force) invented by Diabolical Accusers, and Merciles Judges, against one of
the worthiest men then living Se also, the Concert. in Eccles. Aug. cited,
where you will find horrid Things acted against Priests and Laymen, through
Every page of that Excellent Book.
(to say nothing of others) I mean that glorious champion of JESUS Christ, the
incomparable and ever renowned F. Edmund Campian, whom nature had framed of a
sweet, meek, and amiable Disposition, and Grace adorned with a rich Treasure of
supernatural Virtues.

25. This Innocent Lamb (yet in courage a Lion) and six other Priests brought
before the Judge Christopher VVraye to be tried upon life and death, were
accused of Treason, as if, forsooth, They at Rhems in France had conspired to
murder Queen Elizabeth, And to accomplish that infamous Design came into
England. This vill^nous Aspersion bitterly breathed out (void of all Proof) was
at last laid aside, whilst Campian answering, called God, the Angels, Heaven,
and Earth to Witness, that such Wickedness never entered his Thoughts. Then
Anderson, Popham, and Egerton like Tygars ready to tear the blessed man in
pieces, laid to his charge, that being called from Prague to Rome, he had Ten
years agone a long Discourse with a known Cardinal, and Therefore coul'd
Campian calumniated
not but be conscious of all the Machinations, the Pope, the King of Spain, and
the great Duke of Tuscany had in hand to destroy their Queen, and ruin England.
Hence said They; Thou Campian, came hither as a Forerunner of these forces,
as a firebrand to raise Rebellion amongst us, Hence it is thou schulk'st in the
dark, when thou please, Changing apparel, and wearing silk when thou
please; Now a noble man, now a soldier, now a Merchand and and what not? Yet
in all Shapes a Rebel in all forms a Traitor.

26. Campian answered, he no more knew of any such Machinations intended the
Queen of England, than a Child yet unborn, And said, because our Laws have
prudently ordained, that no man's life be taken away upon weak Conjectures,
Clear's Himself.
or ungrounded Suspicions, He required here before God and the world but one
sole Proof whereby it might appear, he was guilty of the Crimes they accused
him. Not a Proof was, or could be produced. He went on. As for my keeping out
of sight (said he) when pursued by those who sought my blood, I did as the
Primitive Christians taught me in their time of Persecution, and like the
Blessed Apostle, who, you know, was let down in a Basket at a window, and so
escaped the fury of King Aretas. If my wearing Silk offended any, you have me
now homely clothed in a poor winter Garment almost worn to nothing.

27. Much more follows in the Relation of worthy F. Campian's Trial, which I
am forced to wave, being only to show, what Judges and Promotours digraced
England in those dismal Days; However one memorable accusation worth P. Morus
number. 24.
the Readers knowledge, is not to be omitted, and thus it was. That known
perfidious Eliot (now Catholic, now Protestant as best made for his Ends)
openly witnessed, he had heard F. Campian Preach; in which Sermon He much
inveighed against Heresy and Wickedness, and said a Day would certainly come
formidable to the World. O Sedition. O Treason! cried out The Judge enraged
against Campian.
the Judge and his Assessors. By this fearful day thou Campian could mean
nothing but such a day as those late Rebels in the North hoped for, of Ruin
and destruction to us all. Quite contrary replied the Prisoner, the Drift of my
discourse carried me to speak of that formidable day of Judgment; when our
Just Judge CHRIST JESUS will appear, and render to every one a reward or
punishment Answerable to their Deserts; This I said would be a day full of
comfort to the Just, but formidable to Heretics and Sinners.

28. Thus, Reader frontlesse Calumnies, unjust Slanders, fancied Rebellions,
without proof, without witnesses, without the least Evidence given in, contrary
to all conscience were then forged. Thus Malice bitterly acted against the
Innocent Campian, and Two other Venerable Priests, Sherwin and Bryant. Thus it
set them forth as Criminals guilty of the Highest Treason, And (so the Devil
would have it) ended at last in an Extremity of force, for nothing but malice
brought these three Servants of God to the Gallows, and there forced out of
their harmless hearts, Blood, Soul. and Life, to the eternal shame of their
Judges, and horror of all the Spectators.

29. Ponder now I beseech you (it is the only thing I Aim at in this
Digression) could those Accusers, Promoters and Judges forge such Calumnies in
the deplorable Case of F. Edmund Campian and his Associats? Could they
unconscionably force the Life which God had given out of Their Bodies? What
wonder then is it, if at any time, the like Rabble of men, perhaps in some
other Tribunal (unknown to me) forged Lies in the Trial of these three examined
women with Mayney, or forced out of those poor affrighted creatures a false
Confession? Semel inventum decies factum. What do I Say once found? It was ever
done in those bloody Trials of Priests, and as may probably be conjectured not
left undone in the Examination of those simple women, For the Violence of the
English in those Days, as Cambden confesses, Cambden Anno 27. Elizabeth^
(speaking of feigned conspiracies against Catholics) Was to Pry and search
into men's minds, to Devise mischief, to forge Letters from banished Persons
never transmitted, to send Emissaries abroad with order to gather up false
Rumors, and to make all welcome, that any way tended to the Disgrace of
Catholics. Cease therefore to wonder, if in the supposed Trial of those poor
women such Artifices were used, contrary to Justice and Conscience, if all be
not a mere Fiction.

30. One word now of F. William Weston, whom the Dr call's the chief Manager
of these feigned Possessions. For your better Satisfaction, A(...)rm Hist.
prove. Angl. lib. 4. n. 15. and n. 25.
please, good Reader, to peruse F. Henry More cited, where you have the Virtues
of that worthy man largely set down, (too long a Subject for this place)
without the least mention of any imputed and contrived Exorcisms. In case the
Dr except's against my Author as one that is partial, or waves matters he should
have related, I require this Justice at his hands, that he remit me to some
Writer who either proves F. More Partial, or Weston guilty of those enormous
crimes falsely (I avouch) laid to his charge. Believe it, F. More was no way
Shy number. 17.
in faithfully recounting what difficulties Weston met with in Wisbick Castle,
caused chiefly by a Dr of Physic, and another unnamed Priest, that afterward
turned Apostat, perhaps such an one as Tyrel once was. He tell's you also number.
25.
what false Aspersions were laid upon F. Weston, and in what manner the Holy
man was vindicated and cleared; But not a word all this while of Records entered
into any Court of High Commission, Weston vindicated.
or of twelve Exorcists Employed by Weston to feign Possessions, that never
were. The whole Story even as the Dr set's it forth by the Very Circumstances
shows it self a Fable, yea an open Calumny, peevishly invented to dishonor
Priests, and Catholic Religion.

31. But enough of this, And much more Dirt gathered up by the Dr, wholly
useless for any other End, save only to make him that pack't it together,
ridiculous. Observe I beseech you. The Dr Supposes the long Tales hitherto told
to have been cheats, and fraudulent Dr Still. page 663.
fictions, yet simply concludes. This may abundantly suffice for the first
Particular, which was the comparing the Miracles of the Roman Church with those
of Christ and his Apostles. Are all indeed Forged Miracles cannot be called
Miracles of the Church.
Fictions, Mr Dr, like that of the Prioresse of the Annunciada in Lisbon? Have
all been found cheats, and forged Miracles? So it is say you. How then dare
you, Sr, impudently call them Miracles of the Roman Church, when you know, and
the whole world knows, That this Church abhorr's all feigned Miracles, or what
ever of that Nature is, or has been discovered manifestly false? I say
Therefore, such filth deserves no more the name of Miracles wrought in the
Roman Church, than your new, Negative Protestant Articles, deserve to be called
the old Positive Tenets of Faith, or false Scripture, the true Word of God. Now
according to my Promise in the 4.th Chapter, I am to follow Mr Doctor as he
leads us on to the End of his Enquiry.

CHAP. XIV.
An Answer to one os the Doctors Exceptions against Miracles. Whether Miracles
in the first Age of Christianity were but few? How Miracles are proved by true
Doctrine and true Doctrine by Miracles. No counterfeited Miracle can pass the
Churches Tribunal without censure. Of a late VVriters exceptions against
Miracles. The admirable Propagation of Christian Religion convinces that
Miracles have been wrought.

1. WE usually say an Argument that proves too much, proves nothing, but all Dr
Still. Arguments proposed against approved Miracles wrought in the Church make
every whit as much against the Miracles of Christ, and consequently prove too
much, Therefore nothing at all. What is here Asserted you will find made good
in the ensuing Chapters.

2. I replied to one of the Dr's Exceptions Page 665.
c. 2, n. 17. where he thinks Miracles needless in future Ages, because those
wrought by Christ and his Apostles in confirmation of their Doctrine, were
abundantly sufficient without more. I Said then that none can know by a bare
owning those ancient Miracles what Doctrine Christ taught, For all called
Christians, as Arians and Pelagians, admitted Christ's Miracles, yet grossly
swerved from his Doctrine. Dr Still. I suppose, None can say what Doctrine Christ
taught by owning only ancient Miracles.
admit's all the Miracles our Savior wrought, yet he shall never prove one
Essential point of Protestancy by them, no more shall the Arian evince any
Doctrine of Arianisme true that way; if no other Oracle illustrated by Miracles
interposes its Authority, and ascertain's him, that such and such is Christ's
Doctrine concerning the greatest Mysteries of Faith. For example. That Christ is
truly God and man, one Essence and three distinct Persons etc, Tell me Reader
what Sense find you in this Inference? Our Savior raised Lazarus from the
dead, cured the blind man, cleansed the Lepers, Ergo, God is thereby proved one
Essence and three distinct Persons? Again if Dr Still. take on to pare away
what Miracles he pleases, if he thinks so many will sufficiently serve for
future, Ages, I Ask, why are not Christ's Miracles alone, excluding those the
Apostles wrought, sufficient for us all? Nay, why may not only one Miracle
wrought by Christ (without more, if conveyed down by Tradition) bring with it
that Al-sufficiency the Dr speaks of? Page 666.


3. The Dr, seeing such abundance of Miracles pretended to in all Ages and
Countries, and finding them so sparingly wrought in the Writings of Scripture
(unless for confirmation of a new Religion) thinks, we must either hold that
God has changed the Method of his Providence, in being once sparing, and now
too liberal; or that we through ignorance and Credulity take those for Miracles
which are not so. Mr Dr's Religion (as Protestancy) is one of the newest in the
world, yet I never heard of any Miracles so much as sparingly wrought for its
confirmation. But ad rem.

4. The Dr grossly mistakes. Miracles wrought in the first Age of Christianity,
were neither scarce nor sparing, but contrariwise, Admirable, great and
numerous, in so much that no one Age after that, can Parrallel the Miracles
then wrought. The Signs and Miracles which Christ wrought, says S. John, were
many, Though all are not John 20. v. 30.
registered in Holy Writ; The visible appearing of the Holy Ghost upon the then
newly Baptized, their speaking different Languages, and working other Miracles,
seldom or never seen afterward, much augment the number, and set forth the
glory of Miracles in those Days. Add hereunto The Primitive Miracles many, and
admirable.
the innumerable Miracles which the Apostles wrought in their Preaching up and
down the world, And in the Conversion of Nations, you will find no want at all,
but great Plenty, may Ecclesiastical History gain belief; And I see not why
that ought to be esteemed of lesser Credit, then the Dr's Tale of Pythagoras
his golden Thigh, or his feigned cure wrought by Aesculapius, whereof more
presently. In the mean while, the Dr may read what strange Miracles the Priests
and Deacons of Achaia recount of S. Andrew the Apostle, what others Write of S.
Thomas in his Preaching to the Medes, Persians, Bactrians, and finally to the
Indians, Of S. Simon and Judes admirable Conversions and Miracles also wrought
in Mesopotamia, in Egypt, and finally in Persia, where meeting together they
dyed for Christ, and suffered a glorious Martyrdom; The like we read of other
Apostles, whose Holy Lives and labors afford Miracles in abundance. However
grant (which is not true) that God in any one latter Age favovred his Church
with a greater number of Miracles than he did the Primitive, who can repine at
his Providence, he is Lord, and may do what he pleases? Or who dare censure us
as Liars, and over credulous, if by real Proofs taken from undoubted Records,
we make our Assertions good, and evince the Truth of every Miracle in
particular.

5. Dr Still. after a tedious rambling much Page 667.
to this Sense; That God would contradict himself, should he confirm a Doctrine
by Miracles contrary to Christian Religion already proved by Miracles (a Truth
known to all), makes this Inference. Therefore although in the beginning of a
Religion, the Doctrine is to be proved by Miracles, yet that being once
supposed, Miracles afterward are to be tried by the Doctrine. Would Dr Still.
either prove his Protestant Miracles by Protestant Doctrine, or Protestant
Doctrine (what ever it is) by Protestant Miracles, I should be better Satisfied,
But the Good man offer's at neither. I Answer How Miracles are proved by the
Churches Doctrine, and that Doctrine by Miracles?
this common Doctrine, (often proposed by our Divines). All new Miracles wrought
in the Church are to be examined and proved by the Churches Authority, is True,
and therefore whatever Miracle after due Examination is found contrary to the
Churches Doctrine as it is established, and proved Orthodox by the Ancient Signs
of Christianity, the Ancient Prophesies also, by the Sanctity of thousands and
thousands, and the large Extent of this great moral Body, Such a Miracle, I
say, ought to be rejected as false, though an Angel from Heaven (which is
impossible) should visibly exhibit the greatest.

6. Some hereupon will say. Not only new, but all Miracles though now old, are
to be tried and proved by the Churches authority. For the first Miracle wrought
in the Church was then new, so was the second, and all other ensuing,
respectively to the time and place they were done in; But all these together
cannot (if we make a right Analysis) be proved by the Doctrine, The Difficulty
proposed.
or the Authority of the Church, because the Churches Doctrine and Authority is
Primarily proved by her Miracles which seems impossible, For who can first
prove the Churches Doctrine true or Evidently credible by Miracles, and
afterward without a vicious Circle prove her Miracles true by the Doctrine,
which is not proved true, or evidently credible, But by Miracles?

7. Shall we in this Trial of Miracles try also Dr Stillingfleet's speculative
faculty a little, Has the like Force against our Saviors Miracles.
and propose the same Argument against the Miracles wrought by Christ and the
Apostles, using the very same words? The first Miracle Christ wrought was then
new (the like is of the Apostolical Signs) the second also ensuing,
respectively to the place and time when done, was new, and so of the rest. But
all these taken together (if we make a right Analysis) cannot be first proved
true by Christ's Doctrine, because that Doctrine is primarily proved true, or
evidently credible, by Christ's Miracles, which seems, as I said, to imply a
Vicious Circle; For what can be more Circular than first to prove Christ's
Doctrine by Miracles, and afterward to prove the Miracles true by the Doctrine,
not otherwise proved true, or evidently credible, than by Miracles? What Answer
gives the Dr to this Argument? Will he say Christ's Miracles are now supposed
true? I may say as much of Church Miracles, But believe it, if we make a right
Resolution of Faith, we are obliged to show our Suppositions reasonable, and
go deeper into matters, than only to Suppose, and prove nothing.

8. My Answer conformable to what I delivered Part. 1. c. 6. number. 17.
in the last little Treatise against Dr Still. is thus. All Miracles, whether
wrought by Christ or in the Church, may be considered two ways, First as
Objects of Sense, seen or known by undoubted Witnesses, and under this Notion,
(as previous to Faith) they illuminate the mind, and only rationally move to
accept Christ's Doctrine anciently delivered, and now taught in the Church, But
are not the last ground, or only Formal Object of Belief, and therefore Faith
depend's not on the sight or bare Appearance of this The difficulty solved.
or that Individual Miracle. 2. Miracles may be considered as most certainly
true, and this full Assurance of their Truth, we have not from any outward
appearance, (for Devils may delude us) But from the Churches Approbation, which
Church is not only supposed, but rationally proved God's own Oracle by the
glorious light of external Motives (Miracles chiefly). Thus far led on by
reason, we prudently receive her Doctrine, and say, that all new Miracles are to
be tried and proved by the Churches known and received Doctrine, what is Contrary
we reject as spurious and false, What is conformable (when the marter of Fact
is made Morally certain) we rest in, and own as undoubted, after this Oracle
has sealed Chap. 17. from n. 1^ and n. 38.
all up in a Legal Trial, and given in her Approbation. Se more here of
afterward.

9. You will Say if the Churches Approbabation be required as necessary before
we yield An assent though sure, implies not the certainty of Faith.
a sure Assent to the Truth of a Miracle, How can we Show that the Doctrine of
Christ, or the Church is made evidently Credible by Miracles, not yet known
evidently true, when merely considered as previous Inducements (or not firmed
by any certain Oracle) They move to Believe? I Answer Those who heard of
Christ's Miracles only relied on Moral certainty.
very easily; Tell me, I beseech you, Had all those who only heard of Christ's
Miracles and Doctrine, far distant from the place where they were wrought, any
previous clear Evidence of their Truth, or did they then believe them by Faith,
fixed only upon the humane Testimony of such as made a Relation of them? It is
impossible, because Faith requires a more noble Motive; The knowledge therefore
they had was then only morally certain, which as I showed in the last Treatise,
is enough with other helps, to Assent to Christ's Doctrine upon this Motive,
that God revealed it.

10. By all hitherto noted the Reader may Why the Churches Censure is necessary
concerning Miracles?
see, how necessary it is to have an Oracle ever ready at hand by whose Censure
and Judgment true Miracles are discerned from the illusive Charms of Devils,
and wicked men. Nothing that is counterfeit can pass this Tribunal. Though
therefore the Devil often Transform's himself into an Angel of light, and may
dazzle men's Eyes with a false Luster of fair Wonders, yet the Church will find
him out* and lay open the Legerdemain.

11. Dr Still. told us just now, That in the beginning of Religion the Doctrine
is to be proved by Miracles, Upon a mere Accident, I met with a Protestant
Brother, who seems to contradict Mr Dr, and call's himself Gilbert Burnet,
this Gentleman ascribes great power to evil Spirits, and Mr Burnet in his
Rational Method for the proving the Truth of Christian Religion. etc. page 24.
and 25.
says Miracles cannot Determine his belief, without some what previous to
Miracles. Then concludes. The first and great Argument for the proof of
Christian Religion, is the purity of the Doctrine, and the Holiness of its
precepts. which are so congruous to the Common Impressions of nature and
reason. I may here first Ask Mr Burnet, of what Christian Religion he speaks?
There are Arians in the world, that deny the Mystery of the Sacred Trinity, and
the Incarnation also, Pelagians, that deny the necessity of Divine Grace,
Grecians that deny the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and Son,
and finally Catholics that believe these denied Articles as Truths revealed by
Almighty God. All go under the name of Christians, And as you see contradict
one another in the Very Fundamentals Mr Burnets Discourse found Weightles.
of Faith. Speak out Mr Burnet (the Difficulty here moved must not be flightly
passed over) is the Doctrine of so many dissenting Spirits in fundamentals pure?
Are the Precepts whereby every Society is obliged to follow the Doctrine it
makes profession of, Holy and Congruous? Is it suitable to the Common
Impressions of Nature and Reason? Put us not off but Answer directly, or point
me out plainly that Society of Christians, whose Doctrine only is pure, and
Percepts Holy, or which is deemed by the wisest of the world so congruous to
the Common Impressions of nature and reason? If you extol your Puritans upon
the account of their Pure Doctrine, or your Protestants for Holy Precepts, your
first Reformers, Luther, Calvin, Beza and the like, will lay so much nastiness
before your Eyes, that the common light of Nature cannot but decry it as
shameful, and reason abhor it. Moreover you have not within the whole
latitude of Protestancy ( as Protestancy) one essential Article Se Reason and
Religion. Disc. 1. c. 20. number. 4.
of Christian Doctrine pure, For you have none at all Essential, which is not
either Popery, (and that is no Doctrine of Protestancy as Protestancy) or the
long since Cashiered Opinions of condemned Heretics, as is amply proved in
another Treatise. A word now to your Exceptions against Miracles.

12. You say 1. Some what previous to Miracles must have place ere we believe
Christ's Doctrine, and you build much upon its Congruity to the common
Impressions of nature and reason. Good Sr, is the Sacred Mystery of the Trinity
(I hope you believe it) which as Divines teach, is above reason and transcend's
all natural Discourse, so Very congruous to the common Impressions of nature?
Our Lord Christ JESUS, you know, truly God and man, after his painful labors
was scourged and crucified by impious hands ( a scandal to the Jews says S,
Paul, and foolishness to the Gentiles) Is this great Mystery 1. Cor 1. 2. 3.
think ye so Very Congruous to reason? You may say as the Apostle Writes, that
God to confound the wise, made choice of things foolish in the eyes of men, and
of weak things to confound the strong, But in doing so, you run out of the
reach of all natural Impressions, and take your Proof from Divine Revelation,
so that if we yield The high Mysteries of Faith, transcend reason
assent to these great Mysteries, we are not to fix it upon any natural
Principle, but must believe, because God has revealed them. Now further: But no
man according to the present Order of Providence could ever prudently believe
the Truth of that Revelation, or own the Mysteries revealed evidently Credible
Without Miracles, and other prudent Motives, Therefore Miracles (Gods own
Signatures) were both necessary, and ever previous to that firm assent which
the Primitive Christians yielded to the sublime Mysteries of Faith.

13. Shall I prove what is here asserted, by one clear and convincing Instance?
Suppose Almighty God should please to single out now Twelve poor Fishermen, and
impart many great Secrets never yet known to the world, which cannot be known
before they Preach. Having commission from God they run from City to City and
because so commanded, faithfully declare what God told them. For example, The
precise time of Antichrist's coming, when the Day of Judgment will be, how
many are elected to eternal Glory, how many rejected with other unknown
Secrets, but in the mean while A clear Instance proving what is asserted.
work no Miracles, show no supernatural Signs, only Speak and Preach. Would
prudent men think ye believe such Teachers, or yield assent to their Doctrine
having no rational Motive to ground Belief upon, But their bare word? It is
impossible. Had therefore the blessed Apostles, poor unlearned Fishermen by
words only, laid forth the Mysteries and high Secrets of our Faith; had they
only spoken of the sacred Trinity, of that ineffable Mystery of God made man,
of the Dead rising to life again, of the eternal pain due to the Damned, and
wrought no Miracles, or exhibited no exterior supernatural Wonders whereby to
make their Doctrine Credible, The whole world would have deemed them half
frantic, and despised them as cheats, or Authors of Novelties. We se though
they wrought stupendous Wonders. yet how lingering and slow many were, and are
still in believing, what then could have been expected had they showed no
Signs, but a universal Incredulity?

14. You Say. 2. The Predictions of the Messiah did all agree to our Savior
and received completion in him. Very true Answers the Christian, though the
Jews deny all, and pervert these Prophesies to a sinister Sense, And so much
more your Barbarous Nations would have done, had the blessed Apostles at their
Preaching, barely worded it, or read out of the old Scriptures what Moses and
the Prophets foretold of Christ; But when they raised the dead to life, cured
the Infirm, and visibly wrought other great Miracles before those they Preached
to, the hardest hearts relented, and yielded to their Doctrine. These Prophesies
therefore, are one partial Proof for Christianity, but must not go alone How
the Motives of Credibility are to be taken.
without Miracles accompanying them, Or if as taken Solitarily, you hold them
the chief or only motive, you evince little. The Motives of Credibility, Sr,
are never to be looked on by retail, or piecemeal, joined together they
rationally convince, divided from each other or considered one by one, much of
their Efficacy is lost.

15. You Say. 3. The strange Propagation of Christian Religion appears not a
sufficient Proof for Miracles. I contrary hold it both strong and convincing,
For as S. Austin discourses, either The Propagation of the Gospel, Miraculous.
Miracles (as previous and the principal cause of that Propagation) had
influence upon it, or not. If they had Influence, you grant what we plead for.
If not; you must confess the Propagation it self effected without Miracles,
to have been the greatest Miracle of all. Thus S. Augustine Argues and it is a
convincing Dilemma.

16. You Ask next what were the strong Arguments of Christian Religion before
it was Propagated? Those seemed convincing or not; if not convincing, it was
Propagated by weak and unconcluding Arguments, and we are not bound to believe
it, If convincing, we know them, or if we know them not, how can we Judge they
were convincing? I Answer this whole discourse built upon two false
Suppositions falls to nothing. One is, that Miracles either seen or heard of
preceded not the first conversions of Christians. The other, That there were
some other rational Arguments as strong and convincing for Christian Religion
before its Propagation, as Miracles were.

17. I say contrary, and prove that Miracles preceded all great conversions
made to true Christian Miracles were ever previous to all great conversions.
Religion. Those Signal Wonders wrought by our Savior sensible and visible, as
rational Arguments, first induced the blessed Apostles and some few more to
believe in him. It Is true Christ's Holy life and amiable conversation had great
Influence upon minds (to say nothing now of the attraction of Divine Grace
working inwardly) But the Luster of his glorious Miracles (Gods own powerful
Language) made the deepest Impression on men who were first led on by reason,
And therefore could not but Discover a mighty weight and efficacy in this one
Motive of our Christian Faith. Now if we speak of that ample and large
Propagation which ensued upon the Apostles Preaching in several parts of the
world, or of those ^ other great Conversions wrought by the Catholic Church in
after Ages* none can deny, but that most Signal glorious Miracles (not done to
be gazed on) ever preceded as a chief Cause, and effected that great Work of
God among most Barbarous Nations. Finally that no other convincing rational
Arguments greater or comparable with Miracles, can be produced as previous to
its Miraculous Propagation appears by your silence Mr Burnet, you allege
none, neither are there any alledgeable of so great poise as Miracles were.

18. You Say. 4. There was good reason to believe the Gospel when our Savior
wrought his Miracles in the Sight of the Jews (and this great Argument the
Apostles urged) but that reason remain's yet good, and still proves it true
whether the world had embraced it or not. I Answer the reasons were then good,
because Mira^les rationally prove a Doctrine good when an Infallible Oracle
tells us what its meaning is.
the Apostles in those Days were living infallible Oracles, and could not only
ascertain every one of the Gospels Divine inspiration, but also when
Difficulties arose among the faithful declare its genuine Sense, But now ye
Protestants Say matters are much changed, for there is no certain Oracle, no
Church taught by the Holy Ghost that can Infallibly avouch these Writings were
from God, that such and such in the more difficult Passages is their true Sense
and meaning, So that every man left to his private Judgment, may draw what
Religion he pleases out of Scripture, And this we se done before our eyes by
men called Christians, yet differ in the Fundamentals of Christian Faith.

19. Upon this ground your Question next proposed signifies little. What say
you, if the Gentiles had rejected the Testimony of the Apostles as the Jews
did, Had we not been bound to believe the Gospel, if those sacred Writings had
been with a most religious care conveyed down to us? Sr, Methinks you go too
far in your Supposition, Saying, if the world had not embraced the Gospel, and
both Jews and Gentiles rejected it, we are yet bound to believe it. Why so I
beseech you? Upon what Principle are we If all had rejected the Gospel. how are
we obliged to receive it?
obliged to admit a Gospel which the whole world, all Jews and Gentiles
rejected? S. Austin you know teaches (and I am wholly of his Judgment) That he
would not believe the Gospel unless moved thereunto by the Authority of the
Catholic Church, which Church, I am sure, embraces a great part of the world,
And had in it many, who once were Jews and Gentiles. Hence you see, Sr, it is
very hard to Suppose the Gospel universally set at naught, and that a strict
obligation lies on us to receive it. But let this pass.

20. Suppose we receive the bare Word of the Gospel, what Sense shall we make
of it in a hundred abstruse Passages, what Religion shall we suck out of it?
Arianism, or Pelagianism? Nestorianism or worse? It is impossible to clear this
Difficulty without recourse to an Infallible living Oracle, upon whose
Judgment all in this present State must rely, or can believe nothing. You put
much force in those who carefully conveyed the Gospel The false Conveyers of
the Gospel, not found in the Principles of Protestants.
down to us. Very good. could such men be found, But here we are at a stand.
The blessed Apostles who lived not always, left those Writings in the hands of
the Church, But this Church says Dr Still. above a thousand years since
altered Christ's revealed Doctrine, changed the Apostolical Faith, and became as
Idolatrous as Those who worshipped the Sun or a Red cloth? All others out of
this Church named Christians, were known condemned Heretics. Were all this
true, no more would I take the Gospel from this supposed Idolatrous Church; or
these false condemned Heretics, than believe the word of a known Perjured
Person, or credit one esteemed a common Liar. And thus in the Principles of
Protestants the careful conveyance of the Gospel failing, all Faith in
Scripture fail's with it. But enough of this Digression. We return to Dr
Stillingfleet.

CHAP. XV.
How Miracles are to be examined? Christ wrought not his Miracles by natural
Magic or Necromancie, by strong Imagination, or the different Aspects of
Stars. Whatever rational Argument proves Christ to have wrought true Miracles
by Divine Virtue, as forcibly proves Church Miracles to proceed from the very
same cause. Though Devils may work some strange wonders, they cannot raise the
Dead, or cure desperate Infirmities. Of the Egyptian Magicians Feats. A word
of the witch at Endor^ Other matters handled.

1. DR Still. thinks it very reasonable for page 668. and 669.
us (he means Protestants) after so many forewarnings in Scripture of false
Wonders) to Examine all pretenses of Miracles by trying whether they can be
distinguished from deceiptful appearances, which may be wrought by a Power
less than Divine. Answ. I think it also Very reasonable, and wish, Mr Dr, that
you, who yet never went about to examine one Miracle, would undergo the pains
you hold so reasonable. Take courage therefore, examine with greatest rigor
either all, or some of those you have in the 3. Chap. above, And if you find a
flaw in any, shame me boldly; But I tell you before hand, you will have a hard
Task, For no sooner shall you discredit those by reason or Authority, but you
will, eo ipso, enervate all our Savior's Miracles, which certainly were proved
truly wrought upon Humane Faith, before Scripture registered them.

2. In this laudable Examination two things may be Questioned. The first
concerns the matters of Fact, whether for an Instance, God raised the dead to
life by the Intercession of blessed What this due Examination requires?
S. Stephen, of S. Thomas Cantilupe, and S. Xaverius? The like is of desperate
Diseases cured by the Prayers of Saints in God's Church? Hereof we have great
Evidence taken from Eyvvitnesses, and the undoubted Testimony of those who have
left them upon Record. Mr Dr certainly requires not, when a Miracle is done,
That God tell us by a new Revelation it is a work above all natural Power, or
that he work one Mito confirm the Truth of another, This would imply a Process
in Infinitum, when one may as well Question the second, or third Miracle, as
the first. Neither, were our Saviors Miracles when done, proved after this
manner. No. They were first seen by credible Witnesses, afterward divulged,
And that was proof enough. The second thing Questionable is, whether if such
Miracles (as are now evinced) were visibly exhibited, may notwithstanding (that
exterior Evidence) be held deceiptful Appearances only, or wrought by a Power
less than Divine? This the Dr hints at, and would fain have all our Miracles
thought at most bare Appearances, if yet so much.

3. I Say in a word; What even Reason proves Christ and his Apostles to have
wrought true Miracles by Divine Power, evinces the Very same of all approved
Miracles done in the Church. God therefore was and is, the sole Principal cause
of all such Miraculous Effects.

4. Before I prove what is here asserted, reflect Irenaeus l. 2 c. 57. sine.
upon the Resuscitation of Lazarus who lived afterward a long time; Call also
to mind those mentioned by Irenaeus, that were raised from death, and
perseverantly lived (says this great Author) multis annis, many years with
us. So also no few did, resuscitated by S. Thomas Cantilupe, S. Dominick, and
S. Xaverius. All these walked up and down, conversed with otthers, experienced
in themfelves the real Operations of life, and therefore either lived, or we
Act. 3. 3.
live not. Now for strange Cures, consider in the next place, that man lame
from his Mothers womb, who lay begging at the Gate of the Temple called
Beautiful, to whom S. Peter, says The dead raised to life and desperate
Discases cured.
Holy Scripture, instantly gave health, strength, and vigor. Compare his cure
with that of poor John Clement, born also a Criple from his Mothers womb that
often sat begging at the Gate of our Ladies Church in Montagu, And in a moment
of time (like the other in the Acts) lifted himself up, stood straight on his
feet, and was Miraculously cured by the Intercession of the ever Blessed Virgin.

5. Hence I Argue. Christ is rationally proved to have raised Lazarus to life
by Divine Virtue, if no Power in nature or Devils could produce that strange
Effect. Ergo those other Resuscitations now mentioned, are as rationally proved
wrought by Divine Virtue, if no Power in nature nor Devils could produce them.
Again. That cure wrought upon the Lame born All done by Divine Power.
Criple Sitting at the Temple gate, is rationally proved Miraculous, and done
by Divine Virtue if no Power in nature or Devils did it. Ergo that cure wrought
upon John Clement, no less a lame born Criple, is as rationally proved
Miraculous, and done by Divine Virtue, if no Power in nature or Devils did it;
But the Antecedents here proposed in both cases are most true, Therefore
necessarily infer Truth in their Consequences.

6. I am first to Show that no Power in nature or Devils can raise the Dead to
life, and will not entertain the Reader with the open Folly of some Arabians,
who thought Christ wrought all his Miracles, and consequently raised the Dead,
by the strength of his Powerful Imagination. As wholly stupid are those
Judiciary Astrologers that ascribe them to the different Aspects or Situations
of Stars, in which knowledge (say they) Christ was most conversant. Michael de
Medina both Medina de recta in Deum fide lib. 2. c. 7.
largely and learnedly refutes these whymsies and shows, that Imagination, can
indeed, work strange Effects in the Body and mind of such as are liable to
violent fancies, (whereof he gives prodigious Examples) but can effect nothing
Se his page 69. B.
upon Things distant, or wholly separated from the Imaginative Faculty. If
therefore one sit's Lame in a chair, and see's a Book a far off in a
Stationers Shop, the strongest Imagination in the world will never bring that
Book into his hands. He refutes also the Astrologers upon this ground, that not
only our Savior, but the blessed Apostles also dispersed the whole world over
under different constellations, (yea their very The fooleries of some refuted.
girdles, handherchiefs, and Garments, and the Saints in Heaven when invoked at
their Monuments, work innumerable Miracles, independently of the various
motions, and Aspects of Stars. Finally says Medina, if a strong Imagination,
or Stars can produce such admirable Effects, how comes it to pass, that these
talkative men were all born under so unluckly Planets, as to do none? How
happen's it, they are so feeble in their Apprehensions, that not one among them
could ever yet work a true Miracle? But enough of Fooleries.

7. Some thought more wise tell us, that all our Saviors Miracles (the like is
of those wrought in the Church) may be easily effected by a Secret art of
Magic, earnestly sought after by many. Briefly; All Magic is either natural
or Ceremonial, when done by evil Spirits it is called Necromancy. The first
Magic makes a Search into the hidden Things of Nature, and by a ready
application of active Agents to Passive often shows strange Effects, yet no
vvayes Miraculous. For the attaining of this knowledge, Empedocles, Democritus,
Apollonius, and Anaxagoras traveled far, and viewed a great part of the
Universe. Some by virtue of it produce Roses and ripe Grapes in Winter, others
by Alchimy have long tried to find out the Philosophers Stone, but with what
success, I know not. Now this Magic (add to it that they call Astronomical,
Effects wrought by natural Magic.
and Cabalistical) being only limited to natural Causes, can do nothing that is
above all natural Power, as most certainly the raising of the dead is. Neither
did those who so highly extol this Art, ever yet pretend to call men out of
their Graves, and endue them with the like Operations of life, they had before.

8. Necromancy whether Goetick, or Theurgick practiced by Devils and Witches
has its Necromancy has its Limits.
limits also, and extend's no further than only to what is previously contained
in natural Causes, as S. Augustine cited above notes excellently well. Now
because Angels and Devils know more accurately all natural Secrets than mortals
do, They can (when God permits) show strange Effects, and very real ones also.
I say Real. For all are not (though some be) mere Illusions of the eyes or
Phansy, as Delrio and Michael Medina Largely prove, and solve the contrary
Arguments. Delrio Dis* gnis. magic. lib. 2. quaest, 16. Medina cited lib* 2.
page 56. Delrio l. 2. quaest. 10. Delrio cited quaest. 16.
However real, says Delrio, no Devil can change the now settled order in
Nature, or, by local Motion or otherwise, unfasten the established course of
the Universe, whereof the Devil is a part only, And a part cannot do more than
the whole.

9. Delrio shows, that Witches are really transported by Devils to remote
places, where many meet together, sport and banquet. For Proof hereof he
relates two strange Stories, the one borrowed from Gulielmus Neubrigensis, is
of a Neubrig. l. 1 rerum Angl. c. 38.
Countryman who passing one night by a Grot heard Singing and merriment,
looking in he saw a large room all enlightened with a great number of men and
women feasting together. One who served these Guests offered the man standing
at the Door a Cup to drink, but he wiser povred Delrio's Stories of Two
Magicians.
out all the liquor, and rid away with the Cup as fast as his horse could run.
The Cup, says Neubrigensis, made of a strange unknown matter, of a fashion
also no less odd and unusual, was presented as a Gift to Henry the Elder, King
of England, and afterward given to the King of Scots.

10. The other Story Written by Robertus Triezius one of Lisle, Delrio
recount's, and shows Delrio quest. 6.
a pretty strife between two Conjurers. The one had laid hold of a young woman,
(placed on a wooden horse behind him) and carried her through the Air by a
Castle in Burgundy, where, as it happened, another Magician was with many more
at a banquet. That strange sight discovered of a couple so well mounted riding
through the Air; The Conjurer in the Castle began his Charms, and forced man,
woman, and horse down into a Plain before the Castle, where they remained
immovable. The Conjurer with his woman thus fixed, perceiving that the other
in the Castle had thrust his head and neck out of a window between two bars of
Iron, to revenge himself, presently clap't a great pair of branched horns upon
his forehead. He could not draw his head back, the horns hindered, forward he
durst not venture, the Precipice being fearful. Finally an agreement was made.
The horned Magician dismissed the other with his woman, and the Brother
Conjurer on the Plain in requital* took off the Magicians horns within the
Castle. If these Stories be true (Written as very certain) it seems clear,
that all things told of Magicians are not mere Illusions, or fancies only.
Delrio Quaest. 10.


11. Notwithstanding such real matters done, I assert with Delrio and others;
that neither Devils cannot by their natural Power, produce any substantial Form.
Devil nor Magician can by their natural Power, immediately produce any
substantial Form for an instance, the substantial form of Fire. The reason is
clear. Nemo dat quod non habet; No cause can naturally give being to an effect,
which is not precontained in its natural Virtue, But no more can the Devil
immediately give a real being to the substantial form of Fire, of a rat, or
Serpent, than produce another Devil, or one soul another Soul. I say
immediately, without Dispositions previously introduced into a Subject fit to
receive such a Form, which are not done in a moment. Exodus 7 11.


12. Some willing to oppose this Doctrine, urge that Feat of the Aegiptian
Magicians, whose Rods cast down like that of Moses, were turned into Serpents,
And this done by Necromancy, was a work of the Devil, and no illusive but a
true real Conversion, as appears by the words of Scripture, Similiter ac What
is to be said of the Aegiptia^ Magicians?
Moses, They did as Moses had done. So S. Augustine and many Fathers Judge
Quoted by Delrio, whence it follows, that the Devil can give being to
Substantial Form's. I Answer, he can help to such productions of imperfect
Animals, usually called Insecta, in case he more quickly introduce into a
Putrified rod apt dispositions for a frog, or Serpent, which Caitan think was
here done, But this reaches not to the Immediate Production of either
substantial or accidental Form. Others say. That the Devil by a slight
Legerdemain, secretly conveyed into the place of the Magicians Rods, true
Serpents, and so solve the difficulty. Be it how you will, Moses his rod
changed into a Serpent, devovred that of the Enchanters, and therefore was
evidently the greater Miracle.

13. By all hitherto noted our Assertion above (Viz. That neither Devil nor
Magician can raise the dead to life), seems more and more confirmed, which
appears a greater work than to produce any natural substance. A further reason
hereof, convinces. The Soul separated from the Body is either held mortal, or
immortal; Why Devils cannot raise the dead?
If mortal, it perishes, and cannot return again but by creation, But no Devil
can Create or produce something out of nothing, This being the work of God only
Omnipotent; If immortal; it is cast out of this Universe, and consequently
nothing in the order of nature has Power to act upon it, or to reduce it to the
Body, which it first informed. Whence Franciscus Victoria notes Victoria Tom.
2. de art Magica page 279.
excellently well, That these Devils are usually employed about lesser matters,
in finding out Thieves, or Robbers, who have deprived men of their goods. Much
more they cannot do.

14. But what shall we say to the VVitch of 1. Reg. 28. v. 19.
Endor by whose Charms Samuel long before dead, appeared, and told King Saul of
the ill Success of his war, as also of his death the next What to the with at
Endor?
day. Some Answer, Samuel did not appear, but think another spirit assumed his
shape, and spoke to Saul. This opinion seems contrary to what we read in
Ecclesiasticus, where Samuel is Eccl. 46. 23.
said after his sleep or death, to have notified to the King the End of his
life, and exalted his voice out of the earth in Prophecy* It is also contrary
to the Doctrine of S. Austin expressly teaching, that Souls S. Aug. de cura
promortuis gerend.
departed this life often show themselves to the living, and he takes one proof
from this Appation of Samuel. And who can doubt but that Moses being dead,
appeared with our Savior in Samuel truly appeared.
his glorious Transfiguration? Samuel's soul therefore called out of Lymbo,
truly appeared, but not by the Charms of that Pythonical woman, for the
Apparition prevented her Enchantments, and was sooner than she expected, whence
like one amazed, she cried out at the Sight of Samuel, and asked why Saul had
deceived her?

15. Thus it is plain, that no other but God called up Samuel, who by Divine
illumination Prophesied so exactly of that wicked King's End, and the death of
his Sons, which Devils naturally could not foretell. In like manner we read in
Scripture, that when King Ochozias lying 4. Reg. 1. v. 2. 3.
sick, sent Messengers to question Beelzebub the God of Accaron, and enquired
whether he was to dye or no, Almighty God to prevent the foolery, commanded
Elias to tell the King, he should not rise from his bed, but dye; And thus in
raising Samuel the true Messenger, he prevented the Pythonissa's Enchantment,
if yet she used any, whereof Scripture gives no light at all. My Assertion
therefore remain's Firm that Devils cannot raise the dead.

16. Neither can they cure any desperate Infirmity, though in lesser matters
much may be Desperate diseases not Curable by Devils.
done by natural remedies, but to restore Sight to one borne blind, to take a
Leg or Arm cut off, and join it again to a maimed Body, are cures above the
power of Devils, and were never yet wrought by Necromancie. Again, when
circumstancies plainly show, that all cures wrought by Christ and in the Church
were done by Divine Virtue, it is madness to make the Devil Author of them. Our
Savior cured the blind man, and said he did it that God's works might be
manifested, John 9.
had the Devil think ye any hand here? Others implore help from the blessed
Saints in Heaven, and after earnest prayer recover perfect health suddenly, can
such works be ascribed to Devils or Necromancy, when the very circumstances of
their Prayers, directed to Almighty God and his Saints evidence the contrary?
Reflect, I beseech you; Shall God and his Saints be called on for a Favor* and
must the Devil interpose his Art and do it? All is ridiculous.

17. The second thing gathered from this A Comparison between the primitive
Miracles, and those wrought in the Church.
whole Discourse and most to be reflected on, is the comparison made between
our Saviors Miracles and others wrought in the Church. Those fir^^ before
Scripture registered them, were rationally proved upon humane Faith, works of a
Divine Power, and so are all Church Miracles when attested upon Oath, or seen
by many Eywitnesses, whose credit was never stained. The Dr therefore must
either prove such sworn Persons per^ured, and those Ey-witnesses deluded in
what they saw, or if humane Faith be in the world, he cannot but grant that the
Church has had most glorious Miracles wrought in It. In case he say, he will
not yield assent to any though svvorn Ey-vvitnesses of a Miracle, I Ask, what
if he had lived in our Saviors time, and only heard by a Moral certain report
of Lazarus raised to life, would he not upon humane faith have prudently
yielded assent to that known and much famed Miracle? If not; Why should any
other rational man have then prudently assented to it upon humane faith? Why
should not all in like manner have suspended their assent, and believed nothing
till Scripture registered our Saviors Miracles, which would therefore like dead
Signs, have lain in obscurity without Universal Fame, never so much as
prudently spoken of. Neither could they then have had any Influence upon Faith
in those Days, before men's eyes saw them Written in Holy Scripture. Such
consequences, if granted, are desperate, and would be decryed as pernicious,
the whole Christian world over.

18. It may be the Dr will say the Reporters Latter witnesses as faithful, as
those were, who saw the primitive Miracles.
of our Saviors Miracles were far more honest and faithful, than those are who
either saw, or wrote of Miracles done in the Church, And therefore upon their
word he would have believed those Ancient Miracles. Mr Dr, let us not word it,
hut come to Principles. Show me what you have against the honesty and sincerity
of S. Ambrose, of S. Irenaeus, S. Austin, S. Jerome, and S. Bernard, who both
saw and have Written of Miracles? What exception have you against those who saw
Miracles wrought by S. Thomas Cantilupe, by S. Xaverius; to say nothing of
others? Discredit these Ey-witnesses if you can, But fob us not off with a
proof taken from your own Incredulity, that signifies as little as your many
empty words and simple Jeers do, we require stronger proofs from a Dr of
Divinity, but God only knows, when they will see light, ever or never.

19. The Dr thinks we of the Roman Church page 699.
can give no evident Distinction between the Miracles we pretend to, and such
as we are bid to beware of, he means Legerdemain Miracles? This Cavil also
impugn's our Saviors Miracles, which the Jews rejected, as Heretics do the
Churches. My answer, is. Just as you distinguish between those Primitive
Miracles and all false lying Wonders, so we distinguish between our Miracles
and those other pretended to by Heathens, and Heretics. The outward appearance
The Churches Miracles are as well distinguished from Lying wonders, as the
ancient Miracles were.
of Christ's Miracles and the Churches is the very same, Lazarus raised to life
lived afterward many year's, and so did those of whom S. Irenaeus cited,
speak's. Now if you credit not Irenaeus, S. Ambrose and others, who saw great
Miracles, we are out of all good Principles, and must contradict these grave
Ey-witnesses, because you, forsooth, are incredulous, and will not believe them.

20. The true distinction briefly, between Wherein this distinction consist's.
all true Miracles (whether wrought by Christ or in the Church) and lying
Wonders, is taken from the Greatness, vast number, and admirable Effects
manifested in those first Ey-witnesses that saw them, whereof I have spoken
largely above, And there noted, that real Miracles ever show another Luster,
Light, and Majesty; not perceptible in any Charms or juggling Wonders. You Sr,
say again in the same Page. We cannot prove that Miracles wrought in the Church
could be done for no other End than to prove the Churches Infallibility. I
answer first; They have been wrought, that is undeniable, unless all humane
Faith go to wreck, for what End we shall see in the ensuing chapter.

CHAP. XVI.
Why Miracles are wrought in the Church? Of their two fold End. Miracles
rationally prove the Doctrine of Christ, and the Church infallible. Clear
Miracles have been wrought in confirmatian of every Doctrine taught by the
Church. Of Dr Stillingfleets simple Reply to two known and renowned Miracles.
Whether Aesculapius cured a woman in the Temple of Epidaurus. The Dr's Story
of Pythagoras his golden Thigh examined, found a fourb, or at most Necromancy.

1. DR Still. in the page cited peremptorily concludes. It must be showed, that
our Miracles could be wrought for no other End, but to prove the Church
Infallible. Why so Mr Dr? Can you show that every Miracle which Christ and his
Apostles wrought, were done for no other End but to prove Christ's Doctrine
Infallible? Or did those first great Masters of Christianity at every
particular Cry out, this Wonder Gods wor^s for no other End but only to All
Miracles usually wrought for a double End.
prove Christ's Doctrine Infallible? Its Improbable. I Say therefore, those
Miracles were usually done for a double End, The one was the benefit of him
they were done for, whether afflicted or diseased, And this our Savior fixed
upon, when he cured the blindeman, so also S. Peter did in the Cure he wrought
upon the Lame Criple sitting at the Temple gate. The other End, ever intended
by Almighty God (though not always explicitly declared) was the manifestation
of his Divine Power ( ut manifestentur John 9. 3.
opera Dei in illo, says our Savior) working by those he sent to teach the
World. Whence every one might have rationally discoursed as that Prince among
the Jews did. Rabbi we know John 3. 2.
thou art come from God, For no man can do the Signs thou does't, unless God
be with him. But if Christ and the Apostles were rationally proved Teachers
sent from God by Miracles, their Doctrine was in like manner rationally evinced
sound, and infallible.

2. And thus we discourse as to Church Miracles, where you also have a twofold
End, the one is the benefit of him that receives it, the other the
manifestation of Gods Power working by his Servants, whence also their Doctrine
is rationally proved to be from God, sound and true, though not always
explicitly asserted true at every Miracle. Ask says S. Austin (often Miracles
have their Language.
cited) what Miracles speak of Christ, Habent enim vocem suam, They have an
audible Voice, speak by them selves, and tell us that Christ was the true
Missias sent by Almighty God to teach, and therefore proved his Doctrine true
and sacred? So say I, Ask what Miracles speak of the Church? They have their
language, and tell us, She is a luminous Sun, that disperses her rays over the
whole Universe, She is Gods own Oracle, and therefore what Doctrine She
teaches is proved by reason evidently Credible, sound and true. Thus much is
easily made out in a rational Discourse, In what Sense all Miracles have a
respect to truth.
though he that works the Miracle says nothing of its confirming Faith, or of
its distinguishing the Church from all Heretical Communities; And in this Sense
All true Miracles cannot but have a respect to Truth.

3. Again many Saints have often publicly declared, that the Miracles they
wrought were done to confirm the Catholic Faith. So speak's S. Bernard of the
great Miracle done upon the Loaves of bread. In this, says he, you shall know
that those things we teach are true, and Se Chapt. 3 above n. 33. se Chap, 12.
number. 3.
that we are God's Ministers etc. So also did S. Xaverius to prove (they are
his words) the Verity of our Christian Faith, you shall see this dead man
raised to life again. But what good will these and many more like Instances do
upon an incredulous Dr, who can jeer at all, when he has nothing to Answer?

4. I Argue. 2. If we show all those Articles Every Article of Catholic Faith
has been confirmed by Miracles.
of our Catholic Faith (most opposed by Modern Sectaries) to have been
confirmed by illustrious Miracles, we clearly Evince that one End of Miracles
wrought in the Church (though not ever the only End) was, and still is, to
strengthen Faith, and withal to assure us, that what Doctrine this Oracle
Proposes, is from God and consequently most certain. But this we make out upon
the irrefragable Testimony of as grave Authors as ever wrote, and in the first
place will remind the Reader of S. Bernard's indubitable Miracle, wrought to
confirm these Catholic Articles. Viz. The real Presence, Sacrifice of the
Mass, Purgatory, Prayers to Saints and praying for the Dead, which those
Heretics, like Protestants now a days, denied. This one Miracle (I say)
alone, supposing the matter of Fact which none can rationally Question, no
less now evinces Protestants guilty of gross Error, than it anciently did
those Henricians, or Heretics called Apostolici.

5. If you yet desire more Satisfaction herein, Brerely P^ot. Apol. Tract 2 c.
3 sect. 7. subd. 1. Fevard. in notis ad 8. cap. Irenaei. lib. 1. advers. Heret.
read Brerely (an Author ready at hand) and peruse also Franciscus
Fervandentius. There is, says he, not any one Catholic Doctrine, or Article of
our Faith but has been proved and confirmed by most evident Miracles From
Heaven, which the Saints in God's Church have wrought, as grave Writers beyond
all exception, testify. It is known says Fevardentius, that the Decrees of the
most Holy Councils at Nice and Calcedon, wherein the main Articles of Faith are
contained, were all ratifyed by open and manifest Miracles. Then he remit's you
to S. Augustine, to Optatus Milevitanus, S. Cyprian S, Ambrose and other worthy
Fathers who recount most clear Miracles, by which not only our Catholic
Doctrine, but even the Rites of our Church have been confirmed. I cannot insist
upon all, or the half (the work is too long) and therefore will only bring to
light a few most clear and undeniable.

6. S. Gregory Nazianyen relates, how his Nazian. Orat 11. de obitu Gorgoniae.
One Miracle related by S. Gregory Nazianzen.
Sister Gorgonia when past all hope of recovery was miraculously freed from an
infirmity by prostrating herself before the Altar, and calling on Christ our
Lord, there present, there honored, and worshipped O Admirable wonder, says
the Saint, presently quit of her sickness, She found herself well, and
returned home eased in Body and mind.

7. Optatus Melivitanus relates a fearful Story Optatus l. 2. contra Donatistas.
of Heretics, who cast the reserved Holy Eucharist to Dogs, and had for that
wicked fact a condign Punishment, the dogs, says he, furiously raging tore
their Masters in pieces, a just Judgment of God Answerable to their horrid Two
more by Optatus Melsvitanus.
crime. Another Miracle, says Optatus, Almighty God evidenced, when those
wicked Heretics threw out of a window a little Vial of Chrism, or Holy Oil,
with intention to break it in pieces upon stones lying under the window, but
Providence by an Angel's Hand preserved the Vial entire, not a drop of the
Crism was spilt, which caused wonder in many.

8. Guitmundus Bishop of Avarsan, Petrus Diaconus, Guitmund. lib. 3. de
Sacramento Euchar. Petrus and Joannes Diac in vita S. Gregory.
and Ioannes Diaconus recount a Signal Miracle wrought by S. Gregory the Great
in confirmation of the real Presence, and Transubtiation. A Roman Matron (say
they) ready to receive the blessed Sacrament burst out into laughter, S.
Gregory perceiving that Sign of contempt, Ask't why She laughed? She Answered,
I cannot but do so, when I hear the bread I lately made, called the Body of
Christ. Whereupon S. Gregory laid the consecrated Host on the Altar, and
desired that the People then present, would petition Almighty God with him (for
the Confirmation A fourth Stupendous Miracle wrought by S. Gregory the great.
of our Catholic Faith,) to show visibly, that what the Matron took for bread,
was not bread, but really Flesh. Prayer made, nothing like bread appeared, But
pure flesh only (which all beheld) and the woman acknowledging her Error, now
penitent, received the Host with great devotion, after the Saint had obtained
by prayer, that God would restore it to the former show of bread it had before.
Whoever undertakes to refute this known and much famed Miracle, must prove by
good Authority, these three quoted Writers to have been open Liars, false,
fraudulent, which will be a hard Bellar. de Scrip. Ecclesiast.
Task, For every one of them has their due praise, as you may see in Bellarmine.

9. No less stupendous is that Miracle which Evagrius (called Scholasticus)
exactly recount's. Evagrius Histor. lib. 4. cap. 36.
When, says he, Anthimus was driven from the Sec of Constantinople, Epiphanius
succeeded; after Epiphanius came Menas, under whom a Miracle happened worth
every man's notice, and remembrance. An ancient Custom had long prevailed in the
Church of Constantinople, that when the People had communicated, young Children
were called from the Schools to eat the small remaining Particles of our Lords
immaculate Body. A fifth no l^sse stupendous, Evagrius recount's.
Once it fell out that a little Boy, whose Father was a professed Jew, and by
trade a Glassmaker (contrary to Custom) came home late: Questioned where he had
been so long, and whether he had eaten with other Children of those Particles,
the Child innocently confessed the Truth, Without delay, the enraged Father
cast him into a burning Furnace, where he formed his Glasses; The Mother
knowing nothing of that impious Fact, sought her Child three Days the whole
City over, but not finding him returned home comfortless, and sitting at the
Workhouse door, cried out. O my child! and named him! The Boy hearing his
Mothers wailing, Answered. Here I am in the Furnace. She rushing in saw him
standing amidst the Coals without hurt at all. Questioned at his coming out,
How he escaped the scorching flames so long a time? He answered a woman clad in
a Purple Garment, often visited me, quenched the Flames with water, And when I
was hungry gave me to eat. Justinian the Emperor hearing of this certain
Miracle ordered that the Mother and the Child should be Baptized, and hanged up
the wicked Father upon a Gibbet, still obstinate in his Judaism,

10. This Miracle because something less than that is we read in Daniel, of
Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago walking in the midst of flames, may perhaps be
flurted at by Dr Still. But, believe it a Flurt, or Jeer shall not serve his
turn. Evagrius I make use of, is the Basil Edition Anno 1557, and the Chapter
where you find this Miracle is the 36. in order, though some Authors quote his
35.

11. I have said enough upon several Occasions in this Treatise of most
glorious Miracles wrought to confirm the Doctrine and Practice of the Church,
while we invocate Saints. honor their Relics, Bless our selves with the
Sign of the Cross, and use Holy water etc. None can call so much as one of
those Miracles into doubt or Question. Now as for the worship of Holy Images
Miracles are so known and manifest, that it would be labor lost to produce
again what has been written. Every one, though but meanly versed in
Ecclesiastical History can tell you, how that woman cured by a touch of our
Saviors Garment, returning home in memory of the Benefit, erected his Image or
statua, with Matthew 9. v. 21.
her own adoring him, and that a strange Herb grew up at the foot of the
Statue, which wrought great Miracles. Julian the Apostat vexed at the Miracles
wrought by Holy Images,
Sight of this Image, and less enduring the Miracles done there, threw it
down, and set up his own in the place, But his was presently destroyed by fire
Eusebius. l. 7. Hist. c. 13. Sozomen. lib. 5. c. 20.
from Heaven. See the whole Relation in Eusebius and Sozomenus.

12. Memorable also and most known is that famous Miracle evidenced in the City
of Beritos in Syria, where the impious Jews Crucified our Saviors Sacred
Image pierced it with a Lance, whence great plenty of water and blood issued,
which cured all diseases. The certainty of this Miracle caused no less a man
than the learned Athanasius to write a Book entitled. De passione Brerely
Protest. Apol. cited p. with me 522. Turon. de gloria Mart. lib. 1. cap. 22.
Imaginis Christi in Berito, which, as Brerely says, was alleged in the Nicene
Council. Act. 4. And is also recorded by Gregorius Turonensis. The Miracle seen
by innumerable Ey-witnesses, prevailed upon many obdurate Jews, and brought
them to believe in our Crucified Savior.

13. By all hitherto noted my Assertion is proved. God has confirmed the,
Articles of our Roman Catholic Faith by clear and undeniable Miracles (never
wrought to attest a falsehood) Therefore the End of Miracles is to give us
rational Assurance that her Doctrine is from God, true most certain, and
infallible. The Antecedent granted (already made out, Dr Still. shall never
rationally oppose) The Consequence follows inevitably, Ergo our Doctrine is
from God, certain, and infallible; or as is now said, Miracles were wrought for
this End to confirm its Infallibility.

14. Dr Still. in his three next pages proposes Dr Still p. 670. 671. and 672.
many Questions, the most are as follow. Why should not Pythagoras his golden
Thigh be as Miraculous, as the restored Leg at Zaragosa? Why should S. Francis
his Ass that stood still to hear him Preach, be more Miraculous than the Ass
that heard Ammonianus his Lectures? To omit others. Why may not Aesculapius
Strange Questions proposed by Dr Stillingfleet.
his cure of the woman in his Temple, of Epidaurus be thought as strange, as
Xaverius his appearing to F. Marcellus Mastrilli at Naples, and curing him upon
his Promise of going to the Indies? One Question more and as much to the
Purpose. Why should not Friar Bacon's brazen head be thought every whit as
wise, as Dr Stillingfleets? Had that Brazen head ever spoken, it could not have
uttered greater Nonsense. I will first express the folly of these Questions,
by proposing some few more, then retort them, and Answer every one.

15. A She Magician says Virgil, professed She could stop the Stars, and turn
them Virg. 4. Aeneid.
back from their ordinary course. Why should not this be esteemed as great a
Miracle as the standing of the sun and moon at Josue his Prayer? Here is one
wise Question. Lucan tells us that Josue 10. v. 13.
by Magic Charms the Moon may be brought down from Heaven, whereof se S.
Austin at these words. Quale est lunam deponere. And why may not this pass for
as great a Miracle, as Lucan l. 6. S Aug. lib. 10. de Civit. c. 16. 4. Reg. 1.
v 10. Plato l. 10. de Republ.
Elias his calling down fire from Heaven? Here you have another of the Dr's
Questions. To lay forth this folly yet more plainly, shall we go on a little?
Plato recount's that Aerus slain in a battle, lay ten days dead, had his Body
cast into a burning Pile of wood, and there not only came to life again, but
also made a Relation of all the Accidents which happened in that Fight. Pliny,
says Medina, tell's the like cited by Medina l. 2. p. 58. B.
Story of Cneus Aelius Tubero stark dead, who thrown into a great fire
forthwith revived, and afterward had the dignity of Pretour confered upon him
in Rome. Nay some Grecians have Open fopperies of Heathens, worth nothing but
contempt.
Written, that the fabulous Aesop of Phrygia really dead, was restored to life.
Now to retort the Dr's Questions; I ask why may not these Resuscitations be
thought every whit as Miraculous as those were whom Christ and his Apostles
raised from death to life? If he Answer, all are true alike, but not of equal
certainty (because Scripture gives indubitable assurance of what is read
there), he must grant that Virgils Magician could as truly force the Stars
back, and Lucans Charms fetch down the moon from Heaven. Shall I credit Aesops
resuscitation? I will give as much belief to Lucans lunatic Fancy? No
disparity can be imagined.

16. If on the other side, the Dr Judges with Medina and all Christian Writers
this fetching down the moon, and these pretended Resuscitations of the dead to
be mere Fictions and Heathenish inventions, or at most no more, but Charms and
Illusions, he Answers his own Questions, and must list his Wonders among lying
Fables, or hold them, as I now said Cheats, done by Legerdemain. In case he
yields not thus far to the common Judgment of Christians, he will be forced to
bring the greatest Miracles our Savior wrought into open Contempt, for who can
set a high value upon those certain Miracles (testified by eternal Truth to be
greater than ever man wrought) Is Heathens have done as great ones, yea and
some greater?

17. The Dr's chiefest Aim in some of the Reason and Religion. Disc. 2. c. 8.
number. 20.
Questions proposed, was to discredit two known and clear attested Miracles
whereof I gave a large Account, in another Treatise. The one relates to the
Admirable cure wrought by S. Francis Xaverius upon F. Marcellus Mastrilli a
dying man, restored to perfect health in a moment of time. I showed there how
the Miracle was examined upon Oath, openly attested before lawful Judges,
legally approved, and finally believed F. Marcellus Miraculously cured in a
Moment.
upon humane Faith, over all Italy, France, and Spain. I much urged one
manifest Proof taken from S. Xaverius his Prophesy of Marcellus his going into
the Indies, and there dying a Martyr for Christ, which being known and openly
divulged long before Marcellus suffered, would have exposed all those who made
it public, to shameful Disgrace, had not the real Effect of the Virtuous man's
Martyrdom, evidently shown the Prophesy fulfilled, and most exactly true.
Neither S. Xaverius his Prophesy exactly fulfilled, proves the Miracle.
Devil nor mortal man. could certainly foretell things so remote, liable (as I
noted) to a hundred casualities, and uncertainties. For what if Marcellus, no
strong man, had dyed in the way? What if Pirates had taken the Ship that carried
him? What if it had perished by Tempest? Would not, think ye, the most prudent
men have exploded all those as besotted, who so peremptorily avouched upon the
Prophesy Marcellus his arrival in the Indies, and there dying a Martyr? God
therefore was the Author of that Prediction, and consequently his Divine Power
(using S. Xaverius as Instrumental) wrought the Miracle? Much more you have of
this Miracle in the place already Quoted.

18. Reader now give a little attention, and Aelian. l. 9. de animal, cap. 33.
you shall hear how Strangely the Dr goes about to obscure this manifest Work
of God by a mere fabulous Story. He cites Aelianus, and thinks, as I said,
Aesculapius his cure upon a woman in the Temple of Epidaurus to have been as
great, as this done upon Marcellus. Briefly.

19. The Title of that 33. Chapter is of a great The Dr would confute this
Miracle by a False fabulous Story.
Virtue contained in an Herb called Abrotonum, or Abrotonus, in English
Souththernwood, excellent against belly worms, not curable (says the Story) by
humane Art. To persuade this incurability, Hyppis Rheginus (as Aelianus has it)
tell's of a woman Sick of these worms whom no Physician could cure; She
therefore went to implore help of the Gods at Epidaurus, when by chance
Aesculapius was abroad, however his Officers or Ministers there took her in
hand, and first commanded her to rest a while, then cut off her head, and one
of them forcing his hand into her belly pulled out a mighty great Mawworm, But
could not join the head to the Body as it was before, till the God Aesculapius
came home. Upon his return, he chid those Ministers, and said they had gone
beyond all humane skill, then Aesculapius set's the woman's head upon her
shoulders, and restord her to life, O Aesculapius! cries out Hippis Rheginus,
great is thy wisdom amongst all the Gods, and wonderful are the Cures wrought
by the herb Southernwood. Thus Claudius Aelianus, who neither relates the
Story as a Truth, nor can ascribe so great Virtue to any Herb as to restore
life to a dead woman. You will say Aesculapius did the wonder by his divine
Power. That is to Say, the Devil (if Vives in his notes upon S. Austins 16.
chap. cited.
any) did it, For as Ludovicus Vives observes Aesculapius was himself the
Serpent (he means the Devil in a Serpents Likeness) or had with him as
companion, a Dragon-Divel, and therefore is usually painted with a Dragon or
Serpent wrapped about a staff.

20. Here you have briefly Dr Still. Story told out, as vain a Fable as ever
was heard, or (at most) an Illusion of the Devil. And can this be paralled with
a Saint's Miracle wrought upon a great Servant of God, when the very
Circumstances, as Aelianus recount's them, give the Devil as great Power in
working Miracles as ever our Savior had? All is a Fourb never examined, never
attested upon Oath, never approved by any, nor (as I shall presently note)
gained Belief among the wisest of Heathen.

21. Whoever desires more of these Heathenish August. lib. 18. de Civit. c. 17.
18: S. Austin's Words.
Fictions or false Illusions, may read S. Austin. Some, says the Saint, relate
incredible things of the famous witch Circe that changed Ulysses his companions
into beasts, others talk much (as I was informed passing through Italy) of
women that giving cheese to Travelers, could make them appear like bruit
Animals. So Apulius writes of himself in his golden Ass, that by taking
poison (yet retaining a man's Soul) he was made an Ass. But these
Transmutations, says S. Austin, are either false, or so unusual, that no man
can believe them. Nay, Ludovicus Vives in his notes upon this Passage, Vives
Plinius lib: 8:
cites Pliny plainly teaching, They are all false and fabulous: With far
greater reason Therefore, may we conclude, that Aesculapius his pretended cure
wrought upon a beheaded woman, S. Aug: de Civit: l: 10: c: 27:
was a horrible Lie, or, as I said, a Divelish Illusion. Non audit ista hominum
multitudo, says S. Austin upon another occasion, where he rebukes Porphirius
for saying that Devils can by Theurgick S. Austin slight's These fopperies of
Heathens:
art purge and free souls from great Misery, but as S. Austin add's, whole
multitudes of People believe no such things, knovving well that our Savior
came to free us from the Devils Tyranny. In Christ we have a merciful
Deliverance both in Soul and Body. And this is evidently proved by clear
Experience, For since our Saviors coming, Since Christianity was established,
we hear no more of heads cut off, and restored by Necromancy, no more of
Circe's charms, of Appulius his change into an Ass, of stopping the Stars in
their course, or of any such fopperies, which argues all before Spoken of, were
nothing but vain apprehensions of some few credulous, and too easy deluded
People; I say of some fevv, for the wiser sort of Heathens, as Pliny cited
observes, Nay whole multitudes believed none of them. And one great Blessing
hence ensued, For after the world had been quite wearied with these Heathenish
fooleries, and the wisest of men had seen them lie under open contempt, The
infinite Surmounting Excellency of Christian Religion became glorious, got
ground every where, and with greater ease spread it self over all Nations.
What therefore moved Dr Still. to disgrace Christianity? How highly does he
undervalue it, while he set's so great a Luster upon Miracles wrought by
Infidels, clearly intimating, that our Saviors Dr Stillingfleets grand Offense.
professed Enemies, have done as signal Wonders as the very best of Christians
ever wrought? Why does he not plead also as strongly for the Idols of Heathens,
where their pretended wonders were usually shown? He may as laudably stand for
the one, as defend the other?

22. I well know not what great advantage the Dr get's by his Story of two
Asses, The one heard S. Francis Preach, the other Ammonianus his Lectures. What
then Mr Dr? Does it therefore follow that Ammonianus was as great a Saint as S.
Francis? Had we Sr, no greater Evidence of that blessed man's Sanctity, but the
small wonder you relate, he would never have gained so much renown in the world
as he has most justly merited, But thanks be to God, his humble mortifyed
life, and other glorious Miracles raised the Saint as far above any thing
Ammonianus or his Ass ever did, as Heaven is above earth. I Dispute not
whether that Infidel S. August. lib. 21. de Civit. c. 6.
had an Ass brought him by Magic Charms, S. Austin tell's you of greater
wonders done by Devils. And though we should Suppose (which is not probable)
that the Devil put a Trick upon S. Francis, that is no prejudice to his
Sanctity, while that great Servant of God, as his whole life shows, never
meddled with Devils, or Charms of Magic.

23. The other Miracle I insisted upon, was Se Reason and Relig. Disc. 2. c. 9,
from n. 11.
that known and much Famed cure wrought upon a young man at Zaragosa in Spain,
who had his broken Leg cut off, and a long time buried, but at last
Miraculously restored by the Intercession of our Blessed Lady. This Miracle
seen by thousands and thousands at Zaragosa and Madrid, was upon the
Attestation of many sworn Witnesses rigidly examined, and afterward approved,
as a Prodigious work of God. His Catholic Majesty, and the whole Court in
Madrid, French, The young man's Cure in Spain proved most Evidently.
English, and Nobles of other Nations, frequently conversed with the youth, and
to their great admiration beheld the Mark ( a round red Circle) where his Leg
was cut off, now perfectly whole and sound. Amongst others the Lord Hopton then
Lord Ambassadeur in Spain (often desired by his Catholic Majesty to be present
at the young man's Examination) was present, and upon his return to England
declared before many Noble men, that the cure wrought upon that maimed youth,
was most certain. What I here assert, The Lord Hoptons attestation.
I had not long since from a right Honorable Person, who in company with others
heard my Lord Hopton's plain Testimony given of that cure, as a Truth most
certain, not to be called into doubt.

24. Reader, Dr Still. strange Answer to this most manifest Miracle, will I am
sure purchase him more Shame than Credit. He thinks Pythagoras his Golden thigh
may be held as Miraculous as that restored Leg, unless says he, the Priest
Abaris be proved a falser Witness than Hieronymus Brizids, or the People of
Zaragosa less suspected of partiality, than the Greeks at the Olympic Games,
at which, some Authors tell us, Pythagoras shevved his golden thigh. In the
first place I might complain of the Dr's Juggling, The Dr's unhandsome Dealing.
and ask why he minces matters, why he Tell's my Story by half, as if,
forsooth, I had no greater Authority for that Miracle than Hierome Brizid's,
and the People of Zaragosa, Too partial Attestation? I produced innumerable
other Witnesses then living in Zaragosa and Madrid also. But let this pass,
the Dr was in have, willing enough to quit what he could not Answer.

25. However, one main circumstance, or the Substance rather of that true
Miracle can never be Answered. The Boys Leg, as you have heard, (really flesh
and bone) was certainly cut off, huried and Miraculously restored. But who
tell's Mr Dr, that Pythagoras had ever his Thigh parted from his Body, cast
away, and one of Gold put in its place? No Author assert's it, or if any did,
its a mere fourb, or a false Illusion. The main material Thing therefore
failing in that The main thing fail's in the Dr's Story of Pythagoras.
pretended Wonder relating to Pythagoras, no comparison can be made with the
other true Miracle wrought at Zaragosa. I require the Dr's Answers to this one
particular.

26. You will ask, How can we show a Fourb Jamblicus in vita Pythagore cap. 2.
or a false Illusion wrought by Necromancy in this Story of Pythagoras?
Iamblicus who tells a long Tale of Abbaris the Priest, and of Pythagoras his
showing a golden Thigh, gives Evidence enough of a Fourb. Abaris, says he, a
very old man leaving those Hyperborei or People living under the North Pole,
came to Pythagoras and gave him an Arrow, which he had at his going out of
Apollo's Temple, thinking it would be useful to Pythagoras, upon this Arrow
(like one on horsback) Abaris rid, and passed through places where no man could
go; Nay, with his Arrow He rid over Rivers, standing waters, Fenns or Marish
grounds, and flew over Mountains, when he pleased. Crafty Pythagoras like one
scorning the The whole Story of Pythagoras and Abaris, proved a Fourb.
Gift, took the Arrow, but never Asked Abaris, why he gave it, For he was the
God supposed to know all things? Then he showed Abaris (set at distance from
him) his golden Thigh, proving thereby that he had not told any Lie at all. In
Fine he took the Priest Abaris to his Tuition, and imparted so much learning as
he found him capable of. Here you have briefly Iamblicus his Story of Abaris,
and Pythagoras Epitomized, Judge Reader, whether all circumstances duly
weighed; you find any thing in the whole But fraud, or Necromancy? What? To
hear of an old Idolatrous Priest riding on a Stick, over Rivers and Mountains
(not feasible by humane Power) either Argues, as I think, fiction in the Story,
or that the Devil had a hand in Abaris hit Travels.

27. For as much as concerns Pythagoras showing his golden thigh, or rather as
Beyerlinck Beyerl. in Theatro vitae ^^m^^s^ verbo Magia. S. Aug. l. 7. de
civit. cap. 35.
observes, bragging of it, S. Augustine well versed in the Writings of Heathens,
touches upon the very Truth, and plainly Says, Pythagoras was a Conjure^, or
one that Practiced Hydromancy or Necromancy, as Numa Pompilius did. Numa, says
the Saint, to whom neither Prophet nor Holy Angel ever came used Hydromancy, to
the End he might see the Images of the Gods, or rather Pychagoras Judged a
Conjurir by S. Austin.
the deceipts of Devils in water. This Divination, Witness Varro, was brought
from the Persians, which Pythagoras the Philosopher practiced, adhibito
Sanguine, adding blood to the water; Etiam inferos perhibet sciscitari, and
said Devils were best enquired after (others read suscitari) or easily raised
up by such Charms, Well therefore might Pythagoras while Abaris was placed at a
distance call up a Devil, and in appearance show him a golden Thigh, for if
Devils as I noted above, can by Necromancy make men sitting at a Table to
appear like Blocks of vvood, or carrying Asses heads on their Shoulders, and
spread on a Sudden a fair branched vine through a Dining Room, They may as
easily delude ones Senses, and cause that a thigh (made of flesh and bones)
seemingly look like Gold. God, I am sure, wrought not this Wonder upon a
Magician Philosopher (if yet it was a wonder), Nothing in nature can join a
Thigh of gold to a humane Body, the Devil therefore did what was done, if the
whole Story (scorned by all Christian Authors) be not as I said a Dream, or a
Heathenish fiction.

28. Whoever would know more of Pythagoras and Abaris the Priest, may peruse
Malchus de vita Pythagorae in Iucem edita a Cunrado Ritters husio J. C.
Porphyrius, or Malchus, where you have the same stuff told over again after
Iamblicus here and there enlarged, and as much laugh't to Scorn. Malchus Page
43. Tell's you of Pythagoras his taming the Daunian bear, and a Tarentine Ox,
adding, the Salutation which a River gave Pythagoras as he passed by, clara and
humana voce, in a clear and audible Malchus corn's Py^hagoras his Wonders.
voice. Such things, says Malchus, you may list among Lucian's Stories, Nam
quid non Graecia mendax. audet in historia? In the very next page this Author
Quotes S. Chrysostom, who thought some wonders done Chrysostom: Hom: 1: in Joan:
Evang:
by Pythagoras were true, but thence proves (with S. Austin cited) that he was
a Witch, a Juggler, a Cousener, and what not? Thus much of Pythagoras, and Dr
Stillingfleets two Stories.

CHAP. XVII.
Of many other Quotations partly impertinent, partly false, produced by the Dr.
Arguments against Miracles Answered.

1. THe Dr very copious in his Quotations Dr Still. page 673. Philosostory:
apud Photium, cod. 40.
first introduces Philostorgius Saying, that the Arian Bishops wrought
Miracles, and he attributes the same Power to the Bishop of Nicomedia, to
Agapetus, the Bishop of Synada, who is said to have raised the dead, And to
many other known Heretics, Yet this very Dr tells us at the End of the same
Page, that S. Chrysostom teaches; There is not so Philostorgius cited.
much as a footstep of that Power of Miracles left in the Church which was
in the Apostles, and moreover assert's that God has put a stop to Miracles,
that they were intended for Infidels, not for Believers, now settled in
Christianity.

2. I never yet saw man lay together a louder contradiction in one page.
Philostorgius, says the Dr, ascribes the Power of working Miracles (as raising
the dead) to Heretics, yet S. Chrysostom tell's us, God has put a Stop to
Miracles, and will have no more done. If Philostorgius speak's Truth in
granting Miracles The Dr drives on two plain Contradictions.
wrought by Arian Bishops; S. Chrysostom (understood as the Dr would have him)
grossly mistook, when he teaches; God has put a stop to Miracles. The Dr not
content with one contradiction, drives on another. The Arians, says he, the
Eunomians, and Novatians, all challenged the Power of Miracles to themselves,
but the Catholic Bishops pretended no more to them, than the Protestant
Bishops do now, Reader, this Dr writes he knows not what. Observe I beseech
you. Did those Heretics falsely lay claim to a Power of Miracles? So it is
says the Dr. How then durst your famous Philostorgius play the knave, and
peremptorily assert, that an Heretical Bishop raised the dead, and healed all
sorts of Diseases, or with what face could you, Sr, bring in an Author, as
deserving Credit, when your own Judgment tell's you, he writes loud untruths?
Me thinks, this Discourse is plain. You either Judge the Arians and Eunomians
to have had the Power of working Miracles, or not: If not; you should have said
plainly Philostorgius cheat's us, in setting down Miracles which were never
done, And you, Sr, may be ashamed of your own Writings, where you so highly
extol Miracles wrought by Heathens; For if Heretics, as you here seem If
Heretics never wrought Miracles, much less did Heathens.
to Suppose, never did any, much less did Heathens and Infidels; Therefore
Aesculapius his Miracle wrought upon a beheaded woman, And the whole Story of
Pythagoras his Thigh, ought in your Judgment to be decryed as fourbs, and
fictions, or as Charms of Necromancy. To what purpose do you fill so many
Pages of your Book with Lies known, as such, to your self?

3. Now, if on the other side, those Eunomians and Donatists had the Power of
working true Miracles, you force a Lie upon S. Chrysostom, saying (as you
interpret) That God has put a stop to all extraordinary Signs. The Saints own
words, Mr Dr, confute your Gloss. There is not, says S. Chrysostom, The like
Power of Miracles in the Church which was in the Apostles. The cap. 9. n 10.
true meaning is, as I have largely proved above, That no set number of men in
the Church had such an ordinary Gift in working Miracles as was annexed by
peculiar Privilege, to the twelve Apostles. Se more of this Privilege in the
Chapter cited, it is here needless to transcribe what is there clearly set
down.

4. Mr Dr, I must once more tell you, you write you know not what; For nothing
but a Frolic or a height of impudence could have uttered The Dr speak's a loud
Untruth.
this intolerable Proposition. The Catholic Bishops of the Church of Rome
pretended no more to a Power of Miracles, than Protestant Bishops do now. With
what Conscience or Countenance can you, Sr, impose so manifest an Untruth upon
mankind? Were not S. Irenaeus, S. Gregory Thaumaturgus, The two worthy
Cyrills, S. Athanasius, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom Bishops, and learned
Bishops? All these and many more, as is evident* have either wrought Miracles,
or laudably written in their Defense. Show me but one Protestant Bishop that
has done the like, or for stark shame, Mr Dr, fool us no more, abuse us no
more, with manifest Fopperies.

5. The Dr as I told you to set forth his Phylostorgius Photius Biblioth. page
26. de Philostor. ex lib. 40.
remits the Reader to Photius, But how wisely he did so, I leave to every man's
common Judgment, for having perused Photius exactly, I find much ill, and not
so much as one good word spoken of Philostorgius. He began with Philostorgius
proved a most impious Heretic:
the Heresy of Arius, next adhered to the Errors of Atius, and finally
professed the Eunomian Heresy. Thus much I gather also out of several great
Authors. Photius goes on. Philostorgius was a lying Writer, and full of Idle
Fables, He extolls Aetius and Eunomius, as if they had purged the Christian
Doctrine foully contaminated with Errors, wherein, says Photius, he lies
prodigiously; He was enraged against the most Orthodox Fathers, and falsely
calumniated the great S. Basil. though his calumny made the Saint more Baron.
Annal. Ecclesias. tom. 3. Anno 354. n. 14. 15. 16. Vossius de Historicis
Graecis l. 2. c. 20. p. 210.
renowned. Cardinal Baronius speak's home also. Philostorgius, was a most
infamous Heretic, the ancient Graecians abhorred the man's very name, cur'st
his execrable VVritings, as deserving nothing but oblivion, and perpetual
silence. Gerardus Ioannes Vossius rebukes him as one Deo invisum, hated by
Almighty God for his Heresy and excessive bitterness against all Catholics,
loving none but Heretics. These Testimonies and many more you may read in the
Epitome of Iacobus Godefredus, who compendiat's the Twelve Books of Photius.
See also Godefred's Prolegomena, where upon several Godefred. printed at Geneva.
occasions he spares not to tell us, what an impious Heretic Philostorgius
was. However Dr Still. introduces him as a creditable Author, and will not have
him suspected of Partiality, though no man more ruin's his credit than the Dr,
for he says those Miracles whereof Philostorgius and other Heretics write,
may be justly suspected, because only pretended to. If only pretended* Mr Dr,
you cannot but mistrust the Sincerity of those who relate them, unless you
Say, though the Miracles in Them selves are false, yet the Heretics that wrote
them spoke Truth.

6. The Dr much entangled, loses himself in Page 676. and p. 677.
a lame and undigested Discourse. He would, forsooth, fain know how Miracles
can prove the Truth and Infallibility of the Church, if the Truth of Miracles
depend's upon the Churches Approbation? And I Sr, would as fain know (and I
hope do know) How Miracles can prove the Truth and Infabillibility A difficulty
proposed by the Dr.
of Christ's Doctrine, if the Truth of those Miracles depend's upon Christ's
Sacred word, and approbation?

7. To clear this matter I must first know what you mean by this word, Proving?
Would you, Sr, have us prove the Truth and Infallibility of our Church Doctrine
evidently, or by a clear Demonstration? Neither you nor any man living can thus
evince the Truth and Infallibility of Christ's Doctrine. Had you seen all the
Miracles Christ wrought, could you upon their outward Appearance, or the
exterior sight alone, have demonstrated, that Christ was the true Messiah, or
that his Doctrine was thereby evidently proved true and Infallible? It is
impossible even in your Principles, Because you Say, an Evidence taken from the
outward Appearance of a Wonder only, gives no certainty of its Truth, or the
verity pointed out by it. Speak otherwise, and you will be forced to grant,
that all the Wonders you have collected from Heathens, were as really true, as
ever any was, which Christ wrought, for you yield them an Appearance Very
Visible.

8. Hence it Follows that besides the Exterior From whence we have full
certainty of a Miracle?
Sight of a Miracle some other Oracle must interpose it is Authority, and
ascertain all ( yet without Evidence) of its real Truth, as wrought by Divine
Power, and for such and End. This full certainty, Mr Dr, we take from the
Churches Approbation, as the Apostles and primitive Christians took theirs
from our Saviors own words. That the works of God, says Christ, John 9. 3.
speaking of the blind man, may be manifested in him. I must do the works of
him that sent me. These Things John 20. ^. 3^.
are written, says the same Evangelist, That you may believe (not know
evidently) That Jesus is Christ, and that believing you may have life in his
name.

9. The want of pondering one Distinction plainly laid forth in Bellarmin,
brought the Dr Bellar. de not is Eccl. lib. 4. c. 14.. Est aute^
to this confusion. By Miracles, says Bellarmin, the Church is demonstrated,
Non quoad evidentiam aut certitudinem rei, sed quoad evidentiam and
Certitudinam credibilitatis. That is, we prove not Evidently the Church or her
Doctrine to be evidently true by Miracles, But prove both by Miracles, to be
evidently Credible. The Evidence of Credibility, Mr Dr, disposes to Faith, and
brings in an Obligation of Believing: That other fancied Evidence relating to
the Truth and infallibility of Christ's Doctrine, or the Churches, God in this
state impart's not to any, For we walk by Faith, not by Evidence.

10. But say you, what Evidence of Credibility can there be from Miracles,
where no one can be certain whether they be Miracles or not? I Answer. The
same Evidence of credibility which the Primitive The same Evidence of
Credibility, we now have of the Churches Miracles, which, the ancient
Christians had of our Saviors.
Christians had of our Saviors Miracles, (as they were Objects of Sense) we
also have of Miracles wrought in the Church. The outward Appearance alone
neither grovvnded Faith, (for Faith relies on a surer Motive, God's Divine
Revelation) nor gave more Evidence of their own real Truth, than Church
Miracles have done. All true Miracles therefore, whether wrought by Christ, or
in the Church, when attested by undoubted Witnesses (and are known upon humane
Faith as morally certain), beget in every rational man an Evidence of
Credibility, and move to embrace Christ's Doctrine, so far they lead us on, but
no further. When the Church after a rigid Examination (upon Her Humane
Authority) approves them as true and wrought by Divine Power, we are raised to
a higher Degree of certainty, and upon this Oracles word own them not only (in
a vveak manner) morally certain, But without all Dispute Unquestionable though
yet not known as evidently true, For all Knowledge implies c. 14. n. 8: 9:
not strict Evidence. Reader turn, if you please, to what I have noted above,
and you will find this whole Difficulty cleared from all reasonable Exception.

11. The Dr still remain's in his Confusion. How is it possible, says he,
that the Church should be certainly known by Miracles, if the Miracles cannot
be certainly known but by the Church? I Ask likewise. How is it possible, that
Christ should be certainly known by his Miracles, if his Miracles cannot be
certainly known but by Christ, or by some certain Oracles Approbation? The
fallacy lies in that word^, Known, which may either Signify a great moral
Assurance, such as the Primitive Christians had of our Savior Miracles, which
prudently induced them to believe in Christ, Or, a higher Degree of certainty,
And this they attained, when they heard an Infallible Oracle give full
Assurance of our Saviors Miracles. Thus we Discourse of Church Miracles. The
first moral knowledge previous to Faith induces us to believe, the other
grounded on the Churches Approbation, takes all doubt away, and in order to
Believers gives full certainty, as is further explained in the 14. Chapter
already cited. Upon this Page 6V7*
Distinction, that pretty Paralogism of the Dr, comes to nothing but empty
words. We must, Says he, know a man by such marks, which we cannot know to
be the Marks of such a man, till we first know the man. He would say. We must
know the Church by her Marks, That is by her Miracles, The Dr's Paralogism
dissolved.
which we cannot know to be the Marks of such a Church, till we know the
Church. I Answer, we must know the Church by her Marks or Miracles upon moral
certainty, which yet we cannot know by a certainty excluding all doubt, to be
the Marks of such a Church, till we know the Church, That is, till we have from
her Approbation and Assurance concerning the real Truth, and solid worth of her
Miracles, as proceeding from a Divine Power without fraud or false Illusion.

12. To Satisfy the Dr, I retort his Argument And instanced in our Saviors
Miracles:
using the same formal words, as to our Saviors Miracles. We must know Christ
by such Marks That is, by his Miracles, which we cannot know to be the Marks
of Christ, till we know the man called Christ. We must know Christ by his
Miracles, But how? As the Primitive Christians knevv him, when upon moral
certainty they saw, or heard of his Miracles, And thereby were induced to
believe in him, Yet they could not know them by an indubitable certainty
excluding all Dispute, or That they were truly Miracles wrought by Divine
Power, till some Oracle raised them to a higher Step of certainty.

13. To clear what is now said, Let us Imagine that Dr Still, or some such like
Incredulous man had been present with our Savior when he cured the blind, or
cleansed the Lepers: He would upon Moral certainty have Judged the works
Miraculous, But withal might have doubted whether Christ did them by Divine
Power, or no, (hereof he had no Evidence at all). Suppose, that some other
known Oracle owned infallible, had told him, These strange Cures thou sees't
proceed from God, He would without hesitancy have yielded a firm Assent to
their certain Truth, and Judged them Miracles proceeding from God. Thus we
discourse of Miracles wrought in the Church. A knowledge highly moral grounded
on humane Faith, first Proposes them as Works done by Almighty God, though as
yet not undoubtedly certain, But when we hear that our Oracle approves them,
under the Notion of works done by Divine Power, all further doubt ceases, all
hesitancy is taken away.

14. From what we have said hitherto, Two Two things deduced from the former
Discourse:
things follow. The first is, that our Church Miracles (as seen or heard of)
are easily distinguished upon Moral certainty from all Juggling Legerdemain
Wonders, pretended by Heathens and Heretics. Their exterior Luster even to
Sense, Their long and never interrupted Continuance in any Age, Their
prodigious Greatness and vast number wrought in a Holy Society of Christians,
and by men of a most innocent life, manifestly difference them, from those
other few and inconsiderable Wonders laid claim to by Gods professed Enemies.
Add to this exterior visible Appearance, the Churches Judgment and
Approbation ( Though only Humane) relating to the real Truth of Miracles, all
comparison ceases, the Difference between true and false Signs is made most
notorious.

15. The second thing observable is, That all Arguments Imaginable, which
either are or can be proposed against Miracles wrought in the Church, have the
very same force against our Saviors, and the Apostles Signs. That they are now
registered in Scripture, and thereby made matters of Faith weakens nothing the
Strength of my Argument, For I consider those Primitive Miracles as famed up
and down the world, and known upon humane Faith before the Holy Ghost sealed
them up in the Book of Scripture. Thus considered, the Proofs are the same for
Miracles wrought by Christ and in the Church. And were there any Argument (as
there is none) that could lessen the Credit of latter Miracles, it would as I
said, be as forcible against the most Primitive Wonders. Our Savior, all know,
wrought many Miracles not recorded in Holy Writ, and so also the Apostles did.
Suppose, these had been conveyed to us upon the Testimony of grave Authors ( as
the very most of the Apostles Miracles are) must such works of God be exploded
as Fourbs, because not recorded in Scripture? It is no small Folly to Judge so.
But enough of this matter. We now follow the Dr in his other Quotations.

16. Dr Still. cites Fevardentius, who confesses, Dr Stilli page 678.
Fevardent. in Irenaeum lib. 2. c. 86.
the Church has never determined that Heretieks cannot work true Miracles, and
that those who hold the Affirmative have plain Testimonies of the Fathers for
them. Mr Dr relates not this Authors words, or Sense sincerely. Briefly.
Fevardentius having Quoted some Fathers (only thought to favor the Opinion The
Dr abuses Fevardentius.
concerning Miracles wrought by Heretics, though other Fathers are of a quite
contrary Judgment), Speak's thus. Quibus vero magis adherendum sit, pronunciet
Ecclesia. Let the Church here determine, who we are to follow, which is far
from that round open Assertion which the Dr imposes on him. Fevardentius, says
he, confesses the Church has never determined, that Heretics cannot work true
Miracles. He makes no such open confession either in words or Sense, much less
does he Say, as you Sr, unworthily Cite, That those who hold the Affirmative,
have plain Testimonies of Fathers for them. It is utterly false. Fevardentius
barely relates the Sentiment of others, who seem to teach that Heretics may
work Miracles. Some, says he, think Tertullian favour's the Opinion, others
bring in Sozomenus, and Socrates, others seek Patronage from S. Augustine. Does
this lessening way of speaking import, that those who hold the Affirmative,
have plain Testimonies of the Fathers for them?

17. Had you, Sr, perused Fevardentius in Fevard. in cap. 8. lib. 1. Irenaei.
another place he remit's us to, you might have been ashamed of this Juggling.
There he expressly denies the Power of working Miracles to Heretics, and
grounds his Denial upon the Authority of Clemens Romanus, Justin Martyr, and S.
Augustine. Then he tells you, There is not one Doctrine of our Catholic Faith
which Almighty God has not confirmed by most evident Miracles, Which Miracles,
says he, wrought in every Age Some Chief Heretics have gathered together,
written of, and divulged to the world, yet you, Sr, building upon one Testimony
of Fevardentius would fraudulently persuade us, that Miracles prove nothing as
to the Truth and Infallibility of the Church, And that they may be only wrought
(when the Communion of Christians are different from each other) for the
Verifying of some Common Truths, received among all Christians. With what
Countenance can you avouch this, when you see the Author quoted Miracles says
Fevardentius, have confirmed Every Catholic Doctrine. c. 16. n. 4.
by you point blank against you? Most evident Miracles, says Fevardentius,
have been wrought not only to attest some common Truths amongst Christians, but
to confirm every Doctrine held by the Catholic Church. Whereof see more in a
foregoing Chapter.

18. The Dr in the Page cited, drives on a Lingendes in Conc. quadr. to. 2.
Conc. 2.
long Quotation borrowed From F. de Lingendes (very true Doctrine as delivered
by the Author) But Mr Dr's Inferences drawn from it (which as strongly impugn
Miracles wrought by Christ and the Apostles, as any done in the Church) have
been already weighed in the foregoing Chapter, and are there fully Answered.
Lingendes, says the Dr, grant's that to all outward Appearance Heretics may
do as great Miracles as any. And you, Sr, grant (or you cheat the Reader) that
Heathens have done Miracles to appearance, as great as ever our Savior or
Apostle wrought. Now, Sr, as you Difference Christ's Miracles from such false
Signs, we also difference and distinguish Of the Difference between all false
Signs, and true Miracles.
Miracles done in the Church, and Oppose their vast number manifest in all
Ages, their Majesty and Greatness (in raising the dead, restoring sight to the
blind, and curing mortal Infirmities) to those few inconsiderable dull wonders
pretended by Heretics, whereof, if not all, more than the half are False. The
Circumstances also accompaning our Miracles add a singular Luster, having been
wrought in a Church ever owned Orthodox, and by men of eminent known Sanctity,
who upon their invocating the Saints in Heaven, obtained what they prayed for.
But enough of this particular in the precedent Chapter cited.

19. The Dr think's we cannot show our Page 684.
Church Miracles wrought for no other End, but to prove the Church Infallible.
Answ. No more can the Dr prove that the Apostolical Miracles were wrought only
to prove Apostolical Doctrine Infallible, as I have clearly showed above. Now
that c. 16. n. 1.
innumerable have been done to testify the Truth, and consequently the
Infallibility of Catholic Doctrine, is so manifest that nothing but Impudence
can deny it. Why have so many glorious Martyrs joyfully suffered bitter
Persecution before Tyrants, why have they openly professed to die for our
Catholic Faith, why has God evidenced so many Miracles, not only at their
death, but afterward at their Shrines and Monuments, Were not these things
done to testify that the Faith they dyed for was True and Infallible? If any
doubt be made hereof, Ecclesiastical History will clear all. Peruse, Reader,
among others Victor Vticensis who Victor Uticens: l: 1:
wrote three Books of the VVandals Persecution, where he set's forth the
admirable fortitude of Martyrs. Se also Eusebius, Nicephorus, Tertullian, and
Eusebius lib: 5: Hist: per totum Niceph: lib: 3: c: 29: and l. 9. c. 17.
Tertull in Apolog. S. August. lib. 18 de civit. c. 50.
Chiefly S. Augustine, who recount the horrid Persecution of Martyrs living
after the Apostles days, And Say that God made his eternal Truths known,
Signis, portentis, and variis virtutibus, by Signs, prodigious wonders, and
sundry sorts of Miracles, which those blessed men wrought before Kings and
Tyrants, that formerly endeavouvred to destroy the Church.

20. In the next place the Dr has another fling at the poor Boys restored Leg
in Spain, and most simply Ask's. What signifies this to the Proof of the Roman
Churches Infallibility? I Answer it signifies very much, and manifestly proves
one Article of Catholic Doctrine, The Invocation of Saints. The Miracle
surpassed all natural Power, Devils, when the blessed Virgin was called on, did
not do it, God therefore who cannot Employ his Power to confirm a falsehood,
approved by that Prodigious Cure, page 684
the Catholic Doctrine of praying to Saints.

CHAP. XVIII.
Whether it be reasonable, to have Missionaries now sent into England, and
work Miracles there? The Dr wishes this done. More of the Dr's many false, and
impertinent Quotations. Antichrist's Wonders, no true Miracles. Miracles known
upon Moral Certainty, sufficiently induce to Faith.

1, IN the same the page Dr Proposes what he would have done. Let their
Missionaries, says he, come here among us whom they account Heretics, and do
the same things that Christ and his Apostles did in raising the Dead, and
healing all manner of Diseases, But let them not think to put us off, with
painted strawes, and counterfeit Trances? Good The Dr's uncivil Expression.
Mr Dr, speak, I beseech you, more reverently, were all the stupendous
Miracles related by S. Irenaeus, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and S. Chrysostom,
painted Strawes, and counterfeit Trances? Was that great Miracle wrought lately
at Calais upon cap. 3. n. 3
a young Gentlewoman (whereof you have a full relation) a painted cure, or the
Boys restored Leg in Spain, a painted Leg? Were all those dead raised to life
at the Intercession of Blessed S. Thomas Cantilupe manifest in your own
England, counterfeit Resuscitations? Nothing but impudence can Judge so. Know
therefore, Sr, (and it is your Duty to know it) that all these admirable All
the Miracles wrought in the Church, were done for Heretics.
Works of God with innumerable more, were wrought for you, and for this End,
that you (if not perverse) may se how gloriously Christ our Lord has beautifyed
his Spouse the Militant Church, with the same Signal Marks of Credibility,
which he favovrably demonstrated, while he lived here on earth. Why then do you
like that depraved and wicked Generation of men mentioned in Luk 11. 29.
Scripture, require more Signs than are done? Why should Missionaries come to
you, and work Miracles? If the greatest were wrought before your Eyes your
Dullness would slight all, and account them either fallacious Charms,
Necromancy, Luke 16. 27.
or painted Strawes, and Counterfeit Trances.

2. Remember I beseech you, Abraham's Answer given to that Rich man in
Torments, who would have one sent from the dead to do good upon his Brethren,
Abraham replied; No. They have Moses and the Prophets, And in The Dr has an
Answer in the Cospel.
case no ear be given to these, neither will they believe, though one should
rise from the dead and Preach to them. In like manner I discourse of Miracles
wrought in the Church, They speak (witness S. Austin) as plain a language as
ever Moses or the Prophets spoke, And if such visible and manifest attested
Signs work nothing upon your Incredulity, neither would the greatest servant of
God, though he should raise the dead in the City of London, mollify your
hearts, change your minds, or make you better than you are. So true it is;
Perversi difficile corriguntur.

3. Again you Propose that which if done, would do you little, or no good at
all. Suppose one or more were raised from the dead in London, Imagine also that
the Missioner should (like S. Bernard or S. Xaverius) declare that God raises
those dead for this End, that all may believe the Roman Catholic Churches
Doctrine, what Conversions would be wrought hereby, upon thousand and thousand
obstinate hearts in the remote parts of England, who only hear of the Miracles?
Must God send Missionaries to every one of these, and set before their Eyes a
dead Carcass restored to life? Neither Christ our Lord, nor the Apostles did so.

4. You may Say. The Fame of some dead Miracles seen by innumerable, Famed and
written, work little upon Heretics.
raised among you would be so publicly divulged, that none could rationally
call such matters of Fact into Question, when visibly seen by many. I Answer,
Ex ore tuo te Iudico. But innumerable more Resuscitations, innumerable more
Miraculous Cures, have been, and are still famed the whole Christian world
over, and besides remain upon undoubted Record, yet this Fame and these Records
make no greater impression upon your hard heart, than painted strawes and
Counterfeit Trances. The like, or as little effect, would such Miracles (as you
seek for) work upon your numberless incredulous People dispersed over the
Nation, had they not beheld with their eyes what some few are now Supposed to
have seen. And God only knows, whether that visible Evidence (were it shown)
would change their minds, or abate in the least the Obduracy which stick's
close to the hearts of Thousands.

5. The Dr has not yet done with the Poor Page 685.
Boys Leg. If all, says he, that had been pleaded in the Apostles time for
their divine Commission, had been only that a Boy had his Leg cut off, and
strangely restored, would this have Satisfied the world? A more simple Question
was never proposed? Pray, Sr, is all that the Church plead's for her
Commission, reduced to this one Miracle of a Boys Leg restored? No. She
offer's to your view the like admirable Miracles which Christ and the Apostles
have done. You, Sr, triefle no less in this your Demand, than if you should
Ask, whether all the works our Savior did, were brought to the curing of a
poor Boys Eyes, born blind? Compare the one Miracle with the other, and you
will find that the restored Leg was in itself, as great a Miracle as that
restored sight. Give me the least disparity if you can? Nothing in nature could
more reunite that Leg to its own Natural Body, than restore Sight to one born
Page 686. Suares de Fide Disp. 4. sect. 3. number. 10.
blind, and I am sure the Devil had no hand in either cure.

6. The Dr Quotes Suares and foully perverts his meaning. A Miracle says this
learned Author, may be wrought Two ways. 1. Without any respect to confirm a
Truth, but only for the benefit of him that receives it, as in case of a
Miraculous cure, or the like. 2. It may be done purposely to confirm the Truth
of a Doctrine. The First sort of Miracles, says Suares, wrought Suares
perverted by the Dr.
for the Benefit of others, God may do by wicked men, though this happens very
seldom, or if it happen, it is rather done ex Fide, for the Faith of him that
receives it, than for any good in the wicked man that work's it? All these
words which explain Suares his meaning, and discover the Dr's Juggling the Dr
omit's. Observe the Juggling. If, says he, such Miracles, as the cure of Mark
the Words. According to Suares,
F. Marcellus and the restored Leg at Zaragosa may, according to Suares, be
wrought only for the benefit of those who receive them, what can this prove
as to the Churches Infallibility? Mr Dr Suares says nothing to this The Dr's
Iugling Discovered.
your Sense, but expressly the contrary. He speak's there of Miracles wrought
(and very seldom) by wicked men. Were those two cures upon F. Marcellus and the
maimed youth done by the wicked? The Mother of God wrought the one, and S.
Xaverius a Canonized Saint the other, are these now glorious in Heaven,
according to Suares to be listed among the wicked? For stark shame retract this
vast Untruth, and know that such Miracles may be justly numbered with those
Suares mentions, which confirm our Catholic Doctrine, as is already proved.

7. The Dr, to little purpose Quotes Delrio, Page 687. Delrio l. 4. Dis. Magic.
c. 4. 9. 5. Sect. 2.
Saying, that Faith being now established there is little or no necessity of
Miracles to confirm it. I Answer, Delrio in that place replies to an Adversary,
who thought Miracles not so frequent now as formerly, by reason of much
coldness and inconstancy in Faith: That is one cause, Says Delrio, but a
better is, because Faith being now established, Minor est vel nulla necessitas
Miraculorum. Can the Dr draw from this Expression of less or no necessity, a
Total abatement of Mercy, as if God wrought none, but such as are precisely
necessary? Did Christ our Lord indulge no favors or Graces to mortals, but
just so many as were necessary? Were all the Prodigious Signs which the
Apostles wrought of such absolute Necessity, that if one had been omitted, men
could not have believed; or if more had been done than are recorded, the world
would have been overwhelmed with Miracles? The Dr, it seems had little to Say,
while he tires his Reader with these impertinent Quotations.

8. The Dr in the page cited, tell's E. W. he never undertook to prove that
Miracles are wrought to confirm the Churches infallibility in Doctrine. Mr Dr
err's grossly, E. W. has handled Reason and Relig. Disc. 2. c. 9. n. 3.
this point upon several occasions. For your Satisfaction, Reader, peruse only
Reason and Religion, where I proposed this Question. If Miracles (as the Dr
often intimates) only mark out a Doctrine The Dr again mistaken.
common to all called Christians, how comes it to pass, that that the
Nestorians, and Protestants have not Miracles more frequently done among them?
Why is this favor only annexed to the Catholic Church? I said 2. There is not
any one Doctrine taught by our Church, which is not Sealed, signed, and
confirmed by manifest Miracles, and named particular Doctrins, whereunto the Dr
never yet replied, nor can reply hereafter. Yet forsooth, E. VV. never handled
this matter.

9. The Dr in the same page quotes Maldonat, Maldonat in Marc. 16. 17.
as one confessing that since the Christian Religion has been confirmed by
Miracles in the Churches beginning, there is no necessity of Miracles, for that
End. Here the Dr Juggles, Maldonat makes no such confession, He says indeed
(which is a great Truth) that Miracles were necessary for the Propagation The
Dr wrongs Maldonat.
of Christian Faith, But does not therefore exclude them for being useful and
necessary in after Ages, his words are so plain, that I wonder the Dr passed by
them without notice. Neque vero existimandum est etc. We are not to think,
Says he, the Power of working Miracles exstinguished in S. Aug. 22. de civit.
c. 8. and sermo 7. de sanctis in Episcopatu suo.
faithful Believers, for many have been done, as S. Austin proves by
innumerable Examples, which the Saint beheld with his own Eyes, for the space
of Two whole years at the Relics of Blessed S. Stephen. Thus you have
Maldonat's Confession. Now if as the Dr pretend's, Maldonat Quotes S. Gregory
and Bid for this Confession, he introduces both their Testimonies as strong
proofs of latter Miracles wrought in the Church. These Maldonat stoutly
defend's. And who ever yet doubted, but that S. Gregory, and Bid stood as
earnestly for them, as ever Catholic Authors did? Nay more, does not the Dr in
this very Treatise bitterly Dr Still. Page 586.
inveigh against S. Gregory and Bid, upon the Account of their over much
Credulity, and want of Judgment in giving encouragement to all the Monkish
Tales, and Impostures afterward? He would Say, if he speak's Sense, That
because these two great Doctors wrote so copiously of Miracles (the one in his
Dialogues, the other in several Passages of his works) they taught Monks to
tell their Idle Stories concerning Miracles, yet here forsooth, they are
brought in, as great Adversaries to Miracles.

10. A word now to S. Gregory. The Saint mentions three sorts of Miracles
peculiar to most S. Gregory Homil. 29. in Evangelia, post initium.
Christians in those Primitive times. First they cast out Devils. 2. Spoke
different Tongues. And 3. By laying hands on the diseased, cured them. Thus
much said, S. Gregory demand's. What my good Brethren, will not you believe,
because you Ordinary Observe well, of what Miracles S. Gregory Speak's.
Christians work no such Miracles? Know those Signs were Necessary in the
beginning of the Church, to the End that Faith nourished by Miracles, might
increase among the Multitude of Believers; We, says S. Gregory, water a plant
till it take root, but when that is done, irrigatio cessabit we water it no
more. Therefore S. Paul tells us that the gift of Tongues is not for Believers,
but for Infidels. Observe Reader a double cheat. The Dr first pervert's the
true Sense of S. Gregory, who speaks, as you see, of particular Miracles which
God then usally wrought by all sort of ordinary Christians, and such Signs,
says the Saint, were necessary at the beginning for the Suppression of
Infidelity (then rife in the world) as also for the firm Establishment of
Christian Faith; But now that great Work being done, The plant needs no more
The Dr's two fold Cheat discovered.
watering, That is, it is not now necessary that the faithful generally be
assumed to work such Miracles as they did in those Primitive Days. Hence the
Dr fraudulently infer's, that all Miracles cease in the Church, because, either
all or the most of Christians, speak not different Tongues, cast not out
Devils, lay not hands on the Infirm and cure them. Is not this Juggling?

11. What is here Said, Maldonat, whom the Maldonat's Doctrine.
Dr cites, so fully expresses that more cannot be desired. Viguit quidem in
initio, Says he, tantopere Miraculorum usus etc. The use of Miracles was so
frequent and flourishing in the beginning, that seldom could you se a Christian
who wrought not all Miracles, Two chiefly were most common. Viz. To speak
different Languages and to cast out Devils. Though these Graces were not given
presently upon Baptism, But by the Imposition of hands or in the Sacrament of
Confirmation. Thus Maldonat, But the Dr's Eyes were shut, and would not see.
Judge Reader, whether this be not a second Fraud.

12. The Dr Quotes Andradius (we call him Dr Still. page 688. Dandrada Defens.
Trident. Fidei lib. 2.
Payva Dandrada) and remit's me to his second Book which contain's a vast
number of leaves, from folio 98. to folio 270. And here I must seek out these
few words of the Dr. Andradius says, that Miracles are often times false, but
always weak proofs of a true Church. The Authors own context Dandrada page 205.
will afford the best light. When, says Dandrada, S. Augustine disputed
against the Donatists who confined the whole Church to Africa, He proved, that
the true Church could be Demonstrated by the Testimonies of Holy Scripture.
Hence Kemnitius thought the Saint asserted, that all things are expressly
contained in Scripture, never considering what S. Augustine contend's for. Viz.
That the most firm proofs for the Church (free from all suspicion of falsehood)
are to be taken from Scripture. He goes on. For when Miracles which Holy men
often do, may with the Devils help be exhibited by the most wicked, and the
Prediction of future things may not only happen to the pious, but to the
impious. Falsa Profecto haec sunt plerumque, infirma etiam semper Ecclesiae
verae indicia. Such Miracles (not comparable to the Testimonies produced from
Scripture) are often times false, and ever weak Marks of the Church. The only
difficulty is, when this Author distinguishes two sorts of Miracles (some
wrought by good men, others, by the most wicked) whether those Particles.
Falsa profecto haec sunt, relate to both, or are only restrained Dandrada his
Doctrine explained.
to Miracles done by the wicked, And the whole Context seems to clear all.
Seeing Miracles and Revelations, says Dandrada, Non modo piis sed and
flagitiosis hominibus accidere aliquando possunt, may happen not only to the
Godly, but to the wicked also, falsa profecto haec sunt, Those wrought by the
wicked are for the most part false, (sometimes true as in Balaam and others)
and always weak proofs of the Church.

13. Now if you will refer those words. Falsa profecto sunt haec plerumque. to
Miracles, whether done by good or bad men, you may Say without offense, That
all new Miracles, yet under debate, and not easily differenced from the Signs
of wicked men may, (before they are rigidly examined and approved) in order to
us, appear often times false, and are always weak proofs of the true Church.
Never did Dandrada Say or dream, that Miracles juridically examined, and
approved by the Church can be false, yet this the Dr is to show, or he fail's
in the Main, and evinces nothing.

14. The Dr in the same Page cites Ioannes Ferus Ferus in Matthew. 24. 23. 24.
saying, that the Doctrine of a Church is not to be proved by Miracles, but
Miracles by the Doctrine. I Answer he speak's so, and very pertinently, if you
ponder his connected discourse. You may learn, says Ferus, how to Discern
false and true Ferus deliver's true Doctrine.
Mitacles, For as true Miracles when done are never contrary to God's word, so
false ones oppose those Sacred Verities, which have been long since confirmed
by Miracles, And for that reason c. 14. n. 5.
Miracles are to be examined by the Churches received Doctrine? Here is nothing
but what I expressly deliver in a foregoing Chapter, and Therefore it may well
pass among Dr Still. impertinent Quotations.

15. The Dr soon after Quotes Josephus Acosta, Acosta de Tempor. noviss. c. 9.
as one highly extolling the Miracles which Antichrist shall work, in so much,
That it will be a hard matter to discern true and false Signs, and he Quotes it
from Hippolytus, that Antichrist shall do far greater Miracles, than the cure
of Marcellus, or the restored Leg at Zaragosa. Viz. That he will raise the
Dead, cure the diseased, and have command over the Elements. Thus the Dr, And
almost err's in every particular. First he mistakes the IX. Chapter for the 18.
and 19. where Acosta handles these Acosta ill cited by the Dr.
matter. In the IX. Chapter he chiefly insist's upon Antichrist's raging
Persecution, in subduing the Kings of the earth etc. 2. Neither Hippolitus
Hippolit. de consumma. mundi and de Antichrist. Biblioth. Patrum apud Bignium.
Tom. 2. Edit. 2.
nor Acosta ever said (as the Dr unworthily writes) that Antichrist shall do
far greater Miracles, than those wrought upon Marcellus and the Boy of
Zaragosa. Peruse Hippolitus, and you will find Acosta's observation true, that
he speak's indeed so much of Antichrist's Signs, ut vix credibilia videantur,
that all he brings to light seems not credible. Antichrist, says Hippolitus,
will do prodigious Things, he will cleanse the Lepers, expel Devils, raise the
Dead, change night into day and day into night, he will turn about the Sun
whither and to what place he pleases etc. Yet this ancient Writer (Scholar to
Clemens Alexandrinus) contemn's all these wonders three or four times over in
that Oration, as false, feigned, and counterfeit. Signa, says he, edet and
horrenda, non vera, sed falsa, He will show strange Signs, But all will be
false. Again. Haec omnia faciet consilio simulato, ac fraudulento, quo
circumveniat omnes ut se Regem creent. There will be nothing in these Wonders
Hippolitus, and Acosta Slight Anchrist's Wonders. 2. These. 2. 9.
but hypocrisy, and dissimulation. Thus Hippolitus undervalues Antichrist's
Miracles.

16. So also does Acosta, and every Christian that believes the Apostle
speaking of that Man of Sin, whose coming is according to the operation of
Satan in all Power, and lying Wonders. Magnopere nos recreat, says Acosta, The
Apostles words Comfort us, when he tell's us that Antichrist's Signs will be
nothing but Cheats, Acosta cap. 19.
Lying wonders, wrought by the Devils assistance. Real Miracles cannot be
done, by that Archenemy of God and Truth. Soon after. They are rightly called
fallacious Wonders, exhibited either by a secret Power in nature, or by the
Ministry of Devils, and done for this End to confirm Lies contrary to God's
eternal Verities. The Servants of JESUS CHRIST never work Miracles after this
manner, nor can attest a Lie by any true Sign they do. Thus Acosta. Is not
therefore the Dr's Question most ridiculous? I The Dr's simple question,
retorted, and answered.
would understand, says he, from E. W. Whether Antichrist's Church will not be
proved as Infallible in this way, as the Church of Rome? And, I would as fain
understand from Dr Still. whether Antichrist's Church will not be proved as
Infallible in this way, as the Apostolical Church? If the Dr dare assert, That
Antichrist shall work true Miracles in raising the Dead, and curing all
desperate Diseases, I Ask how can he distinguish the Apostolical Signs, and
those? If contrariwise, he Teach with S. Paul and Catholic Doctors That all
Antichrist can do, will be only Lying, Iugling, and Hypocrital Wonders, The
folly of his own Question appears as it is, vain, idle, and vveightlesse,
unless he prove (which neither Devil nor Dr shall do) That all the Miracles
wrought in God's Church, even those related by S. Irenaeus, S. Augustine, S,
Hierom, S. Ambrose, and other Fathers, are to be esteemed base Cheats, juggling,
Legerdemain; In fine, wholly as Lying, and invaluable, as Antichrist's wonders
will be.

17. The Dr in the next place cites Cajetan, Cajet. de concep. Virg c. 1.
But where to find the Treatise of the Conception, though I have four Tomes of
that Author by me, I know not. However the words as the Dr relates them,
contain no Difficulty. Cajetan says first. The Church has no ground to
determine any matter Cajetan cited makes nothing for the Dr.
of Doctrine now, on the account of Miracles. Very true, because, as he
insinuat's, the Church has no new Revelations, and therefore hold's her Doctrine
already Determined upon Infallible Tradition, handed down Age after Age, from
the Apostles Days. O but Cajetan gives another Reason. Because the Devil may
do such things which we cannot distinguish from true Miracles. Answ. His
meaning may be, that some true Miracles are not upon the first sight, before
full Examination, easily distinguished from false Signs, but that many are
distinguishable (as when the dead rose and conversed (witness Irenaeus) a long
time with the living, seems clear enough. And I Neither Cajetan any ever
taught that the Devil can revive the Dead.
am sure neither Cajetan nor any Christian ever thought, that the Devil called
those Dead to life, or did those great Cures which our Savior and the Apostles
wrought. As therefore the primitive Christians differenced those admirable
works from the Devils Lying Wonders, we likewise set the same distinctive Marks
upon our Churches Miracles, whereof I have largely treated above. No disparity
can be given, Supposing the matters of Fact true, And to call the Truth of all
approved Miracles into doubt reaches to a high Degree of Madness.

18. The only thing urged by Cajetan is that the most Authentic Testimonies of
Miracles, even in the Canonization of Saints are not altogether certain,
because it is a Written every man is a Liar. If this Proof be valid, Why may
not he also mistake that wrote thus, For he is amongst the number of every one?
Please Reader to distinguish three Degrees of certainty, and the Difficulty
vanishes. One certainty called Metaphysical, is altogether Infallible. A second
named Physical, is had by such as behold a Miracle, And that certainty the
Three Degrees of certainty.
two Sisters Mary and Martha attained, when they saw their Brother Lazarus
raised to life. A third certainty called Moral, (though inferior to the other
two) may be so persuasive, That none but most impudently and rashly, can call
the matter attested into doubt. This Degree of Moral certainty all those had,
who upon the prudent Information of faithful Witnesses, heard that our Lord
restored life to Lazarus, though they saw not the Miracle. Thus much premised.

19. I Say it is not necessary that Miracles which induce to Faith, or excite
us to believe, be known by Metaphysical or Physical certainty. A high moral
Assurance of their being wrought (The very most of the Primitive Christians
before they believed, had no greater) is abundantly enough, and fully
sufficient. The reason is Miracles as cap. 14. number. 8. 9.
I noted above, show not Faith to be evidently true, but only evidently
credible, neither are they the formal Object whereon Faith relies, but rational
Inducements only, moving to accept of what ever Truth God Reveal's. Therefore
Cajetan says: well. Faith must stand on a more Infallible Page 689. Moral
certainty had of Miracles, serves as an Inducement to Belief.
ground, than that of Miracles, and the Dr only Triefles, when he tell's us,
that our Writers hold there can be no certainty of the Truth of Miracles but
from the Churches Approbation, which, says he, is in effect to say. They do
not believe the Church Infallible, because of their Miracles, But they believe
their Miracles to be true, because they believe their Church to be Infallible.
The want of distinguishing different Degrees of certainty, caused the Dr to
blunder as he does. Read therefore his words thus. We believe by a sirm Act of
Faith the Church to be Infallible because God says She is Infallible and to
this Belief, we are prudently led by Miracles known upon so high Moral
certainty, That it is open folly to call them into doubt, And all difficulty
ceases. Again, when the Church approves Miracles as true, we ascend to a higher
Step of certainty, and own them (thus approved) without all hesitancy
indubitable, because a known Oracle seal's them up as certain. Now I Ask Mr Dr
(who plays at fast The Dr would find a Difficulty where none is.
and loose with his word Certainty) what Mystery lies in this, that a lesser
Degree of assurance (to wit Moral) serve as an Inducement to believe God
speaking by the Church, And that an other of a higher nature (yet below the
certitude of Faith) be consequent, after we own the Church firm and sure in
Her Declarations? No man but the Dr, would have proposed such empty stuff to
the wearisomnesse of every Reader. Se more relating to this matter in the XIV.
Chapter already cited.

20. The Dr yet cloyes us with three our four impertinent Authorities. Paulus
Zacchias a Physician says, that wicked men and Devils, may not only do
Miracles in appearance, but such as are really so, as the Instruments of Divine
Power. Very true, The question is whether Devils by their own Power can work
Miracles. Sec. 15.
if God (who has better Instruments at hand, the blessed Angels) will make use
of Devils, he might Destroy the world by them. But the Question is whether
Devils of their own Power can work true Miracles, This difficulty waved by
Zacchias, is decided in a foregoing Chapter. Zacchias also much inveigh's
against bare pretended Miracles, and so does every wise man also, But what is
this to the purpose, while we plead by no pretended or forged Miracles, having,
thanks be to God, great plenty of others, never Questioned never called into
doubt by any?

21. The other Quotations following are as weightlesse, and impertinent.
Fortunatus Schacchus Dr Still. page 693.
says first, it is a very easy to take false Miracles for true. What then? Are
therefore no Miracles true, because some too forward will, perhaps, have that
thought a Miracle which is not? I heard a very great man (a Protestant)
confidently avouch more than once, That the strange Escape of our Sovereign
King Charles after the Battle at Worcester, was a plain, Doubtful Miracles of
no account in the Chvrch.
downright and undeniable Miracle. God only knows the Truth, May be it was
Miraculous; if not; what great harm follows, save only, That the Honorable
person over confident, was deceived? The Church, Mr Dr, builds nothing upon
dubious and uncertain Miracles. Schacchus Asserts. 2. That wicked men may do
real Miracles. No doubt hereof, if God will make use of them as he did of
Balaam, though this, Witness Suares cited, seldom happen's. He says 3. That
no Argument can be drawn for the Sanctity of any Person, but only from such
Miracles* are approved by the Roman Church. This supposes approved Miracles,
let the Dr own such as undoubted (which are innumerable) and there is enough to
stop his mouth. Episcopal Authority, Mr Dr, after due Examination may, as we
see practiced the whole Church over, approve a Miracle, Though The Sea
Apostolic only Canonizes Saints. Page 694.
to declare for the true Sanctity of any Person, belongs only to the Sea
Apostolic.

22. The Dr hopes to find something for his purpose in the Process touching
the Canonization of Andreas Corsinus, where the Auditors of the Rota say
first. It is necessary that a Person Canonized have wought Miracles, Very good:
Miracles therefore are supposed wrought, and useful also for some good End.
Will the Dr yield thus much upon the Auditors Testimony? O but They Say, 2. It
is not necessary that Miracles be done for the Confirmation of Faith, seeing
they may be wrought for a proof of a Persons Sanctity. I Answer. If true
Sanctity (as is most certain) ever supposes true Faith, And The Miracles that
Evince Sanctity prove Faith also.
if the Person Canonized be a faithful member of the Catholic Church, the same
Miracles which prove his Sanctity, cannot but also prove his Faith, sound and
real, Though as I noted above, it is needless at every Miracle to cry out. This
is done to confirm such and such Articles, believed in the Church. You have
already many Miracles purposely wrought in Confirmation of every Catholic
Article, what can the Dr desire more?

23. Those Auditors say. 3. Miracles are a Sign 1. Cor. 14. 22.
not but Believers to Unbelievers. The Apostles words are thus. Linguae in
Signum sunt non fidelibus sed infidelibus: Prophetiae autem non infidelibus sed
fidelibus. That is, the extraordinary gift of Tongues, was a Miraculous Sign in
the Primitive Church, both useful and then Necessary for the Conversion of
Heathens, but Prophesies belong to the faithful, not to Infidels. Here is
nothing in favor of the Dr. I say moreover, as the Gift of Tongues was then a
Sign and a Strong Inducement to an Infidel's Conversion, so all the ancient
and latter Miracles since, have been Signs and Inducements to them, But are not
so in order to a faithful Believer. The Reason hereof is clear. All the
Miracles from the beginning of Christianity to this day (whether seen or heard
of by credible Witnesses) were shown an Infidel first to evidence the
Credibility of Christian Religion, to draw him from Infidelity, and to beget
Divine Faith in him; But a Believer long since established in Faith, and fully
assured of the Verity of Catholic Doctrine. as One already sound in Faith
requirs not Miracles to confirm it.
he neither expect's nor desires more Miracles, than God's graciously will
show, So when exhibited, he look's not on them as any first Motives or
Inducements to believe (for he is already sound in Faith) and Therefore need's
no further proofs taken from Miracles to convince That, whereof he has full
certainty already.

24. Contelorius (an Author I have not seen) Dr Still. page 695.
says the Dr, tell's us. It is not necessary to a Miracle that it be done for
the confirmation of any part of Christian Faith. Yet Mr Dr thinks, Miracles may
be wrought for the Confirmation of some General Truths believed by all
Christians, I hope those are parts of true Christian Religion. But mark the
Expression. It is not necessary, Says this Author, that Miracles be done to
confirm any part of Christian Faith. Does this imply they are Though it be not
necessary that God work ^ Miracle to confirm faith, yet he may do i^ for that
End.
not done for that End? Certainly no. It is not necessary that Dr Still. write
more Books, Does it therefore follow, he will hereafter leave off Scribbling? No
absolute Necessity forces Almighty God to work new Miracles, Ergo God will work
no more, is a Lame consequence, And just like the Dr's, which run's thus. Since
therefore the far greater number of Miracles in the Roman Church are wrought
for another End, how can they prove from them, the Infallibility of their
Church? Hold, Mr Dr, you go too fast: Your Author only says. It is not
Necessary that a Miracle be done for that End, you blindly leap further, And
would thence infer, many are defacto wrought for another End. Keep Close to
Contelorius his words. It is not necessary etc, And your Inference will be
thus, or nothing. Though all the Miracles which God ever wrought, have been
done to confirm some part of our Christian Faith, Yet it is not necessary that
every particular Miracle be done for that End. Here is all you get from
Contelorius. Again Suppose gratis, that many Miracles have been wrought only
for the benefit of him that receives them, How does this prejudice our Cause,
when we manifestly make it out, that innumerable have been expressly done in
confirmation of every Catholic Article taught by the Church, as is largely
proved already. Sec. 16.


CHAP. XIX.
The Conclusion.

1. THus Reader, by Gods good Assistance we are as you see come to an End of Dr
Stillingfleets Enquiry into Miracles. A Treatise far more fastidious and
tireing, than hard and difficult, for you have not in the whole Book one
rational Argument, one Testimony of any Orthodox Church, one clear Sentence of
a Father, or so much as any one Authority of Divines produced, against the
approved Miracles wrought in the Roman Catholic Church. This I Averr, and do
it with so great Confidence, that I challenge Mr Dr to rejoyn if he can, and
Disprove what I say. Yet after all you must hear the poor man brag, as if he
had done Wonders, in taking, forsooth, more pains, The Dr's Idle brag.
not merely to detect the frauds and Impostures of the Roman Church, but to
preserve the honor of Christianity. Frauds and Impostures Dr! Not one have you
shown through your whole Treatise in matters hitherto debated, nor shall you
ever show any hereafter. You have indeed preserved the Honor of Christianity,
But How? Just as wicked Sec. 17. n. ^
Philostorgius (witness Photius) did S. Basil's, whom he made more renowned by
his Senceless railing at the Saint. Your weak Efforts, Mr Dr, your Calumnies,
your Taunts, your Jeers, your open Falsities, wherewith you manfully strive to
obscure God's own Seals and Signatures, are so far from Eclipsing their Luster,
that Miracles thereby are made more glorious.

2. Reader, had this Dr gone about to Dissuade from a Belief of the Sacred
Trinity, or the Incarnation, because the Mysteries are very difficult, and
surpass our short Capacities, he might, perhaps, have had followers, and
gained some to his Opinion, But to vapor only as he does against A bold
attempt* to set against plain Objects of Sense, seen by thousands
plain matters of Fact, visible Objects of sense, seen by innumerable sworn
Ey-witnesses, and by that means to hope for Proselyts, or to draw one of
ordinary Prudence to his Sentiment, is so desperate an attempt, so profound a
folly, That the like could have never entered any man's head but Dr
Stillingfleet's.

3. What therefore moved the Dr to Write his Enquiry, or for what End came it
forth? Was the great pains he speak's of taken, to Discredit forged or mere
pretended Miracles? A needless It is hard to say, what moved the Dr to write
this Enquiiy.
entertainment seeing the Church long since, had laid a heavy Censure upon all
that Do so. Did he (conscious of his fraudulent Proceeding) think his Book
would take with a simple sort of People that want leisure, and Abilities to
trace him through his many Meanders? Or could he persuade himself, if such
poor Souls were ensnared, or imposed upon, he had done an Heroic work? If so;
He is unworthy humane Conversation, and can hope for nothing, but a large
allowance of Disgrace before God

4. It may be replied. The Dr verily thought his Enquiry would gain esteem
among the learned, and be valued of as a singular rare Piece. Speak so. He
Discovers a mighty want of Judgment, For how could this man, who No applause
to be hoped, from the Learned.
never yet through his whole Book, was able to cast the least blemish upon one
approved Miracle^, brag of his pains? How could he think that the learned would
applaud his Labors, or so much as take notice of so empty and fruitless a
work? Now that he has not made the least rational Exception against one
approved Miracle, is as clear, as that there are letters in his Book. If he Say
I wrong him, He may right himself, and show me, where, in what Page, or
Paragraph through his whole Treatise, he has made it out, that such and such
opproved Miracles (Nay, I say One) have been by him plainly detected, false,
feigned, and counterfeit. It Is true in rambling up and down, he bring's to
light some forged Miracles, which the Church detest's, and severely punishes,
But those no more obscure the Luster of true Miracles, than one man's horrid
crime, cast's a blemish on another known most just, and honest.

5. Perhaps this or the like Fancy most How the Dr might Discourse.
swayed with the Dr, and set his fingers on Itch to write against Miracles.
Many Miracles (might he say) for time and place are remote from us, and
therefore the very most of our English Nation (as things now stand) being
strangely incredulous, cannot but look upon them as matters of Fact no way
clear, but contrariwise very dark and doubtful. It will Therefore be easy for
me after some discovery of forged Miracles (Those must usher in the main
Design) to blast the credit of the Very best Miracles, and, though I cannot
lay the least Aspersion upon one approved by their Church, yet when I handle
such a Subject at distance from men shut up in an Island, and speak to an
obdurate sort of People who scarcely believe their Creed, I may well hope my
pains will have the Success I wish, which is to dishonor the noblest Motive
for Christian Faith, The glory of Miracles.

6. In case these or the like thoughts set the Dr Things once really done cease
not to be true, because remote from us.
on work (and I cannot, Imagine upon what other Design he wrote) I Answer.
Though he might take great advantage from the Incredulity of many thousands
dispersed over England, and may perhaps in time persuade the very most of such
men to believe nothing at all, Yet none, I hope, are so deeply besotted, as to
think that a matter once really done, leaves off to be true, because it is
remote from us, for upon this account our Saviors Miracles may be Cavilled at.

7. But to give the Dr Satisfaction in every thing proposable, shall we wave at
present those more ancient Miracles recounted by S. Irenaeus; S. Austin, and
others, and require the Dr's direct Answer to some latter, three or four only
wrought in the memory of many yet living, will be sufficient. John Clements
Miraculous Cure at Montaigu, is one, whereof the Dr never yet took notice. The
poor youths restored Leg in Spain shall be another. A Third is, that sudden and
Miraculous cure done upon F. Mastrilli in Naples by the glorious S. Xaverius.
The last (because the most near Anno 1661.) is that undoubted Miracle, which
God manifested at Calais upon a young Gentlewoman, by the Intercession of
Blessed S. Francis Se C. 3.
of Paula. These Miracles (excepting the last related in this Treatise) are, as
is largely proved Reason and Religion, owned by the Christian Reas. and Relig.
Disc. 2 c. 8. n. 17. 18. and cap. 9. n. 11
world most certain, I therefore require Dr Stillingfleet's plain and express
Answer to every one, being yet fresh in the minds and Eyes of innumerable.
Unless full Satisfaction be given herein, I would have the Dr know, that
though he write Volumes against this short Treatise, all he does, or can do
(after this just Provocation) what satisfaction is required from the Dr?
will appear weightlesse, insignificant, dishonorable to a Doctor, in fine
worth little but Derision.

8. Moreover, Let not the Gentleman think, that to scorn God's most certain
Wonders will do his work, or prove Satisfactory to me. Let him not think,
though in Spite of Truth he call's that stupendous Miracle wrought in Spain,
A pretended growing out of a Leg, and to his shame tell's us, It is an easy
thing for a Stump to grow a Leg in its passing from Spain hither, which is to
say in other terms, It Is a Lie, a fourb, both falsely set Ieers shall no longer
serve the Dr's turn.
abroad, and foolishly believed. I Say, let him not think, that such Fatras
will serve his turn. No. We expect better Answers (old birds, believe it, are
not easily caught with chafe), He must therefore either prove Fraud in this,
and the other Miracles hinted at, or will be forced by reason and Authority to
own the Facts most true, and unquestionable.

9. One word briefly concerning the pretended No want of Clarity for either
ancient or latter Miracles.
want of Clarity for our Miracles, whether ancient or of a latter date. My
Assertion is. It is as clear and manifest (yea much more manifest at this day I
write these Lines) that innumerable most certain Miracles have been wrought in
the Roman Catholic Church, than it will be manifest one Age hence, that Dr
Still. was ever a man in being, a student in Cambridge, received Degree in that
University, or finally was promoted to a Rectorship of S. Andrews. For proof
of my Assertion I suppose, few or none now living will be alive a hundred years
hence. How will it then be proved, if any doubt be, that The Assertion proved
by one Instance.
the Dr was ever in Being? You will Answer most easily, from the Register of
his Baptism. Very good. But we have most evidently as clear Registers for
innumerable Miracles, The time when, the place where, the Circumstances how
they were wrought, the Ey-vvitnesses that savv them, their Examination, and
approbation, are with all clarity registered. Thus our Proofs are equal. Again,
Records may tell, when and at what time from a Bachelour of Divinity He became
Dr, and as faithful Records inform us, when, and in what time, and before
whom, innumerable Miracles have been wrought. A constant Fame, or report of the
Dr's Promotion to S. Andrews may, its likely, be preserved in the minds of Some
above an Age. And have we not as constant, yea a far more universal Fame, for
the four Miracles now mentioned, and many others? There is no comparison*

10. If therefore it would be plain Dotage in any to doubt of Dr Still. birth
and Promotions, when the particulars are proved upon the moral Certainty
already set down (it will be no greater but Moral a hundred years hence) much
more is it a Degree of madness to call a hundred Miracles into doubt, whereof
we have at least so high Moral Certainty, And as I now said, far more Universal.

11. Some may reply. There seems a great Disparity in the matters now spoken
of; For its both natural and ordinary, That men live, meet with A weak
Objection, Answered.
promotions, and have also Honors and Dignities in the Church, or common
wealth; But the Miracles we defend, are strange extraordinary Signs, contrary
to the course of Nature, Therefore moral Certainty (though sufficient to ground
a prudent Assent in other matters) is not strong enough to raise us to a
prudent Belief of Miracles, which are never looked on without Admiration: And
the Wonders seems much to abate their Credibility. An ungrounded Discourse, if
ever any was. For though a Miracle in it self be a Work of God above all
natural Power, yet to To work a Miracle is above all power in Nature, but to se
it when done is not Miraculous.
see it when it is done, is no way Miraculous, but most connatural. Had Lazarus
his Sisters. when they saw their Brother called out of his Grave their eyes
Miraculously opened to behold and converse with him? Should God now create a
man never yet in this world, and empower him to Preach in the City of London,
His Creation would be Miraculous, but to hear him Preach to treat and converse
with him, would imply no Miracle. Now that many Miracles have been seen and
attested upon solemn Oath is already proved. Again, if the Argument proposed
prove any thing, it evinces, that none could yield a prudent assent to our
Saviors Miracles, when upon their Sight, Witnesses of undoubted credit made
all by moral certainty known to the world. But of this enough is said already.

12. Upon These and the former considerations laid forth in this Treatise, all
may justly exclaim as Medina does. Ingens est Miraculorum potestas. Mich.
Medina lib. 2. de recta Deum fide p. 51. A.
The Power of our Christian Miracles is mighty great. By these God converted
the world, and demolished Gentilism, both anciently and in later Ages. These
Signal Marks, strangely conquered innumerable obdurate hearts, when they
clearly saw the God of nature, working by Signs from Heaven above all force in
nature. Medina Medina p. 52. 53.
goes on. What brought the great S. Denis to the School of Christ, was it only
S. Paul's preaching? No, but it was his Preaching confirmed by prodigious
Miracles. What made S. Miracles converted the world and gained the wises ^ of
men to our Christian Profession.
Cyprian (once a Magician) a faithful Bishop, and afterward a valiant Martyr?
Miracles gained him, Miracles gave him both Courage and constancy. Who was
wiser then Origin, more eloquent than S. Cyprian of Carthage, more learned than
Tertullian, Athenagoras, Theophilus and the two Clements? What Storms of
persecution did these great men joyfully pass through, and suffer, whereas,
would they have deserted their Christian Profession, Honors, Dignities, and
all earthly commodities, would have followed them with Acclamations of joy? But
they slighted that Trash, kept still to their firm hold and what prolonged
their Patience, And what Arguments stayed them in the Christian Disciplipline?
He Answers. Profecto nihil aliud quam divina Miracula. Their Arguments were
drawn from Divine Miracles, quibus omnis cedit humana Sapientia, which have so
mighty an Influence upon reason, that all humane wisdom quite vanquished, must
give place, yield it self Captive, and ingenuously confess, that God has
honored his Church with innumerable glorious Miracles.

13. S. Augustine also Discover's a mighty lib. 22. de Civit. c. 9.
force of Miracles, manifest in the cruel Persecution of Martyrs, and no less
apparent in the undaunted Testimony they gave before Tyrants, while they made
Profession of that Faith they dyed for, as also in their admirable patience and
courage, whereby they conquered the world. Vt in his Miraculis (says the
Saint) tanta ista potentia Sequeretur. As who should say, Power, Strength, and
Efficacy accompanied those Miracles, lively demonstrated in those joyful
Sufferances, in that Courage, magnanimity, and Patience. In the next Chapter S.
Austin Shows, Miracles highly valued by S. Augustine. Cap. 10.
that the Miracles given out as done in the Temples of Heathens, are not in the
least Degree comparable with those wrought by Martyrs. Verum, Says the Saint.
Si qua Similia videntur, if ever any such Things were done in those Temples,
the Martyrs Miracles as far Surmounted them, as Moses his Miracles did the
juggling Wonders shown by Paroah's Magicians.

14. Reader, if you find not this Treatise a full Answer to Dr Still. Say, I
beseech you, wherein its deficient, and my Endeavor shall be to give better
Satisfaction. If contrariwise, you think well of it, give me leave to retort
the Dr's own words upon himself. I have taken the more pains, not merely to
detect the frauds and Impostures of Dr Stillingfleet, but also to vindicate the
glorious Miracles of our Christianity from open wrong, least they should suffer
by the intolerable rudeness of a pert and bold Adversary, whose Virulency
Spightfully vented against Miracles, if not retracted, will lie heavy upon him.
I wish the load of his sins less, but know not how to extenuate it. Sorrovvful
repentance must do that, without which Mr Avila's words cited in the Preface,
will one day prove too true. Multum deferet ad Iudicem, Dr Still. cannot but
have much to Answer for, in the last hour of his life before an Impartial
Judge that fears none, And will most assuredly do Justice to every one.

FINIS.

