A SERMON Preached at the Parish Church of Solihull in Warwickshire, DECEMBER
21. 1690.

On Occasion of the Death of ANNE, The Wife of the REVEREND and WORSHIPFUL
HENRY GRESWOLD; Precentor of the Cathedral of Lichfield, etc. And RECTOR of
SOLIHULL aforesaid.

By JOHN WRIGHT Master of Arts.

(...). Isoc. ad Demonic. LONDON, Printed for W. Crook at the Green-Dragon
without Temple Bar. MDCXCI.

TO THE Reverend and Worshipful HENRY GRESWOLD. Precentor of the Cathedral of
Lichfield, etc.
Honored Sir,
YOur late dear Consort when she discerned the time of her departure to draw
near, desired that what was to be preached at her Funeral, might first
entertain her own retired Meditations in the Chambers of Death, while her Soul
was dressing up for Eternity. But since it pleased the Allwise God, to take her
unto happiness, before I could minister to her Piety herein, I now bring these
Leafs to lay upon her Hearse. I confess she deserved the greatest honor that
can be done to her Memory, and mine is the least. But because the design
relates to one who was so near a Portion of your self, I am willing to hope
that you will give it some entertainment, and favorably resent my writing your
Name at the Entrance. No body sure, can expect accuracy and fineness from one
who is but an Underbuilder in God's House. Yet how mean soever it appears, I
must acknowledge with all thankfulness, that the leisure I have for this and my
other Studies, together with most of my Support, I owe to your Bounty and
Favor. And besides my publicly declaring so, I can make no other return, but
to beg of God Almighty, that he will please to prolong your days upon Earth,
for the good of his Church, the benefit of your Country; and the more
particular comfort of your Relations and Friends: and at the end of a Life full
of Years and Honor, to receive your Soul into that Heavenly Choir, whither she
is already gone, with whom you will rejoice to sit and sing Allelujahs for
evermore: which is the sincere and affectionate Prayer of

SIR, Your mightily obliged, and most Faithful Humble Servant. JOHN WRIGHT.

HEB. IX. 27. It is appointed for Men once to dye.
THE first thing which these Words suggest to our Meditations is Death, a very
affrighting thing, formidable to human Nature, the mere mentioning of which, is
enough to damp our Spirits, and the Caresses of all sensual Delights and
Satisfactions, quash all the Glee which we can find in any wild Frolicks or
riotous Jollities; dim the luster of all Earthly Grandeurs and Beauties;
over-cloud and darken all the Splendour and Glories of this World. And yet dye
we must, it has pleased God, by reason of Sin, to bring it upon all Mankind,
to make it the necessary condition of our Nature in this Life, For it is
appointed for Men once to dye.

That we may make the best improvement of these words we can. 1. Let us
meditate what it is to dye. 2. Of the assuredness of Death to us all, It is
appointed for Men. 3. The time when this shall befall us, we are once, at a
certain time to dye. Lastly, What may comfort us against the fear of Death.

1. What it is to dye; how we are to understand Death. Now this, according to
the Sense of all Mankind, confirmed by the Gospel, is our removing out of this
Life, our going into the next World, and our leaving these Earthly Tabernacles
behind us, to return to the Dust of the Earth whence they had their Original.

1. It is our removing out of this Life. Linquenda est Tellus, Horat. Carm.
lib. 2. Od. 14.
says the Poet, and domus and placens uxor atque harum quas colis arborum te
praeter invisas Cupressos nulla brevem dominum sequetur. Thou must leave thy
Land, and thy Dwelling, and thy pleasing Wife; and of all thy Trees, none shall
attend thee to thy Grave, but Oak for thy Coffin. Fuller's Holy War.
A black Shirt was all that Celadine the Great carried to his Grave. Dr
Taylor's Holy Dying, Cap. 1. Sect. 2.
And when Ninus went to Hell he took with him neither Gold, nor Horse, nor
Silver Chariot. We are here but as Strangers and Pilgrims upon the Earth. This
World is not our Home and Country, we are only to pass through it, where we
have no abiding City. 1 Pet. 2. 11.


This should teach us to bear all the Evils of this Life with an even Mind, as
remembering that we are upon our Journey, and have so fair a Country in our
Prospect, where we shall be happy, past all the Storms and Tempests; all the
Doubts and Fears; all the Sins and Temptations; all the Pains and Cares of this
troublesome Pilgrimage, shall be safely landed in Heaven, where all tears shall
be wiped from our Eyes, and Rev. 21. 4.
death and sorrow shall be no more.

We should hence also be careful, that we do not carry away out of this Life,
(which we cannot always enjoy) such Earthly Affections to it, such gaspings for
it, such lookings back after it, as may make us miserable in the next, when we
are parted from it. The other World does not alter the Temper and Disposition
of Mind which a Man carries with him: He that Rev. 22. 11.
is filthy will be filthy still, and he that is unrighteous will be unrighteous
still. And we are not certain that we shall not take with us sensual Appetites,
when we remove from sensible Objects. Old age does not cure wanton Desires in
bad Men; nor envious Passions, nor worldly Affections; nay, these rather
increase as the Body decays. And then we may well believe, that a Man carries
the Earthly Passions and Inclinations of his Mind along with him; and it must
needs be a torment in the other State, and possess the Soul with vexation and
restlessness, to despair of ever enjoying that which only it has an ardent
Affection after.

2. ' It Is our going into the next World, our entering upon a new state of Life,
where there will be neither Marrying nor Building, nor Food nor Raiment, nor
Ploughing nor Sowing, nor Buying nor Selling, nor Sitting nor Walking, nor Heat
nor Cold; but a new World of Spiritual Beings. We are told glorious things of
the happiness of that State, but withal, that it is like nothing which we have
seen or heard, or can conceive. And no wonder, since it is the entertainment and
employment of Angels and Spirits, whereas all our notices come by Sense. While
we are in this Body, we can have no Notions from any thing but what is
Material, and can affect our Senses; and can no more understand an Invisible
World, and Immaterial Inhabitants, than a Man born blind can Colors; he may
believe there are such, and may hear Persons discourse learnedly about 'em, but
they cannot be represented to him any way, whereby he can have an Idea of them.
So that we cannot conceive how we shall be when we have parted with our Bodies,
and left them behind us; what will be our employment, or shall so much as first
present it self to us; how we can be able to discern and distinguish Spirits,
or converse with 'em; whither it is we are to go, since no Place as such can
affect a Soul; wherein the happiness of that State consists. The knowledge of
which things, while all our Intelligence is to come by Sense, cannot be
conveyed to us.

Hence then were it wise in us to comply with all our Savior's Directions, for
the fashioning of our Minds, and to practice all those Graces and Virtues he
requires of us; as easily supposing, that such Habits and Dispositions of Mind
are necessary for us to relish the Happiness of that state. For there are many
degrees and instances of Virtue required from us, which are not necessary to,
nay, scarce consistent with the happy and prosperous Condition of this World,
or our living in it: For we are not to love it, we are to live above it; to
stifle and suppress not only the extravagant and irregular, but even the
natural Appetites of the Body, and to despise the Pleasures of it, subduing the
Flesh to the Spirit; to enjoy this World with that great indifferency, as if we
enjoyed it not; to have our conversation in Heaven, all our joys and
affections, our treasure and hearts there; to love our Enemies, and those who
hate us and despitefully use us; to forgive Injuries; not to retaliate Evil for
Evil, but the contrary: Which things we cannot think why our Savior should
require from us, were it not that that Temper of Mind which these Virtues form
in us, is necessary to prepare us for the happiness of the other Life; and so
far as we abate of them, so far shall we fall short of our Felicity in that
State.

As for the Miseries of it, we may well believe, that they also are more than
any thing we have seen, or felt, or can conceive. They are represented by Rev.
20. 15. and 21. 8.
Lakes of fire and brimstone; and though Fire cannot hurt a Soul, yet if such
Expressions be Metaphorical, what will those sufferings be that are real!

Thus to dye is to enter into the strange Regions, and new state of the other
Life.

3. It Is our leaving these earthly Tabernacles behind us, to return to dust;
our Bodies to sleep in the Earth, though our Souls have taken their flight from
it. With reference to these was it said, Genesis 3. 19.
Dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return. Yet it is but for a time, and 1
Cor. 15. 44.
though it be sown a natural Body, it shall be raised a Spiritual; for Ver. 50.
Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither can corruption
inherit incorruption. These earthly Bodies which we live in, cannot subsist in
that pure Light and glorious Region where God dwells; and therefore to be fit
to inherit Glory, they must at the last day be spiritualized, free from all
sublunary Passions, to relish none of the Pleasures of Flesh and Blood; and
the more they are refined here from Fleshly Appetites and Earthly Inclinations,
the more glorious will they rise again.

1. This again should wean our Minds from all sensual Pleasures and worldly
Affections. For if we can like nothing but these things, what shall we do when
we come to leave 'em, when they cannot be had? For whatever clothing our Souls
may have, yet Flesh and Blood they shall not. And although when our Bodies fall
from us into Dust, the particular Desires and slighter Inclinations of 'em may
possibly depart from us, (as we see in long and tedious sicknesses and
austerities, Men care not much for bodily Pleasures:) Yet when the Soul is
sensualiz'd (as it is in old Sinners, though the Body be decayed) and can esteem
no other; it is incapable of any happiness among Spirits, or in a Body that is
Spiritualized and Glorified. By how much therefore our Inclinations are sunk
into Flesh and Sense, by so much are we indisposed for the happiness of the
next Life, which does not consist in 'em; and the more Spiritual our Nature is,
the more is it prepared for the Glories that shall be revealed.

2. We should not hence pride our selves too much about our Bodies, -- Either
as to their Descent, since our Pedigree is all alike Ancient, and no one knows
what sort of Persons his Ancestors may have been, however we know what we all
in a short time must be.

Or as to their Beauty, which if it be not overvalued, but real, soon
whithereth away like Grass; whereas Grace and Goodness gives the most pleasing
Air to our very Aspect, such as no Beauty Natural or Artificial can come near.
However it is but a little while till we shall not know the difference betwixt
the Dust of one Person and another.

Or as to their Apparel, which besides that it often but indifferently sets off
the Person (the plainest Dress according to Peoples Quality being most
becoming) can be of no use in the other Life to cover a Man's Soul.

Or that we have an Estate to provide more largely for them than others have;
or can pamper them more: Yet for all this they will fall into Dust, and the
sooner ordinarily for our too much Indulging.

Lastly, we should believe according to the Scriptures, that our Bodies shall
spring up again more glorious at the Resurrection, and in the mean time they
are said in Scripture to be asleep. The Soul must all the while be in an
imperfect State without the Body, and is not completely happy till they meet
each other again, to live in perpetual Harmony and Pleasures, to which
glorified Bodies will be highly Instrumental. But if we make our Bodies the
Servants of Sin, and they carry to their Graves fleshly Lusts and sensual
Affections, Dan. 12. 2.
they will rise to shame and everlasting contempt.

Thus we have heard what it is to dye. In what sense we are to understand
Death, that we do not then cease to be. And methinks when we see the Body of a
worthy Friend or Relation lie before us, pale and without Sense or Motion, who
but few Hours since, may be, was our Support and Comfort; we cannot conceive
that this must be all of the Person, but that the Soul is alive somewhere, though
we did not see it go, nor what Company did attend it, nor what a State or Place
it passed into.

2. I proceed to the next thing, The assuredness of Death to us all, It is
appointed for us.

Of this all Mankind is a Proof by the succession of Generations. And our
selves see that those who live the oldest, yet Death follows them close at the
Heels, and at last gives them the fatal stroke. There have been two indeed
excepted since the beginning of the World; but no more will till the end of it,
and then says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 51.
We that are alive shall be changed.

Sin is the Cause of this, for Romans 5. 12.
Death came into the world by it, and 1 Cor. 15. 22.
in Adam all dye.

Had we been made Spirits at first, we had had no Principles of Mortality in
us; and it had been hard to have deprived us of our Natures, and to have made
us mortal for one Man's Sin, without our fault. But we were made of Flesh and
Blood, of the Dust of the Earth, and subject therefore by Nature to Dissolution
and Corruption; for that which is made of Dust, may sure be resolved into it
again. And since it pleased God to deprive our first Parents, because of their
Sin, of that Supernatural Privilege of the Tree of Life, which was granted
them alone for a Sacrament or an Assurance of Immortality, we have no wrong
done us. For human Nature is, and always was, in its Frame Mortal. Adam's Body,
even in Paradise, was in it self as vulnerable, as capable of a violent Death,
or being prejudiced by infectious Airs as ours are; though it was more secured
from them. But now since Sin is come forth into the World, and Men have
corrupted their Nature by it, and are left to their own Counsels, to injure
themselves and one another by violence and excess, and to the Contingencies of
things, there must needs be Death, though we could get a Preservative against all
the decays of Nature. So true is it that Sin brought Death into the world. And
it is as true, that he will now never leave coming to our Doors, till he has
fetched us one after another all away.

And indeed considering this fallen and Apostate state of the World, an
Immortal Life were not desirable in it, though our Bodies might be preserved by
a Miracle, and Mankind did not too much increase. For short as it is, a little
while gives wise Men enough of it, but then it would be intolerable, and it has
pleased God to provide a better Place for us.

Now the assuredness that we must all dye, that the pale Messenger must shortly
close our Eyes, and fill us full with Dust and Clay, should cool our desires
after this World; teach us when we have enough; show us that these are not the
Riches of a Soul, which must shortly change this Life; and put us upon an early
Preparation for Death, lest we render our Lives uncomfortable for fear of it,
and be affrighted and in Agonies, when it comes within view, and we see it
approach us.

3. The time when Death will befall us. We are once, at a certain time to dye.
It is appointed for men once to dye.

When and where, and how each of us shall depart this World, the All-knowing
God foresees, and has certainly determined. For we cannot suppose it to be
unknown or unresolved with him, how he will proportion our Lives, and what our
Death shall be. And, Mat. 10. 30.
if the very hairs of our Head, then assuredly all our days are numbered.

Therefore with reference to the Period of Human Life we are told, Job 14. 5.
That the days of man are determined, the number of his months are with thee,
thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. And Job 7. 1. Is there not
an appointed time to man upon Earth? are not his days like the days of an
hireling? And if we will allow God, who governs the World, to order and dispose
all Events in it, according to his Will and Counsel, and by his disappointing
or giving success to things, to be the Author of all the Good or Evil which
happens to Mankind; (as the Scripture makes him) Ver. 29.
If a Sparrow does not fall to the Ground without him, much less shall Man,
who, as our Savior teaches, is of more value than many of 'em. Psalm. 31. 15.
My times, says David, are in thy hands. No Man can depart from this World, no
more than he can be born into it without his particular Providence. No one can
be guilty of his own murder, but by God's forsaking him and giving the Man up
to himself; no sickness or distemper shall prove mortal, but when God pleases
it shall; no Wrath or Malice of Men can destroy us but when God permits them,
and then he is said to deliver up a Man into the Hands of his Enemy; no Wars,
Pestilence and Famine but are sent by God, and directed by him where to strike.
Since then the Providence of God does peculiarly overruled and determine all
Events, and especially the end of Man's days here on Earth, and withal
foreknows whatever shall come to pass; we are then to believe, that all things
shall move on in that certain Track which God foresees and has appointed, and
that no one shall dye sooner, nor live longer than that Period which God in his
wise Predestination has determined for us. Not but that God often prolongs the
Life of the Righteous, and cuts off the wicked Doers, as the Scriptures
frequently assure us. But then they assure us too, that God has ordained the
Righteous to be such, and to leave the Wicked to their own Devices, as the
means of that their longer or shorter time, which accordingly God has
fore-determined. So that our using or neglecting those of Religion and a Holy
Life, as well as other ways of Self-preservation are neither in vain for the
lengthening or lessening our Race here, nor yet alter, but pursue and compass
the Goal which God has prefixed us. Thus is that Matter resolved which
Beverovicius the Learned Physician was so much concerned about.

But then it is a thing which some would be glad to know, viz. The number of
their days, and the time we have for yet to live; and could we tell them, they
were to hold out yet fifty or sixty years, it might be glad Tidings; and then
they would let loose all the Reins to Sin. But if all that must dye betimes
knew so, how would it damp and chill their Spirits, fill the rest of the World
with mourning, cast a Veil over all the Comforts of Life, and put a stop to all
their Industry in it! For what would become of all Arts and Sciences, Trades
and Education, if Persons knew they were to dye, by that time they had made any
Improvement or Progress? And so a great part of Mankind would lay aside the
necessary business of Life, which I believe no dying Persons would much concern
themselves for; and Religion be little minded but against the time of Death.

As to the Bounds which God has set to human Life in general; Moses tells us
that in his time Psalm. 90. 10.
the days of man's age were seventy years. And in the ordinary course of
Nature, our Bodies cannot hold out much more; all beyond is labor and sorrow.
When Mankind were few they lived longer; but now the World is stockt with
Inhabitants, should our Ancestors, who lived Seven or eight hundred years ago,
and their immediate Children and Grandchildren, down to our times, be alive
now to enjoy their Estates, the present Generation must needs be Beggars, would
not know where nor how to live; and wickedness might come to the same pass as
it did in the Old World, when there was but one righteous Family left; the most
probable Cause whereof was the length of their Lives. Whereas the shortning of
them, has made Men more governable; sets Heaven and Hell at a nearer distance,
encourages good men thereby to persevere, and sooner removes those who are bad.
In a word, our Lives are long enough to prepare our selves for Heaven, and if
we are soon removed thither I hope it is no loss, especially to so great a part
of mankind who live in pains and sorrows, want and drudgery, to whom the
shortness of Life is a Comfort. For so we find Job most passionately expressing
himself, Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life to the
bitter in Soul? which long for death, but it comes not, and dig for it more
than for hid treasures; which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can
find the Grave, Job 3. 20, 21, 22. My Soul chooses strangling and death rather
than life, I loath it, I would not live always; let me alone for my days are
vanity, Job 7. 15, 16.

Since then it has pleased God to bring down the ordinary term of our Life to
Seventy years or thereabouts, if we could attain unto it, as few do.

1. We should hence learn some end of our Cares, and not have our Hearts and
Desires constantly intent and eager after Money, and increasing our Estates to
the last gasp, as if there were no Life but in them. For this exceeds the
covetousness of that laborious rich man in the Gospel, who knew when he had
enough, and Luke 12. 19.
to take his ease. But bethink our selves what provision we have made for our
Souls, against they Luke 16. 9.
are turned out of these earthly habitations; what Mat 6. 20.
Treasures we have laid up in Heaven; what good we have done in the World; how
useful we have been in our Generation; how kind to our Neighbors; or rather,
how few naked Backs we have clothed; how few empty Bellies we have filled; how
few languishing Bowels we have refreshed; how few good Works we have rewarded.
And yet how many Rich men may we observe in the World, who part with Money to
the Poor as it were Blood out of their Veins; repining at ordinary expenses;
raging at a loss or mischance; tenacious and narrow to those about them? What
sordid Practices and dishonorable Shifts they will take up with to save? how
tamely they can sit under the lash of Tongues, and content under an ill Name?
In a word, What Slaves they can be to worldly things? not forbear God's own
day, nor, as Solomon speaks, are they Eccles. 5. 12.
suffered to take rest in the night. And lastly, What Glory has God had from
all? Whereas a little will serve us while we live; and such a competent
Provision for Children, as may encourage their Industry and Virtue (though not
maintain them in Idleness and Vice) may be a just reason for our care; but to
make them Rich and Great is not: And yet many Persons are never contented with
Earth till they are laid in it; neither live beloved, nor dye lamented. And
this is the more to be pitied, when it befalls any of those who, for their
other Endowments, might have been the delight and pride of their Country.

2. We should likewise bethink our selves, how our Lives shorten every day; and
how near we may be got to the common Period of Man's Life. It may be there are
but a few years behind, and then at least we must begin to mind what we came
hither for, and to do it, or else we shall soon be in everlasting Torments. And
when we have past through the remaining Scenes and Stages of Life in Virtue and
Honor, and have got the taste and relish of this World out of our Minds, have
no hankerings after it, and can live without it, and are approaching into the
Confines of Eternity; we should not be apt to think of the melancholy State of
our Bodies, which are left to putrify in their Graves till the Resurrection;
but of the glories and pleasures of another Life to which we are a going, which
will raise our desires after it, and take off the natural Aversions to Death.

We must once dye, says the Text, after that we shall dye no more, Death has
no more dominion over us. Some we read of in the Gospel, who were raised from
the Dead to live here anew, and such were fain to dye again. But this we must
not expect, after once we are dead, have parted with these Earthly Bodies, gone
into another Life, ever to return into this World again to amend. We then pass
into an Immortal and Irreversible state of Rewards and Punishments. The only
time then we have to work out our Salvation, is while we are in these Bodies, 2
Cor. 5. 10.
For we must be judged according to the things done in them. Let wicked Men
therefore look to it betimes, and get such Habits and Dispositions of Mind, as
may make their Souls happy when they depart hence. For if Men's earthly Natures
are to be spiritualized and refined, before they can be fit to live in the
presence of God in Glory; it must be only those Graces and Virtues which come
from Heaven to adorn our Souls here, as must carry us up thither. But if Heb.
12. 16, 17.
with profane Esau they will for worldly enjoyments sell their Birthright; i.
e. their Right and Title to eternal Glory, when they come to inherit the
Blessing annexed to it, they will find no place for Repentance, i. e. no altering
God Almighty, no changing or reversing their Case, though they seek it carefully
with tears; for so neither could Esau make Isaac reverse his.

Indeed Men may so far harden themselves in Sin, and reject all the means which
God uses for their amendment, as that at last he may before Death withdraw his
Spirit from them, give them up to their own Counsels, and the Government of
Evil Spirits. And the hardness of the Israelties* was such that God cast them
out of the care of his good Providence, left them to wander, and at last to dye
in the Wilderness, and Heb. 3. 11. Psalm. 95. 11.
swear in his wrath that they should never enter into his rest. Of like Persons
did our Savior speak, That the Kingdom of God should be taken from them, and
given to a Nation bringing Mat. 21. 43.
forth the fruits thereof. We are likewise told of Apostates from the Christian
Religion to Paganism; that it is Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
impossible to renew their Baptismal Grace, and receive them again to
repentance; that Heb. 10. 26, 27.
there remains no more sacrifice for their sin, but a certain fearful looking
for of Judgment and fiery Indignation: and S. John discourages Christians from
1 John 5. 16.
praying for those who were fallen into it, calling it a sin unto death; and
thereupon disswades us from the Verse 21.
Pagan Idolatry; but otherwise God does not deny his Grace and Mercy to any one
in this Life who will accept of it.

Nay, if a Man believes God's Mercy in Christ to penitent Sinners, and upon
such a Belief repents and lives a Holy Life; if the Man should dye desponding
his own Case, and hope for no Salvation by Jesus Christ, we have no reason to
think that God will condemn him, because he upon a mistake will condemn
himself, no more than he will save that wicked Person who dies, believing all
shall go well with him.

But now Death puts a stop to all our Opportunities, and cuts off the hopes of
wicked Men: they must then abide under the wrath and vengeance of God for ever;
and are reserved in a miserable Estate for the Judgment of the Great Day; when
there will be the final Consummation of Rewards and Punishments for evermore.

This should therefore put us upon doing all the good we can, while the day of
Salvation lasts, before the dismal Night comes upon us, which for ought we
know, may be within this Week, and after that no more trial, for we must dye
but once. Mat. 24. 44.
Be ye therefore ready, says our Savior, for the Son of man comes at an hour
when ye think not. We may be cut off on a sudden, seized with distraction or
dullness, so as not to be able so much as to set our House in order. And though
Men by a strange partiality, are apt to fancy to themselves that they shall
live as long as any body uses to do; yet we see they are often mistaken. When
and where, and in what manner we shall dye God has concealed from us, to engage
us to constant Watchfulness and an early Piety. And who then would have his
Heart set upon this World, who knows not how soon his Head may be laid low, how
soon he may be turned out of his Earthly Tenement? it may be to morrow for
ought he knows, yea Luke 12. 20.
This night his Soul may be taken from him; and then with our Life the day of
Grace ends.

Heb. 3. 7, 8.
Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost says, to day if ye will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts. And since our Blessed Lord will reward all the good Offices we
do for him, so that a Cup of cold water given for his name sake, shall not
lofei Mat. 10. 42.
its reward. We may get to be rich in good works; for the more we do, the more
we shall be rewarded; and God will proportion our Glories, according as we have
improved our Talents and Opportunities to do good here, and have laid up our
treasures with him. Now this shows Men, besides the hazard they run, what they
lose, by not beginning the Service of God early. Nor can they rationally think,
that they who begin to live well at the latter end of their time, should have
an equal reward with those Mat. 20. 12.
who have, as the Gospel says to another purpose, born all the heat of the day,
have served God all their Life: Nor that they who do but little, should be as
well rewarded, as they who have done a thousand times more good: Which is also
contrary to what our Lord delivers in those Parables concerning Mat. 25. 14.
Luke 19. 12.
a Nobleman traveling into a far Country, who delivered to his Servants his
Goods, to each according to his several ability to improve for him, and at his
return rewarded every one proportionably according to his works.

But though some Men are contented to be least in the Kingdom of Heaven, and care
not how late they prepare for it, nor how little a share they have in the
Glories there, so they can have any; and it is well if such indifferent Persons
ever can. Yet there are others who do not mind it so much, and scarce ever in
good earnest think of another Life, till their Souls are pasting into it; and
then, it may be, they sadly lament their Folly, in that they preferred the
deiuding Scenes of this World, before the complete and endless Glories of the
other; and this they are apt to call Repentance, but is too often only a
Conscience distracted with a sense of its own Guilt, and the fearful
expectations of the Divine Vengeance. These Men part with their Sins, as many
do with their Charity; not while they live and can keep it themselves, but when
it cannot be reckoned among the Actions of their Lives. Lord, what Horrors and
Agonies are they many times in! What Vows and Promises of better Obedience! and
no doubt, sometimes sincere and hearty, as is plain in some few who have
recovered. Now in this Case there is certainly very great hazard, and therefore
no less madness for any of us to leave our Salvation to it; as the World of
Christian Writers do generally, (I suppose) conclude, and diverse of them and
those of the first Magnitude, that it is at least next to desperate. And I
confess Justification by Faith only, seems principally to respect our entering
the Baptismal Covenant, yet sure Charity will not determine that it does so
absolutely and solely, but rather find reason to hope that the All-wise God,
who foreseeth all future Contingencies, and the Effects of things in their
Causes, while he discerns in a penitent sick Person a true (...), or change
of mind, such as if the Man lived would be productive of a good Life, will
mercifully accept according to what a Man has, and not according to what he
has not; as he graciously does of the Faith and Repentance of those who fall
into Sin after Baptism, but through an unexpected Death, do not live to pursue
their good Purposes and Resolutions. And why should that be such a difference
in the State of a Man's Soul, where the Principle of a new Life is arrived to a
like degree in both; that their deaths are alike near, but in the one not
thought so? We read of the Sick Jam. 5. 15.
whose sins shall be forgiven before recovery. And our own Church obliges us
to absolve the sick Person after Confession, if he humbly and heartily desire
it, though his Conscience be troubled with weighty Matters. And this we do not
only for those who may recover (though if they do the Absolution is past) but
in the Case of such Malefactors who we are sure will not. And there are many
Promises in the Gospel to encourage us in so doing Joh. 2. 1, 2.
If any man sin, says St. John, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins Joh. 3. 16.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end that
all that believe in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life. And all
those Places of Scripture which represent 1 Timothy 1. 15.
Jesus Christ to come into the world to save Sinners. And if this be meant of
Penitent Sinners believing on him, who renounce every Evil way, and will
effectually serve him in a good Life, if they live; why, such are those
supposed to be we speak of: And yet their end must needs be very tragical,
since no Man can be sure (though God is) at that time, whether he is one of them.

4. We proceed to the last thing, What may comfort us against the fear of
Death. Now this may be resolved according to those several Notions wherein Men
fear it.

1. If we consider Death, as it is a leaving these earthly Tabernacles behind us
to dissolution. Men are loath to dye; Nature shrinks at it; Body and Soul are
not willing to part; Job 2. 4.
Skin for skin, says Satan truly, yea all that a man has will he give for his
life. Men would naturally fain live; Eccles. 11. 7.
Light is sweet, says the wise Man, and a pleasant thing it is for the Eyes to
behold the Sun; but very unpleasant to have our Life go from us; to return unto
the Earth; to be distolv'd; it is against the decency which human Nature
delights in, for us to fall into Corruption, and the deformities of Death,
and the dishonours of a Grave; and it is against the most natural and general
instinct of Self-preservation. Now if we enquire into the bottom of all this;
we shall find, Men are chiefly afraid that Death puts an end to their Being, or
that the next Life will not please them. But they need not fear, since our
Savior has discovered to us, that there is another glorious World, which our
Souls shall pass into; and a state of happiness above any thing we can conceive
here, which we shall enjoy, without dying any more. We are assured, that when
we leave this Tabernacle of Flesh, we shall enter upon a more glorious Scene of
things; new and suprizing Wonders will present themselves to our view, upon our
first passage into it, which are here concealed from us; and 2 Cor. 5. 1.
We shall have building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens. We should not therefore have our Thoughts always dwell amongst Tombs,
and of the condition of our Bodies for a while in the Grave; but upon that
blessed Country we are designed for, and the happy World to which we are going;
and this will make our leaving this Life easy to us, when we must change it
for Heaven; and to be of St. Paul's mind, after he had a glimpse of the
heavenly glory, desirous to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far
better. And although we cannot form any Notions of the condition or happiness
of the next Life; For it is above any thing we can think, and Flesh and Blood
cannot inherit it; yet we may be well assured, that God will provide such
Pleasures as will be suitable for us in that state, and shall make us happy for
ever. As for our Bodies, they will be in the mean time without Sense, and so
not capable of any Enjoyments or Misery; but God will take care of them, and 1
Cor. 15. 42, 43.
though they be sown in Corruption, he will raise them in Incorruption; though
they be sown in dishonor, they shall be raised in Glory.

2. If we consider Death, as it is our removing out of this Life; Men are loath
to leave it, would be very willing to stay, especially if their Condition be
any thing comfortable in it: here they meet with what an Earthly Nature chiefly
desires and delights in; what supplies all their Needs, and pleasures all their
Senses; and are therefore well contented as they be; do not desire to remove,
or to change Worlds; unwilling to be taken from their beloved Enjoyments,
Estates, Dwellings, Business, Family, Recreations; and to leave behind them all
which their Nature takes pleasure and satisfaction in; and therefore who can
blame them, that they are afraid of Death, which takes them away from all their
Comforts in this Life?

But alas, these Men should consider, that we are to be here but as Travelers
or Inmates; we are not to tarry; it is not our abiding Place; this is not our
Inheritance, but a transitory Scene which cannot last. Our Bodies themselves do
soon fall to decay, and in a while to Dust, and the 2 Pet. 3. 10.
whole world will at last break out into a universal Flame. Therefore we should
have a care, that we do not set our Hearts too much upon it, lest Lakes of Fire
be prepared for us. And this makes Afflictions sometimes necessary: Yet if it
should please God to send us none, but that we had all the happiness which
could be heaped upon us here; we have no Cause to complain, if we must change
the transitory satisfactions of this World, for the more noble and lasting
Pleasures of the next. And what disadvantage is it to be removed to a better
Place and more happy Life?

As soon as ever the Soul has taken her flight from the Body, and has left this
Life, she enters into a new and more glorious state than ever the Sun saw;
enlarges her Prospect, and views and admires the Glories and Beauties of that
happy Place; and so rejoices in the Pleasures of it, that it were worse than
death to return hither again. It Is said of the New Jerusalem, that Rev. 21. 23.
and 22. 3, 4, 5.
there shall be no curse in it, nothing to imbitter that State, but the Throne
of God, and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his Servants shall serve him. And
they shall see his Face, and there shall be no Night, nor need of a Candle,
neither light of the Sun, nor of the Moon to shine in it; for the Glory of God
lightens it, where they shall reign for ever and ever. And although we cannot
tell now how these things will affect us; to be sure no wicked Man can be happy
in God's Presence, for there is such an unlikeness and contrariety in impure
and polluted Souls to the infinitely holy God, that it is impossible there
should be any friendly Communication between them: he is not a God, says the
Psalmist, who has pleasure in wickedness, neither can evil dwell with him; and
2 Cor. 6. 14.
what communion, says the Apostle, has light with darkness? But yet to a
generous and Virtuous Mind, what can be more delightful, than to have our
Understandings entertained with a clear sight of the first and best Being? to
admire his Wisdom, and to behold his Glory, to dwell immediately in his
Presence, and continually attend upon his Throne? to be in special favor with
our Blessed Lord in the place he has prepared for us? to enter into the
perpetual Society and Friendship of the Holy Angels, to whom we shall be made
equal, and Luke 20. 36. Heb. 12. 23.
the Spirits of just men made perfect, many of our dear Relations and intimate
Acquaintance, whom probably we shall know again; with all those brave and
worthy Souls whom we have seen or heard of; and all the Blessed Inhabitants of
those most glorious Regions? to converse with them freely, without any folly or
disguise, or those Passions which spoil the Comfort, and disturb the Peace of
Mankind? Nay, when we enter into our Master's joy, we shall have cause to say,
as the Queen of Sheba of the Glory of Solomon, that not the half of it was ever
told us. And as Heaven is an exceeding, so it is an eternal weight of Glory; as
in God's presence there is fullness of joy; so at his right hand there shall be
pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16. 11.


Now since we cannot see God and live, (for who ever could see a Spirit?) since
these Joys are too big for our poor Capacities, too pure for Flesh and Blood,
too strong for our weak Natures to bear; this should reconcile us to Death, and
welcome that blessed Hour, when we shall pass into the next Life with Comfort,
have our Souls raised to their full strength and activity, enter the promised
Land, meet our Blessed Savior with Crowns of Glory in his hands for us, and
then we shall ever be with the Lord. 1 These. 4. 17.


This is not only enough to mortify all our Affections for this World, but
necessarily requires it. For the Kingdom Romans 14. 17.
of God is not meat and drink, consists not in such entertainments which this
World gives us; we shall find nothing there to gratify sensual Appetites and
worldly Inclinations. We should therefore procure to our selves such
Dispositions of Mind, as God thinks meet for us to be made partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in light; endeavor to be like God, if we would see
him as he is; and 1 John 3. 2, 3.
he that has this hope in him, says the Apostle, purifieth himself even as he
is pure; have our Conversation in Heaven, and not upon the Earth; set our
Affections on things above, and not on things below; use this world, with that
indifferency, as if we used it not, because the fashion thereof passes away;
and then we shall be contented and fit to leave it, as a wayfaring Traveller to
return into his own Country.

3. If we consider Death, as our going into the next World, Men are apt to be
afraid of it, not knowing what may become of them, how God may dispose of their
Souls.

Now this can no way be helped, but by giving all diligence to make our Calling
and Election sure; by ceasing to do Isa. 1. 16. 17.
evil, and learning to do well; by leading innocent and virtuous lives; by
laying up Treasures in Heaven, which may provide for us, when we are turned out
of these earthly Habitations. In a word, to live so, that our Hearts may not
condemn us; and then we shall have confidence toward 1 John 3. 21.
God. Thus when a Man who has lived well all his time, comes to die, with what
Peace and comfort can he resign his Soul into the Hands of God! With what ease
can he part with this Life! How vain and empty, how like Pageantry and a Show
do these things appear as they pass from him! How weaned from all the Pomps and
Vanities of this World! With how little Terror can he behold Death approaching!
or rather, with what joy does he go to meet the Bridegroom of his Soul! How
willing to go to the place where our blessed Savior is, who died for him! No
melancholy Fears, nor storms of Conscience discompose his inward Peace: He
takes a Religious Farewell of his Family and Neighbors that come to see him,
with a Charitable Concern for all his Fellow Christians; and the present
Calmness and Tranquillity of his Mind, are the joyful Beginnings and Dawnings of
that everlasting Rest he is going to. O, who would not so live that he may die
the death of the Righteous, and have his latter end like his.

And now my Discourse upon the Text must needs cease, this so naturally
carrying my Thoughts to the consideration of another in Exemplification of it:
I mean the deceased Gentlewoman, whose Funeral we here Commemorate. Ye have
heard of Death in the Theory; but she presents it to the life: and should not
only affect, but warn us; because we shall all enter into the like darksome
Shades. I confess I find Funeral Panegyricks to be very ancient. For according
to Anaximenes, Solon, that wise Grecian, instituted them to the Atheuians: And
Plutarch tells us, that Valerius Publicola begun the same among the Romans;
which were so approved, that in the Days of Camillus they were appointed to
adorn the Obsequies of Honorable Women by an Order of the Senate. And when
they are for deserving Persons, bring great Glory to God, are a meet Reward to
the Memory of the Deceased, and both an Admonition and Encouragement to those
who survive. And here I had a large Field before me to have expatiated in for
these purposes; but must disappoint Peoples Expectations of my saying much,
being more than once particularly desired by her that I would not: hereby
showing her self (suitable to all the rest of her Life) free from any desire of
Applause or Ostentation I shall therefore only describe some of those greater
Lines of her Conversation, wherein she was extremely commendable.

1. Such as have been observed (though rarely together) in other virtuous Women,
namely,

An extraordinary diligence in her Family; was discreet and thoughtful in the
Government of it; a Prudent and Faithful Wife; a Tender Mother to her Children;
willing to provide for them, as far as was consistent with the Obligations of
Piety and Charity: otherwise as for her self, she could be content, if it so
pleased God, (she has sometimes said) to live in a Cottage, often commending
the Happiness that mightattend such a retired State; and would upon due
occasions manifest a generous Contempt of worldly Things. But as one that was
the Of Mr. John Richardson, Minister of Ratcliffe upon the Reake in
Leicestershire.
Granddaughter, Of Mr. Samuel Marshal, Minister of Dodford in
Northhamptonshire.
Daughter, and Wife of a Minister, was most especially regardful of her
Childrens Souls, instructing them in Religion, and the Duty which God requires
from 'em; particularly cautioning them from time to time, never to take to that
Unbred and Unchristian Disposition, which has been too peculiar to many
Persons, if not Families of this Place, to love to hear and tell evil Stories
of the Vices or Misfortunes of one another; which if true, were fitter to be
lamented; and yet when they have not known the truth of things, would be
willing to believe and speak the worst; a Quality she had ever a just
Resentment against. She was glad of any opportunity to hear the Younger read,
duly minding them of their Prayers; enjoining this in her Will to all her
Children, as a Condition of her Legacies, That they shall say their Prayers
upon their Knees, at the least twice every Day. She was kind to her Servants;
careful of them when they were sick; apt to advise them.

Was mightily helpful and good to her sick Neighbors, or when they were
otherways amiss; always coveted to make Peace among them; her self showing them
a good Example of forgetting Injuries. Of an affable and gentle Carriage,
obliging Persons by the much becoming modesty and handsomness of it: Very lowly
and mean in her own Eyes, rather too much distrusting her own Abilities. So
exactly Just, that she would sometimes rather pay twice, than lie under the
suspicion of wronging any one once. As to her Charity in giving, that we may
well speak to, since twice a Week all are served that come. Fair in her
Dealings; seldom, if ever, reckoning with the Parishioners, but would return
'em some of her own Rights again, (being willing to please 'em;) and to many of
the Poorer, the whole, often to her own loss, keeping off Trouble from them;
ready to advise and assist them in any Emergency that needed to be brought to
her, or wherein she thought she could serve them. Seldom made unnecessary
Visits, having Business enough in her Family, and the care of her own Soul to
mind, so that she had little time to spare. And on every occasion apt to
express the resignation of her Will to the Divine Pleasure; as she especially
did in her long and languishing Sickness, which was many times very painful;
being extraordinary meek and patient under it to the last minute of her life,
as little troublesome certainly to those about her, as ever any one was. And as
she shunned all Pomp and Ceremony through the whole Course of her life, so at
her death, she desired to be carried to her Grave in quiet, without noise or
the attendance of any but the Bearers and her own Servants; though we could not
procure that for her.

2. Such as have exceeded all that ever I knew of either Sexes, namely her
constant Fastings and Prayers. By the former she too much weakened her nature;
and the latter was in a manner her continual employment, when she could get
leisure from business. Some of the Family have supposed, she always kept to six
stated times of Prayer every day; but I have generally known it to be much
oftener, especially against a Sacrament. And she rarely missed the Public
Prayers in her own House, or at Church, for all those Seven last Years that I
have had the Honor to serve her in them: and her coming was not to gaze or
muse, but to join with the whole Service. In such a frame of mind continued she
on to her death; disposing her self into an humble Posture, when she was not
able to kneel, nor rise when she was down.

Lastly, Having received the Absolution of the Church, which she earnestly
desired, together with the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, she departed this
Life the 27th of November last past, in great Peace of Conscience, and
Universal Charity to all People. I conclude all with the Words of our Savior,
highly applicable in this Case, Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he
comes shall Mat. 24. 46.
find so doing.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for W. Crook, at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar. 1691.
1. THe London Practice of Physic, or the whole Practical Part of Physic,
contained in the Works of Dr. Tho. Willis; faithfully made English, and printed
together for the Public good: To which is bound his new Book, being a Plain
and Easy Method for preserving from, and Curing of the Plague, and all other
Contagious Diseases, in 8o. price bound 7 s. 6 d. 2. The Christians Manual, in
Three Parts. 1. The Catechumen, or an Account given by the Young Person of his
Knowledge in Religion, before his Admission to the Lords Supper, as a
Groundwork for his right understanding the Sacrament: alone price 8 d. 2. An
Introduction to a plain and safe way to the Communion Table, with Prayers
fitted for the Communicant, Before, At, and After the receiving of the Lords
Supper: alone price 1 s. 3. The Primitive Institution, showing the great
Benefit and Necessity of Catechizing, to save the Souls of particular Persons,
and to heal the present Distempers of the Church, in 12o. price bound 1 s. but
the whole together 2 s. bound.
3. The Historians Guide, Brittain's Remembrancer; being a Summary of all the
Actions, Battles, etc. Preferments, Changes, etc. that happened in His
Majesty's Kingdom, from An. Dom. 1600. to 1690. showing the Year, Month, and
Day of the Month each was done in; with an Alphabetical Table, for the more
easy finding out any thing in the Book, in 12o. price bound 2 s. 4. Compendium
Geographicum, or a more Plain and Easy Introduction into all Geography than
yet extant, after the latest Discoveries and Alterations; with two Alphabets,
1. Of the Ancient, and 2. Of the Modern Names of Places, etc. by P. C.
Chamherlain of the Inner Temple, in 12o: price bound 1 s. 5. Bucaniers of
America, or a true Account of the most Remarkable Assaults, committed of late
years upon the Coasts of the West Indies, by the English and French; with the
unparalled Exploits of Sir H. Morgan, Captain Cook, Captain Sharp, and other
English Men: Also the great Cruelties of the French Bucaniers, as of Lolonois,
Barti, Portugues, Rock Brasiliano, etc. in two Volumns; both bound together
price 10 s. in 4to. 6. The Works of Homer, viz. His Illiads and Oddises,
Translated out of Greek into English by Tho. Hobbes of Malmsbury: price bound 5
s. 7. Nine Treatises of Tho. Hobbes of Malmsbury, bound in Two Volumns in
Octavo, viz. 1. His Behemoth, or Civil Wars of England. 2. His Historical
Narration of Heresy. 3. His Answer to Bishop Bramhall in Defense of his
Leviathan. 4. His Seven Problems, with an Apology to the King, for his
Writings. These Four were printed all at one time, and called his Tracts: price
bound 5 s. -- -- -- 5. His Life in Latin, writ part by himself, and finished by
Dr. B. 6. His Consideration on his own, Religion, Loyalty, etc. 7. His Art of
Rhetoric in English. 8. His Dialogue about the Common Law of England. 9. His
Ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy in English. These Five last were printed at
several times, and sold single; but for convenience, also bound in a Volumn
together, and sold for 7 s. 6. d. 8. A Modern View of such Parts of Europe that
has lately been, and still are, the Places of great Transactions, viz. Italy,
with all its Principalities: France, with all it Provinces and Bishoprics;
Germany, with the Dukedom of Lorrain, and all the Electorates and Lordships of
the Empire; Spain, with all its Dominions, etc. Wherein is showed the Present
State of all those Countries, with curious Remarks of Antiquity interwoven, in
8o. price bound 2 s. 6 d. 9. The Case of the Resistance of the Supreme Powers
Stated and Resolved, according to the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, by W.
Sherlock, D. D. Master of the Temple, the Second Edition, in 8o. price bound 2
s. 10. A Plain and Easy Method, for preserving those that are well from the
Infection of the Plague, or any Contagious Distemper in City, Country, Camp,
Fleet, etc. and for Curing such as are infected with it; Written in the Year
1666. by Dr. Tho. Willis, never printed before this Year 1691. and now Printed
by the Authority of the College of Physicians: price bound 1 s. 6 d. 11. De
Mirabilibus pecci, being the Wonders of the Peak in Darbyshire, commonly called
the Devil's Arse of Peak, in Latin and English, by Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, in
12o. price bound 1 s. 12. Britains Glory, and Englands Bravery, wherein is
showed the Degrees of Honor from the Prince to the Peasant; the Precedence of
all Persons, from the Throne to the Bondman, useful for all, especially for
Feasts, Funerals, Processions, and all great Assemblies, etc. With Heralds Duty
and Power; and a Dictionary of the Terms in Heraldry, and an Account of all the
Orders of Knighthood in Christendom; and of the Weights and Measures of
England, by B. Smithurst, in 12o. price bound 1 s. 6 d. 13. The Court of
Curiosity: Being the most exact and curious Book of Dreams and Fortune Book
that is extant. Much enlarged and explained in this Edition, 12o. Price bound 1
s. 6 d. 14. Peppa, or the Reward of Constant Love, a Novel. Done out of French
by a Young Gentlewoman: with the several Songs set to Music, for Two Voices,
in 12o. Price 1 s. 6 d. 15 Dr. Hascard, Dean of Windser his Three Sermons. 16
Mr. Maningham's Six Sermons, 4to. 17 -- His Two Discourses, 8vo. 18 Mr.
Budgell's Sermon of Prayer, 4to. 19 Mr. Lightonhouse's Sermon on the Sacrament,
4to. 20 Mr. Buckly's Sermon at Hereford, 4to. 21 Dr. Harrison's Sermon on the
Plot, 4to. 22 Mr. Wright's Discourse of Schism, 4to. 23 Mr. Chillingworth
against the Papists. 24 Des Escotai's Sermon at the Savoy, French and English.
25 Mr. Ellesby's Sermon on Jan. 30. 4to. 26 -- Discourse of Conscience, 4to. 27
Mr. Howell's Visitation Sermon, 4to. 28 Grotius. Catechism, Greek, Latin, and
English, 8vo. 29 Mr Howell's Spirit of Prophecy, 8vo. 30 Dr. Addison's State of
the Jews, 12o. 31 -- Modest Plea for the Clergy, 8vo. 32 -- First Sat of
Mahumetism, 8vo. 33 -- On the Sacrament, 12o. 34 Primitive Institution, 12o. 35
-- Moors baffled in Tangier, 4to. 36 Catechumen 12o. 37 -- Souls Communion with
her Savior. 12o. 38 Kitchin's Jurisdiction of Courts, 8vo. 39 Clarke's Praxis
Admiralitat. Angl. 8vo. 40 Lord Hobart's Reports. 41. Coke's Institutes, 2d,
3d, and 4th Parts. 42 Duke's Law of Charitable Uses, fol. 43 Officina Brevium,
fol. 44 Several Statutes of Bankrupts 45 Complete Clerk. 46 Lord Littleton's
Reports. 47 Complete Solicitor and Attorney. 48 Lord Saunder's Reports. 49 Mr.
Hansard's Book of Entries. 50 Doctor and Student. 51 Fitzh. Natura Brevium. 52
Keilway's Reports, with new References. 53 Wingate's Abridgment. 54 Leonard's
Reports. 55 Bulstrode's Reports. 56 Register of Writs: New Additions to it. 57
Dr. Howell's History of the World. 58 Clelia, a Romance. 59 Scarroon's Comical
Romance. 60 Journal of the House of Peers. 61 Journals of the House of Commons.
62 Townsend's Queen Elizabeth Parliaments. 63 Last Seventeen Years of Queen
Elizabeth. 64 The Connection in King James I. Reign. 65 Fathers Advice to a Son
on a Voyage. 66 Flower Garden, and Complete Vineyard. 67 Plutarch's Lives
English, in Five Volumes 8vo. 68 King killing Doctrine of the Jesuits. 69
Brevis Demonstratio. 70 Blunt's Voyage into the Levant. 71 Bridali's Present
State of London. 72 Saunder's Astrological Physic. 73 Clark's Manual. 74
Hobb's Homer in English. 75 -- Travels of Ulysses, Eng. 76 -- Civil-wars of
England 77 -- Natural Philosophy. 78 -- Vita per Dr. Blackborn. 79 -- Poem on
his Life, in English. 80 -- Poem on Darby Peak, Latin and English. 81 --
Narration of Heresy. 82 -- Answer to Bramhall's Defense of Leviathan. 83 --
Letter of Liberty and Necessity. 84 -- Seven Problems. 85 -- Whole Art of
Rhetoric, English. 86 -- Dialogue of the Laws of England. 87 -- Consideration
on his Loyalty, Religion, etc. 88 -- Leviathan in 4to in Latin. 89 -- De
Principiis and Ratiocinatione. 90 -- De Duplicatione Cubi. 91 -- Quadratura
Circuli. 92 -- Rosetum Geometricum. 93 -- Principia and Problemata. 94 --
Epistola ad Ant. a Wood. 95 -- Lux Mathematicus. 96 -- Historia Ecclesiastic.
97 Heath's Chronicles of the Civil Wars, fol. 98 Popish Cruelty's, being Dr.
Parry's Trial. 99 Mr. Hallely's Golden Rule of Arithmatick. 100 The True
Englishman, 4to. 101 The Queens Birthday Song, for 1691.
In the Press, and will be out this Easter Term.
-- Cicero's Laelius, or a Discourse of Friendship. Translated into English:
With a Pastoral Dialogue of Friendship and Love, by the same Hand, 8vo.

