Viro honorabili and proeclaro Johanni Noel Armigero Tabula merito dicata.
frontispiece

ADDITIONS TO THE History and Antiquities OF RUTLANDSHIRE
SInce the printing and publishing of the foresaid Book, the Honorable John
Noel Esquire Third Son (now living) of the Right Honorable Baptist late Viscount
Campden, has bestowed the Sum of One thousand Pounds in erecting a most Noble
and Exquisite Monument in the North-side of Erton Church in this County, to the
Memory of the said Lord his Father. It is in Height 22 Foot, and 14 Foot in
Breadth, and contains, at a convenient distance from the Floor, two admirable
Statues, of the said Viscount Campden, and Elizabeth his last Lady, standing
upright, something bigger than the Life. Between these two Statues is a Pedestal
supporting an Urne. On the outward sides of the Statues are placed two great
Pyramids, each supporting a Vase of black Marble twisted about with Festoons of
white. And in several parts of the Monument, are represented in Bas-releif, the
several Matches of the said Lord, and all the Issue, as well living as dead, by
those Matches. The whole is the Workmanship of that justly admired Artist Mr.
Grinlin Gibbon, whose Carving at Windsor, Whitehall, and elsewhere, not only in
this Nation, but in Foreign parts, have caused him to be esteemed the best of
English Statuaries, and perhaps inferior to none beyond the Seas.

On two Tables of black Marble, below the two Pyramids, are the following
Inscriptions in Letters of Gold, viz. on that on the Left Hand, these words:

Here rests Baptist Noel Lord Viscount Campden, Baron of Ridlington and
Ilmington, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Rutland. His eminent Loyalty to his
two Sovereigns, King Charles I. and II. his Conjugal Affection to Four Wives;
his Paternal Indulgence to Nineteen Children; his Hospitality and Liberality to
all that desired or deserved it (notwithstanding inestimable Losses in his
Estate, frequent Imprisonments of his Person, Spoil and Havoc of several of
his Houses, besides the Burning of that Noble Pile of Campden) have justly
rendered him the Admiration of his Contemporaries, and the Imitation of
Posterity. He left this Life for the Exchange and Fruition of a better, the
29th day of October, in the LXXI year of his Age. A. D. MDCLXXXIII.

And on that on the other Hand, these Words:

He took to his First Wife Ann Fielding, 2d Daughter to William Earl of
Denbigh, by whom he had Three Children, who Dyed in their Infancy. By his
Second Wife, Ann Countess of Bath, he had One Son Still-Born. By his Third
Wife, Hester, One of the Four Daughters and Coheirs of Thomas Lord Wootton, he
had Two Sons and Four Daughters; 1. Edward, present Earl of Gainesburgh,
Governor of Portsmouth, Lord Lieutenant of Hampshire and Rutland; 2d. Henry
Noel, late of North-Luffenham Esquire who Died in the 35 year of his Age; 3d. Mary
present Countess of Northampton; 4th. Juliana, Wife of William Lord Allington;
5th. Hester, who Died an Infant; 6th. Elizabeth, Wife of Charles Lord Duresly,
Son and Heir apparent of George Earl of Barkley. By his 4th Wife (who stands
by his Side) Elizabeth Bertie, eldest Daughter of Mountagu Earl of Lindsey,
Lord Great Chamberlain of England, he had Nine Children, 1st. Lindsey Noel, who
Died in his Infancy; 2d. Catherine now Wife of John Earl of Rutland; 3d.
Baptist Noel Esquire now living; 4th. John Noel Esquire lik^wise living; 5th. Bridget
Noel also living; 6th. A Son, whose early Birth prevented his Baptism; 7th.
James Noel Esquire who died in the 18th year of his Age; 8th. Martha Penelope now
living; 9th. A Son Still-Born.

In the middle of the Pedestal which stands between the two Great Figures.

To the Pious Memory of Her said Husband, his Wives, their, and her own
Children, Elizabeth his last Wife in her Life time gave Moneys, and left Orders
for the Building this Monument, which by her Third Son and Executor, the
Honorable John Noel was punctually performed, 1686.

HEre follow certain Ancient Epitaphs, and Monumental Inscriptions, not now in
being, but totally decayed, or in the times of Rebellion erazed and
obliterated, mentioned in a Manuscript Collection of Church-Notes, long since
read and observed in the several Churches under-named, by that skilful Herald
Mr. Augustine Vincent; when in the year 1618, he Visited in Rutland, as Deputy
to the famous Cambden Clarencieux: Which with many other Manuscripts of the
said Mr. Vincent's, formerly in the possession of Ralph Shelden of Beoly, in
the County of Worcester Esquire were, since his death, lately given to the
Heralds-Office, where they now remain.

In the Church at Glaston.

Hic jacet Walterus Collie Dominus and Patronus hujus Villae, and Agnes Vxor
ejus, qui obiit, Ann. Dom. 1407.

On another Monument.

In Lindon Natus, Johannes sic vocitatus,
Linguae limatus, apud Oxoniam graduatus,
Doctor formatus, Aulae Merton sociatus,
Oxoniae gratus, Commissarius reputatus,
Glastonae Praelatus, jacet sub marmore stratus
Moribus ornatus, fit tecum, Christ, beatus.
Annos millenos, quadringenos lege plenos
Trinos and senos, nunc Caelos scandit anaenos.
On Another.

Here lies Sir John Bramspath, which was made Knight; He died in the year of
our Lord, 1443.

On Another.

Orate pro animabus Johannis Basset, and Agnetis Vxoris ejus.

In the Chancel at Retton.

Orate pro anima Roberti Whytbie quondam Praebendarii de Ketton.

In the Church of North-Luffenham.

Upon a Monument, on the South Side of the Church.

Simon Digby Esquire Pensioner to King Henry the 8th. Second Son to Sir John Digby
Knight-Marshal, which Simon Married Katherine Daughter of Christopher Clapham
of Beaumesly, in the County of York Esquire and Roger Digby their Son and Heir,
Married Mary Daughter of John Cheiney of Shordelous in Buckinghamshire, Ann.
Dom. 1582.

In the Church of Okeham.

Upon a Gravestone; in Brass,

Hic jacet Willielmus Waren quondam hujus Villae Burgensis and Mercator Stapule
Villae Calisiae, ac etiam Domina Agnes Vxor ejus and relicta, qui quidem
Willielmus obijt Ann. 1499. Decimo die September.

On Another.

Hic jacet Willielmus Dalby and Agnes Vxor ejus, qui quidem Willielmus obiit in
vigilia Annuntiationis beatae Mariae Virginis. Ann. 1404. and praedicta Agnes
--

Painted on the Wall in the said Church.

Mr. John Pooly of Martinsthorp Ann. 1557. Which lies Buried here, Ann. 1557.
Has given the Poor in Okeham Ann. 1557. Ten pounds by the year. Ann. 1557.
Other Supplemental Additions.
Pa. 14. In the List of Sheriffs.
A. D. A. R. Jucobus 2. 1685 1 Johannes Bullingham, Arm. 1686 2 Eusebius
Buswel, alias Pelsant. Arm. 1687 3 Clemens Breton, Armig.

Pa. 16. In the List of the Knights of the Shire.
A. R. Regn. Jacobi 2. 1 Baptista Noel Armiger. 1 Thomas Mackworth, Baronettus.

Pa. 27.

OF the Priory of Canons here at Brook, I have this further to add, out of
certain old Deeds and Grants now in my Possession. Their Estate lay at Brook,
Braunston, Knauston, Okeham and Langham, all Towns near adjoining. As to what
they held in Braunston, I find that Reginald, Son of Robert de Branteston, gave
to God, and the Sacristy of the Church of the Blessed Mary of Brot, the yearly
Rent of 12 d. which the Canons there did use to pay yearly to the said
Reginald, as Capital Lord of Braunston for one Bouate of Land holden of him;
which said Rent he did appoint for the maintaining of the 4th and 5th Lamp at
our Ladys Vespers and Matins; And in like manner for the maintenance of the 4th
and 5th Candle at the High Mass, and at our Ladies Morning Mass. A little
before the Suppression, Robert Orwell Prior, and the Covent of this House, did
by their Lease, Dated 12th of May 23. H. 8. Demise to Robert Reve, John his
Son, and Joan his Wife, Dwelling in Knoston in the County of Leicester, a Mese
place, and four Yard Lands, with all Houses, Measages, Pastures, Commons and
Liberties, late in the Tenure of the said Robert Reve, lying in the Town and
Fields of Knowsington and Braunston for their several Lives, at the yearly Rent
of 43 s. 4 d. And besides usual Covenants, the Lessees obliged themselves to
Set and Plant 100 Ashes upon the Lands and Ground so Demised, within the space
of five years next ensuing from the Date of the Lease. This Lease was confirmed
by Anthony Coope Esquire to whom the Lands belonging to this Priory were Granted
after the Suppression. The rest of the Lands, belonging to this House, with the
Reversion upon this Lease, were Sold and Conveyed 20 Jan. 36, H. 8. By Anthony
Coope of Hardwicke in the County of Oxford Esquire to John Burton of Braunston: Yet
some of the Lands being held in Capite, were not alienated till 30 October. 13
Eliz. At which time that Queen Granted her License of Alienation to Anthony
Cope Esquire, and John Peck, to Convey the same to William Burton, Son and Heir of
the foresaid John Burton. This parcel was expressed by the Name of Flectmeadow,
with the Appurtenances in Braunston, containing by estimation 15 Acres, late in
the tenure of Joan Ryve Widow. Their Estate in Okeham and Langham was of a very
ancient Grant, but of no great value; and as I believe, they lost the
Possession of part of it long before the Suppression. Walkelinus de Ferrariis
(who was Lord of Okeham, Langham, and Brook, in the time of King Hen. 2 d. and
seems to be the First Founder of this House) Gave to God, and to the Church of
St. Mary of Broch, and the Canons there, in pure and perpetual Alms, the Homage
and Service of Jordanus de Saxonis, and whatsoever Right he had in him and his
Tenement; and also the Tithes of the Profits arising from the Fair at Okeham,
held at the Feast of the Decollation of St. John Baptist; and of the Mills of
the said Town of Okeham, and of Langham. Witnesses to which Deed were Simone
Presbitero de Okeham, Gilberto Fratre ejus, H^gone de Ferrariis, Willielmo de
Frenes, Galfrido de Carento, Magistro Johanne Medico, etc. This Deed was
afterward confirmed by Henry de Ferrariis, Son of Walkeline, and after that by
Isabel de Mortuomari, Widow of Roger de Mortuomari, Sister and Heir of the said
Henry de Ferrariis. Long after this, viz. At the Great Court of Edward Duke of
York (who was also Earl of Rutland,) held at Okeham on the Wednesday next after
the Feast of St. Michael, in the 6th. H. 4. the then Prior of Brook exhibited
his Claim to the Tithes of the Mills of Ocham and Langham, valued at 24 s. per
Ann, which his Predecessors had formerly enjoyed, except for six years last
past: But whether he ever enjoyed them afterward, does not appear. The
beforementioned Isabel de Mort^omari Granted to the Prior and Canons of Broke
a Tenement in Langham, which Gilbert Carecarius held of her, and directed her
Precept under her Seal to William de Hampton, her then Bayliffe at Okeham, to
deliver to the said Prior, full Seisin of the same. Of their Estate at Brook, I
have already Treated, to which I shall only add, That in the place where the
Priory of Brook formerly stood, viz. about a Flight-shot West of the Town, has
been since the Dissolution of the said Priory, erected a very fair House, which
has been for many years past the Residence of the Noble Family of the Noels;
and was, of late years, a noted Seat of Hospitality, during the Life of Julian
late Viscountess Campden, Relict of Edward Viscount Campden: which Lady was the
eldest of the two Daughters and Coheirs of Sir Baptist Hicks Knight and
Baronet, Lord Hicks of Ilmington, and Viscount Campden; who at his own proper
Charges built the Sessions House in St. Iohn-street at London, well known by
the name of Hicks's Hall. He also did diverse other public Works of Charity;
Among the rest he Founded an Hospital for six poor Men, and Women, at Campden
in Gloucestershire; wherein he appointed to each of them two Rooms, a little
Garden, and two shillings a week for their maintenance; which Endowment his
said Daughter Julian Viscountess Campden did much enlarge, and departed this
Life at Brook her constant Residence, on the 25th of November, in the year
1680. being then about One hundred years of Age. She had Issue by her said
Husband, Edward Viscount Campden, two Sons and two Daughters, viz. Baptist
Viscount Campden, Henry Noel of Luffenham Esquire Elizabeth Married to Sir Erasmus
de la Fountain Knight. and Penelope to John Viscount Chaworth.

Brook House on the South side
Illustrissimo One (...) ENOARDO Coun^^ de Ganest ^r^^gh ^ (...) Campden, D^^.
NOEL^ Hick^ Baroni de Ridlington and Ilmington in Comilatibus Hanloni^^ ^e
R^^landior Locumlenenti Ne^ (...) Fore^^^ Gardiano, ^^u^ernatori de Portsmouth
Hanc Tabulam. H.D. ^.W.

depiction of house

Pa. 50.

WHich most Noble Lord, Robert Earl of Aylesbury, Our now Gracious Sovereign
King JAMES II. as a further remuneration of Honor, did constitute Lord
Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household in July 1685. but he survived not long to
enjoy the Office, departing this Life at his Seat at Ampthill in Bedfordshire,
on the 20th of October the same year, to the great grief of all that knew him.
He being a Person of singular Merit for his constant Loyalty, unfeigned
Religion, Virtue and Honor; of great Learning Himself, and a Noble Mecaenas to
all the Learned; a lover of Hospitality, and a constant Benefactor to the Poor.
He Married the Lady Diana, Daughter of Henry Earl of Stamford, and by her left
Issue surviving of both Sexes. Whose eldest Son and Heir, the Right Honorable
Thomas now Earl of Aylesbury and Elgm. is the true Inheritor of both his
Fathers Honors, and Virtues, and is one of the Gentlemen of His now Majesty's
Bedchamber, as he was also to His late Majesty King CHARLES II. of ever
Glorious Memory.

Pa. 78.

OF late years Luffenham-House (which was in the War-time so Nobly held out
against the Rebels by Henry Noel Esquire) became the Seat and Residence of another
Noble Gentleman of the same name, the Honorable Henry Noel Esquire Second Son of
the Right Honorable Baptist Viscount Campden. Which last Henry Married
Elizabeth, Daughter and Coheir of Sir William Wale Knight. but died without
Issue-Male, in September. 1677. leaving only one Daughter his sole Heir. Since
when, this House is become the Seat of the Honorable Baptist Noel Esquire another
Son of the said Viscount Campden, who has augmented, and much beautified the
Building.

Luffenham House

On the East side



Honoral^ilick. Praeclare V^re Baptist^^ Noel Armigero Tabula merito dicata.

On the South side

depiction of house

Pa. 98.

THE Church at Okeham is Dedicated to All Saints, as appears by an ancient
Will, Dated in the 15th year of King Henry VII. and Proved before the Official
of the Arch Deacon of Northampton, 10 May 1501. Which Will containing several
observable Matters relating to this Church, and the old Customs of those times,
I have here transcribed at large, as follows:

In Dei nomine Amen. Anno Domini M. quincentesimo, die vero mensis Maij primo.
Ego Robertus Blakburn de Okeham condo Testamentum meum in hunc modum, primo
lego animam meam Deo patri omnipotenti, beatae Mariae ae omnibus Sanctis ejus;
Corpusque ad sepeliendum in Ecclesia Omnium Sanctorum de Okeham praedicta; Item
lego pro Mortuario meo meum optimum animal quod justum est; Item lego summo
altari pro decemis oblitis xij d. Item lego tresdecem denarios ut dentur in
Elimosina pro salute animae meae; Item lego pro obsequiis meis in primo die ij
s. sex presbiteris, in secundo die hoc est ad septimum diem sex presbiteris
istius villae ij s. and ad diem trigesimum taliter sex presbiteris ij s. and ad
Clericos in quolibet die j d. Item lego Campanis Ecclesiae de Okeham iij s.
iiij d. Item lego Guyldiis Omnium Sanctorum and Beatae Mariae de eadem villa
praedicta xij d. Item lego ad vias communes xij d. Item lego Aliciae siliae
meae de bonis meis propriis december Marcas: Residuum vero omnium bonorum meorum
do and lego Aliciae uxori meae and Willielmo Blakburn filio meo quos quidem
Aliciam and Willielmum facio, constituo and ordino meos veros and legitimos
Executores ut disponant pro salute animae meae, and sit laus Deo Amen. Hiis
testibus Magistro Vicario perpetuo Ecclesiae de Okeham pradicta, Thomas Wilkoks
de Knoston, and Willielmo Manby alias Smyth de Okeham praedicta die praed^cto.

IN this Town of Okeham did formerly reside diverse wealthy Merchants of the
Staple at Calais, who dealt in several Staple Commodities of this Kingdom,
chiefly Wool; a Trade of very great account, while that Town was possessed by
the English. Of what Quality and Condition these Merchants were, may be guest
by the Charities expressed in their Wills, Registered in the Prerogative-Office.
One of which I will here mention, as it may be seen in the said Office, Lib.
Horn. 56.

William Waryn of Okeham Merchant of the Staple at Calais (who lies Buried in
our Ladies Isle, or Chapel, being on the South Side of the Chancel in the
Parish Church at Okeham,) by his Will, Dated 1499. (14. H. 7.) among other
things, gave to the High Altar of the said Parish Church for Tithes and Duties
forgotten, 5 l. To every Priest that helps at his Obsequies the First,
Seventh, and Thirtieth days 4 d. each day; to every poor Man, Woman and Child
present at the said Obsequies those three days, 1 d. To find two Priests to
sing and say Masses and Service for the Souls of Him, his Father and Mother,
and all Christian Souls in the Parish Church of Okeham for 20 years next
ensuing, 200 l. To the reparation of the said Church 10 Marks. For a suit of
Vestments for the said Church 100 Marks. To provide Freese Cloth, and Linen
Cloth for Garments, Shirts and Sheets for poor People the space of five years
10 Marks. To every House of the four Orders of Friars in Stanford 13 s. 4 d. To
the Nuns there 13 s. 4 d. To the Gildes of the Holy Trinity, and of our Lady in
Okeham, whereof he was a Brother 40 s. To the mending of Highways and Brigs at
Okeham 10 Marks. Toward the making of Rochester-Bridge 40 s. To the
Parish Church of Lydington in Rutland 20 s. To the Church of Uppingham 10 s. To
the Church of Aston 6 s. 8 d. To the Church of Preston 10 s. To the Gilde in
the said Church, of which he was a Brother 6 s. 8 d. To the Church of Pysbroke
10 s. To the Church of Somerby 13 s. 4 d. To the Church of Cottesmore 10 s. To
the Church of Langham 10 s. To the Church of Broke 6 s. 8 d. To the reparation
of the Priory Church there 13 s. 4 d. To the Abbey of Osolweston in the County
of Leicester, for the making of their Fraytour 40 l. And 40 l. more to find a
Priest of their House, to sing for Him and his Wife for ever. As for his Lands
and Tenements which he held in Okeham, he Devised them all to Agnes his Wife
for her Life; the Remainder to his Son Francis Waryn in Tail; The Remainder to
his Son James Waryn in Tail; The Remainder to his Daughter Elizabeth Waryn in
Tail; the Remainder to be settled on Feoffees (if it conveniently might be) to
the following Uses, viz. The House wherein he dwelt, with the Appurtenances, to
the Use of the Vicar and Wardens of the Parish Church of Okeham; conditionally,
That the said Vicar and his Successors in the said Church, should for ever
Commemorate his Soul, and the Souls of his Father and Mother at Mass, every
Sunday in the year; otherwise, that the said Mansion be sold, and the Moneys to
be distributed in Works of Mercy, and Deeds of Charity, for the Well of his
Soul. Three other Tenements in the said Town, to the Use of the Abbot and
Conent of Osolweston, conditionally, that they maintain in their Covent, a
yearly Obit, or Anniversary for his Soul, his Fathers and Mothers, Wife,
Children, and Benefactors, and all Christian Souls; And at the same Obit
distribute to the Abbot there 20 d. to every Chanon of that House, being a
Priest, 1 s. and to every Novice 8 d. etc.

IN former times, before the Reformation there was a Pilgrimage of Devotion, in
Honor of the Blessed Virgin, performed to a Spring in this Parish, about a
Quarter of a Mile North of Okeham, which is still known by the name of Our
Ladies Well; near which, one may yet perceive several places where have been
the Foundations of a house or two; And this appears more plain from a Record.
in the First Fruits Office, Inter communia de Term. Trin. 8 Eliz. rot. 5.
containing among other things -- Quod plurima Commoda and Emolumenta Vicariae
de Okeham praedictae pertinentia and spectantia constabant in diversis
Oblationibus and Perigrationibus utpote nuper Imagini Beatae Mariae ad fontem,
and etiam Sancti Michaelis Archangili, and aliis compluribus ritubus and
Oblationibus -- Quae jam una cum Commodis and Emolumentis inde Vicario
praedicto renovantibus prorsus evannerunt.

Pa. 103.

BEsides these two Hospitals, there are other considerable Charities belonging
to the Town of Okeham, viz.

Anne Lady Harington gave in the year 1616. the sum of 32 l. per Ann. for ever,
to the Poor of the Lords-Hold in this Town, as I have already mentioned, Pa. 52.

Also Mrs. Parthenia Lowman of London, Widow, gave to the Town of Okeham, the
sum of 100 l. for a perpetual Stock; The Profits or Interest of which Money was
on the 6th of March 1662. thus settled, viz. Ten Shillings part of the same, for
a Sermon in the Church of Okeham yearly, on Ashwednesday, the residue to be
yearly disposed to such Poor People as are past their Work and Labor, or Sick,
and not able to maintain themselves otherwise; Three Quarters of the Sum to be
distributed to the Lords-Hold, and a Fourth Part to the Deans-Hold in the said
Town of Okeham.

HEre also ought to be remembered the Remarkable Charity of Mr. Endymion Canyng,
an old Cavalier, and a Captain of Horse in the Service of King Charles I. of
ever Blessed Memory. After the Civil Wars, he lived for many years at Book in
this Country, in the Family of the Right Honorable Julian, late Viscountess
Campden, to which Lady he was Steward, and her Principal Servant. He Died a
Bachelor at Brook in the year 1683. And by his Will, Dated on the 24th day of
May, in the year 1681, gave to Pious Uses as follows, viz.

To the Poor of Chipping-Campden and Berrington, in the County of Gloucester.
-- 200 l. To the Poor of the Parish of Monysend in Esser, where he was Born and
Baptized. -- 50 l. To the Poor of Terback in the County of Worcester, where he
was sometime an Inhabitant. -- 50 l. To the Poor of Okeham in the County of
Rutland. -- 50 l. To the Poor of Vppingham in the said County. -- 50 l. To the
Poor of Brook in the said County. -- 20 l. To the Poor of Ilmington in the
County of Warwick. -- 20 l. To the Poor of Aston-Subedge in the County of
Glouceste. -- 20 l. To the Poor of Bradfarton in the County of Worcester. -- 20
l.

And by a Codicel annexed, Dated April 2. 1683. a little before his death he
gave further.

To the Town of Castle-Bytham in the County of Lincoln, to buy a Clock for the
use of the Town. -- 6 l. To the Poor of the said Town. -- 10 l. To the Poor of
Exton in the County of Rutland. -- 5 l. To the Poor of Whitwel in the said
County. -- 5 l. To the Poor of North-Luffenham in the said County. -- 5 l. To
the Poor of Ridlington in the said County. -- 5 l. To the Poor of Belton in the
said County. -- 5 l. To the Poor of Braunston in the said County. -- 5 l. To
the Poor of Langham in the said County. -- 5 l. To the Poor of Halsted in the
County of Leicester. -- 5 l.

Besides other Legacies to his Relations, and Chief Friends, and to some Poor
People particularly named, of which I make no mention here, but only of the
Sums given as above expressed to Pious and Public Uses, which in all amount to
the Sum of 536 l.

P. 108.

WHich most Noble Lord Edward, Earl of Gainesborough, has been twice Married,
First, to the Lady Elizabeth Wriothsley, Eldest Daughter and Coheir of Thomas
late Earl of Southampton, Lord High Treasurer of England, by whom he has
Issue, One Son, Wriothsley-Baptist Lord Campden, who is joined in Commission
with his Father for the Lieutenancies of Hampshire and Rutland; and Four
Daughters; 1st. The Lady Frances Noel, late Wife of Simon Lord Digby, Baron of
Geashil in Ireland, which Lady died in Childbed of her First Child, a
Daughter; not long after whose death, her Husband also departed this Life at
his House at Colshil in Warwickshire, on the 19th of Jan. 1685; whose Loss was
much regretted by all that knew him, He being a Person of very great Honor and
Virtue, and of Signal Charity; 2d. The Lady Jane Noel, Married to the Right
Honorable William, now Lord Digby of Geashil, Brother and Heir-male of the
foresaid Simon Lord Digby; 3d. The Lady Elizabeth Noel; and 4th. The Lady
Julian Noel. The said Earl's Second Wife, the present Countess of
Gainesborough, is Mary Daughter of the Honorable James Herbert Esquire Son of
Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Widow of Sir Robert Wortesley Knight
and Baronet.

Pa. 128.

SIR William Burton here mentioned (who as I have already observed out of the
description of Leicestershire, Pa. 108. is by that Author affirmed to be one of
the Justices of the King's Bench, in the Reign of King Edward III.) was Lord of
Foxton, and other Lands in the County of Leicester; But Tolethorp in Rutland
was his chief Seat. I have seen a Pedigree setting forth his Issue; and their
several Matches, as follows;

Sir William Burton Knight. Ob. 49. E. 3.= Elleonor. Sir Thomas Burton Knight. Ob.
8. R. 2.= Margaret Daughter of Thomas Grenham. Sir Thomas Burton Knight.=......
Dau. of Simon Louthe. Thomas Burton Esquire
........ Dau. of Sir Robert Brabeson Knight. Ux. 1.= Robert Burton Ob. S. M.
=......Dau. of Sir Hugh Bushey Knight. Ux. 2. William Burton=......Dau. of John
Foluille of Ashby Foluille, Com. Leic. John Burton of Vppingham. Com.
Rutland.=......Dau. of Thomas Bassing. Thomas Burton=......Dau. of Ralph Low
of Denbigh, Com. Derb. John Burton of Braunston. Com. Rut. Ob. 1 Mariae.=......
Da. of...... Blackwell. William Burton of Braunston.= Alice Daugh. of Richard
Peck. 1 John Burton= Ann Dau. and Heir of Thomas Digby Esquire Philip Dau. of Henry
Cobham al. Brook vx. I.
Sir Tho. Burton of Stockerson Co. Leic. Baronet. creat. 22. Jul. 20. Jac. 1.=
Anne Wi. of Sr Abell Barker Baronet. Elizabeth Frances
= Anne Da. of Robert Reinolds of London, Gent. Ux. 2. Sir Thomas Burton, Bar,=
Elizabeth Da. of Sir John Prittyman Bar. Sir Thomas Burton Bar.= Anne eldest
Dau. of Sir Thomas Clutterbuck Knight.


2 Bartin Burton of Okeham, Com. Rut.= Abigail Dau. of John Cholmley Esquire Andrew
Burton. of Okeham Esquire= Ann Daught. of William Fairmedow of London, Merch.
Cornelius Burton of Okeham Esquire Andrew Burton of Exton Gent. Anne Abigail Mabel
Elizabeth Mary Sara.
Mabell Wife of John Booth of Okeham Gent.
3 Simon Burton of Braunston.









Pa. 136.

ROger Flower of Okeham, here named, who Married Catherine, Daughter and Cohe^
of William Dalby, was a Person of so great Note in this County, that I ought
not to omit here what I find memorable of him, out of his Will, Registered in
the Prerogative-Office, Lib. Luffnam, f. 69.

By his said Will, Dated 15 April 1424, he appointed his Body to be Buried in
the Church of All Saints at Okeham. His best Animal he gave for a Mortuary. To
the Vicar of Okeham for Tithes forgot, 10 s. To the Guilds of the Holy Trinity,
the Blessed Virgin, and St. Michael at Okeham, 40 s. To the Chaplain of the
said Parish, 2 s. and to every other Chaplain of the said Town, 1 s. To every
Order of Friars at Stanford, the Carthusians at Coventry, the Abbey of
Westminster, and the Priory of Laund, 6 Marks, to pray for the Souls of
Katherine his late Wife, William his Father, Ellen his Mother, William his
Brother, William Dalby and Agnes his Wife, William and John his Sons, Agnes
Plessington his Daughter, and Edward late Duke of York. To certain Chaplains by
his Executors to be appointed to celebrate for his Soul, the Soul of King Henry
5th, and the other Souls aforesaid, 40 l. To be distributed to the Poor, and
for the performing of his Exequies; 50 Marks. To the Almshouse of Okeham,
toward the Repairs of the Chapel, and Ornaments of the Altar there, 50 s. To
every poor Man of the said House, 4 d. To the mending of the Highways, Bridges,
and Causeways at Okeham, 50 s. To every Monk of Westminster being a Priest 1 s.
not a Priest, 8 d. To the great Guild at Coventry, 40 s. To the Prior and
Canons of Brook, 13 s. 4 d. To the Nuns of Langly and Huntington, and Prior,
and Canons of Newsted near Stamford, each House 13 s. 4 d. To 20 poor People of
Okeham, each a Gown of Coventry Freese, and a new Shirt. To the Master of the
Chantry at Manton (whom he made one of his Executors,) he gave his pair of
Beads which he used himself, with the Ten Aves of Silver, and a Pater noster
over-Gilt, praying him to be mindful of him sometimes when he says our Ladies
Sawter on them. It appears by the said Will, that he was the Principal (if not
only,) Benefactor to the Building of the Voute ( i. e. the Spire) of the
Steeple at Okeham: And that he was the Farmer or Lessee of the Parsonage Tithes
at Okeham, under the Abbot and Covent of Westminster. Besides his Lands and
Revenues in Okeham, Whitwell, and Little-Hambleton, in this County, he had
diverse Lands in Lincolnshire; and in Leicestershire, Leesthorp, and the
Mannours of Steneby and Braceby, which two last he devised to his Second Wife
Cecily, during Widowhood, or (as the words of the Will are,) In case she take
upon her the Mantle and Ring, and avow Chastity. He left Issue at his death
five Sons, Thomas his Son and Heir, Robert designed to be a Priest, James,
Roger, and John, and Agnes a Daughter.

Pa. 38. Col. 2. l. 12. add, Which Ezekiel Johnson has since, by Deed of
Bargain and Sale, bearing Date 2. July 1686. and Enrolled in Chancery the 5th
of the same Month, Sold, Granted, and Conveyed, the Manor of Clipsham, with
all the Lands, Tenements, Pastures, and Wood-Grounds to him belonging in
Clipsham, Pickworth, Stretton, and Thisleton in the County of Rutland, And the
perpetual Advowson of the Church of Clipsham, to Richard Snow, Gentleman, (one
of the Clerks in Chancery) his Heirs and Assigns for ever. Which Richard is the
youngest Son of John Snow, heretofore of Gunnerby in the County of Lincoln,
Gent. and has Married Grace the eldest Daughter of Edmund Bolsworth, Citizen
of London, by whom he has had issue of both Sexes.

P. 30. col. 2. l. 31. add, in August 1621.

P. 43. col. 2. l. 17. add, These Ancient Guilds in England were of the same
nature with those Fraternities of Householders, and others of both Sexes, which
are now called Sodalities, beyond Seas.

Corrigenda.

IN the Pedigree p. 63. for, Elizabetha fill. and h. Will. Com. Rut. Ux. 1. read
Elizabetha fill. and h. Edw. Com. Rut. Ux. 1. In the Ped. p. 79. for, Maurice
Rich read Maurice Roche. p. 96. col. 1. l. 29. for Henry read Edward. In the
Pedigree, p. 109. for Eliz. f. and coh. Tho. Dom. Wotton. read Hester f. and
coh. Tho. Dom. Wotton. In the same Pedigree these Letters [ob. s. m.] which by
mistake are misplaced under the Name [Johannes Noel Arm.] should be removed,
and stand under the Name [Henricus Noel Arm.] who died without Issue Male.

Licensed Jan. 4. 1686.

Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for the Author by Edw Jones, 1687.

Farther ADDITIONS TO THE History and Antiquities OF THE COUNTY of RUTLAND. By
the same Author.


