A SPEECH, DELIVERED IN PARLIAMENT; November. 13. 1641. By Sr JOHN WRAY, a worthy
Member of that Honorable ASSEMBLY. Concerning the unlawfulness of Bishops,
and Episcopal Authority.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Banks. 1641.

SIR JOHN WRAYES Speech the 13th. of November, Concerning Episcopal
Authority. 1641.
THE first Challenge for Lordly Primacie has of old been grounded out of the
great Charter, by which they hold an Episcopal Primacie or Jurisdiction to
belong to their states of Prelacie, this is their Temporal foundation and main
objection.

Here I demand of them, unto what Church this great Charter was granted, and
whether it were not granted to the Church of GOD in England, let the word of
Magna Charta, deside this, which are their Concessimus pro nobis and in
perpetuum quod Ecclesia Anglicana libera sit habeat omnia, sua Jura Integra,
and libertates suasillaesus. Now by this Charter if it be rightly interpreted,
there is first provision made, the honor and worship should be yielded unto
God, as truly, and indeed belongs to him.

2. Secondly, That not only such Rights and Liberties as the King and his
Progenitors, but also such as God had ordained the Church of England, which
should be inviolably preserved. And indeed such only are to be preserved,
indeed such only are to be called the rights and Liberties of the Church of
England, which God himself has given by his Law unto the universal Church.
And not that which the King of England by their Charter have bequeathed to the
particular Church of England. And this no doubt was the cause that moved Hen.
the eighth so effectually and powerfully to bend himself against the Popes
Supremacy usurped at that time over the Church of England, (for says the
King) we will with hazard of our life, and loss of our Crown, uphold and
defend in our Realms, whatsoever we shall know to be the will of God.

The Church of God in England not being free according to the great Charter,
but in bondage and servitude to the Sea of Rome, contrary to the Law of God,
the King judged it to stand highly with his Honor, and with his Oath, to
reform, redress, and amend the abuses of the same See.

If therefore it might please our gracious Sovereign Lord King CHARLES in
imitation of those his Noble Progenitors, to vouchsafe an abolishment of all
Lordly Supremacy, executed by Archiepiscopall and Episcopal Authority, over
the Ministers of Christ: his Highness in so doing could no more rightly be
charged with the violation of the great Charter, then might King Hen. the
eighth with the banishment of Popes Supremacy, or then our late Sovereign
Queen Eliz could be justly burdened with the breach of her Oath, by the
establishment of the Gospel.

Now if the Kings of England by reason of their Oath, were so straightly tied to
the words of the great Charter, that they might not in any sort have disanulled
any supposed Rights or Liberties of the Church then used, and confirmed by the
said Charter unto the Church that then was supposed to be the Church of God in
England. Then belike King Hen. the eight might be attainted to have gone
against the great Charter, and against his Oath, when by the overthrow of
Abbeys and Monasteries, he took away the Rights and Liberties of Abbots and
Priors, for the express word of the great Charter, Abbots and Priors, had as
large and ample a Pattent for their Rights and Liberties, as our Archbishops
and Bishops can at this day challenge for their Primacie.

If then the Rights and Liberties of the one as being against the Law of God,
be duly and lawfully taken away, notwithstanding any matter, clause, or
sentence contained in the great Charter, the other have but little reason under
the color of the great Charter to stand upon their pantables, and contend for
their painted sheathes: for this is a Rule and Maxim in Gods Laws, Quod in
omni Iuramento semper excipitur authoritas Maioris: Unless then they be able
to justify by the holy Scriptures to such Rights and Liberties as they pretend
for their spiritual Supremacy over the Ministers of Christ, be in deed and
truth conferred unto them by the holy Law of God, I suppose the Kings Highness
as Successor to Hen. 8. and as more just Inheritor to the Crown of England, by
the words of the great Charter, and by his Oath, are bound utterly to abolish
all Lordly Primacy as hitherto upheld, and defended, partly by Ignorance, and
partly by unreasonable and evil Custom.

FINIS.

