CAROLUS D. G. Anglia, Scotia, Francia, et Hibernia, Rex, Fidei Defensor


A PANEGYRIC of King CHARLES; Being Observations upon the Inclination, Life,
and Government of our Sovereign Lord the KING.

WRITTEN BY Sir Henry Wotton Knight Provost of EATON College, A little before
his death.

And Printed for Richard Marriot; London, --

TO OUR Young CHARLES Duke of Cornwall, And Earl of CHESTER; Henry Wotton
Wishes late days.
THese following Vows and Acclamations wherewith Your Father (the best of
Kings) was wellcomed at his return from Scotland, I dedicate to Your Highness:
not unadvisedly, that when you shall be endued with erudition (the ornament
long since of your ancestors) you may draw from this small memorial, whatsoever
it be, a more glorious treasure then a triple Crown; namely, an hereditary
image of virtue.

To the Reader.
Reader,
KNOW that this piece was (by the deceased Author) writ originally in Latin;
and was received generally with applause and satisfaction then: And by a person
highly and deservedly valuing the Authors Memory, taught to speak our English
tongue; which ought not to blush, even in these times, for owning the thoughts
of this much renowned Patriot, and true servant to his Royal Master yet in
being. Whose virtuous and happy reign was no less the admiration of his
neighbors, then the just subject of this learned pen, to transmit the true
lights thereof to after ages.

And if it fail of an effect suitable now upon the Readers of these days in
general; the Publisher doubts not of one in thee, whom he hopes art neither
biased by desperate Interest, nor dazzled with false Illumination.

Farewell.

TO THE KING at His return from SCOTLAND; Sir Henry Wottons VOTES and
ACCLAMATIONS. Imperial CHARLES my Sovereign King and Master;
I. IT was an ancient custom among the civil nations, so often as they were
blessed with a just and a gracious King (lest their felicity should be mutely
smothered, and moulder in their breasts) to pour sorth their affections and
joys in elogies, in hearty wishes, and in applauses; especially, when any
occasion did excite their acclamations. By emulation of which sacred custom,
being rapt, and my very bowels in this my frozen age being warmed therewith, I
have taken a flagrant confidence, to celebrate this day which has restored
your Majesty to us, and us unto our selves: being so little daunted with the
weakness of mine own elocution, that almost I am ready to esteem my self
thereby the fitter to perform it. For, what need is there here of any
rhetorical stuff? or why should I too curiously balance words by weight? it
will be enough this day simply to rejoice. Sincerity is a plain and impolite
thing, by how much the less tricked, so much the more joying in her own
natural alacrity; and fine speech while it adorneth, corrupts our gladness.
Neither do I fear that this duty shall appear a flattering blandishment, or to
proceed from one ambitiously projected at the feet of fortune, which intruth
were unworthy of that ingenuity that I have received from my parents, and
likewise of that blessed contentment, which liberal studies have taught me.
Yet, one thing I confesse^d oh involve my thoughts at the very entrance, in a
kind of Solicitude; namely, lest I should with true praises offend that
verecundious modesty, wherewith Your Majesty does so sweetly season all your
other virtues: for although your fortitude be great against any thing that
requires either Constancy of spirit, or validity of body; yet, I cast some
doubt, lest you should bear these applauses the more tenderly, by how much they
are the more justly due.

II. We read that Germanicus (and yet what a man?) somewhat before the battle
against the Catti; went disguised with a beasts skin about his shoulders, to
listen behind the soldiers tents what opinion they had of him. So as they seem
the weakest receivers of their own commendations, that are the worthyest to
receive them.

Whence I easily foresee that I must prepare a way for your Sacred Ears, by
more severe arguments then I can borrow from the shop of light Rhetoritians. I
will therefore roundly affirm, that neither the fair, nor the deformed lives of
Princes, should be suppressed under ignoble silence, but that both the good and
bad, should be delivered to posterity with the same liberty in writing, which
themselves used in living: and with no less reverence of truth then of majesty:
the good, lest by subducting the examples of virtue from our knowledge, virtue
it self by little and little should decay: the bad, that being exempt while
they live, from all danger of laws, they might at least be attempered with some
awe of future records. This I dare speak to your self (most excellent
Sovereign) and, even that I dare say so much as this, I owe only to your self,
who have now so lived 33 and reigned almost nine years, that you are not afraid
of truth.

III. Most famous it was of old, and will eternally live, that answer of
Virginius Rufus, to Cluvius: You know Virginius (says he) what credit is due
to history: wherefore if you read any thing in my books, otherways then you
would have it, I pray pardon me. To whom replies Virginius; Cluvius knows this,
that I have done those that I have done, that it might be free for you writers
to write what you list. Which was the security (I must confess) of a brave
gentleman indeed, but of a private personage.

How much more may this day rejoice, at the reception of a King, of whose life
and whole deportment we may speak both openly and safely. Yea, let me add this
boldly, that if nature her self (the first Architectres) had (according to
Vitruvius his conceit) windowed your breast: if Your Majesty should admit all
men's eyes, not only within the walls of your priviest chamber, but into the
inward'st closet of your heart, nothing would there appear, but the splendour of
goodness and an untroubled serenity of virtues. What said I? if you would
admit? why, can they whom the supreme power has set in a high and lucent
throne be secluded from the eyes of men? or the course of your life and
government be hidden in a mist? certainly in this point, obscurity of degree
and solitude it self, is more veiled then Majesty. Does that Emperor of
Abyssine (who they say is seen but once a year abroad) think that it is less
known what he does with in? Do we not know even at this day that Domitian
even in his secret retied room, whither he daily in private resorted, did
nothing but stick flies with a bodkin? Lay Tiberius hid in his recesse to the
Islands of Capreae, when among so many wounds and tortures of his conscience
(with which he was vexed like so many furies) many tokens of a distracted mind
did daily break forth? Surely no.

Your Majesty has taught the Princes both of your own, and future times, the
only and most wholesome way of concealing your self, in this, that you endeavor
nothing that is to be concealed. There are certain creatures of ungrateful
aspect; as Bats and Owls, (condemned by nature to hate the light,) and I know
that some Prin-have held it among the secrets of Empire, and for a great
mystery of craft, to be adored afar off, as if reverence did only dwell in
holes, and caves; and not in full light. Whence flow those Sophistries of
Government? I will speak in a word, and freely; they wandered in crooked paths,
because they knew not (the shortest way) to be good. But, Your Majesty does
not fly the eyes and access of your subjects; you do not joy to be hid, you
do not withdraw your self from those that are yours; you do not catch at false
veneration with a rigid and clouded countenance: yea, sometime you vouchsafe to
descend to a certain affability without offense of your dignity: for thus you
reason with your self in the clearness of your own bosom; if it were not
above our power to lie concealed, yet were it below our goodness to will it;
then which nothing (in conclusion) is more popular; for good Princes are by all
good men openly revered, and even silently by bad: so much do the beams of
virtue dazzle even unwilling eyes. Wherefore as of late I did pass with
Tranquillus Suetonius (who has anatomized the very bowels of the Cesars) to
beguil in the time of your absence with some literate diversion, the tedious
longitude of days, and had by chance fallen upon that passage, so lively
describing the wailings of Augustus, after the Varian defect, often crying out,
Render me Quintilius Varus; straight there arose a fervent desire of Your
Majesty, and wishes glowed for your return: for it seemed much juster that
England should solicit her sister with panting suspirations, then Augustus the
ghost of Quintilius: Restore to me, Scotland my sister, our King; restore the
best of men, whom none but bad does not love, none but ignorant does not
praise; both the ruler of our Manners, and the rule together; that we may not
only be the gladder, but the better for it, while we shall never contemplate (a
thing most rare) in the highest degree a pattern of the least licentiousness.
Seeing therefore (excellent King) that you are such, permit I most humbly
beseech you (if supplications may more prevail then arguments) that nine
people of distinct language (for so many they are in my account) whose realms
you moderate, may glory that you are such, and proves that not only in every
ones particular Idiom, which would be in truth too narrow for our joy, but in
this common language however expressed, that even foreigners may know heretofore
yielded the best Emperor, and of greatest name to the Christian world, not to
be so dry at this day, but that it still can afford a type of a most laudable
Sovereign.

IV. Now, having as I hope a little mollified the way to your patient hearing,
hence forth I shall take a pleasure, out of a general habit, and course of
your life, to crop a few things like the gatherers of flowers: for, I joy more
in the chief then in the plenty; though not ignorant that either the diligence,
or ambition of Ancients in this kind was so profuse, as perchance Timeus did
not say unpleasantly, that Alexander the Macedonian had sooner subdued all Asia
then Isocra^es had writ his panegyric. The truth is, art was much cherished in
those days, while in a rank age of eloquence the wits of Orators were wanton*
but it becomes me, being mindful both of my simplicity and age, to touch
rather the general heads of your due praises* then to prosecute the
particulars; that the very brevity of my speech, may in a sort imitate the
defluxion of my sliding years. Now before other things, there offers it self
unto me, the singular Nobility of your birth: whereby, in the long pedegre of
antecedent King^ ye are eminent above them all, even your blessed father not
excepted; this I will deduce more clearly: your great great-grandfather Henry
the seventh, (I know not whether more beholden to his fortune or his fortitude)
being almost at once an Exile, and a Conqueror, united the white and red Roses;
the Armomories of two of our mighty families, by the marriage of Elizabeth of
York; which being in division had so many years polluted their own Country with
infestous rancor and bloody fewds: A more blessed Colligation of the Kingdoms
then of the Roses, we owe to the good days of your father, even for that
alone never to be remembered without high veneration. But, in you alone, most
Imperial Charles, is confluent the glory of all nations, of all ages, which
since the Romans have possessed Britannie either by right, or by Arms. In you*
I say* alone, whom of all hither^o crowned, we acknowledge the only branch of
the Cabrians, Anglosaxons, Scottish, Norma^ and Danish Race. In this perchance
(if the comparison be not too mean) not unlike to the Ister that (...) river
of ^^rope, which rolling down so ^minense a (...) enn^bled by (...) way with
the contri^^tion of so many famous streams. Among our authors, one of no mean
condition, that our Elders would not legitimate the Norman government in
England, till Maude marrying with Henry the first brought into the world a
branch of the ancient Saxon Kings: she was the sister of David, nephew twice
removed of King Ethelred your Progenitor.

What greater cause have we to embrace Your Majesty with open arms, descending
to our times from so manifold a stock of Kings; adorned with access of the
Cambryan line by Queen Ann your Mother, a Lady of a masculine carriage and more
truly may we challenge that which Buchanan (who next the ancients had the
happiest strain) attributed to your grandmother (to whom might a better fate
have fallen)

Ye sway Scepters independing,

From elders numberless descending.

But these you scarcely account your own. I pass to your peculiar glories,
which no less give then receive luster.

V. Three things are remarkable in your beginning, Best of Kings, (give me
leave to call you so often) of no small moment to your following felicities;
and things in their increase for the most part keep a relish of the beginnings;
first, that you were not born to the supreme hope of Soveraigntie, whereby
flattery (though a swift and watchful evil) clinging to the very cradle of
Heirs apparent, slowly crept on your tender years, giving time to your natural
goodness to suck in the generous juice of honesty: for certainly it much
imports the Commonweal to see that the first propensions even of private men
be well informed and instilled: how much more of Princes, whereof they are not
only sustainer^ for the present, but patterns for the future?

Next, that you suc^eed a brother of no ^mall endowments of nature: this
redoubled and contracted the se^ulity of your parents (...) I call it sedulity,
for ^t exceeded an ordi^ary care) about the ^mprovement of their ^nly son: Nay,
by this, ^our own spirits were ^he more and more ^rected, when now such a
weight of exp^^ctation was fallen onl^ upon your self; the^ were they appoint^^
which should fait^^fully endue with the elements of knowled^ your age not yet
fit f^^ affairs of State: the^ were such sent for (...) might dress yo^
growing strength w^ feats of Chivalr^ which I well remem^^er how handsomely ^ou
performed in the ^rime of your youth, ^ill afterward run^ing at Tilt I knew
^ot whether we took more joy or fear to ^ee you adventure.

Thirdly, it falls into ^y mind how nature ^^rugled for a time with the
weakness of ^our body, far unlike ^o that firm vigor which we now be^ hold
with joy and ad^miration: which ^ think did not happ^^ without a secret
pro^vidence, that the^ might be the more i^^tentive care of cult^^vating your
mind, (...) indeed well becam^ the heir, then secret^ destinated, of such (...)
King, whom of all a^^ter many ages his ve^ry maligners do not deny to have
been the Prince of greatest knowledge. But I haste from your first essays to
your stronger times, not forgetting my promised bre^ity.

VI. After your travells abroad, obnoxious to many hazards, you came unto the
Crown, where was seen how much you^ self then dared to adventure, while in the
mean time all at home were trembling for your sake. But, the celestial favor
di^^ reduce you again faf^ unto us, with not s^ much as a taint of fo^^raign
tincture like a^nother Ulysses, t^ whom it was enoug^ even by Homer, to peruse
the manners of men and their government.

VII. When you had taken the Crown, before all other things, there was
resplendent in you a Royal religious mind: the pillar of Kingdoms and the joy
of good men: the regal Chapel never more decent, the number of excellent
Divines daily increased, Sermons in no age more frequent, in none more learned,
and the example of Prince more informing then the Sermons; no execrations
rashly proceeding from your mouth; your eyes abhorring, not only any sordid,
but even the least lascivious word: which perchance under Edward the 4th. while
vagrant loves did reign, was accounted a piece of courtly eloquence; neit^^r
was this piety immured within the Court, but diffused through the Kingdom.

The Church revenues not touched; Temples here and there newly founded;
delapidations repaired; and, (which posterity will ever speak) the
contributions of your Kingdom, excited by your Majesty's most religious
exhortation, to restore the Temple consecrated to the Apostle of the nations,
which had suffered some injury of time; in all the Christian world, without
question, the most ample work of equal antiquity; where your Majesty's care
was eminent in demolishing those private houses which disgraced the view of so
goodly a work: Nor less in imposing the charge of that whole business, upon
that most vigilant Prelat^e who for his singular fidelity and judgment, has
lately been assumed to higher dignity.

Now (next to God) how tender was your affection to your people? when contagion
grew amongst them, recourse was had to public fasts, by your own commandment:
when we were pressed with greater fears then affliction of famine, the
cornmongers were constrained to open their barns, and the prices underrated.
Among those pious cares, I cannot omit one peculiar Elogie, proper to your own
providence, whereof I must fetch the beginning a little higher.

VIII. Some years ago, certain points about sublime points of our Belief were
born abroad, or rather perchance newly rubbed up out of antiquity; which when
they had also flown hither unto us (as flames of wit are quickly diffused) lest
here also our pulpits and pens should grow hot with public disturbance, Your
Majesty has by Edict with most laudable temper compressed all disceptation on
either side. Let others think what they list; in my arbitriment (if the phrase
may be pardoned) the Itch of Disputing will prove the Scab of Churches. I will
relate what has happened to me in my observation more then once: namely, two
arguing about some subject very eagerly, till either of them transported by
heat of contention from one thing to another, they both at length first lost
charity, and then the truth. Whither (in the name of God) would restless
conceit proceed if it were not bounded? there is no end of subtle arguments:
but Your Majesty has found out a seasonable provision.

IX. To these praises of piety I will add a mighty pattern of gratitude: and
almost a greater of Constancy toward George Villers Duke of Buckingham, who
being the chief concomitant adjoined unto them amongst the hazards of the
Spanish Journey, Your Majesty afterward at home as it were by exchange did
safely carry through all the rocks of either fortune, till the unforeseen day
befell him. We have also seen no small means of your favor cast upon another
of trusty and judicious associates in the same Journey. Neither do I only
recount these things, as arguments of an heart mindful of faithful service
(which is a truly regal virtue) but likewise of singular obsequiousness
toward the memory of your own parent, though then decea^sed, to whom the Duke
of Buckingham had stood so many years in his special privity: as if Your
Majesty reputed your self no less the Heir of his affections, then of his
Kingdoms; a rare example among the memorials of all ages. He was indeed a Duke
of many lovely parts, very seldom consociated, in all the limbs of his body
exquisitely composed, yet doubtful whether his shape or his grace were the more
eminent: undubitably of an undaunted spirit, equally attentive to affairs
either imposed, or assumed: he showed likewise in the midst of so many
distractions an incredible temper and equability. I will not deny his appetite
of glory, whereof generous minds are not easily divested; but, that which of all
I reckon the sweetest, no austerity of behavior, nothing outwardly tumerous:
but obvious, accostable and almost exposed to every man's access: as if so high
felicity had scarce been sensible of felicity: for which endowment though it
had been single, he might well have merited (in humane judgment) at his end a
softer Bed.

X. After this there began to grow powerful in Your Majesty's principal
affairs and daily growth, by how much the more tried, by so much the more
trusted, a person certainly of a moderate course of life, and of most weighty
counsel, and with contempt of va^nity born to solid wisdom, whom to nominate
were injurious, for after a sincere de^cription their needs ^ot a name.

XI But the highest Empire over your affections, is deservedly challenged by
your most worthy consort of your royal bed, her self likewise descended from an
ancient line of Kings: but it is enough to say the daughter of Henry the Great,
and Sister to Lodowick the Just; whom for most deer pledges already of either
sex, for the endowment of chastest beautifulness, and (which chiefly blesses
the nuptial bed) for congruity of dispositions, Your Majesty embraces with so
religious and invi^lable love, that just^y you may seem to have passed from the
Title of an excellent pattern, into that of an excellent husband.

XII. To chastity you have added temperance her nearest Companion: which
virtues among miserable and impotent men, who would not pass by with silence^
but in a King so young, in the vigor of his age; and in such a promptness of
satisfying all appetites, know not whether we should more commend or admire.
Now, after these Elogies (which partly beget love, and partly beget wonder) to
doubt once of the justness of your times, were most unjust. It will not yet
repent me to repeat a little at large a thing of illustrious example, in a man
of obscure condition. There fell out at London I know not what tumult for one
rescued out of a Sergeants hands, who for debt was carried to prison, where in
the midst of those confusions, one or two (as for the most part it falls out)
did perish of sudden hurts; whereupon one John Stamford a stout and lusty fellow
(who had fatally run into the throng) was apprehended as guilty o^ murder; he
watched not with Your Majesty intercessors of great name; and there was a
certain hope of his pardon already in vulgar imagination conceived, because he
waited on the Duke of Buckingham in his Chamber, and among attendants of his
own condition was many times very acceptable to his Lord for a mighty ability
of body, and skill in wrestling, whereof the memory as then was yet fresh, which
perchance made the poor man the more audacious; but neither the intercessions
of the living, nor the man's own well known valor, nor finally the remembrance
of so well known a Patron whom he served, could prevail with Your Majesty above
Justice, (but which is much to be said) after these circumstances he suffered
the ordinary death --. Fresher is the execution which a Baron of most ancient
lineage suffered for a fact; unworthy of his ancestors. But, if an old
observation of a witty author may yet have place, that some examples are more
illustrious* and some greater, I should think the Barons the more illustrious
and Stamfords the greater.

XII. But whither am I ravished? while I revolve these things, with no
unpleasing meditation? Your Majesty has in your Tribunals of strict Justice
proper Judges; whose Sentences are rigid; you have also a most sage Chancellor
of right and equity (not inferior to the ancient Pretors) who for the peoples
relief mollifieth the former severity; but, those do sit apart, in several
Bars: if one should ask by chance, why they sit not together (which might seem
the more expedite way) I will deliver my opinion, our Ancestors out of a most
grave providence, that Justice and lenity which in the inferior Magistrate sit
divided, might be consociated in the only breast of the Sovereign: And truly so
it is, for, composed in your self, as it were of the very desire of your
ancestors, has so tempered them together, that none have presumption to be
evil, nor grieve to be good Hitherto I desire to be understood, that I have
only spoken of the restraint of common vices, which every where swarm, for of
more hai^nous transgressions (by Gods goodness) we have not a word, no not so
much as a dream; we are in labor of an excellent ignorance: we know not what
insurrection is: what plotter is against the Commonweal: or that is, which
Gramarians call the offense of Majesty: the very words are vanished with the
things; and (in truth) no marvail; for, what wretch (unless he were of all
mortal men the most stupid and felonious, and both equally a fool and a
villain) would violate the quiet of so just and pious a Governor?

XIII. Now as you maintain your lustice, (which I would call the health of your
Kingdom) in an even Balance, without too much stretching or slackning the
strings^punc; so you are not careless of the security; for so the same would
fall to Empires, which falls out in natural bodies, which subsist dangerously,
if nothing but mere health sustain them: wherefore after a war with two mighty
Kings together with various event (as it falls out in humane affairs)
concluded by new Confederations on either side, your principal care at home,
was to provide for the Maritine strength, as it became the Tutor of Insular
Kingdoms; where the Navy Royal was yearly more increased and furnished;
likewise more commodious roads chosen for the Ships, and of readyer issue upon
sudden occasion; Your Majesty not only commanding, but with your own Eyes
pe^using the places, as if in a matter of that moment you had scarce trusted
another man's view: Then a more exact survey of Arms, and the general Musters at
due time better executed.

XIV. Amongst these things it were uncivil to pass over silently, that which
wise men often time have noted; namely, that Your Majesty does more frequent the
Counsel of State, then any of your Predecessors, unless perchance we should
reflect our eyes upon Edward the Sixth, whom they say even in his childhood, to
have been seldom absent.

XIV. In that Session of your privy Counsel, the highest Prelates add
reverence, the Nobles of both Kingdoms, dignity.

Some there are whom foreign experience, some whom the knowledge of our Laws do
adorn: among whom the learned and faithful Sagacity of your Secretaries watch
over all accidents; but above these the very presence of the Sovereign has
always (I know not how) a certain blessed inspi^ation: it is a small matter
which I have said, your Presence only, yea those which participate of your
Counsels, (not altogether I must confess incurious, for which I beg pardon) I
have many times heard how attentvely (as often as you are pleased to be
present) you resolve things propounded; how patiently you hear, with how sharp
judgment you ponder the particulars; how stiff you are (for I will use no
milder word) in good resolutions, and how stout in great.

Finally, in secret affairs, what taciturnity you impose, and how severely you
exact an account thereof; in this also, your own example leading your
Commandment. For besides other, there are two things which Your Majesty has
most blessedly bound together; namely, there was never Prince since the
Constitution of Empires, a safer preserver of a secret, and yet none whose
secrecy and silence we less fear; which we read anciently noted of that
excellent man Julius Agricola, who was the first Roman that invaded the skirts
of your Calydonia: for Your Majesty does not suffer secretly in your bosom
tyrannous and crafty thoughts, nor hatch the sparkles of offense til they
flame: but if any be contrived, you do vent it and as I may say) exhale it
with a high noblecan^or. Truly I confess, I do not more willingly insist in the
reverence of any of your virtues, then in this very attribute of your heroical
ingenuity: for as the supreme Character of the most high power is Verity: so
what can more become or more magnificently invest his Representants on earth,
then veracity it self? hitherto we have seen your obsequlousness toward your
parents, constancy toward your friends, fidelity toward your Consort, and
toward the Commonwealth, not only the affection a King, but of a father;
neither among these (as the condition of the times, and the perplexed state of
things would bear) the regards of an excellent brother toward your only
sister, whom I have always thought the only -- of her sex; the greater by
suffering, and the more illustrious by obscurity, and though constituted in this
world under chance, yet above the command of fortune, whom how much Your
Majesty loves, nay how much you esteem, did appear in a late legation, when to
consolate the lo^s of her husband, you sent the chief of your Nobility, and
himself a personage even of the ancient virtue and deportment; that to so
loving an Ambassie, there might be something added by the very election of the
Ambassador.

XV. Thus much of Comfort; now for a point of assistance: did not Your Majesty
give leave to a Merchant of chief Nobility in Scotland, though tied here to
your person by near and assiduous attendance, to exercise his valor abroad by
intricate passages in such an interruption of access, by adventures of Sea and
Land; by places and Towns beset with Plague and famine: where it was almost
easier to conquer then to enter; and harder suffering then doing. If after this
success has wanted, yet not the generous affection of a King; not the valor
of his subjects; not expenses of diverse kinds; not legations upon legations, to
appease if it were possible by equal conditions, and by friendly treaty the
frenzy of the time: for the rest, we must repose our selves in S^lons advice,
Let no man glory before his Time.

XVI. Now among so many cares wherewith even the best of Kings are least free;
it will be no unpleasant Speculation to enquire a little how elegantly* Your
Majesty does dispose your vacant hours.

You joy in Chi^^lry, and use of the great Horse, of which no man does more
skilfully manage^ those that are already gentle, or tame the furious* Insomuch
as I doubt whether it were aptly or worthily done of him who has lately
erected an Equestrian Statue to Your Majesty of solid brass, the lively work of
Listerius.

To this I must add Music, which under you (both instrumental and vocal grows
every day more regular; as being fitted to the judgment of your ear. This (lest
it should seem too tender a delight) you temper with hunting. In which Image of
War you do, so exercise your vigorous Spirits, that it is hard to say whether
you love the pleasure more, or the labor, or whether you had rather wish the
killing or the long standing of the Ch^se.

But the most splended of all your entertainments, is your love of excellent
Artificers, and works: wherewith either Art both of picture and Sculpture you
have so adorned your Palaces, that Ita^y (the greatest mother of elegant Arts)
or at least after the Grecians) the principal Nurse, may seem by your
magnificence to be translated into England; what can be more pleasant then
those sights? nay I am ready to ask, what more learned then to behold the mute
eloquence of lights and shadows, and silent poesy of lineaments, and as it
were living bles? here would the spectator almost swear that the limbs and
muscles designed by Tentoret did move: here the birds of Bas^sano do chirp,
the oxen bellow, and the sheep bleat; here the faces of Rafael are breathing,
and those of Titian even speaking: here a man would commend in Coreggio
sweetness, in Parmesano daintiness of limbs. Neither do the Belgians want
their praise; who if they paint land-skips, al kind of plants seem in their
verdure; the flowers do smile; the hills are raised; the valleys in
depression: in your statuary works likewise learned variety, of which some
glory in vivacity, some in the tenderness of limbs. But, those are the
entertainment of your eye. To delight you sometime you read a book of some
choice subject: but for the most part you read men, as well knowing how much it
imports a Prince to look into the nature of his people. Now and then also you
please your mind with the rehearsal of some ancient Epigrams, with no less
sharpness then they were composed. Thus have I cursorarily run over your
serious thoughts, and your remissions: but this very pleasure which I have
taken, (though but a flight transcursion) does (I know not how) infuse into my
pen now in motion a new spirit to represent (with Your Majesty's leave) though
it be but to my self, your true portraiture in little: and (as it were) in one
short view together, which I thus conceive in my fancy. I would call your
stature next a just proportion; your body erect and agil; your color or
complexion, has generally drawn more from the white Rose of York, then the
red of Lancaster; your hair nearer brown then yellow; your brow proclaims
much fidelity; a certain verecundious generosity graceth your eyes, not such as
we read of Silla, but that of Pompey; in your gestures free from affectation;
in your whole aspect no swelling, no rigidity, but an alluring and pleasing
suavity: your alacrity and spirit appears in the celerity of your motions,
otherways stayed affections, and composed demeanor; in your purposes and
promises unremoveable, a lover of truth, a hater of vice, just, constant,
courageous, and not simply alone, but knowingly good.

Such you are; and being such, with what applause shall we receive you!
methinks I see, when sometimes I compare together horrid and quiet times, as
often as Richard the third returned perchance from his York, or further off to
London, and assembled his States about him, how the heads of noble men did hang
down, how pale were their cheeks! what solicitous suspicions, and murmurs they
conferred together; as if suddenly some dismal Comet or inauspicious star
had risen above the Horison: but contrariwise, the return of a just, and a good
Prince, is intruth nothing else but the very approach of the Sun, when with his
vernall beams he does expel the deformed winter, and with a gentle heat does
comfort and ex^ilarate all things about us.

XVII. Welcome therefore Most graceful King, to all that are good: But in what
wishes shall I end? Among the ancients (by whose example I have too boldly
undertaken this small labor) there was a form after the times of Trajan, under
every excellent Emperor, Long may thou live Antonius; long must thou live
Theosius; happier may thou be then Augustus; better then Trajan: but let this
be the concluding Character of Your Majesty's time; that the things we can
with, are fewer then those we praise.

Wherefore when I have out of an ardent zeal only wished this, that CHARLES our
excellent King and Master may reign and live like himself;

I will end thus, Oh how extremely fortunate were we,
If well we knew how fortunate we be!


FINIS.

