An Experimental TREATISE of SURGERIE, In Four Parts.

1. The first Part showing the dangerous Abuses committed among the Modern
Surgeons.

2. Of Cures of all sorts of Wounds in Man's Body, from the Head to the Toe, and
of other Infirmities belonging to Surgerie how the same ought to be observed
according to the Fundamentals of Art, to be handled and cured.

3. Of the Symptoms of Wounds, how they are to be discerned and known before
they appear, what they foretell, how to prevent them, and how to cure them when
apparent, etc.

4. Treating of all kinds of Balmes, Salves, Plasters, Ointments, Oils,
Blood-stenchers, Potions, Tents, Corrosives, etc. which are used for Wounds,
and have been mentioned hitherto in the former Parts of this Book; how they are
to be Artificially prepared, and used well. All which are very plain, and easy
to be understood and managed, by an ordinary capacity.

By that most famous and renowned Surgeon, FELIX WURTZ, City Surgeon at
Basell. The praise of whose worth you may read in the following Epistles, the
worth it self in this Book.

Exactly perused after the Authors own Manuscrip, by Rodolph Wurtz, Surgeon at
Strasburg.

Faithfully the second time Translated into Nether Dutch, out of the twenty
eighth Copy printed in the German Tongue, and now also Englished and much
corrected, by ABRAHAM LENERTZON FOX, Surgeon at Zaerdam.

Whereunto is added a very necessary and useful Piece, by the same Author,
called the CHILDRENS BOOK; Treating of all things which are necessary to be
known by all those, to whose trust and overlooking, little Children are
committed.

London, Printed by Gartrude Dawson, over against the Black Horse in Alder^gate
Street, and are to be sold at the Booksellers Shops. 1656.

TO THE HONORABLE, Wise, deep Learned, Sr. CLAES PIETERS TULP, Doctor of
Physic, Counceller and Assessor at AMSTERDAM.
SIR,
IT is Gods Will and pleasure to make it a duty to every one, to do good unto
his Neighbor, which befitteth every one in his calling to express that duty
according to the gift God has bestowed on him: your Honor is herein well
disposed, to put to use that talent you have received; no better opportunity
may be had for it following the calling then this present work: in which simply
is presented that, which another with great toil has brought together for the
benefit, and comfort of fore wounded Men: it being the twenty eighth Copy
published in the German Tongue, still augmented and corrected by that most
famous Surgeon Felix Wurtz, City Surgeon at Basell; whose notable and good
doctrinals I have successfully practiced these many years, which urged me to
undertake the Translating of it into our Belgic Tongue; the rather because I
am well versed in the German Tongue, counting it worthy of our Nation, to the
praise of that greatly experienced Surgeon, and the benefit of our people. And
knowing your Honor a sound Doctor in Physic, not only well experienced, but
doubtless well seen also in the German Tongue, and a great practitioner in
Chymicks, and deeply enlightened therein: in consideration whereof, I present
this out of a good affection to your Honor, the rather, because Mr. John
Watshaert, Stationer and Printer, has recommended your Honor very much,
knowing my intention was no other, but that I would Dedicate this my labor to
a Learned Man. To which end I present it to your Honor, praying you would be
pleased to peruse it, and upon your worthy judgment to commend it to the
judicious, and to protect it against the ignorants, in the way your Honor
shall think most fit.

Therefore Honorable Doctor, be pleased to accept of it favorably; to that
end that those, which are of mean capacity, and are of small gifts may be
encouraged by your gracious acceptance, and may put out to use their small
talents also for the public good, which happily may be practiced shortly, if
your Honor be pleased graciously to accept of it; it will be an encouragement
to the desire of my affection, to get new supplies the more willingly to
accomplish that which is begun, that I may speed the better in the pursuit of
my intention, as well in the hitting of the sense, as in the framing of the
style, I thought it to be necessary, to take in hand the readiest means, as to
help my neighbor in the speediest way, and through the same means also to get
into practice the more conveniently. Therefore with the greater courage I
dedicated this my labor to your Honor, as a well expert Dr. in Physic, to
the end, that when your Honor has perused it, to receive better instructions
in that, where I mistook Herein I seek no other, but your Honors good
affection toward me, not only to protect the Work, but also to learn some good
instructions from your Honor in Surgery, as being necessary for my calling. If
I might be so happy in such enjoyment, I should value it at the greatest rate
of my worldly things. Your Honor has greater judgment of the utilitie of the
work, as well of its Manuals, as of its Medicaments, more than my expressions
can reach at; notwithstanding I have followed them in Surgery above these
nineteen years. I commit most humbly this my labor to your learned and grave
judgment, and my self into your gracious favor, thus closing I commend your
Honor into Gods most gracious and fatherly protection, to keep your Honor in
health, to the welfare of his Church, and the good of his People: Amen.

Dated at Zaerdam, the 28. Of October, Anno. 1632. Your Honors most willing
Servant, ABRAHAM LENERTZON FOX, of Assendelf.

To the Judicious READER.
Courteous Reader.
SOme years ago my friends prevailed with me to take in hand the translating
out of the German Tongue into the Belgic style, this present Book of that most
famous and well expert Surgeon Felix Wurtz, City Surgeon at Basell: I
undertook it, and having done the moity of it, an unavoidable obstruction fell
in, whereby the work was left, by another to be finished; who as much as he was
able to do took it in hand, to further the public good: but being not so well
expert in the German Tongue, some of the Simples were not well translated.
These Copies being spent for the most part, and since that Book was at
severaltimes new printed, with augmentation and correction: thereupon I thought
it good, to undertake the second translation into the Belgic style; in respect
of the great utilitte of it, how necessary it would be for many young men and
Novices in that profession, who having been Apprentises to good Masters,
undertake to cure such and such accidents as may come into their hands, which
they hardly understand any thing of; such young men must put their greatest
confidence to the several doctrines and instructions of expert and good
Authors, among which this (though but small) ought to have not the lowest
place, being well expert in his ways, plain in his doctrinals, and prosperous
in his manualls, perfect in his preparations, and correct in their use. All
these in my judgment, will be very useful to Novices and others in Surgery;
the Book is but little, of no great price, easily used; the medicaments set
down in it, though they are not costly, yet they are approved. From thence as
well Masters, as Novices may draw many useful good and subtle instructions,
and perform many cures on pained and tormented hearts. In consideration
whereof, I took in hand this present translation out of the last Copy, which by
reason of its special utilitie, was reprinted then the 28th time in the German
Tongue, and by the Author perused, augmented and corrected, whose practical
ways I have followed these nineteen years, and successfully performed many
good and notable cures through Gods blessing. For I declare upon experience,
that one time through means of his Fracture Plasters (next unto God) I
preserved a young man's life, whose right leg was broken, and his shin bone
stuck in sand half a fingers length being at Sea ten weeks, enduring all manner
of tempestuous weathers, set him upon his leg, though somewhat shorter; his
Sea business made him stir his leg too much, putting the Fracture to a wider
gape, which occasioned that the Fracture could not so well be kept together,
besides the wound requiring every day a second dressing: the marrow did run so
fast, that the maggats without the wound next to the band grew on, which I
killed with the black Ointment, and kept them out of the wound, notwithstanding
we were then in a very hot climate in the West Indies.

Consider how pleasant his Manuals are in Head and Eye wounds, and their
accidental difficulties. How neatly he describes the wounds of the breast and
belly, and the cures thereof. Take good notice of the use of his band and
dressing of a Fracture, which are of several sorts; what notable examples he
quoteth of several cures? How lively he describes the several Simptomes, and
their cure? What shall I say more? Does he not write of the several signs and
forerunners of all accidental difficulties, which may be incident unto all
sorts of wounds? In brief, he is an extraordinary good and useful Author, in
my judgment, especially for young beginners in Surgerie, comprehending so many
things in such a small volum; nothing derogating from other good Authors. For
he teaches so lively, and handles the several Simptomes so well, as ever I
saw in any Author, well understanding the things he writes and makes relation
of. Considering these things, it was a motive unto me, to set it over into our
Belgic Tongue for the public good, to the end, that those which do not
understand the German Tongue, may have it in their mother Tongue to make the
best use of it. I entreat all those, into whose hands this work comes, to
accept of the Translators good will, and in case some Herbs and Simples are
found untranslated, which will be but very few, let the Courteous Reader
understand, that these Smples are left so, because in Germany they call them
in one Province by such a name, and in another Land they have other names for
them: herein the Reader may have good help out of the Belgic Herball; and this
I am certain of, that I used but few names of the Germans. Thus I recommend to
the courteous Reader this my labor, and my self into his favor, praying
withal that those who know better, would be pleased to do better.

Dated the 2. of October, 1632. Your Honors most willing Servant, ABRAHAM
LENERTZON FOX, Surgeon; born at Assendelf, dwelling at Zaerdam.

Doctor JOHNSONS Epistle, to the understanding READER, he being the main cause
of the Translation of this Book.
GENTLE READER,
I Endeavor not to hold a Tortch to the Sun; I am conscious our Age and Nation
afford us many excellent and expert Chyrurgeons, and strive not (ex novo fonce
haurire aquam, quasi ex eo dulcius peteretur.) I bring my judgment accompanied
with the best of our modern Authors, nor find I any whose expereince have
raised any note of excellency upon them, but they have added some Encomium to
my Authors worth. I will begin with Joannes Baptista Vanhelmont, a man of a
Noble Family, not easily parrell'd, and present him unto you in his own
Language.

Felix Wurtz modernorum Chyturgorum meo judicio patesignanus. Page 214.

I shall second his apprehension with that of Joannes Antonidae Vander Linden,
who in his Manuductio Medicine studiosae juventuti, page 234. sic scribit.
Abunde me vobis praeivisse puro, ad auctorum non tantum selectionem,
lectionemque sed universam insuper rationem studij vestri medici been
incipiendi, et cum fructu promonendi, et cum hunde perficiendi; sane ad scopum
hunc acriter tonsis ingenij mei nervis collimani: ut ipso usu discatis, quanti
sit aliquo per ignotam vium proporanti ductorem esse fidum, qui itimeris omne
compendium monstret. Et idcirco Astoristcis signani indices eorum, quos aut
Plempius meus aut ego singulariter commendatos habemus cupimusque Nos si
auditis, haec suffici aut studiorum instrumenta. Amongst whom Felix Wurtzius de
vulneribus curandis, is marked.

Glandorfius and others mention him with honorable respects; nor can I
conceave if his method had been vulgar and common, the Germans would ever have
printed him eight and twenty times in his own Language, and twice in the
Belgic. I presume the Epistle Dedicatory, and Epistle to the Reader prefixed,
speak so liberally in my Authors commendation, that though I were silent, he
need no greater applause then the general fame of his worth to set him forth to
the world, who has so much admired him.

Other Nations have made such honorable mention of his practice at Basell,
with such happy successes, that I could not so much undervalue his worth, as to
conceal and eclipse him, from our English Character and knowledge. Therefore
now having (upon the importunity of some friends) presented him to public
view, not binding him up under the protection of one Man, but giving him free
leave to sojourn all the Nation over, that he may do the most good he can, not
in the least questioning, but that he it able to make good shift for himself,
in the greatest difficulty, though but a stranger in this Land; for I do not in
the least think, but that he will meet with very many Carpers and Cavilers, may
be some upon this account, because he is not Dedicated to some learned English
Doctor; but let them know, that when he was in his native Country, he had a
worthy Defender, the fame of whom, (though he be dead) still is able to protect
him from scandalous and reproachful speeches. Now as for the judicious and
understanding Reader, to whom especially I present him, I humbly desire him, to
consider the frailty of Man's nature, that if he find any thing, either not
perfectly Translated, or mis-reprinted, loveingly to amend it with his pen, and
defend its cause therein; and still to ascribe that which is good in him, to
the Praise and Glory of God: in the doing of which, he will very much oblige
his friend, and servant in the like case.

WILLIAM JOHNSON.

THE CONTENTS of this ensuing Treatise of SURGERY.
The First Part.
Chapter I. OF the Original of Arts among Men; and of some sort of Wounds,
treated of in this first Book. Page 1. Chap. 2. How the abuses did arise, and
were brought forth among the Surgeons themselves. 3. Chap. 3. Of the abuses
committed in stitching, the danger that ensues from; the true use of
stitching: to benefit Novices in Surgery, who otherwise might approve of such
abuses. 4. Chap. 4. Of abuses committed in Blood stenching, with Corr^sives,
nealed Irons, and the like; and the dangers and hurts which ensue upon it,
illustrated with some examples. 12. Chap. 5. Of the abuses in Phlebotomie; how
some supposed to stench bleeding, with an example illustrated. 19. Chap. 6.
What gross abuses are crept in, in binding up fresh Wounds, with searching,
groaping, grabling. 22. Chap. 7. Of the abuses which are committed with Wicks,
Tents, Lints, Mullipuffs, etc. chiefly in deep stabbings, illustrated with an
example. 27. Chap. 8. Of the abuses committed in Plasters, Papps, Poultesses,
and such like, at the dressing of Wounds, and what hurt is caused thereby. 33.
Chap. 9. Of all such Surgeons which dwell in abuses and errors, which know
neither their own weakness nor Medicines, nor are able to judge of their
operation, together of two examples, which show the chiefest abuses. 35.
The Second Part. 43
Chap. 1. What a Surgeon ought to know. 45. Chap, 2. How a Surgeon ought to
behave himself, as well for his own particular, as about the Patient. 50. Chap.
3. How a Patient ought to be kept in his Diet, and other such like things. 51.
Chap. 4. Of three accidents commonly befalling wounded Men, a weak stomach, a
stoppage in the urine, and not going to stool; how these are to be remedied.
55. Chap. 5. How a Surgeon must behave himself about his swathing bands, and
other Manuals. 57. Chap. 6. Of Head Wounds, what behavior the Surgeon is to be
of, both toward himself, and toward the Cure. 61. Chap. 7. Of other Simptomes
which are incident in Head Wounds, and how they are dealt withal. 66. Chap. 8.
Of the Headache, after the Cure, and how that is to be helped. How to make the
subt^le Head Ointment, with remarkable examples of Head Wounds cured. 69. Chap.
9. Of all kinds of Wounds in the Face, be they in the Forehead, Temples, Ears,
Nose, Cheeks, Chin, Eyes, how they ought to be cured, without leaving a scar
behind. 78. Chap. 10. Of Wounds in the Throat and Neck how a Surgeon ought to
deal with them. 84. Chap. 11. Of Wounds at the Breast, how a Surgeon ought to
behave himself there. 88. Chap. 12. Of some particular Simptomes which are
incident unto Breast Wounds, how Surgeons ought to behave themselves here. 92.
Chap. 13. Of Belly Wounds, and the inward parts thereof, how Surgeons must deal
with them. 96. Chap. 14. Of the Wounds of the four outer joints, and of joints
contused; all comprehended in one Chapter, where you may find several good
Manuals and examples quoted. 99. Chap. 15. Of cloven Nails on Fingers, and of
their Cure. 116. Chap. 16. Of Wounds in Hands and Fingers; and if any Bones be
cut asunder, how it is to be cured. 122. Chap. 17. Of Cracks in Members, caused
by great and heavy liftings, or when men work so strongly, that their Hands
crack as if broken. 124. Chap. 18. Of knees that are full of pains, and how
they are cured. 125. Chap. 19. Of the little Ulcer, that grows on the Knee.
130. Chap. 20. Of an inflammation or St. Anthonies Fire on the Knee. Erisipelas.
131. Chap. 21. Of some humors of the Body, which sink down into the Knees and
Legs; what these are, and how they must be cured. 132. Chap. 22. Of Wounds
made by Gunshot, of the abuses committed with the thorough pullings and
Ointments; what a Surgeon ought to note here. 135. Chap. 23. How to cure Wounds
made with Shot, and how the coolers are made, and how the Saltpeter is prepared
thereto. 138. Chap. 24. Of Bone Fractures, and first of the naughty custom,
which is kept in dressing them. 144. Chap. 25. A Fundamental iustruction of
the true cure of broken Bones, how Surgeons ought to be regulated in the
dressing of them, and how to keep the Fracture from upswelling, and from pain.
147. In this Chapter also is contained, short and true rules of Fractures
whereby you may know in what posture the Fracture is, illustrated with some few
Verses. 163, 164.
Chap. 26. Of flap Fractures, and of their orderly dressing, and healing. 165.
Chap. 27. Of Arm Fractures, above and below the elbow, how these ought to be
dressed and healed. 179. Chap. 28. Of Fractures that are cloven and burst, how a
Surgeon ought to deal with them, in their dressing and healing. 181. In this
Chapter is quoted some examples of crooked Bones what they are. 183. And also,
how cracked Bone Fractures may be learned, or discerned, in old and young
folks: and of a festred Nail, which foolishly is called the sleeping Worm, what
it is properly. 186. 187. Of a cracked Fracture on the shin, and a Quotation of
notable examples of Sprains and small Bone Fractures, which turned to great
sores. 189. Of certain directions, opening or incisions, dressings and healings
of splitted Bones. 192. Some useful and remarkable Rules, comprehending briefly
all necessaries belonging to cracked Bones. 198.

The Third Part. 217.
Chap. 1. Of the signs in general, whereby Simptomes are duly discerned. 219.
Chap. 2. Of the sleep of a wounded Party, what a Surgeon ought to judge of it.
222. Chap. 3. Of pains in Wounds, what does cause them, how judged, and how
remedied. 223. Chap. 4. Of the corruption in Wounds, and what may be gathered
from thence. 227. Chap. 5. Of the Joint Water; the difference of it: how to
allay it. 230. Chap. 6. Of the false Joint Water: that is, when another humor
is joined with the Joint Water, whereby many Surgeons are deceived. 233. Chap.
7. Of congealed Blood within or without of the Body: Remedies for such parties,
though otherwise they were well. 236. Chap. 8. Of Simptomes which are incident
unto congealed Blood, to be expelled by inward means. 238. Chap. 9. Of
congealed Blood to be expelled and healed by outward Medicines. 242. Chap. 10.
Of bleeding Wounds; what it signifies; what Surgeons ought to do for it. 245.
Chap. 11. Of Collosities of Head Wounds, some whereof break afterward, some are
gone, and settle to another place, causing lameness; what these signify, and
how they are to be handled. 248. Chap. 12. Of Joint Wounds which by silly
Surgeons were cured to lameness, though not hurt to any lameness; how these
must be remedied. 250. Chap. 13. Of Wounds spoiled through external accidents,
as through the heat of the Sun; and the raw air, and are dried up, and how
these ought to be remedied 253. Chap. 14. Of a Callus on the Head or Foot,
causing great miserable pains. 259. Chap. 15. Of swellings of Wounds after
they were healed; and what it means: and how they must be handled. 262. Chap.
16. Of Vulnerary Simptomes, caused by bodily infirmities, chiefly by the Pox,
or suppressed Menstruum: how these are to be dealt withal. 264. Chap. 17. Of
three sorts of Wound diseases; and first of the Wound Fever; how that is to be
discerned, prevented, and cured. 268. Chap. 18. Of the second sort of the Wound
disease, called the shaking or Wound gall, how that is to be discerned and
cured. 276. Chap. 19. Of the third sort of Wound disease, called the pulling
and unquietness in the Wound. 279. Chap. 20. Of an accident in a Wound, which
is almost like to the Wound disease. 282. Chap. 21. Of the Prunella in the
wound, how it may be discerned and cured. ibid. Chap. 22. Of the Cramp, Palsy,
Apoplexy, etc. how these Simptomes befalling Wounds, must be cured. 286. Chap.
23. Of consumed, withered or up-dryed Wounds and Members, how Surgeons ought to
deal with them. 289.
The Fourth Part. 298.
Chap. 1. Of Wound Balsams, Ointments, Plasters Oils, etc. and among the rest
of that precious Brown Ointment, which was so often mentioned hitherto. 300. In
this Chapter is contained these several things following. Of wound Ointments in
particular. ibid. 1. Wound Ointment. 301. 2. Another Wound Ointment. 302. 3.
Another Wound Unguent. ibid.
Of wound Oils. 303. Of Vnguentum Anodynum. 305. Of the Cramp Unguent. ibid.
Of the Brown Unguent for wounds, which I have made mention of so often. 306.

Chap. 2. Of Plasters in general, and in particular of Opodeldoch, Stiptick
and Defensive Plasters. 308. In this Chapter is contained these several things
following. Description of the Plaster called Opodeldoch. 309. Preparation of
some of the Ingrediences which come to the said Plaster, and first of the
Magnet. 310. The Calmy is thus prepared. ibid. Preparation of Tutia 311.
Preparation of Crocus Veneris. ibid. Preparation of Crocus Martis. ibid. How
the Earth of Vitriol is made. 312. Of Stiptick Plasters. ibid. Another
Stiptick Plaster. 313. Another Stiptick Plaster. ibid. Of Defensive
Plasters. 314. Seven several Defensive Plasters. 315. 316. 317.
Chap. 3. Of Electuarium Anodynum vel Labdanum. 318. Chap. 4. Of Blood
stenching in Wounds and Noistrils; how the things requisite thereunto, must be
prepared and used. 319. Chap. 5. Of Vulnerary Potions in general and
particular, how these are to be made, and in what different manner they are to
be used. 325. 1. A good wound Drink ordinarily used. 330. 2. Another ordinarily
Drink which is good also. ibid. 3. Another which is pleasant to be used. ibid.
4. Another Wound Drink, for one in which there is a loose Bone, fowl corruption
or the like. 331. 5. A Vulnerary Potion, for Stabs in wounds. ibid. 6. A rare
Master piece for a wound or stab, where you suspect there is a Bone, proud
flesh, broken veins, or other impurities. ibid. 7. A Vulnerary Potion for
spoiled wounds, which yields a tuff and slimie matter, environed with a
swelling, and are deep and hollow underneath, are like to turn to a Cancer.
332. 8. A Vulnerary Potion for the Joint water. 333. 9. A Vulnerary Potion
against Gun-shots. ibid.
Chap. 6. Of spouting or sprinkling into wounds, of Tents, and of Corrosives.
335. Of Wicks or Tents. ibid. Of Corrosives. 336. How to prepare Arsenick that
it may safely be used. 337.

Here ends this Book of Surgery.
To which is added a very necessary and useful piece, called The CHILDRENS
BOOK, by the same Author, viz. FELIX WURTZ, a famous and expert Surgeon;
Treating of infirmities and defects of new born Children; and of the faults and
abuses, which wet or dry Nurses, commit among and against little Children; and
of Medicines, and Cures of such Children, which received hurt in that way. 339.
Some Country fashion, about the winding their Children into clouts, and to lay
them down in the Cradle. 354. Of crooked and lame Children, coming thus into
the World. 355. Of crooked and dislocated Legs, caused by careless layings,
and of their cure. 358. With many more things, very needful to be known by all
those to whose trust and overlooking little Children are committed.
Of the dangerous abuses committed among the modern SURGEONS. The First Part.
CHAP. I.
Of the original of Arts among men; and of some sort of Wounds, treated of in
this first Book.

GOD Almighty having Created man, among other gifts, he bestowed also on him a
Knowledge of good and profitable Arts, wherein he was completely furnished, if
so be, he had continued in that state, in which the Lord at first had created
him; but not staying there, and being missed by the Devil, falling into sin,
then he lost those good endowments also, wherewith he at first was adorned; and
fell from the light of Knowledge into a darkness of ignorance: whereupon he was
put to it, with great pains and industry to recall them to his mind again, and
in part to recover that, which formerly he had been endewed withal: and we
see, that men naturally are thus qualified, that they are able either to speak,
or to practice one Skill or other, be the degree thereof what it will, as we
see in Musical, Arithmetical, and other Arts. That the like was happened also
unto Surgery, is no question. For though a physical Skill had been needless, if
man had not sinned; yet is it certain, that all things, which God had from the
beginning created to be medicinal, were more effectual and operative, then they
are now adays, the which doubtless was well known unto man: but having lost
this Knowledge through sinning, and there being a necessity of a physical
Knowledge, by reason of the multiplicity of infirmities he made himself subject
unto by sin, then he began to look for that, he lost, as much as lay in his
power, knowing and finding in himself, by the help of that little spark which
he had left to him of the first Light, that such infirmities and diseases might
be prevented by remedies. Hence we observe, that few men are found, which do
not know either how to help or how to advise in time of sickness, be it in any
kind. Being it is so, as I hope none will gainsay it, it enforced me to write
somewhat of Surgery, for the benefit of the Novices in Surgery. I should at
first speak of the meaner and slighter Wounds, which being known for the most
part how they may be cured, and generally the practice thereof professed; I
hold it needless to write of them, and so I begin with higher matters.

Note therefore, my intention is not to treat of slight Wounds in this Book,
when the skin only is cut, which either Nature or an old Woman may cure; my
purpose is to speak of dangerous Wounds, in respect of the place, or of the
blow, which are subject unto symptoms accordingly, as when not only the skin
is cut, but the flesh, sinews and arteries, and other things are hurt: slighter
wounds are easily cured, but such, whereby Nature is suppressed, requires more
skill, which by long experience is attained unto. Therefore marvel not, why I
do not mention at the beginning of my writing, how slight cuts and wounds may
be cured, because their cure is generally known and practiced.

CHAP. II.
How the abuses did arise, and were brought forth among the Surgeons
themselves.

IT is free for every one to set down in writing that which he experimentally
found, and to publish it for the benefit and information unto others, as a
thing which concerns the public good, and we ought to be beneficial unto our
neighbors, and to warn him of dangers, as we would have done to our selves:
which has been a motive unto me to write of wounds, as I found it in my
practice: And in the first place I advertise of the gross and dangerous abuses,
which are committed at the curing of wounds (to say nothing of old sores) to
the greatest prejudice and danger of poor Patients.

Doutless all expert Surgeons will acknowledge, that a Skill in Surgery is
obtained with great painfulness; for it is not gotten with sitting on a cushion
at home (as many suppose) by reading and writing, but a long and industrious
practice is required, if so be that men intend to be real in it, unto which
great traveling belongs also.

Therefore he that studies to get a name of credit herein, How Surgery is
learned.
must visit in his travelings expert Surgeons, and to learn of them what they
have seen in their practice, and to observe their Manuals, which are learned
when they are seen done, and in that way committed to our trust: and when we
have been ocular witnesses in their practice, then may we be enabled to do the
like. It is not enough to be full of talks, and to say, such and such write so,
and if these Writers should be asked, from whence they had it, it may be, they
will direct us either to a Nun in a Cloister, or to some old Woman, from whom
they had it, and in the upshut it proves merely an accustomed thing, whereas
Surgery ought to be grounded on a sure science, and not on an opinion. A
Painter, what is he the better for it, if he can discourse well of colors, and
prateth much, how this or that ought to be painted, when himself cannot hold a
Pencel, and has no skill to paint? his prating will give no content to him
that would have a picture made by him: even so it is in Surgery, a Patient is
little the better for it, if his Surgeon be merely talkative, and has no skill
to dress, ease, or cure his wounds. From thence, in my judgment, arise all
manner of faults, errors and abuses in Surgery, when experimental Knowledge is
wanting, when men are full of words, but empty in the practick part. For when
Surgeons are all upon discourses, and take their experience from thence, needs
must they be faulty in their undertakings, relying only upon their Authors;
what is the Patient the better for it, if Medicines are not aptly and duly
applied.

We are to note how these abuses creep in: whence fellows, start-ups, that have
cured the Scabs, Morphew, or such Of Poachers and Quacks.
like, then are they cried up for Surgeons, and when some hardly come out of
their apprenticeship they also must instantly profess Surgery, and if their
Masters have been Ignorant's, what can be expected from their Apprentices? if
these do seek no further, but what they had from their Masters, which knew
little enough, then we know what these may be confided in. And thus they play
on upon the old Fiddle the old tune continually: yea, it happens, that the
old things are counted best, and new ones, which are better, are rejected: old
naughty things long practiced are still cried up, not considering, that naught
will be naught, and never good, though it had been practiced a thousand years,
but rather will prove worse.

CHAP. III.
Of the abuses committed in stitching, the danger that ensues from; the true
use of stitching: to benefit Novices in Surgery, who otherwise might approve of
such abuses.

HItherto I have spoken of the abuses in general, which basely disgraced
Surgery: now will I speak of the abuses in particular, in what, wherewith and
how they happened, and what inconveniences they caused: and finding this
Profession ^logged abundantly with gross abuses, made me to observe no order in
the rehearsing of them, and I took in hand that which came first, speaking of
it plainly, briefly, as much as possibly may be. Let the Reader not be offended
with my style, much differing from other Authors concerning Surgery, whose
artificial description of Cures, with their secret mysteries, are not unknown
unto me, having judged them long ago to be foul, useless and naught, and never
defiled my hands with them.

First of all I begin with stitching, where several abuses are found, causing
intolerable dangers.

Touching stitching, it is to be noted, that I neither contemn nor disprove
this or that means, which shall be spoken of hereafter, which are of good use,
if seasonably and in a due measure used and applied: but if neither in season
nor measure they are made use of, then are they not only useless, but very
hurtful also. My meaning is not, that because things are abused their lawful
use should be taken away also. My assertion is, that stitching does good, and
is of good use, if time, place and other circumstances are exactly observed:
but if used indiscreetly, not regarding of the circumstances, then is it not
only useless, but very dangerous.

Stitching is granted and permitted, and is of singular Where stitching is
permitted.
utility, not in all places, nor in any wound, but only when and where there
is a necessity of it. Stitching may be used where any thing is cut, as in
Hare-lips and such like, item Ears and Nostrils may be stitched, when they
grow downward, or hang over, and so in any other part of the body; and in the
cheeks, or elsewhere, when a great flap hangs downward, the which I call a
flap-wound: in such cases stitching is to be used, provided, that the wound at
first be not over-burthened; and it matters not, whither you stitch it with
twisted silk, or white thread, or use a stitching plaster, which is made thus:

Gum Tragacanth and Arabic, Mastick, Frankincense, Sarcocolle, ana. one dram.

Mingle these, reduce it to a subtle powder, take the white of an Egg, beat it
with a spoon to a froth, let the froth settle to water, imbibe the powder with
it, with this Ointment spread your linen, with stitching may be thus performed
likewise: dissolve the brown ointment, put it into wounds in such places, where
it conveniently may get in, then stitch it closer, the stitches must be two
fingers breadth asunder: in joynt-wounds the stitches must not be so close
together; in case the wound be above the shoulder, or above the knee, then two
close stitches may be made, that the one may keep and hold up the other,
otherwise each may tear out. Betwixt the two stitches there must be left an
open place, to put tents in, to cleanse away the matter and moisture. Note
further, touching wounds upon joints, that these wounds must be with double
silk strongly stitched, more than other wounds usually are, else they break and
tear out: if you stitch a wound on the shoulder as you do one on the belly,
that stitch will not hold one day or night.

Touching other wounds and stabs (few excepted, be they what they will) there
stitching is not only not good, but extremely hurtful, and causes a great
deal of misery and pain, which must be avoided if you will be upright in your
dealing.

Now to speak of abuses, I know it very well, that stitching is of common use,
and so common as any thing is in Surgery, and used almost by all: (I say
almost, because some there are found, which know not what belongs to
stitching.) Besides this good custom, this additional came unto, that they set
upon the several stitchings several prices, which custom prevailed so much,
that some Surgeons press it to the utmost, and stand upon it, not regarding the
hurts and dangers caused thereby, and poor people durst not say one word
against their demands. Therefore let me talk a little with such, which stiffely
would have all kind of wounds stitched (though they understand little or
nothing of it) to make known their ignorance, not to that end, as to disgrace
their profession and skill.

True, I am not ignorant of, that stitching has been Stitching is used of old.
commonly practiced and used, and that it is of an ancient use and custom, but
I do not say, that it is ere the better for it; for things ancient, things
common, are not therefore the better, else many evil customs and abuses must
be approved of, which, as naught, are most justly rejected.

For any Surgeon must needs confess and agree with me, and it is undeniable,
that wounds ought to be cured fundamentally, not superficially; for if wounds
be cured outwardly, and the inside and bottom of it be still unheal'd, as it
often happens, what can ensue thereupon, but a dangerous and incurable
fistula, to say nothing of their inconveniences? Thus you see, that there is no
reason at all, why any wound should be first stitched together.

Some say, that through stitching the lips of wounds are joined orderly, which
being neglected, the wounds gape wide asunder, which with stitching must be
prevented: I know it very well, that the lips of wounds are drawn together
through stitching, and kept from gaping, but how wisely it is done, and what
good it does, let men of understanding judge! For those that do such things,
little do they think, that wounds stitched either do soon rot, or soon break
out, and thereby the wound comes to its old gape and shape, yea, often grows
worse than it was at first. Moreover, if so be, that the stitches keep long to
the wound, then the silkthreed consumes in the flesh, which causes worse
scarrs from the stitching than the wound it self would, besides that, the
thread is obstructive to the healing of the wound, sliding up and down in it.
Neither do these men once consider, which is the chiefest thing, that any wound
(let it gape nere so wide) by a natural inclination and quality grows closer
every day more and more, and that from beneath upwards, and from within
outward, as much as every days healing comes to: and thus that inbred and
natural quality drives on from the beginning to the end, so that the lips of
wounds are found closed, and cause smaller cicatrices after healing, then
stitching would have done. For a wound pressed and stitched together, that
wound leaves not only a scarr behind, but also every stitch causes one,
which after healing shows ghastly: if there be any dangerous wounds, the same
may be helped with lints, whereby they may the sooner and easier be closed. For
good bindings are of great consequence, as you shall hear hereafter. But
stitching is wholly naught, except in some few wounds is it necessary, which
partly were mentioned, and partly shall be spoken of hereafter.

Seeing it is manifest and known, that wounds ought to be healed fundamentally,
and by no means from above downwards; therefore it follows, that medicines
must come to the bottom of wounds, where must be laid the beginning of their
healing: and if a wound be stitched in the outside, how can the ointment come
to the bottom of the wound, where it should first of all begin to work? Truly,
if a door be shut, then they use to say, stay without till the door be opened
again.

Sometimes it happens upon that reason, that worms Worms in wounds.
grow in wounds, caused by the matter in wounds, choked up there; for the
wound being stitched, it was so obstructive; Their cause
so as that the medicine and ointment could not penetrate to the Wounds in most
places, as Nature was desirous it should.

And when such symptoms fall out, then they look out for all manner of remedies
to destroy and to kill these worms, whereby the wound in its healing is not
only hindered, but is made also worse and more dangerous, and poor Patients
are thereby most miserably tormented. Therefore such Surgeons, which suffer
worms to grow in wounds, deserve to be punished severely and exemplary; the
rather, because such mischief might have been easily prevented, and that only
with common Sallade oil; much more could their growing be hindered with sharp
and bitter things.

Surgeons, God be thanked, may be had, which understand well enough how wounds
ought to be cured, and that it must first of all be done from within, and the
medicine Medicines must penetrate to the bottom.
applied must penetrate to the bottom: and if wounds are stitched close, how
can they apply any medicine to the bottom of the wound, without putting the
Patients to great pains? for they take tents, roll it in their balsoms or
ointments, and force them in betwixt the stitches to the bottom of the wound.
Some, to mend the matter, instead of such tents or lints (Mullipuffs) take
gross strong weeks, and thrust them to the bottom of the wounds, and so,
according to the common saying, they afford the wheel, instead of the Gallows,
to be executed withal. But what reason they have to do so, and whether it be
available and good, let them answer. How does it sound, or stand with any
reason, to stitch a wound together in the outside, and to tear it asunder
afterward betwixt the stitches, with lints, or mullipuffs, tents or weeks? I
say nothing of other mischeifs, which are caused thereby, as truly
understanding men may easily judge of it: and to say nothing of the extreme
pains, and grievous smartings, which are inflicted upon the wounded, when their
wounds are thus scoured, even as Musquetieres are scouring their Muskets after
much shooting.

Furthermore, it is well known, and cannot be denied, that Wounds must be
cleansed.
every wound ought to be kept clean, and to be cleansed from the filth, which
the blow brought in, and other uncleanness incident unto. Now if a wound be
stitched, how is it possible to cleanse it daily, as it ought, the stitches
standing in the way, and are obstructive to the cleansing of them? And though
they partly may be thus cleansed, how can it be done without putting the
Patient to cruel torments, which in conscience ought not to be? For they must
gripe, feel, sound, thrust, this and that way, and many things besides, which
are required at such cleansings; whereby the healing is often hindered, and
contractures and lameness Stiching hinders healing, and causes lameness.
are caused. Men should consider, that wounds cannot so soon and so well be
healed by pressing the matter out of them forcibly, as then when the matter
comes forth freely without any let, through Natures driving it forth out of
wounds.

Things hitherto spoken do not suffice, more must be said Stiching hinders the
swellings of wounds to their prejudice.
yet, which serve to our purpose very much, touching stitching of wounds, it is
generally known, and plain, that all wounds, be they what they will, are of
that condition, that they will swell a little, and naturally extrude their
corruption and matter. Seeing it is so, and none can gainsay it, therefore the
judicious may easily conceive, that if a wound of its own accord is swelled,
the door or lip of it is thicker than at other times, and so generally wounds
always strive to gape. And if in that posture they be stitched, as their usual
way is, then is that wound in that natural swelling hindered, and so cannot
enlarge it self, as it should. Then it begins to spawn and swell, whereby
nothing else is caused, but an inflammation of the wound, to the greatest
misery and unspeakable pain of the Patient, which this rash and intolerable
stitching has caused, against which there is no remedy, till that anger in the
wound be past, and the wound cast out its matter. Now when the strength of
Nature has overcome this Surgeons skill, I should have said, his abuse, and
other symptoms (which struggling is no sporting to the poor Patient, because
his skin lies at the stake) then the wound inclines to a rest, and fitteth it
self to healing. But it happens many times, that the wounds press hard with
the stitching, insomuch that of necessity they burst and break, whereby the
wound is made bigger, wider and more dangerous than ever it was before. I pray
to what end were the stitchings used, but to torment the poor patient the more?
These and the former things are noted to that end, that it may appear to every
ones eye, that a stitched wound does not heal so well as those which are not
stitched and left free, for reasons mentioned above, needless to be repeated
here.

Moreover (which is the chiefest) this must needs be granted, and in no way
contradicted, that the signs of accidentals Stitching hinders the judging of
Symptoms.
in wounds are chiefly judged and discerned from the bottom of wounds. Now if a
wound be stitched, how is it possible, that symptoms of wounds can be discerned
and judged rightly, when they may not be viewed within? This makes me wonder
the less, why so few Surgeons are found, that have any judgment in symptoms
of wounds. When the wounds are quite healed, then are they puzzled, not knowing
what excuse to make, not knowing the cause, why swellings and other symptoms
remain, nor how to cure those which they had healed, daubed up, and choked up.
Then they fall to washing, bathing, anointing, salving, binding and the like,
whereby they suppose to remedy and to expel all these symptoms, which
themselves have caused: why could they not consider of it before, whilst the
wound was open, and could then see it plainly, what will they undertake now,
when the wound is shut?

Note one thing more, which I had almost forgotten; it Sinnews are taken hold
of by stitching.
happens sometimes, that one being wounded in the hand, or elsewhere, where
there is little flesh, and many white veins and arteries: if a Surgeon, that
will hear of nothing but of stitching, has it in hand, how soon is it done,
that he thrusts the needle through a sinnew or blood vein, pulls the thread
through it, and so stitches them altogether? I tell you truly, that through
this rashness and indiscreetness most dangerous and worst symptoms are caused,
that ever may be imagined. For how can the blood-vein be stench'd, when a
thread is thrust thorough, and how can the anger of the sinews be allayed, when
the thread is drawn through it? It happens many times, that through this
needless stitching of the sinews, is caused the running of sinews, and how can
they come at it to stop it?

It is beyond expression and belief, what great dangers are caused with such
unnecessary stitchings: I could quote many examples to that purpose, if it were
needful, how by these abuses Patients were brought to extreme miseries, and to
the loss of their lives, who might have done well enough without this
stitching, being in no danger of life at all.

Thus much be spoken of stitching in general and in particular; when I come to
the practick part, perhaps I shall speak more largely, and make every thing
more plain to the understanding.

Now follow some necessary observations touching stitchings and wounds, which
are worthy to be diligently considered. Charge not the wound with too much
stitching, have a care of the evenness in stitching, make not crooked stitches,
take hold enough, else it tears out, and the wound grows ghastly; do not
begin to stitch at the end of the wound, but just in the middle: begin with
that lip first, which is the fitter of the two: stitch none of the loose pieces
of flesh, they will assimilate no more: Let the wound have air above, thereby
to put in the ointment, and leave open below, that the matter may get out: bind
the wound not too hard, else it will swell, be the wound on the hands, feet, or
any other member: the wounded members must be laid even, not shelving or
downwards, else that member will swell: and your bindings must not be too
slack, that no air may get in betwixt the bands: let the party be quiet, and
neglect him not in dressing, else the bands will stink and rot; let the bands
be not hot, else an Imposthume will befall that member, and be not over hasty
in your binding, else cramps will be caused, or a consumption may be incident
to that member. Stop not the wounds with weeks and such like, that the matter
swell not, and below the wound holes be caused, which usually turn to
fistulaes. Be not sparing in your salve and ointment at first; and let not the
ointments quantity exceed the matters, which otherwise overtopping the
ointment, would make it of no effect. Have a care, that the stitches break not,
else they will cause scarrs, but supply them with stitching-plaisters.

CHAP. IV.
Of abuses committed in blood-stenching with Corrosives, nealed Irons and the
like, and the dangers or hurts which ensue upon it, illustrated with some
examples.

BLood-stenching in Surgery is a very necessary point, insomuch Stenching of
blood is necessary.
that without it little is effected. For Patients loose their lives if they
bleed too much; neither are the medicaments effectual, if by a continual
running of blood they be hindered in their operation: and where there is a
necessity of blood-stenching, there it ought to be used and applied according
to Art. And, God be thanked, Surgeons are found, which have reasonable
judgment in it, and know how to stench blood, and use it without any
prejudice, but rather to the great benefit of their Patients.

But the ruder sort goes to work basely, whose number always overtops the
better sort, and refuse better instructions, Blood-stenching abused.
keeping and sticking to their old ways, obstinately observing their abuses,
even as when they intended nothing else but the ruin of their Patients: I
speak of such only, which use Corrosives, supposing the stenching of blood
must be effected only with nealed Irons and other burning means; among
others, they use sublimed Mercury, crude or sublimed Arsenick, calcined
Vitriol, Alumen Plumosum, Caput mort of Aqua fort, Euphorbium, and such like
things, whereby they suppose to stench the blood: Some there are found, which,
to mend the matter, take one or two of the mentioned things, put them together,
and mingle other medicaments among it, as Bole Armoniack, Terra sigillata,
Millers dust, Crocus Martis, and such like. This they hold for a rare Secret
and Masterpiece, calling it, a sharp Blood-stenching, not without a cause, for
it is sharp enough, nay too sharp.

It is a great pity, that these and such like things must be Abuses condemned.
cried up for rarities and masterpieces, whereas they are nothing else but
heavy and dangerous abuses and errors, whereby infinite wrongs are done. For
all those above mentioned things, one or more of them being used to a fresh
wound, for to stench the blood withal, effect or do little or no good at all,
which were tolerable yet, but they cause thereby infinite wrongs, and do no
less therewith, as if they had strayed the wounds full of venom.

Tell me, I pray, if a wound bleedeth vehemently, and you will stench it with
one of the above named materials or corrosives, when you stray that powder
into, does the wound cease to bleed presently? Whoever affirms it, I deny it:
For these materials in and outside I know very well, and understand, whither
they have any efficacy in them to stench blood presently, yea, or no? Must not
the Wound, being straid full, be bound up, with cotton Wool, plasters and the
like, that the blood may not issue forth? Now when you have thus bound up the
wound, and stench'd the blood, so that it can run out no more, could you not
procure also that the in-strayed powder should not work in the wound, and that
the corrosive, which pulls the running veins together, cannot effect that,
because the running blood drives it back, and washes it away? For if a wound
be carefully bound, so that no blood can run out, then of necessity the blood
is stench'd, and congealeth in the Wound. This being done, then the corrosive
incorporates with it, and begins then to work, that is to say, to rage, to eat
and to burn.

I would fain know here, of what use Corrosives are in Corrosives are hurtful
extremely.
blood stenching, as long as the blood congealeth without such fretting things,
and may be stayed only by a careful binding of the Wound? Perhaps you think
the Patient is not sufficiently tormented, unless you put more affliction and
plagues upon him: you immagine the Patient is not weak enough, and so with your
sharp Corrosives you must make him a Martyr. Ah how many veins! ah! how many
sinews, which are not hurt at all by the blow, nor touched, are eaten through by
your sharp corrosiive blood-stenchers, and are forcibly torn in pieces, or at
least benumbed or mortified, which would not have been so, if you had not
meddled with them. Are not lamenesses caused thereby, and much wrong and evil
inflicted upon Patients, whose Wounds might have been easily cured, if they had
been dealt honestly withal

I knew one, who professed Surgery, he was to stench a Example of one whose
blood was stenched.
bleeding wound: He took his powder (of the which he boasted much) thrust the
powder into the Wound with some cotton wool, bound it up, supposing he had
done enough at it: a little while after the Patient cried out extremely,
complaining of his pains, by reason of the raging and burning he felt in the
Wound. I asked the said Surgeon, what he had put into the Patients Wound? He
was loath to reveal it, because he held it for a great Secret and Masterpiece:
however upon my importuning he said, it was calcined Vitriol, and Gummi
Euphorbium, sublimed Mercury, mingled with Bole and Terra sigillata, and a
little quantity of Vinegar among it, which he called quenching. This was his
great Skill and Secret, wherewith he usually bound up Wounds. But what
happened? He did more hurt then a wound twice as big would have done. For
though this man's Wound was not such, where a lameness might be feared, yet was
he made a Cripple, because this corrosive powder has corroded and eaten off
his sinnews, which were not hurt at all: I pray what simpathy have these said
simples one with the other; especially Terra sigillata, Gummi Euphorbium? In
like manner many Receipts are screwed together with a company of simples, which
do fit as much, as a piece of new cloth a Beggar-patch'd coat of several sorts
of old rags; all this is no sport or pastime to the poor Patient, whose skin
must reach for it.

These abuses hitherto showed, about blood stenching, are great and gross
ones, whereby incurable hurts are caused; Abuse of hot Irons in
blood-stenching, which cause great hurt, A horrible Skill.
and yet are they not comparable unto those which are committed with hot Irons,
whereby the Patients wounded veins, sinews and other parts are drawn and shrunk
together, and haled, as if pulled by a horse. And this is held a great Skill
amongst many; but it is, in my opinion, such a terrible Skill, which merely
belongs to murders, and I am easily persuaded, that Hangmen have taught this
way at first: Others, that will outstrip their fellows in their Skill, take
cotton wool, thrust it lighted into the Wound, whereby they suppose to have
done well for the good of the Patient.

But as I have said in general, that I reject nor condemn blood stenching, but
rather hold it necessary and allowable, as occasion serves: neither do I
wholly condemn hot Irons to stench blood withal, and hold it to be of very good
use in Surgery, as at the off-cutting of a member, at the thickest part in the
thigh, and in two or three places more; as when an Excrescence is to be cut
off, or other things, well known to judicious Surgeons. But that it should be
of any use in wounds, there I deny it absolutely, and am fully persuaded, that
nothing but misery thereby is caused, For as soon as the little white veins
feel the heat of the fire, they shrink presently, grow shorter, and may never
be brought to their former length; all judicious Surgeons must confess so much.
Unto which misery this is incident also, or rather will ensue thereupon, that a
Wound thus burnt will never heal so soon and so well as those will, which never
had such things supplied, the reason of it is known to many. And ah! how many
Wounds are thereby inflamed, and the parties lame, when doubtless they might
have done better.

In my youthful days I have been an eye witness, how one received a Wound
about his temple of four fingers Example.
breadth; oh! how was this poor man tortured with Corrosives, with lighted
cotton Wool, with nealed Iron, and the like, being thrust into his Wound, and
all to no purpose; for the bleeding of it could not be quenched. All these
Surgeons being in a despair about their Patient, whom they thus unmercifully
tormented, not knowing what to do any further in this case, they wished the
Patient to commit himself to God Almighty, which however ought to be done
without their grave advise: when all their applied means would neither take
nor work, there came forth an old Woman, laid some kind of hairs on a leather,
and laid into the Wound a piece of lint or quilt, and then she applied her
plaster: it stenched the blood, and the Party was healed: was not this old
Woman more skilful, and surer in her Art, than all these Surgeons, Barbers,
Doctors, that were then present? My self at that time being very young, and
unexperienced, was ashamed for their sake, though I had very little judgment,
that they professing that Art had so little judgment in it.

Some sixteen years ago there was a young man at B. Sharp oil of Marcasts is
said to stanch bleeding.
which received hurt in his buttocks, which did bleed very much, which a
Barber-Surgeon could not stench with his sharp bloud-stencher, which in that
place was held a Masterpiece to stench it: What do you think this
Barber-Surgeon had done? He took that biting oil of Antimony, prepared with
Sublimed Mercury, dipped cotton Wool in it, thrust it to the Wounds bottom, this
was such a rarity and secret skill, that this young man out-breathed his last
within few hours after, for it most miserably tormented him, who might have
been very well saved, if this Barber had not meddled with him.

If I should rehearse all what miseries I have seen committed Intolerable
miseries caused by burning.
by burning of wounds, that did bleed, though I have seen but little, and have
but small experience, yet time would fall short with me, to rehearse all, and
it would prove tedious unto the Reader, to hear and read such a long tale:
besides, I should but pull an old house about my ears, if I should put them to
the public view; and the rather, because some ancient Surgeons find some of
the above named blood stenchings very necessary. Therefore I let it rest,
hoping that judicious Surgeons will take my writing in good part, and gather
from thence, that among the Ancients there was great ignorance by
misunderstanding, as well as there is now adays, or rather more.

To prevent these abuses, in my judgment there is nothing better to be used in
blood stenching, then quilts, lints, or mulli puffs, cotton Wool, or the like.

As for example, if a Wound bleedeth, and the cause of it is unknown, then do
not feel, nor stir in the Wound, nor apply any ointment, but only use a
plaster, but in case the bleeding would not cease, then such said things may
be used, or any other fitting thing: but if the Wound does bleed but little, in
time when the Patient either walks or sleeps, then bind it gently, and
apply the plaster, where it bleedeth, then you may soonest know from whence
the blood comes, and if there be any loose or shatterd piece in it, which
causes the bleeding; being bound slack, it casts up a ball or soft flesh like
coam'd wool, let it be gently pressed in again, it is a sure token, that there
is a shatterd piece in it, which is not altogether loose, yet striveth to come
forth, where lies a blood-vein, which that loose piece does hurt when stirred.
Now such like things being at hand, no haste at all must be made with, nor
search made into the Wound; for that search would put the Surgeon and Patient
upon more work, and increase the bleeding; and the vein, being deeply hid, out
of sight, and no coming unto it: would produce new troubles. Therefore only
burnt Allom very subtly pulverised clapped in and upon, which is strong
enough for it, for if stronger or sharper things should be used, they would
through-run the Wound, insomuch that the cure would be delayed where it had
been almost performed. That Alum must be let alone, till it drops away, or
comes off by melting, and in case it should not come out the next day, then
stray more Alum upon it, then it will soon take away that flesh which hangs
on that splinter: but in case that splinter should follow also, and the flesh
about it all consumed, then that splinter hangs yet on a panick, which must
come out also. However proceed in the healing, as if there were no such
splinter therein, it will loosen of its own accord, the healing will put that
aside, even as an old tooth must give way to a young one, even so the new flesh
drives out that piece at the wound easily, insomuch that it may be taken away
without danger. Search not with any Iron or Silver Instruments into the Wound,
for if you touch any bone or crisle, especially in such members that are full
of them, then that joint will never take any flesh. I give warning to all, I
have found it so, desire no more to search: it is a common saying amongst them,
because there are more such loose pieces in the Wound, they will have them all
out, and feel and search in the Wound like a blind man. It is a great
foolishness, to feel, and groap about Wounds, touch them with hard fingers
without, and search their inside with Instruments, You Novices in Surgery, when
three, five, or more are called together to such a Patient, suffer not the
Patients Wound so rudely to be touched, for I speak by knowledge, and not out of
other men's opinions, and know what hurt is done thereby.

CHAP. V.
Of the Abuses in Phlebotomy; how some supposed to stench bleeding, with an
example illustrated.

HAving begun to treat of blood stenching, I could not Abuses in Phlebotomy.
choose but to declare some abuses committed by some Nations, as in Italy and
France, in phlebotomy, where they make many Experiments upon wounded men, in
stenching of blood, and in doing other great feats. For if any be wounded among
them, falling into their hands, then the next day they open a vein, and that
without measure and knowledge, not regarding how much the Patient has bled
already: but what good they effect thereby, may be seen out of this ensuing
example, where I was an eye witness.

In a certain place (which for some reason shall go nameless) I saw a wounded
party, which had bled very much, and was brought very low thereby; the next day
came the Doctor which undertook to cure him, who brought a Barber with him to
open a vein of the Patient, who had already lost too much blood; that opened
vein could not bleed, because there was but little of blood in it, and that
little Nature reserved in store for to help her self withal. This Doctor would
needs have blood, and seeing that that vein would not yield so much as he
expected, he caused another vein to be opened, whether that would satisfy his
thirst after blood, but little came out of it, and the poor Patient died under
his hand.

This is related here not to that end, as if I would condemn Phlebotomy
altogether for the defense of the wounds: Phlebotomy not wholly condemned.
for I have seen more than once, that Phlebotomy has done much good to wounded
men, and fell out very well for their healing. I only related it to that end,
because it is used by some very indiscreetly, whereby they did all manner of
mischief: true, they give some reason why they do so, as namely, in respect of
a rheum which falls down from the head (as they call it, so will I call it also)
that it may not altogether fall upon the wounded side, but may be diverted,
that the wounded party may be in the less peril. Whether this be so I cannot
tell, nor can I agree with them herein, for the symptoms of wounds take for the
most part their cause from the place where the wound is, and not from the head,
as I shall make further declaration of it, neither are these symptoms caused by
the blood, but rather by the abuses that are committed, amongst which this
abuse also (of the which I now treat) may be numbered. It is true, Phlebotomy
is used with great utility, in all such wounds, where the wounded have either
gotten a Paroxisme of a Fever, or they fear one, which may be caused either by
frights or by anger. Phlebotomy is used also with advantage, when a party has
received a stab in the body, and it is feared, that there is congealed blood in
the body, in such a case Phlebotomy is not only advantageous, but also
necessary, when the blow given was done either by force, or with a fall, and
the party bled but little: especially in head Wounds, which bleed but little:
Such Wounds are dangerous, by reason of congealed blood, which by this means
may be driven out.

Here I must needs relate a custom which some have to expel congealed blood:
For when they have a wounded man in cure, especially if his wound be in the
body or belly, and if they suppose that there is congealed blood there, then
they lay him on the ground, with the wound downwards, shake him to and fro,
even as a Butcher uses to do with a Swine: in this manner they suppose to get
the congealed blood out of the body, all which is little to the purpose. And if
there be at hand a hot Fever, or other inflammation (which is known by some
signs, of the which shall be treated hereafter) there Phlebotomy may safely be
used, but it must be done upon mature advise; for it is not good in all cases;
in some accidents it is good, and in some it is dangerous: therefore care must
be had, to be sure when it is necessary, and when needless. Many use Phlebotomy
in all wounds without distinction, little regarding the situation and
condition of the wound, whether in legs, arms, joints, supposing to prevent
hereby the Prunellain wounds, (known unto few) but they effect nothing at all
thereby; for this rash and indiscreet Phlebotomy used keeps off none of these
forenamed symptoms: if the Wound be in a dangerous place, then you must deal
with it in another manner of way, if so be you will be honest and get credit in
the cure. This also must be made account of, that the less the wounded has
bled, in the less peril his life stands. But this is considered little by
many, which are bluntly for blood.

Many do advise, if a bleeding Wound cannot be stenched Many use Phlebotomy to
stench blood.
easily, then the Patient is to be phlebotomized in the opposite side, and to
let him bleed well, for thereby the blood, as they persuade themselves, will
take another course, and be drawn away from the Wound, (be the Wound never so
big or wide, and never so many veins wounded) and the blood turned to the
little and narrow mouthed veins opened. But let them tell me, what reason they
have for this, and whether this was ever done, that a bleeding Wound was ever
stenched in this manner? Some reasons were produced in their answer, but
without any truth, because experience shows the clean contrary.

This is true, when the blood is thus inflamed, and in this Phlebotomize when
the blood is in an angry course.
his anger, it takes an unconstant course, then through Phlebotomy this angry
and impetuous course is in some sort allayed. But without this anger, I know
not to what end Phlebotomy should be used, unless it were to bring the Patient
the sooner to the Churchyard. For if a party were wounded in the four outer
joints, and at each did bleed vehemently, on what side must he be phlebotomized
to divert the blood from the Wound?

In this case much more could be alleged, and I rest to make any further
relation of it: of this I intended only to give a hint, that when in the next
part of this Book I treat of the stenching of blood through easy, mean and
honest ways and means, thereby to overthrow these Imposters, so the courteous
Reader may the better understand, upon what occasion I undertook the writing
hereof.

CHAP. VI.
What gross abuses are crept in, in binding up fresh Wounds, with searching,
groaping, grabling.

BEing already noted more than once, how through the carelessness of Surgeons
often evil and perilous symptoms are caused, whereby afterward are caused
lameness-fistulaes, cankers and such like; therefore is it needful to show what
manner of abuses these are, intimated by the word carelessness. Having cleared
the two head points, as stitching and stenching of blood, and showed how gross
abuses are therein committed, I will touch also other abuses which are as
usually committed as the other.

The next unto stitching and blood stenching, is that which is committed with
the small iron instruments, which by reason of seeking, are called the seekers
or searchers, wherewith some do so seek and groap, as if they had lost somewhat
there, and desire to know exactly of what largeness the Wound is, and of what
depth the stab is, what vein be stabbed, which bone be broken, and which be
whole: this they do only at the first time of binding it, which might be
pardoned and excused, but as often as they dress it, so often do they search
the Wound. And if there be three or more Surgeons together, then is it not
enough, that one with his searching iron show his judgment and cruelty, but
also after the first the second, after the second the third must seek for his
lost penny in the Wound, and thrust up and down in it, the one more rudely than
the other, beyond all the rules of justice: But how think you that the poor
Patient is thereby mortified and tormented?

But to what end is it, to groap and to grable so much in Wounds? Ah! how
little do they consider, that with that A dangerous custom to search in the
wounds.
poaking and searching they break and destroy that natural Gluten or Balsom
(which settleth for the healing, and is the healing it self) and spoil it
altogether. Pray tell me, what else do they to a Wound, which in the said
manner they search and sound, but to make another? I see no other thing used,
but that they constantly play all upon one string, and still keep the old
Ditty, and they always use but one sort of salves and ointment, one sort of
oil, and one sort of plaster, the Wound fares a great deal the worse by
reason of that cunning seeker. Seeing there is but one thing used to Wounds,
let there be found in it whatsoever it will, why should the Patients be much
tormented, which are troubled enough already with their wounds? But it must be
so, that their gross ignorance and palpable rudeness may be brought to light,
because they know nothing else to use, be the Wound in what shape and form it
will.

There are some Surgeons found, who merely for customs sake make use of that
little iron, because they have seen it used, though they know little, what they
seek for, or why they seek, but only to make men believe, that it is a thing
of great consequence, and that men should hold them to be great Masters,
whereas all is but useless, nay often very hurtful.

Being there is no defect in the Wound, why do they then Searching does great
hurt.
molest the Patient with seeking, pressing, griping, grobling and moiling in
the Wound, and tormenting him thus immeasurably? for thereby not only extreme
pains are caused by touching his quick flesh and veins with the iron, but the
time also is prolonged to make him endure the more misery, and then the Wound
also is kept open the longer, and cannot so soon close as Nature could desire
it: nay they undo that also, which has been healed partly, as you shall hear
more afterward. In case the Wound should not be in a right posture, surely that
instrument will never set it righter, nor find its defect.

There are better ways belonging hereunto, as signs How to judge of a wound.
whereby the Wound is judged; viz. by the viewing of it, by the smell, by the
matter, by the pain, by the form, color, plasters, their working and such
like; by these signs we must know the Wounds condition, and into what symptoms
it is like to fall,

Touching the form and color of Wounds, take good notice of these signs, for
they ought to be looked to; if the brims or outsides of a Wound look red, it is
no good sign, and shows that there is a fault in the Wound: but if the borders
of it look bluish and light, it is a sign, that the Wound heals; but if the
skin about the Wound is dark blew, that is no good sign, then the blood makes
the healed skin come off again, and now you must make vent with sisers, and cut
that bluish part, to let the blood run out, else the new healing falls quite
away, and by giving vent, then the new healing holds in part; if the Wound
round about in the outside feels hard, is swelled, and looks red, then is
it a sign, that the Patient is pained, and Imposthumations are like to ensue,
which is dangerous; if there be a swelling with a whitish skin, and feels to
be full of water, and the Patient feeling a droughth at night, then good care
must be had, for fear the cold fire should grow on him, and if there be a stink
in it, then the cold fire is already in it, and smells like a thing putrified,
but is not so full of pains as the hot fire would cause; and in case he
complains not, or feels no pains, then his death draws on, especially if
that cold stays long, then he soon dies, or else falls into great danger, by
reason of the wounded joint.

Touching the smell and its sign, if a Wound smells strongly, then the veins
and sinews are dying, and purge; for as soon as a Wound is dressed, then always
the flesh separateth, and so do the veins also.

Concerning the corruption in Wounds, take notice of these ensuing signs: if
there be white matter in a Wound like sour milk, then a conflux of ill humors
comes to it, and look from what side these humors come, for the Wound is now
settled to a bad end: if a Wound be full of white matter, then it is not in a
full healing way, but is at a stay and delaying posture: if there is red matter
in a Wound, then some loose piece is in it, or some other hinderance: if there
is in a Wound ruddy and thick moisture, inclining more to a flesh and carnation
color than red, then that Wound is in a healing posture.

Touching the pain, take notice of that sign; if the wound be moist and
waterish, then there are pains at hand, and the joynt-sponge is like to grow.

These are the true signs, whereby you may have a fundamental information of a
wounds condition, without these it is impossible to learn things aright about
Wounds: and in this manner all may be known without putting the Patient to any
further pain, much better, then with seeking, groaping, and the like, which is
not only useless, but very hurtful and painful.

As often as a vein or sinew is touched, as often is a new Note.
pain caused; for they are very touchy and full of sense, which sense by that
touch runs all the body over; and as often as you stir in a naked wound, as
often ought it to be again cleansed; for there is nothing to^cht in a naked
wound, be it as little as it will, or as gently, there separateth something,
and thrusts by the healing. For it causes a flame, that is, the humidity of
the natural balsum, which always like a crystal lies on the wound, should
not be taken off from the white small veins, for they cannot endure to be
wiped off.

Now, as you heard above, if they keep a stirring too often in the wound with
the Seeker, is not the natural working in the wound interrupted, and the wound
in its healing obstructed and prolonged, nay rather made worse? For the
blood-veines, to speak only of these, in the wound, are desirous to thrust off
their healing, and to separate that which is worsted and touched. How often
falls it out, that when a bloud-vein is stopped and desires to heal, then with
that Instrument called Seeker, the healing is thrust off, and the wound is put
to bleeding afresh? Is it not so, that thereby that which was once healed is
wounded again, and so muss de novo be healed?

Lastly, this doubtless is true also, if you stir often in the wound with the
Seeker, and always the bloud-veines are thereby put to a sweating, then
commonly it turns to a sponge, and that principally in a joint.

Note this of the Joynt-sponge: first, what it properly Ioynt-sponge*
is, then how it is discerned, and lastly, how the same may be cured.

Touching these three: a Joint-sponge is nothing else but a moisture of the
sinew-water, which grows on and turns hard, and settleth there. Some think,
that in that place the healing is done, whereas it is a sponge of joynt-water,
and paineth the party: though it paineth him not, being touched, yet the party
feels pain in that joint, and is red and angry, burns, and commonly lameth
the party; it causes lameness if it be not expelled betimes by medicaments. I
have seen one of an eggs bigness standing out before the joint, with Sisers I
cut it off in the upper part, looks like boiled becon, touches like rusty old
bacon, only that it i^ softer and is tough; I applied to the part I cut,
Vuguentum Aegyptiacum prepared with Verdigriece, this takes it quite off, and
the joints pain is diminished; though Aegyptiacum biteth much, yet the other
pain in the joint molesteth the party more intolerably. And the sponge being
gone, then must be used the brown ointment, either spouted in, or else conveyed
in liquid; repent not the bestowing of your ointment, for therewith you may
shake the wound wholly, for it opposes the sinew-water vehemently, the pain
cease, and the healing comes near. But in case you cannot well come to the
sponge to apply soft weeks, therefore there is a sharp week, which surely will
penetrate to it, and it is made in this manner; take of the green ointment made
with Verdigreice, besmear the week with it, then take another week, wrap it
about the first, dawb it with the ointment, then spread it full thick with the
green salve or ointment; this being put into the wound, feeling a heat, it
melts off the week, and is fed further from the inner week. This is that
corrosive I ever used to my Patients; for it melts and flows better and
sooner than any corrosive or water; and it comes to the holes where no water
can reach unto, and it biteth not so long neither as other corrosives do,
because it is not only of a drying, but of a moistening quality, and
separateth very easy, and resists forcibly the sinew-water, called the
joynt-water. A better remedy was never known for this purpose, and found to do
the feat, by several men's trial upon my direction. And in case a joynt-sponge
should grow, (which usually happens in wounds neglected; for in fresh wounds
better care ought to be had to hinder the growth of a joynt-sponge, or else it
is not well with the wound) then you must deal according to the process now
rehearsed; and then the wound may be healed, according to this direction spoken
of.

At the first healing let all run together, what may be healed, and the more
the wound lesseneth, the better it may be healed; if so be it do not grow
hollow and incline to a fistula.

This could be more largely handled, but I pass it over, and commit the
courteous Reader to further consideration herein; these few things I mentioned
to that end, that men may see what a deal of mischief a little Iron instrument
may cause.

CHAP. VII.
Of the abuses which are committed with wicks, tents, lints, mullipuffs, etc.
chiefly in deep stabbings, illustrated with an example.

VVIcks and such like things are not altogether condemned, Wicks are of good
use, but abused.
as if they were of no use at all; no, but are well used in fit places and
seasons. This I cannot approve of, which many do use, they stuff wounds with
lints, wicks, as much as they can hold, or are able to put into, without any
distinction or discretion. Medicines ought to be put into Wounds, and not
filled up with rags; and in case any wick or tent is used, it ought not to be
forced in, but let it have a free passage, but to press them in with
instruments, as they commonly do, is not advisable, being both useless,
dangerous and hurtful.

For who does not see, that wounds (which begin to close and come together) are
torn again, and kept asunder, and are not able to come together; and that is
commonly done in stitched wounds, and thereby the stitches are so pulled and
spann'd, that they tear out, to the greatest pain of the Patient, which might
very well have been omitted. I do not approve at all of stitching, especially
in deep stabs, because of the several mischiefs and difficulties caused
thereby, as a fistulo, which is such an infirmity* which inwardly is wide and
broad, but outwardly it is narrow.

To speak of wicks further, is not thereby the wounds mouth stopped and closed?
what ensues upon? the matter cannot get thorough the shut-door, which should
come out, and naturally desires to come outward, and is by force kept in,
unless the door be unbolted, and vent be made for it; in the mean while this
matter does little good in the wound, but rather great mischief. Besides that
the pains are mightily increased by that matter in the Patient, and this also
does further ensue, that the the sinews grow thereby slimy and unclean, which
causes extreme inconvenience and misery. And how should there any good come of
it, when the wound is healed against Natures stream. Nature of her own accord
does drive well, but she must be assisted. Therefore when she is desirous to
outcast the matter, why should she not be furthered in that work, and not
hindered with rags? This not being observed, it happens, that when a wound is
in a healing way, its made more dangerous, whereby more work is made than there
was at first.

The bigness of a wick should not fill out a wound, and if hard wrung in, it
swells, and stops the wound, and no passage left for the matter, to get out,
and is an obstruction unto the healing; therefore is it better and more
convenient, that wicks be made of a thin neck and a broad flap, thick in the
middle, and not pointed, but round in the end, and soft, that it may the more
easily receive the ointment, so that the ointment on the end of it may come to
the bottom of the wound, and not on the top of the wound, for if the upper end
of the wick be anointed, then the wounds top heals, and makes the mouth of
it narrow, and heals not from beneath upward, but if the ointment be put to
the other end of the wick, then the flesh heals from below, and before it
drives the ointment out of the wound, it turns to a matter, and so heals
better upward: and if the wick be made big, then the matter stays below in
the wound, causing rather corruption than any healing. But if a wound has two
mouths, I very seldom stopped both, only one, and left vent to the other,
which furthereth the healing of the other.

It is helpful to let the wick be kept dry for a while in the wound, that the
ointment on it may the longer keep in the virtue of it. For that reason I never
wrung any wick into a wound, but let it have room enough, and let the wick fill
up the wound below; pure cloth ought to be taken to wicks, the purer the
better, for the loose threeds of it if they stay behind in the wound, will
cause mischief. Make your wicks thus (for so I found them to do best, when I
desired to keep open a Wound, without any pain) take pure small flax, cut it
even, then take two or three hairs of the flax, as lon^ as you intend to have
your wick, wind it about on the smaller end; the wick must be thicker in the
middle then on the top or above, and the top must be thicker then the end, the
middle of it must be thickest, thus the wounds mouth is the better kept open:
anoint the wick well with the green ointment, or wound-salve, it heals the
wound from beneath upwards, and the wick will not suffer the mouth of the Wound
to grow narrow: you ought not to put any swelling wick into a Wound; and fit
the wicks sharp end so, that it open a little in the Wound; and fit it so, that
the Patient be not put to pain; then the upper end of the wick you open as
far as you please, and wind it about with two or three hairs, to keep in the
in-turn'd wick: in this manner you need but two wicks to a Wound, and whilst
the onesticketh in the wound, you may dry the other, and use it again; and if
these be not dry enough, then make a fresh one. Fresh ones are better (but
require more toil) for cleanness sake; such wick you may use in Wounds, sores,
or where you please; I made use of them for the top and for the bottom, to keep
the mouths of the wounds the wider, that the ointment may be poured into, and
run down the better. Other wicks, or tents, be they made of what they will,
they suffer not the matter or corruption to pass. And when you think your wicks
did reach to the bottom (for they heal the deep way not into narrowness or
laterally) then cut them shorter in the pointed end, and leave that end round
and soft, they prick not, and the ointment sticks the better on the soft
round wick, than on that which is hard twisted, and if you make them sharp
pointed, then the healed flesh is pinched by them.

I know that Wounds may be kept open with these wicks a whole year and upward,
and that the flesh rather would press forth by the side, then wear out the
wick, or fill out that hollowness.

Sometimes I made long wicks (for fistulaes in the thighs) for the better
framing of them, I took twigs or sprigs out of a besom, cut and scraped them,
wound flax about them and made them stiff, else they are not stiff enough the
long way, as they should be; and wound a twig and a wyar together and covered
them with flax, even as yarn may be roul'd up in wax to make a stiff candle of
it, and that windeth and turns according to the hollowness of the wound. I
speak here not of Wounds, but of hollow Sores, that are deep, a span or more;
they are thereby refreshed and cleansed.

These kind of wicks I held in esteem, and these flax wicks are to be used
only for such Wounds which are kept open, whilst other things about them are
healed.

Further, I dislike that custom, when some fill up all sorts of Wounds, be
they where they will, with wicks, which is a very dangerous way and great
abuse. For if you must needs deal with the Wound in that way as has been said
above, then first consider the form and condition of the places where the
Wounds are, whither they are able to bear wicks, yea, or no. For wounds are not
always in one condition, as some rude Asses suppose, who use but one sort of
salve and plaster, be the Wound what it will, no other, as if one pair of
shoes could fit every bodies feet.

The place of the Wound ought to be considered, where many white small veins
concur and meet, as in hands, feet and joints. For where there are many white
veins, there are no wicks to be used, for that reason, alleged partly here,
and partly in the precedent chapter, and for that also which follows.

I have often seen, that when some had thrust their wick into the Patients
Wound, he felt such pains, that his eyes did run over.

But what followed upon?

Nothing else, but that through their rude touching the sinews by thrusting in
the wick, forced the joynt-water to run; and not giving over with their wicks,
they bereaved the poor man of his life, who might have been healed, if they had
dealt honestly and discreetly.

More might be said of this, but I will close it with one particular Example,
though I could quote a great many.

There was a Surgeon pretty well skilled and experienced, in whose service I
lived one year, being some kinn to me, he was brought to a Patient, who was run
thorough the shoulder at night time, the Surgeon dressed his Wound (he shall go
nameless now) that Wound did bleed much, because a vein that run that way was
hurt: the next day he opened the Wound, and thrust two great wicks into it, the
one before, and the other behind: with this wick he touched the blood-vein that
was hurt, which had been stenched already, and made it bleed afresh, which he
regarded not at first, little thinking that he had caused it with the wick: and
coming another time to dress his Patient, and going to pull out the wick, the
blood burst out again. Then he took notice, that the wick had caused it; but it
was too late, for there was no remedy left; the poor man died,

Lastly, it ought to be well noted, that if a Wound bleedeth, and you suppose
it does not come from any splinter or shatterd piece, which might be the cause
of that bleeding, but from an opened vein, which was not quite healed, let that
neither fright nor trouble you much, but do thus; make use of the Wound salve
with the brown ointment mingled, that the Wound salve run the better into the
Wound, and anoint therewith a lint, for tents of linen cloth cause bleeding
not so much as those that are made of flax, for linen is of a sanative
quality, in some veins, but they close not so well, as the wicks do made of
flax. Make this linen wick very soft, and that it fill out the Wound, from
whence the blood comes, and let it be thick at the upper end, that the blood
may be kept in. Even as usually Cotton wool is applied to the vein
phlebotomized, lay here also Cotton wool to it. Briefly, close and keep the
blood in the Wound as well as possible you may, and keep the ointment also in
the Wound, and thirty hours after dress his Wound again, and if the plaster
and the wick comes off together, then make a softer wick for the place, and
proceed as formerly, and if it does keep on, let it settle or lie there, and
ten hours after dress him again, and do not take-out the tent unless it be
very loose, then dress him again; for it heals by degrees at every dressing,
and the flesh grows as well so, as if dressed every hour.

This I speak of to the end, that better care may be had about the wicks or
tents, for the^e are not to be used to all Wounds indifferently, especially not
to such, where blood veins and sinews are cut, and dangers are feared, as you
have heard hitherto.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the abuses committed in plasters, papps, ^^^ltisses, and (...) such like
a^ the dressing of Wounds, and what hurt is can^^sed thereby.

IF Wounds in the dressing be abused, ^s hitherto we (...) of, and the natu^^l
balsum disturb*d, what can be expec^^d, but Nature un^^llingness and
refractoriness, because she is hi^^ered in ^own free working, desp^^ng to help
her self? if it be so* then surely one symptom or other will be incident, and
if it happens best, ^swelling will ensue, to sa^^^ thing of other accidents*

Be^^^es these things, you heard, many other faults are committe^ (...) when
some think* that all may be performed Abuses in Cataplasms
and effect^ (...) ^at^plasmes, and thereby to bring all to right; (...) make
such ^at^plasmes* of Ro^^ cakes, others of (...) ma^low^ (...) Millers dust,
F^ni*greek, Milk, yolks of Eg^ and such like; of ^hese they make a poult^^
pouring some oils amongst it, and apply (...) the Wou^^ as hot as the Pati^^
(...) it. ^^re is no need of such a Poultess, (...) uprightly, because these
are r^ther hur^^ (...) and if suc^ ^^in (...) ^lied, then (...) against (...),
and ought no (...) applied hot, it will not keep long thu^, but grow^ (...)
before it works, a^ all moist th^^ ^sually do.

^^plasmes I do not condemn* if ^^ed in (...) ^sure, Cataplasms are good, if
not abused.
season and place ^ my self make som^^^ use^ (...) But that they sh^^^ ^be good
to fresh Wounds, as some (...) I can^^ (...) believe it: For experie^^ (...)
conv^^^ it th^s: Lay such a Poul^^ (...) place, let it lie there two or three
hours, you (...) a sti^^ing caused in that place* (...) does so to a sou^^
(...) what do you think it will do in ^^ un^^nd place, which is moved and
stirred enough already, and become raging in its course.

The several hurts done to Patients thereby I pass over, A Cataplasme choaks
the wound.
and relate only this; such Poultesses do choke and stop the Wound in her
course: for when such a Poultess is taken off the wound, you see how it
smoaketh, and what signifies that smoke? Nothing else but putrefaction. For
Nature promoteth putrefaction, even as a Mother that breeds a Child, and
brings it to light. Now if these Cataplasmes cause more hurt in wounds than
good, as that smoke is an evident sign thereof, why are they not omitted, but
applied to places where they should not? for in such places there is moisture
enough without these?

I have known some Surgeons, who held it for a good sign when they saw wounds
smoke; but the good that comes of Vapors in Wounds an ill sign.
it, they may keep to themselves, for I will have no share in it. And to say it
once more, if a wound does smoke, it is an infallible sign of putrefaction; for
if such a wound after dressing be not opened in two or three days, then a
stink is at hand, which putrefaction thrusts forth as her first fruit, and a
wound, which begins to putrify, whether it be so soon healed, as when it was
fresh, let them tell it me? And to say nothing of the chiefest thing, which is
the healing thereof; is it not hindered and kept back? For before you can come
to the healing of it, you must first remove the putrefaction, and spend some
time in it: Besides the troubles and pains which this putrefaction causes, it
is most certain, that any wound, whose vent is taken away by the said Poultess
is forced to smoke, as you heard above.

And what is this smoking else but a moisture? which moisture gathering
together turns into a water, as we see it in such wounds which are thus papp'd
up; for at their opening there is found a water round about, like drops of
sweat, which come merely from that smoking.

Now I ask, whether the water signifies any good? and I ask further, whether
any Medicine does effectually work on such wounds, thus forced to sweat and to
water, if dressed as they ought? In my judgment wounds that are thus compelled
to dew, will hardly come to healing.

And at the closing of this Chapter let me tell you thus much; any wound in a
joint, be it in the hand, foot, or elsewhere, being choked up in the said
manner, it keeps a foul and angry bird in the nest; and the Patient will be A
soul bird in the nest.
pained in that place as often as the weather does change, because of that
moisture shut up in the wound; and Nature will hardly rectify that unsound
moisture in a long time.

That up-shut moisture will stir at the changing of weathers, and at the
increase and decrease of the Moon; for the Celestial Lights do doubtless work
upon the things below, according to Gods singular Ordinance. Enough of these,
let us proceed.

CHAP. IX.
Of all such Surgeons which dwell in abuses and errors, which know neither
their weakness nor own Medicines, nor are able to judge of their operation,
together of two Examples which show the chiefest abuses.

THe highest and principal'st thing in a Surgeon and It is dangerous when men
know neither the Medicine nor the hurt
Physician is this, that he be a knowing and experienced man, not only in
wounds, hurts, sores, but also in the Medicines he intends to use to them; if
not, then little good will be done: if a Doctor or Surgeon knows not the
disease or sore which are brought to them to be cured, insomuch that they know
not what to call it, or of what condition it is, how shall they then apply a
fit Medicine for them? Though sometimes a blind man can give a name to the
child (as the saying is) what helps it the Patient, if both these be unexpert
in the operation and virtue of their Medicines, which they intend to minister:
therefore the knowing of the Medicine and of the Disease must go hand in hand,
if so be that any good shall be performed. For Tailors and Shoomakers usually
take measure to fit their Customers.

But many profess themselves Surgeons, and are ignorant Asses, which appears
thus, because they use one sort of oil and plaster to all manner of Wounds
and Sores, supposing to do well therewith; and in case that will not do it,
then the Cerussa must do it: And what is the meaning of all this? nothing else,
but that they know neither the disease, nor their own medicaments, neither do
they know what belongs to the disease, nor what the operation and virtue of
their Medicine is.

They should rather consider, that the stomach in man's body, and the wounds in
the outward members are like one Wounds are like to the stomach
another in some sort. For as the stomach has a decoction to digest the meats
he feeds on: so any wound receives the Medicine applied unto for its
healing. And as there are some kind of meats, which are not pleasing to the
stomach, and it casts them up upon occasion; so it is not good to apply any
medicine to a wound, one more, another less, according to occasion, season,
place and circumstance. And as a Physician ought to know when the stomach does
not digest well his food, being grown either slimie, or taken cold, or when the
liver is out of order, the which he must judge by signs, because he cannot
look into the stomach, and so order his Medicaments accordingly; so it
behooveth a Surgeon also, who can plainly see into the wound (in that he has
an advantage before the Physician) to know, whether the wound is able to
receive and digest the applied Medicine, and must know, what food she likes,
for her healing; for several wounds have their several signs.

Therefore a Surgeon, when he has dressed any wound, and takes the plaster off
again, must know and judge by the wound matter, smell and shape, what defect
there is in the wound: whether ^t has received the medicine like a food, and
has digested it well, or whether it has east it up again? Thereby he may know,
whether his applied medicine be right and good, or whether it be defective,
either too sharp or too sweet, too weak or too strong: and if he finds the
infirmity in the Wound, and the defect in the Medicine, then he must regulate
himself accordingly.

Now those that understand themselves thus, as soon as they have dressed the
wound, and have taken off the plaster, or any other thing, then they may
easily know what condition the wound is of, what will please it, and what is
against it: and then they may well say, that they are Masters in their Skill
and profession, and herein consists the fundamentals of a Surgeon. But those
that understand those things not at all, they will be in errors and abuses in
all their undertakings; such may well hold their tongues, and hide themselves,
and learn their lessons better, and go longer to school. But where are such
Schools?

In Germany, France and Italy, those that undertake Surgerie are examined, and
none is suffered to pass for a Surgeon, Novices in Surgery exam^ned.
nor practice that Art, (Art I say, some make a Trade of it) and if they
subsist and hold in their examination, and can answer to the questions they are
asked, which they call, their Masterpiece, that is, when he says as well as
his Examiners.

These Masterpieces are found in Manuscripts and in How abused.
print in several places of Germany: Some learn these Questions by heart, as
Nuns do their Psalms, and do well therewith, and are accepted of in their
Masterpiece, though they never had any insight into Surgery, nor ever learned
the fundamentals thereof.

However I do not condemn these Examina, for I count them very necessary and
good. For Tailors and other Tradesmen suffer none to set up his Trade, unless
he have made first his Masterpiece: if it be the fashion amongst Weavers,
where the matter is only about a piece of cloth, why should it not rather be
in that noble Art of Surgery, which concerns neither breeches nor doublet, as
the saying is, but it concerns man's life and welfare.

Now I would fain ask some Examiners, why they examine those that are not of
their Opinion or Science? Surely if they should examine them more closely, and
ask reasons of their sayings, I know many would keep in their tongues, and
learn their lessons first, before they come to the Examen: O how many would be
found faulty, only in wounds, to say nothing of other simptoms, sores, etc.
wherein some make no distinction at all in the healing of them, though it be of
a high concernment; Some can make a long discourse of it, how, what and where,
but to no purpose, though they prate never so much. For if their reasons be
considered, touching wounds and hurts, and their original and cause, and their
Medicines they use thereto, it would be found manifestly, that they do not
agree at all, which in honesty should be.

But what other reason is there here, but that they know neither the hurts, nor
their causes, much less their conditions, nor their own Medicines, and their
operations, they understand them not, and what good can they effect in their
cures? Hence commonly it falls out, that they are at a stand, know not what to
do, and then they judge such hurts and wounds to be incurable, of the which
more largely shall be treated hereafter.

These things, hitherto spoken of, touching abuses, might be more largely
handled, and more abuses alleged. But supposing the judicious Reader will by
these guess easily at the rest, therefore I let it rest, and quote two Examples
only, which in general show the abuses, and so close this first Treatise.

At Padua in Italy, some fourteen years ago, a Noble An Example, showing all
kind of abules.
German in a Duel* with a Polander received on his left hand a Wound near his
little finger, cross over the joint; thereunto were called the chiefest
Physicians and Surgeons, which came riding on their Asses, and took the wounded
into their cure, and dressed him the first time, but how and what they had done
then is unknown to me, because I was absent; the next day I went thither also
to see their dressing, at which I saw excellent rarities and mysteries, which I
should not speak of, yet for the public goods sake I cannot hold my tongue.
And when they undrest him, they took off from the Wound the Poultess they
applied, and with the little Seeker they searched round about in the Wound,
which fell tedious to me by reason of the Patient, and the Wound being thus
long sounded, then the Physicians stepped aside to consult together, where an
Anatomist made an eloquent discourse, which of the veins, and which of the
sinews in that Wound were cut and hurt: after consultation they showed and did
an extraordinary Masterpiece; for they took two flat wicks or tents of linen,
and dipped it in their joynt-wound-oyle, and thrust them into the wound, whereof
the wound gaped very much, then they laid a plaster over it, and upon that a
cloth full of medicinal Poultesses, which I cannot name all. In this manner
they dressed him; and there was no end of their seeking in the Wound, of their
stuffing and cleansing at their several dressings.

Now hear what happened, and what their Medicines did work: few days after the
Wound began to water and to run, which we call the joynt-water. Then they fell
a purging of him, used all manner of things they could think upon to cure the
wound, but all to no purpose, for they could not stop the joynt-water: then
more things they tried, and what? they tied and bound his arm very hard and
close by the elbow, hoping thereby to stop the course of the joynt-water, and
other simptoms and rheumes coming from the head. But as they misunderstood the
thing, so it went contrary to their expectation. For as much as they mist in
the stopping of the course of the joynt-water, so much more there was caused an
inflammation and swelling, whereby the wound grew most horribly slimie and
dangerous, at last it swelled up to the arm; then grew on a putrefaction in the
veins and sinews, and holes fell in the arm of a fingers length, thus the arm
rotted, For to such simptoms truly belonged better Skill, then they brought
forth and used. They supposing a heat had caused all this mischief, which
indeed was not heat, but a mere suffocation, the which they knew not, which
they went to quench with Vinegar and Well water put together, washing the wound
therewith, dipping clothes in it and applied them. But all this was not yet
enough, for these remedies availing nothing, and the Patients weakness growing
on more and more, then they fell on other things, met, and consulted, and
disputed the causevery much, at last they resolved to expel all these simptoms
out at the Patients Arse, because it could be no otherwise. Here Glisters and
Purges must walk, Sirrups, Electuaries, Decoctions of Honey and Sugar, all must
help the poor Gentleman to some ease, for he was forced to swallow up a whole
Apothecaries shop; when all came to all, the poor Patient died in great misery.
This was their good practice they used on that brave Gentleman: I have not told
the fourth part of the abuses they committed upon him, for it is too rude, and
too gross, and pity to have it told. An old Woman might have cured this Wound
with a small and mean herb, without any danger and pain; but it is done.

An Italian Lord, at an Inn in Rome, was cut with a short Another Example.
Hanger above the elbow: the chiefest Doctors and best Surgeons were called,
and the Wound was put to their cure, and they undertook him. These Doctors and
Surgeons used great rarities and Arts: after a short dispute and consultation,
the chiefest of them was to dress the Patient, as being not only a good
Anatomist, but an expert and rare man, who took a linen cloth dipped it in warm
Wine, tied it about his two fingers, therewith he felt in the Wound, as deep as
he could, and began to wash the Wound, and to cleanse, and to scour, even as if
he were to scour a rusty Armor; the Patient was so pained thereby, that he
prayed him for God and Mary's sake to let him alone, but he had not done yet;
then he took out his Seeker, searched and sounded the Wound to and fro, and
viewed it very narrowly, how wide, how deep, how long it was; then he fell on
prating, the long and the broad way of the danger in the wound, and how this
and that muscle was hurt, and what danger it would have proved, if this or that
had been wounded and hurt: what great danger he escaped, because this and that
was not hurt; and how good a luck it was, that this and that was not hurt and
touched, and such like things more, too tedious to relate them all.

After his preaching, without which the Patient well could be, he took a cloth
bedawbed it with a Salve and Oil, thrust it often through the wound, and at
last he left it there, and thus he dressed him curiously: whilst he thus handled
him, the Patient hardly held up, that he died not under his hand, yet he died
that very day.

I could quote more of such like examples, but I let it rest so: this I showed
only to that end, that every one may see into what miseries Patients may fall,
if they happen to fall into such Surgeons hands, who think that all is well,
what they do, however they handle the Patient; because in that particular they
have a grant upon Letters pattent, to profess such Arts, and have read once a
thing, which other men as well as themselves have done also.

I forbear to nominate any man in these examples, because many of those
Surgeons are still alive, and the Reader would be never the nearer, though the
parties had been named. He that is touched herein, will soon take notice of,
and easily know and acknowledge, that Surgery and Physic does not lie in the
authority of any man's persons, whether a Gentleman in the City, or a Bore in
the Country be a Surgeon. For the whole business lies chiefly herein, whether
he knows or understands the thing, and whether he knows to meet and to
fit Nature, yea or no: for in Physic without this no good can be done

All what hitherto I have written is not done in spite or disgrace, only that
those who are so obstinate in their old errors, should be led away from their
old dance and old fiddle, and from their naughtiness, and to take better things
in hand, whereby Patients may reap more benefit. And it is an apparent truth,
no naughty thing, be it never so ancient, No naught is good be it never so
ancient.
and never so much used, can be made good; for I have seen many, who said, it
was not fit that old customs should be left off, and to produce new things
into their places; yea, those were worthy to be severely punished that do so,
because they despise and condemn thereby the Ancients and the Universities.
Therefore in some places the Books of Theophrastes Paracelsus (to whom the best
and most famous Surgeons must give place) are prohibited to be read; but in my
simple judgment it is done very foolishly. For it were to be wished, that old
Customs were well understood and followed, and not to bring in their own
fancies, then things would fall out better then they do. Things may be brought
to light, if Nature only were well studied, as Experience testifies, which is
nothing else but Nature her self.

Nature in her self does remain,
Which Experience makes known amain.
No new thing on earth e're comes on,
Things past do return again.
What is that to me, what opinion Gallen, Avicen, Guido, etc. hatched in their
breasts, were not the things they brought forth in their age, new things, and
who knows, whether the same thing did not befall them then, which befalls those
who produce new things now (as they call it.) Momus, who is never pleased, has
doubtless lived in those times as well as now adays, and besides this, many
things are done out of hatred and envy. Therefore it is best to consent and to
follow those, which agree best with Experience, and commend and show their
skill effectually and really: if any one finds and learneth better things,
though they more agree with ancient things, who shall forbid him to make use of
them? Thus much of the first part, touching the abuses in Surgery committed.

The end of the first Part.
OF CURES, Of all sorts of VVounds in Man's body, from the head to the toe, and
of other infirmities, belonging to Surgery, how the same ought to be observed,
according to the fundamentals of Art, to be handled and cured. The Second Part.
IN the first part of my Surgery books I treated of the abuses, which are in
full practice among the greater part and number of those that profess
themselves to be Surgeons, and showed what mischief is caused thereby, to the
greatest prejudice and ruin of poor wounded men. Yet have I not related all
the abuses which are practiced and committed now adays, because that relation
would be never at an end, and would prove tedious to the Reader to peruse them,
and so I gave only a hint of the grossest, hoping that those that know these,
may easily guess at the rest. In this second part are rehearsed many abuses,
which every judicious man will easily discern, and if he finds any defect in
that particular in the first Part, he may easily supply that want without great
labor.

Now I come for the present nearer to the business, and declare what belongs
unto Surgery. Therefore my intent is to write in this second Part of all sorts
of Wounds from the head to the toe, and of all kinds of infirmities which
belong also unto Surgery, namely, how the same ought to be cured without any
abuse. Where I will bring in several subtle Manuals, which Surgeons
advantageously may use, and will conceal nothing, as much as is known unto me.
Let the Courteous Reader be persuaded, that I will have great care to bring and
show nothing which I know to be not true, but that which I have made trial of,
and seen experimentally, what good it has done, and what hurt it did. For it
is not my purpose to borrow any thing out of other Surgeons writing, and to
trim my self with strange feathers, and to publish the same for mine own, as it
is the custom of many now adays, which do nothing else, but to make up
volumous collections, and is all one to them, from whom they have it, even like
Smiths, who know how to hammer their old nails, and so to get a great name and
fame thereby: whereas it had been much better, that their prating, and
loquacity, and their names had ever been concealed and unknown, and that good
paper (which would have served for better uses) had not been spoiled. For to
what end are such great volumes, in which there is no utility but hurt? it had
been better they were quite let alone, then they would have done no hurt: It is
better a book be short and good. To what end should it be, to write a great
volume, and to show in it even those things, which others before me a thousand
years, more or less, have written. Is it not so, those that are minded to read
them, would rather read them in their own books, according to the verse:

Purius ex ipso fo^te bibuntur aequae. I do not speak it to that end, as if all
were new what I write, and that my book contains nothing, which in other
books of Surgery might not be had, is it not a common saying, the one pulls the
bread out of the others mouth? and what marvel is it, if two write of one
thing, when sense and meaning makes them seem to write the same? It is lawful
to publish one another meaning. For that end and reason do I speak this, that
others may see, that I am careful ^^ publish and impart that, which I have
learned from others, and got it upon mine own experience, and that faithfully
to benefit my neighbor withal. And that will I perform without any prolixity,
and as briefly as may be possible, so that this my Book may prove a small
Enchiridium and pocket book, easily to be carried about one, as well in time of
war as in time of peace; for a present Instruction to Novices in Surgery. For
touching plaister-making, salve roules and cakes, turning of wicks and tents,
and such like, these they ought to have learned before, and be industrious in
those things, if minded to be good Surgeons.

CHAP. I.
What a Surgeon ought to know.

IT is well known to those that have any understanding, that Art does imitate
Nature: for all what Nature shows, Art imitateth Nature
the same Art undertaketh to imitate. Therefore men ought to observe Nature in
their actions, and regulate themselves after her, if so be they intend to have
good success in their undertakings. For Nature may as little be conquered, as a
strong River may be stopped in his course; even so nothing will prove prosperous,
if undertaken against Nature.

Seeing things spoken are really found so, therefore it is resolved upon, that
a Surgeon is Natures servant, and that he ought to endeavor to imitate Nature,
because she will not be in subjection to any. Therefore in Surgery nothing
ought to be done against or contrary unto her. For if a Surgeon should
undertake to do and to force Nature, then he would not only labor in vain,
but also would make the last be worse than the first.

Though it be not my desire, that a Surgeon should have a Nature must be known.
perfect knowledge in all natural causes, because there are many things which
concern not his Profession, though it would do him no hurt if he knew them:
however Necessity requires to have a good knowledge of such things that
concern him; as of Wounds, and of Medicaments which he uses to them, and of
all such things that depend upon; in all these he ought to know of what nature
and condition each of them is, that he may prepare his Medicine accordingly,
because all Wounds are not cured one way.

Therefore when he vieweth a Wound, and considers the place and situation of
it, thereupon he must presently consider the condition and quality of that
place, whether that Wound be mortal, or whether by Gods help it be curable.

Therefore is it exquisite, that a Surgeon be well seen in Anatomy, of which
among us there is great defect, so that A Surgeon ought to be an Anatom^st.
scarce one amongst many understands the internal constitution of man, nay,
hardly have ever seen any man anatomized. My desire is not, that a Surgeon
shall and must have a perfect knowledge in Anatomy, so that he should know
where every sinew, vien and other parts of the body lie, even to the least, for
that we leave unto those which make profession of Anatomy, whom we desire not
to take it from; only Necessity requires thus much, that he have a
superficial knowledge of it, especially of man's bones, that he may know how the
same are joined and stand together, as well in the head as in other members,
especially the junctures, For it happens many times; that joints are
dislocated, which must be set again, which he will hardly do, that knows not
how they stood formerly. He must know also the chiefest sinews and
bloud-veines, and must know their situation, from whence they come, and
whither they go, and how they run together and meet, and such like. For this he
may well know, which places are dangerous, to deal the more discreetly, and to
order and prepare his Medicine the better, all according to occasion of things.
He must know also the internal joints and members, and the chiefest occasions
touching places; as also the principallest muscles, what they do cover, and
what they move, and such like things, and all this to that end, that when he
only looks upon a Wound, he instantly may know what part be wounded, so he
needs not to stir and search much in the Wound with the Seeker, of which in the
first part has been spoken more largely. He ought to know how to judge,
whether a Wound be mortal or no, whether it may be cured wholly without any
lameness; of all which he can neither know nor judge certainly, unless he have
good skill in Anatomy (if not in the whole, yet at least in some part thereof:)
And this is the reason, that so many bone-fractures keep crooked, and so many
joynt-wounds prove a lameness, if so be it falls out so luckily, because
Surgeons have no knowledge in these things, or very little.

And whereas T^me is the first and chiefest thing, therefore wise and
understanding men observe it carefully in all their Time must be observed.
affairs, and regulate themselves accordingly: for it is most certain, that
some things are more fitly and conveniently done at sometimes than at other, it
is needless to prove it with examples: therefore it is most Necessary, that
Surgeons be observers of Time, (and all what thereby is contained and
understood) wherein he may do a cure; as whether it be summer or winter, cold
or warm, dry or moist, in the decrease or increase of the Moon, etc. For
Experience, that great Teacher, tells us to be naught, at all times to undertake
for health: whereas it may well happen, that that Medicine, wherewith in
summers time a Wound is cured, the same may spoil a Wound in the winter; so of
other reasons may be argued. Therefore a Surgeon ought to learn, how to fit
himself for the time, and prepare his Medicaments accordingly, to use them more
or less, either to strengthen or to To observe a dist^nction in Wounds.
weaken withal; all according to occasion.

Surgeons ought to distinguish Wounds, whether they run downwards or upwards,
and to order things accordingly with the out or in running, and to make their
salves and plasters accordingly, either thinner or thicker, so as ne cessity
requires in the application: and they must know and judge also by certain
signs, whether a Wound be poisoned or no, whether it be spoiled or no: for
among these one Wound is not like the other, and each must have a particular
cure.

A Surgeon especially ought to observe the signs, which partly show themselves
in and by the Wounds, and by no Signs are to be observed.
means to slight them, let them be never so mean; for every sign, be it never
so slight in the appearance, singnifieth something, and makes him that
observes it to consider of something already come into the Wound, or at least
at hand. And signs in the Wounds have their special signification, be it good
or bad, especially they foretell of simptoms, which partly are coming on, of
the which in the third part of this book shall be treated: therefore it is
necessary, that every Surgeon take notice of the signs, by reason of the
simptoms, which a body in health is also subject unto; hence it is apparent,
that the signs, be they never so slight, ought not to be slighted, as from
thence great mischief arises, if not prevented in time, and are opposed
seasonably. He that has good judgment herein, is worthy of honor, and to be
commended for a good Surgeon.

The nature, complexion and condition of the Patient ought to be known, and
observed; for some are strong, The Patients nature ought to be observed.
some are weak, some of a cold, others of a hot complexion, some of a moist,
some of a dry nature, some are subject to special Diseases, and have them
already, as Fevers, yellow Jaundice, when they were wounded.

After such circumstances and occasions a Surgeon ought to regulate himself,
and to debate from the one, and to add to the other. For a strong Medicine is
to powerful for a weak body, and overcomes his nature; and a strong body
cannot be hurt by a weak Medicine: and it happens often, as has been said,
that the bodily Dise ases strike into the Wounds, and make the same worse.
Therefore a care is to be had, for every sort of wound requires a particular
cure, and he that undertaketh to cure all these with one sort of Medicine, he
does no less, as if he strove to put two feet into one sock.

For it is not only required; that a Surgeon know the nature Medicine and
Wounds must be known equally.
of the Wound and of the Patient, but he ought to have also good knowledge of
his Medicines, whether they be compounded or simple, that he may know how they
are fitted for the Wound, whether they burn, or obstruct, or work any other
way, that he deal discreetly, and prepare the Medicines accordingly: for when
he sees that the Wound cannot brook with the Medicine, but are contrary one to
another, then that Medicine you must cashier, and take a better for it, and
rectify that which the first has spoiled; but if he finds that the Medicine
has done well, and was either too strong or too weak, then must he know how to
add or how to debate, according as the thing requires, which he ought to know;
in which case Alchymie fitteth a Surgeon exceeding well, but that is almost all
the world over fallen into contempt, by reason of the great abuse that is
committed therewith; which however I count it very necessary, that a Surgeon
should have skill in it; for that Science will teach him to know the inside and
outside of things, by which means he will be able to prepare his own Medicines,
to separate the poison from the good, and the pure from the impure, according
as he is expert in that Art. If a Surgeon first knows the hurt and Wound, and
then knows the efficacy of his Medicaments, then he may easily know also,
what is good or naught for the Wound, and how according to the condition of it
he must diminish or increase his Medicine, all which lies in learning, which
is never at an end as long as man lives.

CHAP. II.
How a Surgeon ought to behave himself, as well for his own particular, as
about the Patient.

THere are other things besides these hitherto mintioned, which a Surgeon ought
to observe carefully, as well concerning himself as his Patient, and are of
great consequence. My purpose is to treat of them in this Chapter, and to take
notice, though not of all, yet of the most, or of some.

A Surgeon ought to take heed of drunkenness, that he A Surgeon must be no
drunkard.
be not given unto it, and that for many weighty reasons.

For how should a drunken Surgeon judge of a hurt or wound, when he in his head
is always disturbed, and is bereaved of his true sense? How can he view well a
Wound, to view the signs, and to judge discreetly of them, when his sight does
fail him, and all what he looks upon seems double unto him? or how can he
touch or feel a hurt well, when his hands do shake, are rough and rude for
feeling.

A Surgeon ought to take heed also, not to permit every one to look into the
Wound, as many use to do. And being it is the custom in many places, that the
Magestrate sends sworn Surgeons to view Wounds, therefore I neither can nor
will disprove that custom, but I say, it is very necessary it should be so,
and should be strictly maintained, that in case a Surgeon should have nothing
for his pains from the party, he might have a recourse to them; but I can by no
means approve, that rude and unexpert persons are suffered to come to such
Patients, as they do upon an Order made by them; whereas it is more fit, that
the best experienced Surgeons ought to be chosen thereunto: those aforementioned
rough and rude Surgeons make show as if they had great judgment in the Art,
themselves alone are able to sound, groap and search in the Wound, and so with
their Instrument they search therein, as if they had lost some money in it, and
are like a blind man, which feels with his stick for his way.

Now when these rude Surgeons get a Wound into their hands to cure, then he
that has dressed the Wound already must show and let them see the Wound, by
reason of the judgment they are to give of it. But it is a thing not to be
suffered, to sound and to groap in the Wound, for reasons alleged in the first
part; the Patients advantage ought to be considered, and the rest regulated
accordingly.

Lastly, a Surgeon ought to observe his Patient, that he eat and drink not all
he has a mind to, of the which more shall be spoken hereafter. For Patients
are like Children, still desiring such things which are offensive and hurtful.
For if the Surgeon give liberty to Patients in this, then he would be accessory
to the evil that should ensue upon. Therefore he ought faithfully to warn him
to take heed to himself; for in case he should not do well, then all the fault
would be laid upon the Surgeon: if he before-warned, he does well to keep unto
it, if not, let him take what falls.

CHAP. III.
How a Patient ought to be kept in his diet, and other such like things.

HItherto it has been said, what knowledge a Surgeon ought to be of, and how
he must behave himself in many things, both toward himself, and then toward
his Patient. Now order requires further, that I come nearer to the business,
and speak more properly of the Wounds, and of their Cures: however things
hitherto spoken of concerns the business very much.

I will now touch things further, and first before I come to the cure and
healing of Wounds, me thinks it is good and necessary, to show in what manner a
wounded party ought to be kept in the diet, because this particular is many
times of as great concernment as the Medicine it self: yea, when things are
brought to a good pass by Medicaments, the same are spoiled and turned about by
immoderate feeding. Is it not often seen, that sound and strong bodies spoil
themselves with sound food? (I say nothing of unsound ones:) if they transgress
in the measure and time, what marvel is it then, if the like happens to
unsound and wounded parties?

With some vulnerary potions Wounds in part may be healed; and may thereby be
made worse also, and quite spoiled. Hence any understanding man may easily
judge, that a true moderateness in eating and drinking, is none of the least
things that are necessary unto healing.

A distinction is to be observed in the person, if it be man or woman, that the
Surgeon may fit either with a diet; A dist^nction to be had of circumstances
for it is not good indifferently to feed upon meats, for that which is good
for man proves very naught to a woman; and again, what is good for a woman is
naught for a man. The reason is well known, and in many examples made good, and
so I avoid herein any prolixity of discourse. And this distinction is also to
be observed in persons, whether the party be tender and slender, or whether of
a robust constitution, as the precedent Chapter made mention of. And according
to the distinction of persons a distinction to be observed in their diet; and
the Climate of the Country is to be observed also. For some Countries are
better, colder, drier and moister than others, and as these qualities are
contrary one to another, even so are the Inhabitants of these Countries in
their complexions contrary one to another? and that which is good for a
Saxonian in a Simptom, the same proves hurtful to an Italian in that weakness.
I will say nothing here of the age, whether the wounded party be young or old,
because every one ought to know, that this distinction also is not to be
slighted, as Experience teaches us. Neither will I mention the place where the
Wound is, be it inward or outward, above or below, before or behind: Neither
will I make any words of the time, in which a party is wounded, whether it be
done in Summer or Winter. For I do not believe that any Surgeon is so rude and
ignorant, that should not be sensible of, that a distinction is to be had of a
Summer and of a Winter Season, touching heat and cold: And I mentioned it only
for that end, that every one may see, that it is fit Surgeons should observe
such distinctions about persons, and still be regulated after the form and
condition of things, as well in the diet as elsewhere.

Touching the said diet; some have that custom, as soon Abuses in diet
forbidden and commanded.
as they have got a Patient into their hands presently forbid him Wine, Beer
and all good Meats, and make Decoctions for him, which are very unsavory, and
would make a sound body sick; however some meats are forbidden, as Cabbage,
Coleworts, Pork and Bacon, all manner of water Fowls and Fishes, because these
are of hard digestion, and give no good nourishment to the body; and such food
is allowed which nourishes well.

A certain Physician forbidding all meats to his Patient, was asked, what his
Patient should eat then? He said, young boiled Cocks: he was laughed at! What
diet is good for a wounded party? Use him like a Woman that lies in, according
to the custom of the several Countries; and I declare it further, not only in
general, but in particular also, as much as concerns eating and drinking.

Concerning the meats, let the wounded suffer no hunger, and what he has a
mind too let him have it, in case it be not hurtful to him, observing the sex,
age and climate of the Land, as you heard above. Neither ought the Patient to
be forced to eat this and that, which goes and is against his stomach, that
Nature may not be oppressed, whereby danger would be caused. And this must be
observed when the Patient has a stomach to eat. For sometimes Patients have
lost their stomach; in such a case what is to be done? Then endeavor to give
him some Cordials to corroborate his stomach. But in case the Patient will take
none? Then apply stomack-plaisters, and use the oil of Nutmegs and Mace.

I will set down how to make good broth for the wounded, to strengthen his
stomach withal.

Take a Hen, or in want of that a piece of lean Flesh, cut Good Pottage for the
wounded.
it in pieces, put it in a pot, put Calmus, Cinnamon and Salt to it as much as
will season it; lute the pot, and let it boil for three hours in a sufficient
quantity of water; at the opening of it you will have good broth, pleasant to
the Patients stomach; or boil and roast such things, as you shall think fitting
for him.

Touching his drink; wounded men being always more His drink.
dry than hungry, having lost much blood, their Liver striveth to have that
want supplied: besides, blood is like a food to the Wound, and drink generates
blood, and the more blood the drink breeds, the sooner the Wound heals. Hence
you may note, that the wounded must have drink sufficient, and let him not
suffer thirst, or keep him not too dry, as some usually do, for thereby
mischiefs are caused, as daily experience witnesses. But the distinction
mentioned at the beginning of this Chapter ought to be well observed, and let
the drink be neither too hot nor too cold, and not too much Salt to be used; ye
may permit him small Wine to drink, which is very good for such parties,
especially when the party has lost much blood; but no Wine is to be permitted,
if the Wound be mortal, and in the head, or any great Wound of the body, be it
inward or outward The same rule is to be kept in such Countries, which
affords but Beer. Let the drink be what it will, the Patient ought to be kept
in a cool temper rather than in a hot, in which case Barley water is of good use.

I advise no wounded party to drink great draughts at a No great draught good
for them.
time, for such hasty drinking oppresses the Liver, which is hot and dry, and
would prove no better, then when oil is poured into fire to quench it withal,
and thereby the Liver would be obstructed and hindered in her sending forth
nourishment to the rest of the members, as being oppressed and hindered in her
operation, which would cause great inconveniences, and a slime would settle
about the Liver and choke her, and being thus obstructed, how can the veins
receive any blood, and you may easily guess what the issue would be.

Touching other things, the Surgeon ought to observe, Hasty motion hurtful
that the Patient do not stir and move too hastily, whereby great pains would
be occasioned unto him, as the Gout, Falling Sickness, Fever, Cramp,
Inflammation and such like are caused by such violent motions, chiefly, let
wounded parties not practice Venereous lusts, whereby the worst accidents are
caused.

A Surgeon observing all these things carefully, then there is hope, by Gods
help, of good success in his Art, for the good of his Patient, and the Patient
also ought to behave himself accordingly. For all dorh not lie in the teaching,
but in the learning also. For if a Patient be unruly, not caring for the
Surgeons instruction, but fall on gourmandizing and drunkning, then no good is
to be looked for; because the Patient refusing all natural helps, like a Swine
trampling on Pearls, cannot expect any cure, and the Surgeon loses his credit
and reputation, and all his pains he bestowed will be in vain.

CHAP. IV.
Of three accidents commonly befalling wounded men, a weak stomach, a stoppage
in the urine, and not going to stool, how these are to be remedied.

WOunded men are subject unto many Diseases, as Experience shows, among the
rest there are three things which commonly befall wounded men.

First, a Patient that has lost much blood has a weak stomach, which keeps
not his meat nor digesteth it, but vomiteth it up, whereby he falls into great
danger, and the Wound shuts not, nor is it fed naturally, and the healing is
put back.

Besides this, his urine also is stopped, and can hardly make any water, whereby
inflammations and other mischiefs are occasioned.

Lastly, the wounded are bound in their body, cannot go to stool, and this
usually befalls wounded men, whereby gripings in the belly are caused: these
three accidents must be helped in the following manner.

Touching the stomach, to help him to right, that he may To help the vomiting.
keep his meat, make use of this following Receipt: Take Mint, Wormwood, ana M
1. Ginger, Calmus and Nutmegs cut small, ana ss. boil these in Wine and Water
for an hour together, then take a great sponge, or in want of it a four doubled
cloth, dip it in the foresaid boiled liquor, press it out again, and apply it
hot to the stomach, his vomiting will be stayed; this must be iterated twelve
times a day, and will cause an appetite. Vomiting is not very dangerous, and is
stayed sometimes of its own accord, and is not much to be regarded, unless it
hold the Patient vehemently, then is it time to help him.

Touching the stopping of the urine, the following Receipt To help the stopping
in the urine.
I made use of with good success. Take Annise seed 2. put it in a pewter
bottle, pour Water to it lb 1. keep it stopped, and boil it in a Kettle full of
Water, in this Annise seed water dip a sponge, apply it to the Patients privy
members as hot as he is able to endure it, this provokes urine. And if this be
too weak, and does not prevail, then the Receipt must be made stronger thus:
Annise seed, and parsley seed, ana 1. Maidenhair M 1. Berberries 1. boil these
in Vinegar and Water, to one pint of Vinegar put three quarts of Water, boil
away a third part of it, and use it as you heard above. And if these outward
means will not help, and the Patient is pained in his Urine, then inward means
must be used: Viz. Maidenhair, Alkekengi, and oculi cancrorum, take a
sufficient quantity of these, as of Maidenhair ss. of Alkekengi or
Winter-cherries 1. lay it in the Patients drink, and let him eat the Oculi
Cancrorum, doubtless it will provoke his Urine, in case outward means be used
also.

Touching his going to stool, this is not much to be set by, To help him to
stool
especially when the wounded ought to lie on bed: but if he has no stool in
three or four days, then is it time to look to his back door. Some think to
remedy this with purging, but in my judgment it is not good, it is always
accompanied with danger, especially in head-wounds: it is better to make
Suppositories of Honey and Mice turds mingled with Salt, and if that will not
help, then make a Glister of Mallows, oil of Cammomil and flesh-broth, and put
Salt to it, and minister it: and if that be two weak, then Electuarium
Diaphenicum ss. oil of Cammomil 3. Mallows ss. beaten, pour on these a quart of
Water, (Flesh-broth were better) or Goats Milk, stir it well about, apply it
neither too hot nor too cold, you will soon see the effect of it, you may put
Salt to it if need. But in case the wounded should be purged, then the safest
way is to make a Potion of Seen leaves, and Rubarb, and minister it.

Thus much of those three accidents, usually befalling wounded men: sometimes
other Diseases are incident also, which are to be remedied as there is occasion
for: Of other Simptoms which happen unto Wounds, shall be treated in the next
part of this Book, where I intend to write of them.

CHAP. V.
How a Surgeon (...) himself about his Swathing-bands, and other Manuals.

ALL manner of Arts being invented through experimental knowledge and exact
observations, and even till now, dies diem docet, one day teaches another, I
hold it a thing impossible, considering the brevity of man's life, that an Art
can be so exactly learned, but the after-comers find somewhat more in their
practical part; and so it is impossible to set all down, what belongs to
Surgery. As much as is known to me I will communicate in the following Chapter.

Note, the dressing of a Wound is of great concernment, to handle it well, and
to use and take notice of advantages, which some little regard, and dress their
Wounds without any difference or distinction, whereby they effect this, that
they lame those, which could be set upright if, they had been honestly looked
too. Sometimes it happens, that neither the Wound nor the Medicine applied is
in fault, but the fault was committed at the dressing. A Wound may be furthered
in the healing, if well dressed and bound: and a Wound may be spoiled in the
dressing, and a lameness caused: as when a wounded member is bound too hard,
then is a swelling caused, the Wound is choked, having left no vent to help it
self and to receive any life: yea, I say this, that if a Wound were only kept
clean, and duly dressed, it would sooner heal, than if all the Art of Medicine
had been used, and all the Poultesses applied to it.

Seeing that binding is of great consequence, therefore Take notice of the
binding.
take good notice of all the parts of the body, and chiefly of those that are
dangerous; in some Wounds there is great danger, in some there is less, and
that according to their places.

And observe exactly the Wounds on the Shinns, Knees, Cartilages, Arms, Hands,
and where there is any joint, for those are dangerous, require great care, by
reason of unhappy Simptoms, which easily fall i^ (...).

Touching other Wounds in the point of ^^ck, Sides, Neck, Throat and Head,
those also must (...) looked to, but require not such exactness in the
dressing, and are for the most part dressed so, that the Medicine applied may
not fall off.

There are some Wounds also, with a flap hanging down, which require a careful
dressing.

Those that have undertaken Surgery, must have a care to be ready, and have in
readiness Salves, Plasters and other Surgeons must be ready at all times.
necessary Medicines, well prepared, that at what time soever any Patient be
brought to them, he may find good counsel and present help, and not to tarry
for their readiness, or stay till they make and prepare something, which
tarrying would prove hurtful and prejudicial to the wounded, by reason of his
bleeding, and other disturbations; for the readier you are to dress him, the
better the healing prospers, and the more credit it will be for you. And when
any comes to be dressed, you ought to endeavor to be ready with your
Medicines, Plasters, Salves, Lints, Roulers, that the Wound be not kept long
undressed, and be speedily covered and closed.

And that must be observed for that reason, that the air be Air hurtful to
Wounds.
kept out as much as possible it may, for air does hurt to the Wound,
especially air is contrary to veins, sinews and joints, usually causing cramps
and stitches; and the room, in which the Patient is dressed, ought to be kept
shut and closed, to keep out the air and wind.

A Surgeon ought to be careful, that he breath not into the Not to breath into
Wounds.
Wound, especially when he is yet fasting, and is to turn away his mouth from
the Wound, or ought to put a cloth before his mouth, if need, for such
breathing may cause that a water may stick to the Wound, and incline it to a
rottenness. But this is chiefly noted in Head-wounds, when the Pan or the Dura
matter is wounded, for then it is dangerous.

Some Surgeons have that custom at the dressing of The blood in the Wound is to
be let alone.
Wounds, that they wash the blood out they find in the Wound, thinking it to be
done very well, freeing it from uncleanness, and this they do at the first
dressing. But it is an abuse, and a thing contrary; no blood should be washed
out of the Wound, but let it be there, if settled; for a congealed blood in the
Wound is no hurt unto it, and is rather beneficial, by keeping out the air,
which otherwise would hurt the sinews, and it hinders the bleeding of the
veins, which they would do, if the congealed blood be wiped out; it takes away
the flesh, for it is a right flesh-glue, exceeding a Sarcocolla, and it heals
other Wounds if used, much more that where it lies, and it furthereth the
matter in the Wound, and hasteneth the healing, and though it were not so, yet
it breaks forth gently without any pain, and that of its own accord from
beneath upward: therefore in that particular molest and trouble the Wound no
further, as to wipe out the blood.

An honest Surgeon ought to have care of wounded joints, be the Wounds great or
small, and observe a distinction in their dressings, and bind them not too
hard: a small joint must not be bound so hard as a great one, it cannot brook
with it.

A Surgeon for the general ought to endeavor to order his bindings so, that
the Wound be kept together, and the joints in the hands ought to be dressed and
bound commodiously, whereby lamenesses are prevented.

Touching the binding it self, how it must be performed, Note the manner of
binding.
note thus: No joint, neither from above, nor from below, must be bound in the
beginning, but let it alone, otherwise the blood is driven inward or down,
which would cause a putrefaction, and an inflammation; but that binding must
begin in a convenient place, either higher or lower then the joint, and that
very gently: thus dangers will be avoided, and swellings prevented, which in
Wounds commonly appear,

The Swathing-bands must be made choice of also, for all What swadling-bands
they must use.
do not fit, nor are good for it. For a Wound that is to be dressed, requires
that the swathing-bands be soft, and keep asunder, that they may lie on the
closer: such swathing-bands are best made of old and worn linen, because they
are very soft, yield the sooner, being retched and pulled, lie close on, keep
the Medicine the better to the Wound, and cause no trouble nor molestation. But
such Swathing-bands, which purposely are woven with two selfedges, or such that
are hemmed on both sides and ends, these are altogether unfit for Wounds,
because such hems cut deep prints into the flesh.

Thus much of the Swathing-bands: more could be said in that behalf, but to
bring in all what could be said, would be too great a labor. He that desires
more, let him advise with Experience, which is able to put a Knighthood upon
him.

CHAP. VI.
Of Head-wounds, what behavior the Surgeon is to be of, both toward himself,
and toward the Cure.

NOw it is time to come to the Wound it self, and to describe As the Wound
lies, so it must be cured.
the cure thereof as it ought to be; hitherto I swarved round about; Here great
care ought to be had about the condition and distinction of it: For as the
Wounds lie distinctly, so they must be cured distinctly; and as the one part of
the body is stronger than the other, so the Medicines must be prepared
accordingly. For a Head-wound cannot brook with such strong Medicines as a
Wound may in the leg; and a Wound in a joint cannot endure such great clotter
as that which is in the flesh: these things ought to be observed, and more
shall be spoken of in the following Chapters.

And I will begin with the Wounds in the head: I know what order I ought to
keep in their description: namely, first of the slighter Wounds, afterward of
the broken Skull, and then of others also, and to speak of their several cures.
But this order I do not observe, for that reason, because they are cured almost
one way. Therefore I will write only of dangerous Wounds of the head, where
not only the skin is broken, but the Skull also, and such like. For he that
can cure such a dangerous Wound, truly he will be able to cure a slighter Wound.

This used order serves to show how dangerous Wounds are. For to say they
appear clear and clean, but afterward they cast up loose and shattered pieces
of flesh or bone, and one thing or other appears, and so I regulate my self
accordingly in the doctrinals, touching the Head-wounds, and show the meanest
and safest way to heal them, as Nature allows, and Experience bears witness.

All Wounds in the head are dangerous, commonly they bring death along, by
reason of the many and heavy simptoms they are subject unto: as there is the
Cramp, arthritick, or Palsy, Apoplexy, and many more, and especially are they
dangerous, when the pan or scull is broken, and more dangerous are they, when
the skin of the brain is hurt and wounded, and most dangerous it is, when the
brain is touched, as it falls out sometimes.

Therefore a Surgeon ought to be the more careful, and the wounded also must
not be wanting to himself. For where wood and field, as they say, hold
together, commonly a good year comes after, Therefore the Patient must be ruled
by the Surgeon, and though the means used are somewhat rough, yet he ought to
consider, that Malus nodus malum requirit caneum.

The Surgeon is to observe, that he govern the Patient with a good diet, as the
condition of the Wound requires, as you heard in the precedent Chapter.

Touching his speaking, the Patient ought to be as sparing in it as possibly
may be, and if he speaks, let him speak softly, and the room he lies in must
be kept quiet and still. And the Surgeon must place the Patient orderly in his
lying especially when the Wound is dangerous, then the Patient must be ruled,
and lie still in his bed, lie high, even as if he were sitting, the higher the
better, and that for reasons well known, and the chamber must be kept dark for
quietness sake.

If a wounded party be brought unto you, dress him quickly thus: Cut off the
hair round about the Wound, in case the Wound bleedeth much, that the blood may
the sooner be stenched, and danger of death be prevented: the hair being cut
off, stench the blood with Cotten-wool, or with lints, as you shall hear
hereafter, and then dress and bind him as it is the fashion.

But in case the Wound does not bleed (as it falls out sometimes) or only
weepeth, then there is no need of bloud-stenching, but lay a Head-plaister to
it, after the manner of an Opodeldoch, so that the Wound be covered broad and
well every way, and then lay a soft bolster upon, and bind it that it do not
fall off. All this must be done quick and nimbly, that not much of the air
come, whereby inconvenience soon is caused, if the dressing of the Wound be
delayed.

And the Surgeon ought to dress the party in a close chamber, especially at the
second dressing, to keep out the air, because air endangers the Wound, as you
heard already; the chamber also must be warm, according to the years season,
for cold is hurtful to the Patient, causing Cramps, the which to prevent, let
his neck and back bone be anointed with warm oil, as with Cammomil oil, and
such like, at the several dressings.

Touching the bands; bind it not too hard, and keep measure herein, as you
ought in all other things. But if it be a very dangerous Wound, it needs be
dressed but once a day the two first days, after that you may dress it twice a
day. But I approve but of one dressing a day, unless the matter come too much,
then two dressings a day will serve.

Have a care you use not much the Seeker to search in the Wound withal, to
find out its depth, breadth and length; the Wound does not brook with it, but
desires a good and a short work, for the reason alleged in its due place.

You ought not to stitch any Head-wound, because it is Seeking and stitching in
Head-wounds is forbidden.
dangerous, whereby an inflammation and anger soon is caused, which will be of
an ill consequence.

Having dressed the Wound, and observed every thing well, then is it
advisable, that in case the Wound did not bleed, the Patient be phlebotomized
the next day. But if his Wound has sufficiently bled, then Phlebotomy may be
forborne and delayed for a fitter time.

The blood being stenched, and the Wound dressed, and stayed there its due
time, then at the taking off the blood-stencher go as neatly and gently about
it as possibly you may, that you move not the Wound to bleeding again, which a
rough dealing would cause, when the bloud-stencher is taken out by force, which
puts the healing by, and causes worse things. Therefore be careful, tender and
gentle in the opening of the Wound.

And in case the scull and the brain is opened, then at the taking off the
bloud-stencher be careful that nothing fall Brain opened.
upon the brain, for that cannot brook the least thing to lie upon it.
Therefore if any thing be fallen in, be it but the smallest hair, it presently
falls on cleansing it self, and striveth to cast it out. But what pains,
beatings, pantings it causes to the Patients head, may easily be judged, for I
am not able to express his misery. You must not use greasy things to such a
Wound, also oils, ointments, because they do no good, for the reason quoted
above. Therefore my advise is, not to use any Pouders, Waters, Oils, Salves,
which some do make and apply them to the Scull and the Dura matter: for I
marvelled much, that in this particular Nature was not better regarded, whereas
neither the scull nor the brain can endure any thing. For the most were of
opinion, that things good for the head may be useful also for Head-wounds, if
applied; like the Bore, who thought the Plaster, that should be applied to the
stomach without, would do better within, and so he swallowed it, and by his
good belief he was healed. Others would mend the matter, and mixed other things
with Aqua vitae, and poured it into the Wound, and dipped lint in it, and laid it
to the Scull or Pia matter; all which in Head wounds, where the brains Dura
matter is opened, are mere poison, whereby apparent dangers are caused.
Therefore let none be deceived, that whether Pia matter be hurt or no to use
such like things; and have a care that nothing fall upon it.

And if you intend to make use of an Ointment besides Ointments Salves and
Plasters used.
the Plaster, hoping it will do better, and dispatch the cure the sooner, then
do thus.

First, make ready fine, clean, white lint, and lay it into the Wound gently,
not roughly, as they usually do, nor to thrust it in, nor deeper than the scull
is, and that the ends of such lints do hang over the Wound, that they may with
more ease be taken out again; upon these lints others may be laid of the same
stuff, which with the Ointment must be made wet, which is set down hereafter,
but not too much, that nothing drop from it upon the Pia matter, then apply the
Head-plaister upon, and dress the Patient warm, covering him with a soft
bolster, and observe all things well which hither to have been spoken of, then
doubtless with Gods help all will be well.

And being it happens commonly in Head-wounds, How to deal wi^h these
splinters in Head-wounds.
that the Scull is wounded, and some bones are shattered, some whereof are
quite loose, and some do hang by a little, and some of them stick downwards on
the Pia matter, and some of them are beaten quite into the brain. Here a Surgeon
has need to regulate himself accordingly: no such small bone or splinter ought
to be taken out, unless it be free and loose; and are to be taken out very
gently and cautiously: be not afraid, though they hang by a little and are not
quite loose, then go on in your Art as well as you learned it. Nature her self
will in time loosen those splinters, and expel them in good time; and Nature
must be assisted here with vulnerary Potions, as you shall here of them
hereafter.

In case a splinter hangs within the Cranium downwards, which may be known by
a certain sign, then you must Splinters hanging inwards.
look to it, by reason of the difficulty which is at hand. For when the brain
raises, as commonly it does, then the brain touches such down-hanging
splinters, with raging and pricking, and makes a short time seem to be very
long to the Patient: with this raging, beating and panting, Pia matter is often
broke thorough, and the brain it self hurt, upon which, nothing so sure, as
death does ensue, or at least a mortal Chronical Imposthume. Therefore if by a
sign you can observe, that from within such a shattered splinter hangs
downward, then take it out with an Instrument, as well as ye can, though some
force be used.

In case you cannot come to the splinter, then you must make room to it, and
expel evil with evil, thereupon cut the In case the splinter cannot be come by.
hair close round about the Wound, yet so, that none fall into the Wound, then
cut that skin and scull cross way, where that splinter lies; loosen the skin
off the scull, and then see, whether you can get it out without any further
trouble. And if you cannot come near it that way, then you must use a very
sharp incision knife, and take out that piece with the on-hanging splinter. But
if you could see that little bone, then cut it off even with a sharp knife.
This is the shortest, safest and best way to deal upon such like dangerous
Wounds: from hence we observe, that the scull being broken may easily be dealt
withal with carving and cutting, because in such cases there are always
certain rents at hand, so that the cutting goes off easily from the hand:
otherwise where these rents are not, then is it hard to deal with.

And when you observe, that from the scull some little bones are fallen upon
the brains, and that the vulnerary potion and the plaster cannot drive it out,
which is not done in haste neither; then they may be taken out with the
Core-tongues, and have a care that the Piamater be not laid hold on, and pulled
asunder, which would cause a Palsy or Apoplexy.

CHAP. VII.
Of other Simptoms, which are incident in Head-wounds, and how they are dealt
withal.

IT falls out in Head-wounds, that Biles appear round Biles in Head-wounds.
about, which in time must be opposed, before it come to any simptom. For the
blood and the matter is settled under them, and soon cause pains to the
Patient, if not remedied in time.

This to prevent, as often as the Patient is dressed, to stroke them gently,
and press that matter out at the Wound: with your Swathing-bands and Bolsters
you must be so careful, that the matter be forced to come forth at the Wound.

It usually falls out also in Head-wounds, that the skin looseneth The skin
loosened from the bone.
off from the bone, and such Biles grow there as you heard of now, where the
blood and matter gathers, and puts the Patient to miserable pains, and that
is easily discerned; for then the Patients eyelids do swell, especially when
their rising appears, which feels soft here and there in the head.

This must in time be remedied, else the blood would settle into the eyes,
which hardly or never will be gotten from thence; yea, the Patient would be in
a deadly peril if it should be delayed. Therefore remove these gathered
matters in time, and drive them out at the Wound. And in case this matter would
not yield unto this, then lance these Biles, and let the matter out, and heal
them again without delay, that you cause no other trouble.

It happens sometimes, that the scull by a heavy blow is bowed inward, and
there happens a great Bile in that How to help a bowed scul.
place, and that sometimes is done without hurting or breaking the skin, and is
congealed blood beneath it; some have an open Wound, and some have the scull
only bowed without the skin broken, and sometimes not without splinters: In
such dangerous cases a Surgeon may well look about him. For if the brains be
crushed, then all remedies are used in vain, nothing will help, though the scull
could and should be put to the right place, unless God miraculously strengthen
or put new strengths into the Patient. Therefore I will be silentin such cases,
and show how others are to be dealt withal.

In this particular, most of the Surgeons say, that when such a hollow and
bowed scull comes to be cured, the same must be raised with a Screw, but of
this Screw I cannot approve, because it causes splinters and more troubles,
and I never found any good was done with it, which in this particular gave
occasion to me to study upon a better way, unto which (next God) I took Nature
for my help.

If such a case is brought to you to be cured, then carefully feel with your
finger, whether there be any fraction or congealed blood at hand, and ask the
Patient whether he be pricked, or how he feels himself: if you find congealed
blood, then presently lance the place, let the matter run out. For this must be
a common rule unto you, as soon as you suspect any thing under such an inbow'd
hole, be it blood, a fracture, a little bone, a splinter, then with one cut you
must lance it, to press out the matter, and to make vent. For such holes are
sooner brought to right when they have vent and are cleansed, then when they
are shut up: and for that reason you must lance it, that you be the surer of
the thing, else you will be forced to cut off such hurts, by reason of the
splinters or little bones, which come to the innermost part of the scull, and
so cause Imposthumations, which at last must be cut up, together with a piece
of the scull, as has been said.

In such cases, as generally has been said in the precedent Chapter, where the
scull is bowed, Phlebotomy must not be neglected, and that in both arms, as
occasion shall serve: use no greasy things, as Oils, Waters, Ointments,
Coolers, etc. but the Wound must be kept dry; neither must the in-bowed scull
be oppressed with Cataplasmes, or such like Compounds, as some use to do. Only
stick to your Head-plaisters, and apply them the thicker, that no air may get
in: use no tents into such open hurts, neither thrust any thing into, with the
Seeker, or any other Instrument. For besides other incommodities which are
caused thereby, as was showed in the first part, the Scull is brought by that
means to that pass, that it will receive nothing, and must of necessity be
shaved; which may well be omitted, if rightly proceeded in other things.
However, not regarding the mis-handling: it happens in some falls and blows,
that the skin goes off from the bone, and will embrace no more one another.
Here of necessity you are forced with a sharp knife to shave or to scrape the
bones, that you may get unto a fresh bottom. But in case by feeling no more can
be found or felt, but only the hole or fall, then omitlancing; and use only
the Head-plaister, together with the vulnerary Potion, it will do well enough,
and by the help of Nature, which is ready to help her self, it will come to a
good end.

Touching the Trepan, make no use of it, and let it not trouble you, though the
scull be bowed; for the head is able to bear with that hollowness without any
hurt or prejudice, because a great hollowness and emptiness is below it, and
not filled. Only good care must be had, that no ill simptoms may fall into.
Therefore Phlebotomize the party, and in the rest follow the government of the
curing the Wound. But in case the scull be in bowed very much, then open it
with a sharp knife, and at the hollowest part, where it is deepest, raise it
again with a convenient Instrument, and bring it into its due place, as well as
possible it may be done.

In case the pan of the head or scull be forcibly bowed inwards, which the
sword at the b^ow could not rise, and made a pit or hole, as you heard above,
and the blood settleth there, in this case the skin, which rose thus, must be
instantly lanced, and let the blood run out, then it will sit down again and
sink, then you may easily feel, whether there be any fracture in the scull, or
any splinter. It happens also at the lancing of such deep pits or holes, that
the skin does not sink, but remains as it is cast up. In this case cut it with
Sisers cross way, then the heads skin will sink again, and in a short time
after will heal to it.

In case at such a blow or fall, where the scull is in-bowed, there be a Wound,
then dress it, as hitherto you have heard, how Head-wounds are dressed.

And if there any bone be loose, then take it out, but in case it hangs yet,
and sticks inward, then raise it outward again with an Instrument into his
former place. Let it stand so, use convenient means, and let Nature provide for
the rest, I know she will not be wanting unto her self.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Headache after the Cure, and how that is to be helped. How to make the
subtle Head ointment, with remarkable examples of Head-wounds cured. Headache
after the cure of a Head-wound.


IT happens sometimes, after that a Wound has been fully cured, that the
Patient after two, three or more days, or after so many weeks feels pains in
his head, and the same pains do increase more and more, and many die of it; for
all Surgeons do not understand the cause thereof, and how the same were to be
helped, of the which I will inform you here.

First, when a Head-wound is healed, and rises after the When a Wound does
swell after healing.
healing, and swells, and is very painful, then lance the Wound presently,
for it signifies that some splinter would fain be out, and if you do not open
it, then the matter would make a mighty great hole, and break out in another
place, which would cause many simptoms and troubles, and the blow would come on
a fresh; therefore look you give vent to that matter, and when such things are
opened, then the plaster will draw out the splinter, together with the matter
blood and water, and if you think it good, you may let him use an expulsive
vulnerary potion, then the Wound will be cleansed and cured.

Secondly, look well to these following signs; if the Patient complains of
great pains, feels great prickings in the head, and these smarting pains
increase more and more, and cannot endure to be touched in that place where the
Wound formerly was, yet no swelling nor rising of the skin appears, as you
heard formerly, then is it a sign, that within the scull there is a splinter,
which hangs inward, and causes these prickings; in this case that place must
be lanced instantly, and the splinter must be taken out, as has been said.

Thirdly, In case the Patient complains more and more after the Cure, not
only of the place where he was cured, but all his head is panting and
broyling, accompanied with extreme pains. This is a sign, that congealed blood
is gathered under the scull, and is turned to an Imposthume. And if his eyes be
swelled, and some blood and matter runs out of his nostrils, then is it a more
sign of it.

This infirmity may, with Gods help, be cured easily, as has been said
already: Viz. Cut off the hairs in the place where the pains are, lance the
skin cross way to the scull, in the breadth of half a Crown, and put back the
four pieces, that the scull be naked, then cut with a Raisor or other Knife a
Wound into the scull, open it, that you may look into it, then the matter will
start out against ye, and the Patient will be eased; and if there be any
splinter at hand, you may easily see it, and take it out, as you have heard
before. This is the only way to help such a Patient. Such Wounds now made are
soon healed again, only govern the Patient well, as is fitting, and as I have
informed you before: You must lay nothing to his brains, as I told you before,
for the brains will expel the things of their own accord, when they have a vent
for it, without any further help, and suffer not any strange matter to stay or
abide there.

Touching the cutting up of the scull, note, that there is Note the cutting up
of the scull.
no difficulty in it, and is done easily and quickly. For the scull gapeth and
opens, if there be any splinters or little bones there, therefore with a
little help those small bones may be taken out; only look narrowly to it,
whether there be any fracture at hand, for you may easily discern, whether a
splinter within goes down and inwards, or whether there be any more of
congealed blood there. But if you find after the opening of the skin, neither
fracture nor scissure, a hundred to one but there is, and however you are sure,
that the scull must be opened, be it either by reason of the congealed blood,
or by reason of an Imposthume; take a well turned sharp borer, and bore
thorough the scull at the place where the pain is, then the matter will startle
out, and when the place is almost thorough bored, then work gently, and look
well to it, that you cause no small bones with the boring to fall into the
hollow of the head, for if so, then you will find somewhat to do, and not
without danger.

In this case some will have (though I never had need Another way to open the
scull.
of) that when the matter at the first opening does not appear, then another
hole, a fingers breadth from the first, is to be bored, and then to cut both
these holes into one, and so to make a Wound into the scull: into that made
hole you may see with a lighted candle in a dark place, and understand the
cause; if you find then either congealed blood or a swelling, then touch it
only a little with an Instrument, as soon as it feels vent, it will soon
come forth at the Wound. I should like this way well enough, in case any
splinter or loose bones be there. But it is your duty to study in what manner
it may be done most fitly and conveniently, as the condition of the case
requires, and to regulate your self accordingly. For it is impossible to set
all down in writing, only be mindful of the vulnerary potion, as you shall
hereafter hear of.

Before the close of this matter, I will tell you how you shall prepare the
Head-plaisters, and the thin ointment, so To make Head-plaisters.
often mentioned hitherto.

Make the Head plaster thus: Of Wax 8. of washed Turpentine 4. of oil of Roses
2. of the juice of Bettony 6. put all these into a pan, let it boil, let all
the joyce boil away, when the other are melted, then take it off the fire, and
put thereto pulverized Colophonium ss Mastix, Frankincense, Myrrh, of each half
a dram; this must be continually stirred, till it be so cold, that you may
touch it with your hands, then work among it Oleum Storacis Calamitae ss, make
it up into rouls, and keep it clean for use.

This plaster cleanses Wounds, leaves no unclean thing in them, and is
pleasant and proper for the brains, and the whole head. Therefore use it as it
ought, it will not deceive you, and does better than Oils, Aqua vitae, Waters,
Salves, as you heard above.

I will teach you another Head plaster, which is yet better.

Wax lb 1, Turpentine 6. melt these together, being well heated, pour it into
Rose water, let it cool; take it Another Head-plaister.
out and melt it again, and look that the Rose water come all away: afterward
take of pulverized Sanicle 1. and stray it into the melted Wax, and then all
these following pieces; Frankincense, Mastix, Myrrh, ana 1. prepared Calmystone
2. Terra sigillata, or prepared Bole armoniack, ss all which must be purely
beaten and strayed into: take it off the fire, and stir it continually till it
be cold; then take it out of the pan, and work it with Cammomil oil, make it
into roules, and then into cakes, and keep them for use.

Touching the thin Head salve, make it thus:

Heart Suet ss purely skimm'd Honey ss Aloes hepatick Head-ointment or salve.
purely beaten 1. melt the Suet, stir the Honey and Aloes among it till it be
cold, then you have a pure subtle Salve for the head; at the using of it,
spread a little of it on a linen, and apply it to the Wound; take heed that
nothing of it fall on the brain, which can endure nothing at all. These are the
Receipts I impart unto you.

Let it not be strange unto you, that I set down no more Many Receipts cause
errors.
Receipts, which I could easily do. But to what end are pluralities of Receipts
good for, but to confound him that is to make use of them, insomuch that he
knows not which to choose, or which to trust most unto. A Receipt which is
approved is better than a thousand which prove false. He that is well grounded
in Surgery will find Receipts enough in his daily practice. For the Art
consists as well in the knowledge of Simptoms, as in the knowledge of
Simples. He that well knows these two, will soon compose Receipts, either to
weaken or to strengthen them in their virtue, and all according to the
condition of the Wound.

Thus much be said of the Head-wounds. Touching the Cramp and other accidents
in Head-wounds, the same shall be showed unto the Reader in its due place.

Now I will set down some examples of Head-wounds, which, through Gods help,
have been strangely cured; as I have copied them out of my Fathers writing,
after his death.

I have, says he, had occasion to dress one by night in all haste, because he
did bleed so much, that I was afraid he would die under my hands before I could
dress him. For from his scull was cut off a great part, hair, skin, bone and
all clean away, and then on the left side by the temple a great piece was cut
off, skin, bone and all was gone: this Wound looked so ghastly, that I was
amazed at it, for it did bleed so vehemently, and it was so great, that I could
not cover it with my hand. I dressed it in haste thus: I covered the Wound with
Mullipuffs, and bound it with broad Swathing-bands, and did no more to it, for
I thought no other, but the Patient would die under my hands; I was forced to
make all the haste I could, and had no time to cut the hair away about the
Wound. The next day taking off the uppermost rouler, there I found the lint
mullipuff stick close to the Wound, which I let alone, and poured round about
warmed oil of Roses, with some of that oil also I anointed the Patient his
neck and back bone, and so I dressed him again: At the next dressing I took off
no more of that Wool, but that which easily came off, and daily I anointed his
back with Cammomil oil warmed. I dressed him still in a dark still chamber,
where no air should fall on his brain; and I had a care also, that none of my
breath came into the Wound, and the things I intended to use to the Wound I had
in readiness, that he in the dressing might not be delayed. The Patient was
well governed in his diet, and quiet, according to order. The lint together
with the blood came purely off from the Wound; but the brain began to swell,
and in the outside the scull opened, where the brain pressed thorough all
along, which a knife might have taken off, and it did pant and work, as if it
would come forth and change his place, which it did more in the nether Wound,
than in the upper, where the brain was not touched. To all which I did nothing,
but dressed the Wound with the wound-plaister three doubled, so that no air
might come to it. At the tenth day the upper Wound inclined to healing, and the
brains began to settle by little and little, and grew so little, that I could
have laid a finger betwixt the scull and the brain, thus empty grew the head.
And the brain sinking thus, I spied a little thing lying on the brain, which
was not quite separated, in the rest it was wholly pure: on the Pia matter there
began to grow flesh, which grew bigger and bigger; I wondered, that in few
days there could grow so much flesh: but where that said impure splinter did
lie, there it stunk extremely, and would not come to any healing; at last the
said splinter began to stir to and fro in the Wound, with a subtle linen I
took off nimbly as much as would stick to the cloth, the rest which clung not
to the cloth I left there, for I still was afraid that he would die under my
hands, though the twenty eight day was past already. At last I thrust that
little splinter away also, so that I could see what was beneath it. There I
found (there were present many honorable persons) that the brain was hurt very
little, of the breadth of half a fingers joint; in that place there was always
a moisture, as often as it was wiped away, presently another came into the
place, and the flesh in it round about looked no other than like a raw Wound,
in which there lies a splinter, which hinders the healing of it: it grew
thicker and thicker and soft, that I marvelled at it; yet it would never cover
that place where the brain was hurt. At last when the flesh increased, in one
night it covered that place wholly, so that I saw no more moistness, only some
matter lay there, And thus the whole head grew up with flesh, and I suffered
the flesh above the scull to grow out, and hindered it not, for here his scull
could not be metled withal. Now suffering this flesh to overgrow, then I straid
in that flesh round about burnt Alum, but none into the middle, for there he
could endure none. Afterward the flesh pressed forth at the Wound and scul so
fast, that it drove out some little bones that were loose in the Wound, at
which I wondered not a little, that so many small bones should come forth out
at the Wound, At last he was cured of this dangerous Wound, and the flesh was
good and sound, and not soft (as commonly it is:) for the which he owed thanks
to God, without whose gracious help such remarkable cures cannot be performed;
and not every one rises sound from his bed of such heavy Wounds.

Hereto serves this ensuing example also, that every one may see, that nothing
ought to be laid upon the Cerebrum, and the pia Matter, because Nature in that
particular works better, than any Surgeon may perform with his Medicaments.

In the Jurisdiction of Bern it happened, that one received An example of a
splinter.
a Wound in the head, where the scull to the eye seemed not hurt, because his
Surgeon dawbed it up in haste: But ten days after the Patient began to
complain, every day more and more, till at last he could have no rest: it was
time then to send for a Surgeon; among the rest I was called; after
consultation had over the condition of the Patient, I opened his scul, at the
opening of it there ran out much blood and matter; three days after within the
scull there was a splinter about the breadth of a finger, where I had much ado
before I could take it out, without further enlarging of the Wound; at last
being taken out, the Patient presently was at ease, and inclined to healing,
and was fully recovered from this accident.

I must quote one more: In the younger days of my traveling for to get
experience, at Nurnberg I met with an Another example.
acquaintance, being a Student, this Scholar was wounded on his head by a
Cuttler with an old blade, and was dressed by the City Barber-Surgeon, who had
good experience, and the Wound seeming little to the eye was soon cured, and
both parties thought all had been well. Now hear what happened: ten days after
the Patient sickneth upon a sudden, grew very weak in the head, feeling
extreme pains in that place where the Wound was, and before he could be helped
he died. After his death his head was opened, to know the cause of his sudden
death, it was found justly, as you have heard in the former example.

These examples I thought to quote, and no more; for if these are not
understood, surely others will not be neither, though I should quote hundreds,
and if these be understood, then in such like causes Surgeons have sufficient
advertisement, whereby they may regulate themselves.

The Reader may take notice by these, that in Head-wounds I use no Balsams, no
Salves, no Oils, no Head-powder, nor any such like thing, name it what you
will: And stick only to the Head-plaister, but so, that it may be laid over
the Wound, after the manner of an Opodeldoch, there lies the Whole Art and
advantage; and if you use it in this manner, you effect more therewith, than
with all other Salves, Oils, Balsams, Pouders, that may be found in all
Europe. For if you apply these Plasters rightly, according unto Art, then the
Patient will be well, not only in his head, but also in his whole body; it
draws all heat out of the Wound, and brings broken bones and matters better
out of the Wound, than any tongs can pull it out; it covers the Wound in such
a manner, that no air can get in upon the brain, nor can any vapor get out,
which fitteth and becomes Head-wounds exceedingly. Therefore if you follow
this order, you will perform more than all those, which dance after the old
pipe and fiddle, as it is apparent among the Italians, French, Spanish, and
others: What a miserable thing is it amongst them, if they have in hand but a
small Wound in the head? How many die in that way, by reason of their old
abuses? I confess, the hot Climate in those parts may occasion somewhat. They
write such great Volumes, of this and that, and so confidently, that even to
this day they know not what to do, and yet they persuade themselves, that
others must believe and learn of them. I have been present more than once, that
Patients were possessed with heat, fevers, dryness, yea, the great heat took
away quite their senses; and there were used all kind of Medicines, Glisters,
Purges, Potions, Coolers, but all would not help. But after I had applied my
Plaster in the said manner, they mended, and without the use of any other
Medicine, all pain, anger and heat was gone: from thence I could well observe,
that their dangerous binding and dressing was the only cause of all these
mischiefs: and I may confidently say, that I have found the safest and fittest
manner, and the best, to dress Head-wounds. In new Wounds much groaping and
seeking is naught: I do not speak this by hearsay, but knowingly and
experimentally. For if you touch too hard new flesh, which is but newly grown,
it bleedeth presently, and separateth again: therefore have a care when you
intend to cover a bone in the head, for if you do but touch hard the borders
and outsides of such Wounds, they turn blew and go asunder, and will not so
easily close again or unite. Therefore you must take heed, to commit any fault
that way, for after it has been touched, it never closes so easily again.

Thus I will close the relation of these perilous Head-wounds, hoping you will
behave your self well, both in slight and dangerous Head-wounds; and therefore
I will write no more of the slight Head-wounds: Much more could be said, how
the causes of such mischiefs ought to be judged; but these are the chiefest
things, which may lead you to the knowledge of the rest.

CHAP. IX.
Of all kinds of Wounds in the Face, be they in the Forehead, Temples, Ears,
Nose, Cheeks, Chin, Eyes, how they ought to be cured, without leaving a scar
behind.

When I speak of Wounds in the Face, you must note, as has been said above,
that I mean not scratches, which Children or Women cause and make one another,
or Cats either, but such which bear and deserve such a name. In this Chapter I
will treat of the whole Face, of the Forehead, Temples, Ears, Eyes, Nose,
Cheeks and Chin.

Touching Wounds in the Forehead, these are to be dressed Wounds of ^he
Forehead.
as Head-wounds, yet are sooned healed than those on the Head.

Temple-wounds are more troublesome, because they bleed more, and are subject
to more simptoms than those in the Forehead, yet are cured like those of the
Head; thither I direct the Reader; only these must be kept very warm.

Note, that on the Temple is a sinew, which if that be cut, Temple-Wound.
it causes lameness in the jaw bone, which hardly, or not at all will be able
to stir, which to prevent, let the Patient gape sometimes as wide as ever he
can.

Wounds on the Nose and Ears are cured all one way; if Nose-wounds. Ear-wounds.
they hang downward^, then let them have one, two or three stitches, and the
stitches must be made even, and take heed you make not too many stitches; when
these begin to hold the flesh, then cut the stitches out again, and not let
them rot there, which would cause ghastly scarrs, and keep these Wounds well
together with roulers, because they are dangerous: Such Wounds heal freely,
though they hang but at a little piece.

But if a Nose or Ear is altogether grown cold at the stitching, be not amazed,
but stitch it on, and warm it with warmed Wine, in which is laid Sanicle, or
Housleek, and being well heated, then apply it, afterward dress it like a soft
Wound, and being healed to a skin, then let a scurfe grow upon, it will heal
the Nose finely.

Wounds on Chins heal easily and freely, if they be not cut downward, and need
no stitching; but if a flap hangs Chin-wounds.
down, then set two stitches. But, as was said by the Nose and Ear-wounds, to
prevent ugly scarrs, which stitches usually leave behind, let them be ripped up
again. Plasters which cling hard ought not to be laid to Chin-wounds, whereby
the tender and young healing would be broken again at the taking off the
plaster. No great advantage to be used at the healing of such Wounds, being
they are of a free healing; Wound-waters made of Honey and Wine are of good use
for such Wounds.

In case the jaw bone be displaced by a blow, it ought first of all to be put
in the right place; such Wounds, by reason Cheek-wounds.
of the jaws constant motion, do heal very hardly, not so easy as those in the
Cheeks. Use no greasy things to these Wounds, which would cause naughty flesh,
if not quite a fistulo; the manual herein is, to let the cure rest on a good
strong Wound-plaister, which will do it: Apply that Plaster warm and well
covered, and let the Patient gargarize twice or thrice a day, as occasion
serves: With this. Of Wine lb 1. of Water lb 4. of Oak leaves 1. burnt Allom
31 white, Vitriol 3 ss. Mingle these, let it have a strong walm. This
Gurgarisme, if the sooner used, keeps off proud flesh, and suffers no thing to
grow in the Wound.

This following Wound-water is to be used also: Of Cousolida major, Oak leaves,
ana M 2. boil these in two quarts of Water, boil some part of it away, let it
cool, let the Patient wash his mouth with it lukewarm, and he will be healed
quickly.

No Coolers are used to Eye-wounds made of the white of Eggs, as usually they
do; neither is Turnip water good, Eye-wounds.
which would make the Eyes sore, which abuse is very common. I have known some,
which held themselves great Surgeons, who held it for a great Masterpiece, to
outrun the Eye in a short time, and kill the heat therein. But this is a
horrible skill to spoil folks eye sight; these men little think upon Nature,
and how little do they regard her help. Better ways are to be considered of,
for the Eye-wounds are very dangerous.

To use cooling things, and to apply them outwardly, is advisable some way,
and I intend to describe something also. For the Eyes are slimy, and love slimy
things. If you have an Eye-wound in cure use this Collyrium, though metalline
things are more pleasant and proper. Oil of white Lillies, oil of Roses,
Honey water, Verdigreice, or rather take the oil of Ceruse, which is better: I
say, the oil of Ceruse is an approved thing in Eye-wounds, if you have not
this, then make use of the other.

These things outhgt to be had in readiness, for they are virtuous and
effectual in such cases. I knew a Citizen at Strasburg, whose apple and stars
of his Eye was wounded, his sight was recovered, though not so perfectly as he
had it before the Wound, even by that oil of Ceruse.

Vnguentum Mucilaginis put into the wounded Eye with a spattle will clear the
sight.

Foenugreek, Althea, Consolida major, steeped in Oak-leave water, or Celendine
water, as also a red sour Apple boiled in Wine and Water, ana. Item. Apply the
Collyrium lukewarm.

But in case there be a great heat therein, then cooling things are to be used,
viz. whites of Eggs, Rose water, Bole on linen: the following things are good
also; Whites of Eggs, spawn of Frogs, Nightshade water, Rose water.

Lastly, if great pains be in them, then use this following: Albumen ovi,
Succus hyosiami, Opium, Coquantur s. a.

If a party has received a Wound in the Eye apple, or the Eye has received
some other Wound, then in the first place note, that wounded Eyes must have
drying things, and so the Medicaments must be made accordingly. The metalline
ones (of whom hereafter) I hold to be the best. Courteous Reader, I will
conceal nothing, but faithfully impart that which I found experimentally.

If an Eye be wounded, this is the Secret, I know, and is of A Secret for
wounded Eyes.
great use in many other cases.

Virgins Honey, which of its own accord is fair and clear, and need not to be
more clarified, lb ss. mingle with it the juice of fresh red Roses 4.
pulverised white Vitriol ss. Verdigreice. put all these in a glass body,
distill it in Balneo Mariae, you receive two waters, the first and the last,
this last is the better of the two; of these waters you may safely drop two
drops into the Eye. Afterward take one part of this water, and the mucilage of
Foenugreek, ana, break to it the yolk of an Egg, beat these well together, warm
it a little, spread it on a doubled cloth, apply it to the Eye, all pains will
be gone at the third or fourth application, and will come to healing.

The mucilage of Foenugreek is made thus:

Foenugreek purely beaten ss. pour on it of Rose water 2. you may add to it,
Fennel, Celendine and Eyebright Eye-plaste^ or Collyrium.
water, let these stand a while in a heat, it turns to a mucilage, which must
be pressed through a cloth, and used as you heard. Some use also Gum Tragant, and
Gum Arabic, with Henbane. Daily experience will produce more and better things
than may now be written: if you apply this slimy plaster, first moisten the
wounded place with oil of Roses and blew Violets, that the plaster may not
stick to the skin, that afterward you need not to take it off forcibly,
especially when great anger is therein. Take heed, that of this plaster
nothing come into the Eye, though it be no hurt, but only biteth. The heat and
anger being removed, then the next and best that I know, is the red oil of
Ceruse, drop two or three drops into the eye, and round about the outside
anoint the place with the white oil of Ceruse, it is a mavelous healer and
true metalline cooler, clarifying the eyes, and preventing other simptoms. This
is generally used for the eyes, and found never a better. And with these only,
by Gods help, I undertake to heal swelled, beaten and wounded Eyes and
eyelids, though they be never so much bloodshed, and full of congealed blood.

How is the oil of Ceruse made?

With distilled Vinegar. The red oil, which I commend so much, is made thus:

Ceruse lb 1. well grinded, pour on it distilled Vinegartwice drawn; the first
running is put by, and the last, as the strongest, only taken, lb 3. boil
these together for half an hour, and then set it in a warm place for three or
four days; then put it in a coated Retort, set it in the open fire, let your
first fire be gentle, and draw all the Vinegar into a Receiver; which being
done, then increase the fire so long, till you see red drops coming, which must
be received a part, and still increase the fire so long, till nothing comes.
Its true, you will get little enough, but as little as it is, as great virtue
and efficacy it has, not only in the Eye simptoms. but also in other things,
which in its due place shall be spoken of.

I know these things, according to this process, may not be had every where,
and in case these things could not be had timely enough, then other things, as
good as they, may be had, must be used; for in case of necessity, means present
are not to be refused, and I allow of them, if so be the Eyes be not killed, or
otherwise spoiled.

In the last place note, in case the eyelids hang over they must be stitched.

A certain Merchant was cut over the Nose, and one of his Eye apples was hurt
also, that Wound was cross the star. That party, next God, was helped only
with this red oil of Lead, or Lethargir.

Another party received a splinter of wood in his Eye, where it stuck two
grains deep in, this oil only recovered his Eye.

Another party spoiled his Eye unawares with a sharp wood, a Surgeon made
experiment on him with the white of Eggs and Bole, whereby the Eye was killed,
and when there was no more hope left, half the Eye was loosened, and the skin
of it wrinkled. To the party I, being called, used my Medicine you heard of,
and put of the red oil into the Eye, he presently felt ease, and the eye was
perfectly cured, but only it was not so clear, and a spot staid in it, and I
am persuaded, if I had been with him at first, I could have cured his Eye
without defect.

For good men and women's sake, I will teach you how To heal Wounds, not leaving
a scarr behind.
Wounds are healed, and leave no scar to be seen in the face or any where, or
else they shall hardly be discerned, Here I except such Wounds that were
stitched, and where the bones were shattered, and where veins and sinews are
hurt: I speak only of such, either great or small, Wounds in the face or
elsewhere, that are not very deep, and where the skin only is broken.

Good Aqua vitae drawn twice or thrice lb 1. put it in a glass body, put
thereto bean-floures 4. which must be dried a little, cover it with a smooth
parchment, lute a head to it, set it in lukewarm Water, or in Balneum Mariae,
as deep as the glass is filled, lute a Receiver to it, let it stand, there so
long, till you see drops of water lie on the parchment, then open it, that
which is in the Receiver keep in a glass apart, well stopped, that nothing
exhale. Whilst the body stands in Balneo, apply cold wet clouts to the head,
and another clout on the Receiver, that the spirits of Wine may cool, and
resolve into drops.

At the using of it, take the single threeds or ravellings of linne, wet them
in this Water, cleanse the Wounds with them, let it lie in the Wounds, lay a
fine soft boulster on it, and bind the Wound close that no air come into it,
thus the Wound must be dressed twice a day, at the healing no scarr will be seen.
Use no other Salve nor Plaster, else this Secret will do no good; you need not
fear that the spirit of Wine will burn much in the Wound, you may safely use it.

CHAP. X.
Of Wounds in the Throat and Neck, how a Surgeon ought to deal with them.

AFter the Wounds in the Head and Face, follow the Wounds in the Neck and
Throat, of them I will treat now: Here, as I have told you before, I do not
speak of slight and small Wounds, but of dangerous ones, where partly the great
blood veins are hurt, when the sinews of the Neck, and the Windpipe, or the
like is wounded; my information shall be according to these, hoping that he*
who can heal such Wounds, may heal also those which are less dangerous.

Now to speak of these two sorts of Wounds, first note, Neck and Throat-wounds
are dangerous.
that these are very perilous, and subject to all manner of simptoms, by
reason of the exceeding great pain; and such things are incident, viz. Cramp,
Palsy, Apoplexy, Wound-consumption, and such like, and so they must the more
wisely be dealt withal: and I will give a particular instruction of each Wound,
because there is some distinction to be observed; and in the first place I will
speak of the Neck-wounds.

As I have informed you formerly, that as I do not mean Neck-woudds.
here any slight Wound, so on the other side you must understand, that I mean
not such Wounds, where all the Neck is in pieces, for such Wounds surely bring
death along, and are incurable. But here I speak of all such Wounds, when the
Neck is hurt grievously.

Note also, that the Neck depends from the Back bone, and has great affinity
with the Brains, out of whose hinder part runs a marrow along, like a
rivelet through the Neck and Back bone. Therefore all what I tell you here of
the Wounds of the Neck, the same you must take also for the Wounds of the Back
bone, for these are cured all one way. Therefore the things spoken of above may
be drawn hither.

Therefore, as you have heard above, you ought not to Neck-wounds ought not to
be stitched nor tented.
stitch Wounds in the Neck, nor to put a tent into, much less ought you to
search and to sound them with any Instruments, how deep and how large these
Wounds are, whether stabbed or cut; do not sound them, let the depth be what it
will, never trouble them, else you cause all manner of sorrows and dangerous
simptoms, and so you make the last worse than the first was.

Proceed thus: First stench the blood, as you shall hear; The true proceeding.
and having removed the Bloud-stencher, then take a good Wound-ointment, which
you shall find described in its due place in the Chapter of Wound-salves; make
it lukewarm and pour it into the Wound, then apply a good plaster upon, be it
a stiptick one, or an Opodeldoch, and cover it with a defensive Plaster made
of Beans, which must guard the Wound round about. This Plaster, when there is
great pain at hand, must be applied fresh several times. Have a care, that the
lowermost Medicaments, which lay next the wound, do not cling and stick to the
defensive plaster; therefore betwixt the lowermost and the other lay a cloth,
on which do ye rest the defensive Plaster. But in case the Wound be not
pained, then there is no need of the Defensive Plaster, because it does not
always good. Anoint then the Patient with warmed oils of Cammomil, of Rose
oil, mixed with a little Saffron, or anoint the Patient round with Gray*s
grease, his Neck, and Back bone, and the Wound also, and look carefully to the
business. Govern the party in his diet, as you were told at the Head-wounds.
Keep him from cold and air, and let him be quiet, and not stir much, and be
temperate in eating and drinking. You may apply also to his Wound a Sandel
plaster, which I call the red Sandel plaster: with these things you proceed
in the cure, till you come to a perfect healing.

These wounds being very subject to simptoms, and among Note the signs by
reason of dangerous simptomes, as Cramp, joint water.
the rest to the joynt-water, which in the whole body is no where so dangerous,
as it is about the Neck and Throat, especially when a Cramp falls into,
therefore you have cause to look the better to it, and to prevent such
accidents. But how you must behave your self, touching the joint and sinew
water, and against the Cramp also, with the brown Ointment, you shall find
direction for it in the third part of this Book, or else in some other place.

Touching Throat-wounds, these you must trouble as little Throat-wounds.
with Tents, and with the Seeker, as the other in the Neck.

Proceed thus: If you have a Throat-wound in cure, True proceeding.
where the blood issues forth mainly, so that there is fear that a blood vein
has been hurt, or that the swallow and Throat be cut, then note, if the Wound
or Stab be deep or shallow, near the Ear, then you may stitch it, but not
slightly, as commonly is done, but must be drawn strongly together cross-way,
so that neither breath nor blood can get out, then apply to the Wound an
Opodeldoch, with a defensive plaster upon, which is described also in its due
place; this do so long till the anger be past.

Having drawn the Wound together with that stitching, then is it requisite,
that you have a good Medicine, which penetrate with its virtue, and that is the
Magnetic plaster, which is described in Books of Decoctions, truly that will
draw all matter; you need not to use any other thing to the Wound, but only
apply this plaster great and thick. Let it not trouble you, which way the
matter in these wounds goes; for Throat-wounds afford not much corruption, and
the Opodeldoch is of that quality, that it leaves not much uncleanness behind.
If the Wound be great and wide, so that you fear it may not be stitched that
way, then let it alone, for common stitches will not hold in this case, and
keep in the blood from issuing forth; therefore make use of a Bloud-stencher,
and proceed further, as you did with other perilous Wounds; and if you use any
plasters hereto, then spread it thick, that the air may press the less
thorough; for the swallow is a substance which can endure no air at all. But if
the throat be hurt at the side, then do not stitch it, especially if the
Windpipe or swallow be in pieces, for if a swelling should be incident, the
patient will be choked, or perish in his food.

And if the Wound be not great or deep, then do not stitch it, and draw much
flesh into, it would cause an ugly upcast scarr.

For at the Throat usually happen gross scarrs, and therefore take heed of many
stitches there, and of too much flesh, and if-you can, endeavor to heal it up
to a scurfe, for if you suffer the flesh to grow freely and high, then the
scarr will be as big as a great nut, therefore be not neglective in the
preventing the simptom betimes, else it may be too late to undertake the
opposing of it; you ought not to put into the Wound any Salve, oil, or Tent,
for it may as little endure any Tent as the Back bone, by reason of the variety
of sinews which are in the Throat,

It being a thing more usual in Throat-wounds, that swellings Gargarism.
are incident, whereby soon great sorrows and troubles are caused, therefore is
it requisite, that there be used, besides the defensive Plaster, a Gargarism,
not only the sooner to further the healing of the Wound, but to assuage also
the pains. And if there be not heat at hand, then take Wine, else do you take
Water lb 3. put one hand of Mallow seed, boil a third part away, which being
done, then strain it through a clean cloth, put thereto of Honey 2. boil it
again, after you scummed it put it in a pewter dish, put to it of Storax
Calamintha and so let it stand for your use. Some add a little Cinnamon, which
cannot be amiss. Let the Patient use this water several times a day, it will
not only further the healing, but ease him of his pain, and keep off rheumes.
This Gargarism may safely be used also in Head-wounds, and is effectual always.

Touching the joynt-water, when that comes, then carry If the joint-water
com^^ with pain.
your self as you shall be instructed in the Chapter about the joint-water. And
if accompanied with great pains, then take notice of the causes and signs
thereof, that you may know whether the Prunella or inflammation be either at
hand or coming on, and if it does signify the Wound sickness, or any other
thing, then proceed as you shall be informed.

All such that are troubled with such deep Neck and If a heat comes.
Throat-wounds, and endure great pains, then use smarting plasters, it will
ease them.

One thing more; in case the Patient feels great heat, either in the Head, or
in the Face, and by reason of it fears the Prunella, the Wound-sickness, or
other such like, then phlebotomize the Patient chiefly under the Tongue, if it
may conveniently be; for such phlebotomy cools much both Head and Throat,
taking away all the heat, quenches thirst, opposes many simptoms, and makes
the Wound forward unto healing; therefore neglect not Phlebotomy in these
Wounds, if need, not else. These veins you may safely open in Head-wounds where
any heat is felt, surely it will not be fruitless.

CHAP. XI.
Of Wounds at the Breast, how a Surgeon ought to behave himself there.

TO speak of Breast-wounds, I mean not small slight Wounds, which require no
singular great cure, being Of Breast-wounds.
without danger. By Breast-wounds I understand the first part of the Ribs. If a
party be wounded there, and the Wound is not gone through the body, then no
great danger to be feared; and upon that you ought to deal, as usually is done
to common Wounds. For those Wounds, which deeply run into the body, are very
dangerous. It falls out in such wounds, that the stab does not go deep into the
wound, and yet one of the inner members is wounded. Sometimes a party is run
quite thorough, and yet no internal part wounded. Let the condition of the
Wound be what it will, you must note first, a party being wounded at the
Breast, commonly there comes a wind out of the Wound, which is like unto man's
breathing; here you must have a care, for that is from thence observed, viz.

In case an internal part is wounded, then there is a remarkable sign
accompanied withit. For if the Lungs, or the Signs of internal parts wounded.
Midriffe, which distinguishes the Lungs from the Breast, is wounded, then is
the Patient troubled with a continual cough, and there appears a scum in the
Wound, and the Patient is full of pains, and can hardly fetch breath: if the
heart be wounded, then no remedy expected, of which I say nothing more, for the
party dies presently, for no Art nor care will avail here, however be not
wanting on your side, dress his Wound as Wounds of Lungs usually are dressed.

Of the same conditions are other internal wounded parts. And in case the party
be quite run thorough, without hurt to the internal parts, yet that Wound is to
be judged and undertaken as perilous and mortal. For though none of
Back-wounds are a cause of lame members.
the inward parts be hurt, yet it may be, that that thrust has hit some of the
white veins or sinews on the back, which is dangerous, by reason of the
affinity they have with the Heart. It happens many times, that when a party
is wounded in the Back, that he falls lame, either in his hand, arm, or
elsewhere, where no defect at all was, which is caused only by those white
veins that are hurt.

Touching the cure of such Breast-wounds, I intend not Breast-wounds ^^red.
to give any other doctrinals herein, but what has been made known at the
dressing of Throat-wounds. Only concerning the defensive Plaster, that may
here be omitted, unless the Back bone be run thorough also, and great pains are
felt, caused by the hurt sinews.

Therefore as I have informed you in Wounds of the Throat, what you should do
touching stitching, so you must Stitching is permitted.
note here also, that Breast-wounds are to be stitched, and the stitches drawn
strongly together cross-way, yea, you may use twisted stitches, because they go
easily asunder, by reason of the breathing which constantly is against it,
whereby they are forced asunder. And whereas breathing hinders the vapors, and
the air the healing, therefore the Wound must be stitched as close as possible
may be,

After that use no more but the green Salve, which enforces the healing, then
lay the Magnetic plaster upon, and bind it quickly; care not what course the
matter takes, or which way the blood runs; for it ought not to have any
vent, and may get perhaps more vent than the Surgeon shall well like of. Bind
it well with warm clothes, but not too hot, else it would incline to a fistulo,
neither use any Tents, and above all, search not with the Iron in the Wound,
which is a cursed custom.

In case the Wound be so great and so wide, that it cannot be drawn together
and stitched, but it will keep some vent, Stltching when disproved of.
then omit stitching altogether, because such stitches would break out and
burst asunder, by reason of the breath, which if it has but a little passage,
it presses more vehemently against the stitches, as when the Wound were more
narrowly closed.

In such Wounds use neither flat nor round tents, but only put in your
Tent-ointment, and then lay your plaster upon; Take heed of flat and round
tents
on; for the wounded parties breath being drawn, would strongly draw also the
Tent into the body, and the Patient would bring great misery upon himself, and
cause his own utter ruin, because that indrawn Tent must lie on the Midriffe,
or Diaphragma, and rot there; and indeed no wick or tent is fit to be used in
these Wounds.

Note also, that cold and warm dressing is dangerous, and Cold and hot
dressings are dangerous.
hot dressing is more dangerous, because it causes infallibly a putrefaction,
as experience shows. For many suppose, that hot dressings and hot Medicaments
were best, but the contrary ensued upon, as has been known. Therefore a medium
is best in all things, let it be neither too hot, nor too cold

If you undertake to cure a Wound which cannot be stitched, then use a strong
Bloud-stencher unto, as you heard How to dress breast wounds that cannot be
stitched.
above, and more of it follows after; and at the taking off the
Bloud-stencher, and at the dressing again, all necessary things you ought to
have in readiness, as I told you above, that the Wound be dressed nimbly, that
the parties breath may not pass much thorough, which would be very hurtful. All
this must be done in a dark place, and sharp rough air be kept off. Have a
great burning Candle by the hand, you shall Air hurtful to the Wound.
see that the breath that comes forth out of the Wound will blow out the
Candle.

Hence you may gather, that such Wounds are endangered if not quickly dressed;
and a care must be had, that the Lungs draw not into the body the rough air,
for if you suffer this to be done, the Patient will never be recovered. Breath,
if it gets but a little passage, and is warm, it causes moist vapors, whereby
are caused internal Fistuloes, and hot fevers, Internal sistuloes, hot fevers.
with the loss of understanding and sense, and so all natural means lost.

Therefore use such Plasters which stick and cling easily, and suffer not air
to come by, and use such stiptick Plasters in manner of an Opodeldoch, or use
an Opodeldoch, which is very useful in such cases.

By these things may easily be gathered, that Cataplasmes, Cataplasms of no use.
which in such cases are too much used, are useless altogether, for they are
too weak, and have no power to oppose the air and breath, and besides they are
too moist, and so they further putrefactions.

I know, that there are many which will not like my manner of dressing, no more
than I like other men's dressing: for some may object, saying, if a Wound in the
said manne^ be stitched and closed, whither runs the blood? Does it not run
into the hollow of the body? where it may doubtless cause great troubles and
miseries?

Answer: For the taking off of this doubt, note: Daily experience witnesses,
that Breast-wounds, which can be thus stitched, have no where such danger, as
those which cannot be stitched and it is known, that that which is inwardly
hurt sooner heals, because no air troubles it, than that where the air
comes to it: For the air in the hollow of the body is judged mortal and
deadly. Touching the blood, which, you say, runs into the body, troubles me
little. For Nature, which always endeavors to help her self, turns that
blood into water, which if good and fit means are used, may be expelled by
sweat and urine.

It may further be objected, Whether runs the matter? Objections answered.


Let not that trouble you, it is consumed and expelled through the Opodeldoch,
and further removed by stool, with the help of Medicaments. Where you may note
also, that the Breast-wound being healed, loosen and thrust off the stitches,
and leave a passage, whereby the matter can pass and run out. And before that
is done, the Wound is well set and healed, and the fear is the less in that
particular, provided that the Patient be still kept as he should, as you heard
above.

Why do you not stitch other Wounds also?

Marvel not at it. These Wounds have room enough to yield their matter, which
other Wounds in outward joints and members have not,

CHAP. XII.
Of some particular simptems which are incident unto Breast-wounds, how
Surgeons ought to behave themselves here.

BReast-wounds have simptoms incident to them, more than other Wounds have,
which in this place I will mention Breast-wounds have many simptoms.
in particular. For touching other common simptoms of Wounds, of them, in its
place, you find sufficient instruction.

In the antecedent Chapter I have told you, that you ought How to do when a
tent is gotten into the wound or body.
not to use any Tents in Breast-wounds, nor any other ravelings, and the like
rags, for a reason alleged.

There are some Surgeons found, who use their tents in an ignorant way and
gross mistake, and put such like things into Wounds, which afterward are sucked
in by the breath of the Patient into the Breast, and the Patient is thereby
brought into extreme danger. I have seen such Patients, who having drawn and
sucked such tents into the body, dyed of it Therefore have a care, that you use
no flat and round tents untied, unless you guard them well; nor make any such
tents, as if you would heal therewith another hole: There is no need of any
tent, but only of a Salve and Plaster, and by a nimble and quick dressing
keep out the wind, air and cold.

Others that use Cataplasmes, or linen dipped in warm Wine, I leave them to
their old custom, for many Surgeons that are experienced use them, and my
Writings are not for them, but only for Novices. If any such Wounds comes to
be cured by you, then stitch it closely that it have no vent, for the Wound
will get vent before you shall be pleased with it. Be diligent and quick in
healing, which if you do it not quickly, you will hardly do it afterward. And
let the Patient have a vulnerary potion, over and above, for these are such
Wounds where the bones are hewed and cut thorough, and help Nature that way:
Wounds that are before are more dangerous than those behind. Use no tents nor
searchings in the Wounds, for you will meet with difficulties enough, make you
all the haste with the healing; make use of the green Salve and Wound-plaister,
these are sufficient, bind and dress it well. I have never made use of warm
Wine, nor of any Cataplasm, because I know it will keep not long warm, though
it be applied so.

In case some mischief should happen by the falling in of something into the
Breast or Back-wound, and you are sure that something is fallen in, then look
whether you can see it, and set the Patient into a very dark place, light a
great candle, being of Wax, hold it directly at or over the Wound, then you may
see better into the Wound then when the Sun shines, feel not and search not
into the Wound; if you never felt into the Wound then you may, if it be fit, if
not, then this is the best advise, viz. Make a Lavament of Liquorice, let it
run gently into the Wound through a Sirenge, that the in-fallen thing be not
stirred, the patient must keep in his breath, and then let it go gently. Or
take Water and Wine, ana, dry Rose leaves, a few Cammomils and Mallows, boil
these together, pour it out, being settled, cant it off, use the clear, make it
lukewarm, wash the Wound with it several times, though some of it comes into
the body it does no hurt, and is consumed, and comes forth when you let the
rest run out of the Wound. Having used this Water to the Wound, then let the
Patient suddenly cough, then the water will partly run out of the Wound, and
bring forth that also which is fallen in, which you can take hold on, and draw
it out fully: if that will not do it, then place the Patient with the Wound
downward, that the water may run out, then look to it, whether there be not a
partition at hand, before you set the Patient upright. This water you may use
safely, for it will not hurt the body at all.

This is the only remedy, which I know in this particular is used, which if it
will not help, and the ravelings stay in the body, then nothing else is
expected but a miserable chronical disease, which will produce nothing but
death, of the which I told you also formerly. You see the reason, why such
dangerous abused attempts upon wicks and tents should be shunned.

Patients in this case are commonly plagued with a cough, A Cough is hurtful to
breast-wounds. The remedy for it.
which is extremely dangerous, and chiefly in Breast-wounds. Therefore great
care ought to be had, to resist it with convenient means, either before or
after, purposely prepared, which are to be given to the Patient, either in a
Potion, or otherwise. Some Apothe caries shops afford the like: as Morsali
iri^s, morsali diatrag acauthi frigidi, and such like. Item. Lohooh sanum made
of Foxes lungs, item. Sirrups of Hysop and Liquorice, etc. every Surgeon should
know what is to bedone herein.

Some Surgeons use pectoral Potions, which are good, Pectoral potions.
and not to be rejected* but thus much I say, distinction is here to be used,
because these are not good to all Wounds indifferently, therefore I will set
down some which are good in this particular.

A Patient being troubled with a Cough, and is put thereby True pectoral
potions.
into some danger, then Liquorice 1. Annise seed, ^^isius Hysop, and ss Speed
well, Lungwort, and ^/4; Water lb 7 ss. Boil all these together, so that there
remain lb 3. strain it through a cloth, put to it of Honey lb ss. boil it a
little more, scumming it well, let the Patient drink of it mornings and
evenings, it will do him good.

Another which is good also. Liquorice 2. Mallows Another.
1. Walwort Water lb 8. boil these to lb 5. strain it through a cloth, fling
away the rootand herbs; put to this water of Raisins 3. Sobesten Jujuben
Lungwort, Maidenhair, ana 1. Annise seed 2. boil these to lb 3. strain it, and
dulcifie it with Honey and Sugar, and minister it as you heard.

Note, these Breast-potions must be thus prepared, that urine thereby be
provoked, being the Lungs or other parts are hurt, which these are good for,
and that the matter and blood, which sticks and stays in these places, may be
the better expelled by stool and urine, therefore it is good to steep Rhubarb
and Seen leaves in this drink, that it may work the better: and in case heat
and sharp humors are at hand, then use the seeds of Cucumbers and Melons, and
if need, you may use also Gum Galban and Ammoniack, inwardly and outwardly,
because these are commonly used in such cases.

And in case the Lungs are fallen into a rottenness, which you may know by the
Patients breath, if stinking, and his Corrupted Lungs.
daily undisposedness: if it be so, then it is a sure sign that the Patient is
in deadly danger, and all remedies will hardly help.

In this case, I know this Secret to be good against internal Imposthumes and
putrefaction of the Lungs. Pure Balsam for putr^fied Lungs.
Turpentine lb 1. put Well water to it lb 6. put it in a glass body, lute a
fitting Helmet to it, distill it in ashes; when lb 1 ss. of the water is come
over into the Receiver, then leave. At the taking off of the Receiver you will
see the spirit of Turpentine on the water, which separate from the water. Of
this spirit 3. and well prepared flowers of Sulpher 1. put these into a glass
body, lute it well with Hermes his Seal, set it in water not too hot, else the
spirits break the glass, and set it no deeper than the glass is full; let it
stand in a constant warmth eight or nine days, you will see these spirits turn
bloud-red, Then open the glass, pour this red Turpentine into a less glass
body, pour to it of the best Aqua vitae 1. fit a Helmet to it, set it in
Balneum, distill off the humidity, there remains a blood red oil or Balsam in
the bottom, for the spirit comes over in the Balneo. Keep this Balsam for use,
it is precious, it is an effectual The balsams use
remedy against all putrefaction, none like it, minister gutt. 3. in Rosewater,
or other convenient Vehicle; it is of a good scent and rare virtue, is used
inwardly and outwardly, and is of no corrosive quality.

In this manner Juniper oil may be prepared, which expels all rottenness and
stinks, is a rare Secret also, but requires Juniper oil.
a longer process, and its needless to set it down here.

Flowers of Brimstone are prepared thus: Pure yellow To make flowers of Sulpher.
Sulpher very well beaten lb 1. calcined Vitriol and white Salt, ana lb 1.
mingle these, put it in a glass body, fit a Helmet to it, increase the fire
under it by degrees, and make the Sulpher rise into the Helmet; then let it
cool, take out the sublimed Sulpher, mingle it with fresh calcined Vitriol and
Salt, and sublime it again, take out the flowers and weigh them, put to its
quantity as much of red Myrrh, and as much of Aloes hepatick, and a fourth part
of oriental Saffron; mingle these with the flowers of Sulphur, put it in a
glass body, and sublime it once more; this sublimate has an admirable virtue;
and if it be dissolved in spirit of Turpentine, then is it more penetrative.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Belly-wounds, and the inward parts thereof, how Surgeons must deal with
them.

VVOunds in the belly, if not quite through, are not dangerous: Here I
comprehend all Wounds from the breast to the privy parts. Of slight Wounds in
the belly I speak little only of the great Muscles which are about the Navil;
if these be hurt, then they must be well looked unto, because they are
dangerous; they easily putrify, by reason of the abundant humor of the belly,
anger and inflammation soon getting into, and thereby great miseries are
caused, if not prevented: I intend not to speak of all the circumstances, but
briefly of the chiefest.

The Belly being stabbed or cut thorough, then the inward Signs of inward parts
hurt.
parts are hurt thereby, which is known by some signs. For if the Patients
food comes to the Wound, then is it a sign, that the stomach is hurt; and if
the excrements come into Wounds of the stomach and guts.
the Wound, then is it a sign, that the guts are wounded, and so of the rest.

Whatsoever inward part is hurt it is dangerous; for the Wounds of the Liver
and Milt are perilous, as also the Wounds of the Liver; Milt, Reins, Gall,
Bladder.
Wounds in the Guts; the Wounds of the Gall, Reins and Bladder are counted
mortal, and those also of the Stomach. Surgeons must deal here, as they heard
partly about the Breast-wounds: Wounds of the Lungs are held mortal, by reason
of their constant motion, more than the Wounds of the Liver and Milt. These
Wounds must not be stitched, but ought to be healed with stiptick Plasters;
neither must these Wounds be troubled with the Seeker or iron Instrument, for
if the Belly be run quite thorough, how can you sound the Wound with the
Instrument? And if any blood vein was hurt, and stenched again, how soon may it
be made bleed again with the Seeker, and make the thing worse than it was? Heal
the Wound outwardly, is inward cure chiefly depends from a good diet and
phlebotomy; you may, if you please, make for such a Patient a vulnerary Potion,
made of Walwort, Stellaria, Starwort, and Liquorice.

Touching the Wounds of the Entrals, the old custom may Wounds of Guts.
here be followed, viz. to stitch the wounded Entrals, and cleanse them with
Milk, in which Annise seed is boiled: However these Wounds are counted mortal,
and it is a hard matter if ever they recover, because inflammation soon gets in.

This following is a rare Masterpiece: If a Patient be wounded in the side or
body, and you fear the Milt or Liver is hurt, whereby commonly great swelling
is caused, then take this oil, and anoint the Wound about, two hand-breadths,
it will allay all hardness of the Wound, be it in the Belly, Liver, or Milt,
and that in a short time; it is the rarest Remedy for such Wounds, as
experienced Surgeons know. For such hardnesses cause inflammations and fevers.

This Oil is made thus: Of distilled oil of Gum Oil for a wounded Milt.
Ammoniack 2 of common Annise seed oil 4. mingle these together; if the Wound
is near the Liver, then use of Populeon 2. and leave out of the Annise seed oil
2. enough of this at this time.

I will quote here a notable example, of one, whose urine run out at the Wound,
and was recovered. Anno 1618. in Urine run out of a Patients Wound.
September, not far off from Hamborough, called on the Geys, a Mariner, born
at Gripswald, was stabbed with a knife, a hand-breadth above his privy members,
at the right side; his urine run out at the Wound all day long, and was cured
by Gods help in this manner. First of all I stenched the blood, then I applied
to the Wound an Opodeldoch, and a Bean-plaister, in this manner I dressed him
but once a day, to give no cause to the urine to pass only at the Wound. I
used no tent, neither did I sound the Wound with the instrument, for fear I
should touch any blood vein, and so cause a fresh bleeding. I ministered to him
w^rm Beer, in which was steeped Clophium, wood Purslane, I let him drink no
other, and kept him in his diet as a Patient ought. By these means I reduced
the urine to its right place in three days, and the Patient recovered in a
short time. How could any one tell, what had been hurt here inwardly, but only
by the urines coming to that way? whither the fleshy part of the bladders neck
was hurt or no, troubled not me, nor stayed me in the healing of him, for my
chiefest care was to reduce the urine to its natural course, and not to run
through the Wound, and to cause a great deal of pains.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Wounds of the four outer Joints, and of Joints contused, all
comprehended in one Chapter, where you may find several good manuals and
examples quoted.

THe Wounds of the four outer Joints I comprehend in one Chapter, because their
cure is all one, only in the handling of them there falls in some difference.
Here I speak not of slight Wounds (as has been often said) but such which
deserve the name, and which are subject unto simptoms: For slight Wounds be
they in the Head, Neck, Belly* or any where (which ought not to be too much
slighted neither, because from a little hurt great matter may come of it) may
easily be cured, with pure Cloth or lint, Wine, Water, Salt, etc. for the
natural balsam in Man does much, and applied Medicines perform not the cure
alone. Wounds subject unto simptoms, where the natural Balsam is disturbed,
must have other means ordained, because every simptom requires a particular
expulsive Medicine. I could divide these Wounds into several sorts, as into
Wounds of the legs, flesh, sinews and veins: it happens sometimes, that all
these four parts are hurt at once, and yet only one of them wounded, this is
the reason why I put them together into one.

Note, that you ought not to stitch any such Wound, unless Joynt-wounds not to
be stitched unless it have a flap.
there hang down a great flap of it, and chiefly have a care you stitch none of
them that went into the great Muscle or joint, as in the Shoulder, Elbow,
Hands, Knees, Knockles or Ankles, for if you stitch them with needle and thread
(as the fashion is) you will cause only great pains, which would prove a
forerunner of many simptoms. Rather stitch them To stitch with plasters and
bands.
with a twisted stitch, or twisted Silk, for these must be stitched strongly,
more strongly than other Wounds, or else they break out again. For if you
should stitch a Wound on the Shoulder like one on the Belly, that stitch would
not hold a day and a night. Therefore I advise you to use a very strong one,
especially one upon the Wound as strong as you can, yet stitch not too deep,
for fear you hurt the sinews or veins, for too much is naught; be moderate,
prospective and cautious in stitching, and not too hasty. Then apply the
stitching plaster on the stitches, it will help to keep together: pull them
even and well together with the plaster and roulers, holding them together as
long as you can, for it is good for the members and sinews, and very good to
further the healing. Though the Wound for all that does keep asunder, let it
not trouble you, but go on, and press the Wound together, as it ought, at the
several dressings.

If you have in hand a flap-wound, then do not cut off Flap-wounds.
the flap, as many do, for Nature may strangely recover that, and close it in a
short time, therefore proceed thus: Stitch on the flap, but not over-stitch it,
for fear you kill all the life in it, and after the stitching apply a
Stitch-plaister to it, trouble it not with any feeling in, and sounding, and
trying whether the stitch hold; and let the stitches not eat thorough, these
else will cause scarrs; neither must you put any tent, be it flat or round,
betwixt the flap and the body, nor suffer any water to come betwixt, but press
the flesh side of the flap close to the body. Bind the Wound not too hard, but
close and gently, as the flap requires, and cause as little pains to the
Patient as you can; choke not the flap, else inflammation is caused, and make
it thus, that the stitches do not hold all, but the band also must help, as you
heard.

If you take off the Plaster, then pull it off not against To take off the
plaster.
the flap, which would cause great pains, but take it off with the flap, or by
that side where it hung on a little, and by no means against the flap, and
apply not any strong clinging plaster, else at the taking it off you stir the
flap and disturb the cure; the flap must be bound gently one manner of way,
and not to day so, and to morrow another way, else the flap is hindered in its
closing with the other flesh.

If you have made two or three stitches, let the Silk not hang down into the
Wound, else it causes matter and slime in it, and hinders the flap in closing.

Have a care also you do it not too hard, nor pull against the flap, and apply
always a bolster to the middle of the flap, that it grow not hollow
underneath; that you may do it the better, make vent with a tent, thrusting it
under the flap, that the matter do not run upward but downward, and the tent
must not be so long as to reach from one end to the other, else the flap will
be raised and stirred.

Do not search a Wound in a joint with tents or the iron Instrument, for
reasons above quoted: do not put the Tent-ointment to a flat tent to apply it
to the Wound, and then to lay a plaster upon; no, but let the Ointment run
into the Wound to the bottom, and it must run every where in the Wound, and
fill up the Wound with it, and the Brawn-ointment must sometimes be let run
into it, it preventeth the running of the joint water, cleanses the Wound,
furthereth the healing, and suffers no simptoms to be incident: if the flap
be so great and broad, that of its own accord it separateth, Flap separateth.
then make vent for it with a little tent, which must be very thin, that it
stop not the matter, neither must it be too long, as to reach to both ends,
which would increase the Wound, and loosen the flap.

Let the Wound have vent, that the Ointment may the better run to all the
places of it, let the vent be in two or three places, it will close at the vent
holes as if it had been stitched, and skinneth freely; apply a stitch-plaister
also for to keep the vent holes open: I have often used a Sirenge, spouting the
Ointment into bloud-warm, and made the Sirenge warm, that the Ointment should
not cool too fast, and gently I spouted, else the wind of the Sirenge raises
the Wounds, veins and fresh flesh, and cleansed it as neatly as possibly could
be, to which end my Siringe was so fitted, that it drew the Ointment easily,
and let it run gently, as if it had but dropped into. And as there are two or
three vent-holes to put the Medicine thereby into the Wound, so there must be
vent-holes also at the nether part of the Wound, for the matter to run out
there. For where the matter must be squeized out, there surely the healing is
hindered. Therefore I have always put a tent into the Wound, to day on this
side, and to morrow on that side, and never filled up or stopped the Wound, so
that the matter could come forth, and needed not to be forced out; and when the
moisture or matter is come forth, then the Wound heals the sooner, and where
the Ointment can run into all the places of the Wound, there the sinew or joint
water is staid, and the Patient from further pains freed.

Concerning other Manuals of such Wounds, they have Manuals in Joynt-wounds.
been spoken of before for the most part, however it will not be amiss to
rehearse some of them.

It is requisite, that Joynt-wounds be dressed once in eight hours, sometimes
in six hours, which I like better, for the joint water is sharp, and spoileth
sound things, the which you ought to oppose, and aid the Wound against the
sharpness of the joint water, that things healed may not be made tender again
by it: of this more shall be said, when I treat of the joint water.

And when you are to dress the Wound, then have all necessary things in
readiness, as I told you above, and let no air get into the Wound, and dress it
speedily, and do not delay its healing; for if it be delayed, then lameness is
caused, and the sinews shrink and grow stiff. Apply a stiptick plaster to the
Wound pretty well warmed, in the manner of an Opodeldoch, the plaster will
work the better, and remember you apply also round about a defensive plaster,
to keep the Wound warm: of the which more shall be spoken hereafter; the brown
Ointment and other things ought not to be forgotten.

Have a care in Joynt-wounds you do not stop too hard, for the joint water
cannot be stopped with any tents or stitches. Therefore let the Ointment run
into the Wound, which stays the joint water, that is, the humidity of joints
and sinews, and every one has a name for it: the Germans call it the Bands,
for they bind and keep the Joints together, and for the most part there are the
tendons which pull and hold to it, which extend most behind the Joint, and
there are some which hold before also, these you must have a special care of;
if a party be wounded either before or behind the Joint, then stretch it out,
perhaps the tendons is not hurt so much, it will be the better for the sinews
and veins, which there must be kept open and extended, and in the healing the
sinews also be help; it may be the hurt in the Joint is such, which may help it
self: if the Wound be either below or behind the Joint, then lay it bent or
bowed, that the sinews may not shrink and be helped partly, and heal up that
Wound in sixteen days, and neglect nothing, let the Wound not grow too full
with flesh; for I have seen, that such flesh has caused a shortness, and lamed
the party: Such neglects happen in Burnt wounds, as I have seen it, and more
shall be spoken of, when I treat of Burnt-wounds and Adustions.

And you look to, that the like do not befall you, which would prejudice both
the Patient and you; and look well to his lying, and extend the wounded joint
every day but a little, and do not heal the Patient lame, if he be not lame
wounded. Let himself stir it too and fro by little and little; my self have
mollified such lamed members, that were lame healed, and brought them to right.
And when you s^e all difficulties past, which were present at the first, then
begin more and more to bend and bow the joint, but so, that you cause no pains
in the joint, and in case he feels any, then anoint him with Vnguentum
Dialthoeae, let the wounded joint hang, and not to be carried in a band,
neither must he lift his foot up, nor set it down, as he used formerly, as long
as you fear the joint water, heat, swelling or pain in the joint, then let him
lift the joint upward, according as the place is: This he must not do too long;
but when he can endure it, then let him hang the joint downward, that the blood
and heat may come to the place again, otherwise Exiccations and Consumptions
are caused, and the sinews dry up, if the joint be kept too long bound upward,
and in case at the hanging down of his leg or hand a swelling appears, let it
not trouble you, for that will pass away and sink; but if that a swelling is in
it, then is it a sign, that some untoward thing staid in the Wound, for in the
Joint must not remain any spissitude or grossness when it is almost healed,
much less must any such fatness be healed up. My way was this, when a party was
wounded, then I applied round about the Wound a plaster, which I lest there
four or five days or more, and that was a hand breadth round the Wound; and if
the parties either Knee or Elbow was wounded, I tied clothes about his Foot or
hand, to keep off swellings (for these swellings are nothing else but a humor,
unless it be an Imposthume or Dropsy, which are not humors but simptoms) and
that no humors might come to the Wounds, nor to the uttermost parts of the
wounded member, as the Hand or Foot. For I have seen humors fall into the Hand
or Foot, which could never be gotten from thence; which mischief to prevent, I
applied also a Plaster to the whole member, Arm, Hand, Finger, Toes. For a
humor fallen into the uttermost part is hardly gotten out again after the
Wound be healed, more hardly than it is gotten from within the Wound.

And that was my stitching-plaister which I applied thus, and it is better to
take it off dry, then when it keeps moist, because it opens the pores, if
applied to the hand or member, and performs its virtue as it ought to do; I
applied my stitch-plaister for the most part to the whole part of the member,
in places where I feared consumption, tenderness, exiccation, and in such
members wherein a swelling was, to disperse the moisture, and where I could not
well make use of my Salve against shrinkings. The member keeps very warm under
that plaster, and counted it Gods blessing. For I show you hereafter how I
used it, and did much good with it. For it was my Fracture-plaister to all
beaten, broken and swelled members.

When I name, my Plaster, then you must understand this Plaster, or mine
unknown Plaster, that you may know also, what Plaster it was I used to such
Wounds and hurts. The swelling and pain being gone, and the member able to
endure the anointing, then with all speed anoint it with Dialthaea, I always
carefully used my Ointment against shrinking, which I will show when I speak of
shrinking. For though no shrinking appeared, yet I still feared, and prevented
it with the Ointment before any exiccation came, and whilst the member was yet
swelled. I did use no cooling Ointments, but warming ones. I had made a
Populeon, which I kept twenty five years, not that I contemned the Ointment,
but I never used it; I always used Vnguentum Dialthoea to wounded Members:
understand me well, I do not write now of imposthumes, sores and other inflamed
hurts, but of all manner of heats in Wounds; for I always supposed, that such
heats do not come from the heat of the Member, but from an accident, which
ought to be prevented, then the heat goes soon out of the Member wounded.

For I have often seen, that when they thought to resist the heat outward, as
with Goats milk, in which is boiled Vinegar, Leth argyre, Salt and Water, some
took also Sallade oil and Lie, some took Nightshade and Housleek, and others
what they pleased: I am not against it, but I never used it; for I supposed
still, things outward may not hurt the Wounds: your care must be only, first
to bring the Wound to right, then other means may be used for the rest: and I
thought still also, it may be the Member has bled too much, and wants
warmth, and if there be any heat, it comes from the pain of sinews and other
accidents. For that reason I used no warming things, for I thought, if I use
warm things then the blood is gone, and warming things will bring other blood
into, which causes runnings, and usually Imposthumes, which I know
experimently, and these Imposthumations have done much hurt to the Members, and
caused great pains, which terrified me so much, that I would never use any
warming things, as usually Cataplasmes are used, of Lin seed, Fenugreek,
Walwort, etc. and applied warm, and dipping of Bolsters in warm Wine, and
Balsam oil poured into the Wound. I must confess I used such things also three
years together, but I gave them over, and took my other things in hand, and
used neither hot nor cold, only made use of Dialthaea, and used it only
lukewarm.

There were many times found about the Wound Blisters Blisters and Wharts about
Wounds.
and Wharts, which were caused by the hot dressings, and sometimes the salt
Phlegm of the Patient has been the cause of it: in such a case I took only my
Vnguentum, which I will describe, moistning it with a little Vinegar, which
soon healed it.

And when any proud flesh appeared, and one place grew Proud flesh
sooner and higher, then I used burnt Allom, let it be there, till it fell off
of its own accord, and if need, I used it once more, if not, I let it alone.

To comprehend all in one, about Joynt-wounds, consider these things: Viz. Fill
the Joynt-wound with Vnguentum, dress and bind it well, let no air come into,
bind it nimbly, neither too hot, nor too cold, nor too hard, keep it quiet,
seek and search not in it, keep it pretty well open, thrust nothing between,
only one vent above for a passage of the Ointment, and another below, let not
the Patient drink much Wine, prepare and make all things ready before you
undress it, and let not the Member hang down. Neither take out any shattered
piece, unless it be quite loose; and in case a bone be cut thorough in a
Joynt-wound, and yet it sticks to the sinew, it must not be cut or dug
out, as some use to do, but rather set it into its right place, let the work be
done by the Lords blessing and the Medicine.

Therefore pull out nothing, unless there be great cause for it, for these will
not be obstructive unto the healing, nor cause pains: consider the things well
at first, feel not in the Wound like a blind man, especially if you go about to
cut or loosen any thing in the Wound, and stay for the occasion some days, as
long as nothing is yet neglected, and though healing goes on the more slowly,
yet is it the more convenient and safer.

I was called once to a Patient, whose knee-pan was cloven, Example.
whom another Surgeon undertook to cure, and would needs show his skill on him,
he loosened the knee-pan, thinking he had done well. But what happened after
the pan was taken out? The pan feel asunder, and looked most ugly, for he could
look into it before well enough, and gaped so far asunder, that two fingers
could be put in, not touching either side. This Knee put me and that Shaver to
great troubles before we could fill up the place with flesh, for the
Joynt-water gushed in so fast, that all Medicines were thrusted out thereby; at
last it was stayed by the brown Ointment, and a good Opodeldoch, the place was
filled out with flesh, and the Patient by Gods help cured. But he was halting
on that leg; and I am confident, if the knee-pan had not been taken out, he
would have been more perfectly cured without any defect.

I will quote another example: In my travels, which I undertook Another Example.
for to get knowledge, I came to a Surgeon, who was famous and expert man, who
undertook to cure one, in whose Hand a bone was dislocated, and seemed to be
quite loose, and the Surgeon, held it to be so, and went to take it out, but it
stuck so fast yet to the sinew, that it came not so easily off as he first
supposed, and so he thought to loosen it quite; but the Surgeon lost almost all
his credit by it, because he could do so little good upon him: For when he cut
off the sinew, he caused such lamentable pains to the Patient, that he was not
able to have it handled any more, and so the Surgeon was fain to let the bone
alone, and dressed the Wound, and cured it; but that bone was not healed to the
first place of it, for after healing it was moveable, however it was no
hinderance to his hand. That Surgeon afterward told often, that he could not
have gotten out that bone without cutting of the sinew, which would have caused
a lameness to the Hand, which in this way was avoided. By these examples you
may see, how perilous it is to take any small bones out of a Wound that are
not quite loose.

Note by these Joynt-wounds; a Joint being in the said manner wounded, then the
Joints stand loose and weak together, especially if the Wounds be deep; then
such Wounds must be helped with underproppings and bolsters, and the place be
eased of the weight, chiefly if on the Hand or Arm. But how that dressing is
done, shall be showed in the Chapter of Bone-fractures.

Note further, if a Joynt-wound stinketh after eight or Signs of a Wound that
falls to a stinking.
nine days, then have a care that no inflammation come into: For if any
blackness comes to the Wound, and the Wound is soft, then is it a good sign,
for then the inflammation is going away, and the Wound inclines unto healing
But if that blackness in the Wound clingeth hard, and will not separate and
part from the redness, then is it a certain sign, that an inflammation is at
hand, which must be opposed in that manner, as you shall hear of in its due
place. And in case the Patient complains also in the uttermost part of that
Member, then no other remedy is left, but that Member must be cut off, or else
the party must die. But in case it do separate, and will not stick to the
stinking veins and sinews, then pull it forth, as much as the Patient is able
to endure it, and cut off as much as you can come by, for the Wound does hardly
cleanse, when the Sinews will not separate but stay in it, which must come out,
if so be the Wound shall be healed. But that which is good yet must by no
means be pulled out and cut off; for the less you take away from the black
gray veins, the better it is, for if you take out much it causes larneness.
For these hamstrings tendons keep the Joints to gether, and give them their
power. For when these are wanting, then all hopes are gone, and the Patient
cannot be brought to right, and is like a chain of Beads without a string. To
that end good heed must be taken, that a Wound breath strongly, by reason of
the veins and sinews, which are still cleansing themselves.

For no Wound can be dressed so soon, but the flesh and veins will change and
separate; however I did read, and heard it also, that some Wounds were healed,
which never had any matter in them: I confess I never saw it, and will not
gainsay it, but leave them to their opinion. For I am but a common
Barber-Surgeon, not learned and much experienced, neither am I he that has
seen all things; yet I have cured a stab without bearing any matter, and that
stab was but narrow. I have cut Hare-lips and Canker-wounds, which bred very
little of corruption, and separated in the least degree, and made a show of
purging, like other Wounds, but not so much; this happened by reason of the
flesh kept warm together in the stitching, and received not yet any alteration
or air. For in case a Wound, Stab, or other hurt receives air, then they
always bear and breed matter, and when it thrusts off and separateth unto
corruption, then must it first putrisie, (for flesh that is fresh does not
putrify) then a stink is caused, which must be remedied with the brown
Ointment, then that stink will cease in two or three days, and you need not to
fear the Prunella or inflammation.

Note further, in case the Marrow be wounded, then usually When the Marrow is
hurt.
a Consumption or Exiccation is caused after the healing, which commonly is
incident to all Joynt-wounds. This I mention to this end, that you should
prevent these simptoms, and not tarry their coming: but how you ought to handle
such things, shall be showed in the Chapter of shrinkings and Consumptions.

What hitherto has been spoken of Wounds in Joints Wounded Muscles.
and Members, the same must be meant also of Wounds and Stabs made upon the
great Muscles, for all manner of such simptoms are incident, viz. Prunella or
Inflammation, as you heard of by the Joynt-members, which Wounds you must not
stitch neither with the needle, but only let the Ointment run into, and apply
the Wound-plaister to it, as I told you before.

Touching other common Wounds, where the flesh only is wounded, and none of
the sinews, muscles and bones, any Surgeon may easily heal them, if he has but
ordinary skill, And I hold it needless to write much of them, not intending to
show the curing of slight Wounds.

But if an Arm or Bone be thus, that all the bones thereof are shattered, and
the Member hangs only by the flesh, When bones veins and sinews are asunder.
then their condition is this. In case that part which hangs down is
senseless, caused either by too much bleeding or too much cold, then the safest
way is to cut it off. But in case there is some life in it yet, then set the
down hanging part to its right place, and dress that Wound like as the Fracture
of a leg is dressed, which is gone through the flesh. But mighty great care is
to be had, to keep the Patient as quiet as may be, and to dress the Wound
several times with the brown Ointment.

Let me tell you also, how you must deal with wounded fingers: Of wounded
Fingers.
Though Fingers are but small parts, yet they must be cared for whilst they are
whole, and these being wounded require as great cares in the dressing as bigger
Members do, and that by reason of the many simptoms which easily befall them.

Note, a wounded Finger must not be bound hard, which To dress Fingers.
soon are killed through hard binding, bind them somewhat slack, and begin at
the nail first toward the Hand; for if you begin behind toward the Fingers end,
then you drive the blood forward, which kills the Finger, and an Inflammation
is caused. This manner of dressing belongs also to the rest Members, except the
Legs, which require another manner of binding.

You ought not to stitch any wounded Finger, though it Fingers ought not to be
stitched.
hangs but by a little, but underlay it with splinters or little boards to
make it lie even and quiet, which is done easily. In this manner the Finger
heals the sooner, and is not subject to so many simptoms, as when they were
stitched.

Neither ought ye to use any Tents to wounded Fingers, To use no Tents to
Finger and Hand-wounds.
nor to any wounded Hand, because of the many white veins that lie in the Hand,
and meet there, and usually lamenesses are caused if Tents used, which are
prevented if Tents omitted. But this rule is little regarded by these, which
think themselves wise men, and hear the grass grow (as they say.)

Neither must you let the wounded Fingers suffer cold, but keep them in a
convenient warmth. There is no Member which can less endure cold than the
Finger, and no where more hurt and lameness expected, and the running of the
joint water, than there. And the cold fire is easily incident here, which is
obstructive unto health. Dress it not hard nor strongly, because the hard
binding causes inflammation: for if the blood dies, then that Member must die
also, especially if the Hand or Finger be angry, or when too many cold things
are used. For many times there is a grim anger in the Hand or Finger, by reason
of the veins and sinews, which is caused sometimes by a cold humor fallen
into, and rises as if there were great heat in it, and that heat apparent
there, comes from the pain, and not from the heat, as I shall distinguish
between them, when I come to speak of the hot and cold fire.

If a finger grow lame, then is it better and fitter to heal it To heal lame
Fingers crooked.
crooked than straight, the reason is known. In other things dress a wounded
Finger as other Joynt-wounds are dressed, bow it not much, nor let it be much
stirred till it be almost healed: and for the keeping off of the join water,
use often the brown Ointment, let it run into the Wound: it is good to use here
a defensive Plaster.

Bathings are good for wounded Fingers also, made of Lie of Pine wood ashes and
some Walwort boiled in it.

Let no Finger fall into the Hand, be it which it will, but rather keep it out,
for though a benumbed Finger be a mighty hinderance, yet a Finger healed
crookedly into the Hand is most hurtful, it were better to be without that
Finger, as to have it healed crooked into the Hand. And if a Finger be straight
healed, it hinders the Patient also in his work; a middle way must be used
here, that the wounded Finger be healed neither too straight nor too crooked,
in case its benumming cannot be avoided. As it happens many times, that a
Member will be lame do what ye can, then in time the fittest course must be
taken for it, and not to delay it, whereby great pains to the Patient may be
caused. Briefly, a wounded Finger must not be dressed extended and outstretched,
nor let fall so much into the Hand; and if more than one Finger is wounded,
whilst you are healing one, do not stir the other much, unless you know them
fast enough, for these cannot brook so much of Medicines as other great
Members; and make use of the brown Ointment to the wounded Finger, it cleanses
very much.

It happens sometimes also, that at the end of the Finger there grows a
great Callus: have a care that not too much flesh grow there, it will show
ugly. And be careful in the dressing, for if you bind it too slack, then flesh
grows high there, therefore bind it well together with the roulers, but take
heed aso that you do not bind it too hard, as to pain and to make his Finger
swell, and the blood be choked and quite killed, as I have seen sometimes fall
out so, and make no knots when you tie the Finger, for they cut in deep, and
hinder the course of the blood, and pinch more strongly, than it may be
believed. I stitched the band with a needle and thread, and used the bands in
the best manner, and tied it close enough to prevent the growing of any Callus
in the Wound, and the Finger grow to an ill shape: the like must be prevented
in other Members, where some excrescencies may fall, when you suffer the flesh
to grow too much. For a Joynt-wound cannot be healed, but some flesh must be
suffered to grow; and a Joint has but little flesh, and when there more flesh
grows than there was before, than it stands out, especially on the foremost
parts of the Finger, there usually such knots are, and there the little bones
also go out, because they have less help of the sinews than other Members.

And if any be wounded through the nail, this also causes an unshaped Finger,
therefore on that place suffer but little flesh to grow, as little as may be,
for then the nail will stand out high, and the Finger will show ugly, do not
stitch and Joint of a Finger, it would cause pains and a lameness, besides the
excrescence. It is best and safest that a wounded finger be not stitched,
unless need require it, if so, then do but one stitch to it, if the condition
of the Wound requires no other.

If any be wounded behind the Thumb, so that the great The Thumb sinews in
pieces.
sinew be in two, for there goes a strong sinew down from the Shoulder,
divides it self about the Elbow, from thence it scatters into the Hand, and
through them is maintained the whole Hand with the Fingers, in their motion.
This wounded and thorough cut sinew you must fetch about and bring to light
with an Instrument (if you can) and stitch it strongly together, but the Wound
must not be stitched, and so this sinew will heal together again, and preserve
the Patient from lameness.

If one be wounded in his Arm, before or behind the Elbow, then look well to
the great sinew; and if one be cut Arm-wound about the Elbow.
so, that he lets sink his Hand, then is the Thumb sinew cut, which you may
stitch short, that his hand may not continue thus hanging, but be healed as
quickly as possible it may be, therefore bind the Hand upward, let it not hang
so.

For I have seen a Barber, that was cut in that manner and Example.
healed, but his Hand continued hanging, which another expert Surgeon undid,
and cut a Wound near the place, and pressed the great sinew together, even as
an Eagles claw which Children carry about, and draw it to and fro.

Another also was cut lame, and cured lame, but another undid it again, and
healed him straight.

Another was cured lame of a Wound cut in his Knee, that Wound was opened
again, and cured better afterward.

One of these Cures I have seen, but the rest were by men of credit done, and I
understand the cause may be thus, If any ones skin, flesh, veins, sinews and
all be wounded, and stitched together, they let him lie still in a posture, and
so heal him lame, though he received not a Wound unto lameness, which I found
so, and speak it by experience, that a Patient in that kind may be neglected,
that is thus cured; therefore suffer not always a Patient to be cured, who
lies still, and never stirs, never stretches his Leg, nor boweth it, or
the like; for healing stiffeneth the nerves, arteries, flesh, pannicle, and
stiffeneth them together, and those being thus stiffened and grown together,
then the one suffers not the other to perform its work perfectly, in the
pulling up, and the stretching out, as they ought to do of their own accord.
Therefore I give you fair warning, not to cure any in such a quiet posture, but
stir him still, then you shall see, and the Patient will feel, that the Member
of the body begins to be used too, and stirs of it self, and so that which is
not quite lame may be preserved, and that which is unfound they must leave as
it is; you must not do too many stitches in the great sinews, for you stitch it
through, which was not cut through, and make more holes into than you need, and
you will cause a lameness, which would not have been, if it had not been for
your stitching; for these stitches are not made for plainness sake, but to help
and keep that together which was not hurt, and to keep the further part from
hanging.

And this happens to no Member so soon as to the The thumbs use.
Thumb, and so no Member ought to be pulled and bound more upwards than the
Thumb; for if the Thumb falls or sinks into the Parties Hand, it is not only
for no use, but is hurtful also; for what keeps stronger hold in the whole Hand
but the Thumb? for when the other Fingers pull to, then the Thumb meets them.
But if the Thumb lies in the hand, then he not only holds nothing, but lets
go that also which is given and put into.

Therefore be careful, be the Wound cut, shot, or lamed any way, to set the
Thumb out of the Hand, for it will fall soon enough into the Hand, more than it
will be to the Patients liking, regard not the Patients complaint, if he says,
that he cannot bring his Thumb into the Hand, for in case he must be lame, yet
the Thumb standing out of the Hand, is of better use, then if within.

Have always a care to the Thumb, for the Thumb stands in better stead in the
Hand than two other Fingers, and do not let it fall into the Hand, for after
the healing it will fall into the Hand however. Briefly, keep the Thumb upwards
in all your dressings.

This happens not only to this great sinew, but also to other sinews and
veins, if you can come by them to stitch them, as here by this great sinew,
doubtless they will grow together and heal. But the Surgeon must still be
provided with good Medicaments to prevent simptoms.

If any ones hand be wounded, these Wounds ought not to be stitched nor tented,
less than any other Wound, by reason No Wound to be stitched on the Hand.
of the many bones and sinews. This rule is slighted by a great many, and this
is the reason, that when a party has received a wound on the Hand, though the
Wound was but slight, the fingers are not only stiff and defective, but
sometimes the whole Hand grows lame thereby, which such supposed Surgeons
have caused with their stitches and Tents, truly the Magistrate should punish
such fellows severely, which do spoil the people in this manner. Whether a cold
or a hot dressing be better*


Now I come to speak of cold and hot dressings, of which something has been
spoken already in the first part: here are many abuses and faults committed,
Touching this business, whether a Wound ought to be dressed cold or hot, in my
mind, according to my experience, it is best to dress it milk-warm. Therefore
care must be had, that the Ointments, Oils and such like be used warm, which
pleases and fitteth Wounds best, and to keep in these with bolsters and
roulers, etc.

The general fault herein is, that many apply their Medicines as hot as ever
they can, thinking they do very well, Hot dressing is hurt full.
especially when they apply their Cataplasmes, made of marsh Mallows, Lin seed,
Butter, Oil, Milk, Meal, Rose cakes; with such things they think to do great
wonders. Such Poultesses may do good, when swellings are to be ripened and
softened.

But to apply them to Wounds, will cause but mischiefs, Cause of putrefaction.
because such hot things applied cause putrefaction, which in Wounds ought not
to be. For such Poultesses choke up Wounds, which of necessity breeds
corruption: and when these are taken off from the Wound, there comes a great
fume from the Wound, very moist and wet, which is a sure forerunner and sign
of putrefaction, caused by that suffocation, which paineth the Wound
exceedingly, and brings Sign of it.
great hurt unto it. And if it be a Joynt-wound, there settleth usually a
moisture about the Joint, where like a Tartar it does coagulate, thence is
caused a lameness, because that matter grows harder and harder, and takes
root there; and all this is merely caused by choking the Wound with such hot
Cataplasmes.

Experience shows sufficiently, that when these pap-Cooks A stinking Bird
stays in the Nest.
with their Poultesses have healed a Wound, where many veins and sinews lie,
commonly a stinking Bird stays behind in the Nest (as I told you in the first
part.) For how often does it fall out, that a wounded man being healed,
afterward is mightily pained and swelled, which such Surgeons Pains and
swellings in Wounds.
are not able to help; for if such errors are not known of them whilst the
Wound is open, what wonders should these Surgeons perform after the Wound is
closed?

Touching cold dressings, they are not good but hurtful, Cold dressing hurtful
and are to be avoided, because they cause cramps, great pains in veins and
sinews: therefore at the dressing of Wounds a right warmth is used, conformable
unto Nature, neither too hot nor too cold.

You say, some Wounds are hot, and some are cold, and, so they must be dealt
withal accordingly, as necessity requires.

I reply, that that heat or cold is not to be regarded, for if good and proper
Medicaments are used, they cool the hot, and warm the cold parts by their own
virtue and quality, Therefore if a Wound be hot, do not think to drive away
that heat by a cold dressing; and so it is with a cold Wound, for proper
Medicines must do the fea^. For as a Good Medicines do cool and warm.
cold thing quenches not a fire, but water and other liquid things does it, be
the water hot or cold, it is all one, its moistness will quench it; even so are
good Medicines effected unto Wounds.

Therefore do not say, this is cold and this is hot in the Wound, but say, it
is a simptom: Now as there is a variety of simptoms, so they require several
Medicaments; and hot ones also, as oil of Turpentine, Petroleum; there are some
hot Wounds also which ask for coolers, according as occasion is, which must be
observed carefully. And if there be any pains in the Wound, then things are not
right, either the Patient has done amiss, or the Medicine was not proper, or a
simptom is coming on, then the Medicine must be altered accordingly, but no hot
nor cold dressing is to be used.

CHAP. XV.
Of cloven Nails on Fingers, and of their cure.

SOmetimes the Nails on Fingers are cloven either the long or the cross way,
and are almost wholly loose. And when they hang yet a little fast at the
uttermost part, you may cut it off, but it will be long before another comes,
for the flesh about the Nail commonly grows high, and hinders the Nails
growth; if that hanging Nail be tied it is painful, yet it may not so neatly be
healed as a new one would show. According as the party is, whether a Tradesman,
or one that is often abroad at feasts, such ought to be cured neatly, and such
a cure may be performed within ten days: if the party looks often on his
Finger, he misliketh the double Nail, and it looks double when splitted,
unless it be well tied together: if a Nail be splitted the cross way, then at
the Fingers end there will be a Callus. It is better if a Nail be splitted the
long way. Be it which way it will, if it holds fast, do not cut it, because
without causing pains it cannot be cut; let it not gape far asunder; use
constantly burnt Allom pulverised; Nails usually raise and thrust the flesh
upwards, and are of tedious healing. A Nail that begins to close again must be
kept bound continually, as hard as the Patient is able to endure it, and still
pare the old Nail away; take heed you make it not bleed at the paring; the old
Nail will give way to the young one, even as an old Tooth gives way to a young
one. This is the fairest cure, if you can bring it so to pass, and causes the
least pains, and suffers not the flesh to grow high. Learn to know well the
new Nail, for at first it appears like a blew skin; do not try whether it be
a Nail or no, for if you touch it with any Iron, Finger, or Nail, it gets a
scarr, and will not be touched, neither will it look so fair, as when you lay a
plaster to it, and tie it close together with linen, then the Nail will be
stiff, close, smooth and even; but if you touch it, it grows rugged, which
hardly can be rectified afterward; therefore help, that the old Nail touch not
the new one, it does hinder else: the old Nail still gives way from above, and
grows loose, cut it off, but do not pull it off; for of its own accord it
goes off more and more, keeps down the flesh, that the young Nail may grow
over it, If you should pull off the Nail, it would pain the party, and the
flesh would grow high, and hinder the young Nails growing. Therefore take heed
you do not cut the old Nail too fast, neither leave too much of the old Nail,
it would prove a hinderance to the young Nails growing; neither must the old
Nail be cut too close, neither leave too much of it, so the new Nails coming
will not be hindered; the Finger at the end must be tied most strongly, and
make the Finger sharp and pointed, because it will fall broad enough at last

Many times the Nail grows rugged and unshaped, therefore lay a stiff
plaster to it, and a little well-wrought green Wax, it will keep the Nail from
ruggedness: in case the Nail does fester, then use my red unknown plaster,
which I shall show hereafter, let it lie there six days; it keeps the Nail
from ruggedness, and makes it even and smooth: tie it stiffely, else the Nail
stands high out.

But care must be had also, that the Fingers end be not killed with too hard
binding; tie it with a fine small tape, make no knots, but pin it; in case the
Nail be contused, then it looks blew, black, yellow, red and quite mortified,
as when a Stone, Hammer, Wine-pipe, or any other heavy thing is fallen upon;
then make a hole with a Raisor on the Nail, some do it with a piece of glass,
and get out the blood under it, make that hole not too little, but as wide as
it may be, and lame it not at the cutting, apply to it the brown Ointment, it
keeps the Nail from festering, rotting and stinking: do not cut away all the
Nail, it will loosen it self without danger: that Finger must not be tied hard;
but slack; and in case the Nail be so much loose that it will not stick or hang
on, then cut it away. But take heed here, and be warned, if there be no
necessity for the cutting off of it, then let it alone, as you were told also
before about the cutting off of members: for I have seen, many times, such
Fingers healed to the admiration.

It happens sometimes also, that a Finger is lamed with glass, iron, stick,
or other wood splinters, somewhat of it remaining in the Finger: here you must
have a care how to get it out again; sometimes such a piece of glass, wood,
etc. gets into the Joint, which is a slippery part, and is shut up there, and
cannot be gotten out at the first Wound where it entered, then Instruments and
other means must be used to get it out, and take heed you do not break it: When
you have gotten it out, then use the stiptick plaster, and if you doubt that
somewhat remained behind, then use that plaster and apply it right to the
place: do not feel and groap much in the Finger, least you make it angry; for
feeling with the Iron into the Wound, and touching a small bone, then a mark
you put on there which will not heal so easily: If it raises and is soft, then
do not lance it presently, let it grow very ripe, then the iron, glass, wood,
etc. that is in it will loosen, and the flesh falls off from it, and comes forth
easily: For if you should open it presently, before the splinter be loose, then
you would hinder its putrefaction and separation; for it will soon separate,
and be loose at the festering, be it glass, or what it is, etc. from the
sinews, ligaments, or flesh, for all what sticks to it, at the festering it
must part from it. Being parted, it heals then easily, no Tent you ought to
use, for it loosneth of its own accord. If you should take it out forcibly,
then that part would be lamed. I do not say, that at the first you should let
it fester, as soon as it comes to your hand: no, but when you think that some
piece staid behind, then no need to seek in it, but apply only the stiptick
plaster; if there be nothing in it, then is it needless, but if there be any
thing in it, it must be had out, though it should be made loose with a sharp or
small Tent, which is better than lancing: I confess, I made use sometimes of
cutting out such splinters, but never searched in the hole with the Instrument.
Therefore lay hold on the appearance of a splinter, nail, thorn, etc. that
entered into a Joint, be it the Ankle, Knee, Elbow, Hand, etc. for a splinter
stays not in that place where it entered, unless the Patient never stir,
but as soon as he stirs then the splinter goes further and slideth off. I have
seen strange passages with such splinters, viz. they came forth a span from the
hole they entered at, thus slippery are the Joints if stirred.

I could write mavelous things that happened to me, viz. one splinter parted
into three pieces, none of these came out with the other, and some weeks past
between, before they came forth the one after the other: many such Patients I
had.

Therefore be not deceived, neither marvel at, that when a splinter, nail,
thorn, is gone into a Joint, you find it no more in that place. Stirring is
good for such a party, that the splinter may appear and break out in another
place, and that at an opposite place, either above or below it. In case a
splinter stays long in the Joint, it will make long work for the Surgeon,
therefore such Joints must be looked to speedily, and the thing that entered
into be gotten out, for the bones in the Joint are not so strong as they are in
the Arm or Leg, but are covered with Arteries, which are weaker than bones: The
further the bone is from the Joint, the harder it is to be cut or broken; and
hurts about the Joint are more dangerous than those which are further off.
Every Joint has its own ligaments, which hold the Joint together, and if any
thing stays in these ligaments, it putrifieth them, and that Joint will not
be so flexible as it was before, and sometimes a small putrefaction lameth it
quite. And if you do not know what to do in such a case, and the hole, where
the splinter went in, is no bigger than a pins head, yea, you hardly can
discern, whether any thing entered or no, and you cannot feel with your finger
any pricking thing, then let it alone, feel not into, unless by a sure sign you
know that something is in it: in case you have no certain sign of it, then
apply the unknown Plaster a hand-breadth over it, and leave vent about a
Dollers breadth at the hole, there apply the stiptick plaster, as if it were a
thorough wounded bone-fracture, bind it not too hard, else you cause a swelling
at the Joint, and in case it is swelled, then make vent, keep it not too stiff
with binding, that you may see, whether it inclines to swelling, and where it
is thin, and where it casts up a bile, and makes a blew mark: be not too hasty
here, at another time you may be surer, whether any thing be in it or no; if
so, then lance it, and press it forth, and proceed as you think good.

Being that lancing is not always good, I always stayed for a fitter time,
and had no mind to lancing, always holding it better, that for four days some
pains should be felt, rather than to cause greater pains for two days, and I
am still of that opinion. For if the splinter can neither be seen nor felt,
what need then of groaping? It cannot always be hid, it will find its place
one time or another. Some use to take Hares grease, and Bone-marrow, and apply
it to the Wound: and others do it another way, every one thinks his own to be
the best: but for my part I used the stiptick Plaster, as you heard before: if
it comes forth, well and good, if not, I let it alone, using no Tents, let it
have its own working to cast it out. Some use swelling Tents and Fomentations,
others use Corrosives, others fall to lancing: let every one have his will,
what I Write, I Write for Novices.

I have seen splinters, and took them forth, which had staid some years in the
flesh, the parties notknowing how they came into it, feeling no pain, till at
last when the splinter rose, and I thought it had been a loose bone, neither
did the party know what it should be, but at the opening it proved a long
splinter, which was as clear, as if lately broken off from the wood.

It happened, that one leaning on a Pin-cushion, a needle run into his Finger,
and a piece of it brake off, his Daughter complained that her needle was
broken, made him remember it, at the present he felt it not, neither regarded
it; in sound flesh for a time it may not be felt, and cause no pain for the
present: The thing that I would say here is this, that such Wounds should not
be metled with, as long as they are not painful, and stay the time, when they
cause pains.

And I have seen a splinter rising upwards in the flesh, as well as downward:
Iron and Lead always tends downwards, and heavy things, that sink in water,
do the like in the Body, and light things, that swim on the water, the same
climb upwards also in the Body, if there be a way for it.

The splinter which is gone into the Body, if green, it may be pulled out and
laid hold on with a Skrue, or a skrued Bullet-tong, or Corn-tong, or with the
Seeker; and if you are about any such thing, do it nimbly, else the wood swells
in the flesh, grows big, and you can no more get it out, where it softeneth
and rotteth, and no Instrument can take hold of it, and the Joint swells;
therefore be quick and nimble.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Wounds in Hands and Fingers; and if any Bones be cut asunder, how it is to
be cured.

IF you have a Patient, whose Hand or Finger is wounded, and something is loose
in it, and the ligaments are cut in pieces; here have a care, that the Joint be
not hurt or touched at your dressing. Some have Hands made of wood, and others
have cases, in which they lay the wounded Members to rest, such things I
approve and commend, I had none such, I used splinters, as it is the fashion
about broken bones which I fitted for the Arms, Hands, Fingers, according as I
had occasion; these splinters were like such, as I used to Bone-fractures. For
I shall show you, how I fashioned these splinters, in the form of a Member or
Joint, and fitted them so, that they hurt or touched no where, and lay on close,
and they fitted very well, and looked handsome, and were either of a sleeve
fashion, or of a finger case, taking just measure; having prepared them well,
then first I applied the red unknown Plaster about the Wound, so that it
enclosed round the Joint, and made it lie smooth, for if the Plaster runs
together, you will hardly get it asunder; therefore keep them asunder a straws
breadth, and not let them close, nor come one over another, else the skins or
splinters could hardly be changed without great moiling; and when they are at
this distance, they are the easier taken off from the skin, and the Joint must
not be stirred nor pulled much, when the Plaster comes off uneasily. Therefore
be warned, you do not let the Plaster come together, be it on the Fingers
joint or elsewhere, you may lay a double Plaster of course cloth to the Joint,
then the Plasters stick close like an armor, and the Joint is under it
immovable. The Plaister's being doubled, let them be at a further distance,
else you will hardly get them off from the body; and when I intended to let a
Plaster lie long, and not to take it off in haste, then I spread some of the
said Salve or Ointment on the splinters, then they held strongly and I tied two
laths about it or more, as I saw need for it; and when I laid any such bands to
it, I took heed, that I touched not the Plaster. The use will teach you more,
how these laths and splinters must be laid, they must not cover the Wound, but
it must be as in a bone-fracture it is used: Above the bolster and band you lay
them to the Wound, at last lay on lath, and so bind it to, as you think fit.
And doing thus, be it the Finger, Hand, Arm, Leg, then you may look to it twice
or oftener in a day, that the Joint does not move, and is at better rest, then
if it were every day stirred and taken out of the case, or lifted; you need not
fear any Imposthumations to fall into the Wound. In case such laths and
splinters are not used, because no Joint or bone was in pieces, nevertheless I
applied the red unknown Plaster, by reason of Imposthumes and Swellings of the
Joint, always leaving vent for the Wound, as there was need of. When you lay
clothes over the Plaster, then first lay a bolster upon the Plaster, then the
other clothes will not stick to the Plaster, thus the easier you may open and
bind it. I let this Plaster lie sometimes ten days long, in case it was not
washed much. On a Fracture I let it lie somewhat longer; and on the Knee it
must lie longer, as I shall show it in Fractures of bones and Knees: when you
place the Patient into the plaster and bands, you may lift him immoveably as
you please.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Cracks in Members, caused by great and heavy liftings, or when men work so
strongly, that their Hands crack as if broken.

SUrgeons many times undertake a cure, which is of no great weight or
consequence; sometimes the Hand is swelled, and sometimes it is not, but the
great sinews of the Arm is cracked, and the party is not able to lift any thing;
and it paineth him when he works; he aileth nothing, but that his sinews are
cracked. If you dress him with the red Plaster, as a Fracture is dressed, then
the cracked sinews join again, even as a Fracture in a bone does; but if you
only anoint, and not bind him, he will not be cured in haste; such like
Patients I had many. But you need not dress him with many laths or such like,
one lath or splinter will serve the turn here. And apply that lath either above
or below the great sinew on the Arm, another within the Arm, and better is it,
to appply one above than below the sinew, and so tie it stiffely, then the
great sinew joyneth, and the sinew water is consumed without any danger.

If a party was beaten, or had a fall, without a Wound or Fracture, I dressed
him in this manner, as you heard of the cracked Joints, then the congealed blood
could not gather nor putrify, and the blew and yellow color was gone: I
anointed them sometimes with Dialthaea, that it should be the more supple, and
used no laths or splinters, but only dressed the Hand with the red Plaster, and
needed no further toil; some I dressed but once, some twice, and at the most
three times.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Knees that are full of pains, and how they are cured.

I Will write now of Knees that are much pained, and do look like other found
Knees, yet are full of pains continually, without ceasing day and night, and
grow untoward and unshaped: Of these there are several sorts, some are with a
fall, blow, thrust, casts, and other ways thus lamed; others were sound at day
time, and at night they fell lame, swelled and greatly pained in their Knees:
Of these I should write severally; of such Patients I had enough, had great
care and toil with them. I have lanced more than a hundred of such Knees,
besides those I had cured otherwise, and not opened them: I call my Journymen
and Apprentices to witness, which dwelt a long time with me, that I still was
troubled to cure such Knees, two or three Patients in one day, whose Knees were
so full of matter, that it was to be wondered at. And God has given a great
blessing unto such cures, whose Name be praised for ever.

If any one was lamed in his Knee, either by a throw, fall, blow, etc. and it
was swelled, which swelling was not long there, but even newly come on, these I
cured so; first I applied my red Plaster in a great and broad way, only
leaving free the tendons or hamstrings, and bound it well with roulers, to keep
off swellings, and the Sinew water from gathering, and from festering. I did
not undress the party in four or five days, neither did I much anoint the
party, only kept the Joint free from simptoms; thus all ill humors were
exsiccated.

Thus simply I dressed the Knees, which order I do keep even to this present
time, neither did I hitherto here of any better way. Sure I am, I have dressed
above a hundred such Knees; at the taking off of the one Plaster I applied
another, not troubling the Patients with any other things, and so cured them.

The same process I used to Elbows, Shoulders, Hands, Ankles, Fingers. Briefly,
all parts wounded and hurt by a fall, blow, throw, thrust, etc. Fractures and
Wounds, never altered the cure.

Further, if any had ugly Knees, full of hardness and pains, I proceeded in the
same manner with them, and with coagulated Sinews and other stiff parts; I
never could hear of any better thing these seven and thirty years, and as long
as I followed this Profession; and if I should continue it as long again, I do
not believe that ever I should change it: and as many Knees as I have lanced, I
still applied that same Plaster, healing it toward the Body up, and down to
the Leg, and bound it well above and below the Knee with a broad rouler:
somewhat I left open about the Wound, like an open Fracture, which I undrest
and dressed again, as necessity required a lanced Wound should be dressed: I let
lie the applied Plasters, as they use to do on a Rupture, and dressed them twice
a day, even as I thought good, and the Joint could not rise, by reason of the
applied Plaster, because the Plaster would not suffer any thing to press or
thrust upward, and the hollowness and swelling never rose higher. I had also
many Knees in cure, which were very hard, and would not be stirred, having a
lameness, biles and other simptoms, and Joynt-sponges grew therein, and
exiccations of the Joints.

All these I dressed with the said Plaster, tied them strongly, and pressed the
hardness downward below the Knee, driving it down to the Leg, then the Knee
began to lessen, only the Shin and Foot swelled, for the which I applied warm
clothes, and sometimes I perfumed these warm clothes with Frankincense, then
the Legs swelling was gone also, and that internal moisture was exiccated
without any danger. These parties were so cured, that they needed not any other
Medicines.

Moreover, some Knees came to my cure, full of lameness, biles and
joynt-sponges, such I cured in the following manner.

When the Knee was hard and ugly, then I bound it strongly all the Joint over,
and mollified it, and was careful to see where the joyntwater would appear; and
having found it in a ripeness, being gathered under the band, and there also,
where it appeared first, and there also, where it never was, then I took care,
where it might be best to open it, and took hold on the matter, where I was
sure it was, which I let run out as clear as water, not mingled with matter or
blood, and that water looked as clear as Well water. In case I could not come
so nigh as to get the water out at one cut, lying yet under the knee-pan, then
I cut only through the skin, making a little hole, putting in a Wick rould in
Allom or other Corrosive, and still eat a deeper and broader Wound with
Corrosives, till I came to the water: For it is sure enough, if you hit and
meet with the water, it gusheth forth, as the blood does out of a breathed
vein. It often happened to me, that I was fain to set the basin farther off,
when it gushed forth in this manner: one time it gushed into my Man's face,
scarce able to hold the basin, so fiercely came it running. Having let out this
water, then I dressed him with a Tent and Ointment, every day thrice, like an
open Fracture: Once I lanced a young Man's Knee, the water gushed out so
vehemently, that none of it run down his Legs, till at the end, when they were
empty. I know not one but he was healed, if any water was found therein: and I
had good success also upon those which I dressed with bands and roulers; and when
I was about the lancing of any Knee, I did it so, that the Patient was no where
endangered thereby. I never opened any with a Knife or other instruments, but
only with that Lancet I used to phlebotomize withal, making no great incision,
only of such a bigness that I might get in a Tent. Further I did so, I dropped
one drop of Ointment on the place where I meant to cut, and was sure, that in
that hollowness the water did lie; and having thus marked it with a drop, then
I took a long rouler and bound the place beneath it, and then I struck upward
above the marked place, then I laid another band, tied it strongly, so that the
skin rose on high, and made it insensible with the stiff and hard binding, and
raised it so high, that I knew I could not hurt him, and to come only to the
hollowness with the iron, and it hurt the Patient not so much, as it would if
the place had not been tied, neither could it slide away under the Lancet, it
must stand to it, and it could not but be hit and surely found.

Now is it time here to consider, what sores I mean to be opened on the Knees
and Elbows.

Note, I mean not such Knees or other Members, which are full of matter, or
other swellings filled up with scirrosities, but only such that are full of
water, and are soft, and by that water are brought to a lameness; of such I had
a great many; neither are they marked with any weakness or defect, only they
complain of it, when they go, or stand still, and at mornings near the breaking
of the day they are most pained, neither do they feel any great pain when
touched, only there they are pained where the water lies, and is swelled a
little, no other sign to be seen. It is hardly believed* how it gusheth out at
the cutting; but if tied it spinneth out, as when a vein is breathed, but no
blood comes with it.

Many such Knees would not yield to any softness under the Plaster, though
they were much anointed, and troubled with Cataplasms of Althea, Malva,
Grease, etc. hot Wines, Oils, Sweatings, Fomentations, Coolings and chiefly
Water-baths, all which were hurtful, and rather caused the growing of a
Joynt-sponge. When they were so hard, and shapless, and unmovable (for the
abovesaid Medicines make them stiff, tough, hanging and clingling:) then I was
forced to do what I was loath to do; and seeing that the thing must be opened,
namely, the top and the highest part of the bile, and put some Corrosive into
the Wound, and made it angry every day more and more, till the hardness was
consumed, and then I dressed him, as any other Wound of the Knee ought to be
dressed; after it was somewhat healed, I applied the red Plaster also, and so
exiccated the rest, as I usually did to Knees not lanced: I often bowed,
outstretched and moved them, fitting them for motion, for the flesh sticks
so close to the healing, that it will hardly admit any stirring, therefore by
force they must be stretched, bowed and bound, as hereafter shall be spoken of
at crooked joints. Note also, that a Mercurial Ointment is good for lameness
and pocky biles, if his foot be anointed with it, or it is better, if laid
into it, for the Pox and lame blains come sometimes only into the Knee, though
no where else, but men are loath to hear, that these are caused by that Morbus.

There are other strange hurts on the Knees, more than to the whole Body may
come, and differ so much, that no body can tell what they are, and I believe
there is no man, who knows them all.

There are also some humors of the Body, which stink, and fall down upon the
Knees, of which many perish and die, and I say not that these may be cured; for
besides the misery, pains, stink, putrefaction of the bones and sinews, there
grow Worms therein, which fall from thence, and to speak truly, these ought to
be cut off, and the Patient be ready for death.

And my counsel is to you Novices in Surgery, not to undertake alone to cure
Knees, unless you know first, what accident there is in it, whether it come by
a hurt, or whether it accrue to it, for an accrued hurt is worse than one that
is made; and an accrued simptom has a root, which if it be stirred and roused,
a dangerours excrescence may be caused, and the root not known. But things
proceeding from the Pox, which are running, are bad enough to be cured,
especially when they break forth of their own accord, for then they are worse
than when they are opened; for when corruptions seek to come forth, they search
then many places betwixt the veins and sinews, and stay there, and have many
passages and ways; and when a Surgeon thinks he is almost at his journeys end,
then is he only at the beginning, and can hardly come near it, and falls out
many times, that the true ground can never be had, and then bodily humors come
also, which come from ill Lungs, and fall down from the Diaphragme.

Moreover take care, and understand me right, that you will have perhaps cause
in sore Knees to make use of a lenitife, by reason of the swelling and the
water which is in it, which ought not to be used. Use no mollifying things made
of Althaea, Mallows, Honey, Meal, Lin seed, Butter, Grease, and such like, etc.
for I do not advise, that any softning things should be applied to Knees, but
to let Nature have her course; and if Nature be too weak to expel, then aid her
with a Lancet, make a hole, which is to be made wider with a Corrosive, or
burnt Allom, which is enough, I used no more. Here I speak of hard and not of
soft Knees, for when they are soft, then they soon ripen unto matter or water.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the little Vcler that grows on the Knee.

IT falls out sometimes, that one gets an Ulcer or Sore before on the Knee-pan,
and paineth much, and appears with a swelling and heat, and sometimes there
is also a cold in it, it gripeth the party extremely, it shoots and rages
like a Plague bile, and it grows red and hot, at first it looks ghastly,
but the danger is not great; let it have time unto maturity, it will get a
little Blister with a black head, like unto a small Pox. At its breaking there
comes forth a little water, there stands a green husk, which cannot be pressed
out before it comes to a ripeness, and being grown ripe, then it opens like
a sore, and is healed again without any tent or mollifying, is curable like any
other sore, and is called the good Pox, it is full of pains, and easily cured.

CHAP. XX.
Of an Inflammation, or St. Anthonies Fire on the Knee. Erisipelas.

Those Knees that raise and swell, and have many red pimpels here and there,
they raise, but swell not, and is called the Rose. These ought not at all to be
anointed, much less must any greasiness or moisture come to it, only dry warm
clothes must be applied unto, which dry up all their damps. Some do foment
those, and I used such means also, and me thinks it does very well. This Rose
or Anthonies Fire must be so dealt withal, and that swelling or raising goes
away without any peril, if only kept warm with dry clothes. These Knees must
be tied pretty stiffely, that the Knee-pan do not raise too much. It is good to
bind a Knee hard, as much as the Patient is able to bear, be it in any
infirmity whatsoever, except when there are gray blains or blisters at hand,
these ought not to be bound, that the sooner and better they may come to their
ripeness, for they grow and swell till they be ripe.

In case you were to use any tents to the Knees, by reason of the hollowness
and bigness of the hurt or sore, that in the inside it be too wide and too
great, then the Tents must not be of that bigness as to fill out the hole, else
the matter will be deeper undermining, before you dress it again, by reason of
the abundance of it: but at that hole, where the tent is put in, the matter and
water must run out.

CHAP. XXI.
Of some humors of the Body, which sink down into the Knees and Legs; what
these are, and how they must be cured.

THe hurts and simptoms of the Knees are several; among the rest there is a
malignant humor, running down from the Body, making a passage through the Thigh
to the hollow Knee by the sinews, which humor stinketh, and is like to matter,
and white like Whey, there it stays, and admits of no cure, it is one of the
worst humors, and I never heard, that any was cured of it, either by
fomenting, woods, lancing, cooking, or by other manuals, nor by potions, or
corrosives, but it kept its course, which it has from the Body downward, and
the passage it made is hardly found out. Therefore I advise you, not to attempt
much upon it, but only keep these Knees clean, that they may stink the less.

There are other sharp humors also, of the nature of a salt rheum, which fall
down from the Body upon veins and sinews, and these also have their revelets
and passages. These corrode and gnaw the bones into a black color, and cause
more pains than the former, and are very hardly cured, yet through good counsel
and good diet they may, and must be held to the Wood cure; and if they are
cured, it is done with inconvenience, by cutting or taking out of bones; if
these rheums are taken off, and their condition changed through a good diet,
then these sharp rheumes are consumed and gone, and may the easier and better
be healed than the other above named.

There are other rheums also in the Body, which fall on the bones above like
great Imposthumes and swellings, where they putrify, and sink till they come
to the Knee, which proves naught, some of these rheums have their supply from
the Body, but these are neither stinking nor corroding, as the other two sorts
named above are, and these run most round about the bones, before they come to
any maturity, and fill the Legs with matter, and are easily cured, if come to a
full ripeness, and when they have mollified the flesh and skin, then must they
be opened, and a cleanser put in, and let the rheum run out, let it not rest
one quarter of an hour in its running, and let the party have a constant
dressing, applying Tents and Plasters, let the hollowness be not much covered
with flesh, that the Muscles and the skin together with the panicles may close
the better, for these do willingly close, for that reason they must not be
filled up with flesh, and must be tied stiffely, then the hollowness heals
together; therefore sit your Wicks so, that the moisture may run out by it, and
gather not at the one place or sinew to the other; for I held it not good, when
I pulled out a Tent, that the matter followed close, if the matter is run out
before the Tent is pulled out, then is it more wholesome when no matter
follows after the Tent. The Patient must not always lie still, but must turn
himself this and that way, that the matter settle not any where. The Tent that
is to be put in must be covered with Aegyptiacum, or with a Wound-ointment, as
you see cause for it. You may siringe him a little, and that gently: Use no
Glisters, they cause windiness, which brings danger. But siringing is good,
and the Balsam and Ointment comes the better into: and the simptom being
inwardly well cleansed, and the swelling allayed, then dress the opened hole
with the Ointment and Plaster, then you will know, whether any matter is
settled, it raises then like dough: you need not to put the Patient to any
pain, nor to make any hole, for it will run out freely when you dress him with
the rouler, and apply the red Plaster over that dough or softened place, and
if it thrusts against, as the matter usually does, and you are sure of the
matter, then you may lance it, which will be good, thereby the matter will take
its course, and let the first little Wound be healed up as fast as you can, and
bind it strongly. And the neathermost hole must have vent, and be kept open,
till to the last of the healing. Let the Knee not lie still and rest, but
stretch and bow it as much as you can, that it grow not lame. For if you stay
till all be healed, then will it be too late for the Knee to be stirred.
Therefore do it betimes what you ought to do, that the Knee be not healed
stiff. For if you stay too long, and neither bow nor out-stretch the Knee,
then you will hardly help it afterward, and it will be a great difficulty to
bring it to right. For if you deal rightly, and heal it well in the joining of
it, then the party will be of a sound and strong body, for all the dangerous
humidity which was in all the body, was expelled through this strong humor. I
have seen, that all those which were cured of such humors grew strong and
sound men.

There are other humors which fall into the Knee, even A humor like the Rose,
but worse.
as the Rose or Anthonies Fire uses to fall, and with such a cold as the
Plague does, and looks like unto this Rose or Anthonies Fire, but is somewhat
worse, having blew spots, as the Rose has red ones, but the blew ones are not
so big, but are of that bigness as the black blisters are, and this redness is
altogether naught, for it is a flour of the cold Fire: But if that Member has
great help from the body, then it does not so much hurt, for there fall little
holes into those blisters; and when their skins are pulled off, their matter
looks black, and falls out, and these are easily healed, but are worse than the
Anthonies Fire is, and ought not to be made wet, neither must they be
anointed, but kept only warm and dry, as long as the redness and the black
blisters hold, then plasters are applied unto them, as other little holes
usually are healed.

There are also Dogs blisters, very like unto the above named, Dogs blisters.
but not so dangerous, and they make the Knees swell, these also ought not to
be made wet.

There are also on the Knees laming humors, which are of a difficult healing,
make deep impressions, cause a great deal Laming Humors.
of trouble, and are not easily turned or diverted, and do not show from whence
their original is; the pain they cause is just in the middle of the Knee, with
a little swelling, and stand on the Knee-pan, there seems to be store of
filth in it, but is not, only the pain is apparent; there is a sinew and lame
water, which can neither be softened nor ripened, even like the water which is
in a Joint, as we heard above: much pain usually creepleth and makes the Knee
crooked, or shrinks it, especially toward the day. My constant practice was to
dress and bind them dry, strongly and warm, to keep the Pores open. No greasy
things, no Ointments, no wet things I used thereunto, after I had well learned
the simptom, but my red Plaster I still applied, and warm clothes. And as I
showed at the great Bands, to keep things there in a sweat, so these lame biles
also will steal away; for if Patients sweat well under the Plaster, they will
doubtlese be healed, and tie the places hard, though it makes the foot swell it
matters not, for that soon allayeth and goes away, if kept warm with clothes,
even as other humors are expelled by keeping open the Pores.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Wounds made by Gunshot; of the abuses committed with the thorough pullings
and Ointments: what a Surgeon ought to note here.

ANy shot that went thorough Man's body is held mortal, Wounds made with shot.
because the internal parts are spoiled and hurt by that heat; such Wounds are
not easily cured: of these I intend not to treat, nor of such, where the shot
has carried all away, which things can neither be filled nor set on. We will
speak here, how to quench such burnings, and how such inflammations are to be
prevented, so that that burning cause no further mischief than the shot has
made, and then how Surgeons in such particulars are to regulate themselves.

The condition of one that is shot is this; some bullets Bullets stay, or
penetrate the Body.
stay in the Wound, or else go quite through; if gone quite through, then the
cure is this, that the burning be quenched, because if that prevails, it
causes more hurt than the shot has done.

But if the bullet staid in the Wound, then it must be taken When a bullet
stays?
out, but how that is done, is not well possible to set down every particular;
for shots are made several ways, the one is not like the other, a whole book
could be written of it; Experience must show the way, how they are to be dealt
withal; and so here you must go to school and learn.

The Ancients indeed have used hereunto many strange Screws and Instruments,
and were very careful herein. But these are either of no use, or of very
little. For if the bullet cannot be laid hold on by the Instrument, how shall
it be gotten out? The bullet will strive to get out at the Wound, if the
Patient be laid downward with the Wound, or else by its sinking it will come to
a place, where it may be cut out; if none of these can be, Experience must show
you another way.

Touching Wounds where the bullet went through; here I must show the dangerous
abuses which Surgeons commit; if they have a Patient that is shot through a
Member, they take hempen thread, or some twisted hair, which rotteth less, and
draw it through the Wound, let it hang out on both ends, they put their cooling
Ointments to it before they draw it thorough; and when they come to dress the
Patient again then they pull the threeds forth, and besmear it afresh with
their cooling Ointment, and then they draw it through again, that part of the
thread which staid in the Wound they make very clean, from that it gathered in
the Wound; then they apply their Plasters to the Wound, as they think they are
fitting.

With these thorough-drawings (as they call it) they Thorough-drawings do more
hurt than good.
suppose to have done great good. Nay, some are of opinion, that this is the
only way to dress and heal Wounds made with shots.

But it is otherwise: For they do not effect so much with these thorough
drwaings as they think, for the hurt weighed with the good, that is done
thereby, it will be apparent, that more hurt is done than good, and ought to be
omitted altogether.

For such a cord or line drawn through the Wound must Hurts done with the
thorough-drawings.
needs cause great pains, and that not only at the first, but at the several
dressings. This way were less dangerous, and the less refuseable, if the shot
had hurt no sinews and blood veins; but this being very seldom, I hold, this
scouring should be omitted. For it often falls out, when a blood vein is hurt,
and has stencht her self, this thorough pulling causes in her a fresh
bleeding, which blood stays within and causes no good. And in case a sinew
be hurt-in that Wound, then this line must needs hurt the wounded sinew at the
several dressings, and stir it at this pulling or drawing, which doubtless is
not done without causing of great pains, and thereby the worst simptoms are
occasioned. For these and many other reasons, which I could allege here, I
hold this thorough-drawings to be a very dangerous abuse, and count the
following way, which I made use of, far better, as being an easier and slighter
way, causing less pains an^ dangers, in respect of simptoms.

Object. It may be objected here, that such cords draw out the filth which the
fire has left in the Wound, and the Wound is thoroughly cleansed within?

It may do so; but in respect of other inconveniences, pains, dangers, whereby
some Patients are quite spoiled, I hold it for naught. For Nature is her own
best Physician, and desires to be aided in these things, which are not contrary
unto her; and the matter, burnt flesh, blood, etc. through Natures help
separateth of its own accord, and Nature ought to be helped herein with
convenient means, as you shall here hereafter.

Therefore the burning or fire being quenched, then there is no more need, but
that Nature be assisted, and that be expelled, which the fire in the Wound has
spoiled, the which is easier and sooner done through the following Medicines,
better than with all their thorough-drawings.

I must needs give a hint here of the cooling Ointments, Abuses in the Coolers
committed.
which some Surgeons prepare, of Oil and other shorty and greasy things:
Though indeed they do no hurt, and in that respect I reject them not: But there
is one thing in the way, at which I am offended, and must needs speak of. All
fat things, be they what they will, grow hot suddenly and cool slowly. Must now
such a cooling Ointment be ^ut and forced into the Wound, where the bullet
sticks, either in the bone or in the flesh, whilst it is yet hot? Surely that
Wound must needs be more inflamed thereby? Besides this will ensue also, when
such Ointments are poured into the Wound, the Patient must endure the more
smarting pains, especially when the bullet is still hot and warm in the Wound.
Therefore I hold it to be better, to use means which cause less pains, for it
is usual, that to pained places worse things are incident. But where there is
no pain, there the Wound settleth the sooner unto rest.

As for the healing of such Wounds, I will tell you what I found to be good,
not that there should not be other cures for them, but only that the courteous
Reader may see, that I and others have endeavored to the utmost, that hurts
and dangers might be prevented, and the good of all Patients promoted.

CHAP. XXIII.
How to cure Wounds made with Shot, and how the Coolers are made, and how the
Saltpeter is prepared thereto.

THe first thing belonging to such Cures is, that the bullet be taken out, and
I gave a hint of my meaning for it in the precedent Chapter, and let it rest
thereby.

Touching the burning and fire in the Wound, to quench it, you may note the
following things.

First, when the fire in the Wound is at the highest, prepare an Ointment of
Honey, and not of Oil or other greasy things, spout it into the Wound three or
four times, or any other way you can best get it in, and moisten all places
within, even the bullet also if it be in it. Then take a Tent of Gum
Tragadanth, anoint it with the said Wound-ointment, and thrust it into the
Wound. But if the Wound be shot quite thorough, then you must use two of these
Tents, be they short or long, as the occasion of the Wound requires, let the
Tent^ be thin and not thick, that they may the easier be put in; at last apply
a good stiptick Plaster upon, and take notice of its operation.

Then minister to the Patient of prepared Saltpeter ss (which follows
hereafter) in fresh Well water, or according unto occasion, sirrup of Violets,
or of Sloe-thorn flowers, minister to the Patient without delay, of this you
may give before you dress him, the fire within will the sooner be allayed and
quenched; for outward means do not always quench such fire, inward things must
be used.

In case the pain of this burning will not cease in two or three hours, then
undress the Wound, and dress it again, and let him have one dram more of the
prepared Saltpeter, surely that burning will cease in a short time: If it be
not yet quenched, then try the third time, and be provided with a better thing.
In the mean while let the Patient drink Water, let him not be oppressed with
thirst; the raw Water is better than if boiled; but things cannot always be
had in readiness: If inwardly a Joint or Principal part be hurt in the Wound,
at which you cannot come with the Medicine; of such Wounds I will not speak
here, because they are usually mortal.

The greatest pain being gone, then another Cooler may After burning.
be used, made of Oils or fat things, as you shall find hereafter, and that may
be done safely; only my advise is, not to meddle with oily things at first,
for reasons spoken of before.

Note also, that when all the fieriness and burning is gone, Phlebotomy will be
of good use in such places, as the Wound will permit, and that is to be done
when the fire is quenched, but if you do it before that, then you do nothing,
but make the fire to prevail the more and get the predominancy, for I found it
so by experience.

In case the great pain and burning holds still, and is not quite ceased, and
the Wound also does not purge out its When a Wound it poisoned.
filth, and grows redder and redder round about the brim, and the Patient be
thereby the more weakened, from thence you may argue, that the Wound is fallen
into a venomous simptom. Now is it necessary to let the Patient have a draught
of Aqua vitae (described in the Chapter of Wound-diseases) and let him sweat,
being well covered. For what is such a Wound, thus burned by Gunpowder, but a
venomous Wound? And in case you cannot have the aforesaid Aqua vitae, in lieu
thereof take good Mithridate or Treacle, and let the Patient sweat upon. For I
found it by experience, that with such sweating the heat was taken off, and
quenched, more than with the best Medicines outwardly applied; the Patient may
be thus sweated twice or thrice: In the interim neglect not the Wound, and
dress it as it ought.

As Wounds are several and different, so their Cures also Difference in Wounds.
must be according. Some Wounds are cured only with outward means, if timely
and orderly used; other Wounds require also inward Medicaments, without which
they are not cured.

Therefore vulnerary Potions, which I shall teach you, are not to be rejected,
to expel the filth from the blood and flesh.

Touching the Patients diet, you heard of it before, which I will not repeat
here, only let me tell of the Medicaments, I made mention of formerly, how
they ought to be prepared. To make Coolers.


To make the Cooler do thus: Honey lb 2. the juice of Housleek lb ss juice of
Crefishes five ounces, Rose Vinegar six ounces, phlegm of Vitriol five ounces;
mingle all these; scum it well in the boiling let it be a little thinner then
Honey; thus is it right.

The juice of Crefishes is made thus, Oflive Crefishes lb 1. beat them in a
mortar, press out the sap.

Phlegm of Vitriol is the distilled water from Vitriol, at the drawing off the
spirit of it: Of these in the Chapter of Cramp and Palsy, etc. more shall be
spoken.

This is a good Cooler, it quenches the fire presently, it must stand and go
no further, and the fire must separate the sooner from the sound part. It is
not only good against the fire, the Gunpowder left in the Wound, but other
burnings also, caused by Wood, Water, Oil, Iron, Tin, Lead, Gold, etc. if the
burnt place be anointed with it, then a stiptick Plaster applied to it, will
do very well.

This fire being quenched, and the pain allayed, then milder Medicines must be
used, which mitigate the Wound, and help to expel the rest.

I will teach you one or two I made use of my self:

Wax four ounces, melt it on a gentle fire, add to it of fresh Butter one
ounce, of Lin seed oil two ounces; all these being well melted, then pour it
forth into a pewter dish, in which be water of plantain, or Roses; stir it well
about, make it hot again, consume away the Water, pour it again into the dish,
stir it well about, then set the dish on a place to warm, stir it still, then
all the water will be gone, stir among it of Bole half an ounce, then is the
Ointment prepared for to get out the fire, let it lie as deep as it will; the
Wound must be often dressed with it at the beginning, and the Plaster before
spoken of applied to it.

Another cooling Ointment, which quenches not only the fire, but draws it
out also; but it is not so good against Another Cooler.
the burning caused by Gunpowder, as that which is prepared with Honey: Make
it thus:

Lin seed and Hemp seed-oyl, ana lb ss Oil of Poppy seed four ounces; mingle
these Oils, beat them, put a spoonful of Vinegar to it, let it cool, some feces
will settle to the bottom, which cleanly must be separated from the Oils. Then
of Wax three ounces, melt and mingle it with a quarter of an ounce of white
Amber, put these among the Oils, then is your Ointment prepared.

Thus much of cooling Ointments, because it is known enough how cooling
Ointments are made.

It happens sometimes, that though the fire be quenched and expelled, yet the
Wound does not heal, and is at a stand. In such a case use the following
remedy. In case the Wound heals not.


Gray Calmy stone, and Tutia Alexandrina, or a Calmy cake, ana one ounce, grind
them small, put it in a Crucible, let it stand in a glowing heat for an hour,
then pour it into good Vinegar, let it cool there, which being done, then take
it out, set it again into a glowing heat, and then let it cool, then take the
juice of Nightshade two ounces, of Litharge of Silver a quarter of an ounce,
oil of Roses half a pound, of Wax four ounces, of Frankincense one dram,
mingle all these, and make an Ointment of it.

There are many Simples found also, which take out the Simples that are good
also in that case.
fire, and are of a sanatife quality, viz, red and white Colewort, Soladel, and
many more of that kind. And some Animals also are good, viz. Frogs, Geese, etc.
of these I speak no more here, Surgery being of a greater concernment with the
Manuals and Experience in it, more than great prating come too.

An expert Surgeon, according to skill and Experience, will Manuals and
Experience is best in Surgeons.
find more things than conveniently may be set down in writing, when, where and
how is to order and alter his Medicines, and to make them milder or stronger.

This I will teach you, how the aforesaid Saltpeter is to be To prepare
Saltpeter for Wounds made by shot.
prepared for Wounds made with shot, and how Tents are to be made and used,
because the preparation is not known to every one.

First touching the Saltpeter, its preparation is thus; its naughty humidity is
to be taken from it, and a better restored to it, that it may safely be used
for the good of the Patient, it is of a good scent, it quenches thirst, it
allayeth heat, provokes urine, and is endowed with many good qualities, not
known to every one.

Its preparation is thus: Of the purest clarified Peter two ounces, put it in a
pot, and make a circular fire about, let it be melted, it being melted, put a
little quantity of purified Sulpher to it, that being flamed away, then cast
more into, till a quarter of an ounce be burnt in it, the Sulpher clarifieth
the Peter; and when it is purified enough, cast it forth, and pulverise it, and
put it into a Bag or Manica Hypocratis, put Rose water to it, and make a
Lixivium, this Lie boil away half, let it cool and shoot into Cristals, which
you keep for use; boil away the moiety of the remaining water, let it cool and
shoot again; pulverise the Cristals, keep them from the air in a glass for use.

The Tents formerly mentioned are made thus:

The juice of Speedwel rectified through Wool, two ounces, Gum Tragacanth
purely beaten half an ounce, mingle and reduce it to a pap, let it stand in a
warm place, it will be like dough, then take lint of Silk, roll it in this pap
on a pewter plate, and keep these Wicks for use. Note, these must be made of a
pretty bigness, because in their drying they grow less; when they are dry, and
you have need to use them, then take one, cover it with your cooling Ointment'
and put it into the Wound, the Wick will swell in it, and the Tragacanth
attracteth all the moist filth, which at one time with such a Wick you may get
out of the Wound The lint the Wick is made of must hang out of the Wound, to be
pulled out thereby, else it may be lost in the Wound. Use the Wicks so long,
till the Wounds are cleansed, and the heat and anger of it be past.

Some Surgeons use Camphire to cool the Wounds, mingling Camphire of no use
here.
it with other things; but they do not well, because Camphire is not of a cold
quality, but of a penetrating heat. And that Camphire brings out heat and
expels it, is not because it is of a cooling property, but it comes from other
cooling simples mingled with it. In this case Camphire is not to be used, for
many reasons, which to relate I forbear at this time; and chiefly in Wounds
made by shot it is to be avoided, by reason of the affinity it has with
Saltpeters fire, known to Artists that deal therein.

There are some Surgeons which use Gum Opium to their cooling Ointments, but as
far as I know it is to little purpose. Gummi Opium is naught here
Such Gum is not good to any Wound, for outwardly it cools no Wound, within
the Wound it burns, unto which Experience bears witness. Therefore it
cannot quench any burning caused by Gunpowder; that thing quenches such a
burning, which attracteth fire, as Saltpeter and Sulphur does. Saltpeter and
Sulphur keep their native quality still, which is, to attract that fire which
they have lost, and quench that they set into fire. No more of this, and let
every one defend what they use; I do not intend to gainsay that, which others
have found good in their trials; for experimental knowledge is endless, and
every day new things are brought to light, and they may be such which I do not
know of.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Bone-fractures, and first of the naughty custom which is kept in dressing
them.

To cure Bone-fractures is common, and known almost to all, it is of great
consequence that it be rightly understood; for many know much, but have small
experience, and some want fundamental knowledge, who doubtless make many
naughty cures, as Experience witnesses and whereas I have spoken in the first
Part of many abuses committed in general, so I thought good to speak in
particular of abuses that are committed at the dressing of Fractures, and to
give a warning to Novices in Surgery.

Touching the naughty use at the dressing of Wounds, Abuses at the dressing of
Bone-fractures.
whereby Patients are neglected, which though it be common, yet it shall not
stop me in the disclosing of it, for reasons quoted above, Know therefore,
courteous Reader, that under this common use there lies hid a great abuse.

If a Fracture be set and placed right, after the setting they dress and bind
it with splinters made purposely for that use, these are laid round about the
Fracture, and with fitting fillets and bands, on which there are small eylid
holes, through which the tapes are put, and so pulled together, and closed up,
that it stir not. Before they do so, they usually make a pap, called the drying
band, of Tile stones, Bole, Walwort, and other such like, as every one thinks
good, or has seen others do it; this they apply about the Fracture, hoping
with this Drier to reduce the Fracture to a speedier healing. This is their
common way, and hold it for a Masterpiece.

As touching their Medicaments, I do not intend to disanul them, and to make
them of no effect; I should not dislike them so much if they had dealt well
with the Bone-Fracture, The quoted manner of dressing I do not like at all,
First, by reason of the great pain caused thereby to the Patient, because every
Bone-fracture being set right, striveth a little to a swelling, but the
Fracture being thus enclosed and bound up, as you heard, how can it come to a
swelling? (which Nature would have:) Therefore she presses and striveth the
more, is made angry, and swells the more, and still at the bands, where it
finds any vent, there it forces out the swelling, which cannot be done without
smarting pains to the party.

Yea, by this anger and forced swelling a whole Joint and Member is suffocated,
which can be proved by woeful examples. But this is little regarded of those,
who are ignorant of Nature and the true cause: and though it does not happen
always, that a Fracture is choked with such dressing, because it gets vent
sometimes, yet that pain is so great, that all those parts about the Fracture,
be they sinews, veins, Muscles, etc. are so much angered, that the Patient is
bereaved of his natural rest, for in his sleep he feels such pulling in the
bone, which awakeneth him with an amazement, these smartings and amazements may
easily cause other simptoms, viz. Fevers, Inflammations, etc. all which is
caused by his untoward and rude dressing.

All this is not enough yet, which ensues upon such rude dressing, there are
other difficulties and inconveniences. For they dressing a Fracture in the
quoted manner, they can neither see nor know well, whether the broken ends are
well set or no, for they think, if the splinters and boards lie well, then the
bones also stand well together. They little think, that the parts of the broken
bones either at the left or right side are terrified, and so the bone stands
awry and crooked. This makes them leave the Fracture undressed for some days,
thinking as long as the splinters lie right, the bones also are in a right
posture, which must not be taken ill at their hands, because they not knowing
how to dress a Fracture well, it is no wonder, why they are so loath to undress
it; but this is little ease to the Patient, which many times gets crooked legs
and joints, the one standing outward, the other inward, which such Surgeons
little regard, be it straight or crooked, as long as they have made a cure.

This before named manner of dressing is old, and has been practiced many
years, and so men must believe that it is good, because it is ancient.

I will say nothing of that which is still in use, viz. of the Screw-box (which
has been a long time in practice) not regarding the great danger and hurt
which they cause thereby, as daily experience witnesses, but poor Patients
have small cause to rejoice at this. This box usually opens with wings, which
some use for Fractures: I partly commend it, but never made use of it, because
my Band is easy, and the band with the Leg may easily be lifted, and thereby
the whole Member I may easily lift which way I please, and never feared to stir
the Fracture, because no splinter nor band is made loose. And when I intended
to open it; then I placed the Leg even and plain as I thought it was fittest,
and then I laid it down and undid the splinters, which I was to take off by
reason of the Wound, which was to be cleansed.

I will not speak here of those, which think themselves wise and subtiler, and
make use of Wheel-chips, or such boards that are used for sheaths: such things
indeed are of no great consequence, neither does it matter much, whether the
one use Walwort, the other broken stones, and a third use another thing, and
every ones cookery differs according to their skill.

To cure a Fracture in it self, understand me right, is no great skill, because
every broken bone easily and willingly inclines to healing, but the Manual is
all in all, how to deal well with a broken Leg or Arm, and to keep it in a due
fashion and posture; of all which I will give you a full information.

Courteous Reader, I would have you ponder it, and not be easily misled,
neither to think the worse of the slightness of my dressing of Bone-fractures
and broken Ligaments. Be assured, that such manner of dressing, which I will
show you, causes less pains, and is more easily done than the other way named
before, though generally used among Surgeons, especially touching the swelling,
as you heard before, and you shall hear more of it.

For many reasons known to me, I will not speak much of here, how a Fracture is
to be cured and healed, without the use of any splinters, only the Fracture
must be carefully and rightly set, and kept quiet in a good rest; some Surgeons
begin to practice that way, and have good success therein: But being it
requires great carefulness, therefore that way pleases not every Surgeon.
That manner of binding and dressing which I will set down, I hold it to be the
best, as being the safest way, accompanied with less peril, causing fewer pains
and little swelling, even as if the Fracture were not bound at all.

CHAP. XXV.
A fundamental Instruction of the true Cure of broken Bones, how Surgeons ought
to be regulated in the dressing of them, and how to keep the Fracture from
up-swelling and from pain.

IN broken bones it usually happens, that either the skin The difference of
Fractures.
or the flesh is broken, or both these be whole, and only the bone is broken;
this difference I speak of by reason of an open Wound; their cure is of no
great difference: I will set my Cures one way for the most, hoping the
judicious Reader will be regulated after my instruction, in other Fractures, of
which I shall not altogether be silent.

In the first place it is most necessary, if a Surgeon has a To know the
condition of the ligaments.
Fracture in cure, that he discern Man's inward condition, especially of the
Ligaments, for these differ very much, sometimes there lie two together,
sometimes one, and one is crooked, and the other is straight. Anatomy School
teaches largely of it, and thither I direct you.

A Surgeon being made ready, and having all things needful, To be ready for all
things.
in case he be to dress a Patient in have, for delays breeds no good in
Surgery, especially at the dressing of Wounds. Let him have in readiness a
bundle of pine-wood splinters of all sorts, to fit the Fractures above and
beneath; of a pretty strength, broad and small ones, crooked and straight ones,
and to have a store of all sorts of boards and splinters, and let him split
them with a Wood-mans Axe or Hook, and cut them hollow, some must be hollower
than others, some must be small, some broad, some short and some long,
according as the wood will bear it, the one crooked, the other straight, the
one thick, the other thin, some strong ones, some weak ones, of an arms or
fingers length, as the wood will cleave in length, some crooked, others
crookeder, Briefly, you must have all sorts, and such also which you think are
of no use, these may fit best of all, sometimes I chose the most crooked and
worst of them, which Wood-men intended for fuel, and splitted them, which came
out hollowed strangely, and were best for my use, into which I placed a Knee,
or Ankle, or Elbow, a Hand or other crooked Member; and as Men differ in their
Ankles and Joints, so these splinters must not be of one sort, therefore I
sought and measured so long, till my desire was satisfied. The splinters must
be measured first before you stretched and set the bone, else it would fall too
long, both for the Patient and those that bear him up, and the Fracture may be
stirred, and that which you set together might easily with one gripe be unset,
which would prove ill and painful to the Patient, and cause a greater swelling.
It would be a gross fault, if you should not first measure the splinters,
before you touch the Patient to dress him: And having ordered the splinters,
then spread some plaister-salve on them, that in their application they may
stick the closer; and do not spread too much on them, else in the dressing they
would be stirred, and though you think the splinters are well applied, yet will
they stir when pulled and laced together. Lay the splinters a fingers breadth
asunder when you apply them about the Fracture, because they come closer at
their lacing and binding. Therefore lay them not too close, else at the pulling
they will go one over the other, and too many splinters are more hurtful than
two few. In brief, there was no wood so crooked, but I made crooked splinters
of it, and the bigger the billet was the better I liked it, and the splinters
will fall more hollowed. Therefore the greater and crookeder the wood is, the
better the great ones for grown people, and the smaller will serve for
children, I had long splinters reaching from the foot to the hip for unruly
Patients, they will make them lie still. And if a Surgeon dresseth such
Fractures, and he has a thousand of such splinters in store, viz great, small,
crooked, straight, hollow, plain, weak, strong, narrow, broad and broader ones,
let the splinters be as they will, they will be for some use, and your store
will be no sore unto you, for I had use for some, which I never thought they
would be serviceable; practice made me to get such a store. Therefore provide
good store of them, and if some do not fit, you may make them fit for your use,
as the several Fractures may require. For though you may think they will fit,
yet they want much of that, be it in their length, breadth, smalness,
narrowness, straightness, or crookedness, which you cannot know before you
tried it; he that wears the shoes knows where they wring. Begrudge not
your labor you bestow on the cutting, measuring and applying of splinters, for
it is one of the chiefest Manuals, to lay splinters aright, and to set them
well together, for if you miss in the due placing of splinters, you may miss in
the whole cure.

Many have on their splinters laces and loops, I do not contemn these, for many
honest Surgeons made use of such, and do still, and have had good success with
them. But I never used them, because I had good store of splinters, and used
such hollowed splinters without lacing, applied them loose on the plaster, and
pulled them together with two or three bindings, commonly I used to it some
pieces of fustions, cutting them of two fingers breadth, and somewhat narrower,
that a knot could be made with them, and to the mindlemost I made the first
knot, then I could see how it would fit, whether there be too many of the
splinters or two few, and placed them as I saw it fitting, then I laid the
uppermost band, where I could see the better, whether it would be too much or
too little, that knot I pulled hard together, because it will still yield and
slacken, at last I laid the lowermost band, then commonly the middlemost was
tied too slack, which I opened and pulled it as hard as I thought it would hold
the Fracture without hurting the Joint, and the Fracture be kept from stirring.
These three bands hold the Fracture, and if dressed and bound otherwise it does
no good. Thus much of splinters.

A Surgeon ought to have two roulers, or at least one, Of the Roulers.
though there be no need of them, yet they must be had in store, and great
pieces of spread plasters, seven or eight, and a number of all sorts of
splinters, short, long, crooked and plain ones, for to flap-Wounds you must
have several sorts, according as they are made.

Roulers must be made not too broad, and must run with the thread or Wool, and
cut with the thread, or tear them after the thread, which is best, and cut off
the ravelings, for some of them have hindered me much; in the same manner you
must cut even the plasters and the splinters all the sides along, for the
smoother and plainer a thing is, the better is it handled, nor let the linen
be wrinkled or plated, nor the plasters neither, and apply them plain and
smooth, and apply the plasters straight, for they will slacken fast enough
when the splinters are pulled together; wet your finger either with Water, or
with a little of the Ointment, then the Plaster will not cling to your finger.

Then have a long Rouler at hand, with two other ordinary Roulers, as also five
small pieces cut from one end of the piece to the other; and have your Surgeons
box filled with necessaries, viz. Raisor, Spatule, Sheers, keep the box clean,
that you may in nothing be hindered; have in readiness also a good piece of
plaster in a box of Tin or Copper, which being hard, you may fling it into hot
Water to soften it.

Have a good Knife also about you, in case you have need to cut the splinters
to a fitness; also a Sponge, and a threeded Needle, and a piece of lint.
Besides the great Plaster (which must be spread broad and thick) you must have
many smaller pieces, whereby you may fill up places if need. Therefore spread
always more Plasters than you think you shall have use for. Item. Be provided
with Stitch-plaisters, bolsters or bags filled with chafe. Provide also
Fracture plasters, of the which hereafter is spoken, and spread it on a strong
cloth, broad and long, according to the bigness of the Fracture: and you must
be provided also with ordinary Plasters, made of two parts of Wax, one part of
Turpentine, and one part of Suet, and spread them thick and broad, as the first
Plasters are: lastly, you must have in readiness also broad linen, as you
shall hear: all these things named are necessary for to dress a Fracture.

The abovementioned Fracture-plaisters make thus: How to make
Fracture-plaisters.


Clear white Resine (no hard glass Resine) lb 2. Cyprus Turpentine lb ss. melt
these together gently, and not boil it, put to it of Barba hirci four ounces,
which Herb must be pulverised, stir it so long together till it be almost
cold. Thus is the Salve made; if you will spread it on a cloth, then pour on
it boiling hot Water, then is it pliable to be spread.

I like this Plaster better than the before-named ordinary The virtue of this
plaster.
Cataplasmes or Drier: For it sticks close to the skin, and stirs not in
haste, even as splinters also applied to the Fracture must not stir. This
Plaster draws forth the moisture from broken bones and ligaments, and makes
their gluten stiff and strong, through the virtue of the Resine, which is the
true external Balsam unto bones and ligaments. For this Resine draws forth
the superfluous moisture which the bones cast up, and coagulateth the
on-growing the sooner, and makes it come together, and then the said Herb
Barbahirci is an extraordinary healer far beyond other Wound-hearbs: Indeed
Comfrey, Walwort, Sanicle, Bistorta, have their virtues also in the joining the
bones together, but not comparable to this Resine; true, they draw forth the
filth from flesh and blood, but to get out the matter out of the bones, they
are not strong enough, much less is Terra sigillata, and Bolus, of that virtue:
true, all these are great driers, but have no power to extract things that lie
deep. To heal with greasy things is naught.


I will say nothing here of those, which use to broken bones several fat and
greasy things, there is no reason to defend what they do, whose actions I
reject as naught for many reasons; Oils, Waters, Lies, etc. are not to be used.
For no man that is swelled ought to be wetted, drying things are good for him;
I dissuade here the use of Oils and Ointments, though they be more pleasant to
Man's body than Lies or Waters.

Before I come to the handling of the Fracture, I will first inform the
courteous Reader, how many sorts of Fractures there may happen unto Man's body,
then will I speak of them in particular, where you shall faithfully be informed
in things that I have found in my practice, to the good and comfort of poor
Patients and Surgeons.

It happens many times, that the foremost part of the Arms bones are broken,
sometimes the uppermost great bone or Shin, and sometimes the lesser bone, and
sometimes both these are broken, and sometimes the upper part of the Shin has
a Scissure, and sometimes the Arm or Hand is bowed or dislocated, and may be
set right again, even as a stick bowed may be made straight; sometime their
Fracture breaks through the skin, at the end of it, and are apparent to the
eye. In brief, there are several sorts of Fractures in these places, all which
are known by the practice; as that part above the Elbow, and those below the
Knee, and who can remember all such accidents? sometimes a bone in the Finger
is broken, and another in the Shoulder, or the Shoulder blade, or the Neck
bone, or a Toe, or the Knee-pan, which sometime is split and broken. I have had
Patients, whose Knee-pan was thorough cloven; sometimes the Elbows-knockle is
broken, sometimes the gibbous part of the Hip, as it befell mine own Child, and
grew halting of it; sometimes the Ankles is off from the bone, sometimes the
bone of the Foots wrist is broken, or that upon the Hand, and sometimes the
bones go asunder, or raise, yet are unbroken, sometimes the Skull is broken,
and the bones and crissels of the Nose, etc.

If the Patient has a bowed Arm or Bone, then feel whether it be broken, and
look well in what place it is so, for sometimes a Bone is bowed without a
Fracture, which by the hard feeling you may learn whether it be a Fracture or
no; if none, then set it right again, even as a hasel stick may be made
straight if bowed; then lay a four-doubled Plaster to that raised part, and
lay splinters to the hollow side, two splinters will serve the turn, one to the
raised part, and the other to the hollow part, use not many Roulers, only pull
it hard, it will not stir, if once you placed the splinters right.

There is more difficulty to heal a broken bone on the Leg, then one on the
Arm, and the former requires more time in healing, and stronger bands; and a
Fracture above the Knee is of a worse healing than that below it, and the
nearer it is to the Knee above, the worse it is; if the Fracture be on the
Shin, it is easier healed, than if it were near the Joint; a Fracture near the
Hip is hardly cured; a Fracture near the Knockles is worse than that in the
middle. In brief, the higher it is on the bone, the worse it is, and the nearer
it is to the joint, the worse it is to be cured. Of all this you ought to take
notice, and deal more carefully with the Leg than with the Arm, for you may
think the Leg is cured, and the Patient may run away with it, when he may
scarce halt on it, here and there some defects may be, and his Leg may swell
and his Foot also, or may wither and dry away, therefore have a care, and keep
him under your cure for some weeks.

If a Leg be broken either above or below the Knee, dress Where a Fracture
ought to be dressed.
it not at home in your house, nor in any strange house, unless the Patient be
resolved to stay there, for if after dressing he should be removed, the bands
would not hold as well as when he lies still. Therefore presume not to dress a
Fracture in a strange place, whence the Patient must be removed presently after
he be dressed; the Fracture on a Leg is of another condition then that in the Arm
or Shoulder: a Fracture on an Arm may be dressed in strange places, for the
Patient may then more safely be removed after dressing.

The Patient being resolved to stay in a place, then place him so, that the
Fracture come to lie forward, and in case you cannot do so, then do it thus,
that you may come at both sides to the Leg, which is more convenient, you may
ask the Patient which way he would lie; at first let him not lie too low, for
in time he will be low enough; let him lie high at the head, let his bed be
somewhat hard, for in a soft bed he lies too deep, and you must not shift him
from his first lying in eight days.

For the longer the first dressing lies on, the better it is; the greatest
error is here committed, to let the Patient rise too soon, or to shift him,
when once well laid and dressed, for if the Fracture be stirred but in the least
manner, than the healing of it is extremely hindered thereby.

Having well laid your Patient, be it Man or Woman, young or old, let him lie
only in his shirt, and in no other clothes, and place his bed so, that you may
come conveniently near him with your right hand, your spread Plasters and
other necessaries must be laid on a stool to your right hand, and te hollow
side of the splinters must be spread also with salves, that being applied to
the Plaster, they may stick and hold the better, and such things, which you do
not use at the present, lay aside, that they may not hinder you, especially
such splinters which you do not use then, that the other which are fitted may
the more uptly be applied.

Touching the Persons that are present, you must have one to reach things unto
you which you have need of; and there What persons ought to be present at the
dressing.
must also be two strong men, which are sound and hardy, to hold the Patient
unmoveably below and above; there must be also another man or woman to speak
comfortably to the Patient, and in case he faint, to refresh him with some
Cordial; and there must be one more, which holds the Patients other leg, for
fear he should interrupt you in your dressing; if any more persons are present,
let them stand off, and let none come near, unless you bid him to fetch or
reach something for you. Being thus well provided with all necessaries, then
take a Basin full of cold water, with a sponge in it, and set that by you, that
in case the Plasters roll or fold together, that you may open them again with
your wet hand. The Surgeons posture at the dressing.


Now touching your self; pull off your doublet, thrust up your sleeves, be
bare-headed, have some cloth near ye, to dry your hands withal and other
things, for it is fitting to have clean hands; if the Fracture be above the
Knee, then give a strong swadling-band into his hand, which holds the Patients
upper part of the thigh, let the Patient put it through the thigh, and hold it
by the two ends, or another that stands by may hold it; for whether the bone be
quite off, or not, it must be more strongly pulled to, then when it is but
contused or crushed, therefore the swadling-band must be put through the Leg
which is broken, that the one or other hold it fast, and if one grow^th weary
in holding, another may take it and so to keep the Leg from sinking; he that
holds the swadling-band must stand to that side of the Patient where the
Fracture is; and he that holds the nether part of the Leg, must stand on
that side which is sound; and the next man, which holds neither cloth, swadle
nor leg, but is to help you to join the Fracture, let him lay one hand to the
Patients muscle, and let him lay the other hand below the Fracture, and extend
the Patients skin, and with both hands keep it asunder, that the skin be
spanned asunder; and above they must hold strongly also with spann'd hands, and
let one hold also high on the thigh, that you may not be hindered when you
apply the Plasters, splinters, etc. let the Patient not lie in the midst of
the bed, but near the side of it, where he is dressed, that those which hold
him may do it with more ease.

The Patient must not lie too high with his head whilst he is dressing, but
somewhat lower than ordinary till he be dressed, then do as you please, but stir
not his body. He that holds the Leg below, must stand thus, as if he stood
between the Patients Legs, and that at the beds feet, and not at the side,
unless it could not be otherwise. He must have also a swadling-band, to lay it
singly about the Patients broken bone, no higher than to the Knees, that the
plasters and splinters may the plainer be applied. But in case the Fracture be
next to the Knee from below, then use no swadlings over the Knee, it would fall
obstructive to the dressing. In case the broken ^ones cannot be set or well
joined together, then there must be used another help; one must lay one hand
above the Knee, and the other below it, and turn in the swadlings a little,
thus will he be able to hold out the longer; this swadling-band is the fitter
to hold by, then to hold with the naked hands, which if they sweat will not
hold so fast.

Let the bone neither be lifted nor stretched, unless you be The broken Leg not
to be lifted or stretched, unless the Surgeon be ready with all his necessaries.
ready with all your necessaries about ye; let thread and needle not be
wanting, the sponge be sufficiently wrung, many little pieces of plasters be
ready cut, some bigger, some lesser, as paper Roses are usually cut, and the
splinters inside be ready spread, and some pieces of salve of a beans bigness
be laid by you, that if one splinter do not stick and cling, you may spread on
it such a piece of the salve, for splinters will not always hold near the hip,
where the place is thickest, there the splinters must be spread most, then the
applied linen will hold the better. Two or three plasters more you must have,
of a fingers breadth, and of a spans length, in case two or three splinters
were to be joined together, that with these plasters they may be kept
together; and if these plasters be cut with the thread, then they hold as firm
as a stitch-plaister, and must be laid the cross way on the splinters; order
thus three or four of them in the middle of the Leg by the Fracture. He that
holds the Patient, either his sound Arm or Leg, and is to comfort him, must not
be on that side where the Fracture is: and he that reaches things to you, must
stand behind you on the right side, and not too nigh, as to touch ye.

Having all things in readiness, then in Gods Name bid him that holds the Leg
below, to lift it up, and you lay your left hand under or beneath the Fracture
and lift up, and he that stands at the upper place must help also to lift,
and lay him in a posture.

Anoint your hands with Dialthoea, and feel about the Fracture, to know what
condition it be of, whether it be broken To feel the Fracture.
outward or inward, up or downward, whether the upper bone which goes to the
Hip; sometimes it falls at the side upward, but seldom: be cautious in the
feeling, and stretch it out without interruption, till you see it is enough
outstretched, and then with your hands set the bones together as well as you
can, set it so, that no unevenness be seen, no hole, no bile, no bowing; feel
with your hands to and fro, up and down, and on both sides, and try every
where, whether you can feel any unevenness, whatever you find uneven, leave is
not so, but press it in or outward, or up or downward, even as the staves of a
tub are set right, which were bowed in or outward; for if these uneven things
are not made even with pressing they will not hold so well, they must directly
be set even one upon another, therefore give not over, unless your be sure they
stand one upon another; let another also feel and touch after you, who in your
absence may bear witness, that you left not the Patient before the bones were
well set together. For such Fractures are more difficult to be set one upon
another, which are short broken off, then those which are only shattered, for
there is less toil to bring such splinters together, and to keep them together,
then the other, which are short broken off: for things broken in splinters
willingly keep together as they are set, and contused bones are easier healed
than bones short broken: and in case you cannot well press in these bones, then
is it a sign, that some splinters or other branches are in the way; if so, then
you must regulate your self with the rest with pressings, heavings and
turnings: bid him that stands below to turn his hands, either out or inward, as
occasion requires, and see whether you may find the true places for such
branches, and to set them into their due places. In case this will not do well,
then bid the lowermost man to bow his hands downwards, and do as if you would
bow his bone, then you will see, whether it will hang on, and then seek for its
due place, unto which the branch belongs.

But if a bone be contused, so that it will fall short, then let it be well
outstretched, then ball the bones together with your hands, as a snow-ball is
made, and press it hard, as you think good; this is easier done then to set
right a bone which is short broke off, and keeps better unstirred in the band
then the foresaid Fracture, and a Contusion heals more firmly and strongly
then a short off-cut Fracture, which usually causes a halting, consumption and
exiccation of the Wound, a Contusion does it not so much; if that Fracture be
successfully well set in its due place, then take not too hasty* away your hand
from the Fracture, keep your hand or thumb on the place inward, that the
Fracture may not go out again, and those who hold the Patient may in the mean
while recover themselves in their weariness.

Then take a broad short splinter, which is fitted well for the place, lay it
first upon the plaster, where it is not spread, for the plaster must be laid
double, plainly extended, without any wrinkle, the plaster must not wholly
close the bone, but must stand asunder two straws breadth, or half a fingers
breadth, else it would stick so close to the bone, together with the splinters,
that you can hardly get it off without danger; for my self had many times more
toil with the second dressing then I had with the first, because it stuck so
close to the skin, especially if any hair were grown on the Fracture, and it
were fit that the hair thereabout be first shaven away. Now having applied thus
the plaster then lay the undermost splinter next to it, the Patient may the
easier be lifted with the help of the other two men, which will have enough to
do to hold him fast, before he be fitted in his posture. That splinter being
laid, then lay also the uppermost splinter, short and broad, and tie them both
together with one band, then you see how far asunder you are to lay the rest,
for these splinters will creep closer together then you may imagine; then lay
the broadest splinter upon the Fracture, and before you lay it, lay first the
plasters made Rose like, directly upon the Fracture, to the place where the
Fracture came out at first, to keep it in, then lay a thick bolster upon, and
the Rose like Plaster will be kept together by the broad splinter, and must
not be laid too thick one upon another, else they would pinch the Patient too
much, and growing hard there, would print a hole into the flesh, which would be
a hinderance unto the healing: You must keep open one part of the plaster,
that it may be taken off, for it will not come off easily: The open part of the
plaster must not be just upon the Fracture, nor below it, but at the side, and
there must no splinter come to lie on that streak, but it must be betwixt the
two splinters, and the bands must be well pulled together for all that, so
hard, as if the plasters were laid one over another; and when you have laid
that plaster Rose upon the place where the Fracture came out, then make loose
the two bands, where the two splinters were bound together, above and below, to
see how it will fit best, and let these two splinters lie still, and then lay
the rest of the splinters as you please; for the two splinters which lie at the
side of the Knee must reach more than a hands breadth below the Knee, then you
may tie them together, such long ones will hold strongly; the four broad
splinters must be ordered, as you heard above, must lie close as if they were
grown on it, the one under, the other above, two at the sides, and then
sometimes two little splinters betwixt, according to the bigness of the
Patients Limbs you must regulate your self with your splinters. Look well, that
the plasters be longer and broader than the splinters, for if the splinters be
longer they pinch the Patient; if so, then he must endure it till he be undrest
again, which will not be before ten days be past. You must also lay some small
cut pieces of plaster to such places, where you cannot come to with the great
plaster, which are of a spans breadth, and of two spans length, and thus they
fit best; where the length or breadth of the plaster does not reach unto, to
that space others must be laid, and so you must do with the small pieces, in
case the great ones do not fit. At the dressing note, bind the neathermost band
first about, pull it well together, that the splinters lie on close, then bind
the uppermost band by the Hip, and tie it fast that it yield not, and the small
bands you stitch or fasten with a Stitch plaster; then bind the middlemost
band above the Knee.

That which hitherto has been spoken of bands, understand it thus: lay two or
three bands in the bed under the Patients Fracture, that when you intend to tie
them closer together, then you need not to lift his Leg to thrust the bands
under it; therefore lay all the bands you have need of under the Leg, and the
garters also, all this must be done before the Leg be laid down. If the
middlemost band be tied* too hard, then slacken it a little, but if you think
it is well, then let How the Leg is placed after dressing.
it alone, then tie the other bands also, as you think it fit; if one be tied
too slack, then pull it closer, and set his great Toe upright, and let not his
Foot or Leg fall on a side, and suffer not the great Toe to hang outward, for
if the Foot lies usually outward, and is so healed, it will never be turned
inwards again, but if the great Toe be turned inwards, then that may be holp
again in good time.

The contrary is observed at the healing of an Arm, for if How to place a hand
or foot.
you use the Thumb inwards to lie, you will hardly turn it outward again,
therefore the Thumb must be turned outward when you lay the Arm into the band.
The bones must be set together as they were at first, then they may most safely
be healed in the best way as may be done.

At the healing of a Fracture on the Leg, the Foot must be turned more inward
than outward, but the best way is to set the Foot upright; this I speak to that
end, that you should be the more careful, not to place the Leg or Foot outward,
neither must the Hand be bent inward, these are contrary ways healed; the Hand
must be laid so, that the Patient may behold the inside of his Hand, and not
so, as that he may look only on the Thumbs outside, for a Hand is hardly
turned again if it be healed in an upright posture. Therefore I reject the
splinters made for the Arm, which Why the Arm box is rejected.
were spoken of above, because they keep down the Hand in a flat way, thereby
the broken bones are hindered, and cannot be set or kept even one upon another,
which by the quoted reasons is proved sufficiently.

Touching the upper part of the Arm, there the danger is not so great, because
there is but one bone there; and what is spoken here of this part of the Arm,
the same must be understood also of such bones that are of the like conditions.

But you must note, that the uppermost part of the bone How to deal with the
uppermost bones.
must more carefully be set than that in the Arm below the Elbow, and cannot so
easily be kept even together. And those are much mistaken, who suppose, that
when the Knee lies upright all things are well, which is found false in the
practice, and is clean contrary: If such a party is dressed, then lay him on a
sack in form of a cushion, which must be of an else length or longer, according
to the Patients bigness, which must be of an else length, or longer, according
to the Patients bigness, which must be filled with chafe or straw cut small,
it must not be filled too full, leave it hollow in the middle, and lay his Foot
or Knee into, lay some straw for his Heel to rest upon, his Heel must lie
deeper than his Knee, then the straw raises by the Foot or Knee, which then
lies as a stick unmovable, and the nether part of the Leg must lie higher,
that is, the Foot on the sack must lie higher than the Leg, and the Shin must
lie higher than the Knee, and the Knee must lie higher than the uppermost of
the Thigh. You must have a care also, that when you let him lie so for some
days, and he does not stir his Knee, you must look in the whole to the last,
that his Knee do not remain thus, which will hardly be bowed afterward without
paining of him, and so it may fall out, that if he be healed in few days, then
you will have much to do with the Knee before you will be able to bend it.
Item. You must have a care of the Arms, Elbows, Knockles in the Hands, and the
Ankles in the Feet. This stirring and bending at the Knee must be after the
second dressing, at the first it is needless.

This is the best and plainest way of dressing of Fractures, The convenience of
the dressing
and you may look every day to the band several times, only the plaster must
not be taken off, and the Patient, as he pleases, may add to, or take from
these three bands, and may do it safely without any peril, and such a Patient
may with more convenience be carried into the Country, being dressed in this
manner, then if he were dressed after the common way; for this band is light and
plain, and does not burden the Fracture at all; and in case the bones Fracture
would be in a swelling, it may do it conveniently without causing any anger;
and that swelling being upon settling, then the plaster, bone and skin
settleth also, drawing and clinging much unto it, and thereby the bones are
kept and forced to stand stiffely together.

Other ordinary bands, which are applied round about the The inconveniency of
the other bands.
broken Member, cannot effect the same. For as soon as there any swelling
appears, then are the bands stirred and raised, and Nature not enduring to be
tied up, there is soon an anger caused thereby, which surely will afford enough
of smarting pains. For it is often seen, that such forced swellings press forth
betwixt the bands and the splinters, whereby that Joint or Member is
suffocated; and in case these mischeives appear not, yet is this incommodity
subsequent, that the bands, which lie about the Fracture, and have quite
encompassed the Member, are so strongly extended, that when the swellings are
upon settling, and the Joint or Member begins to lessen, that the band grows
loose and slack about the Member, and the foresaid swelling and anger having
brought some humor into the Member, causes the Fracture to yield to the side,
and the healing of it proves uneven. Hence is it, why so many halting and
crooked Joints about men are seen. The cause of short and bowed Members.


I have never anointed any Fracture, because I was persuaded, that thereby the
Fractures would be healed soft, therefore I still applied the plaster to it,
and never used any Why Fractures ought not to be anointed.
Ointment, and dressed the Patient but seldom, for I was afraid, that at the
dressings I might stir the Fracture. Therefore if the Patient at the first time
be well dressed, let him keep that band for a time; but in case the Patient
complains that his Foot and Toe is swelled, and is painful unto him, then
look where the fault lies, and let him not lie long in that misery.

You may easily know where the fault lies, if you undo the bands, and the
Fracture has vent, if then the pain cease, To know the errors committed in
the dressing.
then the splinters were in fault, which pinched the Patient, or else he was
pained in another place. In case after this opening the Patient feels still
some pains, then is it a sure sign, that something is stirred in the Fracture,
be it as much as it will; the place where the fault is committed you may learn
of the pains; for when you touch the Fracture on that place where the pain is,
on that side the neathermost part of the bone is stirred and turned, either up
or downwards, or to the side; if you find it thus, delay no time, undo the
Fracture, and bring to right the disordered part, and then dress it in the
former manner, and is done quickly. Some Fractures may not be ordered in many
days.

This was always to me a sure Sign, whereby I knew whether it stood well or no
with the Fracture, and whether it was bound too hard or too slack.

Short and true Rules of Fractures, whereby you may know is what posture the
Fracture is.
Rake nor stretch not any Fracture, neither strike nor set it with your Hands,
unless you be sure that it stands right and even, and that you cannot feel no
hole, no bile, nor raised place, be it never so little, let it not pass so, but
endeavor to set it plain and even.

Measure and fit the splinters well for Legs and Arms, that they be of a fit
length and shortness, well cut as they ought, and that they pinch not the
Patient any where.

Presume not to dress any Fracture before you be provided with all necessaries,
as you heard above; let there be no want of splinters, roulers, linen clothes,
plasters, and be sure you want none of such like things: be not to seek such
that hold the Patient, or that help to lift him, for men at the beginning may
be lusty and strong, but in time these growing weary, looking for fresh ones,
one danger or other will be caused, and in case you be not provided
sufficiently with plasters and splinters, what time can you have to spread and
to split more of them? for when once you begin to press and to set the
Fracture, how can you get off or hold up the Fracture, without hurt and pains
to the Patient?

The Fracture, where it is broken must be supplied thick with plasters,
especially that place where the bone came forth, and apply small pieces of
plasters close and thick, and keep in the Fracture by force, that it may not
come forth again, for it easily comes out by that first place, and the
splinters also must be bound hard to it.

Splinters must not be cut too short, which would pinch the Patient; neither
must you apply any splinter to the naked skin, else they are burning and
pinching the Patient too much.

Bind the Patient not too hard, which would mortify the Member, which I found
true many times; neither bind him too slack, which would easily remove and stir
the Fracture; keep a medium according to these Rimes.

The whole sum be spoken briefly,
And this warning is given really:
Bind the Patient not too strong,
Else he is choked, and his blood gone;
Thereby is caused the cold Fire,
It shames the Surgeon, to the sick it draws
Smarting swellings, and hearts misery:
Give way for the Pulse, and do not tarry.
This advice I give you in good troth,
In following my counsel be not sloth:
In the binding be very cautious,
Not too hard, nor yet too loose;
The Band must hold the Fracture stiffely,
Yet the pulse must have its way thoroughly.
Signs bring to the Surgeons head,
That there is no pain when swelling is laid.
Let the Knees and Toes be laid upright, let them not fall to either side, and
let not his Heel be without a stay and rest.

Set the Patient not too soon upright, as if all were well with him, unless you
know that he has recovered strength enough.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Flap-fractures, and of their orderly dressing and healing.

HAving sufficiently and largely spoken of ordinary Fractures, and Contusions,
now it follows, that I speak some remarkable things about Flap-fractures, and
will declare it faithfully, as much as I have seen in my practice, and as much
as Novices in Surgery ought to know,

I call this a Flap-fracture, when the Wound of the broken Leg goes only
through the flesh and skin, and comes forth with the one end.

Concerning the healing of these Fractures; in the first place note, that this
cure requires a more exact carefulness than the former Fractures I told you
of. For a Flap fracture festereth, even as any other wounded Member, because
these must be dressed twice or thrice in a day, for there comes so much
corruption into it, that it runs through the band and skin, and can hardly
be stayed. And in that corruption are bred many times living Worms, and that
more in a Summer than Winters season, and sooner in a hot than in a cold
Climate, and in some Patients sooner than in others; therefore you are forced
to dress them oftener than you are pleased with, because there is a necessity
for it; for frequent dressings are hurtful to Fractures; and such Fractures are
very dangerous, where the great bones are wounded, and some bones and ligaments
gone from them, then is there great danger at hand: These I have been several
times at, where the persons present did wonder, and were amazed, how such
Wounds and Fractures could be dressed, when so many wounds and holes are in one
Wound, and filled up with filth abundantly! My self marvelled many times, how
it was possible, that one or the other in such simptoms could have their food,
and how life could remain in the Leg; however God gave his blessing thereunto,
that many such Patients recovered to their going and jumping, and could perform
all manner of work. You remember, that I warned you before not to cut off any
thing from a wounded Member which hangs down, and I give you further warning,
not to bereave any Member, though there be never so little hopes for its
recovery, for Gods blessing may be great upon it, beyond all men's expectation.
And in case any such is brought unto you, or you are called unto them, then
view the Wound very well, and touch it but a little, neither lift him, nor lay
him down, that you may cause no pains unto him, and terrify him not at the
first, for if you amaze the Patient at first, you make him unwilling to let you
touch him. Secondly, look that you stench the blood presently, before you make
ready your things, then the dressing of him will fall the easier; the blood
unstenched will not suffer you to dress him: make the Wound clean with a
sponge, and let it be dry, then you may see what it is, and what defect there
is therein: you need to this bloud-stenching only a sponge and lint, Cotton
Wool, etc.

Note, that ordinary Fractures do not bleed so much as these thorough broken
Flap-fractures, therefore in that particular you must have a care to stench its
bleeding: for my part I have had troubles enough with them: Cleanse the Wound
well round about, that Worms and Magots do not engender there. And let the
Patient eat somewhat whilst you are cleansing his Wound. Bid those that are
present to bring forth all necessaries which you are to use about him, viz. the
bed, cushions, pillows, swadling-bands, towels to set him upright withal, for
with such towels he can raise himself better that way than others may. Then
spread plasters enough, and more than you have need to use; and cut also the
splinters orderly, as you heard before, for afterward that occasion you are
bereaved of when you are about the dressing of him; make the splinters not too
long, nor to sharp, not too straight, nor too crooked, not too small, nor too
broad, not too short, nor too weak, not too thin, nor too hollow; and to fit it
well to the Wound, is no smaller manual than the dressing it self; for a
binding can be renewed and altered every day, but it is a harder matter to
alter the splinters and plasters. Note also, if there be need of some broad
splinters, where great holes are cut into the whole piece of it, these hold the
more strongly and stiffely; two of such may be laid opposite one to another,
and weaker splinters between; but if the Fracture be so great, that without
stirring it the rest could not be fitted, then have in readiness some Iron
ones, which be fit for it, even as the wooden ones, and are better for to
handle the Patient withal.

For I dressed once a Patient at Lentzburg, whose bone Fracture had thirteen
Wounds, all which I dressed thrice a day, and the Wounds were of that bigness,
that I was fain to leave open thirteen vent-holes, and still opening one knot
after the other on the Fracture, and tied them again with a knot one after
another, and still kept the Fracture firmly tied. I should hardly be bleived,
if I should speak of the toil and moil I had with it, and I had no sooner ended
one dressing, but I was fain to undo the first again to cleanse and dry it, for
the matter was so troublesome betwixt the skin, the plaster, and the splinter,
that I was afraid the Worms would engender there, for I never took the first
band wholly off from the Fracture, else I must have held his Foot in my Hand,
if I had taken off the bands, splinters and plasters; therefore I dressed him
thus, that to day I opened one knot and splinter, and the rest at other times
as I saw occasion.

Courteous Reader, I tell you the truth, that you may see what ought to be done
at such a huge Fracture, which may not be dressed as one would. And when I
intended to dress him again, then I took strong splinters, these I applied
upon, that I might not stir and disturb him. As you heard, how you ought to fit
your self for common Fractures, so you must prepare your self here in this the
rather, because you must look to such Flap-wounds every day, and yet you must
not stir the Fracture.

The splinters must not too close be applied to the Wound, but let it have
vent, for they will move too close to it for all that. And such Fractures must
be dressed like another Fracture, only the first band is left unbuttened, and
that band must not be bound just on the Wound, which must yet stand free and
open, and not touch any other band or splinter; afterward dress the Wound as
you please, and tie the splinters, plasters, salves and bolsters about, as if
the bone were whole and unbroken, be it on the Leg or Arm, even as if you were
to dress a fresh Wound.

The bands wherewith you intend to bind, lay them down on the linen before you
lay down his Leg, as you have been told formerly; and though you are to spread
the splinters with the Fracture-salve (as you have heard before) yet I mean no
other splinters, but such which are not to be removed, unless when the whole
band is taken off. But the little bands, which must be daily undressed, and the
bolsters and roulers, these must not come to the plasters salve to make them
greasy, that if the plaster come to them it may not stick unto, for if that
should be, you could never take them off again without stirring the Fracture,
and the splinters could not be left unstirred neither.

The last applied splinter must be stiffer and stronger than the other, for
that must keep in the Fracture by force, that it do not get out again out of
the Wound; and the Wound must be provided with bolsters beneath the splinter,
else the flesh goes out of the Wound. and the bones would then be left naked,
and hardly admit any healing, and the bones being naked will grow rugged from
the air, and the panicle falls off from the bone, which would make the bones to
admit of no flesh, neither is the Fracture desirous of any, and it is dangerous
at the first day, to keep the bones and Fracture together, when the panicle is
loose it seldom closes again.

To prevent these dangers, and to keep the Fractures from dis-joyning, and that
it need not to be so strongly tied, and that the flesh may the better stay
there and fall not off; then before you dress him, first view and measure it
well, and cut the hole into the plaster, and lay it about (like a ring) and
chiefly on that which stands out higher, and will come out further (even as I
have written before of ordinary Fractures and closed ones) that the ring about
the Wound keep in the bone, and then the splinters also of the first band help
to keep the Fracture off, and not those that were applied last, and those that
are laid last do not pinch the flesh so much, as when they were laid flat upon.

Though you make the bolsters never so soft, if you bind hard, it closes and
presses the flesh in so much, that it goes away the more, and leaves the
bones naked, then these bones will never admit of a cure. But you must make
that ring thus, that by the splinters you may know whether they rest upon the
ring and do not touch the Wound; that is, on that high place, where the bone
strives to get out, you must lay a four-double plaster, but to the other side,
where it does not strive to get out, there you lay but a three doubled plaster
and about the whole Leg but a single one. But if you have laid a double
plaster about the whole Leg, as I often use to do, that the band may draw and
hold the stronger, then you must lay it thicker about the Wound, by reason you
took the other double; all this is to be observed, according as the Fracture
goes out and is hollow; for the Fracture is sometimes very hollow and deep. A
Flap-fracture made with a Cart-wheel.


As for example, if a Cart-wheel breaks such a Fracture, it presses not the
bone out by the Wound, but commonly presses it upward, and for the most part
cuts off the flesh above, and forces the bone into the Wheels track. Here you
see it is done on the contrary, therefore the bolsters also must be laid
contrary, viz. to the whole side, even as in a single Fracture which is not
open, here you need not that ring about the Wound, but a plain splinter must be
applied on the Wound, with a plain bolster, plaster and ointment, and other
things belonging thereto, that the materials may run into, and the band be not
fouled; the same also must be observed in other Wound-dressings.

Courteous Reader, by way of admonition I told and showed this unto you, that
when you meet with any such dangerous simptoms in Fractures, that it may be a
rule unto you how to deal with them, and not to put the Patient into pains. For
in such things I was many time perplexed, not knowing what to do, when the
flesh begun to go off from the bones, and stood naked like a dead man's bone.

Once I had a Patient, born at Altstad, who broke his bone twice above the
Knee, to whom with others being called, to look unto this heavy spectacle, I
saw the middle most piece about six thumbs breadth standing naked from the
flesh, going about to get it in again, behold on the other end it was off the
flesh, for he had two fall Fractures on the Thigh, I seeing that it was quite
loose, and without any streaks, and looked like a dead man's bone, and I
perceiving that it would stick no where, then I took it out quite, and dressed
his Wound as Fractures usually are dressed, and set the two ends to their places
as well as I could, and I healed him so, that he was able to follow his
Calling, but he halted in his going as deep as the broken bone was long; there
came such corruption from this party, for horrors sake I dare not write of it.
This example is quoted for that purpose, that you should not give over any
broken bone or Member as long as there is any life in it, and this party
carried it as well as any did with a stilt. Therefore be not too rash in
cutting off of Members, unless the thing well considered be found, that there
is no other means left for to keep it on.

No bone ought to be taken out of a Wound, unless it be quite loose, neither do
search much into the Wound with the little Seeker, as is usually done, for such
bones will loosen themselves, if they must be loose; stroke the matter neatly
toward the Wound, and look well, that the Wound beneath grow not hollow, which
usually happens. For sometimes the flesh falls quite away which at first
stuck, because all was crushed and consumed away, and smoaked continually; it
must be cleansed by reason of such showers, and still wipe away that which is
falling, for which you must be stored with clean linen.

Moreover these bands must be carefully handled, more than any bands you are to
look to, therefore do not spoil the first band with binding, for it is better
to bind it slack, than too hard, and it is better likewise to apply not too
many splinters, so it is also with the plasters, to be sparing here is better
than to be lavish. In a word, pains in Wounds are sooner increased than
diminished with too many splinters, plasters, clothes, etc. then the band
holds so fast, that you can hardly get it off; but if any of these be
wanting, they may be supplied at any time, but if you exceeded in the former,
you cannot mend that fault without putting the Patient into great pains;
therefore let enough vent, and room as much as you may.

How perplexed was I many times in studying out the best way to dress such
Fractures? sometimes I made holes into the splinters; sometimes I joined two
together, and so cut one proper piece out of it; sometimes I laid two, one by
the other, and yet left room enough to come to the Wound; and if hollow ones
were fitting, I applied them, but I made all serve so, that I left the band
untoucht and unaltered. Sometimes such cases I had, which way to dress the
Wound conveniently I knew not; and when I saw it could be no otherwise, but
that the band must be undrest, I let it pass for that time, thinking when the
Patient and I am otherwise minded, then things should be better considered of,
and that which was defective for the present, I mended at the next dressing.

For the which I could quote many examples, how I was called out of my sleep,
finding many help and useless people about the Patient, and neither measuring
nor fitting the true length or breadth of the splinters, I did my best, as well
as I could, but this was my great comfort, I had room to let the green Ointment
run into the Wound between the splinters, and afterward the Wound-ointment, and
was not sparing of it, and made it come into all places, and where I could not
come to the Wound, I let some days pass, in the interim supplied it with the
Salve and Ointment; then I took it off, and cut the splinters either shorter or
narrower, yet not stirring nor moving the Fracture.

Now I have showed unto you in brief, that if a Fracture, by reason of some
obstructions, cannot be dressed as it ought, Flap-fractures.
what you are to do. For a Flap-wound is not like another ordinary Fracture;
for though it be set well together and even, as much as possible it may, yet
will it not stand and keep so firmly one upon another as ordinary Fractures
will; because their skin being whole, it sooner clingeth to, does not rot or
fester away, but clingeth freely to the other. But Flap-fractures, if much
broken, and some splinters being broken out, they fester and yield much
corruption, and fall quite away, though the bones thereof be set as well as can
be, yet will they not keep together, and the flesh of it festereth away,
whereas in other Fractures the flesh comes to good, and holds firmly.
Therefore in such Fl^p-fractures you must suffer more flesh to grow than in any
other Wound, and must be more cleansed than any other Wound. For the marrow
also in such Fractures turns to matter, and runs out at the Wound, here flesh
must be made grow to fill up that place, which will not be done in a long time.
This may happen also to an ordinary Fracture, however that flesh which hangs
at the panicle and streaks, which also hangs on the bones, sooner takes hold on
the bone, than that flesh which is but growing like a new twig.

Courteous Reader, I will propound you a true example, with all the
circumstances to the full. I had once a Patient, whose Leg was pulled off by a
roap, by his treading in the roap, which quickly parted it, at which time was
drawn up a Beech-tree, which fell on this Man's Leg, between the Ankle and the
Knee, and broke such a long Wound, that I startled at it when I saw it; for the
Leg was off, hanging only on a little piece, and I wondered much, how any life
could be left in it; I saw no help for him, being far from people in a
Farmers house, and that happened in a Winters night, where I had no
accommodation, and could not dress him as he ought; I cut off the bruised,
broken and torn flesh, veins and muscles with sheers, for it was broken so
much, that it looked like out-worn fringes, and was very black. I dressed him as
well as I could, and laid him down in the best manner the place would afford,
and had small hopes of his Foot, for I was afraid it would fall off every
moment. I let him lie, being he was not much pained, neither was there any
swelling, I put a great deal of Ointment into it, I cleansed it in the best
manner I could, and when I dressed him, then I thought, now the Foot falls off,
because the danger was so great. But God gave a blessing, his Foot kept on;
when I came to dress him at the fifteenth day, I was desirous to see how the
Leg and Foot did look, after I cleansed him carefully, I saw that the torn
flesh and veins were separated and purged, but the Fracture and the bones I
disliked in their posture. I took his Foot and turned it to the Knee-ward, and
viewed the bones to see where they hung yet, and so I set his bones now
together, as if the Fracture had been done newly; then I found a dried beech
leaf in the bone, which I took out, and cleansed the Fracture as well as I
could, and made ready a band for him, with splinters and other necessary
things, and so I dressed him.

This notable example, courteous Reader, I quote for no other end, but that
Surgeons should not make too much haste for cutting off of desperate Members,
before the Wound and Fracture be fully cleansed.

I entreat you not to cut off Members, though they be crushed and shattered in
pieces, much less such that are wounded lame; for I have seen things grow on
again beyond any man's expectation. Therefore be careful, and be not too rash in
cutting off of Members: For my self have cured Legs, Feet, Arms, with Gods
blessing, which ordinary Surgeons had condemned to be cut off, which were kept
on through my help; I do not speak here beyond exceptions; for I also have cut
off Fingers, Nails, Toes, Legs and Arms; I speak only of that great hasty
rashness, when they fall on cutting at first, where at the tenth dressing it
should be forborne, as long as the Member is not quite separated, nor the
contused parts fall off still and stink; for it will not always continue in
that stink (for the like I told you at the healing of sinews, where the like
stink ensues.)

Surgeons are many times blinded, that when they come to cut into a Member,
they find somewhat which looks fresh enough; and seeing there is some lively
thing there, then surely there is more there than they could imagine.

But when neither hope, nor advice, nor any Medicine avails, then I can say
nothing against their dismembring: Because my self have cut off neglected
rotten Members, which were past all cures.

But I never dealt so upon fresh Wounds or Fractures, nor that at the first
binding, but only when such bands were putrified and quite rotted off. There
is a difference between fresh and rotten bands, and each requires a due
remedy. But to cut off a band, which to day, or two or three days ago was
dressed, that is no putrified flesh, but a Member contused, or a part that had a
hurt by a fall or cut; but if such a Wound had been of half a years standing,
it may be held then for a putrified ulceration; and whether it lasted a longer
or shorter time, yet is it never reckoned among the first bands, for then is it
already fallen to putrefaction unto matter, and not to separation unto healing.
For eight or twelve days are enough for a cleansing, yet these things are
considered of, according as the condition of the Fracture is. Therefore do not
stand upon a two or three days band, but rather wait till ten days be past at
the least, before you fall to the cutting off of any part, which yet hangs
firmly, though some part of the skin separateth. For as soon as it begins to
raise and to separate then there is hope that more of the contused part will
remain. Therefore be not too hasty in cutting off such a Joint, which is of
great use to the party, be it a cut, a blow, a contusion, a burning, or a shot,
or any other way inflicted. Consider first very well, whether it may not be
time enough, after three, five, or more days, to take the section in hand, for
all rottening sinews and veins do make a stink; but when it can be no
otherwise, then I cannot say against it, for my self did so. Sometimes such
contused sinews and veins cause such a stink, by reason of a cold, and hot fire
that is therein, then separateth the putrified flesh from the sound, in such a
manner, that it is to be admired.

If you come a Fracture which is not quite broken off, do not you take it off
with your griping, groaping and seeking, but let it alone till you have
sufficiently viewed, if you seek not in it, it will swell the less, and fit it
self better for healing, nor the shattered pieces will prick the flesh afresh,
nor the branches of the bone will break off or come atwhart. Try not whether it
be yet strong enough, unless you be sure that it will be no hurt to the party.
Let the party lie still day and night till you cleanse and dress him; use no
Corrosives to the Wound for to cleanse it withal, it cleanses it self enough
through the Wound-ointment, and casts forth that which should be cast out; if
you corrode it, you nip of the agglutination, and the bones turn to a
blackness, and will hardly agglue again. Let him have a dry sweating Bath to
cleanse him, and let him not come the whole year into a water Bath.

If the Fracture has lain a long time, and you would fain set it up-right, and
the Wound on the Flap-fracture is not yet healed, then is it dangerous to do
it, especially if the Fracture is on the Thigh for there no bones grow
together, only a flesh betwixt the ends, and is just as glue is betwixt two
boards to hold them fast together, so that flesh holds the two ends of the bone
together, for that reason is it called Horseflesh, because it is harder then
other flesh, and is softer than a Cartilage, and is very like the gums about
the Teeth, and that Horseflesh.
holds the bones together one on another. Therefore if such a party has lain
long, and many wait for his being set upright, however do not you venture too
soon to set him on his Leg (especially if the Fracture is on the Thigh) unless
the Wound of the Flap-fracture be well healed; if not, then is it a sign, that
the flesh about the Fracture is not grown together nor healed; for when that is
healed, then the skin about the Wound heals and closes. The Ointment must
always run well into the Wound of the Flap-fracture, that the flesh may grow
from within, for on every part of the bone there grows flesh in the place
where the marrow was, and is filled up with Horseflesh.

Therefore the common saying is, that a broken bone after it is healed holds
stronger than it did before the Fracture, by reason of that hard flesh, which
is very tough. That party which proves well in flesh about the body and the
eyes, it is a sign that his Fracture also will heal the sooner.

I have cured such parties, who were strong in their going and standing,
feeling no weakness about the Fracture, but when they happened to fall sick
within that years time, either of a Headache, or a Fever, Ague, or such like,
then about the Fracture they felt also a weakness, because the flesh of their
bodies decaying, the flesh also about the Fracture decays.

I desist from rehearsing any examples, because Experience brings in enough
daily. Therefore if the Wound of the Fracture be not quite healed and closed,
then I hold it to be not stiff and strong enough to bear; therefore be warned,
because I know where such faults have been committed, though the Fracture were
reasonably well cured, so that no complaint was about that, yet afterward
complaints were made, because the Patient was set too soon upon his Leg, and
made too soon use of it, either by carrying too much, and outting his strength
too soon to the work, causing a relapse to himself, and a re-fracture to his
bone; the Surgeon is not in fault here, but the party must bear the blame.

Though you are assured enough of the healing and his setting him upright, yet
if the party would not be willing to bear two splinters about him, yet let him
have one splinter about the Flap-fracture after healing, for if any chance
befalls him, it will appear in that place first.

This needs not to be done to an Arm fracture, neither the Fractures below the
Knee need to wear splinters so long a time as those on the Thigh must, because
the great and small bones of the Leg help to bear one another, and in the Thigh
there is but one bone, which will not hold together so well if once broken.

There are some, who by all means would have Fractures salved and anointed,
and will not believe the Patient can be healed, unless he be so anointed and
salved; but you are to forbear, and be afraid of such dawbings. When a
tenderness is incident to a bone, then you may anoint the party, if of growing
years, being above twelve, and under twenty years, in their bones is a
shortness and smalness, and that holds not long neither. And this makes me to
bring in a Comparison of two twigs of a Tree, the one was bowed and nibbled by
beasts, the other was not, the nibbled one could not prove so well as that
which was not nibbled. So it is with the bones in young growing people when
they are wounded, the hurt bone stands still, or is somewhat hindered in its
growing, but the sound bone grows mainly, and so the one is not like the
other in the growth, and that must be mended with Medicaments that warm and
rarifie the blood, that it overtake in growing that, it last in the still
standing, and be equal with the other.

I had a party in cure, whose Feet grew unequal, and the one Leg also was
longer than the other; here I was perplexed, not because the Leg I cured
consumed away, but rather that the other out grew it, which had a greater
supply of pure and thin blood than the other, which was under cure, and
hindered in its growing, by the posture the Leg lay in, and the wounded sinews,
and the ill setting of the bone. To further the growing of this short Leg I did
thus; after the Fracture was healed, I rubbed and stroaked the inside of the
Leg, and going to anoint it, I applied a band where the Fracture was, or else
I had one that held that place strongly; then I anointed the Leg very well
above and below the Fracture, always warming my hands; I never touched the Leg
with cold hands, warming also the bands and plasters, and let the Leg hang
down, when I anointed it, I did not gripe the Leg hard, but the skin I
stroaked freely. More of this shall be said in the Chapter which handles of
exiccated Members.

I intend now to speak of swelled Fractures, which are healed, Of swelled
Members and Joints.
yet are still thick and gross, and that one Joint and Member is as heavy as
two in the going or standing, which thickness I took away without causing any
pain. I had several such swelled Members, which amaze the beholder, yet the
Lord gave a blessing to their healing, but some signs were left behind.

The reason why I speak now of swelled Members is, because formerly I have
written of exiccated Members, these being contraries, that Surgeons may take
notice how to help these simptoms, for that which is good for the one is naught
for the other, and a wet Bath is naught for both, but in other things
contraries are used; viz. if you have in hand a withered and up-dried Member,
you must stroke it downwards, and a swelled Member you must stroke upward at
the dressing. If in an Arm or Leg a humor remained, and is not a swelling
caused by some ulceration of a wounded and lamed part, be it of a fall or a
blow, be the cause what it will, either itch, small pox, imbroidered clothes,
hard and long labor, or a long down-hanging of the Member, or an ulcerated
Fracture, or a great scabbedness redness, dropsy, etc. of all these I do not
speak, but of a humor of the body, where there is neither redness, anger, nor
water. Here you may judge if you be judicious, of what humor I do speak. Such
means must not be used, spoken of formerly, for swelled Members, whereby the
Patients Member would easily be mortified, and death ensues upon. Look well and
consider what swellings are spoken of here, all sorts of swellings are not yet
related, as among the rest, the swellings of lamed Members, which have neither
spots, nor biles, or holes, such may be dressed in the manner spoken of, and
bound not so hard as the first. Such simptoms are incident to Knees, Elbows,
Shoulders, Ankles, but seldom to other places.

Lastly, If a Flap-fracture be so great, that whole pieces of the Leg come out,
you must not therefore cut off that Member, When the bones are gone out.
as many would do, but set the bones right again one upon another, and let
Nature provide for the rest. These bones will grow together again, but the
Member grows shorter.

I could quote many examples serving to that purpose, where the two bones of
the Leg were taken out some fingers breadth, which were set again from below
upward, and were healed successfully, but the Leg fell as much shorter as those
pieces were long that came out.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Arm-fractures above and below the Elbow, how these ought to be dressed and
healed.

IF a Patient has a broken Arm above or below the Elbow, set him on a strong
stool, tie his sound Arm to the stool, or let him be held strongly by that Arm,
that he may not interrupt you in your work, and do it well at first, that you
may have no disgrace afterward, and the Patient be put to further misery, for
if his Arm be not well set at first, afterward you will hardly do it, and the
Joint will be pained a long time, which at first was not well set, therefore
presently stretch the dislocated Arm, and set it well one upon another, and
having well set it, then have good help about ye, especially when you have in
hand any great Fracture in Arms or Legs. For the greater the Fracture is, the
stronger help you must have, and one body alone is not sufficient, unless your
Patient be hearty and willing to endure; when you are about to dress him, let
him lay his Arm on a cushion in his lap, in the mean while be you ready with
your plasters, splinters; bolsters, roulers, needle and thread, and
stitch-plaisters, as you heard above. To an in-bowed Member you need but two
splinters, the one to lie to the bowing, to keep in that raising or callusity,
and the other must lie opposite to it, to be helpful to that which lies on the
bowing, for one alone will not keep it down sufficiently. But if the Fracture
be great, and on a strong Joint and Member, then you must use four splinters,
which will be the safest way, for splinters will hardly be so broad as to keep
the roulers off from in-printing, and when four splinters are laid, then the
bands or roulers cannot come so nigh to it; on that splinter which lies on the
raised place or bulk lay another smaller splinter, it will hold the stronger,
and spread a little of the Fracture salve to it, that it may not slide away,
for if you lay two splinters one upon another, the one must be broader than the
other, to keep that raised part the better in, and will slide off the less.
Have a care you do not bind it too hard, nor too slack; the hard binding is
dangerous and destructive to the Member, causing an inflammation and dying, and
a slack binding is hurtful also, but not so much as the other, causing a
crookedness in the healing, when the band yeildeth, and the Fracture begins to
raise or to slide, though that raising may be helped, but not so well as when
it had been done well at first; the Patient must lie very quiet, neither
stirring or turning much, be the Fracture in the Arm or Leg.

Though I speak here of in-bowed Members, think not that I mean only such, for
hereby you have further information for all other Fractures, be they broken in
what manner they will, for an in-bowed Joint or bone requires as much toil, as
if it were quite broken: there is a very small difference between a Fracture
and an in-bowed bone; a Fracture requires care, that it stir not and go
asunder, but an in-bowed bone if once pressed or turned right will keep so, but
so does not a Fracture, especially that above the Elbow and that on the Thigh,
that striveth always to get out again, for these bones commonly are somewhat
crooked naturally, that is the reason why it does not keep its standing, and
that bone is in some straighter than in others.

Now if you can set right an in-bowed bone, much more may you do it in a
Fracture; an in-bowed bone well set, keeps the place, but a plain Fracture has
more ways to get out again: I have seen also, that in the looking to it I was
put to more trouble then I had at the first setting it right: it is not so with
in-bowed bones, for that does not go out any side, unless you force it such a
way in the turning of it. Therefore do not over do it, make it not worse, as
such an oversight rudely may be committed, where a Fracture is put out of its
place, which would have kept together. There is great advantage here, both in
the work and pains in the healing and growing.

Briefly, the cure is half done, if a Fracture set keeps together, for if once
struck asunder, then the splinters and teeth break, and the bones also break
unequally, because they break not so, as when they are sawed and e^t asunder,
but at their breaking they tear into many splinters, and many times can hardly
be brought together again. And if any of these splinters comes atwhart, the
same is a hinderance unto healing, bringing an unevenness in the going and
standing, disgracing the whole work.

That branch or splinter which is in a cross way, puzleth Surgeons, that they
know not where the defect is, and if so be they know it to be a splinter, but
how will they turn it? my advise is, if the Fracture be not quite asunder, let
it keep so, that with meddling with it you may not cause one splinter or other,
for to fall a twhart; I cannot give warning enough here, because the dangers
are great in such cases, which I have known and felt.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Fractures that are cloven and burst, how a Surgeon is to deal with them in
their dressing and healing.

HAving spoken enough of Flap-fractures, now it follows Split Fractures.
that I speak also of Fractures cloven and burst. I call this a split or gaping
Fracture, when a bone is split and burst either with a thrust, blow, fall, or
how as it may be done in any way; which split or cleft is not a plain Fracture,
but only a rent, crack, like a crack in a glass, which to say is yet whole for
all the crack.

If any come to you, complaining of a bone which is a little To know a cracked
Fracture.
swelled, and paineth him when he touches it, or when he treads hard on that
Foot, it betokens that that Leg is craked You are to apply the before named
Fracture-plaister and the splinters, as you heard before, and so let the party
lie still for some days; that plaster will draw out the moisture which is in
the Legs, and the patient will quickly be healed.

But if it be of a high swelling and feels soft, it is a sign, that a
moisture is gathered there from the blood and bone. Lance that place, make vent
for that humor, put a tent into the place covered with the little brown
ointment, and dress it as a Flap-fracture, it will soon mend.

Here I must needs speak of some abuses, which many have Abuse.
committed. When they are about to cure such Patients, and undertake to do it,
then they will perform it with anointing, bathing, washing, and such like. But
it is seldom seen, that it is to any purpose. Yea (which is a pity) they cause
such hurts thereby that can never be cured. That hurt, which is caused thereby,
is called by some Surgeons, Marrow-wounds, the original whereof to describe
here Marrow hurts.
is needless.

If a bone be cracked, it may be the party does slight it for Cracked bones not
presently felt.
the present, especially if the bone be cracked all along, it will hardly cause
any pains to the party in a twelve months time: if such a crack be so subtle,
that it is not felt in so long a time, however the marrow in that bone has
vent.

Now as Nature in man cannot endure any Fracture, be it as little as it will,
but it will complain of it one time or other; that crack in the bone will bring
forth its excrement, I confess it is very little, yet in time it will come to
some matter, which settleth to the lower part of the bone toward the Ankle, and
the crack also in the mean time goes on by degrees, because its own excrements
stay there, and are not expelled through Medicaments. That moisture being
gathered to any quantity, it will seek for an issue in the end, and causes a
simptom, which commonly at the first appearance is like to Anthonies fire with
a blister upon.

Such things admit afterward no healing in that place where they are, because
their fountain and original is not there. For many times one hurts himself on
the Shin, and that hurt breaks forth at the Ankle, because the humor settleth
down. Such hurts being healed will break out again, not regarding the skin, and
will not be mended neither with diet nor purges, then they call it a
Belly-flux, which is none at all.

I have cured such simptoms of twelve or fifteen years Cracks are no Belly-flux.
standing, which by all Surgeons that had them in hand were counted
Belly-fluxes, whereas they had no other original but what was told. It falls
out, that in such cases many Patients are spoiled, because Surgeons undertaking
to cure such hurts, know not their original, which is the chiefest thing here.
But how these shall be known well, and fundamentally cured, you will find it in
its due place, when I shall treat of all manner of simptoms.

Here is a necessary Quaery: How can any man go about his work with a cracked
Arm, and how can a party stand or go whose Leg is craked?

To which I answer: Yes, it may be, which I know not by hear say alone, but
have seen it: Mr. Jurian of Weslen an expert Surgeon found it so in himself; he
had a Fracture on his Leg, but went about a long time, till at last he was fain
to yield, and in his down-lying he often conferred with me about it, telling
me, that he marvelled, that he could stand and go about so long having a
cracked Leg. From hence I infer, that a party may have a cracked Arm or Leg,
yet for all that he may follow his occasion, but in what manner it is, he
knows it best that has the Fracture; and it may be, that such parties are
limping. Some Fractures are such, that the party is not able to tread on that
Foot, though the whole house should be on fire. Fractures are not all alike,
break not alike, and their healing is not done one manner of way,

The reason why some can do their work and go about is in my judgment, because
in the fore part of the Arm are two bones, as also on the Leg, if only one of
these bones be cracked, the other holds strong yet, and so the party does his
work, though in pains; but it is another thing with the bone above the Knee and
above the Elbow; and so there is a difference in such cracks.

Of cracked bones, what they are; some examples quoted.
These are called cracked Fractures which are not apparent, it is not unknown
what such parties ail, they complain, and know why, and ignorant Surgeons
having them in hand, neglect them so long, till the hurt breaks out, and
counting it ignorantly to be a Belly-flux or humor, in the upshut they call it
a Sprain. Of these I quote some examples, that you may know what I do call a
cracked Fracture, and what the condition of it is.

1. A Maid coming home ward laden with bought Wares, fell on a stone in the
street, after she rose she went on her way, though with pain, and coming home
she anointed the place to disperse the blood, and this anointing she
continued for half a year, at last it broke out with great pain and stink, it
was held to be a humor of the body, which they dawbed with Plasters for a
whole year, but it would not come to any healing.

This Maid was brought to me, perceiving the cause of it, I desired her to let
me open it, there I found a Fracture with a cut, and the bone began to be
scaled and black, I took it out, cleansed the sore, and cured it as a cracked
bone, and she was healed.

2. A Maid gathering Apples under a tree, taking up a load of them on her head,
going along she stepped into a hole, broke her shin in pieces; she sat down,
staying for her Father to lead or carry her home; her Father coming, chid her,
bidding her to rise, telling her, that some vein or other she did sprain; she
went on that Fracture some hundred paces, and made it thereby worse and worse,
at last she could not tread upon it: I was sent for, I told, that her bone was
broke, I was laughed at, they saying, it were not possible a body should tread
on it if the bone were broken, much less to go so far as she did after her
fall. Their belief was brought to experience upon their own peril. For the
bones went asunder, and the Fracture began to grow too big for her to endure,
and for me to heal.

3. A Man servant carrying a bundle of grass, perceived he cracked his Leg, yet
he went on, and in pains he carried home the grass with much ado. This fellows
Fracture was of so great difficulty to be set and healed, as ever I had any,
for when I lanced it, it was found to be enough for one Fracture.

4. A young man taking down from a Horse a sack of salt broke his bone, for all
that he went about for some days, but at last the bones broken appeared in
good earnest, many Surgeons had him in cure before I came to him, and it proved
a real Fracture, which at first it would not be taken to be one.

5. A Barber riding along, came among Horses which fought among themselves, by
their kicking his Leg was broken, he felt it well enough that it was so, but he
knew not whether it was broken in two; lighting from his Horse he went into his
house, and in his going it was not seen by the boot whether he was hurt or no,
the boot being pulled off, he tried whether he could go, but could not, for the
two bones of the Leg were beaten in pieces; I had to do enough to cure them,
and were healed without limping.

6. A Girl carrying a basket full of chips, and stepping over a block heard her
bone give a snap, she flings in the chips at the door, sits down on the next
block, but her Parents being hard to her, made her go for all that, this
Fracture was lanced afterward, and was long under the cure.

7. A Servant had a Fracture, which I judged to be a lame one, I was laughed
at, because I called it a Fracture, but it was past laughing, when I took out
the bone from the gartering place to the Ankle. For those Surgeons which saw
him, thought it a thing impossible, that he should be able to go when his bone
was in pieces, and many agreed with these Surgeons it was so. But the Patient
said, my bone is broken; I presently opened the place, opened the flesh to the
bone, which was black, because the marrow pressed thorough the Fracture, but he
was healed, could leap and jump without halting at all.

Many more examples I could quote, but forbear it, and rather tell the cause
why any one can go for all his bone be broken: viz. if a bone be broken so,
that the Fracture has branches and splinters, these hold the bones still
together, because it stands together yet and bears up the Patient; as when
ones bone be not well healed, he goes but in pains and with much ado, more
than one whose bone is but broken lately.

A Servant broke the bone next to the hand, complained much, his Mistress
applied to it Vinegar and Bran; I coming to dress the old Woman's Sore on her
Leg, I looked on the Lad, knew what he ailed, but would say nothing for fear
they should give me the lie; the Lad complained more and more, at last I was
bid to see what he ailed; I told, that the Medicine applied could do no good,
for the Lads Arm is broken, and it was so as I said, and the Lad had no rest,
and it was worse with him every day, then my words were found true. The Lads
Hand being grown crooked, then they gave leave that he should be dressed. I set
his bone right, dressed him, he felt ease, and his Hands swelling was allayed.

How cracked Fractures may be learned, or discerned, in old and young Folks.
If you have a Patient, whose Arm or Leg is red, accompanied with a swelling,
and the redness does not always appear at first, but after, when it begins
to swell, and will break out; if such a thing appears, then ask the Patient
how long that sign was there, if he can tell, then you may the better discern
the hurt, but if he cannot tell, either by reason of his young age, not able to
speak being a Child, then feel it hard, and try whether you feel any
unevenness, or any thing broken; ask again, where he does feel any pain, if he
be able to answer you. But if a Child, take notice where it shrinketh at if
touched, whether there be a hollowness, or a bump, or any other crookedness, and
at the feeling of the place take notice whether it does stir, if you find it to
do so, and gives a snap, or you can feel the hollowness, or it yields to
bowing, then is it surely a Fracture; and if it should not yield to bowing, and
yet the other signs are at hand, which you felt with your Signs of a
crack-fracture.
hands, then is it surely a crack, which holds stiffely yet, and the party
can stand upon it, and go, and can work, and no body could think that he ailed
any thing.

In case you are not yet sure by feeling, bowing, etc. then take notice of ^^e
Patients words, whether he heard any thing crack or snap, and what work he had
done: whether it came by a jump, lift, fall, thrust, blow, or slipping into a
pit, or by striding over ditches, or climbing up the Ladder, or hurting himself
against the bedsted. For I had Patients which broke their Arms by turning in
their beds, and proved plain Fractures, apparent to the eye and feeling.

It happened, that at Nefel in Glaris I was to see a Boy to know what ailed
him, no body knew, but I conceived what it might be, though I knew not the
manner of it, I held it to come either from a blow, fall, etc. But the Boy and
the rest said it was grown so, but I said, it was a hurt, be it done what time
it would. I intending to be gone, his Nurse said to the Boy, I remember you
fell from the chest, when you were ramping with another Boy, and after that you
complained. Then he confessed, saying, I remember it, for ever since I felt my
self every day worse.

From hence we gather, that Surgeons must not easily be misled, though they say
no hurt befell the Child, it came of it self! For Servants will conceal things,
when they let a Child fall, or other ways hurt it by their carelessness: but
when I felt the crack or swelling, then they put it off, saying, it was done at
night in their bed, to shun their Masters displeasure; nay, Children themselves
will conceal the true causes of their hurts, for fear of offending their
Parents. And some Parents are superstitious, supposing their Children are
bewitched, when they see their healing does not come off soon enough.

Of a festered Nail, which foolishly is called the steeping Worm, what it is
properly.
This Sore had several names put upon it, because it was known but to few; some
call it a Worm, of which opinion I am, for such a sore may very well deserve
such a name, because it feeds like a Worm every day more and more, and grows
bigger, because the marrow that pressed thorough the bone cannot be reduced to
its own place again, from whence it once came, it searches further, and
presses so far, that it must needs break out thorough the skin. It is called a
Worm, because it gnaweth, pants and pulls, continually pricking, causes
miserable pains before it comes to a ripeness, and before the flesh putrifieth
and dies. Sometimes it falls out to the loss of that Joint. He that had such a
Sore knows what to say of it. In my Judgment it is a gnawing Worm, and not a
sleeping one, as some put that name upon it, because it does cause no sleep to
the party, but keeps him awakened in pain and torments. It is called also the
not-named, or (a what is you call) an unknown Sore, no body knows what it is.
Seeing it is unknown, never had its true name put upon it, then let it have its
name, and say, this sore Finger is a cracked Fracture, and it is so indeed, let
others say of it what they please, I found it to be so. And this Sore has its
original from thence; if a Finger has received wrong, and the foremost bone is
hurt, then in time that natural moisture desires to get out by that little
rent (for as soon as a bone is cracked then it falls out so) betwixt the bone
and the flesh, which covers that bone, and is tough and strong like a tendon,
where the fatness lies, and being it is removed from its place, needs must it
begin to putrify and break through the flesh: then pain and misery grows on,
the bone inflameth and festereth. From thence it comes into the flesh, then
sorrows begins, and the Joint must be taken off, if on the Toe, the Foot may be
lamed, if the sinew or joint water comes to it, which is clear and yellow,
causing more danger; if that Sore goes further, a whole Member, Hand or Foot
may be lost, or a whole Arm, if not death follows altogether. I have seen a
Hand cut off, by reason of such a cracked Fracture, which being opened and
searched; the cause was found of all that mischief. Hence we gather, how from
small Sores great simptoms may arise, which indeed may well be called the
not-named (or what is ye call it) because their first cause or original is
unknown.

Of a cracked Fracture on the Shin.
If there be a crack on the Shin, it falls out that that crack inclines to
fester, which makes a hollowness that begins in time to be moist; a hollowness
being made, the moisture soaketh lower; if so, then is the cause worse; for
though you should open that Sore where that matter is, and you would heal it,
you will miss your aim do what ye can: My advice is, to open such a thing
before the matter be settled to any place, because that moisture breaks not
forth so easily as it does in any other Sore, for it is a mere water, and
hardly turns to matter.

For when you open that hurt at the place where the Fracture is, then you may
the easier come at it, then if you open it at a further distance from the
crack, and that crack will heal the sooner, the nearer it be opened to the
Fracture; and in case you were to take out any bones, were it not fitter there
to do it there then at a further distance? how shall the broken or loose bones
get out, if thus neglected and let alone till festered? And the bones that are
desirous to get out are commonly black, stand seldom loose, but hold fast, and
must be forced out with an incision Knife or other Instrument: in case you will
stay the bones leisure to get out of its own accord, there is no way for them
but by putrefaction, if so, then you may look for many of them; it will prove a
tedious cure and to no purpose; for scarrs, short Members, haltings, crooked
bodies, etc. yea, a perpetual sign it will leave behind. Three or four
Fractures thus opened are sooner cured than one which is not opened, which I
have seen several times.

A Quotation of notable examples of Sprains and small Bone-fractures, which
turned to great Sores.
Out of these following examples the Reader may see, how such things might be
prevented before they turn unto such simptoms. About the year 1540. the whole
Company of Surgeons at Zurich has been baffled and put to a nonplus by
Sprains and small cracked bones, some whereof I will rehearse, that were under
cure a whole twelve months, some six months, some two years, some more, some
less, before they came to my hands, these must be a warning to Novices in
Surgery. Some of the Patients may be a witness this present year 1563. what
toil and moil, what pains they were put to, how their Members were cut off,
others condemned to be cut off. Why? By reason of a Sprain, a small hurt or
fall, which brought some to a lameness, some to a most painful halting, and
those were glad which came off with an ordinary or easy limping.

1. A Tailors Widow sprain'd her Foot, after she had been plaistered and
dawbed with Salves a long time, the Surgeons resolved twice at a meeting to saw
the Foot off; but at last with much ado she was cured, and her Foot saved.

2. A Mason sprain'd his Leg coming down a Ladder, who lay a long time under
Surgeons hands, who in the end condemned his Leg to be sawed off; no help for
it, though many foreign Surgeons were called to it.

3. I had two Brothers at Knenou in cure, whose black bones I dug out with
much ado, the one was perfectly cured, but the other not so well, however he
went his ways: all this came from a Sprain.

4. The Millers Daughter at Cloten sprain'd her Foot, and was a long time under
the Surgeons hands, but she was so well dawbed, that the bone putrified and
grew black, then was she brought to me, I cut to the bone, and cured her, that
she was able to go about her business again.

5. One had a fall from a Ladder, and had some hurt on his Leg, he did lie a
long time under Surgeons hands before he was brought to me, never had I a more
difficult cure in hand, his Leg could not be saved, but off it was cut, and his
life paid for it.

6. A Servant going about some business, he heard his Leg give a snap, which he
slighted for the present, and went many days about, but into the Surgeons
hands he fell, where being salved a while, at last he was brought to me also:
Some told me what he ailed, but I found what it was; his bone from the
gartering to the ankle, I opened it, and then dressed him, and cured him, so that
he went his way without the fore bone of his Leg: this broken bone, though it
made no show that it was broken, however it was so, and the party endured pains
enough before he could be cured.

7. In Einsidle at Shobechlin, one at the taking up a load of grass heard his
Leg give a snap, and went on it for a while for all that, but his bone
putrified, as the rest of the quoted examples did, in the presence of his
Parents I opened it, they saw that it was putrified, and I cured it.

8. A Woman at Geroltswill going down some where, sprain'd her Leg, it was
swelled as much as ever I saw any: I opened it, an abundance of corruption came
out of it, after some days she was cured with much ado, the bone was not
black, all kept together, no shatterings nor splinters in it. Her life was much
feared; all this came from a small crack, I should have hardly believed it,
that such a small crack should cause so much mischief, and a Woman to undergo
so much misery as she did, for she let it run on a long time before she sought
for help, still hoping an amendment.

9. A Servant at Swartzenbach jumping from a higher dunghill to a lower sprain'd
his Leg, which he at first regarded not, but it brought him to the feeling of
it at last; and being a long time under Surgeons, at last was brought to me, I
dressed him in the manner of a Fracture, his bone was not yet grown black, he was
healed.

10. A Girl at Horgen carried on such a crack a long while, which at last
broke up, and was cured with much ado: I took out many small splinters, and
dressed her as Fractures usually are dressed, and healed it in the way of a
Flap-fracture.

11. A Servant at Horgerberg got a crack, and went about with it a long time,
at last his bone did raise and putrified, and a great stink was in it. He being
put to my trust, I opened his bone, viewing it I found the Fracture, and dug
out with Instruments the rotten bones in the best way I could, and afterward I
dressed him after the manner of a Flap-fracture, and the fellow w^^ healed, his
Leg was saved from being cut off, but he went halting after he was healed: his
Leg was sentenced by the most Surgeons to be cut off.

These hurts named before, came all at first from a Sprain, by falling, by
stepping into a hole unawares, or by lifting of things, or stretchings and
throwings: it is hardly believed, that from such small things such great
mischiefs should arise; its strange a man should hurt himself in a slight
manner, and to turn to a Fracture, which at the beginning appeared to be no
such matter. But when I opened and viewed such hurts, then I perceived, that if
they had been dressed at the beginning like a single crack, then it would not
have turned to any greater inconvenience without causing any further pain and
trouble.

Of certain directions, opening or incisions, dressings and healings of
splitted bones.
If any one is brought unto you which complains of a cracked bone, you need
not to let it trouble you much, unless it be, that the hurt was carried on a
long time, and the crack begin to raise, and to swell, and break out; of these
has been spoken enough above, and you may be satisfied with it.

But if such hurts be yet fresh and unswelled, then I call them fresh cracked
Fractures, because they are lately done, and are swelled a little, these may
easily be remedied, and you may do thus: make this following plaster to be
applied to the Leg.

. Rosin lb 1. Wax 1. Turpentine 2. Colophonia A plaster for a cracked bone.
1. Myrrh 1. Walwort ss. make a plaster of it. This plaster must not quite
close the Leg, there must some space be left naked; or you may dress him with
the red plaster as a little Fracture; if it be on the Leg, then the Patient
must forbear to stand or to go; if on the Arm, he must spare that also so long
till he recover the strength thereof; and though it be healed, yet the plaster
he ought to keep on still for a while; if the Fracture be stiff and strong
yet, then you need not to prop it with splinters; but if the Fracture stirs,
then use two splinters as you see occasion. In case the bone stands yet firm,
then hold it together only with a good Plaster, which must be broader than
the Fracture, it will hold it more strongly than if your plaster be applied
sparingly, and put a good rouler about it, let it lie so eight days, well tied
together with the rouler, but not too hard, that the hurt be not endammaged.
This must be understood of the fore part of the Arm toward the Hand, and the
nether part of the Leg below the Knee.

That part of the Arm above the Elbow, and the thick part above the Knee, must
not be dealt so withal, neither must you apply any splinter to it, because
there is but one bone in that place, which sooner is stirred than the other
bones below the Elbow or the Knee, of the which there are two, a bigger and a
lesser. The bone above the Knee or Elbow requires better looking unto, not
only because it is only one bone, but also because it must endure more in
lifting, going, standing, glimming, carrying, than the other fore bones.

One may object: Does not the fore part bear up the hind part?

Experience shows the contrary, that the upper part must be stronger than the
fore part, Laborers and Foot-posts know it; besides, one bone is sooner
stirred and removed, then two standing and up-bearing one another, and that one
is fuller of Marrow, and is of a greater largeness, stands more hollow, and is
sooner removed by reason of that hollowness.

Therefore do not slight that upper part, though it be neither cracked nor
dislocated, or not felt, for it is dangerous enough, if painful in the touch.

Look you do not neglect it, but bind and dress it as well as you can. Apply a
splinter above or at the uppermost part, if you do not, then you will have work
enough for your self and for the Patient. You apply here the splinters not as
upon another Fracture, but only one, or at the most two splinters are to be
used, and a doubled plaster, it holds as stiff as an armor. Let it lie so
applied ten or twelve days, pull it well together with a rouler, it will
endure a hard binding, more than that part below the Elbow or the Knee, for on
those parts a too hard binding may cause a deadness to the Foot or Hand, by
reason of the muscles and sinews, which is not feared on the Thigh, or on the
Arm above the Elbow.

Therefore d^ not bind it too hard, especially if your Patient is far from
you, and you cannot come soon to him; if it be a Child, whose Muscles and
sinews are not strong and cannot complain of it, as aged people may observe,
and have the more care of it, be the Fracture what it will, either rent or
crack, at the dressing and undressing; especially have a care to the Marrow,
that it do not press thorough, that it come not to stand between the bone and
the flesh, and cause no blackness to the bone, and the Marrow do not break
thorough to a swelling, and turn to a Fistula; for such a thing will be most
like a Fistula, being full of holes here and there; all these may be caused by
a crack of a bone, the marrow of the bone pressing thorough, turning to a
swelling, is scattered up and down: Such examples I have seen many; unto which
a belly flux is incident, or humors gather that way from the body, which
increases the disease of the Patient, whereof in the end he miserably dies.

If I know a bone to be broken, and the marrow of it is hardly to be dispersed
or driven back, then I do not dress it as a Fracture, but make an incision,
like to a Flap-fracture, in the place where the Fracture and redness is, and
dress it round like a Fracture-wound, and laid a splinter to the place where no
redness was, held him quiet so long till the Fracture was sore, and was fiery,
appearing like a swelling, and coming to maturity, I dressed him then to the bone
very carefully, and left the band so, that the marrow might not press thorough
and sink downward. It laid a long time before it came to any corruption: I
applied a plaster to the raised red place, like a Diachylon, guarding it
round, that it could not press thorough, but only in that place where it
should break.

However I advise no man to do so; at the dressing of such a one, have a care
that the plaster go not quite round the Leg, and let your roulers be big and
strong, for if you suffer the place to raise and swell, the whole Joint will be
exulcerated and inflamed, and if you let it swell of its own accord, the whole
Member will swell. And bind it not too hard; if it has no vent at all, nor the
plaster yields, then you must fear a suffocation of the Member, and the
Patients health lies at stake.

Here I must tell ye, that some Patients will not have they should be touched
with any Iron, but rather will lie longer by, than be hastily cured.

If you intend to make use of a Lenitife, apply it gently and bind it slack,
viz. a Diachylon, or a Melilot Plaster, or any such like to keep the sore from
further ulceration; when it makes show to break, let it have time enough, and
open it not too hastily, for the sinew water is commonly at hand, and runs
forth, not like corruption, but like blood and water, which is a good sign; if
a white matter comes forth, then is it a sign of putrefaction and separation of
the bone; if blood and water comes out of it, then there is no putrefaction,
such a party must be kept in a band, like as a Flap-fracture is kept, which
must not stir, it will be softer at the swelling then it would at an
ulceration. Therefore dress that party like as a Flap-fracture is dressed, and
apply a fresh Fracture-plaister, and leave an open place, that he may be dressed
twice or thrice a day, let the corruption not run under the plaster to make it
stink. When the Fracture is opened the Member unswels, if the matter runs out,
then the band will slacken, and the splinters will hold no more, and then you
must renew your bands, and the splinters set right again.

Leave room for the red place which inclines to ulceration, let the place not
be covered with the plaster, that you may come at it when you intend to dress
him; do not bind that place, least you drive the matter back with the Lenitife
you apply to; and in case you should bind that place hard, you must fear that
corruption will seek for another way to break thorough; if you make an
incision, then do it in that place where the Patient is most pained, for under
that place the Fracture lies hid; take notice of the sign where it is, strike
with your finger up and down, to see whether you can feel any crack, stirring
or crookedness, hollowness or raising, if you find none of these, then take
notice of these tokens, viz. the pains when the place is touched, is hard and
red, and a raising is there, and the Patient complains that it is in a
continual rage, and there is no where any swelling but in that place; for if
there be a swelling in any other place besides that, then is it a sign, that
the bone and panicle is putrified and eaten thorough, if these three signs be
together (the redness being the chiefest) and they may be felt with the finger,
then is it certain, that there is a crack of the bone there and no where else;
and here you are sure of the token where you must open it. And that you may not
loose again that place, then mark it with a small coal, or chalk, or oaker, or
with a drop of oil. At this time bind him not with roulers, tapes or
fillettings, before you be provided with the Lancet, and a Plaster to apply it
to the hole, Tents, Ointments, Sponge, Water, Cisers and Spatule, etc. make
first two or three Tents one bigger than the other, to have your choice.

Being provided thus with necessaries, then take a long rouler and bind his Leg
or Arm, etc. cross way, cover not with the rouler the marked raising, pull the
rouler strongly together, pressing down the veins and sinews, that the red
marked place may raise the better; make that place raise high where you intend
to make the incision, then you may be sure that the matter will disperse it
self no whether else, and your incision will be made the surer, you need not
fear to hit an unright place, nor the Patient shrink under you; the incision
will cause no great pain if bound hard, which would not be so if tied slack.

I tied many times on the roulers two fillettins, one above, the other below,
fearing the marrow would slip away. Be not timorous in the incision, because
there is no danger in it, neither in the bleeding in case you should hit a
vein. For when I hit a vein in such a case, I let it bleed but a little and
stopped it again, neither is it any small advantage, for it makes good
breathing to the Patient, the Leg grows the lighter, and the pains are
lessened. Sometimes such an incision cannot be made without the hitting of a
vein, especially below the Knee, unless the veins be rotten, having no blood
but matter in them.

I speak of such, where neither corruption nor ulceration is, but of fresh skin
and flesh, and where a redness is apparent; you must make the incision upon the
redness, if you will open it right, else the incision will be in vain.

When I held the Patient thus, and marked the highest place of the redness,
then I took a strong Lancet, laid it on close to the place where it held hard
against, thrusting it deeply into the crack, turning the Lancet a little in my
hand, that the incision should fall the bigger till to the Fracture or crack;
if you do not so, then the incision will soon close, no other, as when a hole
is made with a bodkin into a four doubled cloth, where hardly a tent may be
thrusted into; therefore have a care that the incision close not, let it bleed
well; having done bleeding, then apply to it Cotton wool or Mullipuffe on the
tent, with a clinging plaster; you may allay the bleeding with a wet Sponge;
if you think the panicle is not cut thorough, then make a strong tent well
turned, cover it with a sharp Unguent, thrust it in, that the panicle may be
touched with it, that tent will make vent enough, you need not to apply any
Corrosive, and it will heal like a fresh Wound. Sometimes thinking that I had
not hit it right, yet I took a board tent, which might best go into the Wound,
and covered it with Aegyptiacum, straying some burnt Allom upon it to keep open
the incision and to make it wider; if you do so, then you cause no long
continuing pains, it keeps open the Wound if you put it in loose.

Having given him a little rest, and no blood comes out, not so much as to
stain the cloth, then you may dress him with a Fracture band, leave the Wound
open, that you may come at it without any stirring, like a thorough Fracture or
Flap-fracture. Dress him so as is said, then you need not so many plasters,
roulers, nor splinters, nor so much toils. That Wound must not be so scoured,
as usually they deal with a Flap-fracture, only let the Wound have vent, and
let it stand free. Apply the Plaster to it, that no air get into, and prevent
putrefaction therein, that it run not betwixt the band; the Patient must not
lie still as he does at a Flap-fracture, neither ought he to stay so long at
it; if you can dress well such a cracked bone, it will be a great advantage to
you in dressing other Flap-fractures, and will be a great help unto you.

Some useful and remarkable Rules, comprehending briefly all necessaries
belonging to cracked bones.
Let no ulceration come into a cracked bone, as much as possible you may, else
the Patient will be endangered.

Keep it open not too long, let it close as fast as it can, and use in four
days not any tents.

Do not press it too hard, that you hurt not the new flesh, and make it not
fall off, else the flesh is hindered.

Use no Corrosive where there is no need, which would make the bone black,
which cannot brook with any corroding things.

Use no swelling Tents, they for the most part are hurtful here.

Search not with the little Instrument for any splinters; if you do so, you
make the bone rugged and shattered, which heals unwillingly.

Keep out the air, that you make not black the white bone; for the air that
falls on such bones makes them black, which proves incurable.

Make a small Wound, and not a large or wide one.

Make the incision the long way along the Leg, holding the Knife not the twhart
way.

Thus I close this part of the cures of all sorts of Wounds, and Fractures, and
Cracks.

Finis of the second Part.
The Third Part. Of the Symptoms of Wounds, how they are discerned and known
before they appear, what they foretell, how to prevent them, and how to cure
them when apparent: etc.
COurteous Reader, hitherto I have showed to you plainly what I have found in
my practick part, how you are to cure all sorts of Wounds from the Head to the
extremest parts, the several fractures and confusions also; hoping you will
not begrudge your pains, if you have followed the rule of my instructions. You
must take these things into ser^ous consideration, and be not wanting in your
carefulness and industry, because all particulars cannot be set down in
writing.

In this third Part, I will Inform you in the best and most Knowledge of Symtoms
is necessary.
faithful way of Symptoms, befalling the wounded, and the wounds, which is one
of the chiefest points belonging to Surgerie; for without the knowledge of
Symptoms in wounds little good can be effected, nay irrecoverable hurts are
caused if Surgeons are ignorant of them, as woeful experience testifies. And in
my opinion those are no Surgeons which have no judgment in these Symptoms: for
wounds healed, not according to the fundamentals of the Art, falls out
accidentally, which good luck old women may have also, and some Matrones there
are found which would be too hard for such Surgeons. These I count for good
Surgeons, which have a sound judgment not of Symptoms that are at hand
already, but such that discern by infallible signs there coming: for these
Symptoms have always there forerunners, which foretell of their coming. There
is nere a rain without clouds, thundrings and lightnings accompany each other,
and great cold brings frost. Man is taken from earth, and has the qualities
of earth about him. Earth is the mother of all fruits, yet has it many
miscreance: of the same condition is Man, for which cause Antiquity put the
title of Microcosme upon him. For Man being wounded, is no more in his right
tune, is like a mother of all diseases, which before there breaking in, appear
in some tokens, which tokens a Surgeon ought to know, if he intends to do good
and get credit. It deserves more praise to prevent an enemies invasion, and is
sooner opposed then, then when his army is come into a land to be expelled. A
Surgeon has the more cause to be knowing in such Symptoms, because there is
such a variety of them, which to rehearse is impossible. If men in health are
subject unto Symptoms, what shall we say of wounded men? there are some held
for sound, in whom many infirmities lie hid; who being wounded fall into the
wounds, causing some fistula's, cankers, or the like; which without a true
process are hardly cured well, and Surgeons may easily be deceived herein, if
not well expert in those ways. Situations of dwelling places either further or
hinder such Symptoms, foggy places are not so wholesome, as those of a clear
and pure air. And the same cause it is with the years seasons; as also the
weapons are of different natures, whereby a wound is made; some are poisonous,
others are not, the former cause more dangerous Symptoms than the latter, and
one part of the body is more subject unto Symptoms than the other; and so are
men also according to their several complections. Some patients cause Symptoms
upon themselves with their disorderly course of life; from thence several
Symptoms within and without are caused, which a good Surgeon ought to know,
else he will have but ill success in his curing of wounds.

These have been the stronger motive unto me, to write of the Symptoms in
wounds, because that knowledge lies hid deeply, whose names scarcely are
known; whose true knowledge is very necessary; without which little good can be
done: of these I will speak in brief, and plainly, however fundamentally and
really, not having borrowed it from others, but as I found them true
experimentally: my intention is to write of mine own, and leave others to their
opinion, and it is fit every bird should wear his own feathers. Setting other
things aside I come to the things themselves.

CHAP. I.
Of the Signs in general, whereby Symptoms are duly discerned.

COurteous Reader, before I come to speak in particular of Symptoms, I will
first rehearse some tokens in general, whereby Simptoms may be known: hoping
you will be thereby enabled to conceive the better of them, if you hear every
Simptoms sign described in particular.

He that is wounded at the Dura and pia Matter, looks horrible: Signs of a
wounded Brain.
when he begins to draw his mouth together, then it is a figne that there is
a cramp in the wound: but if he stareth with his eyes, it is a figne of an
Apoplexy, and of death: if none of these signs are present, and the patient
is hot, and his face is red, it signifies a Fever, or a disease of the wound
is like to befall him. But if all the said signs be at hand, then nothing so
sure as death. But if the patient Wound-disease.
is besides these in a rage and fury, then is he in a worse condition: again
if the patient looks pale in his face, and is still and quiet then is he in the
better condition. If a patient still thinks that some body gapeth into his
wound, after he is A pulling wound.
dressed, it signifies a Cramp, unless the Surgeon have put too much of the
resign, which runs like Turpentine, or any other Gum of that nature,
whereby he causes that pulling or griping.

If a wound be in a flame when dressed, it signifies that a A burning wound.
sharp humor is fallen into it, which eats of the flesh already healed; unless
the Surgeon have put too many hot herbs to his Salve, or has put to it too
much of Mastick, or gum Sarcocollae.

If a wound swells on the outer member, and paineth the patient very much at
the changing of the weather, it signifies A wound sensible of weathers.
a withering and consuming of the member, delay no time to help it, for if you
should stay till the wound be healed, afterward you will hardly bring that hurt
to right. A true Surgeon must understand and know aforehand, and help before
the hurt be done; let him make use of exiccating medicaments.

If there be a swelling in an outward joint or member, near the wound, and is
yet hard, and does not pain the party, Swellings without pain.
and that wound heals together from within, then is it a sign that the
medicaments are naught, and will do no good; though the wound be not unto
lameness, yet in this manner it will be made lame, if the Surgeon goes on in
his applied medicines: if he perceives it, then let him take better mecicine:
Viz. Of Storax, Gum Opopanax, etc. This Symptom befalls a joint-wound, when
stitched, and afterward a poultesse applied to it.

If a wound swells on an outward member, and does Sign of a Fstula.
not pain the party when touched, and closes, and the more it closes the more
it swells, it is a sign that a fistula grows on: if it pricketh much being
felt and touched, it signifies that a splinter of the bone would fain get out;
but if it does not prick, and seems to the patient as if he were touched with
an Iron, it is a sign that a piece of an affthrusted bloud-vein would fain get
out, and the Surgeon ought to make vent: but in case the swelling paineth the
party sometimes, and at other times it does not, at one time it is red, at
another it is pale, it is a sign that a Cancer will come Sign of a Cancer.
into the wound: if it does gnaw a little and does prick when it is not touched,
and looks brown-red, then is it a sign there is a Cancer in it already.

A wound that yielded much matter at first, and the party being well, but
afterward the wound begins to water, (I Water in a wound.
do not speak here of the joint water) it is a sure sign that either a Cancer
or a Fistula is coming; but if the patient grows daily weaker, it signifies
death.

If a wound inclines to heal very fast, and yet the party Hasty healings of
wounds.
grows daily weaker, it is a sure sign of death: such wounds are commonly
purple-brown, shrink commonly, and it is an unnatural healing.

When wounded men are continually in a fright, it is an ill sign, if a tucking
pulling be accompanied with it, it is a Frights in patients.
sign that a wound-disease is coming; and if any redness be joined with it, it
is a sign that the wound-disease is already Wound-disease: Sudden pains.
at the door. If sudden pains come into a wound, and goes away suddenly, and
the party can after it not stir the joint, it signifies that the Palsy is
come into: of that joint you may say that it will keep lame, if no worse thing
come unto, which is to be feared.

If a Joint wound swells, and the joint water runs strongly, Joint water
joined with a swelling.
and the more, the more it swells; it is a sign that the Surgeons medicines
are not proper for it: therefore let him use better, in case he intends not to
spoil the joint quite and by too much running it cost the patients life; let
him learn to make better Salves than he has in his Dispensatory.

If a party be wounded on a joint, and complains of pains on the extreme part
of that joint, as being wounded Pains in a wound.
in the arm, and his pains are worse in the finger than in the wound it self:
then is it a sign that the member will dye, and that the cold fire is coming
into: then is it high time to Cold fire.
prevent that evil, and do not neglect the patient.

A wound made into the body, and prickings are in the side, signifies death,
if so be the wound is in that place.

A wound made into the hollow of the body, and is at a stand in healing,
signifies death; but if a wound be at such A wound at a stand.
a stand on an outward member, and the wound waters a little, it signifies
Cancer, Prunella, Inflammation, Wound-disease, or death if they be not
prevented: it may be that some imparity was in the wound Ointments and Balsoms,
which set the healing backward, for such slovens are found, which care not
whether their medicines be made clean or no; and that fault is committed in
medicaments that are both for inward and outward use. If a cough is incident,
which Cough a sign of congealed blood.
is not cansed by the lungs, it is a sign of congealed blood in the body, if he
brings up any blood with his cough, then is it the surer sign of it; but if
that blood brought up by coughing is red and fresh, then is it a sign that a
blood vein is wounded, which is still a bleeding.

If a wounded party begins to stammer in his tongue, looks ghastly, turns his
eyes, is deaf, it signifies madness and death: if he be snoaring at the
noistrils, knows no body, has a Stammering.
great droughth, yet drinks little, his sleep is gone, and still will be
gone: all these are ill signs, and easily judged.

If a hard knot or callus grows on a wound, which is painful and increases,
yet the wound heals; it is a sign Collossities
that the veins and sinews which are there about, are dying and rotting, death
ensues upon: of such heavy examples I know too many, which have thus been
neglected, and such collossities grown there must be looked to.

These few signs I hold forth to you, thereby to learn to discern other
Symptoms: it is not possible to rehearse all, the defect hereof may be supplied
in those that follow, for to discern such Symptoms.

CHAP. II.
Of the Sleep of a wounded party, what a Surgeon ought to judge of it.

REader, marvel not that I keep no method in describing of Symptoms; I took
these Simptoms in hand to write of, as they fell out in my practick.

Touching Sleep; sound peoples sleep is not alike, some snoar in their sleep,
others without a noise, in these it matters not much: but it is another matter
with those that are wounded, because Surgeons ought to take notice of such
signs in their patients sleep. If a patient pulls in his sleep his wounded To
judge the signs by the sleep.
member, and is thereby awakned, it is a sign that the Cramp or Wound disease
is coming: but if he is frightened in his sleep, and awakneth of it, if his
vvound be in the head, a Cramp or Palsy ensues upon.

If a wounded party awakneth, knows not where he is and talks idely, it is a
sign that he is in a great heat, which soon will cause a disease in the wound.

A head wound which suffers not the party to sleep, accompanied with a heat,
it signifies a mortal Symptom: in such a case phlebotomy is very needful, if
he cannot sleep after that, then death ensues.

A patient that sleeps much, and is idle withal in his sleep, is hot in his
body, yet sweats not, it is a sign that the wound disease is predominant: for
such there is no remedy, and dies: but if he sweateh all the body over, then
there is better hopes of him, but if he sweateh only on his breast, it is a
deadly sign.

If a patient lets go his stool in his sleep, it signifies death.

A patient who at first is in a good posture unto healing, but grows worse
afterward, and loses his sleep; it is a sign of a mortal Symptom.

If a patients sleep be thick and short, but sweet, it is a good sign; and if
he be in a good temper, not too hot, and his pulse beats orderly, it is a good
sig^^^ but where no such signs are, there is it dangerous.

Touching medicines to cause sleep withal, when they are good, and when not,
you will find them in the Receipt described of Anodin, or Laudanum.

CHAP. III.
Of pains in Wounds, what does cause them, how judged, and how remedied,

PAins in wounds are natural, and in there cure they will Pains in wounds are
usual.
be caused one way or other, and pains will be felt as long as nature
separateth the bad from the good, and is done, when the wound matters, thereby
cleansing it self: pains caused in that way are of no consequent, in case the
patient be not otherwise disturbed, and is kept in a good diet: but it is
another case when the wound brings not out the matter in due time, and the
patient in his diet, or by the Surgeons carelessness is neglected: out of such
pains a Surgeon which is expert, will look to the circumstances must be
considered; and for that reason I thought good to write one Chapter of it, to
know from what the pain is caused, how it is to be judged, and to fit the
remedy against it.

Here I will not speak of ordinary and natural pains, but of extraordinary
ones, which are caused either by the patient, The patient causes pains.
or by the Surgeon, or by both: A patient causes pains to himself with
disorderly eating and drinking, pretending they must have a recruit for their
blood, some spoil themselves by eating of Cabbages, slimie Fish, Pork, etc. by
sour or strong Wine, stinking and sour Beer, etc. some by being too much in the
Sun shine, or being too much in the Air, or stirring too much in Leachery,
etc. whereby pains are caused in wounds, if not quite spoiled. A Surgeon cannot
exactly judge of the causes thereof, nor to allay them, unless the patient be
better governed in such ways. The Surgeon ough^ ^^ warn the patient of the
danger which such disorders do breed, if he will take no warning then let him
take what falls.

Surgeons also may cause such unnatural pains: as first, with stitching with
tents, by forcing them into Wounds, etc. Surgeons in fault.
of which you heard enough in the first part: and bad medicines also cause
great pains, and by ill and rude dressings, wherein Surgeons should have great
care to do things conveniently, such bad and improper medicaments should not be
used at all,

Surgeons must be careful at the dressings of Wounds, because some medicines
are sooner consumed by Wounds, than others: if a Wound be hastily dressed, before
the medicine has done its work, then the Wound is robbed of the medicines good
quality, and corruption is left in the wound beyond its time, which causes
pains to the wound, being over-burthened with the matter, and terrified by it.
In case both the Patient and the Surgeon behaved themselves well; yet pains are
still in the wound, then search into the cause thereof.

A Wound which brings not forth the matter duly, and more pains are caused
thereby, it is a sign, that an inflammation, or Cold fire is coming, if he does
not prevent it. If a pain increases more and more in the Wound, yet it keeps
its true color, it signifies some fault in the Wound: if the Wound be as
deep, till to the bone (I speak of outward members it is a sign, that some
splinter does not lie right, and a fracture happily is at hand; which the
Surgeon ought to look well unto. If a pain stays in a Wound, after it is
healed, it signifies that that member will exiccate and wither: but if that
part swells, it is a sign of a loose splinter of the bone: and if the
swelling endures to be touched, then there is a vein or sinew dying, whereby is
caused a Gangrene or Fistula.

Pains in a head Wound, which is healed, signify that a splinter will be
loose: but if it endures the touching, it signifies an inward Imposthume, or
there lies a splinter on the Pia Matter of the brain.

Sudden and shooting pains accompanied with chilness, Sooting pains.
signify the Wound disease: and if the pains are more above or below the
Wound, than in it, it intimates no good, commonly a Gangrene or Fistula is
coming: and if such a pain increases daily, it signifies that the medicines
applied were not proper: if you do not prevent it, the Cold fire will come into.

A Wound that looks well to the eye, and no great defect seen, yet the Patient
at the several dressings grows weaker, it intimates the naughtiness of the
medicine.

A party wounded in the head, and the Temple veins are Temples that prick.
full, and feels pricking in them, it is a sign that the Patient is kept too
warm. Such parties usually are kept in a Cellar.

A wounded party having shootings and prickings in the Wound, is full of heat
on a sudden, and by it cease, especially at the change of the weather, it
intimates that a humor will settle into the wound: the Surgeon must learn to
what disease the Patient is usually inclining, to oppose that with proper
medicaments.

If a Patient feels on a sudden a pulling in his wound, it Pulls in the Wound.
intimates that a Cramp will get into. If a Wound is full of pricks, and a
Pleurisy appears, it signifies death. A party being usually pained and
pricked, or a Patient is eased, yet is not as he should be, it intimaneth a
coming Wound-disease, or rather death, unless these pains be taken off through
medicaments.

These are the Signs, I thought good to inform you of, more could have been
quoted: but hoping you will judge by these of the rest, I let it so rest, and
only one more I will tell you: In case there be pains in a Wound, where the
veins, sinews, tendons, etc. are wounded, to remedy these, proceed in the
following manner. A sinew wounded only, is more pained, than if quite cut
asunder: Reasons of it are known, if you find that there is great pain in a
Wound, by reason of the wounded white veins, then in the first place, apply a
defensive Plaster (of the which you shall find more in the Book of decoctions,
or of coockery) and put into the Wound red oil of Terpentine, or distilled oil
of Bays or of Tyles, for these hot oils assuage the pain in the sinews, are
pleasing to them, and cold things are hurtful unto them: and the said oils are
very penetrative with their heat: when ye put any of the said oils into the
Wound, then dip a linen piece of cloth in it, lie it to the vvound, and apply
upon it a stiptick plaster. The pain being assuaged, and you will dress the
Wound again, then let the brown wound ointment run into, and you may mingle a
drop or two of the said oils with it, the pain will the sooner cease, and you
fear the less the Joint water.

I will teath you here to make a Wound Unguent, which A good Unguent.
is good to take away not only the pains of the sinews, but is good also
against the Cramp and other things. the clear and sweet oil of Amber, distilled
with water ss distilled oil of Bays 1 ss, of unguentum dialthaeae 4 mingle
these use in and about the Wound, and anoint the whole joint and member with
it and you will get credit by it. If there be great pains in the wound, and the
joint water runs also, then proceed in that cure, as you heard in the
Chapter, touching the joint water.

Lastly note also, that when a Patient is vehemently pained in his Wound, and
the pains will not cease, and the Patient be not troubled with any other
disease, then minister unto him in Wine or Water the conserve Anodynum, from 6.
to 8. or 9. grains, and so let the Patient rest: in his sleep all pains will
cease, be they never so vehement: and let the Wound nevertheless be dressed
according to Art. Thus much of pains in Wounds: he that knows more and better
ways, it is free for him to do well for the public good, and not hide his
Candle under a Bushel.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Corruption in Wounds, and what may be gathered from thence.

COrruption is the excrement of Wounds: every wound mattererh, and desires to
make a separation of that What Corruption is.
which is destroyed, and to clear the impure from the pure, and to cast away
that which is naught, that the good part may not be infected and hindered.
Nature beginning thus to work then appears the matter.

Corruption comes partly from the Wound, which striveth to cleanse it self,
partly from the medicine, and the From whence it comes?
food, used to the Wound, and the matter is ordered that way: for a Wound if
only cleansed, and nothing else used to it, it will afford some matter, which
man's natural Balsam casts forth at the Wound, which striveth to heal it: if a
proper medicine be used, pleasant to the Balsam, then the Wound is fed by that
medicine, casting away the excrement thereof, and is strengthened thereby the
better to attain unto a healing.

Therefore if a proper medicine be applied to the Wound, then it casts forth
the matter the better, in such a manner Good Medicine maks good Matter.
as it ought to be. But if the medicine be contrary unto the natural Balsam,
then the wound cannot digest it well, and the matter also comes short in its
form and sent: if so, then that medicine is naught, and a better is to be
applied: for the matter is altered according to the medicines goodness.
Therefore learn to know the Matter, that you may be sure whether its form be
from the wound or no, or from any other Symptom, or whether the medicine
causes it to be of such a shape.

Surgeons ought to know, that every wound affords Matter, be it much or little,
and the one Matter does not look like the other. Flesh and blood have their
singular matter: A twofold Matter.
the white veins have their proper matter: and another matter affords the
bones: the same must be understood also of the internal members. Bones at there
healing yield a white slime and somewhat thick: but if they are not in a right
tune, they give a clear water, without any smell, and looks greasy; which is
seen by the linen that are put into. White veins afford a clear water,
somewhat tuff and slimie: but if they be out of order, then the water runs out
yellowish abundantly, and tuff like the white of an Egg, or raw indigested
blood.

Flesh affords its matter somewhat thick, white gray, or of a carnation color,
with its due sent, and willingly separateth from the wound.

If the matter be tuff, clinging to the Wound, and must be forcibly taken off,
and is cloddy, it is a sign that the body Full and cloddy matter.
decays in strength.

And when there appear any streaks therein, it intimates that the sinevvs are
going, all hastneth tovvard death. And if the original be not touched and found,
there is neither help nor hope for to recover such a party.

If the matter be tuff, sticking to the vvound, then is the vvound in no good
case, and inclines to turn to another Symptom, as to a Gangrene, Cancer,
Fistula, and the like.

If the matter be thin, looks white like milk, it signifies naughty blood, and
the marrow in the bone is consumed: Thin matter.
if this matter comes in any quantity, then it is yet joint water, and
intimates a terrible Symptom, like to a palsy, unto which you must look well,
that the wound be kept dry, and no greasiness come into; else it will befall
you as you heard about the wounds in the back bone.

If there be but little matter, the wound sinks, and turns blew, and hastily
shutteh, it signifies death, no help Little matter.
for it.

But if the matter be thick and yellow, runs abundantly out of the wound if
only squezed a little; it intimates a thick matter.
great hollowness: and if that wound be bone-chattar'd, then it is a sign, that
a loose bone would fain break out. If such a party come to your cure, then
tarry not, but begin in time to cure it as a Fistula: if there be a small bone
at hand, it will come out nere the sooner. That Patient must be put to the
smallest, and not to the greatest cure.

If a Wound that is soft, being squezed, yields a foam or A froth in the wound.
froth mingled with blood, it intimates a spongie flesh in the wound, and it
will turn to a Fistula: therefore cure it as a Fistula; that soft flesh will
soon settle to a better groundwork of the cure. A wound that bears no
matter, is at a stand, it intimates that an Inflammation is coming into, whose
Wound without matter.
forerunner is Prunella.

Stinking corruption in wounds prognostic ill. Here the Surgeon must well know
the matter, and to judge by the Stinking matter.
form, sent, coluor, etc. how his Patient must be cured.

Thus much of corruptions in wounds, more could be spoken of in that
particular, shuning prolixity, I let it rest so: neither is it well possible to
write more exactly of it: for every matters form is a working to the applied
medicine, every Surgeon uses his own medicines; which is the reason why these
signs differ so much. The signs mentioned here, are set upon mine own Wound
Ointments, stiptick Plasters: those that use other things, must find other
signs.

Surgeons ought to know their medicines, and observe their operations, chiefly
how they appear in the making of the matter, then may they judge what medicines
are good, and which are naught for the wounds they have in hand.

CHAP. V.
Of the Joint Water; the difference of it: how to allay it.

THe Symptoms of the Joint water are so well known, that I believe it a thing
superfluous, that I should write Joint water is dangerous.
of it. However confidering that the Symptoms herein terrify Surgeons more
than all others, therefore I could not forbear. I have seen many which
understand as little herein, as nothing, which occasioned so many abuses in
surgerie committed, at the stenching of the Joint water, against which many
receipts were invented, even as if in surgery nothing were known of it.

Note this about the Joint water, there is a moisture in joints, called by
Surgeons a Gluten, because it makes the Joint water is no gluten.
joints slibberie, without which no joint is in its right tune: this moisture
is but little in quantity. Some Surgeons suppose, that the joint water is that
which lies in the joint: these are mistaken, and deceave others to their great
damage. For sometimes there runs out of one wound more joint water than there
is of the Gluten in man's body: and when that Gluten has done running in that
joint, then that joint withers, and is no more flexible. No art can restore
that gluten, if once gone and lost. For the joint water, called Synonia, which
usually runs out at the wound, is properly a moisture of sinews and veins,
whereby every joint receives its strength, without which no joint can subsist.
What is joint water.
For if in a wound the sinews, tendons, muscles, etc. be hurt, then they let
their moisture go, which runs out at the wound; and is then called the joint
water, and continues running so long, till the sinew is fed by the digestion,
then it begins by degrees to cease, and the wound inclines unto healing.

If a wound be hindered in its healing by the running of the joint the joint
water is hurtful to the whole body.
water, because it was not dressed with proper medicaments; and the joint water
getting its full course, it will bereave all the parts of the body of their
natural moisture or radical humidity, and cause them to dye. For the joint
water getting the praedominancie, and runs too long, then that joint falls into
an irrecoverable Consumption, whithereth quite away, as being wholly bereaved
of its food. It happens Salt spirit by the joint water.
some times, that the joint water is accompanied with a salt spirit, corroding
the sinews, bringing them into putrefaction, whereby great holes and pains are
caused. I have met with such a party, who was hurt in his finger: his Surgeon
could not allay the joint water, because the sinews were corroded and eaten,
whereby holes got into the hand, and from thence even to the elbow, pieces of
putrified sinews were taken out. This joint water his Surgeon could not stay,
it run up into the arm further, and came into the shoulder, the party dyed
miserably of it. Here let Sugeons take notice, not to set so slieght by the
joint water, and to stay it in time, how that may be done you shall hear.

An expert Surgeon must not be terrified by the joint water, because it is the
excrement of sinews and white veins: let him endeavor to stay it with proper
medicines, which if right and good, they will stay it within five days: and
the running of it is chiefly caused by improper medicines applied, and by the
patients disorderly life.

Note, the joint water cannot be reduced to a corruption, which among ignorant
Surgeons has begotten that foul abuse, which they commit in the staying of
it, and is still in practice: for they suppose, that it can be stayed with
exiccating things, therefore they used Terra sigillata, Bolus, calcined Shells,
bones of Pickrels, Egg shells, of new hatched Chickens, vinegar of Sloes, etc.
some (being taught by the Hangman) burnt Cotton wool, and thurst it thus
burning into the wound, some use Cantharides; whereby they make it known, that
they never knew what joint water means: else they would never go so
dreamingly about so weighty a matter. I must confess, that the manual is of as
great consequence as any Receipt may be. I reject none of the means, which they
have learned; because the vehement course of the joint water requires
sometimes such hasty stenching. But if such wounds be dressed in the way I told
you of, the joint water needs not to be feared. To stay the joint water, you
may best conceive by these examples in what manner it is done: Examples.
A Carpenter hurt himself against a piece of Timber: I know not in what manner
he was dressed at first, the joint water run out abundantly at the wound, and
about the wound many holes fell in, which the Barbar Surgeon dressed always with
tents, and in his thinking he had done well. But the extraodinary pains grew so
much on the patient, that he was fain to change his Surgeon. because he saw
that things grew worse with him: and he sent for me, whom with good success
upon Gods blessing I dressed and cured thus. I warmed my brown ointment, let it
run into all the places of the wound, filled them up therewith: afterward I
dressed him with stiptick Plaster, after the manner of an Opodeldoch, that
nothing may run out of the vvound, this I iterated three times a day: I kept
the vvound vvarm also, and applied a defensive plaster. This continuing a
while, the joint water was stayed; after that I went to healing, and
proceeded succesfully in the cure.

Note this Master piece, accompanied with much advantage: the brown Ointment a
true Master-plece.
if you think the depth of the vvound be such; that the bottom of it cannot be
filled out every where with the ointment: then take my brown ointment, boil
it to such a spissitude, that you may make tents of it, ^hurst it to the bottom
of the vvound, cover it well, that nothing of it get out again, apply a
stiptick Plaster to it: the inthrust tent will melt in the vvound, join
with the joint water, repelling it back, and will stay it more than any
other ointment made of greasy things: for the joint water being humid,
receives not easily any greasy thing, but expels it without any operation
done. But that brown ointment, made of Vitriol is not greasy, and easily
uniteh with the joint water: and being sharp, consumes the tuffness in the
humidity, and works more effectually.

This is the mean and plain way whereby I stay the joint water, making use of
no other means, in case no other Symptoms came into, This is the reason, why I
mentioned so often this brown Ointment to be used against the joint water, and
other Symptoms. You shall hear more of it hereafter, when I come to describe
how this brown Ointment is to be prepared.

CHAP. VI.
Of the false Joint water: that is, when another humor is joined with the joint
water, whereby many Surgeons are deceived.

THere is no disease of the body, which if a party be wounded, will make show
of, in the wound; this maxim Wound-disease.
will not sink into many men's brains, let experience cry never so loud. By
diseases the joint water or radical humor is falsified, when other humors are
mingled with it, and are driven forth at the wound.

This deceives unexperienced Surgeons, makes the^ miss in their cures. I
have seen Surgeons, though they had good judgment in joint water, yet such
incident humors put them to great perplexity.

The joint water comes from white veins or sinews, and has its color, as it
is known: if other sharp humors are Color of joint-water, what it signifies.
joined with it, then it loses its own color, inclining to a whay-colour,
and is tuff like the white of an Egg: sometimes it is of a ^uddy or flesh
coluor: sometimes it looks like oil tinging the ravelings of linen about the
tents.

It is known by experience, that the white color of it brings the greatest
danger, commonly causing a Palsy to that member, and the other humor joined
with it has its cause from the head. The red matter which holds longest
here, intimates a humor falling from the liver, milt, and reins. The yellow
water, which causes the greatest pains, comes from the yellow Jaundice, or
from the gall If a Surgeon is about the staying of such a joint water, and
another humor be joined with it, it is hardly repelled or stayed, as long as
these humors are joining with it. Therefore Surgeons must endeavor to prepare
their medicines Note the cure of the joint water.
accordingly; that those humors coincident with the other may be taken away:
suppose the humor come from the head, then the medicine must be Cephalical, and
so with the rest must be proceeded.

The manner of this cure is thus: If a humor accompanies white.
the joint water, which came from the head, then this subsequent remedy, I
found to be best for the party. Viz. The fume of Storax Calamintha mingled with
some Amber, which the party took down at his mouth going to bed, in a funible
or pipe. This may be used two or three days, then look whether it do stay that
white water, if not, then use it once more, to cleanse the head the better of
that white humor; for that fume is very proper for the head: item other
specifica proper for the head may be used. In the intrim let the wound be
dressed as it ought, with the brown Ointment, wound-Ointments, stiptick
Plasters, applied in the manner of an Opodeldoch, or the Opodeldoch it self to
be used. Let the Patients diet be answerable to the heads infirmities. It is
fit that a contrary vein to the wound be breathed, as the parties condition
requires. If the Red joint matter.
joint water runs of a ruddy color* then use Diuretics, to open the
obstructions of the Liver, and Milt, Viz. Annise, Fennel, Maidenhair,
Tamarisks, winter Cherries, Plantain, Liverwort, etc. Of these you may make a
drink for the Patient, and go on in the applying of external medicines, so long
till this red color is changed. Yellow joint water.


The yellow joint water burns exceedingly, usually spoyleth the wound; and
this is incident to such parties, that are subject or troubled with the yellow
Jaundice, and is known by these signs: The parties looks yellowish in and
about the Eyes, the Breast, where that disease begins and sends it further to
other parts; and the party then feels some ease about the heart and stomach.
Such a party must be spedily looked to, before this hot humor eats off the
veins and sinews, and bring him unto deaths door, if the party be not holp, the
wound will far the worse. Therefore delay no time in diverting these humors,
and expel them by stool. For these parties are good such things, which usually
are ministered against the yellow Jaundice. Let the party obstaine from Wine,
but he may drink Barley water, wherein are boiled Raisins, and Melons seed.
Order him also right in his diet, use no sour nor hot things, no Spice. Let him
use much of Borage, Buglosse, Succory, Plantain, etc.

This ensuing purge also may be used. of the best Manna 3 of Rubarb 2 small
beaten; of Raisins 2, of the best Prunes the number of twenty, of Rose water 1
ss. fresh well Water, and white Wine, ana lib. 1.

Boil these till the Prunes be enough, ad to it pulverised Cinnamon. The
Patient is to eat every morning of these Prunes the number of six, and of the
liquor he is to take cochl. 4: it will purge him gently, and expel the sharp
gall by stool.

This purge may be, will be too costly for poor people; let them take instead
of Manna and Rubarb, of Polopodium 1. small chopped and beaten, and of Rhapontick
3, and make the rest as you heard. These must be used, as long as these humors
are apparent: these being gone, your medicaments are to cease also, else too
much moisture will be drawn to the wound, which would prove obstructive unto
the healing of it. Touching outward things to be used for the wound, apply the
brown Ointment, Wound-ointments, stiptict Plasters, etc. as you heard above,
which are used so long as any of these Symptoms are apparent.

CHAP. VII.
Of congealed Blood winthin or without of the Body: Remedies for such Parties,
though otherwise they are well.

THe things that I do write now, touching congealed Blood; have been told by
those which lived long before me, and found them very good for such purposes:
to their large writings I direct the Reader. I have made use of them, and found
them to do very well, and durst confide in them.

I mean not here congealed Blood which is in the head betwixt the scull and the
skin; of these I have spoken enough above about Head-wounds.

I speak now of such congealed Blood, which lurketh about other places of the
body, caused by a blow, push, fall, strain, etc.

There are two sorts of this Blood, inwardly such congealed Blood comes to the
hollow body: outwardly it congealeth between the skin and flesh. Surgeons must
be careful Congealed blood is of two sorts.
herein, to deal rationally; for such parties come daily to their hands, which
by ignorant Surgeons are spoiled.

Touching congealed Blood in the hollowness of the body. Note if it be there,
then be sure that a Fever will be caused, Blood in the hollow of the body.
and a mortal Imposthumation. Therefore in the first place phlebotomize the
party, observing the Patients condition, and the place. Jest not in these
things, which concern man's life; and advise with a good Physician. Then use
means, which are diuretic, diaphoretick, purgative and extenuating, that it
may not turn to a Fever, or mortal Imposthume, or Ulceration. To this purpose
are commonly used, Rhubarb, Rhapontick, Maidenhair, Fennel, and Annise seed,
herb and root, Parsley root: all manner of diureticals and aperitives of the
liver, Here is used also Terra sigillata, Bole armoniack, Ocula cancorum,
Sperma cetae, prepared red Corals, calcined Hearts horn, etc. In such cases are
used also some distilled waters, of Nightshade, Alkekengi, Cassia, etc. as Art
and Experience shall supply you herein. There is Unguentum populeon, found in
shops, which is very good against congealed Blood within the body, mornings and
evenings 1 taken in Wine, or the like vehicle.

You may use also this following Powder: Sperma cetae, Powder*
ss, Mumia, Terra sigillata, Linch cakes, coals of the wood of Tamarisk, ana
ss, Polipodium the root of it, 1: pulverise all these, minister 1 of it to the
party, mornings, evenings, and at noons. This doubltless will disperse and
expel the congealed Blood.

You may observe, when ever you intend to disperse and Note.
to expel congealed Blood within, then put a purgative ingredient among the
rest, as Folia senae, Rhubarb, Polipodie, etc. Above there was set down some
pectoral Potions, which may serve for this purpose also, if you please.

Touching external congealed Blood caused by falls, Blood in Wounds.
throws, blows, etc. whereby the blood burst out of the veins and lurketh
between the flesh and skin, and appears with blew streaks, in such cases my
advice is this. Let the party be phlebotomised instantly, where you think it
fittest; then apply a Plaster to the place where the blood appeared; Viz.
Emplastrum exiccans, of Terra sigillata, Bole Armoniack, Dragons blood, Ceruss,
Pitch, Rosin, Amber, Calmey, Sloe-moss, unripe sloes, buttons and leaves of
Roses, Mirtles, etc. out of these make a Plaster, called a Dryer, and apply it
in form of a Poultesse.

In this manner you may order your medicines, as you think good, observing the
conditions of the party and place. I give you one instance: Bole armoniack 3,
Chalk 1, evaporated exiccated juice of Sloes 1 pulverise these and boil them in
strong Vinegar, ad to it some beaten Walwort, and stir among it Oat meal or
Millers dust, make it thick like a Poultesse, ad some oil of Mirtles among it:
the oil of Sloes were better: apply this Cataplasme wet to the place affected.

I must needs speak of some abuse, which some Surgeons commit in such cases
using greasy things, to little purpose: Abuse.
take heed of snotty greasy Ointments, because in such cases no moist but
exiccating things are to be used. For all sorts of Blood, which forsook their
natural places, as veins turns to water; and if there be no great quantity of
such water-bloud, it will be exiccated by natural applied medicines and quite
expelled. But if you use much of greasy things, and many wet Cataplasmes, as
some Surgeons usually do, it will not only be to no purpose, but also cause
perilous Symptoms: for such applied greasy wet Poultesses force the
congealed blood to turn unto corruption. What will that prove but a dangerous
Imposthumation, which after a long time in great pains breaks, if it falls out
so well: sometimes it turns to a Fistula, or other Ulcer: yea sometimes such
anger is caused, that death ensues upon.

Thus much of this: one thing more I add: a pulverise Potion may be used here
also, it will hasten the healing and ease the Patient the sooner.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Synptomes which are incident unto congealed Blood, to be expelled by inward
means.

THings spoken of in the precedent Chapter, touching congealed Blood, are to be
understood thus: they concern such parties that find themselves well besides
the trouble they are at of congealed blood. In our language I know not whether
any sufficient information is extant touching this particular, and I think it
not amiss to give some hints of it.

If congealed Blood in the body be left there so long, till Congealed blood in
the body.
it turn into matter, then the aforesaid means will not help, as being too
weak; Surgeons either out of carelessness, or out of ignorance let their
Symptoms run on: If in the side, back, breast, or a vein be broken, be it
about the milt, liver, or any other part; and that sprained or broken vein bled
very much, but that blood does not run into the belly, but sticks between flesh
and skin, and is nearer to the inside than to the skin, and makes little show
at the outside, and may be nearer the liver or milt, however it is betwixt the
flesh and the skin, and there it putrifieth and comes to ulceration: this will
not be cured nor helped by purging, etc. Reader understand it thus: if nature
be oppressed by abundance of blood, or neglected by Surgeons, of these we intend
not to speak. For nature is able to expel it of her own strength. The four
outer parts of the body may be oppressed with congealed blood, caused by a fall,
throw, etc. if neglected or by Surgeons dawbing brought to ulceration: then the
things spoken of in the precedent Chapter, avail nothing: therefore other
medicaments must be had, of which I will give you a hint.

Note one thing, there is but one process, be the hurt from what cause it will,
either from the superfluity of blood, or the Patients carelessness, or the
neglect of the Surgeon. I will be orderly in my instruction, and tell you the
best way how to help congealed blood in the body, which is turned into
corruption: if the Imposthume be not absolutely within the body, but more to
the outside, and that befalls the four outer parts of the body, either through
the Patients or the Surgeons fault.

Then if that congealed blood begins to putrify, it may be Signs of congealed
blood.
known by signs; the Patient will feel it at his side, whether it will come to
any Imposthume, and he may know it also by the matter he brings up, whether in
clots and stinking: if so, then that congealed blood begins to putrify.

Such a party must not be delayed, but speedily be taken into cure; for delays
will make it run on to an Imposthume, which must break at last. If it comes to
that, then the party is neglected, and the help will come too late: for Nature
having once begun to cast up that matter, then she must be aided.

As I told you above, so I say still: when these foresaid signs are apparent,
then the named remedies will avail nothing, because the Imposthumation is too
sturdy for them, and goes on in growing. For putrified blood goes slowly out
of man's body, infecting other parts, as the lungs, liver, milt, etc. Besides a
dangerous cough will be incident, which will breed*mischief, mischief,
therefore other means must be thought upon.

Tonching my medicine, I tell you thus: if congealed blood be in the body, and
that within the hollow of it, then use not Mercury, spoken of afterward;
Diaphoreticks are to be used. But if the Wound was not into the hollow body,
and none of the inward parts is hurt, then these things may be used which I
will speak of. If the case be such, as was told now: then first make a gentle
purging drink of sirup of Roses, to give the Patient two stools: the second day
minister to him in ss of succus Rosarum 5, 6, 7, or 8 grains of the following
prepared Mercury, still regarding the Patients condition, and let him lie
still: when it begins to work, let the patient take some spoonfuls of broth,
and two hours after he may eat a broth into which two yolks of Eggs are beaten,
afterward let him take his rest, and sweat upon.

This Mercury may safely be used: if it fumeth up but once, and that very
gently, according as he meets with an Mercuries operation.
object above in the body: but it purges bravely by stool, carrying away the
congealed blood and other filth, though it had been an Imposthume, it must go,
with a gentle stirring, not so, as usually precipitated Mercury does.

If you are an Artist, you will prepare this Mercury in my way: and you may
prepare also somewhat of Antimony. But Vitrum Antimonij is naught here, by
reason of its strong vomiting quality: I tell you without Chemical preparations
congealed blood will not be eradicated out of the body, if turned to an
Imposthume. The next day after the ministration of this purge, phlebotomize the
party: provided, Phlebotomie
if the party cannot tell where his greatest pain lies, then breath the Median
of the right arm, or open the Liver vein on the right arm: if the party
complains of his left side, then open the Spleen vein on the left arm. This
being Diaphoretick.
done and the patient is not well yet, as it falls out commonly, then take the
precious red Balsam of Sulphur, (whose preparation you find above in the
Chapter of breast Wounds) four or five drops of it, and 1 of the Aquavitae
described in Wound-diseases, mingle these, let the Patient drink it and sweat
upon. This Diaphoretick may be used twice or thrice, once a day, and so long
till the party be eased of his pains. Thus you will do much good.

Reader, this is the remedy I opposed such malignant and mortal Symptoms with.
True I have seen other process, with Pills, Potions, etc. whereby congealed
blood is expelled: but these ways were to little purpose. I neither reject nor
condemn the means others do use.

Mercury is thus prepared, 1 of Mercu^^ ^urged with salt and water, taking away
all his blackness ^^d impuritie; put it into a coated glass body, pour on it of
Aquafort 5, made of one part of Vitriol, and one part of Saltpeter: abstract
the Aquafort, and pour it again on the Mercury, which stayed on the bottom,
abstract it again, and iterate the abstracting the third time; then take the
Mercury, which stayed on the bottom (looks yellow like brass) grind it well on
a marble, put it into a glass body, and pour on it of oil of Vitriol 1, let
these stand in a warm place for 24 hours, let the oil of Vitriol evaporate in
hot ashes, then the spirits of the Aquafort, together with the oil will
evaporate, and the yellow Mercury will stay on the bottom; take it out, (that
on the sides let alone,) grind it again, pour upon it good Aquavitae, that it
stand two fingers breadth over it, let it stand in a warm place for two days
and two nights, then cant of the Aquavitae cleanly, and pour fresh on it, let
that also stand so long in a warm place, and then cant off that also, and when
you have done so a third time, then is the Mercury prepared, and perfect in his
operation. Thus much of congealed blood within the body, to be expelled by
means used inwardly: now follows, how congealed blood is dipersed by outward
means.

CHAP. IX.
Of congealed Blood to be expelled and healed by outward Medicines.

IT happens sometimes that by a fall, throw, thrust, push, etc. congealed,
blood settleth to the side, or back, and turns to an Imposthume, which can
neither by inward nor outward means be helped. This may befall also external or
outward parts, through carelessness of Surgeons, or the Patients slieghtness,
keeping it concealed, so long till the blood turns to co^^^ption and causes
many pains. Let the case be as difficult as it will, yet through Gods help we
will undertake to cure it. And first we will speak of such blood, which is come
to the outer parts.

If a party be hurt either by a fall, thrust, push, etc. and the place be
swelled a little, and is soft and paineth the party if Signs.
touched; it is a sign there is congealed blood under it, be the place of a
yellow blew or any other color: and if there be panting and beating in it,
then you are the snrer that it is so, as has been said. Here you need not
tarry till it come to corruption, as Surgeons usually do, toyling much about
the molifying of it. That place is to be launced instantly, and to be tented,
the tent be covered with Unguentum Aegiptiacum, and calcined Alum strained on
it, apply to it a stiptick Plaster, and a defensive Plaster upon: or else you
may apply a fracture Plaster, to cover the whole place withal: in the middle
of it, leave a hole of the bigness of the Wound at which place you apply a
little Plaster, which you take off in time of dressing, without removing the
great Plaster: if the tent stayed a day and night in it, and at the taking out
of it the matter will soon make show, and begin to run, the pains will cease, and
the swelling asswageth also, proceed in this way so long til all anger and
swelling be gone, and the hollowness be filled up: this being done, leave off
the tent, and heal the rest, as usually Wounds are healed: in the mean while
inward medicaments, as Vulnerasie potions, must be used also.

Some may wonder, that I bid such hurts to be launced, before th^^ be ripe, or
come to corrupion. But he that understands Objection answered.
the business, will easily concur with my saying* For what needs one to let it
have time unto corruption; being it must come out, why not in time before it
causes greater troubles; for it will have a long while, before it can break
through the skin, before it comes to do, to what pains and sorrows may it
cause? as Fevers, Inflammation, and an anger joining with it, may suffocate the
sinews, inflame the bones, and cause them to grow black, which may turn to
Fistula, etc. they should the rather be launced, that it may turn to matter,
for any blood, if it gets vent, will turn to corruption in one night: the which
is seen in Wounds, where the blood in it turns quickly to matter: so other
congealed blood will the sooner turn to matter, if it once has gotten air.
Being it is so, why should it be kept locked up there to prolong pains: besides
as you heard, it is sure, that the blood which is removed from its natural
place, turns to matter: why should it not be better then, to let that water
run out of such places, and the hurt may the sooner be healed, to which
rational men will condescend.

Reader, by these you may know, that lenitives are to be avoided here; Viz.
Diachylon, or other Gums, and Cataplasmes; for all softning things are hurtful
here: because these Symptoms are of another condition, then other putrified
swellings: thus much of these, touching the outer parts.

But if Symptoms are iucident to the side, belly, back, shoulder: with these
you must proceed thus: here the Surgeon ought to take notice, whether after the
fall, blow, etc. the place did swell four or five days after, and whether any
pains be joined with it, as pantings, beatings, pullings, and whether the party
can fetch his breath easily and without pains, and whether he feel any great
heat; it matters not of what color the hurted place be.

If that swelling does pain the party being touched, and looks ruddy, then
lance the place with any instrument, do it undauntedly, doubtless you will hit
the congealed blood, then dress the party after launcing as you heard above,
minister to the party good vulnerarie potions, then things ^ill soon mend.
Remember to phlebotomize the party on that side where the hurt is, let it bleed
well, be it on the arm or leg, considering the condition of the patient and
the place: in the rest you proceed, as you were informed about blood congealed.

Formerly I condemned Cataplasmes to be used, much more now do I forbid them.
For there is no maturative of that virtue, as to do the feat here, to force the
matter the sooner to eat thorough the skin, but rather will make the matter eat
inward, and if it eats through, into the hollow body, then the party dies:
and suppose that some recover in that kind, yet will they be unfit for work,
and are crazy to their dying day.

I have seen many neglected in this kind: I quote only two examples for to
inform you the better: the one shows, how the party after launcing did well,
and the other party, whose hurt was not launced, dyed miserably. Some years
ago a party was hurt by a Bull, which hurt grew worse every day, at last he
fell bed rid: no purges, no phlebotomy, no diaphoretick would avail: on the out
side there was little sign, only the place the Bull pushed him at, was red,
and a very little swelled: but he could not endure to be touched: this past on
three weeks: at last I being called with some others, we consulted and resolved
to lance the place: which I performed, there run out above half a pint of
matter, after that by Gods blessing he was cured.

Another party being a Gentleman had a fall with his horse, was shrewdly
bruised on his left side; all manner of means were used but to no purpose: the
party was much troubled with prickings and a cough, little sign was seen
neither swelling nor redness, and where the blood should be gathered, it could
not be discerned, Physicians, Surgeons, and my self also were called; some
would have it launced, but the major vote, was for the negative, what happened?
the third day after the blood and matter come out at his mouth, and not long
after he dyed.

CHAP. X.
Of bleeding Wounds: what it signifies; what Surgeons ought to do for it.

A Wound which was thought to be well, beginning to bleed, then the following
signs are to be taken notice of. The Surgeon trying with his Seeker, finding
some What the bleeding in wounds means.
bleeding, in a small quantity, is not be troubled much at it, because the
sound flesh may be that searching be caused to bleed. But if the blood comes
abundantly, then surely by that needless searching a blood vein is hurt and
turned out of its place, which caused such vehement bleeding. But the wound not
being hurt by that searching, yet bleedeth: it signifies that some shattered
splinter is loosned, which being desirous to get out, sticks in the new flesh,
and makes it bleed: this is best known to be so, if the party touched at the
wound, is mightily pricked, and that blood be clear and fresh.

The manual to be used herein in this, to keep open that wound with a small
tent, which is to be covered with unguentum What the Surgeon ought to do in
this case.
Egiptiacum, and to dress that wound but once a day, so that that loose
splinter may come nearer the mouth of the wound, and be plucked out. And if it
hangs yet on a panicle, it must be let alone, till it loosneth of its own
accord. In that intrim search not with the instrument in the wound, for fear
that splinter be pressed into a sinew, whereby great mischief would be caused.

If a wound bleedeth abundantly, it is a sign, that a blood vein closing is
opened again, in which case you must do thus. If the wound be yet wide open,
then use an ordinary blood stencher, and put into it daily the wound Ointment,
then it will soon overgrow with flesh, and be stenched of its own accord. And
in case there be any blood in the Wound, as it often happens, then that blood
must not be wiped or washed out, which Surgeons ordinarily do, but leave it
there, because that stops the blood vein: and then the wound Ointment, and
the stitch Plaster keeps off other hurtful things unto the Wound: and that
blood which stays in the wound, will soon come out in the ulcerating. But if
the Wound be very narrow, then the case of it is otherwise: for if it be very
narrow, then make a tent prepared with a corosive (that corosive is it which
lies settled, in the bottom of unguentum Egiptiacum,) and fill up the wound
with it, so that no blood may get out: this tent must not be put too deep into
the wound, only half way, leave it their for thirty hours, applying a Plaster
to it. At the taking off the Plaster, the tent not sticking to the Plaster,
and goes out easily, then let it stay there, and apply the Plaster again for
ten hours longer, then open it, take out the tent, apply a smaller tent covered
with the wound Ointment, and a stitch Plaster upon: and thus proceed to the
end of that cure.

Squeeze no blood out of the Wound, because the Opodeldoch will do it without
any other means: beware you No blood to be sqeezed out of the wound. Example.
do not search in the wound with the seeker, for fear you do stir a blood vein,
and cause it to bleed afresh. For I knew a Surgeon, who was still graping with
his instrument into the parties Wound, causing thereby a vehement bleeding, and
spoiling the patient.

At a certain time a patient was brought to me, whose wound did bleed so much,
that he grew very faint thereby. The Surgeons who had him first in hand, tried
several conclusions, using long sharp tents for the Wound, whereby they touched
the blood vein, causing vehement bleeding, I took out the tent, flung it away,
using none, and cured the party in short time.

In some Wounds there is found much blood, yet none runs out at the opening or
undressing of it, and no sign appears either of pricking or any other: this
is a sign, that that that Wound was tied to hard, and the party is full of
blood. For with hard binding the flesh is pressed together, and is forced to
cleansing, and weeping: and if it has vent, it bleeds no more. This Symptom is
thus remedied, to bind the wound slackly, and let the party not put on too
straight clothes.

Surgeons ought to take good notice, and care, when the bleeding Wound will not
be stenched, especially when that Wound bleedeth not, but after when it is
dressed, or else it bleedeth before and after dressing, and at the dressing: the
cause hereof is, that the veins at the dressing be too much forced and pressed;
the same is seen at phlebotomising, when the veins are tied too hard, the blood
does not spin out so freely: however pretty things help the bleeding of the
vein. This ought to be known, at the bleeding of a Wound in the foot, to have
it stenched. The dressing is of as great sequel and concernment, as applied
medicines to Wounds, which I know experimentally.

If a parties Wound bleedeth, when he goes or sleeps, then bind it slack,
and merely apply the Plaster, then you may the sooner perceive from whence
that bleeding comes, and take notice of the following sign: for that is caused
when there is no tent put in, else it is a false sign. When a spongious flesh
appears out of the Wound, looking like coam'd wool, and that without any pain
may be put in; this signifies that a splinter is loose, or a piece of arteries
is coming forth: for such a thing closes nigh with the blood vein, which is
hurt with touching: here you must search without delay, else the party and you
will have work enough, because the bleeding may be increased, and the vein be
shut a great deal behind that, and no way left for you to come near it, and
bring you to sorrows.

Therefore strew only burnt Alum into it, this is strong enough; if you
should use a stronger, it would soon run and eat through the Wound, which in a
long time you would hardly be able to cure again. Let the Alum lay there till
the next day, it will come forth of its own accord: if not, then put more of
the Alum to it, it will take away the flesh which sticks to the splinter.
But in case the flesh and splinter will not part one from another, proceed you
nevertheless in the cure, as if there were no such splinter, it will loosen of
its own accord in time, the healing will thrust it off, and must give way, even
as an old tooth must yield to a new coming one: so that spongious flesh drives
the splinter, that it may be taken forth at last without danger.

Therefore let not such a Wound be closed, but keep it open till the splinter
comes forth, or the piece of the vein be gotten out with the matter: for a
Wound closed up, where a piece of the vein is yet unhealed, it will cause
shrewd Imposthumes.

CHAP. XI.
Of Collosities of healed Wounds, some whereof break afterward, some are gone,
and settle to another place, causing lameness: what these signify, and how
they are to be handled.

SOme Wounds after healing are knotty and callous, and covered with the skin
even as the wound is: here the following signs are to be observed.

If that collositie be without any swelling round the Signs of Callus ^n
wounds.
wound, then it is a sign that a splinter would fain get out: and if the party
feels prickings, then is it the surer sign of it: and if that calous gets a
yellow blister, and breaks, then keep it open with a tent to the end of the
cure, as you heard about such splinters. But if the Wound is swelled, then it
is a sign, that a hollowness is left in the Wound: and if pantings, pains, and
smarts are felt in it, then the surer is the sign of such a thing. This is
incident to such Wounds which were very deep, and were silily and ignorantly
stitched, to close them the sooner, before any fundamental healing was laid at
the sides, hence such spoiled wounds are caused. If any such neglected wound
comes to your hands, and you have observed by the signs, that there are no
splinters in it, then do thus. Take our Opodeldoch, and the clear running
resine, ana 3, melt each apart on a gentle coal fire, and then pour them
together, put to it pulverised amber ss, stir it well together, till it be
cold: spread a Plaster of it, in that bigness, that the whole sore and
swelling be covered with it, and apply it: let the plaster not run together,
as you were informed of it, about the fractures: it will forcibly draw out the
humidity through the skin, and heal the wound fundamentally. In case there
lies matter beneath the Wound, then open it nere the sooner. These are called
Wound Fistula, these have their causes from other Wound Fistula.
things, which are caused by evil medicines and silly Surgeons. They are
comprehended under one cure, which you shall hear in its time, when I shall
speak of all manner of sores.

There is another kind of Collosities, different from the other, which are very
hard, without pains, and appear on Other collosities.
the joint with a swelling, do not pain the party if touched, and go away again
of their own accord, and the Wound looks fair, as if healed: this it a sign,
that there is some humor shut up there, which after the healing of the part or
member does appear on the joint, and there settleth in the hollowness of the
joint: that gibhositie goes away again, yet leaves a humor behind. This
moisture being settled there, does join with the gluten of the joint, and
grows tartareous in the end; being come so far, then pains are caused
afresh, which stifneth and suffocateth the joint, that it cannot be flexible
any more, which the party ar first could stir and move whilst the Wound was
fresh.

The Surgeon that had such Wounds in cure, knows best what the cause thereof
is, if he has dressed them with Cataplasmes, which never did any good to any
joint Wound: because moist things are always hurtful to joint Wounds, and
above you heard more largely of it: if the tendons in joints are wounded, and
the wounds are stitched, then the moisture which these ligaments afford cannot
be well cleansed out of the Wound, (for these afford no matter, as flesh wounds
do, though their moisture be more clear and subtle, but is tuff and clinging,)
so these settle betwixt the joint, where they keep so long till they get a
little vent. This makes no appearance, unless the Wound be closed. And seeing
it can not ripen to any matter, (no moisture of tendons turns to matter, as you
heard) therefore needs must it turn to a collositie, causing that mischief you
heard of above. Some Surgeons regard these infirmities but little, if they have
made up their cure, then they have a holy day.

Many Patients that were spoiled through stitching, were brought to me, whom
through Gods help I have cured de novo, and made them sound.

The process of it is thus: drive the gluten in the binding all to one place,
then lance it, where it is deepest and safest, drive out its moisture with the
salt of red Corals (which is strong enough to dissolve that on-settled tartar)
and then heal it with the great Opodeldoch. That tartar being out of it, then
you may use baths, fomentations, ointments, etc. else you cannot prevail. For
if the slime stays within, things used will avail nothing: and that party
will be pained at the changing of the weather. I know no nearer way to cure
these Symptoms: he that knows better, may bring it forth.

CHAP. XII.
Of Joint Wounds, which by silly Surgeons were cured to lameness, though not
hurt to any lameness, how these must be remedied.

IN the precedent Chapter I told, that if patients be healed lame with
stitching and Cataplasmes, suffocating the joint thereby, and causing a
lameness: now will I tell you, how such joint wounds, being cured lame, are to
be brought to right again: for the silly Surgeon causing too much flesh to grow
in such a Wound, caused the joint to be lame.

The case happens thus: if a joint be wounded, be it in the ancles, knees,
hips, elbowes, shoulders, hands, fingers, then commonly these Wounds are
dressed as other Wounds with oils, Plasters, Ointments, and vulnerarie
Potions, etc. and they suppose, if the Wound only be filled up with flesh,
then all is well: and so they give way to the flesh to fill up the wound, and
so close it, not regarding that canon I quoted above, in joint Wounds not much
flesh must be suffered to grow.

Hence doubtless lameness is caused: for if too much flesh Cause of lemeness.
grows in a joint Wound, and the Wound in the outside closes, the flesh
within still grows, and cease not to grow till it have filled up all the
hollowness of the joint, whereby the arches of the joints are stopped* insomuch
that it is impossible for that party to use that joint, as he did formerly, as
long as that flesh in those chambers do lodge there: for as soon as that joint
is stirred, then the flesh in that joint is so pressed together with painfulness,
whereby a lameness is caused: and the party can make no use of that joint by
reason of the great pains, which the overmuch growth of the flesh does cause.
And this commonly befalls the joints in hands, by reason of the plurality of the
bones that are there. This rude Surgeons bring to pass, which hasten their
cures away with anointing, salving, somenting, etc. ordinarily men may know,
that such things cannot be performed in such ways, if so be that the flesh
shut up there is thus imprisoned: therefore observe another process, Viz. In
case a party be lamed in the said manner by Surgeons silliness, and you intend
to help that party to right, do thus: lance the healed wound with a rasor,
pretty deep, provided, you hurt neither bone nor sinew, and enlarge the wound
daily with gentle corosives, but in the middle of the wound, even on the
hollowness of the joint, where the party complains most, and where you think
the fault is, to leave some flesh, which you may soon discern, that the
corosive powder did not touch that part of flesh when the wound is open, and
the party blows the joint. That flesh in the middle you must loosen round to
the bone, lie a four doubled thread about it, draw it close together, and then
gently pull: if it be not quite loose, then make it loose with a launcet, then
give a stronger pull, and see you get it out: that flesh will ^^^full of
ravelings and streaks. Thereupon presently put into it the brown Ointment, and
so dress the wound twice a day with the Opodeldoch, so long till your cure be
at an end. Make use only of the Plaster, and forbear to use any greasy
things, as oils, poultesses, etc. in case you have not the brown Ointment,
then you may use other things.

Many may marvail at this strange process, and cure: let them observe, that
which has been said, viz. on that flesh, which is to be pulled out, hang many
ravelings and roots, are like the little roots, which are scattered in the
joint; which in the bowing are stifned and made inflexible: these cannot be cut
out, because they lie hid strangely in the depths and hollowneses of the
joints, these cannot be gotten out with any corosives, they will sooner corrode
away the sound flesh and bones, before they could touch the scattered and
deeply hid roots and streaks: neither is there any difficulty in this way:
because these flesh roots hold not very fast, slide easily off from their
places, and that very neatly and purely.

I do impart unto you also a fundamental instruction of curing of joints, lamed
with a blow or fall; be it on the knees, elbowes, and hands, where the joints
stand still, and are well set, yet the patient cannot bow nor stretch them; or
turn them as he would: such may in some sort be helped, for I brought many such
elbowes to right: and I took an easier way in hand, I greased that joint with
warmed Dialthaea, and at night I laid good store upon it, and dressed the joint
with binding below and above it, in the mornings I anointed it, stroaking it
gently, sometimes I continued it a whole hour, and every day I measured the
joint, on his body, to see how far he could bring it, and two days after, I
tried further, and tied the joint into a splinter, because it should not shrink
and grow shorter, and so after the pulling, I proceeded. For if a joint be
stretched suddenly, usually an exiccation befalls that joint; but if done
gently and by degrees, then is it advantageous to the joint, if a joint be
outstretched forcibly, yet it will not keep so, it runs backward: and if you
leave off the splinter, then the jo^^^ swells or dries up. Therefore I still
set and bowed it gently, and brought it at last to its due proportion; though
the out-stretching falls not out so just, as it does in the bowing. Wounded
joints, which lame many, several ways, are to be understood and taken the same
way as the above named joints, and used gently in the out-stretching and
bowing, as much as the joint may endure, and to lenifie them with Oitnments,
Fomentations, according as occasion will serve. And to illustrate this cure
with some examples: I had one of Nurnberg that was cut in his hand, and was
cured lame; which I cut and lanced again, pulled on the great sinew, and drew it
upwards, and cured him, so that his hand hung no more down, as it did after the
first cure. Another receiving a wound in his knee, was cured lame: upon
occasion he suddenly starting up to defend himself, he was hurt again on that
knee, but was cured then without a lameness. Another was cut lame at Nurnberg
on his elbow, he was cured without a lameness. I always observed, whether it
was possible or no to heal a wounded joint, and regulating my self accordingly,
and still having a care to heal the thumb upward out of the hand: and hold it
better to heal a finger straight, than crooked; and too straight is dangerous,
and an upset hand is sooner bowed, than a hand which hangs down, to be set
upright: and a knee and elbow is sooner bowed, than stretched out, to make it
stand right, as it should.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Wounds spoiled through external accidents, as through the heat of the Sun,
and the raw air, and are dried up, and how these ought to be remedied.

HOw can a Wound be spoiled by outward causes? and in what condition such
wounds are, you shall hear: some parties are wounded in a place, and cannot get
from that place, where they were wounded, must lie under the cope of heaven in
the heat of the Sun, whereby all his body is set in a flame, and the wound also
is made angry, is grown brown red, dried up, and the party commonly has
exceeding great thirst: and if such a party were to continue to lie in the heat
of the Sun, death would befall him; especially if the wound be in the scull. But
if such a party can be brought to a good Surgeon in any time, then ready well
prepared medicines will be aiding to Nature, with Gods blessing upon the means.

Such a wounded party happily tarryeth long in the field, Wounds soon are burnt
or spoiled with cold.
is far from home, before he can be dressed the wind gets into the Wound,
exiccateth the same: and if that Wound takes cold, if in a winter season; then
that wound is spoiled by frost, and many other inconveniences are incident
thereunto. Touching Wounds that are exiccated, or have taken cold, of these I
will plainly deliver my mind, and the rather, because such things fall out
frequently: and chiefly Surgeons to an Army in the field, have need to be
ready for such accidents; for here they meet with all manner of inconveniences:
when parties are either skirmishing, then they have no long time to bethink
themselves what to do, neither is there any occasion to advise with others, the
parties wounded must lie, till the skirmish is over, let the Wounds be what
they will. There is great distinction to be observed touching such cures, and
those, which to such accidents are not subject.

The cures I shall speak of here, were not found out in mine own practice, but
I have seen and learned them of experienced Surgeons; which afterward I took
into careful consideration, and in my daily practice endeavored so far, that
at last I got to the true fundamentals of them. And that which I have learned
and seen, and made experiments of them, I will impart it faithfully, whereby
you may see my intentions to be side and real.

Touching these Wounds which are spoiled and exiccated bp the Suns heat, you
are to note; if the suns rays strike directly into the wound, or they fall
only on the patient, and do not come near the wound, then it may fall out,
that the wound is dried out in a short time, the lips of the wound grow as hard
as a stick: in the inside the wound grows brown red, like half roasted meat,
yet there is some moisture in it, with a little swelling about, beating and
panting very much, great headache is joined with it, and the patient is saint
by reason of the great heat, which possessed his body.

To apply pertinent remedies for such Symptoms, do thus: Curs for exiccated
wounds.
of Salmiac water 1, Rose vinegar 3, white Amber, honey Roses or mel Rosatum 6.
Boil these like an Egyptiacum, wet linen ravelings in it, and tie it to the
Wound. If the wound be deep made by stabbing, then the Ointment may be conveyed
into, with a syringe, and apply a Plaster to it. Then take good Rose vinegar,
in which you dissolve a little of prepared Saltpeter, make it luke warm, dip a
cloth into, apply it four double about the Wound, covering the wound every way,
that vinegar being grown cold, warm it once more, and apply it again. Beware
you use no greasy things, of oils ponltesses, etc. because such wounds
receive no greasy things, for they are not only not good, but hurtful. Moist
ointments of a waterish nature, without greasiness, allay heats, and are
sharpish: to eat away the heat, the skin, panicle, etc. thereby to open the
obstructions of the wound, that they may the better admit of healing, such
things you are to use here, if so be you intend to do the party good: such
wounds must not be stitched by no means: for these wounds that are thus
exiccated by the Suns heat, admit of no healing, unless they have thrust forth
that, which the Suns heat has spoiled.

Outward means thus applied will not do it alone, inward Internal medicines.
medicines must be used also. For a Wound spoiled in this manner, doubtless the
whole body suffers also, especially when other Symptoms are coincident, as a
Wound sickness, a Fever, an Inflammation, etc.

Therefore in the first place phlebotomize the party on the opposite side to
the Wound: The best way for head wounds, is to open a vein under the tongue, if
the patient be able to endure it: for thereby the heat in the head will be much
allayed.

When phlebotomie is used in this case, then be provided with a Vulnerarie
potion, which must be made thus: Stellaria or Wound herb, Bistorta, Pyrola,
white Roses, Vulnerar^ potion.
or Rose water, ana 1, boil all these in a quart of water for an hour or two
in a closed kan: being boiled, strain it, dissolve in it of prepared Saltpeter
1, put to it of pulverised Oculi cancrorum 1; of these let the patient drink
four times a day 1 ss. This drink will come to the Wound and will expel the
heat not only out of the Wound, but out of the whole body, and will quench the
patties extreme thirst.

The patient must be kept in a cool temper, and eat of meats which are of easy
digestion; let him not be oppressed with thirst, which would be hurtful unto him.
His drink Diet.
must be made of Barley water, of Plantain roots, and of winter Cherries: he
must use also conserves of Violets, Roses, etc. Go on with this process, so
long till the Wound separateth from that which is spoiled: then you may use
other means, as they are proper for wounds, and proceed with the rest, as you
heard above of other wounds.

One thing more is necessary, if so be that the patient is able to endure, that
he be put into a sweat; be it with Treacle, Metridate, etc. For such wounds
must be dealt Diaphoreticks.
withal, as if there had been any poison therein. If the patient can endure
sweating, his condition will be the better.

Touching the Wound diseases, or the Wound gall, (which by some are judged to
be a kind of the plague) the patients condition is the worse, if these are at
hand: if the patient cannot endure to sweat, then is he in a worse condition,
and is in great danger. Further Symptoms he is not able to undergo, and
therefore I leave to speak of any more.

These things you hear do befall wounds, exiccated by the Suns heat, the like
befalls other wounds by the Air and Wind, whereby they are exiccated also,
insomuch that they are left bloudless.

The occasion and condition whereof may be learned of the patient; Viz. how
long it is since the vvind and the air Signs of exiccated wounds.
got into the Wound: if not, then the follovving signs must be regarded: the
vvound is dry and does not bleed, unless being touched, it vveepeth a little,
the skin of it being shrunk, and its lips turned: if an anger is in it, then it
gapeth vvide, and that is accompanied with smarting pains: it gapeth sometimes
so wide, as if it were ready to split in two.

If in such a Wound the great muscle of an utter joint be hurt, and a sinew cut
in tw^, and the joint also be much hurt or the scull of the head is cut, then
the condition of the wound is the worse, because many simptoms are like to
meet, Viz. the Wound Inflammation, on which the Cold fire attends. the Wound
disease, and Wound fevers, Gout, and Cramp, etc.

The cure of such a Wound is this: Viz. well scummed Honey 4, Aeris viridis ss,
Vinegar 3, raw liquor of Ointment for exiccated wounds
Vitriol, mingle these, boil it like an unguentum Aegyptiacum, to a spissitude:
spread it on a long fine linen, thrust it down to the bottom of the Wound
(provided it be not a head Wound for that must not be dealt so withal) the one
end of that linen must hang out of the Wound, for the easier puling of it out,
when occasion serves. The wound must be filled up with that ointment, then a
stiptick plaster to be applied upon.

Then take of the oil of white Turpentine, or spirit of Terpentine, one part,
of distilled oil of Bays one part, and of gum Amoniack one part, mingle these,
anoint the wound about, it will penetrate, and warm the sinews. Then apply a
defensive plaster, and so proceed in that cure: use no greasy ointments or
poultesses: Keep the patient warm, dress him twice or thrice a day, and
phlebotomize him, if his strength will allow it.

The next day I usully minstred to the patient this following drink; Radic,
Turmentil, and Angelic, purely beaten, Potion.
ana 1, of Mumia 1, Mitridate 2, Aquapimpinelle 4: mingle these, let the
patient take two spoonfuls of it, and an hour after let him take two spoonfuls
more, mix with it 1 or ss. of Oculi cancrorum, more or less, as you shall see
occasion.

Endeavor to persuade the patient unto sweating, which if you proceed in, the
patient will be soon the better; and Sweating.
in the time of sweating if he be very dry, then let him drink of boiled Barley
water, let him not be oppressed with thirst, as I told you above also: it is
indiscreetly done to suffer such patients to be thirsty overmuch, because great
inconvenience is caused thereby: it would do well, if after such sweating, the
party might be phlebotomised: but Surgeons must be regulated herein, as they
see occasion: if the party by reason of his faintness is not able to endure
sweating, then press him not thereto, and proceed with the rest in that cure.

All these said things being done, then look to the wound, whether the part
spoiled in it, inclines to separate: which is known thus: when the wound is
waterish and mingled with some matter, the which happens not within thirty or
forty hours: if that sign be at hand, then cease to use any further the above
named ointment, and take good wound ointment, put that into the wound, and
apply an Opodeldoch or stiptick Plaster upon, and make use also of a defensive
Plaster. In case you dare not trust to all these, then let him sweat twice
more, for more security sake, and proceed in the rest as you heard above. The
Cramp is usually joined hereunto; what you are to do in that case, you shall
find in its due place.

I must needs speak of abuses committed in these, whereby patients are bereaved
of their joints, and sometimes of their lives also.

This abuse is partly committed, by stitching, which is stark naught to be used
here: because that flesh in the wound, exiccated and spoiled by air or cold,
the same assimilateth no more, but is to separate off; and how can it well
separate, if pulled together with stitching: besides these stitches will not
tarry, but tear out, because the lips of the wound are turned outward; and in
case such a wound should be thus stitched, the cold fire would soon get into
the stitch.

Some Surgeons committed great faults herein, causing great hurts to the
parties. Viz. As Soon as such a party falls into their hands, then they presently
use their Wound ointment or Balsam to the Wound, which is improper hereto:
because such Wounds admit of no healing, unless the spoiled flesh be separated
and be out of the Wound: which exiccated and cooled flesh comes not out of the
vvound of its own accord, but must be aided. Therefore sharp ointments are to
be put into such Wounds, which cease on the corrupted flesh, and eat it off,
and thereby to prevent that the sound flesh and veins be not infected.

Which cannot be done, if only wound Oiles and Ointments be used, because
these cannot rectify that corrupted and spoiled flesh, but rather make it
worse: which to prove, I could quote many exam^^es, upon good reasons; whereby
illeterate men of an ordinary capacity may be persuaded unto. And if it should
happen that a party was cured by such oiles, and ointment, surely a great many
to that one have miscarryed.

I have known such Surgeons, which replied, that such Wounds had not their due
excretions, only watered a little; yet they went on in their salving,
anointing, to the utter ruin of their patients: though that the patient felt
that the pains of the utter parts of the joints increased more and more,
inclining to an Imposthume by reason of the continual beating and pulling:
heowever they continued in their course, obstinately, supposing their way to be
the best. Those indeed that know no other, and do their best endeavors, may
partly be excused.

Thus much of this, of the rest the Reader may think, and mend it.

CHAP. XIV.
Of a Callus, on the Hand or Foot, causing great miserable pains.

SOme receave a hurt on their hand or foot, on which places many bones and
sinews concur; where one or other may be hurt, which is taken no heed or notice
of, neiany Collosities or^ginal.
care had to remedy the same. Hence it falls out, that Synonia begins to run
into that joint, and grows to a collositie: and whereas to that place a
swelling is joined, then is it supposed, to be nothing else but it. Hereby the
patient is put into great extremity.

This being an ordinary Symptom, enforces me to speak something of it, the
rather because this cure agrees with the cure of the Callus, or Nodus: of the
which mention has been made above. This Symptom befalls not only the hand or
foot, but all other joint wounds, and stabs, where there is a concurrence of
sinews and muscles, which being wounded, are by Surgeo^ ^lso often times
neglected.

To make it more plain: if a sinew or muscle be wounded, then usually they
begin to weep, and yield a moisture, which moisture, as you heard above, never
comes to any corruption: and the skin being closed on that part, and that water
has no issue, it fills up that place in a short time, whereby that place is
enforced to an up-swelling. The sinews having a fellow feeling herein, may soon
be set on a heat, which in time turning to a sharp humor, may make the thing
worse. For the joint water or radical humor running from the sinews, joining
with a sharp humor, how soon may that humor inflame and corrode the sinews and
veins, and may easily be suffocated, if no vent made for it.

Though this happens also to other places, as you heard, yet usually it befalls
hands, and feet betwixt the toes and ancles, because there is a meeting of many
small bones, veins and sinews, and little flesh joined to them: and in such
places such wounds may the sooner be inflicted. And because no congealed blood,
nor spots appear there, therefore some silly Surgeons suppose the place to be
in the less peril, and all is well to their seeming: and ignorantly they let
it run on so long, till all be past help.

If any such party comes to your hand, being hurted by a blow, fling, fall, on
his hand, foot, knee, elbow, and within few days it begun to raise, swells,
its pains increases more and more, yet no sign appearing of congealed blood,
or other fracture, nor any sinews or veins seems to be hurt, then is it a sure
sign, that the Synonia or moisture from the sinews does separate, and begins
to be in a fury.

In this case tarry not, but instantly lance that part, and How to proceed in
this case.
give vent, where you think it to be best, till to the hollowness within, and
to squeeze out that water or matter: it had been well, if it had been lanced
sooner: experience must teach you, how to deal herein: for it is impossible to
set all down in writing, the work will put the manuals upon you.

Then thrust a propertent into the Wound, well covered with the brown ointment,
and prepared Verdigriece, then apply about the wound a defensive plaster. But
forbear, to apply any hot Cataplasmes, as usually they do: because the strong
heat of them causes putrifactions and suffocations to the sinews, But in case
the matter diminishes not, still increases, and the swelling retreateth
further, then is it a sure sign, that the sinews and veins are all inflamed. In
this case above the swelling there must be made another incision, and mix the
brown Ointment with the Balsam of sweet Arsenick, make tents of it, as you
heard above about the brown Ointment: thrust these tents into the uppermost
hole, once a day, then the anger of it will be allayed, and the dying of the
sinews shall creep no further: then other convenient means may be used, of good
wound Ointments, etc. and so go on with the cure so long till the ill be
separated. Remember to continue the brown Ointment to the end of the cure, for
fear of a relapse.

The mischiefs, which those do cause, that undertake the curing of such things
which they do not understand, ought Abuses what hurts they cause.
not to be past over in silence, being a thing of great concernment. Those that
understand not these hurts, use this process: they presently apply to such
hurts warm Cataplasms though their swelling still goes back, yet they still
continue their poultesses; but to what purpose? they give cause to
putrefaction, suffocating the sinews? others make their experiments upon, with
anointing, fomenting, bathing, etc. but to little purpose, because they know
not, what lies hid under it.

When all these will not help, they made use of, and the Abuse committed
ignorantly.
pain increases still, and the swelling also incroacheth more and more upon
the body, and all turns to naught: then they conceive where the fault lies,
and lance that place, and let run out what will. But their judgment fails
them, not knowing from whence that matter comes, and so they cannot hit the
nail on the head: but give leave to the matter, as much as it will run forth*
not considering the tuffness and clamminess of the matt^^, and sometimes
ravelings of the sinews come out also, which they not regarding go on with
their old rags; though that be an apparent sign, that the sinews, veins, lig
aments within do rot, that is, an Inflammation has taken hold on the sinews. If
this misery be not remidied, then the sinews will be burnt away to the body,
whereby great heat and fever is caused. And that joint also being bereaved of
its food, it had from the sinews, then the cold fire will get into, which
brings death upon the party. For though that member be dismembered, yet all
the other sinews are taken with the flame, and draw on into the body, which
puts the party to death miserably. For this fire is of another nature, than the
cold fire is, occasioned by other causes. Other Inflammations can be discerned
in time and prevented from running further, and by dismembring can be remedied:
but the foresaid inflammations do not appear so plainly to the eye, and are not
taken notice of, but when they have all inflamed, and cannot be remedied. These
I make mention of, to inform how by carelessness great mischiefs are caused, no
other, as when by a small fire, a whole Town or House is set on fire, and burnt
down, if not quenched.

CHAP. XV.
Of swellings of Wounds, after they were healed: and what it means: and bow
they must be handled?

THe causes of the several swellings in and about Wounds ought to be known to
Surgeons. Formerly I have spoken of some kinds of such swellings: at this time
I will give a hint of two kinds of them, not as yet mentioned.

In the first place it is to be noted, that all kind of swellings do not come
into the number of dangerous Symptoms: those are of the dangerous ones, when
sinews, bones, joints, etc. are grievously wounded, (...) ^re not only the
wound, but all other parts thereabout are ^welled: of that sort having a
natural cause of its swellings; I intend not to speak of: because if the wound
does frame well to healing, the rest in time will pass away.

The other sort of swelling, coming after healing, I intend to give a hint of,
Viz. An utter joints muscle, being wounded, and well healed, was by the Surgeon
kept too hot, and with Cataplasmes suffocated: after which such a wound begins
to swell, at the beginning being without pains, when touched, nor altering the
color. Such a swelling passes away in tow or three weeks time, but leaves
behind a pain, which continues with an increase: and the swelling being quite
gone, it is found, that on that joint a great deal is tender, and that happens
as it were in a sleep, not payning the party.

For to prevent this swelling, and to hinder that consuming A plaster to
prenent the tenderness or updrying.
and updrying of the joint, much salving, dawbing, anointing, etc. they have
used; but I never saw any, which has done more good, then the ensuing Receipt,
meal of Fig beans 1, meal of common Beans 3, well beaten Orras 1, pulverised
Marigold flowers, gum Amoniack, boil these to a spissitude with vinegar, ad to
it of distilled Annise seed oil 3, of emplastrum Diaguilon 5, the emplastrum
must first be melted, and then with the said oil be mingled and stirred with
the Cataplasme: spread a cloth with it answerable to the bigness of the
swelling, apply it warm, in few days the swelling will be assvvaged, and no
exiccation will ensue. Because the virtue of the Plaster expels and
outdravveth all humors, before they shall come to any settlement in such
places. There are other means expelling winds and humors: viz. Annise, Fennel,
Carravvay seeds, etc. as also Diuratick means may de used. Surgeons ought to
order themselves herein, as they see occasion.

There is yet another sort of swelling, viz, Some receive a vvound, where no
sinevv is vvounded, yet that being healed, the party cannot bow that joint, in
which some raising there is, but is not a perfect swelling, and the party
feels no pains. This is incident (...) ^^ch, that were wounded iether in the
Hand or Foot, where some humor or other is settled to that wounded joint: and
this befalls those usually, that are troubled with the stone, gravel or gout:
and in that respect such sort of swellings we take to partake of he same
infirmity. Such swellings cannot be allayed with anointing, fomenting,
bathing, etc. For the matter which lies in the joint, must be reduced again to
water, and so be drawn forth, to which end this ensuing is allowed. Take of
Goats piss lb 6, you may mingle Cowes piss among it, if you cannot have a
sufficient quantity of the other, distill it in sand, through a Helmet, the
faeces staying in the bottom must be calcined in a Pot, let it be cool, pour
the abstracted water from it upon the Calx, make a lixivium of it, evaporate
that, a salt you will find: take this salt, ad to it of kitchen salt 1, of the
distilled piss lb 3, and a sufficient quantity of well Water, for to dissolve
the salt, to clear water: all these must be boiled again so long, that an Egg
may swim in it, then let it cool so much, that you may endure to put your hand
into. Into this water let the party put the said swelled member or joint, it
will dissolve and allay those tartarous humors in a short time. The same may be
used to other parts also, as to knees, ancles, elbowes, where any such swelling
appears, after they have been healed.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Vulnerary Symptoms, caused by bodily insirmities, chiefly by the Pox, or
suppressed Menstruum: how these are to be dealt withal.

IT old formerly, that Surgeons must observe what diseases their patients are
subject unto, or troubled withal, that their medicines might be applied
adcordingly: for these humors coincident to the wound, require answerable
cures: I intend not to speak of all such Symptoms, but will give only a hint
of one or other, whereby the rest may be judged, how they ought to be observed.

Some pocky people happily are wounded: these do not love te hear much of that
infirmity, however they cannot Wounds of pocky folks.
be cured in their wounds, as those which were not defiled with them: for such
pocky humors will take their course to wounds, settle there, and are usually
obstructive to healing. Surgeons have reason here to look to themselves, how to
cure such: they may know there by the matter, and the persons they have in hand.

First of all to cure such wounds, things above said must be known, and in case
these will not be cured by ordinary dressings, then other means must be taken
in hand.

Note; no Mercury is to be used to the symtomes of such wounds, be it prepared
for fixation or otherwise; because Mercuries quality is to take away all
impurities: and if Mercury should be used to a wound of a pockyfied party, that
morbus would be rowzed, and the party would be brought to deaths door.

The cure of such wounds is thus: Flos aeris 1, crocus Martis, Aloes Hepatick
ss, Myrrh, Frankincense, ana ss, Sallat oil 4, Wax, Terpentine ana, melt the
Wax, Turpentine, and Oil with Vernice, then put the rest to it, stir it well,
so long, till it be cold. Use this Ointment to the wounds, apply a stiptick
Plaster upon it, it will heal the wound.

In case this said ointment should not prevail, then use the red liquor of
Vitriol to it, which will enforce the wound unto healing: and make it thus: of
Vitriol lb 2 purified with fresh rain water, let it dry, then calcine it to a
yellowish color, then pour on it again fresh water lb 8, exiccate it again,
then set it into a Reverberatory, to bring it to some rubification, then put it
in a glass, pour on it rectified Aquavitae, that it stand two fingers breadth
over it, which will tinge the Aquavitae to a redness: Cant off this Aquavitae,
and pour other on it to be tinged, which put to the first. This tinged
Aquavitae is to be extracted per Balneum, a spissitude of honey remaining on
the bottom: on this must be poured fresh Alcool vinj, to take out the tincture.
Cant of that purely, and abstract the Alcool again in Balneo to a liquid form,
then is it prepared.

This liquor is of an attractive or to get her drawing quality, is not
corrosive, and is a principal sovereign thing for spoiled wounds, where bodily
humors are like to be incident: this may be safely used for spraines, and other
wounds received in warlick services.

A Gentleman not long ago received a wound in his face, who was pockified, but
would not hear of it; the pocky humor faling into the wound, did burn much, and
eat into: some Surgeons being sent for, they went about to use precipitated
Mercury, thereby to cleanse and keep the wound clean; But what happened? Morbus
Gallicus was thereby rowzed, and that humor was forced to come abundantly to
the wound, and the mouth was full of it also. I being called thereunto, soon
found what was done, and the patient was fain to yield to a pocky cure.

This example I quote to that end, because some Surgeons Mercury not useful in
many things.
suppose they can prepare Mercury so, that he can be fitted like a Saddle for
any horse, little considering, that Mercury is naught for fresh wounds, be it
as artificially prepared, as ever it may: because he is too searching, which is
not always good in these ways.

Many other Symptoms do concur in patients: one example I will quote, which is
very remarkable, whereby A notable example of a woman.
others may be judged.

Anno 1590. not far from Basell, an honest Gentlewoman, (which shall go
nameless) was cutting a stick one time with a sharp knife, but the stick
breaking at her hard laying on, she cut her hand, near the joint, flesh, skin,
sinews, veins, all in pieces. A Barbar Surgeon being sent for, dressed her, and
that cure went on well unto healing for twenty days together, as both the
Surgeon and the Gentlewoman affirmed it: now which of these two was faulty, I
cannot tell: one night a humor fell into that wound running out of the wound
like waterish blood, causing smarting pains. The Barbar holding it to be the
joint water, used all the means he supposed to be good against it, but did no
good. A Physician and two other Surgeons were called, these also counted it a
joint water, advising their remedies to be used to oppose it. Here was
affliction upon affliction, and no ease or help: the Gentlewoman had no rest
neither by day nor by night, and that continued for a whole week, then the
humor stayed, and the party had some ease. But that humor had corroded all that
which was healed these twenty days, her whole arm was much swelled and
inflamed, and with much ado that wound was hardly brought to that state it was
in, in fourteen days, so much was it come out of order. They supposing now,
that all things were brought again into a good posture, and that all dangers
were past. Behold four weeks after the said humor fell again into that wound,
causing as much pains as ever it did before; Physicians were much perplexed at,
not knowing what to do. At that time it fell out, that I went to dress a
Gentleman's child, which had a hurt on the ancle, wherein a callus was grown,
being neglected by Surgeons. The other party hearing of my being there, sent
for me; I beheld and viewed the wound, and found that that humor was no joint
water: I presently asked the Gentlewoman about her monthly courses, she
replied, she had them not since she was wounded: then I perceived what humor
that was, for I had several such cases under hand, their cure I learned
strangely.

I proceeded thus: first of all I opened on her foot the Saphena, then I made a
pessary of Hellebore niger, to be put into the matrix: thereby the humor was
brought to its natural channel, she found ease instantly, all pains were gone,
and was cured, which the party thankfully acknowledged. Others marvailed at the
cure, some whereof held it impossible, that according to my direction such a
cure should be performed: but they could say nothing against the thing being as
clear as the Sun. The like must be judged of a Cancer on Women's breasts,
bellies, or privy places, which sores or ulcers are mortal, if their courses be
obstructed: all your medicines will not prevail, unless their courses be first
reduced. The like in Men may be observed, if troubled with Cancers, which are
uncurable, unless their Hemorrhoydes be orderly: in such it is true, that
usually have them.

One thing more I must tell: if you have such a Woman No inward medicines to be
used.
in hand, to cure her of a wound, then beware you trouble her not with any
internal medicaments; for such humors are not so soon stayed: and though you
suppose to reduce such humors by inward medicaments, it will avail nothing:
for in that case that humor will not keep its natural course, but comes forth
at the wound, and the stronger that inward medicine is, the more it will spoil
the wound. Therefore make use only of the above named Pessarie, or other
fomentations, perfumes, bathings, etc. according as experience shall minister
occasion.

Thus much Reader, I thought good to impart unto you ahout such Symptoms,
hoping you will learn so much ther^by, as to regulate your selves in the rest
agreeably.

CHAP. XVII.
Of three sorts of Wound-diseases; and first of the Wound-Feaver, how that is
to be discerned, prevented, and cured.

HItherto I have made mention often, about the Wound-disease, and Wound-feaver
or Ague: my intention here is, to speak more largely of it, the rather, because
there is not a worse Symptom; and these are not alone by themselves, when they
come: but Apoplexy, Palsy, Convulsion, etc. do accompany them: of these I
shall speak no more, then my practick has revealed unto me. I cannot choose
here but must speak of a mistake about the wound disease, because they talk of
it, as if there were no more but one sort of Wound disease, and make no
distinction herein: and because that distinction is not observed, comprehending
it all under one cure, is the cause why so many patients are neglected.

There are three sorts of diseases, which befall Wounds: A threefold wound
disease.
the one is not cured like the other; and what is good for the one, is naught
for the other: and the one disease is more dangerous than the other. Therefore
it is a dangerous and foul abuse, when some pretend saying, if one is
understood and cured, the rest also may be cured in the same manner. The first
sort is called a Wound Ague, or Fever, or the Wounds fire: because at its
first coming it Wound Ague.
is exceeding cold, shaking the whole body like a strong Ague, then a strong
heat follows upon, and a mighty inflammation of the whole body ensues.

The second sort is called the Shaking, or the Wound-gall, Wound gall.
it comes with a shivering cold, no heat follows, but a great pain in the
Wound: commonly there is seen within the wound a little clear blister, or in
the outside there is a brown one, which is full of blood.

The third sort of the Wound disease, is called the beating or unquietness
within, which is only within, without Beating in the wound.
any shaking Ague, when it comes, but it comes with extreme smarting pains,
with heat and cold joined: the patient has no rest neither by day nor by
night, continually turning and winding this or that way.

These are the three distinct and several sorts of Wound-simptomes, of these I
intend to write, yea rather because I nere saw any thing written of it
fundamentally. It is strange that so little is exstant in writing of the signs
hitherto mentioned, about the Wound diseases, being a thing of such high
concernment, and ought to be timely prevented.

Most Surgeons regard them not, watching only for their end, yet know not what
to do, or how to handle these things. When such a Symptom is come to the wound,
and the patient in great anguish, and the thing is come to extremity, then
they conceive of a simptom in the wound, but know not what it is. But
experience shows, what the event is of such simptoms. These men not
understanding the sorts of these simptoms in the wound, and perceiving a great
heat about the patient, yet cannot discern that it is a Wound disease; then
they are busy to cure that Wound disease as an ordinary Ague, hoping with
their coolers to expel that heat, using Nenupharine, Poppy seeds, Solatrum,
etc. and thereby they use things contrary unto it. But does not experience
tell, that such Paroxismes cannot be allayed and kept off by their coolers?
true the great dryness and thirst they quench, but it was not seen that they
ever cured the disease.

Though such a patient be plebotomised, yet is the disease not expelled
thereby, as every one may judge; though plebotomie is of good use in such
cases, and that is the reason, why so many dye of it; because such diseases are
not rightly opposed: and if any recovereth of it, they have the more cause to
be thankful unto God, that granted them so much strength, when neither
plebotomy, nor purges would help them.

To speak of the first sort of the Wound disease, Note, that Cold. Of the
chilliness in the wound.
that is commonly the most dangerous wound: if that simptom befalls the wound,
especially a head wound, commonly it brings death: and many patients loose
their lives in that kind. This simptom is the worst among the rest, and its
effect is as bad as the plague it self. It comes first with a chilliness,
whereupon there follows a mighty cold, and then smarting pains in the head:
if that wound be in a place, where there is a concurrence of great muscles,
sinews, white veins, then the patient grows somewhat out of his wit, and
talks idely: and if he recovereth not his right senses in tow or three days,
then is it a sign of death: if that paroxisme comes above three times, then is
the sign of death the surer.

This is that simptom, whereof so many dye. For it is an usual saying, if the
patient outliveth five, seven, or nine days, then he escapes with his life.
Some set that time further off, to the thirtieth or thirty fifth day, which is
not very uncertain neither. For if a simptom comes not into the wound within
twelve or fifteen days, then it will not come at all or very seldom; unless
the Surgeon or patient hasten it on. But if the wound be not so dangerous, then
no great carefulness is need; unless the Pia Matter under the skull be wounded,
for then strange simptoms must be expected, which happen when they dream least
of it, as you heard above about Head wounds.

Touching this cold or ague in the wound, Note; how it may be discerned before
its coming. For my meaning is not, that Surgeons should stay for the seventh or
ninth day, when its full fore is come already into it. Experience teaches,
that an enemy is with less opposition kept off from invasion, than beaten out,
when invaded already.

The original of this Wound Ague, which causes great mischief, is variously
discoursed of; even among those, which do not understand it. My intent is not
to be large in the writing of it, only for Novices sake in Surgery, and the
good of patients, I will show, how this simptom is known, and how it is to be
healed.

If you desire to know exactly, from whence a Wound The original of the wound
dis-
disease has its original, let them take notice of the following things: Its
commonly caused by anger, frights and fears, great pains, and disorderly life
in eating and drinking uncleanness: I forbear to speak here of bad medicines:
in a word; according as the wound is in a dangerous place, and in a dangerous
joint or member: (the one being nobler than the other) especially the Head is
the noblest, and according as the blow, cut, stab, is made, and in what years
season; so simptomes will be accordingly. Nothing brings so soon on such
simptomes, than when a party is wounded in a dangerous place, and the wound
bleedeth vehemently.

French, Italians, and other Nations observe this custom, that if a patient
has bled nere so much, they will plebotomize him further, which is an ill and
refusable way. For a patient, which loses too much blood, loses also much
of his natural color, whereby he grows cold and faint. And if the wound be
on a dangerous place, then pains are caused; these pains cause anger, anger
causes heat, upon which the foresaid paroxisme follows infallibly: heat and
cold striving and fighting one against another, at last the cold being
conquered, heat got the predominancy, whereby all is set on a flame. This heat
and venom lies in man like a smoke or fume, and must by force be expelled;
because otherwise it cannot be extinguished: and coolers can do little in this
particular. Syrups, Juleps, Conserves of Buglosse and Borrage will avail here
nothing: and with these Surgeons commit gross errors. I have been present
sometimes, when the Physician felt the patients pulse, which is not so improper
neither, then viewed or cast his water, finding him to be in a strong fever,
and it was so. Then presently some Syrups must be mixed, and with Cordials the
patient must be upheld, with Goat milk, Syrup, Conserves, etc. but none of
these men knew, where that Ague did lie, nor where the fault was: the one
judged it to be a continual Ague, the other judged it to be somewhat else:
every one had his own judgment of it, the one contradicting the other. But
what was the patient the better for their jarring? I never saw any patient
cured with disputing: my self differed sometimes in my judgment concerning
such simptoms, but Experience showed me the better way.

This Wound Ague, (to come to the point, according To discern the wound ague.
to my promise made before) to discern well before its coming, you are to note;
that when that Wound simptom is coming, the patient is unquiet, stares up and
down, lost his sleep, and if he slumbereth, be starteth, awakneth, and is
unquiet. If the Wound be on a joint, then he does not hold still, striveth
continually to shift this or that way, and then it is commonly angered. But the
patient must first be well observed, whether he sweateth in his sleep, (as you
heard above also) they do not usually sweat, though they are hot enough, and
are much gready for drink.

Moreover this also ought to be noted, if a wounded party has a deep red color
in his face, more than, he had formerly before he was wounded; or he looks
paler, yet is hot in his body, which he was not so before he was wounded, then
is it a sure sign of this simptoms coming; which we speak of now. These and
such like signs are to be observed in the outside of the patient.

But the knowledge of the wound is of chiefest concernment: if the wound be in
such a condition, as I shall speak of the like about the Prunella or
Inflammation; (thither I commit the Reader) then is it a sign of the coming of
the Wound simptome. For if Nature be so strong, as to keep the Prunella in the
said joint, and not to let it run into the body, then the cold fire comes into,
and nothing else; but if that heat in that joint presses backward into the
body, then it causes a Wound simptom. These two simptoms meeting, are a sure
messenger of death.

These following signs, which concern not the Inflammation and Prunella, are to
be observed also. If a Wound be fresh and new, not much touchy, so that the
patient may suffer to be touched well, and being touched hard, he feels it
smart; this is the first sign of all: especially if the patient speaks quick,
and looks agazed: it is a sign, that such a party is mightily infected, and
is to look for that paroxisme, accompanied with perril of death.

Observe also these signs, which the coming of the wound disease gives you to
understand. If a Wound look pale and a dead color about the corners and lips,
but the wound within looks brown red; and the patient is overrun in his body
with a strong continued heat, and keeps in that strong heat, grows not cold
or clammy, (as it usually happens in other sorts of wound diseases, which must
be observed for distinction sake) and that strong heat and fever goes on, to
the coming of a paroxisme, after which there follows yet a strong heat and
inflammation, which may soon make an end of the patient.

One thing more I must relate, touching the increase or Signs from the Moon.
decrease of the Moon, according to which commonly wounds are affected. When a
patient grows still weaker at the decrease of the Moon, then you may expect
at the new Moon a heavy and dangerous paroxisme: if the patient continues in a
strong heat at the increase of the Moon, it signifies that a wound simptom is
come, or any other bad accident, which is so, if the aforesaid signs appear
also; else it has another meaning, however it signifies but little good.
These signs spoken of, Surgeons ought to observe diligently, and learn thereby
to discern a coming wound simptom, that they may oppugn and repel, or keep
them off, (before they be quite come) the preventing of them is easier then
their expelling after they are come.

It is time now to tell, how this simptom is to be oppugned: Cure of wound
simptom.
I will speak of it as I found it experimentally. I do not hold my process
forth in that manner, as if it were unparraleled; only this I say; I found it
to be the safest and best. Note, I comprehend all into one cure, whether a
simptom be coming, or be come already. You must consider, that if a wound
disease be discerned in its signs, before its coming, then is it needless that
strong medicines be applied, as when a paroxisme had been over. For this cure I
applied not when an inflammation was already in the wound disease, for then it
must be ordered otherwise, as you shall here in its due place.

The foresaid signs of the wound disease having appeared, then have a care to
remove pictures out of the Chamber, where the patient lies; for patients being
very weak, and beholding such pictures, causes in their fancies strange
imaginations, whereby they are frightened and amazed, which makes simptoms to
be cured with more difficulty.

Touching the cure it self, as I have learned in my practice, I ordered for the
wound disease, where the paroxisme was gone, which being done, then minister
unto the patient of this following Aquavitae, from one to two and a half ounce,
according to the condition of the patient; and let him sweat upon them very
well.

In case the party cannot sweat (which usually happens) then heat Tiles, or
Brick stones, moisten them with Vinegar, To cause sweat.
wrap them into a cloth, and apply them to his feet in the bed; or to any other
place, where you think it fit, and so let him sweat, as much as he is able to
endure.

Seeing the party is to sweat thus, notwithstanding he is hot already; then
take of Goats milk lb 1, of distilled To expel heat, caused by sweating.
water of Nightshade 1, dried or fresh Alkekengj ss, pulverised Fenegreek 3, of
Rose water 1 ss; boil these to a spisse Cataplasme; spread it on a cloth, apply
it warm to the right side to the region of the liver, then that heat, caused by
sweating will not prejudice him.

This must be applied to the right side where the liver lies, that it be not
too much inflamed, that must lie there, whilst he is sweating. To the pulses
both on hands and feet must be applied a four doubled cloth, dipped in Rose
water, where Saltpeter was dissolved in: doubtless the patient will find
himself well after his sweating.

His diet must be of easy digesting meat, it would not be amiss to put among
his meat some sirup of Nenupharine: after the sweat other medicaments may
operate; which ought to be noted. If the party be costive, then make a glister
of flesh broth, prepared of Mallows, Camomils, Rose oil, you may if you
please, or you see it fitting, mingle with it, two three or five drams of
Electuarium de succo Rosarum, which will cool the body within gently, and do
more good than other purges, this may be iterated, if need be, etc.

This cure is ordered for a wound disease, when it is already come: But when it
is but coming, and you intend to prevent its coming, which will be the best
way, then the medicaments ought not to be so strong; therefore a dose of the
foresaid Aquavitae, will be enough of 1 ss: in the rest you proceed as you were
told.

Touching the wounds, it is the safest way to use to it the brown ointment, and
apply on it a stiptick Plaster. If Cure of the wounds.
there be any heat in it, then use round about the wound unguentum dialthaeae,
or oleum Rosatum: I love not to have the wounds too cool, because coolers are
not very good in these ways. At last apply to it a good defensive Plaster,
and look to the healing, which doubtless will soon appear, as soon as sweating
is over.

All these being done, the patient and the wound being in a better condition,
then go on with that cure, secundum Artem, till to the end of it.

In case the patient is not yet settled for to have his sleep quietly, then use
that precious Pill Anodynum.

The Aquavitae which I made mention of in this Chapter, is prepated thus.

Take the best Aquavitae, without any phlegm in it, called Aquavitae for wound
frost or ague.
Alcool, lb 1, put it in a glass body, put to it of rasp'd Hearts horn 6, mingle
with it pulverised Myrrh 2, lute the glass carefully that nothing vapor away,
let it stand thus infused for eight days; then distill gently off the Aquavitae
in Balneo, so that the feces may stay dry behind: this abstracted Aquavitae
pour on the feces again, distill again very gently, iterate it a third time:
put this Aquavitae in a wide glass of a narrow mouth, then put into it well
pulverised Myrrh 1, filed Hearts horn 2. Mithridate ss, Camphor 2, close the
glass exactly; serva ad usum. Having stood a month and none of it used, then
cant it off, put away the feces, and put fresh materials formerly named into
it, let it stand well closed; it is precious, has great virtues, to purify
the blood, and to expel all venom. Camphor by reason of its penetrative
spirit and harmless hot quality, is one of the chiefest things in it.

In case such Aquavitae cannot be had, then you may use Treacle, or Mithridate,
etc. but that will not do so well, as the said Aquavitae, for reasons known,
needless to be related here. And thus much of the first Wound disease.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the second sort of the Wound disease, called the Shaking or Wound gall; how
that is to be discerned and cured.

THis also is one of the worst simptoms, which may befall A wound gall is
dangerous.
a wound, whereof many dyed, and are like to dye hereafter; because it is
hardly well known, and its cure neither known nor used. All which is
occasioned, by reason of the foresaid distinction, which ought to have been
observed about the Wound disease; but they comprehend all under one cure, which
should not be, as you may judge by that which ensues. As dangerous this
simptom is, and as suddenly it may be a danger of death to the patient; so
easy and suddenly is it cured also, provided, the thing be well understood,
not else.

This simptom I heard it called the Wound gall, by reason Why called a wound
gall: why a shaking.
of its form: some call it the shaking or quaking, doubtless because it seizes
on the patient with a quaking, as if it were an ague. For my part I know not
what other name to give it, nor why I should hold it for any other: should I
call it an Anthrax or no? it may as soon and as easy be Anthrax.
cured as an Anthrax: a futher discourse of it I commit to the learned, let
them dispute of it so long, till they find a true and proper name for it: if my
opinion herein should be required, I should say that it is a special sort of
Wound disease, because its cure is almost like the great Wound disease; only it
requires no such great toyling.

To know and to discern this simptom, note; I know as yet not any fundamental
or real sign of it, whereby to discern Signs.
its coming, not unless it be come. For that reason I will not speak here, what
others do think of; doubtless it has its signs, whereby it may be discerned:
every one is to have his own observations about it, if I meet with any I shall
be ready to let the Reader know it.

Where ever this simptom is fallen in, it appears and is conditioned in the
following manner. First the patient feels a shivering, no other, as if it
were an Ague. But upon this shaking there does not follow neither heat nor head
ach, as it is usual in the ordinary great Wound disease (unless the wound be in
the head) which distinction or difference ought to be carefully observed, as
being of great consequence. An extreme misery and pain befalls the wound with
panting and beating, making the wound extremely out of order.

Within the wound where the greatest pain is, there appears a bright blister,
but somewhat darkish: if the wound be deep, and it being made with a thrust,
then the blister cannot always be seen: therefore the judgment of it must be
taken from the cold pain, caused by the chilliness.

But in case the foresaid blister be not in the wound, but without or beside
it, then is it brown, of the bigness of a pea, is full of blood, and feels
hard, with a hard swelling round about the wound, having no ill color. If
these be let alone, then the said blister falls again inwards, gets a hole,
leaving a scarre after it, very white with a darkish ring; presently after
there appears black spots, and look like the cold fire: by and by there
follows upon a great heat, and vehement head ach, then ensues a palsy, next
is death.

There is exactly to be observed also, that if a patient is Note.
taken with a Wound gall (so I name it now) he has no desire to turn this and
that way, and as they say to hop up and down, as those do, which are troubled
with the great Wound disease: but he lies still, and stands out his time, not
without great complaining, by reason of the continued increasing pain. For if
he stirs then his pain increases, and is forced to be quiet against his
will.

Touching the cure of this simptom, it is thus: Take of the prescribed
Aquavitae 1, Oculi cancrorum 1, which Cure.
must be well grinded; mingle these, let the patient drink it, cover him well,
cause him to sweat in his bed, for this sweat is of great concernment: if the
patient be loath to sweat, or is difficult for him to do, yet however you must
keep him to it; for no sooner the sweat comes, then he will be at ease.

About the wound apply the Anodyne ointment, and let some of it be put into it,
in case you do not see the blister within: apply to the wound a stiytick
plaster, in which must be no Rasom, or any such thing, which is of an
attractive quality; for the patient would thereby be put to more smarting
pains, which would prejudice the party.

As Soon as he has done sweating, then plebotomize him next to the place where
he is wounded, and let the vein run reasonable well, doubtless the pains in the
wound will be allayed, after which you may cure the party with more facility.
Let him forbear meats hot of spices.

And because the blister, (being broken by sweating, and is no more mortal)
makes still the wound disformed, so that it grows brown and weeping, then it
will be requisite, that you use the brown ointment for one or two days till
the wound be well cleansed, then go on with the cure according to Art.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the third sort of Wound disease, called the pulling and unquietness in the
wound.

THis Symptom is known unto expert Surgeons; and it has its name answerable
unto its deed. I should have written of it before, before I had told of the
other sorts, and that the rather, because the great wound disease, which I have
described at first, commonly is caused from thence: but I purposely delayed it
to this place, for some reasons. For though the great wound disease (thus I
call the first sort for distinction sake, and others also call it by that name)
is caused sometimes of or by this last sort, (which for some reasons I call the
unquiet:) yet this also is true, that the wound disease for the most part
comes into the wound, whereas the unquietness has not yet been felt in the
wound. This unquietness, though it be bad and dangerous enough, yet is it no so
perrilous as the great wound disease; therefore it requires the less care than
the other, in respect of the pains, which are not so grievous.

Touching other things, together with the cure: there is found also a great
difference easy to be discerned by him, which takes notice of.

From whence that unquietness comes into the wound, From whence that Unquiet
in the wound.
is needless to make any further discourse of it. Even the same cause, which
causes the great wound disease, causes also the unquietness in the wound, and
that sooner and suddenly: therefore the unquietness comes sooner into the
wound, than the great or first sort of wound disease which usually comes then,
when the patients wound begins wholly to come off at the end.

When that unquietness is coming into the wound; then Signs.
shieverings and chlilliness runs over the patient, which are not so
vehement with quaking as other sorts of wound diseases usually do. This cold
shaking runs about a long time in the body, afterward it setleth to the
wounded member or joint, from thence into the wound, where it causes horrible
pains, with heat, cold, insomuch that the patient does not know, what ayleth
him.

The wounded member he is not able to rest it any where, Why it is called
unquietness.
still shifting from place to place, hoping to find ease in one place or other.
Therefore this wound disease is called unquietness, because the patient still
moves the wounded joint, like the jack of a watch does move.

If the wound be on the body, its not the better; because the patient will stir
himself to and fro, and to turn this and that side, whereby great inconveniency
may be caused. If the wound be in the head, then is it very dangerous, if it
Very dangerous if a wound in the head.
should hold him long; by reason of the Cramp, Palsy, etc. which easily is
incident also. The party cannot sleep, though inclined to it; and if in a
slumber, yet that panting and beating rowseth him to an amazement, pulling the
wounded joint after, the which increases his pain: it is a most pitiful thing
to behold such a party.

If this simptom be not opposed, then there ensues an extraordinary heat, and
one inconvenience follows after the other, at last the great wound disease is
incident into it; which proves a mortal sign: from that, I never saw any come
off, or recover of it, though all means are used. For these two simptoms
meeting are deadly enemies one to another, make a quick dipatch of the patient,
not staying for any medicament.

Therefore this unquietness must be opposed without delay, and to allay all the
smarting pains of it, not regarding the joint water or changing of the color
of the wound, swellings, or things about it. Other such accidents may be soon
mended, if the restlesness of the wound be allayed, then all the rest will soon
be mended.

The process is thus: Take the brown Ointment, cover a tent with it, thrust it
in near to the bottom; but if it be a stab, then convey it into with the
siringe: then take the Opodeldoch, and apply it thick and broad, so that all
places may be covered a hand breadth about the wound, and to tie it: place the
party into a warm bed, minister to him a spoonful of Rose water, or Barnet
water, and six grains of the Pill Anodyne; half an hour after let him have of
the same pill in a convenient vehicle, of four grains: stay an hour, and see
whether the patient takes his rest, if he does, then let him rest; if not,
then give him four grains more of that Anodyne, and tarry an hour and a half.
This must be iterated till the party sleeps, which will he at the third or
fourth time.

When he sleeps, then cover him warm, not too hot, but as much as he is able
to endure: then in his sleep he Dose of the Anodine confection.
will sweat very much: if he awakneth after five, six, seven, or eight hours,
then doubtless all his pains, together with the anger, heat, cold, and wound
disease will be gone, and the party refreshed.

Fear not that the said Confection will endanger any way the party; for it may
safely be used from twenty to twenty five grains.

Some Surgeons use cool things to wound diseases, as the Abuse.
juice of Cicuta, and of hyssciamus, the which they apply to the wounded
member, of this I cannot approve; because these things cool the wound so much,
that it cannot be reduced to any true temper of healing. These usually cause
the Cramp, which they naturally use to do. Coolers are not proper for wounds.
It is a better way to shorten the pains of wounds, than to seek ways to have
them prolonged.

CHAP. XX.
Of an accident in a Wound, which is almost like to the Wound-disease.

THere is another simptom incident to Wounds, the name Tickling in the wound.
of it I have not yet told. I have seen it often, and found it in my practick,
that wounded parties have felt great heat and burnings in their wounds, which
when it was gone, it was as if many worms were crawling in the wound, whereby
they felt great pains: as soon as that pain was gone, the heat returned, and
then the other tickling came in the place of that; and thus the one gave way to
the other.

That party was like unto those, whose fingers were killed by a hard frost, and
coming into a warm place, they are benumed or frozen.

This simptom be it as painful as it will, yet it longs for Cure.
a speedy medicine. For I have seen it, that as soon as distilled oil of Bays,
or red oil of Turpentine was put into the wound, and well anointed round about
with it, then the simptom was quieted, and never returned

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Prunella in the Wound, how it may be discerned and cured.

IT is strange, this being so dangerous a simptome, whereby both poor and rich
were spoiled, and many dyed of, should be so little known among Surgeons, and
so little of it extant in print, being it is usually incident to such wounds,
that are in dangerous places. Some that knew this simptom, called it Prunella
or Brayn, for no other reason, but because it is like to that Prunella, which
befalls the throat.

That expert Philosopher Theophrastus Paracelsus writes Why called Prunella.
that he had seen a patient; which was mightily troubled with the Prunella in
the wound, insomuch that a kind of a thick skin like a ragg could be pulled of
the wound, fust like the skin that is peeled off the tongue of one that is
troubled with the Prunella in his throat. I believe him; but I rather marvail,
how the party held out, and was not quite spoiled. I never saw it so much in
any parties wo^^^, but he either dyed of, or else the joint or member was gone
and lost. But God be thanked, that where ever that simptom was known, and
proper medicines were applied, such wounded parts were for the most recovered.

How and by what signs this Prunella in the wound is discerned Signs.
and known, are these, viz. A wound which gathers no matter in its due time,
but keeps very dry, without corruption, then it signifies a Prunella, a strong
coming on of it.

If the wound on the top beats much, and sometime it weepeth, or some
moisture it has, then is the condition of it the worse.

If the wound looks red, like dried or Bartholomes beef, and the lips of it
turn about and are hard, it is a sign of the Prunella, and a forerunner of a
wound disease.

A wound being on a perrilous place, yields a grayish matter like slime,
after the fourth, sixth, eighth or ninth day, and it settleth close to the
wound, and will not be cleansed, unless by forcible means, and the wound also
looks round about like a skin, and the patient also is hot, then is it a sure
sign of a Prunella.

If a great muscle be wounded, and the joint also be shrewdly hurt, and that
wound is loath to afford any corruption, besides that there is a rank smell in
the wound; it is a sign of a Prunella.

In other wounded parties these following signs are apparent: Other signs.
the party is still desirous to drink, is costive, and troubled with flushing
heats. His urine and stools and judgment will be little informed: if the urine
be red, it commonly signifies a Prunella to be at hand, and sometimes also a
wound disease is at hand.

Note; two, three, or more simptoms do meet in a wound, and appear all at once:
it happens also that a wound is very dry, yields no matter but only a little
water, its lips are hard and turned outward, are thick and red, round about
disformed and indisposed, and a slyme in it, no great heat and pain the patient
feels.

Further note; if the wound be in an outer part, (for that about the bodies
bulk is of another nature) and the party feels panting and pulling pains in
that joint or part, it is a sign of the cold fire, which usually has its cause
from the Prunella: if it be not timely opposed.

Touching the cure of such wounds, note; If Prunella be Cure.
discerned and known in a wound, by some of the said signs, then the patient in
the first place must be phlebotomized, as you shall see occasion.

It would be well if it could conveniently be, that a vein were opened under
the tongue; for if a party be troubled with Prunella, it is soonest discerned
by the throat: and so it will soon show it self in the wound also, if it was in
the mouth or throat: at which some Surgeons are estranged, and others do slight
it: but no sport for the poor patient.

After phlebotomizing, take water of Salarmoniack, mingle it with half as much
of Rose Vinegar, make it warm, siringe the wound with it, if it may be done
conveniently: afterward use this following Ointment to the wound or stab: Take
of well scummed Honey 4, Vinegar of Roses and of Juniper, ana 1, phlegm of
Vitriol ss, mingle these, make an Unguent of and use it; and apply a defensive
plaster without about the wound, but on the wound you are to put a stiptick
plaster.

But if the wound be very angry, then the following Lavament is to be used:
Take of Rose vinegar lb 3, of Myrrh 2, mingle these and let it boil together
for an hour, then ad to it of Camphore 1, of Saltpeter, these must be well
beaten: dip cloths in it, wring them out, lay them four doubled and warm to the
wound, let them be big and broad enough; but the wound must be covered first
with a good plaster before the cloths be applied: if these grow cold, then
apply other warm ones, and this must be iterated so long, till the wound be
well warmed, then apply a stiptick plaster,

If a wound by these be brought to a good pass, and Signs whereby is known a
wound to return right.
shows a true and good sign, then go no further on with these medicines: then
you are to take good wound Ointments and stiptick plasters: But how you shall
know that a wound returns to a right tune, it is thus: The patient as well as
the wound alters: and the best sign whereby to know it is, when there is no
more pain in the wound, and looks ruddy, and is soft and tender.

The patient must take heed of drinking of wine as much as of poison, and to
shun all meats seasoned with spisces arumatical. Let him drink Barley water,
wherein must be dissolved prepared Saltpeter, (of which has been spoken above)
to five pound of water you are to take half a dram of the said Saltpeter, it
will allay his heat, as well that in the wound as that in his body.

About the dressing of his wound, and the applying of the medicines, you are to
do it in that manner, as you heard above about wounds which were exiccated by
the Suns heat.

Out of these in my judgment may be enough discerned, that it is of great
concernment, that a simptom in a wound be well known, then it will fall the
easier to cure such wounds. It is most certain, that these simytoms in wounds
will by no means admit of any greasy medicines. Now those that do not know it,
and go on in their old ways, applying their wound ointments and plasters,
these will do little good, nay rather do mischief. There ignorance is in fault,
why so many wounded parties loose their lives; especially if the wound be in
the head, or any other perrilous part: and when such Surgeons have done their
best, it is at the least (God bless patients) to the loss of the wounded
member.

For your better instruction I will set down here, how this water of
Salarmonick is prepared: Take of Salarmonick one part, of white calcined Tartar
one part: mingle To prepare water of Salm^ack.
these together, sublime them to a powder, according to art. Let this
Salmoniack sublimed be dissolved to a water, in a celler or other cool place.

In case you are to go into the Country with it, then is it better to keep this
sublimate in a powder, and carry it not dissolved. And coming to your patient,
you may dissolve it in Rose water: and in case you cannot have neither Rose
water, nor Aqua Nenupharina, then take fresh Well water, which for a need may
serve the turn, especially in a Camp, where Prunella usually is brief among
Soldiers.

One rare thing more I must relate, viz. the phlegm of Verdigriece is
dangerous here.
Vitriol, or Vitriol it self, is very good for such wounds, whereas Verdigriece
is very hurtful to them, though both are made of Copper.

The wounds and the medicines differ here in their conditions: the one
affects wounds, the other dissafects them: or the one is a friend, and the
other an enemy unto them, etc. Therefore I say this, that Alchymie is worth to
be praised, whereby medicines are prepared in that manner, as occasion does
require.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Cramp, Palsy, Apoplexy, etc. how these Symptoms befalling Wounds,
must be cured.

CRamp is a dangerous simptome, especially in Head wounds, in the neck, throat,
etc. where wounds are in dangerous places, there the Cramp is the most hurtful.

Cold causes the Cramp in a wound, either by that cold Cause of wound Cramps.
which from the raw air is come into, or else the patient was kept too cold. It
is most certain, as soon as the arteries and white veins have felt but the least
cold, presently shrink upward, and cause the Cramp. Therefore the Surgeon ought
to have a care, that when he is about to dress the party, to let the wound not
be open too long, but dress and bind it presently, go not beyond the allowed
time of dressing: and the patient must be looked to, that he commit no fault in
fretting and vexing at one thing or other. There are other causes of the Cramp
which we now pass by.

Touching the cure of the Cramp, note; if you discern Cure in head wounds.
the Cramp in a Head wound, then always anoint the patients back and neck
with proper oiles, of which in the description of Head wounds I made so often
mention of, viz. you are always to anoint his back and neck with the oil of
Cammomil, of the oil of Lumbrici terrestres, etc. And it were not amiss to
anoint him well with Petroleum.

The best oil for such is the oil of Amber, but is not fitting to be used per
se or by it self, but should be mixed with oil of Olives, or oil of Majoram: it
allayeth the Cramp, keeps off the Palsy, caused by the Cramp usually.

But if the Cramp be in a wound of an outer joint or part, Cure of the outer
parts.
where you suspect some sinews be hurt, then mix your wound ointment with some
of the red oil of Turpentine, and apply upon a thin stiptick plaster. Anoint
round about the wound with Tile oil, or with distilled oil of Bays, and bind
him warm. And in case the Cramp will not yield to these means, and is on an
outer part, as hand or foot, then foment the wound with warm Lie made of Beech
or Oak ashes, wherein are boiled Cammomil flowers, or Saint John's Wort: Being
thus bathed or fomented for half an hour, and is well warmed, then presently
dress it, doubtless the Cramp will cease. But take heed you do not cause the
Cramp to return, and let the patient also be warned of it hereby.

In such cases I have seen Piony root to be often used for the Palsy,
wherewith indeed some good may be done, if Pionie is good if dug seasonably.
seasonably dug: if not, then I found that these roots did no good.

It must be dug in April, when Soll is in Aries, and at a plenilunium
before the rising of the Sun. It must be dried in the Air, not in the Sun
shine, then they are right, and proper to be ^^^nged about the party: you may
make of this green root either a sirup or a conserve, it will be the more
effectual.

Touching Palsy, Apoplexy, etc my intent is not to write much of it, being it
concerns Physicians more than Surgeons. But whereas the Cramp is commonly a
cause and forerunner of the Gout, Palsy, and such like simptoms; there seems a
necessity to lie upon a Surgeon, to have some judgment of it, that the better
he may oppose and cure it, therefore I could not choose but to give an hint of
it.

I know nothing better to allay this simptom, than a well Cure.
rectified spirit of Vitriol: I must confess there are several precious waters;
powders, etc. good against the Palsy: I I reject none of these, but this I
hold to be none of the least.

Spirit of Vitriol is made thus: Take crude Vitriol which is pure and green,
put it in a coated glass body, set it in an To make Spirit of Vitriol.
Oven into the open fire, apply a Receiver, and lute it well: let your first
fire be gentle, increase the fire by degrees, get over all the phlegm, when
the retort has been red hot a good while, and no more water comes over, then
let the fire go out, and let it be cold.

That phlegm which is come into the Receiver, contains that body, in which
is the spirit of Vitriol, for he is not in the Colcotar as some suppose;
because in that there is no more spirit, but a mere oil: for if you take that
spirit of Vitriol, which is made of the said Colcotar, and you abstract all its
spirits in a glass body, then on the bottom you will find nothing but a
corrosive oil of Vitriol: whereby we see that no small fault is committed
herein; for the one is not comparable to the other in its virtue.

That spirit of Vitriol is pure and clear, like rock water, is acide and not
heavy, and it is made thus: Take that phlegm you have received in the
Receiver, let it evaporate in Balneo Mariae, on the bottom you will find the
spirit of Vitriol; abstract it in sand a second and third time, in an Alembick,
the oftener the better: if any phlegm stayed with it, the same you may separate
at any time. And if you will have it yet better, then put to it half as much of
spirit of Wine, put it into a doubled glass body, lute it well, set it in Sand
for a month into digestion.

This is the true Spirit of Vitriol, which has no corroding quality, and may
safely be used; and specially it is a sovereign thing for the Head, when an
Apoplexy, Palsy, etc. is feared: and if this Spirit be mingled with Magistene
of Pearls and Corals, then nothing comparable unto it, for the said diseases.

That Spirit thus mingled may be given to those, that are The use of this
Spirit.
troubled with a wound disease, or with a Prunella: It refreshes and
corobrateth the inward parts, principally the head and heart. It serves also
for a precious vulnerary Potion. The use of it is, to be taken fasting four
five or six drops in one ounce of distilled water of Stellaria: but the
soveraignest is, that grass green oil of Vitriol; which, being it cannot be had
every where, I forbear to speak any more of it.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of consumed, withered or updryed Wounds and Members, how Surgeons ought to
deal with them.

A Withering, is a Symptom which is incident to joints wounded, commonly to
arms or legs: as much as my experimental knowledge will afford, I shall
faithfully communicate it.

This withering or consuming is easily discerned, because From whence this
withering comes*
the skin on the outer member looks blacker, than that on the found member; the
causes thereof are several: either when muscles, sinews, joints are wounded by
a fall, blow, thurst, etc. there may be an external cause of it, though not any
wound happened to that part: as a cold humor falling into, or other diseases, be
it in the shoulder, hip, knee, etc.

An Ariditie comes thus also: a parry being wounded, and by the Surgeons
neglect the joint water did run too Exiccation Adridum Membrum.
long. this expert Surgeons call Membrum aridum, or an exiccation. For the
joint water is a food, whereby all joints and members are sustained. Now if
that joint water did run too long, then thereby that part was bereaved of its
natural humor, without which it cannot subsist, it being so, how can it choose
but to decrease and consume.

The condition of this joint water is like a tree, which is Comparison.
opend at the prack in the spring, whose sap runs out where it is cut, and
so the tree withers and dries up, and cannot be recovered. So if the joint
water be run thus long, whereby that member is dried up, and grown hard, stiff
and inflexible, then Surgeons bestow their pains in vain about such cures: can
do no more to it but to allay the pains that are still in it. But if it be not
gone too far, then be not afraid to fall on the cure, and be helpful unto
nature.

There are several causes of this witheredness, all of them Cause of this
Ariditie.
I shall not relate, one in general I will name, touching the occasion of the
up-drying.

That updrying for the most part comes from an oppilation of that member, be
that caused from what it will, either from pains, diseases or woundings. For
where there are great pains in a member, which have held a long time, then it
comes to an updrying; because that sick member cannot digest that food which
Nature afforded, and causes an oppilation in that member; no marvail then if
it withers.

It falls out also, when a member is wounded very deeply, there may be incident
there such an Ariditie, because the natural balsam has not its true course,
and it is impossible for Nature to skip over the wound, and that which runs
amiss, does not go well. There may also fall a humor to a member, which though
it be not wounded, yet it may be obstructed, and so causes an exiccation.

More causes could be quoted of such updryings, but it is needless to do it,
because their cures differ very little: for Acidities caused either by a fall,
blow, thrust, or by any other occasion, all these are comprehended under one
cure. Those cold witherings by a shot, fall, etc. whereby great pains, and
consequently a consumption of that member is caused; that has a peculiar cure,
differing but a little from the other: it may be said of the rest also.

Touching such cures, we will first of all speak of that, which Surgeons call
Aridum membrum, caused by the running out of the joint water, you must
conceave, that I do Cure of Arudum membrum.
not speak here of an aridity, which is come unto an extremity; for that which
one neither knows, nor is able to cure, why should he write of it. I will
speak here only of a consumed member which is not gone too far, where there is
yet great hope of its recovery: Do it thus.

Take head, feet, lungs, and liver of a Goat, or of a sheep, or Calfes gather,
cleanse the head and feet well from hairs, wool, etc. put these together into a
great pot, put alike quantity to it of water and white wine, let it boil that
all the bones fall off from the flesh, throw away the bones, the rest cut
small, put it into that liquor it was boiled in, boil it again to a mash: with
this liquor the patient must be fomented as hot as he can endure it. But in
case the withered member could not conveniently be bathed, then spread that
mash on a thick cloth, apply it like a Cataplasm, as hot as the patient can
endure it: as soon as that grows cold, then apply another of the same, as warm
as he can endure it. That which was used must still be put into the pot, that
you may not want materials for Cataplasmes. This must be continued so long,
till the patient confesses that it has warmed his member very well; this
warmth may hold half an hour or more: which being done, then take the following
Ointment, anoint the withered member at a coal fire, do it downward, still
warming one hand after the other, so long till the said member be warmed well
thoroughly; then lay on it a plain plaster, made of Wax and Hoggs grease, that
member and the patient must be kept warm: forbear to use any Oxycroceum or
other hot plasters. Go on with the former so long, till you see and perceave
that the member is at a mending hand, and gets strength.

When you perceave that all the pain is gone, and that member begins to
prove again, then use other Ointments against shrinkings and updryings; which
are found at the Receipt for ordinary Consumptions and witherings: all the
skill lies herein, to stay the consuming, and to get to the member its natural
nourishment, which being brought to pass, then you may easily go on with the
rest.

The Ointmunt above named against withered members is thus: Take Cranes grease,
Foxes grease, ana 2, grease of a young Hogg 1 ss, mingle these together, make
an Ointment, and use it as you have heard.

Reader out of these you may gather, what the fundamentals are of my cure about
exiccated members, which exiccation though it be a withering, yet it differs
from other exiccations in the cure. For the medicines used here, are not of hot
qualities, as those are, which they use to other withered members. Now this
difference not being understood of those which undertake such cures, how can it
be otherwise but that many patients are spoiled and utterly und one.

I have much read, seen, and heard of withered members, and made use also of
such medicines, that were usual then, but afteward finding better, I left the
other: some used to whip the dried member with Juniper twigs, or Horse tails,
or with Nettles; others rubbed the place with Sackcloth, etc. others anointed
the party at a good fire, others used Cupping glasses, others used
Fomentations, etc. all these ways I do not condemn, because my self made use
of some of them.

I will inpart unto you my way, with the reason thereof.

I hold the flesh of every sound body has its growth from abundance of blood
and natural humidity: my chiefest endeavor was, to imitate Nature herein, and
to restore flesh to a withered member: and to convey blood and food to it, by
rarifying the same, by stirring and monving it, now by the lifting up the hand,
then by hanging it down: in which way the blood is made to come forward and
backward, and by stroaking it may be lead further. To which end I took in hand
such a withered member, and stroaked it downward, not upward, anointing each
part thereof with Wound Ointment, all downward, and stroaked the blood and
humidity down to the member, in the manner of milking, afterward rubbing the
member so long, till the very marrow in the bone was warmed thereby, at which
work my hands also were heated. This stroaking downward to the hand or feet I
continued for an hour, bringing the blood into the fingers or toes, and forced
the blood to the extreme parts as much as I could, insomuch that the toes or
fingers began to swell from the abundance of blood. After this stroaking I
applied a warmed Oxycroceum, well and thick spread, laid it on gently only to
keep to the part, and let it have air and room enough, for the blood and
natural humidity to come unto. That member I bid the patient always to hang it
down, not upward, that the blood may the easier get into. I anointed the party
twice a day, which saves toyling to the party: when the member begins to grow
again, then the party felt no pain when anointed. That witheredness caused by
a fall and not by a fracture, I have anointed twice a day: if a member did
consume away, by reason of a cold or other simptom, then I anointed it four
times more, than if it had been caused by a fracture. If a hand or foot was
swelled, but the part above was not swelled, I liked it well, then I knew my
labor would not be ill bestowed: when that member felt a tickling or tingling,
it was a sign of healing; and when that member at the undressings grew warm,
and the veins looked blew, then I proceeded in the cure. It fell out often,
that a great pain was come into a hand or foot, which did not much trouble me,
because it was frequent with me to have such cases, for that pain upon slighter
proceedings passed away: after that I went on with rubbing and anointing, and
with Gods blessing the cure was performed.

For other sorts of withered parts, which almost require one process, make this
Unguent. Bucks grease 1, Oil of Bays 3, Oil of Juniper ss, Oil of Spicke 1,
Ointment for other ^onsumed parts.
Hoggs grease 2; melt these together, add to it the following pulverised
pieces: of Savine 1, Nettle seed ss, Alumen Plumosum ss, these well pulverised
and stirred among the other, are to be made to an Unguent. This is used as the
other was above related, about withered members. The poultesse above mentioned
made of a Sheep or Calfes Gather, is needless here: and use here Oxycroceum,
instead of the plaster made of Wax.

I must needs speak here of faults, ordinarily committed; Abuse.
They usually take Gummi Euphorbium to Ointments against withered members:
which is here both useless and hurtful. For it consumes all natural heat in
that member which is anointed with it, it dilateth and dries up the skin,
which ought not to be at any withered or consumed member.

These men suppose because that Gum is hot, therefore it is good here, when it
is no such matter. True, hot things ought to be used in such cases, but those
hot things must have a moist quality also, to open the opilations of that
member, a contrary quality shows here that Gum.

Many other things could be quoted here, to be used against consumed members,
but I wave them, being they are usual and known simptoms.

But the exiccation of a member is not known so well, how it ought to be cured,
many abuses are committed in its cure, and many dangers are caused by ignorant
Surgeons. I shall be the more exact in the description of such cures, the
rather, because such exiccation may befall a member which was not wounded, nor
bereaved of its humiditie by the joint waters running. A hot chollerick humor
may fall into a member or joint, whereby such exiccating heat may be caused,
natural moisture exhausted, whereby a member consumes away. For such cases the
ordinary Unguent against shrinkings are naught, making the case rather worse
than better.

There are other means found against withered members, as hot Baths or Pepoirs,
etc. Some Unguents, Plasters, Aquavitae's, etc. There are also Topical
medicines, viz Levisticum, gathered in April, when Soll enters Aries, and
Other means against withered parts.
Ellebore niger, and the like, which sometimes prove effectual. There are
medicaments also, which for that purpose may be used inwardly at the increase
of the Moon: but these are good against ordinary consumed members, but not
against exiccated ones: as the Paracelsian Water made of Bloodwort, which I
have made use of, and found it to do good.

Such like things are successefully used against withered members; but this
order ought to be kept also which you heard given about consumptions or spoiled
members. To speak really, the Unguents are not so much regarded, as their true
preparation and careful application, to work them strongly into the place
affected. Therefore let Surgeons use, what they have learned, and known in
their practick, applying things duly and discreetly; therein lies the
chiefest part of their judgment.

Note; As long as a wound is not healed, and great pains are in it, a Surgeon
will do little good, unless the pains in the wound be removed. In like manner
if a member be out of joint, the same must first of all be well set again; if
you do not so, then your cure is in vain: Nature desires to be unhindred in her
course. If in this manner you be careful about a wound, that no pain be
caused, nor any joint water running be obstructive, then the less danger will
be about the consumption of that member.

I cannot choose but to reveal a Secret, very good against all manner of
consumptions of members, none comparable A Secret for all Aridities.
unto it: but my expressions will be according to this Art, to which every one
must take his course, and those that knows to work with fire will agree with
me. For it is an universal medicine against all consumptions, it opens pours
and obstructions in one day more, than other Unguents will do in a whole
month; it purges sinews, which of necessity must be done here.

Take of fixed Allom 4, I mean not crude sharp or drawing Allom, but the mild
and soft Allom which is taken out of its own earth; mingle with it dissolved or
fused Salt, very purely beaten, three times as much; put it in a pot or other
vessel, lute it well, keep out all air, set it in a reverberatory, put fire to
it of the fourth degree, the flames must beat upon twelve hours long, all must
be red hot, then let it cool; take it out, open it, the matter which you find
on the bottom, cast into four quarts of Well water, it will dissolve, that
which does not dissolve, keep and dry it, put it in a glass; pour on it Alcool
vini, (which is an Aquavitae distilled subtly from all phlegm, so that being
put in a vessel, and kindled, that all goes away with the flame, no liquor
staying behind) let it be covered two fingers deep about it, and so keep it for
use: when you are to use it, then mingle some of it with Oil of Bays, or
others, your Ointment is made of, anoint the consumed member with it once or
twice, no matter whether the Moon be new or at the full: this anointing will
make the memher swell a little, but no pain at all it causes: this being done,
then go all the consumed member over, the member and joint will recover its
former strength: keep that member warm, let it take no cold.

I tell you that this Seeret is so effectual, working upon all manner of
opilations of joints; it will help also a Sciatica, A Secret for the Sciatica.
be it caused by heat or by cold, of a short or a long standing.

My intent was not to reveal that Secret against the Sciatica, which
follows; but having such a near affinity with the former, for the public
good sake, I will reveal it.

Take the foresaid Water, from which the foresaid Powder was separated, make it
warm, rub the hip bone well with it; then take the above said Powder prepared,
mingle it with Oil of Bays, make an Unguent, and anoint the affected place
with it once a day, and do it for two days: then take of the Water, where that
matter was separated from one part, of Vervain and Centorie ana three parts;
boil these in a sufficient quantity of Water for a bath, let the party be
fomented with four or five times, for one or two hours, (that must be in the
decrease of the Moon) then is it enough. Whilst the patient is in that stove,
let this following drink be prepared for him: Take of Cardnus Benedictus 1, of
Calmus, Flowers of Centorie 1 ss, Wormwood, Cinnamon, pour upon these six
quarts of Wine, let him drink of it, and no other; or a very little of Barley
Water, in case the party be very dry; Thus the Sciatica will soon pass away,
make no doubt of it: though the hip were out of joint, it will soon turn inward
again to its right place, without any further purging, fomenting, wood cures
and such like, which are otherwise made use of in that case, though to little
purpose.

Thus I close this third part of Symptoms, let no man imagine that I have
written of all Symptoms, because there are many which have not been touched at
all, neither was it my intent to do it. But these are the chiefest, and of
greatest concernment: he that knows these aright, and can handle them well,
he may easily deal with the rest; if so be he have judgment in Surgery.

Finis, of the Third Part of Symptoms in Wounds.
The Fourth Part. Treating of all kinds of Balmes, Slaves, Plasters,
Ointments, Oils, Blood-stenchers, Potions, Tents, Corrosives, etc. which are
used for Wounds, and have been mentioned hitherto in the former parts of the
Book: How they are to be Artificially prepared, and used well.
This Fourth Part is called the Book of Cookery.
COurteous Reader, it is well known, and found it so perhaps by your own
experience, that a bad Cook may spoil good Meats, over or under seasoning
them, though in themselves they be good and wholesome, yet by his bad cooking
may be very unwholesome: and on the other side Meats that in themselves are
unpleasant and unwholesome, may be dressed so that they may safely be eaten.
Even so is it with Medicaments, and those that prepare them: For Medicines
which in themselves are good and useful, are by those which are to prepare
them, made pestiferous and unsafe to be used: on the other side there are some
Druggs, which in themselves are naught and poisonous, may in their preparation
be so rectified, that they prove wholesome and effectual Medicaments.

Therefore those that profess such an Art, as to prepare Medicaments, must do
it so, that their compounded Medid^caments may be proper and safely used to
Wounds, Sores, Ulcers, Fistulaes, Cancers, and that their Medicaments may agree
with Wounds, etc.

In consideration hereof, I would not could not intermit, to annexe to my
practick of Surgery this fourth Part, which for some reasons I call the Book of
Cookery. And that Novices in Surgery may know how to deal in Salves, Plasters,
Vulnerary Potions, Ointments, etc. the which to do I am the more moved
thereunto, because in the precedent parts I named some Ingredients, but did not
set down the composition of them, nor how they were to be prepared, and
directed the Reader to this fourth Part.

Courteous Reader, do not think, that I will write of such things here, which
are known all the world over, as how Oil of Roses, Oil of Cammomil, and such
like, are to be made; which would not only raise the Book to a great Volum, but
would be needless also and superfluous: therefore if I give only hints of
Plasters made of raw Druggs, is the reason, because their compositions are
common and very well known. Other things which do not lie so open as yet, and
their preparations, are not known to every one, these I will reveal and impart
faithfully. And then will I speak of things also, which want corrections, which
though they be good, yet have some bad things also, for which cause they ought
not to be ministered unto patients, unless their good and pure things be first
separated from their impure parts; and that is commonly called correcting, when
a harmless thing is put to that which is dangerous, which is a great fault to
do so, and be warned that you beware of it.

CHAP. I.
Of Wound Balsams, Ointments, Plasters, Oils, etc. and among the rest of that
precious Brown Ointment, which was so often mentioned hitherto.

I Never made use of any distilled Wound-Balsams, neither Distilled wound
balsams.
do I greatly esteem them, because usually they are too hot; and are not only
dangerous in Head wounds, and useless in other wounds, but also by reason of
their too violent penetrating quality, are poisonous to Head wounds.

But if sinews are cut in a member, there I praise the red Oil of Turpentine,
and hold it to be very good. Use of redd oil of terpentine.


Some Surgeons are accustomed to use Wound Balsams to all Wounds, which I do
not approve of, advise them rather to forbear, though many precious Ingredients
come to their composition, yet they are made too hot in the destilling.

I like and approve better of Wound Oils, and of Wound Ointments, than of
Wound Balsams; I know no Wound-oyles wound ointments.
other difference between them, but only that the Ointments are somewhat
thicker, and may more conveniently be carried into other places, for that
reason I rather used Ointments for easier carriage sake, and when I had use for
them, I dissolved and applied them warm, by letting them run into the wound.

Note also this difference about Wound Ointments: some Clear terpentine
Wounds are better pleased with this Ointment, and others are dissafected unto
it: which may be seen by that, when an Ointment causes pains in a Wound; for
that reason I approve not so well of clear Turpentine, to be used thus crude
into the Wounds, especially to Head wounds, because it paineth them. The dry
Turpentine, or the Gum of Larix is better for this purpose, if it be well
washed.

Of Wound Ointments in particular
Note about Wound Ointments; there are so many things used hereunto, that they
hardly can be named, because Gumms of trees.
Surgeons hold this or that, and as many heads so they vary herein. Several
sorts of Herbs, Roots, Flowers, Seeds, Fruits, are used hereunto; also all
sorts of Gums, of Apple trees, Cherry trees, Juniper trees, Mastick,
Frankincense, etc. Balsam of Apples, etc. Who is able to relate all?

What matter it is, how many things are used to Wound Ointments, as long as the
Ingredients are good. It is not so great a skill to heal wounds, because one
Salve or Ointment if good, may heal many wounds, though one wound is not healed
so soon as the other, yet it will be done in due time. The chiefest thing is,
that a Surgeon have judgment in these things, and be able to discern when any
simptom is coming, that it may timely be opposed or prevented.

Many Surgeons use these Gums, Bdellium, Opopanax, Bedellium Opopanax Serapium.
Serapium, and such like, for to dress wounds withal, of which I do not
approve: because they are of too strong an atractive quality, which ought not
to be used to wound Ointments, being more dangerous with their too much drawing.

Other Surgeons make use of Unguentum Apostolicum, which is an absurd thing, if
it should be used to fresh wounds whereof I speak here; such like gross
Compositions, usually some made much of, I could not forbear to give warning of
it* My Wound Ointments which to this day I made use of, are few and plain, but
are well prepared, which I will faithfully impart to you.

Wound Ointment.
1. Take white Rosin 3, sweet May Butter, 6, the The Authors wound Ointment.
juice of Stellaria or Statwort 1, the juice of Sanicle and Winter-green
(Pyrola) ana ss, Sallat Oil 3, juice of Goats bea^^ (B^^b^da ^^rdi^) 3: the
Sallat Oil with the juices of the Herbs must be boiled together, all humidity
thereof must be boiled away, then put in the Rosin, when that, is melted then
put the May Butter to it, then press it through a cloth, stir it so long
till it be cold, and keep it for use. True, this is a plain Wound Ointment, but
it is very good, heals wounds in a short time.

Another Wound Ointment.
2. Take Pyrola, Bistorta, Sanicula, Veronica, ana 1, Flores hypericonis,
Flores Centaurij ana; cut these small, put them into a Bolthead, pour to it of
Sallat oil 2, Beef marrow 1, Hoggs grease 3, sweat Butter 4, lute the glass,
set it in hot Sand, or hot Water, let it digest eight days, so that the oil
and grease be in a continual melting: then take it out into a Copper dish,
boil it therein to the consumption of all the moisture, then press it through
a pure cloth, fling away the feces: to that which is pressed through the cloth,
must be put of Turpentine 1, which being cold, then put to it subtly
pulverised Mastick, Frankincense, Myrrh, ana ss, of purely pulverised Aloes
bepatick 1, let it cool; thus you have an excellent Wound Unguent.

If you please, you may mingle with it one dram of Verdigriece, Verdigriece
to the end, that your medicine may cleanse also; prepared Verdigriece is good
for to give it a good color. If you have a difficult Joint wound in hand, then
it is necessary you put to it prepared Verdigriece, or F^os aeris; and if that
Ointment be too thin, then melt among it of Wax 2.

Another Wound Unguent.
3. Take of good Honey lb 2, of ^resh Well water lb 1 ss, let it have some
walms over the fire, and scum it well, of Pulmonaria ss, of Virga aurea,
Serpentaria, Stellaria, Sanicula, ana 1, Plantain 4; out these and beat them,
and put them into the scummed Honey, digest it in a warm place for eight days;
then boil it to a spissitude, press it out from the Herbs, put to that of well
pulverised Mastick, Frankincense, Mirth, ana ss keep it for use.

This Unguenthath greater virtues than it is believed: it runs better into
all the corners of wounds, than any other Oils can do, it joineth with the
natural humor in wounds sooner than any Unguent or Oils, and is exceeding good
against the running of the Joint water or radical humor.

Of Wound Oils.
There is no other difference between Wound Unguents and Wound Oils, only
their thickness, the one is thinner than the other; and to the one are used as
many Ingredients as to the other: if you take to the said Herbs, or other
Ingredients, no Wax or thick stuff, but only Oils or thin grease, then it is
only a wound Oil. But I made more use of the Unguents than of the Oils: the
advantage herein is only, that Unguents may more conveniently be carried into
other parts of the Land, than the Oils.

There are several sorts of wound Oils, and wound Unguents, I intend not to
speak of them all, only of some rare wound Oils I will speak, to make use of
them if you please.

Take pure Turpentine, and no running Rasom 1 ss, put and heat it in a pan,
then take pulverised Amber, put A good wound Oil.
it in by degrees and let it melt, then put to it of Mastick, of Frankineense
ss; all these being melted and stirred, then take off the pan from the fire,
and drop into gently of Linseed Oil 4, stir it till it be cold, try on a stone
with a drop whether it be done well; if it be of the thickness of Vernice then
is it right, if it be too thin, then let it boil longer, if too thick, then put
more of the Oil to it.

Courteous Reader, here you have a wound Oil of great virtue for deep wounds
and stabs, if put thinly into. But if you will have these Oils more pleasant
and affected to the wound, then take of that Oil 3, of Oil of Roses 2, Fowers
of St. John's wort, and of the blew Flowers of Knotgrass ana 1; mingle these all
together, beat them, let them stand in the Sun for twenty days, and keep it
for use: you may put to it of such wound Herbs, which you think fit best, then
will it be praiseworthy.

Let no man be afraid, as if these wound Oils were too strong, by reason of
the Mastick, Frankincense, Amber, etc. because their burning hot quality goes
away at the melting, Chemists know that it is so. These are the wound Salves,
and wound Oils I thought good to impart. Marvail not that I give so few and so
plain Receipts. To make Salves, Ointments, and Oils for wounds, is no great
skill; true, these are of concernment, and so are the application and dressing,
and not so much does lie in their variety.

Sometimes one Simple will heal a wound as well as a great Compound. The
judgment in things is of a far greater concernment, than the variety of
medicines. Therefore if you will make a Compound of Ointments, Oils, Plasters,
of many Ingredients, then you must know first, why you will use this or that,
and for what; you must not go on in it like a blind man, to make an omnium
gatherum without discretion, which many use to do. And it is for certain true,
that it is more dangerous sometimes, if but one Simple is used, than when a
plain Composition is applied.

I must give one hint more of a thing I have said above, that Galbanum,
Opopanax, etc. are not good to be used to Unguents for fresh wounds: I remember
that Mastick, Sarcocolla, Frankincense, Myrrh, are frequently used for wound
Salves and Unguents: these are good if used moderately; but if exceeded in,
then are they hurtful, and are too hot for wounds: and in case any simptom is
coming into the wound, then are these also very hurtful; especially in the
wound disease, and wound Prunella, and to exiccated wounds they are a mere
poison.

And for that reason I use but little of Mastick, Frankincense, to my wound
Unguents, and stiptick Plasters, and no more than I do know that I must needs
take, why should I take more of them than there is need: too much and too
little spoils any thing: wound Unguents and wound Plasters, should always
stand in one temperament. I have observed, that if too much of any of the said
Ingredients were taken, that it never brought any good; that flesh which in the
healing should come on, they quite burn it away, causing the running of the
Joint water. It is better the medicines be rather to weak than too strong, and
may easily be observed in wounds that it is so, if notice be taken.

You must observe (let it be a warning) how much the wound does receave of the
medicine in digesting of it, that thereby you may know what distance of time
you are to keep for the next dressing: all this you must be sure of, and not to
go by guess, for here it does not hold, to say my Receipt is good, you must
have judgment both of wounds and of Receipts, whether they affect each other.

Of Vnguentum Anodynum.
This Unguent is made several ways of which I do not intend to speak, because
I know no reason why I should Anodynum
make use of in fresh wounds and what good it should be for: neither have I
made use of Unguentum Populeon, for Unguentum Populeon.
the same reason, finding no good it does to wounds. I will only speak here of
Anodynum, the which I advised you above you should make use of, to be applied
to the Wound-gall, to allay the extreme heat in the wound by To kill the
wound-gal.
force, and without further means to kill the Wound-gall.

Take the juice of Nightshade, and of Hisciamus ana 2, of the water of Froggs
spawn 6, the juice of Cicuta 1, of good Vinegar 3, of Honey 8; mingle these,
heat it in a pan over a coal fire, stir it well for two or three hours long,
then set it over the fire, boil it and scum it well, press it through a cloth,
cast away the dreggs, keep the rest: instead of Honey you may take Butter or
Oil, as you please.

Of the Cramp Unguent.
The description of this Unguenr, you had above in the Chapter of pains in
wounds, where I let it rest not speaking of it here. But how those Oils ought
to be prepared, which are used unto it, I count it needless to tell of it,
because the preparation of such are commonly known.

Though I know a readier way for their preparation, yet I hold it unseasonable
now to speak of it: When I publish any more of my writings, then will I be
mindful of it, and impart also many other metalline medicines, which I make use
of for wounds; which are the soveraignest medicines against spoiled wounds, and
are a great many of such I never spoke of yet, whereby the Reader may
understand, that it is a thing of high concernment, to have medicaments and
medicines well prepared, a thing most necessary for Surgeons to know; because
their medicines must bring to right again, such wounds, which have been spoiled
through salving, anointing, and the like dawbings.

Of the brown Unguent for wounds, which I have made mention of so often.
Courteous Reader, I have made several mentions of this Brown Unguent.
brown Unguent, and advised you to use it to wounds, especially to joint
wounds, as soon as you fear in the least manner the coming of any simptom into
it: I laid the cure For what use?
of joint wounds on this Unguent, held it good for all wounds, and counseled
Surgeons to make use of it.

Therefore I held it necessary to describe it orderly, by reason of its great
virtue. It preventeth and drives away all simptomes, cleanses wounds, and
furthereth their healing mightily, it keeps off inflammation, opposes forcibly
all malignant corroding humors. This Unguent may be boiled to a hardness, to
make wicks or tents of it, to convey them to the bottom of deep wounds or
stabs, where it melts by degrees, laying a clean foundation for healing,
opposing all contrary things.

All these you will find in the practice better, than How and when it is used.
I am able to express here: But as in all other things, so in this also a
moderate use is to be observed. Use it not every day, especially when the wound
is in a good state; and not use it unless there be occasion for it, or
necessity require it, of the which I gave you notice above.

Make it thus: Take Scrophularia, Hedera terrestis, Celandine, Speedwell, ana
one handful, cut these small, put it in a glass, pour on it good Wine Vinegar
to cover the Herbs, set it in a warm place, let it stand in digestion a week,
strain the Vinegar, and put the Herbs in a bag, to press them out so that the
Herbs be dry, fling them away and keep the Vinegar.

Then take of Vitriol lb 2, calcine it in the following To prepare the red
Vitriol.
manner: put it in an earthen pot, let it dissolve, then dry it, increase the
fire, let it be red hot for an hour together, it will be red: break this pot,
take out the Vitriol, and put it into another pot, pour more Vinegar upon, and
let it boil a little; after that put a quart of water to it, boil one moyty of
it away: this being done, let it stand a while, then cant off this red water
into another pot, and the remaining feces on the bottom pour another quart of
water, boil the moyty of it away, and the water being tinged red, cant it off,
iterate it so long till the Vitriol tingeth the water no more. These off-canted
waters must be put into a glass body, and evaporated to a dryness, then the
Vitriol on the bottom appears red; make this red Vitriol in a new pot red
hot, and being thus red hot, you cast it in a pot full of rain water, there let
it dissolve: vapor away this water also, and the tinged water you put into
another glass, on the feces pour fresh water, and this tinged water you put to
the other tinged water, iterate it a third time, or as long as the Vitrioll
tingeth any water; these feces fling away, the tinged water must be evaporated,
that the Vitriol lie dry on the bottom, as formerly it did: make it red hot in
a Crucible, and proceed also as you did with the former; that Vitriol being
dried, then is it prepared, and is sweet on the tongue; pulverise this Vitriol:
take of it 2, and put of the out-prest Vinegar from the Herbs 3 to it, add to
it of phlegm of Vitriol 2, of scummed Honey 6, of Flores aeris 1, and a of an
ounce; boil these to a spissitude of an Electuary, then is it ready prepared.

Flores aris are prepared thus: Verdigriece 1 ss, pulverise Flowers of ^^s.
it, pour on it of distilled Vinegar 7 ss, let it stand, the Vinegar will be
tinged green; cant off the Vinegar, the feces being done away, abstract that
Vinegar in a glass body, then the Verdigriece lies green on the bottom, fairer
than it was at first.

This is that aes Viride, half an ounce of it does more with less pains than
five ounces of others.

CHAP. II.
Of Plasters in general, and in particular of Opodeldoch, stiptick and
defensive Plasters.

AS there is a variety of wound Unguents, so there is a variety also of wound
Plasters, according to the experience in Surgery: I cannot dislike that every
one sticks unto that, what he has learned, and I know that some Surgeons use
things, which they do not understand, and care not for better experimental
knowledge.

To speak my opinion about wound Plasters, it is merely a cover over for a
wound, as many do count it no other; but they are of as great concernment as
wound Unguents, which run into the wound: for if these Plasters be well
prepared, then they preserve wounds from many simptoms, and are to be highly
esteemed.

And do not approve at all of that, when Surgeons apply Plasters to wounds on
dangerous places, made of Wax, Suet, Turpentine, Oil, etc. In some place they
hold it a great skill in Surgery, if they can prepare Emplastrum Diachylon, and
apply it to the wound: it helps such wounds which hardly deserve the name of
a wound: but in dangerous wounds, where more care and vigilancie is required,
it does no good, to say nothing of a worse matter.

But as I said before, it is a great matter to have good Compositions in
Plasters: for an unclean wound is affected with Gum Amoniack, and such like;
but to running wounds such Gumms are clean contrary: for that reason is it
requisite, that Surgeons ought to know the nature and condition of wounds, and
to be sure with what each wound does agree: therefore as in former Chapters I
have imparted unto you faithfully the Compositions of wound Unguents and of
wound Oils, so will I do now also, and teach you the composing, preparing, and
using of wound Plasters, and will begin with the Plaster Opodeldoch.

Description of the Plaster called Opodeldoch.
This Plaster deserves the prerogative among the rest, being a Catholic
Plaster, used for all wounds and stab^, and preventeth many simptoms by reason
of its quick healing, though it asks no great toil in the preparation of it,
yet this ought to be considered in it, that half an ounce of it effects more
than five ounces of stiptick Plasters, and these also according to my receipt
are good, however they cannot be compared with the other.

He that will have or make it, must be informed and expert in many things; and
he that cannot make it, let him keep to his stiptick Plasters, and be more
vigilant and careful, then he will have good success in his cures.

Take of Virgins Wax lb 2, of the darkish Turpentine lb 1, of Sallade Oil 3,
note, I speak of the darkish Turpentine, because some base shopkeepers sell
Kintrigt Rasom, which is soft and running, for Turpentine, whose virtue is not
comparable unto that of Turpentine.

Melt these together, and put to it the juice of Celondine, the juice of Oak
leaves, the juice of Starwort, and Speedwell, ana 1 ss, boil these and let all
the moisture thereof be consumed; then put these Gums to it, Ammoniack,
Galbanum, Opopanax, clarified with Vinegar, ana, of Colophone 1 ss, of Amber
ss, of Mastick, Myrrh, Frankincense, Sarcocolla, ana 3; when these are a little
cool, then stir among it of pulverised and prepared Magnet 1 ss, of Crocus
Martis 2, of Crocus Veneris 1; all this must be stirred into the Plaster, and
when it is almost cold, then stir amonst it the red sweet earth of Vitriol,
(as before you put in also, of prepared Tutia 3, and of prepared Calmy 10.) as
much as will make the Emplastrum brown red: then take it out, work it with your
hands into rouls, roll them on a board greased with Rose oil, make the rouls of
the bigness of a knifes back, and keep them for use: you must cook it so, that
at the use of it being warmed a little, it grow soft; and not so, that when it
is cold, it is not flexible, breaks at the bowing like glass: in this manner
keep it for your use.

This Plaster separateth all impurities from wounds, takes away the proud and
superfluous flesh, causes the growth of good flesh; preserves from bad
simptoms, and brings on healing in a short time: this is the operation of it.

Preparations of some of the Ingrediences which come to the said Plaster, and
first of the Magnet.
Magnet is prepared thus: Take and pulverise the Magnet, Preparation of the
Magnet.
make it red hot in a melting pot, put into this red hot Magnet of well
dulcified oil of Mars a like quantity, set it on a gentle heat, let it be dry,
then is it prepared; half an ounce of it effects more, than one pound of
other stuff,

That Oil of Mars which is used to it, is made thus: Take of Allom lb 1, of
common Salt 4; distill a water from it, and with that water imbibe iron filings
several times a day, a rust will stick to it, which must be washed off cleanly,
let the water evaporate from it to an oyliness, which must be dulcified with
another distilling, and it is thus: put fresh water to it, let it evaporate,
then is this Oil of Mars; which is fit for that purpose prepared.

The Calmy is thus prepared.
Pulverise Calmy very subtly, put it in a pot, and make it red hot, pour it
thus hot into good Vinegar, cover that Calmyes preparation
pot quickly, after that Calmy is quenched, then cant off that Vinegar, and put
the Calmy into a Crucible, make it red hot again, put it into the same Vinegar,
iterate it a third time.

Preparation of Tutia.
The preparation of Tutia is the same with the Calmy, only Tutia prepared.
at the quenching of it, you take water of Fennel, or the water of Celondine,
instead of Vinegar. Tutia is nothing else but the fume of Copper, which
sticks to the iron bars of the furnace.

Preparation of Crocus Veneris.
Take thin Copper lamins, lay them in a melting pot, Preparation of Crocus
Veneris.
make Stratum super stratum with Kitchen Salt, let these together be nealed;
then cast the lamins with the salt into cold water, wash the lamins clean from
their blackness, then make again with Salt stratum super stratum, neale it
again, cast it after into cold water as formerly, and wash the lamins clean,
iterate it as often as you please: to that water you wash the lamins in, pour a
good deal of warm water, then cant it off; that Crocus Veneris you will find
red as blood on the bottom, which you must wash well, to take off all the
sharpness of the Salt, dry it carefully with a linen cloth, and keep it for
use.

Crocus Martis is prepared thus.
Some make Crocus Martis with Salt, others make it with Crocus Martis.
Urine, others with Vinegar, etc. to consume the Iron to rust, out of which
rust they make Crocus Martis thus: the Iron being consumed unto rust, that rust
they put into a melting pot, make it red hot, and bring it to another color.
But it should not be so, because the Salt of it is not taken off, for whose
sake it ought not to be used to any medicine. For it should be made without
bringing the Iron unto rust, not adding any Salt thereunto; and it is done
thus: Take pure Iron filings which are not tasty, put them into a long
Reverberatory, give a strong fire at last, give the strongest degree of fire
for a day and a night, that the Iron be brought unto a brown-red; being cold
take it out, and cast it into a tub full of water, stir it lustily about, and
suddenly put it into another tub, in the first tubbs bottom all that Iron will
be which is not sufficiently Reverberated, you may fling that away; but that
which is run over with the first water, that you must keep, set it on a fire,
let it evaporate to a dryness; I say, let it evaporate, and not cant it off,
else its obstructive virtue goes away also.

This is the best way to prepare Crocus Martis, thus may it safely be used in
medicines, of which I made mention often in the description of the Opodeldoch,
and Blood-stenchings.

How the Erath of Vitriol is made.
Take of Vitriol as much as you will, put it in an earthen Terra Vi^rioli.
pot, make a circular fire about it* and calcine it to a red color: being thus
rubified, then pulverise it and pour water upon, let it stand a day and a
night, then pour off the water, and pour other water on it, let it stand to
clear up, cant it off, iterate it as often that all sharpness be taken off, and
brought to a sweetness, make it dry, then you have a kettle brown earth, which
has greater virtues and operations than Bole or Terra Sigillata.

Of Stiptick Plasters.
There are several sorts of Stiptick Plasters, having often made mention of
them above, here and there, only giving a hint of their names, not showing what
sort of them I meant, therefore as occasion serves, I will speak of their
preparation and use.

Take of Wax one ounce, of Turpentine four ounces, of Colophone two ounces, of
Gum Galbanum, Opopanax, Armoniacum of each three quarters of an ounce, of
Magnet two ounces, of Amber one ounce, of Mastick, Myrrh, ana one quarter of an
ounce, of Verdigriece one quarter of an ounce, make an Emplastrum out of these
according to use. This Plaster draws forth from the deep bottom all impure
corruptions, which did settle in wounds and stabs.

Another Stiptick Plaster.
Take of Wax half a pound, of Turpentine (not of the running Rasom) four
ounces, of prepared Calmy five ounces, of Silver lethargyre one ounce, of oes
ustum half an ounce, of Vitriol earth three quarters of an ounce, of Crocus
Martis one quarter of an ounce, of Amber, Frankincense, Myrrh, of each one
dram; mingle all these according to the manner of a Plaster, and work it with
your hands into rouls. This Stiptick Plrister is good for running wounds,
making fresh flesh to grow, and opposes the running of the radical humor.

Another Stiptick Plaster.
Take of Wax one pound, of fair white Rasom four ounces, of Turpentine one
ounce, of juice of Celondine four ounces, of Solanum majus half an ounce, oil
of Toads two ounces, of Stirax liquida one ounce, of Gum Ammoniacum one quarter
of an ounce, of Myrrh, Sarcocolla, ana one dram, of oil of Scorpium two ounces;
out of these make a Plaster according to Art.

Oil of Toads is made thus: Take of Sallade oil half a Oil of Toads.
pound, put into it eight, nine, or ten Toads, according to the bigness more or
less, bake them in it, and let them be cold; thus you have your Toads Oil,
which is endued with several good qualities: the Toads must be spitted with a
stick, and on that spit to let them dye, that earth they have in their bowels
must be taken out, and must be well cleansed with Vinegar.

This Stiptick Plaster is very good for such wounds in which there is any
venom: it draws out all impure things, brings the wound to a separation: when
these signs are at hand, then that Plaster must be put away, and others must
be used.

It is requisite that when these Plasters are used, the patients be put to
sweat either with Treacle or Mithridate, then the virtues of this Plaster will
the more be seen in these venomous wounds, in their inflammation or wound galls.

Reader to describe this Plaster I could not choose, though it was not mine
intent to write of any poisoned wounds.

And thus I close to speak of Wound Plasters, hoping that the Reader will
conceive of my instrustion, how in such cases Surgeons ought to deal.

There are good Plasters made also of other things, which I do not reject,
only let Surgeons observe and know, whether their Plasters agree with the
Wounds.

Of Defensive Plasters.
There are as many sorts of Defensive plasters, as there Defensive plasters.
are of Wound Unguents, Wound Oils, and Wound Plasters. The Ancients have
prepared these of Bole, sealed Earth, Ceruss, and such like: and called them
Defensives, because they used them to that end, that the Corrosives which they
used should eat no further, these Defensives keeping them within their bounds.

But I using no Corrosives neither to Wounds nor Ulcers, but hold them for a
horrible thing, therefore I have not need of any such Defensive Plasters; but
I call these Plasters Defensives for another reason, because they assuage the
smarting pains, defend and preserve wounds from many dangerous simptoms; and
for that reason I advise Surgeons to make use of them for dangerous wounds, for
I found it so in my practick, that great good is done thereby.

And these Plasters I used to all wounds, where there was a necessity for it,
instead of Poultesses; in whose stead I keep unto Defensives by reason of their
utillity; and reject Cataplasms as dangerous things: yea, I can say truly, if
only a single Wax plaster great and broad be applied about the wound, it is
better than Cataplasms made of Milk, Meal, Rose cakes, Oil, Butter, Mel^lot,
etc.

To speak of these, note first, that some Unguents are Defensive unguents.
had for that purpose, which deserve the name of Defensives: these are made
several ways, amonst the rest, they are made of yolks of Eggs, and of oil of
Roses; item of Honey, of oil of Roses, and of yolks of Eggs: item of Honey, of
yolks of Eggs, Saffron, and Saint-Johns oil, etc. Of this Unguent put once into
wounds, and anointed with, defends them from dangerous inflammations, which
Surgeons ought to take notice of. Though they be plainly prepared and composed,
and are not fetched from the Indians, yet in such cases they are used safely
doing much good. Now will I show you my Defensives.

A Defensive Plaster.
1. Take Wax, and soft tuff white Rosin, of each lb 1, Dears suet, Turpentine,
of each 6, of dry pulverised The Author Defensive plaster
Starwort 4; melt the things meltable, mingle that Powder among it, work it
with Cammomil oil, and make rouls of it.

This Defensive Plaster, used for the outer joints or members, is composed not
of many foreign Druggs, and for that it is slightly esteemed; but as slight
as it is, so much the better is it; it strengthens joints and sinews, keeps
the wound in a due warmth, cools incident inflammations, and throughout
furthereth the healing of wounds.

Another.
2. Take of Wax lb 1 ss, of Turpentine lb ss, oil of Cammomil, and Lumbrici
Terrestes of each 2; melt these together, mingle with it of red Sanders 4, of
Cariophyllata 2, purely beaten, let it stand on a gentle fire for an hour, at
last put among it of Gum Ammoniack 1, stir it till it be cold, work it with
Cammomil Oil, make rouls of it and keep them for use.

This Plaster is a strong Defensive, fitter for wounds about the body, than
for the outer parts thereof; and is specially good for such wounds, which turn,
where impurities and slime do settle into; and serves for such wounds also,
which are of an eating quality.

Another.
3. Take of Wax, of white Rasom, of Turpentine, of each lb ss, of Cammomil Oil,
Oil of Lumbrici Terrestes, of Linseed Oil, of each lb 1 ss, of Hearts suet 2;
melt all these together, then put these following pulverised things into, viz.
of Orras 3, of Annis seed, Fennel seed, of each, of pulverised Alkekengi ss; of
these make a Defensive Plaster, and use it to such wounds, where there
appears an up-puffed swelling.

Another.
4. Take Emplastrum Diaguilon, made of the Mucilage of Linseed, and Fenugreek,
one pound, of Orras 4, of Oil of Lillies 2; make a Plaster of it, and use it
where the following Plasters are fitting, especially where arteries are out of
tune.

Another.
5. Take the Muscilage of Marsh Mallow root, of Fenugreek, and of Linseed, of
each lb ss, of Oil of Cammomil lb ss, of good Orras 3, of Bean meal 4, of Annis
seed Oil undistilled 1: boil these to a body, put among it of Styrax liquida 1
ss, of Gum Opopanax ss, beat it with Turpentine and Wax to a plaster, neither
too thick nor too thin, according to Art. This Plaster is of a great virtue to
assuage pains and swellings, and is an extraordinary Defensive for such wounds,
where many sinews are wounded, as about the neck and privy parts.

Another.
6. Take Wax, Rasom, Turpentine, of each six ounces; melt and pour it into
Vinegar, take it out and melt it again that all the Vinegar come out of it:
then put into Resine of Cherry trees or Gum of Apple trees three ounces, of
Juniper Gum one ounce, of Saffron one quarter of an ounce: all these being well
mingled, then add the Oil of Cammomil three ounces, of grinded Camphire one
dram, make rouls of it. This Plaster is to be used to the outer parts, it
strengthens them, allayeth pains, which may cause a simptom: as to a hot
up-puffed swelling, which inclines to a Collositie, and is ready to break,
which may turn to a Cancer or Noli me tangeri, that is, to a Cancer in the
noistrils.

Another.
7. Take of Wax one pound, of Scorpion Oil four ounces, of Violet Oil one
ounce, of Turpentine washed in Rose Vinegar five ounces: make a Plaster of it
according to Art. This Plasters quality keeps of incident humors, asswageth
the anger in wounds, takes away all such cases, whereby a wound may be
infected, or else with impurities overburthened.

One thing more I must relate, because I am so much for What oils to be used
besides the Defensives.
Defensives. Note, you may use besides of Defensives other things, as the Oil
of Scorpion, the Oil of these great Gums, of Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum,
Opopanax, etc. These things are extraordinary helps, but must be prepared most
sweetly: you may compose also of Oil of Turpentine, of Oil of Rasom, grease of
Froggs, Oleum Nenupharinum, Oil of Orras, these are of a Defensive quality:
Item, the Oil of red Sanders, the sweet Oil of Vitriol is a rare Secret for
joint wounds, which are inclining to shrinking and stiffness.

Thus will I close this Chapter of Wound Plasters, Stiptick Plasters, and
Defensive Plasters, hoping thereby to have wrought in young Surgeons an
encouragement to be more careful, and industrious in these cures.

CHAP. III.
I Have made frequent mention of this Anodynum Labdanum, Electuarium Anodynum
vel Labdanum.
and advised often to be used, but its description I have put off to another
place: now is it time to inform you of it: and it is made thus.

Take of Opium Thebaicum two ounces, cut it into small Its preparation.
pieces, and pour unto it of Alcool vini five ounces, put it into a little
glass body, let it stand in a warm place, the Alcool will be tinged, cant it
off cleanly, the best virtue of that Opium is in that Wine, the remaining feces
on the bottom may be flung away.

This Alcool must be abstracted in Balneo Mariae, then that Opium appears in
the bottom of the glass, in thickness of Honey; then take the out-queezed juice
of Lemons, as fresh as you can have them, let it run through a woolen bag to
clarify it; of this juice half an ounce, and of the said Opium half an ounce,
mingle it well together, then ad to it of Oil of Cinnamon 1, Oil of Cloves ss,
of the Magisterie of Pearls, and of the Magisterie of Corals, of each 2, of
Amber 1 ss, of Mosch 1, of oriental Saffron ss, of the extract of Castorium,
extracted with Aquavitae one dram; mingle all these well together, lute the
glass body, that nothing vapor away, let it be in a warm place in digestion
twenty days: after that time open the glass, all that is in it is wholly ready
and prepared, take it out and keep it for use.

If you will have this Electuary yet better, then you may ad unto of Tinctura
Auri ss; but I was contented always with the above said Receipt.

This Electuarium has extraordinary virtues, for many infirmities, and it may
very well be held for a treasure. It allayeth all raging and beating in wounds,
asswageth the pains in the head, causes sweet sleep, expels the pains in the
body, warmeth the inward parts, is a strengthner to the skull, refreshes the
spirit, and makes the party merry, it causes good appetite to eat, refreshes
the head, opposes rheums, that they hardly shall come to any increase: all its
good qualities cannot be expressed.

The dose of it is from four grains to six, eight, twelve and more, as
necessity shall require it, which you ought to take notice of: it may safely be
used.

One thing I must give warning of, viz. if you have a A warning.
patient, whose breast is obstructed with phlegm and slyme, then this Electuary
is not good for him: neither must it be used to such, on whose breast or lungs
is fallen a rheum.

There are more Anodynes, which are made by distilling, and are subtiller,
pleasanter, and of more use, than these that are set down above: but because
every one does not understand that excellent Art of Chymistrie, therefore I do
not speak of them here, and so let it rest at this time.

CHAP. IV.
Of Blood stenching in Wounds and Noistrils, how the things requisite thereunto
must be prepared and used.

ABove have I rejected some Blood-stenchings, understand it thus, I do not
thereby reject or refuse all Bood-stenchings which ordinarily are used: I
rejected only such Blood stenching, performed through Cauteries, otherwise I
hold all Blood stenching good (except Cauteries and Corrosives) if used without
danger and prejudice to the party, be they made of what they will: viz. of Rye
meal, of Mill dust, Pulmonaria, etc. in brief, all things imbibed and turned to
a pap are good to stench Blood; provided it be not a hot matter.

These following may lawfully be used, viz. a Carniol stone, Haematites, Agat
stone, Crocus Martis, Bole Armoniack, sealed Earth, Earth of Vitriol, in which
there is no Alcool left, the sweet red liquor of Vitriol: in like manner Gum
Arabic, Gummi Tragant, the white hair of Hairs, Cotton-wool, Mullipuff, and
the like: of Herbs and Roots tending to that purpose, provided they be not of
a biting and corroding quality, whereby inflammations in Wounds may be caused.
Expect not many Receipts about Blood stenching, I will set down only these
which I made use of, and found them to be best: he that understands me well,
will easily provide for himself the like Blood stenchers, leaving every one to
his own discretion.

To Bloud-stenching I use first a Plaster, which is made thus: Take of Amber
half an ounce, of white soft Rosin The Authors plaster to stench blood.
one pound, the dark Turpentine four ounces, of Mastick a quarter of an ounce,
of Crocus Martis made in a Reverberatorie three ounces. Of these make a
Plaster in the following manner.

Take a fourth part of Turpentine, make it very hot, strain the pulverised
Mastick and Amber into by degrees, these two being melted therein, then put the
rest of the Turpentine to it, and then the Rosin, which in another pot must be
melting gently; after all that, you put in the Crocus Martis, and then you let
it cool, so is it ready.

This is the first and chiefest Blood stencher, not so much by reason of the
Ingrediences, but by reason of the singular Manuals which fall out here, as you
shall have more of it hereafter.

2. The other piece which is here to be used, is this: Take Mullipuff, cut
great and small pieces of it, of a fingers thickness or thicker, some as big as
an Egg, and of a fingers length, shorter and longer of all sorts, tie these
several pieces in a paper as hard as you can, and tie them close together, then
bind them more harder together with tape, so that one piece which was of the
bigness of an egg, in the binding be no bigger than the little finger: this
being done, press it together with heavy weights, or screw it into a press,
where you must let it lie for some days, that they may be yet closer pressed
together, then take them forth, lie them yet more together, and keep them for
use.

3. Thirdly, you must be provided also with this Powder: Blood stenching powder.
Take Sheeps blood, let it stand till the blood separateth from the water,
which is done in one day and night, pour off the water, and put the congealed
blood into a pot, set it in a circular fire, like unto a little cement fire,
let it stand so till it be quite dry, it neither stinketh nor is of any rank
sent, and being turned to a powder, then is it ready. Take of this prepared
blood four ounces, of purely pulverised Gum Traganth half an ounce, of Blood
wort pulverised half an ounce: mingle all these, and keep it for use.

Now if you have any patient whose blood you are to stench, then first note and
observe carefully, whether when he is angry, the blood will not be staid,
unless his anger be over. The like case is when the party has a paroxisme on
him: otherwise you are to do thus: take a little of that powder and cast it
into the wound, and take a piece of the prepared Mullipuff, apply it to the
wound; the bigness of the Mullipuff must be answerable to the wideness of the
wound, yet so that it easily go into the wound, and not be forced into:
therefore ought you be provided with all sorts of such pieces: then another
broad and thin piece must be laid on the wound, or else Cotton wool, mingled
with a little of stenching powder, and hold it a little with your hand.

Make the place dry with a sponge round about the wound, and apply the before
written plaster to it, spread on a bladder, pretty broad and great, so that
the wound every where be well covered: then take a boulster press the plaster
close to the wound, and with the binding be made cling unto the skin, then it
will receive no more moisture, and closes the blood in the wound, and can
press forth no where, neither at the sides, nor below nor above, so that the
blood is as it were forced to stay, and run together and congeal within.

Hereby the Reader may easily understand, that it is a matter of consequence
when you are about the applying of a plaster, that you must be careful to put
away the blood about the wound, and that the skin be well dried: for the dryer
the place is, the sooner the plaster clingeth, and the plaster sticking to
it, then is the thing for the most part holp Have a care that the plaster do
not get loose again; and in case the wound bleedeth too vehemently, then is it
requisite, that you apply a greater plaster upon the first, that it may stick
on a dry place.

This Blood stenching is very natural, as judicious men may easily understand,
and it is very convenient for a wound; for whither can the blood run, being
kept in by that on sticking Plaster, neither can it press above through the
bladder, and so it is forced to stay and be stenched. Besides the abovesaid
powder has a marvailous quality, because it turns glutinous, and uniteth
with the blood by reason of the Gum Tragacanth, and the prepared blood; for
that blood also uniteth with man's blood, the matter swells in the wound, and
turns to a slyme, as you heard above: and the blood also grows thereby
glutinous, and so cannot run much.

The same thing is it also with the prepared Mullipuff, when it is laid into
the wound, it goes asunder, swells to the bigness it was at first of,
stops the wound thereby, and that swelling is gentle not forcible, without
any danger and prejudice to the wound: that may be used to all wounds, even to
head wounds; so the powder also may be used, provided it do not come too nigh
to the naked inflammation.

It is not always needful, that such great earnest be used in Blood
stenchings, neither is it necessary to use such pressed When Mullipuff is to be
used.
Mullipuffs: understand it only of such wounds which bleed extremely, where no
ordinary means will prevail: the Mullipuff may be used per se also, but you
must use a good deal of it, apply it loose to the wound, and then to keep it on
with a plaster: many do use it so, and they do well therein.

There is no man compelled or tied to the foresaid powder, nor to the
Mullipuff, you may make a composition of your own head of the foresaid
Ingrediences, as you think it best. Mingle that powder among pure Cotton wool,
use it duly, but then I counsel you, not to forget the plaster which is the
chiefest thing herein.

I made use of this way in Blood stenching hitherto, and was ready to impart
faithfully the same unto others, hoping that if you understand me aright, and
handle these things rightly, you will doubtless have good success: only let me
entreat you, not to use any Corrosives, that are burning and biting, for
reasons alleged above.

Touching spells over wounds, and characters, which are greatly used of some,
to stench bleeding thereby: I know Spells.
nothing to say of them, and I leave it in its worth. They are mere words and
signs which are not understood of him neither which makes use of them: and
what they are like to effect thereby, the same I commit to your consideration.

Sometimes things fall out strangely, when the wound is in such a place, where
the said plaster cannot be applied conveniently, as a party being wounded in
the mouth or throat: as ones nose falls a bleeding vehemently, then other
means must be thought upon, as I shall tell you afterward.

If one be wounded in a place, where a plaster cannot How to stench the blood
in the mouth.
conveniently be applied, then stench that blood thus: Take of the red liquor
of Vitriol, which has no corrosive quality, one part, and of Gum Arabic a
third part to its quantity; mingle these, spread it on Cotton wool, and
endeavor to bring it to the wounded place, it will make the wound draw
together, the blood veins will shrink, and the blood will be quenched, and all
without biting or corroding: but you must have a care to let the Cotton wool
with the matter, lay a while on the wounded place, that it may work upon it:
and if it does not work sufficiently at the first time, then iterate it once
more, that the blood may be stenched.

Of the same nature is the vehement bleeding at the nose; Bleeding at the nose.
here it is not always good to have that bleeding stenched pre^^^tly,
especially in cephalical diseases, because thereby other diseases are spent and
consume away by that bleeding: but if that bleeding be so violent, that it must
needs be stenched, then proceed thus: Take instead of Cotton wool, (of which I
made mention above) a little piece of How to stay it.
the soft dried and pressed Mullipuff, pull a needle and strong twisted thread
through it, with a great knot on the end of it; the Mullipuff must be of that
bigness, that it may just go in at the noistrils, cover it with the foresaid
liquor of Vitriol, mingle it with Gum Arabic, thrust it up with an instrument
into the noistril to the hole which goes down to the throat; if you do not so,
you will do but little good, for fear the blood should take its course into the
throat, therefore the Mullipuff must be straight thrust upward, being it is
soft and causes no pain. Have a care that the thread, stuck thorough the
Mullipuff, hang a good deal out of the nose, that you may pull it out when you
have need.

Thus a bleeding nose may easily be stenched. For such kind of bleeding other
means may also be used, as Saltpeters clothes laid to the neck, inwardly you
may help much, as you shall here hereafter.

If you see that the patient has need to be plebotomized, Phlebotomie.
and has need of other medicaments, then let him have them: my intent is here
only, how the bleeding of the nose is to be stenched, though this my process
seems mean and poor, yet I found it still to be best and most useful: for the
Mullipuff swells in the nose, and Mullipuff.
obstructeth the bloods course; and the liquor of Vitriol by its constipating
virtue draws things together without any danger and prejudice.

I am not ignorant of, that many remedies were sought The working of Vitrriols
liquor.
after for to stench the bleeding at the nose, but they never did much good
with it; insomuch that many bled to death, without help or before they could be
helped: I speak no more of it, than what I have found true by experience.

There are many good means which ought not to be rejected, as precious Stones
hanged about the neck, or put into the mouth or hand, or they scrath the party
with them; or there is a singular experiment made of Saltpeter, ^^und in old
rotten walls, take this Saltpeter of the wall, put it Use of Saltpeter.
in a melting pot, make a circular fire about it, make it very hot, then
pulverise it in a mortar, put white Wine Vinegar to it to dissolve it, dip
clothes in it, apply them cold to the wound.

This powder may be used also among other Blood stenchers, and used to wounds
where great anger is, for it quenches the heat, and coagulateth the blood in
the wound

Another secret piece, which is not common, and is this: if you cannot well
stay the blood of a wound, then take one dram or one dram and a half of well
prepared Saltpeter, (which we set down in the third Part in the Chapter of
Wound diseases,) dissolve it in a convenient water, as Chervil water, etc. if
you cannot have such, then take Well water, let the patient drink it, you will
soon see the blood stayed; it is no hurt to the patient but does him good: Thus
I close this Chapter also.

CHAP. V.
Of Vulnerarie Potions in general and particular, how these are to be made, and
in what different manner they are to be used.

TO make Vulnerarie Potions, and to use them is a common thing, and every
Surgeon has his own way which he thinks best, which indeed is tollerible: for
these drinks cannot be rejected, as if they were good for nothing, but are
rather to be praised, as without which Surgeons sometimes cannot be, the which
I had e^perience of.

But I met with indiscreet dealings in such potions, that thereby some did more
hurt than good; whereas if well handled and made, more good can be done by
them, than otherwise; which moves me to bring to light, that which I have used
successfully.

The Reader may easily gather from hence, that it is a matter of great
concernment, to keep Vulnerarie Potions ^^ a true use, and if you stick to my
order, you will find the abuses which others commit in the use of such potions,
and are commonly practiced.

For some there are found, which are of opinion that wound herbs are healing
the wounds, therefore it is all one, what herbs they take, and so keep none,
or very little difference between wound herbs, whereby many a patient is
spoiled, who can nere be brought to right again. And this is the reason why
some hold very little or nothing at all with Vulnerarie Potions, by reason of
the abuses that are crept into them, and effect very little with them.

And for my yart I esteem them little or nothing, if ministered by such, which
understand them not: but if they be used by expert Surgeons, according unto
Art, then I hold it for a thing very necessary and helpful, to further the
cures of wounds. For I speak it really that through Vulnerarie Potions many
malignant simptoms can be either opposed or prevented; as Fistulaes, Cancers,
Collosities, etc. But if this business be not rightly understood, then much
mischief can be caused thereby, as you heard enough of it.

These following are the wound Herbs, which I used and still use to wound
Potions: Viz. Barbula hirci, May flowers, Wound Herbs the Author used to wound
Potions.
Alkekengi, Pyrola, Cinckfoyle, Virga Aurea, Adderwort, Sanicle, Stellaria,
Ground Ivi, Speed well, Hypericon, Nipp, Carduus, Fennel root, Serpentaria,
Artemisa rubra, Cariophyllata, Salvia, Strawberry leaves, Bistorta, Ellebore
niger, Knotgrass, white and red Roses, Plantain, Savin, Rhubarb, Tormentilla,
Matrisylva, Maidenhair, Tamarisk the herb, the root of Polypodie, Liquorice,
Vervain, the herb of Centorie, etc. And I have further made use of Oculi
Cancrorum, Mumia, and Sperma Cetae. There are other things besides these, which
may be used for that purpose, of roots, seeds, gums; but I made use of the
things named above; from them I will describe my practick.

The chiefest thing about Vulnerarie Potions is, to know the virtues and
operations of Simples, of which you intend to make your wound Potions; for some
of (...) Ingredients press very forward to the wound, appearing in the shape of
a water, so does Serpentaria, Adderwort, and the tke fat herbs, where great
muscles and other flesh is wounded, they are good also for such wounds, which
incline unto exiccation.

But such Herbs are not good for Joint wounds, for Fat wound hearps for what
use.
whom are more proper, Artemisiarubra, Virga Aurea, etc. Where is to be noted,
that as soon as Joint wounds are safe enough from simptoms, then no wound potion
to be used at all, else too much flesh will be drawn into the wound, Therefore
f^t wound Herbs, which draw much of superfluous flesh into the wound, do no
good at all to Joint wounds: For they are of that condition, that they
presently Note.
press unto that place, and bring their humidity into the wound. And if these
wounds be a little closed, so that the moisture cannot press through, therefore
of necessity it must settle in the joint, which appears not till after
healing of the wound, in a kind of swelling, which though they be not painful,
yet cannot be consumed but in a long time.

Therefore my meaning and counsel is, that Vulnerarie potions should no longer
be used, but as long as any defects appear; and when no more faults appear, and
no simptoms are feared, then cease with Vulnerarie potions, using them less
every d^y, so long, till you leave them quite. Take heed you use any wound
Potion at the closing up of a wound, for then no good, but merely hurt is done,
and you may gather so much from the things hitherto spoken of.

The Surgeon must well observe what is proper for a wound, and pleasant to the
patient; for some Potions become some patients better than others, one thing is
liked better of some than of others, and then some Potions are more proper for
wounds than others, and according as wounds are qualified, because the one is
more fiery than the other; of the same condition are patients also.

A hot wound in a hot patient, especially if the wound be Vulnerarie Po^ions
for head wounds.
in the head, those Potions are more pleasing more proper for him, which are
made of Bistorta, Knotgrass, Roses, Alkekengi, and Oculi Cancrorum, etc.
because they are more convenient, than those which are made of hot Ingredients;
the contrary falls out, (yet not much) touching Ground Ivy, Carioplyllata,
Hypericon, Veronica, Savena, and such like.

You must have a care also to simptoms in patients, and in To have a care of
the simptoms in patients and the wounds.
wounds, and look well what they a^l, and whether the wound be in a right
posture or no; for where ever you find any defect, you must accordingly prepare
your Vulnerarie potions. To make it more plain unto you, if there be many
sinews and veins wounded, and the wound makes no have to cleanse it self, then
Carioplyllata is very good in that Vulnerarie potion, also the Serpentaria,
Tormentilla, Vervain, Centorie, Sanicle, Fennel root, Rhubarb, etc. as also
(which indeed is but an ill sign) when the wound or stab is at a stand, and
will not heal any further, and begins to stink, then the Cardnus is the best
herb for it, as also the Nip, Cariophlyllata, Adderwort, Ellebore niger,
Sp^rma Cetae, Oculi Cancrorum, etc. and of other.

Which ought to be well observed, because these herbs differ in their
operation, for the one is much stronger than the other, and so ought the less
to be used, as Ellebore niger is stronger than Dracunculus, or Serpentaria,
Adderwort, or Veronica; and some of these herbs are opilative, as Knotgrass,
Stellaria, red Roses, Tormentilla, etc. on the other side others are laxative,
as Rhubarb, Helleboras niger, Polypodium, etc. others are diuretical, as
Maidenhair, Fennel root, winter Cherries, Rhubarb, Oculi Cancrorum, Sperma
Cetae, Savin, and Nipp, etc.

And this is also to be noted, that among these Herbs the one is stronger than
the other, the one is more diuretic than the other, and the one purges more
than the other, which by all means are to be observed.

Therefore let Students here learn their lessons better, and not accustom
themselves to deal and to handle Wound potions dreamingly, as many do, which
care not what Herb they use; if it bears only the name of a Vulnerarie
potion, then all is well with them. Hence arise many abuses about Vulnerarie
potions, whereby they do more hurt than good. I heard them many times boast,
that they had such wound Herbs, nothing comparable unto them, but I never
regarded them, because they used neither judgment nor discretion therein.

Of the above named Ingrediences you may order your Vulnerarie potions, and to
join together hot and cold herbs as you see fitting; but still look to that,
what the condition of the patient, and the necessity of the wound requires.

To speak of their quantity, weight or measure, cannot be well set down;
because one Patient is of a stronger nature than another, the one a man, the
other a woman; these parties ought to be considered, and the Vulnerarie potions
regulated answerably. And to come nearer to the description of Vulnerarie
Potions, first you must note; and it is known unto others also, that Vulnerarie
potions increase the blood more than meats, therefore the better that Potions,
the better blood it will make; now every wound receives its food from the
blood: hence easily it may be gathered, if that Potion be prepared of good
wound Herbs, that the wound also will the better and sooner be healed,
preserverh and defends them from several malignant enemies; if so be that
good order and diet be kept with moderateness: therefore endeavor to use to
such Potions not the meanest, but the best, however all must be ordered as the
occasion of the thing requires.

Touching the cooking and boiling of Vulnerarie Potions, Boiling of Vulnerarie
potions.
therein not one alone but several ways are used: the one boileth them in Wine
simply, another boils it in Wine in an upshut vessel, which is more fit, but
not much better, others use Waters to it, distilled of Herbs, these are not
much to be regarded, because the salts are not therein which operate most;
others take these Herbs green without any other addition, putting them in a
closed Pewter vessel, setting it in a kettle full of water, boil the Herbs so
long till the juice be out of the Herbs, and that drink they use; but such
Potions are too strong, and but a little of it must be used at a time. It can
be made pleasant with Cinnamon and Sugar, to please the patients pallat; all
which is left free to every ones disposing, however discretion ought to be used
herein.

There remains now that I set down some Receipts for Vulnerarie Potions. It
must not be understood here, that thereby I reject all other Vulnerarie
Potions; the Ancients also have left behind them several good Vulnerarie
Potions, and they set them down so upon sure reasons: I am only against
abuses, as you often heard me speak of; therefore you have leave not only, to
make use of my Vulnerarie Potions, but also of other men's Potions, and all
discreetly and considerately.

If you will make a Vulnerarie potion for to use it, then No red Wine to be
used to wound potions.
take no red Wine to it, for reasons known: and such potions are to be used
mornings fasting, and the party fast two hours upon, or evenings two hours
after supper.

A good Wound Drink ordinarily used.
1. Take Sanicle, Stellaria, Pyrola, Mugwort, of each 1, The Authors ordinary
wound drink.
of ground Ivy ss; boil these in two quarts of Wine to the boiling away of the
one moyty, minister to the patient of it twice a day, mornings and evenings.

Another ordinary Drink, which is good also.
2. Take Adder tongue, Bistorta, Serpentaria, of each ss, of Tormentil boil
these in a quart of Wine, and use it as the former.

Another, which is pleasant to be used.
3. Take Adder tongue, and our water Bloodwort, Barbula hirci, of each 1, of
May flowers ss, of Stellaria ss, of Cariophyllata ss, of good white Wine lb 5;
put these in a glass body, and set a blind helmet upon, close it well, let it
boil in sand for four hours gently according to Art, open it, and ad to it of
Cinnamon, close it again, and let it cool; thus you have a very good wound
Drink. Let the patient drink of it twice or thrice, about four ounces more or
less, considering the parties condition.

Another Wound Drink, for one in which there is is a loose bone, fowl
corruption, or the like.
4. Take of Sanicle, of red Mugwort, of Speedwell, of Virga Aurea, of Pyrola,
of each 1, of Savine 1 ss, of Nipp ss, boil these in two quarts of Wine or
Beer, and use it as the rest: if you will have this Drink yet stronger, then
put to it a little of Oculi Cancrorum, or of Sperma Cetae, the impuritie will
be expelled thereby out of the wound.

A Vulnerarie Potion for Stabs or Wounds.
5. Take of Adder tongue, of our water Bloodwort or Goats beard, of each 1,
(note it is not the Goats beard Dr. Foxl, and Dr. Taberna Montanus says that
it is, but that noble Wound Herb, which is used inward and outwardly) of
Stellaria ss, of Sage, Matrisylva, red Mugwort, of each 1 ss; mingle these
together and pour on it lb 3 of Water or Wine, which you please, boil it in a
closed glass body, as you heard above: of this let the patient drink twice a
day, 4, at a time, more or less, according to the parties condition.

But if you will cleanse the wound or stab, then take of Oculi Cancrorum, of
Mumia, of Sperma Cetae, of each 1; mingle them purely. Of this powder let the
party take every morning 1, mingled with the wound Potion, and let him drink it
warm, and fast two hours after.

A rare Master piece for a Wound or Stab, where you suspect there is a bone,
proud flesh, broken veins or other impurities,
6. This Composition is not known to many, which moved me to impart it, and it
is thus: If you fear that there is in a wound or stab a loose piece of bone,
proud flesh, pieces of broken veins, fowl matter or such like, (which usually
happens to deep wounds or stabs) then take your wound Herbs, which you intend
to use, mingle among them a sixth part of Savine, to all the other Ingrediences,
and thus prepare your wound drink.

And when you minister any of it to the patient, then mingle with it of
pulverised Oculi Cancrorum ss; and let Expulsive potion.
them drink it. This Potion will expel at the wound all loose bones, blood,
corruption, and the like, and cleanse it; without this cleansing no wound can
be perfectly healed. The wound being thus cleansed, then leave off this
expelling wound drink, and make use of others as you think fit, and leave no
danger behind, and use your Unguents and Plasters according to Art. Though
there are not used any wound potions but they are expulsive, because Oculi
Cancrorum, Savine, etc. are driving, yea almost all wound Herbs are of that
quality, therefore I would have you to conceive aright of it: though the red
Mugwort, Polopodie, Rhubarb, etc. are expulsive, yet they do not expel so well
fowl blood, and naughty flesh, together with the loose spinters out of the
wound, as the Savine, Azarum, and Oculi Cancrorum does. Besides there is not
any of the Difference in driving wound Herbs.
forenamed Herbs, which so effectually expels the onset, hard clinging slymie
matter, as the Helleboras niger does; but must always be used with Carduus
Benedictus: Neither is there any of the foresaid Simples which sooner takes
away the sharp humors from the gall, and dulcifies more their corroding
condition, than polypodie does, used with Liquorice, and Mallows; so it may be
said of the rest, of which a hint has been given above.

A Vulnerarie Potion for spoiled Wounds, which yeildeth a tuff and slimie
matter, environed with a swelling, and are deep and hollow underneath, are like
to turn to a Cancer.
7. Take of Virga Aurea, Sanicle, Speedwell, of each 1, of Vervain 1, of
Carioplyllata, of Carduus Benedictus 1, of Ellebore niger; boil these in four
quarts of Wine to the consumption of its moyty, the rest you strain through a
clean cloth: let the patient drink mornings of it 3, use it so long till you
see the wound yields lo external medicines applied; if it does, then leave off
your Vulnerarie potion, and use convenient means.

But if any pains are incident, then stay, for it is turned already to a
Cancer; outward medicines must be applied answerably, that its eating may be
killed, which is done Sweet Cauteries.
with the sweet Cauteries; which are mighty helpful in such Vulnerarie Potions.

A Vulnerarie Potion for the Joint Water.
8. True, there is no such great necessity to use Vulnerarie Potions against
the Joint Water; for if a Surgeon understands himself, and is diligent in his
dealing, he may stay it without such Potions; as you heard of it above
sufficiently. But in case a Surgeon doubts that he will not be able to stay it
with external medicines, and is defective in his ways, then let him make use
of the following Potion.

Take Strawberry leaves, Knotgrass, red Rose leaves, of Vulnerarie potion to
stay the joint water.
each 1, of Consolida ss, of Speedwell 1 ss, of Cariophillata, of Wine lb 3, of
Water lb 2; boil away the moity of it, let the patient drink of it; consider
the parties condition: it were good if Centorie were added to the rest by
reason of its bitterness, but makes the Potion unpleasant; I leave it to your
discretion whether you will use it or no.

A Vulnerarie Potion against Gun-shots.
9. Take of Speedwell, and the herb of Alkekengi, or red Mugwort, of each one
handful, of the root of Tormentil 1 ss, of Adderwort 1; boil these in Water or
Wine (as the patients condition may brook withal) to the moity of it, let the
patient drink of it twice or thrice a day.

And in case there be much corruption in the wound, then Expulsive powder for
wounds made by Gunshot,
let the patient have of the following Powder among his drink, daily one dram,
and that for three times; then all blood, matter, bullet if it be in it, will
be expelled at the wound. Make it thus: of Mumia ss, of Sperma Cetae, Oculi
Cancrorum 3, Liquorice 2; pulverise these very purely; if you will have it yet
better, then ad of Rhubarb, of Cinnamon ss: it drives strongly so, and is more
pleasant, is safely used, causes no pain.

Note one thing more: when Sperma Cetae is stale, it To prepare Sperma Cetae.
stinks, then it ought not to be used, making the medicine very unpleasant:
however if you must needs use it, make a separation with Vinegar distilled, and
fling away that which is stinking, and that which is clean keep for use. Of
this you must not take so much, as usually is taken, because its virtue now is
made better and stronger: which is to be understood of other things also, where
Sperma Cetae is used.

And this is all what I intended to write of Vulnerarie Potions, hoping that
the Reader has sufficiency of iustructions from thence, according to which he
may order all other sorts of Vulnerarie Potions. And thus I let it rest, and
having made one relation more, then have I done with it.

Many may think, when they have perused the things I have written concerning
Vulnerarie Potions, and say; this man uses in his Surgerie none but plain
Plasters and Unguents: if any one should persuade himself so, he may be
deceaved. For besides these Vulnerarie Potions, I use always Wound Unguents,
Stiptick Plasters, Opodeldoch, etc. as good as they may be, and occasion
requires. However it is true, that if Vulnerarie Potions are used, then the
wound needs not so much of Unguents, as when none were used. Neither do I
advise, that such Vulnerarie Potions are to be used to all wounds, for where I
have no need of them, there I omit them; and where they are needful, there I
make use of them. And I used them discreetly, not because I was accustomed to
it: if I should have done only according to my custom, I should never have
been without sorrows.

CHAP. VI.
Of spouting and sprinkling into Wounds, of Tents, and of Corrosives.

I Cannot chose but to speak something about syringing, and that briefly
without any Receipt: spouting is much Spouting or Sprinkling.
used with Lavaments, I describe none of them, because I see there is more hurt
than good done with them, and so I hold their use to be unadvisable, and this
must be understood about fresh wounds. And if any wound precisely be for the
use of them, he ought not to siringe strongly into any wound or stab, be it as
deep as it will, else the wound within will be driven asunder, or enlarged and
made wider: spout so gently, that the medicine may only droppingly fall out of
the Syringe into the wound.

But in spoiled wounds, which are fistulated, to these siringing may very well
be used, unto which in some place I gave my advise. These Syringes must be
either crooked or straight, as the condition of the wound is, whereby you may
come to the bottom of wounds, and to bring the medicines thither also. To sore
throats, for pains in the mouth, a strong siringing is necessary, because
through that strong spouting, is better washed off the slyme and filth from
teeth, and from the holes of the throat, than when merely gargarismes are used.

Of Wicks or Tents.
When Wicks are to be used, ye heard it above, viz. to wounds where spinters
are, to flap wounds, to vehement Swelling tents are naught.
bleeding wounds; for other places I do not advise them, it being a dangerous
abuse: I hold less of swelling Tents, unless they be made of Juniper Gum, of
the root of Gentiana, dry Sponges etc.

I do not see what good they can do either in fresh or in dried wounds: true,
they keep a wound asunder, but close again quickly, leaving the wound in her
old condition: if a swelling Tent be put into a Wound, stops the hole, lets no
matter come forth, keeps it in forcibly, till it be pulled out again, and vent
be given to the wound.

If Tents needs must be used to keep open wounds: then How to make tents to
keep wounds oopen thereby.
make them of linen cloth, cover them with an Unguent, mingled with burnt
Alum, etc. then they will bite round about, and make an open place. My advise
is that medicines should be conveyed to the bottom of the wound, and not only
to dawb the Tents therewith: and Tents used to spoiled wounds are such, which
of themselves melt within the wound. These are thrust home to the bottom of it,
Melting tents.
and to the upper place of the wound there is laid another made of linen, to
keep in the first Tent, that it come not forth before it is melted; of such
Tents I have made mention before, hoping to speak more largely of it in another
place, when I shall publish my Cures about wound Fistula's, and the like Sores.

Of Corrosives.
To use Cauteries to fresh wounds is needless, and hurtful, and spoils a fresh
wound wholly, and does no good Cauteries are not good to be used.
at all neither in Blood stenching, or other occasions. Corrosives have
poisoned many wounds, turning them to a Fistula, Cancer, Noli me tangeri.
Corrosives do wound bones, and are the cause why such a wound cannot be healed,
and turns to a Fistula: they inflame sinews and cause many other mischiefs.

Surgeons usually corrode with sublimed mercury, which Sublimed Mercury.
is a great abuse and misunderstanding: for Mercury does not bite, the salts do
it which he received in the subliming, these corrode the broad way, causing
smarting pains: Mercury ought not to be used at all to fresh wounds. Others use
crude Arsenick, and some do sublime it; but it is as hurtful to fresh wounds as
Mercury is: some use the caput mort of Aquafort: and otheres use the red
calcined Vitriol: all these are naught to wounds. Nature desires quietness,
will not be disquieted by such evil medicines: sweet and gentle things are to
be used here, and not to press Nature with sharp Corrosives. I never used any
stronger Corrosive to wounds but quenched Alum: true, I hold, that Extinguished
Alum.
Arsenick is to be used to spoiled wounds, but my way of preparing of it is,
that it deserves no more the name of a Corrosive or venom; it separates the
ill from good, not Arsenicks operation.
causing any pain. The Brown Unguent performs all, what is to be done about
wounds; as you heard above: in want Brown Unguent.
of this Unguent, you may use Vnguentum Egyptiacum; provided there be no Alum
in it, or a very little, as some use it: But this Egyptiack Unguent is not to
be compared in any degree with the Brown Unguent.

How to prepare Arsenick that it may safely be used.

Arsenick ought not to be used crude, being a mere venom; Arsenick how
prepared.
its operation is answerable to its preparation; usually it is prepared thus.
Take of Christallin Arsenick 2, of Saltpeter 2, grind them well together, put
it in a melting pot, make a circular fire about it, let it melt, and let the
smoke and fume go away; increase the fire, that it be red hot, let it stand
thus two or three hours, then cast into it of yellow Sulphur 1: this being
done, cast it forth on a marble, set it in the Cellar, it dissolves in few
days: that liquor keep in a glass for use.

Thus I close this Fourth Part, true, I could have quoted many other things,
but I purposely avoided prolixity; being Conclusion
this Book is already grown bigger than I inrended it should. Reader I hope
these will be an occasion to you, to regulate your self in other things,
entreating you, to accept in good part this my labor, which was to be
servicible to others. The bad things in it must be ascribed to Man, for the
good things in it God is to be thanked and praised.

FINIS, Of the Fourth and Last Part of this Book of Surgerie.
The Childrens Book OF FELIX WVRTZ, A famous and expert Surgeon.
This Book was never published till now.

Treating of infirmities and defects of new born Children; and of the faults
and abuses, which wet or dry Nurses commit among and against little Children;
and of Medicines and Cures, of such Children which received hurt in that way.

Written for young Surgeons, wet and dry Nurses, Maid Servants, and other
parties, to whose trust and overlooking little Children are committed.

MY purpose is to communicate an usual little Treatise concerning the
infirmities of new born Babes and sucking Children, which are befallen them by
the neglect of wet and dry Nurses, or else brought them into the world from
their mothers womb. In the first place I will speak something how Midwives,
wet and dry Nurses ought to be conditioned, that they may the better deal with
such little Children or Babes, even as it becomes an understanding, sober,
godly Woman.

Such Women to whose trust little Babes are committed, Duties of such Women.
ought to be pious, honest, modest, and civil in words, works, and manners: she
must be one, that has been a Mother of Children, and is expert in those ways;
for experience is the Mistress of things, and there is more credit to be given
to experienced Women, than to such which know things by hearsay. Therefore if a
Midwife be a Woman of credit and fidelity, and has endured in her own body,
anguish, miseries, and pains, which others neither can nor will believe,
because they never endured any torments in their own bodies; neither may they
hear nor have heard of the like: those that had such things befallen them, know
what they are; neither is there any need to tell unto such, what miseries pains
and torments mean: and those that were never in such perrilous cases, may hold
their tongues and not speak of it jeeringly or contemptibly.

It falls out often, that in such dangerous travails, one three, or two loose
their lives, besides the loss a good Husband has in his Wife, and poor
Children in their Mother, etc. And in case such parties may escape with their
lives in hard travails, yet are they so pulled and torn, that they are made
unfit for any work, which otherwise might have better been preserved, if
honestly and faithfully they had been dealt withal. This I speak not as an
invective against others; let every one look to it, what they are instrusted
withal, and make a conscience in their ways, remembering also that they must be
accountable unto God for it, then they need not to be put in mind of it by my
words.

I beseech every pious Matron, not to take ill the things I speak of, for what
I intend here is for the good of little Children, which cannot complain of
their griefs but by crying.

For it is most certain, that Children will not cry, unless How Babes reveal
their griefs.
they ail somewhat; because it is more ease for them when quiet: and they are
not able to make their complaints any other way but by crying. Hence we are to
note, that as soon as man is born into the world, then is he made subject to
endure pains. Therefore good notice must be taken what these crying Children
aileth, wherein they are grieved or pained, that with one thing or other they
may be holp. I do not write here of such, that are yet under birth, but of
those that are brought already into the world. For I presume not to write of
such things, which I never What weaknesses he he treats of.
had any experience of; those I leave unto wiser men. Things that are not
commonly known, I intend to describe for the good of bearing Women: for I have
been much sent for to come to Children, and experimentally, knew this or that
defect in them; and parents themselves confessed, that it stood with their
Children as I told them: and gave warning afterward to young and old, to look
to it if the like cases befall their Children. By some my faithful counsel was
slighted, not hearkening after, much less to follow my advice; however some
honest Women thankfully accepted of my counsel.

Having seen several pains and defects in Children, which He hathseen the
defects of many Children, calls to God to affist, him in the writing thereof.
could not make their griefs known but with crying, therefore I call to God
Almighty for his Grace, that he would be pleased to assist me in this my
present writing, that it may tend to the Praise, Honor, and Glory of his Name;
to the welfare of young Children, and to the good of those which love Children:
Amen.

I do not write here for those, which know things as well or better than I;
neither do I carp at any: but in case there be any which do not understand
these ways, neither had any Children, neither considered what such pains and
defects incident to Children, might prove; to such I dedicate this my Treatise,
for an instruction unto them. How a Nurse to a green Woman must be fitted.


To return again to Nurses, they must be of an honest godly life, neither must
they drudge in heavy toyling works, neither in the field or garden, neither
within doors with washing, scouring; nor about the fire, or handle any other
rough works, whereby their hands are made hard and rough. In case that such
Midwives or Nurses are driven to do such rustic works, it behooves a
Magistrate or Congregation, to allow a certain annuity to them, that they be
not forced to fall to such rough and hard works. To clear this with a
comparison: if hands are kept clean, because their work in hand is about Silk,
fine Linen, Laces of Gold Children must be handled tenderly.
or Silver, is Man not more precious and worthier to be kept clean than all
these? especially when that young tender Children are not able to speak or
complain against those, which deal roughly with them, more than their nature
and body is able to brook withal, by hard pressing, thrusting, pinching,
burning, etc. and thus such unhappy girds, Children are put unto.

I have seen both Mothers and Nurses, to bind and tie their Children so hard,
which for pity sake made me weep. A Woman that usually handles neat work,
whose hands Soft fingers commoniousness.
are pure, what advantage has she before such a one, which is forced to do all
manner of skullion work? to feel with her fingers ends, etc. As a Barber
knows the commodiousness of soft fingers at the touching of veins, before
him, whose fingers ends are rough and hard: and those also know it, which work
in Silk.

A Vein-broken Child is like to flesh wrapped in a naked skin, as every one may
observe also, who had a swelling or wound on his body which is but newly
healed, how tender and soft that new skin feels: even so is it with a new
born Child. If a man does but scratch his finger, or is pinched, if a heat
comes to it, how soon he complains of it; or if he be hurt any other way by a
fall, thrust, etc. whereby some danger he falls into, and that place is more
painful unto him than others, which are not hurt. These things any one may be
sensible of; much more will A tender Child must not behandled rudely.
be new born Babes, if roughly or rudely handled, or are hurt in the least
manner either with hard hands, rough woolen clothes: or course unblanched
linen, or hot and hard swaddlings, or when laid upon hard and pricking straw,
feathers, or dried oak leaves; laying the Child in a Cradle purposely made,
whereby the Child's head may be framed round, lying it on the back also, that
thus outstretched it may look upward, which furthereth Childrens fancy unto
melancholy, itch, frights, and the like: for Children are sooner full of
frights, if placed with their heads upright, than if laid a little side way,
and that their pillowes may not yield so soon or so much to their head, as to
fall deep in, neither must the Nurses make it so purposely, as to lay the Child
hollow on the pillow, that the Children may the easier turn or slide: this kind
of lying hurts the Child's memory very much, or it causes other simptoms,
which afterward are not reduced so easily, and the Children being laid on their
backs, it causes heavy and melancholy dreams, which old people do find, if
they lie on their Lying on the back is hurtful.
backs, and the heavy melancholy blood runs about their heart, putting them
into anguishes and frights: some do think that then they are awakened, are
troubled with strange thoughts, break forth into strange words, from their
fancies they had in their sleep; he thinks he awakneth, and yet cannot
awaken, because his talking and out-calling keeps him thus.

Some use to lie their Children in the Cradles higher at Children must be
higher at their feet than their head when?
their feet, than at their head or heart, at which I marvailed many times. But
if a Child has scabbed swelled legs or feet, then their feet must be laid
somewhat higher, that the blood run not too much into the feet, and the pulling
itching pains be not increased thereby: let every one be judge here, that is
troubled with naughty legs, if he has but a little blister about his foot or
ancle, what pains he feels then, if his leg hangs down: what do you think
a Child endures in this case.

If the Child be sound in body, legs and feet, then it To lay a sound child
that it may sleep well.
may lie higher at his feet than at his sides, but not higher than it lies at
his heart and head: this I hold to be very good. Therefore my advice is, to
make that part of the bed somewhat higher where the Child's side is to lie, then
his head and heart will lie higher than his feet and body, which is the safest
and easiest way for his rest.

Touching the rocking of Children; some Mothers use their Children to it at the
first, but others do it when they What the rocking of the Cradle is?
would have them sleep, and others rock them when they cry; others there are
which will not use their Children to it at all, as one a Clergy Man's Wife did,
who set her Child every night into a Cellar, because nothing should disquiet
him in his sleep, not thinking on any other things the Child might befall, but
no honest Woman I hope will imitate that fashion. In my judgment I hold it to
be best, that if a Child be laid down in Gods Name, etc. to rock it gently, and
not too hard, then let it rest. But if a Child sleeps unquietty being as it
were frighted, as it can be perceaved, when it snorteth, snuffeth, or when
frightened, or cries, then rock it gently again, then the melancholy blood
which oppressed the Child, and frightened it, is by rocking brought to right again
out of its fear and anguish, and are dispersed or expelled.

It falls out sometimes, that a Mother means to quiet her Child with rocking,
whereby the Child is the more unquieter, and with crying inflames his head so
vehemently, that in many days he cannot be brought to right again: sometimes
such a Child aileth that which a Mother does not think of, supposing to be the
Child's frowardness, which is not so, but it feels something to be amiss in
the bed, which does hurt it, or its hand lies hard, or a prick, straw, or hard
feather does prick it, or a pin, which eareless Nurses left in the linen, or a
flea or louse tormenteth the Child: therefore my advice is, that if a Child
will not be quieted, to take it up and see what does ail it,

Little Children are tormented also sometimes with the Cramp, when they are
taken up, then their blood runs To help Children of the Cramp.
up and down, and by that means are they quieted; few people take notice of the
cause of it: and is remedied when the blood gets its course again, and come
to that place which was bereaved of it, it warmeth that part again, which
warmth drives the Cramp away, and the pains which are caused thereby. A Cramp
will hold a Child strongly if once it takes possession in a Child, causes
great pains below and above; as these pains are to the Children continue in
their crying, and commonly the Gout does accompany it. Therefore these things
must be taken good notice of, when the Child cries much either half sleeping
or awakened, then take it up, and wrap it in warm clothes. This misery is
caused by the following things, viz. when Children are kept cold in the Nurses
or Mothers lap, or in the bed, bath, or lie in wet clouts, bepissed by
Children, or such Children sit naked on the flower, or stone, I have seen that
the sitting so naked on cold places has proved so dangerous unto Children,
that in short time they were creepled, with whom I had great toil, before I
could recover them to their former health; for if once they take cold in that
way, they are hardly recovered again.

This befalls old people also, some whereof I have seen dye of, in great
anguish and misery, and lay long by it before they dyed. Therefore tender
Children must by all means be kept warm, not to shake stir and dally them too
much. If a new skin in old people be tender, what is it you think in a new born
Babe? Does a small thing pain you so much on a finger, how painful is it then
to a Child, which is tormented all the body over, which has but a tender new
grown flesh? if such a perfect Child is tormented so soon, what shall we think
of a Child, which stayed not in the womb its full time? surely it is twice
worse with him.

Touching Baths of Children, it is known that they are Child's Bath.
bathed sometimes so hot, that the heat thereof is scarcely sufferable to an
old bodies hand, whose skin is strong: we must not here, that if a water bath
be made for any one, which seems to him to be not very hot, at that time when
he was scabby, and went in the first time; so the skin of a Child is so thin
and tender, as his, who is full of scabbs. A hand which is usually naked, can
endure more cold, heat, air, etc. than that strong sound body, which usually is
not naked, etc. This every one does or may conceive easily if he takes notice
of: some Women are so careless, that they take no notice, nor observe, what
pains they do or may cause unto others, and make Baths for Children so hot, as
if Children were able to brook with, not considering, that Children are weak in
their little bodies, and not so strong, as aged people are in theirs.

The bodies of such little Children may be compared to a young and tender root
or twigg of a Tree, which in the fouch is not so gross as an old root or
branch of a Tree; take heed you cause no pains unto little Children, that they
may not be filled with pains in their joints, whereby they are made unfit ever
to follow closely or well any mechanic calling. And it is a most certain
thing, that those which are bathed too hot, get a more tany skin, than those
which are not bathed so hot: neither must they be bathed too cold, else there
will be caused to them pains in the Pains in the belly, and the Cramp how
caused.
belly, and the cramp, and is then most of all caused, when Children are naked
in the water, are not covered in their body, or else when the bath is made too
thin, or when such a bath is made but once, and no more used a long time after,
and no order is observed herein, or when the Child is taken out of the bath,
and they care not how long they keep it in the lap. Some use to lie the
Children bathed behind the hot oven, whereby the Child may soon be Children are
hurt if after bathing are laid behind a hot Oven.
stiffled or choked, not regarding, whether that heat does not cause a pain in
the body or head, supposing only if the Child be but laid behind the oven,
then is it well cared for. Some have that custom, when they have bathed their
children, then they rub them with Wine, and the whites of Eggs, saying now I
think I washed my Child neatly; and rub it so strongly as if they had an old
bodies skin in hand, which is grown hard, thereby to soften it; they do not
consider, that if an old bodies skin after bath should be so rubbed, and the
party were scabbed, how he would be affected with it: or if a sound bodies skin
should be thus stretched or reached, what pain would it cause to it, little do
they consider, what great wrongs are done thereby unto little Children.

All honest Mothers and Nurses will be cautious and careful Children must not
be kept loug naked or wet.
that their Children be not uncovered too long, be it either at their taking up
or their carrying about, and ought to be laid dry down again; in like manner
when they are taken out of the bath, they must be received in a warm cloth, the
Dray also in which the Child was bathed, must be so placed, that no air may
come to the Child in the bath, and that it take no cold by opening of
Casements, Doors, etc.

The Child must be well guarded above, to be wet the less, and its head
dressings and attires be not made wet, else great hurt and wrong is done unto
the Child: for a Child's head or body being washed, and then to let it sit thus
wet, and let it take cold, it wrongeth the Child so much, that it will stick
unto him even to his old age, rheums will trouble them, about the eyes, their
hearing decays, their heads break out, especially if you let Children take
cold in their wet heads, then such wrongs are done unto them, which hardly can
be expressed.

In case a Child's head must be washed and cleansed, then A wet head taking cold
wrongeth young and old people.
it must be dried again suddenly, let it not be moist too long, for if you do,
it will be troubled with running eyes, hard hearing, rheums in the face, nose,
gumms, shoulders, arms, and their body will be troubled with cold diseases,
which he will not be rid of all his lifetime. Therefore I warn you faithfully,
that you keep not long Childrens heads wet, nor let them come into the cold
with wet heads, which is more dangerous than if in a warm place.

Now will I speak of the thrush in Children, which caused Of Childrens thrush
in the mouth.
many Children starved, and I cured of that weakness, more than a hundred of
them.

For a warning, I will give a hint of faults committed by Nurses, in their rude
manner of washing Childrens mouths, whereby they do and have caused this great
mischief unto Children.

Some indiscreet people take wool, or rough linen, or the bath cloth out of
the bath, feel with it to the throat, Cause of the thrush.
and so wash it, saying how furred is this Child in the throat, I must wash off
that white stuff, and rub it so hard that they pull off their subtle skin,
even as a soft rind is peeled off the tree, which if once done, then the next
day his mouth grows more white, which if they see it, then they feel further
into the mouth, and fall on washing of his mouth, saying, this Child's tongue
looks white, I must scrape his tongue, and scrape and wash away the tender skin
of his tongue, and make it bleed, which surely causes the thrush in the mouth,
and the more they go on in their washing, the worse they make it. This great
fault about the mouth washing, has moved me to write this Treatise, and I
entreat all good people not to make use of such washing, and to warn others
from it also: for the tongue does cleanse it self, being a member which is
still in motion, and grows not weary.

It may be objected, why should not Children be washed

I answer, this reason is produced only by ignorant

It is known among judicious people, that every new born The condition of
childrens mouth.
Child, if sound, is pale and white in the throat, and if it be red or green in
the throat, then is it hurt or wounded, and his cheeks and tongue are yet
white, especially on the middlemost streak, what need then to have it scraped,
washed or rubbed, to make it red?

Sometimes there rise blisters on the tongue, and also on Bl^sters on the
tongue cheeks or throat*
the cheeks within, and at the throat; of these I do not speak now, but if a
Mother or a Nurse knows whether they are blisters or no, as many of such were
brought to me, which were tampered too long withal, insomuch that their mouths
stunk, and could neither eat nor drink: therefore care must be had to be sure
whether it be the beginning of a thrush, or whether it be a defect the Child
brought into the world; for if their mouths stink strongly, then is it not
natural, but comes from putrefaction and filth: for such I do not say, that no
remedies should be used; but I speak of those, which scrape and rub Childrens
mouths so long, till they have pulled off that little skin, whereby is caused
the thrush.

It usually comes to pass, when Children are fed with How much children are
wronged by hot papps.
hot paps, which burns their mouth, tongue, etc. which carelessly Nurses,
Maids, or rude laboring Mothers do commit, which have hard skins on their
fingers, before they can feel how hot the pap is, they burn the Children,
whereby small blisters on their tongues and lips are caused like to burnt
blisters, which are difficult to be healed, which if not well looked to, will
prove the thrush; therefore care must be had, that Childrens food be not given
too hot.

In some places Children are fed in this manner: they Some customs to feed
children.
take a spoonful of pap out of the pan, put it into the mouth, then put it
again into the spoon, then they give it to the Child: in this manner Children
are not so soon burnt, but they fumble so much with the spoon about the Child's
lips, which if no heed taken will cause blisters also, which hinders Children
in their feeding, and the thrush is partly caused thereby.

Therefore let Nurses look to it that they wound not the Child with the spoon;
for though aged people may feed themselves safely with spoons, as being used to
it, yet a Child may be hurt with it, being unused to it: and if aged people may
be hurt with a spoon at the eating, much more a tender young Child: and if a
spoon does not scratch or cut on the one side, it may do it on the other, which
if not regarded, may soon bring some hurt.

Moreover they use to warm the Childrens pap again in Butter or Oil, and when
that fatness swimmeth above, and they taking off some of it with the spoon,
then they blow away the fatness strongly, not having a care, whether any of it
leapeth into the Childrens eye or face: I have seen it, that Childrens faces
grew full of scurfe, even upon that cause, and looked as if they had been
leprous: Item How children gets faces full of blisters.
Children may be hurt also in that kind with their Drinking bottles, which in
the end may prove a putrefaction: therefore Mothers are to oversee their Nurses
herein.

If a child has an itch in his feet or hands, then it must If they feel an
itch in their hands or feet, what to do?
not be kept too warm, but must sometimes lie uncovered, else it can have no
rest or sleep. There grows also little worms in childrens hands or feet, which
if killed, give a snap like a nit, these suffer not little children to sleep:
many of these worms have I dug out, which if not dug out, no hope for any
rest, which being once taken out, then these children are at ease in their
hands and feet; and if children are bathed, these worms are drowned: Alum and
Salt makes them engender, but if Sulphur used it kills them quickly. Nurses
must look to it, whether children be troubled with such worms, or whether only
with a scurfe, if an itching one, then such children must be laid into the
Cradle so, that they may turn themselves, they will the sooner settle to rest,
for after their own rubbing, the smart being gone, will the sooner bring them
to sleep. For this grief in children about these itching worms, no better thing
can be used, then a water Bath in which Sulphur is boiled in; it does not heal
it so soon, as when such children are anointed with, in a dry way. In case the
child cannot be put into a wet Bath, then apply the Ointment which is spoken of
afterward; in a broad and long way, as far as these running worms have made
their tracks, which Ointment must be let alone there for two days before it be
taken off: it takes away the pains, and the worms are killed under it. I made
experiments upon mine own children, and found it very good.

Children are troubled sometimes also with burning blisters, Sharp burning
blisters in children and their cure.
which are full of heat and pain, these must not be let alone till they are
dried up, by reason of their tormenting pains: the following plaster applied
to it is very good. of Wax and Rosin of each a like quantity, put some Oil to
it, let these melt together, spread some of it on a cloth, apply it and let it
stay there for a day, though some matter gets out of it, it is no hurt: or, a
Honey Plaster, or Suet, etc. It is better to use any of these, than to let it
alone naked.

Children are troubled also with Fellow feeders, Fellow eaters.
which are continually growing at the back betwixt the two shoulders. To cure
them of these I took the children into a hot Stove, let them be well heated,
afterward I anointed their back with Honey, then these black worms crept
forth, which shaved off with a Rasor, having iterated it twice or thrice, then
all these itchings ceased.

Children are troubled also with pains betwixt their Smarting in children.
thighs, under their arms, and near their privities, at the making of water
they feel smarting pains. Some do help this with ravelings of linen, which
they apply to the affected places, which does no hurt according as they do it.
For some scrape it off with a knife, (lint) which is naught; ravelings of cloth
are better, the former stick too close. Others wash their children in these
smarting places with Wine. Others take fresh Water, and wash their children
therewith in such places, which in my opinion is better, The true cure for
smarting pains.
causing less smarts than the Wine does; being after washing well dried, then
anoint the affected places with warmed Suet, and with warm Ointments these
places be anointed, where there urine may come unto. Pomatum is good also for
the bitings caused by urin.

And to make these outward means to be more effectual, it is necessary, that
rules prescribed be observed also, viz. the Mother or Nurse must abstain from
salt sharp meats, as red Hearing, pickled Cabbage, Bartholomies Beef; no Meats
of Spieces, as dressed with Pepper, Ginger, and such like hot Spices; for as
the Mothers diet is, so the childrens urin will be, of a sharp biting quality
more or less. Bays are the best help for such pains.

Some Childrens eyes are always running, others have Running eyes in children,
sore eyes, and some of them have their eyes clung together, The which to
remedy, Mothers or Nurses usually let their Milk run into them, of which I do
approve; provided that such Nurses feed not upon any Garlic, Pepper, Mustard,
etc.

The clear Water which runs out of childrens eyes, is less curable or
stayed, than if their eyes be sore: for a little soreness of eyes is not
dangerous, but rather a wholesome cleansing of the whole head and brains: but
the clear water often causes cronical Simptoms. In case the child is not able
to brook any light, or to open his eyes, trouble it not with opening of them,
unless the water in his eyes cease and dry up; then let his eyes he opened
twice a day, open his eye lids but not against the fire, but only in a dark
place; although the child lies in a dark place, yet his face must at that
time, be still more turned to darkness. Let no white All shining things ought
to be removed from bad eyes.
clothes hang over or about the child, it would be hurtful to his eyes, sight;
especially fire and candle light is hurtful to his eyes, if children be laid to
look toward or into it: and all other burning things of a flame, are hurtful to
such eyes, and cause smarting pains.

Let every one be warned, to keep off every brightness or Felix Wurtz
testifies what hurt bright things did to his bad eyes.
heat from sharp humors in the eyes, and not to suffer that Sun, Moon, Day,
Fire, Light, or any other whiteness of a Wall, Sealings, etc. give any shine to
such eyes, especially to keep off the Sun Shine. I found it by experience how
hurtful hot glimbles of shines are to eyes: for one time being troubled with an
head ach, opening my eyes toward the place where the windows stood open,
looking then on a new whitned Wall, thinking the windows were shut, (but stood
open unknown to me) there struck a white glass or shine so strongly into my
brains, that I thought I nere felt so great a pain in my life. Let every honest
body be persuaded, to believe that the like will be caused in young children,
and not suffer any white or hot shinings fall on their bad eyes. I have been
troubled with many infirmities in my body, but never felt greater pain than
that head ach, caused by looking on that new white Wall, has brought upon me:
and was enforced by these extraordinary pains to have the pulse or temple vein
on the left side to be cut, which all Surgeons, Barbars, and good friends
diswaded me from; my Wife also by persuasion suffered no knife or other cutting
instrument be brought near me, and kept all such things from me, and all such
that came to see me, were entreated to let me not have any manner of instrument
to cut or stab withal. All were afraid I would lay violent hands on my self,
by reason of the great pains I was in. Thus making pitiful mourn to Surgeons
and all my friends, on whom I called for help, entreating them to cut the pulse
vein on my left temple, which crying and calling, I continued for ten days,
those that heard my outcries, suposed I did out of impatience, for the which
none would hearken unto my cries; but I continued still with my lamentation,
hoping one or other would take pity on me: At last my friends considered of my
cries, and promised in case any one would undertake the cutting of the pulse
vein, they would then consent unto my demand; I thanked God that my cries were
heard, and my pulse vein to be cut: then came that famous and conscionable Dr.
Cennad Gesner, comforted me and my family, and advised Dr. Gesner advises for
an incision.
that my pulse vein should be opened, then returned I thanks to God again, who
put this council into his heart: then was I asked, what means should be used
for the stenching of that blood, and incision; I gave directions to the
Surgeons then present, that my friend and Brother in Law, John Waser should
make the incision, he took it in John Waser makes the incision.
hand, and by my leave, and all the Master Surgeons then present placed me on
the beds side, and made the incision at twice cutting, the wound bleeded
vehemently, before he laid down the incision knife, I found my self better, for
the which the Lord be praised for ever: thereby was I delivered from all my
pains, and being dressed according to the direction I gave, I lost nere another
drop of blood; after that I felt my self better in my head, than ever I was in
my life, as long as I could remember. To the Lord be Praise, Honor and Glory,
for evermore: Amen.

Some Country fashion, about the winding their Children into clouts, and to lay
them down in the Cradle.
It is the fashion in some Countries, that when they intend to lie their
Children to sleep, they lay them on a Table on a great pillow, and have their
woven or hemmed linen swaddling clothes, whereby they bind the Child into the
clouts, from the arms downwards, but others begin from below, and bind along
upward, and on the Cradle they are lain, whereby the inlaid Child is packed up
like a pack of Wares; this I do not much mislike, provided the Child be not
tied or packed too hard.

In other places, Nurses or Mothers take Children into their lap, wrap the
Child into a woolen cloth, after they have wrapped them first into small linen
clouts, binding arms and hands down, and begin in their tying from above
downward; but this I approve not so well of, as of the former way, because
these clouts fall thicker, cause unquietness to Children, of the which more
shall be said afterward; how Children are hurt thereby: having bound and
wrapped the Child thus, then they lay it in the Cradle, and tie it once more.

Others lay their Children only in clouts into the Cradle, over that a piece of
woolen cloth, or a piece of a ragg, and so tie it to the Cradle, from hole to
hole in the Cradle, which they tie very hard; for if they should not do so,
they believe their Child would not stay in the Cradle; even as the former too,
which tie their Children once before they put it into the Cradle, and when it
is put into, then tie it once more: however let these things be done so, that
with their strong binding they do no hurt to the Child, for such hard binding
any aged body would hardly endure about his breast or heart: I am assured that
by such hard binding, great and anguishing pain is caused in their sleep, as
you heard also above, about the sleeping on the back.

Of crooked and lame Children, coming thus into the World.
It happens that a Child is born with crooked feet, placed and pressed one upon
another, and must go on the ancles if they can; they usually say, that such
lame births are caused by frights, strange sights, or by carelessness, which
also Nurses have to answer for. These defects they say usually are incurable;
it agrees with that saying, no body makes himself crooked. These idle
pratings causes careless and lazy people, pretending, if my lame Child cannot
be cured, why should I be at expenses or taking of pains. It is a base and
false excuse, because experience proves it to be otherwise. To liken this to
an example, many have eaten from that Trees fruit, which they nursed by putting
the kernel into the ground; my self have eaten the fruit of a Tree, six years
after I put the kernel thereof into the ground. Even so is it with lame
Children, some whereof I cured so, that after some years I saw them go
straight. Let no man be neglective if his Child be thus crooked, as not to ask
counsel about it; though all be not recovered which are in such cases, yet many
are cured, and if not perfectly, yet may they be mended in some sort; the which
I do demonstrate with examples. I have dressed a new born Child, and ordered it
with splinters as I thought fitting, whose feet from his Mothers womb stood
so, that the Child stood on the outside ancle, which with splinters I brought
to right, and that Child went as straight as any other.

I have cured Children, whose thumbs and other fingers, No crooked joint ought
to be broken, but plainly to be set right.
have lain in their hands for many years, tied them outward, but did not break
the joints, as they usually say, that they must be broken again, which is false,
and he that says so discovers his silliness in Surgerie; they ought not to
be broken, but gently and steedily be placed right: for if a Child be put to
pains in that kind, the joint will be inflamed thereby, and the case made worse
and more painful, than it was formerly. My advice is, that none should attempt
to break, nor permit any to do or undertake the doing of it rashly; and if you
meet with one that give reasons, the thing might be done without pains, and
that in such a way the cure might be performed, then follow his advice: but he
that says that first of all such joints must be fomented, bathed, anointed,
he goes the contrary way to work, for thereby the joint is not made soft but
stiffer. But if Childrens ancles, kees, feet, fingers, etc. are so hard and
ugly, that they must be first of all mollifyed, then such medicines may do
something. And so I speak here not of all, but of such which are curable,

Therefore observe, whether that joint does bow and turn easily to the place
where it should be, then bind it that way, and cure it. Some of such joints
will easily turn and bow, but that is not enough; binding is for such a joint
the better, the growing whereof brings forward the cure, and not the bowing
or setting; the bowing of it is good, but it is not all, but it must be set and
laid right also, then the one helps the other, and the growth in time is
brought on: though little amendment is seen in a week, month, or three
months, yet a whole years time may produce something, and in time perfectness
comes in. But how to How to set and dress crooked joints.
set and bind crooked joints, is not possible to set down every particular
thereof, the Surgeon must take notice and observe, which way his splinters and
other things will sit best.

No splinter must be too close applied here, neither must they be bound too
hard; if too hard, and the Child cries out by reason of the pains it feels,
then instantly tie it slacker, for such pains would cause great mischief:
therefore bind such joints softly and gently, according to the place. Some
joints are bound hard, some slack.
For a foot is and must be tied more strongly than a hand, and a hand can
endure a band more strongly tied than a finger: conceave thus of the rest of
the joints. The stronger the joint is, the better is it able to endure a
stronger band: and again the less a joint is, the worse it can endure a band.

You are to observe exactly, when there comes into any joint, pains, redness,
smartings, blewishness or collositie, a swelling or the like simptome, then is
it very hurtful and dangerous; for then you have bound it too hard, unbind it
presently, the Child's welfare lies herein, if not his life: for these joints
cannot endure any pain; this you ought to take good notice of.

This is my faithful advice, that you do not deal too hard with it, at the
first you ought to bind it gently, then you may soon perceave, whether you are
or may proceed further and more hard in it. For in such cases Surgeons must not
presently go on, as they ought to do in fracture bindings; in case it does fit
here the first time, then you are to let it rest, and not to trouble your self
nor the Child any further, if it fitteth well at the first time, then go on, in
few weeks you will perceave the amendment thereof, you may alter the band as
the defect requires.

When you are to dress a Child's crooked joint, then take my red Plaster,
which grows stiff and hard, sticks closely, and as you measured your
splinters, then take the Plaster spread on a cloth, apply it on the splinters,
that it may stick thereunto, and cover the splinter well in the inside, then
that band holds fast; for it keeps the splinters so fast together, as a
Saddle holds firmly which is glued together. The overplus of the Plaster,
which goes or runs beyond the splinters, you cut off and spread the
Plaster there on the splinters, as you use to do at a fractures dressing with
splintures spread with the Plaster, then apply a Plaster to the same joint,
yet not so close together as to have them laid one on another, as I advised you
in my second part of Surgerie touching bone fractures: in fractures it must not
be laid so close together, as in these little joints, because these joints
neither swell nor consume, it pulled not too hard but gently: it is better they
be bound slack a whole week, than too hard one hour. Then apply your measured
splinters, you need but two, and not three, four, or more, which other
fractures require. Then bind this joint as it fitteth in the bowing, and let it
rest thus bound ten or fourteen days, as you see occasion: you need not to
fear any simptom here, if you bound it not too hard, nor too untimely, and do
as you did formerly; if the case be altered and mended, then your splinters and
binders must be accordingly altered: and there is not any Craft worse to be
described than even this, as how one should prepare, keep and behave him in his
splinters and bands, it is a thing almost impossible: I have often practiced
it, and had good success therein; God be praised for ever: Amen.

The whole business and manuals are comprehended in these Verses.

Have a care you bind the Joint not too hard, then surely is done neither hurt
nor smart.
Do not begrudge your time at all, a timely cure on the party will fall.
Be exact with your tying and setting, then the crooked Joint will right come
in.
Give not over, be willing, not timorous, the Joint grow'th right as a twick
most curious.
Of crooked and dislocated Legs, caused by careless layings, and of their cure.
I have seen Children born straight, yet became lame and crooked, and could not
be healed straight again; their Mothers or Nurses told me of the manner, how
they became to be thus lame and crooked: I bid them many times to untie the
Child, and to tie and bind it again, to see the manner of it; where I then
quickly perceaved, in what they had missed, which was done and committed in
binding, as I spoke of it above: for they lying the Child in their lap, and
toward the feet binding it so, that the Child's knees comes together in lying,
and puts some Boulsters betwixt, and will not leave the birth as God has
created it, will have their Children yet handsomer, by binding them straighter
to their thinking; tie and bind them more crooked, doing it too hard, which
makes the Child unquiet, turns and winds himself so long, till he gets
somewhat loose, in this way the Child grows like a twigg, according as it was
tied. But by the help of God the like cases may be remedied, and my self have
done many such cures, when Children were spoiled with such untoward bindings,
and had carried it on above sixteen years long; as long as they are growing, so
long are they in the state to be mended and set straighter: when Children are
bound straight with strong binding, then they usually grow crooked; and none
will grow more straight in his body, than those which are laid free and loose
with their hands and feet: therefore my advice is, not to use any curiosities
at the laying and binding your Children, unless there be some miscreance, or
other unshapedness about them, then is it reason and time to advise with good
Surgeons, who will tell you how these faults are to be ordered and mended, and
let not people follow only their own counsel and fancies.

Some reply here; I am fain to tie and bind my Child hard, by reason of his
scabbie feet, if I do not so, then it rubs them together, and makes them
smart, and then it cannot be quieted.

Others which have no skill how to bind them right, say, though I bind my Child
hard, yet it slideth and slippeth out of the band, which causes me to wrap and
bind it harder: these neither mind nor care what or how they go about it, nor
know how they should do it, neither will they advise with others about it, but
go on obstinately in their ill accustomed ways; binding their Childrens shins
together, making them lame and creeple. Therefore I advise you to take better
course in these bindings, and chiefly above about the breast and heart, not to
put Children to miseries that way.

Further I counsel Mothers and Nurses not to bind their What hurts Children
gets, if not covered about the shoulders*
clouts too strongly together at the end of their feet, which makes Children
lame in their going or standing. If Childrens shoulders are left open or
uncovered, it is great hurt to them, by reason of the pores, which are more
open than aged peoples, because their skin is very tender: it is a pain to them
all night long, especially in frosty nights, and when they come to age, they
are full of rheums, have heavy arms, and grow lame in their hands, shoulders,
elbowes, and about the upper parts of the body, about the head, the eyes, the
sinews all the body over, in their hearing, and pains in their back bone. Never
more complaints made by men but about such lamenesses, when they took cold in
their young years, lying thus uncovered in their Cradles.

To prevent these several inconveniences and hurts incident A fit garment for
Children to wear in their Cradles.
to Children, my advice is, that Childrens caps and sleeves should be all of
one piece, or sowed together: for a cap of it self, and sleeves apart, though
they cover the parts they are made for, yet the Child is not all covered that
way: but if cap and sleeves be sowed together, as one piece, it is the best
way: though the Child pulls his hand out of the Cradle, yet are his shoulders
covered; and cover the heart and stomach of the Child the better, and his
clothes must be made the wider, that they may fall one over another, and lie
double.

This in my opinion, is a proper garment for a Child to lay in, in the Cradle,
then there is no need of the strong band above about the body, and are thus
best covered and guarded from cold. And that you may not need to tie the Child
too strong about the feet, then take great and long clouts, which may go about
the feet twice double, and lay other linen between the ancles to keep them
assunder: and if you will not bind the Child, yet lie it warm, so that the feet
may not touch nor rub one against another: if such great and long linen may
not be had of every one, then let them use other clouts, provided they cut off
the ravelings about them, which tickle the skin, and cause a rubbing.

Some people has that ill and base custom, they fling To cast up Children and
catch them is an ill fashion.
with one hand the Child upward, and catch it with the other, which can cause
no other, but that such Children usually take frightnings in their sleep,
because that dancing in the Nurses hands comes to them in their sleep by
imagination, thinking they are leaping or jumping in their Nurses hands. The
like befalls aged people, who having been on a dangerous tempestious Sea, in
their sleep they are horribly frightened, thinking they are in that dangerous
Sea still.

Though Children are not so much frightened by that dancing, yet there are other
sports for them to be dallyed withal, for it falls out sometimes, that
Children in that dancing are let fall, which can it be done without hurt unto
the Child? I have seen a Father taking his little boy by the shoulder, and
threw him upward, the sport pleased the boy very well, desired his Father to do
it again and again; this pastime pleased Father and Son for a while, but one
time the boy being flung too high, and turning in that flinging came out of his
Fathers reach, fell down behind his Father, who was not able to stay him then
in his fall. This sport was turned into lamentation.

Some dance their Children on their lap, with their legs A warning against
dancing chiltoo much on the knee or lap.
outstretched, and these regard not the tenderness of their legs and sinews;
in that way of dancing these little ones may easily receave hurt. After such
dancing ^^^y lay the Child down, when the next day the Child is taken up, then
is it sore, cries, cannot endure such dallying, or be touched or carried about:
then they say, I wonder what aileth my Child, I laid it last night well and
sound into the Cradle, and was cheerful, and could dance in my lap, now it
cries, if I do but touch it: thus they blame the innocent Child, when
themselves are in fault. Then they bring it to the Surgeon, saying, pray see
what my Child aileth, for it can neither stand nor go, and yet nothing is seen
about it, no sign or spot at all about his skin, I cannot conceive what hurt it
should have received; I fear it is bewitched, etc. If a Surgeon says some
tuxation has befallen this Child, or it is handled roughtly, or has been over
played: they reply, Oh no! our Child was not hurt of us; and will not confess
their apish play: if they would confess their fault, then their Child might
the sooner be cured. My advice is this, use no apish tricks to your Children,
let them keep that health, which God has bestowed on them, not to pull or to
hale them from one place to another, with dancing, jumping, juggling, etc. and
playing, like as the Cat does with a Mouse: for these tricks wrongeth Children
so much, that when full grown, it is seen then what hard shifts they are put
to, to do their works.

The like befell my eldest Son, it is a pity, and all those that know him do
pity him; for he is quite disabled to do any work, and must continue so as
long as he lives, only upon such an accident as I told now; which held him to
the twelfth year of his age, and it was concealed from me that he had it from
such dancing: if they had confessed it in time, that with that kind of sporting
it was caused, then by Gods assistance I might have cured him.

At this present I cease to write any m^re of such apish tricks, juglings,
jumpings, which they practice upon Children; and who can rehearse all the hurts
done thereby unto them? the one gets a lameness by that jumping, and dancing,
another is put into frights which is seen and observed at ^ights; and some are
quite put to Convulsion fits; an^^^er loses his sight; another his hearing;
and many other hurts are done by several such tricks, which I forbear to
relate, for fear they should be practiced.

Sometimes I found a fracture on a Child's leg, or arm, or a crack; and when I
said the Child received this or that hurt, and talking to them of it which had
the oversight, they durst not confess how the Child was hurt, fearing their
Masters and Mistresses displeasure, when the Child was cured, then the
neighbors Children would say, how the Child was hurt at such a t^me. Sometimes
they cannot tell what the Child aileth, though it has received hurt from
another; and those Nurses or Maids which were to look to the Children, though
they outstand it most that the Child was not hurt, where found to be the only
fault of that hurt the Child received; but when they saw the Child do well, and
was cured, then they bewray it, what hitherto they have kept close. Children
when carried about, may soon be hurt in such a manner, that they can never be
helped again.

In some places Children are carried about in mantles, or Table clothes, as at
Bambury and Forchheym I have seen it: in this way Children may be hurt least,
if carried only in the arm, and slencker'd up and down by lazy Maids are
easily hurt in that manner. I have espied the like Children are hurt by
untoward carrying of them.
mischiefs done to Children by such rude carrying, but durst not reprove them
for it, these impudent wenches would have outfaced me therein. Some Childrens
back bone have I seen cratkt in two, and the verticles thereof were disjoined,
and removed so far, that they could never be brought together again, or if
joined, could not be kept so long, if that once happens to Children, then they
go bowed, and their head almost between their thighs, or else they halt or
limp on both sides. This comes from a careless carrying Children abroad and
about.

Therefore be warned, not to carry Children abroad too When children ought to
be carried on arms.
soon, before his back bone and sinews be strong enough; unless the party that
is to carry it, knows well to handle a Child in carrying, and to stay the
Child's back with her hand; let it be carried as well as it may, yet it soon
falls out that a Child gets a division or strain in the back, which may prove a
great inconvenience to the Child. Little Maids are sometimes entrusted to carry
a Child, a Child overturning himself or lenting backward, that girl is not
able to stay the Child, by this means little Children may soon get hurt.

Children commonly are carried on one arm, as those usually do, which are wont
to carry only on the right Children not to be carried ^lwaies on one side.
arm, and never change the child from the right to the left side, or arm, and
again from that to the right arm, the which is hurtful also unto children: for
I know, that when children are carried only on one side, then that leg lies
closer to the body than the other, and is caused to grow crooked, even as a
twigg on a tree, which i^ bowed either straight or crooked.

Therefore let children be changed from one side to the other in the carrying
to day on this, and to morrow on that side, and not still on one alone.

Some Mothers have the custom, that they place their To govern children in
their sitting.
children by times in a stool, purposely made. Others let their child sit in
the elders child's lap. Others place their child with clouts into a tub. Be it
in what manner it will, I advise no body to use his child too soon to sitting,
because the child's body above is heavier than his neither part, and all the
weight of it lies on his back. Some children are weaker in their backs and
sinews than others; therefore it is not advisable to place children too soon
into stools, or other sitting places. To set it upright in the cradle, and to
stay his back withal, or to place it on a pillow near the harth or chimney, is
the better way. The longer you stay with the child in that kind, the better
strength it gets, even in sitting before another child. As we see a twigg
inoculated this year, grows as fast as that which was ingrafted the other
year before that. The same condition it has with a child, his back grows
strong in that time, and the less danger is it subject unto, which if too soon
used to sitting, parents must still be afraid that it will take hurt. Though a
child is able to sit, yet for many reasons, it is naught for it, to have it sit
long.

Therefore as I mentioned above, the child is to be laid on the back, and let
it lie so untyed or bound playing; this way is best for such children, which
are not agazed at their feet and hands, when they thus play on their back; but
if they be so young, that their own feet or hands may terrify them, then they
ought not to be laid unbound or open.

Touching the standing of children, there are stools for children to stand in,
in which they can turn round any way, The standing of children.
when Mothers or Nurses see them in it, then they care no more for the child,
let it alone, go about their own business, supposing the child to be well
provided, but they little think on the pain and misery the poor child is in,
in that standing. Take an example from an aged man, which stands but an hour
in a place, either in the pulpit or else where, that time seems long to them;
what shall we think of the poor child, which must stand may be many hours,
whereas half an hour standing is too long for such a child. I wish that all
such standing stools were burned, and that never any were made, by reason of
the great misery that Children endure from such standing: for I hold these
stools a mere prison, or stocks for poor Infants; I do wonder many times, what
merciless fool that was, who invented that rack at first, to make a Child stand
above an hour in that tub. I found many times, that when such Children
overstood themselves in Children are hurt in standing too long in their stool.
that tub, sunck down where they lay a long time, and there they lost their
strength, which were brought to me afterward to recover and cure them: Children
should not be made stand on their feet, before they are half a years old, and
be strong enough in their sinews; and coming from such a cure, they must rest
half a year, then they grow strong again, and Nature will be aiding unto them,
neither is there any medicine to be used, only they must be kept warm and
quiet. I made use sometimes of Oxycroceum Plaster, and three months after I
made a warm Bath, put them in, thereby I recovered them to their full strength.
Children that are forced to such standing, commonly grow lame, and limp on both
sides. I never saw any good done, when children were taught to stand or to go,
before they had any sufficient strength to it: my advise is, not to put
Children to soon upon standing, but if Nature be forward in them, then they may
venture the sooner.

There are running stools for Children made, in which Childrens running wagons.
they do not only stand, but go also; in these stools the Children can hold
out longer, because they can stir and move in them.

I must speak also a word or two about the covering of childrens faces to keep
off the flies from them. Some lay a white cloth over them; others doubles such
clothes, enough to stifle the child under it, which in my opinion is an ill
custom; Others set bows over the cradle and Bows
hang clothes over them, which I hold to be good, because the children are not
touched by the clothes that are hangged over, neither can they well be
frightneh by them: these please me the better, if the clothes hanged over are
so thin, that the chilrens breath can have way to go thorough, and if such
clothes be either of a blew or green dye, they are the better for their eye
sight: pure Scrafes or Tiffinies are good for that purpose.

Some careless people does not cover their childrens faces Overspread ^othes.
at all; if done out of neglect and calesness, are worthy of reproof.

Thus much of childrens infirmities. Let all be to Gods Glory, and the good of
Children: Amen.

FINIS,

