LETTERS OF Sir Henry Wotton TO Sir Edmund Bacon.

LONDON, Printed, by R. W. for F. T. at the three Daggers in Fleet Street. 1661.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
TO remove all suspicion that may arise concerning these Letters published so
long after the Authors death, these are to assure you, that they are printed
from the Originals written with his own hand, though without this assurance the
spirit of them will sufficiently discover their Author.

Farewell.

Letters.
SIR,
IT is very just, since I cannot Personally accompany this Gentleman; yet that
I do it with my Letter: wherein if I could transport the Image of mine own
mind unto you, as lively as we have often represented you unto our selves
abroad, then I should not think us asunder while you read it: But of my longing
to see you I am a better feeler then a describer, as likewise of my Obligations
toward you, whereof it is not the least that I have been by your mediation,
and judgment, and love furnished with so excellent a Comforter of my absence,
and so loving and discreet a divider and easer of my Travels; after whose
separation from me, I am ready to say that which I remember the younger Pliny
does utter with much feeling, after the loss of his venerable and dearest
friend Corollius Rufus; Vereor (says he) ne posthac negligentius vivam. But
herein my case is better then his: for I cannot but hope that some good
occasion will bring him again nearer me: And I must confess unto you, I should
be glad to see him planted for a while about the King or Prince, that so if his
own fortune be not mended by the Court, yet the Court may be bettered by him in
that which it does more desperately want. Now, Sir, Besides himself, there
comes unto you with him an Italian Doctor of physic, by name Gaspero
Despotini: a man well practiced in his own faculty, and very Philosophical and
sound in his discourses. By birth a Venetian; which though it be not Urbs
ignobilis (as St. Paul said of his own Mother-City;) yet is his second birth
the more excellent, I mean his illumination in Gods saving Truth; which was the
only cause of his remove, and I was glad to be the conductor of him where his
conscience may be free, though his condition otherwise (till he shall be known)
will be the poorer. This stranger I was desirous to present unto you as my
friend, in his company; whose testimony may more value him then mine own: And
so committing them both to your love, and your self with all that family to
Gods blessing hand, I rest,

Your poor friend and Servant, HENRY WOTTON.
From my Lodging in King Street this 2d. Apr. 1611.
Sir,
IT is late at night, and I am but newly come to the knowledge that my Lord is
to send a Messenger unto you to morrow morning: yet howsoever, I have resolved
not to be left out of this dispatch, though in truth I had rather be the
footman my self, then one of the Writers. But here I am tied about mine own
business; which I have told you like a true Courtier: for Right-Courtiers
indeed have no other business but themselves. Our Lord Jesus bless you all as
you are now together, and wheresoever you shall be.

Your Uncle by your own Election, and your servant by mine, HENRY WOTTON.
From Greenwich, the 27. May, 1611.
March the last, 1613. Sir,
I Returned from Cambridge to London some two hours after the King. The next
day was celebrated with 20 Tilters, wherein there entered four fraternities: the
Earls, Pembrock and Mongommery: my Lord Walden, Thomas and Henry Hawards, the
two Riches, and the two Alexanders, as they are called (though falsely) like
many things else in a Court. The rest were Lenox, Arundel, Rutland, Dorcet,
Shandowes, North, Hey, Dingwel, Clifford, Sir Thomas Sommerset, and Sir. John
Harrington. The day fell out wet to the disgrace of many fine Plumes. Some
Caparisons seen before, adventured to appear again on the Stage with a little
disguisement, even on the back of one of the most curious: So frugal are the
times, or so indigent. The two Riches only made a speech to the King: the rest
were contented with bare Imprese: whereof some were so dark, that their meaning
is not yet understood; unless perchance that were their meaning, not to be
understood. The two best, to my fancy, were those of the two Earls Brothers:
The first a small exceeding white Pearl, and the word, Solo candore valco. The
other a Sun casting a glance on the side of a Pillar, and the Beams reflecting,
with this Motto, Splendente refulget. In which devices there seemed an
agreement; the elder brother, to allude to his own nature, and the younger to
his fortune. The day was signalized with no extraordinary accident, save only
between Sr Thomas Haward, and Sr Thomas Sommerset, who with a counter-buff had
almost set himself out of the saddle, and made the others Horse sink under him;
but they both came fairly off without any further disgrace. Of the merits of
the rest I will say nothing, my Pen being very unfit to speak of Lances.

To this solemnity of the public Ambassadors, only the Archdukes was invited,
for the healing of the distaste he had taken for the preference of the Venetian
at the marriage. But I doubt the Plaster be too narrow for the sore; which he
seemed not much discontented that men should note in his whole countenance that
day. Toward the Evening a challenge passed between Archie and a famous Knight,
called Sr Thomas Parsons; the one a fool by election, and the other by
necessity: which was accordingly performed some two or three days after at
Tylt, Tornie, and on foot both completely armed, and solemnly brought in before
their Majesty's, and almost as many other meaner eyes as were at the former.
Which bred much sport for the present, and afterward upon cooler consideration
much censure and discourse, as the manner is.

The departure of the Count Palatine and my Lady Elizabeth is put off from the
Thursday in the Easterweek, till the Tuesday following: which day I think will
hold. The Commissioners that accompany her, have the titles of Ambassadors, to
give them precedence before Sir Ralph Winwood at the Hague; and likewise in any
encounters with Almaigne Princes. Sir Edward Cecil goes as Treasurer to keep
up that Office in the name, though it be otherwise perhaps from a General,
rather a fall then an ascent. Before this journey there is a conceit, that the
Duke of Lenox will be naturalized a Peer of our Parliament, and my Lord of
Rochester be created Earl of Devonshire. The foreign matter is little
increased since my last unto you from Cambridge. The Savoy Ambassador not yet
arrived. The Turks designs hitherto unknown, and marching slowly according to
the nature of huge Armies: In which suspense the Venetians have augmented their
guard in the Gulf: enough to confirm unto the world, that States must be
conserved, even with ridiculous fears. This is all that the Week yields. My
Lord and Lady have received those letters and loving salutations which my
Footman brought. And so with mine own hearty prayers to God for you, and for
that most good Niece, I commit you both to his blessing and love.

Your faithfullest of unprofitable friends, HENRY WOTTON.
I pray Sir remember me very particularly to my Cousin Nicholas your worthy
Brother, for whose health our good God be thanked.

Sir James Cromer is this week dead of an Aposteme in his stomach, and in him
the name; unless his Lady (as she seems to have intention) shall revive it
with matching one of her four Daughters with a Cromer of obscure fortune, which
they say is latent in your shire.



Sir,
I Have newly received your last of the 25th of April, and acquainted my Lord
with the Postscript thereof touching your Fathers sickness; of which he had
heard somewhat before by Sir R. Drurie: who at the same time told him the like
of my Lady your Mother; but we hope now that the one was never true, and that
the other (which you confirm) will be light and sufferable, even at he^vy years.

The long-expected Ambassador from Savoy arrived yesternight at Dover: so as
now I begin by the virtue of a greedy desire to anticipate beforehand, and to
devour already some part of that contentment which I shall shortly more really
enjoy in your sight and conversation.

Sir Thomas Overbury is still in the Tower, and the King has since his
imprisonment been twice here, and is twice departed, without any alteration in
that matter, or in other greater.

My L. of Rochester, partly by some relapse into his late infirmity, and partly
(as it is interpreted) through the grief of his mind, is also this second time
not gone with the King: some argue upon it, that disassiduity in a Favorite, is
a degree of declination; but of this there is no appearance: Only I have set it
down to show you the hasty Logic of Courtiers.

The Queen is on her journey toward Bathe.

My Lady Elizabeth and the Count Palatine having lain long in our poor Province
of Kent languishing for a Wind, (which she sees though it be but a vapor,
Princes cannot command) at length on Sunday last toward evening did put to
Sea. Some 8 days after, a Book had been Printed and published in London of her
entertainment at Heidelberge, so nimble an age it is. And because I cannot end
in a better jest, I will bid you farewell for this week, committing you and
that most beloved Niece to Gods dearest blessings.

Your own in faithfullest love, HENRY WOTTON.
London this Thursday the 29th of April, 1613.
Sir,
YOur Kinsman and friend Sir Robert Killigrew was in the Fleet from Wednesday
of the last week, till the Sunday following, and no longer; which I reckon but
an Ephemeral fit, in respect of his in firmity who was the cause of it; which
to my judgment does every day appear more and more hectical. Yesterday his
father petitioned the King (as he came from the Chapel) that his son might
have a Physician, and a servant allowed him, as being much damaged in his
health by close imprisonment: which for my part I believe, for the diseases of
fortune have a kind of transfusion into the body, and strong-working spirits
wanting their usual objects, revert upon themselves; because the nature of the
mind being ever in motion, must either do, or suffer.

I take pleasure (speaking to a Philosopher) to reduce (as near as I can) the
irregularities of Court to constant principles. Now to return to the matter:
The King has granted the Physician, but denied the servant: By which you may
guess at the issue; for when graces are managed so narrowly by a King,
otherwise of so gracious nature, it does in my opinion very clearly demonstrate
the asperity of the offense. Sir Gervis Elvis (before one of the Pensioners) is
now sworn Lieutenant of the Tower, by the mediation of the House of Suffolk,
notwithstanding that my Lord of Rochester was the commender of Sir John Keys
to that charge; which the said Keys had for a good while (and this makes the
case the more strange) always supplied even by Patent in the absence of Sir
William Wade. Upon which circumstances (though they seem to bend another way)
the Logicians of the Court do make this conclusion: That His Majesty satisfying
the Suffolcians with petty things, intends to repair the Vicount Rochester in
the main and gross. And therefore all men contemplate Sir Henry Nevil for the
future Secretary; some saying that it is but deferred till the return of the
Queen, that she may be allowed a hand in his Introduction: Which likewise will
quiet the voices on the other side; though surely that point be little
necessary: For yet did I never in the Country, and much less in the Court see
any thing done of this kind, that was not afterward approved by those that
had most opposed it: such vicissitudes there are here below, as well as of the
rest, even of judgment and affection. I would say more, but I am suddenly
surprised by the Secretary of the Savoy Ambassador, who I think will depart
about the end of the Whitson Holy Days, for which I languish. With his
businesses I can acquaint you nothing till the next week, by reason of this
surpriz^l: And besides it has disturbed my Muses so, I must remain still in
debt to my sweet Niece for that Poetic^l Postscript that dropped out of her
pen. I do weekly receive your Letters, which in truth are more comfort, then I
could hope to purchase by mine: so as whereas before I had determined to
continue this my troubling of you but till I should see you next, I have now
made a resolution to plant a Staple, and whenever we shall be separated, to
venture my whole poor stock in traffic with you, finding the return so
gainful unto me. And so committing you to Gods dearest blessings, I ever rest

Your faithfullest poor friend and servant, HENRY WOTTON.
The 14 of May, 1613.
Sir,
I Have not yet presented to my Lord that Box which came with your Letter of
this week; for he removed on Wednesday with the King and household to Greenwich:
And I still remain here to show you that the Court does like a Lodestone, draw
only those that are intra orbem virtutis suae: I mean, within the compass and
circle of profit.

The Savoy Ambassador seems in his second audience to have discharged all his
Commission; or otherwise he wants authority to proceed further then to a
general overture, till the arrival of the Cavalr* Battista Gabaleoni, who is
hourly expected, and is here to remain as Resident for the said Duke.

With him likewise come certain other Gentlemen of title, who should from the
beginning have dignified the Ambassadors Train; but the cause of this
straggling, was a sudden attempt, which the Duke immediately after the
Ambassadors departure (who appointed those Gentlemen to follow him) made upon
the Marquisat of Monserrato, where he surprised three Towns with the Petarde:
the first time (as one writes from Venice) that ever that pestilent invention
had been put in practice beyond the Alps.

The cause of this attempt, was for that the Cardinal Gonzaga (now Duke of
Mantua) had yielded to send home the Dowager Infanta, to the Duke of Savoy her
Father; but would retain her only child, a daughter of two years: in whose
right, the said Duke of Savoy pretends colourably enough to the foresaid
whole Marquisat; and clearly to all the movables left by the late Duke of
Mantua her Father, who died intestat. Into which point of Law, there entered
besides some jealousy of State: being unfit for respects that would have falln
easily into the apprehension of duller Princes than the Italian, to leave a
child out of the custody of her Mother, in his that was to gain by the death
of it: yet am I of opinion, who have a little contemplated the Duke of Savoys
complexion, that nothing moved him more in this business, than the threatenings
of the French Queen, who had before commanded Didiguires to fall into the said
Dukes estates by way of diversion, if he should meddle with the least Village
in the Monserrato: which feminine menacement did no doubt incite him to do it
out of the impatience of scorn; And withal, he built silently upon a ground,
which could not well fail him; That the King of Spain would never suffer the
French Soldiers to taste any more of the Grapes and Melons of Lombardie,
because L'apetit vient en mangeant: which the issue of the businesses has
proved true: for the Governor of Milan, having raised a tumultuary army of
horse and foot, did with it only keep things in stay from farther progress on
both sides, till the agreement was made between the Duke of Mantua himself in
person, and the Prince of Piedmont within the Town of Milan. The accord is
advertised the King from Venice, and Paris. The conditions will be better known
at the arrival of Gabaleoni; and then likewise we shall see the bottom of this
errand, which has been hitherto nothing, but a general proposition of a match
between the same Lady that was formerly offered, and our Prince now living:
which the Ambassador has touched so tenderly, as if he went to manage his
Masters credit. Upon the whole matter, I cannot conceive (though he seems to
let fall some phrases of haste) that he will be gone yet this fortnight or
three weeks, till when I languish. And so let me end all my letters, ever
resting

Your faithfullest poor friend and servant, HENRY WOTTON.
May 21* 1613.
Sir,
IN my last I told you, that the Ambassador of Savoy was to meet the Queen at
Windsor, which pains she has spared him by her own coming yesternight to
Greenwich: where I think she will settle her self a day or two before she admit
him. Now, seeing the time of the Commencement at Cambridge so near as it is,
and being able to determine of this Ambassadors departure within that space, I
have resolved to take those Philosophical exercises in my way to you; hoping in
the mean time to see Albertus admitted by oath to a Clarkship of the Council,
or at least to the next vacancy: for he is now strong enough again to swear.

Sir Robert Mansfeld, and Mr. Whitlock were on Saturday last called to a very
honorable hearing in the Queens Presence Chamber at White Hall before the
Lords of the Council, with intervention of my Lord Cook, the Lord chief Baron
of the Exchequer, and Master of the Roles, the Lord chief Justice being kept at
home with some infirmity. There the Attorney and Solicitor first undertook Mr.
Whitlock and the Recorder (as the Kings Sergeant) Sir Robert Mansfeld; charging
the one as a Counselor, the other as a questioner in matter of the Kings
prerogative and Sovereignty, upon occasion of a Commission intended for a
research into the administration of the Admiralty: against which the said Sir
Robert Mansfeld (being himself so principal an officer therein) had sought some
provision of advice, and, This was the sum of the charge: which was diversely
amplified. Whitlock in his answer, spoke more confusedly, than was expected
from a Lawyer, and the Knight more temperately* than wa^ expected from a
Soldier. There was likewise some difference noted, not only in the manner, but
in the substance between them: For Whitlock ended his speech with an absolute
confession of his own offense, and with a promise of employing himself
hereafter in defense of the Kings prerogative. Sir Robert Mansfeld on the other
side, labored to distinguish between the error of his acts, and the integrity
of his zeal and affection toward the King his Master: protesting he should
hold it the greatest glory under Heaven to die at his feet, and that no man
living should go before him, if there were occasion to advance his dominions,
with some other such Martial strains, which became him well. The conclusion of
his speech had somewhat of the Courtier, beseeching the Lords, if the restraint
he had endured were not in their judgments a sufficient punishment of his
error, that then they would continue it as long as it should please them, and
add unto it any other affliction of pain or shame whatsoever; provided that
afterward he might be restored again into his Majesty's favor, and their good
opinions. To tell you what they all severally said that day, were to rob from
the liberty of our discourse when we shall meet. In this they generally agreed,
both Counselors and Judges, to represent the humiliation of both the Prisoners
unto the King in lieu of innocence, and to intercede for his gracious pardon:
Which was done, and accordingly the next day they were enlarged upon a
submission under writing. This is the end of that business, at which were
present as many as the room could contain, and men of the best quality; whom
the King was desirous to satisfy, not only about the point in hand, but in
some other things that were occasionally awaked; which I likewise reserve to
our private freedom.

The Kings Officers are returned from my Lady Elizabeth; whom they left at
Goltzheime the last of May, where His Majesty's expense did cease. This place
was chosen for her consignment in stead of Bacherach, suspected of contagion.
She was at Andernach feasted by the Elector of Cullen; at Confluence, or
Cobolentz (as they call it) by the other of Trier; and at Mentz by the third of
those Ecclesiastic Potentates, very Royally and kindly, and (which was less
expected) very handsomely. The Count Maurice, and his Brother with troops of
Horse, and a guard of Foot, accompanied her to Cullen, and entered themselves
into that City with her: (I need not tell you, that though themselves were
within, the Horse, and most of the Foot were without the walls) Which is here
(by the wiser sort of Interpreters) thought as hazardous an act, as either of
them both had done in the heat of War; and indeed no way justifiable in foro
sapientiae. And therefore such adventures as these must appeal ad forum
Providentiae; where we are all covered by his vigilant mercy and love: to which
I commit you, and my sweet Niece in my hearty prayers.

Your faithful poor friend, Uncle, and Servant, HENRY WOTTON.

Sir,
I Send you a sprigg of some flowers, which I have newly received out of
Piedmont, in Winter and Summer the same; and therein an excellent type of a
friend.

I am bold likewise to keep my self in the memory of my Niece, till I see her,
with a poor pair of Gloves of the newest fashion:

Inventore Henrico Wottono, Sculptore Crocio.
The 18. of June, 1613.
Friday the 25. June, 1613. Sir,
I Told you in my last, that I would take the commencement at Cambridge in my
way toward you, where I shall be God willing to morrow seven-night. This I now
repeat, to save the telling of it again by the next Carrier, foreseeing that I
shall then be impatient of so much delay as a line of mine own effusion, which
even now does torture me, while I contemplate some of those green Banks (that
you mention) where when I have you by me (to express my contentment in the
Italian phrase) Non scrivero al Papa fratello. The Ambassador of Savoy departed
yesterday, making much haste homewards, or at least much show of it; where he
is likely to come timely enough to the warming of his hands at that fire which
his Master has kindled; whose nature in truth does participate much of the
flint, as well as his state. But is not all this out of my way? Sir, Believe
it, my spirits do boil, and I can hold my Pen no longer then till I have wished
all Gods blessings to be with you, and with that best Niece of the World.

Your poor Uncle, and faithful Servant, HENRY WOTTON.
Albertus was yesterday with me at the Court. And though there be great
disproportion in the space, yet I dare conclude, that as much strength as did
carry him to Greenwich, will bear him to Redgrave.



July 2. 1613. Sir,
WHereas I wrote unto you, that I would be at Cambridge as on Saturday next; I
am now cast off again till the Kings return to London, which will be about the
middle of the week following. The delay grows from a desire of seeing Albertus
his business settled before we come unto you, where we mean to forget all the
world besides. Of this we shall bring you the account.

Now, to let matters of State sleep, I will entertain you at the present with
what has happened this week at the banks side. The Kings Players had a new
Play, called All is true, representing some principal pieces of the reign of
Henry 8. which was set forth with many extraordinary circumstances of Pomp and
Majesty, even to the matting of the stage; the Knights of the Order, with their
Georges and Garter, the Guards with their embroidered Coats, and the like:
sufficient in truth within a while to make greatness very familiar, if not
ridiculous. Now, King Henry making a Masque at the Cardinal Wolsey's house, and
certain Chambers being shot off at his entry, some of the paper, or other stuff
wherewith one of them was stopped, did light on the thatch, where being thought
at first but an idle smoke, and their eyes more attentive to the show, it
kindled inwardly, and ran round like a train, consuming within less then an
hour the whole house to the very grounds.

This was the fatal period of that virtuous fabrique, wherein yet nothing did
perish, but wood and straw, and a few forsaken cloaks; only one man had his
breeches set on fire, that would perhaps have broyled him, if he had not by the
benefit of a provident wit put it out with bottle Ale. The rest when we meet:
till when, I protest every minute is the siege of Troy* Gods dear blessings
till then and ever be with you.

Your poor Uncle and faithful servant. HENRY WOTTON.
I have this week received your last of the 27. of June, wherein I see my steps
lovingly calculated, and in truth too much expectation of so unworthy a guest.



June 8. 1614. Sir,
IT is both morally and naturally true, that I have never been in perfect
health and cheerfulness since we parted: but I have entertained my mind; when
my body would give me leave, with the contemplation of the strangest thing that
ever I beheld, commonly called in our language (as I take it) a Parliament:
which has produced nothing, but inexplicable riddles in the place of Laws. For
first, it is aborted before it was born, and nullified after it had a being;
insomuch, as the Count Palatine (whose naturalization was the only thing that
passed in both houses) is now again an Alien. And whereas all other Parliamenrs
have had some one eminent quality that has created a denomination: some being
called in our Records mad Parliaments, some, merciless, and the like: This I
think, from two properties almost insociable or seldom meeting, may be termed
the Parliament of greatest diligence, and of least resolution that ever was, or
ever will be; For our Committees were as well attended commonly, as full Houses
in former Sessions; and yet we did nothing, neither in the forenoon, nor after,
whereof I can yield you no reason, but this one, that our diversions were more
then our main purposes; and some of so sensible nature as took up all our
reason, and all our passion in the pursuit of them. Now, Sir, what has
followed since the dissolution of this Civil body, let me rather tell you, then
lead you back into any particularities of that which is passed.

It pleased His Majesty the very next morning, to call to examination before
the Lords of his Council, diverse Members of the House of Commons, for some
speeches better becoming a Senate of Venice, where the Treaters are perpetual
Princes, then where those that speak so irreverently are so soon to return
(which they should remember) to the natural capacity of Subjects. Of these
Examinants, four are committed close Prisoners to the Tower: 1. Sir Walter
Chute. 2. John Hoskins. 3. One Wentworth a Lawyer. And 4. Mr Christopher Nevil,
second son to my Lord of Apergavenie.

The first made great shift to come thither: For having taken in our house some
disgrace in the matter of the undertakers (of whom he would fain have been
thought one) to get the opinion of a bold man, after he had lost that of a
wise; he fell one morning into a declamation against the times, so insipid, and
so unseasonable, as if he had been put but out of his place for it of Carver,
(into which one of my L. Admirals Nephews is sworn) I should not much have
pitied him; though he be my Countryman. The second is in for more wit, and for
licentiousness baptized freedom: For I have noted in our house, that a false or
faint Patriot did cover himself with the shadow of equal moderation; and on the
other side, irreverent discourse was called honest liberty: so as upon the
whole matter, No excesses want precious names. You shall have it in Pliny's
language, which I like better then mine own translation; Nullis vitiis desunt
pretiosa nomina.

The third is a silly and simple creature, God himself knows; and though his
Father was by Queen Elizabeth at the time of a Parliament likewise put into the
place where the son now is, yet has he rather inherited his fortune, then his
understanding. His fault was the application of certain Texts in Ezekiel and
Daniel to the matter of impositions; and saying that the French King was killed
like a Calf, with such like poor stuff: Against which the French Ambassador
(having gotten knowledge of it) has formed a complaint with some danger of his
wisdom.

The last is a young Gentleman, fresh from the School; who having gathered
together diverse Latin sentences against Kings, bound them up in a long speech,
and interlarded them with certain Ciceronian exclamations; as, O Tempora, O
Mores. -- Thus I have a little run over these accidents unto you, enough only
to break out of that silence which I will not call a symptom of my sickness,
but a sickness it self. How soever, I will keep it from being hectical; and
hereafter give you a better account of mine own observations. This week I have
seen from a most dear Niece a Letter, that has much comforted one Uncle, and a
Postscript the other. Long may that hand move, which is so full of kindeness.
As for my particular, Take heed of such invitations, if you either love or pity
your selves: For I think there was never Needle touched with a Lodestone that
did more incline to the North, then I do to Redgrave: In the mean time, we are
all here well: and so our Lord Jesus preserve you there.

Your faithfullest poor Friend and Servant, HENRY WOTTON.
Sir I pray remember my hearty affection to my Cousin Nicolas Bacon; and, all
joy to the new conjoined.

I shall propound unto you the next week a very possible Problem, unto which
if you can devise how to attain: Non scriveremo al Papa, fratello.



London, June 16. 1614. Sir,
THe Earl of Northampton, having after a lingering fever spent more spirits
than a younger body could well have born, by the incision of a wennish tumor
grown on his thigh, yesternight between eleven and twelve of the clock departed
out of this world: where, as he had proved much variety and vicissitude of
fortune in the course of his life: so peradventure he has prevented another
change thereof by the opportunity of his end: For there went a general voice
through the Court on Sunday last, upon the commitment of Doctor Sharp, and Sir
Charles Cornwallis to the Tower, that he was somewhat implicated in that
business: whereof I will give you a little account at the present as far as I
have been hitherto able to penetrate. John Hoskins (of whose imprisonment I
wrote unto you by the last Carrier) having at a reexamination been questioned,
whether he well understood the consequence of that Sicilian vesper, whereunto
he had made some desperate allusion in the House of Parliament, made answer
(and I think very truly) that he had no more then a general information
thereof, being but little conversant in those Histories that lay out of the way
of his profession: whereupon being pressed to discover whence he then had
recieved this information, since it lay not within his own reading, he
confessed to have had it from Doctor Sharp, who had infused these things into
him, and had solicited him to impress them in the Parliament: And further, that
Hoskins hereupon demanding what protection he might hope for, if afterward he
were called into question; the said Doctor should nominate unto him, besides
others (whose names I will spare) that Earl who has now made an end of all his
reckonings: assuring him of his assistance by the means of Sir Charles
Cornwallis, with whom the Doctor was conjoined in this practice. Thus came Sir
Charles into discovery: who being afterward confronted with the Doctor himself,
though he could not (as they say) justify his own person, yet did he clear my
Lord of Northampton from any manner of understanding with him therein upon his
Salvation: which yet is not enough (as I percieve among the people) to sweep
the dust from his Grave. Thus you see (Sir) the natural end of a great man, and
the accidental ruin of others, which I had rather you should see in a letter,
then as I did on Sunday at Greenwich: where it grieved my soul to behold a
grave and learned Divine, and a Gentleman of good hopes and merits carried away
in the face of the whole Court, with most dejected countenances, and such a
greediness at all windows to gaze at unfortunate spectacles.

The Earl of Northampton has made three of his servants his Executors, with a
very vast power as I hear; and for Overseers of his will, my Lord of Suffolk,
my Lord of Worcester, and my Lord William Haward: to the Earl of Arundel he
has left all his land (which will amount to some 3000. of yearly revenue)
besides three or four hundred to Mr. Henry Haward, whereof he had before
assured him at the time of his marriage; but neither of them to enjoy a penny
thereof as yet this eight year: all which time he intends the fruits of his
estate shall be collected and distributed in legacies and pious uses according
to his will, which has not yet been seen: but thus much as I have told you was
understood before his expiration. To my Lord of Suffolk he has left his house,
but has disposed of all the movables and furniture from him: And it is
concieved, that he dyed in some distastful impression, which he had taken
against him upon the voices that ran of my Lord of Suffolcks likelihood to be
Lord Treasurer; which place will now assuredly fall upon him; and the world
does contemplate my Lord of Rochester for Lord Privy Seal, and Lord Warden of
the five Ports. As for the Lord Chamberlainship, it is somewhat more
questionable between my Lord of Pembroke, the Duke of Lenox, and my Lord
Knowels. A few days will determine these ambitions. In the mean time, I commit
you (who have better objects) to the contemplation of them, and to the mercy of
our loving God in all your ways,

Your faithfullest poor friend and Servant, HENRY WOTTON.
Sir, I have (I know not how) mislayed the character which I left you:
therefore I pray send me in your very next a copy. Therefore I have deferred
the matter which I am to propound unto you till the next week, because I must
send you some oar of lead, and iron withal, which I have not yet gotten.

Is there no room left for the remembrance of that dear Niece* God forbid. And
I pray (Sir) tell her besides, that a certain Uncle here (whom yet I will not
suffer to love her better then my self) does greedily expect some news from her.



The 7. of June style of the place. 1615. Sir,
I Hear a little voice that you are come to London, which to me is the voice of
a Nightingal: for since I cannot enjoy your presence, I make my self happy with
your nearness: And yet now methinks I have a kind of rebellion against it,
that we should be separated with such a contemptible distance. For how much I
love you, mine own heart does know, and God knows my heart. But let me fall
into a passion: for what sin in the name of Christ was I sent hither among
soldiers, being by my profession Academical, and by my charge Pacifical? I am
within a day or two to send Cuthberd my servant home: by whom I shall tell you
diverse things. In the mean while, I have adventured these few lines to break
the ice of silence: for in truth it is a cold fault.

Our sweet Savior bless you. Servidore ANIGO WOTTONI.
My hot love to the best Niece of the World.



Right Honorable and my very good Lord.
HAving here lately seen the deaths of two, and the elections of two other
Dukes within the compass of six weeks: I have been bold to entertain your
Lordship with a little story of these changes and competitions, though with
small presumption that you can take any pleasure in my simple report thereof,
unless it win some favor by the freshness or the freedom. For the rest, The
whole town is here at the present in horror and confusion upon the discovering
of a foul and fearful conspiracy of the French against this State; whereof no
less then thirty have already suffered very condign punishment between men
strangled in prison, drowned in the silence of the night, and hanged in public
view; and yet the bottom is invisible.

If Gods mercy had not prevented it, I think I might for mine own patticular
have spared my late supplication to the King about my return home toward next
Winter: For I cannot hope that in the common Massacre public Ministers would
have been distinguished from other men: Nay, rather we might perchance have had
the honor to have our houses thought worthiest the rifling. I shall give your
Lordship a better account of this in my next: Having now troubled you beyond
excuse, with my poor Papers. Our blessed God keep your Lordship in his love.

Your Lordships with all true devotion, HENRY WOTTON.
Venice this 25. May, 1618.
Sir,
AMong those that have deep interest in whatsoever can befall you, I am the
freshest witness of your unexpressible affections to my most dear Niece; whom
God has taken from us into his eternal Light and rest; where we must leave
her, ^ll we come unto her. I should think my self unworthy for ever of that
love she bare me, if in this case I were fit to comfort you. But it is that
only God who can reconsolate us both: Who when he has called now one, and then
another of his own creatures unto himself, will unclasp the final Book of his
Decrees, and dissolve the whole. For which I hope he will rather teach us to
thirst and languish, then to repine at particular dissolutions. I had in a
peculiar affliction of mine own (all within the compass of little time) much
consolation from you; which cannot but be now present with your self; for I am
well acquainted with the strength of your Christian mind.

Therefore being kindly invited by the good Master of the Rolls to write by
his express Messenger unto you; let me (without further discourse of our
griess) only join in this with him, to wish your company divided between him
and me.

We will contemplate together when we meet our future blessedness, and our
present uncertainties: And I am afraid we shall find too much argument to
drown our private feelings in the public solicitude. Gods love, wherein is
all joy, be with us.

Your ever true and hearty servant, HENRY WOTTON.
From Westminst. this 16. Apr. 1626.
From the College the 14. of December. 1628. Sir,
I Have received from London the favorable lines wherewith you honored me
then near your departure; which you have somewhat allayed, with the promise of
your return at the beginning of the next Term, which consorteth well with a
change of my purpose to Christmas in Kent, born in me as I was reading your
Letter: For what should I do there in such haste after the Nuptials, when I
shall come so as well in Lent? Much ado there has been toward the point of
conclusion; like that Aphorism of Hyppocrates: Nox ante Chrisin est
molestissima. Loves being in this like Fevers, as well as in the rest; for one
definition will serve them both: Cordis accensio.

Jack Dinely is not yet arrived, but we expect him daily as Messenger from the
Queen his Mistress, of her late happy delivery, after a foul report that had
been maliciously thrown abroad of her miscarriage by a fall. The Doctor
likewise as yet has given me no answer; but I will quicken him, and put life I
hope into the business.

Now, let me tell you, That the noble Sir Gervase Clifton (as in good faith he
is in ipsis visceribus) has been lately here with us, at a time when he has
been content to be entertained with the pastimes of children; a Latin and a
Greek Hyppolitus How often you were remembered between us, is harder for me to
tell you, then I hope for you to believe. Among other discourse he showed me a
little excrescence that he has beginning upon the uttermost ball of his eyes;
a filmie matter, like the rudiment of a Pinn and Webb as they call it.
Whereupon fell into my memory a secret that Mr Bohan had told me his Mother
knew: How to take away that evil in growth, and perchance much more in the
infancy, with a Medicine applied only to the Wrists. And I have heard your self
likewise speak of a rare thing for that part. I beseech you (Sir) be pleased
with all possible speed to entreat that receipt from M. Bohan, to whom we shall
both be much beholden for it. And Sir Gervase Clifton is already so possessed,
that he both says and thinks, that nothing will cure him better then that
which any way shall come through your hand unto him. No peace as yet with
either of the Kings: The more wished I think with France, the likelier
perchance with Spain. No Offices disposed in Court. No Favorite but the Lord
Treasurer. More news in my next. For the present, God keep you in his dear love.

Servidore, H. WOTTON.

On the 6. of March, 1628. Sir,
I Beseech you, let these lines with as much affection, though with less
civility, conveigh my good wishes after you, which I should my self have
brought before your departure.

You seem to have left the Town somewhat Prophetically, not to be near the
noise of a very unhappy morning on Monday last: at which time the Parliament
assembling again (which you know had been silenced till that day) was then
re-adjourned by the Kings especial Command till Tuesday next: Whereupon the
Lower House fell into such heat (one passion begetting another) that the
Speaker (who as discharged by the Royal Power, did refuse to read a kind of
Remonstrance which Sir John Eliott had provisionally set down in Paper) was
forced into the Chair. It is strange to consider the lubricity of popular
favor: For he that before during this whole Session (if so we may call it) and
the former, was so highly commended, and even in this very act by some of the
soundest and soberest of the House; yet with the general Body is so stripped of
all his credit in a moment, that I have hardly seen in any Chemical work such a
precipitation. What has in sued, will be better told you by this good Captain.
Some think the Parliament does yet hang upon a thread, and may be stitched again
together: But, that is an ayrie conceit in my opinion; yet the peace of Italy,
and the preparations of France against us, are voyced so strongly, that I
verily believe we shall have a new summons.

The States of the low Provinces have since their Western great Prize, newly
taken a Careck out of the East, of huge value: so as their acts are, Sub
utreque sonantia Phoebo.

I have not yet sent those Verses to Mrs Katherine Stanhope, that she may
rather have them in the second Edition: For the Author has licked them over,
and you shall have a new Copy sent you by the next Carrier. We have met
together once or twice since your going loco solito; but like a disjoynted
company, wanting one of our best pieces: God send us often cheerfully together:
And so I rest

Your hearty servant, HENRY WOTTON.
When Jack Dinely shall return out of Lincolnshire, I will give you an account
what I writ by him to the Queen of Bohemia about your Spiritous Nephew. And I
will not forget to rouse the Doctor at Cambridge in the charitable intention. I
pray remember my service to your whole name, and to my Noble Cousin Sir Drue:
To whom I will write the next week.



Sir,
I Know that between us there needs little complement: for which I am for my
part so unproper and so unmoulded, that I often neglect even civil duties: as
well appeared by my coming from London without taking leave of you: but yet I
cannot be wanting unto your self, nor to the least of your name in any real
service, for that were too much violence to my nature: therefore before my
coming from Westminster, I wrote such letters to the Queen of Bohemia about
your Spiritous Frank (as I hope, together with the good offices of the bearer
thereof) will place him with the Prince of Orange when he has taken the Busse.
I could have wished that his lively blood had been a little fleshed at that
siege. But Jack Dinelies long stay at London for his dispatch, and at Gravesend
for a wind has lost us time. We hear that the King of Spain upon the peazing
of his affairs in Italy (where a palm of ground imports him more then a
Province abroad) was resolved to make the Marquess Spinola Governor of Milan,
and that the Count Henry Vanden Berge should command the Armies in chief under
the Infanta. If this be so, there will be there Bella plusquam Civilia, for you
know he is near of blood to the Prince of Orange, though he has some a little
nearer: for he has one or two by his own sister, as I remember they told me in
his Town of Maestrick. The other employment of the Marquess is a counsel,
plainly taken rather from necessity then reason. For otherwise jealousy of
state would hardly commit so much power to a Genouese in the Confines of his
own Country, unless I have forgotten my foreign Maxims.

I have my head toward Kent, with a hope to see you first there, and
afterward at our Election: which will be the third of August. And so with my
humble and hearty remembrance to that best of men, and noblest of Ladies, I rest

Il suisceratissi manente vostro, HENRY WOTTON.
This Monday night late. 1629.
Sir,
ALthough I intend to write again speedily, and at a little more ease unto you
by James, and then to send you and Sir Gervase Clifton the Copy of a letter,
which Giovanni tells me you both desire: yet lest you should send over your
Frank (who has from you all his sails and fraught) without part of his balast
from me, I have hastened the enclosed letters unto your hand, with the copy of
mine to the Queen of Bohemia: the other are ad hanc formam. I could wish that
he would begin with Jack Dinely, and slide first unseen to Leyden: who will
bring him thence to the Queen, and acquaint him with all due respects.

I have written to the Countess of Levistain to cherish him also: a great and
assiduous Lady with the Queen, and by Title, my noble Secretary. This is all
that I need say at the present. Doctor Sharp and I do threaten you the next
Christmas. In the mean while

Your humble servant. HENRY WOTTON.
From the College this Tuesday. 1629. Optimo virorum; and to his most worthy
Lady. S.



Sir,
THe very truth is, your love has prevented me: for I meant by Giovanni to
give you some account of what has passed since our divorcement. When I had
slept half an hour after you were gone from Danford, I found my self fresco
come una rofa: but I awaked in a strange dream, that had seldom before befaln
me in an Inn; finding nothing to be paid, not so much as for mine own horses:
whereby the reason was plain of the paleness of my water which you observed:
for none of the tincture of my gold was gone into the reckoning of the drink,
as you had handled the matter.

At the top of Shooters hill my footman stayed, as if he had been watching the
Beacon rather then for me; and told me there were good provisions made at Sir
Adam Newtons for you and me, with kind expectation of us both. But my self
being desirous to reach Eton that night, as I did, (for my horses I see travail
best upon an other man's purse) I blanched the house, and sent thither by
Giovanni a fair excuse. True it is, we are much of a humor: Cento Bue will
hardly draw us in a journey to any strange place.

At that time likewise Will brought me a letter from Mr. Griffith, which had
been expressly sent to Gravesend the night before: whereby I saw Giovanni had
taken a false alarm: for he was not to be gone till the Monday morning
following: so as I have had time to ballast him with letters: And I have
intimated beforehand to your Jack Dinely, your purpose to pass over the
spiritous Frank as soon as you can trick him. We are now toward the Festival
of our Election; wherein annually I make a shift to loose four or five friends,
and yet do my self no good: so as they are angry with me on the one side, and
they laugh at me on the other.

I apprehend this year a great poverty of Venison with us: for I came too late
to exchange your warrant; and my Lady Throckmortons will not serve my turn.

Since my coming, Mr. Turvil a French practical man of good erudition has
passed a day or two with me, from whom I hear a shrewd point; That the oath of
peace (which should have been taken between the two neighboring Kings upon the
same day) is put off for a month: I believe the stop be in France to gain time
to disturb our Treaty with Spain.

Mr. Pim (a man whose ears are open) told me likewise yesterday a strange
thing; that the Queen of Bohemia has newly, being hunting, been chased away
her self with some affrightment from Rhenen by certain Troops of the enemy that
have passed the Isel. With whom it was feared the Count Henry Venden Berge
would join and ravage the Velow. Yet withal were come tidings, that the Prince
of Orange at the Busse had had parley offered him. But my intelligences are
Cistern waters: you are nearer the Fountain. And not only, Dulcius ex ipso
Font bibuntur aquae, but verius too. For both will stand in the verse.

Before I end, let me beseech you, to remember my humble and hearty devotion
(in the very style of Seneca to his Lucilius, and I shall need to say no more)
Optimo Virorum. I envy your enjoyments and conversations, and most when they
are privatest, for then they are freest. I hope the Noble Lady will return
quickly again to her Hesperian Garden. To whom I pray, likewise let my humble
service be remembered. And so I rest,

Excep^o quod non simul esses caetera laetus. HENRY WOTTON.
From the College this Wednesday night, 1629.
May it please Your Majesty,
THis Bearer is that Lad, by name Frank Bacon; for whom your Majesty's
intercession with the Prince of Orange, has bound so many unto you here. It is
your goodness that has done it, and therefore he is addressed by his friends
(and by me who am the meanest of them) first through your gracious Hands, and
laid down at your Royal Feet.

There is in him (I believe) metal enough to be cast into good form: And I hope
it is of the hoblest sort, which is ever the most malleable and plyant. Only
one thing I fear, that coming from a Country life, into the luster of Courts,
he will be more troubled with it, then with the hissing of Bullets.

Now when I consider (as I do at the present) that besides your Majesty's
antienter favors toward me, and to them that have been, and are so dear unto
me; some gone, and some remaining; you have lately received the child of my
very worthy friend M. Griffith, about the Prince your son; and honored this
other with your especial recommendation, in such a forcible and express manner
as you were pleased to do it: I say, when I consider all this, I cannot but
fall into some passionate questions with mine own heart. Shall I die without
seeing again my Royal Mistress my self? Shall I not rather bring her my most
humble thanks, then let them thus drop out of a dull Pen? Shall such a
contemptible distance, as between Eton and the Hague divide me from beholding
how her virtues overshine the darkness of her fortune? I could spend much paper
in this passion; but let it sleep for the present: And God bless your Majesty,

As I am Yours.
Aug. 16. 1629. After this humble and just acknowledgement of my obligations
unto Your Maj., it were a miserable thing for me to tell you, that at our late
Election, I have remembered Your Commandment in the first place; I should indeed
rather ask what Your Majesty will have next done.



My noble Nephew.
I Am sorry that your Cast of Bucknames cannot be served at this Election: For
to choose one of them (and that must have been in a low place) had been
discomfortable: they will fly best at ease together. Yet I have thought of a
way the next year, in all event not to fail; which is, to divide them between
Westminster and Eton. Their Election precedeth ours some three weeks; and truly
upon my late observation there, I must needs say, that school mouldeth good
Scholars, and of certainer preferment to either of the Universities (for some
go to Oxford, and some to Cambridge) then this: out of which the issue is
always hard, and the entrance not always easy. Glad I am to hear by your
Letter, that you have gotten so good a Schoolmaster, that they may be well
mued in the mean while. Betwixt this and the next turn, I shall lay you down an
infallible course for them. And this must content their good father at the
present.

If your Masons Brother (who was here on Sunday) had stayed till the next
morning, there was some practicable hope to have sped the Boy this year to
Cambr. but some unfortunate haste, and despair of so many places as fell open,
carried him away.

If you had not intimated your own coming to London, you might perchance have
been troubled with me in the Country: But I will now languish for the hour you
promise this place of seeing you here; where your Venison (which we enjoy by
exchange from Mr Vice-Chamberlain) has given us all occasion to remember you
thankfully, as a Benefactor to this Board. I will entertain you with no
home-novelties; but let me tell you a fresh piece of no small noise from
abroad. The King of Sweden has landed with 200 ships a great Army of some
40000 in Germany, with intention (if the Party of our Religion be not all
drowsy) to redress the common Cause; or at least, to redintegrate his near
Kinsman in Meckleburge, confiscated you know by the Emperor: And the
opportunity is fair, while the Austrian power is diverted for the help of Spain
into Italy. God bless it, and cherish it as his own business; and in his dear
love I leave you: Ever remaining

Your faithful Servant HENRY WOTTON. As intricate as a Flea in a bottom of
Flax.
From your College this 27. July, 1630. Sir, I will write to you at large
after our Election, when my Brains are settled.



Noble Sir, and my most dear Nephew.
WE were for three weeks together so besieged at your Eton, first with an
overflow of water from the West, and then with a deep snow out of the East,
(contrary quarters conspiring against us) that our ordinary boats, which
usually go and return twice a week, could not pass under the Bridges: whereby
such a Letter from you as never man received, lay silent at my Chamber in St
Martins-lane till mine own coming to London; to the utter condemnation of my
unthankfulness in the mean time: Which truly I should fear, but that it is the
natural property of the same heart, to be a gentle Interpreter, which is so
noble an Obliger.

Now, Sir, After I had received and read your Letter, I took some days to
deliberate what I should do, and to let my judgment settle again which was
distracted with so kind a surprisal: should I use a feathered quill to write
unto you? or fly my self to Redgrave? for you had given me wings. At last, I
resolved upon both. First, to make this true protestation by writing from my
very bowels where it is engraven. That though your bounty (considered in all
the circumstances, as well the form, as the matter, and the very opportunity of
the time wherein it came, and especially without any imaginable pretense of
desert in my self) has been such, as never befell me before, nor can ever
befall me again: yet have you therewith not enriched, but stripped and despised
me for ever: Nothing that was before, either in my power or possession, being
after this mine own: for it is all yours, if it were both the Indies. So as
your kindness howsoever flowing from a tender affection: yet is with me like
hard wax, dropped and sealed together.

The next after this, shall be to follow it my self: but therein (after the
Spanish phrase) I will take language at the Roles, where I shall understand
more punctually about what time you purpose to be here. For, I aim at the
convoying of you up to your Eton. About which I will write more by the next
Carrier: and prepare your self (Sir) with patience while we live, to be
troubled weekly with my letters; wheresoever I am, even when I shall have no
more to say then this, which is the least that can be spoken, that I am

Yours, HENRY WOTTON.
Feb. 13. 1632.
May the 27. Sir,
I Do as unwillingly put my pen to tell you, as I am sure you will be to hear
what has befaln my Nephew Albertus this week. He was going on Friday last
toward evening in a Coach alone: whose driver alighting (I know not upon what
occasion) hard by Charing Cross, the horses (being young) took some
affrightment, and running away so furiously, that one of them tore all his
belly open upon the corner of a Beer Cart, my Nephew (who in this mean while
adventured to leap out) seems to have hung upon one of the pins of the boot,
from whence struggling to get loose, he brake the wast-band of his hose behind,
and so fell with the greater violence on the ground, hurting only the
hindermost part of his head, by what possibility we cannot conceive, unless the
motion of the Coach did turn him round in the fall. The force of the concussion
took from him for some hour or thereabouts the use of his voice and sense,
which are now well restored; only, there yet remains in his left arm a kind
of Paralitical stupefaction, and his right eyelid is all black with some knock
that he took in the agitation of the Coach; which peradventure may have been
the motive to make him leap out. But these external evils do not so much
trouble us, as an inward pungent and pulsatory ache within the skull, somewhat
lower then the place of his hurt; which has continued more or less since his
fall, notwithstanding twice letting blood, and some nights of good rest, and
shaving of his head for the better transpiration; which we doubt the more,
because it comes sine ratione, his hurt being only in the fleshy part, and
very slight, without fracture of the skull, without inflammation, without any
fever, and all the principal faculties, as memory, discourse, imagination
untainted. The King has in this time much consolated us both with sending unto
him, and with expressing publicly a gracious feeling of his case: but we must
fetch our true comforts from him, who is Lord of the whole: And so I leave it.

Since my last unto you, I am sure you hear how Sir Robert Mansfield has been
twice or thrice convented before the Lords, and committed to the Marshalsie;
partly for having consulted with M. Whitlock the Lawyer about the validity of a
Commission drawn for a re-search into the Office of the Admiralty, whereof
himself is an Accomptant; and partly for denying to reveal the name of the said
Lawyer his Friend; who before had been committed to the Fleet for another case
much of the same nature. The point touches a limb of the Kings Prerogative,
and immediate Authority. Sir Robert Mansfields Answers (by report) had as much
of the Philosopher, or of the Hermit, as of the Soldier, or Courtier;
professing openly his little care of this World, or of his own fortunes in it;
and diverse other phrases of that complexion. Sir Thomas Overbury is still where
he was, and as he was, without any alteration: The Viscount Rochester yet no
way sinking in the point of favor; which are two strange consistents.

Sir R. Drury runs at the Ring, corbeteth his horse before the Kings window,
haunteth my L. of Rochesters chamber, even when himself is not there; and in
secret divides his observances between him and the House of Suffolk: And all
this (they say) to be Ambassador at Bruxels. So as super tota materia, I see
appetites are not all of a kind: Some go to the Tower for the avoiding of that
which another does languish to obtain. I will end with my Paper, and by the
next Carrier either tell you precisely when I shall see you, or prevent the
telling of it. And so our sweet Savior bless you and my deer Niece.

From St. Martins by the Fields, this 18. of Apr. 1633. HENRY WOTTON.

To my Noble Nephew long and cheerful Years. Sir, From St. Martins by the
Fields, this 18. of Apr. 1633.
BY beginning first with Philosophy, I will discover the Method of my nature,
preferring it before the speculations of State.

Take any Vegetable whatsoever, (none excepted in the effect, though some
difference in the degree) express the juice; put that in any vessel of Wood or
Stone, with a narrow neck and mouth, not closed at the top, but covered with
any thing, so as it may work out above: Set it afterward in some cold hole in
a Cellar, let it stand there some three weeks, or a month, till by
fermentation it have both purged it self upwards, and by sediment downwards.
Then decant from it the clear juice, and put that in a Limbeck in Balneo Maris,
or in Balneo Roris. The first that rises will be Aqua ardens, useful perchance
according to the quality of the Plant; as of Wormwood for the stomach, of
Succory, or any of those Incubae for the Liver. And on the sides of the Limbeck
will hang a salt; this is the extracting of salt without calcination; which
otherwise certainly must needs consume all the active powers of any Vegetable,
and leave nothing but a plastic and passive virtue.

For the point of preserving that salt afterward from resolution by air into
water, I hold it impossible, notwithstanding the proper examples that you
allege; which yet must of necessity yield to it. For as your excellent Uncle
says, and says well, in not the least of his works (though born after him) of
his experiments: Air is predatory.

I have forgotten (for memoria primo senescit) whether I told you in my last a
pretty late experiment in Arthritical pains: It is cheap enough. Take a roasted
Turnip (for if you boil it, it will open the pores, and draw too much.) apply
that in a Poultice to the part affected, with change once in an hour or two, as
you find it dried by the heat of the flesh, and it will in little time allay
the pain.

Thus much in our private way, wherein I dare swear, if our Medicines were as
strong as our wishes, they would work extremely.

Now, for the Public, where peradventure now and then there are distempers as
well as in natural bodies.

The Earl of Holland was on Saturday last (the day after your Posts departure)
very solemnly restored at Council Table (the King present) from a kind of
Eclipse, wherein he had stood since the Thursday fortnight before: All
considered, the obscuration was long, and bred both various and doubtful
discourse; but it ended well. All the cause yet known, was a verbal challenge
sent from him by Mr Henry Germain in this form: To the now Lord Weston newly
returned from his foreign employments. That since he had already given the
King an account of his Embassage, he did now expect from him an account of a
Letter of his, which he had opened in Paris, and he did expect it at such a
time, even in the Spring-garden (close under his fathers Window) with his sword
by his side.

It is said (I go no farther in such tender points) that my Lord Weston sent
him by Mr Henry Percy (between whom and the said L. Weston had in the late
journey (as it seems) been contracted, such friendship as overcame the memory
that he was Cosin-German to my L. of Holland) a very fair and discreet answer:
That if he could challenge him for any injury done him before, or after his
Embassage, he would meet him as a Gentleman, with his sword by his side where
he should appoint. But for any thing that had been done in the time of his
Embassage, he had already given the King an account thereof, and thought
himself not accountable to any other. This published on Thursday was fortnight,
the Earl of Holland was confined to his Chamber in Court, and the next day
morning to his house at Kensington, where he remained without any further
circumstance of restraint, or displeasure Saturday and Sunday: on which days
being much visited, it was thought fit on Monday to appoint M. Dickenson one of
the Clerks of the Council, to be his Guardian thus far, that none without his
presence should accost him. This made the vulgar judgments run high, or rather
indeed run low, That he was a lost and discarded man, judgeing as of Patients
in Fevers, by the exasperation of the fits. But the Queen (who was a little
obliquely interrested in this business, for in my Lord of Hollands Letter,
which was opened, she had one that was not opened, nor so much (as they say) as
superscribed; and both the Queens and my L. of Hollands were enclosed in one
from M. Walter Mountague (whereof I shall tell you more hereafter.) The Queen I
say, stood nobly by him, and as it seems pressed her own affront. It is too
intricately involved for me so much as to guess at any particulars. I hear
generally discoursed, that the opened dispatch was only in favor (if it might
be obtained) of Monsr de Chateau Neuf, and the Chevalr de Jarr; (who had both
been here) but written with caution (and surely not without the Kings
knowledge) to be delivered, if there were hope of any good effect, and
perchance not without order from His Majesty to my Lord Weston; afterward to
stop the said Letters, upon advertisement that both Cateau Neuf, and de Jarr
were already in the Bastille. But this I leave at large, as not knowing the
depth of the business*

Upon Monday was seven-night fell out another quarrel, nobly carried (branching
from the former) between my L. Fielding and M. Goring, son and heir to the Lord
of that name. They had been the night before at supper. I know not where
together; where M. Goring spoke something in diminution of my L. Weston, which
my L. Fielding told him, it could not become him to suffer, lying by the side
of his sister. Thereupon, these hot hearts appoint a meeting next day Morning,
themselves alone, each upon his Horse. they pass by Hide-Park, as a place where
they might be parted too soon, and turn into a lane by Knights-bridge; where
having tied up their Horses at a hedge or gate, they got over into a Close;
there stripped into their shirts, with single Rapiers, they fell to an eager
Duel, till they were severed by the Host and his servants of the Inn of the
Prince of Orange, who by mere chance had taken some notice of them. In this
noble encounter, wherein blood was spent though (by Gods providence) not much
on either side there passed between them a very memorable interchange of a
piece of courtesy, if that word may have room in this place: Says my Lord
Fielding, M. Goring, If you leave me here, let me advise you not to go back by
Piccadillia-hall, lest if mischance befall me, and be suddenly noised (as it
falls out in these occasions now between us) you might receive some harm by
some of my friends that lodge thereabouts.

My Lord (replies Goring) I have no way but one to answer this courtesy: I
have here by chance in my pocket a Warrant to pass the Ports out of England
without a name (gotten I suppose upon some other occasion before,) If you leave
me here, take it for your use, and put in your own name. This is a passage much
commended between them, as proceeding both from sweetness and stoutness of
spirit, which are very compatible. On the solemn day of Saturday last, both
this difference and the Original, between the Earl of Holland and the Lord
Weston, were fairly reconciled and forgiven by the King, with shaking of hands,
and such Symbols of agreement: And likewise Sir Maurice Dromand, who had before
upon an uncivil rupture on his part, between him and my Lord of Carlisle been
committed to the Tower, was then delivered at the same time: and so it all
ended, as a merry fellow said, in a Maurice. But whether these be perfect
cures, or but skinnings over and Palliations of Court, will appear hereafter:
Nay, some say very quickly, for my Lord Westons Lady, being since brought to
bed of a daughter, men stand in a kind of suspense, whether the Queen will be
the Godmother after so crude a reconcilement, which by the Kings inestimable
goodness, I think may pass in this forgiving week.

For foreign matter, there is so little and so doubtful, as it were a misery
to trouble you with it. The States confuted Treaty is put to the stock; and the
Prince of Orange (by account) gone to the field two days since, having broken
the business (as they say) by three demands; the resignment of Breda and
Guelder, the dismantling of Rheynberg, and the equality of free exercise of
Religion on either side. The States are strong in arms, weak in money, owing
above six hundred thousand pounds sterling in bare interest, besides the
Capital. The enemy has neither money, nor men, nor agreement. Arena sine
calce, yet I hear (and ex bonis Codicibus) that the States are absolutely
resolved to besiege no Town this year, unless it be some such place, as may
happily fall gently into their lap. They will range with divided troops.

I will have a care in my letters to the Kings only sister (for that is now her
published style even in Sermons) so to commend your Frank unto her (whom she
was wont to call, when he went first over, her little Pig) that he may speedily
have a Captains place.

God bless him, and bless your whole name; to which I am so much tied, both by
the alliance of the sweetest Niece that ever man had, and by your own kindness
since her departure to Heaven. And so I rest,

Your indissoluble servant, HENRY WOTTON.
Your Hester is re-entered into the green sickness, fault de je seay quoy.

I pray burn this hasty letter when you have read it.



Sir,
If you have (as I remember once you told me) the Will of Sir William
Pickering; I pray favor me with a Copy of it for a certain purpose: out of
which, if I pick any good, you shall be partaker of it.

I have been for the most part sick since I wrote last unto you, but am now
cheerful again.

To my Noble Nephew many cheerful years. Sir,
IT is worth the noting, how commonly the casual firings of houses in Towns do
follow one another: And so (methinks) do the inflammations of spirits in
Courts: for after the solemn quenching of our late quarrels, there is fallen out
a new, and shrewdly pursued between Mr. Harbert Price a Sewer to the Queen, and
Mr. Eliot, Page to the King.

The beginning they say was upon very slight occasion: but because a young
Lady is an ingredient in the story, I will pass it over. To field they went two
days since upon hot and hasty blood (which somewhat saves it from a deliberate
Duel) both shooting the Bridge in several boats; yet the matter being before
suspected, my Lord-Chamberlain sent one Mr. Haies (a Scotishman and a good
Surgeon, though of late an ordinary Courtier on the Queens side) in guest of
them: who found them both on the Surry side a mile or two below bridge closed,
and (I hear) on the ground. But Mr. Price already hurt in three places; in one
of his sides, in his face, and in three of his fingers: the other is come off
untouched. This Price has been formerly bred a Soldier, and sometimes (they
say) a Lieutenant in the low Provinces. Mr. Eliot scarce yet a man in years:
but for height and strength at his full prime, and in both above the common
scantling. The King is herewith highly offended: succeeding so freshly upon the
late reconcilements. And it is doubted, they will at least lose their places.

The journey to Scotland continues hotly, and his Majesty removes house to
Theobalds, that way on Saturday come fortnight. But first must be censured the
Bishop of Lincoln for too many words, and the Citizens of London in their
undertakings in Ireland for too few deeds, which I believe will both trench
deep. I shall stay long enough in London (not intending to be gone before the
Kings remove) to tell you the event: and truly without your beneficent
courtesy, I had been wrapped in a strange riddle: for I could neither have staid
nor departed.

I received at the Communion in St. Bartholomews on Sunday last (being
Easter Day) in the same Pue with your Hester and her mother; your Hester,
either becomes a little tincture of the Green Sickness well, or that becomes
her well: well she looks I am sure, and in my fancy draws toward the
countenance of her sister Stanhop more and more, but stealingly. My Niece
Margaret is come home from her Artisan in Southwark, with some pretty
amendment. The manner of his cure in those imperfections is somewhat strange:
He uses no bindings, but oils and stroakings: of which I take him to be (in
all my reading) both the instrument and the Author. My Niece Ann will prove one
of the handsomest creatures of the world: being much grown, and having
rectified a little squinting or oblique look which she had in one of her eyes
so far, as the remainder will turn to a beauty. Her mother has of late been
much troubled (and I think as much in her fancy, which is the greater cure as
in her body) with a pain in her right side; which changes place, and therefore
is sure, but a flatuous infirmity: yet it hasteneth her removing to better air.

From my Lady my sister at Canterbury we hear nothing; I believe she is in
travail with her own thoughts about defacing the inscription of the Tomb, as
far as Catholico and Catholica amount unto. And I could wish, as she took your
advice in the invention and word upon the Marble, she had done so in the rest:
but in that you were no apt Counselor.

Now, for foreign matters. We have fair tidings from Germany; that the Princes
hold fast together, and things go well: and I am of opinion, that when those
parts have learnt as well as the lower Provinces, to spend a Summer upon the
siege of a Town, the war will nestle there as well as below. For they abound in
strong places, and war it self is a great refiner of spirits in little time.

The States are in the field earlier then heretofore: and in all judgment, it
imports no less, then the countenancing and covering of a general revolt of
the geheerten Provinces, as they call them: of that more in my next. And so
(Sir) leaving you in our blessed Saviors love, I rest,

Your Sviscerato servidore, HENRY WOTTON.
From my lodging in St. Martins-Lane by the fields, April 25. 1633. Sir, When I
have sent you (as I will do by the next Carrier) a new character, I will open
my files.



St. Martins-lane by the Fields, the 3. of June, 1633. To my Noble Nephew, long
and cheerful years. Sir,
THis other day at the Cockpit in Shoe-lane (where my self am rara avis) your
Nephew M. Robert Bacon came very kindly to me, with whom I was glad to refresh
my acquaintance; though I had rather it had been in the Theater of Redgrave.

I asked him of his Brother, your Frank; and he told me he had been so hindered
by winds, as he thought he was not yet gotten over: At which I was sorry, for
he has lost the honor of taking Rheinberge: He may come yet timely enough to
see Guelders yielded, and after that, to have his share in Juliers, which they
write from the Camp, will be the next piece, and so the States will be Masters
of all the tract that lies between the Maese and the Rhene; and backed with one
of the fattest Provinces of Christendom. Besides, we hear they have recovered
their former footing in Brasiel, and beaten the Spanish Fleet. It is hard to
say, into what these prosperities will run out: For surely, if they can
establish a right correspondency with the upper Armies of Germany, and either
both hold out, or neither agree without the other; even this Summer will breed
notable effects, and among other I hope, the restitution of the Palatinate;
where as much as the Swede had taken, is offered for 16000 Dalers; whereof the
half is paid already by the Duke of Simmern, Administrator to the young
Palatin in his minority, and the other moiety is expected from hence. One thing
I must not omit to tell you, that the said young Prince was at the siege of
Rheinberge to initiate him in action. The young Cardinal Infant is come you
know to Milan, and they say will there reside as Governor till he can recover
Casale and Pignerolo, and purge Italy of the French: So as I believe he will
come to Bruxels (for thither he finally tends) in the Spanish pace. Having thus
a little skimmed over our foreign news, give me leave now to enternain you with
some novelties of Art. I send you herewith two printed Capps, A triangular
Salt-seller, and the top of an Ambar-Ring. The Capps is a pretty fresh
invention of a very easy rate; for they will run shortly at some six pence
apiece: and they say the sale is monopolized by a woman at Amsterdam; which may
come to some pretty perfection in the ornament of Curtains and Valances of
Beds* or in some fine historified Tablecloth for a Banquet, or the like. In the
invention of the Salt-seller you have an interest your self; for I remember
(Sir) you showed me a whole furniture of Marble-Saltsellers for a Table of your
bespeaking: But there is one that has only gone beyond you in the cheapness of
the Material: For this which you now receive, is but of Seacole, and it is
strange to see what a polishment so base a stuff does take, like the ennobling
of a Clown. To the broken Ring there belongs a little more discourse. I bought
for a trifle in Lombard Street long since, because it had a Fly intombed in
the sealing part; which if it had been precisely in the middle, would have
showed like the sculpture of the signet it self. Now a while since by a fall
from a Table to the ground, it brake, though in a boarded room. Whereupon,
there fell a conceit into my mind, that the Ring was Artificial Amber, and not
Natural; as indeed my servant Giovanni and I have since plainly discovered. Now
I cannot choose but smile when I think how much more the first Seller of it
might have had from me for the falsehood (if he would have said so) then for the
truth. For surely many rare things may be made of this composition, and entire
insectils of any greatness, and in any posture be enclosed therein; which I am
sure will inflame you, as it has set me on fire already to find the way how
to clarify the Pasta, which seems to be of Rosin, and perchance some dust of
true Amber. And thus you see what easy ways I take to please my self, while I
am conversing with you. Let me add to these a strange thing to be seen in
London for a couple of pence; which I know not whether I should call a piece of
Art or Nature: It is an English man like some swabber of a ship come from the
Indies, where he has learned to eat fire as familiarly as ever I saw any eat
cakes; even whole glowing Brands, which he will crash with his teeth, and
swallow. I believe he has been hard famished in the Terra de Fuego, on the
South of the Magellan-strait.

Sir, I have heard (I know not by whom) that you had a purpose to be here this
Whitsontide; but imagining that at least M. Chitock may meet you by the way, I
have ventured the trouble of these Lines unto you. For mine own estate, I must
acquaint you, (because whether well or ill I am yours) that of late I have been
much troubled with certain splenetick vapors, mounting to the top of my
stomach when it is empty: For which I am in a course of gentle Physic at the
present, remembering that of Galen, Ego soleo hortari amicos meos, ut in
melancholicis affectionibus abstineant a validioribus remediis. My best Physic
will be your company,

To whom there is none bound in truer service then HENRY WOTTON.

OH (my most dear Nephew: for so I still glory to call you: while Heaven
possesses her who bound us in that Relation) How have I of late after many
vexations of a fastidious infirmity, been at once rent in pieces by hearing
that you were at London: what? said I, and must it be at a time when I cannot
fly thither to have my wonted part of that conversation: wherein all that know
him enjoy such infinite contentment? Thus much did suddenly break loose from
the heart that does truly honor you. And now (Sir) let me tell you both how it
has gone with me, and how I stand at the present. There is a triple health.
Health of body, of mind, and of fortune: you shall have a short account of all
three.

For the first: it is now almost an whole Cycle of the Sun, since after certain
fits of a Quotidian Fever, I was assailed by that Splenetick Passion, which a
Country good fellow that had been a piece of a Grammarian meant, when he said
he was sick of the Flatus, and the other hard Word: for Hypocondriacus stuck in
his teeth: it is the very Proteus of all Maladies; shifting into sundry shapes,
almost every night a new, and yet still the same; neither can I hope, that it
will end in a solar Period; being such a Saturnine Humor: but though the Core
and Root of it be remaining, yet the Symptoms (I thank my God) are well
allayed: and in general, I have found it of more contumacy then malignity; only
since the late cold weather, there is complicated with it a more Asthmatical
straitness of respiration then heretofore: yet those about me say, I bear it
well, as perchance custom has taught me: being now familiarized and
domesticated evils: In the Tragedians expression: Jam mansueta Mala. And thus
much of the Habit of my Body. On the other side: My mind is in a right
Philosophical Estate of health: that is, at an equal distance, both from desire
and hope; and ambitious of nothing, but of doing nothing, and of being nothing:
yet I have some employment of my thoughts to keep them from mouldring, as you
shall know before I close this letter. But first, touching the third kind of
health. My condition or fortune was never better, then in this good Lord
Treasures time: the very reverse of his proud Predecessor, that made a scorn of
my poverty, and a sport of my modesty; leaving me in bad case: and the world,
so as though we now know by what Arts he lived, yet are we ignorant to this
hour by what Religion he died, save only that it could not be good, which was
not worthy the professing. This free passage let me commit to your noble breast,
remembering that in confidence of the reciever, I have transgressed a late
Counsel of mine own which I gave to a young friend, who asking me casually of
what he should make him a suit, as he was passing this way toward London; I
told him that in my opinion, he could not buy a cheaper nor a more lasting
stuff there then silence. For I loved him well, and was afraid of a little
freedom that I spied in him. And now, Sir, I must needs conclude (or I shall
burst) with letting you know, that I have diverse things in wild sheets that
think and struggle to get out of several kinds, some long promised, and some of
a newer conception: but a poor exercise of my pen (wherewith I shall only
honor my self by the dedication thereof unto your own person) is that which
shall lead the way by mine and your good leave, intending (if God yield me his
favor) to print it before It be long in Oxford, and to send you thence, or
bring you a Copy to our Redgrave. What the subject is you must not know
beforehand: for I fear it will want all other grace, if it lose virginity. And
so the Lord of all abundant joy keep you long, con quella buona Ciera, which
this my servant did relate unto me,

Who live, at all your commands, HENRY WOTTON.
From your College this Ashwednesday. 1637. Postscript.
Mr. Clever one of the now Fellows of this College (where have been diverse
changes since it had the honor and the gladness to receive you) being this day
returned hither from the Excellent Lord Keeper, to whom we had addressed him
about a business that concerns us: Tells me even at this instant in the
account of his journey; that it pleased his good Lordship to inquire of him
twice or thrice very graciously touching my health. I beseech you (My Noble
Nephew) let his Lordship see, if it please you, this whole letter (for I dare
trust his indulgent goodness, both with my liberties and with my simplicities)
and that will tell him my present Estate: which by making it any part of his
care, is for ever at his most humble service.



Noble Sir; above all the most honored and loved.
UPon the receipt of a letter from you (which came late, and I know not by what
misadventure, half drowned to my hands) with advertisement, that you had been
at Sudbury in your passage homewards assailed with a Quartan: I resolved
immediately to visit you by this bearer the best of my flights, and lately well
acquainted himself with farther travelers, who yet has been kept here after
my said resolution, that he might bring you a full account of the business
touching my inviol^t Niece so dear unto us both, which was a part of your
foresaid letter, and wherein I am confident you will receive very singular
contentment out of the very Originals of some, and true Copies of other letters
which I send you by this my said inward servant; and if he were not so, I would
not have entrusted him with so tender Papers. The rest of his stay, was only
that I might collect among my poor memorials and experiments something
conducible to the recovery of your health, wherein I reckon my self as much
interessed as in any one thing of this world. I will not say unto you, Courage,
as the French use to speak: for you have enough of that within your self: Nor,
be merry, in our English phrase (for you can impart enough of that even to
others in the incomparable delight of your conversation) But let me give you
two comforts, though needless to the serenity of your spirits. The first, That
I hope your infirmity will not hold you long, because it comes (as I may speak,
according to the barbarous translators of Avicenna) In complexionato suo: that
is in the very season of the revolution of melancholic humors, for Omnis
Morbus contra complexionatum Patientis vel Temporis, est periculosus aut
longus. The other, That it has not succeeded any precedent caustic disease,
because those Quartans are of all the most obstinat which arise out of the
Incineration of a former Ague. The rest I have committed to the instructions
and memory of this bearer, being himself a Student in Physic: and though I
dare not yet call him a good Counselor, yet I assure you, he is a good
relator: with this dispatch I will intermingle no other vulgar subject, but
hereafter I will entertain you with as jolly things, as I can scamble together.
And so, Sir, for the present, commending you into the sweet and comfortable
preservation of our dear God: I rest

Your faithful poor servant HENRY WOTTON.
From the College this 6. of November. 1638.
On Tuesday, the 16th. of November. Sir,
AN express Messenger will ease us both of the trouble of a cipher: But I was
in pain whether I should send another, or be that Messenger my self, being now
as near you as Royston, and scant able to obtain pardon of mine own severity
for not passing farther; yet this may be said for me, that the present occasion
required little noise; and besides, I am newly engaged into some business,
whereof I will give you a particular account, when I shall first have
discharged that part which belongs to your self.

My Lord, my Brother having been acquainted with the matter enclosed in your
last to me, dispatched the very next day M. Pen down to Boughton for such
writings as had passed at your marriage; which having consulted with his
Lawyers, he found those things to stand in several natures according to the
annexed Scedule.

For the point of your coming up, he refers that to your own heart, and I
have only charge from him to tell you, that without any such occasion as this,
which seems to imply your affectionate respect of his Daughter, your own
person and conversation shall be ever most welcome and dear unto him.

As for my Lady, through whose knowledge, and my self, through whose hands you
have passed this point of confidence; if you could behold us, and compare us
with my Lord, you should see, though no difference in the reality, yet some in
the fashion. For to him you must allow the sober forms of his age and place;
but we on the other side are mad with gladness, at the hope we have now taken
by this occasion of enjoying both you and my Niece this Winter at London; and
we are contented to profess it as profusely as it is possible for a better Pen
to set it down: Nay for my part (who in this case have somewhat single) I
flatter my self yet farther, that the Term (whereof not much now remains)
will accelerate your coming: Which if you resolve, I pray then let me only by
this Bearer know it, that I may provide you some fit Lodgings at a good
distance from White Hall; for the preservation of blessed liberty, and
avoydance of the comber of kindeness: which in troth (as we have privately
discoursed) is no small one. Now touching my self.

It may please you Sir to understand, That the King, when he was last at
Hampton, called me to him, and there acquainted me with a general purpose that
he had to put me again into some use. Since which time, the French Ambassador
(and very lately) having at an Audience of good length besought His Majesty (I
know not whether voluntarily, or set on by some of our own) to disincumber
himself of frequent accesses by the choice of some confident servant, to whom
the said Ambassador might address himself in such occurrences as did not
require the Kings immediate ear. It pleased him to nominate me for that charge,
with more gracious commendation then it can beseem me to repeat; though I write
to a friend, in whose breast I dare depose even my vanities. But lest you
should mistake, as some others have been apt to do here, in the present
constitution of the Court (which is very ombragious) the Kings end in this
application of me, I must tell you that it is only for the better preparing of
my insufficiency and weakness for the succeeding of Sir Thomas Edmunds in
France; toward which, His Majesty has thought meet, first to indue me with
some knowledge of the French businesses, which are in motu. And I think my
going thither will be about Easter.

Thus you see (Sir) both my next remove, and the exercise of my thoughts, till
then; wherewith there is joined this comfort, besides the redemption from
expense and debt at home (which are the Gulfs that would swallow me) that His
Majesty has promised to do something for me before I go.

I should now according to the promise of my last tell you many things,
wherewith my Pen is swollen; but I will beg leave to defer them till the next
opportunity after my coming to London: And they shall all give place now to
this one question: Whether there be any thing in this intended journey, that
you will command? Which having said, I will end; ever resting

Your faithfullest poor Friend and Servant, HENRY WOTTON.

Cambridge Sunday at night. Sir,
TO divert you from thinking on my faults, I will entertain you with some news
out of a Letter which I have here received from Venice, of much consequence
diverse ways.

The Bishop of Bamberge, a practical Almayn-Prelate (of which kind there be
enough of that coat, though not in that Country) was treating in Rome a League
against the Protestant Princes of Germany, with whom His Majesty (you know) was
first by Articles, and is now by alliance more nearly confederate: His
Commission he had from the Emperor, Sotto parole tacit as they call it. Now,
while this matter was there moulding, a Chiaus arrives at the Emperors Court,
with a Letter from the Turk; importing a denuntiation of War, grounded upon a
heap of complaints easily found out between Princes that do not intend to
agree. And accordingly the Turk is departed in Person from Constantinople into
Hungary with great Forces (as my Friend writes) on a morning quando nevicava
a furia (by which appears the sharpness of the humor) having made a leavy
before his going of 5000 youths out of the Seragli; a thing never seen before.
He has left behind him Nasuf Bassa as President of his affairs, who told the
Baiolo of Venice there resident, that his Master was but gone to hunt: and
seems to have healed the same language with the other Ambassadors: whether
out of mere wantonness of conceit, or as esteeming a war with Christians, but a
sport in respect of that which he had newly concluded with the Persian, I know
not: howsoever, this is likely to quash the Bishops business, and I fear it
will fall heavy upon Germany: which first in it self was never more disunited;
and besides, the Emperor in small good will with those that should help him. It
will likewise in my conjecture hasten the departure of the Count Palatine, or
at least (if it so please him) it may well serve his turn for that purpose.

This is all that I have for your entertainment: To morrow morning I depart
hence toward London: whence I determine to write by every Carrier to you, till
I bring my self.

In your last you mentioned a certain Courtier that seems to have spoken
somewhat harshly of me; I have a guess at the man* and though for him to speak
of such as I am in any kind whatsoever was a favor: yet I wonder how I am
fallen out of his estimation; for it is not long since he offered me a fair match
within his own tribe, and much addition to her fortune out of his private
bounty; when we meet, all the world to nothing we shall laugh, and in truth
(Sir) this world is worthy of nothing else. In the mean time and ever our sweet
Savior keep us in his love.

Your poor faithful friend and Servant H. WOTTON.

My Noble, Honored, Loved, ever Remembered, ever desired Nephew.
I Shall give to morrow morning Matthew Say our Boat-man before his going a
shilling, and promise him another at his return to deliver this small packet
with his own hands at the Green- Dragon in Bishopsgate-street according to the
form of your address, not for any value of mine own Papers, but for some things
therein contained, which I wish may come safely and quickly to you. And first,
I send you your immortal Uncles confession of his faith; which I did promise
you at Canterbury, solidly and excellently couched; as whatsoever else had the
happiness to fall under his Meditation, and Pen. Next; you receive a letter
freshly written me from Cambridge, with mention (God bless us) of a Jesuit of
your name: who seems (as all that comes from any of you is piercing) to have
sent over lately some pretty iusinuative book in matter of Theological
Controversy, perchance better dressed then any before, and with more relish
commended to the vulgar taste, but I believe it will be the same to the
stomach: for well they may change their form, but it is long since we have
heard their substance over and over, still the same ad fastidium usque. I shall
languish to know how he touches upon your Name and stirp. The name of my
friend who writ me the said letter, I have defaced for the censure of some
other things therein, which I should be sorry to adventure at large: but you
shall know him from me hereafter; and believe it, he will be worth your knowing.

I cannot forbear to tell you a thing (I know not whether I should call it
news, because it is nearer you then to us) but strange in truth, written me
from the said University at the same time by the Provost of Kings College
there; between whom and me does pass much familiar correspondency. It is of a
weekly Lecture there performed heretofore by the Person of Mr. Christopher
Goad, and lately deposed with severe commandment (as it should seem) from
above, whereupon the women especially by way of of revenge for that restraint
do flock to St. Mary's in such troops, and so early, that the Masters of Art
have no room to sit; so as the Vice Chancellor and Heads of houses were in
deliberation to repress their shoaling thither. Methinks, it is a good thing,
when zeal in a land grows so thick and so warm. But soft, if I lanch any
farther, I may perchance run (which yet were a great mistake) into the name of
a Puritan. For that very Lecturer which is now deposed, did live heretofore
with me at my table upon especial choice: being in truth a man of sweet
conversation, and of sober solidity.

Now, for other things, Nicolas Oudard brought me the Friday after his
departure from you the glad tidings of your Agues discharge, as you then
conceived it would be at the twentieth Access, according (as you seem to have
told him) to a common observation with you there: so as in Suffolk, I see you
count Quartan fits, as you do your sheep, by the score. I could heartily wish
you would take for some time after it Alternis Diebus, my preparation of the
Lignum Sanctum, with addition likewise of the roots of China, Enula Campana,
and a sprig of Tamarisque, all in the decoction of Barley-water, and quickened
with a little sprinkling of a Lemmon: a rare Receipt to corroborat the Viscera,
and to keep the Stomach in Tono. My said Nicolas tells me likewise, that you
began to chirp upon being in London the next Term. I should be glad with your
favor to know that point precisely: for having a purpose (by Gods dear
blessing) to visit you at Redgrave (which will be the best Cordial I took in
long time) I would shape my course circularly, either from Suffolk to Kent, or
from Kent to Suffolk, as I shall hear of your motions toward the beginning of
next Lent. For novelties of Court and State, all men's minds at the present with
us seem magnetical, looking toward the North. Order is come down this day to
the Justices of this Shire, about a general muster at Alisbury the next week,
and for especial watch at the Beacons: so as any burning of a bush by chance
near one of them, would set the whole Province in an alarm; but notwithstanding
these good providence, we hope well of the issue: and the rather, for that a
pretty strong conceit runs, that the Deanery of Durham is reserved for
Doctor Belkanquel, as a reward of his travails to and fro in this great
business. While we are uniting our ceremonious breaches, The Kings of France
and Spain abroad treat hard this Winter about a peace, as one writes; (and I
believe very truly) without consideration of any other Prince or State but
themselves. If this be so, and take effect in that manner, then is Charles de
Loraine Exutus Lepidus, stripped to his shirt, the Count Palatine lest at large,
and the Swede must stand upon his own feet. But Brevibus Moment is summa
vertuntur: all depends upon the taking, or not taking of Brisach, the Helena of
Germany: and though a Town indeed of great strength and advantage; yet a poor
price for so much blood as has been lost about it. While I am talking of war,
let me tell you what I hear, that your Sir Jacob Ashley is grown a great man at
Court in private introducements to the King, together with the Earl Marshall:
our good Sovereign will feel a sufficient man quickly. The States lie still and
close oppressed with the adversities of the last year; and with nothing more,
then the late ruin of forty well laden ships by the Texel, wherein with
deploration of the whole Province were lost one thousand Mariners.

Touching the subject whereof I sent you an account by Nicolas, I have heard
nothing since to increase my hope, and much less my faith. You shall have more
the next week. Till when and ever our sweet Jesus have you in his love.

Your servant alla suiscerata HENRY WOTTON.
Sir,
Since I concluded this, Mr. Hales (our Bibliotheca Ambulans, as I use to call
him) came to me by chance, and told me that the Book of Controtroversies issued
under the name of Baconus, has this addition to the said name, Alias Southwel.
As those of that society shift their names as often as their shirts. And he
says, it is a very poor thing, only graced with a little method.


From your College, December. 5. 1638.
Sir,
YOur friend Sir Robert Killigrew has been committed to the Fleet, for
conferring with a close prisoner in a strange language: which were (as I hear)
the two circumstances that did aggravate his error.

Of his case whose love drew him into it, I can yet make no judgment. The
humor seems to be sharp, and there is wisdom enough in those that have the
handling of the patient to manage the matter, so that at length, his banishment
from the Court may be granted as a point of grace. The nature of his alteration
was (as you rightly judge it) in the first access somewhat apoplectical, but
yet mingled in my opinion with diverse properties of a lethargy; whereof we
shall discourse more particularly when we meet, which I now long for, besides
other respects, that we may lay aside these Metaphors.

This very morning shall be heard at the Star Chamber the case of Sir Peter
Buck an inhabitant at Rochester, an officer (as I take it) of the Navy, who
has lain some good while in prison for having written to a friend of his at
Dover a letter containing this news, that some of the Lords had kneeled down to
the King for a toleration in Religion: besides some particular aspersion in the
said letter of my Lord privy Seal: whom likewise of late a Preacher or two have
disquieted: whereby he has been moved besides his own nature, and (as some
think also) besides his wisdom, to call these things into public discourse:
quae spreta exolescunt, if ancient grave sentences do not deceive us.

My Lady of Shrewsbury, my Lord Gray, and the Lady Arabella remain still close
prisoners since their last restraint, which I signified unto you in a little
ticquet. Sir William Wade was yesternight put from the Lieutenancy of the Tower.

I set down these accidents barely as you see without their causes, which in
truth is a double fault, writing both to a friend, and to a Philosopher: but my
lodging is so near the Star Chamber, that my pens shake in my hand: I hope
therefore the Ambassador of Savoy (who has already had two audiences) will
quickly be gone, that I may fly to you, and ease my heart. By the next Carrier
I shall tell you all his business. In the mean while, and ever, our dear
Savior bless you.

Your faithful poor friend to serve you, HENRY WOTTON.
This Friday morning, May 7. in such haste, that I must leave my dear Niece
unanswered, till I can better assemble my spirits, and call the aid of the
Muses.



Sir,
AFter the rest of your trouble at the present, there remains a proposition
to be consulted with you: about which I should esteem the charge of an express
messenger not ill expended, though you were at Jerusalem. And both Mr. Harison
and my self think no man living more proper to solve it, then our Sir Edmund
Bacon. The Question is this: whether there may not be found some natural
Philosophical way to determine the measure of a minute, or quarter, or half, or
entire hour, or any portion of time more precisely and uniformly, and
infallibly then has been yet invented by any Mechanical and Artificial motion?
And particularly, whether it may not be done by the descent of drops through a
Filter, either in Manica Hippocratis, or in a Tongue of cloth equally thick,
with consideration likewise of all circumstances in that liquid substance which
must sink through it. If this may be done, there will be a mighty point
obtained in the rectifying of the Longitudes of the Earth, which depend upon
the thoment of the Lunar Eclipses; and Mose, upon the exact determination of
the beginning and ending of an hour: for which purpose the great Tycho Brach
composed diverse Horologies, and hour-glasses, some running with simple water,
some with distilled spirits, some with pulverized metals, and some with crude
Mercury; but never to any infallible satisfaction of the point propounded:
which likewise would be of singular use in diverse Astronomical observations, if
it could be once justly regulated. This we commend to your curious judgment.
My servant Nicolas and I hope to send you some good Flints to be Agatized by
your miraculous invention.

I pray, Sir, If you have any of those Island stones which you mentioned unto
me at Canterbury, bestow a few upon me. But above all forget not to let me know
where you will be about the beginning of Lent.

Iterum and Iterum vale.
A late letter written toward the end of Lent, by Sir Henry Wotton Provost of
his Majesty's College at Eaton: To the Right worthy his ever truly honored,
Sir Edmund Bacon Knight and Baronet: touching the loss of friends, and final
resignation of our selves.
Sir,
ALL the faculties of my mind (if they had ever been of any value) and all the
strength of my body, must yield to the seignory and sovereignty of time over
us: But the last thing that will die or decay in me, is the remembrance, how
amidst that inestimable contentment which I enjoyed (as all others do) in the
benefit and pleasure of your Conversation (being then with you at Redgrave in
Suffolk, both your delightful Mansion and Philosophical retreat, where you are
best, because there you are most your self, though every where well imparted to
your friends) I was then surprised with advertisement from Court of the death
of Sir Albertus Morton, my dear Nephew in the vernality (as I may term it) of
his employments and fortunes under the best King and Master of the World. And
how no great time after (as adversities are seldom solitary) there succeeded in
the same place the departure of my no less dear Niece, your long, and I dare
say, your still beloved Consort (for love and life are not conterminable) as
well appears by your many tender expressions of that disjuncture, and by that
Monument of your own excellent invention which you have raised to her memory.

This (Sir) ever freshly bleeding in me, and withal revolving often in my
retired thoughts, how I have long since overlived my loving Parents, all mine
Uncles, Brothers, and Sisters, besides many of mine especial Friends and
Companions of my youth, who have melted away before me; and that I am now my
self arrived near those years which lie in the suburbs of Oblivion, being the
sole Masculine Branch of my good Fathers house in the County of Kent: So as
that poor Name and Reputation which my Ancestors have heretofore sustained by
Gods permission, must expire and vanish in my unworthiness: I say (Sir) again
and again debating often these Circumstances with my self (and truly not
without the common weaknesses and passions of humanity, from which I am of all
men least exempted) an extreme desire did lately assail me to entertain between
my other Private Studies some such discourse as might work upon mine own mind,
and at least abstract awhile, if not elevate my cogitations above all earthly
objects. Whereupon, toward the end of this last Lent (a time of contracted
thoughts) I fell to think of that Theme, which I have now entitled, The loss
of Friends and final Resignation of our selves. Intending, though it be the
highest and uttermost point of Christian Philosophy to familiarize it between
us as much as I can, and to address it in form of a letter to your self. For,
with whom can I treat of this matter more properly, being both of us almost
precisely of equal age, and by the love which you are pleased to bear me, all
Joy in the Fruition, and all Grief in the Privation of Friends common between
us.

Now Sir, etc.

Sir,
NOw I begin: but why not before? That question shall be answered by the next
Carrier, or by a special messenger the next week, at which time you shall have
an account of all that has passed, and some prognostication also upon the
future: for my pen is grown bold and eager with rest, as dogs that are tied up.

At the present all my care is to let you know that I have received your last
with the enclosed: which although I well understand my self, yet I have not had
time since the decyphering to acquaint the party with it, which shall be done
as soon as I have sealed this, and sent it to the Carriers.

I thought now to have said no more: but lest it lose the grace of freshness, I
pray let me tell you, that yesterday morning the Vicount Rochester was very
solemnly in the Banqueting-hall in the sight of many great ones and small ones
created Earl of Somerset; and in the afternoon for a farther honoring and
signalizing of the day, my Lord Cook (brought in by the said Earl) was sworn a
privy Counselor: to counterpoise the difference of the profit between the
Common pleas, and the Kings Bench.

I will turn over the leaf though I die for it, to remember the heartiest love
of my soul to that good Niece, to that sweet Niece; to whom I have much to say
by the next opportunity. Our dear Savior keep you both in his continual love.

Your faithfullest Servant, HENRY WOTTON.
Touching the project of our house, believe it Sir, I boil in it; and am ready
to begin again that I may tell you how busy I have been in the matter: but let
this also be put over till the following week, which is likely to fall heavy
upon you.

Written on the day of our great preservation, for which our God be ever
glorified.



On Midsummer morning.
Sir,
LIke a woman great with child I have threatened you almost every week with a
proposition of profit: in which kind of breedings, methinks I am of hard birth:
but I hope to be brought to bed by the next Carrier. This week has yet yielded
in the public small effects to entertain you withal; only, some change of
opinion about the future great Officers, which are now thus discoursed.

The Earl of Suffolk is still beheld as a Lord Treasurer, and that conjecture
has never fainted since the very first rising of it. But it is thought, that
the dignity of Privy Seal shall lie vacant as it did in the Cecilian times, and
that the execution thereof with the title of Lord Chamberlain, shall be laid on
my Lord of Somerset; for if my Lord of Suffolk should remove from the Kings
Privacy to a place of much distraction and cumber without leaving a friend in
his room, he might peradventure take cold at his back: which is a dangerous
thing in a Court, as Ruygomez de silva was wont to say, that great Artisan of
humors. Of the Office of five Ports, I dare yet pronounce nothing. My Lord, my
brother will none of it (as I heard him seriously say) though it were offered
him, for reasons which he reserveth in his own breast: yet the late Northampton
did either so much esteem it, or thought himself to receive so much estimation
from it, as he has willed his body to be laid in the Castle of Dover.

Chute, Hoskins, Sharp, and Sir Charles Cornwallis are still in the Tower, and
I like not the complexion of the place. Out of France we have the death of
Doctor Carrier; whose great imaginations abroad have had but a short period.
And so (Sir) commending you and that dearest Niece to Gods continual blessings,
and love. I rest

Your own in faithfullest affection. HENRY WOTTON.

John Hoskins to his little child Benjamin from the Tower.
Sweet Benjamin, since thou art young And have not yet the use of tongue, Make
it thy slave while thou art free, Imprison it, lest* it do thee.

A Hymn made by H. W. in the nights of a great sickness abroad.
ETernal MOVER, whose diffused glory
(To show our grovelling reason what THOU art)
Unfolds it self in clouds of Natures Story,
Where Man thy proudest Creature acts his part:
Whom yet, alas, I know not why we call
The worlds contracted sum, the little All.
For what are we but lumps of walking clay?
Where lie our vauntes? whence should our spirits rise?
Are not brute beasts as strong, and birds as gay?
Trees longer lived, and creeping things as wise?
Only was given our souls more inward light
To feel our weakness, and confess thy might.
THOU then our strength FATHER of life and death,
To whom our thanks, our vows, our selves we owe,
From me thy Tenant of this fading breath
Accept these lines, which by thy goodness flow:
And thou that were thy Regal Prophets Muse,
Do not thy praise in weaker strains refuse.
Let these poor notes ascend unto thy THRONE,
Where Majesty does sit with Mercy crowned,
Where my REDEEMER lives, in whom alone
The errors of my wandering life are drowned.
Where all the QUIRE of Heaven resound the same,
That none but THINE, THINE is the saving Name.
Therefore my SOUL, joy in the midst of pain,
Thy CHRIST that conquered Hell shall from above
With greater Triumph yet return again
And conquer his own justice with his love,
Commanding Earth and Seas to render those
Unto his bliss for whom he paid his woes.
Now have I done, now are my thoughts at peace,
And now my joys are stronger then my grief:
I feel those comforts that shall never cease
Future in hope, but present in belief.
THY words are true, THY promises are just,
And THOU will know thy dearly bought in dust.
My dearly and worthily ever honored Nephew.
THis is that Saturnine time of the year which most molesteth such splenetick
bodies (as mine is) by the revolution of melancholic blood, which throws up
fastidious fumes into the head, whereof I have had of late my share. Howsoever
this trusty fellow of our Town being hired by one about some business to
Cambridge (as he is often hither and thither) and acquainting me commonly with
his motions, I have gladly stretched his present journey as far as the
Redgrave: hoping by him to have an absolute account of your well being, which
Nicolas my servant left in a fair disposition.

Let me therefore by this opportunity entertain you with some of our newest
things: but briefly: for I dare not trust my brains too much.

First, for the affairs of Scotland: Est been non potuit dicere, dixit, Erit.
The wisest Physicians of State are of opinion that the Crisis is good; and I
hope your Sir Jacob Ashley, and my Sir Thomas Morton will have a fine
employment upon the borders; Honor by the choice of their persons, money by
their journal pay, little pains, and no danger. Our Court mourns this whole
Festival with sad frugality for the untimely death of the young Duke of Savoy,
our Queens Nephew, hastened they say by the Cardinal his Uncle, who would first
have illegitimated him, and that not taking effect by the supportment of Spain,
he fell to other Roman Arts; so as the said Cardinal to decline this black
report, is gone a wandering; and as it is thought, will visit barefoot the
Holy Land. In the mean time, methinks I see him with a crew of Banditi and
Bravi in his company; and his own conscience a continual Hangman about him. The
Queen Mother stirs little between Majesty and age: She has published a
short Manifesto touching the reasons of her recess from Bruxels; wherein is one
very notable conceit: That she had long born silently the affronts done her by
the Prince, Cardinals, Counselors, and Underofficers, upon no other reason
then the very shame to have received them. Of himself she speaks with good
respect, but I know not how the Character of Humility (which she gives him)
will be digested: For perchance he had rather have been painted like a Lion
then a Lamb. Our Queens delivery approaches; in a good hour be it spoken.
There is newly sworn her servant, a lovely Daughter of Sir Richard Harisons,
our neighbor in Barkshire; to answer Mademoiselle Darci on her Mothers side.
The Count Palatine since his late defeat, is gotten in disguised habit to
Hamborough, and as they say, has been there visited by the King of Denmark
amidst that cold assembly of Ambassadors. But in his passage between the said
Town and Bremen, was like to have been taken by an ambush of Free-booters, who
no doubt would have made sale of him. Certain it is, that his Brother Prince
Rupert fought very nobly before he yielded: Whereof such notice was taken, even
by the Count of Hatfeld himself, that he has ever since been kept by him in a
strong place, rounded day and night with a guard of naked Swords; yet in the
Tablets of one that had leave to visit him, the Prince made a shift to comfort
the Queen his Mother with a line or two to this sense: That whatsoever became
of himself, he would never change his Religion nor his Party. We hear my Lord
Craven has made his composition under 20000. l. As for Ferents, I believe his
own head must ransom him, or his heels. The Popes Treaty at Colen goes Il passo
del Gambaro, rather backward then forward. And all deliberatives of State seem
to depend much upon the event of Brisach; which I use to call the German
Helena, long woed, but for ought I hear yet an Imperial Virgin. These are our
foreign Rapsodies: I will end in somewhat nearer us. You receive herewith the
Copy of my last or second Letter to M. Carry Raleigh, and his answer thereunto.
Believe it Sir, (what conceit soever his actions shall breed) that he is a
Gentleman of dextrous abilities, well appearing in the management of a business
so tender and delicate, as that which now runs between us; which for my part
I resolve to press no further. For (to depose my mind as plainly as I may
safely in your breast) I never could observe any great good effect to ensue
upon violent disswasions in businesses of this nature, but rather an obduration
then an abversion: Howsoever I would fain (as the occasion suggesteth) propound
unto your judgment a pretty Moral doubt, super tota materia, which I have
heard discussed and resolved affirmatively among some sk^lfull Humorists, who
knew the world well. The Question was this, Whether in such a case precisely as
ours of mere scandal, without apparent truth, some ^nclining to think the
worst, and some the best, there be left room for any middle imagination between
Good and Ill? In the solution of which point, I will crave pardon to reserve a
secret till we meet; at which I believe you will smile.

We are here (God be blessed) all well: Our Audit ended a little before
Christmas Day, more troublesome then fruitful, after the fashion. The same
Officers as the year before, every man of them your servant, or otherwise they
had wanted my voice. M. Harison has been of late somewhat more then heretofore
troubled with certain Nephritical fits; but they are transient and light, Et
jam mansueta mala. M. Powel speaks of you with much devotion, as all other
whom you have once touched with your Magnetical virtue. In the Conclusion let
me, as with a Box of Marmalad, close up your stomach with one of the Genialest
pieces that I have read in my life time, of the same unaffected and discheveled
kind, (as I may term it) sent me newly from London; which if you have seen
before, I am out of countenance. And so (Sir) wishing you (for I cannot wish
you better on earth) after the sweet apprehension of Gods continual favor, the
fruition of your self: I rest

At what distance soever, Your unseparable Servant, HENRY WOTTON.
From the College on the Eve of the New year, through which God send you a
blessed passage, and many more.
YEt my mind and my spirits give me against all the combustions of the World,
that before I die I shall kiss again your Royal hand, in as merry an hour as
when I last had the honor to wait upon your gracious eyes at Heidelberge.

I will now take the boldness to conclude my poor lines with a private and
humble suit unto your Majesty; which I bring with me out of Suffolk from Sir
Edmund Bacons house, and that whole Family; among whom your Majesty's name and
virtues are in singular admiration.

There is of that House a young Plant of some sixteen years; well natured, and
well molded both for face and limbs, and one of the bravest spirited boys in
Christendom. It is their joint ambition, and they have made me their
Intercessor, that your Majesty would be pleased to take him for one of your
Pages. They want not means otherways to bestow him, but their zeal toward
your Majesty, and their judgments guide them to this humble desire, for his
more virtuous and noble nurture. And lest the ordinary number of your Majesty's
Attendants in that kind, being perhaps full, might retard their hope of this
high favor; I have commission to assure your Majesty, that their meaning is
not to aggravate your charge, for he shall have yearly a competent provision
allowed to maintain him in good fashion. If my Niece Bacon of dearest memory
were alive, (whom God took not long after my Nephew Albertus into his eternal
bliss) I am sure she would join in this suit unto your Majesty, that all Sexes
might enter into the obligation: But it is your Majesty's own goodness, from
which only we can hope for a favorable answer: And so with all our prayers,
and with my particular obliged devotion, I most humbly commit your Majesty to
Gods reserved blessings, and continual love, ever resting

Your Majesty's poor Servant in all truth and zeal, HENRY WOTTON.

Sir,
I Must now acknowledge it true which our Navigators tell us, that there be
indeed certain variations of the compass: for I think there was never point of
a needle better touched then you have touched me, having ever since I parted
from you been looking toward you, and yet still by something or an other, I am
put out of my course. I will therefore hereafter not promise you any more to
come unto you, but I will promise my self it: because indeed I have no other
means to be at peace with my self: for I must lay this heavy note upon your
conversation, that I am the unquieter for it a good while after.

This is the first part of what I meant to say. After which I would fain tell
you, That I send this Footman expressly unto you to redeem some part of my fault
for not answering your late kind Letter by the Messenger that brought it: But
the truth is, I had some special occasion to send to Berry: And therefore I
will set no more upon your account then his steps from thence to Redgrave,
where perhaps you now are. See what a real Courtier I am, and whether I be
likely to prosper. Well, howsoever, let me entertain you a little by this
opportunity, with some of our discourses. The King departed yesterday from
hence toward you; having as yet, notwithstanding much voice, and some wagering
on the other side, determined nothing of the vacant places: Whereupon the Court
is now divided into two opinions; the one, that all is reserved for the greater
honor of the marriage; the other, that nothing will be done till a Parliament,
or (to speak more precisely) till after a Parliament: Which latter conceit,
though it be spread without either Author or ground, yet as many things else of
no more validity, it has gotten faith enough on a sudden. I will leave this
to the judicial Astrologers of the Court, and tell you a tale about a subject
somewhat nearer my capacity.

On Sunday last at night, and no longer; some sixteen Apprentices (of what sort
you shall guess by the rest of the story) having secretly learnt a new Play
without book, entitled, The Hog has lost his Pearl; took up the White-Fryers
for their Theater: and having invited thither (as it should seem) rather their
Mistresses then their Masters; who were all to enter per buletini for a note of
distinction from ordinary Comedians toward the end of the Play, the Sheriffs
(who by chance had heard of it) came in (as they say) and carried some six or
seven of them to perform the last act at Bridewel; the rest are fled. Now it is
strange to hear how sharp-witted the City is, for they will needs have Sir John
Swinerton the Lord Mayor be meant by the Hog, and the late Lord Treasurer by
the Pearl. And now let me bid you good night, from my Chamber in King Street
this Tuesday, at Eleven of the night,

Your faithfullest to serve you, HENRY WOTTON.
Francesco has made a proof of that green which you sent me; against which he
takes this exception, That being tried upon glass, (which he esteems the
best of trials) it is not translucent; arguing (as he says) too much density
of the matter, and consequently, less quickness and spirit then in colors of
more tenuity.



Sir,
BY the next Carrier (for yet I must say so again) you shall hear when this
Ambassador will be gone. The mean while let me entertain you with the enclosed
Paper, which the Duke of Savoy has published in his own defense; joining
together the Sword and Reason.

Sir Robert Mansfeld is still in restraint. Sir Thomas Overbury not only out of
liberty (as he was) but almost now out of Discourse.

We have lately started at a dispatch from Ireland, importing a variance there,
about the choice of a Speaker in the summoned Parliament; which came to so
sharp a point, that the Deputy was fain to fetch wisdom from hence. Sure it is
that the humors of that Kingdom are very hovering, and much awaked with an
apprehension taken that we mean to fetter them with Laws of their own making;
which in truth were an ingenious strain of State. My Lord and Lady are stolen
down into Kent for a few days to take in some fresh air. They go not this next
Progress, if my Brother can get leave of the King to see his Grandchildren;
where he intends to spend some fortnight, and the rest of the time between
Boughton and Canterbury.

A match treated and managed to a fair probability between my Lord Cooks heir,
and the second Daughter of Sir Arthur Throckmorton is suddenly broken; the
said Lord Cook having underhand entertained discourse about the Daughter of the
late Sir Thomas Bartlet, who in defect of her Brother, shall be heir of that
name.

I have nothing more to say, and therefore God keep you and my sweet Niece in
his continual love.

Your poor Uncle, faithful Friend, and Willing Servant, HENRY WOTTON.
Albertus (God be thanked) grows better and better: And in the midst of his
own pains, has remembered those in Suffolk, whom we both so much honor.



From my Chamber this Thursday, St. George his Eve. Sir,
THe last week, by reason of my being in Kent, was a week of silence; and this
I think will appear unto you a week of wonder.

The Court was full of discourse and expectation, that the King being now
disincumbred of the care of his Daughter; would toward this Feast of St.
George fill up either all or some at least of those places that had lien vacant
so long, and had been in this time of their emptiness a subject of notorious
opposition between our great Vicount and the House of Suffolk. Thus I say ran
the opinion: When yesterday about six of the Clock at Evening, Sir Thomas
Overbury was from the Council Chamger conveyed by a Clerk of the Council, and
two of the Guard to the Tower; and there by Warrant consigned to the Lieutenant
as close Prisoner: Which both by the suddainness, like a stroke of thunder, and
more by the quality and relation of the person breeding in the Beholders
(whereof by chance I was one) very much amazement; and being likely in some
proportion to breed the like in the Hearers, I will adventure for the
satisfying of your thoughts about it, to set down the fore-running and leading
Causes of this accident, as far, as in so short a time I have been able to wade
in so deep a water. It is conceived that the King has a good while been much
distasted with the said Gentleman, even in his own nature, for too stiff a
carriage of his fortune; besides that scandalous offense of the Queen at
Greenwich, which was never but a palliated cure. Upon which considerations, His
Majesty resolving to sever him from my Lord of Rochester, and to do it not
disgracefully or violently, but in some honorable fashion; He commanded not
long since the Archbishop by way of familiar discourse, to propound unto him
the Embassage of France, or of the Archdukes Court; whereof the one was
shortly to be changed, and the other at the present vacant: In which
proposition it seems, though shadowed under the Archbishops good will, that
the King was also contented some little light should be given him of His
Majesty's inclination unto it, grounded upon his merit. At this the Fish did
not bite; whereupon the King took a rounder way, commanding my Lord Chancellor,
and the Earl of Pembrock to propound jointly the same unto him (which the
Archbishop had before moved) as immediately from the King, and to sweeten it
the more, he had (as I hear) an offer made him of assurance before his going
off the place, of Treasurer of the Chamber, which he expects after the death
of the Lord Stanhop; whom belike the King would have drawn to some reasonable
composition. Notwithstanding all which Motives and impulsives, Sir Thomas
Overbury refused to be sent abroad with such terms as were by the Council
interpreted pregnant of contemptin a case where the King had opened his will;
which refusal of his, I should for my part esteem an eternal disgrace to our
occupation, if withal I did not consider how hard it is to pull one from the
bosom of a Favorite. Thus you see the point upon which one has been committed
standing in the second degree of power in the Court, and conceiving (as himself
told me but two hours before) never better then at that present of his own
fortunes and ends. Now in this whole matter, there is one main and principal
doubt, which does travail all understandings; that is, Whether this were done
without the participation of my Lord of Rochester: A point necessarily
enfolding two different consequences; for if it were done without his
knowledge, we must expect of himself either a decadence or a ruin; if not, we
must then expect a reparation by some other great public satisfaction, whereof
the world may take as much notice. These clouds a few days will clear: In the
mean while I dare pronounce of Sir Thomas Overbury, that he shall return no
more to this Stage, unless Courts be governed every year by a new Philosophy,
for our old Principles will not bear it.

I have showed my Lord and Ladies Sister your Letter of the 18. of April, who
return unto you their affectionate remembrances, and I many thanks for it. The
King has altered his journey to Thetford, and determines to entertain himself
till the progress nearer London. The Queen begins her journey upon Saturday
toward Bathe. Neither the Marquess di villa (who comes from Savoy) nor Don
Pedro* disarmiento (who shall reside here in the room of the present Spanish
Ambassador) are yet either arrived, or near our Coast; though both on the way:
So as I can yet but cast toward you a longing, and in truth an envious look
from this place of such servility in the getting, and such uncertainty in the
holding of fortunes, where methinks we are all overclouded with that sleep of
Jacob, when he saw some ascending, and some descending; but that those were
Angels, and these are men: For in both, what is it but a Dream? And so (Sir)
wishing this Paper in your hands, to whom I dare communicate the freest of my
thoughts, I commit you to Gods continual Love and Blessings.

Your faithful poor Friend and Servant, HENRY WOTTON.
I pray (Sir) let me in some corner of every Letter tell my sweet Niece that I
love her extremely, as God judge me.



FINIS.

