The glory of GOD'S REVENGE against the Bloody and detestable sins of MURDER
and ADULTERY expressed in 30 Trag: Histories

To which are a^ex'd the Triumphs of Friendship and Chastity

By Tho: Wright, M. A.

Printed for Benja* Crayle in Fleet street

THE GLORY OF God's Revenge AGAINST THE Bloody and Detestable SINS OF MURDER
AND ADULTERY, Expressed in THIRTY Modern Tragical HISTORIES.

To which are annexed, The TRIUMPHS of FRIENDSHIP and CHASTITY, In some
Illustrious Examples.

By THOMAS WRIGHT, M. A. Of St. Peter's College in Cambridge.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Moore, for Benjamin Crayle at the Lamb in
Fleet Street. MDCLXXXVI.

TO THE Right Honorable and Noble Lady, FLOWER Countess of Clarendon.
Madam,
IT may seem an unpardonable rudeness, that to this Collection of Histories I
should prefix so Venerable a Name: But though I may be judged guilty of a
Presumption in this Dedication, yet the general Character of Your eminent
Virtues (which gives as great a Luster to Your Name, as Your Honorable Birth)
does somewhat excuse and apologize for me, and I question not but Your
transcendent Goodness and Clemency will prevail with You to patronize a Piece
(though unpolished before your Ladyships most discerning Judgment) which may
prove instrumental toward the restraining those execrable Crimes which are so
frequently committed in this exorbitant Age; and likewise as it publishes some
other Examples which may tend to the propagating those resplendant Graces of
Friendship and Chastity, which may without Hyperbole or Flattery be said to be
most Eminent in Your self. The Author's Affairs having called him far distant,
before the Press had finished the Book, frustrated his intention of dedicating
it to Your Lad^ship himself: And therefore, as the Presentation of it was
designed You from its Birth, so I am sure I have infinitely obliged the Author,
by performing his desire, and I hope no ways contributed to Your Honors
Dissatisfaction.

I am Your Honors most Obliged and Humble Servant, Benjamin Crayle.

To my Ingenious Friend, Mr. Thomas Wright, on his Excellent Histories.
AFter the first Apostasy of Man,
The rich Endowments of his Mind began
To be depraved, and lost its Excellence
By being conquered by the Lusts of Sense;
Since which unhappy time (of Man's being frail)
Examples more than Precepts do prevail;
For Exhortations we do seldom find
To leave such strong Impressions on the Mind.
Then who can speak the Debt the World does owe
To Thy ingenious Pen, that does bestow
An Antidote to Vice from others Woe,
And from The Examples of the Chaste and Kind,
Fix brigh^ Imbellishments upon the Mind?
Thy Histories, by Chemistry Divine,
Do the depraved Faculties refine,
And make them in their pristine Luster shine.
This Mirror to the Vicious does present
Their Picture so deformed, they will repent;
And to the Good such charming Graces show,
As they till then could not so fully know:
Such -- as will make them to improve, and be
Like patterns of Heroic Piety.
Thou ha^t disclosed here a Golden Mine,
And have with Eloquence enriched each Line.
So sweet's thy Style, so manly is thy Sense,
It justly may be called an Excellence.
Thy Wit and Skill may former Artists blame,
And Reynolds Murders now we must not name.
As sable Darkness, which attends the Night,
To the Days Sunbeams is the opposite,
So Vice from Virtue, Wrong from Right's the same;
Then how can thou write wrong, when WRIGHT's thy Name?
London, May 29. 1685. I. C.

To the Ingenious Author, Mr. Thomas Wright.
SInce the too bold aspiring Angel fell
(By his Ambition and his Pride) to Hell,
And since Rebellious man lost Paradise,
The World is filled with various sorts of Vice;
Murder and Lust Twin-Tyrants long have reigned,
And a vast Empire through the World maintained;
The Sword of Justice could not stop their rage,
They Have boldly tyrannized in every Age,
Nor could Divines their furious heat assuage
Yet doubtless, Friend, the examples you have given,
May give them prospect of revenging Heaven;
Your Pen with Eloquence Divine inspired,
Will cool the Soul with Lust and Murder fired,
Tame all the Passions, regulate the Will,
And stop that rage that guiltless Blood would spill.
Thy Pen does here such Oratory give,
As teaches Us by others Death to live;
And from a Life of Chastity and Love,
A great advantage to our selves improve.
Thy Book so much my Praises do outrun,
I do but light a Candle to the Sun.
I. Whitehall.

THE Introduction.
PLATO, a Heathen, thought Virtue so amiable in it self, that could it appear
clad in Humane shape, the excellency of its features would attract the love and
admiration of all its spectators: and shall We, who are Christians, be less in
love with the Beauty of Holiness? Shall We, who live under the Meridian
Illustrations of Divine Wisdom, not see those glorious Truths, which by the
glimmering light of Nature He so much revered? O shame on that Egyptian
darkness which clouds our Reason! O shame on that Infidelity that poisons our
Souls! He lived a Divine Heathen, while we live and die professed Christians,
but in Practice more wretched and inexcusable than Pagans; witness the Avarice
and Rapine of some, the Malice and Ambition of others; in a word, to name no
more, the frequent Murders of the Street, and the more close Adulteries of the
Chamber; the bloody Revenge of the enraged Bravo, and the wanton Embraces of
the lustful Paramour. Of these two last, viz. of Murder and Adultery, I shall
more particularly treat, which as they are sins of the first Magnitude, so has
their punishment been the most dreadful, and their Guilt always prosecuted with
the most fatal consequence of Divine Vengeance, as the Reader may plainly see
in the several following Histories; of which some are extracted out of that
excellent Piece of Mr. Reynolds his Murders, and others altogether New, all
re^uc'd into so small a bulk, that they may be neither cumbersom nor tedious to
the Reader. Examples of these Crimes, as most heinous in their own nature, (the
first destroying Man, Gods Image, and the second defiling him) I have the
rather pitched upon, for that they are the spreading Cancers of the Age, which
have not only infected the Southern and warmer parts of the World, but spread
their contagion under the Arctick Pole, in Climates bound up in Ice, and Lands
covered with Snow. Murder, it is true, got the start of Adultery, and was the
firstborn of its wretched Parent Cain; but since, like kind Companions, they
have lovingly associated together, and rarely do we meet Adultery in the Van,
but we find Murder in the Rear, which have now usurpt so large an Empire, that
the Rigours of the Frost do not chill their heats, nor stop their growth: the
cold Rus^es, Finns, and Tartars, are as well guilty, as the hot Moors, Blacks,
and Aethiopians; the phlegmatic Dutchman, or heavy German, as the lustful
Spaniard, or Sodomitical Italian.

Murder has been always looked upon as a most detestable sin in the sight of
God and Man, and punished as a Capital Offense; nor is Adultery to be less
abhorred. The Commands of God, the Laws of the Jews, and other Nations at this
day, inflict death on the miserable Criminal; however it has obtained more
favor amongst the debauched Sparks of our Age, who esteem it but a slight
Peccadillo, a piece of Gallantry, and account it rather the Glory than the
Shame of their youthful heat, and vigorous Extravagance: But let such know,
that God has promised by a severe threat, That he will judge the Whoremonger
and Adulterer; nor will they find the punishment so light as they imagine. This
it was that brought a Deluge upon the old World, and this it is which has
since overturned Kingdoms, and laid wast the most flourishing States. And as
there is no Place, nor has been any Age, free from notorious Examples of this
Crime, so also are there no degrees of Persons exempted from the commission of
it: Princes of the highest Dignity being as well guilty, as those of more
inferior Rank and Quality: But let such know, that they shall both taste the
bitterness of punishment; for God will as soon fling his Thunderbolt on the one
as the other; the Princes Purple shall no more excuse him, than the poor man's
Rags can defend him.

If our Body is the Temple of God, let us then keep it undefiled, and not make
it a Sanctuary for Murders and Adulteries; for that Holy Spirit will not
endure the impurity of our thoughts, much less our polluted actions; our hands
must not only be free from the stain of Blood, but our hearts from the guilt
and the very desire of Revenge.

Incontinency is one of the Devil's Light Horse, with which he at first
skirmishes, till he can draw us into those Ambuscades of more dangerous Enemies
he has laid to entrap us, and then charges us with his desperate Train of
Adulteries and Murders, and the whole body of succeeding Villainies. In
Adultery he baits his Hook with the honey and sweets of the temptation, paints
the hidden Thorns, and sticks them with Flowers; guilds the Chains, and studs
them with Diamonds; makes every curling Tress (the Witchcraft of the Fair) of
the most soft and shining Silk, which he ties up in True-Love-knots for
garniture: but when once we have swallowed the deceitful Potion, we quickly
lose the relish of those mistaken sweets, and find that bitterness and sorrow
were the chief Ingredients in the fatal Composition, and a speedy Repentance
our best and only Antidote.

I could here enlarge upon the various Punishments inflicted by different
Nations, according to the rigorous or more merciful inclination of their
temper, on the horrid sin of Adultery; but then I should transgress the modest
bounds I intended to this Discourse. I shall therefore leave the Reader to the
following Histories, in which I hope he will receive both delight and
satisfaction; and conclude with the Remarque of a witty and observing
Traveller: The Italian (says he) poisons the Adulterous Wife, the Spaniard
stabs her, the German beats her, the French -man puts her away, and the English
-man will not believe it.

THE GLORY OF Gods Revenge Against the Bloody and Execrable Sin of MURDER.
HIST. I. Grand Pre and Mermanda.
The proud Hautefelia hires Le Fresnay an Apothecary for 200 Crowns to Poison
her Sister in Law Mermanda, then sets her Husband De Mallery at variance with
her Brother Grand Pre, who kills De Mallery in a Duel; She afterward gives Le
Fresnay 300 Crowns more to Poison Grand Pre which he does, and being Condemned
for a Rape Confesses the two Murders, and accuses Hautefelia, who is
apprehended, and both suffer the severity of the Law.

HAD the Precepts of God or the Laws of Man been able to restrain the
Extravagance of our debauched Natures within the limits of our Duty, we should
have had not only no Occasion, but no Examples of such wicked Wretches, whose
Lust, Ambition, or Revenge* has made them the unhappy Arguments of humane
Misery. Their vicious Courses have plunged them into Crimes which could not be
expiated here, but by the severest punishments, both which the Faithful
Historian has transmitted to us, that by the Obliquity of their lives, we may
be persuaded to amend our own, since we see that Sin always proves fatal to
the Offender, and an Ignominious Death is the certain consequence of a Corrupt
and Vicious Life. If perfect Innocence was the beauty of our Creation and that
happy Dowry which God Almighty gave, when at his Command the Soul and Body
first espoused each other, which the more Wily Serpent stole from us; Oh let us
not be again Cheated by the same Deceiver, and sell our Integrity for the
gilded Shows of Sin and Misery, exchange our Glory for Shame, and to satisfy
one burning Lust, endure the Torment of Everlasting Flames.

The following Histories are all Tragical, and the parts of the chifest Actors
writ in Characters of Blood; which are not so much designed to divert the
Reader with the Variety of surprising Circumstances, as to afright him by the
sad Examples from the Commission of that horrid Sin of Murder, of which
sincerely to repent, is highly difficult, but to make Satisfaction for
Impossible. When once the Golden Bowl is broke (which the wise man speaks of,
Ecclesiastes the 12 th.) by the Impious hand of some bold Assassin, he fills
full the Cup of Gods Indignation against him, which will be a draught more
bitter than all the glozing pleasures Life or Fortune can sweeten with their
greatest advantages. Humane Laws have provided Shackles and Dungeons, Racks and
Gibbets, not only to punish, but deter such sanguinary Bravo's, who, if they
chance (which but rarely happens) to escape the latest hand of Justice, yet are
they constantly haunted with the horror of the Crime, and antedate the Torments
of a future, by the present Hell of an evil Conscience.

But I proceed to the History which is thus.

Near Auxone, upon the Frontiers of Burgduny, dwelt an Ancient Gentleman nobly
descended, whose name was Monsieur De Grandmont, his virtuous Lady was
Madamoyselle De Carny, this happy pair were blessed with a plentiful Offspring
and a fair Estate to support the Honor and Grandeur of the Family. They had
three Sons and two Daughters, of which Grand Pre (who was the first and
chiefest Pillar of the House) applyd himself wholly to Arms, and obtained leave
to serve his Apprenticeship in the Wars under the Command of that Incomperable
Captain Grave Maurice, then Earl of Nassaw, and since Prince of Orange.
Vileneufe who altogether delighted in Books was sent to Pont au Mousson, and
Masseron was for his Beauty begged a Page by that great Marshal of France who
unfortunately lost his Head in the Bastile of Paris* Hautefelia the Eldest of
the two Daughters lived at home with her Parents, and de Cressy the youngest
had the honor to attend a great Lady of Burgundy, where she received all the
advantages of a Noble and Virtuous Education. But see here how soon the
Pleasure of Heaven can overthrow our most Established fortunes, and sink all
our present Joys and Ripening hopes into the botom of Despair. Within the
Compass of a Year Vileneufe was Drowned as he bathed himself in the River at
Pont au Mousson, Masseron was killed in a Duel at Fontainbleau by Rossat Page
to the Duke of Espernon, and Hautefelia dyed at home of a Fever. Grandmont and
de Carnye being thus made unfortunate by the death of three of their Children,
resolved to call home the other two, which were now the only Comforts and Props
of their declining Age. First from the Baroness of Lux came de Cressy who
Succeeded her Sister and we shall now term by the name and title of Hautefelia;
After her very shortly came Grand Pre from Holland, where he left many
Honorable marks of his Courage and Bravery. Upon his arrival, the Flower of
all the Nobility and Gentry came to Condole with him for the Death of his
Brothers and Sister, and Congratulate his happy return, whom they all admire as
a most complete Gentleman in whose mien shone all the Graces and
Accomplishments of a brave and generous Cavalier. Grandmont observing the
Martial disposition of his Son, and fearing least the thirst of honor would
again Transport him to the Wars, and that his towering Spirit would not long
endure the lazy retirement of the Country, resolves to try if the softer Charms
of Love and Beauty could not assail that Breast which seemed wholly devoted to
the God of War; For which end he proffers Grand Pre the Choice of several young
Ladies and Gentlewomen for his Wife, of the richest and most Ancient families
near Auxone; But Grand Pre appeared wholly averse to all proposals of this
Nature, and thought it a high Blemish and disparagement to his Valor, to be
made a slave and Captive to any Beauteous she, who knew no way to conquer but
by smiles and the weak Artillery of her Eyes. Grandmont perceiving this design
would not take effect, resolves to leave the Country and reside at Dijon
(formerly the ancient Seat of the Dukes of Burgundy, and now famous for the
Present Court of Parliament) where he hoped amongst the great confluence of
Ladies and Gentlewomen, Grand Pre might at last Espy that Paragon of nature
whose Excellencyes would subdue his stubborn heart, and Captivate his
affections, which accordingly answered his Expectation.

On a Sunday Morning in Lent, Grand Pre went to the Royal Chapel to hear
Father Justinian Preach, and over against him saw a most delicate and beautiful
young Lady, infinitely rich in apparel, but far more glorious in the
perfections and Excellencyes of her mind; in a word being not used to encounter
with such Beautyes, he was ravished with the Sweetness of her Angelic form, and
she alone the Subject of his present Devotion and future Contemplation. Nor was
Grand Pre less observed by the Lady, who seeing him a proper young Gallant well
attended, would sometimes feast her Eyes with a Stolen glance, which presently
her modesty and discretion would check her for, and paint her Cheeks with those
graceful blushes, that Grand Pre was forced to do homage to her Beauty and ask
pardon of that God of Love against whose power and dignity he had so long
offended.

Sermon being ended, Grand Pre took a turn or two in the Church, and ordered
his Page to make private enquiry who the Lady was; he speedily informed him
that she is Madamoyselle Mermanda, eldest Daughter to Monsieur de Cressonville,
one of the chiefest Presidents of the Court of Parliament. Grand Pre was
extremely pleased in knowing who she was, and the more, in that it was no
disparagement to his Quality or Family to marry with her. Wherefore, bidding
farewell to all the bloody conflicts of the Camp, he resolves his future
Engagements into amorous Encounters, which often prove no less fatal and
dangerous: and accordingly, the next day, with two intimate Acquaintance, under
pretense of other business, made a visit to Monsieur de Cressonville; who being
abroad, his two Friends entertained the Mother, whilst he made his addresses
to the young Lady, whose conversation was so obliging and agreeable, that he
now owned no other happiness but what centred in the sole enjoyment of the
beloved Mermanda. Grand Pre having received so respectful entertainment in his
first visit, resolved to acquaint the old President with his affection to his
Daughter, which he did, and having thus begun his Suit, left his Father
Grandmont to finish it, whilst he paid his daily Orisons to his beautiful
Mistress.

Monsieur de Cressonville approved the Match; and knowing that Grandmont had
likewise one only Daughter, and himself one only Son, desired it might be
double, thereby to contract a more firm and stricter League between their two
Houses; which, after some debates and conferences, was resolved upon. I do here
on purpose omit the several Letters of Courtship between Grand Pre and
Mermanda, and from de Malleray (Cressonville's Son) to Hautefelia, both because
they would swell this brief History beyond its intended bounds, and expressed
nothing more of moment, than the common Raptures of endearing Lovers in their
first Addresses. These Marriages, to the joy of the Parents, and the great
content of their Children, were pompously solemnized in Dijon, and the Interest
and Honor of both Families (in the eyes of all) fixed on the firm foundations
of a lasting felicity. But, oh the strange and sudden revolutions of all
worldly happiness! Our best fortune is checkered, and our greatest joys seem
only given us to usher in more dreadful sorrows. Some few months had passed, in
which the Lovers reaped the full Harvest of their short-lived Pleasures, when
Hautefelia, whose temper was imperious and revengeful, began to envy the
advancement of her Sister-in-law Mermanda, and contemn her own: Her haughty
humor could by no means submit to give place to her after marriage, who was
her inferior before. Mermanda, who was of a most gracious and mild nature,
lived happy in the affections of Grand Pre: their virtuous behavior, and
loving respects to each other, was highly praised and applauded by all, but the
sullen and envious Hautifelia. Mischief and revenge had now wholly engaged her
thoughts, when she resolved to change the Scene; and make Mermanda as miserable
in her Husband's Jealousy, as formerly she had been happy in his Love; and
considering how to accomplish her black designs under the fairest pretenses,
she remembered that the Baron of Betanford frequently visited Grand Pre and
Mermanda, upon which she might with easy arguments lay the surest foundations
of jealousy and revenge. In pursuit hereof, the next day she sent a private
Letter to Grand Pre by her Page, entreating him to come immediately over to
her, to consult upon a point in which his Honor and future happiness were
equally concerned: He accordingly came, and supper being ended, de Malleray
(after some discourse) complemented him to his Chamber, and took his leave;
when Hautefelia coming up with tears in her eyes, acquainted him, That (to her
great sorrow) she was assured that the Baron of Betanford, without respect to
the sacred rules of Honor, Friendship, and Hospitality, had too frequently
abused him, in his familiarity with Mermanda. Grand Pre, fired with this
discourse, resolves a revenge upon both, without considering the truth of
circumstances, (so far does Jealousy infatuate!) that the next day riding home
in the evening, he desired Mermanda to walk into the Garden, where in express
terms he charged her with disloyalty to him, and dishonesty with the Baron: all
which with floods of tears she utterly denied, and so far prevailed upon him,
that he declared himself satisfied with those assurances of her fidelity, and
was perfectly reconciled. Mermanda fearing that if the Baron should still
continue his visits as formerly, they might awaken the sleeping Jealousy of
her Husband, and to take off all grounds of a future suspicion, writ this
following Letter to him.

Mermanda, to the Baron of Betanford.
My Lord,
IT is not with blushes, but tears, that I presume to write unto you; nor can
any thing more deeply affect me, than that I am now forced to publish my
Husband's Folly, to vindicate my own Innocence. I must confess his ingratitude
to you, and wrong to me, whilst his jealous humor charges us with those
clandestine Crimes which both your Honor and my Virtue abhor to think of: And
that we may both endeavor rather to quench than inflame this irregular
passion, I beseech you to refrain our house, and neither to visit me, nor be
familiar with him, and I hope time will conquer all those evil thoughts, which
truth and reason must always condemn. Your Virtue and Generosity assure me of
this favor, which I will repay with thanks, and requite with prayers, that
your Days may be as infinite as your Perfections, and your Fame as glorious as
your Merits.

Mermanda.


Upon the receipt of this Letter, the Baron was highly incensed against Grand
Pre, for entertaining such unjust and dishonorable thoughts of him: But to
remove all jealousies, he immediately left his house, and took Coach for Paris.
Grand Pre understanding the Barons sudden departure, grew more suspicious,
imagining it to be a plot between him and his Wife; which so enraged him, that
he refused her bed, and resolved that a quick and severe revenge upon them both
should only atone for those injuries he had received. Accordingly the next
day, under pretense of other business, with a Page and two Lacqueys, he went to
Briecount Robert, and retiring to a private Inn, writ this Challenge, which he
sent by his Page, with directions to deliver it secretly to the Baron, and
bring him his speedy Answer.

Grand Pre, to the Baron, etc.
COuld I have dissembled my malice, as you have done your friendship; you might
have expected my revenge had been as private as the injury you did me. You need
no other witness to inform you of my dishonor, than your own false self, who
have wronged me; which is a Crime of so high a nature, that your blood can only
expiate the offense. I expect this honorable satisfaction from you on Thursday
at Carency, where I will meet you at five in the morning, with Sword or Rapier,
on horseback or afoot. The bearer hereof shall attend to conduct you to a fair
Meadow, where without Seconds I expect you, when your life or mine shall end
the difference.

Grand Pre.


The Baron having received this Letter, caused the Page to dine with him, and
after dinner sent him away with this answer; Tell thy Master, that I will not
fail to meet him on horseback, without a Second, at the hour and place
appointed. On Thursday morning they met accordingly, having only their Surgeons
with them, and after a sharp and resolute fight on horseback, and the exchange
of several wounds, Grand Pre received a desperate thrust in the belly, upon
which he fell from his Horse, and Betanford remained Victor, who like a Noble
Cavalier assisted him to a neighboring Village, where his Surgeons took care
of his wounds. The next morning, having something recovered his senses, the
Baron satisfied him of the odiousness of the scandal raised against his own
Honor, and Mermanda's Virtue. These solemn protestations prevailed upon Grand
Pre, who now repented his groundless Jealousy, promised to renew his love to
his Wife, and live and die his honorable Friend. Some few days after they took
leave of one another, and Grand Pre returning home, related to his Wife the
occasion and event of the Combat, begged her pardon for his jealous and
credulous humor, and promised for the future that nothing should ever divide
his heart from his virtuous and faithful Mermanda. Thus were all discontents
buried in Oblivion, and their kind endearments sealed a perfect reconciliation.

But now must I return to Hautefelia, who seeing her wicked design thus
disappointed, resolved rather to sell her Soul to the Devil, than not purchase
her revenge on Mermanda; and accordingly struck a bargain with le Fresnay an
Apothecary, for the reward of 200 Crowns to poison her, which he promised, and
effected in less than two months time.

Hautefelia, who had been thus succesful in her first Villainy, instantly
begins to teem with a second; and as she hated Mermanda the Sister, so did she
never love de Mallery the Brother, though her own Husband, and therefore
resolves by a safe and speedy death to dispatch him to another world. To this
end she set de Mallery at variance with Grand Pre, by telling him, that her
Brother had been jealous of Mermanda, called her the Baron of Betanford's
Strumpet, upon which they fought; and that since by her sudden death it was
shrewdly suspected he had poisoned her.

De Mallery, infinitely grieved at this News, acquaints his Father de
Cressonville therewith, expecting that by order of Law he would question him
for it; but de Cressonville thought it more prudence to forgive those injuries,
than publish his Daughters Infamy by an unseasonable and uncertain Vindication.
But de Mallery's fiery temper could not admit those sober considerations, but
hastily resolves a revenge for his Sisters death, and understanding that Grand
Pre was lately come to Dijon, sent him by a Confident of his own this following
Challenge.

De Mallery, to Grand Pre.
I Should think my self of baser blood than the Honor of my Family entitles me
to, should I suffer those wrongs and injuries you have offered your Wife and my
Sister to go unpunished. I know not whether her Innocence deserves more pity,
or your Jealousy contempt and revenge: Her unspotted Virtue, which you have so
unworthily questioned, and sudden death, you have not yet accounted for,
command me to a juster Challenge than that you sent the Baron of Betanford: The
equity of my cause, and the unjustness of yours, makes me confident, that as
you lost your blood at Briecount Robert, you shall leave your life in sight of
Dijon. To morrow at five in the evening, by the row of Walnut-Trees, near the
foot of Talon-Fort, I shall wait your coming, with single Rapier, or Rapier and
Poniard, without Seconds. I long to try the Courage of your Heart, and the
Temper of your Sword, which can only satisfy the injured

de Mallery.


The next evening Grand Pre met him, and making choice of single Rapier, they
stripped, and without further ceremony fell to it, commanding their Surgeons to
withdraw into the next Field till the death of one of them proclaimed the other
Victor. After the third breathing, de Mallery received a mortal wound under the
left Pap, upon which he instantly dropped down dead, without speaking a word.
Grand Pre mounted his Horse, and fled to Dole, a Parliament free City, where he
stayed till he had obtained his pardon, which at last he gained,
notwithstanding all the opposition de Cressonville and his Friends could make
to prevent it.

Hautefelia hearing of her Husband's death, (which was welcome News to her)
presently packed up her Jewels and other Goods of value, and went home to her
Father at Auxone, where with an imperious hand, and more wicked heart, she
controlled at pleasure, till the return of her Brother, who in this time had
discovered her malice to Mermanda and himself, and that she had been the only
cause of his fighting with the Baron of Betanford, and killing de Mallery; all
which created in him so great aversion and hatred to her, that he either wholly
declined her company, or treated her with the most public arguments of scorn
and indignation. Hautefelia was now as resolved in her revenge against him, as
she was formerly against Mermanda and de Mallery, and accordingly made a new
contract with le Fresnay for 300 Crowns more to poison him, which within a
short time after he effected. She now domineered at will, without the least
sense of her Crimes, or dread of that Vengeance which so closely pursued her.
Scarce was Grand Pre laid in his Grave, and his Funeral solemnized, but le
Fresnay revelling at a Tavern in Dijon, where every drop of Wine he drank was
the price of innocent blood, growing now wanton in his Cups, commits a Rape
upon Margaret Pivot, a Girl of twelve years old, and Daughter to the Master of
the house, upon which he was apprehended; but denying the fact, was put to the
Rack, and at the second torment confessed it, upon which he was condemned to be
hanged. Two Friars who were sent to prepare him for his death, by their pious
exhortations so wrought upon his conscience, that he confessed to them, That at
the instigation of Hautefelia he had poisoned Mermanda and her Husband Grand
Pre, and received 500 Crowns for a Reward. Upon this Confession his first
Sentence was altered, and for these bloody Villainies he was condemned to be
broken alive on the Wheel, and there to languish till he died; which was
executed accordingly.

A Provost was immediately dispatched to apprehend Hautefelia, who found her at
her Fathers house, dancing in the Garden with several Gentlemen and Ladies, who
seized her, and carried her before a President and two Counselors appointed to
examine her. At first she impudently denied all, and said that le Fresnay had
basely belied her Innocence; upon which being adjudg'd to the Rack, at the
first torment she confessed all, whereupon the Criminal Judges pronounced
sentence upon her, That she should be carried to the place of Execution, have
her Breasts seared and torn off with red-hot Pincers, be afterward hanged, her
Body burnt, and the ashes thrown into the Air, which was accordingly executed.

Thus we see by the sad example of Hautefelia, that they who sow wickedness
shall reap misery, and he that sheds his Brothers blood, stains his own Soul,
which nothing can wash away, but that Fountain of living Waters which cleanses
from all unrighteousness. The Judgments of Heaven may seem to follow the
impenitent sinner with Leaden Feet, yet they strike at last with Hands of Iron.
HIST. II. Pisani and Christineta.
Pisani robs Gasparino of the affections of his Mistress Christineta. Gasparino
challenges him for the injury, and kills him in the field. He afterward renews
his Suit to Christineta, who dissembling her revenge, by the assistance of two
Bravo's, Bianco and Brindoli, murder him in a Garden, and are all three taken
and executed.

IN the City of Pavia in the Dukedom of Milain lived Seignior Thomaso Vituri, a
Noble Gentleman, who had one only Daughter called Christineta, a Lady no less
eminent in all perfections of the Mind, than glorious in the outward
excellencies of an admired Beauty. Amongst other Gentlemen who made their
Courtship to this Lady, Seignior Emanuel Gasparino of Cremona was one; who
acquainting his intimate Friend Seignior Pisani with his resolutions, he
entreated his company to Pavia, and his friendly assistance in this great
affair. Being arrived at Pavia, they were respectfully entertained by Vituri,
to whom Gasparino motion'd his Suit to marry Christineta, which he courteously
received, and like a prudent Father desired some time to advise upon it. During
this interval Gasparino found Christineta very cool in her affections toward
him, whilst he doted on her Beauty, and endeavored by all those courtly
entertainments, which often please the fairer Sex, to gain her love: But still
finding her averse, and not knowing what further to offer, he resolves to make
use of the intercession of his friend Pisani to mediate for him, who readily
accepted of it, and promised to discharge himself in this trust with all
diligence and fidelity. Pisani presently after finding an opportunity,
addressed himself to Christineta in behalf of his Friend; with all the Charms
of Wit and Eloquence that the most endearing Lover could express his Passion
in. Christineta seemed strangely perplexed at his discourse, which he carelessly
observing, begged she would please to make him for once happy in a pleasing
answer to his Friend and her Servant Gasparino. After a serious pause, and deep
sigh, she told him she must needs confess the character he had given his Friend
was both honorable and true, but she had already fixed her affection upon
another person, who at least in her own esteem was more deserving. Pisani
earnestly pressed her to nominate the Gentleman so happy in her love, which she
denied, but promised if he would meet her next day at eight in the morning in
the Nuns Garden at St. Clare, she would acquaint him both with his name and
person; which he readily agreed to, and took his leave. When finding out his
friend Gasparino, he related to him the truth of the former passages, but
concealed the intended meeting; whereupon Gasparino despairing of success in
this amor, civilly took his leave, and returned to Cremona.

The appointed hour being come, Christineta, with her Prayer Book in her hand,
went to the Nunnery, and so to the Garden, where having taken a turn, Pisani
entered, and having saluted her with the common Complements of the day, told her
he was now come to wait the performance of her promise: Sir, (says she, with
blushes in her cheeks) the person I love much resembles your self, (pray
interpret my words with honor) and be (...) Christineta to solicit for her
self the beloved Pisani, but never henceforward let Pisani mediate for the
hated Gasparino.

Pisani strangely surpised at this answer, and considering that to reject the
Ladies Love was discourteous, but to betray his Friend base and dishonorable;
after a little stop thus replied, As I must needs own the greatness of my
obligation to you, without any merit of mine; so I must humbly beg your excuse,
in that I cannot be your Servant, but I must be a Traitor to Friendship,
Justice and Honor. Upon which he abruptly took his leave, and the next day
returned to Cremona.

Christineta not able to conquer her Passion, within ten days sent this Letter
after him.

Christineta, to Pisani.
THink it not strange, that I second my last Speech with this my first Letter;
for were not my affections to you as sincere as they are constant, I should
never thus have trespassed upon the modesty of our Sex: But where the flames
are so ardent, and the passion so generous as mine, I hope the truth of my Love
will atone for my confidence in the pursuit of it. I must confess it is
impossible for Christineta to love any but Pisani, whom I no sooner saw, but I
deeply admired, and dearly affected. Now, since my Zeal to you is begun in
Virtue, and shall be continued in Honor, it makes me flatter my self with the
hopes you will not force me to despair. Thus can I fix bounds to my Letter,
though not to my Affection.

Christineta.


The receipt of this Letter at first a little startled the noble resolutions of
Pisani; but upon second thoughts, Affection was forced to give place to Honor,
as appears by his Answer.

Pisani, to Christineta.
I Cannot tell whether you discover more Affection to me in your Letter, or I
should Treachery to accept or requite it. But I will not fear to say, that
Pisani loves Christineta because she deserves it, did not my friendship to
Gasparino forbid it; for though your Beauty commands the One, yet Honesty
denies the Other. Could time reconcile these difficulties, I could fly swift to
the Embraces of Christineta, whose affection* I profess to esteem next to my
friendship with Gasparino.

Pisani.


Though this Letter seemed to flatter, yet fear quickly blasted those blooming
hopes; wherefore once more she resolved to let him know the violence of her
Passion, which she did fifteen days after in these following words:
Christineta, to Pisani.
I May pass the bounds of discretion, but will not exceed those of Honor,
though I have learnt this Maxim, That the affection which receives end, had
never beginning. If then I live, I must breathe the air of your Love, as well
as this of my Life, since it is the sole cause thereof. Could you dive as deep
into my Heart, as I have into your Merits, if Nature does not, Pity would
inform you, that you ought to prefer the Love of a Lady before the Respect of a
Gentleman, since he may carry his heart from you, and I desire to present mine
to you. I write rather with Tears than Ink; and if you will not live my Saint,
I must die your Martyr.

Christineta.




Having received this Letter, he was quite conquered, and now thought no more
of Gasparino, or the fidelity of his friendship toward him, but cast off all
respects to him, and paid his sole homage to this sovereign Lady of his
affections, which he expressed in this Letter, which he presently dispatched
away by his Page.

Pisani, to Christineta.
YOur Virtue and Beauty might alone prevail with me, but your Affection makes
me absolutely forget my respects to Gasparino, to remember my love to
Christineta; and that which gives life to my resolution is, that it is
impossible for him to hate me as much as you love me; and in this hope I both
rejoice and triumph, that you shall not be my Martyr, but my Mistress, and I
will be both your Saint, and your Servant: For as you desire to live in my
Favor, so my greatest ambition is to die in your Affection. I will shortly
follow and second this my Letter; till then you can never so much lament my
absence as I desire your presence.

Pisani.


So great are her transports of joy at the receipt hereof, that my best
expressions would appear but faint shadows to those lively colors. In few days
Pisani having now quite forgot his old friend Gasparino, winged with desires
began his journey to his new Mistress Christineta.

Such were the mutual embraces and kind caresses of this welcome interview, as
longing Lovers would express their greatest endearments in; when Pisani being
thus assured of the Daughters love, honorably (yet secretly) endeavored to
win the Parents consent, which he found a task of greater difficulty; for
Vituri, displeased therewith, forbid Pisani his house, and Christineta his
company. This vexed the Lovers to the heart, and nipt their hopes in the bud:
however, they continued their affections with constancy, and Pisani for the
present retired home, considering how to effect his desires; and at last
concluded, that if Christineta could gain her Mothers good will, she might in
time procure her Husbands approbation. To this purpose he wrote to her, which
she put into execution, and in few days got the one, and in less than a month
obtained the other, who had now fixed the day of Marriage, and revived the
dying hopes of the despairing Lovers.

Come we now to speak of Gasparino, who notwithstanding the secret management
of this affair, had notice of it; and considering the nature of Pisani's
treachery, was extremely incensed at him, and vowed a sudden and sharp revenge.
His judgment being thus overwhelmed with passion, he thought not only himself,
but his whole Family dishonored in this affront; and understanding Pisani was
in Pavia, taking a resolute Gentleman along with him, and his Lacquey, he rode
over to him, and concealing himself in his Inn till the next morning, he sent
this Challenge to him by his confident Friend Sebastiano, who delivered it
accordingly.

Gasparino, to Pisani.
YOU who have made the first breach in our friendship, by treacherously robbing
me of my Mistress, must now both in Honor and Justice take my life too, or
give me yours in requital. If you think me severe, you may tax your own
Ingratitude, but cannot condemn my resolution. I shall expect you at the
west end of the Park by four or five after dinner on foot with Seconds: the
Weapons, if you please, two single Rapiers, of which I will give you the
choice, and be content with the refusal. If your Courage answer your
Infidelity, you will dare to meet

Gasparino.


Pisani having read the Letter, returned this answer; Pray tell Gasparino from
me, that I will meet him with my Second at the hour and place appointed.
Sebastiano being returned, Pisani found out a Gentleman of his acquaintance
called Sfondrato, (to whom he related the whole business) who readily engaged
himself. The hour being now come, (and the matter carried secretly, that
Christineta might not hear of it) they post away to the Park, where they found
Gasparino and Sebastiano, when alighting from their Horses, they threw off
their Doublets, and drew their Swords.

No less doubtful than bloody was the engagement between Gasparino and Pisani,
when at the third encounter Gasparino run Pisani through the heart, at which he
fell stark dead to the ground. Sebastiano running to congratulate Gasparino for
his Victory, Sfondrato called to him to prepare himself, which he did, and so
with various fortune they fought, till providence resolving to make both
parties equal losers, after they had breathed three several times, Sfondrato
run his enemy Sebastiano through the small of the belly, and so nailed him to
the ground, bearing away his life on the point of his Rapier; which done, their
wounds were dressed; Gasparino fled to Parma, and Sfondrato to Florence.
Christineta at the News hereof was infinitely grieved, tore her hair in fury,
and swore by all the Powers above, the death of her beloved Pisani should be
revenged as deep as it was now lamented.

Some time after Gasparino having obtained his Pardon, returns home, from
whence he began presently to renew his love to Christineta, first by Letters,
then by his Friends, and at last in person. She dissembling her malice, thought
this a fit opportunity to be revenged on him for the death of Pisani; and
finding him very earnest in his Suit, appoints to meet him in the Nuns Garden
at six next morning. No sooner was Gasparino gone, but she agreed with two
Ruffians, Bianco and Brindoli, for 100 Ducats to murder him.

Gasparino and Christineta are both early up, but with different intents, and
so are Bianco and Brindoli: They all meet, she walks in public, they hide
themselves in private, when immediately in came Gasparino, and approaching
Christineta with his Hat in his hand to salute her, she uttered these words,
Gasparino, this place I first had conference in with Pisani, and here I purpose
to have my last with You: At which words the Ruffians issued out and killed
him, but with some noise and resistance. Christineta thinking him not dead
enough, runs to him, thrusts her Handkerchief in his mouth, and with a
Stilletto stabs him many times into the body, with this bloody Speech; This I
sacrifice to the memory of my dear Love Pisani. Then throwing the body into the
Well of the Garden, the Ruffians fled at a Postern, and Christineta went to the
Nuns Church.

The Nuns in their Cells having heard the clashing of Swords, acquaint the
Abbess with it, who with other company coming into the Garden, found the
Postern open, saw the Alleys bloody, and suspected Murder; whereupon she
ordered the Garden to be searched, but forgot the Well. The Magistrates being
advertised of it, caused enquiry to be made among all the Chyrurgeons, who
(having fresh-wounds) came lately to be cured? Rhanutio, a principal
Chyrurgeon, informed them of Bianco and Brindoli, who being both sent for, and
examined how they came by their wounds, they said they had a quarre^ between
themselves, for which they fought at six in the morning in the Nuns Garden at
St. Clare; which agreeing with the relation of the Nuns, all was ended.

But Gasparino having been now missing from his Lodgings two whole nights,
which his Lacquey confirmed upon examination, with some other circumstances of
suspicion, the Judges ordered Bianco and Brindoli to be imprisoned, examined,
and tortured, which they stoutly bore, without confessing any thing. The Garden
was again searched, and the Well which was neglected before, when letting down
their hooks, they brought up some pieces of wrought black Taffata, which
Gasparino's Lacquey did affirm his Master wore when he last saw him; and
searching more narrowly, they brought up the dead body with thirteen several
wounds, whereupon all concluded Bianco and Brindoli guilty. A little Boy
standing by, asked what cloth that was in his mouth? which being pulled out,
was found to be a Cambrick Handkerchief with Christineta's Name upon it. Upon
this she was apprehended in the midst of her pleasures; but upon examination
denied she knew any thing of his death, until she was adjudg'd to the Rack,
when she confessed the fact, and that in revenge of Pisani's death she had
hired Bianco and Brindoli to murder him for 100 Crowns.

The Ruffians were condemned to have their right hands cut off, and then to be
hanged, and their bodies thrown into the River Po. Christineta was first
hanged, and then burnt, and her ashes thrown into the Air, which Executions
were performed, to the great satisfaction of Justice, and all the spectators.

May all Christians read this History with a holy dread, and remember it with
horror and detestation. If thou will shun the Punishment, be sure to avoid the
Crime; for if the wages of sin is Death, sure none but a Madman will lay out
his pains to be so rewarded. HIST. III. Mortaign and Josselina.
Mortaign deluding Josselina with promise of marriage, gets her with child, and
then causes his Lacquey Le Verdure, and Le Palma her Host, to murder her and
her Son. Isabella, Le Palma's Wife, by her jealousy of her Husband discovers
the murder, upon which they are all taken and executed.

NOt far from the City of Lions in France, near Darency a small Country
Village, dwelt an honest Farmer called Andrew Mollard, who being a Widower had
one only Daughter named Iosselina, whom he intended for his Heir, a Maid of
that blooming Beauty, that she was justly called Iosselina the Fair.

Within a league of Mollard's house dwelt a rich Gentleman who had several
Children, of which the eldest was Mortaign, but young in years, though of great
hopes, and nobly educated in the Families of several Persons of Honor.
Mortaign having now lived some years in Paris, was desirous to see his Father
De Coucye, who was both aged and sickly, as also to be present at the Nuptials
of one of his Sisters, who was to be married to a Gentleman of Avergne.

The Wedding being over, and Mortaign weary of the diversions of the Country,
resolves upon his return to Paris; but the night before his departure De Coucy
fell dangerously sick of a burning Fever, which for the present put a stop to
his journey. During his stay in the Country, as he was walking one day in the
Fields he sprung a Pheasant, which flying to the next Woods, he sent for his
Hawk; but having ranged far and near for several hours in quest of his Game,
which he could not recover, he grew very thirsty, and 'spying Mollard's house
at a distance, made up to it.

Mortaign seeing a man in the Vineyard, demanded if he might have any Wine
there; Mollard answered, Yes; and (guessing by his face who he was) courteously
invited him into his house, where being set down, he sent his Daughter
Iosselina for Wine, and what other homely Dainties his house afforded.

Mortaign admiring to see so fair a Maid in so obscure a place, and curiously
observing each grace and feature, to which was added a natural modesty, and
simplicity of behavior, was wholly ravished in the contemplation of her
Beauty, and vowed to himself he would be Master of her affections, how dear
soever it cost him. No sooner had Mortaign entertained these thoughts, but a
lucky opportunity (and most favorable to his designs) offered it self; for
Mollard told him, that he rented a small Tenement of De Coucy, who now su'd him
for two Heriots, and therefore entreated his good word to his Father in his
behalf, which he promised, and with thanks for his kind reception, departed.

Under pretense of discourse and business with Mollard, Mortaign made frequent
visits to Iosselina, whose Chastity he attempted with variety of Gifts and
Presents, which she modestly refused to accept upon so dishonorable terms; and
assured him, that as a chaste and virtuous Reputation was the greatest part of
her Fortune, so she would never exchange it for the infamous portion of shame
and misery. Mortaign was now out of all hopes of success; but rather than miss
his aim, was resolved to play his last stake, and promise Marriage; and
accordingly told her, that notwithstanding the inequality of their Birth and
Fortunes, he would condescend to marry her, provided she would first permit him
to enjoy his desire. Iosselina flattering her self with the hopes of
advancement, consented to it; and now finding her self with child, (which her
Father likewise discovered, to his great grief and sorrow) advertised Mortaign
of it, who one night stole her away from her Father's, and sent her ten leagues
off from Durency, to a poor Kinswomans house of his, where she was delivered of
a fair lusty Boy.

Calintha, Mortaign's Mother, who knew nothing of these passages, advised him
to marry, and proposes a match to Monsieur De Vassey, the Seneschal of La
Palisse, between his only Daughter Madamoyselle La Varina, and her eldest Son
Mortaign: The Parents readily concluded, and upon sight the young Couple
agreed, so that it was now generally reported the Marriage would be suddenly
solemnized. This News startled Iosselina, who considering she must look to her
self, being now dis-inherited by her Father, and having no Friend left to
assist or advise her, she resolves to write Mortaign a Letter, to re-mind him
of his promise, and desire some relief for her self and her Son.

Josselina, to Mortaign.
YOU prevailed upon my Honor with the sacred promise of making me your Wife:
it is true I credulously believed your Oaths, and consented to my shame, but it
was under the solemn pretense of Marriage; and though we wanted the Ceremony,
yet Heaven is witness to the Contract, which now you resolve to violate. What
though the sweetness of my Youth and the freshness of my Beauty have now lost
their charming powers over you? yet methinks the innocent smiles of that lively
Image you have left to my care should raise some pity in your breast. -- But if
you will not advance my Fortunes, yet make not shipwreck of my Life, as you
have of my Chastity; and since all my support must proceed from you, it will be
high ingratitude in you to deny her Maintenance, who has given you a Son, and
extreme cruelty not to allow the poor Babe wherewith to live, who received his
life and being from You. I hope you will prove more natural to Him, and more
charitable to Me, otherwise be assured that such unkindness will never be long
unpitied of men, or unpunished of God.

Josselina.


With this to Mortaign, she sent another of the same effect to his Mother
Calintha, which they received, when he, as an unworthy Gentleman, triumphs in
his sin, and mocks at her poverty, and will neither relieve her or the Child,
but burns the Letter without any further concern at it. Calintha's malice was
so great, that she not only refused to assist them her self, but commands him
that he should not supply them with any conveniences, and heartily wishes them
both in another world. At the hearing of this cruel News, Iosselina fell into a
swoon, and had not some accidental assistance came in, she had then ended her
life and misery together. Barbarous Calintha understanding in this interim poor
Iosselina's residence, was so devilishly bent against her, that she persuaded
her Landlady in a dark and cold night to turn her and the Child out of doors,
and suffer her to have no other shelter but the ground for her bed, and the
Heavens for her covering. In this distressed condition* with the unfortunate
Babe in her arms, she wandered all night through the fields and places unknown,
when by the morning light she discovered a Village which she knew, where she
sold her clothes from her back to relieve her self and her Child. Here she
continued some time in great extremity, when at last, forced by mere want and
necessity, she acquainted some persons with her sad and deplorable condition,
who advised to send Mortaign his Son home, and provide for her self.

This was not so secretly discoursed, but it came to the ears of La Varina,
Mortaign's Mistress at La Plaisse, who presently withdrew her affection from
him, and her Father his respect; which Mortaign perceiving, and imagining it
was upon the account of Iosselina, swore he would destroy both her and her Son,
and the better to dissemble his design, he gave orders that she should be
lodged in a better Inn, where she was furnished with all necessaries; and
further sent her word, that he had provided a Nurse for his Son, and would
shortly send his Lacquey for him, and take more particular care for her support
and maintenance, if she would keep things private to her self. Iosselina was
much rejoiced hereat, and within three days Mortaign sent his Lacquey Le
Verdure for the Babe, which with many tears and kisses she delivered to him. Le
Verdure following his Masters command, and being now four leagues from
Villepont, strangles the pretty Infant whilst it smiled in his face, and
wrapping it in a linen cloth, threw it into the River Lignon.

Mortaign being thus rid of the Son, makes a bargain with Le Palma (Iosselina's
Host) and his Lacquey Le Verdure, for 200 Franks to stifle the Mother in her
bed, which they performed, and buried her body in the Garden. As soon as these
Villains had perpetrated this cruel murder, they went over to Durency to give
Mortaign an account, and receive their reward; which having done, they
continued several days together frolicking and drinking; when at last Le Palma
went home to Villepont to his Wife Isabella; who being an old woman, and he a
young man, she was jealous of his stay, supposing he went out in company with
Iosselina, whereupon she entertained him with this salutation, Le Palma (quoth
she) you are very unkind so soon to forsake your Where Josselina. For which he
gave her the lie, called her Whore, and expressed himself highly passionate and
angry. She continued her railing, and provoked him to that degree of
impatience, that he struck her a box on the ear, which felled her dead to the
ground, upon this noise the Neighbors came in, and supposing his Wife dead,
apprehended Le Palma, and carried him before the Procurer Fiscal of La Palisse,
who committed him to Prison. Isabella being recovered, complains to the Fiscal
of her Husbands cruelty toward her, gives a true account of the occasion of
the quarrel; adding, that if Josselina is not her Husbands Strumpet, she
believes he is her Murderer, of which her Maid can say more. Iaquela the Maid
upon examination declared, That her Master Le Palma and Le Verdure were
together at midnight in Josselina 's Chamber, and since she was never heard of.
Le Palma being charged with these points, denied every syllable, that he
neither was in her Chamber, nor knew what was become of her; but being judged
to the Rack, confessed the Murder in the several particulars.

Sergeants were presently sent to Mortaign and Le Verdure; they met the Lacquey
in the way, and seized his Master in bed. Le Verdure upon the torment confessed
the murder of Iosselina and her Son, and Mortaign being examined, with great
penitence owned the guilt he was charged withal; whereupon Le Palma was
condemned to be hanged and burnt, Le Verdure to be broken on the Wheel, and his
body thrown into the River Lignon, and Mortaign to be broken on the Wheel, his
body burnt, and his ashes to be thrown into the Air; which on a Market Day was
accordingly executed in La Palisse.

Let all Maidens learn to preserve their Chastity by the example of Josselina,
and men by Le Verdure and Le Palma, not to shed innocent blood for the lucre of
money; and by the lamentable end of Mortaign, to be less inhumane, bloody and
lascivious. HIST. IV. Alsemero and Beatrice-Joanna.
Beatrice-Joanna causes de Flores to murder Alonso Piracquo, who was a Suter
to her, that she might marry with Alsemero; who being wedded to her, and
finding her in Adultery with de Flores, kills them both. Alsemero afterward
treacherously kills Thomaso Piracquo in a Duel, for which being beheaded, the
murder of Alonso is discovered and punished.

NOt many years since, at the City of Valentia in Spain lived Don Pedro de
Alsemero, a young and Noble Cavalier, who wholly applying himself to the Wars,
added to his own plentiful Estate as large a share of Honor and Reputation.
This Gentleman, whose temper altogether inclined to Martial affairs, resolved
to leave his own Country, (now in peace) and enter himself into the Society of
the Valiant Knights of Malta, and accordingly went to Alicant, where he stayed
in expectation of a favorable wind. During his abode here, going one morning
to Church, he observed a young Lady kneeling over against him, with whose
Beauty he was so surpised, that it was difficult to determine whether Love or
Devotion more inflamed his heart, and inspired his thoughts. Mass being ended,
he inquired of the Priest who this Lady was, her Name and Quality: The Priest
told him, She is Daughter to Don Diego de Vermandero, Captain of the Castle,
and her Name Donna Beatrice-Ioanna. The next morning Alsemero rose early, and
went to the same Church, in hopes fortune would bless him with a second sight
of her whose charming Graces had already so far prevailed upon him: when
entering the Quire, he saw her upon her knees at prayers in the same place.
Alsemero, who thought himself extremely blessed with so lucky an opportuity,
resolved to improve it to the best advantage; and kneeling down by her, (not
having the patience to wait till Mass was ended) whispered his affections in
her ear, interrupting her Devotions with his amorous Complements, vowing to
live and die her affectionate Servant. The Lady checked his bold Address with a
modest reprehension, which (Prayers being ended) Alsemero renewed with all the
passionate expressions of a vigorous Lover, and after several refusals, at last
prevailed to wait upon her to the Castle, where the Captain her Father received
him with all imaginable respect, and in return for his civilities to his
Daughter, showed him the rarities and strength of the Fort. Alsemero continued
his addresses to the Lady by frequent visits, which the Captain her Father
seemed to encourage by a generous and courtly reception. In Alicant lived a
young Gentleman of Noble Extract and plentiful Estate, whose name was Alonso
Piracquo, a complete Courtier, and passionately in love with Beatrice-Ioanna.

Piracquo, who had a long time concealed his affection, resolves now to make a
visit to Vermandero, and acquaint him with his passion for his Daughter, which
he accordingly did: Vermandero received him with all the demonstrations of
respect and kindness, thanked him for the favor he did him in his honorable
proposals, which he highly approved of, and was of nothing more ambitious, than
an alliance with a person of so great worth and merit. Thus we see Alsemero
rivall'd in his pretensions to his Mistress, by an unknown Cavalier; but
however, though Piracquo had gained the Father, Alsemero had already won the
Daughter, who carried her self with that prudence and respect to Piracquo, that
he lived in hopes, whilst Alsemero had the assurance of her love and affection.

Vermandero after some time understanding the inclinations of Beatrice-Ioanna,
which more respected Alsemero than Piracquo, now declared himself in behalf of
Piracquo, and with an austere look commanded her to direct her affections
accordingly; which she not observing, he withdrew himself to his Countrey-house
at Briamata, and took her privately along with him. Piracquo had here the
opportunity of courting his Mistress, which was denied Alsemero, who had
already gained the Fort, which Piracquo in vain endeavored to storm. Piracquo
made his constant visits, whilst Alsemero could only solicit by Letters,
which were powerful enough to preserve the heart he had already obtained.
Several Letters had passed between Alsemero and Beatrice-Ioanna without the
privity of Vermandero, when the last told him, That as he was sole master of
her affections, so she earnestly coveted his company, which she desired that
evening at eleven, when she would acquaint him with a secret which concerned
them both.

Alsemero upon this advice took post, and arrived at the hour appointed* when
going privately into Vermandero's house, he found Diaphanta her waiting
Gentlewoman attending his coming, who directed him to Beatrice-Ioanna's
Chamber. And here, with the Readers leave, I Will draw the Curtain before those
amorous Complements and more familiar Dalliances with which the Lovers
entertained themselves. In discourse Beatrice-Ioanna cast out some doubtful
expressions to this purpose, That before Piracquo was in another world, there
was no hopes for him to enjoy her for his Wife in this. Alsemero presently
understood the sense of it, and offered to send him a Challenge, and fight him,
which she would by no means admit of, and desired him to leave Alicant for a
short time, and return to Valentia, and for the rest (says she) repose your
self upon my constancy and affection. The morning now growing upon them,
Alsemero took his leave, and promised a full observance of her commands, and
accordingly within four days left Alicant, and went back to Valentia. This
meeting (though private) was not so closely carried, but Vermandero had notice
of it, whereat he was very angry, but however assured Piracquo, that in a short
time she should accomplish his desires, and that if his paternal admonitions
could not, his authority should prevail over his Daughters perverseness. Thus
was Piracquo encouraged by Vermandero, though he had private intelligence sent
him that Beatrice-Ioanna was already contracted to Alsemero, and it would now
more nearly concern him to consult his reputation by an honorable retreat,
than to advance his Suit with so much zeal and violence, which it was
impossible he should ever obtain. But Piracquo pressed on more eagerly, which
gave Beatrice-Ioanna great trouble and disquiet. Vermandero understanding that
Alsemero was gone back to Valentia, returned to Alicant, where Piracquo made
his daily visits. There was a gallant young Gentleman of the Castle whose name
was Don Antonio de Flores, a person who dearly affected Beatrice-Ioanna, and
one whom she thought might be a fit instrument to execute her barbarous and
bloody design. She sent for De Flores accordingly, (who was now besotted with
her Beauty) and acquainted him with her intentions, and by the powerful
arguments of her more particular kindness and respect, won him to promise, that
within few days he would answer her desires. De Flores insinuates himself into
Piracquo's company, and waiting for an opportunity, he heard Piracquo one day
commend the strength of the Castle, when De Flores told him he had not yet seen
that which consisted in the Casemates, which were stored with good Ordnance to
scour the Ditches: These Piracquo desired to see, but De Flores told him it was
now noon, and if he pleased he would meet him after dinner, and wait upon him
himself. After Dinner they met accordingly, went to the Ravelins, Sconces and
Bulwarks, and from thence by a Postern to the Ditches and to the Casemates:
Three of them they had viewed, and coming to the last, De Flores laid off his
Rapier, telling Piracquo that the descent was narrow and craggy, upon which
Piracquo put off his. Being entered into the Vault of the Casemate, as Piracquo
was looking through a Port-hole De Flores (who had hid a Sword and Poniard
behind the door, stabbed him into the back, so swiftly redoubling his blows,
that he killed him dead, and buried him under the ruins of an old wall.

De Flores having committed this murder, acquaints Beatrice-Ioanna with it,
who was overjoyed at it, and the better to blind the world caused it to be
reported, that Piracquo was seen to go forth the Castle-gate, and take boat in
the City, as was supposed for a little Sea-air. Piracquo being thus missed,
after several days search in vain, was supposed to be drowned at Sea; and three
months being now past, Alsemero was solemnly married to Beatrice-Ioanna at
Alicant in much state and bravery.

Alsemero had not been long married, but he grew jealous of his Wife, and so
far restrained her former liberty, that she complained to the Captain her
Father of his discourteous usage, upon which Alsemero provided a Coach, and
carried her away to Valentia. Vermandero willing to know how matters stood
between his Daughter and her Husband, sent De Flores to Valentia with Letters
to them both. Alsemero being abroad, she told him of her Husbands unkindness,
of which he taking the advantage, revived his old suit: she willingly complies
with his desires, and prays him to see her more often. Alsemero coming home,
understands by his Wife that De Flores had been there with Letters from her
Father, and by Diaphanta her Waiting Woman (who was one of his spies) that
there passed many amorous kisses between De Flores and her Mistress, and
relates to him whatever she either heard or saw. Alsemero in a great fury flies
to his Wife, charges her with too much familiarity with De Flores, and as his
passion rises into a greater rage, calls her Whore, Strumpet, etc. Upon which,
to palliate her own Crimes, she was forced to discover Piracquo's murder. Know
(says she) Alsemero, since you will enforce me to show the true cause of my
chaste familiarity with De Flores, that he it was who at my request dispatched
Piracquo, without which I could never have enjoyed you for my Husband; and so
told him all the circumstances of that cruel Murder, and conjured him to
conceal the same; vowing to die a thousand deaths rather than defile his Bed.
Alsemero wondered at this discourse, and strictly charged his Wife to admit De
Flores no more to her company; but she continuing a correspondence with him,
which Diaphanta informed her Master of, he pretended one day a Journey into the
Country; but with a Case of Pistols in his Pocket, and his Rapier and Poniard
privately withdrew into his Closet, which was within his Bedchamber.

De Flores had presently notice that Alsemero was gone into the Country, and
immediately came over to visit Beatrice-Ioanna; and as they were in the middle
of their pleasures upon the Bed, Alsemero rushed in, and discharged his Pistols
on them, and afterward stabbed them with his Sword and Poniard, of which
wounds they instantly died. This being done, he went and acquainted the
Criminal Judges with the death of his Wife and De Flores, whom he had killed in
the very act of Adultery. Diaphanta appeared a Witness for him, who declared
upon Oath, That she had several times seen her Mistress and De Flores commit
Adultery, and had acquainted her Master with it. Upon mature deliberation
Alsemero was acquitted of the Fact, and the dead Bodies ordered to be buried.

But now let us speak of Don Thomaso Piracquo, who had formerly advised his
Brother Alonso Piracquo to give over his suit to Beatrice-Ioanna: He hearing of
all these occurrences afresh, remembers his dead Brother, and confidently
supposes that Alsemero and Beatrice-Ioanna had a hand in the loss of him;
wherefore he now resolves to call Alsemero to account for him, and accordingly
sent him this Challenge to Allicant, where he now resided.

Thomaso Piracquo, to Alsemero.
I Fear Beatrice-Joanna's vanity and your rashness have bereaved me of a
Brother I ever esteeemed more dear than my life. As I am a Gentleman I think I
ought to seek satisfaction for his death with the hazard of my own life:
wherefore, as your Sword has chastised Beatrice-Joanna's error, I hope mine is
reserved to correct yours. I pray meet me at the foot of Glisseron-hill to
morrow at five in the morning, and it shall be your choice either to use your
Sword on horseback, or your Rapier on foot.

Thomaso Piracquo.


Alsemero accepts the Challenge, and they met at the hour and place appointed;
when Alsemero throwing away his Rapier, with his Hat in his hand, told him he
was ready to join with him in the revenge of his Brothers murder: Piracquo not
suspecting any treachery, threw away his Sword too, and with the same civility
addressed himself to Alsemero, who suddenly drew his Pistols out of his pocket,
and shot the one through his head, and the other through his breast, upon which
Piracquo cried out, O Villain! O Traitor! and fell down dead.

The News of this murder, with the treachery and flight of Alsemero, was
presently known, and the Criminal Judges ordered a speedy pursuit after him; in
the midst of his have his Horse fell with him, and broke his fore-leg, and
Alsemero's right arm; when endeavoring to escape on foot, he was presently
overtaken, and surrounded by six horsemen, against whom he defended himself
like a Gentleman and a Sould^^r; when at last his Rapier being broke, he was
forced to yield himself their Prisoner.

Thus was he brought a pitied spectacle to Alicant, where he was condemned to
lose his head; and being upon the Scaffold, and seeing no hopes of life, he
discovered Don Alonso Piracquo's murder by De Flores in all its circumstances,
protesting his own innocence, only in the concealment of it: Of which the
Judges being advised, they caused his head to be taken off for Thomaso, and his
body to be thrown into the Sea for concealing Alonso's murder, and the bodies
of De Flores and Beatrice-Ioanna to be taken out of their Graves, and burnt at
the common place of execution, and their ashes thrown into the Air.

Thus we see the Justice of Heaven will at last overtake the bold offender, and
though he seems at present to triumph in sin, and praise the success of his
iniquity, yet let him consider the end of it will be bitter; and that though
God does forbear, yet he will not forgive, without a sincere repentance, HIST.
V. Sypontus and Victorina.
Victorina causes Sypontus to murder her first Husband Souranza, which is
strangely discovered, and Sypontus executed. Afterward she poisons her second
Husband Fassino, for which her Maid Felicia being condemned, and upon the point
of Execution, her innocence is cleared by a miraculous discovery of the truth,
and Victorina hanged and burnt.

IN the Reign of Leonardo Donato Duke of Venice, there lived a worthy Gentleman
called Seignior Iacomo Beraldi, who had one Daughter named Donna Victorina, a
young Gentlewoman rich, noble, and fair, and courted by several persons of the
first rank and quality in Venice. Amongst other suitors, Seignior Sypontus was
most esteemed by the Lady; but having lately suffered great losses by the
Turks, her Father recommended Seignior Souranza to her affections, who as he
was of a far greater Estate, so was he now in his declining age, and wanted
those warmer Charms which the youthful Sypontus was blessed withal, and the
sprightly Victorina most affected. However, her Parents forced her affections
to submit to their will, and within few days she was married to Souranza; but
Sypontus (to use the Venetian phrase) was her Enamorato and she his Courtizana.
Victorina now grew so notoriously vicious, that she perfectly hated her
Husband, and wished him every day in another world, which she often hinted to
Sypontus, but he seemed to take no notice of it, till one day hearing of two
great losses which had befallen him in the Levant Seas, which amounted to at
least 70000 Checchines, and knowing Souranza to be very rich, he resolved to
make himself master of his Estate, by murdering him, and marrying his Wife.
This was concluded on, and three days after Souranza going to his house of
pleasure near Padua, upon the bank of the River Brenta, Sypontus hired two
Watermen to assasinate him, who being sworn to secrecy, as Souranza returned
(after three days stay) in the close of the evening, Sypontus in disguise
entered his Boat, and with his Poniard stabbed him to the Heart, cut off his
Nose and Beard that he might not be known, and threw him into the Sea, and the
Waterman after him, that he might tell no tales; and making have home, sent
this Letter to Victorina.

Sypontus, to Victorina.
My dearest Victorina.
I Have begun and ended a business which infinitely imports your good and my
content. The party has drunk his fill of White and Claret, and is now gone to
his eternal rest. I hope a little time will wipe off your Tears, and confirm
our Ioys. Judge by this the sincerity of my love, who will rather endanger my
life, and hazard my hopes of a future Heaven, to enjoy the present Paradise of
your Company. We must for a time refrain each others company, that we may the
sooner meet and embrace with more content, and less danger.

Sypontus.


Victorina was extremely pleased at the News; but the better to hide her malice
began to complain of her Husbands long stay, and sent a Nephew of his own to
see how he did, who brought word that he was come from thence four days before;
and that after all the enquiry he had made, he could hear nothing of him.
Victorina appeared all in tears, and grieved above measure, for fear any
mischance had befallen him. What she did in appearance, his friends did in
reality, when word was brought that a dead body was taken up by some Fishermen,
and landed at St. Mark's Stairs. Seignior Souranza the Nephew went presently to
the place, and observing the body more curiously, at last espied a red spot in
the Neck, and a Wart under the left Eyelid, by which marks he was too well
assured it was the body of his Uncle Seignior Baptista Souranza. The body was
decently interred, and Victorina remained the most disconsolate Widow in the
World. Souranza the Nephew, who had formerly made some observations on the
carriage and behavior of Victorina, vehemently suspected her of this Murder;
and for the more effectual discovery, enquires of Felicia, Victorina's waiting
Gentlewoman, what persons most frequently visited her Lady, when she named
Sypontus, that he sent her many Letters, and that there was much love and
familiarity between them. Souranza conjured her to intercept some of their
Letters, which she promised to do; and in a short time after, being sent to
fetch her Lady a pair of Romish Gloves, she opened an Ivory Box, where she
found the Letter which Sypontus sent to her. Souranza having read the Letter,
accused Sypontus and Victorina of this murder before the Criminal Judges. They
were examined, but denied the Fact, and disowned the Letter, upon which they
were separately committed to Prison. Sypontus suspecting the discovery of this
Letter was by the treachery of Victorina, sent a Letter privately to her, in
which he charged her with it; but she in her answer to him so well cleared her
Innocence to his great satisfaction, that he now resolved no torments should
force him to accuse her. The next day he was put to the Rack, where he endured
the torments with admirable constancy; but the next day the torments being
redoubled upon him, he confessed the Letter his, and himself guilty of the
murder, and totally cleared Victorina. Upon this he was condemned to lose his
head between the two Columns at St. Mark's Place; and being brought upon the
Scaffold, confessed the murder to all the spectators, but took it upon his
death that Victorina was absolutely innocent, and no ways privy to it.
Victorina was afterward sent for into Court, and threatened with the Rack; but
she boldly denied all, and was in open Court acquitted and discharged.

Six months were scarcely past, since these tragical revolutions happened, but
Victorina throwing off her mourning, adorned her self with her richest Jewels,
and resolves to have a second Husband; and amongst the crowd of Suitors which
her great Wealth and Beauty brought her, she fixed on Seignior Ludovico
Fassino, a handsome young Gentleman, rich and nobly born, but extremely vicious
and debauched. A month was hardly past since the Nuptials, but he left her, to
follow his old course of Whoring, so that now she is become a married Widow;
and understanding that the Lady Calenare was the Loadstone that attracted him
from her, she first endeavored by all the endearments of Love and Respect to
recover his straggling heart; but this not affecting him at all, she storms, and
in most sharp and severe terms reproaches him for his unkindness and disrespect
to her, who must now be slighted for the company of an impudent and common
Courtizana. Seignior Fassino took no heed to her words, but pursued the same
lewd courses, upon which Victorina vows a revenge, and that his life shall pay
dearly for abusing her, and so concludes secretly to poison him, and to that
purpose sent for Augustino an Apothecary, to whom she offered 300 Checchines to
perform it; but he very honestly refused it, and persuaded her to better
thoughts; but she persisting in her bloody design, was resolved to do it her
self, and to that purpose procured Poison from a strange Emperick, and now only
waited an opportunity to administer it.

Not long after Fassino complained he was very sick, which was occasioned by
his dissolute life, and desired his Wife to make him some comfortable Broth;
which she glad of, commands her Maid Felicia to make it, and going up to her
Closet, fetched down the Poison, and (having sent Felicia from the fire) put
two parts of it into the Broth, and kept the third by her. Victorina (who no
less intended a revenge on Felicia too, for discovering Sypontus's Letter)
orders her to carry the Broth up to Fassino, which he supt off, wh^^'^^ she
went and laid the other part of the Poison in Felicia's Trunk, and came down
undiscovered. About an hour after the poison began to operate with Fassino, who
called for his Wife, and told her that he feared Felicia had poisoned him in
the Broth she gave him, and desired she would send for his Friends and
Relations, who found him ready to expire, and cried out with one consent, he
was poisoned. Victorina accuses her Maid Felicia, which dying Fassino confirms,
that she had that morning poisoned him in the Broth, upon which she was
apprehended, and carried before the Criminal Judges, where with tears and cries
she justified her innocence: But Fassino being now dead, and there appearing
all probabilities of Felicia's guilt, she was hurried away to Prison.

Three days after being brought upon her trial, she confessed she gave him the
Broth, but knew nothing of any poison it; when being asked if any body else
meddled with the Broth, she answered, No, not to her knowledge, but she was
afraid it was a device of her Ladies to be revenged upon her for a former
grudge. Upon this they went to Fassino's house, and secured Victorina, and
searched all the Boxes, Trunks, and Caskets, but found nothing; when going into
Felicia's Chamber, they in search of her Trunk found the remaining part of the
Poison, upon which she was condemned to be hanged next morning at St. Mark's
Place, and Victorina discharged. Being now brought to the place, she ascended
the Ladder, and protested to the world she knew nothing of the matter, but
imagined her Lady Victorina was not innocent, and so prepared her self to die;
when Augustino the Apothecary landed at St. Mark's stairs, and seeing a young
Gentlewoman ready to be executed, demanded who she was, and her Crime, and
being told the whole circumstance, remembered that Victorina had formerly
tempted him to the same murder, and did believe the Maid was innocent, and the
Mistress guilty: wherefore hasting to the Officer, he requested him to stay
Execution, for he had something material to discover in relation to Fassino's
murder. Augustino then in discreet manner informs the Judges of the manner,
time, and place where Victorina seduced him to poison Fassino.

Felicia was presently remanded to Prison, and Victorina apprehended, and
confronted with Augustino, who now made good his former allegation. At first
she denied every thing; but being adjudg'd to the Rack, she acquitted Felicia,
and acknowledged her self guilty both of her first and second Husbands murder.
Upon this Confession innocent Felicia was freed, and Victorina condemned the
next morning to be hanged and burnt at St. Mark's Place, which was performed
accordingly. She died very penitent, and desired that her example might be a
caveat to forewarn others from commission of the like Crimes, which would
certainly bring them to the same punishments.

Could the Power of sin defend us from the Punishment, or the fading Pleasures
of it comfort us in our Sufferings for it, we had some encouragement to be
wicked: But when our utmost Reward is to be completely miserable, he that is
guilty of it sins against the light of his own reason, and to be sure not to be
happy, purchases his own Damnation at the price of his immortal Soul.

Let us therefore praise the Providence and Justice of God; the first by
protecting the Innocent after an extraordinary manner from the brink of
destruction, in the example of Felicia: and the latter by punishing the
detestable sins of Murder and Adultery, in the sad example of Victorina.

HIST. VI. De Salez and La Hay.
De Salez kills Vaumartin in a Duel, murders his own Father, that he may marry
La Hay a Strumpet, who afterward cuts his throat. She hires Michael to poison
La Frange, for which Crimes La Hay has her right hand cut off, and is burnt.
Michael is broken on a wheel, and De Salez his dead body is hanged and burnt.

AT Toulouse in France lived a Counselor whose name was Monsieur de Argentier
a Widower, who had one only Son called De Salez, of two and twenty years old,
whose martial temper, (which wholly inclined him to the Wars) being unpleasing
to his Fathers quiet disposition, he endeavored to divert him, by offering to
his choice several Noble, Rich and Virtuous Ladies, out of whom he desired him
to choose a Wife, and more particularly recommended to him La Frange, the only
Daughter of Monsieur de Clugny, very young, and of most complete perfections of
mind, though of a misshapen body. The Fathers had already agreed upon the Match,
and appointed a solemn meeting for their Children, which produced different
effects: La Frange highly approved, and passionately loved De Salez, whilst he
on the contrary could entertain no thoughts but what showed his slight and
disesteem of her.

At the same time there was a Nobleman called the Baron of Vaumartin, who to
repair the Debaucheries of his youth, courted La Frange in marriage, but more
out of respect to her Fortune, than affection to her Person; and being put off
with only verbal complements by De Clugny the Father and La Frange the
Daughter, was at last acquainted that his suit would be but vain and fruitless,
for De Salez was that happy person she loved and admired. De Salez was in this
interim grown acquainted with Monsieur de Soulange, a Gentleman of 'small
Estate, but blessed with three Daughters famed for their Beauties through the whole
City, of which the Phaenix was La Hay, the youngest. De Salez, who had
contracted a friendship with Monsieur de Soulange, that he might have the
better color to visit his Daughters as other young Sparks of the Town did,
grew passionately in love with La Hay, who as she was exceeding beautiful, so
did she in her mien and behavior appear with all the graces of modesty and
goodness: But though in public she seemed an unspotted Virgin, yet was she in
private a professed Courtezan; nor was she so secret in her lascivious
delights, however she obliged her Gallants to conceal her favors, but she was
suspected of dishonesty by all chaste and virtuous persons. Amongst others of
her Enamorato's, De Salez was one, who doting on her delicate Complexion, and
counterfeit Modesty, spent all his hours in visits to La Hay, and with his best
art and policy laid siege to her chastity: but such was her subtilty, that
knowing he loved her, and was the only Son of a rich Councellor, she resolved
to decoy him in for her Husband, and would not by all his costly Treats and
constant solicitations be won to his embraces and consent to his lustful
desires.

This folly of De Salez, and subtilty of La Hay, was not managed with that
privacy, but Argentier his Father took notice of it, and considering De
Soulange's mean Extraction and Poverty, and his own Nobility and Wealth, was
high incensed with De Salez for his courtship to La Hay, told him she was a
Strumpet, and swore if he did not leave her, and marry La Frange, he would
disinherit him, and never repute him for his Son. But De Salez is resolute in
his folly, and contemning his Fathers advice, privately contracts himself to La
Hay, and promises as soon as providence shall be so kind to him to call his
Father into another World, he would consummate the Espousals. In the mean time
the Baron of Vaumartin seeing all his addresses to La Frange was unsuccesful,
and his Debts and Creditors growing clamorous upon him, resolves with himself
that so long as De Salez lives, to whom La Frange had entirely devoted her
self, he must never expect to be happy in her arms; and therefore, to remove
this obstacle, concludes to send him a Challenge, since it would appear more
noble and generous to kill him in the field, than privately murder him by
Poison or Poniard. The next day by his Page he sent him this Letter.

Vaumartin, to De Salez.
IF you seek the cause of my malice, you may find it in the Lady La Frange's
affection to you, and hatred to my self; wherefore think it not strange that I
command my Pen to invite you and your Sword to meet me at five in the morning
to morrow, on horseback, without Seconds, behind the Jacobins Garden. Could
that sweet Lady have affected Me more, or You less, we might have proved as
true Friends, as now our Reputations conjure us to live or die honorable
Enemies.

Vaumartin.


De Salez having received and read this Challenge, wondered at it, considering
he neither regarded La Frange, nor valued her affection: But lest Vaumartin
should think by his declining the Combat, it was for want of courage to meet
him, he called the Page, and bid him tell his Master he would not fail to
breakfast with him at the time and place appointed.

The morning being come, our Champions met bravely mounted, with each his
Chyrurgeon at the place assigned, where they no sooner saw each other, but
setting Spurs to their Horses, they closed furiously, and at the third
encounter De Salez ran Vaumartin through the body, when dropping his Sword, his
body fell from his Horse stark dead to the ground. De Salez galloped to the
next Village to dress his wounds, and then provided for his safety by flight,
All persons rejoiced at the good success of De Salez, whose Father and Friends
with much difficulty at last obtained his Pardon. But no sooner was De Salez
returned, but he renewed his visits to La Hay, to the great grief of his
Father, and dissatisfaction of all his Relations. Sometime after Argentier
being obliged upon some considerable business to go to Paris, both advised and
charged De Salez during his absence to forbear his visits to La Hay, and for
fear he should forget his commands, as he was on the way to Paris he writ this
Letter, and sent it to him.

Argentier, to De Salez.
IT is out of a religious and fatherly tenderness that I now send thee these
lines, for thy Youth cannot see what my Age knows, how many miseries attend
Vice, and how many blessings wait on Virtue. If La Frange be not fair, yet she
is not contemptible: If therefore thou will leave a Saint to marry a Strumpet,
then take La Hay, and forsake La Frange; but if thou will forsake a Strumpet to
marry a Saint, then take La Frange, and leave La Hay: In the First thou shall
find content and honor, but in the Second shame and repentance. This Letter
shall be a witness betwixt God, my self, and thee, that if thou perform not my
commands I will deny thee my Blessing, and deprive thee of my Lands.

Argentier.


De Salez was infinitely troubled at this Letter, to see his Mistress
disgraced, and himself obliged to so difficult a task, that he was not able to
hide his discontent from the observance of La Hay; who desirous to know the
reason of it, as he was one day asleep on the Couch, she dived into his
pockets, where she found his Fathers Letter, and having perused the contents
with choler, awaked De Salez, and with the Letter in her hand called Heaven and
Earth to witness her Innocence, and the wrong his Father had done her, and that
whatever he might out of malice or prejudice say or think, she hoped the world
entertained a more honorable opinion of her, whose Virtue was as chaste, and
Reputation as unspotted, as the envious and deformed la Frange. De Salez at
last with the most powerful expressions of the sincerity of his affections to
her, appeased her raging passion, and solemnly swore that he would never be
prevailed upon to forsake his admired La Hay for the hated La Frange. But she
being doubtful of the worst, and fearing that at some time the commands of the
Father might take place upon the duty and obedience of the Son, like an impious
Wretch resolves to send her into another world, and for that purpose hires
Bernardo Michael, an Italian Emperick, for 400 Crowns to poison her, which he
promised to perform.

Michael being now to consider what methods he was to take, concludes to
insinuate himself into de Clugny's acquaintance under the notion of a
Chyrurgeon, who by his great skill was able to reform the crooked body of the
young Lady his Daughter, and accordingly furnished himself with several
plausible reasons to induce him to believe it. This succeeded, and de Clugny
having had consultation with diverse other Physicians and Chyrurgeons, resolves
to employ him, and gave him 100 double Pistols in hand to attempt it, with the
promise of as much more when he had performed it. Michael being thus employed,
betakes himself to his business, applies Plasters and Searcloths outwardly,
and inwardly Pills and Potions, into which he infused the Poison, which he
assuredly knew would in ten days send her into another world; whereupon he
secretly went to La Hay, and bid her provide the rest of the money, which she
willingly gave him, and again swearing him to secrecy they parted; and just on
the tenth day la Frange (to the unspeakable grief of her Parents) died, not
without suspicion of Poison, upon which Michael was apprehended, when La Hay
(to prevent his discovery) privately sent him 100 Crowns more, and promised him
a rich Diamond Ring, which so wrought upon him, that when he was upon the Rack
to extort a Confession from him, he out-brav'd his torments, denied the Fact,
and so was acquitted.

Lae Frange being thus dead, De Salez resolves to go to Paris to obtain his
Fathers leave to marry La Hay* but the old Gentleman to prevent the same had
bought a Captains Commission for him, and contracted with Monsieur de Brianson
to marry De Salez to his Daughter; whereupon he sent to his Son to make have to
him at Paris, and upon his arrival discoursed his intentions to him. De Salez
obstinately refused both his Commission and his new Mistress, and would neither
accept the one, nor see the other; whereat his Father in a rage swore he would
disinherit him if he would not comply with his commands in three days. De Salez
mad on the other side, resolved rather to dispatch his Father, than leave la
Hay, when two nights after he found an opportunity to perpetrate his villainous
design. Supper being ended, his Father complained he was not well, and ordered
his Clerk next morning early to carry his Water to Dr. Salop, an eminent
Physician who lived at the other part of the City. No sooner in the morning was
the Clerk gone, but de Salez stole privately into his Fathers Chamber, and
finding him in a sound sleep, stifled him betwixt two Pillows, went out
undiscovered, and speedily hasted to St. Honories gate, and so to St. Clow. The
Clerk returning from the Physician, entered his Masters Chamber, found him dead,
and almost cold in his bed; at which sight crying out, the Master of the house
came up, who vowed he saw no person enter his Chamber, and that his Son
departed as soon as himself. The body was searched, but no wounds appearing, it
was concluded he died a natural death, upon which the Corpse was nobly interred
by De Salez with all the outward expressions of grief and sorrow.

De Salez having with all pomp and decency performed the Obsequies of his
Father, within eight days returned to Toulouse, where the old Gentleman was
much lamented by all but the wicked La Hay, who rejoiced at it, and De Salez
himself was so senseless and forgetful of his Fathers memory and his own
Reputation, that in six weeks he threw aside his Mourning, and in the most
gaudy Apparel solemnly married La Hay, at which the whole City wondered.

Three months were hardly past after their marriage, before De Salez discovered
the lascivious Intrigues of his Wife, whose Adulteries had now made him a
Knight of the Forked Order; to prevent which, or at least conceal ^t, he
persuades her to reform her life, complains to her Father, but neither
prevailed, for she was now grown so impudent, she scorned her Husband, and
played the Whore before his face with open doors: whereupon he resolves to
divorce himself from her, and took advice upon it; which coming to her
knowledge, she vowed not to lose her share in his Estate, which was very great,
but to prevent him, and satisfy her own malice by a present and bloody
revenge. To this end, watching an opportunity when most of the Servants were
abroad at the Vintage, she stole into her Husbands Chamber, and finding him
soundly sleeping, she drew out a Razor from her sleeve, stepped to him, and cut
his throat; when throwing the Razor and her Taffata-gown (which was all bloody)
into the house of Office, she secretly got out to Church. De Salez, whose
throat was not cut so fully through, but he could cry and groan, was overheard
by two of his Servants, who hastily coming up, heard him utter these fearful
speeches; That Strumpet my Wife has killed me! O that she-Devil my Wife has
murdered me! The Servants cried out at the Window, and called in the
Neighbors, who sent for his Confessor, and the Lieutenant Criminal, to both
which he said the same words, confessed the stifling of his Father, and instantly
died. Search was presently made for La Hay, who was found in the Dominican
Friars Church at Sermon, from whence she was dragged to Prison, and charged
with her Husbands murder, which she confessed upon the Rack; upon which she
was condemned to be hanged and then burnt. Being remanded to Prison, some
Divines who were sent to her so wrought upon her conscience, that she confessed
fu^ther how she hired M^cha^l for three hundred Crowns to poison la Fr^nge* of
which the Judges having notice, altered her sentence, and judged her to have
her right hand cut off, and then be burnt alive. De Salez his dead body was
ordered to be hanged at the common Gallows by the heels, and then burnt.

Michael as soon as he heard of La Hay's Imprisonment, fled disguised in a
Friars habit; but being discovered, was brought back to Toulouse, where for
poisoning La Frange he was adjudg'd to be broken on the Wheel, and there to
remain till he was dead, and his body to be thrown into the River Garrow, which
the same day was executed accordingly. As he lived an Atheist, so he died
impenitently; saying only this, Because the World had had so much to say to
Him, he would have nothing to say to the World, but bad the Executioner
dispatch him quickly.

Thus do we see the Justice of Heaven punishing the Disobedience of De Salez by
the dishonesty of La Hay, and the murder he had committed on his Father
revenged on him by his adulterous and bloody Wife, who is her self at last
rewarded with the justice and severity of the Law, whilst the wicked Emperick
Michael, who had lived in sin, died in shame; he lived the Devils Servant, and
died his Martyr. HIST. VII. Mertillus and Doranta.
Geronto murders Floria in the street by night. Doranta and her Maid Salvia
poisoned her Husband Mertillus. Salvia afterward strangles her newborn Child,
for which being apprehended, upon the Ladder she confesses that her Mistress
Doranta and her self poisoned Mertillus, for which Doranta is taken and hanged.

IN the famed City of Barcelona dwelt an ancient Lady named Donna Felicia
Maracalla, who by her late Husband had two Children, a Son called Don Floria,
and a Daughter named Donna Doranta: Maracalla (though not rich) educated her
Children very genteely, and maintained them exceeding rich in Apparel. The
Beauty and courteous behavior of Doranta invited an old rich Gentleman termed
Don Francisco Geronto to make his courtship to her: The Mother approved of
Geronto's Riches, but Doranta despised his Age, (being near threescore and ten)
at whose request Don Floria soon prevailed with his Mother to change her good
opinion of Geronto, upon which they all three gave him the repulse and denial;
but such was his obstinacy, that he would receive no answer, though by frequent
disobligations they endeavored to tire his patience, and often either refused
his visits, or left him to converse with the bare walls.

But Doranta was so urgent with her Mother for a Husband, that she was ashamed
of her unchaste desires, and to prevent future mischief promised her at large to
get her one; but she impatient of delay, urges her Brother Floria both to
remind her Mother of her promise, and that he would recommend some Gentleman of
his acquaintance to her love.

It chanced not long after, going with her Mother to the Benedictine Monks
Church, she saw a proper young Gentleman not far from her, and ordering her
Lacquey privately to enquire who the young Cavalier was, he brought her word
his name was Don Mertillus, Son and Heir of Don Richardo de Mantez: Doranta at
first sight was so enamored with the comeliness of his person, that she vowed
neither her Mother or Brother should have any truce before they had made a
motion of Marriage for her to Don Mertillus, and so prevailed with her
importunity, that some few days after Don Floria invited him home to his
Lady-Mother Maracalla's house, where after a noble entertainment, Maracalla
with the greatest complements and commendations of him she presents her
Daughters motion to him. He saw Doranta, and very respectfully told her he
thought himself extremely happy that a Lady of her Perfections was pleased to
have an esteem for him, and that he would advise with his Father, whose consent
he was obliged to receive, and hoped to obtain. Mertillus at his return
acquaints his Father with this proposal, who by all means endeavors to divert
him from it, alleging as the most considerable argument, that the poverty of
the Mother could never raise a Fortune for the Daughter answerable to his
Estate and Quality, and therefore charged him to think no more of it.

Geronto, who upon all occasions still pressed on his Suit, understanding that
Mertillus had gained Doranta's affection, and (as the report went) would
shortly marry her, (which he thought made him slighted) he vowed his death; and
hearing that the following evening Mertillus supt at Maracalla's house, (which
he yet secretly visited, notwithstanding his Fathers commands to the contrary)
charged his Pistol with a brace of Bullets, and waited his coming forth; but
Don Floria accidentally coming out upon some particular business, Geronto lets
fly at him, (supposing he had been Mertillus) and shot him through the head, at
which he fell down to the ground.

The report of the Pistol was heard, and Don Floria found reeking in his blood;
upon this noise in the street the house was alarmed, and Mertillus coming
hastily out, saw his friend Don Floria murdered at his gate. Mertillus, who was
diligent in the search and pursuit of the murderers, found Geronto limping in
the street with his Dark-lanthorn in his hand; and laying hold of him, caused
him to be committed to prison. Next day Maracalla went to the Criminal Judges
of the City, and accused Geronto of the murder of her Son, for that he was
found near the house with a Pistol in his pocket which had been lately
discharged. Geronto boldly denied the Fact, and justified his own innocence;
but being ordered to the Rack, upon sight thereof he confessed the murder, and
the reasons which prompted him to it; upon which he was condemned to be hanged,
which the next day he suffered at the common place of execution; where by a
foolish Speech he endeavored to excuse himself, and that it was by the
darkness of the night he mistook Floria for Mertillus, against whom only his
Pistol and Revenge was levelled, whilst Floria suffered by mistake.

Don Richardo knowing his Son Mertillus yet continued his visits to Doranta, as
this accident published to the whole City, was infinitely troubled at it, and
to prevent his marriage sent him to Marina, (a Mannour-house of his some ten
leagues off in the Country) with charge to continue there till he received his
positive order to return. Mertillus was extremely troubled at the rigorous
commands of his Father, and Doranta in appearance grieved no less; but being of
a wanton disposition, and thinking Mertillus stayed too long as she conceived,
began to entertain lascivious thoughts, and could neither live chaste nor
constant; but utterly forgetful of her respects and professed affection to
Mertillus, received new impressions from other Gallants, whose courtship found
a welcome reception, and easy conquest, to whom Doranta prodigally dispensed
her favors, which at last grew so public, that her Mother both sharply
reprehended her, and by strict confinement endeavored to reform her looser
conversation. At this she pines, grows sick, and keeps her bed, at which her
Mother was very much troubled, and sent a messenger to Mertillus, to inform him
of Doranta's indisposition, which he credulously supposed was occasioned by his
absence, and very kindly sent word he would certainly wait upon her the next
day, which he performed accordingly; when Doranta dissembling her affection to
him, told him, It was for him alone she thus languished, and must certainly
die, if she could not be for ever so happy both in his company and affection.
Mertillus, whose love was sincere as his expressions, with much difficulty
obtained his Fathers consent, and married in state and bravery.

Never did Husband love a Wife more dearly, who deserved so ill; for three
months after marriage she not only slighted his conversation, but refused his
bed, which unkindness of hers brought him into a deep Consumption; whereof
being ready to die, she was so far from sorrowing for him, that in her heart
she wished him dead; and for fear his skilful Physicians should recover him,
resolved to poison him, and with her own wicked hands administer the fatal
Boll. To this end she acquainted her Chambermaid Salvia with her design, who
for the reward of 50 Ducats consented to it, and promised her assistance.
After her Mistress had sworn her to secrecy, she sent her to procure a strong
poison, and advising Mertillus to drink some comfortable Broth she had made
him, infused the poison in it, of which before night he died, and by his Wife
was privately and suddenly buried, his long illness taking off all suspicion of
a violent death.

This Tragedy being thus acted, Doranta (tho'a Widow) was very jovial, and
merry, and now breaks Pale, ranging beyond all bounds of Chastity and Honor,
insomuch that her Mother and all her Relations were ashamed of her infamous
behavior. Two months were scarce expired since Mertillus was laid in his
untimely Grave, when (contrary to the minds of all her friends) she married
with Don Renardo de Polez, one of her former Paramours, altogether as vicious
as her self, who though he well knew her to be dishonest, yet for the advantage
of her present fortune was induced to be her Husband; but that not answering
his expectation, he thought it high time to be wise, and (contrary to Mertillus
his humor) was very strict to her, and after a little time confined her
Prisoner to her Chamber, where (like a Scholar) she conversed only with her
Book and Needle; and to make an absolute conquest over her haughty temper, he
despoiled her of her best Apparel, her Rings, Chains and Jewels, allowing her
little or no money.

Doranta, though grievously perplexed at this change of her fortune, yet still
continued in her unchaste pleasures as often as opportunity gave her leave; and
no sooner was her Husband abroad, but she had a Ruffian at home. And her Maid
Salvia following the example of her Mistress, with the 50 Ducats given her for
the poisoning of Mertillus bought her new Clothes, which procured her a
Sweetheart named Blanco, with whom she wantonis'd so often, that at last she
had a great Belly, which she concealed from all persons but Blanco, who advised
thereof, fled into France. Salvia now considering her former folly, and present
misery, and seeing her self deserted by Blanco, and no friend she could rely
upon, in the midst of these distressed thoughts fell into labor, and was
delivered of a fair Son, which she strangled as soon as born, to hide her own
shame, and the same evening wrapped it up in a linen cloth, and with a
pack-threed tied a stone to it, and carried it to a Pond without the City, and
threw it in without being observed by a^y body. This done, she did not think it
proper for her to go home to her Masters house that night, but lodged at an Inn
whose Sign was the St. John's head, where (pretending lameness which she had got
by a fall) she was kindly entertained.

But within an hour after a Groom watering his Horse there, so sported and
plunged the water with his feet, still pawing and snuffling and thrusting his
head therein, that at last the pack-threed broke, and the linen cloth appeared
floating, in which was found the Infant lately murdered. This brought a great
concourse of spectators, who all concluded it to be the Bastard of some
Strumpet, and murdered by her; upon which a search was made in the adjacent
parts, and Salvia apprehended by the Officers of Justice, who upon search
appeared to be the Mother of the Infant. Upon this she was imprisoned, and
threatened with the Rack, and for fear of the torments confessed she had
strangled and thrown it into the Pond, for which she was condemned to be
hanged. Being brought to the place of execution, and now upon the Ladder, she
confessed there was one sin which she had not discovered, or repented of; which
was, that she with her Lady Doranta had poisoned Mertillus; whereupon Doranta
was immediately apprehended, and confessing the fact which Salvia accused her
of, was condemned to be hanged, which was executed accordingly; and to Salvia's
sentence was added, that after she was hanged her body should be burnt to ashes.

Hence may every lascivious Dame learn the practice of Virtue and Chastity by
the sad examples of Doranta and Salvia, and take warning by Geronto not to
stain their gray hairs with the scarlet dye of Murder, which will bring them
with sorrow and shame to the Grave. HIST. VIII. Ursina and her Son Bernardo.
Bernardo poysoneth his own Mother Ursina, and afterward kills Romeo in his
Garden with a Carbine from a window. For these two Murders he is beheaded, his
body burnt, and his ashes thrown into the River.

IN the Noble City of Orleance in France there lately dwelt a rich Canon of a
Cathedral named Cortesius Romeo, who had a young Gentlewoman to his Niece of
excellent Beauty and Disposition, whose deceased Mother left her very rich: her
Uncle Romeo being nearest in blood, took her into his protection, giving her
all manner of Breeding and Education requisite for a person of her Rank and
Quality; and the better to accomplish her in all virtuous perfections,
carefully sent her in his Coach to Morlieu, to the Lady Margareta Ursina, a
Widow-gentlewoman, eminent both in Virtue and Piety. Donna Carolla (for so was
she called) with her waiting Maid and one Manservant, arrives there, where she
is kindly received by Ursina, highly applauding Romeo's honorable care of his
Niece, who she hopes in few years will be a most complete Gentlewoman.

Romeo did well to place his young Niece with the Lady Ursina, but ill forgot
that she had a young man to her Son named Monsieur Bernardo, a most debauched
person, and one whose vicious life made him the scorn and pity of all Morlieu.
This young Spark seeing so sweet a Beauty, and so great an Heiress (as Carolla
was) fallen into his Mothers hands, secretly courts her, but she received him
with contempt and indignation, upon which he grew more importunate, and she no
less averse; when Bernardo hoping no success from these violent courses,
acquaints his Mother with his passion for Carolla, who forbids him to proceed
any further, unless he would svvear to reform himself, which he vowed on his
knees to do, and performed accordingly. Romeo came three several times over to
Morlieu to see his Niece, whom Ursina entertained with all imaginable respect,
charging her Son during his stay not to mention one word to Romeo of his
affection to his Niece. But Ursina now secretly understanding by Letter from
Orleance, that the following Autumn Romeo designed to send for his Niece home,
thought it convenient to motion it to him, which she did in a fair and
honorable manner. But Romeo displeased with her ambition in desiring his Niece
for a Wife for her Son, well knowing the small Estate of the Mother, and
corrupt conversation of the Son; yet taking no notice thereof, he excused
himself that he had already disposed his Niece, and could not with Honor or
Justice recede from his promise.

Three weeks after this answer, not thinking his Niece to be safe at Morlieu,
he sent over his Coach and Servants to bring her home, writing a gratulatory
Letter to the Lady Ursina, for her great Care, honorable Education, and
Entertainment.

Romeo, to Ursina.
HAving formerly contracted my Niece Carolla to a Husband, his request and my
promise now oblige me to take her from you in Morlieu, and give her to him at
Orleance. To this purpose I here send my Coach and Servants to you for her, and
desire you to return her to me, with your best prayers that she who by your
sober instructions and indulgent care has begun the morning of her life in
Piety and Virtue, may continue in those happy paths, and die in Peace, to live
in everlasting Glory.

Romeo.


This Letter vexed both Ursina and her Son, as seeing thereby no hopes of
attaining their ends; wherefore Ursina (at her Sons entreaty) uses all her
Interest to persuade Carolla, but she was deaf to her motion, and so far from
hearkening thereto, that she now refused to see Bernardo, much less admit him
to any grace or favor.

Breakfast being now ended, and the Coach ready, Carolla departs to Orleance to
her Uncle Romeo; but Ursina would not be thus repulsed, but writes a second
Letter to Romeo to the same purpose; who very angry that she should so
disrespect him as not to credit what he had said, and believe him that she was
prae-contracted, very sharply returned her the same answer as before,
protesting withal for the future either not to receive her Letters, or to
answer them with silence. Bernardo was so incensed to see all his great
expectations utterly defeated, that he returns to his former Vices, and lives
more dissolute than ever, upon which Ursina vowed she would never speak in his
behalf any more. This resolution of the Mother breeds bad blood in the Son, so
that he now determines with himself to work his revenge on his Mother, and his
own advantage by the same villainous act; for was she but dispatched, he should
then be sole Lord of all her Wealth and Fortune, which might induce Romea and
Carolla to accept of his affection: To which purpose he provides himself with
Poison, which he still carries about him, waiting an opportunity to administer
it.

Bernardo's return to his former lewd courses so distempers his Mother, that
she falls sick of a burning Fever, to allay the heat whereof she caused some
Almond-milk to be made her, in which were infused several cooling Herbs, and
drinks thereof three times a day. On the fourth day of her sickness, walking in
the afternoon in her Garden, she was suddenly surprised with the symptom of
her Fever; when sitting down, she caused her Maid to hold her head, and prayed
her Son to fetch her a Bottle of Almond-milk, which de did, and in the way
poured the poison into it, which he gave her, who drank plentifully of it; but
on a sudden a cold sweat overspread her face, she looked pale, and ready to
faint away called for a Chair, in which they carried her to her Chamber, and
laid her on the Bed, where few hours after she died in great torture, and is by
her Son and Servants coffined up, and (with all the counterfeit signs of
immoderate grief) buried by her ungracious Son.

The News of Ursina's death was soon known at Orleance, where Romeo and Carolla
hearing of it, exceedingly lamented and sorrowed for her. Carolla being now
grown marriageable, in regard of her excellent Perfections and great Estate,
(for she was now declared sole Heir to her Uncle Romeo) was courted by many
Noble Gentlemen; but her Uncle at last privately married her to Monsieur Le
Berdu, a rich young Gentleman who was Nephew and Heir to the Bishop of Orleance^

Let us now return to Bernardo, who desperately gave himself over to all Vices,
consuming all his time in licentious Riots, in the midst of which follies he
remembers Carolla: wherefore putting himself and Servants into very rich
Equipage, he rode over to Orleance, where he became an importunate Suter to
Romeo and Carolla, but all in vain; yet he obstinately persists, which made
Romeo tell him in plain terms, That his Niece was married, and that in
consideration thereof he forbid him his house and her company. This unkindness
Bernardo took so ill, that in his rage he swore he would murder Romeo; and then
considering the safest way, determined to shoot him with his Carbine as he
walked in his Garden, which he constantly did every morning and evening alone.
Thus resolved, he went in disguise at six in the evening to a small Tavern,
where the Chamber-windows looked into Romeo's Garden, and pretending to stay
for a friend, called for some Wine: then bolting the Chamber Door, he opens the
Casement, and sees Romeo walking in his Garden; he lets fly at him, and shot
him into the breast with a brace of Bullets, and Romeo after ^hree shrieks fell
down dead.

As soon as this was done, he endeavored to make his escape, but by the
immediate Judgment of Heaven he was presently struck in a stupefied swoon, and
fell to the ground. The noise of that and his Gun caused the people below to
come up, who finding the Chamber Door bolted, imagined he had shot himself;
when forcing open the door, they found him grovling on the ground, upon which
they took him and pulled off his Clothes to search for his wounds, but found
none. After an hour he opened his eyes, and with a distracted look and amazed
countenance, rather raving than speaking, in the heat of his madness he cried
out, I have murdered Romeo! I have murdered Romeo! which he often repeated. By
this time the dead body of Romeo was found in the Garden; and search being made
for the murderer, and seeing his Horse at the door of the Tavern, they went up
stairs, where they found Bernardo in bed. The people of the house being
examined, they reported what they knew, as also his confession that he had
murdered Romeo; whereupon he was apprehended, and the next morning arraigned,
when he forswore his former Confession: but the Judges, to extort the truth,
condemn him to the Rack, where at the first torments he again confesses all,
for which he was sentenced the next day to be beheaded; and being brought to
the Scaffold, there confessed the murder of his Mother Ursina by poison: His
first sentence was executed upon him, and (as an addition of punishment for his
Mothers death) his body was burnt, and the ashes thrown into the River Arno.

Thus we see by miserable Bernardo, that he who ripens in wickedness as he
grows in years, shall at last reap the bitter fruits of his own Debaucheries;
for he that slights the Grace of God here, shall never taste his Mercy
hereafter. HIST. IX. De Bushie and La Valere.
St. Quintin is killed in a Duel by Moreni. Pharamond hires Prochier the
Apothecary for 300 Crowns to poison his Brother De Bushie. Prochier falls down
the stairs, and breaks his neck. Pharamond first debauches Lucia, and then
hires Mariot a Miller to strangle her, which he does, and throws her body into
the Mill-pond, for which he is broke on the Wheel, and Pharamond beheaded and
burnt.

AT Roan in Normandy of late years there dwelt a rich and noble Gentleman
called Monsieur De Bertue, who had two Sons; his eldest was Monsieur Pharamond,
and the younger Monsieur De Bushie, both hopeful Gentlemen. De Bushie being at
Christmas-time at a friends house at Curant, (10 Leagues from Roan) saw a young
Gentlewoman infinitely fair and beautiful, called Madamoyselle La Valere, whom
he liked and loved so dearly, that he resolved to make all his courtship to
her, which he so handsomely and discreetly managed, that at last she consented
to love him; but withal entreated him to conceal her affection, till he had
made his application to her Father, and gained his good will. De Bushie in few
days after made a visit to Monsieur De Moulin her Father, who lived at Curant,
acquaints him with his Suit, and begs his consent. But he not relishing the
motion, re^urned De Bushie a very cold answer, upon which he civilly took his
leave, and the next week went home to Roan, and acquainted his Father and
Mother with his affection to La Valere, which they approving of, he prayed his
Father to ride over to Curant, to confer with Monsieur De Moulin about this
affair: but De Bertue being seized with a sudden fit of the Gout, ordered his
elder Brother Pharamond to bear him company, and in his name to treat with De
Moulin. Pharamond and De Bushie nobly attended, with a Letter from their Father
to De Moulin, took horse and rid to Curant, where being arrived, Pharamond
delivered his Fathers Letter; and after a short conference with De Moulin, in
which he discovered his Brothers affection to Valere: he addressed himself to
her, whilst De Moulin and De Bushie took a walk in the Garden. Having this
opportunity of a private discourse, after he had obliged her to secrecy, told
her, That though he came over to Curant his Brothers Advocate, yet her powerful
Charms had already captivated his heart, and his passion for her now obliged
him to make use of all his Oratory in his own behalf; and though his Brother had
the honor to see her first, yet his love (he hoped) deserved not least regard,
or the last place in her affections. La Valere incensed with this unexpected
discourse, with a frown told him, That this was not only an ignoble
Ingratitude, but a base Treachery* and therefore know (says she) that I
undervalue you, as much as I highly prize your Brother: and so with a
countenance which showed both anger and disdain, left him alone, who presently
went to her Father, and in fair terms informed him of his love to his Daughter,
a^^uring him of the sincerity of his affection to her, and that he covered
nothing in the world more than to be happy in the enjoyment of her.

Old De Moulin approves Pharamond's motion, but was unwilling to displease De
Bushie, yet over-sway'd with ambition, calls his Daughter into his Closet, and
bids her leave De Bushie to love Pharamond; but she positively refused it,
telling him that she had already made her choice, which she would not alter for
any worldly advantage. Pharamond contriving how to deceive his Brother, told
him, that though he found La Valere inclinable, De Moulin was altogether averse,
nor could he ever hope to gain his consent; and therefore (says he) let us go
home to morrow, which was agreed to. But La Valere (who had well considered the
base treachery of Pharamond) resolves to give her De Bushie a private meeting,
and at night sent for him to her Chamber, bid him be cheerful, and that in life
and death she will be his, and only his, and that she would send him a Letter
to Roan, which should acquaint him with a business her tongue was obliged to
conceal. So after all the promises of constancy and fidelity, they parted, and
as a pledge of their mutual kindness, he presented her with a Diamond-Ring, and
she gave him a pair of Pearl Bracelets.

The next morning De Moulin took De Bushie aside, and in short terms prayed him
to forbear his house, and refrain his Daughters company, for he had provided
another Husband for her. After a solemn leave, the Brothers took horse, and
returned home. La Valere remembering her promise to De Bushie, two days after
his departure sent him this Letter.

La Valere, to De Bushie.
MY promise owes you this Letter, wherein I must acquaint you, that I know not
whether you have greater cause to love Me, or hate your Brother, in regard he
vows he loves me dearer than your self, and has attempted to rob you of your
Wife, which (if I mistake not) is base Treachery in him. I have heard his
Courtship, but for your sake hate both It and Himself. He has won my Father,
but be assured that he neither can nor shall prevail with me; and though my
Father has banished you his house, yet his Daughter is resolved to retain you
in her heart, and you alone.

La Valere.


De Bushie having received this Letter, was passionately incensed against his
Brother Pharamond; but discretion at last took place, and he resolved to hide
his resentments, and dissemble his anger, and immediately returned her many
thanks for her courtesy and constancy. Pharamond three days after privately
went over to Curant, where he renews his suit to her with all the earnestness
and vigor of a passionate Lover: but La Valere seemed absolutely averse, and
without hopes to prevail, returned sorrowfully to Roan. But though Pharamond
endeavored De Bushie should know nothing of his journey to Curant, La Valere
next day gave him word thereof by a second Letter.

La Valere, to De Bushie.
I Hold my self obliged in duty and affection to acquaint you, that these two
days I have been importunately solicited by your unkind Brother for Marriage:
but he has found my first to be my last answer. I hope I have blasted all his
endeavors, by giving him and my Father this infallible resolution, either to
wed You, or my Grave; and I believe they will be satisfied without giving me
further trouble: But if your Brother shall still pursue his fruitless
addresses, I will beg on my knees to my Father to hasten our marriage. And this
is my positive resolution.

La Valere.


De Bushie kissed this last testimony of his dear Ladies most tender affection,
but frets inwardly at his Brothers malice, whereof he is resolved to tax him,
but first returns her ten thousand thanks for her inviolable affection, and
went to find out his Brother, whom he finds feignedly sick, when Pharamond (as
it were rejoicing at his presence) told him, That his tender love to La Valere
had reduced him to that extremity, and therefore conjured him for the saving of
his life to quit his pretensions to her, and resign up all his interest to him:
At which impudent request De Bushie was so enraged, that in indignation and
disdain he called him base and treacherous, and vowed to die before he would
consent to such a thought; and (without any other farewell) hastily flew out of
hi^ Chamber.

Pharamond swore he would make his Brother repe^^ his saucy carriage; whereupon
three days after, understanding his Brother to be at Charron, he sent Monsieur
St. Quintin, his particular Friend, (whom he had engaged to be his Second) to
him with this Challenge.

Pharamond, to De Bushie.
IN regard we cannot both enjoy the fair La Valere to Wife* it is fit that one
of us should die, that the survivor may be enriched with so precious a
Treasure; which considering, as I have done your late uncivil carriage toward
me, I find it not strange to see Affection to give a law to Nature* wherefore I
invite Thee with thy Second to meet me and min^ with single Rapiers on foot to
morrow at three after dinner, in the Meadow next to St. Vallery. I shall as
impatiently expect your coming, as I do my revenge.

Pharamond.


De Bushie smiled hereat, and bid St. Quintin tell his Brother he would not
fail to meet him; when turning to Monsieur Moreni his Friend, who sat by him,
Pray (says he) read this, and give me your company to morrow; which he readily
promised. The time being come, the Brothers and Seconds met in the field: The
Principals first drew, and after three or four breathings, and several wounds,
De Bushie ran Pharamond into the Swordhand, and forced him to surrender his
Sword, and beg his life, which he did, and the other as generously gave him.
The Principals having thus ended the dispute, the Seconds drew near; but Moreni
thought it no dishonor to refuse to fight, since his Principal had soiled his
Enemy: but on the contrary St. Quintin was resolute, and would not by any
arguments be persuaded, upon which they both drew, and at the third pass Moreni
killed him dead in the field; a fit reward for his boasting temerity.

The News of this Duel was presently known to their Father and Mother, nor was
it long before it arrived at Curant, where De Moulin grieves, but La Valere
rejoices at Pharamond's foil, and taking advantage thereof, with tears and
prayers gained her Fathers consent, so that in a short time she was solemnly
married to De Bushie in great state and splendour.

Pharamond, though he had received his life from his Brothers hand, still
continues his ingratitude to him, and reviving his lustful desires to La
Valere, (whom he could not possibly enjoy so long as his Brother lived) he
therefore resolves to get him poisoned, and to that end offers Prochier his
Brothers Apothecary 300 Crowns to do it, which he undertook, and performed in
this manner.

De Bushie six weeks after his marriage found himself inclinable to a Fever,
for prevention whereof he sent for Prochier (his Apothecary) to open a vein,
which he did, and toward night gave him a Clyster, wherein he infused strong
poison, which so operated, that the next morning he died in his bed. La Valere
passionately laments, and is wholly dissolved in tears at the sudden death of
her Husband; and amongst other Relations who came to comfort her, Pharamond was
one, whom she both slighted, and shrewdly suspected to have a hand in his
murder, but in what manner she was not able to discover. Her year of mourning
being out, she had many Suitors, amongst whom she made choice of Monsieur Moreni
for her second Husband, and was publicly married to him. Pharamond seeing
himself thus slighted, turns his love into hatred, and gives himself over to
the company of Whores and Strumpets, and leaves no sin unpracticed that his
wicked heart desires, or his lustful eyes can see.

Amongst others, hearing of a Farmers Daughter 7 miles from R^an that was fair
and young* he resolved to tempt her to his obscene desires, and riding over saw
and liked her, and laid close siege to her Chastity; which her Mother observing
in his frequent visits, fearing the worst, forbids him her house, saying, that
if he persisted, she would acquaint his Father with it; at which he was much
troubled, but remembering an old Friar named Simplician, he thought him a fit
instrument to gain Lucia (for so was she called;) to consent to his lewd
embraces, which for a reward he undertook, and accomplished. It was agreed
between them, that Pharamond should fetch her away in the night to his old
Nurses house, where he secretly kept her till he had surfeited his lustful
desires with repeated pleasures.

Lucia's Father and Mother very much grieved for the loss of their only Child;
and suspecting Pharamond to have stole her, complained to his Father and
Mother, who sent for, and very strictly examined him; but he denied all, and
called the old Woman Hag, to charge him with stealing of her Daughter: Thus
without any redress did they return home, and Pharamond to Lucia's arms, where
we shall leave him to speak of Prochier.

Pharamond (as was formerly said) hating La Valere, hired Prochier likewise for
300 Crowns more to poison her, which he speedily promised to perform. About two
months after her second marriage, she fell sick of a pestilential Fever:
Moreni her Husband sent for Prochier the Apothecary, who having drawn six
ounces of blood from her, intended next morning to give her Physic, wherein
should be infused the Poison; but as he was taking his leave on the top of the
stairs, and complementing with Moreni, his foot tript, and he fell down
headlong, and broke his neck. Pharamond hearing thereof, was neither glad nor
sorry, but spent all his time in revelling with Lucia, so that it was now
publicly known he kept her, whereof her Father and Mother being informed, they
went again to Pharamond's Father, beseeching him to restore them their
Daughter; He promised his assistance, and gave them leave to search all his
Tenants houses; which Pharamond hearing of about midnight he ordered Mercot his
Fathers Miller to fetch Lucia from her Nurses to the Mill-house, where at
length she proved with child, when seeing her sad condition, she repented of
her folly; especially since she saw her Lover Pharamond made not those frequent
visits he was accustomed, and in his respects to her seemed more strange and
reserved than usual. But alas! poor wretch, she knew no way to remedy it, but
by the common cure of Patience.

Pharamond now deals with the Miller to marry Lucia, but he downright refused
it, and poor Lucia besought him either to provide her a Husband, or permit her
to go home. Pharamond (who now loathed her more than ever he loved her) first
absented himself from her company, and afterward plainly refused to see her.
She exclaims at his ingratitude, prays Mercot to speak to his young Master in
her behalf. Mercot finds him out, but instead of comfort, they conclude to
murder her, which Mercot undertakes for the Fee-simple of his Mill, and within
three days with a small Cord steals into her Chamber, and strangles her; when
carrying her to the Mill-boat in the Pond, he fastened a piece of a Millstone
with a strong new Rope to her middle, and sunk the body in the deepest part of
the Pond. The next morning away goes the Miller to tell his young Master what
he had done, who were both overjoyed at the success of their Villainy.

A month was scarce past, when Moreni (La Valere's second Husband) with some
other Gentlemen his Friends had a mind to hunt a Duck, and made choice of this
very Mill-pond for their sport; where the Duck and two Dogs are no sooner in,
but coming to the place where Lucia was sunk and tied, they le^t the Duck, and
howled and barked at each other, without stirring thence; which the Gentlemen
observing, they presently imagined that some body was drowned there; but before
they proceed to search, they intend to make a second trial after dinner, and
for that time called off their Spaniels. At their return the Dogs do as they
did in the morning, which confirms their jealousy, so they desired to draw up
the Sluice, and let the water out of the Pond, which the guilty Miller refused
to do, upon which the Gentlemen seemed to desist, and went into the Mill to
play at Cards for Wine, which the Miller offered to fetch from the Town, (there
being none nearer) and when he was gone, they drew up the Sluice, and by that
time the water was half out, they saw the dead body float, but the face was so
mangled and disfigured by the Fish, it was impossible to know the person. They
all concluded the Miller guilty, whom they apprehended at his return, and shut
him up in his Mill till the body was owned, which not long after happened by
her Father and Mother, who knew her clothes, and affirmed it to be their
Daughter Lucia.

M^reni rid to Roan, and acquainted the Judges with this deplorable fact, who
sent for the Miller, and examined him of the same murder, which he denied and
forswore, whereupon he was ordered to the Rack, at sight whereof he confessed
himself to be the sole author and acter in this murder, and spoke not a word
of Pharamond; whereupon he was adjudg'd to the Scorpions, to know if any person
was accessory with him: but he not able to endure the cruelty of that torment,
confessed that his young Master Monsieur Pharamond hired him to strangle Lucia,
for which he gave him the Fee-simple of his Mill.

Upon this Mercot was condemned to be broken alive on the Wheel; but execution
was deferred till Pharamond was taken, who was then gone to Morleaux: At his
return he was suddenly apprehended and imprisoned, and upon hearing his
Indictment read, and Mercot's Confession, presently acknowledged the Fact, for
which he was condemned the next day to be beheaded; when mounting the Scaffold,
he first publicly owned the murder of Lucia, and then confessed he hired
Prochier to poison his Brother De Bushie, and had contracted with him for three
hundred Crowns more to poison La Valere which he had effected, had not
Providence preserved her by punishing him with so sudden a death. For which he
heartily craved pardon of God, and then his Head was chopped off, and his Body
for his Brothers death burnt to Ashes. Mercot was broken on the Wheel, and
Prochier's dead Body dug out of the Grave, and in the Coffin burnt by the
common Hangman* and his ashes thrown into the Air.

So strong is the deadly poison of Revenge, that it breaks through all ties of
Friendship, bonds of Relation, and rules of Religion. The desperate Pharamond,
to satisfy his malice, murders his Brother, and to please his unchaste desires,
first r^bs Lucia of her Virtue, and then of her life; for which his Body
suffers the punishment of the Law, and his Name perpetual Infamy. HIST. X.
Formoso and Almira.
Almira twice attempts to poison her own Sister Corinna, by the means of her
waiting woman Doria: but being both times disappointed, she hires Nicon an
Emperick to poison Doria. Almira is killed with a Thunderbolt, and Nicon
hanged. Corinna, to revenge her Lover Formoso's death, murders her Brother
Puteoli, for which she dies immured.

AT Lisbon (the chief City in Portugal) lived Don Sebastian Florenzo a
Nobleman, great both by Blood and Revenues; he married the virtuous Donna
Andrada, (a Lady of eminent Quality and Perfections) by whom he had one Son
called Don Puteoli, and two Daughters, Donna Almira, and Donna Corinna. Don
Puteoli (whose Education was abroad) in his travels acquaints himself with Don
Formoso de Castello, a Gentleman of refined conversation and courtly behavior.
Puteoli, that he might perpetuate the friendship which was thus happily begun
with Formoso, invites him to Lisbon to his Fathers house, proposing a marriage
with his eldest Sister Almira. Formoso very courteously embraced his offer, and
went with him, where he was generously received by Don Sebastian his Father,
and saw his two Daughters, the stately Almira, and matchless Corinna, but with
different sentiments, for Corinna the youngest had already taken possession of
his heart, where the other had not made the least impression; whereupon Formoso
made his court to Corinna, and desires her in marriage of her Father; which he
refuses, but offers him the eldest, alleging that he would give her the same
preference that Nature had done, who as she was his eldest, should be first
disposed of.

However Formoso persists in his love to Corinna, and continues his suit to her
Father, which Puteoli earnestly (but in vain) sollicits for him; so obstinately
resolved was Don Sebastian in behalf of Almira, that he was forced to take
leave of his beloved Corinna; when the faithful Lovers mutually expressed their
kind endearments to each other, and vowed eternal constancy. Formoso civilly
took his leave of Sebastian and Puteoli, and returned to his Castle ten leagues
from Lisbon at Villamont, and in this recess made it his only comfort to
converse with Corinna by Letters, which were secretly conveyed to her, and hers
to him, by his faithful Page Honorio, who making love to Doria, Almira's Woman,
passd unsuspected.

The frequent visits of Honorio at last raised jealousy and mistrust in
Almira, who suspected they were only pretended to Doria, whilst in reality
they were designed to Corinna, whereupon she ordered Doria to sound him, but
Honorio would not make any discovery; but at last an unhappy accident did that
for her which all her artifice and cunning could not attain: for one
Sunday-morning, when Corinna was walking in the Garden, Almira went into her
Chamber to see for a little Book, which not finding where she expected, she put
her hand into her Sisters pocket of the Gown she wore the day before, and
instead of that pulls out Formoso's last Letter to Corinna, which she shows to
her Father, who was very much concerned at it, and severely checked Corinna for
entertaining a private correspondence with Formoso* and to prevent it for the
future, strictly confined her to her Chamber.

But this was not satisfaction enough to Almira, who (rather than lose Formoso)
resolves to poison her Sister; to which end she hires Doria with 100 Ducats,
and the promise of as many more, to undertake it: Doria agreed to it, and
accordingly sent an unknown messenger for it, who presently returned with it in
a small Gally-pot, Doria intending to make use of it that very night, but
Honorio's visit prevented her, who finding her in the Garden, they sat down in
the Arbor, and in the midst of their discourse Honorio's nose fell a bleeding,
and not readily pulling out his handkerchief, she hastily pulls out hers, and
with it the Gally-pot of Poison, which falling upon a stone, immediately broke,
and the baneful Dose was lickt up by Honorio's Spaniel, who presently swelled
and died before them. At this they were both amazed, but especially Doria, who
knew not what excuse to make, or how to palliate her wicked Design; for Honorio
pressed to know for whom this Poison was prepared, she gave him uncertain
answers, which made him the more inquisitive, so that at last he prevailed with
her to discover the naked truth, that her Mistress Almira had hired her
therewith to poison Corinna.

Honorio no sooner saw this, but he informed Corinna privately of it, praying
her to be careful of her self, for fear they might be more succesful in a
second attempt, which no doubt the malice and wickedness of Almira would prompt
her to. Honorio pretending his Father had suddenly sent for him, (who lay
dangerously ill) took his leave of Doria, promising in a short time to see her
again, who confidently trusting to the counterfeit love of Honorio, believed
her design was no ways discovered to Corinna. Honorio having privately received
a Letter from Corinna, (which in part acquainted Formoso with the villainous
mischief of Almira to her, recommending him for the rest to his Page, who would
give a fuller account) went hastily back, and gave his Master the Letter, and a
large relation of the whole matter. Formoso reading the Letter over again, and
pondering upon it, (especially that part where she told him she could be no
longer safe in her Fathers house, and therefore desired him to protect her Life
and Honor, which she hoped to secure by his favorable assistance) assured her
of it in another by Honorio, and that he would be ready at the Garden door the
next night at twelve, and the signal to be a lighted Candle in her window to
him, and the discharge of his Pistol to her.

In the mean time Almira urged Doria to the performance of her promise, which
she assured her of in three days, and to that end a second potion of Poison is
prepared: in the mean while Honorio returned, and delivered his Masters Letter
to Corinna, who is now busy in packing up her Jewels and richest Apparel; when
Almira pretending to go to bed ill, sent Doria with a sweet Posset to Corinna,
desiring her to eat the rest, of which she had already taken her share. Corinna
very kindly received it, and entreating Doria to fetch her Prayer Book and
Gloves out of her Sisters Chamber, poured out the Posset into a Basin in her
Closet, and washing the Cup put Almond-milk into it, which at Doria's return
she drank up, and dismissed her. Not long after Honorio came privately to
Corinna's Chamber, where she related to him this second attempt, which they
concluded to experiment upon Almira's Parrot, which was then in Corinna's
Chamber, the Bird immediately swelled and died. They laid the dead Parrot upon
the Table, and upon the report of Formoso's Pistol, (which they soon after
heard) Honorio took up her Trunk, and they went softly down the stairs to the
Garden-door, where (to her great joy) she found Formoso with a Coach and six
ready to attend her to his Castle at Villam^nt.

Next morning Almira hopes to entertain her self with the pitiful outcries for
her Sisters death: but being deceived, about ten a clock (according to her
custom) she went up with Doria to her Sisters Chamber, where instead of her
Sister, she found her Parrot dead on the Table. They looked fearfully on one
another; but hearing that Honorio was also gone, they concluded C^rinna was
fled with Formoso, upon which Almira immediately allarms her Father and Mother
with the News, who dispatched away a messenger to Villamont to enquire the
truth, who brought word she was there.

Don Sebastian being then ill of the Gout, sent his Son Don Puteoli, with six
other resolute Gentlemen, to remand her, and take satisfaction of Formoso for
and indignity he had offered him. Puteoli arriving at Villamont, made his
demands of her, and assured him that his Father and himself would have her at
what rate soever. Formoso gave him a positive denial, and urged for reasons the
two attempts Almira had made against her life, which his Castle should protect.
Almira now suspecting that her designs against her Sister were discovered, by
her Fathers examination of her to that purpose, and fearing that Doria might
confirm their suspicions by an open and plain discovery, hired Nicon an
Emperick for 200 Ducats to poison her, which in few days he performed. Whilst
this was acting at Lisbon by Almira, her Brother is endeavoring a more
honorable satisfaction at Villamont from Formoso, who had now received express
orders from his Father, Either by point of Law or dint of Sword to bring back
Corinna; whereupon he sent his Cousin Don Morellos to Formoso for his last
resolution, who gave him the same answer as before: Upon this, Puteoli
reflecting upon the Honor of his Family, and his own Reputation, which lay
both at stake, resolves to regain her by arms; and making choice of Morellos
for his Second, the next morning sent him to Don Formoso's Castle with this
Challenge.

Puteoli, to Formoso.
I Must either return my Sister to Lisbon, or lose my life here at Villamont,
for I had rather die than see her dishonor, which so nearly reflects upon my
self. It is not I who have first violated the bonds of friendship, but your
self, who is both the author and sole cause thereof: wherefore of two things
resolve on one, either to morrow at six in the morning to render me my Sister
Corinna, or at that hour meet me on foot with your Second in the square green
Meadow under your own Castle, where the choice of two Rapiers shall attend you.
If thou art honorable, thou will grant my first, and if generous, thou can
not deny my second request.

Puteoli.


Don Formoso received and accepted the Challenge, and choosing a near Relation
of his named Don Leforto for his Second, they met and fought at the place
appointed. At the third close Formoso was run through the heart, at which first
staggering he soon after dropped down dead, and immediately after Don Le Forto
had the same fate. The Criminal Judges had presently notice of this Combat,
whereupon Puteoli and Morellos were apprehended, but by the great interest of
their Friends procured their pardon. Puteoli being now at liberty, went again
to the Castle and demanded his Sister, which was utterly denied him, upon which
he applied himself to the Judges, who granted him an armed Power, wherewith he
forced the Castle, and took his Sister away (all in tears and mourning for her
dear Formoso) and returned her to his Father, for which and the death of
Formoso, she vowed a severe revenge upon him. At her return her Sister Almira
earnestly desired to be reconciled to her, and privately confessed her former
malice, for which she was now heartily sorry, and begged her pardon.

Doria had a Sister named Maretta, who having been particularly acquainted with
the two Ladies Almira and Corinna, invites them to her wedding: Corinna excused
her self, but Almira promised her company. The day being come, Almira went in
her Fathers Coach very splendid and rich in Jewels: but whilst they were on
their way a sudden Tempest arose, with loud peals of Thunder, when after a
terrible crack the fatal bolt pierced through her breast, and almost killed her
in her Coach: at the fright whereof her waiting Maids and Coachman returned
home with her, who was put to bed, and finding she could not live, confessed
that she had twice attempted to poison her Sister Corinna by her Woman Doria,
and had afterward hired Nicon for 200 Ducats to poison Doria, which he
performed, whereof she heartily repented, and so died.

The Criminal Judges being acquainted with this, they sent their Officers to
apprehend Nicon, whom they found very merry at the Wedding-house, and
(notwithstanding all his endeavors to escape) took him coming out, and
committed him close Prisoner. In the afternoon being put to the Rack, he
confessed all the circumstances of the murder, for which next morning he was
hanged over against Don Sebastian's house, on a Gibbet erected on purpose.

In the mean while Corinna's desire of revenge had armed her with a large sharp
knife, which hiding under her sleeve, with her Lute in her hand (about ten days
after her Sisters death) early in the morning she went into her Brothers
Chamber, and finding him fast asleep, with her Knife cut his throat so
suddenly, that he could neither cry nor speak, and stabbing him seven times in
the body, retired to her Chamber. As she went out, she was met by her Brothers
Page, who went directly into his Masters Chamber, where he found him murdered
in his bed, at which, with his loud outcries he raised the house, who seeing
this bloody spectacle, went in search of the murderer; but finding none to
suspect, the Page said he met Corinna coming out, as he entered his Masters
Chamber, who was easily apprehended, but peremptorily denied it. The next
morning she was brought to the Rack, but seemed not at all daunted. In this
interim the Servants having searched every corner of the Room, and Corinna's
Chamber; in the Close-stool they found the murdering Knife wrapped in her bloody
Gown, which being brought before the Judges, at the ^ight of it she confessed
the fact, and begged for mercy, but notwithstanding was condemned to be hanged
in the public Marketplace; but by the mediation of her Friends her sentence
was altered, and she was sentenced to be shut up between two Walls, and there
with a slender Diet to end the remainder of her days. This Judgment was
executed upon her, but in few days a violent Fever put a period to her
miserable life.

Thus did disgrace and misery eclipse the luster of this Noble Family, through
the Fathers obstinacy and perverseness: Hente let all Parents be warned to bear
an indulgent tenderness toward their Children, whilst they are to pay a
dutiful regard to all their lawful commands. HIST. XI. Briant and Lauretta.
Monsieur Ferio a rich Merchant is poisoned in his Inn by Father Constantine a
Priest, and Briant the Innkeeper, and his body buried in the Garden, where a
month after a Wolf digs it up, and devours part of it; upon which the
Murderers are discovered by their ^light, apprehended and hanged.

A Rich Merchant of Tours in France named Monsieur Ferio, being of sixty years
of age or upwards, having been at Venice, where he received 2000 Checchines,
and not meeting with a speedy and convenient return for his money, he carried
it in a Cloak-bag behind him, and some Jewels of great value which he had
bought for the Duchess of Orleance, in a private leathern Girdle next his skin.

As he traveled on his way, he chanced to fall ill, and having for two or
three days contended with his sickness, it now overcame him, and finding
himself weak, and unable to travel further, he got into a poor Countrey-Tavern
on the Highway, where he took up his Lodgings for that night: The next morning
(not liking his Lodging, and doubting his safety there, in a loansom place) he
took his Horse, and about 2 of the clock after dinner came to Dieren, and went
into the very first Inn he came to at the Towns-end, where his Host's name was
Briant, and his Wife Lauretta. Briant was a debauched fellow, and addicted to
all manner of lewdness, poor, and of mean Parentage, but his Wi^e well
descended, with whom he had 2000 Crowns in marriage, all which he had spent in
Luxury and Riot.

Into this House, and to this vicious Host Briant, entered poor sick De Ferio
for the recovery of his health: He liked his Hostess very well, but not his
Host; however, he prays him to procure him a Physician, which he did, Monsieur
Morat, who seeing his Water, and feeling his Pulse, let him blood, to prevent a
burning Fever, and still gave him new hopes of recovery, though the Patient
complained he was rather worse than better. Lauretta tended him diligently, and
performed both the duty of a good Hostess and a good Woman: but her Husband
imagining De Ferio to be rich, hoped and prayed that he might speedily die in
his house, and if he does not, resolves to kill him by one means or other. De
Ferio's sickness increasing upon him to the despair of his life, he entreated
Briant to bring him a Priest to give him the Sacrament, which he did, named
Father Constantine, a person as notorious in all vicious courses as himself,
and one whose prodigality had made very poor. To this wicked wretch, Briant
(having first endeavored to draw his Wife Lauretta to be concerned in it, who
peremptorily and constantly refused it) on a Monday-morning reveals his bloody
purpose, which he readily consented to, provided what Gold, Silver, or Jewels
they should find about him might be equally divided between them, which was
consented to; so, solemnly swearing to one another not to discover their
design, they parted.

At night they met again to consider of the manner and time when they should
perpetrate this Murder: the safest way was agreed to be by Poison, which
Briant should buy, and Constantine administer in a Wafer which he used
sometimes to give him in his sickness: And as it were the better to favor
their Devilish design, word is unexpectedly brought that Lauretta's Father (who
lived four leagues off) was dangerously sick and like to die, whereupon Briant
with all have dispatched away his Wife to him and her Maid Ioanna. De Ferio was
much troubled at his Hostesses departure, in whom he reposed all his trust and
confidence; and finding himself every day worse than other, began to suspect
his safety as well as recovery: for he often observed his Landlord and the
Priest whispering together, and saw some fatal apparitions in their faces which
told him all was not well: This afflicted him day and night with new cause of
despair.

However, he still concealed his Gold and Jewels from his Host and the Priest,
but feared their jealousy and hopes of it would hasten his end: But so cunning
was Constantine, that he would not murder him till he knew what would be the
reward of his villainy, and what Wealth he had about him; wherefore he advised
him to send for his Son to Tours, and proffered himself in person to carry a
Letter, and deliver it with his own hand. De Ferio thanked him, and told him he
had rather trouble his Host with it, if he would bear him company in the mean
time, which was agreed. The next morning De Ferio gave Briant this Letter, and
four double Pistols to def^ay his charges to his Son Du M^nt at Tours, praying
him to bring his Son back with him, with all possible speed.

De Ferio, to Du Mont.
SEven weeks since coming from Venice, I fell sick at Dieren, where I lie very
weak in the house of my Host Briant, the bearer hereof, whom I purposely send
to command you to come over to me with all have. I have here with me 2000
Checchines, and some Jewels of value for the Duchess of Orleance, and I fear
that neither it nor my life is safe here. Come away with intent to find me
either dead or dying* Conceal this Letter from all the world. Love this
Messenger, but trust him not. God prosper my health, and ever bless you with
prosperity.

De Ferio.


Briant having this Letter, pretends to take leave, and Father Constantine in
civility goes to see him take Horse; but instead thereof they went into the
Parlor, and bolting the door opened the Letter, and satisfied with the
discovery by the contents, resolved to make that ensuing night his last, so
they burnt the Letter, and Briant privately hushed himself up in his own house
from the sight of all the world. Father Constantine went back to De Ferio, who
was infinitely troubled in mind, fearing that his death was already plotted,
and blaming his indiscretion in mentioning in the Letter what sum he had, which
if they should come to the knowledge of, might tempt them to commit some
violence upon him. And now was the fatal hour come, for about midnight De Ferio
waking out of a troubled slumber, prayed Constantine to give him a little warm
Wine in a small earthen Pot he used to drink in: Constantine glad of this
opportunity, mixed the Poison with it, and gave it him to drink, which he
innocently did, and died therewith two hours after: But for fear he should make
any noise in the last agonies of death, these two Devils with Bedstaves ramm'd
a great holland Towel down his throat. This was no sooner done, but they cut
open his Cloak-bag, where they found a great quantity of Gold and Silver, and
searching further, they discovered the leathern Girdle about his wast, in which
were quilted the Jewels and several pieces of Gold, which they presently
divided, and in a great fire burnt his Clothes, and every thing that belonged
to him, and turned his Horse loose into the Fields to seek a new Master: so
cautious they were in their villainy! By this time the Corpse was grown cold,
which (digging a Grave in Briant's Garden) they buried, and covered the place
with green Turfs so artificially, that no mortal eye could discover it.

Three weeks after, Briant sent for his Wife home, who wondering to see her
Husband so gallant in new Clothes, enquired after De Ferio, he told her that
about ten days before he went from thence safe and well, and gave him 50 Crowns
for his Lodging and Entertainment, and (as a token of his love for his care and
kindness to him) 20 pieces of Gold more to himself, and as much to Father
Constantine: but Lauretta fearing the worst, would not touch any part thereof.

And now with wonder and admiration may we see the Justice of Heaven in the
discovery of this cruel Murder: for the same day month De Ferio was buried, a
huge Wolf seeking for his prey came into Briant's Orchard, and smelling dead
Carrion, with his paws fiercely tore up the earth, and dragged up the dead
body, and there continued till an hour after daylight, eating the flesh of his
Arms, Thighs and Buttocks, but never touched any part of his face. Some
Gentlemen being hunting in the field, their Dogs took the scent of the Wolf.
and followed it into Briant's Orchard. But the Wolf terrified with the shouts
of the Hunters, and cry of the Dogs, left his Prey and fled: when the Hunters
coming in to see what the Wolf preyed upon, with great horror and amazement
they saw the body of a man miserably mangled, which the Wolf had dug up from
his untimely Grave. They presently suspected him to have been murdered by
Briant, his Wife and Servants, and setting a Guard upon the house, they sent
and acquainted the Criminal Judges with it.

In the mean time Lauretta hearing so early and unusual a noise in the Yard,
(her Husband lying abroad that night with his Strumpets) began to doubt the
worst. By this time the Criminal Judges were come, and with them a multitude of
people, amongst whom was the Physician Monsieur Morel, who knowing the dead
body by the face, cried out it was De Ferio the Merchant who lay long sick in
Briant's house, and he verily believed was murdered by him, and buried there.
The Judges believing the report of this honest Physician, broke open the house,
and seized Lauretta and her Maid Ioanna and the Ostler, who were brought to the
body, and flatly charged with the Murder, which they as resolutely denied.

Lauretta and her Maid both declared they believed it was the body of De Ferio,
but called Heaven and Earth to witness they were innocent, and knew not who
were the bloody authors of it: however they were all kept close Prisoners,
while search was made after Briant, who lying that night at Father
Constantine's house with two Courtezans, hearing the news of it, they fled
together, upon which they were both adjudg'd guilty, and close pursuit made
after them. The three Prisoners were all threatened with the Rack, the tortures
of which the Ostler and Ioanna endured with wonderful constancy and patience
(so great a comfort is it to be innocent!) but Lauretta, upon the good report
of her Neighbors, was dispensed withal for that time, and all of them remanded
to strict confinement.

The Judges sent away post to Tours to advertise Du Mont of this disaster, who
with all speed came to Dieren, where upon view he owned his Fathers dead body,
and with showers of tears decently interred him in the next Church. The Judges
acquainted him with the manner of the discovery, the certain suspicion they had
of Briant and Father Constantine, who were fled upon it, and that they had
Lauretta his Wife, and her Maid and Ostler in Prison, that the two last had
been put to the Rack, but would not confess any thing, but strongly justified
their Innocence, and that Lauretta had so good a repute amongst all her
Neighbors, that they exempted her from the torment.

Eight days were now past since these wretches first fled, in all which time
they had not gone above seven leagues from Dieren, when on the tenth night
being extremely tired, at the entrance of a Wood they spied a stray Horse
grazing, and coming nearer to him, Briant knew him to be De Ferio's Horse: At
this they were very jovial, and making a Halter of their Girdles and Garters,
they both mounted, hoping to recover St Iuan three miles off before night. But
not being acquainted with the way, they wandered all night, and were now
farther off than before: They feared every Bush was an Officer, and to add to
their trouble their Horse began to tire, when alighting by turns to ease him,
they took the nearest way, and hoped to get thither before people were up, it
being yet early in the morning. Providence directing Du Mont the same way,
within a mile of St. Iuan he overtook them, and eying the Horse well, knew him
to be his Fathers, or very like him, and what more confirmed his suspicion was,
that one of the two persons was a Priest, and the other much resembl'd the
description that was given of Briant. He now and then made a halt, by
pretending to mend his Bridle, or better girt his Saddle, that they might keep
before him. Coming now to St. Iuan, they went in at the Sign of the White Lion.
where he followed them, without seeming to take notice of hem, but as soon as
they were gone into a Room, he sent to the Criminal Officers and apprehended
these two persons, upon suspicion that they were the same who fled, and by all
circumstances were guilty of his Fathers murder. They confidently denied it,
but in searching their Pockets they found store of Gold about them, and several
pieces more, with some Jewels, quilted in their Doublets, which confirmed them
in their belief that they were the persons, and were really guilty. The
Prisoners the next day with a strong Guard were sent over to Dieren, where they
were again examined, and still as impudently denied it, upon which they were
both adjudg'd to the Rack, and at the first wrench Father Constantine confessed
the murder in all its circumstances, and affirmed that Briant and himself were
the sole acters, and Lauretta, Ioanna and the Ostler absolutely innocent and
ignorant of it. The like did Briant after some time, upon which the others were
acquitted and discharged, and Constantine and Briant condemned to be hanged
next morning and their bodies burnt to ashes, which was executed accordingly.
The remainder of De Ferio's Gold was restored to Du Mont, to the general
satisfaction of all parties.

The Devil first tempts us with the delight of some forbidden pleasures, that
he may draw us into more dangerous Crimes. Thus Constantine and Briant in their
Luxury, Drunkenness and Whoredoms, only gave him earnest for some greater sin
they were ready to commit upon as fair an invitation, which he offered in poor
De Ferio, and they accepted, to their own Ruin and Destruction. HIST. XII.
Leonardo and Cordelia.
Leonardo basely murders Durel in the street. Cordelia, Durel's Mistress,
betrays Leonardo to her Chamber, where she shoots, and by the assistance of her
Maid Sabrina, kills him with a Poniard. Sabrina flies for the fact, and is
drowned. Cordelia is apprehended, hanged and burnt.

AT Montpelier in France dwelt Cordelia, a young Lady of greater Beauty than
Wealth, adorned with many excellent Qualities and Perfections, but all were
sullied by one Vice of Unchastity, which she was too frequently addicted to.
She was now Mistress of her Person and Fortunes, (her Parents being dead) which
was attended with the interment of her own Honor and Reputation. Amongst other
Gallants who were her Enamorato's, she was particularly delighted with the
company of Monsieur Leonardo, Nephew to the Duke of Turenne, a Gentleman of
more Wealth and Discretion, who was absolutely bewitched to her, than spent
whole days and nights in her Courtship and Entertainment. Leonardo not content
to enjoy her favors in private, used often to make his boast how kind and
obliging Cordelia had been to him; which she understanding, at their next
meeting severely taxed him with it, and checked him for it; and as an argument
of her high displeasure, forbid him her company, and vowed never to see him
more. Leonardo was extremely grieved at this, but however continued his visits,
and by all the sacred protestations imaginable endeavored to purge himself of
so malicious a scandal Cordelia, who did in part believe him, judging his
Innocence by his Constancy, readmitted him to her favor, with most dreadful
threats of a sharp revenge if he ever relapsed into the same Error.

Much about this time Monsieur Durel, a brave young Gentleman, came to
Montpelier, where he no sooner saw Cordelia, but he loved, admired, and was
totally enamored of her; but his Courtship was only a piece of Gallantry, not
in the honorable way of Marriage. Cordelia, whose pretensions to Honor were
as great as any bodies, was wholly averse and deaf to his requests. Her denial
made him the more eager to contrive some means to attain his desires; which
after he had in vain endeavored, an unexpected accident presented him with, by
Madamoyselle de Sinclere, a rich young Lady, who seeing him dance, fell in love
with him, of which she gave many shrewd signs, that he could not but be
sensible of it, though his heart was pre-possessed with the Charms of Cordelia.
Madam de Sinclere knowing that Cordelia was the cause of his indifferency to
her, acquaints him that Cordelia was already engaged and Mistress to Monsieur
Leonardo. This stings him to the heart, when confirmed by Sabrina, Cordelia's
waiting woman, (whom he had gained by Gold to confess) that Leonardo was the
only happy man there, but that he had like to have been discarded lately for a
word he let fall to her dishonor. Durel hearing this, and being told that
Leonardo was but a Coward, insinuates himself into his acquaintance, and
becomes his most familiar and intimate Companion. Durel making use of this
opportunity, contrives a match at Tennis with Leonardo for a Collation, and
beats him; so taking Monsieur le Roch and Monsieur le Mot, they went to the
Tavern, where they were very pleasant. Monsieur Durel in return of his civility
invites the Company to sup with him at Le Hare's, who was famed to have the
best Wine in Montpelier: After supper they drank plentifully, and now Durel
laid his bait; O (says he) how happy are the Gentlemen of Italy, to us in
France! they each of them after dinner go to their Courtezans without control.
I believe (says Le Mot) Montpelier has as good-natured Girls as Italy. Ay
(cried Leonardo) I am sure for Jews and Whores it may vie with any City in all
Italy; for 'y Gad they are all right, from the Lady to the Kitchenmaid, they
are all tractable. Nay (said Le Roch) except still our holy Sisters the Nuns.
Not I (quoth Loonardo) nor my Mistress neither, and so names Cordelia. Durel
had enough now, so their mirth ended, and the Company parted.

Next morning Durel in a Letter by his Page informs Cordelia what Leonardo had
said, which she received with grief, anger, and astonishment; and having
returned her thanks to Durel, sent for Leonardo, whom she charges with what he
had said the last night in the presence of Durel and other Gentlemen against
her Honor and Chastity: at which she fell into such a rage, that she had
certainly stabbed her self with a Penknife which lay upon the Table, had not
Sabrina luckily diverted the blow. Leonardo (surpised at the violence of her
passion) vows and swears he is innocent: She produces Durel's Letter against
him, but he still denies and forswears it, which yet gave her no satisfaction,
nor should all his protestations gain any credit with her, till he had
vindicated her Honor and his Reputation against Durel in a Duel, who had so
positively averred the truth. Leonardo, forced by Necessity, more than urged by
Courage, three days after sent him this Letter by his Page.

Leonardo, to Durel.
THy malice and treachery to me is as odious as apparent; for whilst I sought
to cherish thy friendship, it has been thy study to betray mine, in sowing
discord between me and Cordelia in a point of Honor; a Lady to whom I owe not
only my Service, but my Life. Wherefore to morrow at five in the morning meet
me with thy single Rapier, without Seconds, at the foot of the Bridge, where
thy dearest Blood shall wash out the stains of my injured Reputation.

Leonardo.


Durel received the Challenge, and was amazed at his resolution; however he bid
his Page tell his Master he would not fail to meet him at the time and place
appointed. The morning is now come, which brings Leonardo by unwilling steps to
the Bridge, and soon after came Durel: They both draw, and pass very furiously
at each other; but Leonardo having received two wounds, throws down his Sword,
and begs his life. Durel satisfied with this, goes to his Chamber, and Leonardo
to his Chyrurgeons. The news of this Duel was spread abroad by two Soldiers
who saw them fighting. Cordelia sends presently to Leonardo to know the truth,
but he would not be spoken withal; wherefore just as she was sending to Durel,
he prevented her by a visit in person, and after several Complements told her,
That he had given Leonardo two wounds for her sake, and his life for his own.
At this she seemed much pleased, and here began the first intrigue of their
Amors. Whilst Durel thus triumphs over his conquered Adversary, and sleeps
secure in the arms of Cordelia, Madamoyselle de Sinclere grieves for his loss,
and Leonardo vows his revenge; which de Sinclere understanding, out of pure
love to Durel discovers it in a Letter, in which she both gives him a caution
of Leonardo, and prays him to have a care of himself. But this was rather
pastime than advice to Durel; yet his civility returned her thanks, though he
continued as regardless of himself as ever. But Leonardo, whose revenge made
him more watchful, hearing that he came often late from Cordelia's Lodgings,
pretends to go to his Countrey-house ten leagues off, but returns within six
days with none but his Lacquey, and passes the Gates in disguise at the close
of the evening, and goes to Cordelia's door, where he stands with his Sword
ready, (having notice that Durel was there) and just as he came out into the
street ran him through the body, and with a second pass killed him dead; and
then returning to his Horse, upon the pretense of urgent business, and by
giving the Watch some money, made his escape. By this time the murdered body
was found, which being viewed by the Criminal Judges, they knew it to be
Monsieur Durel's, and ordered a strict search to be made, but could not
discover the murderer. But Cordelia was satisfied in her thoughts, and deeply
swears that nothing shall atone for Durel's death but Leonardo's blood, who
conscious of his own guilt flies to Paris, where amongst the multitude of
people that daily throng thither, he hoped to conceal himself. Leonardo lives
here in all profuseness and prodigality, and wholly devotes himself to his
beloved sins of Whoring and Drinking, which in a short time so drein'd his
pockets, that he was forced to leave Paris, and return home: to which he was
the rather induced, by a fresh remembrance of Cordelia, whom he preferred to
all the Beauties of Paris. Wherefore, the better to get re-admittance to her,
he sent his Page with a Letter first, in which he gave a hint as if he had done
her some considerable piece of service, extremely lamented the unhappy fate of
Durel, and passionately desired to be reconcl'd to her good opinion. Cordelia
received this Letter, and was very much pleased with it, to think how he was
now plotting his own ruin, and to keep him in the same mind, sends him a
Present and a Letter back by his own Page, wherein she tells him she longs to
know what he had done for her, which she promises to reward with her most
sincere love and tender affection.

The receipt of this Letter gives wings to his desires, and early the next
morning he sets forward for Montpelier, and the very first night he arrived
there, made a visit to Cordelia, who desires they may be frequent, and
outwardly expresses an extraordinary passion for him, and satisfaction in his
company. The next day he comes again, when she desires to know what it was he
had done for her, that she might make him a suitable acknowledgment. Leonardo
swearing her to secrecy, tells her it was he who killed Durel, and the manner
how. Cordelia dissembling her revenge, observing he had a Pistol in his pocket,
asked him the reason he went so armed, who told her it was for his own defense.
The next day he came again, upon promise of a further favor: in the mean time
she had concluded upon his death, and had accordingly won Sabrina for a Purse
of Gold to her assistance. After some discourse, Cordelia desired him to send
away his Lacqueys, for she resolved not to part with his company that night,
which he accordingly did. At his return into the Chamber, he sat down upon the
Couch, and laid his Pistol upon the Table; Cordelia took it up, and asked him
if it was charged? Yes Madam (says he) with a brace of Bullets. Do you think
Sir (says Cordelia) I have courage enough to shoot it off? Pray let me try, and
look out at that window for a mark. Whilst he stooped to see for one, she shot
him into the Reins of the back, at which he staggered, and Sabrina with a
Poniard gave him six wounds upon the back and breast, which she with that have
and fury redoubled upon him, that he immediately fell down dead at her feet;
which done, they dragged him down into a Cellar, where they buried him in his
Clothes, and laid a pile of Billets over him. The next day his Lacqueys came to
enquire for him, but were answered that he parted from them within an hour
after, and said he would take a walk in the fields, and that he had not been
there since. Three days after, (there being yet no account of him) several
Gentlemen his Friends and Relations came to demand him of Cordelia, who
returned the same answer as before; but they being for some reasons suspicious
of her, acquaint the Criminal Judges with it, who after examination of several
parties commit her to Prison, where about ten days after the virtuous
Madamoyselle de Sinclere came to visit her, to whom in discourse Cordeliae
said, she was as innocent of Leonardo 's death, as he was of Durel's Murder;
which being overheard, was told to the Judges: This gave them more cause of
suspicion, but she still justified her Innocence, and positively denied that
she ever knew any thing of either of the Murders; and though she was guilty of
such a simple expression, it was purely through ignorance and inadvertency.
Upon this she was adjudg'd to the Rack, which she endured with admirable
patience, insomuch as the Judges now began to favor her, and conclude her
Innocence from the constancy and courage of her resolution.

About this time News was brought that Sabrina (who was fled) was taken up on
the banks of the River Diren dead: This News revives Cordelia, who now began to
think her self secure, since there was no person to accuse her, and that she
was safe beyond the reach of punishment from Heaven or Earth.

But here mark the wonderful Providence and Judgment of God! Cordelia was
indebted to her Landlord a whole years Rent, and 300 Livres in money; which now
giving for lost, he let out her part of the House to Monsieur Chatillon, (who
came thither for his healths sake) and sold all her Goods, even to the Billets
in the Cellar, to make himself satisfaction; when upon the removal of the last,
they found the earth had been lately opened to the proportion of a Grave. The
Landlord hearing this, suspects the truth, and acquaints the Judges with it,
who presently ordered it to be searched, where they found the body of Leonardo
in his Clothes, which they carried to the Prison, and exposed to her sight,
roughly charging her with the murder of it, which she undauntedly denied. The
Judges then commanded her Paps to be torn off with hot burning Pincers, to make
her discover the truth: whereat amazed, and seeing the torment ready to be
inflicted, she fell on her knees and confessed that she and Sabrina murdered
Leonardo, the manner how, and the reasons why, for which she was condemned to
be hanged in the same street, over against her Lodging, and her body burnt; and
Sabrina's dead body to be burnt with her. And for that Leonardo had been guilty
of the Murder of Durel so basely and cowardly as Cordelia reported, his body
was hung up by the heels upon the common Gibbet for three days, and then thrown
into the Lake Ricon; all which was executed according to the sentence.

Thus we see that one sin is the Parent of another; Nor is Vice less fruitful
in its Offspring than the most glorious Virtue: Whoredom propagates Murder,
and Uncleanness is often the Daughter of Intemperance. HIST: XIII. Orlindo and
Paulina.
Orlindo (upon promise of Marriage) gets Paulina with Child, and leaves her,
and marries Lucretia. Paulina sensible of her disgrace and his treachery, in
the habit of a Friar pistols him in the Fields, for which she is hanged.

IN the Famous City of Florence lived of late years two rich and beautiful
young Gentlewomen, the one named Donna Paulina, Daughter of Seignior Miranto,
and the other Donna Lucretia, the only Child of Seignior Sterlin. Both these
young Ladies had several Suitors, yet none of them so dearly and passionately
loved Paulina, as the Baron of Orlindo, a rich young Nobleman of Venice, and
Lucretia as passionately loved him, but not he her. Lucretia had in vain
attempted by her friends to prevail with him to forsake Paulina, to love her;
for so great was Orlindo's affection to Paulina, that by the strictest promise,
and most sacred protestations he was privately contracted to her, though he had
not yet gained her Fathers consent; which after many entreaties he obtained,
though for some reasons he thought convenient to defer the solemnity of the
Espousals.

Orlindo continuing thus in Florence at a vast expense, grew in want of money,
which he knew not how to relieve at present, but to make sure work of his Lady
Paulina, with many Sighs and Prayers, Oaths and promises of fidelity and
constancy, he drew her to his lustful desires, in which unlawful familiarity
they continued several weeks: But then, like a base Nobleman, (having surfeited
himself with those amorous pleasures) visited her but seldom; and when she
desired him to marry her, he was either deaf, or so doubtful in his Answers,
that she had now great reason to suspect his treachery: But three months after
he utterly forsook her sight and company; which tormented her to the heart, nor
did she know how to remedy it. Orlindo now made all his court to Lucretia, at
which she was extremely pleased, and being of a great wit, and informed some
great distaste was fallen out between him and the Lady Paulina, and that being
far from home, he wanted moneys to bear out his port in Florence, imagined that
might be the cause of it. To oblige him therefore to her self, and knowing her
Father had a great respect for him, she one day told him, That of late she
observed Orlindo was was grown melancholy, and that she fancied his great
expenses at Florence, and his long absence from Venice, might have exhausted
his moneys, and that probably the reason of it. Her Father meeting Orlindo the
next day, invites him home, and taking him aside into his Study, after several
complements told him, Venice was a great distance from Florence, and the return
of money uncertain; but if at any time he should have occasion, desired him to
make use of his friendship, and that he should freely command whatever he could
call his own; and there laid him down 500 double Pistols: Adding withal, That
if he needed more at present, he should have what he pleased, and repay it when
he pleased; and if he thought good to marry his Daughter, he would settle his
whole Estate upon him.

This kindness of Seignior Sterlin so prevailed with Orlindo, that he presently
found out his new Mistress Lucretia, and relates to her what had passed between
her Father and himself; which so pleased her, that she now assures her self she
alone shall be happy in the affection of Orlindo.

Paulina, who in this time had heard what frequent visits Orlindo made to
Lucretia, and considered her own distressed condition, resolves to try if she
can reclaim him, and to that end, knowing the fidelity of Curanto her Fathers
Coachman, she gives him a rich Diamond-Ring from her finger, and bids him find
out the Baron of Orlindo, and deliver it to him, and tell him that she desires
to see him in the afternoon. Curanto finds him out, and delivers his message;
To whom Orlindo returned this answer; Commend me to thy Lady, and tell her I
will wait on her immediately after dinner.

Orlindo came according to his promise, and was conducted to Paulina's Chamber,
where taking him aside, she complained of the coldness of his affection, his
long absence, the violation of his Oaths, and her own great belly: which he
angrily replied, That he ceuld not get his Friends consent, and without it he
would not marry her; That Lucretia, though she was not so Fair, was more
Virtuous; and therefore (says he) provide for your Fortunes, and so will I for
mine; and throwing back her Ring in a passion, hastily departed from her. The
consideration of this barbarous cruelty to her, pierced her heart with sorrow;
but seeing no help, she resolves to provide for her Reputation, and the
disposal of her great belly: To this end she thinks none so fit to be entrusted
with a secret of that nature, as her Aunt Camilla, a wise and rich Widow who
lived at Pontarlin ten miles from Florence, by whose advice and prudent conduct
she hoped to prevent a public disgrace. Paulina, who wanted not an excuse,
obtains her Fathers leave to go to Pontarlin for change of Air, and there
acquaints her Aunt with the secret of her great Belly, and prays her love and
assistance, which she faithfully promised, highly extolling her prudence in
concealing her folly. Here she often remembered Orlindo's monstrous ingratitude,
the thoughts whereof impaired her health, and made her miscarry of a lovely
Boy, which she kissed and bathed in tears, and at night her Aunt buried it
decently in the Garden. Paulina, though she continued very sick and weak, yet
her heart was still toward the ungrateful Baron; and not daring to trust any
person but her faithful Coachman Curanto, she ordered him to post to Florence,
and acquaint Orlindo with her deplorable condition, and pray him to come and
see her before she dies. Curanto made have to Florence, and meeting Orlindo as
he was going into his Coach, delivers his Ladies message to him; who first
smiling, and then in passion, returns Curanto this answer in his ear; Tell thy
Mistress Paulina from me, that I wish she was buried with her Bastard, and both
at the Devil; and so (without any more words) took Coach, and drove away to
Lucretia. Curanto returns this answer to his Lady, who bitterly grieves at it,
and tells her Aunt, who blames her for her fondness and folly, and bids her
rather scorn and detest him. In the midst of this discourse, comes a Servant
from her Father Miranto with this Letter to her.

Miranto, to Paulina.
HOping that by this time the sweet Air of Pontarlin has recovered thy health,
I now desire thee with speed to return to Florence, and I have sent this bearer
on purpose to conduct thee thither. I believe thy Countrey-absence has lost
thee a good Fortune here in the City, for yesterday morning the Baron of
Orlindo was married to Donna Lucretia in great state, who I well hoped should
have been thy Husband. I send my best Love and Respects to my Sister, and my
Prayers to God for thy Health and Prosperity.

Miranto.


Paulina at the receipt hereof was all on fire, to be revenged on the faithless
Orlindo, and swore he should pay dear for his Ingratitude, and vows either to
murder him her self, or procure those who should do it for her sake: In this
fury she returns to Florence, and first tempts Marcian her Apothecary to poison
him, and then Curanto her Coachman to stab him, but both these absolutely
refuse to engage in so wicked a Design. Being thus disappointed by these two,
she resolves to act that tragical part her self; and understanding that
mornings and evenings he frequently walked a mile out of the City to a pleasant
walk planted on both sides with Olive and Orange Trees, concludes to make that
the Scene of her bloody revenge. To this purpose she secretly provides her self
with a Friars complete Weed, a sad-colour'd Russet Gown and Coat, with a Girdle
of a knotty Rope, wooden Sandals, a false, negligent old Beard, and hair to the
head suitable to the same; in one pocket of his Gown she puts a begging box and
a new Breviary bound in blew Turkey-leather, richly guilt, and in the other a
couple of short Pistols, each charged with a brace of Bullets. All these she
ties up close in the Gown, waiting an opportunity to effect her execrable
Contrivance. The Thursday following she had an account that Orlindo was gone to
his usual walk, upon which she ordered Curanto to bring the Coach to the door;
and giving him the little bundle, told him, She was now resolved to give
Orlindo such a merry meeting in the fields, as should make him laugh, and so
bid him drive on. Being now come near the walks she descends from the Coach,
and taking the little bundle in her hand, orders Curanto to wait her return,
and under the covert of some Bushes puts on the Friars habit. At a distance she
saw Orlindo walking very contemplative, whom with a bow or two she approached,
holding up her begging Box for an Alms, which he was ready to give; but seeing
so fair a Breviary in the Friars hand, he took and opened it; when Paulina
stepping behind him, softly drew out one of the Pistols, and shot him into the
back, and as he fell discharged the other into his breast, of which he
presently died. Paulina having thus wrought her revenge, withdraws hastily to
the same covert, puts off her Disguise, which she hides and returns to the
Coach: Well Curanto (says she with a smile) my heart is now at ease, my injured
Honor has now received a satisfaction, and his ingratitude a just reward.
Drive speedily back, and keep your own counsel. Curanto, who knew nothing of
her Design, yet now guessed her meaning by the report of the Pistols which he
heard go off, was astonished at it, suspecting the worst; when driving on with
more have than good speed, passing by the side of a Hill, the Coach
over-turn'd, and broke his left leg, and Paulina's right arm; The furious
Horses ran away with the Coach, which was torn all a pieces. At this instant
came by Orlindo's Coach with his Page Varini in in it, going to his Master; who
seeing the Lady Paulina (whom he knew) in so distressed a condition, alighted,
and took her up into his Lords Coach, and Curanto with her, and so speedily
returned to fetch his Lord, whom he found in the same Grove dead. Varini
strangely amazed at this ruful spectacle, cries out, and tares his hair for
grief, not knowing what to say or do: At last he resolves to stay by the body,
and send the Coach for his Lady and her Father Seignior Sterlin. Paulina and
Curanto went back to Florence in Orlindo's Coach, where she had leisure to
consider the mischiefs she had drawn upon her self by her violent passion and
insatiable malice. Seignior Sterlin and the Lady Lucretia are now arrived,
where they see and bewail the one his Son, the other her beloved Lord, with
sorrows inexpressible. The Criminal Judges being acquainted with the murder of
Orlindo, send out their Officers into the Fields to apprehend all persons they
found there, and bring them before them: but they found no more but one poor
ragged Boy, who was keeping of Cows on the other side of the hedge, and gave
them this account:

That he saw the Gentleman walk alone at least an hour, and then an old Friar
came to him who shot two Pistols at him, and killed him, and then the Friar
went away, and he saw him no more; but there was a fine Coach which stood a
little distance from the Grove, where a fine Lady came out, and went into the
Grove; and after the Friar had killed the Gentleman, the Lady went back to the
Coach, and drove away. They asked him what color the Horses were, and what
Livery the Coachman had on? The Boy said, The Horses were white, and the
Coachman had a red Cloak with white Lace.

Varini observing this, affirmed it was the Lady Paulina, her Coach and
Coachman, and so related in what a condition he had found them two hours
before. Upon this they were suspected of the Murder, and the Officers at their
return to Florence commanded to apprehend them, which they did, as they were
going out in a fresh Hackney-Coach, and brought them Prisoners to the common
Goal of the City.

Two days after Orlindo had been solemnly interred, Paulina and Curanto were
brought before the Judges, and charged with the Murder of Orlindo, which they
both stoutly denied. The Boy is called to give in Evidence against them, who
stands to his former ^epositions, but cannot think the Lady was the Friar, nor
can he truly say that this was the Coachman.

The next morning Curanto was racked, but the torments could not make him
confess any thing: Presently after Paulina was put to the same torture; which
not being able to endure, she confessed her self to be the sole Author and
Acter in the Murder of Orlindo in all the circumstances as before represented,
and strongly affirmed her Coachman Curanto was Innocent: For which she
received Sentence to be hanged next morning, and accordingly about ten the
sorrowful Paulina was brought between two Nuns to the place of Execution, where
(after a very penitent and religious Speech) she was turned over.

Honest Curanto, though he was thus cleared by Paulina, yet by the
solicitations of Lucretia was adjudg'd to the double torments of the Rack,
which he patiently endured without confessing any thing: The Judges therefore
moved in conscience to make him some satisfaction for enfeebling his body, and
impairing his health, decree the Lady Lucretia to give him three hundred
Duckatoons, which was paid him accordingly, and he discharged.

May the reading of this Tragical History learn us all to hate from our hearts
the Inconstancy and Ingratitude of Orlindo, and from our souls abhor the
Cruelty of Paulina, who though at first she seems to triumph in sin, and praise
the success of her Revenge and bloody Enterprise, yet the Judgment of God
immediately overtakes the bold offender, and brings her to open and condign
Punishment. HIST. XIV. Castlenovo and Perina.
Jacomo de Castlenovo lusts after Perina his own Sons Wife, hires Jerantha to
poison his own Lady Fidelia, and then his Son Francisco, for which Perina
murders him in his bed. Jerantha (ready to die) confesses the two Murders, is
hanged and burnt. Perina's right hand is cut off, and she condemned to suffer
perpetual Imprisonment, where she dies of a Consumption.

BEyond the Alps not long since lived Seignior Antonio de Arconeto, a rich and
noble Gentleman, who by his Lady lately deceased had a Son named Seignior
Alexandro, and a Daughter called Perina: the Son the Darling, the Daughter a
Castaway, who bears her Fathers frowns with admirable patience; but the Son
building too much on his Fathers fondness, grows Debauched, and gets a Surfeit
at a Banquet, which cast him into a pestilential Fever, and that in three days
into his Grave. Perina is now sole Heiress to her Fathers Lands and Favor,
whom he yet looks upon with disdain; which brought her into a melancholy, and
that into extreme sickness; which was so ill resented by the Lady Dominica her
Aunt, that she prevailed with her Brother to let Perina be with her, at which
the Aunt was very glad, but the Niece overjoyed.

Perina being thus settled there, her Aunt has a Daughter who was suddenly to
be married to a Gentleman of Nice, where she was chosen Bride-maid, and Don
Francisco de Castlenovo, (a Native of Nice, Knight of Malta, and sole Heir to
Iacomo de Castlenovo, a rich and ancient Baron of Savoy) Bride-man, who is
enamored of Perina, and understanding that her Birth and Quality answered his,
during his stay there made his court to her, and in fifteen days obtained her
consent to be his Wife, with which he acquaints the Lady Dominica, desiring her
assistance to obtain her Fathers, which in a short time she effects. Castlenovo
posts away home to his own Father, and speedily returns with his approbation,
whereupon they were married in great pomp and solemnity, and Perina brought
home to Nice, where she was honorably received by his Father with great
Feasting and Mirth, at which the young Couple thought themselves in Heaven. But
old Castlenovo being threescore and eight years old, forgetting both his Duty
to God and himself, lusts after his young Daughter-in-law Perina, which makes
him wonderful complaisant to her; but not daring to express his beastly Desires
whilst her Husband is at home, he tells him, That his Honor and the service
of his Prince and Country invite him to the expulsion of the Spaniards out of
Piedmont: His Son (nothing suspecting his Fathers treachery) notwithstanding
all his Wifes tears and entreaties, takes his leave of her for three or four
months, and fitting his Equipage, goes to the Camp. Now old Castlenovo plays
the part of a young Lover, is still with Perina, and ever and anon kissing her;
which though she thinks too much, yet a Fathers name makes it current. But the
Lady Fidelia seeing her Husbands humor, is jealous of the truth, and
exceedingly troubled at it, but manages her grief with discretion, till one day
with tears in her eyes she privately reproves him for his lustful Desires;
which wrought so bad an effect on him, that he resolves to remove that
obstacle, in order to which he hires Ierantha, Fidelia's waiting woman, for 500
Ducats to poison her, which she did by infusing Poison into some white Broth
she had made her, and so in eight days dispatched her into a better place.

The old Leacher inwardly rejoices, but in outward show is exceedingly
afflicted and dejected, and in very honorable manner causes her to be
interred. While this is acting at Nice, Peace is concluded between Spain and
Savoy, and young Castlenovo comes home, where he is entertained with mourning
for his Mother.

The old man knowing it was impossible for him to obtain his ends whilst his
Son was at home, seeks a pretense to send him away, and in a short time two
several occasions offer themselves, either to go to France with the Prince
Major, who was to marry the Kings second Sister, or to go to Malta to get a
pension during his life. The young Couple like that of France best for several
reasons; but in obedience to his Father he must to Malta. This filthy old
Leacher now resolves either by fair or foul means to compass his end, in order
to which he gives her the sole Government of his house: But ever fifteen days
were past, finding her in her Bedchamber playing on her Lute, after some
pauses, Coughs and Kisses, he vomits forth his foul affection; at which
enraged, she throws away her Lute, and in great passion leaves him; but he in
every Walk, Garden and Room haunts her like a Ghost, thinking to gain by
importunity what he could not by persuasion. But modest Perina is inflexible,
and grieves at his perseverance, but how to quench the fire of his Lust she
knows not; she has no friend to retire or make her moan to, wherefore she
resolves to write a Letter to hasten her Husbands return, which she does, and
sends by the hands of his intimate Friend Seignior Sabia, wherein she tells
him, That her Honor is in danger by his absence, (but names not from whom) and
earnestly presses his speedy return. At the receipt hereof he was troubled, but
fancied it was only a trick of his Wifes to make him speed home; and so being
loath to quit his hopes of the Preferment the Grand Master had promised him,
returns Sabia to Nice with a rich Emrald-Ring, and a Letter to this purpose,
That he was assured of her Love, and the care she took of her Honor, and that
he only believed it was an artifice of hers to call him sooner home, which he
could not yet comply with, since he daily expected Preferment from the Grand
Master; which being obtained, he would fly to her embraces.

This Letter was both a comfort and affliction to her; for as she was confirmed
in his health, so she was too well assured of his stay, and now begins to fear
her Father-in-laws wicked purpose; nor were her fears groundless, for he seeing
i^treaties prevail not, threatens to force what she will not freely give. At
which being terribly affrighted, she resolves to provide for her safety, which
by the help of Sabia she effects, who conveys her from Nice to her Father
Arconeto's house, where reflecting on former passages, she grew sickly, which
made her once more send Sabia to Malta with another Letter; That she is gone
from Nice to her own Fathers at St. John de Maurien; That if neither her
Affection nor her Honor will draw him, yet she begs the care of her Life may
invite him; and withal says, That she has a secret to impart to him before she
dies, which she will entrust with no person but himself.

Whilst Sabia is going to Malta with this, old Castlenovo finding his Villainy
would be discovered by the flight of his Daughter-in-law, and being sure that
his Son will be enraged at it, is in great perplexity, not knowing what to do.
Mean time Sabia delivers the Letter to young Castlenovo, who wonders who it
should be in his Fathers house that durst attempt his Wife, which makes him
dispatch Sabia away to carry News of his coming, and three days after arrives
there himself. The joys of both parties were unspeakable, but when he knew it
was his own Father that sought incestuously to enjoy his Daughter, he was
struck with horror at the thought, and resolved to continue at St. John Maurien
with Arconeto.

But old Castlenovo thinking what a scandal the divulging his Crime, and his
Sons absence would prove to him, wrote a Letter to him, wherein he acknowledged
his lascivious and graceless attempt upon the Honor of so chaste a Lady, which
he could not remember but with detestation: but now Religion had vanquished
Lust, and he did heartily sorrow and repent of so foul a miscarriage. That if
he, who was the sole prop of his age, (whose absence he daily lamented) would
return with his Lady to Nice, he called Heaven and Earth to witness, That for
the future he would as much honor her for her Chastity, as he had formerly
lasciviously sought to betray it. And further adds, That his tongue should make
good what his pen had writ.

This Letter prevailed with his Son and Daughter, who about eight days after
the receipt thereof return to Nice, where the old man with tears in his eyes
confesses his error, and so they were perfectly reconciled. But (alas!) this
Sunshine will quickly be clouded, for the old Dotard daily beholding Perina's
Beauty, soon relapsed; and knowing he cannot obtain his desires so long as his
Son lives, makes use of the same hellish Agent Ierantha, with the promise to
marry her, and give her down 500 Ducats more, to poison him; which she, for
lucre of the Money, and ambition of being a Lady, in less than six days
effected. The sudden death of Castlenovo had like to have occasioned Perina's
too, who tares her Hair, and betrays all the deplorable demonstrations of
sorrow that can be imagined, and so does the old hypocrite Castlenovo, which
she takes for counterfeit, and suspects that he and Ierantha are guilty of her
Husbands death, and concludes that if he renews his suit, they were really his
^urtherers. A little more than a month after his Son was laid in his untimely
Grave, the old beastly wretch began afresh his solicitations, to which she
seemed not so averse as before, and at last (to palliate her design) she
yields, and the time and place is appointed; which being come, and Castlenovo
in his bed, impatiently expecting Perina, she softly enters his Chamber in her
day-attire, with a Pisa-dagger in her sleeve, and bolting the door after her,
comes to his bedside, where seeing his breast open, she stabs him to the
heart, and with repeated blows kills him stark dead, not suffering him to speak
one word, only he shrieked once or twice, which his Servants over-hearing, ran
up to his Chamber, where they met Perina coming out with the bloody Poniard in
her hand, for which she was presently taken and imprisoned, and two days after
arraigned, where she freely confessed it, alleging for her reason* That He and
Jer^ntha had murdered both her Husband and her Mother-in-law Fidelia, as she
had good reason to suspect. But this not ^xcusing her fact, she is condemn^d to
be hanged, from which Sentence ^he appeals to the Senate at Chambray, whither
she is conveyed, who moderate the former Sentence, and adjudge her to have her
right hand cut off, and to suffer perpetual Imprisonment at Nice, where in a
short time she died very penitent of a Consumption.

Ierantha being with child by old Castlenovo, apprehensive of the danger she
was in, fled secretly to a Friends house, where she fell in labor, and her
pains were so violent, that the Women about her concluded she would die,
whereupon she began to repent, and confessed the two former Murders, after
which she was safely delivered of a Son.

The Judges being acquainted with her Confession, on the second day she was
apprehended, committed to Prison, and the third hanged and burnt at Nice, and
her ashes thrown into the Air.

Thus we see the Ruin of two Noble Families wrought by the wickedness of the
Old and Leacherous Castlenovo, who murdered his Wife and Son, renounced all the
hopes of Heaven, despised the dreadful flames of Hell, to gratify one burning
Lust on Earth. HIST. XV. Muletto and Servia.
Muletto murdereth his Wife Servia, and twenty years after (unknown) robs
his and her Son Augustino, who likewise (not knowing Muletto to be his Father)
accuses him of the Robbery, for which he is hanged.

IN the Kingdom of Naples near the Arsenal dwelt a proper young fellow named
Muletto, by Trade a Baker, who having both an Oven and a Shop of his own, by
his indefatigable pains and Industry grew exceeding rich, and became one of the
prime Bakers of the City. This Muletto going one day to Cassan, twenty miles
distant from Naples, he there saw and fell in love with a rich Vintners
Daughter, her Fathers name was Pedro Spondy and hers Servia, a lovely and
beautiful Maid, exceeding virtuous and religious; who though she had several
Suitors, yet fancied Muletto above 'em all. Whereupon he sought her in
Marriage, and easily got her good will, provided he could obtain her Fathers
consent.

Muletto having thus won the Daughter, applies himself to the Father, but so
averse is old Spondy, that he will not by any means hear of it; yet still
Muletto continues his Suit, and jointly with Servia entreat his consent, but he
proudly and disdainfully refuses, swearing he will die before he will permit
him to marry his Daughter. At which answer Muletto went very discontentedly
back to Naples, and Servia remains at Cassan with her Father, who now thinks to
provide her another Husband, and gives her choice of two (to prevent her
marrying Muletto) but she utterly refuses both; whereat old Spondy is mad, and
threatens to dis-inherit her.

Three years are now past since the young Couple first saw one another, and
since Muletto first asked Spondy's consent; and still seeing it in vain, he
thinks it now high time to lay close siege to Servia, that she would agree to
marry him, (notwithstanding her Fathers refusal, telling her, That though he
had not a Duckatoon in Portion with her, he valued it not, that he married her
for Love, and had Estate enough to maintain her in a prosperous condition. By
which sweet words she was prevailed upon to leave her Father, and go along with
Muletto. Thus agreed, Muletto hires a Boat, whereof having notice, she goes out
at the Garden-door. That night they went down the River, and early the next
morning he hires Horses, and brings her to Naples, where they were privately
married.

Spondy missing his Daughter, rages extremely, as doubting that Muletto had
stole her: whereof making secret enquiry at Naples, and being assured of it, he
passionately swears, That they shall never enjoy one penny of his Estate, nor
will he ever after see them. Ten days after their Marriage, Muletto rode over
to Cassan to Spondy, to labor with his best respects and duty for a
reconciliation. Coming to Spondy's house with intent to see and discourse him,
he bolts himself into his Chamber, and charges his Servants to deny him, for
that he is resolved neither to see nor speak with him. Muletto went back to his
Inn, and two hours after came again, but Spondy was still denied; when the next
morning rising early, he went to Spondy's house, but received the same answer:
whereat very angry, he took his Horse and rode home to Naples, where he truly
relates to his Wife the entertainment he had at her Fathers; whereat she was
exceedingly grieved, but Muletto comforted her up with good words, and was
indeed very kind and loving to her. Thus they lived very providently, and
managed their Trade to the best advantage, both of them being very diligent and
saving. Six months after, having not heard one word from Spondy, Muletto prays
his Wife to go over to her Father her self. Servia accepted of the journey, and
comes to Cassan, where she received the same entertainment her Husband had
found before in all respects; nay he caused his doors to be shut against her:
At which unkindness of her Father she wept bitterly, and got her Aunt and her
Fathers own Ghostly Father to intercede for her; but finding all fruitless, and
to no effect, she returned to Naples to her Husband. Muletto asking what
success, she relates to him the unnatural discourtesie of her Father toward
her, which vexed him to the heart, but he dissembleth his discontent, which is
aggravated by being known to his Neighbors, who flout and jeer him in all
Companies.

This makes him now to look untowardly on his Wife, and slight her, and turn
ill Husband, neglect himself and his Profession, and follow lewd and evil
Company, spending and consuming his Estate with Whores and Strumpets, which at
length reduces him to great poverty and want; for the relieving whereof she
sends to Spondy her Father, and acquaints him with her necessities, praying his
assistance to relieve her present distress: but he is so hard-hearted, that he
will neither help her wants, nor pity her affliction, whereby her condition is
grown so miserable, that she is ready to despair. In the midst of these her
sorrows, she was brought to bed of a fine Boy, who was christened in a poor
manner, and named Augustino. The charity of her Neighbors to her in this
condition preserved her from starving, for her wicked Husband took no care of
her, but was so wholly devoted to Drunkenness and Debauchery, that he never
thought of being better, nor had she any reasonable grounds to expect his
amendment. After she was up again she worked very hard with her Needle to
maintain her poor Babe and her self; and if she got a little money to keep them
from starving, he presently tore it from her; so that not knowing what to do in
so great want and misery, she sent a Letter to her Father in these words:
Servia, to Spondy.
MY Husbands Vices do so increase my wants and miseries, that I have not
clothes nor food left to preserve my self and my poor Son Augustino; and
considering that I am your Daughter, methinks in Nature and Christianity you
should relieve me in these bitter distresses, especially since my sighs beg it
of you with humility for Charities sake, and my tears with sorrow for Gods
sake. If your heart will not relent in compassion to me, at least let it
toward the pretty young Child, whom I beseech you with tears to take from me
and maintain. God will requite your charity to him, and I shall the sooner
forget your cruelty to my self: And so may you live in as much prosperity as I
fear I shall shortly die in want and misery,

Servia.




Spondy received this Letter and read it without any compassion or concern for
his Daughter; but his rugged and stubborn humor had some pity for poor
Augustino, and to let her know so much sent her this Answer: Spondy, to Servia.
I See thou art obstinate, in disobeying my commands with thy Letters, wherein
I believe thou take more glory, than I conceive grief at the relation of thy
wants, which I am so far from pitying, that I am only sorry that I am thy
Father. But since thy young Son is as innocent as thou art guilty of my
displeasure, I have sent this Bearer for him, and I will see if it be the
pleasure of Heaven that I shall be as Happy in Him, as I am Unfortunate in Thee.

Spondy.




Servia having read this Letter, though she grieved at her Fathers obdurate
heart to her self, yet was joyful at his kindness to her Son, whom she
delivered to the messengers hands, and next to Gods protection religiously
recommends him to the affection and education of her Father: but Muletto would
not so much as kiss him at parting, whose unkindness he will live to return.

Servia having thus sent away her Son, the same night dreams she shall never
see him more; whereat awaking, she wept bitterly, while her Husband laughed at
her fondness, who now grows worse and worse, so that her life was a mere
burden to her. Five years has she now lived in this misery, having no
consolation but in her Prayers and Patience. Instead of mending, Muletto (if
possible) is more dissolute than ever, grows weary of his poor virtuous Wife,
and thinks if she were dead he might get another which should enrich him, for
which reason he resolves to murder her; and accordingly, on a great Holy Day
took her out with him to walk to a Vineyard out of the City, pretending to
recreate themselves, which poor Servia took for a great kindness, and gladly
went along. Muletto lies down upon the ground, and feigns himself asleep, when
she lying down by him slept soundly; which he observing, softly rises up, and
cuts her throat, not suffering her to cry or speak one word: So leaving her,
went back to Naples a contrary way, to take off all suspicion.

The very same night her murdered body was found by some who chanced to walk
that way, and brought to Naples, where it is known to be Servia, Muletto's
Wife, who was sent for, and seems passionately affected at her untimely death,
requests the Criminal Officers to search for the Murderers, which he is very
diligent and industrious in himself, and with that cunning and hypocrisy
conceals his own guilt, that he of all men is least suspected.

Muletto (his Wife being buried) now sells her Clothes to buy himself some, and
seeks many Maids and Widows in marriage, but he is refused and scorned by all;
so that utterly despairing to raise himself at home, he enrolleth himself a
Banditti, and for many years practices that theivish and villainous Profession.

Old Spondy trains up his Grandchild virtuously and industriously, so that he
becomes excellent in Painting, Graving, and Imagery, and then chooses to be a
Goldsmith, and proves a singular workman in his Trade. His Grandfather is very
kind to him, and intends to make him his Heir; but Augustino desires to travel
and see other Countries, particularly Rome: To which purpose finding a Ship in
Savona-road going to Civita Vecchia, he privately packs up his Baggage, and
imbarques therein. Being arrived at Rome, he becomes a singular ingenious
Goldsmith, and expert workman, thriving so well, that he resolves to set up his
abode there.

Four and twenty years are now past since Muletto left Naples and turned
Banditti, of which growing weary at last, he went to Florence, and set up his
Trade of a Baker, intending there to settle and marry; but it happened
otherwise, for the Cardinal De Medices going to Rome to receive his Hat, and
intending to enter and continue there in great state and magnificence, he took
into his house double Officers, to whom he gave rich and costly Liveries, and
amongst others Muletto was chosen Baker in that journey, and at Rome flaunts it
out gallantly, and is more debauched and prodigal than any other of the
Cardinals Servants: So that at last growing bare both of money and credit, he
resolves to recruit himself by stealing some pieces of Plate out of a young
Goldsmiths Shop in Rome. with whom he had some little acquaintance. From him he
stole two fair rich gilded Chalices, a curious small Gold Crucifix set with
Saphyrs and Emralds, all amounting to the value of 450 Duckatoons.

The young Goldsmith amazed at his loss, knows not whom to suspect or accuse
for this Robbery, but Muletto the Cardinal of Florence his Baker, who much
frequented his Shop. Upon which, knowing that he lay not in the Cardinals
Palace, but in a Taylers house adjoining, he got an Officer and searched his
Chamber and Trunk, where he found one of his Chalices, but nothing else, and as
he was going out meets Muletto, who is committed to Prison, and by the evidence
of part of the Goods found in his possession, and his confession in hopes of
mercy, is condemned to be hanged next day.

In the morning he was brought to the common place of Execution, at the
Bridge-foot near the Castle of St. Angelo, where upon the Ladder he confesses
the Robbery, and that his name is Muletto, and that 26 years ago he lived at
Naples, where he murdered his Wife Servia Spondy in a Vineyard a mile out of
Naples, for which, and other his sins, he sincerely repented: Augustino hearing
the names of Muletto, Servia and Spondy, burst into tears, and cried out that
man upon the Ladder was his own Father, and that Servia Spondy was his Mother,
and therefore desired the Executioner to forbear a while, when at his descent
from the Ladder Augustino threw himself at his feet, and freely offered all his
Estate to save his Fathers life, but it would not be accepted, so the next day
he was hanged, having first freely forgiven his Son, and asked forgiveness of
him for his Mothers murder.

As for Augustino, after this infamous death of his Father, he removed from
Rome, and returned to his Grandfather Spondy, who received him with many
demonstrations of joy and affection, and at his death made him sole Heir of all
his Goods and Estate.

Though the Vengeance of Heaven may seem to sleep for a time, it still keeps a
watchful eye over the impenitent offender. -- The perverseness of Spondy causes
disobedience in Servia, which is punished by the bloody cruelty of her Husband,
whose barbarous Murder Heaven at last revenges by the hand of his unknown Son
Augustino. HIST. XVI. Morosino and Imperia.
Imperia in Love with Morosino, causes him and his Companions Astonicus and
Donato, to stifle her Husband Palmerius in his Bed. The Murder is discovered
by Morosino's Gloves, for which they are all apprehended and executed.

IN the famous City of Venice, lived a young Gentleman, called Seignior Angelo
Morosino; who in Company of Seignior Astonicus and Seignior Donato, Embarked
for the Islands of Corfu and Zant, and after a short stay there, were bound for
Constantinople; but by the way forced by a Storm, they put into the Harbor of
Ancona, which belongs to the Pope. In which place being obliged to stay by
contrary Winds, the three Merchants out of Devotion went up to Loretto, where
having spent two days in visiting the Holy Chapel, on the third early in the
morning, Morosino leaving his ^riends in Bed, went to Mass; where (at her
Devotion) he saw a young Lady incomparably fair, at whose sight he was so
enflamed with Affection to her, that he could willingly resign all the Powers
and Faculties of Soul and Body to her Service. Mass being ended, he followed
her out of the Chapel, and seeing her only attended with a Waiting Woman and a
Lacquey, with great Respect and Civility offered his Service to wait upon her
home, and after several Complements, which passed between them, obtained the
favor to take her by the Hand, and gracefully conducted her to her Fathers
House, whose name was Seignior Hi^r^nimo Bondino, and she his only Daughter
Dona Imperia* Morosino at the door took his leave (though she cour^^ously
invited him in) and begged the Honor to wait upon her in the Afternoon,
whispering in her Ear, that so great was the present Violence of his Passion to
her, that he feared he should not be able to acquit himself with that decency,
as became a Cavalier, to a Person of her Merits and Quality.

In the Afternoon he made his visit to her, acquainted her with his Name and
Quality, his intended Voyage to Constantinople, but chiefly with his constant
Resolution to seek her in Marriage both of her self and her Father: and so
expert was he in the Art of Love, that in three weeks time (the Winds
continuing contrary) he made her many Visits and amorous Courtships, and at
last obtained her Consent to be his Wife at his return from Constantinople. He
then addressed himself to her Father Bondino, who was so averse to it, that
neither his Entreaties and Persuasions, or her Tears and Prayers could melt his
heart into a better Temper.

Morosino now acquaints his two Friends, Astonicus and Donato with his
Affection to Imperia, and brings them next Morning to see her; they highly
commend his Choice, and use all their Endeavors to gain Bondino's Consent; but
he is so resolutely obstinate, that no Arguments can in the least affect him.
This grieves the two Lovers to the Heart, to see they must now be parted, for
the Master of the Ship had sent word, that the Wind now blowing fair, he should
with all Expedition weigh Anchor and set Sail for Corfu. Morosino seeing the
necessity of his departure, again moves Bondino for his Consent, but he proves
inexorable, when going to bid Imperia Adieu, he sacredly Vows to live unmarried
till his Return, which shall be within a year, and then to marry her; and as a
Pledge of his Fidelity and Constancy, presents her with a rich Diamond Ring
from his Finger, and she him with a fair Bracelet of Orient Pearl, as a sign of
their mutual Contract: to which Astonicus and Donato are both Witnesses. This
done, they took Horse for Ancona, and presently Embarked for Corfu and
Constantinople.

Bondino three months after, provides her another Husband, old Seignior
Palmerius; a rich Merchant of Ancona, at least sixty years of Age, and withal
of a deformed Personage, and morose and sullen Temper; but this old Dotard, is
so taken with Imperia's Youth and Beauty, and the encouragement he received
from Bondino, that he comes to his House and makes downright Love to her. In
the Interim, her Father had charged her to receive him with all Respect, and
accept his Affections; which with Tears in her Eyes, she flatly told him, she
could not Obey; she was fixed already, and would marry no Person but Morosino:
Bondino with Fury in his Face, told her he expected no other answer but her
dutiful Compliance with his Commands, and in a Passion left her to the Company
of old Palmerius, who entered at the same time, and with all the kind
Expressions he was Master of, offered her the entire command of himself and his
Fortunes, in Exchange for her Love and Affection: She told him, If this was all
his Errand, she did assure him, she neither would nor could dispose of that
which was already in the possession of another, and so left him to his own
Meditations. Palmerius returned to Ancona; but two months after, to the great
Joy of Bondino, made a second Visit* and now both day and night, they importune
Imperia to consummate the Marriage; and to that purpose her Father gives her
good Words, and Palmerius rich Gifts and Presents: but she will neither hear
the one, nor accept the other; however Palmerius grows obstinate in his Suit,
and her Father resolute in his Commands; to avoid which she locks her self up
in her Chamber, and concludes that her only preservation, can be in the Company
of Morosino, whose Return she earnestly desires; and accordingly furnishes
Seignior Mercario, her faithful Friend, with Gold for his Journey, and this
Letter to her beloved Morosino.

Imperia to Morosino.
COuld you measure my Affections by my Sorrow for your Absence, you could
hardly tell whether I love or grieve more; for I am assured that all the Seas
between Ancona and Constantinople, are not able to wash away your Memory from
my Heart and Soul: Nor can the Sands of the Shore compare in Number, with those
Sighs and Tears I daily offer to you. If then I am as dear to you, I heartily
beg you will leave Constantinople and come to Loretto, for my Father Bondino is
ready to force me to leave my young Morosino, for old and withered Palmerius.
Judge now how unkind you will be to send an Excuse, and not bring your self.
Farewell my Dear, may the Angels preserve thee, and fill thy Sails with fair
and prosperous Winds, till they land thee safe in the Embraces of thy

Imperia.


Mercario in three Weeks arrived at Constantinople, found out Morosino, and
delivered the Letter which he perused, and after a solemn Entertainment,
returned him with this Answer.

Morosino to Imperia.
THy Health and Constancy, makes me as joyful in the Receipt of thy Letter, as
thy Fathers disrespect to me and love to Palmerius makes me sorrowful. Our
Hearts are now sacredly united, only live in two different Bodies, which Love
and Breath the same desires; and I would now at thy c^mmand return thee
immediately that part of thy self, I am f^rc'd to divide from thee, would the
necessity of my Affairs give me leave to (...) Constantinople for Loretto. The
Seigniory of Venice have by their Ambassador Landy here resident, made me
Consul of Aleppo, but what this year cannot the next shall perform. O thou my
dear and sweet Imperia, repute (...) not ingratitude in me to send thee this
Letter, for I do d^cl^re in the presence of Men and Angels, my Excuse is as
sincerely true and unf^igned as my Affection to Imperia, which can never dye
bu^ with

Morosino.


Imperia received this Letter both with Anger and Joy, with Anger because he
came not in Person, and with Joy that i^ came from him, whose Victim and Martyr
she resolved to dye, rather than live Palmerius his Wife. But her Father one
way and Palmerius another, still haunt her at all times and places without
intermission; who finding after six months more elapsed his Labor lost, he
resolves at once to strike at all; and to that end, proffers Bondino, that if
Imperia will become his Wife, he will Endow her with the one half of his Lands,
and give up all his personal Estate into his Hands to purchase her more. This
offer so wholly won Bondino, that in have he told his Daughter the generous
pro^fer of Palmerius, and bid her dispose her self to marry him speedily, or
else he would utterly renounce and for ever disown her to be his Daughter.

Imperia hears her Fathers cruel Commands, which she only answers with Sighs
and Tears; but at last told him: Sir, You know I both saw and engaged my Love
to Morosino, before I ever knew Palmerius, nor can his Riches compare with
Morosino 's Virtues; Heaven that is Witness to those Vows I made Morosino, will
certainly punish my perfidiousness; nor is it out of Disobedience to your
Commands, that I reject Palmerius, but in respect to those Sacred Oaths I made
Morosino. Bondino after several Threats in a Chafe left her, who presently
resolved to send Mercario with a Gold Watch set with Diamonds, and a second
Letter to Morosino, in these words.

Imperia to Morosino.
I Had little thought that Profit or ^r^ferment had been dearer to thee than
Imperia, or that the Seigniory of Venice or their Ambassador Landy, had more
power to have s^aid thee at Aleppo, than I to have requested thy Return to
Loretto; judge now what a poor half I am of thee, when by thy vol^ntary
absence, thou will wholly resign me to another, and that Palmerius must be my
Husband, when I desire nothing more than to live and dye thy Wife. Come away
therefore, my dear Morosino, and blame not me but thy self, if thy absence and
my Fathers Obstinacy bereave me of my sweet Morosino, and thee of thy Dear

Imperia.


Morosino receives this Letter and Presently blushes, to see himself thus
outstrip'd by her in Kindness; when advising with his two Friends Astonicus and
Donato, after ten days feasting of Mercario, and a generous Reward for his
pains, he sent him back to Imperia with a fair Chain of Gold, and a rich
Diamond Ring fastn'd thereto, a pair of Turkish imbroydered Bracelets, and this
Letter.

Morosino to Imperia.
THy Beauty and Affection, shall both command my Resolution and my Self; I will
therefore shorten the time of my Stay, and convert a whole year into a few
Months; for to Right the life of my Heart, I value the Affection and Company of
my sweet Imperia above a Con^ulary Dignity, the Treasures of Turkey, or the
richer Indies. O then, my fair and sweet Imperia, live my dear Wife, and I will
assuredly dye thy loving and constant Husband

Morosino.


This Letter Imperia receives with no small Joy, which is suddenly blasted by
Bondino's Cruelty; who to bring her to his Will debarrs her of all Liberty, and
takes away from her, her Jewels and best Apparel, and makes her more his
Prisoner than his Daughter; whereat she is so cast down, that despairing of
Morosino's Return, and vanquished by her Fathers Tyranny, and Palmerius his
Importunity, grants his Suit, and three days after was solemnly contracted and
married to him. Palmerius after his Marriage, proved so amorous and kind, that
he left no cost unbestow'd on her; but this was not the con^ent she desired,
his age was too frozen and cold for her warm vigorous Youth. While Affairs went
thus at Loretto, ten months after his promise, Morosino with his two friends
Astonicus and Donato land at Ancona, where Mercario meeting with him, salutes
him with the News of Imperia's Marriage with Palmerius; at which they both
grieve and wonder. By this time Imperia heard of their Arrival, and Mercario is
employed to beg a private Visit of her, which is immediately granted, and the
next night in her own house they met. At Morosino's first entrance into her
Chamber, she fell at his feet and begged his Pardon; he took her up with all the
passion and tenderness imaginable, and then with mutual Embraces they revived
those Affections, which their long absence might have buried in Oblivion; and
as he promises her that she shall be his sole and only Love, so she willingly
protests to him, that he shall be more her Husband than Palmerius. Thus for
that night they part.

Next morning Morosino and his two Companions give a public visit, and are
courteously received by Palmerius, and in the afternoon Morosino and Imperia
meet in the Garden remote from her House, where she was not able to deny
whatever he had courage to ask; These unlawful Pleasures make her beg into
slight her old Husband, and in a short time, so Bold and Impudent was she grown
in the practice of her adulterous Embraces, that they were now become
Customary; of which her own Family and Servants, (especially Richardo Nephew to
Palmerius, a youth of eighteen,) could not but take notice of it, and make
their Remarques upon it. Morosino was not content only thus to enjoy Imperia,
but knowing that his Expenses far exceeded his Estate, and considering that
Palmerius his Wealth would bear up his Port, and Imperia so much his own, that
she was fit for any impression, and capable of any Design, that would advance
his Fortunes and confirm their Contents, resolves to Murder Palmerius. To this
end, at their next meeting they consult on it, and after diverse ways proposed,
it was at last agreed to be most safe, to Stifle him in Bed between two
Pillows, which would leave no cause of suspicion behind it. Morosino after
dinner invites Astonicus and Donato to a walk in the fields, and there
acquaints them with the design; and that it was his own and Imperia's request,
that they would assist them in it. Which Astonicus and Donato cheerfully
promised, and having sworn secrecy to each other, they returned to their
Lodging, where they drank a Health to the success of their great Business. The
next day Morosino relates all to his Imperia, who over^oy'd thereat, and
Impatient of all delays, concludes to have the business finished the next night
after.

The dismal night is now come, and the clock strikes twelve when Morosino,
Astonicus, and Donato go to Palmerius his House, where at the Street Door they
find Imperia ready to receive them, where leaving Donato to secure the Door,
Morosino and Astonicus leading Imperia without their Shoes, in Woollen Pumps up
the Stairs to her own Chamber, she gave each of them a Pillow and dir^^ted them
to Palmerius his Chamber, where entering in, whilst she guarded the Door, they
stifled him and ^hru^t a small Orange into his Mouth; they gently s^ut the
Door, and with silence went back to their Lodging, and Imperia to her Bed.

The next morning, Imperia went to Mass at St. Francis Church; in the interim,
came a Messenger with a Letter from Bondino to Palmerius, which his Nephew
Richardo receiving carried up to his Uncles Chamber, where on the (...) he
found a rich pair of Gloves, which he knew belonged to Morosino and put in his
Pocket; when going to his Bedside, he drew the Curtains and found him dead in
his Bed with a small Orange in his Mouth. At this he made so loud an Outcry,
that several of the Servants came up, who seeing their Master dead, believed he
had stopped his own Breath, by putting the Orange in his Mouth: But Richardo
remembering Morosino's Gloves which he found, and the familiar Dalliances he had
often seen between his Aunt and him; went presently and acquainted the
Podestate with the Murder of his Uncle, and strongly charged it upon his Aunt
and Morosino, on whom he craved Justice.

The Podestate being satisfied in the Circumstances, sends his two Son^ with
his Co^ch to St. Francis to allure Imperia thither, who was no sooner come but
he charged her and her Enamorato Morosino, with the Murder of her Husband, for
which he confined her that day to his own house, and sent his Officers to seize
Morosino, who so strongly beset his Lodging, that though he and his two Friends
were well armed, they thought their best resistance would be in vain, and
therefore delivered up their Persons, Pistols and Swords, and were committed to
the common Prison of the City. Bondino hearing the sad News of these passages
at Loretto, suddenly fell sick and dyed.

The third day after, Morosino, Astonicus and Donato were separately examined,
but neither of them would confess any thing, whereupon Astonicus was put to the
Rack, which Torments he endured, still affirming his Innocence; an hour after
Donato was adjudg'd to the Scorpions, who being but of a weak Constitution, his
right foot no sooner felt the fire, but with Tears he confessed the whole Truth
in all it is Circumstances. In the Afternoon the Judges sent for Morosino,
Imperia and Astonicus, when they charged them with Donato's Confession, who was
brought in a Chair to confront them; whereupon they immediately owned the Fact,
and confirmed Donato's Account of it. Upon which they were all four sentenced
to be hanged next morning, at the common place of Execution. Imperia next day
had notice that her Uncle Seignior Bondino had obtained her Pardon, at which
she asked the Messenger if Morosino was pardoned too, who answered, No; then
said she I will dye with him; and though the Judges came and advised her to
live, and all her Relations entreated her to accept the Pardon, she would not
be persuaded, but her answer to the last was, I hate Life if he must dye. The
next day first Donato and then Astonicus were executed, then came Morosino who
taking leave of Imperia earnestly desired her to accept her Life, which now was
the only favor she could gratify him in, and so was turned off. Imperia was
now afresh solicited by the Judges, Friars and Nuns, but she refused with
disdain, and voluntarily went up the Ladder, where making a short Speech to the
numerous Spectators, bid the Executioner do his Office, who immediately turned
her over. Thus lived and thus dyed three young Gentlemen, and the constant
Imperia, than whom never any dyed more pitied and lamented.

If we would consider the pain of Sin before we commit it, the Grace of God
would either prevent us in it, or the punishment deter us from it. HIST. XVII.
Don Araneo and Orminta.
De Cortez causes his Son Don Araneo to marry Orminta, and then commits
Adultery and Incest with her; and by her means and for her sake poysoneth his
old Wife Aspatia, and makes her Brother Delrio, kill her Chambermaid Dian. Don
Araneo afterward kills Delrio in a Duel, Orminta's Brains are dash't out by a
Horse, and De Cortez beheaded and his Body burnt.

IN the City of Santarem in Portugal, dwelt an ancient Gentleman named Don
Alonzo de Cortez, whose Wife was Dona Aspatia; they had now lived happily in
the Sacred Bonds of Marriage near forty years, and had two Sons and four
Daughters, all which dyed young except Don Araneo, who for his excellent Parts,
complete Breeding and Courtship, was esteemed a most accomplished Gallant, and
one of the prime Cavaliers in all Portugal.

Six Leagues from Santarem, dwelt a young Gentlewoman very handsome, and a
Widow, named Dona Orminta; to this Lady, old Cortez (having now left the
Virtues of his Youth to grow vicious in his Age) makes his address by frequent
Visits, and discovers the violent flames of his raging Lust, which she severely
checks him for, and with peremptory refusals, scorns and denies his lascivious
Suit. But he is as constant in his solicitations as she in her disdain, when
at last Orminta perceiving, he passionately affected her; told him plainly,
that if he ever thought to gratify his desires in her Love and Kindness, he
must first cause her to be married to his Son Don Araneo, which once effected,
she swore to deny him nothing. De Cortez wondered at this strange proposal, and
knew not what readily to answer to it, but going home seriously consults with
himself about it, very willing he was to preserve his Sons Honor and Bed
undefiled, that point he found very tender, but alas! Orminta's Beauty had so
great a power and command over him, that it easily conquered his most serious
and virtuous Considerations. The next day he made her another Visit, but she
was fixed to her first resolve, and would not recede a tittle from it; when like
an old Lecher, rather than lose the pleasure of his obscene Lust, he promised
to use all means possible to prevail with his Son to marry her, and at his
return home motion'd the Match to him; Don Araneo after a short time of
Consideration, told him he very well approved of it, especially since he was
pleased to direct his Affections in it, and some time after, rode over to St.
Estianne to make his Court to her, who seemed wondrous coy on purpose to draw
him on with more Vigor and Earnestness.

While thus the Father underhand, and the Son openly, courted Orminta, Dona
Aspatia, Don Araneo's Mother, by many strong reasons, sought to divert him from
her, and peremptorily on her Blessing, forbid him to marry her, adding that if
he did, more Misery would attend those unhappy Nuptials, than was yet possible
for him either to know or conceive. Don Araneo pondered on these Speeches, and
for a month forbore to visit Orminta, which made her frown on De Cortez who
inquires of him what made him so strange and cold in his Affections to Orminta;
Araneo made a very modest Excuse, wholly concealing his Mothers advice to him
in it. Orminta was mad to see her hopes of Don Araneo almost frustrate, and
asks De Cortez the cause of his Sons Aversness, who told her he supposed it was
his Mother who had diverted him; whereat in a rage she told him, The old Beldam
his Wife must first be sent to Heaven before he can hope to enjoy her, or she
his Son on Earth; and withal voluntarily offered to make a Visit to her and
poison her, which De Cortez would by no means admit of, but promised speedily
to perform it himself. Upon this she took care to provide him the Poison, which
he administered to her in preserved Barberies, which he observed she loved very
well and often eat of, so that in three days after Aspatia dyed, whereat Don
Araneo wept bitterly, not in the least suspecting she was poisoned.

Orminta understanding Aspatia was dead, is marvellously pleased, and in three
months after De Cortez and she dealt so politickly with Araneo, that he married
her and brought her home to his Lewd Fathers House, who as often as he pleased
commits Adultery and Incest with her, but so clandestinely that for two years
Araneo had not the least inkling of it. But Dian her waiting Woman, took notice
of this unlawful familiarity of hers with De Cortez, which her Mistress
understanding, beat her severely for it, and twice whipped her naked in her
Chamber, and dragged her about by the Hair; which Dian resolving to be revenged
for, acquaints her young Master Araneo with this foul Business, between his
Wife and his Father, at which he was so amazed and grieved, that he scorning to
be an eyewitness of his own shame, and their grievous Crimes, which had now
made them as unworthy of his Sight and Company, as they were of his Love and
Respect; took horse and r^de away to Lisbon, and from thence went directly to
Spain, resolving to make his Residence with the Court at Madrid.

De Cortez and Orminta seeing this his sudden departure, which they were
conscious would make apparent to the World those horrid Crimes they had so
privately indulged themselves in, and knowing that none but Dian could have
made this Discovery to her Husband; she provides her self with rods, intending
the next morning to glut her anger and Indignation with a sharp Revenge: but
Dian having notice of this the night before, takes Horse, and rides home to her
Fathers House, and there from point to point relates all the former passages,
and publishes, the Adulteries of her Mistress. Orminta being advertised hereof
sends for her Brother Delrio, and acquaints him with the base Treachery of her
Maid against her Honor; protesting both her own and De Cortez his Innocence,
which he too credulously believing, bids her be of good cheer, and he will soon
take such Order, that her maids Tongue shall no longer spit her envenomed
malice against her in^ur'd Reputation. Thus to make good his promise to his
Sister, Delrio rode over to St. Saviors, and there by night waiting at the
Door, as Dian came out in a dark night, ran her through the Body in two several
places, upon which she fell down dead without speaking one word, and he posted
away to Santarem being neither seen nor discovered. As soon as he came thither
he informed his Sister what he had done, who infinitely glad thereof gave him
many thanks, and now bent her whole malice against her Husband, Don Araneo,
cunningly provoking her Brother to accomplish it, which he (thus exasperated by
her Policy) vows to effect, and that he would immediately fight him if he did
but know in what part of the World to find him in. When behold (as it were to
bind him to his promise) news of his Residence at Madrid is accidentally
brought him by a Servant purposely sent to Santarem with these ensuing Letters;
the one to his Father the other to his Wife.

Araneo to De Cortez.
WAs there no Woman in the World for you to abuse but my Wife? If Nature would
not inform you that I am your Son, yet you are my Father; and it should have
taught you to have been more natural to me, more honorable to the World, more
respectful to your self, and more religious to God; than to have made your self
Guilty of the foul Crimes of Adultery, and Incest; the least of which is so
odious to God and detestable to Men, that I want Terms to express it. The shame
and infamy whereof, has made me leave Portugal for Spain, and forsake Santarem
to live and dye at Madrid. I wonder that you in the Winter of your Age, which
makes you fitter for your Grave than my Bed, should be guilty of so unnatural a
Crime, which if you do not redeem with Tears and Repentance, I fear you will be
as miserable as you have made me unfortunate.

Araneo.


Araneo to Orminta.
IF the consideration that I was thy Husband could not in Grace deter thee from
the Commission of that foul Sin of Adultery, yet the remembering that he was my
Father should in Nature have made thee both abhor and detest the Incest. What
Devil possessed thy Heart with Lust, and thy Soul with Impiety I cannot tell; But
since thy inordinate Lusts have brought Misery to me, and shame to thy self; I
no longer esteem thee my Wife, but look on thee with an eye of Indignation as
the World does of Contempt.

Araneo.


De Cortez and Orminta at the reading of these Letters, were stung in their
Consciences, and curse Dian and her Memory, yet they resolve to bear up their
Reputations in the World, and by the Justification of their Innocence,
solicit his return, and to that purpose write to him in the most plausible
Terms that devilish Hypocrites could invent; gilding over their Impious
Adulteries with Pious Pretensions. Don Araneo having received these Letters,
was too prudent to be imposed upon with their Flatteries, or credit their fair
words; and that they might know his Resolution, neglecting his Father, sends
Orminta this Letter.

Araneo to Orminta.
THy Letter has rather confirmed than diminished my Confidence of the Truth of
those Bestial Crimes thou art guilty of; and I prize the Apology of thy
Innocence at so low a rate, that I disdain it for thy Sake, and thy self for
thy own. I grieve at thy Maid Dians Death, fearing that you both have been
concerned in it, and if you are so, be assured that God will revenge it to his
Glory, and punish it to your Confusion.

Araneo.


This Letter inflames Orminta with envy and malice, who now again repairs to
her Brother Delrio as to her Champion, shows him Araneo's Letters, and requests
his Advice to regain her Honor, either by bringing home her Husband, or
removing him out of the World, that her wrongs may dye with him, and be buried
together in the Grave of Oblivion. Delrio prays her to refer it to his care,
and gives her good night; the next morning taking an intimate and valiant
friend, called Seignior Gramont, along with him, they went to Madrid, where
being arrived, he wrote a Challenge to Araneo, and sent it by Gramont who
delivered it to him. Araneo having read it with a cheerful Countenance returned
this answer, Pray tell Delrio that my Friend, my Sword, and my self, will be at
his Service to morrow at the hour and place appointed.

The morning no sooner appeared, but Delrio with his friend Gramont came to the
Prado on Horseback, and the like did Don Araneo, with a Gentleman named Don
Francio Thurino in his Coach. As soon as they saw each other, they threw off
their Doublets, and without Complements drew, and passed furiously, after
several Breathings, at the first bout Don Araneo ran Delrio clean through the
Body, wherewith falling, he redoubles his Thrust, and nails him stark dead to
the Ground, so binding up his Wounds, by a private way he went home to his
Lodging, and the next day causes Delrio's Body to be decently buried: after
which Gramont returns home, and from point to point relates the Issue of the
Combat to De Cortez and Orminta, adding withal, that he was so reserved and
strange, that he refused to write to either of them, which, though they seemed
to be troubled at, they still continued their beastly sins, as if they either
not feared, or not believed a Judgment to come.

About ten days after, as Orminta was riding to Coimbra, to visit a sick
Kinswoman, as she came within a small League of the Town, a Hare suddenly
starts up between her Horses Legs, which so frighted him, that he stumbled, and
then threw her to the ground, and kicking her with his hind foot, struck her in
the Forehead, and dashed out her Brains.

At this instant, as the Footboy was lamenting the death of his Mistress,
there fortuned to pass by two Corrigidors (or Officers of Justice) of Coimbra,
in their Coach, who seeing the mournful Spectacle, allighted out of the Coach,
and enquired who she was, whereof being informed by the Footboy, they took up
the Body, and carried it to Coimbra, from whence they sent to De Cortez,
desiring him to come thither, and take order for her Funeral. In the mean time
they secured her ^ings, Jewels, and other Apparel, and searched her Pockets
likewise for Gold, in one whereof they found the l^st Letter which her Husband,
Don Araneo, had sent her from Madrid, and for the reading thereof withdrew
themselves to a private Chamber, whereby understanding the obscene Pleasures,
Adultery and Incest of De Cortez with his Daughter in Law, they much wondered,
but when they read the Clause wherein he taxes them for Dian's Death, they say
little, but agree to seize and (...) De Cortez, as soon as he shall come
thither. In the in^^rim they a^k the Footboy if his Lady had not a Maid named
(...), he said Yes, and that she was lately murdered, but by whom unknown;
that her Father l^v^d at St. (...), and was called Seigniour Paulo Castrucchio:
they secured the Boy and sent presently for Castrucchio; this done, De Cortez
the same night arrived and was seized, when he least thought of it, and
committed close Prisoner. The next morning came Castrucchio, who hearing all
the former Passages and Don Araneo's Letter, believes them guilty and craves
Justice on De Cortez for the same. After Dinner they sent for him to appear,
and Castrucchio accused him, but De Cortez stoutly denied it, and being put to
the Rack, bore the Torments of it with a fortitude beyond his Ag^ or Strength.
Castrucchio then prayed eight days time, to make good his accusation, which is
freely granted, and in two days time, brings in a new Indictment against him
for poisoning his Lady Aspatia. Upon this he is sent for to appear a second
time, but as before, so now he resolutely denies all, and is adjudg'd again to
the Rack, but before his Torments, the Judges sent some Divines to him to work
upon his Conscience, which they did with so good effect, that he confessed
himself guilty of poisoning his own Lady, but altogether innocent of Dian's
Death. Then being asked if Orminta was guilty, he said, true it was that she
bought the poison and he administered it; for which her dead Body was that
afternoon burnt at the common place of Execution, and De Cortez was condemned
to loose his head, from which Sentence he appealed to Santarem, where the first
Sentence is confirmed, and an addition thereto, that his Body should be burnt
and his Ashes thrown into the Air.

The next morning a Scaffold was erected at his own Door, whereon he lost his
Head, the rest of the Sentence being executed to the satisfaction of Justice
and content of all the Spectators.

Thus the wicked Lust of old De Cortez, meeting with the insatiable Ambition of
young Orminta, they agreed in a hellish Contract, which the Devil witnessed,
and the Vengeance of Heaven severely punished. HIST. XVIII. Benevente and his
two bloody Daughters.
Fidelia and Celestina cause Carpi and Monteleon, with their two Lacquies,
Lorenzo and Anselmo, to murder their Father, Captain Benevente. Monteleon and
his Lacquey are drowned. Fidelia hangs her self. Lorenzo condemned for a
Robbery, on the Gallows confesses the Murder. Carpi is beheaded, and Celestina
beheaded and burnt.

IN Otranto, a City of Apulia in Italy, dwelt an ancient, rich and valiant
Gentleman, termed Capt. Benevente, who, by his deceased Lady, had a Son, named
Seignior Alcasero, and two Daughters, called Fidelia and Celestina, who
continued at home with their Father, whilst Alcasero lived altogether at
Naples, with the Spanish Viceroy.

Capt. Benevente was a Gentleman beloved and honored by all the Nobility of
Apulia, so that his House was like an Academy for all Martial Exercises; and as
the Beauty of his two Daughters, amongst so great resort, could not be long
unseen, or uncourted; so were they addressed to by many Persons, of great Worth
and Quality, who sought them in Marriage; but such was the averseness of their
Father's Temper, that he constantly crossed all motions of that nature, to the
great Trouble and Discontent of his Daughters. Alcasero is now returned from
Naples to Otranto, and his two Sisters acquaint him with the severity of their
Father's Humor toward them, and desire him to intercede for them, who dealt
so effectually with his Father, that he told him, he had provided the Baron of
Carpi for Fidelia, and the Knight Mont^leon for Celestina, and that in fifteen
days they would come over to see them, at which the young Ladies were extremely
pleased. Within the time appointed these two Noblemen come, and are as soon
misliked, Carpi being Crookbackt, and Monteleon lame of a Leg: Benevente
receives and entertains them nobly, whilst his Daughters treat them with Frowns
and Disdain; he tells them plainly they shall marry these, and no other; the
Father presses them, and the Noblemen importune them to confirm the Contracts,
but they plainly answer, they neither can nor will force their Affections to
comply with all his unreasonable Commands. The young Ladies are very much
dissatisfied with their Father's Perverseness, who, they think, usurps too much
upon the freedom of their choice, by his positive and rigorous Orders. This, at
length, bred ill blood, and they begin to hate him, which Fidelia first
discovers to her Sister in her Complaints, That, for her part, since her Father
is so resolute, she had rather see him laid in his Grave, than be forced by him
to marry that Man she cannot affect: Celestina declared her self of the same
Opinion, adding withal, that the sooner he was dispatched, the better: Thus
they conclude his death, and as to the manner of it, after many Consultations,
they think it most safe to engage Carpi and Monteleon to effect it. To this end
they now change the Scene, and pretend to love those they mortally hated, which
so pleases the two Noblemen, that with much urgency they importune them to
Marriage; but they told them it was impossible, so long as their Father lived;
for though he seemed to countenance and encourage them in their Suit, yet he
had given them express Commands not to love them, which was the true reason of
that Slight and Disrespect they had all along received them with. The Noblemen
were taken in the trap, and never considered the Treachery of those deceitful
and bloody minded Ladies, but jointly engage themselves, in a short time to
remove him who was the mistaken Subject of their Hate, and his Daughters
Disobedience.

Capt. Benevente used often, after Dinner, to ride to his Vineyard, and now and
then to a neighboring Village: Carpi and Monteleon took their ^acquies,
Lorenzo and Anselmo, and disguising themselves, set upon him at the corner of a
Wood, with their Swords and Pistols, attended only with his Servant Fiamenti,
whom after they had murdered, they carried their Bodies to the top of an
adjacent Hill, and threw them down into a deep Quarry, full of thick Bushes and
Brambles. Then they consulted of their Flight, Carpi took Post to Naples, and
Monteleon with his Lacquey rode to Brundusium, but on the way Monteleon's Horse
fell down dead under him, and he was forced to dismount his Lacquey and ride
his horse, leaving him to follow after a-Foot. At length near the Village
Blanquettelle he met with a swift Ford passable only with Horses, which
constrained him to take up his Lacquey Anselmo behind him; but in the midst of
the Water his Horse stumbled, and so violent was the Torrent of the River that
before they could recover themselves, they were both drowned.

By this time Benevente and his Man, were both missing and not to be heard of,
Alcasero who was now at Naples, was acquainted with it by his Sisters and
grievously laments, for fear any mischief should have befallen him, promising
great rewards to any person who could give intelligence of him. After five
days search and no news of him, his Daughters with all the counterfeit
Passions of Sorrow, begin to suspect he is murdered by his Servant Fiamenti,
who alone went out with him, and had not since been heard of. Alcasero's Grief
was as real as theirs was feigned, and left nothing unattempted that might lead
to a discovery, but all had hitherto been in Vain; when it happened one day,
that some Gentlemen who were hunting the Stag near Alpiata, he being now tired
with a long pursuit ran for Shelter in to the Quarry among the Bushes, whither
the Hunters following him, they discovered two dead Bodies, which the Crows had
pitifully mangled, and approaching nearer, they knew them by their Clothes to
be Benevente and his Man Fiamenti, which they gave Alcasero and his Sisters
notice of, the Bodies were brought to Otranto that night in a Coach, where they
were the same Evening interred, with as much decency as the short time would
allow, but with Floods of Tears from Alcasero, whilst his two Sisters wept like
Crocodiles. Next day News came, that Monteleon and his Lacquey were both
drowned, which added yet more to the satisfaction of these bloody Sisters, who
heartily wished that Carpi and his Lacquey, might meet with the same Fate. Six
weeks were now past, since the Funeral of Benevente when Alcasero began to
think it strange that Carpi came not to condole with him for his Fathers Death
and renew his Suit to his Sister, which made him entertain some jealous
thoughts, though at the same time, he had no probable ground of Suspicion. But
about a Month after, Carpi having heard nothing of the Premises, sends a
Lacquey over to Fidelia at Otranto with this Letter.

Carpi to Fidelia.
THere are some reasons, for which I have not lately seen Otranto, what they
are none can better imagine than your self; when thy Sorrows are overblown I
will come to thee having now given thee so true and real a proof of my
Affection, that thou can not in Justice ever doubt thereof. I pray signify
to me how thy Brother stands affected toward me; Thy Answer shall have many
kisses, and I will ever both honor and bless the hand that writ it.

Carpi.


The Lacquey comes to Otranto, delivers the Letter to Fidelia and requests her
Answer; But she was now wholly altered from her former Resolutions, a deep
Melancholy seized her even to despair, she hated all Company, was afraid of
her own Shadow, and thinks every House will fall upon her Head; this makes her
forsake her Devotion, look pale and ghastly, in which condition (at the
Importunity of Carpi's Lacquey) she returned this Answer.

Fidelia to Carpi.
MY Fathers Death has altered my Disposition, for I am wholly addicted to
Mourning and not to Marriage. I pray trouble not your self to come to Otranto,
for the best Comfort I can receive, is, that it is impossible for me to receive
any. I never doubted thy affection, nor will give thee cause to fear mine, for
I am resolved either to marry thee or my Grave. How my Brother stands affected
I cannot tell, but I think he neither loves thee for my sake, nor my self for
Thine. Live thou as happy as I fear I shall dye miserable.

Fidelia.


Having sent away this Letter, she is now again distracted in her Thoughts,
which her Brother and Friends endeavor to remove by good Counsel; but all in
vain, since they are ignorant of the true cause thereof. In a word, she grows
weary both of the World, and her Life, and would kiss that hand would kill her,
having her Father's Murder always in her mind, which was so terrible to her,
that she resolved to lay violent hands on her self, rather than endure the
tormenting pains of an evil Conscience. To this end she took Poison, but that
would not work; she sought her Knife and Penknife, but finding neither, she
bolted fast her Chamber door, and tying one of her Silk Garters to the Tester
of the Bed, there hanged her self. Dinner being served in, Alcasero and
Celestina call for their Sister Fidelia, when one of the Servants going to her
Chamber, brought word, that the Key was on the outside, and the door bolted
within, yet she answered not. Whereupon Alcasero ordered the door to be broke
open, where entering, he saw his Sister Fidelia hanging to the Bed^tead dead,
and her Body coal black, and horribly stinking, at which sight they were all
affrighted: The Officers of Justice being first acquainted with his dreadful
Accident, gave leave that the Body should be taken down, and privately buried
in the Garden.

Return we now to Carpi, who having received Fidelia's Letter, wonders at the
Contents, but resolves to second his first with this ensuing Letter.

Carpi to Fidelia.
HAd not thy last forbid me to pay those Respects due to thy Merit and my
Affection, I had seen Otranto on purpose to comfort my Fidelia, though, were
matters rightly weighed, I have more reason to sorrow than thy self, yet I hope
I am far from Despairing. Endeavor to love thy self, and not hate me, so shall
thou draw Felicity out of Affliction, and I Security out of Danger. Let thy
second Letter give me half so much Joy as thy first did Grief, and then shall I
rejoice more than I now lament.

Carpi.


This Letter was brought by Fiesco, one of Carpi's Lacquies, who coming to
Otranto, as he walked in the Court before the House, was spyed by Alcasero, who
sent to know whose Servant he was, but he refused to give any account. Alcasero
ordered him to be carried down into the Cellar, where he was plentifully
entertained with Wine, and invited to Dinner, but would neither by entreaties
nor threats be prevailed upon to discover himself. Alcasero told him he saw him
there fifteen days ago, but Fiesco is silent; Alcasero then offered him twenty
Ducats to disclose himself and his business. This took, and the Lacquey told
him he belonged to Carpi, and had a Letter from him to Fidelia, which he
delivers to Alcasero, and thereby his suspicion of Carpi for his Father's death
revives, but knowing silence is one main point to make out such a Discovery, he
bid the Lacquey stay that night, and he would give him his Answer next morning,
which was this: Tell the Baron of Carpi, thy Master, that my Sister Fidelia is
in another World, and that I shortly resolve to see him at Naples, and in the
interim will keep his Letter.

Fiesco knowing his fault, never returns to his Master, and Alcasero minding
his Promise, speeds to Naples, to the Criminal Judges, there accuses Carpi for
Benevente's Murder, for which he is apprehended, and adjudged to the Rack,
which torments he endured, and still denied all, so that the Court by public
Sentence clear him: but Alcasero will not; for after six months time, when
Carpi was sound in his Limbs again, by Plantinus he sent him this challenge.

Alcasero to Carpi.
ALthough the Law has cleared thee for my Father's Murder, yet my Conscience
cannot; and I should be a Monster of Nature not to seek Revenge for his Death
who gave me Life and Being: Wherefore I request thee to meet me at Eight to
morrow, after Supper, at the West end of the Common Vineyard, where I will
attend thee with a couple of Rapiers, the choice whereof shall be thine. If
thou will make use of a Second, he shall not depart without meeting one to
exchange a Thrust or two with him.

Alcasero.


Upon Receipt hereof Carpi was in doubt with himself what to do, but at last
bid Plantinus tell him, That though he had not deserved his Malice yet he
accepted his Challenge, but would fight single, being unprovided of a Second.
The morning is now come, and both Carpi and Alcasero met in the field, where it
was Carpi's fortune to have the day, by leaving Alcasero speechless, (and as he
supposed dead,) in the field, but by the great Care and Skill of his Surgeon
he was at last cured of his Wounds, and lived to see his Father's Murder
discovered, and the Assassins punished.

As Soon as Alcasero was recovered of his Wounds, he returned to Otranto, where
Celestina did now more triumph for Carpi's freedom than before she trembled at
his Imprisonment. So that now being out of fear, she marries a noble young
Gentleman, with whom she had lived above six Weeks; but Lorenzo, Carpi's Page,
who had his Masters Pocket at pleasure, to keep secret Benevente's Murder,
grows debauched, lewd and dissolute, and being one day sent on an Errand by his
Master, he observed a Gentlewoman to pull out a Purse of Gold, wherein were
five and twenty Ducatoons in Gold, which he stole from her, and being taken in
the fact, was the next day convicted, and adjudged to be hanged. Carpi was
strangely surprised to hear this News, went to Prison to him, and promised, if
he would not reveal the business he was concerned in, he would be a faithful
and constant Friend to his Mother and Brothers.

Lorenzo promised secrecy, but being brought to the Gallows, upon the Ladder,
confesses that he and the Baron of Carpi his Master, together with Monteleon
and Anselmo, had murdered Benevente and his Man Fiamenti, and threw them into
the Quarry, the which he took upon his Death was true, and so was turned off.
Lorenzo being thus hanged, Carpi is apprehended, who being put to the Rack,
discovers the Murder in every particular as Lorenzo had done, adding withal,
that Celestina and her dead Sister Fidelia drew them into it, protesting they
had never done it but at their Requests. Upon which he was condemned to have
his right hand cut off first, and then his Head. Which done Celestina was
seized at a Wedding, making merry with her Friends, and committed to Prison,
who understanding the former Confessions and Executions, confessed the whole,
and so was judged to have her Head cut off, her Body burnt, and her Ashes
thrown into the Air, which the next day was performed accordingly.

Oh wicked and bloody Daughters of unhapy Benevente! If Murder is a Scarlet
Sin, Parricide is a Crime so much of a deeper Die, as the indispensable Duty to
our Parents is above our common Respect to our Neighbors. HIST. XIX. Dario and
Cleandra.
Coligni seeks Cleandra in Marriage, but she loves Dario, Varini courts her for
Coligni but in vain, whereupon Coligni rails against both, for which Varini
challenges him but is killed. Dario desires to marry her, but his Father is
against it, and sends him away, whereupon Cleandra dies for Grief; Dario fights
Coligni, and gives him his Life, for which he basely Murders him and is
beheadded.

IN Rome were two noble young Gentlemen, the one named Seignior Francisco
Coligni, the other Seignior Andre o Varini, the latter of which had a Sister
fair and young named Cleandra, and her Coligni had chosen for his Mistress; And
as his Wealth made him confident, so he in amorous and honorable Terms, courts
her by himself and Friends, but he is not so full of hope, as she is of
disdain, and in few words tells him his Suit will be in Vain, for her
Affections are pre-engaged. But he unwilling to give over his Suit, for the
first denyals, acquaints her Brother Varini with his Passion for her, and
desires his assistance, which he promises, and like a true Friend, earnestly
sollicits for Coligni, but with no success, for she tells him her Heart is
already disposed of; he desires to know to whom; she told him (after she had
sworn him to secrecy) to Seignior Pedro Dario; at which he left her, and gave
his Friend Coligni, her definitive Answer.

Coligni hearing this grows enraged, and abruptly walks from him, and the next
day, in Cardinal Farnesi's Gallery, being asked by four or five Gentlemen, for
his Friend and Companion Varini, very passionately answers, He was a base
beggarly Gentleman, and his Sister Cleandra* a lascivious dissembling Strumpet;
which words were carried the same night to Varini by some of the Company, which
he highly resents, but chiefly for his Sisters Sake, and will not bear them.
Therefore next day he goes to Coligni's Fathers House, and asks for his Son;
his Father directed him into the Garden, where he enters and meets Coligni with
his Hat in his hand, and desires him to dismiss his Servants for he had a
Secret to impart to him. Coligni sends them away, and then Varini charges him
with the former Words, whereat Coligni in a great heat, swore they were his,
and what his Tongue had affirmed, his Sword should justify, on which they
cover and abruptly part. Cleandra having understood that her Brother was gone
to find out Coligni, waited his return to know the Issue, which he told her in
general Terms, should shortly prove to her Honor and his Content, and praying
her not to be troubled, went to his Chamber, and wrote this Challenge.

Varini to Coligni.
THy scandalous Reports like thy Self, are so Base, and I and my Sister so
Honorably descended and educated, that I doubt not but the disgrace, which
thou have so unjustly reflected on us, will e're long return upon thy self to
thy eternal Shame and Dishonor. Wherefore as thou art a Gentleman and a Roman
meet me at 5 to morrow morning, behind Cardinal Barronvo's Palace, where I mean
to take thy Life in satisfaction to my injured Honor, which is all thou can
give.

Varini.


This being delivered to Coligni, he returned this Answer, Tell Seignior
Varini, that I will not fail to meet him according to his Appointment.

The next morning they met, attended only by their Surgeons, where at the third
Encounter Varini's Foot slipping, Col^gni took the advantage, running him
thorough the Body, killed him dead upon the spot. Coligni with his Surgeon
return to the City, where he lies private at a Friends House near his Fathers.
The News of this Duel and the event thereof, is quickly spread abroad, whereat
Cleandra and her Father grieve inordinately. To allay and mitigate their Grief,
Seignior Pedro Dario proffers his Service, to right his Mistresses Honor and
Revenge Varini's Death, which both Cleandra and her Father dissuade him from.
Coligni is now grown so foolishly sottish, as notwithstanding the former and
present disadvantages he was under, he again by Letters sollicits his Suit to
Cleandra; but the report of a strict search, which was ordered to be made for
him forced him to retire, (disguised in a Capuchins Habit) where he stole out
of the City, and took Post to Palermo.

Dario begins now to make his private Affection public, and as he had gained
Cleandra's Heart, endeavors to obtain her Friends consent to the Match, of
which his Father having private notice, sent him from Rome to Naples, and
thence shipped him to the Island of Caprea to the Guard and keeping of
Alphonsus Drisca Captain of the Island, with charge not to permit him to return
in a whole year without express order.

These Afflictions (to lose her Brother and her Lover, and suffer in honor)
coming upon Cleandra, so immediately after one another, over-charge her with
grief, whereupon she falls desperately sick, at which receiving a Letter from
Dario, she returns him an Answer, and twenty days after dies a Love-Martyr.
Old Dario glad of this, sends a Servant to Caprea to recall his Son, who at the
sad news of Cleandra's Death, grieves beyond Measure, and so immoderate was his
Sorrow that had not the hopes of being revenged on Coligni, revived his
fainting Spirits, he had then followed his beloved Cleandra into another World.
In order to which, he got privately on Board a Neopolitan Galley, bound for
Sicily, and lands at Palermo, where the first night lying private in his Inn,
he enquires out Coligni, and understanding he was in the City, sent his Lacquey
the next morning to him with this Challenge.

Dario to Coligni
HAving wounded my dear Cleandra in the scandal of her Honor, and killed her
Brother Varini in the Field, for which she has now sorrowed away her Life; my
trouble to survive her makes me contemn my own, and seek thine; to which end I
have left Caprea to find Sicily, and in it Thy self; wherefore as thou art
Coligni, fail not to meet me this Evening, between five and six, in the next
Meadow behind the Carthusians Monastery. Thy Generosity invites Thee, and my
Affection and Honor oblige me, to be the only Guests at this bloody Banquet.

Dario.


Coligni receives this Challenge, but not very willingly, yet bids the Lacquey
tell his Master, he would not fail to give him his welcome to Palermo. The hour
is now come, and both Champions meet in the field, attended only by their
Chirurgions, who withdrawing into the next field, they engage with Fury and
Resolution: At the three first Passes Dario gives Coligni three deep Wounds,
without receiving the least Injury from him, whereat Coligni's heart failing,
he threw away his Rapier, confessed his Scandal on Cleandra, and begged his
Pardon. Dario's Revenge though not satisfied herewith, yet his noble Spirit
disdaining a base Act, gives Coligni his Life, whereupon they put up their
Swords, and went together into the City.

The^ News of this Duel is got to Rome before them, (though Dario makes have
thither) and Coligni having obtained his Pardon for killing Varini, came not
long after. All here generally applaud Dario's Affection and Humanity, but
scorn Coligni, for begging and receiving his Life, which, though he cannot well
digest, he knows not how to redress; for he dares not fight him again, and to
kill him in his Bed he cannot, for he has no admittance to him; and to pistol
him in the Street is dangerous, because of his many followers: So that at last
he resolves to shoot him from a Window, with a Pe^ronel, as he passes along the
Street, and understanding that Dario used to go to his morning Mass, at the
English College, he provides himself accordingly. On a Monday morning early, he
puts himself into an unknown house, between the said College, and the Palace
of Farresi, and having charged his piece with a brace of Bullets, prim'd and
cocked, he saw Dario in the Street, upon his prancing Barbary Horse and foot
cloth, and as he passed over against him he let fly, and lodged both the
Bullets in his Breast, with which he tumbles from his Horse dead to the ground,
only giving two or three lamentable groans.

The report of the Gun, and smoke at the Window, discover the House, where his
Servants running in, they search the House, and in the Chamber found the
Petronel, the People of the House affirming, that the Gentleman who had done
the Murder, fled upon a swift Spanish Gennet by the back gate, and that they
neither knew him, nor durst stop him. Thus he escaped with full hopes to get
clear away, but as he galloped through Campo del F^ogo, at the farther end
thereof, two Bricklayers building of a House upon a Scaffold two stories high,
both the Scaffold and Bricklayers fall down, and beat him and his Horse to the
ground. The news of the Murder was not yet come so far, but his fear hastening
him, he soon recovered his Horse, and mounting, set spurs to him, but had not
rode far before his Gennet fell, and put his Shoulder out of joint, so that he
could not rise with his Master, who finding no other way, betook himself to his
heels, and fled to Nero's Tower, and there in the Ruins of diverse stupendous
Buildings hid himself, but within two hours was discovered, and instantly
imprisoned.

The second morning after he was brought before the Judges, to whom he freely
confessed the Fact, and implored their Mercy; but they, for Expiation of his
Crime, first adjudge his two hands to be cut off, before the House where he
shot Dario, and afterward to be beheaded at the common place of Execution, his
Head to be set upon a Pole, over St. John de Lateran's Gate, and his Body to be
thrown into Tyber, which the next day was accordingly executed in the presence
of many thousand Spectators.

He that is encouraged to the commission of Sin, (as in the Example of Coligni)
in hopes to conceal it, or the Author, loves the Crime, though he hates the
Punishment; but where the first is his Delight, the second shall be his Reward.
HIST. XX. De Mansey and Almanda.
De Mansey being in love with Almanda, hires Lycon and Cruento, two Bravo 's,
to murder her Husband Perron, and then marries her. Almanda slights old Mansey,
who (as he was forewarned) is stabbed in his Chamber by Rosino, his Wife's
Gallant, who was in Bed with her. Lycon and Cruento coming to rob the House,
are apprehended for De Mansey's Murder, which they deny, but confess Perron's,
for which they are broke on the Wheel. Rosino is discovered, and hanged,
Almanda beheaded, and De Mansey's dead Body hanged first, and then thrown into
the River Ormo.

IN Vannes, a City of Britain in France, lived Monsieur Boren, a Gentleman of
ancient Family, and fair Estate, who having several Children, his eldest named
Monsieur de Mansey, whilst he was yet very young, was sent over to his Uncle,
Mr. Verdue, who lived at Turenne, in the Court of the Duke of Savoy, where he
was both in his Favor and Service considerably preferred. De Mansey being
arrived to the Age of Five and twenty, his Uncle dyed, and left him sole Heir
to a plentiful Estate, which was very much advanced by the addition he received
by the death of his Father, at Vannes, and afterward of several other
Relations, who all, as it were, conspired to make him rich and great. De Mansey
continued his Residence at Turenne, it being the place of his Education, and
most familiar Acquaintance, but generally once a year, made a Journey to
Vannes, to receive his Rents, and see in what condition his Tenants were, and
how well they improved his Lands. This being his Custom, for several years he
kept constant Stages in his Journey, and every night lay at such Towns, and
such Inns as his long traveling that Rode had best acquainted him with. It
happened that coming into his Inn one night at St. Claney, (a Town in the mid
way between Turenne and Vannes,) alighting from his Horse, he called for his
Host, who was familiarly called by his Friends, honest Adrian; his Hostess with
a low Courtesy, wellcom'd him to her House, and with seeming trouble and
perplexity, told him that her Husband was dead, and had been so for near six
months. De Mansey condoled with her, for the loss of so good an Host and so
kind a Husband, when being conducted to his Chamber, a ground Room where he
constantly lay, he gave order for Supper, and designing to rise soon in the
Morning, went early to Bed.

It was now about midnight, as he judged by the Moon which shone full in at the
Window, when he heard a noise as if his Door opened, (for his wandering thoughts
disturbed his Repose,) and drawing the Curtain in a fright, to see who it was
entered at that unseasonable hour, he saw the fair Image and Representation of
his Host standing at his Bed side, in the same proportion as alive, with a pale
look, and his Throat cut from ear to ear. This Spectacle did very much surprise
him at first, but after a little time recovering himself, he thus spoke to it,
If thou art what thou appearest to be, the Ghost of my deceased Host, I conjure
thee by all that is Sacred, to tell me what disturbs thy quiet in the Grave, and
what thy business is with me. I come, said the Apparition, to acquaint thee,
that I am basely and barbarously murdered by my Wife, her Sister, and the
Ostler, and request thee (whose Friendship I have always been obligd to) to
acquaint the Officers of Justice with it, and under this Bed they shall find my
Body privately buried, with a stake thrust through my heart: at these words the
Apparition vanished, and De Mansey endeavored to compose himself to rest, but
in vain; for his thoughts were so intent on what he had seen, and the Discovery
his Host had made him, that he began to consider his own Life might be in
danger, if all this was not delusion, which he did not in the least suspect.

About an hour after he heard a second noise at his door of some persons
tampering with the Lock, when having his Pistols at his Bed's head, ready
charged, he prepared himself to receive them: De Mansey got out of his Bed, and
stood behind the Curtains, his door with a sudden shock was violently forced
open, at which some Persons entered, but who, or how many he could not tell,
(for the light of the Moon was now shaded by a cloud) however he discharged his
Pistols amongst them at which he heard a great shriek, and two or three
lamentable groans; the report of the Pistol alarmed all the Lodgers, and some
of the Neighbors, who presently came to know the meaning of it. At the
entrance into his Chamber they found the Ostler upon the floor, shot into the
Breast, and almost dead. By this time the Officers of the Town were come with
the Watch, to know the reason of so unusual a disturbance. The Ostler and the
whole Family were secured that night, and the next morning they were all
examined, and the Ostler having no hopes of recovery, confessed, that himself,
his Mistress, and her Sister, had designed to rob and Murder De Mansey, for
which he was now heartily sorry and repentant. De Mansey seeing how
miraculously he had been preserved by the appearance of his Host, relates the
whole Story to the Judges in all its Circumstances, and accuses the Ostler, his
Hostess and her Sister, of the Murder, and to confirm the truth of what he
said, desired they would search under the Bed in his Chamber, which they did,
and there found his Body with a Stake through his Breast: These Circumstances
made their Guilt so apparent, that neither of them had Confidence enough to
deny it, for which the next day his Wife was burnt, and the Ostler and his
Sister hanged. De Mansey was so much concerned at his own preservation, and the
Discovery he had so strangely made of his Landlords Murder, that he stays to
see the Execution of the Criminals, and removes his Lodging to another House:
when being in Bed the night after they had suffered, his Landlord appeared to
him again all in white, and thanked him for the trouble he had given him and
the Justice he had done him; adding, that if any thing lay in his Power,
whereby he might oblige him and express his Gratitude he would willingly do it.
De Mansey told him he expected neither Thanks nor Reward, but if departed Souls
know what is hid from mortal Eyes, if he could tell him when he should dye three
hours before, as it was his greatest concernment it would be his greatest
satisfaction. The Ghost promised if (it should ever be in his power), to
perform it.

De Mansey returned to Turenne, where amongst his Friends he would sometimes
discourse this Story, asking them if they thought it was in the Power of his
deceased Host to make good his Promise to him, in that nature he desired it. It
was now upwards of twenty years, since this had happened to De Mansey; and he
now grown into years being almost sixty, when he, whom all the charms of Love
had never affected, was now overcome by those of Lust; The Beautiful Almanda who
was both young and fair, was the Object he so much admired and doted on.
Almanda was the Daughter of Monsieur Chartres, a Lady highly virtuous had not
Ambition poisoned her excellent Qualities, and was two years before, married to
a young Gentleman more extravagant than rich, whose name was Monsieur Perron;
This Lady* De Mansey courted with assiduous Visits and costly Presents, both
which she willingly received, but would by no means yield up her Honor to his
lustful Embraces. Having thus been at great expense of Time and Moneys,
without any hopes of success, one day resolving to urge his Amors with the
most prevailing Arguments, he offered her a vast Treasure to consent to his
desires, which she absolutely refused, telling him, if she was at liberty she
could love him as a Husband, but never as a Gallant, which was a Crime so
odious to her, that all the Riches of the World should never tempt her to the
violation of her Marriage Vows. De Mansey either misunderstanding her meaning,
or out of despair of attaining his Ends, resolves to put her into such a
condition, as she might with honor comply with him; and to that purpose hires
two Bravo's, called Lycon and Cruento, to murder her Husband Perron, for the
Reward of five hundred Ducats, which they agreed to, and about a Week after,
as he came late from the Tavern, in a dark night, set upon him in the Streets
with their Rapiers, and after several Wounds left him dead upon the place, and
acquainted De Mansey what they had done, who immediately paid the Money, and
they made their escape to Genoa.

Almanda grievously lamented the death of her Husband, and gave the Officers of
Justice, all possible encouragement to search after, and discover the
Murderers, but all in vain; three days after his Body was decently interred by
Almanda, with greater show of grief than cost; and about six months after she
was solemnly married to De Mansey, who, as an Argument of his Affection,
discovered how instrumental he had been to discharge her of those Bonds which
were so uneasy to her. Almanda had not been long married to De Mansey, but as
she was pleased with the present state and advancement of her fortune, so did
she loath the cold Embraces of her impotent Husband, which would by no means
suit with the warm and vigorous desires of her Youth. To remedy this
intolerable Evil, she familiarly acquaints her self with a young Gentleman,
called Seignior Rosino, an Italian by birth, who for a Murder committed at
Venice had fled to Turenne. No sooner was old De Mansey gone abroad, but Rosino
supplied his place at home, and all those hours passed away in sighs, when De
Mansey's Company prevented her of her beloved Rosino's. This the Servants could
not but take some notice of, but her imperious Sway, and absolute Command, awed
them into silence.

Lycon and Cruento having riotously spent their Moneys, came privately back to
Turenne, and told De Mansey their great Wants, that the hazard and danger which
they ran in accomplishing his Desires, deserved more than so poor a Reward;
that he was rich enough, and ought to supply their necessities, which were the
effect of their faithful Service to him. De Mansey was very much surprised at
this Discourse, and promised largely, but at present he was unfurnished of
Moneys, and could not answer their occasions till he had received his Rents,
which would be within a Month, or little more; with this Answer they went away
seemingly satisfied.

Four days after De Mansey went to his Country House at St. Agneaw, five Miles
from Turenne, with a design to stay a week, for the advantage of the Air. This
was a blessed opportunity for Rosino and Almanda, who Improve each minute, and
day and night revel in the close Enjoyment of forbidden pleasures. De Mansey
had now been but three days at St. Agneaw, and finding the Air not agreeable to
his present Indisposition, resolves that Afternoon to return to Turenne, but
setting out late, night grew upon him, which proving dark, and being without
his Servant, he was forced to ride more easily, so that the Clock struck
Twelve, just as he arrived at the Gates of Turenne. But that which most
troubled him, was, that when he was yet two Miles off, at the upper end of a
Lane, his Horse snorted and started, and would by no means go forward; at which
looking to see what the matter was, he saw the shape of his Host, honest
Adrian, who appeared to him clothed all in white, and bid him fear not, for he
came only to make good his promise to him, and to tell him that within three
hours he should be as he was; and at those words vanished and left De Mansey in
great Horror and Consternation, who remembering it was his own Request did now
firmly believe it would be accordingly, and as he rid on, disposed his thoughts
into Meditations of another World. At the Gates of the City he was well known
and presently admitted, but when he came to his own house (which was walled
about) seeing no light he concluded his Family all in Bed, and it would be to
little purpose, to endeavor to awaken them at that distance. Considering what
to do in that great Perplexity he was in, he remembered his Gardener lived hard
by, and if he could raise him he might get in by the Garden Door. When coming
to his House he knocked and called, the Gardener knowing his Masters Voice he
presently rose; De Mansey told him he was very ill, and for that reason had
returned late from St. Agneaw, that his Servants were all in Bed, and he had no
way to get into his House, but by his Key thorough the Garden. The Gardener put
his Horse into the Stable and went with him. De Mansey appeared very
melancholy, and complained of his present Illness, and as they walked together,
told him he was sure he should dye that night, for as he came along within two
miles of Turenne he had seen the Ghost of his Host, who had told him so; by
this time they were got into the Garden, and the Gardener called up the Groom,
who opened the Door and let him in. De Mansey ordered him to go back with the
Gardener and take care of his Horse, and with the Candle in his hand went up
Stairs into his Study, which was the next Room to his Bedchamber. Almanda
hearing some body go into the Study, asked who was there. It Is I my dear,
answered De Mansey; at which she was at her Wits end, and so affrighted she did
not know what to do, to conceal her Gallant Rosino, who was in Bed with her; De
Mansey having finished his Devotions, came into his Chamber to go to Bed, and
as he entered Rosino stepping out from behind the door, stabbed him to the heart
with his Stilletto, at which De Mansey dropped down dead, giving only one
lamentable groan. Never were two persons in greater confusion than Rosino and
Almanda now are, they know not what course to take to prevent the Discovery, or
to discharge themselves of the Guilt of this Murder, which would certainly be
known in the morning. As they were consulting what measures to take, Almanda
told Rosino, that his Shirt was all bloody, and advised him to change it for a
clean one of her Husbands, which she fetched him, and wrapped up his and the
Stilletto in a black Scarf of her own, which she put into a green Silk bag, and
locked them up in her Trunk. At last it was agreed that Rosino should make his
escape immediately, and after he was gone, Almanda having laid a Stilletto of
De Mansey's all bloody by him, should in a great fright call up her Servants,
and say that he had murdered himself. This was resolved upon as the best
expedient they could at present find out, but Fortune seemed to be more kind to
them than they could expect or design. Rosino was no sooner gone down the back
Stairs, but Almanda heard a noise of some Persons coming up the other way,
which her Fear and Guilt assured her were the Officers of Justice, come to
apprehend her for this barbarous Murder. They first opened De Mansey's Study,
where they found the Key in it, and ransacked all there; then came into the
Chamber, where they found him dead upon the floor, at which they were strangely
surprised, but pity, or the curiosity to know how he came so, was no part of
their business; when coming to the Bed, they seized Almanda, and gagged her,
and then rifled her Trunks of her Plate, Jewels, and what they liked best.
Rosino heard the noise, and had the same apprehensions of danger as Almanda,
believing them to have been the Officers of Justice, or some of the Servants of
the House who were risen to apprehend him, for which reason he made all
possible have, and having a Key in his Pocket of a private Door where he used
to come in, went off undiscovered. The noise these Thieves had made, awak'ned
the Servants, who coming up into De Mansey's Chamber, found him dead upon the
Floor, Almanda bound and gagged in Bed, and the Chamber and his Study robbed,
but those who had been the Actors of this bloody Tragedy were fled, of whom
they hoped Almanda could give some Account, who was presently unbound, and with
showers of Tears told them that Thieves had been there and murdered her
Husband, because he would not discover his Money, which they supposed was a
greater Sum than they could find, and that they had most cruelly used her, and
had they not come in at that instant, had certainly murdered her too. The
Servants presently called the Watch and made what search and pursuit after them
they could, and Almanda being now recovered from her Fright, smiled to her self
to see how favorable Fortune was to her, and that this lucky Robbery of the
Thieves would for ever secure her and Rosino from being either charged or
suspected of De Mansey's Murder. But see when the prosperous Sinner thinks
himself most secure, then often is the Vengeance of Heaven at the Door, ready
to punish those very Crimes, which he thinks himself most successful in.

The next day two of the Robbers, by the industrious search of the Servants,
were apprehended in their Lodging in St. Leonard's Street, and some of the
Plate, Jewels and other things taken with them; who were presently brought
before the Judge-Advocate of Turenne, and charged with the Robbery and Murder,
and several of the Goods produced in Evidence against them, and amongst other
things the green Silk Bag, which was tied up fast, and had not yet been opened.
The Judge asked what that Bag was, and what in it, which being opened, they
found a bloody Shirt and a Stilletto wrapped up together in a black Scarf. The
Thieves confessed the Robbery, but utterly denied the Murder, for which they
were put to the Rack, when one of them confessed, their names were Lycon and
Cruento, that De Mansey had hired them for 500 Ducats to murder Monsieur
Perron, which they had effected some years ago, and having spent all their
money, they solicited him for more, and not receiving a speedy Supply, and
understanding he was at his Country House, they resolved to rob him here; and
that as soon as they came into his Chamber they saw him dead, and a Stilletto
all bloody lying by him, and no person in the Room, but his Wife in Bed, and
that he took that green Bag out of her Trunk, and till now knew not what was in
it. Cruento confirmed what Lycon had confessed in every particular, and one of
De Mansey's Servants said, the Stilletto was the same or very like that he had
often seen Seignior Rosino wear, who had been frequently at his Masters house;
This gave the Judge some suspicion he might be privy to the Murder,
considering the Discourse of the Town, which spoke loudly of the endeared
Familiarity between Rosino and Almanda, upon which he sent a Relation of his
own to acquaint Almanda that the Robbers were taken, and that he desired to
hear what Evidence she could give against them; she immediately came suspecting
nothing, and in the interim the Captain of the Watch brought Rosino before the
Judge, complaining that because he had refused to let him through the Gates at
an unseasonable hour he endeavored to force his way, and had wounded him in
several places: upon this he was asked what urgent business he had to go abroad
so early, and whether that was not his Stilletto; for the first Question he had
a plausible excuse, and utterly denied the second. By this time the Judge had
notice that Almanda was come who was brought in, and demanded if she knew that
silk Bag and the Scarf, and who owned that bloody Shirt and Stilletto; at this
she was so confounded she had not one word to answer; the Judge observing the
great disorder she was in, told her, if she hoped for mercy, the only means to
purchase it, must be by a free and open Confession; whereupon she accused
Rosino of the Murder, and said, that was his Bloody Shirt and that his
Stilletto, and that she was no farther Guilty than as so great a surprise
forced her consent, and her own Safety, the Concealment which she had
endeavored by hiding them in her Trunk. Rosino being confronted by her
confessed the Fact, and was adjudged to be hanged and his Body burnt; Lycon and
Cruento were condemned to be broke on the Wheel alive, and their Bodies left as
a prey to the Beasts of the Field, and Almanda to be beheaded, and the dead
Body of De Mansey for the Murder of Perron, to be hanged at the common Gallows
for three days, and then thrown into the River Ormo, all which was the next day
executed accordingly.

In this last History we have a Complication of Murders, that of Adrian,
Perron and De Mansey, perpetrated for different ends, and all the bloody
Criminals brought to condign and open Punishment by strange and various
Methods: For be assured that as Happiness here and Glory hereafter, are the
encouragements and rewards of Virtue and Honesty, so present Shame and future
Punishment will be the dreadful Portion of all those whose sanguinary Crimes
and horrid Villainies, have made them the wretched Subjects of divine Vengeance
and everlasting Wroth. FINIS.


Sold by Benj: Crayle in Fleet street

THE GLORY OF God's Revenge Against the Licentious and Detestable SIN OF
ADULTERY.

Exemplified in several late Examples of the Judgment of God upon notorious
Offenders.

BOOK II.

LONDON, Printed for BENJAMIN CRAYLE in Fleetstreet.

THE GLORY OF Gods Revenge Against the Licentious and Detestable Sin of
ADULTERY.
HIST. I. Castrucchio and Gloriana.
The Count of Varini marries with Gloriana a young Gentlewoman of incomparable
Beauty, contracted to Castrucchio; Varini apprehends Castrucchio in Bed with
Gloriana and kills him, cuts off his Head and makes her drink out of his Scull,
and afterward eat up his Heart, who the next morning was found dead in her Bed.

IN the former Book thou have seen (Courteous Reader) the dreadful Judgments of
God, upon those wretched Sinners, who have been guilty of that crying Sin of
Murder, and in this I will present thee with the miserable Examples of
Adultery; a Crime so odious to God and Man, that whatever gentle names we may
gloss it over with, has been always attended with sad and lamentable
Consequences. It has been the Opinion of some, that the Forbidden Fruit in the
midst of the Garden, which God Almighty by his especial Command so strictly
prohibited, and the Devil tempted Eve withal, was no other than Carnality; what
Exceptions this may admit of, I shall not now dispute; but the great mercy of
God, has since taken pity of our Frailties, and not only permitted that
pleasure but sanctified it in Paradise by the solemn Union of Matrimony, taken
from it all filthiness, and made our very Lust, pure and immaculate. Chastity
and Lust, are so professed Enemies to one another, that they can never live
together in the same Subject, no more than day and night, light and darkness;
the first is a bright and resplendent Virtue, the other a raging and devouring
Vice: Chastity makes us Glorious as the Angels, Lust deformed as Devils; it is
like the black foyl to the sparkling Diamond, or the dark shade to a beautiful
Image. Love is the Intelligence that gently moves the Soul from innocent
Desires to chaste Embraces, but Incontinence is the Devils Incendiary, which
first fires us with unlawful Flames, and then violently hurries us over all the
sacred Boundaries of Modesty, Justice and Religion, to satisfy the impious
Cravings of one burning Lust. I could here enlarge on the sacred Institution of
Marriage in Paradise, he noble Royalties it is endowed with, and how Adam, no
sooner beheld the light and glory of the Sun, but he saw the brightness and
illustrious Beauty of a Wife; how Chastity is as unlimited as Lust, and that we
have as many glorious Examples of the one, as Prodigies of the other; that the
name of Judith is yet famed by her Continence, whilst the memory of Lais is
preserved by her Ignominy; that the insatiate Messalina, was not more the
scandal, than the chaste Lucretia the honor of her Sex, who fl^w from the hot
Embraces of the lustful Tarquin, to the cold arms of Death for refuge, her
purer Soul now loathed that Body which had suffered the pollutions of the
Ravisher, and with an undaunted courage opened the door to death, and lodged
the fatal Steel, in her yet unspotted Breast. But I should expatiate too far,
thou shall here find variety of Examples in the following Histories, a Chaste
Imbrigis and a Lascivious Helda, as Loose, as her Sister Continent; where I
hope the beautiful Character of the one, will attract thy imitation of her
Virtue, and the deformity of Vice in the other deter thee from the Commission
of that Sin, which often imprints it is own punishment on the Offender, ( Viz.
the Venereal Disease) but if he is so happy to escape the Brand of his own
Iniquity here, the Terrors of an evil Conscience, will be his constant
Executioner, as the Devil his Tormentor hereafter.

But I proceed to the History.

AT Venice, the Beauty of Italy, which is the Garden of Europe, in the Reign of
Leonardo Donato that noble Duke of Venice, famous for banishing the Jesuits,
and opposing the intrusions of the Popish See, and fulminations of Paulus
Quintus in the just defense and maintenance of the Privileges and Prerogatives
of the Seigniory, lived Pedro Giovanno Count of Varini. He was a Gentleman no
less Eminent for the many Services he had done the State, than admired for his
Virtues; He was honored with the Title of Count, but much more illustrious in
the rich Endowments of a noble Mind; to all which was added a large Estate and
plentiful Revenues, which gave Luster and Support to the Royalty of his House
and Grandeur of his Family. Varini was now arrived to the sixtieth year of his
Age, and being desirous to retire from the Troubles and Cares, that constantly
attend public Employments, left the crowded Streets of Venice for the quiet
and recess of a Country Life, and presently taking leave of his Friends, went
to his Castle at St. Brien about 30 Italian miles distant from Venice, where he
passed his time in the pleasant Diversion of those Rural Sports he was ever
delighted in. It happened one day, as he was abroad in the Field with several
other Gentlemen who were his daily Companions in his Country Recreations, his
Falkner discovered a large Heron upon the Wing whereupon Varini immediately
ordered him to try the courage of his Hawk if he durst fasten on so bold an
Enemy. After several bickerings in the Air, to the great satisfaction of the
Spectators, the Conflict remained doubtful, till at last the Hawk impatient in
the Conquest of his stubborn Adversary, redoubled his force and struck him to
the ground, who fell into the Garden of Seignior Berinto, whither they all
hasted to the assistance of the Hawk and seizure of their Game. Berinto
understanding that the Count of Varini, with several other Gentlemen of Quality
were gone into his Garden, followed after, where he found them taking up the
Heron yet alive though disabled; all the Company highly commended the courage
and strength of his Hawk, which Varini seemed very much pleased at, and being
invited into the House by Berinto was nobly treated, where he first saw the
matchless Gloriana, to whom with all the Expressions of Respect and Kindness,
he presented the Heron, which she with equal Grace and Courtesy received.

Berinto was a Gentleman of Honorable Extract, whose great Grandfather had
been Duke of Venice, and he himself a considerable Merchant there, but having
suffered great Losses at Sea and particularly in one Ship, whose Cargo was
valued at near 100000 l. which was taken by the Corsairs of Argiers, in the
Wars between the Turks and Venetians, he left off Merchandising and betook
himself to the happy and peaceful solitude, of his Country House at Vernon a
League from St. Brien, where he spent his days free from the dangerous blasts
of inconstant Fortune; He had one Daughter named Gloriana the Paragon of her
Sex, in whom Virtue and Beauty were equally eminent, and being now of the age
of 21 by the consent and approbation of her Father, was contracted to Seignior
Castrucchio, a young Gentleman of a neighboring Village, who being lately
returned from his Travells in France and England, desired no other repose of
his future Happiness, but what he should find in the soft Embraces of the
Beautiful Gloriana. But alas in vain do we seek for a perfect and established
Happiness amongst the fading Joys of this uncertain World, in the midst of our
greatest security we are on the Brink of Danger; and those Blessings we catch
at are but the Shadows of what we mistake them for, and either delude us in our
vain pursuit, or ruin us in the fatal enjoyment of them. Varini having paid
his Thanks to Berinto for his generous Reception and splendid Entertainment,
took his leave of him, inviting him over to St. Brien, and telling him, that as
such a fortunate Accident had made him happy in his Acquaintance, he would
study all Opportunities to improve it, and he hoped they who were so near
Neighbors, should be no longer Strangers to one another in their Friendship
and Conversation. Berinto promised in few days to wait upon him at his Castle
in return of the great Honor he had now done him, and that though the sense of
his Obligations to him, was beyond the power of his present Gratitude, yet he
would never be wanting in the acknowledgment of that debt he was not able to
discharge. Night coming on the Company parted, and Varini retired to St. Brien,
where being alone his thoughts began to reflect on the Beauty of Gloriana, the
elegant composure of her Body and the excellent perfections of her mind, which
had now made so violent an Assault and deep impression on his Heart, that his
blood which had been chilled by the cares and sollicitudes of sixty Winters,
now grew warm and wanton, his Pulse beat vigorously, and all parts grew active
and sprightly, so powerful is the strong impulse of Love.

Ten days after Berinto came over to make his Complement to the Count, who
received him with all the demonstrations of Friendship and Respect, and after
he had entertained him with a sight of his Castle, the rarities of his Closet,
and the fragrant Curiosities of his Garden, he retired into a shady Arbor
covered with Iessamines, where after a pleasant Discourse on the great
advantages of a true and sincere Friendship, he began an excellent Harangue, in
commendation of Love and the happiness of Marriage, above the Care and Solitude
of a single Life, which Berinto assented to, saying, he much wondered that a
Person of his Honor and Quality, who wanted nothing to render him completely
happy, had never yet tasted the Ioys of Wedlock, which he had so passionately
extolled. The Count told him, Amongst all the Beauties of Italy, he but once
saw that incomparable Creature worthy of his Affections; And pray my Lord, said
Berinto, what then could obstruct the noble designs of your Love? That Question
says Varini, My dear Berinto, you best can Answer. It is Gloriana, the
matchless Gloriana I love, she alone is the Lady of my Affections, at whose
feet I would prostrate my self and all the Titles of Honor or Fortune I am
Master of, to receive the name of Husband from her, more glorious and valuable
to me than the Purple Robes of aspiring Senators, or the sparkling Diadems of
Eastern Monarchs. Berinto was not a little surpised to hear Varini with so
much ardency of Affection, commend his Daughter Gloriana, nor did he presently
know what answer to return; the Ambition of seeing his Daughter so great a
Lady, and that breach of Faith which would necessarily attend it, raised two
different Passions in his Breast, and so far distracted his Thoughts, that
Varini might easily read the labors and troubles of his mind in his
discomposed Countenance and profound Silence. At last having something
recovered himself, he thus replied, My Lord, the Transcendency of your
Goodness, and the noble offer you please to make my Daughter, is so great an
Honor to my Family, that I, who am highly sensible of my own demerits, can
receive it with no less Transports of joy and satisfaction than the Captive
does his Freedom, or the condemned Criminal a gracious Reprieve.

The next day, Varini returned Berinto's Visit and made his first Address to
Gloriana, who being acquainted by her Father, with the great professions of
Kindness, the Count had made to him, and his m^re particular Respect to her,
gave him a reception which rather showed her deference and regard to his
Quality, than any delight she received from the Courtship of a Lover. However
the Count so vigorously pursued his Amors, that in a short time he absolutely
gained the Father, and had been no less successful over the Affections of the
Daughter, had not her pre-engagement to Castrucchio, obstructed the Conquest of
his Flames, who was fully resolved, that no power should be able to rescind
that sacred Tie, by which they were so firmly linkt together: Nor should all
those empty Titles of Honor, now laid at her Feet, tempt her heart to
Treachery, and prevail upon her to forsake him to whom she had once vowed
eternal Constancy and Fidelity.

Castrucchio was soon acquainted by Gloriana with the unwelcome News, that the
Lord Varini was now his Rival in his pretensions to her, which he received with
a courage undaunted, telling her, that as no person of what Quality soever,
durst make an attempt upon her Virtue, so he was well assured he would find as
cold Entertainment in her Affections; and that she who knew the Honor and
Justice of his Cause, was the most fit person to determine his Right, which the
Lord Varini with more Treachery than Gallantry endeavored to supplant.
Gloriana with repeated promises gave fresh assurance of a constant and Loyal
Heart, which all the charms of Ambition, should never be able to affect with
levity, nor the gilded promises of a plentiful Jointure corrupt with Infidelity.

But alas! what Heart is so steeled from all Impressions of Vice, that
Covetousness and Ambition can make no dint upon it? Love too often softens the
most rigid and austere Virtue, which once made pliable receives the easy
Signatures of those Crimes, we at first so boldly scorned and detested. This
was the case of fair but inconstant Gloriana, the present Temptation of Riches
and Honor, were so often presented to her with all the glorious Train of
future Blessings, that at last the gaudy show staggered her weaker Resolution,
and she rather chose the Age and Impotency of a Gouty Lord, than the Youth and
Vigor of her faithful Castrucchio. In short, the sedulous Addresses of Varini,
joined with the powerful Commands of Berinto, at last took place, and Gloriana
consented to the Marriage, which was solemnized in the Castle of St. Brien a
forthnight after, with all the Magnificence and Splendour a generous Bounty was
able to express.

Castrucchio was not long before he received intelligence of the fatal News,
and a positive confirmation of his own unhappy State by the treacherous
Gloriana, which so nearly reached his heart, that he immediately fell into a
deep Melancholy, which continued for several Months upon him, and had now
brought him into a Consumption, which his Friends apprehending the danger of
advised him to remove to Padua, the chief University of Italy, not far from
Venice, for change of Air; where we shall leave him to the care of the most
able and learned Physicians, and return to Gloriana, who has now attained the
utmost perfection of that Happiness she had aspired to.

The Count and his Lady lived at St. Brien, were visited and complemented by
all the Nobility and Gentry of the Country, and to all appearance no persons
could be more happy than Varini in the Embraces of Gloriana, and Gloriana in
the Love and Endearments of Varini: But alas! the fairest Picture has its
shade, and the brightest day is closed by the dark and dismal night. Gloriana
had not been married above nine months, before she grew pale and wan, the Roses
of her Cheeks were faded, and the little Cupids which formerly danced in her
Eyes were fled and gone, a Cloud of Melancholy sat hovering on her Forehead,
and all her Actions and Discourse spoke the Resentments of a troubled and
discontented Mind. Her Conversation had now lost that air and briskness she was
once so admired for, and all her time was spent in a melancholy retirement to
her Closet, or in the most shady recesses of her Garden, where she sighed away
her bitter hours in complaints to the more happy Birds, who free from the
Tyranny of humane Laws, did once a year choose their own Mates, and in fresh
enjoyments could bill without control. Varini was passionately concerned to
see his beloved Gloriana so strangely altered, and with all the tender
expressions of Love and Kindness endeavored to expel those Troubles which had
seized her Mind; but all in vain, Age had now made him an impotent Physician,
and Nature denied him that Elixir of Life which could only cure the Longings of
a youthful and vigorous Lady. Gloriana declined so fast in her Health, that he
resolved to remove to Venice, in hopes the pleasantness of the Place, and
variety of Company, would divert her Melancholy, and restore her to her former
Health and Beauty, and accordingly did so.

Varini had not been above three months there, but Castrucchio, who was now
perfectly recovered at Padua, heard of his return to Venice, whither he
immediately removed, and courted all opportunities to get a sight of the
Countess, which soon after he effected. Understanding she used to go to St.
Mark's Chapel to Mass, he constantly paid his Devotions there, where at last
he spied her upon her Knees before the high Altar, and not observing the Count
her Husband, or any of her Servants near, went and kneeled down by her. It is
not difficult to guess what Saint he made his Prayers to, nor what was the
Subject of his Petitions* The Countess was strangely surpised to see
Castrucchio so near her, and in the midst of his Discourse bid him forbear, and
meet her there the next Afternoon at four precisely. Castrucchio in the interim
suffered all the Torments that variety of Thoughts could rack him with,
sometimes blaming her Disloyalty to him, he expected nothing but scorn and
contempt, and presently when he considered her first infidelity, it gave him
hopes she might prove as faithless to the Count, whose cold and impotent
Embraces could never oblige the craving desires of a youthful Beauty. The hour
was now come, and Castrucchio impatiently expected the Countess, who presently
came and kneeled down in the same place he had seen her before; Castrucchio
placed himself next to her, who immediately gave him a Note into his hands,
wherein he found these Contents following: Gloriana to Castrucchio.
TO morrow the Count Varini goes to his Castle at St. Brien, and at ten in the
morning I will be at the Franciscan Church, till then farewell my dear, my dear
Castrucchio.




Castrucchio was overjoyed at this Assignation, and punctually observed it,
where, notwithstanding his diligence, the Countess prevented him, from whence
they immediately went to the Waterside, and took a Gondola, and so directly to
a private Garden of Pleasure, where the recluseness of the place presented them
with the opportunity of a more secret Converse. Castrucchio could not so
prudently stifle his resentments of Gloriana's Inconstancy, but she presently
observed discontent in his looks, and by the breaks of his Discourse, that a
more fixed and composed trouble was settled in his heart. Whereupon, My dear
Castrucchio, says she, You blame me I know, and presume the Justice of your
Cause, will warrant your Reflections on my guilty Breast; I confess I am not so
innocent as I ought to be, yet let not the severity of your prosecution, exceed
the quality of my Offense; if I have wronged your Goodness by my Breach of
Faith, let that goodness now forgive me, and my too late Repentance be my
Punishment. Gloriana's Penitence and Castrucchio's Mercy, soon wrought a
perfect reconciliation, and the rest of the time was spent in more pleasant and
amorous entertainments. At evening they parted, when Gloriana told Castrucchio,
the Visit he promised she would receive at her own House the next Evening, for she
did not expect the Count's Return till ten days after.

Thus they had frequent Enterviews, in the absence of the Count by the
assistance of Fortia, Gloriana's Waiting Woman, who being privy to the
Intrigues of Love between the Countess and Castrucchio, was very serviceable to
their Amors, by admitting him in the dusk of the Evening, at a back door into
her Lodgings where they revelled all night in forbidden Pleasures, little
dreaming of those heavy Judgments, which so closely pursued their Adulterous
Crimes. The Count was now returned, who observed great alterations in the
Temper and Behavior of Gloriana, her Humor had now recovered its former
Sprightliness, and nothing seemed so dear and obliging to her, as the Embraces
of her Husband, which he was extremely pleased withal, mistaking that for Love
and Kindness in her, which was only a feigned Passion and crafty disguise, to
conceal a more notorious Offense. Varini had now continued two months at
Venice, whose presence prevented that familiarity and those frequent Visits the
Lady and her Paramour so earnestly coveted, which Gloriana much lamented, and
by the advice of Fortia, resolved to remedy. It was agreed that Gloriana should
counterfeit her self sick, which she did, and prayed Varini that Father Paulo
Raquinto her Confessor might be sent for, whose Prayers and Ghostly Counsel she
hoped would turn to her great advantage. Varini was much grieved at the
sickness of his Lady, and readily granted any request she made; accordingly the
Holy Father came daily to visit the Countess, of which Fortia gave Castrucchio
notice, and that it was her Ladies Pleasure that he should put himself into the
same Religious habit, under which Covert he might with safety see her when ever
Varini was abroad. This design was of great Service to them, for no sooner was
Varini gone to the Rialto, but Fortia gave Castrucchio intelligence, who
presently came and was admitted without the least mistrust of the Servants.
This politic contrivance for a long time skreen'd the Adulterous Countess,
from the suspicions of her Servants and the Jealousies of Varini; who (she
appearing now to be with Child,) doted on her more than ever; praised his own
happiness in a mistaken Blessing, deeming that the strength of his Impotent Age
and the Glory of his Gray-Hairs, which was the effect of youthful Lust in his
shameless and Adulterous Wife.

But not long after Varini by accident took up a Letter in his Ladies Chamber,
and found the Directions of it to Seignior Castrucchio; the name startled him
extremely, wondering how it should come there; the Contents of it, were business
writ from some Gentleman in the Country; after he had a long time pondered upon
the matter, with all the jealous Disquisitions of an Italian Brain, he resolved
the point, that this Gentleman was most certainly his Ladies Gallant, and
probably the same Person since the name was so, to whom he too lately
understood she had been pre-contracted. The Letter however he concealed, and
presuming if there was any such Intrigue that Fortia was acquainted with it,
the Countess being gone to Mass, he strictly examined her, whom he endeavored
to threaten into a Confession which she courageously withstood; but at last
being tempted with a Purse of Checquins, she made that Faith a Slave to Gold,
which could not be forced by the Terrors of Punishment, and discovered the
dangerous Secret with all it is Circumstances. Varini received the dismal Story,
with horror and amazement, cursed his own unhappy Fortune, and much more the
Treachery of his disloyal Countess; after a little pause he gratified Fortia
according to his promise, and commanding her to silence, retired to his Closet
where he meditated a Revenge proportionable to his own Injury and Gloriana^s
Infidelity.

Three days after, he told Gloriana with a smiling Countenance* he must leave
her to lie alone that night and go over to St. Brien for some Writings he
wanted, but would be back the next Evening; and to give a fairer gloss to the
business, and make her more secure, ordered her if Seignior Boraccio the
Procurator came, to give him those Parchments in his Closet, of which that was
the Key. Varini immediately parted for St. Brien, who was no sooner gone, but
the Countess sent Castrucchio word of it, and desired his Company that night;
Castrucchio who had never yet failed her amorous invitations was punctual at
the hour. Varini pretending to his Servants he had forgot something, returned
by 11 at night, and went directly up to her Chamber attended by Sturio a
Gentleman that waited upon him, whom he ordered to knock at the door, (which
was locked) and say, he had a Letter to the Countess of urgent Business from
his Lord Varini. The Lovers having wearied themselves with the repetition of
their unlawful Pleasures lay fast asleep enchased in each others Arms, till
Fortia awaked Gloriana, telling her some body knocked at the Chamber door, who
startled at it, bid her ask who was so rude, and what their Business; Sturio
(whose Voice was very well known) answered, he had brought a Letter from his
Lord Varini to the Countess of important business, upon which, not in the least
suspecting what was designed against her, she commanded Fortia to open the
door, and receive the Letter, and bid Sturio to wait her Answer below. Fortia
no sooner opened the door, but Varini rushed in with his Sword drawn, and
Sturio after him with a brace of Pistols in his hands; Castrucchio was asleep,
and the Countess so surprised, that she only gave one loud shriek, at which
Castrucchio awaking, at the same instant felt Varini's Sword in his Breast, who
with repeated Wounds gave his fleeting Soul an easy passage into another
World. The Countess lay trembling by, happy in this only, that she had nothing
now to fear, but each minute hoped and begged his revenging S^eel would carve
the same Justice on her guilty Breast; but in vain, Varini intended her no such
favor. Castrucchio being seemingly dead, Varini commanded Sturio to strike off
his Head, and with his own hands ripped open his Breast, and took out his Heart,
which leaping in his Hand, This Madam, says he, (turning to the Countess) is
the heart of your beloved Paramour, see yet how sprightly it is; it was
unreasonable, Lady, you should have him wholly to your self, this is my share
now, and that yours, scornfully kicking the Head to her. It is impossible to
describe that horror of Mind and Anguish of Soul Gloriana labored under,
which nothing but the Blessing of a sudden death was able to relieve her from.
Castrucchio's Body thus mangled was thrown out at the Window snto the Street,
and Gloriana confined to her Chamber, where she was left alone, with the head
of her Lover placed on her Cabinet, to furnish her with constant Meditations of
Death, and the sad remembrance of her former pleasures, which, with the present
torment of a guilty Conscience, was a punishment more grievous than ten
thousand deaths. The next Morning discovered Castrucchio's Body, which was
found under Gloriana's Window, with the Head off, the Breast cut open, and the
Heart pulled out, to the great wonder and astonishment of every gazing
Passenger. Varini went early in the morning to the Council and acquainted them
with the Circumstances of the Fact, before the Officers of Justice had notice
of it, acknowledged himself the Author, proved by Sturio and Fortia, that he
found Castrucchio in Bed with his Lady, and upon that provocation had taken
this severe but just Revenge, which appearing to he true by the aforesaid
Evidence, he was acquitted.

Seven days after Gloriana was delivered of a dead Son, whose immature Birth
was occasioned by the Violence of her grief and sorrow, which yet was not
powerful enough to end her unhappy days, and put a period to those Miseries
under which she languished. Varini seeing the present illness of Gloriana,
ordered the Head of Castrucchio to be removed from her sight, the smell of it
now growing very offensive, and sometimes used to visit her, and in some
measure, seemed to remit the severity of his Revenge, and give place to Pity
and Compassion. Gloriana after a Month, was so well recovered, that she walked
about her Chamber and had liberty to take the air of the Garden, and dine if
she pleased publicly with Varini or privately in her own Chamber, but
constantly obliged to drink out of Castrucchio's Skull, which by the Command of
the Count, had the Flesh boiled off, the Brains taken out, and fashioned into
the form of a Cup.

Not long after Varini meeting Gloriana one Evening, walking solitary in the
Gallery, My Dear, says he, I observe you yet continue very pensive and
Melancholy, at which I am much concerned; I have consulted your Physicians in
relation to your Health, who have prescribed an Electuary which you must take
this Evening, an hour before you go to Bed, it will comfort your Spirits and
cheer your Heart: which she willingly assented to. At night he brought it to
her Chamber himself, and having recommended it to her for the richness of the
Ingredients, she eat cheerfully of it, and asking if she must take it all at
once, that, said he, as you please Madam, and as you like it, it is the Heart
of your beloved Castrucchio, prepared for you with my own hands according to
Art: at which words she looked earnestly upon him, saying, It has all the
Qualities of the richest Balsom and most precious Cordial, it is pity any part
of it should be lost; and as soon as she had eaten it all up, went to rest, and
was found next morning dead in her Bed. But I shall not determine whether her
Death was the effect of Passion, in some extraordinary Transport of Joy at the
remembrance of her dear Castrucchio; or that Varini had mixed Poison in the
Composition of his Medicine; and that he might equally temper his Justice and
Revenge together, by giving her Castrucchio's lustful Heart, the sweet of her
Life mixed with the bitter Ingredients of Death, to Varini^s Shame, and
Gloriana's Punishment. Thus dyed the inconstant Gloriana, and two years after,
the Count, having first quitted the troublesome Stage of this World, retired
into the Monastery of S^. Francis, where he assumed a Religious Habit, and
spent the short remainder of his Life, in constant Prayers, and pious
Meditations.

Had humble Virtue, been more the Subject of Gloriana's Meditations, than
Covetousness or Ambition; her lustful Heart, had never made a forfeiture of
Castrucchio's Head: nor his miserable Death, been the shame and punishment of
her Vicious Life. HIST. II. Dribellus and Petronella.
Dribellus courts Petronella, and deflowers her, she is afterward married to
Polissus; By the means of Morella her Waiting Woman Dribellus commits Adultery
with her which is discovered by Paretta, Polissus cuts off Dribellus his
Members, scourges Morella, and Petronella is condemned to the Punishment of the
Radish, of which she dies.

THessaly in Greece, (which so often has heen the happy Subject of the Poet's
Song) is no less celebrated for its lofty Mountains, whose aspiring heads
surmount the Clouds, than for its fruitful Plains, the Riches and Delight of
the industrious Shepherd; in which famed Oeta shares equal Honor with towering
Olympus and the well spread Taurus; not far from the foot of Oeta, are yet some
Remains of that glorious City, once called Hypata, where Patricius Castriot, a
Gentleman of ancient Family and large Demesus lived in Honor and Reputation,
from whom the noble Scanderbeg, that Scourge and Terror of the Turks, derived
his Pedigree. This Gentleman had one only Child, a Daughter called Petronella,
a young Lady of admirable Beauty, in which she not more excelled all others of
her Sex, than in the perfections of her mind, which Bounty of Heaven, her
careful Father still endeavored to improve by the most learned Masters of all
Sciences that Age afforded.

Amongst others, Dribellus a young Gentleman who had been Educated under
Miletus Bishop of Thessalonica, was entertained by him, with the promise of a
generous Reward, to instruct his Daughter in Rhetoric, in which he
particularly excelled; the good Father resolving she should want no
accomplishment that Art could furnish her with, to render her the most complete
Pattern of Virtue and Learning, and the only Phaenix of her Age and Sex. The
Care and Industry of Dribellus was soon discovered by the great Improvement of
his Pupil, which Patricius was no less sensible of, and constantly encouraged
with his bountiful Hand. Twelve Months were now passed, in which Dribellus by
his obliging behavior, had equally charmed the tender Affections of
Petronella, and won the good Opinion of her Father and Mother, both highly
commended his modest Carriage and sweetness of Temper, from whose indefatigable
pains, they hoped to reap those great advantages, his studious Labors so
fairly promised.

The constant society of Dribellus with Petronella, had now endeared them to
each other, and the unhappy Flames of Love warmed their Breasts with mutual
Kindness and Respect, which Dribellus no sooner discovered by the languishing
Looks of Petronella, but he resolved if possible, to raise a future Fortune
there, where at first, he only expected a present Support and Maintenance. To
this end he courted all Opportunities to enjoy her Company, and frequently
exchanged his Lectures of Rhetoric, for the more pleasing discourses of Love,
which he soon found were no less acceptable to his Mistress than the other had
been grateful to his Pupil. Thus they continued for some time, courting each
other with Amorous Glances and melancholy Sighs, the dumb but powerful
Rhetoric of bashful Lovers; till at last Dribellus in express Terms,
discovered his Passion to her, at which she seemed very much surprised, but
having recovered her self, told him, she had been always very sensible of his
great Respects to her in those diligent Instructions she received from him,
which though she was in no capacity to retaliate, she would never forget; and
hoped the Bounty and Generosity of her Parents, would in some measure answer
his Merits, whilst she could only reward him with a Thankful acknowledgement.
Dribellus who well knew the great Wit of Petronella could not mistake the true
sense and meaning of his discourse, though her Prudence and Modesty diverted it
to another Subject, presently replied, Dribellus has no such haughty Thoughts
of his past Service, to think he ever could oblige the fair Petronella, or in
the least deserve a return of that sincere Affection he professes to her. I
love my fairest Petronella; I leve; and no reward is valuable with me but what
gives me your Heart, or robs me of my Life; if your Kindness bids me live, I
live your Servant, or your frown at the same minute, commands me to dye your
Martyr.

Petronella blushed, and what Modesty would not suffer her to utter in words,
she spoke in her languishing eyes and abrupt sighs, live Dribellus, live, and
let that cruel Maid, be for ever forsaken who bids her lover dye. At this
Dribellus took Heart and pursued his Amors with so vigorous an Attaque, that
the Lady made a willing Surrender, and promised that the Heart he had so
bravely conquered, should ever be the Trophy, of his Victory.

Dribellus having thus gained an assurance of Petronella's Affections,
endeavored by all means, to fix it beyond the Power or Cause of ill Fortune,
and accordingly some few days after, finding Petronella in the Garden, began an
Assault upon her Virtue, with all the specious pretensions of Affection that
Love could inspire him with* Petronella, who had already yielded up her heart
to Dribellus, thought the sacred trust of her Honors might be reposed in the
same Breast, with equal security. Thus with kind Caresses, and wanton
Dalliances, did this subtle Thief rob her of the Flower of her Virginity, and
with the sighs and denials of a languishing Maid, she at last exchanged the
native Innocence of her Soul, and Virtue of her Mind, for Shame, Folly and
Dishonor: This was the first step they made in those crooked Paths of
Wickedness, which they afterward so much delighted in, who by the frequent
Repetition of their unlawful Pleasures, were now grown so careless and secure,
as if they gloried in their sins, and were neither sensible of their shame, nor
apprehensive of the punishment, which with a silent pace constantly pursues the
lustful Criminal.

Before this was discovered by any of her Relations, a young Gentleman, who
lived at Larissa, (the Birthplace of Achilles, not far from Oeta) whose Name is
Polissus, the eldest Son of Abridatus, a Gentleman of very considerable Estate
and Family, was recommended to her Father, as a Person who would be a very
suitable Match for his Daughter, who with a very handsome Equipage, was now
come over to Hypata to court her. Fame had spoke loud of the Perfections of
Petronella, both in Body and Mind, and after some days Converse found himself
absolutely conquered by the Charms of her Witand Conversation, which were more
irresistible than those of her Face and Beauty, in both which she appeared so
illustrious, that Polissus was straight made a Prisoner by her, and fast
fettered in the golden Chains of Love. This gave the Lovers an unexpected
disturbance, who with Sighs and Tears express the present Trouble and Anguish
of their Minds, they curse the coming of Polissus, and charge him as the sole
Author of their Unhappiness and Misery: Dribellus looks on him with Envy, and
Petronella with Disdain; she could not willingly afford him one amorous glance,
all her smiles were counterfeit, and the best Entertainment she could give him
was upon force and constraint, whilst he sighs and throws himself at her Feet,
without moving her to the least Pity or Compassion; but Polissus grew daily
into the favor of her Parents, though he found little progress in the heart of
the Daughter; and although Patricius himself interposed his Paternal Authority
to recommend him to her Affections, told her of his Riches, and fair
Possessions, the Nobility of his Family, and his Personal Endowments, yet she
slighted and contemned him, and one day told her Mother, that though she did
allow Polissus to be a complete Gentleman, yet it was impossible for her to act
so great a violence upon her self, as to force her Affections to love that
Person she ever had an aversion to, and should think her self more happy in the
cold Arms of Death, than the Embraces of that Husband that she could not
affect. The Mother moved with the Tears of her Daughter, took pity on her, but
her Father being of a more stern and austere Nature, grew enraged at her
denial, and was so far from admitting her impertinent Reasonings, that he
resolved to force her to compliance, and not suffer her longer to resist his
Will and Pleasure, and to that end dispatched a Messenger to Abridatus,
Polissus his Father, in order to se^tle all things for the intended Marriage.

Patricius finding all his Endeavors fruitless, and his Daughter so perverse
and obstinate, that neither his Threats could force her, or his Endearments win
her, began to consider with himself what could be the true cause of her
Contumacy and Dislike; he saw nothing in the Person or Behavior of Polissus,
but what might render him acceptable to a Maid not prepossessed with the Love
of another: He knew he had kept her strictly at (...) under his own care and
government, and that her youth had hitherto defended her from all Insinuations
of that nature; nor could his thoughts fix upon any Person thereabouts, that
could give him the least umbrage of suspicion, much less did he imagine
Dribellus was that Thief, who had robbed his Daughter of her Heart, so great an
opinion had he of his Virtue and Honesty. But his Wife, who best knew the
temper of her own Sex, so narrowly watched all the Actions and Gestures of
Petronella, that she soon discovered the kindness and Familiarity that was
between the Master and the Scholar; but (like a prudent Woman) she did not
immediately acquaint her Husband with it, and publish to the World the folly of
her Daughter, but watched an Opportunity, that she might take them together and
reprove them of that Folly which would certainly be attended with Misery and
Repentance.

It happened not long after, that Dribellus and Petronella being retired into a
Grove of Olives, which by the privacy and recluseness of it, had been the
frequent Scene of their dishonest Pleasures, the Mother followed them at a
distance, and in the midst of those ravishing Delights they entertained each
other with; she cried out and appeared to the two Lovers in the very Ecstasy
and Rapture of their Lust. It is here impossible to describe the horror and
amasement the two Lovers were in, to see themselves surprised in this wanton
Posture; the sight of her Mother was more terrible to them, than that of a
Basilisk, the lightning of her eyes and the thunder of her voice, pierced their
Breasts and cleft their Hearts asunder. In this posture they continued a while,
without being able to say one word in excuse of themselves or the notoriousness
of that Fact which was too apparent to be denied; till at last Dribellus began
to speak in Justification of himself and the afflicted Petronella, cha^ging all
the blame on the power and force of Love, and the rigorous indiscretion of
Patricius, who would compel Petronella to marry Polissus, whom she could never
Love Petronella, with Shame and Confusion in her Face begs her Mothers Pardon
and Forgiveness with Tears and Sighs, who taking her by the hand, led her to
her Chamber, where after she had severely reprehended her with the guilt and
ignominy of such dissolute Pleasures, she locked her up, and there left her to
her own Meditations; and went directly to her Father and told him that she had
discovered an Intrigue of Love between Dribellus and Petronella, which was the
cause of her Aversion to Polissus, without discovering that secret which would
for ever have blasted the Honor of her Daughter, and branded their Family,
with an indelible mark of Shame and Infamy. Patricius heard this Relation with
Grief and Astonishment, and at the desire of his Wife, resolved to turn off
Dribellus with all speed, and that no particular notice should be taken, at the
same time to discharge all her other Masters, she being now to be married, and
to go and live with her Husband at Larissa.

Dribellus wondered much that he was only discharged, and no other punishment
inflicted on him, which he could not attribute to the Clemency of Patricius,
but his Ignorance of that Crime he was guilty of; which he supposed the
prudence of his Wife had concealed from him, who otherwise would have been as
severe in his Revenge, as the heinousness of so great a Fault did justly
deserve.

Polissus receiving fresh encouragement from Patricius of success in his
Amors, returns to Hypata, where he finds Petronella much altered in her temper
and respects to him, and now fairly promises himself the happiness of
consummating the Espousals with his beautiful Mistress he so earnestly coveted;
which to the great satisfaction of himself and all his Friends, (but the
unhappy Petronella) were solemnized with all imaginable Pomp and Splendor. Two
months after, he took his leave of Patricius, and returned to Larissa with his
Bride, where his Father received them with the expressions of a hearty Welcome;
and Petronella demeaned her self, with that Duty and Respect, that she was both
beloved and admired of all. Who would not now think Petronella is entirely
happy, and might live the contentedst Woman in the World? but alas where Grace
and Virtue do not strew the Wedding with Flowers and Garlands, Hymen is
attended with Furies, and his Saffron Robe dipped in Gall; the happiness of
Marriage, is the union of two Hearts, not the conjunction of two Bodies, and
where the sincerity of Affection is wanting, all Vows and Contracts, are frail
and brittle Ties. The memory of Dribellus and those unlawful Pleasures she had
so often repeated in his Arms, now afresh attacked her, and nothing could
please her lascivious Thoughts, but the hopes she might once again see her
beloved Paramour; when unexpectedly she received a Letter from him to this
purpose.

Dribellus to Petronella.
MY dearest Petronella, the Life and Joy of my Soul, I die for you, and
languish after you my Life; since I am banished from your Presence, (which is
more intolerable to me then the severest Death) I cannot live without a sight
of you; for which reason I am privately come to Larissa, and shall wait your
directions how I may once more be happy in the enjoyment of your Company, which
if you forbid me, you strike a Dagger to my Heart, which now bleeds for you.
Your Answer is my Sentence of Life or Death, which I impatiently wait for, and
if you ever loved I now beg your pity on the most unhappy and forlorn

Dribellus.


Petronella was overjoyed at the receipt of this Letter, and immediately
returned an Answer, desiring him to be at the Garden Door at five that Evening,
where she would expect his coming. But poor Petronella thou will dearly ^rue
this sight, and too late be sensible that the pleasures of Sin, are compounded
of the bitterest Ingredients. The hour being come Petronella ordered her
Waiting Woman Marella, to attend at the Garden Door and conduct Dribellus into
an Arbor, where the Transports of Joy betwixt the two Lovers are
inexpressible; they met with equal Ardour and Affection, bewailed one another
Destiny, and cursed the Tyrany of Parents who often consult more their own
Interest, than the Happiness and Satisfaction of their Children, in such forced
Marriages, which often prove most fatal in the consequence. At last ( Marella
being made one of their Council) it was agreed that Dribellus who was scarce
known to Polissus, should put himself into the habit of a Servant, and under
the feigned name of Cotys be admitted into the Family to look after the
Wardrobe, which place was now vacant. Dribellus was accordingly entertained,
whilst Polissus never suspects the Snake he lodged in his bosom, nor the Thief
he harbored in his House; and now Cotys thinks himself happy, hugs his own
Ingenuity, and imagins himself blessed and fortunate. In this manner the two
Lovers live together, take hold of all Opportunities to converse together and
enjoy each other; no Clouds appeared to interrupt their Joy, and all things ran
with a smooth and even Current. Among the many Servants they kept, there was a
Maid called Paretta, who fell desperately in Love with Cotys, would never be
out of his Company, and at last grew so troublesome to him, that he was forced
to slight and disrespect her that he might rid himself of her importunity. This
she took in evil part, and supposing the reason of his unkindness to her, was
the Love he had for some other Person, narrowly watched him; and at last
discovered the Kindness and Familiarity between him and Petronella.

Paretta, who resolved to be revenged on her hated Rival, watched all
Opportunities to take them together, believing she should find them unchaste in
their Dalliances, which accordingly fell out not long after; when seeing
Morella one Evening go into the Garden and Cotys immediately follow, she made
have after them and found the Door fast on the inside, which the more increased
her Suspicion; and remembering there lay a short Ladder in the Barn, by the help
of it mounted the Garden Wall, and privately conveyed her self near the Arbor
where she saw Cotys and Marella (who were talking together) and presently after
her Lady descending on a Ladder made of Ropes, from a Balcony into the Garden,
whom Cotys presently led into a close Arbor of Iessamines at the further end of
which they caressed each other with amorous Embraces, whilst Morella waiting at
a distance watched the Doors and Windows to prevent a Discovery.

The next day Paretta pleased with the opportunity she now had of being
revenged on the disdainful Cotys, acquaints Polissus with the Infidelity of
Cotys and Treachery of Petronella, who had thus shamefully abused his Honor
and prostituted her self to his Servant and Slave. Polissus struck with the
horror of this Relation, examins her over and over, finds no disagreement in
her Tale, but too much reason to believe the Truth of it, and now fears this
was some former Lover of hers in disguise. To discover the certainty thereof,
he acquainted an intimate and familiar Friend with it, and by his advice
pretending one Evening, to walk abroad upon a Visit, they secretly conveyed
themselves into the Garden where they lay close and undiscovered. Two hours
after, entered Cotys and Morella, and presently after Petronella descended from
the Balcony by the same Ladder of Ropes. Their ears were the first witnesses of
their Amorous Parley, and it was not long before their eyes discovered their
Filthiness, when in the midst of their lustful Pleasures, they surprised them
with their glittering Scymiters in their hands, which struck the Lovers with a
horror and consternation, beyond the power of words to express. Petronella
implored nothing but present Death from his own hands, which he had not Mercy
enough to give, but reserved her for a more infamous and shameful end. Turning
his Eyes from her, with all the passionate Expressions of Abhorence and
Detestation, he called in his Servants, and ordered them to bind Dribellus, who
was immediately dismembered before her Face, and thrust out of Doors to seek his
Fortune. Morella was stripped and bound to a Tree, and scourged with the Twigs of
Hazle, till the Skin was Flead off from her Back, and then banished the City;
Petronella was carried to her Chamber, where she continued Prisoner till the
next Morning, when she was brought before the Magistrates, and upon evident
Proof of the Adultery, was condemned to undergo the Raphination or Punishment
of the Radish, which in those Countries grow to a great magnitude, which they
force up their Bodies. Thus the wretehed Petronella suffered, when she had in
vain begged to be strangled, and dyed the most ignominious and shameful Death
the Art of Man could invent.

Petronella dyed very penitent, confessing the wickedness of her Crime, and
begging pardon of her Husband was both pitied by him, and much lamented by all
who knew the Quality of her Birth and virtuous Education.

Thus we see the Tragical End, of unlawful Pleasures which like the Apples of
Sodom appear fair and beautiful to the Eye; promise a Thousand Happinesses by
their bewitching outside and false appearances, but within are either nothing
but rotteness, or upon the first touch, crumble into Dust, acd leave us to
Shame and Misery here, and eternal Damnation hereafter. HIST. III. Don Pedro
and Paulinta.
Don Roderigo marries Dona Paulinta. Don Pedro de Castello by the assistance of
John de Blinco, the Astrologer, and Laura her Waiting Woman, commits Adultery
with her. Paulinta upon her delivery of a monstrous Birth, dies. Roderigo runs
mad, Don Pedro is branded in the Forehead, Blinco whipped through the Streets of
Corduba, and sent to the Mines; and Laura torn in pieces by Wild Beasts.

AT Corduba in Spain, lived Don Andreo Rametzi, who was a Person very
considerable in those Parts, both for his Estate and Quality, and a peculiar
excellency he had in dispatch of Business of the greatest moment, in which he
was indefatigable: For these Reasons in the year 1579 he was made Proveditor
General under Don John of Austria, to whose care and provision, were committed
the Arms, Ammunition, and all other Naval Preparations, for that huge Armada;
which was completely furnished out in 1588, and designed for the Invasion of
England, and utter Extirpation of the Reformed Religion. This Gentleman died in
the year before at Cales of a malignant Fever, and left three Sons of which,
Don Roderigo was the eldest, who upon his Fathers Death, being Master of a
plentiful Estate, left the Command he had in the Fleet, (upon some disgust) and
returned to Corduba; where within a Twelvemonth he was married to Dona
Paulinta, the only Daughter of Don Camillo, a rich and wealthy Citizen. The
young couple lived with great content and satisfaction in their mutual Love and
Affection, during the first three years of their Marriage; but being not yet
blessed with any Children, those desired Fruits of their Conjugal Vows, the
discouragements of their vigorous Embraces bred discontent; and each blamed the
other, for the want of that Happiness neither could give.

These Differences between Roderigo and Paulinta increased to that height, that
Roderigo forsook her Bed, and often with opprobious Taunts, called her Barren
Do; all his Satirical Expressions, were still pointed with Reflections on her
Sterility; which she unable to bear, with her wonted Patience and Submission,
complained to her Relations, of the unkindness of her Husband, and desired
their Intercession, often saying, she believed he would be a contented Cuckold,
upon condition, he was but a Presumptive Father. These Discords were in some
measure reconciled by the Mediation of Friends; but the occasion of them was
now grown the chat and entertainment of every Feast, and at last reached the
Ears of Don Pedro de Castello a young Gentleman, whose extravagant Pleasures
had much impayr'd his Estate, which obliged him to consider of some new methods
of living, to maintain his Port and Quality. He was familiarly acquainted with
Roderigo, and the late discourses he had heard of the difference between him
and his Wife, raised new designs in his head of advancing his Fortunes by a
Courtship to her, in which his own hopes, and her present Discontent flattered
him with Success. To this end, he watched all Opportunities to oblige him with
some respectful Service, and not long after meeting Roderigo, who told him of
the late misfortune he had in Hunting, to gore his Horse upon a Stake as he
leapt a Hedge, with the danger of his own life; they fell upon a discourse of
the excellency of the Spanish Jennets, their beautiful Shape and Fleetness, in
the close of all, Roderigo told him he thought no Gentleman in Corduba was
Master of a better Horse than himself; Don Pedro presently replied your
Commendations Seignior will make me place a greater Value and Esteem upon him;
and the next day, by his Servant presented him with his Jennet, and a Saddle
and Foot cloth richly Embroydered. This generous Kindness of Don Pedro so
highly endeared him to Roderigo, that they vowed eternal Friendship to each
other; were constant Companions in all their Pleasures and Diversions, and the
same Soul seemed to animate both their Bodies. This Intimacy gave Don Pedro
free access to Roderigo's House, where he observed the disgusts between him and
his Wife, which, whenever he was absent, by his graceful Behavior and more
particular Respects to her, he endeavored to improve to his own advantage.

The assiduous Address of Don Pedro to Paulinta, and the continual slights of
Roderigo, promised him success in his Amors; which he pursued with so much
Artifice and Industry, that Roderigo was not in the least jealous of his
design, nor Paulinta insensible of his Affections. Don Pedro had now made his
Applications, for four Months, in amorous Glances, and courtly Smiles, which he
flattered himself, had so far prevailed upon her that nothing remained but an
easy Conquest, and that she would readily Surrender the Fort of Honor, as soon
as he had the Opportunity to make one bold Attacque. Two days after Roderigo
told Don Pedro, Seignior Courtelet had desired his Company to Hunt the next
Morning, which he had promised him; and hoped he would not be the last in the
Field, who loved the Sport so well. Don Pedro excused himself, that he had
Business of great Consequence fixed for that day, which Roderigo believing,
admitted of, and pressed no further. Roderigo being abroad a hunting, Don Pedro
followed his Game at home, and in express Terms, discovered his Passion to
Paulinta, which she received with disdain, telling him, her Husband little
suspected that Sincerity of Friendship he pretended to him was false and
counterfeit, and that the Injury he had offered him, would warrant his sharpest
Revenge. Don Pedro was very much surpised at so unkind an Answer, and pray^d
that the reality of his Love to her Person and Zeal to her Service, might atone
for the rudeness of his Language; and though he believed her Chaste as the famed
Lucretia, yet when her too vigorous Virtue, shall be the occasion of her
Husband's discontent and her own Unhappiness, common Prudence would advise to
remove both; which since it was the true Sense of his Discourse, he hoped
rather to merit her Esteem than deserve her Reprimand. Paulinta with a look as
if she intended to smile, which was presently dashed with a frown thus replied;
The great Concernment you express at my present Troubles challenge my Thanks,
but did you as well consider the sacred Name of Virtue, which I must for ever
disown, you would not so unworthily tempt me to prostitute my Honor, to cure
the unreasonable Capricio's of a discontented Husband: This first Offense I Will
parden but beware you never provoke my Anger by a Second, which shall make you
sensible of your Fault, by the Justice of your Punishment.

Don Pedro seeing all his hopes of a projected Happiness, thus blasted in a
minute, resolved however not to quit his Design for a single disappointment,
bur try to effect that by Stratagem, which he could not attain by the common
methods of Love and Address. Amongst the Crowd of Thoughts and various Designs,
his wandering Fancy presented him with, he at last hit upon this one
Consideration which pleased above the rest. Laura Paulinta's Woman was
passionately in Love, with his Man Philip, who either despising her Poverty or
contemning her Beauty, slighted all offers of Kindness with a sullen
Disrespect: Whereupon meeting her one day alone in the Street, he told her he
understood she had a particular Kindness for Philip, which he very well
approved of, and if she would come to his Lodgings in the afternoon, he would
propose a way to make her happy in the enjoyment of her Lover. Laura overjoyed
at this, came accordingly, and after several discourses on that Subject to her
great satisfaction, he promised her Philip for a Husband, and a hundred
Duccatoons Reward, if she would prevail with Paulinta to go to John de Blinco
the Astrologer, who was famous for telling of Fortunes, helping Maids to their
Sweet-Hearts, and curing Barrenness in Married Women, which he was confident,
Paulinta would experience the Truth of, in a short time, to the Joy and Content
of her self and Roderigo. Laura told him this would be so great an Obligation
to them, that no Person was more proper than himself to recommend it to her
Mistress, which he excused as not consistent with her Modesty to hear, or his
Friendship to discourse the Secrets of the Sheets and Sacred Royalties of the
Marriage Bed. At last Laura agreed to undertake it and accordingly at the first
Opportunity, proposed it to her Mistress, as a Thought of her own without ever
naming Don Pedro, which he had positively forbid, and she religiously swore to
Observe.

Paulinta, like some of her Sex, who by being too strait laced, do often grow
awry; as she was strictly Virtuous, was a litttle warped by Superstition, and
rather than be less than good, endeavored to be more; This made her easily
Credit Laura's Discourse, who having according to Don Pedro's Instructions,
persuaded her, of the lawfulness and certainty of Astrological Judgments, she
presently concluded her self obliged to make use of those methods which would
infallibly render them both happy in a fruitful Offspring. Three days after
Laura acquainted Don Pedro that the next morning under pretense of going to
Mass, Paulinta had determined to go to John de Blinco's, to consult him what
was the reason of her want of Children, and what Prolific Remedies were best in
her Case. Don Pedro was well pleased at this News and the more that she did it
without the privity and knowledge of Roderigo; No sooner was Laura gone, but he
went directly to John de Blinco, foretold him of Paulinta's coming next day,
her Business, and furnished him with Answers of all sorts to satisfy the
Queries that she or Laura should make; gave him fifty Duccatoons in hand, and
promised fifty more three days after, if the Design was discreetly managed.
This de Blinco accepted, and assured him of his utmost Care and Fidelity.

Next morning, Paulinta attended by Laura, went accordingly, and inquired if
Seignior De Blinco the learned Astrologer was within; upon which they were
conducted up Stairs into his Chamber; De Blinco presently came out of his Study
in a Furred Gown, and blew Satin Cap, with two and thirty Corners, blazoned
according to the points of the Compass; the gravity of his Beard and solemn
Mien, furnished them with a Respect and Reverence suitable to his Quality.
Paulinta began to discourse her Business to him, which he prevented by telling
her, You need not trouble your self Lady, to acquaint me with one Tittle you
have to say, the Stars have already better informed me, and if you please to
have a little Patience till I have made a perfect Judgment of the Scheme, I
have but now erected, I hope the present Face of the Heavens will return you
(by me their Mouth) a serene and pleasing Answer. De Blinco went back to his
Study, and Paulinta with Impatience waited his Return. About an hour after he
came out again with a pair of Compasses in one hand, and a large Scheme in the
other, and now Lady (said he) I am prepared to resolve all your Doubts; but
first let me tell you at your Birth I calculated your Nativity, of which this
is the Figure. You are the only Daughter of Don Camillo, I see very plainly
here, and the present Conjunction was very unkind to you; you have six Enemies
and but one Friend in this whole House, under their malignant Influence you
have suffered these several years, but now they have spit their Venom and the
favorable Aspect of your Friend, shall make you Glorious and Triumphant. But
as to your present Business, you desire to know the reasons of your Barrenness,
and the Cure; The general Reasons are three, which proceed, from the three
elemental Spirits* Tohu, Bohu and Vezi, and these I have already reconciled you
to: Now as to the Cure, yours is the most desperate Case that I ever met with,
there is but one Man in the World born under the same Configuration with your
self, and unless you are in Conjunction with him, you will never be Prolific.
Alas said Paulinta I am the unhappiest Creature in the World! Pray Sir look
again I have told you all the Truth, replied De Blinco, already, and can add no
more; but if you desire to know that single Man, it is within the power of my
Art to discover him to you. Paulinta entreated it, and de Blinco thus went on;
In the Sycamore Walk of the Carmelites Garden; at four in the Evening after the
next full Moon (which is your Auspicious Planet) you will see him sitting alone
upon a Bench reading Quevedo's Visions; and that is the Phaenix you look for.
Paulinta having nobly rewarded him, desired to have it in Writing, which he
gave her, and then taking leave, wished that blessed minute was now come which
could only satisfy her laboring Mind in the Truth of these strange
Predictions.

Learned Mythologists, who best expound the Mysterys of Poetic Fictions, say,
the ancient Heathens worshipped the Moon, under the name of Lucina the Goddess
of Midwifry; and the old Women of those days, thought her in Travel when she
suffered an Eclipse, and by the beating of Kettles, and scraping of Trenchers
kindly endeavored to recover her from those fainting Fits, by their hoarse
Prayers and dismal Noises. But never did they pray more heartily than Paulinta
did, to see her in the full Circle of her resplendant Glory: Nor did she more
passionately caress Endymion when she stoopt to kiss the fair Youth; than
Paulinta now did her, for the sake of her unknown Gallant.

The wished for day is come at last, but the sluggish hour moved on too slow to
answer the earnest and longing expectations of thoughtful Paulinta; the clock
had no sooner struck three, but she called Laura, and made have to the Garden,
and still as she passed along (impatient of delay) sent her eyes, the quick
Harbingers of her troubled mind to make the happy Discovery. But oh the strange
surprise* just as she entered the Sycamore Walk, she saw Don Pedro upon the next
Bench leaning on his Arm in a melancholy posture, and reading to himself.
Paulinta knew him at first sight, and suddenly stepped back, as if her tender
foot had pressed the poisonous Adder, or more loathsome Toad: Don Pedro looking up
spied Paulinta in disorder, whom he approached with that Civility and Respect
he constantly paid her; whilst she prudently endeavored to hide her Passions,
and pleasantly asked him what Book that was in his hand; It is Madam, said Don
Pedro, Quevedo's Visions, he is a merry Companion, with whom I have diverted
many a tedious hour and melancholy Thought; if you are a Stranger to him, pray
accept him from my hands, and I am sure upon better Acquaintance, you will give
him the best reception he deserves. Paulinta received it, and at that minute by
one amorous Glance discovered the Infirmity of that Virtue which was thought to
be impregnable, but now forced to retreat, and give place to a more powerful
and succcessfull Vice.

Frequent enterviews, at length made Paulinta's obdurate Heart malleable, and
her Innocence and chaste Resolutions, were by degrees undermined, and all her
Pretensions to Honor, laid in the dust by the Craft of Don Pedro, and the
Roguery of De Blinco. As to the first Act of Commission, I could charitably
think her almost Innocent, because she was betrayed to it, but when once she
came to relish those forbidden Pleasures, and grow Wanton in the enjoyment,
Messalina was less Intemperate, she had both the Impudence of a Duegna, and the
lasciviousness of a Courtezan.

These Intrigues, were for some time so well managed by the cunning of Laura,
that Roderigo either not knew of them, or contrary to the common Temper of his
Country, pretended Ignorance; and rather chose to conceal her Infamy, and his
own abuse, than publish it to the World, by a notorious and bloody Revenge. But
at last her Lewdness grew so extravagant that he was now become the common
Cornuto for every slavish finger to point at; Thisso enraged him that he
threatened her with the severest Tortures, if she did not confess her Guilt, or
justify her Innocence. Paulinta upon her Knees, with Tears in her Eyes, prayed
his Patience and common Justice, assured him of her Fidelity, and with a
thousand horrid Imprecations desired her dying Fame might be for ever attended
with all those marks of Ignominy, with which the malice and detraction of her
Enemies had stayn'd her living Reputation, if she had been ever guilty of the
least of those Crimes, they had so unjustly charged upon her. Roderigo
credulously believed her, and was perfectly reconciled.

Three months after, Paulinta appeared big with Child to the great Satisfaction
of her Husband, and in that time had behaved her self with that Prudence and
Caution, that no Man was more ready to accuse her than he to Vindicate her
Honor, from the Calumnies and Aspersions of such malevolent Tongues. At her
time of Travel, no Husband was more tenderly concerned for a Wife than Roderigo
for Paulinta; and being told they had small hopes of preserving the Child, but
less of saving her, he wept bitterly. At last it was resolved her Case was
desperate, and their best endeavors to be employed in care of the Child, for
whom like a second Caesar they made his way by Incision. The Father impatiently
desired a sight of his Son and Heir, which he had so heartily prayed for: But
oh the Horror and Confusion! it had the exact resemblance of a Goat in the
Face, with a long grizly Beard, but in all other parts of excellent Shape and
Feature. At this dreadful sight, Roderigo immediately lost his Wits ran raving
about the House, crying out, O wicked and forsworn Wretch! and three days
after, dyed stark staring Mad. The monstrous Birth expired within few minutes
after it was born.

Don Pedro followed his old course of Revelling all night with his drunken
Companions; and being at the Tavern when this tragical News was brought, he
smiled at it, and told the Company (who were supriz'd to hear so sad a
Relation) that he could spice it with a Cup of Mirth, and so began the Account
of his Debaucheries with Paulinta, and how by the Confederacy of De Blinco he
had betrayed her to his wicked Lust; which being heard by the Company with
Horror and Detestation; he was immediately apprehended by an Alguezile and
carried before the Magistrates of Corduba, and Orders issued out for the taking
De Blinco, who was brought in the same Furred Gown and Cornered Cap, and by the
Evidence and Confession of Don Pedro, who also produced his Note for the
Receipt of the last fifty Duccatoons with his Hand and Seal; He was condemned
to be first whipped through the Streets of Corduba with Scorpions, and then sent
to the Mines at Peru. Don Pedro though a Gentleman, received the Punishment of
the most infamous Malefactor, by being branded in the Forehead, and then sent
to the Galleys, where he continued two years, and was then taken by the Turks
and carried into Argiers, where he lived and dyed in the Misery of perpetual
Slavery. Laura to avoid her proportion of Punishment, made her Escape from
Corduba, and her Body was five days after found miserably torn and mangled in
the Wood of Macardis.

Thus Don Pedro like the wily Serpent in Paradise, first tempts Paulinta, to
inquire those forbidden Secrets of De Blinco (the Devils Emissary) which have
no Record but in the claspt Book of Providence; for which he is justly Branded
with an ignominious Letter. Adulterous Paulinta suffers her Punishment, where
she first enjoyed the Pleasures of her Sin; and De Blinco is whipped here with
Scorpions, and Furies hereafter. HIST. IV. Parmel and Cleandra.
Dr. Parmel by an Opiate Powder debauches Cleandra, gets her with Child and
marries her. Cleandra in Revenge commits Adultery with Seignior Makenti, her
former Lover; Dr. Parmel first gives her the foul Disease, and then designing
to poison her, by mistake poisons himself. Cleandra dies miserably in the
Lazaretto, and Makenti lives infamously having lost his Nose and both his Eyes.

SEignior Conto, was ^ Gentleman of great Worth and Abilities, who upon the
Death of Seignior Bardi, was one of those many Candidates for the
Procuratorship of St. Mark at Venice, which was now become vacant: But Fortune
not favoring his designs, and the potency of his Adversaries, prevailing
against his Interest (though no Person had better deserved of that Republic)
lost it* upon this, (seeing the merit of all his former Services disesteem'd)
retired from Venice in discontent, and fixed at Marli his Country House five
miles distant. Seignior Conto was Master of a very considerable Estate, and
blessed with one only Child a Daughter, and named Cleandra, whose native Beauty,
virtuous Education, and the Honor of her Family, made her highly valued by
all; but amongst the crowd of Suitors who made their Addresses to her, Seignior
Makenti a Person of great Estate and a Gentleman of Venice, was that happy Man,
who had gained the Affections of the Daughter, and Respect of her Parents; and
in the Opinion of the World, would carry the beautiful Prize from the rest of
the numerous Pretenders.

At this time, a young Gentleman whose name was Seignior Parmel, having lately
commenced Dr. of Physic at Padua, (whose Father had been Seignior Conto's
intimate and familiar Acquaintance at Venice) came over to Marli to make a
Visit to Seignior Conto and his Lady, who at first sight was so enamour^d on
the Beauty of Cleandra, that though his discretion forbid him making any
public Application to her, who was a Fortune beyond his reach; yet he
flattered himself with hopes of Success, if he could by any means divert the
intended Marrige between her and Makenti. In this Design one lucky Accident
advantaged him more than all his Wit and Invention could do; for there
happening a Quarrel between Seignior Makenti and Seignior Lassuno, upon
discourse of Seignior Conto's missing the Procuratorship of St. Mark, after
several sharp Expressions on both sides, Seignior Lassuno drew his Dagger, and
suddenly stabbed Seignior Makenti into the Breast four inches deep, and
immediately made his escape. Chirurgions were sent for who dressed Makenti's
Wound, telling him they hoped to make a good Cure of it, for though it was very
deep it had missed the Vitals, which in six weeks time they effected. The great
loss of Blood Makenti suffered, threw him into a Consumption, upon which he was
removed to Padua, where he continued for three months with small hopes of
Recovery. In this time Dr. Parmel made frequent Visits at Seignior Conto's, and
by his insinuating Carriage and Behavior had gained a more than ordinary
Friendship in the Family; but yet considering the vast dis-proportion between
his Quality and Fortune, and Seignior Conto's; never durst discover to the
Father or Daughter, that Love and Affection which lay smothering in his Breast.
After several Considerations how to effect his Purpose, at last he resolved to
try how far the misterious Secrets of his own Art and Profession could assist
his Design, and accordingly one day prepared an Opiate Powder, which he had
compounded of such Ingredients as he thought most proper, and waited an
Opportunity to give it Cleandra in such a Vehicle, as would admit no Discovery.

Three days after in the Evening Dr. Parmel came down from his Study, and found
Cleandra in the Kitchen making a pot of Chocolate, for the Entertainment of
some Friends in the Parlour; Cleandra offered him a Dish, who thanked her, and
said he would accept it upon Terms that she would drink another, which being
agreed too, he privately conveyed the Opiate Powder into her Mess, without any
Suspicion. About an hour after the Powder began to operate so effectually, that
though she endeavored to divert the Drowsiness which had so strangely crept
upon her, by walking in the Garden, and other violent Agitation, yet at last it
prevailed, and she was forced to retire to her Chamber, where she reposed
herself upon the Bed, charmed into a deep Sleep by the powerful Medicine. Dr.
Parmel narrowly watched her, and seeing her go into the Chamber followed after,
and there found her upon the Bed fast asleep; whereupon observing the rest of
the Family were otherwise busied thought he might now securely, prosecute his
wicked Design and locking the Chamber Door, treacherously robbed sleeping
Cleandra of her Honor and Virginity, which her waking Virtue had constantly
defended against all the Temptations of Lust and Charms of Love. The Doctor
having thus far accomplished his Ends, opened the Door and went out
undiscovered, leaving Cleandra fast asleep, who continued so for several hours
till the soporific Virtue of the Powder was extinguished, and then waked
without being in the least sensible of the Injury she had received from those
villanious Practices of the Doctor, but as pleasing Dreams or the sportive
Frolicks of Fancy and Imagination presented her with* Dr. Parmel two days after
took his leave and returned to Venice, expecting with Impatience, the Issue of
this odd Experiment.

Five Months after, Seignior Makenti whose Recovery had been retarded by
frequent Relapses, returned to Marli in perfect Health, and earnestly desired
that his Espousals with the fair Cleandra might now be no longer deferred,
which his own Misfortune had been the unhappy cause of; but being acquainted
that his Mistress had for some time been very much indisposed and now kept her
Chamber, desired to see her, whom he found so strangely altered, he scarce knew
her to be the same, but by the faint Remains of that flourishing Beauty which
had once reigned in her Face, and made a Conquest of his Heart. Seignior
Makenti was equally surpised and grieved to see her in this Condition, she was
grown pale and lean, her Eyes were livid and hollow, and all the expressions of
her Tongue, spoke an inward and settled discontent of Mind. Seignior Conto and
his Lady were no less afflicted, and advised with several of the most eminent
Physicians, what should be the Cause of her Distemper, and what the most proper
and speedy Cure; they all agreed she was with Child, and her Disease no other
than the natural Infirmities of Women in such Cases, which her Parents heard
with Horror and Amazement. The Doctors being gone, her Father and Mother with
Tears in their Eyes conjured her to tell the Truth, and discover who was that
lustful Paramour that had despoyl'd her of her Honor, and brought that stain
and infamy upon their Family, which all their Tears were not able to wash away.
Cleandra with no less trouble and astonishment, denied the Guilt of such lewd
Debaucheries, and by all the Sacred Powers of Heaven protested her Innocence
and unspotted Chastity: The Sighs, Tears, and passionate Imprecations of
Cleandra, persuaded her Parents at last to think the Doctors mistaken in their
Judgments, and that the swelling of her Belly, which they considered as an
Argument of her Pregnancy, was occasioned by a Tympany or some other
Praeter-natural Tumor, which was the real Cause of her present Distemper.

Some time after Dr. Parmel came over to Marli and excused himself that the
multitude of Business had made him so great a Stranger, and wanting in those
respectful Visits their great Civilties obliged him to; and missing Cleandra at
Dinner, particularly Inquired how she did, and if she was yet marrried? Her
Mother answered with a Sigh, that she was very ill and had been so for two
months past, in which time she had not stirred out of her Chamber; Dr. Parmel
seemed very much concerned at the young Ladies illness, and desired he might be
admitted to see her, and that he should think himself extremely happy if the
best of his Art and Skill could contribute any thing to her Recovery. Her
Mother told him, she was afraid she already too well understood her Distemper,
which in due time Nature would discharge of it self, and that indeed she was
ashamed any Friend should see her in that Condition, which would end in Shame
to her self, and Disgrace to all her Relations. The Dr. seemed wholly ignorant
of what she meant (though extremely pleased at the success of his Design) and
still more earnestly pressed to see her, which at last she consented to, and
conducted him to Cleandra's Chamber, whom he found alone extreem Pensive and
Melancholy. The Doctor after he had expressed his Respects and Sorrow for her
present illness, desired to feel her Pulse, and after several other critical
Observations more for form than any thing else, told her Mother her Distemper
now would not be of long Continuance, that she was certainly with Child, and
all that he could direct was as a Friend and not a Physician, that they would
prevail with her to confess who was the Father, and by a speedy Marriage,
prevent that Disgrace, which otherwise was unavoidable; whereupon the Mother
desired him to use his Endeavors with her, to discover the Person, and that
she would withdraw, that Cleandra might with more Freedom discourse him, and
accordingly did so. After the Dr. had said what he thought convenient, in
pursuit of that Question which he himself was only able to answer, he took his
leave and told her Mother that was he not assured by all those infallible
Symptoms he had observed that she was with Child, her solemn Protestations to
the contrary, would almost persuade him to credit what she had said in her own
Vindication: upon which her Mother asked him if it was possible for a Woman to
Conceive in her Sleep, without being sensible of those Pleasures of Fruition,
and the Person she enjoyed; to which the Dr. answered it was possible, and that
we might observe it in several Persons who walk in their Sleep, and do those
several Acts of which they have no remembrance when they wake. This one
Argument prevailed with Seignior Conto and his Lady, to believe Cleandra was
with Child, and at the same time innocent of the Guilt and ignorant of the
Person; for she had oftentimes walked about her Chamber, and sometimes down
into the Dairy, and so to Bed again, without remembering one tittle of it next
morning.

After several Considerations what was to be done in a matter of so much
difficulty, and that did they know the real Father, he might possibly prove to
be the Groom or Footman, where the discredit and reproach of such a Match would
be equal to the infamous Name of Courtezan; the Dr. told them that if they
thought him a worthy Husband for Cleandra, he would marry her immediately, nor
did he value her being with Child, nor who was the Father, since he was so well
satisfied her Soul was immaculate and pure, though her Reputation was stained;
and that the preserving of her Fame, and the Honor of so illustrious a Family,
was more dear to him than any private Interest or Respect to himself. Seignior
Conto was infinitely pleased to hear the Dr. express himself in those Terms,
and after his most particular Thanks, told him he would endeavor in few days
to dispose Cleandra to the Match, which he did, and ten days after they were
privately married, not long after, Seignior Conto and his Lady both dyed and
left their whole Estate to Dr. Parmel, and his Children by Cleandra; who now
lived at Marli in great esteem and Reputation.

It happened one day after Dinner, the Doctor being in a most pleasant Humor,
and the Discourse of the Company leading to it, he told them by what Trick he
had married a Person of that Quality and Estate Cleandra was; at which they
seemed very much surpised, but in Compliment commended his Design, which had
now crowned him with so bountiful a Success. Cleandra bit her Lip, and by
change of Color, discovered the inward perplexity of her Thoughts, nor could
she altogether refrain from some passionate expressions of her Resentment, that
she should lie under the great Scandal of a Whore, and lose her Lover Makenti
whom she loved dearer than her Life, and be so basely betrayed into a Marriage
with so mean and perfidious a Wretch as the Doctor was. Some time after she
writ a Letter to Makenti, and acquainted him with all the Circumstances of this
Relation, who was extremely troubled at it; and upon the first Discourse of her
being with Child, had utterly forsaken her and never since seen her. The
Discovery of this Intrigue, created a more particular Love and Respect between
Makenti and Cleandra, who readily agreed, to revenge the Injury they had both
received from the faithless Doctor, by abusing his Bed in their Adulterous
Enjoyments, and charging his Forehead with the shameful Emblem of a Cuckold,
which they thought the heinousness of the provocation, would warrant them in.
Thus did they continue in their Adulterous Pleasures, till the Doctor grew
sensible of it, and by frequent Observations of their private Meetings, was
sufficiently confirmed in the Truth of their lustful Embraces; whereupon he
resolved to meet them with a proportionate Revenge which he thus effected.
Having a young Gentlewoman under Cure, who was very much afflicted with the
Venerial Distemper, he designedly infected himself with it, which he
communicated to his Wife, and she to Makenti, who neither of them suspecting
the present Cause of their Illness, were so surpised by the Venom of the
Disease, that Makenti in a short time lost his Nose and both his Eyes, and
hardly escaped with Life, spending the rest of his days in Shame and
Repentance, Cleandra languish'd a long time in great Misery, which her Husband
saw with Pleasure and Satisfaction, and growing weary at last to see her
Distemper so tedious in the Punishment he designed, prepared a Cordial for her
in which he infused a large Dose of Poison, and recommending it to her as a
great Restorative to take at three in the afternoon, went abroad expecting at
his Return to find her in the Agonies of Death. Dr. Parmel coming back very hot
and faint (it being the midst of August) went directly to her Chamber, and
sitting down by the Beds-side took a Glass of Cordial Drink, which stood by
amongst the rest, and hastily drank it (...) kindly askiing her how she did,
and what good (...) ^^und by that Cordial he had ordered her; I have (...)
taken it, said Cleandra, and don't design it till to (...) for I find my self
much better than I was; at which (...) started and called for it, when the Maid
(...) that was i^ you drank Sir; at which he cried (...) poisoned; I am
poisoned; and sent for his Confe^^or, to whom he related his intended Design of
poisoning his Wife, which he was now heartily sorry for, and in two hours fell
into Violent Convulsions, and dyed in great Torment. Cleandra continued in a
most sad and deplorable Condition, and was afterward removed to the Lazaretto,
where she dyed in Misery and Ignominy.

Thus we see vicious Lives end in infamous Deaths, and the subtle Dr. Parmel at
last deceived himself; and was overtaken by a Punishment as just as unexpected
The lustful Makenti, and the fair but unchaste Cleandra receive their Torment by
the poisonous Sting of those Pleasures they so Lasciviously and Adulterously
delighted in. HIST. V. Bertolin and Aurella.
Monsieur Bertolin commits Adultery with Aurella, Monsieur Chapee's Wife, his
intimate Friend; upon the Discovery whereof she stabs her self. Monsieur Chapee
in Revenge cheats Orinta, in the disguise of Bertolin her Husband, and lies
with her; Bertolin surprises them in Bed, mortally Wounds Orinta, and is then
killed by Chapee, who is apprehended and Executed for the Murder and Adultery.

IN the Reign of that August and noble Prince, Henry the 4th King of France,
the Marquess of Conti was made Governor of Orleans, in whose Family Monsieur
Bertolin and Monsieur Chapee, two young Gentlemen of Noble Birth, and related
to the Marquess and his Lady, received their Education and first Instructions
in Arms and Military Discipline: the equality of their Age and Fortunes with
their constant Society, rendered them by degrees most intimate and familiar
Friends; and if their outward Shape and Features could add any thing to the
inward Harmony of their Affections; never were two Persons more alike, they
appeared the same, distinguished only by the different Appellations of Bertolin
and Chapee. But as the figure of their Bodies so nearly resembled each other,
so their Temper of Mind was as much unlike, Bertolin was proud and ^aughty, of
a Courage that rather feared no Evil than loved what is Good, Chapee was modest
and humble loved Goodness for it is own native Beauty, and thought nothing so
base and degenerous in a Gentleman as Sin and Wickedness At this time dyed
Monsieur le Farin great Uncle to the Marquess, and left his Estate to Aurella a
young Lady and his Niece, the Care of whose Person and Fortune he committed to
the Marquess of Conti and his Lady, under whose prudent Government, she
received all the accomplishments of a Religious and Virtuous Lady.

The constant Conversation of Bertolin and Chapee with Aurella, and the
consideration of her Fortune, which was very great, soon fired their Hearts
with the Flames of Love and Affection toward her. The modesty of Aurella, her
excellent Beauty and sweetness of Temper, were Charms able to warm the most
frozen Breast, with zeal to her Person and admiration of her Virtue. These two
Rivals made their Courtship to Aurella in Smiles and Glances, and all those
little Services which might render them grateful to her, in which Bertolin and
Chapee endeavored to outdoe each other, but still with that Respect and
Friendship, that no Clouds of Jealousy appeared by any outward expressions of
Disrespect. They used often to Hunt together, and one Morning, Chapee sent his
Servant to Bertolin to acquaint him, he was going abroad a Hunting and desired
his Company: Bertolin returned his Thanks, and told him he was yet in Bed, but
would rise and follow after; who did so, but when he came into the Field, as he
soon found the rest of the Company so he mist Chapee, and inquiring where he
was, they answered, he came out with them, but the Dogs making a default by
yonder Copse he rid in, and since they had nor seen him. Bertolin after four
hours stay, ( Chapee not yet coming, and the Sport growing cold) returned home
where he expected to have met him, but the Groom told him he went abroad in the
Morning, with the Dogs and had not been at home since, whereupon he went to
Aurella's Chamber, where her Maid answered she was gone out in the Coach alone
upon a Visit to Pontaret. The Weather being hot and Bertolin weary with his
Mornings Exercise, he went to his Chamber, where after a turn or two, he lay
down and drew the Curtains: a quarter of an hour after Chapee, and Aurella
coming by his Chamber (the same Stairs leading to her Apartment) saw the door
open and no Body there; and supposing Bertolin was yet in the Field walked in;
but no sooner had they begun to express the constancy and sincerity of their
Affection to each other, but they saw the Marquess coming cross the Court with
intent as they suspected to visit Aurella, upon which Chapee, hastily asked if
he should not that night be happy in her arms? Yes my dear, said Aurella, come
between eleven and twelve, when my Maid is gone to her Chamber, and give three
scratches upon the Door with your hand, let that be the signal and I will open
it and let you in, The Marquess was now coming up the stairs, and Chapee and
Aurella being unwilling he should see them together immediately parted.

Bertolin overheard this discourse, and presently suspected Chapee had dealt
deceitfully with him by inviting him abroad to Hunt, that he might alone enjoy
the beautiful Aurella, which he had reason to believe from the freedom of their
late Discourse, and that Chapee so soon left the Field, and when he came back
found Aurella was gone out, who had no doubt made an Assignation to meet him,
of which this was the Result that Chapee should that night be admitted to
Aurella's Bed, to which promise his own Ears were Witnesses. Bertolin who ever
had a most passionate Love for Aurella, and always believed her of unspotted
Reputation and unquestionable Virtue; now began to exclaim against all her
false and counterfeit pretensions to Modesty; called her all the names of a
Whore and Strumpet which did not so much trouble him that she was dishonest, of
which he now made no question, but that he himself was not her happy Paramour,
and to see Chapee preferred to those Pleasures to which his own Merit and
Abilities gave him equal claim, was an affront he scorned to bear. However
since he had a Revenge so sweet in his own power, he resolved to prosecute it,
and supplant Chapee of those Delights Aurella had promised with more Lust in
her than Desert in him: And having the Signal which would gain him admittance
at the hour appointed, he concluded to make use of it to his own Advantage.
Night being come and Supper ended, Aurella retired to her Chamber, and Bertolin
endeavored to engage Chapee in Company with some Gentlemen of their
Acquaintance at Cards, whilst he attended the lucky hour; which he did with so
much Artifice, excusing himself that he was very ill of a pain in his Head, and
desired to withdraw to his Chamber, that Chapee was obliged in Civility to his
Friends, to stay with them, though he intended not to forfeit Aurella's Promise
by two strict an observance of the Rules of Friendship and good Manners.
Bertolin went up to his Chamber and undrest, diligently waiting till he heard
Aurella's Maid go out of her Chamber, and then in his Gown and Slippers went
softly up, and scratched three times upon her Door, she presently rose and
opened it; the Candle was gone for fear the light might give any occasion of
Suspicion, and Aurella took Bertolin by the hand and led him to her Bed, gently
whispering him not to speak for fear they should be overheard by the Lady in
the next Chamber.

Whilst Bertolin was revelling in stolen Delights, and rifling the richest Jewel
in the whole Treasury of Love, Chapee came to the Door and scratched three
times, according to Aurella's Directions, which Bertolin heard, but Aurella's
Senses were all lost, and dissolved in Raptures of Bliss. Chapee for fear of
being discovered, went discontedly back to his Chamber, accusing the innocent
Aurella of Treachery and Injustice, and cursing his unhappy Stars which first
inclined him to Love and believe false and deceitful Women. In the morning
early Bertolin stole from Aurella's arms, leaving her fast asleep and went to
his own Chamber and so to Bed; his languishing Spirits coveted a Refreshment,
and each weary Member a quiet Repose. Aurella according to her Custom hearing
the Bell toll to Chapel, dressed and went to Prayers, where she saw Chapee with
a sad and dejected Countenance like one who had been all night under the
severities of Penance, which she little susspected had been true in the
literal sense. Prayers being done, Aurella went up to her Chamber and Chapee
followed, and upon the Stairs with a stern look told her, he thought his
present Title to her Affections had been of more value with her than to be so
slighted, and her promise more sacred to him than so easily violated. Aurella
replied I am sorry my Dear, you did not reap the satisfaction you expected, I
had thought our endearments had been mutual and our Happiness equal in our
exalted Ioys. The Marquess at that word called Chapee, which broke off the
Discourse. Aurella went up to her Chamber very much dissatisfied with Chapee's
Behavior and Expressions, and he no less concerned at her Reply wondering with
himself, what could be the sense and meaning of it.

Bertolin was now risen, and according to his Custom went to walk in the
Garden, where he found Aurella gathering Flowers and her Maid at a distance
from her, upon which he addressed himself to her with this Compliment; These
Flowers Madam are happy to be gathered by your fair Hands, but certainly much
happier is that Man who shall crop the blushing Rose of your Virginity; Aurella
started at the Expression, and told him those were Flowers in Discourse, which
she did not understand nor know how to answer. Bertolin proceeded, is the
memory of last nights Enjoyments so soon faded? Madam I assure you the relish
of it is yet fresh in my Fancy, and my unwearied Imagination every minute
repeats those Pleasures with fresh Delights; Aurella was strangely surpised at
his Discourse, and after a little pause told him, she had quite forgot all
Riddles, and he that made them was best able to explain them. Whereupon
Monsieur Bertolin, discovered the Secret, telling her how happily he had
overheard their discourse, and the advantage he had made of it, and that if it
was a Crime, he hoped that absolute Royalty of Love, which encouraged him to
the Trangression would pardon the fault. Aurella heard him with Wonder and
Astonishment, and with a deep sigh answered, Alas Monsieur! Your mistaken
suspicion of my Dishonesty, will prove your Unhappiness and my Ruin! Our Loves
were not unchaste as you imagined, I was yesterday privately married at Pontaret
to Monsieur Chapee, and the Signal I gave him to enter my Chamber, was to
complete our Religious Vows in innocent Embraces, you have for ever undon me,
your Friend and your self -- Oh, Oh, and with that swoon'd away, Bertolin
called her Maid to assist him, by whose help they carried her to her Chamber,
where she continued all day extremely ill. Monsieur Chapee was presently
acquainted with it, who came to know the reason; to whom Aurella with showers
of Tears related all the passages of the last nights Transactions adding in the
close, since we are so unfortunate in our Love, Heaven pardon me, and comfort
you; I will rather choose to Sacrifice my Life to the Memory of my lost Honor,
and dye a Martyr to my Virtue, than live with the Shame and Ignominy of a
Strumpet, and at that word struck a Poniard to her Heart of which she
immmediately dyed.

Monsieur Bertolin, upon the first notice of Aurella's Tragical end, took Horse
for Paris, where he continued some time, and then traveled into Spain and
Italy, and after three years returned to Paris, where he settled and married
Orinta, Monsieur Cardans eldest Daughter, a Lady who had engrossed all the
perfections of her Sex in her single self. Monsieur Chapee was for some time,
distracted with that torment of Grief which now seemed to over-whelm him, but
after two years time recovered his Senses, and vowed a severe Revenge, should
only quit scores with so treacherous a Friend and degenerous an Enemy.

Monsieur Chapee, after several inquiries, at last heard Monsieur Bertolin was
returned to France and married at Paris, where he lived in great State and
Splendor; this refreshed his Memory, with the heynousness of that injury he
had formerly offered him, and the loss of so Virtuous a Wife who suffered upon
his Account, which now whetted his anger to a sharp Revenge, and exacted from
him the Justice of as rigorous Punishment. After several considerations in what
proper method he should challenge a satisfaction, he resolved to Pistol him as
cowardly, as he had treacherously abused him; but this not so well consisting
with the Honor and Gallantry of Chapee, to take a base and ignoble Revenge;
upon second thoughts, he resolved to pay him in his own Coin, and make his
abuse to Aurella, the square of his Revenge on Bertolin, to this purpose, he
went privately to Paris, where after he had learnt where Bertolin lived, he
lodged himself hard by, and narrowly watched his going abroad, and at last by
some Spies he hired to that purpose understood that three days after he
designed to follow the Court to St. Germans where he intended to stay a Week,
and leave his Lady Orinta at home. No sooner was Bertolin gone his Journey, but
in the Evening late he came to his House, in the same Traveling Habit as
Bertolin wore, which rendered him so like, that his very Servants received him
as their Master; but for fear of any Discovery, he had bribed Orinta's Woman
with a Purse of Gold, in which were a hundred Pistolls, who was ready below to
receive him, and conduct him to his Ladys Chamber, who was just gone to Bed.
Orinta no sooner saw him, but believing him to be her Husband cried out, O Lord
my Dear, I hope you have met with no misfortune, I did not expect you so soon;
No said Chapee with a low voice, I forgot a Paper I must give to the Secretary
of State, which was the occasion of my Return, I must go back to morrow early
and therefore I Will make have to Bed; upon which he undrest and stepped into Bed,
where no man had ever better Opportunity or Encouragement to the Sweets of
Revenge than Chapee now had. About twelve, the real Monsieur Bertolin returned,
having accidentally met with some Friends 3 miles out of Town, who diverted his
Journey for two or three days, upon promise they would bear him Company, if he
would defer it till then, and spend the day with them at Bowls, which he
accepted of. Bertolin came hastily into his Chamber, without the least
suspicion of finding a Gallant in Bed with his Wife, whom he no sooner saw,
without distinguishing who he was, but he passed at his Wife with his Sword who
lay next, and ran her deep into the left Breast: Chapee suddenly stepped out of
Bed, and catching his Sword which lay naked by, prevented Bertolin's Revenge
upon himself, by running him through the Heart of which Wound he dropped down
dead upon the place. The next morning Orinta dyed with great Pity and
Lamentation for her unnhappy end. Monsieur Chapee was presently apprehended,
who voluntarily confessed the Murder which he was forced to in his own
Defense; and the reason of his Adultery with Orinta (of which she was
altogether innocent) that he might satisfy the Injuries he had received from
Monsieur Bertolin in a proportionable Revenge, for which he was condemned to
lose his Head before the Bastile in Paris, which two days after was executed
accordingly.

He that cherishes one Sin because is it but one, entertains a Legion of Devils
in the singular Number, which like the seeming Viper is big with a poisonous
Offspring of numerous Enemies.

Thus Monsieur Bertolin, thought Lust but a weak Enemy which once admitted,
soon ripened into three Murders, two Adulteries, and his own shameful and
fatal Execution.

HIST. VI. St. Quintin and Cloissa.
The Count of St. Quintin commits Adultery with Lovisia Countess of St. Denis,
and kills her Husband in a Duel; whereupon he flies to Antwerp, and there
debauches Cloissa, Wife to the Here Van Zetken. The House being accidentally
fired, Cloissa is supposed burnt in it, but is preserved by the Count. They
live in Adultery, till he falling from his Horse, is dragged dead to her Door;
upon which she is discovered and dies suddenly.

THe Count of St. Quintin, was a Cavalier eminently known in the Court of
France, for his Intrigue with Madamoyselle Lovisia, Wife to the Earl of St.
Denis; The Count her Husband growing sensible of the Injury and Disgrace he
received from St. Quintin, sent him a Challenge, upon which they met in an
adjacent Field to Fountain-bleau, where St. Denis was mortally wounded, of
which in six Weeks after he dyed* St. Quintin withdrew himself for some time,
and when he heard of the Death of St. Denis, made his escape to Antwerp, chief
Town in the Marquisate of the Empire, in the Dukedom of Brabant; his Lady and
the rest of his Family followed after, where he continued till the Justice of
Heaven punished his present and former Debaucheries by a Tragical and deserved
Death.

At this time the Here Van Zetken was Governor of Antwerp, to whom the Count
of St. Quintin upon his first arrival made his Compliment, and was received by
him with all the expressions of Respect and Kindness, due to a Gentleman of his
Quality and Grandeur. The Count seeing himself daily obliged by the Civilites
of the Governor, paid his acknowledgments to him in constant Visits, which by
degrees rendered them most intimate and familiar Acquaintance. The generous
Hospitality of the Governor, often invited St. Quintin to his House, and the
courtly behavior of the Earl made him a welcome and acceptable Guess. These
frequent Enterviews, gave him the opportunity of a free Converse with his Lady
Cloissa, whose Beauty was alone able to subdue an Empire, and her Wit Command
it. But alas Cloissa's Beauty was not adorned with Honesty, nor her Wit
inspired with Grace. St. Quintin (whose Inclinations were always Amorous) soon
discovered the imperfections of Cloissa, and how to attaque the Fort where it
was least capable of resistance. To this end, he courted all opportunities of
Address to her, in which he behaved himself with that Artifice and Cunning,
that his sutble Charms soon won Cloissa's Heart, and made her a Slave to his
Lust, whose Honor and Chastity had they equaled her Wit and Beauty, would
have made her an Angel on Earth, and a Saint in Heaven.

The great Observance and profound Respects the Earl of St. Quintin constantly
paid Cloissa, were diligently remarqu'd by Captain Cassel, a young Gentleman,
and an Officer in the Town, who was deeply enamored with her Beauty, and
promised himself that happy Conquest, which he now presumed the Gallantry and
courtship of the Count had robbed him of; this made him resolute in his Revenge,
which his Interest and Familiarity with the Governor in some Measure gave him
an Opportunity to effect, which he endeavored in this manner. Being one day
alone, with the Governor in his Closet, he took occasion to commend the Count
for a most complete Gentleman, adding that if he was as great a Soldier, as he
was an accomplished Courtier, he believed his Valor and Conduct would render
him no less successful in War, than he was now prosperous in all his Amorous
Encounters, with the fairer Sex. Say you so? said the Governor, is the Count
of St. Quintin, so great an Artist in the affairs of Love? Yes my Lord, said
Captain Cassel, and has Confidence enough to tempt a Nun, if once his Breast is
warmed with the heats of Passion and Desire. You would make me Jealous said the
Governor, did I not believe you are mistaken in your Character of him; I have
oftentimes observed his familiar Freedom with my Wife, but never yet questioned
his Honor or her Honesty. Heaven forbid, replied the Captain, no doubt but the
fair Cloissa, is Virtuous too, Chaste and Incorrupt as the falling Snow or
Virgin Fountain; but this once shed upon the Earth, is trod by every common
Foot, and those Waters which were pure in their Original Bed, do often lodge in
dirty Ditches, and by the dangerous Neighborhood of Filth at last incorporate
with it, and become polluted Streams. I mean Sir the Devil tempted Eve, and she
yielded to it. But though I believe the Count of St. Quintin dare be a Devil in
his Temptation; yet I hope Cloissa will never be an Eve in her Compliance. This
Discourse fired the Governors Breast with Jealousy and Suspicion, and to add
more Fuel to the Flame, looking accidentally out of the Window, he saw the
Count and Cloissa walking hand in hand in the Garden; but being at that instant
acquainted that some of the principal Officers of the Town attended him in the
Hall, he broke off the Discourse and went immediately down to them.

Two days after, the Count received this Letter from one of his Footmen which
was delivered to him in the Streets by an unknown Person with Orders to carry
it immediately to his Lord, Cloissa to the Count of St. Quintin.
My Lord,
THe Jealousy of my Husband (notwithstanding our Care and Secrecy) begins to
suspect my Friendship to you ex^ceeds the Bounds of my Faith to him, and Honor
to my self; for which reason, he has severely checked me, and confined me to my
Chamber; But all his cruelty shall never divide my Heart from you, though at
present he denis me the enjoyment of your Company, and those ravishing
Pleasures I covet with equal Ardour. I suppose Captain Cassel (whose Courtship
I always entertained with a Frown, and slighted his want of Merit with my
constant Disrespect) is the sole cause of it, whose Insolence, your Prudence
and Courage know best how to correct. Farewell my Dear Lord, and be as constant
in your Love to me, as I am sincere in my Affection to you, which shall never
Expire, but with the dying Breath of your

Cloissa.




The Count upon the Receipt of this Letter, was very much concerned for the
distress of Cloissa, but not knowing how to remedy it, at present concealed his
Resentments; and least he should give further Suspicion of his Guilt to the
Governor, by the discontinuance of his Visits, made them as frequent as
before, still expressing his Respect to him, with the same serene Countenance
and easy Freedom he used to do. He had now leisure to meditate a Revenge on
Captain Cassel, but considering him as a particular Favorite of the
Governors, he thought it not discretion to give him any public Affront; but
understanding he had an Intrigue with Olivia (the Daughter of one Caldus a
Shoemaker, who was dead) and by fair promises had got her with Child, and now
deserted her; he privately by Bautrin his Taylour, encouraged her to complain
to the Governor, which she did, and exposed the Captain to the discourse of
the Town, in his Name and Reputation, but without any advantage to her self.
This so incensed Olivia, who had the Courage of an Amazon and the Malice of a
Woman, that she swore a Revenge, and Bautrin acquainted the Count with her
Resolution, who ordered Bautrin to animate her in it, and tell her, that Cassel
was a dastardly Captain, and if she sent him a Challenge in the name of some
Friend of hers he would never dare to fight, but sign what Terms she offered.
Olivia who was of a bold undaunted Spirit, approved his Advice, saying, if she
had but Clothes, Horse and Arms, she would immediately prosecute it; which
Bautrin promised, and two days after furnished her with all Necessaries, that
she wanted nothing now but an Opportunity to engage her Enemy, and revenge
herself on the faithless and treacherous Captain. Olivia being thus equipped by
the directions of Bautrin sent Captain Cassel this Challenge by a private
Footman in an unknown Livery.

For Captain Cassel.
THe Injury you have done poor Olivia, whose Innocence and Virtue you have
basely betrayed, obliges me to demand satisfaction of you; as I am a Gentleman
and a Soldier I am engaged by the honor of both, to relieve the distressed;
for which and no other Reason, I expect you alone, at five to morrow morning on
Horseback with Sword and Pistol, in the Field next the North-gate, without the
Wall, where the Courage of my Heart and Justice of my Cause, shall make you as
infamous in your Death, as you have been vicious in your Life

Polyntus.


The Captain received this Challenge with Wonder and Surprise, inquired of the
Footman who his Master was, but he being instructed to the contrary, told him
he had no Orders to resolve any Questions, but return with his Answer; which
the Captain with some trouble and disorder told him he should have, and bid him
acquaint his Master, he would not fail to meet him upon the Word of a Gentleman
and Reputation of a Soldier, at the time and place appointed. These Champions
met accordingly, and the Female Warrior without any Compliment discharged a
Pistol, which wounded the Captain in the left Shoulder, upon which he
immediately desired a Parley, and promised the present payment of a hundred
Pistols, to compose the Quarrel, which Olivia accepted of, and an hour after
received them at his Quarters, and then discovered her self: For the bravery of
this Action, Olivia was highly commended of all, and the Captain so scorned and
flouted that he immediately quitted his Command and retired into the Country to
a private Life.

The Count made very good advantage of Captain Cassels Disgrace, and so well
improved it, that the Governor reflecting on the Debauchery of the Captain,
which was so notoriously apparent, began to think the Count innocent of his
Aspersions, and Cloissa truly Virtuous; upon which he soon after took off her
restraint, but still watched her Behavior with an observing Eye. This the
Count was sensible of, which made them both so cautious to prevent new Fears
and Jealousies in the Husband, that they never durst exchange a Smile or one
Amorous Glance but by stealth, and all their present Delights, were but the
empty effects of exalted imagination.

A Month after, the Governor appointed a Mask and invited the Count, his
principal Officers and several Gentlemen of the Town, who all came in
Masquerading Habits; The Count had notice of it a Week before, and withal from
Cloissa that her Husband had strictly charged her to keep her Chamber that
night, for he did not think it proper she should appear, since he had only
designed the Entertainment for Gentlemen, nor was there any of her Sex to be
admitted: This was a great affliction to Cloissa who had some hopes by the
advantage, of her Disguise, to have had a more private Converse with the Count,
which she saw her self now wholly debarred from. The Count having considered
the Circumstances of time and place, communicated his design to an intimate
Acquaintance, and desired him to be there dressed in the same Habit exactly with
himself, but to stand in a Corner where he might not be taken notice of, with a
Cloak on, and not to appear till he gave him his Q. to enter. After two hours
Diversion, they were all conducted into the Dining Room where they had a noble
and splendid Entertainment, and pulling off their Masks, paid their mutual
Respects to one another. The collation being over they returned to the Hall,
and the Count withdrew to his Friend, where he put on his Cloak, and sent him
into the Hall to Masquerade his Person, who was so like him in the Proportion
of his Body, Stature and Habit, that the most critical Eye, could not
distinguish him. The Count was immediately conducted to Cloissa's Apartment by
Lydia her Woman, where the Lovers feasted their longing desires in the
unbounded Joys of their Adulterous and Lascivious Passions.

In the midst of their Pleasures above, the Footmen and Servants were Revelling
in Drunkenness below; whereby their Carelessness and Neglect of their Flambeaux,
the Room was fired, which burnt so furiously that in an instant, Cloissa's
Chamber which was overhead, was in a bright Flame before they were sensible of
it. The Gentlemen in the Hall were strangely surprised with the loud Outcryes
of Fire, and as little able to assist in the extinguishing the Flames, as their
drunken Servants; but each made have away to preserve him self. The Count and
Cloissa by the Care and Diligence of Lydia, had more early notice of the Danger
and almost choked with the Smoke, with great difficulty got down the back
Stairs; and thus they all three sav'd-themselves from the rage of the devouring
Flames. No sooner were they got safe into the Court, but the Roof fell down,
and the Count spreading his Cloak over Cloissa (who was in her Night Gown)
carried her to his Coach, and with her and Lydia went to his Friends Lodgings,
who had personated him in the Hall, who presently came in, in great Horror and
Affright, believing the Count (who he knew was in Cloissa's Chamber) had been
burnt with her, for the Report at the House, was, that Cloissa and her Maid had
both suffered in the Flames.

The next day, the Count disposed Cloissa and Lydia, to a private Lodging three
miles off in the Country where he made his constant Visits to her, and without
control indulged himself in her lustful Arms, and the dissolute Pleasures of
her Adulterous Bed. The Governor her Husband sadly lamented her Loss and
continued in close Mourning for her a Twelvemonth after; which she often had
the pleasure to see and smile at, as often as she met him in the Streets, where
she never appeared in her Coach, but with her Mask on. Thus they continued for
two years, riotous in their Pleasures, only then most happy, when in their
close Embraces they were most luxuriously wicked; till at last the Countess was
privately acquainted with the Amors of her Husband; which he had so secretly
managed that the Lady was yet undiscovered. It happened one day that the Count
being ready to go abroad to make his customary Visits to his Mistress, the
Countess earnestly entreated him to stay within, adding she was not ignorant of
his secret Pleasures, which she with more Passion than Prudence charged him
withal. The Count highly enraged, told her he should not forget her Insolence,
nor should her Prayers or Tears prevail with him, though all the Devils in Hell
opposed him in the way; at which he clapped Spurs, to his Horse and rid on with
full speed: But had not gone above two miles, before his Horse threw him, and
(his Foot hanging in the Stirrup) dragged him along the Road, till he had beat
out his Brains; and coming to Cloissa's Lodgings, stopped at the door, who soon
saw the wretched and deplorable end of her Unhappy and Adulterous Lover.

The Countess had presently notice of the miserable Death of her Husband, and
in her Coach went directly to Cloissa's Lodgings (where his mangled Body lay)
and here saw the most rueful Sight that ever Eyes beheld. After she had in some
measure discharged her Grief in showers of Tears and lamentable Exclamations,
she sent for the Officers, and desired, that the Strumpet who had been the sole
cause of this Misfortune, might be apprehended and carried before the
Governor, whose Justice she hoped, would punish her according to the Quality
of the Crime and her own Dem^rits. Cloissa and Lydia, were presently seized and
carried before the Governor where the Countess spared no Aggravations, her
Passion prompted her to, or the Circumstances of the thing admitted of. The
Governor with an attentive Ear, heard this dismal Relation, and expressed his
Sorrow for the loss of so worthy a Gentleman and intimate Friend as the Count
was and then ordered the accursed Lady to make her defense, and withal, bid her
and her Maid put up their Hoods and discover their Faces; which they delaying
to do, the Officers pulled them off, when the Governor at first sight, knew
her to be his Wife, and with surprise and wonder cried out, It is my Wife, It
is my Wife; at which words she dropped down in a Swound from which she never
recovered. Lydia to the great Astonishment of the Governor and the numerous
crowd of Spectators, gave a full Relation of all these Passages, which she had
been privy to; whereupon she was committed to Prison, and a Week after
condemned to be publicly whipped in the Market Place of Antwerp, and for ever
banished the City.

He that goes on in a constant Course of Sin, runs on the Devils Errand, and
like St. Quintin, rides Post to his own Execution: whilst the guilty Cloissa,
conscious of her Shame, dies suddenly under the horror of her own Crimes, to
prevent a more ignominious Punishment. HIST. VII. Rigidoro and his two Sons.
Carollo, steals Corinna his Sister unknown, from the Nunnery of St. Bridget
and lives in Incest with her; for which he is condemned to loose his Head, and
she burnt. Erasto marries Favonia a common Strumpet, Rigidoro disinherits him.
He Murders his Father and flies, is afterward taken by the Turks; commits
Adultery with Adulla his Patron 's Wife, whereupon she is strangled, and he
flead alive. Favonia dies miserably in the Burdellos of the foul Disease.

IN the Popedom of Pius Quintus, Seignior Rigidoro a-young extravagant
Gentleman lived at Rome, who according to the modish Gallantries of the Age,
was a very complete and fashionable Sinner, and familiarly acquainted with
Emilia a young Lady, by whom he had one Daughter named Corinna; who (to prevent
the Shame, and conceal the Lewdness of her Parents) was privately educated; and
as soon as her Age had qualified her for the Vows of a Religious Life disposed
to the Nunnery of St. Bridget. Presently after the Birth of Corinna, Rigidoro
married Mariana the only daughter of Seignior Placento a Goldsmith; whose
plentiful Fortune was above the Quality of her Family, and by her had two Sons
Carollo and Erasto, and one Daughter. Carollo the eldest was no sooner arrived
to those years which ought to have entitled him as discreet as manly; but he
was eminently known through the whole City for the debaucheries of his Life and
Conversation, which rendered him no less acceptable to the lewd and vicious,
than he was abhorred and detested by all virtuous and sober Men. As he went one
day with some Gentlemen to see the Nunnery of St. Bridget, where one of his
Friends had a Sister lately entered, he had the Fortune to see a young
Gentlewoman, whose Beauty suddenly inflamed his Heart, with the wanton desires
of Love; which he cherished, though but with slender hopes of accomplishing his
Design, and reaping that satisfaction he so earnestly coveted; after he had
inquired who she was he understood her name was Corinna, but her parents
unknown. Corinna was no less enamored of Carollo and growing weary of the
smart and severe Discipline she was confined to, resolved to embrace the first
Opportunity to discharge her self of those sacred Fetters which rendered
Carollo's Courtship more easy and successful. Not to relate all the Intrigues
of their Love which were many, dark and mysterious, to prevent the suspicion of
the Lady-Abbess and the Holy-Sisters her Companions; Carollo in two months time
gained her Heart, upon the promise of Marriage, and a Dispensation from the
Pope, and at last by his Assistance, she made her Escape. Corinna was lodged at
Monsieur Torquato's House, his particular Friend, where her Name and all the
Circumstances of her Quality, were so well disguised that nothing appeared but
what was just and honorable: And here he first gained the Enjoyment of his
unlawful Pleasures under the umbrage and promise of future Matrimony, which he
religiously swore to, and she credulously believed. Carollo having now satiated
his Lust, began to make his Visits more seldom, and was soon cloyed with the
Repetition of such unchaste Delights. In the Interim, whilst they banqueted
their Senses in the fruition of sacrilegious Pleasures, Corinna was discovered
by the search made after her, and apprehended one night in the embraces of her
lascivious Paramour, who was seized by the same Officers, and both imprisoned
till the Pope and the Conclave of Cardinals, were acquainted with the Fact.
Rigidoro was not long a stranger to the Misfortune of his Son, but when he
understood the Ladies Name was Corinna, his Daughter, and Carollo's Sister; he
was so incensed, that nothing could reconcile him, but resolved he himself
would rather be the Prosecutor, than Carollo should not be punished according
to his demerits. This present Fury of Rigidoro, was soon allayed by his Natural
Affection to his Son and Daughter, but his Passion and Indiscretion, had so far
transported him; that in the extremities of his Rage, he discovered the
nearness of their Relation* which the Pope and Conclave being acquainted with,
all Intercession for his and Corinna's Life, was ineffectual though Rigidoro
offered a very considerable sum, and six days after Carollo was condemned to
lose his Head for violating the Nunnery in stealing Corinna and then committing
Incest with her. Corinna's Crime was no less heinous and her punishment as just
and severe; she was first sentenced to be Immured, and so starved to Death
between two Walls, which Judgment the Court was afterward pleased at the
Prayers of her Father, to change into a speedier Death, and ordered that 3 days
after in her Nun's Habit she should be burnt near Trajan's Pillar, which was
accordingly executed upon her.

Rigidoro was very much afflicted, at the Tragical and Unfortunate End of
Carollo and Corinna but time at last dried up his Tears; and the hopes he had
of being happy in Erasto and his Sister, abated his Sorrows and gave some
Refreshment to his distressed Mind: But alas? we too often flatter our selves,
with the expectations of Happiness here, from that very Subject, which proves
the only occasion of our Trouble and Misery. Erasto was as vicious and
debauched as Carollo had been, and no less incontinent, though more private in
his Sins, which at last were punished by a cruel and ignominious Death. Amongst
the variety of lewd Women whose Company and acquaintance were his only Pleasure
and Delight. Favonia was one, a common Strumpet and as notoriously infamous as
any of her Profession, who considering the great Estate Erasto would be Master
of upon the Death of his Father, resolved to make the best advantage of him,
and by counterfeiting a Religious Sorrow and Penitence for (...) miscarriages
of her former Life, to gain him for (...) Husband or else absolutely rerefuse
him those e^^oyments he so passionately longed for. Erasto attempted her with
noble Presents and richer (...) would consent to his Desires; which she
sligh^^d with scorn and contempt, telling him that all the Glories of Rome laid
at her Feet should never prevail upon her fixed Resolution to Honor and
Virtue; and that as her more youthful days had been prodigally spent in the
Pleasures of Sin and Wickedness, so now her riper Age and the whole remainder
of her Life, should be entirely dedicated to Virtue and Goodness. Erasto
pursued her with all the Temptations his Suit and Fancy could invent, but still
in vain; whereupon he at last consented to marry her, which was privately
solemnized by Father Iacomo the Priest, to the great Satisfaction of Favonia,
and the utter Ruin of Erasto. Two months this Marriage was concealed from
Rigidoro, but he at last was acquainted with it, and charged Erasto with the
Truth of what he had heard; that he had married Favonia the most impudent
Courtezan in all Rome: Erasto acknowledged that he was married, and without his
advice or consent, for which he humbly begged his Pardon; that the Person he
had married, was called Favonia, but chaste and virtuous as the most modest Nun;
and however her Reputation had been formely stained, she had washed out those
Spots with Tears and Repentance: and though possibly she had been loose and
dissolute in her Virgin State, she was now a most loving Chaste and Virtuous
Wife. Rigidoro was so highly provoked to hear his Son vindicate Favonia's Fame,
and justify his own Error, that he immediately turned him out of Doors, and
disinherited him, telling him with a deep Oath he would rather give his whole
Estate to the Lazaretto, than relieve his utmost Distresses, with the least
expression of common Charity or Kindness.

Erasto acquainted Favonia with Rigidoro's Cruelty, saying if he continued his
severity toward him he cancelled all his Obligations of Duty and Respect to
him, by his barbarous and inhumane Usage; and that he would Study a Revenge
which should make him as miserable as himself. And being now reduced to great
Poverty and Want, and finding his Father inexorable, notwithstanding he
endeavored a Reconciliation by a most profound Submission to him, owning his
Fault and begging his Pardon for his Offense; resolved, with his own hand to
Murder him in the Street, rather than see him live in a plentiful and
prosperous Estate, whilst he starved for want of Bread. Thus the Devil
encouraged him to the most villainous Sin of Parricide without any prospect of
Happiness to himself, but as he gratified present Revenge by destroying that
Life, from whence he had received his own, and since to live miserably is the
most grievous punishment of Life; he resolved a violent Death should make his
Father as unhappy as he was wretched. To this end he watched frequently in the
dark of the Evening over against Rigidoro's House, and seeing him come forth
without any Attendance, followed him, and suddenly ran his Rapier in at his
Back quite through his Body, upon which Rigidoro fell to the Ground Dead, and
Erasto made his Escape. Presently after the Body was found, and within three
days decently buried, great search was made for the Murderers; but no Person
discovered on whom they could fix the Guilt. Erasto, who was constantly haunted
with the Terrors of an evil Conscience, and the dread of that Punishment he had
so justly deserved, fled aboard one of the Popes Galleys which was bound for
Sicily, and was afterward taken by two Turks Men of War belonging to Tunis,
and all the Seamen and Passengers, who survived the Fight (which was very
bloody) either made Slaves aboard their own Vessels, or disposed to
Land-Servitude, amongst whom Erasto was sold ashore, to Barbarossa a Person of
principal Note and Command in Tunis.

Erasto had now leisure to reflect on the vicious and wicked Courses of his
former Life, and particularly on the bloody and inhumane Murder of his Father,
which he now saw in some measure punished by the Miseries of his present
Condition; which wrought Complaint and Sorrow for the Evils he now suffered
under, rather than a true and sincere Penitence for his notorious Offenses. But
though Barbarossa his Patron was severe and cruel, Adulla his Wife was more
kind to him, and often when her Husband was abroad, brought him Victuals into
the Garden where he worked, above what was allowed him, or the other Slaves
had, which Erasto interpreted as a particular Respect and Love to his Person,
which made her so charitable and bountiful to him, and hoped to improve, to a
more considerable Advantage. The other Slaves grumbled at Adulla's Kindness to
Erasto, and acquainted Barbarossa with it, who presently entertained jealous
thoughts of his Wife, and used Erasto with the greater Severity, which Adulla
being sensible of, redoubled her Kindness, and upon the first Opportunity
expressed her more particular Love to him, which Erasto readily Embraced,
promising that no Torments should ever extort a Confession from him, of those
obliging Favors he received. Their Amorous entertainments had been many and
frequent, which Barbarossa was not altogether ignorant of; but willing that
their Crime should be as apparent as he intended their Punishment, dissembled
his Anger; and one day pretending to go abroad, concealed himself in the House,
till he had notice by one of the Slaves (who was a Spy over all their Actions)
that Adulla was retired to her Chamber, and had sent for Erasto, who was gone
in to her; upon which he followed up, and surprised them in the very Act. The
next day Erasto and Adulla were carried in Chains before the Divan, and there
accused by Barbarossa of Adultery, which was so undeniably proved against them
that Erasto was condemned to be flead alive, and Adulla delivered to her
Husband to be punished as he thought convenient, who immediately ordered two of
his Slaves to strangle her. Thus dyed Erasto miserably at Tunis whilst Favonia
returned to her old profession at Rome, and lived in all the lewdness and
debauchery of a common Strumpet, till at last she was infected with the foul
Disease, and died with Shame and Ignominy in the Burdello's.

Fornication, Incest, and Adultery, are three Furies with Virgins Faces, but
their shining Locks are plated Serpents; like Sirens they sing Melodiously,
till they have charmed us into Misery; and made us more ugly in our Natures,
than the Companions of Ulysses in their Shapes, transformed into Swine. HIST.
VIII. The Duchess of Vlme.
Anne of Werdenberg is carried away by the Lord of Zeringen; rescued by Captain
Conrade, and afterward married to the Duke of Ulme: she falls in Love with
Philip (Conrade's Brother) by mistake, seeks to poison him, and is discovered;
afterward runs away with the Lord of Zeringen, and lives in Adultery with him.
He is Slain and she taken Prisoner and shut up in a Dungeon. Conrade by the
means of his Brother Philip, her Keeper, lies with her, they are surprised by
the Duke, Conrade kills the Duke, and himself and the Duchess are slain by his
Guard.

IN that part of Germany which is called Suevia, lived once a Prince whose Name
was Rodolph, of the Family of Schwalen, entitled Duke of Ulme, an imperial City
in those Parts founded at first by Charles the Great; this Rodolph after the
Death of his Father succeeded in his Principality at thirty years of Age, and
being as yet unmarried resolved to make his own choice, and contrary to the
mind of most Princes, to have a greater Respect to Love than Interest or Reason
of State: whereupon he declin^d all those offers made to him in his Fathers
Life time that he might have the liberty of his own Election, and please his
Fancy in one from whom he might assure himself of reciprocal Love and
Affection. The curious Rodolph had seen all the Ladies of Quality those
Countries afforded without being charmed by any of them, till at last, hearing
of the celebrated Wit and famed Beauty of Ann the Daughter of the Earl of
Werdenberg, a Town in the Province of Suevia, he rode over to the Earl's
Castle* with a handsome Equipage, where he soon found Report had not been too
lavish in her praise: The Angelical form of this Lady at first sight Conquered
Rodolph's Heart, but when he discover,d the acuteness of her Wit, and Ingenuity
of mind, he soon concluded her the Paragon of her Sex. But alas! he could not
penetrate her Soul, nor behold the Vices which lay concealed under so fair an
Outside; with all these Accomplishments she was fickle and Inconstant, Sullen
and Revengeful, and what is yet worse, of an Incontinent and Lustful Temper;
but the Duke saw none of these deformities, the luster of her Eyes, and the
bright Glories of her Beauteous Form had dazzled his, upon which he acquainted
the Earl with his pretensions to this Young Lady, who knowing the Worth of the
Duke, readily embraced so fair an Offer for the Advancement of his Daughter,
and the Alliance with so Potent a Prince, by who^e Power and Assistance he
should be able to oppose himself to some Enemies he had of the House of
Hadsburgh, who were now in Arms against him. Rodolph made his Court to the Lady
Anne, whom he found very reserved and shie, who entertained him Civilly, but
without any sign of Love and Affection, so that he soon perceived it must be a
long and formal Siege could take her in, and accomplish his Desires.

At this time there was a great Contest between the Earl of Wer^enberg (the
Father of this Lady) and Birthold Lord of ( Zeringen, of the Family of
Hadsburg) about certain Lands; which difference was grown so great, that they
had both appeared in Arms, and the Lord of Zeringen, by the powerful Aid of his
Friends, gotten much the better of it. This young Lord was not above the Age of
Five and Twenty, and possessed of a fair Estate, who, though he was at difference
with the Father, was in friendship with the Daughter, and having once upon the
Road surpised her, and made her Prisoner for some Hours, was suddenly
Captivated with the Excellence of her Wit and Beauty, and not only released
her, but discovered his Passion to her, begging that She might be the only
Reward of his Conquests, and all their Hostile Disputes amicably reconciled in
the happy Conjunction of their Persons, by the Sacred Bonds of Marriage. Not
long after, Birthold, by his Friends, made Overtures of Peace to the Earl, and
proposed a Match between himself and the Lady Anne, and that the Lands in
question should be Assigned over as part of her Dowry. But the Earl diverted
this Design by his unreasonable demands, which Birthold in Honor could not
comply withal. However Birthold made secret Court to the Lady, and at last
obtained the Favor of a private meeting with his Mistress, and notwithstanding
the Obstinacy of the Father, came to Terms with the Daughter, and unknown to
the Earl, they were Contracted, making sure of each other, before the
Ceremonies of the Church had confirmed their Vows.

But the Duke by renewing his Suit, interrupted the secret Converse of the
Lovers which though he knew not of, yet fearing the propositions of Peace made by
his Rival Birthold, should take Effect, offered the Earl a supply of five
hundred men, which he accep^ed, and by this powerful Assistance regained the
greatest part of those Lands Birthold had made himself Master of. This so far
enraged Birthold (his Affairs growing every day into a worse Condition, and
fearing the loss of his Mistress, with whom he had frequent meetings in
disguise) that he earnestly solicited her to make her flight with him, which
she as often refused with a Complement, That she hoped the Valor and good
Fortune of her Lover would at last compel her Father to Consent; which he
seeing no probability of, resolved by Stratagem to carry her off. To this end
he engaged her Maid Mariana by rich Presents, to tempt her abroad the next Day
to take the Air, and then conduct her to a remote place (at an appointed Hour)
in the Park adjoining to the Castle, where they no sooner arrived, but they
were surprised by some Horsemen in Ambush, and notwithstanding their Shrieks
and Outcries, were forcibly carried out of the Park to his Coach, where he in
Person attended.

This Violence extremely troubled the Lady, who (though Birthold threw himself at
her Feet, and begged Pardon for so great a rudeness, yet) being of an haughty
Temper, and proud Spirit, resolved to Chastise him severely for it. Birthold
endeavored to pacify her with all the most humble submissions he could make;
and with smooth and passionate Language, allay the Storm he had raised, but all
his Rhetoric was in vain; when considering this was no place for a long Parle,
and the present posture of his Affairs requiring his presence, he committed her
to the Care and Fidelity of his Kinsman, to carry her a private way to his
Castle, whilst he returned to his Soldiers, who were now ready to mutiny in his
Absence. Birthold having appeased his Army, committed the Conduct of it to
Braganti, his Lieutenant General, and posted away cross the Country to make a
Visit to his Mistress; but on the way he met his Kinsman wounded, who presently
recounted to him the sad disaster he had met with. That his Mistress was forced
from him by a Troop of Horse, they had met withal on the way, who upon the
Ladies Shreeks and Cries, rescued her from them, notwithstanding all the
Resistance they could make; in which Conflict himself was wounded and several
of his Men killed. This News afflcted him beyond measure; but seeing no Remedy,
he returned to his Camp, full of Grief and Vexation.

The Rape of the Lady Anne being made known to the Duke, and the Earl her
Father, they were extremely troubled at it, and immediately caused the
Ravishers to be pursued by some of his Troops, who after three days Search,
understood she was brought back to the Castle by one Captain Conrade; upon
which they made a speedy Return. The Earl was exceeding Joyful at the Recovery
of his Daughter, and understanding by her, That Captain Conrade (whom they
accidentally met, marching with his Troop for the Emperor's Service in
Hungary) had delivered her, and safely brought her home, was returned to his
Troop, without his Thanks or Reward; according to his Noble Disposition, sent
to invite him to his Castle, that he might make some Acknowledgments for the
great Service they had done him, and least they should not prevail with him,
caused the Lady Anne to send him a fair Diamond Ring to wear for her sake, and
he himself sent him the best Horse in his Stable, with Furniture richly
Embroidered. But they needed not thus to have presented Conrade, for this Young
Lady had already given gim her Heart, from whom she parted with much regret.

The late Affront of the Lord of Zeringen, and the Generous Gallantry of
Conrade, had now planted her fickle and wandering Heart in the Captain's Breast,
whom she expected with impatience. But Conrade Excused himself by a Gentleman,
That he was upon Duty, and in all have going to the place of Rend^zvous,
returned his Thanks to the Earl for the Civility offered him, and the Noble
Presents he had received, with his Service and humble Respects to the Lady,
Assuring her he would wear the Ring the longest Day of his Life, which should
be devoted to her Service.

The Young Lady was very much discontented when she saw the Captain did not
return, as she had Flattered her self he would, her troubled Breast was wrecked
with Hopes and Fears, and great was the Conflict between Love and Honor: The
handsome Proportion, sweet Countenance, Genteel Behavior, Courtly Speeches, and
the Noble Courage of Conrade, obliged her to think him the most complete
Gentleman she had ever seen; but the Pride that attends on Great Persons, and
often deters them from falling meanly under their Passions, began to settle
hers, and calm the ruffl^s of her Mind into a serene and (...) Temper. But the
Contest was again renewed, and Love gained the Victory: whereupon she writ this
following Letter, which she returned by his Messenger, unknown to any but her
Confident Mariana.

To my Deliverer, Captain Conrade.
THE Service you have done me does Challenge a far greater Acknowledgment than
lies in my Power to give you, and I hope will Excuse me if I say something to
you Kind and Extravagant. I have no other way to requite your Civilities but to
tell you what Power they have over a Soul so sensible as mine is, and it is
your own fault that you have not more Acceptable Pro^fs of my Love and
Affection to you. Since you are going to the Wars, perhaps I may never be put
to the blush by seeing you again; but pray remember as you bave set my Body
free, you have made my Heart your Captive, whilst I am

Anne of Werdenberg.


The Captain having received this Letter, admired the Ladies Kindness and
Gratitude to him, the unexpected Encouragement to obtain her Love, advanced his
hopes of Success, and he resolved to leave his Troop to Court her; but
considering the great disparity between their Fortunes and Qualities, and the
difficulty of gaining a Lady not at her own disposal, he presently returned
this Letter by the same Messenger.

To my Conqueror, the Fair Lady Anne.
I Acknowledge Madam that you are my Conqueror, and I am your Slave, but I
h^pe never to be Ransomed or Exchanged, but to wear out my Life in so grateful
a Bondage. The sense of my own humble Condition forbids me to lift up my Eyes
to my Adored Mistress, unless raised above my own pitch by the purchase of
Honor, which I will seek with the hazard of my Life, That my Head may be
encompassed with Laurels to preserve me from being blasted by the Angry
Lightning of your Eyes, for my Confidence and Presumption. Madam I humbly beg
Pardon for your Affectionate Slave*

Conrade.


The Lady received this Letter, and read it a thousand times, fancied new
Charms* and fresh pleasures in every line; sometimes she would call him Cruel
and Ungrateful, and then Excusing him, would blame her self, and resolve to be
Constant to his Love. Mariana seeing her Extravagancy pityed her very much, and
tried all ways to divert her, and renew her Old Flame for Birthold, but in
vain. She was so incensed against him for his late rude behavior, that the
Pride of her Mind, but more the Love of Conrade, excluded all hopes of
Reconciliation.

In the mean time the Lord Birthold was very much distressed by his Enemies,
and though he was much troubled for the Loss of his Land, he was more afflicted
for that of his Mistress, the first he had hopes to recover, but the other he
feared was lost for ever. He wrote to her, sent Messengers, but could obtain no
Answer, but from Mariana, who gave him more reason to despair than hope of
success. In the Interim the Duke and the Earl her Father, were agreed in all
points relating to the Marriage, and she being now become indifferent, as to
the Duke, did not much oppose it: whereupon, soon after, it was pompously
Solemnized, and the Young Duchess conducted to his Palace at Ulme, where she
was received with Feasts, Balls, Plays, and all the Honorable Expressions of
public Mirth and Joy. Captain Conrade, notwithstanding all this, still
preserved his Image in the Breast of the Duchess, which had made so deep an
Impression, that in the midst of all those Diversions, she still sighed and
languished after him.

It happened as she was si^ting one day to see some Public Games, her Eyes
roving up and down, she thought she espied among the Crowd, her beloved
Captain, all the Features of his Face were so like and agreeable, That she
resolved it must be the same, and could not possibly be any other: Mariana
being near her, she whispered her in the Ear, and directed her Eye to the same
object, who immediately concluded with her, That Gentleman she then saw, was
the real Captain Conrade; but they wondered much to see him in so mean a Garb,
and not in the Habit of a Soldier, which they supposed he made use of for a
Disguise; and when they observed him so intent on the Sports, that he seldom
cast his Eyes on the Duchess, or if he did, with such Indifferency, that
showed nothing of Love or Passion, they were more concerned at his Slight and
Neglect. This Sight raised so violent a Transport in the Soul of the
New-Married Duchess, that she could not contain her self from charging Mariana
to set some body to watch him to his Lodging, and that she should privately
Inquire of him his Design of coming thither in that Garb and Disguise. Mariana
in obedience to the Commands of the Duchess, set one of the Servants belonging
to her Train to watch him to his Lodging, and there Acquaint him that she
desired to speak with him at the Palace, whither he was privately to conduct
him. The Man obeyed his Orders punctually, and the Young Gentleman received the
Message with Wonder and Amazement, protesting that Mariana was utterly unknown
to him; however at the Entreaty of the Messenger he went along; and being
introduced into a private Lobby, Mariana came to him, and looking full in his
Face, Captain ( says she) what makes you here thus disguised? The Duchess owes
too much to your Generosity and Valor, not to take Notice of her Deliverer.
The Gentleman looked strange upon her, as one he had never seen before, which
made Mariana stop, and Ark him if he was not Captain Conrade? the Gentleman
answered No, but that he was his own Brother, and a Twin, and so like him, that
not only Strangers but their own Parents could not distinguish them, but by a
Red Mole under the Right Pap, which his Brother had, that his Name was Philip,
born at Villengen, and Elder by four Minutes.

Mariana seeing his Speech, Carriage, Proportion, Face, Hair, Smiles, and
Actions so very like, would not believe one word he said, but taking all for
Fiction pressed him to let her know his Intentions of being there, and whither he
had already forsaken his Mistress Honor, for whom he had lost a Young and
Obliging Lady, to her great Grief and Trouble. Philip seeing the Incredulity of
Mariana, smiled at her Error, but it not being the first time by many he had
been mistaken for his Brother, it was no great Surprise to him; Mariana still
urged he was the same Person, whilst Philip with many Oaths and Asseverations
endeavored to confirm the Truth of what he had said, and that he came over
only to see the public Sports, and the Entrance of the Duke and Duchess, and
to morrow intended to return to Villengen, unless she or the Duchess had any
Commands to the contrary. Mariana went presently to Inform the Duchess of what
he had said, and desired him to wait in the Lobby till her Return.

About an hour after Mariana returns with the Duchess who was amazed to see
the Captain she loved, deny himself, for both her Eyes and Ears told her it was
he and no other. Captain (said she) the Obligation I have to you, may Excuse
this strangeness, but after the Letter I sent you, and that I received from
you, I cannot but wonder you should call your self Philip, and make so strange
of a Business I would have esteemed more serious; and therefore pray tell me
why you thus disguise your self, and what your pretentions are? Madam, replied
the Gentleman, I desire not to deceive a Person of your Quality, and I do swear
by all that is Sacred, I am not Captain Conrade, but his Brother Philip, that I
came hither only out of Curiosity, and shall return to morrow, unless for my
Brother's sake, who I perceive has done you some considerable Service* you will
be pleased to entertain me amongst your Followers. The Duchess looked somewhat
amazedly, and her Eyes told her she could not believe him, his desire of being
retained about her made her conclude he was no other than Conrade, whom her
Letter and his Love had brought back to serve her. This thought pleased her,
and she told him he should Attend her the next day, and in the mean time she
would speak to the Duke to Entertain him amongst his Domestics for his
Brother's sake, if he were not the same she took him for, which she still
doubted.

But it is too true, the Duchess is deceived, Mariana is deceived, and all the
World who had seen the one, would have been deceived by the other; This was one
of the Fantasticks of Nature, or one of her Rarities which she seldom makes, in
this she had imitated Conrade so exactly, that he was not to be known from
Philip, nor Philip from him, she had formed them in the same Molds in the dark
Cell of the Womb, that it was not possible for the Eye to distinguish them, and
least she should mistake her self, had only differenced Conrade by a private
Mark. But how like soever their Bodies were, their Souls were as different;
Conrade had a Noble Generous Soul, full of Life and Valor, Philip (though the
Eldest) was Covetous, Sordid and Cowardly: besides these internal marks of
difference, Time and Accident had caused one notable distinction, which not
being known to many, was kept a Secret, and being in those parts of the Body
which common Modesty obliges us to conceal, was not discoverable. Philip in his
Younger Years climbing up a high Pear Tree, the Bough broke, and he fell so
unluckily that a Stump of the Tree stuck between his Legs, which so bruised
those parts, that they gangreend and were cut clean off, so that Philip was a
Capon, and as true an Eunuch as any the Turk had in his whole Seraglio. This
was a Secret which shame caused to be concealed, Eunuchs being accounted
Monsters in that part of the World where they are not seen every day, or do not
Govern Provinces, or Command Armies.

The Duchess was not yet convincd, but this was her real Conrade, however he
was pleased to assume the Name and Person of Philip, and accordingly so
represented him to the Duke, that the Brother of that Captain who had so
bravely rescued her from the hands of her Ravishers was now in the City, and
had Petitioned her in consideration of his Brother's Service, to be admitted
one of her Domestics: The Duke glad of an Opportunity to be grateful, and
please his New Duchess, whom he passionately Loved, ordered him to be
entertained in the place of one of the Gentlemen of his Chamber, to the great
content of Philip, and satisfaction of the Duchess. The Duchess for some time
remained very reserved, expecting this Phillp, or disguised Conrade, should
make his Addresses to her, but observing in him so great Indifference, she was
not a little Amazed and Perplexed at it. To be better informed she sent
privately to Villengen, and was there satisfied that this was not Conrade but
Philip his Brother, However as she had before been Enamored on the Comely
Shape, and Graceful Deportment of Conrade, she could not be said to change the
Object of her Love in Philip, who was so like him in all outward appearance, as
one drop of water to another, which occasioned the same Sentiments of Mind, and
Lustful Desires for Philip, as She before had for Conrade. She knew that
Conrade was gone to the Wars, and his return uncertain, but here she beheld,
and had in her power the same Person with a different Name only; and thought it
the greatest Folly imaginable to sigh for one that was absent, and fore-go the
same present; to dye for the shadow, when she might freely enjoy the substance.
The Duchess discovered the secret Passion of her Heart to Mariana, bribed her
with Gold, and did all that a Flattering Mistress is capable of, to subvert the
Honesty and Integrity of a Servant, and make her Faithful to her; Mariana
readily understood what the Duchess meant, and with pity to the poor forsaken
Birthold, unwillingly paid Obedience to her unlawful Commands.

The Duchess took all Opportunities of showing kindness to Philip, and with
her Eyes and Actions spoke the hidden Passions of her Heart; but all her
Favors and Caresses were thrown away on this dull and frozen Statue, his
incapacity for Love had chilled his Blood, and made him cold and reserved; all
her smiles were lost upon him, and for those many marks of her Esteem, he only
returned low Cringes and diligent submissions. The Duchess was vexed and angry
at his dullness and stupidity, or fear and modesty, not being able to
distinguish which was the true reason of so great reservedness. Great Persons
love to be understood at first sight, with a word and a beck, and it is better
to be too forward and mistake their intentions, than too backward, and not
understand their desires.

At this time the great success of Birthold caused the Duke to go into the
Field himself, with those New Forces he had raised for the Assistance of the
Earl of Werdenberg, and with much regret he parted from the Duchess, laying a
particular Command on Philip to be diligent in his Attendance on her, and to
certify him continually of her Health, of which Honor he was not a little
proud. The Duke being thus departed with his Army, the Duchess, with Mariana,
Philip, and some few other Servants, went to her Castle of Blaford, a League
from Vlme, where she designed to divert her self with Hunting for two or three
days, and then return to Vlme. Here she resolved to lay the Scene of her
Amorous Design, and contrive every thing so cunningly, that the most searching
Eye should not be able to find a flaw in her Honor. The second Night after her
Arrival, having before ordered Philip to be Lodged in a Chamber remote from the
rest of the Servants, to which there was a private Gallery, which led from her
Apartment, about Midnight her unruly Love having kept her waking, she arose out
of her Bed, and (giving Mariana strict charge not to stir) flung over her a
light Silk Mantle, richly Embroidered, her Head was curiously dressed, as on her
Bridal Night, then putting on a pair of Velvet Slippers, she took the white Wax
Taper burning in her Chamber in a Silver Candlestick, in one Hand, and a Dagger
in the other, and in this posture left her Chamber, and through the private
Gallery conveyed her self to Philip's.

This Apparition in the middle of the Night (as sweet and tempting as this
lovely and lustful Duchess seemed to be) struck the Amazed Philip with horror
and consternation, not knowing whether it was the bright Vision of some
Angelical Phantasm, or some sportive Devil in the Counterfeit Shape of a
Glorious Spirit, his little Acquaintance with either, gave him sufficient
Argument for his present Fears. Philip lay trembling in his Bed, which the
Duchess approachd and holding the Dagger toward his Breast, thus expressed her
Self. The many Favors I have shown, are the manifest tokens of my Affection to
you, and which have been received with too much Slight and Neglect; you either
disdain my Love, or are so stupid not to understand my Passion, either of which
is alike dangerous to my Repose, and your Life. I have in this manner Appeared
to you, as you see, to discover the Violence of my Love, and entrust my Honor
with you: you have no other way to choose, but to Answer my Desires, or dye by
my hands, this poisoned Dagger shall Sacrifice you to my Fury, if you deny to
be an Offering to my Love. This was a pretty way of Courtship indeed, but this
Lady was none of those who desired to be Adored and Sighed for, to be
Worshipped as a Saint, or Respected as a Vestal: Hers was not Fantastic or
Platonic Love, placed only in Shadows and respectful Ceremonies, her Flames
were to be quenched, and Desires satisfied with Secrecy and Expedition.

Philip opened his Mouth, and fixing his Eyes on the Amiable yet Terrible
Object, spoke something so confusedly and abruptly, that the Duchess soon
perceived the Affright she had put her Lover in, had in some measure debarred
her of the Satisfaction she expected, and to allay those fearful Spirits she
had raised, endeavored to rectify the Error she had committed, by smoothing
her Brow, and putting on her Sweetest and most Charming Looks: She Armed her
Eyes with a softer Fire, her Countenance on a sudden became Serene and Amorous,
Inviting Smiles dispelled the frowns of her contracted Brow. She laid aside the
Weapon in her Hand, and made use of none but Rays of Light, which shot
themselves into the Soul of Philip like so many Daggers, for he trembled to see
what would have rejoiced another Man. She set down the Taper, and disrobing her
self into the Glories of a Naked Goddess, lifted up the Clothes and laid her
self down by him, saying; Thus will I Charm your Fears, thus will I Court your
Love: I have laid by my Thunder and Lightning, and imagine me no longer the
Duchess of Vlme your Mistress, but your Lover, and one that Expects to give
and take a Felicity, Princes would not refuse. Philip was getting out on the
other side of the Bed, when she laid her Arm over him, warm enough to melt the
most snowy Chastity; What (said she) do you fly me? am I a Person after all
this to be refused? then resetling her disturbed spirits, and gently drawing
him toward her, she began to smother him with Kisses, whilst he like a
trembling Partridge under the Pounces of an Hawk made some faint struglings to
get from her Embraces, and as soon as he could have Liberty from the Kisses she
loaded him with, Cried out, Ah Madam! I am not able to perform what you expect
from me, I must Confess I am no Man, and that it is impossible for me to give
you the Satisfaction you desire.

The Duchess was so Confounded at these words, that she let go her Arms from
their Embrace, and rising half way out of Bed, thought he had been a Woman, but
discovering the contrary by his Breasts, which were bare, she thought he only
said so to deceive her, when presently the Color flushing into her Cheeks, and
a fierceness mounting into her Eyes, she began to grow terrible to Philip, who
leaping out flung himself on his Knees by the Bed side, and with many Oaths and
Asseverations related his Misfortune to her.

It is impossible to speak the Confusion this disappointed Lady was in, her
Eyes were fierce and sparkling with Shame and Anger, and transported with Rage
she flew to her Dagger, which Philip being aware of, ran to the Table where his
Sword lay, and put himself into a Posture of Defense, whilst she seeing her
self thus defeated of her Pleasure, and prevented in her Revenge, looked like a
distracted Fury, all her lovely Charms grew terrible and frightful. Whether it
be true or false (said the enraged Duchess) That you have told me, or whether
thou art impotent or Virtuous, it is not much matter, for thou shall dye for my
mistake. But Philip had no mind to be killed, and kept her off with the point
of his Sword, assuring her with a Thousand Oaths and Imprecations of the Truth
of what he said; told her more fully his Misfortune, promised and vowed Eternal
Secrecy, that no Person in the World should ever know one syllable of this
Action, that he himself would endeavor to forget it, and believe it only a
Dream or Vision, provided she did no ways hereafter attempt his Life; But if he
should happen to fall by her Malice, as he easily might, he would leave this
Nights Transactions, under his Hand and Seal, with an Intimate Friend, who
after Death would deliver it to the Duke, and that if he might live secure, he
would be secret, silent, and faithful, her Shame should be hid, and her Honor
safe.

The Duchess saw no other Remedy, but without Reply threw her Mantle about
her, slipped on her Pantoffles, took up the Candle, and left Philip not a
little glad that he was so easily rid of this Amiable Fury. Mariana saw her
Lady return, but with such marks of Disturbance in her Looks, Confusion in her
Eyes, and Shame in her Cheeks, that she wondered what could be the Cause of so
great a Disturbance. The next day the Duchess feigned her self Sick, caused
her Coach to be made ready, and returned to Vlme, writing Dispatches to the
Duke, wherein she told him (with the greatest Art of Feminine Cunning and
Collogueing) how much she suffered by his Absence, who like the Flower of the
Sun must droop 'till his Return, and wither like the Female Palm in the Absence
of the Male. These Let^ers were ordered to be sent by Philip, who was pleased
with the Command, and so Easy a Removal from the sight of the incensed
Duchess. All this Mariana saw and wondered at, 'till the Duchess one Evening
in her Closet acquainted her with the odd Circumstances of her Love, and her
more strange disappointment.

The Duke received the kind Letters of the Duchess, and was not a little
satisfied with her Love and Care, and after he had put his Affairs in a good
posture, returned Post to Vlme, to the Embraces of his Lady. Philip came along
with the Duke, but kept himself as much out of her Presence as he could, who
never beheld him but with Shame and Confusion, and that very Object, which
before had been so pleasant in her Eyes, was now as monstrous and hateful,
Malice and Revenge succeeded her Love in as great a degree, and considering her
Honor and Life were entrusted to his keeping, she resolved neither could be
safe as long as he lived, and having in vain endeavored by several Artifices
to remove him from the Duke, she Consulted with Mariana what was to be done in
so difficult a Case, who agreed to send him into another World, which could
only secure his Silence. To this End, Ieranto the Cook was hi^ed by a Purse of
Gold, to Poison him in a Mess of Broth, which he soon after effected; But his
German simplicity not being so well versed in that Damnable Art, as the
Spaniard or Italian, the Poison wrought so violently it discovered it self too
soon, and by the great Care and Skill of the Duke's Physicians, the Danger was
prevented. He presently imagined it came from the implacable Hatred of the
Duchess, and resolved to be Revenged of her before he Died: whereupon he sent
for the Duke, and having made all Persons avoid the Room, Acquainted him with
the Visit the Duchess had given him, with all the particular Circumstances of
it, and fully informed him of the reason of her Malice and his Empoysoning.

The Duke was like one Thunderstruck with this Relation, and having considered
the several parts of it, began to question whether Philip was not distracted by
his Distemper, but having heard him confirm it with many Oaths and
Imprecations, expecting every moment to dye; Trouble and Grief succeeded his
Wonder and Astonishment, and Jealousy and Rage followed after. He stayed some
time to compose himself, and charged Philip, To let no other know of his
Dishonor; telling him, if he died he would revenge his Death, and if he lived,
reward his Fi^elity. Philip being young and lusty, Nature at last (by the help
of powerful Medicines,) or'ecame the Poison, and he recovered with the loss
only of his Hair and Nails. The Duke in the mean time smothered his Trouble all
he could, from the piercing Eye of the Duchess, and when Philip was recovered
carried him one day into her Chamber, and making all others but Mariana to quit
the Room, caused him to Accuse her Face to Face.

The Duchess seemed not much moved, but took it as if the Duke had been in
Jest with her, at which he grew so enraged, he flatly charged her with the
Crime, calling her Impudent Strumpet, she appearing as Angry and High,
peremptorily denied it, and told him, She would have satisfaction for so base
an Abuse put upon her: She Vindicated her self from all that Philip had said*
and with so many Asseverations justified her Innocence, that the Duke stood
Amazed, not knowing which to Credit. The Subtle Lady perceiving the Duke's mind
wavering, fell on her Knees and Craved Justice against that perjured Villain
Philip; who now saw his own Folly and Danger, in Accusing the Duchess without
any other Witness to corroborate his Evidence. The Duke was very much perplexed
with this matter, and knowing the Duchess had not actually defiled his bed,
but intentionally only, if that was true she was Accused of, and that probably
Philip's Impotency rather than his Virtue, or a due regard to his Honor, had
kept him Chaste; by many good words endeavored to pacify the Duchess, and
reconcile her to Phillip, whom he still continued in his Service.

However the Duke seemed to dissemble the Trouble of his mind, Philip still
standing firm in his Accusation, Jealousy began to prevail upon his Soul, and
imbitter all his Thoughts: He grew Melancholy and Churlish, and she so proud
and disdainful, that an apparent breach was made between them; she Cursed her
Marriage, and the time she forsook Birthold, the Kind and Loving Birthold. This
Mariana took notice of, and acquainted Birthold with the Discontents of the
Duchess, who diligently by Letters addressed himself to her, from whom he
received this Answer.

To the Lord of Zeringen.
BIrthold; If I have yet any Command over your Soul, as you say I have, then
you must not dye; but preserve a Life that is precious to me, and may yet be
serviceable to redeem me from Misery. Time may alter both our Fortunes, and
your Constancy may be Rewarded by

Anne Vlme.


Birthold being encouraged in his Love by the Amorous Letter of the Duchess,
came over privately in Disguise to Vlme, and by the Assistance of Mariana made
frequent Visits to the Duchess, these Enterviews soon composed all former
Differences, and entered 'em into a st^icter League than ever. What mutual
kindnesses passed between them at that time, I never yet could learn, But it is
very likely, as we may judge by the sequel of their Actions, such unscrupulous
Lovers made use of Opportunity. Birthold at last proposed to her to leave the
Duke her Husband, and go along with him, which she consenting to, packed up all
her Jewels and other things of value, and one Evening with Mariana walked out
to the side of the River Danow which runs by the Walls of Vlme, where Birthold
waited her coming, and with a Boat of six Oars, carried them over the River,
and in his Coach conveyed them safe to his Castle. The Duke soon heard where
the Duchess was, and Acquainted the Earl her Father with the Treachery and
Infidelity of his Daughter, who were both so enraged at the Injury and
disgrace, that they immediately raised all the Forces they were able to make,
and mutually vowed a Revenge. So great Success attended the Justice of their
Cause, that Birthold was totally routed in the Field, and forced to take Refuge
in his Castle, where the Duchess was, which two days after was surrounded by
the Dukes Army; Birthold having done all that a Valiant man could do in defense
of the Place, resolved not to be taken Alive and b^come the Scorn of the
Victors* but thrust himself into the midst of his Enemies, and dyed bravely
with his Sword in his Hand. The Duchess had not the heart to fly to a
voluntary Death, though she resisted her Fate all she could, and was taken with
Arms in her fair Hands, encouraging the Soldiers with her Words and Actions.
Being taken and brought before her Husband and Father, the Earl would have run
her thorough with his own hand, but was hindered by the Duke, who desired her
punishment might be left to him, against whom she had more grievously offended,
who resolved not to chastise her by death, but to give her a Life, though full of
pain and misery, by which she might have time to Repent of her Crimes, and save
her Soul.

The Duke sent away the Duchess, and the dead Body of Birthold, with a strong
Guard to his Castle at Blaford, and having finished the Campaign, and restored
the Country to Peace, returned to Vlme with Honor and Victory. The Duke being
resolved now to punish his Adulterous Duchess, ordered Mariana to be taken
from her, and being Chastised as a Confederate in her Crimes, was banished his
Terrritories. The Duchess was then put into a Room where no Light of Day or
Sunshine could ever enter, in which he (...) a Bed to be set up, and the Room
hung with Black, with a Lamp continually burning in the midst of it, a little
Table was placed by her Bedside, with a Prayer Book, the Picture of a
beautiful Lady embracing a Knight on the one side, and the same Knight and Lady
tormented by Devils on the other side of the Chamber, as Objects to remember
her of her Crimes, and promote her Repentance. This was the Furniture of the
Room; and to abate the heat of her Lust, he gave strict Charge that three times
a Week she should have nothing but Bread and Water, and at other times a spare
Diet. He allowed her no other Cup to drink in but the Skull of Birthold, which
he had caused purposely to be made into a Cup, and tipped it round with Silver,
nor no other Carpet on her Table but his Skin, which was flead off and dressed
for that purpose, strictly Commanding, That no Person in the world should be
permitted to see or speak to her, except a Priest, who was ordered to Confess
her once a month: Care was also taken, that she should have no Knife, or any
thing else whereby she might hurt her self, and that he might be sure to have
all this punctually performed, and she not able to Corrupt her Keep^r, he gave
the Command of the Castle to Philip, and made him her Keeper, strictly Charging
him, that no Person should be suffered to see or speak with her, but himself,
and the Priest he should send with a Warrant under his Hand and Seal. Philip
who had no good will to this Lady, undertook the Charge not unwillingly,
resolving to observe his Lord's Directions very punctually, believing them to
be as Just as Severe, (...) good for the Soul of the Adulterous Duchess.

In this manner lived the Duchess for the space of three years, never seeing
the Face of any but Philip and the Priest her Confessor, whilst the Duke lived
Loose and Luxuriously, Wantonis'd in all manner of Unlawful Pleasures and
Lustful desires, there was hardly a Handsome Virgin in Vlme that he did not
betra^, nor a Beautiful Woman that he did not corrupt; His Palace was now
become a mere Seraglio, and his Court a more Honorable Stews. In the mean time
Captain Conrade (a Truce being made between the Christians and Turks) returned
to Vienna, and from thence with the Emperors leave to his own Country, full of
Glory and Renown, to visit his Friends and Relations, till the End of the Truce
should call him again to Action. Being come to Villengen he soon understood his
Brothers preferment under the Duke of Vlme, the various Fortune of the
Duchess, her Imprisonment in the Castle of Blaford, where his Brother was
Constable, and all other Circumstances that Fame or Common report could inform
him of. Conrade finding the powerful Image of this lovely Lady yet fresh in his
mind, with all those Charms she overcame him with, when he released her from
her Ravishers, and remembering her kind Letters and Amorous Expressions, found
he had a great desire to see her, Notwithstanding the Change of her Condition,
which he might easily effect by the means of his Brother who was her Keeper. He
therefore privately and without any attendance, went over to Blaford, and
staying at a house in a little Village near the Castle, sent a Messenger with a
Note to his Brother to acquaint him he desired to see him, but without any
Company for some reasons he should afterward understand; Philip could not but
wonder at the Secrecy and Caution that he used in his Visit; but however
observed his directions and went immediately over to him. The Ceremony of their
mutual respects bring over, Conrade conjured Philip to hearken to his Request
and told him the passionate desire he had to see the Duchess, which he might
easily accomplish by changing Clothes with him, they being so alike that
nothing but the difference of their habits distinguished them. Philip a long
time endeavored to dissuade him from it, urging the danger and hazard of the
Attempt; but Love had blinded his Eyes and stopped his Ears to all
Considerations, and the Importunity of Conrade at last prevailed with Philip,
who changing Clothes with him gave him full instructions of all the ways and
Customs he used, and delivering him the Keys they embraced and parted. Philip
accoutred with his Buff, Sword and Feathers, went back to Villengen instead of
Conrade, and Conrade went to the Castle, where he was admitted by the Soldiers
for Philip, without the least Suspicion or Mistrust. At the time accustomed he
carried the Duchess her Allowance, whom he could not behold without Grief and
Trouble, his Eyes were fixed on her Face, which he saw Pale and Wan, and much
altered by that severity used to her, but yet that Tyrany had not robbed her of
all her Beauty, and sweetness, the pleasing Air of her Face was yet preserved,
though her Complexion was Faded, and even in that Languishment she carried
Charms and Sorceries. The next day Conrade discovered himself to the Duchess
in these words. Behold Madam here at your Feet no longer your Iaylor Philip,
but your Adorer and Lover Conrade, who has preserved your Image entire in his
Heart, who bewails and pities your Misfortunes, and who now comes to offer you
a Life which has been pr^s^rv'd from so many dangers that it might redeem you
from Captivity. Long it was before he could convince the Duchess that he was
Conrade and not Phillip, and seeing his Words and Actions had yet scarce gained
Credit with her, he produced the Letter he had formerly received from her
saying: This Madam I have kept as a precious Relic of your Affection, it is
Penned by your own fair Hands, and your Eyes can Witness the Truth of what I
say. The Duchess Viewing the Letter, was strangely surpised, for now she was
assured he was Conrade and not Phillip, and throwing her Arms about his Neck,
in a Transport of Joy sunk down into his. Before they parted a Vowed League of
Friendship (...) between them, and Articles of a Polluted and Adulterous Love
was S^aled; they are now become one, and united in Wickedness and the Amorous
and passionate Conrade sufficiently satisfied the Lustful Duchess that he was
not the Eunuch Phillip, but her first beloved Conrade. He often off^r'd to
carry her from Ulme, which she refused, saying; she could be no where so
secure, and that it added much to the sweetness of pleasure that she could in
some measure revenge her self on her Cruel Husband, in the same place he had so
grievously punished her.

Philip being now desirous to return to his Command, left Villengen in Order to
go to the Castle of Blaford, but the Duke met Philip upon the Road as he was
riding out to take the Air, and stopped, and asked him where he had been, and how
he came to leave the Castle of Blaford, and what was the reason he was thus
Metamorphosed into a man of War? Philip was very much surpised, and looking
strangely on the Duke as if he had never seeen him before, I suppose Sir (says
he) you are some Person of Quality by your Train, but I must tell you, you
mistake me for my Brother Philip, who is Governor of the Castle of Blaford,
whom I am now going to Visit, whose likeness to me often causes these mistakes.
The Duke knew Philip durst not Jest with him, and seeing him in the Garb of a
Soldier, remembered he had heard the Duchess some time speak of the great
resemblance and likeness of the two Brothers, believed he was in an Error, and
then told him that he was the Duke of Vlme, and that he should go along with
him that night, and the next day they would ride over to Blaford, where he
would give himself the Satisfaction of so great a Curiosity. The Duke
accordingly did so, and Conrade appeared to him in the habit of Philip and he
in Conrade's, who were so much alike that the Duke and the whole Company were
strangely amazed at it. The Duke returned to Vlme, and Philip and Conrade
stayed at Blaford, where Phillip earnestly pr^st him to change his Clothes and
deliver up the Command of the Castle to him, for Fear any unhappy Accident
should make a discovery of their persons, which would prove Fatal to them both;
Conrade told Philip it was Impossible, but if he would go to Villengen and
return two months after, he would then comply with his desire, which he
accordingly did.

Conrade and the Duchess enjoyed themselves in the unbounded pleasures of
their Lust, and laughed at that Vengeance which was now ready to punish all
their Lewdness and Debauchery, by a miserable and Tragical Catastrophe. The
Duke began now to think afresh on the likeness of the Two Brothers, and how
easily he might be deceived if they should agree together that Conrade should
be the Keeper of his Duchess instead of the Eunuch Philip. He knew the Service
that Conrade had done the Duchess formerly, and some had told him that his
Actions expressed more of Love than Civility: Evil men have Evil thoughts, and
they measure other men's Actions by their own. For this reason the next Night he
went privately over to the Castle, attended only with Four of his Gentlemen,
resolving to satisfy himself whether it was Philip or Conrade, who had now the
command of the Castle, and the keeping of the Duchess. The Warders and
Soldiers of the Gate knew the Duke and admitted him, wondering at his coming,
who went directly to Philip's Apartment, thinking to surprise him in Bed, and
there to satisfy himself but not finding him, his suspicion increased, and he
we^^ directly to the door of the Duchess her Cell, which he found Locked, and
harkning at it, he heard the Dutchesses voice and that of a Man discoursing
with her. Conrade who usually visited the Duchess at Nights, and spent the
most part of it in her Company, was now there and in the raptures of his
Lustful pleasures. The Duke knocked loud at the door, which very much surpised
Conrade and the Duchess, who immedialy opening of it, saw the Duke with anger
and Fury in his Face, whereupon he flew ^o his Sword that lay upon the Table,
and laid two of the Foremost dead at his Feet, whereupon the Duke presently
Concluded by his bold and manly Courage he was not Philip but Conrade, which so
far enraged him, that he advanced himself against this Lion Conrade, from whom
he received so home a Thrust that his Sword passing through his Ribbs, appeared
a handful behind his Back, but at the same Instant one of the Guard struck
Conrade over his Head with a Pole-ax, so deep that his Brains came out, and he
fell at the same time with the Duke dead at his Feet. The Duke being yet not
quite dead commanded them to search Conrade, and finding him to be no Eunuch,
and consequently not Philip, commanded him to dispatch the Duchess that he
might have the satisfaction of seeing her punished before he died, upon which
one of the Guard sheathed his Sword in her fair Breast, as she sat on the side
of the Bed amazed and astonished at the suddenness of this Misfortune, the
Duchess fell backwards upon the Bed and dyed, and the Duke presently after
expired who lived only to see her punished Thus their three Souls fled away at
one moment; but whether they kept pace together, or how separated in the vast
abyss of Eternity, is not our business to enquire, but their dead Bodies
remained a sad spectacle of Divine Vengeance against the horrid Sin of Adultery.

This was the Sad and Lamentable Conclusion of the Adulterous Duchess, who had
she been as Eminent in Chastity, as she was Infamously Incontinent, might have
lived the Glorious Pattern of Virtue, as she dyed the shameful Example of Sin
and Misery. HIST. IX. Juderina, or the Dutch-Adultress.
Juderina commits Fornication with Walter, is got with Child, and afterward
turns Whore at Amsterdam. Is there kept by mine Here Vandrecht, proves false to
him, and commits Adultery with Captain Grantzford, who is killed by Vandrecht,
and he drowned in his Escape. She afterward Marries Titus a Puritan, breaks
her Husband by her Riotous Expense, he in Revenge gives her the Foul Disease,
which she first communicates to a Quaker, and then dies miserably of the
beforementioned Distemper.

JVderina was born of poor and honest Parents, in a little Village near
Roterdam, and being now arrived to Twelve Years of Age, was entertained by
Emantha an Ancient Lady and a VVidow, who was reputed very Rich, and for that
reason was Courted by several Gentlemen, who more valued her for the Reputation
of her Fortune, than they admired the ruins of her Beauty. Amongst others who
made suit to the Widow, a Gentleman known by the name of Captain Grantzford,
was one, who though he had no Assurance of obtaining her, had yet more
Encouragement than the rest, being always Civilly treated, and greatly
respected. Iuderina who was a Person of a ready and subtle wit, soon learnt to
Sing and Dance exactly, Emantha having preferred her to wait on her Daughter
Editha, by whose favor, and the opportunities of her Attendance on her, she
gained all the Accomplishments befitting a Person of greater Quality: to all
which, Nature added a larger share of Beauty than is commonly seen in Maids of
her mean Rank and Family. Captain Grantzford no sooner saw the fair Iuderina
but he fell desperately in Love with her, and Iuderina was no less pleased with
the Captain's Courtship, which Emantha observing, he soon lost all hopes of
obtaining the Widow, however the satisfaction of enjoying his Lustful
Pleasures with Iuderina, made some amends, which every day advanced by the
seeming Compliance of the VVench.

At this time Young Walter her Son returned from the University of Leyden, to
Visit his Mother, and Sister Editha, whose presence very much obstructed the
Amorous proceedings of the Captain, who at first sight was deeply in Love with
Iuderina (whose Charms were not to be resisted) and quickly let her know the
power of her Eyes, and the Conquest she had made. This proud Beauty gloried in
her New Victory, and was not a little glad to see her Young Master at her Feet,
fettered with her Charming Graces, whom she preferred to his Rival Grantzford,
and at last yielded to his Embraces, who now Enjoyed at pleasure what the
Captain's Evil Fortune still denied him. The Widow had been very Civil and
Respectful to the Captain, notwithstanding his Folly, and as she had no Passion
for him, so she had forsaken him without Mal^ce or Regret; however for fear he
should debauch her Maid (which she very much suspected) she kept a strict Eye
over Iuderina, whenever Captain Grantzford came to the House; little imagining
that her Son had Robbed that Garden, and Cropped the Flower she had watched with
so much Care and Vigilance. The Captain soon grew sensible of the double defeat
he had received, in obtaining the Widow, and enjoying her Maid, for which
reason he determined to try his Fortune with Editha, by whose Courteous and
obliging Respects, he might promise himself better success: But her Person was
not so Amiable, either to Enkindle Love, or inflame his Breast with Lust,
Iuderina was the only Amorous and Tempting Object, but her Cruel Disdain had
now forced him to Despair.

The Young Editha was full of Passion and Desire, and languish'd after the
Unkind Captain, which at length she discovered to Iuderina, who presently told
her that he was not ignorant of her Love, but heard her Sighs without the least
Pity or Compassion, and as she could not expect her Mother would ever Consent
to the Match if proposed to her, so she could assure her the Captain's
Affections would never be tied by the Sacred Bonds of Wedlock; but all his
Passion was Lust, and his Love Dishonorable, which she sufficiently understood
by his offers to herself, who Endeavored nothing more than the lewd
Satisfaction of his desires, which she had hitherto opposed with scorn and
disdain. But yet she told her if she pleased to make an advantage of his Folly,
she might both please her fancy and obtain him for a Husband if she would
consent to put a Cheat upon him, which she might easily effect by her
contrivance. Editha having heard the methods of her Design, approved them well,
and desired her to put them in Practice upon the first Opportunity. The Plot
being thus laid betwixt them, the cunning Iuderina seemed to hearken more
willingly to the Courtship of Grantzford, she accepts his Gold, seems to
believe his Oaths and Promises, and at the last overcome with his Flateries to
grant his Desires. There is nothing in the World so Joyful as the Captain
really was at the Consent of Iuderina, the Content of his mind might be easily
read in his Eyes, he kissed her a Thousand times, and gave her as many Thanks
for what he is not like to obtain. The Assignation is made between them, and
the Captain by Agreement to prevent all suspicion to take his present leave and
return at Night by a back door of which she gave him the key which led to
Iuderina's Chamber, where he should find her in Bed, but this was to be done
with all silence and Secrecy, for fear of being over heard by Emantha who lodg'
in the next Chamber. All this was agreed to, and the Captain parted with his
Mistress, full of hopes and Satisfaction. Night came and young Editha supplied
the place of Iuderina, obtained her desires and spent the Night in the Arms of
Grantzford, who at the same time thought he had Embraced his Beautiful Mistress.

In the Morning being about to depart, he was amazed to find his mistake, and
hear the young Editha speak to him, instead of Iuderina, who held him fast in
her A^ms, crying out, do not leave me now you have robbed and deflour'd me; but
much more when he saw young Walter enter the Chamber with a drawn Sword and a
Parson with him, who told him (with an angry look,) Captain, either salve the
Honor of an house which you have now w^unded, by marrying my Sister, or
receive the Just reward of Lust and Treachery, either make Editha your Wife, or
satisfy me by your Death. The Captain would have risen from the Bed, and made
his defense, but Walter set the point of his Sword to his Breast, and Swore he
would Run him Through if he did not declare his immediate Consent, which he was
forced to, and the Parson having done his Office, they left him and his Bride
to their now Lawful pleasures; The Widow was amazed next morning at the
Relation her Son gave her, of Editha's marriage with Grantzford, which she
could not well credit, till a little time after they came to beg her Blessing;
She considered it could not now be helped, and after some grave reprehensions
accepted their Duty, and caused their private Marriage to be publicly
celebrated.

Some time after Iuderina found her self to be with Child, and Endeavored to
prevent her Shame and disgrace by taking such things as might cause Abortion
but in Vain, her great Belly now discovered it self, and was known to the
Widow, who too late found what a Viper she had Entertained in her Family, and
what Injury she had done her self by that Wenches Beauty* who first caused her
to lose Grantzford, and now had drawn away the Heart of her Son, and enticed
him to Lewdness. But least these two foolish wantons should marry together, and
so utterly ruin the Fortune of her Son, she resolved to separate them, and
accordingly sent him back to Leyden, and Iuderina over to Flanders to lay her
great Belly, where not long after she was brought to bed of a Girl, and thus
became a Mother before she was a Wife, and had a Child before she had got a
Husband. Iuderina being recovered of her Lying In, the Child by order of the
Widow the Grandmother, was taken from her and put to Nurse in those Parts, and
she turned out of doors to seek her fortune, wi^h some small pittance of
Silver, scarce enough to defray her Charges to Amsterdam, whither she extremely
longed to go, hoping to get into some Service, or by making an Advantage of her
Beauty, to inveagle some Tradesman to marry her. With this in^ent Iuderina went
to Amsterdam, where she no sooner arrived, but she found her Money all spent,
and her self in a most miserable and forlorn Condition. By great fortune she
got a Lodging, which happened to be at a most Infamous and Notorious Bawdy
house, where she behaved her self with so much Sim^licity and seeming
Innocence, told so fair a Story of her Misfortunes, without one word of Truth,
That the Bawd her Landlady believed her, and under pretense of commiseration to
her present Want, but more in hopes of making a good Market of her, kindly and
comfortably relieved her.

In a short time Iuderina's Beauty was famed, of which she knew how to make the
best Advantage, and so well improved her Talent in those wicked Courses, that
she had now considerably enriched her-self by prostituting her long lost
Maidenhead, to seven or eight wealthy Dutch Cullies, who all swore, and really
believed they had it, for which they roundly paid. Having thus advanced her
Fortune, and being unwilling to Expose her self longer in a place so infamous,
she privately withdrew, and took Lodgings between the Stadt-house and Exchange,
where she changed her Name to Angelica, and passed for a virtuous young Lady,
whose Brother was a Merchant and suddenly Expected from the Indies. Not long
after it happened that a Gentleman of good Fortune, called Mine Here Vandretch,
had some short repartees with Angelica under her Vizard at the Playhouse, who
was so taken with her Wit, that he would not leave her till he had seen her
Face, which appearing to him, beyond Expectation, handsome, he grew
passionately in Love with her, and carried her home to her Lodging in his own
Coach. Angelica had cunning enough not to be surpised with his first Offers of
Kindness, nor altered with those rich and Noble presents he made her, which he
wondering at, believed her Counterfeit Virtue was real, proposed a Cosiderable
Settlement, a Stately House, Gilded Coach, and rich Liveries, if she would
consent to live with him and be his Mistress, which she at last agreed to,
rather out of passion and respect to his person, than that such generous Offers
had any power over her Chaste and Innocent mind. She now goes abroad in her
Chariot, sits in the Boxes at Plays, with all the bravery and Impudence of a
Kept-Mistress, or more Notorious Strumpet.

Being one day at the Playhouse, she was seen by Captain Grantzford (whom some
business had brought to Town) who presently knew her, and much wondered to see
that Beauty (which ever appeared to him with a more than ordinary Lusture) now
so resplendent with Jewels, and all the dazzling Embellishments Art could
invent. He could not but confess that she who before appeared a twinkling Star
of Beauty, was now become an illuminated Sun, Bright and Glorious. The Captain
made his Complement to her, which she received with more favorable Expressions
of respect to him, and in a Short time they became so intimate that he often
visited her, where he was blessed with those ravishing Delights he had so long
Coveted in vain. This Amor of Grantzford with Angelica was at last suspected
by Vandretch, who surpised him at the botom of the Stairs, one Night as he had
newly parted with Angelica, and with his Sword Ran him to the Heart, of which
he immediately died. Vandretch sent for a Friend and acquainted him with his
present misfortune, disposed the care of his House and Goods into his hands,
disrobed Angelica of all her finery, turned her out of Doors and then made his
Escape, but in his way to the Brill was unhappily drowned.

Angelica having Saved a little money, put her self in a plain Country dress,
removed to a remote place in the Town, where she took a Convenient Chamber and
professed herself a Saint, going to all the private meetings she could hear of,
where she Sighed, lifted up her Eyes, made Faces, was diligent at Lectures and
Expoundings, so that in a little time she began to be taken notice of, and
attracted the Eyes of many a young Zealot and Amorous Puritan. She changed her
Name to Mabella, though Iuderina and Angelica the Hypocrite were the same in
Heart and mind as Mabella the Saint. At length the Piety and Devotion of
Mabella was taken Notice of, as well as her Modesty and Beauty, by Titus a
Young Brother, a Linen Draper, who was resolved not to Marry out of his own
Tribe, and only wanted a Wife to make him Happy. She observed his Eyes to be
often fixed upon her, and though he took Notes, and wrote in Characters none else
could Read, he looked as if he had been drawing her Picture, he was so intent
upon her. His Courtship was Sentences of Love and Cant intermixed, and Cupid
and Knox were joined together: His Amorous Discourse was larded with fragments
of Sermons, and Doctrines and Uses shuffled together, with Notes taken out of
the Academy of Complements. There was such a strange medly of Love and
Religion, of Wooing and Praying, of pious Nonsense and smutty Courtship, that
Mabella could not but laugh in her sleeve, how gravely and demurely soever she
looked. Titus at last won the good will of his Dear Mabella, and what she much
desir^d, they were privately Married, and she once again Mistress of an House.

Mabella had not been long married before she began to patch and deck her self
with Ribons, and Titus to his great grief saw his Shop crowded with Gallants
instead of Chap men, who came to Cheapen his Wife rather than Buy his Linen;
he first reproved her immodesty himself, and then desired the Pastor to
reprehend the Lewd Carriage of his Wife, but to no purpose: so that seeing
himself undone, he resolved to shut up Shop and leave her to her Fortune.
Mabella had yet escaped the Pox, that Ruin and Confusion of so many of Venus her
Votaries; but as many have Escaped being wounded in a Battle who have been
killed in a Skirmish, so fared it with Mabella, Titus plainly perceiving his
Horns grew as fast as his Estate wasted, was resolved to be first Revenged, and
then leave her. To this end he designedly got a severe Clap, which he
communicated to Mabbella and then deserted her, carrying away all his Goods
along with him to France. Mabella lay long Sick, and was twice Fluxed for her
Foul Distemper; but wanting Money to carry on her Cure, was forced to consider
of New Methods to relieve her presett Wants, before it was completed.

Mabella was now again left to her shifts, her Expensive Clap, with the
Apothecaries, Surgeons and Doctors Bills, had robbed her of all that little she
had left, whereupon she resolved to change her Counterfeit Profession of
Religion, from that of Puritan to Quaker, and accordingly took a private
Lodging at a Quaker's House, who had known her Husband, and believed him to be
as she represented him, a sly and debauched Fellow, pitty'd her very much, and
by her discourse judged her to be very Innocent, and a Zealous Professor. To
this Quaker's House resorted several of that Sect, and amongst the rest, one
Simon an itinerant Holder Forth, who no sooner saw Mabella, who was pretty well
recovered of her Clap, her Color coming fresh into her Cheeks, and her Old
wanton Flame into her Eyes, but the Carnal and Spiritual Man in him began to
have a desperate Conflict. We are all Flesh and Blood, and the little god Cupid
is no respecter of Sects; he spares no Mortal that is composed of those Atoms.
Simon with the wonted Boldness that attends that sort of People, made an
Acquaintance with Mabella, who entertained him with a suitable Freedom, and
whilst he endeavored to delude her with his Holy Discourses, Of the Light
within, and his Holy Inspiration, she cheated him as much with her Modest
Looks. Mabella hearkened to all his Canting very diligently, and in a short
time began to reform her Dress, ripped off all her Laces, thr^w away her Ribbons,
put on plain Coyfs and Pinners, and laid aside all her Babylonish Trinkets.

Simon overjoyed at this Conversion, carried Mabella to their Meetings, where
she endured their Bawling without Laughter, and heard them Rant and Cant, and
Rail and speak Nonsense, with much Devotion and Counterfeit Z^al. Few days
mist she was not at their Meetings, and Mabella was become a very Professed,
Rigid, and Unmannerly Quaker: Simon was now more in Love than ever, and having
Converted her from the World, he determined next to convert her to himself.
Mabella was pretty in all Dresses, and no disguise could hinder the power of
her Beauty; But to Simon she seemed much more handsome since she was in the
Habit of a Sister, and it was now Lawful for him to say that to her, he ought
not to the Profane, and Wicked of the World. He therefore informed her of the
Secrets of his Heart, and by what Spirit he was moved, and endeavored to
persuade her, That all things are Lawful to the Pure, That the World ought not
to Judge the Actions of the Righteous, That Defilement was from within, and the
Impurity of the Mind only could contaminate the Body; That as for her Husband
he was a Carnal Man, and it was no Sin to Rob an Egyptian, That if he was at
this time under a Temptation, she ought to give way to his Frailty, for she had
drawn his Desires after her: With such like Stuff, all to persuade her Fairly
and plainly to Lie with him. Mabella soon perceived by the Light within, that
it was either the Spirit of Love or Lust, that began to move the Carnal Man,
however she Answered him so Cunninly and Obligingly, in his own Canting-way,
still harping on her present Necessities, that he found the ready way to gain
her was to supply her wants, which he plentifully did out of their Public
Stock. With this Gold he opened the Heart of Mabella, and Simon and she had
Thee'd it any Thou Would it so long, till they came to the Closest Conjunction, and
mingled their Spiritual Embraces after a Carnal way. Simon obtained his End
with advantage, for the Clap now breaking out, she severely Pox'd him, and not
daring to stay longer, for fear of being discovered, pillaged the Holy Brother
of all the Charitable Corban he was entrusted with, and stole away to Roterdam,
where the Venom of her Distemper returning with greater Violence upon her, she
dyed half eaten up with that Foul and Poisonous Disease.

Such is the Vgliness of Sin, That the Devil himself is ashamed of his own
Deformity, and often deceives us in the disguise of an Angel of Light: The
Wicked Juderina counterfeits Modesty to conceal her Lewdness, and Religion to
hide her Debaucheries: but Heaven in good time punishes her Cr^fty Vice, by the
fruitful Offspring of her own Sins. HIST. X. Count Waldbourg and Bellanca.
The Lord Moruffi is taken Prisoner by the Count of Waldbourg, and promised to
be Released, if his Lady Bellanca would Consent to his Lust, which she by her
Husband's Advice agrees to. The false Count having Enjoyed her, cuts off
Moruffi's Head and gives it her. She complains to the King, who obliges him
first to Marry her, and then causes him to be beheaded, and gives her his
Estate. Bellanca is afterward got with Child by a Black, she and Clora murder
the Bastard. Bellanca stabbs her self, and Clora is hanged.

IN Gothland, the best and richest Province of Sweedland, which is the
hinthermost part of Scandia next to Denmark, stands the Famous and Impregnable
Castle of Colmar, of which Count Wald-bourge was Governor, in the Third Year
of the Reign of that August and Victorious Prince, Gustavus Adolphus, King of
Sweden. At this time there were Bloody Wars between the Two Crowns of Sweden
and Denmark, and the Lord of Moruffi Lieutenant General of the Danish Army, by
the Command of the King, made a descent into Gothland with an Army of Thirty
Thousand Horse and Foot, and having miserably ravaged the Country, at last sat
down before the Castle of Colmar, which he straightly Beseig'd. I shall say
nothing of those many bold Assaults made by the Danes upon the place, nor the
Stout resistance and Courage of the Swedes, brave and daring Actions were
performed on both sides, the Soldiers at last growing very much distressed for
want of provisions, the Besieged made a desperate Salley, in which they had the
good Fortune to take the Lord of Moruffi Prisoner, whom they brought into the
Castle and presented to the Governor. The Count of Polenzi General of the
Swedish Forces, receiving an Account of the ill Condition the Castle of Colmar
was in, made a speedy March with his Army for the Releif of it, which the Danes
having notice of, and considering they had lost their General the Lord Moruffi,
on whose Courage and Conduct they very much depended, they immediately raised
the Seige and returned.

The Virtuous and Beautiful Belanca upon the first Report that her Dear Lord
was a Prisoner in the Castle of Colmar, was very much afflicted, but there
being some overtures of a Truce then made between the Two Crowns, she hoped
upon the Conclusion of it the Lord Moruffi would be discharged; but the Terms
proposed not being agreed to, the War was renewed with greater Violence. Three
months after a Cessation of Arms was Consented to, for a short time, and
Belanca attended with some few of her Servants, having obtained a Passport
from General Polenzi, took a Journey, full of hazard and danger, to the Castle
of Colmar, to see her Beloved Lord and Husband. The Count of Waldbourge the
Governor received her with all respect and kindness, who soon became an
Earnest Suitor to him for the Release of Moruffi, offering all her Jewels and a
very considerable Sum for his Ransom, which the Governor told her he could not
comply withal without direct and positive Orders from the King. Belanca told
him that would be a matter of great difficulty to Effect, till a Peace was
Concluded, which was very uncertain, but if he pleased he might suffer him to
Escape, for which she would make him the same generous Present; the Governor
answered that was so great a piece of Treachery to his Prince, that in Honor
he could never admit it. The Fidelity of this Noble Count which was not to be
Corrupted by Gold, was soon Conquered by the more powerful Charms of Belanca's
Beauty, whose Virtue after he had long and in vain solicited, he promised to
free the Lord Moruffi his Prisoner, if she would Consent to his unchaste
Desires, and upon no other Terms whatever: Belanca was very much surpised at
his discourse, and told him, I wonder my Lord that you who have so great a
Regard to your Honor (as you but now Expressed your self) can have so little
Esteem for your own Virtue, or my Chastity. Belanca would have proceeded but
the Count interrupted her, saying, Madam I expect not your Advice but Consent,
if my Lord Moruffi is so dear to you, you know upon what Terms you may gain his
Freedom, which if you do not readily Comply with, I will prevent all his
designs of Escape, by a Closer Confinement. Belanca desired leave till the next
day to consider of it, and then promised to return her Answer, and having
parted from the Count, acquainted her Husband with the Discourse which had
passed between them, that she found the Count altogether inflexible, and unless
she submitted to such dishonorable Terms should never be able to Obtain his
Liberty upon any other.

Moruffi was very unwilling to purchase his Freedom with the loss of his
Honor; but his Restraint growing now more irksome and tedious to him, by the
daily hopes of Liberty, he at last Advised his Lady to Consent to the Count's
demand, though they were rigid and severe, adding, That since she was now in his
power, he might possibly force her Virtue to a Surender upon worser Terms.
Belanca, who was wholly at the Devotion of her Lord, whom she loved entirely,
was with some regret at last prevailed upon by his Argument, assuring him, That
she could at the same Instant, with greater Satisfaction, Sacrifice her Life
for his Ransom, than prostitute her Honor. The False Count having now Satiated
himself with the full Enjoyment of his Lustful pleasures, left Belanca in his
Chamber, telling her, he would now go and give present orders for the Lord
Moruffi 's discharge, desireing her ^o stay and expect him there: whereupon he
commanded four of his Servants to go to the Lord Moruffi's Chamber, and bring
his Head to him in that Embroidered Bag, which was accordingly done. The Count
took the Bag in his own hands, and went to Belanca's Apartment, where she was
with great Impatience expecting Moruffi, and told her, Madam, take there your
beloved Husband, Belanca not understanding his meaning, opened the Bag, and
there saw Moruffis Head fresh Bleeding, at which she Swoond away, and had not
the diligent Attendance and Care of the Women, and the Excellent Virtues of the
Cordials they gave her, forced her Soul unwillingly back to her hated body, she
had immediately followed her Beloved Lord. Three days after the Count being
acquainted that her passion was something abated, made a Visit to her, and by
all the tender Expressions of Love and Affection, excusd the late bloody Act he
had been Guilty of, that having once tasted those ravishing delights, he not
only resolvd never to part with her, but could endure no Rival, and that not
his Cruelty to Moruffi, but his Love to Belanca was the Occasion of it. The
Count at last won so much upon her, that she seemed wholly to forget Moruffi,
and with pleasure and delight wantoned in his Lustful Arms, till Three Months
after, that Noble Prince Gustavus Adolphus being Encamped with his Army Ten
Miles off, rode over to his Castle of Colmar, to whom Belanca on her Knees
related this horrible Cruelty of the Count to her Husband the Lord Moruffi, and
Implored his Justice against him the King having understood the whole Intrigue
of their Amors, asked her the next day what would Satisfy her for the loss
she received in her Husband, and proposed a Match with the Count which should
compensate the Injury she received. Belanca accepted of the Kings proposal, and
the Count was well pleased his Punishment was not more severe; whereupon they
were Married in the Kings presence, who told her, I have now in some measure
Answered your Complaint, and now I will satisfy my own Justice, and
immediately ordered the Governor should be Beheaded, and gave her all his
Estate.

Belanca not long after removed to Stockholm, where her own native Beauty, and
the Report of her great Riches, gained her many Suit^rs, and amongst those,
Adrastus second Son to the Duke of Helsinga, with a more particular Zeal,
Admired and Courted her: Six Months were now past, since he had laid Siege to
the Affections of Belanca, yet had not the least private Parley with her, which
added more to the Esteem and Devotion he had for her. At last, upon the
importunity of Prayers and Presents, one of her Gentlewomen promised to bring
him in the Night time, to her Ladies Lodgings, and so to dispose of him, that
he should see her pull off her Clothes before she went to Bed, walking in her
Smock about the Chamber for Coolness, and Singing and Playing upon the Lute,
which she did admirably well. Adrastus was overjoyed with the thoughts of so
great an happiness, Belanca was very surprising under the disadvantages of a
Widows Habit, but would certainly be much more Beautiful, when she appeared
like a Naked Venus; Her great pretensions to Virtue and Modesty, laid so severe
a Restraint upon her Conversation, That she rarely or never admitted any
Gallant to a private Discourse; These Considerations raised Adrastus his
Expectations to the highest degree of Pleasure and Contentment. Night being
come, Adrastus by the direction of Clora, Belanca's Woman, conveyed himself
into her House, and was so conveniently placed, that he saw her sitting on a
Couch, reading in a Prayer Book whilst her Women were undressing her. Belanca
was ready to go into Bed, when Clora entreated her Mistress to Sing, and put a
Lute into her Hand, which she readily complied withal (it being her usual
Custom, when she was not Melancholy indisposed) and performed so well, that
Adrastus could hardly forbear casting himself at her Feet, there to Act the
Part of the Ecstatick Lover. She Sung not long, but went to Bed, her Women
withdrew to their Chambers, and Adrastus went out undiscovered at a Door Clora
had left open for him, but coming into the Court, he found the Gate shut fast
and Locked. Not knowing what to do in this Distress, he sat down upon the side
of a Well in a Corner of the Court, to consider with himself: While his
Thoughts were thus Engaged, he perceived a Door open that belonged to some part
of Belanca's Lodgings, and saw the fair Widow, whom he thought fast Asleep,
with a Wax-Candle in one Hand, and a Plate covered with Jellyes and Conserves
in the other; she had a Rich Flowr'd Gown wrapped loose about her; and in this
Dress she was so full of Charms and Attraction, that he much wondered what this
Beautiful Phantasm meant, sometimes flattering himself that he was the Person
she sought after. At length he perceived her to go toward the Stable door,
whither he at a distance followed her, and supposing she went to visit some
Servant that was Sick, wondered at the Excess of her Pious Charity. He hid
himself behind one of the Horses, and saw her go to the Bedside of a Black a
m^re, that was Sick, who seemed to be about Thirty Years of Age, but with so
Ghostly a Look, that he appeared like the true Image of Death. Adrastus admired
the unparalled Goodness of Belanca, who took up the Negro's Coverlet, and
having raised his Head, sat down by him, and with Tears in her Eyes, wiped the
Cold Sweat from his Forehead with her Handkercheif. Adrastus knew not what to
think of a Charity so Transcendent, when she with showers of Tears, Asked him
How he did? and with a Voice interrupted by Sobs; My dear Franck (said she) Art
thou resolved to dye, and with thy own, be my Death too? Thou spakest not to
me, my Dearest, Take Heart my Soul, if thou desire I should Live, and Eat a
little of this Ielly, for my sake, who Loves thee, who Adores thee, Kiss me my
Angel, Kiss me and recover thy Health or let me dye with thee. To this effect
were her Expostulations, joining her Angelical Face, to the Diabolical
Countenance of the Moor, which she bedewed with Tears. When he with his scraggy
Hand removing her Face from his own, with a hollow Voice, said to her, What
would you have of me Madam? why will you not let me dye in quiet? Is it not
enough you have reduced me to this miserable Condition I am in, but now you
Expect at the point of Death, I should sacrifice the few Minutes I have left,
to the Satisfaction of your Insatiable Inclinations? Take a Husband, Take a
Husband Madam, and Expect no more from me, who am more fit for the Cold
Embraces of Death, than the Warm Pleasures of your Lustful Arms. Having so
said, he slunk down into the Bed, and so suddenly, that Belanca could not get
one word more from him, but returned to her Chamber with a Countenance full of
Sadness and Discontent, like a disconsolate Widow at the Funeral of a Husband
she dearly loved. Adrastus lay close in the Corner of the Stable till the Gate
was open, and getting into the Streets returned to his Lodgings with Wonder and
Astonishment. Next day as he passed by Belanca's House, the Moor was carried
out to his Burial, and a Week after he received this Letter from Belanca, by
one of her Servants.

Belanca to Adrastus.
YOU would have me believe you think me not Unhandsome, and I cannot but
Acknowledge I am so taken with you, That I am willing to Grant you immediately
what I had not promised till a Year was Expired. My Person and Estate are at
your disposal, and though I cannot be too Circumspect in a Business of this
Nature, yet your Merit and my Affection, shall be my Security.

Belanca.


Adrastus was now altered in his Resolutions of Marriage, and having read her
Letter twice or thrice over, returned this Answer: Adrastus to Belanca.
I Am naturally a Person of a very nice Conscience, and therefore cannot
without some remorse, Answer your Proposal of Marriage, you being a Widow but
since last Week. You are much more Obliged to the Memory of your Negro, who
lost his Life in your Service, and can bestow no less than a Year in Bewayling
the miscarriage of a Person, whose Performances you thought so Extraordinary.
In the Intrim we shall both of us have time to Consider what we have to do.

Adrastus.




Adrastus having sent his Mistress this Letter, immediately left Stockholm, and
retired into the Country, where five Months after he received this sad Account
of her miserable End.

Belanca finding her self with Child by her African Gallant, concealed her
Great-Belly from all the World but her Confident Clora, who Assisting her at
the time of her Delivery, they murdered the Tawny Offspring to conceal the
Shame of her Lustful Dalliances, and Clora commanded to Bury it in the Garden,
but being Discovered, was Apprehended and brought before the Officers of
Justice, where in hopes of Pardon, she Confessed how far she was Guilty,
Charging the rest on Belanca, who having Notice by the Officers who came to
Seize her, what Clora had Accused her of, what through the horror of the
Guilt, and dread of the Punis^ent, snatching up a Poniard which lay upon the
Table, she stabbed her self to the Heart, and dyed immediately. Clora had
Confessed her self Guilty of the Murder of the Infant, which though it might
look rather like an Act of Service and Fidelity to her Lady, than a malicious
Design in her Self, was condemned to be hanged, and Three Days after Executed.

Nothing Encourages Sin more, than the false Hopes of Impunity; for did we
really believe the Justice of H^av'n would most certainly punish our Sins in
proportion to our own Demerits; the Murderer would temper his Passion, and the
Adulterer cool his Lust. But that thou may no more dare to Sin, than thou
art willing and able to bear the Punishment Heaven shall infl^ct on thy Guilty
Head; I have here represented the sad Consequence of those two horrid Sins,
Murder and Adultery, where in Variety of Tragical Examples, thou may see
the Justice of Heaven Triumphant in the Punishment of such Notorious Offenders.
The Triumphs of Chastity


Sold by Benj: Crayle at ye sign of ye Lamb in Fleet street.

THE TRIUMPHS OF FRIENDSHIP AND CHASTITY.

Exemplified in some Eminent EXAMPLES AND Delightful Histories.

LONDON: Printed for Benj. Crayle, in Fleetstreet.

THE TRIUMPHS OF FRIENDSHIP, etc.
By way of Introduction.
IN the two former Treatises I have lively represented how nea^ly Sin is allied
to Punishment, in several Tragical Examples of Murder and Adultery; to deter us
from the Commission of those Crimes which will render us as infamously
miserable, as those poor Wretches were. And in this Second Part I shall
endeavor to encourage Virtue by those Glorious Instances of Successful
Goodness, which have perfumed the Memories of the Authors, and given
Immortality to their Names, whose Bodies are long since crumbled into Dust, and
their Ashes lost amongst the common Ruins of Mankind. I shall Contract my
Discourse under these two Heads, Friendship and Chastity, as they do more
directly oppose the precedent Crimes of Murder and Adultery. And here I mean
not that Friendship which receives its Birth from any Effeminate Passion of
Love and Desire; but that Exalted Friendship, whose Noble Extract is only
derived from Virtue and Honor, which is of so pure a Temper, that none but
Good Men are Capable of it. It Is a Misery indeed, that the Knowledge of such a
Blessedness as a True Friend is, can hardly be without some sad Misfortune, for
when we are Happy in the Springtide of Abundance, and the Rising flood of
Plenty, all Men flock about us with bare Heads, bended Knees, and protesting
Tongues: But when these pleasing waters fall to an Ebb, then they look upon us
at a distance, and stiffen themselves as if they were in Armor, lest (if they
should comply with us) they get a wound in the Close. This has deterred some
from taking part with an inauspicious Friendship, but by how much the more
miserable, by so much are they the more certain Examples of a Generous
Fidelity. For a Man to Expose his Life to the Hazard of a Duel in behalf of his
Friend, may appear an Action of Honor and Gallantry; but in Cold Blood to
present himself to an undoubted Death for a Friend, is a thing rarely seen, and
Antiquity furnishes us with few Examples thereof, they tell us indeed of Damon
and Pythias, and the Poets speak with Admiration touching Castor his sharing of
Immortality with his Brother Pollux. But I shall here present you with a late
memorable Example of a Generous Friendship (out of the History of Poland) which
preserved the Lives of both the Friends, who eagerly contended to Dye for each
other, As follows:

HIST. I. Rabatski and Farnel.
Rabatski and Farnel, two Intimate and Faithful Friends. Rabatski falls in love
with Hilaria, who is also Courted by Poto^^i, but slighted by her; whereupon he
endeavors to murder him in the Street, but he is preserved by his Friend
Farnel, who kills Potosti and his Man, and flies. Rabatski is taken and
Condemned to l^^e his Head. At the Place of Execution Farnel appears, owning
himself the Murderer. They are afterward, in regard of their Inviolable
Friendship, both Saved, Married and Preferred.

AT Vilna the Metropolitan City and University of Lithuania, one of the
Principal Provinces in the Kingdom of Poland, lived two young Gentlemen named
Al^xander Rabatski, and Peter Farn^l, who had such an Inclination and Affection
for each other in their tender Youth, that if their Friendship increased with
their Age, it was judged by all they would attain such a degree of Perfection,
as would dim the Luster of all those, Ancient Historians have so highly
commended to us. They Studied together in the University, and Learned all the
Exercises in the Academy befitting their Birth and Condition, wherein by a
worthy Emulation they surpassed their Fellows, and as the Passions which most
agitate Youth are Quarrels and Love, in both these Storms they supported each
other with so inviolable Fidelity, that the Interest of the one was the others,
without suffering the least sprig of Jealousy to cast its Thorny Roots of
Suspicion into their Hearts. At length it happened Rabatski placed his Affection
on a subject full of Honor, the Virtuous and Beautiful Hilaria, who was one of
the compleatest Gentlewomen in the City, of a Good Family, and Considerable
Fortune: But that which made his Address to this Lady most difficult, was the
Courtship of Potosti, Son to one of the Principal Citizens of Vilna, who had
already gained her Parents Good Will, and Rivall'd him in his Affections to his
Mistress. Hilaria, who was Judicious above her Age, soon discovered the
different Temp^rs of her Lovers, and knew how to make a Choice most agreeable
to her own humor; she observed Potosti was Proud and Haughty, Arrogant in his
Behavior and Discourse, who instead of winning Love by Submission, made
himself odious to her by his Vanities and Bravadoes. Rabatski was Mild and
Modest, endued with all those Charming Qualities which render Conversation
pleasing and grateful, this so much affected Hilaria that the Offer of his
Service was no sooner presented but received. And although he had no permission
from her Parents to become a Suitor to her* yet she applied her self to Love
him with that Ardency of Affection, that jealous Potosti soon discovered his
Rival had robbed him of his Mistress her Heart, for which he vowed a severe
Revenge. Not long after they met accidentally, and Potosti with more Boldness
than Civility told him, If he dared to Offer any farther Resp^cts t^ his
Mistress Hilaria, he would punish his Insolence, and make him dearly repent his
great Folly and R^shness. Rabatski told him, He could not flatter himself into
an Opinion that he deserved so good a ^ady as Hilaria was; but he hoped his
Pretensi^^s might any where be Equal to his in p^^nt of Honor or Quality, and
that he had neither so little Affection, or so great a share of Cowardice, to
fear his Threats who was his Superior in nothing that was Generous and Brave.
These words seconded by sundry Replies, would have urged them to a present
Quarrel, had no^ ^ome Friends interposed.

In the mean time Potosti possessed the Parents of Hilaria, as much as Rabatski
did the Heart of the Maid, and caused them to forbid her his Company, and by an
Acquaintance of Potosti's sent Rabatski word, that they desired he would
forbear his Courtship to their Daughter, which was very displeasing to them,
and for the future he would avoid their House to prevent any farther incivility
that might be offered to him. This so incensed Hilaria against Potosti, that as
she shunned his Company and all Converse with him, so she diligently sought all
Opportunities to see or write to her beloved Rabatski. Potosti daily saw by
what secret Practices his Rival advanced himself in the Affections of Hilaria,
and not being longer able to bear her rigorous Contempts, resolved to rid
himself of his Competitor by a private and bloody Revenge; whereupon he caused
him to be watched Night and Day, and at length understood his usual walk was by
Night up and down before Hilaria's House; Potosti like to a Jealous Person who
seeks nothing more eagerly than that which he is least willing to find, went in
the Evening and hid himself near the House with his Friend Leoline, and one of
his Men, a lusty tall Fellow, whose Courage and Fidelity he much trusted. Long
had they not lain in Ambuscade before Rabatski came, accompanied with his
Friend Farnel, to walk their accustomed Round; when at certain signs which he
made, Hilaria appeared at her Window, with whom he entered into Discourse,
whilst Farnel being a little wide from them, gave 'em time and liberty to talk.

What Furies of Jealousy did then invade the Breast of Impatient Potosti? then
was the time, the Appetite of Vengeance seized him, and that he intended to Cut
his Rival in pieces, who to his disadvantage was thus favored by his Mistress;
upon which he commanded his Man to set upon Farnel, whilst Leoline and he would
Chastise the Insolence of Rabatski. At this they all three started out at once,
and parting, ran to Assayl their Adversaries. Farnel soon laid the Servant at
his Feet for dead and then ran to help Rabatski, who having set his Back to a
Wall, by the advantage of a Shop, warded the Blows and Thrusts which his
Enemies made at him. Farnel came furiously up, and the first he met with at his
Swords-point was Potosti, whom surprising behind as he was eagerly passing at
Rabatski, he ran his Sword into his Back up to the Hilt, whereupon he fell dead
to the ground: Leoline received some slight wounds, but secured his Life by a
speedy Flight. Farnel escaped without any hurt, but Rabatski was in danger of
his Life by the great effusion of Blood from his several Wounds. The People
came out at the Noise of this Combat, and found Potosti stark dead on the
stones, and his man some few steps from him, yielding up the Ghost. Rabatski
was conducted to a Neighbor's House, and a Surgeon sent for to dress his
wounds but he swounded in such a manner that for a while they thought him dead,
but by the force of Remedies they brought him to himself again, and after he
was dressed, laid him into Bed.

In the mean while Leoline acquainted Potosti's Parents with the untimely Death
of their Son, and related the matter to his own Advantage, telling them they
were both treacherously assaulted by Rabatski and Farnel, which took such
impression, that they believed all he said, and immediately acquainted the
Officers of Justice with the Murder, who ordered that Rabatski and Farnel
should be Apprehended and cast into Prison* whereupon Rabatski was seized and
dragged to Prison, without any respect to his weak Condition. Farnel made his
Escape in hopes to prove his own Innocence and his Friends, by showing what
they did was in their own Defense: But the Case went quite otherways than he
expected, Potosti's Friends and Relations had that Power and Authority in the
City of Vilna, that in few days Rabatski was Arraigned and Condemned to lose
his Head. The time of his Execution being come* he was brought to the Scaffold,
and though he publicly protested his Innocence, that he was not the Author of
this Murder, but Assaulted by the Treachery of Potosti and Leoline; yet the
Executioner was ready to give the fatal stroke, when (...) Farnel came
thrusting into the Crowd, and with an admirable Courage cried out, Rabatski is
Innocent, and I only am Guilty of the Murder ^f Potosti and his Man, and then
with a clear and distinct Voice, and a Countenance which ou^^ray'd (...),
declared to the Magistrat^ (who was present to see the Execution) how all had
passed, Concluding, That if ^ Man must dye for defending his own Life, he was
there ready to offer his own H^a^ to Justice to preserve his Friend.

All the Company were struck with Admiration to see this Generous Act! and the
People began to Mutiny, Crying out Pardon, Pardon, resolving to kill all that
opposed them, rather than suffer the Execution to proceed any farther. This
Tumult grew very great, But with difficulty was appeased by the Magistrate, who
promised the Cause should be heard over again, and Judged according to Equity,
upon which they grew quiet and the two Friends were led to Prison. The Palatine
of Vilna heating of this Incomparable Generosity of Farnel, went himself in
Person to the Prison to visit these two Friends, who both contested before him
who should dye for his Fellow. He heard the History of the two Lovers Rabatski
and Hilaria, and a particular Relation of all the Circumstances of the late
Accident. Leoli^e was then Examined and Confronted with them, who by the Death
of the Man and the Master, and by the force of Truth was constrained to
Acknowledge the Ambuscade, and that they were Three against Two, and that
Farnel alone killed Potosti and his Servant. Upon this Farnel pleaded the Cause
for his own Death and the Safety of Rabatski, with all the powerful Arguments a
less Generous Friend could have used for the preservation of his Life; urging,
That if to save his Friend from Violence was a Crime so heinous, he alone
deserved the Punishment. Nay, rather Glory, Honor and Rec^mpence (replied the
Palatine) and thereupon discharged them both from Prison, and gave them their
Pardons. Leoline like a base and treacherous man, was put into the same place,
and had been a Spectacle to the People on the same Scaffold, had not his
Friends by their Prayers and Entreaties, obtained the Favor to have his doom
changed into a Banishment for Seven Years.

The Palatine was not pleased only with saving the Lives of these two Friends,
but caused Rabatski to marry with Hilaria, and procured a Wife for Farnel, a
Gentlewoman who was nearly Allied to himself; entreating these two Friends to
receive him as a Third into their Incomparable Friendship. This afterward
coming to the Ears of the King, in favor of the Palatine, they were both
advanced to Honorable Employments. And Lived together many years after, happy
in the fruition of a Reciprocal Affection, and entire Friendship, till time at
length put a period to their days, and gave immortality to their Names, which
still bear Record, as a Glorious Example to future Ages.

Thus we see a Sincere Friendship is the strictest Alliance, and most Noble
Relation. Orestes is better known by his Friend Pylades, than by Agamemnon his
Father. Hence do we conclude, That he that follows Virtue and Embraces her,
shall be Crowned with Glory and Honor. HIST. II. Aleran and Incmar.
Aleran and Incmar two Faithful Friends Incmar falls in Love with Yoland, the
Marriage is ^b^tructed by her Parents; and the day appointed for her ^sp^^sals
to H^golin. Aleran and Incmar steal her away in Man's H^bit, and fly to
Briemberg, where (forced by want) they (...) themselves Soldiers. The Town is
Sacked, Incmar and Yoland are k^l^'d in the Breach. Aleran lives to tell the
sad Tale, and dies of his Wounds. They are all Three Buried in one Grave.

IN the time of Alexander Farnes^ Prince of Parma the Marquess de Vara^hon
received Orders to block up Briemberg, a very strong little Town near Rh^^^erg,
under the States of Holland This Brave Captain made his Approaches with so much
Courage and Policy, that at las^ upon a general Assault the Town was taken by
Storm; the enraged Enemy gave no Quarter, nor any respect to Age or Sex, Honor
or Riches, all was now become desolate, and submitted to the absolute and
entire Conqu^st of the Marquess. Particular Care was taken to bu^y the Dead for
fear any Infection should corrupt the Air: amongst whom two Soldiers were found
in the Breach so closely Embraced, that nothing but that unhappy state they
were in, seemed able to divide their Bodies. The Enemy seeing these two
reasonably well Clothed, str^pt them quite Naked, when to their great
Amazement they found one of them white as Snow, of wonderful Beauty, excellent
Proportion, and a Woman. The Marquess who was a Gentleman that made great
Account of Love and Valor, being acquainted with it, was curious to know the
reason of this memorable Adventure, which proved so unfortuate in the Success.
It seemed strange to him that an Armed Venus should be found there enchac'd in
the Arms of Mars; he passionately desired to know who these two Lovers were,
that he might pay a suitable Honor to the Memory of their Courage and
Fidelity. At length he was told, that a Soldier who was extremely wounded, and
had yielded himself Prisoner to a Burgundian Captain, had offered to satisfy
him in the Truth of this Amorous and Warlike History.

The Prisoner being in that desperate Condition, the Surgeons thought it very
unsafe for him to stir, whereupon the Marquess went to see him, accompanied
with several of his Principal Officers, that he might learn from his own mouth
the particulars of this strange Event. The Sick Man resuming an extraordinary
Courage upon the appearance of the Marquess, made this Relation:

My Lord, I render Thanks to Heaven, which has given me so much Life as I wish
for, to yield in so Honorable Company the glorious Testimony which I owe to my
Love, and to my Friendship, which done, I shall dye in peace; for I can no more
live without Friendship, than move without a Soul, that indeed is my Soul, the
Intelligence which actuates this Body, and gives Life and Vigor to all my
Faculties.

My Name is Aleran, my Birth Noble, my Country is the Landgraviat of Hessen,
the Place that saw my entrance into the World is Melsignam, near unto Cassel. I
entered into so strict a Friendship with Incmar, a Gentleman, Native of
Rottinburgh, who had been bred up a Page to the Landgrave, that we were
commonly called The Inseparable: Those Impatiencies which Lovers feel when they
are from their Mistresses, we felt whenever we were asunder. We lived in the
same House, lay in the same Bed, had but one Purse, one Table, the same
Servants, the same Liveries, the same Retinue, and when any of our Servants
were Asked unto whom they did belong, they answered to The Two Friends, if
those that are but one, may be called Two. It happened once when we were at
Melsignam, my Friend saw a fair Maid in Company, named Yoland, whose Graces so
surpised his Heart, that all his Thoughts and Meditations were fixed on this
Beautiful Object. I presently judged he was stung with Love, and he
acknowledged as much to me at first asking, for he concealed nothing from me.
Truly said I, I am very glad you have addressed your Affections to a
Gentlewoman with whom I have some Interest and Acquaintance, and who is at a
distance allied to me, and by these Advantages I hope to make your access more
easy to her. My Friend with Tears of Joy in his Eyes, told me it was the most
grateful piece of Friendship I could offer to him, and earnestly begged of me
that I would contrive some way that he might the next Evening be happy in her
Company. This and all other good Offices I performed with that Success, that my
Friend was now assured, that all his Respects to the Beautiful Yoland were
answered with a reciprocal Passion.

Thus Incmar by frequent Conversation at last won Yolands Heart, but how to
come to the possession of her Fair Body, that Ornament of Nature, seemed a Task
more difficult, there was some Obstacles which appeared Invincible, if any
thing can be so to the Almighty Power of Love. Raoul, Yoland's Father, was
Married to Graciana her Stepmother, upon condition that a Son of hers named
Hugolin, should marry this Gentlewoman, as soon as their Age made them capable
of those Nuptial Ceremonies, which Raoul in consideration of Graciana's present
Fortune (which was very great) had sacredly obliged himself to, without any
respect to the content of his Daughter, who certainly could never take pleasure
in the Embraces of such a monstrous Deformity: Hugolin had a Back higher than
his Head, able to ease Atlas of his Burden as well as Hercules, had the rest
of his Body bore any proportion to it: But he was so little one would have
thought he had grown in no part but his Ha^r, since the Day of his Birth. His
Shape was like a middle sized Bowl, his Complexion a little whiter than an
Ethiopian's, near the Color of a Sick Spaniard, his Lips big, his Cheeks flat,
his Eyes almost lost in his Head, and this Figure supported by two Legs so
small, that the Ears of Corn which totter in the Field with the least breath of
wind, have a fairer foundation; these were the Columns of this Mighty Hercules.
With all these Remedies to Love, what could be bred in the Heart of Yoland but
an utter abhorrence and detestation? whilst my Friend was adorned with all
those Graces which render a Gentleman Complete and Amiable.

Hugolin soon grew Jealous of Incmar, and challenged Raoul's Promise to his
Mother Graciana, who seconded her Son's Request with that importunity to her
Husband, that he promised in six Months the Marriage should be solemnized, and
in the interim that he would discard this brave Courtier (meaning Incmar) that
thus put crickets into his Head, and forbid his Daughter to see him any more,
which he accordingly did. My Friend with great Trouble and Discontent withdrew
from Melsignam and went to the Court at Cass^l, and left me his Resident to
Negotiate his Amors with that Diligence and Fideilty he might justly expect
from me. I informed him Day by Day of the Constancy and Affection of his
Mistress, but as it is hard to be long in the Sun without being tanned, or in a
Perfumer's Shop without drawing from thence good Odours; It happened that my
frequent Converse with Yoland raised I know not what inclinations in my Soul,
which became Love before I perceived it; her Attraction and Charms struck so
deep into my heart, that I was a long time in Balance tottering betwixt Love
and Friendship, not knowing unto which party to yield. The Combat was long and
doubtful, but at length my Honor conquered my Sense, Reason my Passion, and my
Friendship to Incmar Triumphed over my Love to Yoland.

Hugolin and Graciana narrowly inspected my proceedings, and soon discovered
the Design I managed; That in vain they had forbid Incmar their house, and
Yoland his Company, since I yet remained behind, who with my utmost Diligence
endeavored to promote his Interest with their Daughter. Hugolin and his Mother
by their Daily Complaints to Raoul, at last so incensed him, that he promised
he would acquaint the Landgrave (by whom he was much esteemed) that Incmar and
I designed a Violence upon his Daughter, and troubled her Marriage, which he
accordingly did. Whereupon I was sent for by a Messenger to Cassel, and Incmar
and I received sharp Reprehensions from the Landgra^e, who ordained that she
should marry Hugolin, according to the Promise Raoul had made his Mother. This
Decree from a Sovereign Mouth, was without Appeal. Incmar at the same time, by
the suggestions of Raoul, who prosecuted him with the utmost Malice, was
threatened to be Banished the Court, and lose all those Honorable and
Advantageous Employments he enjoyed, if he ever after dared in the least to
disturb the Match. My Friend continued at Cassel, having promised the Landgrave
never more to intermeddle with that Affair, and I by his directions went back
to Melsignam, to observe what measures they took.

Raoul went back to Melsignam to consummate the Marriage of his Daughter with
Hugolin, and not long after the Time was fixed, and I had Notice of the Day by
Letter from Yoland, who was resolved to dye rather than marry with that shame
of Humane Nature. I soon transmitted the Letter to Incmar, who that Night came
privately over to me; I obtained a private meeting from Yoland, when it was
resolved that all our hopes of future Happiness depended upon a sudden Flight,
which was agreed to the next N^ght.

Judge now the force of my Friendship, it hood winked my Eyes from all
Considerations; I served my Friend against the Honor of my own blood. I in an
Instant renounced all Love to my Country, all my Estate, the Favor of my
Prince, and all hopes of Fortune, to follow the blind desires of these Lovers,
both which I loved with Incredible passions. It was I that in the Obscurity of
Night which favored our Enterpize, drew Yoland forth of her Fathers house,
through a Window, and having Clothed her in one of my Suits, led her to
Incmar, who stayed for us in the Fields. With good Ho^ses, we Rid till day,
and made that speed that we got out of the Land-grave's Territories e're any
Justice could lay hold of us; But because we knew the hands of Princes are
long, finding no safety in High Germany, we came down disguised into these
parts, where we had not continued long, e're that little was consumed, which
the sudden have of our departure had permitted us to bring from our Country.

To tell you something of what passed in our Country after our flight, we heard
by some secret Friends, That the Land-grave was unmeasurably incensed against
us, Ordained that the Law should proceed against us as Ravishers, we were
Condemned to loose our Heads, which we suffered in Effigy, our Goods were
Confiscate, in brief we were used with all Imaginable rigor and severity, so
that having no hopes of succor from home, we settled all on our own Valor, and
committed our Fortune to the hazard of Arms. Behold now to what degree of
Courage Love does Elevate a Soul Inspired with it! Yoland who had taken man's
Apparel to follow her Lover, found her self so well in that habit and took such
delight in the Exercise of Arms, that she learned in short time to Fence, to
Ride the managed Horse, and did every thing with that Dexterity that she was
deservedly accounted the Compleatest Gentleman in the Troop. The necessity we
were under, and the fear that the Land-grave's wrath should persecute us by his
Agent, constrained us to Inroll our selves under the States Colors. Yoland
assumed the name of Rolond, and was Incmar's Comrade and Bedfellow being first
privately married to him, of which I my self was witness, and since by her
Bravery and Courage made her self famous in many Encounters. When I saw them in
possession of their desire, It was then that I discovered with how much labor
and pain I had overcome the Violence of my passions, in consideration of my
Friendship to Incmar. They admired this Victory over my self; Incmar highly
applauded my Exalted Friendship, and Yoland protested to me, that saving her
Honor, after her Love due to Incmar, she loved no man better. Incmar gave me
leave to call her my Mistress, and she called me her Servant, and that was all
the Favor that ever I had from her, Except sometimes Kissing her no less
valiant than fair hand.

After many Encounters we shut our selves up in Briemberg resolving to show in
this Seige, the highest proofs of Valor in Extreme Events, where there has
happened what you have seen: Military Command having separated me from them,
they have been killed in the Breach, and as it may be thought, Incmar being
first dead, and Yoland unwilling to survive him, was killed on his Body and
Expired in his Arms.

Aleran thus ended his Discourse, and had like at the same time to have ended
his Life, so extremely did grief oppress his heart; The Marquess pitying his
great Courage, gave order to his Doctors and Surgeons to labor in this Cure
with all their Industry, but notwithstanding their great Care and pains he died
two days after, and was by Command of the Marquess Interred with Honor by
Incmar and his wife, under a fair Marble Tomb with this Inscription.

To the Memory of the Three Lovers, Inseparable in Life and Death.
Sincere Friendship is the most Excellent Endeavor of Humane Nature; it
Contracts Two Souls into one, and according to the fable of Aristophanes unites
a Man with the other half of himself.

HIST. III. Mellinto and Valeria.
Mellinto Courts Valeria, and is betrothed to her. The Lord Beltimore falls in
Love with her. Mellinto out of his great Affection to Valeria, and respect to
her advancement, retracts the Espousalls. They are afterward married, she is
taken by Pirates, he Swims after to the Galley, and f^r her sake m^kes himself
a voluntary Slave. The King of Tunis und^rstanding their faithful Love,
releases both. Upon their Re^urn they find B^ltimore dead, who by Will
Bequeathed his whole Estate to Valeria, in regard of her Constancy and fidelfty
to Mellinto.

NOT far from Brundusium (in the Province of O^ranto in the Kingdom of Napl^s)
formerly well known for one of the best Havens in the World* lived Seignior
Mordenni, a Gentleman of considerable Quality and Estate, much about the same
time that Massinello made his Insurrection at Naples. This Gentleman had five
Sons, and one Daughter named Valeria, who bore away the Palm of Beauty from all
the Maids of that Country, and as she had many Admirers, was more particularly
Adored by Mellinto, a Young Gentleman of more Esteem for his great Virtue than
Eminent in his Fortune; between whom there was that sympathy of Affection, and
agreeableness of humor and disposition, that the Match seemed to be made in
Heaven, and they born for the mutual Love and Enjoyment of each other.

The Father of Valeria was much obliged to the Lord of B^ltimore, a Nobleman
who lived three Miles off, from whom upon all Occasions he had received
generous Testimonies of his Friendship and Kindness, for which reasons, amongst
other Gentlemen his Neighbors, he invited his good Lord and Patron to the
Ceremony of Betrothing his Daughter to Mellinto, who willing to do Mordenni all
the Honor he could upon so great a So^emnity, promised his Company. All things
were performed with much Pomp and Solemnity, and Mel^into and Valeria mutually
Espoused and Engaged to Marry each other, on such a day as should be agreed
upon between their Friends and Relations. Nothing ^ow was wanting but to
proceed to the Consumma^ion of this Marriage, the term of few days was
pre^crib'd to prepare and end it. The Content of the two ^overs had exceeded
all common bounds of Delight and Satisfaction, had not the adjourning of the
Day (...) on which they should have been United) put water unto their Wine, and
moderated their Joy by ensuing Troubles. Whether Valeria had added to her
Natural ^eauty any secret Embellishments of Art, or whether ^he Earl's Eyes
were more discerning that Day than ^hey were formerly, is uncertain; but so it
fell out that Valeria's Conquering Charms so far prevailed upon him, that he
lost both Judgment and Knowledge of himself; and though he was very Ancient,
and extremely Afflicted with the Gout, yet would he needs inroll himself under
the Standard of Cupid, where the Old and Impotent are never welcome; so great
was the Folly and Dotage of this Decrepid Lord.

After he had made a weak Resistance to the Assault this Innocent Beauty made,
he yields, resolving to Cure himself of this importunate Desire by Marriage;
whereupon he went to Mordenni, the Father of this Beautiful Conqueress, and
weeping like a Child, represented his Grief to him: Mordenni took pity of him,
and counted it a great Honor that he should request to have his Daughter in
Marriage; But my Lord (said he) you know she is Espoused to another, and this
Promise cannot be broken but by the Consent of both Parties. I shall (replied
the Lord Beltimore) deal so bountifully with Mellinto, that in obliging me he
shall be the better for it as long as he lives, and I will so well provide for
your Daughter, that both she and your whole Family shall be sensible of the
good effects of it.

This News was carried by Mordenni to Mellinto, who (poor Gentleman) received
it as the Sentence of his Death, and indeed to rend so strong a Love from his
Heart, was no less than to tear his Soul from his Body. He could not Answer but
with Tears, like a Stag that stands at Bay (Mordenni pressing him to it) he
fell down in a Swoon, showing thereby that he could not grant so hard a Request
but by Death. Then went he to his Daughter to try her mind, who had no other
Answer but Sighs and Sobs; at last, amongst many interruptions, he learned That
her will was in the hands of Mellinto, and being Espoused to him, she had now
no more power to dispose of her self. He then went back to Mellinto, who having
with incredible Convulsions of mind, digested the bitter Thoughts of the Ruin
of his Love, which he saw so apparent, took at last a Courageous Resolution and
such a one as he might justly be blamed for, if not rightly understood,
Philosophers distinguish between Loves, and say the most perfect is that which
tends most to the good of the Person beloved, and that which is less perfect
and respects the advantage of the Person loving, is not so properly called
Love, as self-interest and design. In this Mellinto desired to show the
perfection of his love to Valeria, by considering more her happiness and
advancement, than his own content. Whereupon Mellinto told him, he would,
though unwillingly, resign his Title to the Lord Beltimore; Mordenni overjoyed
at this answer, tenderly embraced him, and mixing their Tears together, told
him, he should be eternally obliged to him, and would ever account him as much
the Raiser of his House and Family as the Lord Beltimore was. This news was
presently carried by Mordenni to his Daughter, who was so incredulous, that she
told him she would never believe it, till she heard it from Mellinto's own
mouth. Presently after Mellinto came in, with a dejected countenance, and eyes
overflowing with tears, who could not endure to look Valeria in the face, who
he thought would upbraid him with disloyalty thus to forsake her, and give her
up to the embraces of another. After they had in some measure overcome the
violence of their passions, Mellinto made it evidently appear to Valeria, that
she was much mistaken in accounting that for baseness of heart and disloyalty
in him, which was the greatest act of Magnanimity his heart could show, to
renounce his own proper interest and satisfaction in favor of the person he so
dearly loved.

Valeria could not at first conceive this subtlety, her soul being so closely
united to Mellinto's, that she believed nothing but death could part them. Oh
Mellinto! (said she) Dear Mellinto! What has caused you so easily to forsake
me? Call you that lovi^g, and perfectly loving to part with me? I should not
only have pefer'd you to a Lord, but a King, to the most potent Emperor on the
Earth; for I esteem not men for their wealth or greatness, but for their own
proper merits. Dear Valeria (replied Mellinto) the affection I bear you, works
in me the same effect as death would do, since it separates me from you: my
vehement desire of your greatness, makes me deprive my self of the greatest
contentment I could have wished, and without which my life henceforward will be
but a death: Live then Great, Honored, Happy, Rich, most Dear Valeria, and by
marrying with Beltimore, become the Glory of thy Kindred, whilst I go miserable
poor, unhappy and forlorn Mellinto, spinning out the remainder of my sad days
in melancholy Groves, and solitary Retirements. Much ado had they to part
these two Lovers from each others Arms: A heart as hard as Adamant, could not
but have relented at so Tragical a scene of Sorrow.

The words of Betrothing being rendered back, the very next morning the Lord
Beltimore made his visit to Valeria, vainly flattering himself, it was now no
longer in the power of fate to blast, or cross his Amors; he promised to make
her a Lady, and settle his whole Estate upon her (having no Children,) and that
the Writings should be sealed before the Marriage was Consummated, which was
appointed two days after. Beltimore generously sent Mellinto a Bag with 2000.
Checquins, with all the Expressions of gratitude, and an assurance of his
perpetual Love and Friendship, which he as Nobly returned with this
Complimental Letter.

Mellinto, to the Lord Beltimore.
MY Lord, I am no stranger to your favors, neither am I ignorant of your being
Master of a liberal and grateful soul, but as I never was in a Capacity to
oblige you, so I cannot with Iastice to my self receive your Lordships present,
which must make me a Debtor to you, more then ever I shall be able to repay. If
your Lordship thinks my resigning Valeria to you, had a respect to my own
Interest, or your Satisfaction, you much mistake me, all my good wishes center
in the fair Valeria, whom I endeavor to render as completely happy, as I make
my self wretched and miserable. Upon no other Terms would I have parted with
her, whom I value above the Treasure of both the Indies, and was I that Potent
Monarch, who sees the Sun both rise and set in his own Dominions, I would lay
my Crown at your Feet to preserve Valeria in my Arms.

Mellinto.


Valeria was in presence when Beltimore received this Answer from Mellinto,
which made so deep Impression on her, that the next morning, which was designed
for the Wedding, she rose early, and attended only by her Maid, went over to
Mellinto, and was privately married to him, of which, she immediately sent her
Father an account. Modenni spared no words to express his rage and fury, nor
did Beltimore conceal his deep Resentments of the Affront done to his Person,
and the disappointment to his longing Expectations. The Father utterly disowned
his Daughter, and would not admit of a Reconciliation, though they offered the
most powerful reasons for what was done by the Intercession of Friends.
Mellinto had but a very small Estate, which the Expenses their Quality obliged
them to soon Consumed, nor would Cruel Mordenni relieve their distresses,
though he daily heard of their complaints: But these wants made no breach
between this loving pair, who were constant in their affections, happy in the
midst of poverty, and contented in the extremity of misery.

It unfortunately hapen'd, that Mellinto and Valeria walked out together one
Evening, more to divert their Melancholy thoughts, than any Pleasure they could
take in viewing that single Acre which was all the Remainder of their Land, on
which fed their whole Herd of Cattle, two loving Mulls, the living Riches, and
support of their Family. Mellinto upon some urgent occasion in their return
staid behind, and Valeria went on to take her usual walk upon the Beach where
she had the prospect of those Galleys which Rowed by; A Turkish Galley
belonging to Algiers having just landed their Boat, immediately seized all they
met with on the Strand, and amongst others Valerea, who in sight of her
Husband, was carried off to the Galley which lay hard by with Spanish Colors,
this dreadful sight he saw, heard her Skreaks and outcries which peirced his
Heart, but he was too far distant to make any attempt, tho his best endeavors
would have proved fruitless, and unsucessful in her Rescue. He saw her gone
beyond recovery, and tears and complaints were but in vain, when like a
constant Friend, and loving Husband, he plunged himself into the Sea, and swam
up to the Galley where he was taken up and brought before the Captain, who told
him, he was come to follow his Wife, and neither feared their Cruelty nor begged
their Pity, that freedom without her Company was a more miserable slavery to
him, then they endured who tug'd at the Oar. The Turks very much admired his
Transcendent Love and Courage, for they had seen some of his Country Men rather
choose death than endure a life so Severe and Cruel.

Amongst some others that he knew a Board, there was a Young Gentleman named
Placento, about 22 Years of Age, whose Father was next neighbor to Mellinto,
Placento lying chained to his Oar as the rest were, was not able to endure the
Turkish Cruelty, ^ut contrived an escape, and Commuicated the Methods of it to
Mellinto, entreating him to bear him company, who told him he had made himself
a Voluntary slave for the sake of his Wife, and would scorn that Ransom which
did not first purchase her liberty before his own, much less would he run the
hazard and danger of his project, and then leave her behind to their merciless
fury and revenge. However Placento proceeded, and was happy in the success,
which he effected in this manner, he had observed that the utmost liberty they
had, was no further then their Chain gave 'em leave, which reached to the end
of the Bench, where there was a large hole for the necessity of nature.
Placento having prepared his Chains to come off upon easy Terms, goes to the
Hole one Evening as they ^ay at Anchor, and according to the Custom of the
Turks, cried Ala Banda, which is the signal they are obliged to give, when they
go to that Convenience, otherwise they are Bastinado'd. The Slaves were all
asleep, and only the Sentinells awake upon the fore or hindeck, who mistrusted
nothing. Placento first pulled off his Coat, which he underprop'd with two
sticks, and then got off his Fetters, (his legs being so fallen away since his
being a Slave, that they grew too small for his shackles) and committing
himself to the Sea, landed safe upon an Island not far off, but though his
Person was gone, his Coat was severely threatened with Bastinado 's before his
real escape was discovered.

At their return to Tunis, the Captain of the Galley acquainted the King with
the whole account of their surprising Valeria walking on the Beach, and how her
Husband Mellinto swam after in Love to his Wife, and made himself a Voluntary
Slave, rather than be deprived of her Company. The King was much moved with the
Relation of so faithful and constant a Love, and within three days gave them
both their Freedom* In the interim, the Lord Beltimore having received
intelligence by some of the Neighbors of this sad Misfortune of Mellinto and
Valeria, in respect of their great fidelity, (like a Noble Gentleman, had taken
Care for their Ransom,) but dying before he could have any account of their
Arrival at Tunis, bequeathed his whole Estate to Valeria, and left it in trust
with her Father, who upon their return to Brurdusium, enjoyed it, and lived out
the rest of their days in a pompous plenty, and happy Tranquillity.

Such is the inestimable value of Friendship, and Conjugal Affection that he
that has found a true Friend in a Loving Wife, has found a double Treasure,
more to be prized than all the Gold of Ophir. HIST. IV. Venon and Teudas.
Teudas being in Prison, is set at liberty by his Friend Venon, who purchases
his Freedom, and in regard of their great Friendship, Marries the Daughter of
Teudas, by whom he had one only Daughter, Named Rosana, Who went in disguise
with her Husband, and Prince Sapor to the Wars in Hungary, where being slain
with her Husband after many signal proofs of their Valor, are both afterward
honorably entered by the Prince, in regard of the inviolable Friendship
contracted betwixt them and the Prince.

AT Breslaw, Chief City in the Dukedom of Silesia a Province of Germany, lived
two Citizens of good quality, who loved each other entirely; the one was Teudas
a Goldsmith, and the other Venon a Merchant, Venon being gone to Vienna in
Austria, to buy some Commodities, staid three Months in his Voyage: and at his
return, found himself welcomed with two disasters, viz: The loss of his Wife
whom he dearly loved, and the misfortune of his Friend, who was cast into
Prison, and past hope of ever getting out; it was not any disorder, but rather
his goodness which had reduced him to this deplorable Estate, for being bound
in a great sum of Money for one of his Friends, who proved insolvent, he was
condemned to the payment of it himself, whereupon all that he was worth being
sold, his body was attached and clapped up into prison for the remainder.

In this place, which may very well be called the Center of Misery, and the
Tomb of the living, Venon came to see him, who grievously complained of
Fortune, accused her of Injustice, for reducing him to that miserable Estate
for well doing; But that which most troubled him, was that he lost the means to
marry his only Daughter, (her Age now requiring it) fearing necessity should
bring her into some vain and lewd course of life. Venon stood not to comfort
him with many words, but came to promises which he soon confirmed by effects.
He told him that his Misery was a mark of his Virtue, against whom Fortune had
sworn a pro^essed Enmity; that he should possess his soul in patience, and
seeing Friendship had cast him into Prison, Friendship should fetch him out
again, that he had means sufficient to relieve his extreme necessity, and
redeem him out of this misery, which by the sacred laws of Friendship, he had
an equal Title to. And I am so far pleased with your misfortune (said Venon,)
as it gives me the Opportunity of showing the sincerity of my affection to you
in this necessity, and that I am truly your Friend: As for your Daughter, let
not that trouble you, seeing I have lost my Wife, I am contented to take her
for my second, if you will; but if her Affections are otherwise disposed of, I
have wherewithal to give her a good Portion.

What unexpected Consolation was this to the heart of Teudas, to hear these
speeches from his Friend, whose words he knew were as true as they were free.
He would have used some Complements to him, but the greatness of the benefit
going beyond his Thoughts, Words and Thanks vanished in his Mouth. No says
Venon, (who judged of his Interior Thoughts, by the Exterior alteration of
his Countenance,) we need not give thanks for that which is our own, If I am
yours, much more are all my goods yours; and either you had no need of them, or
else it was your own fault, you did not dispose of them at your pleasure
before, without any longer discourse, he went presently home, and fetch money,
and paid the sum Teudas was detained for, upon which he was presently
discharged.

Not long after, Venon married Ermige the Daughter of Teudas, who
notwithstanding the great desparity of their Years, loved him affectionately,
not only as a Husband, but a second Father, and esteemed her self happy, to be
a Recompense to him who had with so much goodness and liberality, released her
Father out of Prison. Of so Amorous an Union of these two Hearts and Bodies,
Rosana was the fair product, a Creature destind to love honorably, and
generously, and was but two Months old, when her Grandfather Teudas overcome
with sorrow and grief for the loss of his Estate, left this life to enjoy a
better. Her Father Venon (who had much weakened his Fortunes in delivering his
dear Friend out of Prison,) daily felt necessity approaching, but Heaven which
guards the just, and will not suffer such noble Acts of Friendship to go
unrewarded, provided for him beyond all hope and expectation: Venons grief was
much like that Teudas felt in Prison, seeing himself old, he much feared he
should not leave his Wife* wherewithal honestly to maintain her self, and bring
up, and match his Daughter. But Comfort thy self O Venon with good Tobias, and
be assured, that though poverty overtake thee, yet thou shall have means
sufficient; hope with Job and thou shall have all things restored to the double.

The Duchess of Signits of a Noble House in Silesia reckoned in the Rank of
Princes being ready to cry out, a Nurse was sought for to give suck to the
Child she expected; and Ermige was chosen to be one of the best that could be
found in all Breslaw; this came in good time to preserve this poor Family from
necesity, which daily increased upon them. The Duchess was delivered of a Son,
whose name was Sapor, who was delivered to Ermige to Nurse, and Rosana put to
another, Ermige and her Husband were now both made part of the Dukes Household,
and when time came, that Rosana was weaned and of some stature, she was put to
rock the Prince, and find him sport, as the manner of Children is, thus grew
Rosana gently like a Vine by its Elm Tree. Sapor was not above three or four
Years old when Venon died, leaving both his Wife and Daughter to the Duchess,
who looked for no other Fortune but what proceeded from her Bounty. The little
Prince affected his Nurse and Rosana in such a manner, that although he was
weaned, yet they both tended him and waited on him.

Although it is a grand Error to say that the Parents beget the Souls as well
as the Bodies; yet since the disquesition of the Temperature, and of the
Organs, through which the Spirit exercises it Functions has great effect in
regard of the firm Union of Soul and Body; It is no great wonder if that Rosana
sprung from Parents, whose Inclinations were wholly to Friendship, was
naturally her self addicted to the same passion; which she discovered in that
Love and Affection her more early Years constantly expressed to Sapor. Rosana
loved Sapor in her infancy, with such an extrraordinary fervor, that as soon
as she lost the sight of him, she did nothing but weep and complain; never was
there seen in so tender Years so strong a passion, all the World wondered at
it, and the Duke and Duchess took incomperable pleasure in it. It was a thing
impossible but that Sapor should love this little Creature, which so much
affected him, for to love is the most powerful Charm whereby to make our selves
beloved of others: He could not be without her, and if at any time she chanced
to be away, there was nothing could make him merry. The Duchess seeing the
humor of this little Girl, caused her (for Recreation only,) to be clothed
like a little Page, a habit which pleased her so well, that she never put it
off, but with Tears. In their first Infancy which Unites the Tongue, they
without Ceremony called Brother and Sister, every one wondered at the Courage
and Boldness of this little Girl, when she grew bigger, she called the Prince
her Master, and he called her his Page. All the Exercises which the Master
learned, the Page did learn, and what is more to be admired, with such a Grace,
that she seemed for a Mirror or Example to her little Master, as Physic is
given to the Nurse, that so through her milk the Child may be cured, so was it
with Sapor, for when they were to give him any lesson either of Study, Dancing,
or any thing else, they first taught it to his Page, she learned the faster to
please him, and he took the greater Care that he might not be outstript by a
Girl, an Emulation of Virtue without Envy.

They being now grown up from the Innocence of their first Age, they entered
into the limits of Civility, and the Ceremonies of the World. She was always
much affected with all bodily Exercises, as Leaping, Vaulting, Riding, Fencing,
and whatever was manly and the proper accomplishment of a Cavaleer; The Prince
still calling for her, not only when he was at any Exercise, but at all other
times when she was absent. At last her Age permitting her no longer with
decency and modesty so freely to frequent with Sapor, the Duchess placed her
among the other Gentlewomen, where upon all occasions she still paid that
diligent observance to the Prince as sufficiently witnessed the Ardour of her
Affection: And the Prince on his part bore with no less Impatience the
privation of his Pages Company, it was his greatest contentment, when he could
steal in amongst the Gentlewomen, thereby to entertain her who wholly possessed
his thoughts.

Lewd desires entering into his heart with knowledge poisoned his Love with
sensuality, which he for some time dissembled, but not being able longer to
bear the Impetuosity of his desires, he offered these Indecencies to her which
could neither consist with his Honor or her unspotted Honesty, from whom he
received this discreet Answer. Remember O Prince that poor as I am, and
destitute of Fortunes Favors, I am Rich in Honesty, which if you once offer to
undermine, you ruin my Virtue the most Established Foundation of my Life, but
as I love my Honor more then my Life, so I love it also more than Sapor. If
you truly love me as you have given me many signal Testimonies of it, love me
honorably, otherwise I freely renounce your Friendship, and all the happy
advantages thereby. I love you without Interest, and without any other desire
than to see you Great and Glorious in the World, and in the Arms of a Princess
worthy to be the Spouse of so Noble a Prince, and she will I wait upon with all
the humility and affection of a faithful slave, who will seek no other Reward
but the Glory of serving You. If Fortune should so frown that you dye in deeds
of Arms I will perish at your Feet, that on my Grave may be mixed the Lilies of
my Chastity with the Palms of your Valor, and the Mirtles of my Incomparable
Love to so dear a Master. Whoever has seen a strong North Wind sweeping away
on a sudden all the Clouds which obscured the Face of Heaven, has seen the
effects these genorous words uttered with so good a grace, immediately wrought
in Sapor, the flame of his Love was now pure, the heat moderate without
blackness or smoke.

The Duke his Father being dead, and he the next Lineal Successor of that House
entered into the Honors his Birth called him to. Amongst many Gentlemen, his
followers, he had a particular favor for Numerian a younger Brother and a
Gentleman well descended; Sapor desirous to advance this Gentleman thought he
could not more befriend him than in giving him for his Wife her whom he
affected as his Sister, and her whom he could have wished himself, if the
Grandeur of his Birth had not obliged him, by reason of State, to seek a Match
more suitable to his Quality. The Prince first acquainted Numerian with his
design, who received it with all the humble and dutiful acknowledgments for so
great an Honor, and next Rosana who Answered him with her accustomed
Generosity, Master (said She) will it not be a Treason to give this Body to a
Man who shall not possess the Heart, being so filled with the honest love it
bears you, that there is no place void for any other Subject: Permit me (My
dear Prince) to die a Virgin, with the glory of a Vestal, who has not let her
fire go out. The Prince was infinitely pleased with her discourse which at that
time lasted long, still closing every Period with some expression of a love to
him as sincere and innocent. The next day the Prince ordered Rosana to come to
his Chamber in the Afternoon where she should meet Numerian, whom she no sooner
saw but with a Manly and Generous behavior, which was both natural and usual
with her, spoke to him in these words.

Sir, Here is your Master and mine, who has a desire to join us together in
the Rites of Hymen: but before I embrace this proffer, and be subject to your
power, I must propound two Conditions, without which I cannot, nor will not be
persuaded to take you for my Husband: My Body shall be thine, and so entirely
thine, that never any but thy self shall have part therein. I shall come a
Virgin to thy Bed, and if it be so that I must loose the flower of that
Integrity (which I did intend to preserve all my life time,) yet it shall
Perish at last with Honor in lawful Wedlock. First, then thou shall not need
to watch over my fidelity, of which I shall be more vigilant than thou can,
and if it shall be my hard fortune to outlive thee, I will be just even to
thine Ashes and keep a body pure, and a Troth inviolable. I will Love thee as
my Husband withal my Heart, but to prevent future Jealousies, know this, that I
will love Sapor as my dear Prince, and dear Master, but Imagine not him to have
any part thereby, in any thing that shall appertain to thee, he has no such
thought, and if he had, he should find his expectations frustrate; and if thou
do think this Friendship which is so pure, honest, just and lawful, should be
contrary to the Loyalty I owe to thee; I do now renounce to thy love and
alliance, for I am resolved to carry to my grave this first and glorious flame.
The other Condition is, that thou permit me to exercise my self in Arms, in
Hunting, and other like Recreations, and if thy Courage calls thee at any time
to War, either of thy own accord, or with our Master, that thou permit me to be
partaker of thy labors and thy hazards as I desire to be of thy Laurels, and
thy Palms. On these Conditions I am ready to obey, and follow thee in life or
death.

Numerian no less Ravished at the Spirit and Courage of this Maid, than with
her Beauty, agreed to all she desired; and the Young Duke Honored the Marriage
with such Pomp and Magnificence* that he could not have expended more liberally
at the Marriage of his own Sister. Thus they passed some Years Rich in Wealth
and Children, when the Wars of Hungary a Kingdom bordering on Silesia, came to
disturb this Calm. The Prince being called by the Emperor, had a great Command
in the Army, unto which he went with a Train befitting his Greatness, and
attended by Numerian and Rosana, who would not be persuaded by any Arguments to
stay behind, but dressing her self in Man's Apparel, Accompanied her Master and
Husband to the Army.

One day the Prince was commanded to make an assault upon the Enemy in one of
his Quarters, which he did, (attended by Numerian and Rosana, who never left
him in the most dangerous encounters) with more bravery than Success; for on a
sudden he was encompassed by the Turks, and in great hazard of loosing his
Life, or being taken Prisoner: Then did the great Love of Rosana appear fired
with Fury, who like a raging Tigress, ran her self upon the Weapons of the
Handlers to Rescue the beloved Sapor, Numerian wrought no less miracles with
his devouring Sword, for his Rosana's preservation, than she had done for
Sapors. At last the Prince recovered his safety, and these two Lovers found
themselves surrounded with Enemies, who summoned them to lay down their Arms,
whereunto their great Courages replied boldly, they were never used to such
dishonorable Terms, and pressing into the midst of them, either to break
through, or dye in the attempt, were both Killed, Numerian fell first, and
Rosana after she had given sufficient marks of her undaunted Courage, and fully
revenged her Husbands Death, was run through the body by a Ianizary, and her
soul sent to be for ever happy with Numerian's in a blessed Eternity. The
skirmish being ended she was found among the Dead, with her Husband, and after
they knew she was a Woman, they that felt her s^roaks did more admire her
Valor.

The sorrow and grief of Sapor cannot be expressed, which he took in this loss;
He sent for the two Bodies, that he might yield to their Ashes (which he
watered with his Tears) some Testimony of his Friendship: He caused them to be
carried into Silesia where he spared no cost to make their Funerals sumptuous,
and caused a stately Tomb to be erected over them, to preserve their Memories
to posterity as long as Marble can last.

In the Precedent Histories, we may behold the Glorious Rewards and Triumphs of
Friendship, wherein the chief Bonds of Amity and humane Society do consist, for
without Friendship Mankind would be like Ravenous Wolves, destroyers of each
other, as in the former Histories of Murders, we have had too many Fatal
Examples. Friendship is the perfection of Prosperity, and support of Adversity;
Which Alexander having experienced as a mighty truth, nohen he was asked by
some, where his Treasures lay, Pointed to his Friends. The Pythagorians
preferred Friendship, before all other good qualities, called it the Combination
of all Virtues, and affirmed it to be the Uniting of Souls here on Earth, which
is the preparative to the Heavenly Union, by this Divine Virtue, we may with
Lot unawares, give entertainment to Angels upon Earth, at least we may expect
with the foregoing examples to stand in a fair and bright Character in the Book
of Fame, and Comence Stars of the greatest Magnitude with them above. THE
Triumphs OF CHASTITY.

HIST. I. Christiana.
Christiana refuses the Embraces, and Rich proffers of the French King, and in
her flight for England, was solicited to debauchery by De Boi Master of the
French Vessel, to avoid whose lust She cast her self into the Sea, where she
was taken up by Codrinus Vice Admiral of the English Navy, who in Regard of her
great Chastity married her; The Lord Sebastian attempting to polute her, was
discovered, and afterward slain, she after her Husbands decease, is married to
the Duke of Guise.

FOR the further encouragement of Virtue, after those Glorious instances of
Friendship, 'twill not be improper to present the (Courteous Reader) with some
examples of Chastity, which have Crowned the Memories of those Famed Persons
with immortality and honor, in which thou may as in a mirror behold the
Beauty and reward of the Resplendent Virtue of Chastity, as in the former
Histories, thou see the deformity and punishment of that raging sin of
Adultery, whereby thou may be persuaded to follow the Dictates and Precepts
of the one, as thou would shun the evil consequence, which attend the other.
As Beauty without Chastity is like unto Mandrake Apples comely to the Eye but
Poisonous in taste, so Chastity is the Beauty of the Soul, and Purity of Life,
which despises the corrupt pleasures of the Flesh, and is ononly po^ed of
those who keep their Bodies clean and undefiled, which consists either in
sincere Virginity, or faithful Matrimony; But Chastity is most cospicious when
surrounded with dangers, and then deservedly lays claim to the most chaste and
pure joys of a happy Eternity.

But I proceed to the Story.

AT Tours (chief City of Touraine, a Province which is said to be the Garden of
France, seated on the Loire,) lived Mounsieur de Cadez, a private Gentleman,
who by his Wife had one only Daughter, by name Christiana, whom Heaven had
blessed with so vast a share of Beauty, that she was the admiration and discourse
not only of her Native City, but likewise of the Court, and often solicited by
the King (with the promises and certainty of great Wealth and Dignities) to be
the pleasure of his Bed, but the no less Virtuous than Beauteous Christiana,
esteeming the honor of her Chastity, far above the Dignities of an Empire,
renounced to purchase such shadows of Glory with the Pollution of her Soul,
whose Virtue she knew would Crown her, not only with Honors here, but
Immortallity hereafter, with these virtuous meditations her purer Soul pierced
Heaven, and there took prospect of those far greater dignities which would
reward her Chastity. Long had this Family of Mounsieur de Cadez lived at Tours
in the favor and respect of all Men, blessed with his virtuous, and chaste
Christiana whose Beauty and Virtue, (it being rumored, how she had refused the
Embraces of the King,) drew after her many adorers who both by plain addres^es
and subtility, vainly endeavored to win her, some to their lawful bed, some to
their lewder Arms. At length in the Reign of King Charles the 9 th. Anno D^m.
1562. The Persecution being sore in Tours, De Boi the Master of a French Ship
induced more by his Lust to Christiana than his love to the Unhappy Family of
De Cadez, promised to set them safe on the English shore, with some others who
fled from the rage of the Persecutors. De Cadez and his Wife kindly accepting
so vast a favor, which should protect them from the hand of the devouring
Tyrants, took with them some of their lighter possessions, their Gold and
Silver Plate, bequeathing the rest to the said Mounsieur de Boi, to whose mercy
they owed both their Estate and Lives, and embarked that evening. De Boi
(whose Lust admitted of no Bounds) when he had sailed 50 Leagues from shore,
was not able longer to contain, but thus addressed himself; Madam, to me you owe
this great Protection from the Sword and Fire, thus far my Mercy has secured
your Parents, all this I did not for the hope of gain, 'twas you fair Lady did
induce me to it, your Eyes with mighty Charms did plead so strongly, I could
not but be merciful. Sir replies the modest Christiana My Parents and my self,
still own these Favors, a grateful Spirit cannot soon forget such mighty
Obligations, and doubtless well pleased, Heawill reward that Charitable Virtue.
Alas fair Lady! (returns De Boi,) leave not so small a debt for Heaven to pay,
since you can fully make me satisfaction, let me embrace the body I protected,
and bless your Worshipper with happiness. Christiana perceiving his passion,
and that her refusing his Lustful motions, might endanger the Liberty of her
Parents, begged of him to grant her one hours consideration, and she would
prepare her self for his embraces. He transported with this answer, believing
it to be no other than real, admitted her the time. Christiana whose (Chastity
could not digest so base and dishonorable an Action, yet tenderly affecting
the safety of her Parents, whom she must either expose to his Mercy, or admit
of his lewdness,) knew not what to do in this her greatest extremity; therefore
consulting with her Father, was advised according to her wish, rather to suffer
Death than defame her Honor. Christiana Triumphed, now since her Parents could
without much Reluctance, choose to see her dye a Martyr for her Chastity,
rather than live with Infamy and dishonor to the Name and Family of De Cadez;
therefore recommending her self to the Diviner powers, committed her body to
the mercy of the Seas, without the hopes of Life, but we see despair is some
time the ground of hope: as when the darkness of the night is thickest, then
the morning begins to dawn, thus the extremity of Christiana's Misery was at
the height when she had the prospect of some relief, for Codrinus a Noble Man
of England, who then Rode Vice Admiral of the British Seas, perceiving at some
small distance, a Woman struggling with the Waves, compassionately received her
into his ship, and upon her Information of the Villainous design, which forced
her to prefer death before life with defilement, he sailed up to De Boi's
Vessel, demanding Mounsieur De Cadez and his Wife, and the others which fled
from the Persecution bound for England. De Boi whose Conscience accused him,
knowing Codrinus to be the British Vice Admiral, a Soldier of an undaunted
Spirit, and a singular Respecter of honorable Actions, without disputing the
Case delivered them, whom Codrinus first received, and then with two
broadsides, sufficiently corrected the insolence of De Boi, and so saild
forward for England. This deed being of so generous a Nature, obliged them all
to admire Codrinus, and especially Christiana who with her all conquering
Charms, had wounded the Vice*Admiral there, where the searching Cannon never
had found a passage. He gazed with admiration on her Beauty, and though her
misery had reduced her to a Poverty, yet he knew not how to resist the powerful
Charms of Love, In conclusion, he addressed himself to the beauteous Virgin, who
being equally affected wish his Heroic Actions, not byast by Interest, and
well pleased with his sweetness and fluency of language, the excellency of his
Courteous and affable Demeanor, admitted an easy Victory upon honorable
Terms. Codrinus (being now arrived at Court, as happy, as so short a time could
make him,) made great preparation for his nuptial solemnities, the Consummation
of their bliss. The appointed day being come, and dinner ended, the Wine flowed
merrily round: in the h^ight of their Mirth, Christiana's remarkable passages
of her Life, and the wonderful Vindication of her Honor, being the general
discourse of the Table, my Lord Sebastian after the retirement of Christiana
told Codrinus, he would engage a 100. Pound, that she would admit him into her
bed that evening, and that he would enjoy those pleasures which he had reserved
for his own Appetite. The Vice Admiral who was willing rather to improve Mi^th
than disturb the Company, merrily accepted of the Terms propounded. No sooner
had Christiana entered her Bridal Bed, expecting Codrinus the blessing of her
Arms, but Sebastian without attendants, came into the Chamber, and undressing
himself, so surpised Christiana that she shriekt out, asking him the reason of
his rudeness, he answered, what mean you Madam, how am I rude, do you not know
your Lord, Christiana who was certain it was not the Vice Admiral, both by his
shape and voice, cried out a Rape, Murder, a Rape, at which Codrinus and the
Company, which were at the door ready, burst in, seeming very much incensed
with Sebastian, and threatening to chastise his Insolence, dismissed him, who
pleaded a mistake, and that he thought his Wife now reposed in that Chamber (as
formerly she had done,) which Codrinus acknowledged to be the truth. Next day
the Vice Admiral went to demand the 100 l. forfeited by my Lord Sebastian.
Sebastian readily confessed it due, and wil'd his Servant to pay it to Codrinus,
in the mean time his merry humor was turned into a real Lust, and he took this
Opportunity of soliciting the Lady, who was still in her honor, as
invulnerable as ever, therefore finding his attempts in vain, returned to the
Vice Admiral, who after the receipt of the Money, not willing to carry it off,
presented it to Sebastians Lady, Sebastian thankful for the favor, loaded the
Vice Admiral, with too much Wine, and that evening, in disguise, attempted once
more to win the chaste Christiana but was by her Steward (who found him in a
private Room, next the Ladies Bed Chamber) suspected for some Robber, and there
slain. The Excess of Wine which Codrinus drank, cast him into a fever, of
which he died, and Christiana whose honorable Name, had travaild to the utmost
Coasts of Fame, was afterward married to the Duke of Guise, with whom she
lived long and happily.

It Is said of Eve, that her greatest misery on Earth, was that she had too
lustfully affected the forbidden fruit, when only charmed with an exterior
beauty, the Virtuous Christiana considering this mighty truth, would not admit
of the Serpents various temptations to taste the forbidden Pleasures, though
fairly gilded with the outward gaudiness of Imperial Dignities; She considered
that her Lust might by chance make her seem great upon Earth, but was certain
that her Chastity mould entitle her to Honor amongst the Angels in Heaven.
HIST. II. Of Samina.
Romindus (after a close Siege) having taken the Castle of N --, attempted a
Rape upon the Lady Samina, but she is rescued by the Lord Arminius, who is
afterward esp^used to her. Romindus in another attempt fires the House where
the Lady Samina lay, by which means conveying himself into her Chamber, he
would have defiled her: but she to preserve her Chastity, stabs her self with
his Dagger: He finding himself defeated, murdered himself by her side.

IN the time of the late Rebellion, Romindus (for under that Name I shall
disguise him) who was one of the chief Agitators of the unhappy Civil Wars,
laid close Siege to the Castle of N --, whose Noble Lord and Governor (Earl
Lucius) has by his Loyalty and Valor left his Name firm in the Records of
Glory. Romindus (whose factious, base, and treacherous spirit rendered him
odious to the Family of Lucius) inspired with a particular malice, upon his
Daughter Samina's slighting him, resolved (if possible) to make the Castle
their Funeral Pile, and Samina's blood a Sacrifice to his Revenge, since he
could not violate her Honor, that Guardian Angel of her Chastity. Therefore
with a strong Power, after the effusion of much blood, ( Lucius and his small
Army being toiled in defense) he entered the Castle, took Lucius and his Lady
Prisoners, and searching for Samina, found her at her Devotions in her Closet;
and now imagining that to save her Parents from the Sword, the Castle from
Flames, and her self from certain Death, she would prostitute her Honor to his
Lust, with a smooth speech he a^taqu'd her in this manner: Why are you so
unkind, fair Lady, cruel to me, your Parents, and your self? You that have
Charms enough to soften Rocks, why (Madam) are you so obdurate? Say not
hereafter, that I am bloody; it is for You this heap of dead have perished, for
You such Seas of blood do flow on every side; 'twas You that raised these
storms within me, and Your Beauty drew the hot-brained Soldier on; Your Beauty
set an edge to every Sword. Oh powerful Woman! O wonder-working Charms! Yet
see, fair Lady, low as your feet the Conqueror lies down. I sheath my satiated
Sword; the angered God of War I banish hence; I am all soft as Love; Oh then be
kind. Samina (whose Devotion he interrupted) started up from her knees on a
sudden, and with an austere countenance said, Hence thou Curse of Nature, thy
Lust is hotter than the flames of Hell that wait thee. Say thou so, my
scornful Lady? does the aspect of grim Death seem no more terrible than so?
Madam, your Fathers blood perhaps may soften you; your Mother too shall die;
the Infants who are Innocent shall not escape my Sword; and You, obdurate Lady,
who affect such a Religious Pride, shall first submit to my Embraces, and then
shall be a common Strumpet to my Soldiers. But still your Beauty moves me to
compassion: If you will save your life, your Parents, and the Infants, it is in
your power: speak quickly Madam. Yes (replies she) I will speak quickly, for
c^nsiderati^n cannot move Samina swerve from the Rules of Virtue. If they must
perish, it is not in my power to purchase their ransom: You ask too large a
price: I cannot give my Honor for their Lives; but yet be merciful. Yes Lady,
since you waken my revenge, I Will show you mercy presently; and drawing his
Sword in a great fury, went down, designing first to present her with her
Fathers ^ead, and by degrees of cruelty win her to his arms. But see the
interposing Providence of Heaven which protected them in the extremity of
danger; for e're he could accomplish his design, the Kings Party, under the
Command of my Lord Arminius, (whom the Earl had sent for) came in to their aid,
and with such a violent onset assaulted the scattered Army of Romindus, that he
overthrew them in an instant, destroying 1300, and putting the rest to flight,
among which Romindus escaped. My Lord Arminius was with wonderful joy received
by the Earl, who informing him of the Treachery and Lust of Romindus, (from
whose Sword he had protected him) added, that his Estate and Life were at his
Lordships service. Arminius, who had long respected Samina, found his desire
now more eager than ever, and therefore took this opportunity of urging his
Love to her, which Samina and her Parents out of gratitude soon and thankfully
accepted of. The Earl, whose Estate was larger than my Lords, blessed him with a
considerable Dowry with her, and the Nuptials were solemnized out of hand. The
Charms of this chaste and beautiful Samina still drew after her many Admirers,
whose Lust could not admit of limitation, though they knew her fixed, like
Heaven, above the reach of the Damned, the Gulf of Marriage being betwixt
them; but with the same constancy, the same loyalty to her Honor, renounced
them all with scorn and detestation. After the happy Restoration of His
Majesty, Romindus (who had hid himself from the stroke of Justice) despairing
of mercy from his too much injured Monarch, and wanting a supply of moneys to
maintain him in his concealment, knew not what course to take, his Life and
Conscience being equally burthensom. Long he waver'd, doubting what to do, till
at length, by the suggestion of the Devil, his malice to Arminius who defeated
him, and his equal Lust and Envy to Samina, whose Charms had tempted and
deluded him, he resolved to enjoy her yet, to be revenged and die; but fearing
the Courage of my Lord Arminius, in whose Arms she lived secure, he employed a
servant with a counterfeit Letter to my Lord, to acquaint him that his Father
was near the point of Death, anh required him to attend him that evening, as he
valued his Blessing. The Earl surprised at the News, little suspected the
villainous design of Romindus, neither did he believe the message to be other
than real, therefore took Horse with some few Servants, and with all speed
posted away to Court. Romindus (then but one mile distant from the Abbey where
Samina was left to the charge of some Gentlemen) soon received the news of my
Lords departure for Court, and in the dusk of the evening set ^ire to the outer
Buildings and Stables, which so surpised the Family, that all regardless of
their Lady, ran out to secure what they might, and defend the Abbey from the
flames; but, alas! the hottest fire was within, for his design working to his
will, he watched this opportunity of taking possession of Samina in the Abbey,
and securing the doors after him, he applied himself to the Lady; at the
appearance of whom she swooned away, but in a small time recovered, and said Oh
bloody Villain! is there no limit to your Lust and Treachery? -- No talking*
Madam, (says Romindus) your Charms which softened me before, made me delay, and
ru^n'd me; but now they shall not interrupt me. Madam, I come o'r-gorg'd with
Fury and Revenge; be patient, for you shall submit: Your Beauty shall plead no
more; Rapine and Slaughter both attend. And thus saying, drew a Dagger. The
Lady shrieking, was overheard by some of her Servants, who making up toward
the door, found it shut, and thought that she might have shut it to secure her
self. The Fire being now extreme violent, gave them reason to fear the ruin of
the Abbey, which made them all very busy and laborious to extinguish it, which
could not be done without much noise and clamor. This pleased Romindus well*
for their tumult drowned the cries of Samina, whom he had wounded in several
places, (though not mortally) imagining that the sense of torture might move
her to admit of his Embraces; but all was without effect, for with how much the
greater violence and severity he used her, with so much the greater constancy
and chastity of spirit she renounced him. After a great reluctance, recovering
a Dagger from his hand, she said, You base and ignominious wretch, do think
that Heaven cannot free me from thy lewd Embraces? Yes; thus* thus (stabbing
her self) I set my self at liberty* My Honor far outweighs my Life, and my
blood shall cool the fire that burns within thee: and thus speaking died. When
Romindus had seen the firmness and Chastity of Samina, he turned his Revenge
upon himself and with the same Dagger stabbed himself, where he was found after
the extinction of the fire, with so much life remaining in him as to satisfy
the spectators with a relation of this Tragical History and then expired,
breathing out his polluted Soul by the side of the chaste and beauteous Samina,
who is left upon Record to future Ages, as an eminent and virtuous defender of
her Honor.

Thus the Virtue of Samina was most conspicuous and resplendant in her greatest
extremity, who rather chose the chaste Embraces of a cold Grave, than the hot
polluted Arms of lustful Romindus. In honor of whom an English Poet thus
writes: When sinful Man from Paradise was driven,
The Almighty sent his Angel down from Heaven,
To guard the Tree of Life with Sword of Flame,
Against all who thither on Presumption came.
But Fair Samina (whose forbidden Tree
Could not by Lustful Man defiled be)
Had no such flaming Sword sent down from Heaven
To guard her, when into Temptation driven;
Her Virtue and her Honor were more great,
Which rather than foul Lust should separate,
In Death courageously sh'outbrav'd her Fate:
For when the Tempter fiercely did pursue,
She stabbed her tender Breast, and upwards flew,
To those unspotted Virgin Spirits above,
Who live in a most chaste refined Love.


HIST: III: The Virtuous Imbrigis:
The Chaste Imbrigis is contracted to Sueno, but by the compulsion of her Father
is married to Helga, a rich old man. The Baron of Fobroch afterward falls in
love with her, and bribes her Husband that he might make an attempt upon her
Chastity. Imbrigis kills the Baron who went about to ravish her, and stabs her
self: She recovers, and marries Sueno after the Death of her Husband.

IN the Reign of Christiern the fourth, King of Denmark, lived in Copenhagen,
chief City of that Kingdom, seated in the Isle of Zealand, and usual residence
of its Kings, a rich old Burgher, who had two Daughters, the elder named Helda,
the younger Imbrigis, both very beautiful Ladies, though of so different
inclinations, that it seemed a Prodigy for one Womb to produce such different
fruits. Helda was as lustful as she was fair, placing her greatest pleasure
abroad and in company: Imbrigis as chaste as beautiful, and most delighted at
home in the contemplation of Virtue, and enjoyment of a solitary retirement.

These two different Beauties being ripe for Marriage, were both severally
courted; but the excellent Beauty and Virtues of Imbrigis had more attractions
than the Face and Riches of Helda; however the Father resolved to marry the
Elder first, and accordingly disposed of her to Ericus, a Gentleman of great
Estate, who had some little kindness for Helda, but more for her Dower; and she
more regard to his rich Possessions and Lordships, than his Person: however the
Match was concluded, and the Marriage consummated; but true love appeared not
at this Hymen, neither would the Blessing of Heaven attend upon such Marriages:
they both lived together in Adultery, spending the remainder of their days in
Discord and Infamy.

And now the old Burgher having disposed of his eldest and most beloved
Daughter, he began to think of a match for the youngest, in which he resolved
to consult more his own judgment and convenience, than his Daughters affection
and liking. He had bestowed so large a Portion on his beloved Helda, that he
much straightened the Fortune of Imbrigis, and could not expect any great and
rich Husband for her, unless such a one should be extraordinarily smitten with
Love, or some great disparity in their years; however the Virtues and excellent
Graces of Imbrigis had rendered her desirable to several persons of a suitable
condition, but none were so agreeable to the humor of the old Burgher as to
obtain his approbation, till Fortune and blind Love brought one as unsuitable
to the Youth of the Daughter, as he was acceptable to the covetous mind of the
Father.

An ancient grave Doctor named Helga, a Widower, and one of the Heads of the
College of Sora in that Island, being sent by the University to Court, the
Wheel of his Coach broke as he passed by the door of the old Burgher, who
(being in his Porch) invited the Doctor into his house whilst the Coach was
making fit, which Helga readily accepted, and there first saw the lovely and
virtuous Imbrigis, whose Wit and Beauty had such powerful Charms over him, that
notwithstanding the Snow which covered his head, and the chilness of sixty
Winters that had benumbed his flesh, he found the Ice which the Frost of Age
had congealed about his heart begin to melt, and all the fiery passions of a
youthful Lover play in his breast, which he strove to lay with Stoical Maxims
and prudent Morals; but all proved weak and defenseless against the more
powerful Artillery of Love; he finds his youthful thoughts to spring up anew,
and the Image of the beautiful and modest Imbrigis never from his sight, which
makes him renew his visits, till by daily converse his f^ames increasing, he
was forced to declare to her Father his passion, and the desire he has of
making her his Wife, who readily embraced his motion, and commanded his
Daughter to entertain him as her Lover.

And now this grave Doctor is become a Child again, ridiculously acting over at
threescore all the follies of a youthful Lover: He makes court to this young
Virgin of nineteen, plays with her Hands, looks old Babies in her Eyes,
discourses to her of Love, Fire, and Flame, and makes Verses and Sonnets in
praise of her Wit and Beauty. But whilst he thus plays the Lover and Gallant,
she seems to act the Stoic and Philosopher, by representing to him the evil
effects which such unequal Marriages might produce, tells him his flame will
soon vanish and decay, and that his Love is but an ignis fatuus, a wandering and
erroneous fire, that will lead him at last into a thousand inconveniences, and
precipitate him into the Pit of Jealousy; that though she should be never so
vigilant and circumspect over her actions, his Age and her Youth would give
grounds for the world to asperse her Honor, though never so white and
innocent; that she could not have any passion for him, and that without Love
Marriage would be a double Yoke and intolerable Burden. But Helga was deaf to
these speeches, to the great grief of the modest and virtuous Imbrigis, who had
a God to wrestle with that made fools of wise men, and Children of
Philosophers; a God that had enkindled a more bright and Celestial flame in
her breast, than in the heart of the grave Doctor, which made his Deformity
apparent, and the Commands of her Father more terrible.

Amongst the many Conquests which her Beauty and Virtue had obtained, and that
seemed to stand first in her esteem and favor of the number of those who made
their Addresses and Courtship to her, was Sueno, a young Gentleman of a comely
Personage, and nobly descended, though a younger Brother, and of mean Fortune,
(being at that time an Ensign in the Castle of Cronnembergh) yet in regard of
the constant and sincere love he bore to the chaste and virtuous Imbrigis, had
the happiness to be at last blessed with a reciprocal and mutual affection from
her, and so far prevailed upon her as to gain her consent to the uniting of
their hearts in sacred Matrimony so soon as her Fathers approbation should be
obtained. But they both solicited the old Burgher in vain, for he would by no
means hear the suit of a needy Soldier, but more eagerly pressed forward the
match with old Helga his Rival, whom Fortune and blind Love had now brought to
interrupt his Amors. All this the prudent Imbrigis was sensible of, neither
was she ignorant of the covetous inclinations of her Father; she therefore
discreetly began to lessen the hopes of Sueno, doubting her Duty and Obedience
must take place of Love, for she was informed by her Father that he had
concluded the match with Helga, that her Portion and Jointure was settled, and
the day prefixed for the solemnization of their Nuptials, who commanded her to
prepare for the Wedding. However she was resolved first to take her farewell
and last meeting of her beloved Sueno, which she performed the night before her
Marriage. What passed betwixt these two Lovers was very moving and tender, and
poor Sueno received her last farewell with as great emotion of Spirit as a
condemned Criminal his Sentence of Death; however he was persuaded to preserve
that Life which was not unpleasing to her.

After the celebration of their Nuptials, Helga returns to Sora, and carries
with him his beautiful and chaste Wife, who would have been prized as a greater
Treasure by any other person than the covetous Miser, whose short-lived flame
was too violent to continue: His Age at length declares him impotent, yet the
virtuous Imbrigis was most delighted when she could contrive any thing to the
content and pleasure of her Husband, and declared she should enjoy more
satisfaction with him (since they were espoused) at a slender entertainment,
than to swim in the most luxurious Plenty of a Seraglio.

And now I shall proceed to show you the many trials and temptations she
resisted by her Heroic actions, which made bright her Virtues, and illuminated
her Glory.

Her former Lover Sueno (by the death of his elder Brother) is become Lord of a
plentiful Estate at Helsemore, where he now resides, refusing many rich Matches
and beautiful Ladies, whose Charms could not deface the Image he bore in his
mind of the virtuous and chaste Imbrigis, whom he esteemed as a Jewel of greater
worth than all his Lands and rich Possessions. And now he rides over to Sora,
to enjoy a sight of this beautiful Image which so frequently represented it
self before him, and to inform her both of his good fortune, and firm
resolution of living only for her, still hoping that the declining Winter of
Age will at last give place to the spring of Youth, and that he shall be made
happy in the possession of his Love: But his journey was in vain, for all his
Artifices and Stratagems to speak with his beloved Imbrigis were defeated; she
would neither be seen nor spoke to by him, as doubting that the former sparks
of her affection might re-kindle at his sight. He returned therefore to
Helsemore, but before his departure made shift to get this following Letter
conveyed into her hands.

Sueno, to Imbrigis.
THough I die by your cruelty, Divine Imbrigis, I cannot but admire your
Virtue: and whilst I blame your severity, I praise your prudence and caution;
but methinks the constancy and purity of my affection might have pleaded in my
behalf, and have induced you to have permitted a visit without believing it
criminal; however, since it is your pleasure that I leave Sora without seeing
you, my presence shall no longer disturb your repose. Remember me then no more,
but let me be placed among the Dead in Oblivion. Let the remembrance of this
Letter be raced out of your mind, if it be any trouble to you, though indicted
by the greatest passion, and most pure and constant affection; for since your
severity has banished me your heart and memory, it shall also banish me the
World and Life, which is the firm resolution of your Faithful

Sueno.


This passionate Letter mollified the heart of Imbrigis, and tears melted in
her eyes, when considering her severity had brought him into despair, and might
endanger his life, if not timely remedied; she resolved to send him an Answer
to his Letter, which she thought she might do without any breach of conjugal
Faith, or transcurring the bounds limited to Wedlock, and accordingly returned
this following Reply.

Imbrigis, to Sueno.
YOU ought not, Sueno, so much to admire, as approve my severity, since it is
only the effect of Virtue. Did I not know the purity of your affection, I
should not have returned you an Answer; but since the brightness of your flame
has yielded a light whereby I have read the integrity of your heart* I will
believe favorably of the visit you intended me, and that you meant nothing but
what was just and honorable. But I entreat you not to call my scrupulous
Virtue, Cruelty, and my Denial, Tyranny; for could I have been either Cruel or
Tyrannous, I might have spoke to you, and seen you. No, Sueno, it is the too
great compassion I feel in my soul, and the too great mistrust I have of my
self, that makes me seem thus severe, and not any doubt of your Virtue. Return
therefore with more favorable thoughts, and with all those hopes that have
hitherto supported you, and believe that I wish you all the felicity the best
of your Friends can wish you; and know also, that I will not forget you, but
remember you as much as I can without rendering my self criminal; and believe
also, that your D^^^h would give as much trouble, as your Life gives content
and satisfaction to

Imbrigis.


Sueno having received this Answer, which gave ease to his troubled Spirits,
returned to Sora with some satisfaction, when contemplating and admiring the
Virtue of Imbrigis, some good genius inspired him with hopes, and assured him
he should one day be happy in the fruition of that Chaste and Virtuous Lady.

Imbrigis is well pleased with the departure of her beloved Sueno, as hoping
now to enjoy an undisturbed repose; But, alas! her hopes are vain, she must yet
undergo a harder task, her Chastity must yet shine brighter* by resisting the
assaults and batteries made upon her Virtue; she has hitherto only encountered
with a virtuous and chaste Love in Sueno, who is rather a Son of Urania, than
Venus: but now she will be exposed to the fury of one sullied with impurity.

The Baron of Fobrock, who lived in a very stately Palace not far distant from
Sora, (a person very eminent at Court, and in great favor with the King,)
having several times seen the virtuous Imbrigis at Church, was more attentive
upon her Beauty, than his Devotions, the splendour and beams of which had heated
his Breast with a lustful and impure fire.

Greatness begets respect, and commands an entrance into almost all places; the
doors of Helga, which were shut to almost all the world, were opened to
Fobroch, and Helga thought himself honored by the visits of the Baron, whom he
entertains with freedom and joy, hoping by the favor and friendship of this
Nobleman and Courtier to obtain great advancement. It was not long e're the
lustful Baron acquainted the cha^t and virtuous Imrigis with his Love, and made
many rich Presents to her, not doubting but she would surrender her heart upon
the first summons; he believed the Beauty of Imbrigis, and the Age and
Covetousness of Helga, would prove Traitors within doors, and easily give him
admittance into the Fort and Heart of his Mistress; that the Guards of Duty and
Honor were weak against such potent Adversaries, and where Love was not
Commander, he might have an easy Victory. But he was much surpised to meet
with such stout resistance from the virtuous Imbrigis, who received his
Courtships and Addresses with disdain, refused his Presents, and avoided his
Company as a Pestilence, however he takes a review of this impregnable Fort,
but finds no other access than by the covetous and sordid humor of Helga: He
therefore feeds him with hopes of great Preferment, and finding him a great
lover of Play, (whilst on the winning side) he designedly, whenever he came to
visit Helga, lost ten or twenty Crown-pieces of Gold, which so much rejoiced
the heart of the old man, that the sight of this Lord was as desirable to him
as an Angel, and Imbrigis solicited him in vain not to entertain the Baron so
often, entreating him to let her retire to her Fathers, or some other place in
the Country, whilst the Baron continued in those parts, lest his frequent
visits might blemish her Honor, and blast her Reputation: But perceiving him
instead of discouraging her new Lover, give him fresh opportunities to court
her under the color of Play, Imbrigis was at last forced to discover to him
the Barons dishonorable intentions, and sedulous Courtships, that he was in
love with her, and had attempted her Love and Chastity. But the sweetness of
winning the Barons Gold took away the bitterness of Jealousy, And the virtuous
Imbrigis seeing that Helga knew not how to guard her Honor, was the more
circumspect her self: She therefore (whenever Fobrock came to the house)
immediately locked her self up in her Chamber, or went to a Neighbors house,
and neither the entreaties of the Baron, or commands of her Husband, could
obtain her presence.

But the Baron finding the effects which Gold had over old Helga's heart, and
that 'twas rather his Wifes Chastity and Prudence than his Jealousy, put a
stop to, and obstructed his sight of that beautiful Object, he resolves to
bribe the covetous old man, and so purchase the dishonor of his Wife; in order
to which, he invites Helga over to his own Palace, and (his Lady being gone to
the Spaw in Germany for the recovering of her health) there they diverted
themselves with Tables as they used to do, when the Baron having one day drawn
aside this old Dotard from all Company, he carries him into a Chamber, where on
several Tables he had laid one by one 20000 pieces of Gold, most of them
Crown-pieces, and having fastened the door (...) him sit down before this Golden
Idol, (...) he knew (...) worshipped in his heart, and told him, That he might
by an easy Purchase, if he pleased, bec^me Master of all that Gold. Helga was
not backward to ^^quire which way? to which question the Baron (...), That he
must confess he was passionately in l^ve with his Wife, that he had courted and
solicited her (...) times, though without that success some young and br^sk^r
Gal^ant might probably be blessed with, and at an easier purchase than he could
expect; for he knew that a person who had seen the change and vicisitudes of
sixty Winters, could not always satisfy the craving desires of Youth; That he
would exchange all that Gold (a real substance) with him, for one nights
lodging with his Wife, which was no more than a transitory Pleasure, and pay
one moiety now down, (if he consented) and the other half when the business was
effected.

Helga (whose eyes were dazzled at the sight of this Golden Idol) after a short
pause made answer, That he had taken a fair (though unusual) course to obtain
his desires; for since the Wife, her Honor, and Chastity, is the Husbands own
and proper Goods, it was the better and more lawful way to have them by the
Husbands consent, than to purloin them by corrupting the Wife, which without
the Husbands knowledge was underhand dealing, and not lawfully purchased; that
he was sensible he had bid him fairly, and like a Chapman, and therefore he was
willing to accept his proffer, conditionally that he would keep it as a secret
not only from the world, but his Wife also, which if he observed, he would give
his cons^nt and assistance.

The Baron at the ending of his discourse embraced the old man, and promised to
perform the condition required, and the bargain being concluded, Helga returns
with 10000 Crowns, laughing at the folly of the prodigal Baron; he shows the
Gold to his Wife Imbrigis, as so much won at play, which she little thought to
be the purchase of her Honor and Chastity.

Within a few days Helga visits the Baron, where all things being in readiness,
as they before had contrived, late in the evening Imbrigis receives her
Husbands Ring with a message from him, that he was taken with a desperate fit
of sickness, and that she should by that Token know it was his desire to have
her come to him immediately in the Barons Coach, which he had sent for her:
Imbrigis concluded her Husband to be dying, and out of duty went with the
messenger in the Barons Coach, though not without some reluctance, as fearing
it might be some trick of the Barons, whose Palace she arrived at in the
evening, and was lighted up stairs by the Servants, then conducted into a very
stately Chamber richly adorned and sweetly perfumed, in which were several
Lights, and in the midst a rich embroidered ^ed, etc. The Servants withdraw,
and whilst she steps to the Bed to seek her Husband, supposing him sick and
laid there, she spies the Baron enter the Room, and shut the door fast. Then
'twas that the brave and heroic Imbrigis (finding her self betrayed, and the
Baron approaching toward her with eager steps and open arms) flew swiftly to
the window, and (to preserve her Honor and Chastity unblemished) violently
dashed her head against the glass, and had already got half of her body through
the breach, when the amazed Baron caught hold of her Garments, and pulled her
back, though not without her face being cut and battered by the glass, the
affright putting her in a trance, that she remained senseless, and as one dead,
in the arms of the vicious Baron, who having laid her on the ^ed, went to
bereave her of her Honor and Chastity; but the violence he used in the attempt
brought her to her self again, when beholding the rude approaches of the
lustful Baron, she shrieks out, and struggling with both her hands, one of
those Guardian Angels that attend on weak Innocence and a^^aulted Chastity,
guided her hand to a Dagger that hung at the side of the Ravi^her, with which
she fir^^ gave him a mortal wound and then lodged the fatal s^e^l in her own
chaste and virtuous Breast, to let out that blood she mistook to be polluted by
the Baron.

The ^oise they made in this bloody skirmish, and the fall of their wounded
bodies from the Bed, alarmed the Servants, who attending at the door, rush in,
and behold this fatal sight with amazement.

The Chyrurgions having dressed both their wounds, that of the Barons proved
mortal, and he died within three days full of penitence and trouble for the
evil he had caused to the chaste and virtuous Imbrigis: But Heaven had a greater
care of that brave Woman, the Dagger had not touched her Intellects, and she
recovered after some days. The Baron before he died acquitted Imbrigis of his
death before his Servants, and asked her pardon for the injury he had done her,
his Soul being now refined from that Lust which before had engendered about his
heart. He confessed likewise the business of Helga, who considering the shame and
ignominy his ill-made bargain had cast on his Honor and Reputation, took it so
to heart, that before Imbrigis could recover of her wounds he died, and left
her a rich Widow.

And now the hopes of the faithful Sueno revive, who had heard of the heroic
action of his adored Imbrigis; and at last Heaven took pity of his constant
sufferings, and rewarded his faithful Love; for after Imbrigis had paid what
was due to decency and the memory of her Husband, and remained ^welve months a
Widow, she was married to Sueno, both ^^ending their days in the fruition of
their chaste Loves* he blessed in a chaste and loyal Wife, she happy in a faithful
and loving Husband.

As the charming pleasures of Innocence and serenity of mind, are visible
inhabitants of th^se hearts consecrated to Virgin Chastity; so in respect of
its prevalency over the minds of its Votaries, it makes ripe^ age continue
incontaminate, and the Matrimonial liberty undefiled, as we have seen in the
precedent Example of the virtuous and constant Imbrigis. HIST. IV. Van Zwerts
and Marinda.
Jacob Van Zwerts, after many signal proofs of his Chastity, takes shipping for
Spain, but in his Voyage is taken Prisoner by the Turks, and sold to Ali
Pigget, a Turkish Merchant, whose Sister falling in love with Jacob, sollicits
him to Debauchery, and upon his refusal of her lewd Embraces, accuses him of a
Rape: Ali Pigget being sensible of her Treachery, first stabs her, then gives
Van Zwerts his liberty, who soon after his arrival at Spain is married to the
virtuous and beautiful Marinda, who by a notable Stratagem preserved her
Chastity.

NOt many years since at Rotterdam, a Port-Town in Holland, one of the United
Provinces belonging to the States, lived Jacob Van Zwerts, second Son to the
Here Van Zwerts, a very wealthy and creditable Merchant, of ancient and
reputable Extraction. Jacob Van Zwerts (whose Virtue and Chastity was as
remarkable as any left upon the Records of Time) being weary of the
Debaucheries of that City, to which he was often and frequently solicited by
some extravagant Youths of his former acquaintance, did by the next opportunity
resolve for Spain, whither he might retire with an intimate acquaintance of his
Fathers, and reap the peaceable enjoyment of himself and his Virtue. While his
Father was weighing the consequence of this design, the unpleasant News had
reached the ears of the roaring Debauchees his late Companions, who having let
loose the Reins of Sobriety and Virtue, had plunged themselves into the
greatest Exorbitancy, and therefore nothing could be more unwelcom than the
desertion of one of their beloved associates, on whom (as he was rich) they had
some flattering hopes of dependence, and therefore were resolved, if possible,
to convert him to themselves; to which end they sent for him in the names of
some later Friends, (of whom he was less shie) to drink with him at the
Sun-Tavern not far distant from his Fathers, not doubting thereby to prevent
his Voyage to Spain. Van Zwerts (according to their request) went to them,
where he found them caressing each one his Strumpet, and using even the most
immodest and lewdest actions. They observed Van Zwerts, that his eye was fixed,
and his countenance austere, as declaring the inward resentments of his mind;
yet however they presented him with one of the most beautiful of their Company;
but he declared his aversion to such lewdness, saying, Gentlemen, Have ye
neither sense of Honor, Virtue, nor Conscience? Think ye that Justice sleeps
for ever? No, Heaven will be speedily moved, lay all its Mercy down, take up
revenging Bolts of Thunder, and dash all such profligate offenders to
inevitable ruin: Why then -- But as he would have proceeded, they interrupted
him, and said, What, Jacob, always preaching! will you never give over canting?
Let dull Religious Fools, who never knew the sweets of stolen pleasures, be
tied to the strict Rules of Virtue; but Love's a roving Libertine, scales the
weak Battlements which Virtue raises, and tramples upon Honor, to obtain a
place safe in the arms of Beauty. Alas! thou art lost, thou huntest after
shadows, and followest imaginary Heavens, while we have ours in possession.
It Is ill trusting to Castles in the Air, or, like Astrologers, have twelve
Houses they know not where, yet never a one for themselves to live in. No, it is
we alone enjoy Honor, Beauty, Happiness, and Heaven on Earth. To which Jacob
replied, O profane wretches! have you no remorse of conscience? what means --
But they interrupting him, said, Go preach conscience to the Spaniard; 't might
perhaps make him less proud, though no ways abate his amorous inclinations, for
he would love his Wench in spite of Fate, or twenty Consciences; and so dismissed
him.

Van Zwerts remained unshaken in his resolutions, and hastening his Voyage,
embarked the night following, but e're he had reached the Coasts of Spain, he
was taken by a Turkish Pirate, (whose Power they were not able to resist) and
straightway conveyed to Turkey, and (as Providence had appointed) sold Slave to
Ali Pigget, a Turkish Merchant, formerly a correspondent of his Fathers, which
Ali Pigget by questioning him concerning his Country, Education, and
Extraction, found out, but did not discover it to Van Zwerts, only pretending
civility on the account of his Learning, (for he was a good Linguist, and an
excellent Penman and Accomptant) he employed him as Steward of his house. Ali
Pigget's eye was always severe and strict over Van Zwerts and his own Sister,
(whose modesty he had reason to suspect) judging that she who had formerly so
little respect to her Honor as to admit of the lewd embraces of a common
Slave, would not be backward in promoting her lustful inclinations to such a
qualified person as Van Zwerts; neither was his suspicion or jealousy in vain,
for she omitted no opportunity of spreading her Charms to catch the heart of
Van Zwerts, neither was she ashamed to tell him many times, that he was a
person of the most winning and obliging good nature, that he had fired her
heart, and she should never know any greater happiness than to be blessed in his
Embraces. Thus she often assaulted him, but found her amorous passion still
defeated by the Chastity of the virtuous Van Zwerts; yet she resolved with all
the power and Charms imaginable, and the strongest temptations of Lust, once
more to besiege his Virtue, which she did in this manner.

Ali Pigget being to ride out of Town some miles distant, about his
Merchandise, she thought it her best and securest time to put in practice her
unchaste design. Accordingly upon the departure of Ali Pigget she ordered Van
Zwerts to wait on her at her Chamber within the space of half an hour at
farthest: Van Zwerts (whose Honor was his guard) suspected not the lewd
intentions of this Lady, but went into her Chamber, where finding her in bed,
began to retire, when she called to him as to speak with him, and laying hold
on his hand, said sighing, Jacob, have thou no sense nor compassion for a poor
suffering Lover? must I for ever burn in the^e hot flames, and will you never
yield to cool my passions? Fie! leave these youthful blushes, and come into thy
Lovers arms. -- Not for ten thousand worlds, replied Van Zwerts; and so
striving to withdraw his hand, she turned her Lust to Revenge, crying out, A
Rape! A Rape! Ali Pigget suspected her design, and therefore returned
immediately after his departure, and concealed himself in the next Appartment
to the Chamber they were in, he heard her lustful Courtship, and his chaste
Answer, and upon her crying out went in, and with his Sword stabbed her in that
Bed which she designed for the consummation of her Lust; and as a reward for
Van Zwerts's Fidelity and Chas^ity, bad him ask any thing in his power, it
should be granted him.

Jacob, who still longed to see Spain, begged (since his bounty did extend so
far) that he would give him his liberty, and fit him for that Voyage. Ali
Pigget (to whom Jacob's Father had sent 2000 Cobs for his Ransom) gave him his
Liberty with his Ransom. Van Zwerts taking shipping, in a short time arrived at
Spain, where he had not long resided e're he found his breast heated with Love,
and his inclinations and affections tend toward the virtuous and fair Marinda,
whose unblemished Chastity in Spain was most conspicuous, and spread far on the
wings of Fame. She was indeed the Mirror of her Age, and had as large a share
of Beauty as any in that Country could boast of, which probably might occasion
her more temptations to try her Chastity, than others who were less beautiful;
for in the Civil Wars, when Rapine was fierce and prevalent, and Virgins knew
not by what means to resist or reclaim the extravagances of enraged Soldiers,
she by a notable Stratagem (though very irksom to her self) preserved her
Chastity, which she effected in this manner: Under her Armpits she placed raw
Bief, and retained it there till by the heat of her body it became so loathsome
that none could endure to come within her sight, much less endure her Embraces.
The relation of this, and the like Triumphs of her Chastity, well pleased Van
Zwerts, who after the formalities of Courtship (which he was well versed in)
obtained her consent, and was espoused to her, returning shortly after to his
Fathers house in Rotterdam, who in a short time after his Sons return died, and
left him Master of a plentiful Estate, upon which this chaste Couple lived many
years happily. Such are the rewards of Heav^n here frequently to them who
become strict Votaries of Chastity and Virtue.

Thus we have seen in diverse Examples the eminent Rewards of Chastity, by the
Mercy and Providence that attends upon Conjugal Faith, and Matrimonial Loyalty:
for as Chast^ty, Friendship, and the other branches of a virtuous Life, do
carry some part of their reward in the pleasure of their Performances, so
Constancy and Perseverance in the same crowns our Fidelity with the
consummation of a perfect and glorious Felicity. FINIS.
Advertisement of some Books lately printed for and sold by Benjamin Crayle, at
the Lamb in Fleet Street next White-Fryers-gate.
1. THe Beauty of Holiness, written by the Author of the Whole Duty of Man,
etc. to which is added Holy Devotions on several Occasions, fitted to the main
Uses of a Christian Life. The fourth Impression, in Octavo.

2. The Christians Companion, or a Guide to the Holy Scriptures, discovering
the hidden Treasures contained in the New Testament, and explaining the
difficult and intricate Texts throughout every Chapter: together with
Family-Devotions. By a Reverend Divine of the Church of England, in Octavo.

3. The Queens Closet opened, comprehending several Hundreds of Experienced
Receipts, and Incomparable Secrets in Physic, Chyrurgery, Preserving, Cookery,
etc. which were presented to the Queen by the most eminent Doctors in Physic,
Chyrurgions, Oculists, and diverse Persons of Honor, whose Names are fixed to
their several Receipts. The last Edition corrected and enlarged with many new
and late Additions, 120.

4. The Glory of God's Revenge against the Bloody and Detestable Sins of
Murder and Adultery, expressed in Thirty modern Tragica^ Histories. To which
are annexed, the Triumphs of Friendship and Chastity, in some illustrious
Examples. By Tho. Wright, M. A.

5. Delightful and Ingenious Novels, being choice and excellent Stories of
Amors Tragica^ and Comical, lately related by the most refined Wits, with
Interludes between each Novel Price bound 1 s.

6. Cocker's Morals, or The Muses Spring-Ga^^den, adorned with many sententious
Disticks an^ Poems, in Alphabetical Order, for the Use o^ Writing-Schools, etc.
4to.


