The Rebellious City Destroyed.

Being an Anniversary SERMON In Memory of the Dreadful Fire OF LONDON, On the
Second Day of September, 1666.

Preached At St. Olave's Hart-Street, London, September the Second, 1682.

By WILLIAM WRAY, M. A. Chaplain to the Right Honorable John Lord Berkley,
Baron of Stratton.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1682.

A SERMON Preached September 2. 1682.
EZRA IV. 15. -- So shall thou find in the Book of the Records, and know that
this City is a Rebellious City, and hurtful unto Kings and Provinces, and that
they have moved Sedition within the same of old time: for which cause was this
City destroyed.
THE Pious design of your present Meeting is, to testify unto God and the
World, what Humiliation, his severe Judgment upon this City (yet fresh in your
Thoughts, and yet felt in many of your Fortunes) has begot in you. That it ill
behooves you now to dissemble, or proudly to insist upon Self-justification.
God has signally manifested his Displeasure: and does not use to scatter such
Plagues as these at random, nor suffer his Vengeance to fall so heavy and
Epidemically, but where he has been out of measure provoked. Indeed private
Calamities often light upon particular Men for other Reasons; and are not
always intended for the Punishment of Sin, neither are they infallible Symptoms
of the Wrath of God against those that are thus visited. But where a City, a
Metropolis, and in that a whole Nation is concerned, and where the Judgment is
so dreadfully remarkable, so full of Terror and Amazement as that of this Day;
we must not think that Providence plays at small-games, and only recreates it
self with these sportive Tragedies, designing nothing worse than its own
Diversion: No, God does not use so seriously to Trifle, nor Jest with Nations
when he destroys them. Such signal Judgments are ev^dent Signs that he is
solemnly Angry and in good earnest. That we do but fondly delude our own
Consciences, and aggravate the Provocation, by wipeing our Mouths and pleading
Innocence. This is plainly to give his Vengeance the Lie, and to contradict
that woeful Truth, which he knows better than our selves. It Is as vain to
dissemble our Guilt to the World also. For God has made us Notorious to all
that are round about us: and they must be very dull and inadvertent, that do
not observe our Shame, with a very distinct and Judicious Notice; and the City
in Flames, has Beacon'd and Blazed it abroad to the whole World. And how shall
we Justify our selves before Men, whom God has so publicly and formally
Condemned! If we say that we have no Sin, they may justly alledg his Judgments
to our Faces, that there is no Truth in us: an Argument of more undoubted
Credit, than any that we can Forge in our own Defense; for the Matter is come
to this Issue, whether it be Right to hearken unto God or Us?

Let us therefore deal sincerely with God, the World, and our own Consciences;
and Ingenuously confess, and soberly Repent those manifest Sins which we cannot
hide: and not Ridicule the Divine Justice with a Mock-fast; and so our Incense
become as great an Abomination, as any of those Evils for which we suffer.
Which that you may the better do, I shall endeavor to direct your Consciences
in the way of a Self-discovery, by laying before you the grossest of those Sins
that we of this City and Nation have been most Emphatically guilty of, and
which God has infinite Reason to be Angry at. And doubtless those of the Text
are the very Rubric, and stand in the front of the Calendar. These are they
for which our Infamous Names are deservedly Posted, for which the World hisses
at us, and all the Babylonish Samaritans at home and abroad upbraid us saying,
This, this is the Rebellious City, and hurtful unto Kings, for which cause this
City was destroyed.

In handling of which words, we will First, Give you an account of the Story to
which they relate, and

Secondly, See how far it is applicable to the present occasion.

For the History we must look back, at 2 Kings 17.
the least, as far as the Reign of Hoshea, Jeroboams Successor over the ten
revolted Tribes which dwelt in Samaria: whose Dominions Shalmeneser the King of
Assyria invaded, and made the Land Tributary. But they neglected to pay the
Annual Duty, and maintained a correspondence with the Egyptians; which the
Israelites in all their Distresses were too apt to do. Which Affront
Shalmeneser so highly resented, that he sent his Forces again into Samaria,
took Hoshea Prisoner, and at three years end possessed himself of all the Cities,
and carried the Inhabitants Captive into his own Land: Into whose Estates and
Dwellings, he transplanted some of his own Countrymen, and they possessed
Samaria verse 14.
and dwelt in the Cities thereof. But these Babilonians did not change their
Religion with their Climate, neither Worshipped they the true God, but served
the Abominations of their Fathers, and walked in all the superstitious ways
they had been severally brought up in. For which Cause God let verse. 24.
loose the wild Beasts of the Field upon them, and many of them were destroyed
by Lions. By this means they were brought to understand verse 25.
their Error; and sent to acquaint the King of Assyria what had befallen them,
because verse. 26, 27.
they knew not the manner of the God of the Land. Hereupon the King sent them a
Priest from among those of the Captivity, to instruct them in the Knowledge and
Worship of the true God. But so strong and invincible were the the Prejudices
of their Education, that the true Religion found but cold Entertainment among
them: and though the Interests of self-preservation indispensably necessitated
them to profess it; yet all that God could by his Judgments force, or the
Priest persuade them to, was only to admit Him among their other Deities, and
to make One in their heathen Catalogue. For they feared the Lord, and served
verse 33.
their own Gods, after the manner of the Nations from whence they came. And by
this medly of Religion they were separated and distinguished from them of the
Jewish Communion, unto the very time of our Saviors coming into the World, and
from thence forward till the final Dispersion.

The Assyrians, having thus got Footing in Israel; and opened the way into a
more entire Conquest, made their next Attempts upon Judah and Jerusalem. But
good King Hezekiah, by his own personal Integrity, 2 Kings 18.
and his Zeal for Gods Glory and the Interests of Religion, kept off the stroke
all the time of his own Reign. But when the Date of his Life was out, Piety
died and was Buried with him: And Manasseh his Son confounded the Reformation
his Father had made, revived all the ruined Monuments of chap. 21.
Idolatry, reared up Alters for Baal, Worshipped all the Host of Heaven,
brought the Abomination even into the Holy Place, and set up a graven Image in
the House of the Lord. Thus Religion was laid wast, and a Babel of superstition
built upon its ruins. Nay, to fill up the Measure of Impieties, he practiced
Witchcraft, and kept a familiar Correspondence 2 Chronicles. 33. verse 6.
with Devils. And no wonder if Ungodliness and Unrighteousness go hand in hand
no wonder if they have no regard to the good of Men, that have not the Fear of
God before their eyes. Blood is the usual Cement of every Religion, that stands
beside the Foundation of Truth and Reason; and force the support of that
disjoynted Cause that would otherwise tumble and be its own confusion. To this
Manasseh had Recourse, suspecting that his bad Divinity would never propagate
and stand, but by the help of cruel Politics, (Arguments as wicked as the
Cause.) And accordingly you read, that he shed innocent Blood very much, 2
Kings 21. 16.
till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to the other. And this was indeed
the grand provocation that incensed the Divine Justice so irreconcileably,
against that Place and Nation. Manasseh's wicked Reign was the ground of all
those Prophetic Threats, 2 Chronicles. 34. 23. 2 Kings 21. 10.
that opened the Mouths of Huldah the Prophetess, of Isaiah and Jeremiah. And
for this Cause was Manasseh himself, the first of all the Men of Judah,
delivered into the 2 Chronicles. 32. 11.
hands of the Assyrians, as an earnest of the approaching Captivity. And from
this time forward the Babylonians every day got Ground upon them; bating that
little Respit in Josiahs time, in the latter end whereof chap 35. verse 20.
the Egyptians helped to do the work for them. After this Nebuchadnezzer retook
the chap. 36. verse 5.
Cause into his own hands, subdued Jehoiakim, who for three years held the
Crown in Capite of the Conqueror; but he revolting, became accessory to his
own Fall. Jehoiachin his Son had scarce Reigned three verse 9.
Months, when his City was Beseiged, his Person seized on, his Relations,
Officers of State, Guards and Forces, nay all the Artificers of Jerusalem,
taken; to the number of ten thousand Men: so that none remained but the Poor
and Refuse of the Land, that seemed beneath the Enemies Displeasure, over whom
Nebuchadnezzar made Zedekiah verse 11.
King. But he Rebelled against his Benefactor, and called in the Assistance of
the Egyptians. Which Act of Confederacy and Rebellion so enraged the Enemy,
that, having dispersed their Forces and entered the City, they put the
Inhabitants to the Sword, half dead before with Famine and Pestilence. Neither
the gray Hairs of the Aged, nor the verse 17.
promising hopes of Youth, nor the Charms of Virginity, nor the Innocent
Oratory of Infant Tenderness, could divert the Course of their impartial Fury:
All places Sacred and Profane were alike to them, and the Sanctuary it self
became a Tophet and Place of Execution. And those poor Remains that escaped the
Fury of the Sword, were carried away to Babylon, there to partake in the
Captivity of their Brethren, and bewail their Own. Then was the Temple Sacked,
the Exchequer Plundered, and all the Seats of the Nobility Spoiled and
Pillaged: And having possessed themselves of all the portable Treasure of
Jerusalem, they brake down the Wall set fire of the Temple, and left all her
goodly Palaces in Flames.

In this State of Captivity the Jews remained till the seventy years of
Jeremiah's Prophesy were accomplished. When, Babylon being subjected to the
Persian Empire, God put it Ezra 1. 1.
into the Heart of Cyrus to set his People free, and to rebuild the City and
Temple, that the Caldeans had destroyed. To this end he gave them leave to go
up, and restored unto them all the Vtensils of the House of God, and ordered
them to be furnished, out of the places where they sojourned, with Silver and
Gold, and whatsoever else was necessary for the Undertaking. And having now
with Joy begun the Work, chap. 4. 1.
the Samaritans (of whom I gave you an Account before) solicit the Heads of
Judah, that they might be joined with them in the Building of the Temple:
pretending that they Worshipped the same God, and Professed the same Religion
which the Jews did. So our Sectaries plead for comprehension, do we not own
Christ, his Gospel, the same points of Faith, the same Acts of Worship, see Dr.
Owen Plea for Non-Con. p. 21. verse 4.
But the Fathers of Israel, well knowing that such a Comprehension would
endanger the Purity of Religion, and the peace of the Church, utterly reject
the Proposal, and tell them flatly, that they neither had, nor should have, any
thing to do with them in Building a House to their God; but that they would do
it Themselves, as King Cyrus had commanded them. This Answer so netled the
Samaritans, that they resolved, (if it were possible,) to hinder, what they
could not be admitted to have a hand in: To which end they had always some
Statesman or other in Fee, to persuade the verse 5. 6. 7.
King to revoke his Grant, and countermand what he had Decreed. At length,
Cyrus being personally engaged abroad in Foreign Enterprises, and in the mean
time, consigning the Administration of the Government to his Son Cambyses,
otherwise called Ahasuerus Joseph. de Antiqu. Judaic. l. 11. c. 3 Tirin. in loc
and Alii.
and Artaxerxes; the Samaritans looked upon this as a fit Juncture to work
their Designs in: Wherefore pretending themselves mightily concerned for the
Honor verse 14.
and Peace of the Government, they send a Letter to the Vice King, to let him
know of what dangerous Consequence the Building of Jerusalem might be; that the
Jews were a factious and unquiet People, and if once their Hands were
strengthened, and their City Fortified, they would in all likelihood Revolt,
and refuse to pay Toll, and Tribute, and Custom; and by this means the
Revenues of the Crown would be impared: for the Probability and Truth whereof,
they refer him to the ancient Chronicles, where he should find that this City
had been a Rebellious City, and hurtful unto Kings, etc.

Which Accusation, though spiteful and invidious, was not altogether false: For
upon Enquiry, Artaxerxes found it was as they had said; that the City had
formerly made Insurrection against Kings, and that Rebellion verse. 19.
and Sedition had been made therein. So that all the Untruth, if there be any,
must lie in the Misapplication: For which Cause this City was destroyed: when
indeed, their Destruction was the Execution of God's Sentence upon the Sins of
Manasseh; but we do not find, that Sedition or Rebellion are any where reckoned
in that Catalogue. But notwithstanding that this was the Original Cause of
God's displeasure, yet Sedition and Rebellion were in a great measure the
proximate Cause of its Execution. For the Revolt of Jehoiakin and Zedekiah
hastened their Ruin, and effectually brought the final Judgment upon them.
They were a Conquered People, and by the Law of Nations bound to undergo that
Yoke which their Sins had put about their Necks. As for Zedekiah, he was
Nebuchadnezzars own Creature, and of his preferring: he had also taken a solemn
Oath of Allegiance, and deposited, his Faith before God, as a Pledge of his
Loyalty and Obedience: beside, he had an express Command from God by the Mouth
of Jeremiah, Solemnly backed with the Sanctions of Promises and Threats, to put
his Neck under the Yoke of Jer. 27. 12.
the King of Babylon, and to serve him and his People, which (if he did he
should Live; but if not, He and His should Die, by the Famine, by the Sword,
and by the Pestilence;) but he stiffened his Neck and would 2 Chronicles. 36. 13.
not hearken, but Conspired with the Egyptians, and Raised Sedition and
Rebellion. Now, whether the Text refers to these Instances, (as probably it
does) or to any other, I dispute not; but this is certain that for this Cause,
among others, the City was destroyed. This is the Story, let us now proceed to
the Application.

Our Judgments are not much unlike to Theirs: only God has, in Mercy, hitherto
abated us the Famine, which we have no less deserved then They. But we have
been Blooded till our Veins were almost dry. We have been in Captivity, and our
Lives and Liberties sold into the Hands of Tyrants and Usurpers. We have been
Plagued with a Witness, and have seen Death march with his Armies through our
Streets a Hundred Thousand strong. And as this was the immediate Forerunner of
Jerusalem's Desolation; so no sooner were our Citizens returned to their
Houses, from whence the destroying Angel had driven them, but the Fire consumed
their Dwellings, and the same wet Eyes, that paid the last Tribute at the
Graves of their Relations and Friends, were set afloat afresh to bewail the
City it self Buried in its own Dust; The Shops of Trade, the Halls of
Companies, the Royal Burse of Merchants, the Habitations of Nobles, the Seats
of Judgment, the Temples of God, being all crumbled into Ashes, and scarce one
stone left upon another.

And dare we still Justify our selves, and say we are Innocent, and Plagued
for Nothing? Did God thus visit his own People for their Sins, and shall we
that have had the very same Sentence Executed upon us, plead Not Guilty? These
things are written for our Example: And I think we have Copied them out to
Purpose, and are the very Antitype of their Plagnes and Sins.

The Sins of Manasseh were Idolatry; Sorcery and Bloodshed. The First of these
(by the Help of God) we have long since Rooted out; and our immoderate Fear of
it, is one of the greatest Superstitions that now remain among us: But yet our
Temples have been no less defiled, than theirs at Jerusalem. The Sanctuary has
been the Prison of the Loyal and Innocent; our Altars have been Debauched with
Rioting and Drunkenness; our Pulpits the Mint of Blasphemy, Heresy and
Sedition; The House of God a Den of Thieves, a Slaughterhouse of Murder, a
Stable of Horses. Defilements, that Manasseh would, perhaps, have Trembled at,
and that none but Babylonians, and such as dare Fire a Temple, durst have been
Guilty of. And that Ours escaped it Then, was more of God's Mercy, than any
Sense of Religion on the Prophaners part.

The next Sin of Manasseh, that the Spirit 2 Chronicles. 33. 6.
of God has put a Mark upon, is Sorcery; and I doubt not but we may Match it
with a Parallel. For what do you call inspired Lights, Visions, Revelations,
Daunings, Breathings, and the like Familiar Incomes of a Private Spirit? which,
if they be not Religious Witchcraft, no sober Man knows how to define. What is,
I say, the Enthusiasm of these latter Ages, but the communications of a
Satanical Spirit with Men's deluded Phancies, whereby the Devil has made a
better Market of his Sophisticated Impostures, among us of this Nation, than
ever he did in the World before? And what is that Barbarous Cant and
Phraseology, that we have been so long cheated with, (under the Notion of
Powerful Preaching, and Spiritual Raptures, the Sense whereof is either
Mysterious, or None;) but mere Charms and Exorcisms, to bewitch Vulgar
Imaginations; and Spells to possess and lead their Affections Captive.

The last of Manasseh's noted Sins is Bloodshed. He Murdered his own Subjects,
and so had the pretense of an abused Power. But we, without all Power, and
against all, but what we Usurped, Murdered those, whose Lives were as much
their own as ours, and more: Our Fellow Subjects, our Friends and Acquaintance,
our Brethren and Fathers, our Masters and Governors, our Priests, our Prelate,
our King, and defiled the Land with its best and vital Blood. And what more
could Manasseh do, or wherein was his sin of Bloodshed ( which the Lord would
not pardon) 2 Kings 24. 4.
greater than ours?

And now let us see what we have to plead to the Samaritans Charge; Nay, rather
let us confess the Fact, and say as They and all the World do; that we are a
Rebellious City, and hurtful unto Kings. For our Guilt is too manifest to be
hid, and of too deep a Grain, to be blanched by Pleas and Excuses, Sedition and
Rebellion are the Articles of the Indictment.

Sedition;

And that is either Ecclesiastical or Laic. Hales of Schism. D. 1.
For there is no great difference between Sedition and Schism; but that Custom
has distinguished them, appropriating One to a Civil, and the Other to an
Ecclesiastical sense. And for Church-sedition: What People professing one
common Faith, were ever more miserably divided then We have been? In how many
shapes have we dressed up Christianity, and called it by so many Names, till our
Wits were puzzled to find out Names enough to call it by? We had engrossed all
the Heresies of former Ages, and wracked our Inventions, to Coin a Multitude
more, that the World never heard of till Then: And every one of these,
Constituted a Party, of a distinct Denomination from all Mankind beside. That
the whole Nation was, almost, unchurched; and nothing in the World, but a Pack
of Schismatics, shuffled together without any Uniformity or Cohaerence. The
Body of Christ was rended Piecemeal; and the divided Members, like Bones in a
Charnel house, lay unmatched; and no man could tell how they related. Every Man
was a Christian, Every Man a Saint; (and almost every man a Church too,) but we
were Christians and Saints at large, and Indefinitely; it being Impossible to
find out wherein our Relation to Christ, and the Communion of Saints Consisted;
or how we belonged to the Common Head, by any Joint Order, and Connection of the
Parts unto one another.

This Breach of Uniformity in Religion, easily divided our Affections; and when
once we ceased to be Brethren, the Gap soon opened to such a Distance; that in
fine we were not Friends. All were extreme fond of their own Persuasions;
Impatient to hear their Opinions slighted; zealous to prefer their particular
Conceits; and Imoderately ambitious, to see their Judgments Enthroned; and that
the Pragmatick Votes of their own private Fancies, might pass into public
Ordinances, and become the Established, Standing Forms of Religion to the whole
Church and Nation.

And thus from our differences in Religion, arose Sedition in the State: Here
was the first Ground of the Quarrellaid: From these unhappy Beginnings, we
proceeded to hate, and revile, and proseeute one another, with the utmost
Spite and Rancour. At the first we demurely pretended, that we sought only
the Liberty of our own Consciences, but afterward nothing would serve us less,
than the sovereignty over other Men's: And they that refused to allow us this,
proclaimed themselves our Enemies in that Denial; (the Government it self not
excepted) and as such we proceeded against them; First with bitter Words, and
then with downright Blows: and by these Degrees Sedition advanced to an Open
and unnatural Rebellion.

A Rebellion that had no tolerable Pretense to Justify it. A Rebellion most
unreasonably charged upon the Score of Religion; which in the General does no
where countenance it, and for that of this Church in particular, it neither
needed nor deserved it. For it was Reformed already, as far as Reformation was
necessary, and almost tolerable, that is, to its Primative Purity: and wanted
nothing, so much, toward it is due Perfection, as the Conformity of those, that
exclaimed against it. And the Conscientious Profession and Practice of it,
might have made us happy in this World and in the next; if it be in the Power
of Christianity it self to make us so. Religion was as entire, as Christ and
his Apostles left it; our Articles of Faith were neither more nor less, than
theirs; and our Rules of Life, the same. And for those Ceremonies that made all
the Noise, what were they, but such decent Useages, as were recommended to us,
by the best of Christians, for the first four Hundred years: who looked upon
them as the Ornaments of Religious Worship; and lived and died in the Use of
them. That if they were such Antichristian Prejudices to Religion, and the
Salvation of Men, as has been pretended; We must Judge very hardly of those
blessed Saints and Martyrs: that they are either on this side Heaven, or that
they made but very narrow Escapes thither. But if Religion had been out of
repair, how unfit a Rebellion was to mend it, I hope by this time we are all
convinced.

A Rebellion, as unreasonable on the account of the Government, as of Religion:
And more unreasonable it could not be For as Monarchy is the best of all
Governments, so is Ours the best of the sort. A Government Established by
wholesome Laws; that gives to every man as much Right and Liberty, as Justice
and Modesty can crave. Laws, that have abated the Royalties of the Crown, for
the Interest and Easment of the People. Laws, of our own Choosing, and such as
our selves have voted for; that no man can Suffer by them, but upon his own
Verdict. That a better Government we cannot have, nor an Easier; and they that
do not think so, I am afraid, do, for their own Sakes, wish that there might
be None.

The Administration of this so moderate and kindly Government, was then in the
Hands of a Monarch so Piously Devout, so Morally Just, so Christianly Good; so
every way unfit to fix a Rebellion upon; that we could never have timed it so
unhappily, to our own Eternal shame, from the first Monarch that ever swey'd
the English Scepter until now.

But as these Considerations prevailed not to silence the Seditious Clamours,
and tie down the Hands of a Rebellious People; so, neither did they abate one
Grain of Malice, in carrying on the Bloody Work. For their Fury and Spite was
all one, as if the Grand Sultan, or an Army of Bears and Tigers had invaded
them; and as if He they fought with, had neither been their King, a Christian,
nor a Man: Refusing all Treaty but what they knew, and were resolved
beforehand, should come to naught. And when they had Caught the Prey they
Hunted, in defiance to all Divine and Humane Laws, to that Natural Allegiance
that Subjects owe their Prince, to their own Solemn Vows and Protestations
(which they had only used as Baits to betray him) they un-king'd, un-man'd, and
Barbarously Murdered him; and made no more on it, than if they had Cut off a
Dogs Neck. All the Formality of the thing, being more a matter of Triumph, than
Respect.

And now, Look into your Records, Look, if you can for Shame; and see, if this
City, be not a Rebellious City, and Hurtful unto Kings? This City, I say, that
Influences all the Nation: And whose Example, whether Good or Evil, is a
President to the whole Kingdom, and Governs it as a Law. In these Kennels, did
the Generation of Sects and Vipers Breed. Here, where Schisms brought forth and
Encouraged. Here, was Faction Preached, and attended to, with an Eager Joy.
Here, were Seditious Libells Penned, and Scattered about the Streets. Here,
Rebels Club'd into Confederaces, and modeled Forms of Association. This, was
the Stay and Confidence of the Projecting Party. This, was the Refuge of
Traitors, First; and after that The Five Members first sheltered here, and
afterward carried through the Streets. in Triumph.
their Theater. From Hence, were Insolent Petitions preferred; and the
Government Solicited against it self, with Vexatious Importunities. From Hence,
was the whole Nation Alarmed, and put into a Fright; by their Midnight
Outcries, and unseasonable Doubling their Gaurds and Watches. From Hence, was
the Royal Palace, more than once, assaulted, by an Armed Rabble. Here, the
Common Fund was chiefly Stocked, for carrying on the Design; and they, that
begrudged a Mite to the Loan, could freely offer Hundreds, to the Public
Faith; and never Boggle at that Bugbear Objection of being Arbitrary. Finally,
here were Armies raised, Magazines furnished, and nothing was wanting on the
City's Part, that their Zealous Spirits, their outstretched Hands, or their
unchristian Bounty could do, to promote and further the Cause.

And now, what should make us afraid to say, that for this Cause, this City was
destroyed. Schism, Sedition, and Rebellion, especially weighed with the former
Circumstances, are such aggravating Sins; that certainly we needed no
additional Guilt to ruin us.

And it is no new thing, for such Sins, to be so punished. Thus God avenged
himself, upon the Rebellious Schismatics of old; the first of that
Denomination: There came out a Numb. 16. 35.
Fire from the Lord, and consumed them. And as if it had been their peculiar
Right and Portion, the Disciples James and John, ask our Savior, if he would
not that they should Luke 9. 54.
command Fire from Heaven, to consume the Samaritans? Those obstinate
Seperatists, from the Jewish Church; who refused common Hospitality to any one,
that did but look Jerusalem-ward. And this Demand of Theirs, was grounded upon
a like Instance. For so had Elijah the Prophet, destroyed a Hundred
Schismatics, Jeroboams Proselites in Samaria. And that our Savior refused to
2 Kings 1.
do so too, was more upon the account of that Mercy and Loving Kindness, which
he was so eminent for himself, and by his example and Doctrine, recommended to
his Church; than either the Merit of the Men or their Cause. And though
Christianity allows not, that persons should be proceeded against, by Fire and
Faggot, upon a Religious account in Foro Humano; Yet this is no Abrigement of
the Divine Authority, but that he may still thus Visit us for our Schisms, when
he pleases. Once more: That Last irraparable Destruction, which caused
Jerusalem to be no more; was every way, the consequence of their Faction and
Rebellion. They rejected their Messiah, and would have none of him to Reign
over them: But served Their King, as we did Ours. And this was the primary
Cause, of all their after Miseries. In less than forty years, when the Measure
of their Iniquity was filled up, and they were dropping-ripe for Vengeance; as
if it came not fast enough, they Rebelled agaiust Joseph. de Anti^ Judaic. l.
18. c. 2
Cestius Florus, their deputed Governor; and so brought the Empire about their
Ears: which never gave them over, till they were totally destroyed. And in the
De Bell^ Jud Ib. l^^ c. 50.
very last Siege, by Titus, though they were oppressed by the Enemy without,
and the Famine and Plague raged within their Walls, they ceased not to create
Intestine Factions among themselves: Three several Parties, whereof the Zealots
were One, contending Battle-Royal with one another. And this gave the Enemy an
Advantage, equal to that of their own Strength. At length the City being
Stormed, an accidental Brand, set Fire of the Temple; which no endeavors could
Ibid. l. 12. c. 10.
quench, till both the City and Temple were levelled with the Ground.

Indeed this City has been Guilty of many other Popular, and provoking Sins;
that doubtless were Accessory to her Ruin: But then they are for the most part,
the Monstrous Offspring of the former, and begot between Schism and Rebellion.
Atheism has made its Party strong, by our Diivsions in the Church. Many have
been tempted to be of no Religion, because there is so much controversy about
the True. Popery, that we are so willing should bear all the Blame, has taken
hold of the Advantage: and persuaded many over to that side, because Babylon,
forsooth, is a City more at Unity in it self. Profaneness has entered at the
same Breach; and the Service of God has been miserably neglected, through the
suspension of the Laws, in Favor of squeamish Consciences: neither has the
Grace of God had its due effect upon the minds of Men, in such a divided State:
for that is ordinarily restrained to the Communion of the Church, and has no
where engaged to follow Runnagates, in all their extravagant Rambles, and
Flyings-out. So that Men have been left Defenseless, both by God and the Law;
to the Temptations of the Devil, and the Incentives of their own Lusts: and no
marvel then, that they are so Licentious and Profane.

And that Rebellion has been as good a Friend to Vice, as Schism, we need not
question. For it is a Sin of that prodigious Bulk, that where it enters, it
makes an Inrode into the Conscience, and leaves an open Passage to all the
lesser Fry, to enter after it. Besides, it is a Propagating Sin, and Many are
the natural Issue of it. Such as Fierceness, Revenge, and Murder, etc. For they
that have been Fleshed and Blooded in an unnatural War, and have seen Thousands
Wallowing upon the Spot; are past trembling at a single Man's Fall: especially
such as have been Murderers by Profession, and Espoused THE unrighteous Cause.
To these we may add Rapine and Injustice: for what can come amiss to those Men's
Hands, that have been used to Plunder Palaces, Rob Churches, and Prey upon the
sequestered Rights of Gods Inheritance? Lastly, Cursing and Swearing, Whordom
and Drunkenness, are no where so aptly taught as in an Army, the School of
Debauches. Nor were they ever so openly practiced in this Nation, as they have
been since that unhappy time. And what else could be expected, but that
wickedness should break in, like a Torrent upon us; when all the Bonds of
Restraint were broken and every Man left to do what was Right in his own Eyes?
And now our Sins have taken such hold upon us, that they were not easily to be
broken off: Custom has made them Familiar, and Familiarity is improved into
Delight; that we pursue our Lusts with infinite Desire and Greediness: not
being liable to the checks of Shame, or the fears of Disgrace; Because, the
worst of Sins, are now but common Failings, and every Day produces Instances of
the like kind. And for all this, we are unfortunatly Beholden to our Schism and
Rebellion. So that if this City was destroyed upon the account of our Sins;
then doubtless Schism and Rebellion had the Principle and Leading hand in the
Judgment.

And now, what will the Samaritans say to these things? why, they will call us
Rebels to our Teeth, and Laugh at the Misery and Shame, we have brought upon
our selves. When we tell them of the Henry's of France, or the Powder Plot
nearer hand; The Tragic History of the Martyred Charles, will Strike us Dumb:
For the Children of Babel were never guilty of a more bloody Deed: For which
Cause this City was destroyed.

Well But they are only the Samaritans that say so; those Babylonians that
helped to destroy it. Yes, our own Consciences, if they be soundly put to it,
will tell us so too: and would often have told us so er'e this, if we had not
stifled their Clamours; being loath to ascribe our Ruin to that, which we are
so ready to do again.

The Babylonians, say we, set Fire to our Habitations. I should be loath to
wrong them, and add the Sin of an uncharitable Censure, to those I am called to
Repent of This Day. But suppose it were so: our Sins, Alas, betrayed the City
into their Hands. If we had not lost our Charter, and forfeited our Right, in
the Divine Protection; the Flames of Hell could not have prevailed against it.
That we may say in this Case, as our Savior did to Pilate in another. They
John 19. 11.
could have had no power at all against this place, had it not been given them
from above: therefore we that delivered it unto them, have the greater Sin.

And now having discovered to you the true Cause (or what we have too much
Reason to suspect was so) of that dreadful Calamity, we are this Day met
together to Commemorate and deplore; let me exhort you to a serious Repentance
of those Sins, that, in all probability, occasioned it. For if they escape us,
we Fast, and keep the Day to no purpose. Sedition and Rebellion are sins of
that formidable Look and of that monstrous Size, that if they do not pain our
Consciences, and put them in Travel to be delivered; there is little hopes that
our undersized Immoralities, will beget in us any remorse or Godly sorrow
working Repentance. If we can carry such a Load upon our Stomachs, our Lesser
sins will be easily digested: and so we are but as we were; neither humbled by
the Judgment, nor bettered by the solemnity of the Day. I charge none of you
with Schism or Rebellion: but yet I exhort you to Repent of both, For though
you never worshipped upon Mount Gerizim; though your Hands were never staind
with Royal-Blood, nor lifted up against the Lords Anointed; yet if you do not
resent these Sins with a very serious Abhorrence, and be not deeply affected
with the Guilt of the Nation; your Hearts are tainted; and you partake in the
Sins, with those that Acted them.

It Is too much to be feared, that these sins have scarce entr'd our penitential
Thoughts; or that they have passed through them Raw and unconcocted; and like
unsavory Pills, or bitter Draughts, have been turned off without Relishing. For
our Disobedience to the Government, our unnecessary Seperations from the
Church, our Heat and Vehemence against both, and our Factions and Divisions
among our selves, look so unlike any thing of Humiliation, that they rather
speak us Proud both of our Sins and Judgments. And as if it were not time to
say to the Destroyer it is Enough, we are still stirring up the Old Coals, and
kindling the Fire against another Day. And is this all that Visitation upon
Visitation, Plague upon Plague, has wrought upon us? Have we been Stricken,
and do we revolt more and more; as if our Backs Itch'd for the Rod under which
they smarted so lately? Is not the Fire still in our Bones, and the Ruins of it
yet visible in our unrepared Fortunes? And do we Tempt God to smite us once
more; and pursue his Vengeance through the same Tracks, wherein it formerly
found us? It might have been hoped e're this, that our Fast would have been the
better half of a Thanksgiving; and the more seasonable Duty of the Day, to
bless and praise God for his Mercy, in the Rebuilding of our City; than to weep
before him that our Sins have destroyed it. But alas, we have neither
completed our Repentance, nor thoroughly recovered our Hurts. Our Schisms are
as many and wide; our Hearts as ready for Rebellion; as if we had hitherto
sinned with Impunity, and our City had never been destroyed at all. That we have
no encouragement to rejoice and keep Holy Day, so long as those Sins Reign,
that have been so fatally unlucky to us; and still look big, and threaten us
with another Storm. Our Fasts have hitherto been so far from curing us of our
Fears, that they are Dangerous, and a part of the Sins we wot of. We Fast for
Strife and Debate, (if not to smite with the Fist of wickedness.) And at that
very Instant, when the occasion summoneth us together, to Repent of our
Schisms, and pray for a peaceable and happy Union; we are then Schismatically
divided; and keep up the Sin, while we pretend to Atone for it. That our Prayer
and Fasting, and other external shows of Humiliation, instead of being Acts of
Repentance, are become the Subjects of it; and are as much to be lamented, as
our other Sins; Thus like an ill Crasis, we turn the very Remedy into Humor
and Disease. Saint Cyprian tells us that Schism is a Sin, Cyp. de unit Eccles.
which Martyrdom will not expiate: meaning, I suppose; the Martyrdom of such as
Die out of the Communion of the Church: much less then will Contrition and
Tears avail, if they be Schismatical. For this is but to Repent, and Sin in a
Circle; and when we have done the former, we are as much to begin as ever. That
there is no reason there should ever be an end of our Fasts, and as little Hopes
that ever we shall Fast to any Purpose; until we return to the Communion of the
Church, and perform This and all other Acts of Religion, with one Mind and with
one Mouth. For whatsoever Sin a Penitent discharges himself off, by Duties of
Repentance, performed in any separate Congregation; by the very same Act he
puts another upon the File, viz. an actual Schism, and so makes them up again
both in Weight and Tale.

Lastly, we have not yet recovered the Judgment of this Day. For though we
dwell in our Gieled Houses, yet the Houses of the Lord lie wast in many places;
The House of the Lord, The Temple of the Living God (in S^ Paul's.
comparison whereof, all the rest are but Tabernacles and Synagogues) is yet
but an Ezra
Embryo: and the Adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, the Babylonians abroad, and
the Samaritans on this side the River, wish it never may be otherwise. And what
hinders the Progress of so Magnificent and Pious an Undertaking; but that the
Hands of the People verse 4.
of Judah, are weakened by our Factions and Divisions? On one hand, it is
suggested, that it is like to be but a nest of Idolaters; and indeed our
Schisms, if any thing, are like to make it so. Others, that compare the Sins of
the former, with those of the present Age; fear, least it should rather be, a
Den of Thieves again, or a Prey to the devouring Flames. But thus the Work, on
all Hands, is discouraged. A Work, that David would have been. Proud to have
done; and it was not the least of Solomon's Glories, that he did it. A Work
which the Devout Jews equally affected with their Liberty, if not more: Laying
the Foundation, as Men Overjoyed, with Trumpets sounding, the People shouting,
and the Levites Ezra 3. 10.
singing one of the Songs of Sion. The like Pious Zeal was eminent in the
Ancient Church; for no sooner were the Primitive Christians got loose from
their Slavery and ^useb. Ecl. Hist. l. 8.
Persecution, and blessed with a calm and peaceable Interval; but they
endeavored to acknowledge the Mercy, in Erecting and Consecrating Places of
Religious Worship, to the Honor of their Great Benefactor. And certainly, We
cannot more aptly express our Sense of the Divine Favor, in restoring our
Houses to themselves, and Us to our Houses; than by Preparing a Dwelling for
Him among us: A Dwelling some way Proportionable to the Mercy, in Rebuilding
Ours so soon, and so much beyond Themselves: and suitable in Magnificence and
Splendor, to his Essential Grandeur and Majesty. For from Hence, Solomon took
his Measures, for the Building of the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 2. 5. The House which I
Build, is Great; for Great is our God above all Gods. This would be a good
Argument of our Repentance; and some small Restitution, for our late
Sequestration and Sacrilege, the Effects of Schism and Rebellion. This would
Invite and Confirm the (...) the Glory of Gods Presence among us. This might be
a means to compose our Divisions, and reduce sober men to the Communion of the
Church, by the Decency and Order of her Service daily performed therein. And,
among other Blessings, why should we not hope, that the Peace and Security of
the Government, against the wicked Endeavors of the Seditious and Rebellious,
might be one? While the Priests of the Lord embody to lift up Holy and Loyal
Hands; and to offer Daily Sacrifices Ezra 6. 1
of sweet Savor, and Pray for the Life of the King, and of his Sons, or
Successors.

But, Alas, our sins yet stand between Us, and so Great a Mercy; and I doubt,
the Samaritans are no Friends to the Design. Do they not persuade their Bigoted
Saints, that God is more Purely and Spiritually Worshipped in their Unhallowed
Synagogues? Do they not Greedily Sponge a Monopoly of all Public Charity to
the Clan? Do they not, by stirring up Feuds and Commotions, put the State into
such dubious Uncertainties, that Pious Well-minded Men, whose Zeal is run down
by their Fears, are Jealous of doing Good least their Charity should be subject
to a 17138 l. toward the Repairing Paul's, taken out of the Chamber of London,
to carry on the Rebellion, and the Materials Sold, to pay off the Arrears of
Jephson's Regiment. Heylin in the Life of Laud.
late Abuse, and turn to the Public Detriment? But I hope the Government will
shortly Answer that Objection; And that we shall again see such Happy Times
when Piety will be no Scandal, when there will be no Danger in Doing Good. But
how much more Happy would they be, if we would every Man (as it is our Duty)
concur with the Government to make them so! If we would Repent of our Schism,
Sedition and Rebellion; If we would Repent and leave them, and let God and his
Church, the King and his Government, never hear more of them. Then should soon
we see the Temple in its Glory, Sion in her pefect Beauty, and Jerusalem in
Peace: Then should we see the Church and State and City, deliverd of their
Grievances and Fears, and Established in the Way of a lasting Happiness. In
Order whereunto, let us endeavor to Live Peaceable and Quiet Lives, in all
Godliness and Honesty. Let us put away all Bitterness, and Wrath and Clamor,
and Evil-speaking, and all Malice. Let us Study to be Quiet, to be of One Mind,
and to Live in Peace, and the God of Peace shall be with us. Yea the Lord shall
so Bless us out of Sion, that we shall see Jerusalem in Prosperity all our
Lives long.

Peace be within her Walls, and Prosperity within her Palaces, Amen.
FINIS.

