THE Country-Wife, A COMEDY, Acted at the THEATER ROYAL.

Written by Mr. Wycherley,

Indignor quicquam reprehendi, non quia crasse
Compositum illepideve putetur, sed quia nuper:
Nec veniam Antiquis, sed honorem and praemia posci.
Horat. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, at the Harrow, at the Corner of
Chancery Lane in Fleet Street. 1675.

PROLOGVE,
spoken by Mr. Heart.
Poets like Cudgel'd Bullys, never do
At first, or second blow, submit to you;
But will provoke you still, and never have done,
Till you are weary first, with laying on:
The late so bafled Scribler of this day,
Though he stands trembling, bids me boldly say,
What we, before most Plays are used to do,
For Poets out of fear, first draw on you;
In a fierce Prologue, the still Pit defy,
And e're you speak, like Castril, give the lie;
But though our Bayses Batles often I Have fought,
And with bruised knuckles, their dear Conquests bought;
Nay, never yet feared Odds upon the Stage,
In Prologue dare not Hector with the Age,
But would take Quarter from your saving hands,
Though Bayse within all yielding Countermands,
Says you Confed'rate Wits no Quarter give,
Ther'fore his Play shall not ask your leave to live:
Well, let the vain rash Fop, by buffing so,
Think to obtain the better terms of you;
But we the Actors humbly will submit,
Now, and at any time, to a full Pit;
Nay, often we anticipate your rage,
And murder Poets for you, on our Stage:
We set no Guards upon our Tyring-Room,
But when with flying Colors, there you come,
We patiently you see, give up to you,
Our Poets, Virgins, nay our Matrons too.
The Persons.
MR. Horner, Mr. Harcourt, Mr. Dorilant, Mr. Pinchwife, Mr. Sparkish, Sir
Jaspar Fidget, Mrs. Margery Pinchwife, Mrs. Alithea, My Lady Fidget, Mrs.
Dainty Fidget, Mrs. Squeamish. Old Lady Squeamish. Mr. Heart. Mr. Kenaston. Mr.
Lydal. Mr. Mohun. Mr. Haynes. Mr. Cartwrigh. Mrs. Bowtel. Mrs. James. Mrs.
Knep. Mrs. Corbet. Mrs. Wyatt. Mrs. Rutter.
Waiters, Servants, and Attendants. A Boy. A Quack, Lucy, Alithea's Maid, Mr.
Schotterel. Mrs. Cory.
The SCENE London.

THE Country-Wife.
ACT 1. SCENE 1.
Enter Horner, and Quack following him at a distance. Hor. A Quack is as fit
for a Pimp, as a Midwife for a Bawd; they are still but in their way, both
helpers of Nature. -- [aside.] -- Well, my dear Doctor, have thou done what I
desired.


Qu. I have undone you for ever with the Women, and reported you throughout the
whole Town as bad as an Eunuch, with as much trouble as if I had made you one
in earnest.


Hor. But have you told all the Midwives you know, the Orange Wenches at the
Playhouses, the City Husbands, and old Fumbling Keepers of this end of the
Town, for they will be the readiest to report it.


Qu. I have told all the Chamber-maids, Waiting women, Tire women, and Old
women of my acquaintance; nay, and whispered it as a secret to'em, and to the
Whisperers of Whitehal; so that you need not doubt 'twill spread, and you will
be as odious to the handsome young Women, as --


Hor. As the small Pox. -- Well --


Qu. And to the married Women of this end of the Town, as --


Hor. As the great ones; nay, as their own Husbands.


Qu. And to the City Dames as Annis-seed Robin of filthy and contemptible
memory; and they will frighten their Children with your name, especially their
Females.


Hor. And cry Horner's coming to carry you away: I am only afraid 'twill not be
believed; you told'em 'twas by an English-French disaster, and an
English-French Surgeon, who has given me at once, not only a Cure, but an
Antidote for the future, against that damned malady, and that worse distemper,
love, and all other Women's evils.


Qu. Your late journey into France has made it the more credible, and your
being here a fortnight before you appeared in public, looks as if you
apprehended the shame, which I wonder you do not: Well I have been hired by
young Gallants to bely'em the other way; but you are the first would be thought a
Man unfit for Women.


Hor. Dear Mr. Doctor, let vain Rogues be contented only to be thought abler
Men than they are, generally it is all the pleasure they have, but mine lies
another way.


Qu. You take, methinks, a very preposterous way to it, and as ridiculous as if
we Operators in Physic, should put forth Bills to disparage our Medicaments,
with hopes to gain Customers.


Hor. Doctor, there are Quacks in love, as well as Physic, who get but the
fewer and worse Patients, for their boasting; a good name is seldom got by
giving it ones self, and Women no more than honor are compassed by bragging:
Come, come Doctor, the wisest Lawyer never discovers the merits of his cause
till the trial; the wealthiest Man conceals his riches, and the cunning Gamster
his play; Shy Husbands and Keepers like old Rooks are not to be cheated, but by
a new unpracticed trick; false friendship will pass now no more than false dice
upon'em, no, not in the City.


Enter Boy. Boy. There are two Ladies and a Gentleman coming up.


Hor. A Pox, some unbelieving Sisters of my former acquaintance, who I am
afraid, expect their sense should be satisfied of the falsity of the report.

No -- this formal Fool and Women!

Enter Sir Jasp. Fidget, Lady Fidget, and Mrs. Dainty Fidget.
Qu. His Wife and Sister.


Sr. Jas. My Coach breaking just now before your door Sir, I look upon as an
occasional repremand to me Sir, for not kissing your hands Sir, since your
coming out of France Sir; and so my disaster Sir, has been my good fortune Sir;
and this is my Wife, and Sister Sir.


Hor. What then, Sir?


Sr. Jas. My Lady, and Sister, Sir. -- Wife, this is Master Horner.


La. Fid. Master Horner, Husband!


Sr. Jas. My Lady, my Lady Fidget, Sir.


Hor. So, Sir.


Sr. Jas. Will Not you be acquainted with her Sir? [So the report is true, I find
by his coldness or aversion to the Sex; but I Will play the wag with him.]

[Aside.] Pray salute my Wife, my Lady, Sir.


Hor. I will kiss no Man's Wife, Sir, for him, Sir; I have taken my eternal
leave, Sir, of the Sex already, Sir.


Sr. Jas. Hah, hah, hah; I Will plague him yet.

[aside.] Not know my Wife, Sir?


Hor. I do know your Wife, Sir, she is a Woman, Sir, and consequently a Monster,
Sir, a greater Monster than a Husband, Sir.


Sr. Jas. A Husband; how, Sir?


Hor. So, Sir; but I make no more Cuckholds, Sir.

[makes horns.
Sr. Jas. Hah, hah, hah, Mercury, Mercury.


La. Fid. Pray, Sir Jaspar, let us be gone from this rude fellow.


Mrs. Daint. Who, by his breeding, would think, he had ever been in France?


La. Fid. Foh, he is but too much a French fellow, such as hate Women of quality
and virtue, for their love to their Husban^, Sr. Jaspar; a Woman is hated by'em
as much for loving her Husband, as for loving their Money: But pray, let us be
gone.


Hor. You do well, Madam, for I have nothing that you came for: I have brought
over not so much as a Bawdy Picture, new Postures, nor the second Part of the
Escole de Filles; Nor --


Qu. Hold for shame, Sir; what die mean? you will ruin your self for ever with the
Sex --

[apart to Horner.
Sr. Jas. Hah, hah, hah, he hates Women perfectly I find.


Dain. What pity it is he should.


L. Fid. Ay, he is a base rude Fellow for it; but affectation makes not a Woman
more odious to them, than Virtue.


Hor. Because your Virtue is your greatest affectation, Madam.


Lad. Fid. How, you saucy Fellow, would you wrong my honor?


Hor. If I could.


Lad. Fid. How d'y mean, Sir?


Sr. Jas. Hah, hah, hah, no he cannot wrong your Lady ships honor, upon my
honor; he poor Man -- hark you in your eat -- a mere Eunuch.


Lad. O filthy French Beast, foh, foh; why do we stay? let us be gone; I cannot
endure the sight of him.


Sr. Jas. Stay, but till the Chairs come, they will be here presently.


Lad. No, no.


Sr. Jas. Nor can I stay longer; it is -- let me see, a quarter and a half
quarter of a minute past eleven; the Council will be sat, I must away:
business must be preferred always before Love and Ceremony with the wise Mr.
Horner.


Hor. And the Impotent Sir Jaspar.


Sr. Jas. Ay, ay, the impotent Master Horner, hah, ha, ha.


Lad. What leave us with a filthy Man alone in his lodgings?


Sr. Jas. He Is an innocent Man now, you know; pray stay, I Will hasten the
Chaires to you. -- Mr. Horner your Servant, should be glad to see you at my
house; pray, come and dine with me, and play at Cards with my Wife after
dinner, you are sit for Women at that game; yet hah, ha -- ['Tis as much a
Husbands prudence to provide innocent diversion for a Wife, as to hinder her
unlawful pleasures; and he had better employ her, than let her employ her self.

[Aside. Farewell.

[Exit Sir Jaspar
Hor. Your Servant Sr. Jaspar.


Lad. I will not stay with him, foh --


Hor. Nay, Madam, I beseech you stay, if it be but to see, I can be as civil to
Ladies yet, as they would desire.


Lad. No, no, foh, you cannot be civil to Ladies.


Dain. You as civil as Ladies would desire.


Lad. No, no, no, foh, foh, foh.

[Exeunt Lady Fid. and Dainty.
Qu. Now I think, I, or you your self rather, have done your business with the
Women.


Hor. Thou art an Ass, don't you see already upon the report and my carriage,
this grave Man of business leaves his Wife in my lodgings, invites me to his
house and wife, who before would not be acquainted with me out of jealousy.


Qu. Nay, by this means you may be the more acquainted with the Husbands, but
the less with the Wives.


Hor. Let me alone, if I can but abuse the Husbands, I Will soon disabuse the
Wives: Stay -- I Will reckon you up the advantages, I am like to have by my
Stratagem: First, I shall I be rid of all my old Acquaintances, the most
insatiable sorts of Duns, that invade our Lodgings in a morning: And next, to
the pleasure of making a New Mistress, is that of being rid ofan old One, and
of all old Debts; Love when it comes to be so, is paid the most unwillingly.


Qu. Well, you may be so rid of your old Acquaintances; but how will you get
any new Ones?


Hor. Doctor, thou will never make a good Chemist, thou art so incredulous and
impatient; ask but all the young Fellows of the Town, if they do not loose more
time like Huntsmen, in starting the game, than in running it down; one knows
not where to find'em. who will, or will not; Women of Quality are so civil, you
can hardly distinguish love from good breeding, and a Man is often mistaken;
but now I can be sure, she that shows an aversion to me loves the sport, as
those Women that are gone, whom I warrant to be right: And then the next thing,
is your Women of Honor, as you call'em, are only chary of their reputations,
not their Persons, and it is scandal they would avoid, not Men: Now may I have,
by the reputation of an Eunuch, the Privileges of One; and be seen in a Ladies
Chamber, in a morning as early as her Husband; kiss Virgins before their
Parents, or Lovers; and may be in short the Pas par tout of the Town. Now
Doctor.


Qu. Nay, now you shall be the Doctor; and your Process is so new, that we do
not know but it may succeed.


Hor. Not so new neither, Probatum est Doctor.


Qu. Well, I wish you luck and many Patients whilst I go to mine.

[Exit Quack.
Enter Harcourt, and Dorilant to Horner. Har. Come, your appearance at the Play
yesterday, has I hope hardened you for the future against the Women's contempt,
and the Men's raillery; and now you will abroad as you were wont.


Hor. Did I not bear it bravely?


Dor. With a most Theatrical impudence; nay more than the Orange-wenches show
there, or a drunken vizard Mask, or a great bellied Actress; nay, or the most
impudent of Creatures, an ill Poet; or what is yet more impudent, a secondhand
Critic.


Hor. But what say the Ladies, have they no pity?


Har. What Ladies? the vizard Masks you know never pity a Man when all is
gone, though in their Service.


Dor. And for the Women in the boxes, you would never pity them, when 'twas in
your power.


Har. They say it is pity, but all that deal with common Women should be served
so.


Dor. Nay, I dare swear, they will not admit you to play at Cards with them, go to
Plays with them, or do the little duties which other Shadows of men, are wont to
do for'em.


Hor. Who do you call Shadows of Men?


Dor. Half Men.


Hor. What Boys?


Dor. Ay your old Boys, old beaux Garcons, who like superannuated Stallions
are suffered to run, feed, and whinney with the Mares as long as they live,
though they can do nothing else.


Hor. Well a Pox on love and wenching, Women serve but to keep a Man from
better Company; though I cannot enjoy them, I shall you the more: good
fellowship and friendship, are lasting, rational and manly pleasures.


Har. For all that give me some of those pleasures, you call effeminate too,
they help to relish one another.


Hor. They disturb one another.


Har. No, Mistresses are like Books; if you pore upon them too much, they doze
you, and make you unfit for Company; but if used discreetly, you are the fitter
for conversation by'em.


Dor. A Mistress should be like a little Country retreat near the Town, not to
dwell in constantly, but only for a night and away; to taste the Town the better
when a Man returns.


Hor. I tell you, it is as hard to be a good Fellow, a good Friend, and a Lover
of Women, as it is to be a good Fellow, a good Friend, and a Lover of Money: You
cannot follow both, then choose your side; Wine gives you liberty, Love takes
it away.


Dor. Gad, he is in the right on it.


Hor. Wine gives you joy, Love grief and tortures; besides the Chirurgeon's
Wine makes us witty, Love only Sots: Wine makes us sleep, Love breaks it.


Dor. By the World he has reason, Harcourt.


Hor. Wine makes --


Dor. Ay, Wine makes us -- makes us Princes, Love makes us Beggars, poor
Rogues, y gad -- and Wine --


Hor. So, there is one converted. -- No, no, Love and Wine, Oil and Vinegar.


Har. I grant it; Love will still be uppermost.


Hor. Come, for my part I will have only those glorious, manly pleasures of
being very drunk, and very slovenly.


Enter Boy. Boy. Mr. Sparkish is below, Sir.


Har. What, my dear Friend! a Rogue that is fond of me, only I think for
abusing him.


Dor. No, he can no more think the Men laugh at him, than that Women jilt him,
his opinion of himself is so good.


Hor. Well, there is another pleasure by drinking, I thought not of; I shall
loose his acquaintance, because he cannot drink; and you know it is a very hard
thing to be rid of him, for he is one of those nauseous offerers at wit, who
like the worst Fiddlers run themselves into all Companies.


Har. One, that by being in the Company of Men of sense would pass for one.


Hor. And may so to the short-sighed World, as a false Jewel amongst true ones,
is not discerned at a distance; his Company is as troublesome to us, as a
Cuckolds, when you have a mind to his Wife's.


Har. No, the Rogue will not let us enjoy one another, but ravishes our
conversation, though he signifies no more to it, than Sir Martin Mar-all's
gaping, and auker'd thrumming upon the Lute, does to his Man's Voice, and
Music.


Dor. And to pass for a wit in Town, shows himself a fool every night to us,
that are guilty of the plot.


Hor. Such wits as he, are, to a Company of reasonable Men, like Rooks to the
Gamesters, who only fill a room at the Table, but are so far from contributing
to the play, that they only serve to spoil the fancy of those that do.


Dor. Nay, they are used like Rooks too, snub'd, checked, and abused; yet the
Rogues will hang on.


Hor. A Pox on'em, and all that force Nature, and would be still what she
forbids'em; Affectation is her greatest Monster.


Har. Most Men are the contraries to that they would seem; your bully you see,
is a Coward with a long Sword; the little humbly fawning Physician with his
Ebony cane, is he that destroys Men.


Dor. The Usurer, a poor Rogue, possessed of moldy Bonds, and Mortgages; and we
they call Spend-thrifts, are only wealthy, who lay out his money upon daily new
purchases of pleasure.


Hor. Ay, your errantest cheat, is your Trustee, or Executor; your jealous Man,
the greatest Cuckhold; your Churchman, the greatest Atheist; and your noisy
pert Rogue of a wit, the greatest Fop, dullest Ass, and worst Company as you
shall see: For here he comes.


Enter Sparkish to them. Spar. How is it, Sparks, how is it? Well Faith, Harry, I
must railly thee a little, ha, ha, ha, upon the report in Town of thee, ha, ha,
ha, I cannot hold y Faith; shall I speak?


Hor. Yes, but you will be so bitter then.


Spar. Honest Dick and Franck here shall answer for me, I will not be extreme
bitter by the Univers.


Har. We will be bound in ten thousand pound Bond, he shall not be bitter at
all.


Dor. Nor sharp, nor sweet.


Hor. What, not down right insipid?


Spar. Nay then, since you are so brisk, and provoke me, take what follows; you
must know, I was discoursing and raillying with some Ladies yesterday, and they
happened to talk of the fine new signs in Town.


Hor. Very fine Ladies I believe.


Spar. Said I, I know where the best new sign is. Where, says one of the
Ladies? In Covent Garden, I replied. Said another, In what street? In
Russel Street, answered I. Lord says another, I Am sure there was never a fine
new sign there yesterday. Yes, but there was, said I again, and it came out of
France, and has been there a fortnight.


Dor. A Pox I can hear no more, prithee.


Hor. No hear him out; let him tune his crowd a while.


Har. The worst Music the greatest preparation.


Spar. Nay faith, I Will make you laugh. It cannot be, says a third Lady. Yes,
yes, quoth I again. Says a fourth Lady,


Hor. Look to it, we will have no more Ladies.


Spar. No. -- then mark, mark, now, said I to the fourth, did you never see Mr.
Horner; he lodges in Russel Street, and he is a sign of a Man, you know, since
he came out of France, heh, hah, he.


Hor. But the Devil take me, is thine be the sign of a jest.


Spar. With that they all fell a laughing, till they bepiss'd themselves; what,
but it does not move you, methinks? well see one had as good go to Law without
a witness, as break a jest without a laugher on ones side. -- Come, come
Sparks, but where do we dine, I have left at Whitehal an Earl to dine with you.


Dor. Why, I thought thou had loved a Man with a title better, than a Suit
with a French trimming to it.


Har. Go, to him again.


Spar. No, Sir, a wit to me is the greatest title in the World.


Hor. But go dine with your Earl, Sir, he may be exceptious; we are your
Friends, and will not take it ill to be left, I do assure you.


Har. Nay, faith he shall go to him.


Spar. Nay, pray Gentlemen.


Dor. We Will thrust you out, if you wo'not, what disappoint any Body for us.


Spar. Nay, dear Gentlemen hear me.


Hor. No, no, Sir, by no means; pray go Sir.


Spar. Why, dear Rogues.

[They all thrust him out of the room.
Dor. No, no.


All. Ha, ha, ha.

[ Spar. returns.
Spar. But, Sparks, pray hear me; what do you think I Will eat then with gay
shallow Fops, and silent Coxcombs? I think wit as necessary at dinner as a
glass of good wine, and that is the reason I never have any stomach when I eat
alone. -- Come, but where do we dine?


Hor. Even where you will.


Spar. At Chateline's.


Dor. Yes, if you will.


Spar. Or at the Cock.


Dor. Yes, if you please.


Spar. Or at the Dog and Partridg.


Hor. Ay, if you have mind to it, for we shall dine at neither.


Spar. Pshaw, with your fooling we shall loose the new Play; and I would no
more miss seeing a new Play the first day, than I would miss setting in the wits
Row; therefore I Will go fetch my Mistress and away.

[Exit Sparkish.
[Manent Horner, Harcourt, Dorilant; Enter to them Mr. Pinchwife. Hor. Who have
we here, Pinchwife?


Mr. Pinc. Gentlemen, your humble Servant.


Hor. Well, Jack, by thy long absence from the Town, the grumness of thy
countenance, and the slovenlyness of thy habit; I should give thee joy, shoud'
I not, of Marriage?


Mr. Pin. [Death does he know I Am married too? I thought to have concealed it
from him at least.]

[Aside. My long stay in the Country will excuse my dress, and I have a suit of
Law; that brings me up to Town, that puts me out of humor; besides I must give
Sparkish to morrow five thousand pound to lie with my Sister.


Hor. Nay, you Country Gentlemen rather than not purchase, will buy any thing,
and he is a cracked title, if we may quibble: Well, but am I to give thee joy, I
heard thou were married.


Mr. Pin. What then?


Hor. Why, the next thing that is to be heard, is you are a Cuckold.


Mr. Pin. Insupportable name.

[Aside.
Hor. But I did not expect Marriage from such a Whoremaster as you, one that
knew the Town so much, and Women so well.


Mr. Pin. Why, I have married no London Wife.


Hor. Pshaw, that is all one, that grave circumspection in marrying a Country
Wife, is like refusing a deceitful pampered Smithfield Jade, to go and be
cheated by a Friend in the Country.


Mr. Pin. A Pox on him and his Simile.

[Aside. At least we are a little surer of the breed there, know what her
keeping has been, whether foiled or unsound.


Hor. Come, come, I have known a clap gotten in Wales, and there are Cozens,
Justices, Clarks, and Chaplains in the Country, I will not say Coach-men, but
she is handsome and young.


Pin. I Will answer as I should do.

[Aside. No, no, she has no beauty, but her youth; no attraction, but her
modesty, wholesome, homely, and huswifely, that is all.


Dor. He talks as like a Grasier as he looks.


Pin. She Is too auker'd, ill favored, and silly to bring to Town.


Har. Then methinks you should bring her, to be taught breeding.


Pin. To be taught; no, Sir, I thank you, good Wives, and private Soldiers
should be ignorant. -- [I'll keep her from your instructions, I warrant you.


Har. The Rogue is as jealous, as if his wife were not ignorant.

[Aside.
Hor. Why, if she be ill favored, there will be less danger here for you, than
by leaving her in the Country; we have such variety of dainties, that we are
seldom hungry.


Dor. But they have always coarse, constant, swinging stomachs in the Country.


Har. Foul Feeders indeed.


Dor. And your Hospitality is great there.


Har. Open house, every Man's welcome.


Pin. So, so, Gentlemen.


Hor. But prithee, why would thou marry her? if she be ugly, ill bred, and
silly, she must be rich then.


Pin. As rich as if she brought me twenty thousand pound out of this Town; for
she will be as sure not to spend her moderate portion, as a London Baggage would
be to spend hers, let it be what it would; so it is all one: then because shes
ugly, she is the likelyer to be my own; and being ill bred, she will hate
conversation; and since silly and innocent, will not know the difference
betwixt a Man of one and twenty, and one of forty


Hor. Nine -- to my knowledge; but if she be silly, she will expect as much from a
Man of forty nine, as from him of one and twenty: But methinks wit is more
necessary than beauty, and I think no young Woman ugly that has it, and no
handsome Woman agreeable without it.


Pin. It Is my maxim, he is a Fool that marrys, but he is a greater that does not
marry a Fool; what is wit in a Wife good for, but to make a Man a Cuckold?


Hor. Yes, to keep it from his knowledge.


Pin. A Fool cannot contrive to make her husband a Cuckold.


Hor. No, but she will club with a Man that can; and what is worse, if she cannot
make her Husband a Cuckold, she will make him jealous, and pass for one, and then
it is all one.


Pin. Well, well, I Will take care for one, my Wife shall make me no Cuckold,
though she had your help Mr. Horner; I understand the Town, Sir.


Dor. His heIp!

[Aside.
Har. He Is come newly to Town it seems, and has not heard how things are with
him.

[Aside.
Hor. But tell me, has Marriage cured thee of whoring, which it seldom does.


Har. It Is more than age can do.


Hor. No, the word is, I Will marry and live honest; but a Marriage vow is like a
penitent Gamesters Oath, and entering into Bonds, and penalties to stint himself
to such a particular small sum at play for the future, which makes him but the
more eager, and not being able to hold out, looses his Money again, and his
forfeit to boot.


Dor. Ay, ay, a Gamester will be a Gamester, whilst his Money lasts; and a
Whoremaster, whilst his vigor.


Har. Nay, I have known'em, when they are broke and can loose no more, keep a
fumbling with the Box in their hands to fool with only, and hinder other
Gamesters.


Dor. That had wherewithal to make lusty stakes.


Pin. Well, Gentlemen, you may laugh at me, but you shall never lie with my
Wife, I know the Town.


Hor. But prithee, was not the way you were in better; is not keeping better
than Marriage?


Pin. A Pox on it, the Jades would jilt me, I could never keep a Whore to my
self.


Hor. So then you only married to keep a Whore to your self; well, but let me
tell you, Women, as you say, are like Soldiers made constant and loyal by good
pay, rather than by Oaths and Covenants, therefore I Would advise my Friends to
keep rather than marry; since too I find by your example, it does not serve
ones turn, for I saw you yesterday in the eighteen penny place with a pretty
Country-wench.


Pin. How the Devil, did he see my Wife then? I sat there that she might not
be seen; but she shall never go to a play again.

[Aside.
Hor. What do thou blush at nine and forty, for having been seen with a Wench?


Dor. No Faith, I warrant 'twas his Wife, which he seated there out of sight,
for he is a cunning Rogue, and understands the Town.


Har. He blushes, then 'twas his Wife; for Men are now more ashamed to be seen
with them in public, than with a Wench.


Pin. Hell and damnation, I Am undone, since Horner has seen her, and they know
'twas she.

[Aside.
Hor. But prithee, was it thy Wife? she was exceedingly pretty; I was in love
with her at that distance.


Pin. You are like never to be nearer to her. Your Servant Gentlemen.

[Offers to go.
Hor, Nay, prithee stay.


Pin. I cannot, I will not.


Hor. Come you shall dine with us.


Pin. I have dined already.


Hor. Come, I know thou have not; I Will treat thee dear Rogue, thou shall spend
none of thy Hampshire Money to day.


Pin. Treat me; so he uses me already like his Cuckold.

[Aside.
Hor. Nay, you shall not go.


Pin. I must, I have business at home.

[Exit Pinchwife.
Har. To beat his Wife, he is as jealous of her, as a Cheapside Husband of a
Covent Garden Wife.


Hor. Why, it is as hard to find an old Whoremaster without jealousy and the
gout, as a young one without fear or the Pox.

As Gout in Age, from Pox in Youth proceeds;
So Wenching past, then jealousy succeeds:
The worst disease that Love and Wenching breeds.

ACT 2. SCENE 1.
Mrs. Margery Pinchwife, and Alithea: Mr. Pinchwife peeping behind at the door.
Mrs. Pin. Pray, Sister, where are the best Fields and Woods, to walk in in
London?


Alit. A pretty Question; why, Sister! Mulberry Garden, and St. James's Park;
and for close walks the New Exchange.


Mrs. Pin. Pray, Sister, tell me why my Husband looks so grum here in Town? and
keeps me up so close, and will not let me go a walking, nor let me wear my best
Gown yesterday?


Alith. O he is jealous, Sister.


Mrs. Pin. Jealous, what is that?


Alith. He Is afraid you should love another Man.


Mrs. Pin. How should he be afraid of my loving another man, when he will not
let me see any but himself.


Alith. Did he not carry you yesterday to a Play?


Mrs. Pin. Ay, but we sat amongst ugly People, he would not let me come near
the Gentry, who sat under us, so that I could not see'em: He told me, none but
naughty Women sat there, whom they tous'd and mous'd; but I would have
ventured for all that.


Alith. But how did you like the Play?


Mrs. Pin. Indeed I was aweary of the Play, but I liked hugeously the Actors;
they are the goodlyest proper'st Men, Sister.


Alith. O but you must not like the Actors, Sister.


Mrs. Pin. Ay, how should I help it, Sister? Pray, Sister, when my Husband
comes in, will you ask leave for me to go a walking?


Alith. A walking, hah, ha; Lord, a Country Gentlewomans leisure is the
drudgery of a foot-post; and she requires as much airing as her Husbands Horses.

[Aside. Enter Mr. Pinchwife to them. But here comes your Husband; I Will ask,
though I Am sure he will not grant it.


Mrs. Pin. He says he will not let me go abroad, for fear of catching the Pox.


Alith. Fie, the small Pox you should say.


Mrs. Pin. Oh my dear, dear Bud, welcome home; why do thou look so fropish,
who has nanger'd thee?


Mr. Pin. Your a Fool.

[Mrs. Pinch. goes aside, and cries.
Alith. Faith so she is, for crying for no fault, poor tender Creature!


Mr. Pin. What you would have her as impudent as your self, as errant a
Jilflirt, a gadder, a Magpy, and to say all a mere notorious Town-Woman?


Alit. Brother, you are my only Censurer; and the honor of your Family shall
sooner suffer in your Wife there, than in me, though I take the innocent
liberty of the Town.


Mr. Pin. Hark you Mistress, do not talk so before my Wife, the innocent
liberty of the Town!


Alith. Why, pray, who boasts of any intrigue with me? what Lampoon has made my
name notorious? what ill Women frequent my Lodgings? I keep no Company with any
Women of scandalous reputations.


Mr. Pin. No, you keep the Men of scandalous reputations Company.


Alith. Where? would you not have me civil? answer'em in a Box at the Plays? in
the drawing room at Whitehal? in St. James's Park? Mulberry-garden? or --


Mr. Pin. Hold, hold, do not teach my Wife, where the Men are to be found; I
believe she is the worse for your Town documents already; I bid you keep her in
ignorance as I do.


Mrs. Pin. Indeed be not angry with her Bud, she will tell me nothing of the
Town, though I ask her a thousand times a day.


Mr. Pin. Then you are very inquisitive to know, I find?


Mrs. Pin. Not I indeed, Dear, I hate London; our Placehouse in the Country is
worth a thousand often, would I were there again.


Mr. Pin. So you shall I warrant; but were you not talking of Plays, and
Players, when I came in? you are her encourager in such discourses.


Mrs. Pin. No indeed, Dear, she chid me just now for liking the Player Men.


Mr. Pin. Nay, if she be so innocent as to own to me her likeing them, there is
no hurt in it --

[Aside. Come my poor Rogue, but thou like none better then me?


Mrs. Pin. Yes indeed, but I do, the Player Men are finer Folks.


Mr. Pin. But you love none better then me?


Mrs. Pin. You are mine own Dear Bud, and I know you, I hate a Stranger.


Mr. Pin. Ay, my Dear, you must love me only, and not be like the naughty Town
Women, who only hate their Husbands, and love every Man else, love Plays,
Visits, fine Coaches, fine Clothes, Fidles, Balls, Treates, and so lead a
wicked Town-life.


Mrs. Pin. Nay, if to enjoy all these things be a Town-life, London is not so
bad a place, Dear.


Mr. Pin. How! if you love me, you must hate London.


Ali. The Fool has forbid me discovering to her the pleafures of the Town, and
he is now setting her a gog upon them himself.


Mrs. Pin. But, Husband, do the Town-women love the Player Men too?


Mr. Pin. Yes, I warrant you.


Mrs. Pin. Ay, I warrant you.


Mr. Pin. Why, you do not, I hope?


Mrs. Pin. No, no, Bud; but why have we no Player-men in the Country?


Mr. Pin. Ha -- Mrs. Minx, ask me no more to go to a Play.


Mrs. Pin. Nay, why, Love? I did not care for going; but when you forbid me,
you make me as't were desire it.


Alith. So 'twill be in other things, I warrant.

[Aside.
Mrs. Pin. Pray, let me go to a Play, Dear.


Mr. Pin. Hold your Peace, I wo'not.


Mrs. Pin. Why, Love?


Mr. Pin. Why, I Will tell you.


Alith. Nay, if he tell her, she will give him more cause to forbid her that place.

[Aside.
Mrs. Pin. Pray, why, Dear?


Mr. Pin. First, you like the Actors, and the Gallants may like you.


Mrs. Pin. What, a homely Country Girl? no Bud, no body will like me.


Mr. Pin. I tell you, yes, they may.


Mrs. Pin. No, no, you jest -- I will not believe you, I will go.


Mr. Pin. I tell you then, that one of the lewdest Fellows in Town, who saw you
there, told me he was in love with you.


Mrs. Pin. Indeed! who, who, pray who wast?


Mr. Pin. I Have gone too far, and slipped before I was aware; how overjoyed she is!


[Aside. Mrs. Pin. Was it any Hampshire Gallant, any of our Neighbors? I
promise you, I am beholding to him.


Mr. Pin. I promise you, you lie; for he would but ruin you, as he has done
hundreds: he has no other love for Women, but that, such as he, look upon Women
like Basilicks, but to destroy'em.


Mrs. Pin. Ay, but if he loves me, why should he ruin me? answer me to that:
methinks he should not, I would do him no harm.


Alith. Hah, ha, ha.


Mr. Pin. It Is very well; but I Will keep him from doing you any harm, or me
either.

Enter Sparkish and Harcourt. But here comes Company, get you in, get you in.


Mrs. Pin. But pray, Husband, is he a pretty Gentleman, that loves me?


Mr. Pin. In baggage, in.

[Thrusts her in: shuts the door. What all the lewd Libertines of the Town
brought to my Lodging, by this easy Coxcomb! God's Death I Will not suffer it.


Spar. Here Harcourt, do you approve my choice? Dear, little Rogue, I told you,
I Would bring you acquainted with all my Friends, the wits, and --

[ Harcourt salutes her.
Mr. Pin. Ay, they shall know her, as well as you your self will, I warrant you.


Spar. This is one of those, my pretty Rogue, that are to dance at your Wedding
to morrow; and him you must bid welcome ever, to what you and I have.


Mr. Pin. Monstrous! --

[Aside.
Spar. Harcourt how do thou like her, Faith? Nay, Dear, do not look down; I
should hate to have a Wife of mine out of countenance at any thing.


Mr. Pin. Wonderful!


Spar. Tell me, I say, Harcourt, how do thou like her? thou have star'd upon
her enough, to resolve me.


Har. So infinitely well, that I could wish I had a Mistress too, that might
differ from her in nothing, but her love and engagement to you.


Alith. Sir, Master Sparkish has often told me, that his Acquaintance were all
Wits and Raillieurs, and now I find it.


Spar. No, by the Universe, Madam, he does not railIy now; you may believe him:
I do assure you, he is the honestest, worthyest, true hearted Gentleman -- A
man of such perfect honor, he would say nothing to a Lady, he does not mean.


Mr. Pin. Praising another Man to his Mistress!


Har. Sir, you are so beyond expectation obliging, that --


Spar. Nay, I gad, I am sure you do admire her extremely, I see it in your eyes.
-- He does admire you Madam. -- By the World, don't you?


Har. Yes, above the World, or, the most glorious part of it, her whole Sex;
and till now I never thought I should have envied you, or any Man about to
marry, but you have the best excuse for Marriage I ever knew.


Alith. Nay, now, Sir, I Am satisfied you are of the Society of the Wits, and
Raillieurs, since you cannot spare your Friend, even when he is but too civil
to you; but the surest sign is, since you are an Enemy to Marriage, for that I
hear you hate as much as business or bad Wine.


Har. Truly, Madam, I never was an Enemy to Marriage, till now, because
Marriage was never an Enemy to me before.


Alith. But why, Sir, is Marriage an Enemy to you now? Because it robs you of
your Friend here; for you look upon a Friend married, as one gone into a
Monastery, that is dead to the World.


Har. It Is indeed, because you marry him; I see Madam, you can guess my
meaning: I do confess heartily and openly, I wish it were in my power to break
the Match, by Heavens. I would.


Spar. Poor Franck!'


Alith. Would you be so unkind to me?


Har. No, no, it is not because I would be unkind to you.


Spar. Poor Franck, no gad, it is only his kindness to me.


Pin. Great kindness to you indeed; insensible Fop, let a. Man make love to his
Wife to his face.

[Aside.
Spar. Come dear Franck, for all my Wife there that shall be, thou shall enjoy
me sometimes dear Rogue; by my honor, we Men of wit condole for our deceased
Brother in Marriage, as much as for one dead in earnest: I think that was
prettily said of me, ha Harcourt? -- But come Franck, be not not melancholy for
me.


Har. No, I assure you I am not melancholy for you.


Spar. Prithee, Frank, do think my Wife that shall be there a fine Person?


Har. I could gaze upon her, till I became as blind as you are


Spar. How, as I am! how!


Har. Because you are a Lover, and true Lovers are blind; stockblind.


Spar. True, true; but by the World, she has wit too, as well as beauty: go, go
with her into a corner, and try if she has wit, talk to her any thing, she is
bashful before me.


Har. Indeed if a Woman wants wit in a corner, she has it no where.


Alith. Sir, you dispose of me a little before your time. --

[Aside to Sparkish.
Spar. Nay, nay, Madam let me have an earnest of your obedience, or -- go, go,
Madam --

[ Harcourt courts Alithea aside.
Pin. How, Sir, if you are not concerned for the honor of a Wife, I am for
that of a Sister; he shall not debauch her: be a Pander to your own Wife,
bring Men to her, let them make love before your face, thrust'em into a corner
together, then leav'em in private! is this your Town wit and conduct?


Spar. Hah, ha, ha, a silly wise Rogue, would make one laugh more then a stark
Fool, hah, ha: I shall burst. Nay, you shall not disturb'em; I Will vex thee, by
the World.

[Struggles with Pinch. to keep, him from Harc. and Alith.
Alith. The writings are drawn, Sir, settlements made; it is too late, Sir, and
past all revocation.


Har. Then so is my death.


Alith. I would not be unjust to him.


Har. Then why to me so?


Alith. I have no obligation to you.


Har. My love.


Alith. I had his before.


Har. You never had it; he wants you see jealousy, the only infallible sign of
it.


Alith. Love proceeds from esteem; he cannot distrust my virtue, besides he
loves me, or he would not marry me.


Har. Marrying you, is no more sign of his love, then bribing your Woman, that
he may marry you, is a sign of his generosity: Marriage is rather a sign of
interest, then love; and he that marries a fortune, covets a Mistress, not
loves her: But if you take Marriage for a sign of love, take it from me
immediately.


Alith. No, now you have put a scruple in my head; but in short, Sir, to end
our dispute, I must marry him, my reputation would suffer in the World else.


Har. No, if you do marry him, with your pardon, Madam, your reputation suffers
in the World, and you would be thought in necessity for a cloak.


Alith. Nay, now you are rude, Sir. -- Mr. Sparkish, pray come hither, your
Friend here is very troublesome, and very loving.


Har. Hold, hold --

[Aside to Alithea.
Mr. Pin. Do You hear that?


Spar. Why, do you think I Will seem to be jealous, like a Country Bumpkin?


Mr. Pin. No, rather be a Cuckold, like a credulous Cit.


Har. Madam, you would not have been so little generous as to have told him.


Alith. Yes, since you could be so little generous, as to wrong him.


Har. Wrong him, no Man can do it, he is beneath an injury; a Bubble, a Coward, a
senseless Idiot, a Wretch so contemptible to all the World but you, that --


Alith. Hold, do not rail at him, for since he is like to be my Husband, I am
resolved to like him: Nay, I think I am obliged to tell him, you are not his
Friend. -- Master Sparkish, Master Sparkish.


Spar. What, what; now dear Rogue, has not she wit?


Har. Not so much as I thought, and hoped she had.

[Speaks surlily.
Alith. Mr. Sparkish, do you bring People to rail at you?


Har. Madam --


Spar. How! no, but if he does rail at me, it is but in jest I warrant; what we
wits do for one another, and never take any notice of it.


Alith. He spoke so scurrilously of you, I had no patience to hear him; besides
he has been making love to me.


Har. True damned tell-tale-Woman.

[Aside.
Spar. Pshaw, to show his parts -- we wits rail and make love often, but to
show our parts; as we have no affections, so we have no malice, we --


Alith. He said, you were a Wretch, below an injury.


Spar. Pshaw.


Har. Damned, senseless, impudent, virtuous Jade; well since she will not let me
have her, she will do as good, she will make me hate her.


Alith. A Common Bubble.


Spar. Pshaw.


Alith. A Coward.


Spar. Pshaw, pshaw.


Alith. A senseless driveling Idiot.


Spar. How, did he disparage my parts? Nay, then my honor's concerned, I cannot
put up that, Sir; by the World, Brother help me to kill him; [I may draw now,
since we have the odds of him: -- it is a good occasion too before my Mistriss]
--

[Aside. [Offers to draw.
Alith. Hold, hold.


Spar. What, what.


Alith. I must not let them kill the Gentleman neither, for his kindness to me; I
am so far from hating him, that I wish my Gallant had his person and
understanding: -- [Nay if my honor --

[Aside.
Spar. I Will be thy death.


Alith. Hold, hold, indeed to tell the truth, the Gentleman said after all,
that what he spoke, was but out of friendship to you.


Spar. How! say, I am, I am a Fool, that is no wit, out of friendship to me.


Alith. Yes, to try whether I was concerned enough for you, and made love to me
only to be satisfied of my virtue, for your sake.


Har. Kind however --

[Aside.
Spar. Nay, if it were so, my dear Rogue, I ask thee pardon; but why would not
you tell me so, faith.


Har. Because I did not think on it, faith.


Spar. Come, Horner does not come, Harcourt, let us be gone to the new Play. --
Come Madam.


Alith. I will not go, if you intend to leave me alone in the Box, and run into
the pit, as you use to do.


Spar. Pshaw, I Will leave Harcourt with you in the Box, to entertain you, and
that is as good; if I sat in the Box, I should be thought no Judge, but of
trimmings. -- Come away Harcourt, lead her down.

[Exeunt Sparkish, Harcourt, and Alithea.
Pin. Well, go thy ways, for the flower of the true Town Fops, such as spend
their Estates, before they come to'em, and are Cuckolds before they are married.
But let me go look to my own Freehold -- How --


Enter my Lady Fidget, Mistress Dainty Fidget, and Mistress Squeamish. Lad.
Your Servant, Sir, where is your Lady? we are come to wait upon her to the new
Play.


Pin. New Play!


Lad. And my Husband will wait upon you presently.


Pin. Damn your civility -- Madam, by no means, I will not see Sir Jaspar here,
till I have waited upon him at home; nor shall my Wife see you, till she has
waited upon your Ladyship at your lodgings.

[Aside.
Lad. Now we are here, Sir --


Pin. No, Madam.


Dain. Pray, let us see her.


Squeam. We will not stir, till we see her.


Pin. A Pox on you all -- she has locked the door, and is gone abroad.

[Aside. Goes to the door, and returns.
Lad. No, you have locked the door, and she is within.


Dain. They told us below, she was here.


Pin. [Will nothing do? ] -- Well it must out then, to tell you the truth,
Ladies, which I was afraid to let you know before, least it might endanger your
lives, my Wife has just now the Small Pox come out upon her, do not be
frightened; but pray, be gone Ladies, you shall not stay here in danger of your
lives; pray get you gone Ladies.


Lad. No, no, we have all had'em.


Squeam. Alack, alack.


Dain. Come, come, we must see how it goes with her, I understand the disease.


Lad. Come.


Pin. Well, there is no being too hard for Women at their own weapon, lying,
therefore I Will quit the Field.

[Aside. [Exit Pinchwife.
Squeam. Here Is an example of jealousy.


Lad. Indeed as the World goes, I wonder there are no more jealous, since Wives
are so neglected.


Dain. Pshaw, as the World goes, to what end should they be jealous.


Lad. Foh, it is a nasty World.


Squeam. That Men of parts, great acquaintance, and quality should take up
with, and spend themselves and fortunes, in keeping little Playhouse
Creatures, foh.


Lad. Nay, that Women of understanding, great acquaintance, and good quality,
should fall a keeping too of little Creatures, foh.


Squeam. Why, it is the Men of qualities fault, they never visit Women of
honor, and reputation, as they used to do; and have not so much as common
civility, for Ladies of our rank, but use us with the same indifferency, and
ill breeding, as if we were all married to'em.


Lad. She says true, it is an errant shame Women of quality should be so
slighted; methinks, birth, birth, should go for something; I have known Men
admired, courted, and followed for their titles only.


Squeam. Ay, one would think Men of honor should not love no more, than marry
out of their own rank.


Dain. Fie, fie upon'em, they are come to think cross breeding for themselves
best, as well as for their Dogs, and Horses.


Lad. They are Dogs, and Horses for it.


Squeam. One would think if not for love, for vanity a little.


Dain. Nay, they do satisfy their vanity upon us sometimes; and are kind to us
in their report, tell all the World they lie with us.


Lad. Damned Rascals, that we should be only wronged by'em; to report a Man has
had a Person, when he has not had a Person, is the greatest wrong in the whole
World, that can be done to a person.


Squeam. Well, it is an errant shame, Noble Persons should be so wronged, and
neglected.


Lad. But still it is an erranter shame for a Noble Person, to neglect her own
honor, and defame her own Noble Person, with little inconsiderable Fellows,
foh! --


Dain. I suppose the crime against our honor, is the same with a Man of
quality as with another.


Lad. How! no sure the Man of quality is likest one's Husband, and therefore
the fault should be the less.


Dain. But then the pleasure should be the less.


Lad. Fie, fie, fie, for shame Sister, whither shall we ramble? be continent in
your discourse, or I shall hate you.


Dain. Besides an intrigue is so much the more notorious for the man's quality.


Squeam. It Is true, no body takes notice of a private Man, and therefore with
him, it is more secret, and the crime's the less, when it is not known.


Lad. You say true; y faith I think you are in the right on it: it is not an
injury to a Husband, till it be an injury to our honors; so that a Woman of
honor looses no honor with a private Person; and to say truth --


Dain. So the little Fellow is grown a private Person -- with her --

[Apart to Squeamish.
Lad. But still my dear, dear Honor.


Enter Sir Jaspar, Horner, Dorilant. Sr. Jas. Ay, my dear, dear of honor, thou
have still so much honor in thy mouth --


Hor. That she has none elsewhere --

[Aside.
Lad. Oh, what do you mean to bring in these upon us?


Dain. Foh, these are as bad as Wits.


Squeam. Foh!


Lad. Let us leave the Room.


Sr. Jas. Stay, stay, faith to tell you the naked truth.


Lad. Fie, Sir Jaspar, do not use that word naked.


Sr. Jas. Well, well, in short I have business at Whitehal, and cannot go to
the play with you, therefore would have you go --


Lad. With those two to a Play?


Sr. Jas. No, not with the other, but with Mr. Horner, there can be no more
scandal to go with him, than with Mr. Tatle, or Master Limberham.


Lad. With that nasty Fellow! no -- no.


Sr. Jas. Nay, prithee Dear, hear me.

[Whispers to Lady Fid.
Hor. Ladies.

[ Horner, Dorilant drawing near Squeamish, and Daint.
Dain. Stand off.


Squeam. Do not approach us.


Dain. You heard with the wits, you are obscenity all over.


Squeam. And I would as soon look upon a Picture of Adam and Eve, without fig
leaves, as any of you, if I could help it, therefore keep off, and do not make
us sick.


Dor. What a Devil are these?


Hor. Why, these are pretenders to honor, as critics to wit, only by
censuring others; and as every raw peevish, outof-humour'd, affected, dull,
Tea-drinking, Arithmetical Fop sets up for a wit, by railing at men of sense,
so these for honor, by railing at the Court, and Ladies of as great honor, as
quality.


Sr. Jas. Come, Mr. Horner, I must desire you to go with these Ladies to the
Play, Sir.


Hor. I! Sir.


Sr. Jas. Ay, ay, come, Sir.


Hor. I must -beg your pardon, Sir, and theirs, I will not be seen in Women's
Company in public again for the World.


Sr. Jas. Ha, ha, strange Aversion!


Squeam. No, he is for Women's company in private.


Sr. Jas. He -- poor Man -- he! hah, ha, ha.


Dain. It Is a greater shame amongst lewd fellows to be seen in virtuous Women's
company, than for the Women to be seen with them.


Hor. Indeed, Madam, the time was I only hated virtuous Women, but now I hate
the other too; I beg your pardon Ladies.


Lad. You are very obliging, Sir, because we would not be troubled with you.


Sr. Jas. In sober sadness he shall go.


Dor. Nay, if he wo'not, I am ready to wait upon the Ladies; and I think I am
the fitter Man.


Sr. Jas. You, Sir, no I thank you for that -- Master Horner is a privileged
Man amongst the virtuous Ladies, 'twill be a great while before you are so;
heh, he, he, he is my Wive's Gallant, heh, he he; no pray withdraw, Sir, for as
I take it, the virtuous Ladies have no business with you.


Dor. And I am sure, he can have none with them: it is strange a Man cannot come
amongst virtuous Women now, but upon the same terms, as Men are admitted into
the great Turks Seraglio; but Heavens keep me, from being an hombre Player
with them: but where is Pinchwife --

[Exit Dorilant.
Sr. Jas. Come, come, Man; what avoid the sweet society of Womankind? that
sweet, soft, gentle, tame, noble Creature Woman, made for Man's Companion --


Hor. So is that soft, gentle, tame, and more noble Creature a Spaniel, and has
all their tricks, can fawn, lie down, suffer beating, and fawn the more; barks
at your Friends, when they come to see you; makes your bed hard, gives you
Fleas, and the mange sometimes: and all the difference is, the Spaniel's the
more faithful Animal, and fawns but upon one Master.


Sr. Jas. Heh, he, he.


Squeam. O the rude Beast.


Dain. Insolent brute.


Lad. Brute! stinking mortified rotten French Weather, to dare --


Sr. Jas. Hold, an't please your Ladyship; for shame Master, Horner your Mother
was a Woman -- [Now shall I never reconcile'em]

[Aside. Hark you, Madam, take my advice in your anger; you know you often want
one to make up your droling pack of hombre Players; and you may cheat him
easily, for he is an ill Gamester, and consequently loves play: Besides you
know, you have but two old civil Gentlemen ( with stinking breaths too) to wait
upon you abroad, take in the third, into your service; the other are but crazy:
and a Lady should have a supernumerary Gentleman Usher, as a supernumerary
Coachhorse, least sometimes you should be forced to stay at home.


Lad. But are you sure he loves play, and has money?


Sr. Jas. He loves play as much as you, and has money as much as I.


Lad. Then I am contented to make him pay for his scurrillity; money makes up
in a measure all other wants in Men. -- Those whom we cannot make hold for
Gallants, we make fine.

[Aside.
Sr. Jas. So, so; now to mollify, to wheedle him, --

[Aside. Master Horner will you never keep civil Company, methinks it is time
now, since you are only fit for them: Come, come, Man you must even fall to
visiting our Wives, eating at our Tables, drinking Tea with our virtuous
Relations after dinner, dealing Cards to'em, reading Plays, and Gazets to'em,
picking Fleas out of their shocks for'em, collecting Receipts, New Songs,
Women, Pages, and Footmen for'em.


Hor. I hope they will afford me better employment, Sir.


Sr. Jas. Heh, he, he, it is fit you know your work before you come into your
place; and since you are unprovided of a Lady to flatter, and a good house to
eat at, pray frequent mine, and call my Wife Mistress, and she shall call you
Gallant, according to the custom.


Hor. Who I? --


Sr. Jas. Faith, thou shall for my sake, come for my sake only.


Hor. For your sake --


Sr. Jas. Come, come, here is a Gamester for you, let him be a little familiar
sometimes; nay, what if a little rude; Gamesters may be rude with Ladies, you
know.


Lad. Yes, losing Gamesters have a privilege with Women.


Hor. I always thought the contrary, that the winning Gamester had most
privilege with Women, for when you have lost your money to a Man, you will loose
any thing you have, all you have, they say, and he may use you as he pleases.


Sr. Jas. Heh, he, he, well, win or loose you shall have your liberty with her.


Lad. As he behaves himself; and for your sake I Will give him admittance and
freedom.


Hor. All sorts of freedom, Madam?


Sr. Jas. Ay, ay, ay, all forts of freedom thou can take, and so go to her,
begin thy new employment; wheedle her, jest with her, and be better acquainted
one with another.


Hor. I think I know her already, therefore may venture with her, my secret for
hers --

[Aside. [ Horner, and Lady Fidget whisper.
Sr. Jas. Sister Cuz, I have provided an innocent Play-fellow for you there.


Dain. Who he!


Squeam. There Is a Play-fellow indeed.


Sr. Jas. Yes sure, what he is good enough to play at Cards, Blind-mans buff,
or the fool with sometimes.


Squeam. Foh, we will have no such Play-fellows.


Dain. No, Sir, you shall not choose Play-fellows for us, we thank you.


Sr. Jas. Nay, pray hear me.

[Whispering to them.
Lad. But, poor Gentleman, could you be so generous? so truly a Man of honor,
as for the sakes of us Women of honor, to cause your self to be reported no
Man? No Man! and to suffer your self the greatest shame that could fall upon a
Man, that none might fall upon us Women by your conversation; but indeed, Sir,
as perfectly, perfectly, the same Man as before your going into France, Sir; as
perfectly, perfectly, Sir.


Hor. As perfectly, perfectly, Madam; nay, I scorn you should take my word; I
desire to be tried only, Madam.


Lad. Well, that is spoken again like a Man of honor, all Men of honor desire
to come to the test: But indeed, generally you Men report such things of your
selves, one does not know how, or whom to believe; and it is come to that pass,
we dare not take your words, no more than your Tailors, without some staid
Servant of yours be bound with you; but I have so strong a faith in your
honor, dear, dear, noble Sir, that I Would forfeit mine for yours at any time,
dear Sir.


Hor. No, Madam, you should not need to forfeit it for me, I have given you
security already to save you harmless my late reputation being so well known in
the World, Madam.


Lady. But if upon any future falling out, or upon a suspicion of my taking the
trust out of your hands, to employ some other, you your self should betray your
trust, dear Sir; I mean, if you will give me leave to speak obscenely, you might
tell, dear Sir.


Hor. If I did, no body would believe me; the reputation of impotency is as
hardly recovered again in the World, as that of cowardice, dear Madam.


Lad. Nay then, as one may say, you may do your worst, dear, dear, Sir.


Sr. Jas. Come, is your Ladyship reconciled to him yet? have you agreed on
matters? for I must be gone to Whitehal.


Lad. Why, indeed, Sir Jaspar, Master Horner is a thousand, thousand times a
better Man, than I thought him: Cosen Squeamish, Sister Dainty, I can name him
now, truly not long ago you know, I thought his very name obscenity, and I
would as soon have lain with him, as have named him.


Sr. Jas. Very likely, poor Madam.


Dain. I believe it.


Squeam. No doubt on it.


Sr. Jas. Well, well -- that your Ladyship is as virtuous as any she, -- I
know, and him all the Town knows -- heh, he, he; therefore now you like him,
get you gone to your business together; go, go, to your business, I say,
pleasure, whilst I go to my pleasure, business.


Lad. Come than dear Gallant.


Hor. Come away, my dearest Mistress.


Sr. Jas. So, so, why it is as I Would have it.

[Exit Sr. Jaspar.
Hor. And as I Would have it.


Lad. Who for his business, from his Wife will run;
Takes the best care, to have her business done.
[Exeunt omnes.
ACT 3. SCENE 1.
Alithea, and Mrs. Pinchwife. Alith. Sister, what ailes you, you are grown
melancholy?


Mrs. Pin. Would it not make any one melancholy, to see you go every day
fluttering about abroad, whilst I must stay at home like a poor lonely, sullen
Bird in a cage?


Alit. Ay, Sister, but you came young, and just from the nest to your cage, so
that I thought you liked it; and could be as cheerful in it, as others that took
their flight themselves early, and are hopping abroad in the open Air.


Mrs. Pin. Nay, I confess I was quiet enough, till my Husband told me, what
pure lives, the London Ladies live abroad, with their dancing, meetings, and
junketings, and dressed every day in their best gowns; and I warrant you, play at
nine Pins every day of the week, so they do.


Enter Mr. Pinchwife. Mr. Pin. Come, what is here to do? you are putting the
Town pleasures in her head, and setting her a longing.


Alit. Yes, after Nine-pins; you suffer none to give her those longings, you
mean, but your self.


Mr. Pin. I tell her of the vanities of the Town like a Confessor.


Alith. A Confessor! just such a Confessor, as he that by forbidding a silly
Oastler to grease the Horses teeth, taught him to do it.


Mr. Pin. Come Mistress Flippant, good Precepts are lost, when bad Examples are
still before us; the liberty you take abroad makes her hanker after it; and out
of humor at home, poor Wretch! sho desired not to come to London, I would
bring her.


Alith. Very well.


Mr. Pin. She has been this week in Town, and never desired, till this
afternoon, to go abroad.


Alith. Was she not at a Play yesterday?


Mr. Pin. Yes, but she never asked me; I was my self the cause of her going.


Alith. Then if she ask you again, you are the cause of her asking, and not my
example.


Mr. Pin. Well, to morrow night I shall be rid of you; and the next day before
it is light, she and I Will be rid of the Town, and my dreadful apprehensions:
Come, be not melancholy, for thou shall go into the Country after to morrow,
Dearest.


Alith. Great comfort.


Mrs. Pin. Pish, what do you tell me of the Country for?


Mr. Pin. How Is this! what, pish at the Country?


Mrs. Pin. Let me alone, I am not well.


Mr. Pin. O, if that be all -- what ailes my dearest?


Mrs. Pin. Truly I don't know; but I have not been well, since you told me
there was a Gallant at the Play in love with me.


Mr. Pin. Ha --


Alith. That Is by my example too.


Mr. Pin. Nay, if you are not well, but are so concerned, because a lewd
Fellow chanced to lie, and say he liked you, you will make me sick too.


Mrs. Pin. Of what sickness?


Mr.Pin. O, of that which is worse than the Plague. Jealousy.


Mrs. Pin. Pish, you jear, I Am sure there is no such disease in our Receipt-book
at home.


Mr. Pin. No, thou never met'st with it, poor Innocent -- well, if thou Cuckold
me, 'twill be my own fault -- for Cuckolds and Bastards, are generally makers
of their own fortune.

[Aside.
Mrs. Pin. Well, but pray Bud, let us go to a Play to night.


Mr. Pin. It Is just done, she comes from it; but why are you so eager to see a
Play?


Mrs. Pin. Faith Dear, not that I care one pin for their talk there; but I like
to look upon the Player-men, and would see, if I could, the Gallant you say
loves me; that is all dear Bud.


Mr. Pin. Is that all dear Bud?


Alith. This proceeds from my example.


Mrs. Pin. But if the Play be done, let us go abroad however, dear Bud.


Mr. Pin. Come have a little patience, and thou shall go into the Country on
Friday.


Mrs. Pin. Therefore I would see first some sights, to tell my Neighbors of.
Nay, I will go abroad, that is once.


Alith. I Am the cause of this desire too.


Mr. Pin. But now I think on it, who was the cause of Horners coming to my
Lodging to day? that was you.


Alith. No, you, because you would not let him see your handsome Wife out of
your Lodging.


Mrs, Pin. Why, O Lord! did the Gentleman come hither to see me indeed?


Mr. Pin. No, no; -- You are not cause of that damned question too, Mistress
Alithea? -- [Well she is in the right of it; he is in love with my Wife -- and
comes after her -- it is so -- but I Will nip his love in the bud; least he should
follow us into the Country, and break his Chariot-wheel near our house, on
purpose for an excuse to come to it; but I think I know the Town.

[Aside.
Mrs. Pin. Come, pray Bud, let us go abroad before it is late; for I will go,
that is flat and plain.


Mr. Pin. So! the obstinacy already of a Town-wife, and I must, whilst she is
here, humor her like one. Sister, how shall we do, that she may not be seen,
or known?

[Aside.
Alith. Let her put on her Mask.


Mr. Pin. Pshaw, a Mask makes People but the more inquisitive, and is as
ridiculous a disguise, as a stage-beard; her shape, stature, habit will be
known: and if we should meet with Horner, he would be sure to take acquaintance
with us, must wish her joy, kiss her, talk to her, leer upon her, and the Devil
and all; no I Will not use her to a Mask, it is dangerous; for Masks have made
more Cuckolds, than the best faces that ever were known.


Alith. How will you do then?


Mrs. Pin. Nay, shall we go? the Exchange will be shut, and I have a mind to
see that.


Mr. Pin. So -- I have it -- I Will dress her up in the Suit, we are to carry
down to her Brother, little Sir James; nay, I understand the Town tricks: Come
let us go dress her; a Mask! no -- a Woman masked, like a covered Dish, gives a
Man curiosity, and appetite, when, it may be, uncovered, 'twou'd turn his
stomach; no, no.


Alith. Indeed your comparison is something a greasy one: but I had a gentle
Gallant, used to say, a Beauty masked, liked the Sun in Eclipse, gathers
together more gazers, than if it shined out.

[Exeunt.
The Scene changes to the new Exchange: Enter Horner, Harcourt, Dorilant. Dor.
Engaged to Women, and not Sup with us?


Hor. Ay, a Pox on'em all.


Har. You were much a more reasonable Man in the morning, and had as noble
resolutions against'em, as a Widdower of a weeks liberty.


Dor. Did I ever think, to see you keep company with Women in vain.


Hor. In vain! no -- it is, since I cannot love'em, to be revenged on'em.


Har Now your Sting is gone, you looked in the Box amongst all those Women,
like a drone in the hive, all upon you;should and ill-us'd by'em all, and
thrust from one side to the other.


Dar. Yet he must be buzzing amongst'em still, like other old beetle-headed,
lycorish drones; avoid'em, and hate'm as they hate you.


Hor, Because I do hate'em, and would hate'em yet more, I Will frequent'em; you
may see by Marriage, nothing makes a Man hate a Woman more, than her constant
conversation: In short, I converse with them, as you do with rich Fools, to laugh
at'em, and use'em ill.


Dor. But I would no more Sup with Women, unless I could lie with them, than Sup
with a rich Coxcomb, unless I could cheat him.


Hor. Yes, I have known thee Sup with a Fool, for his drinking, if he could set
out your hand that way only, you were satisfied; and if he were a
Wine-swallowing mouth 'twas enough.


Har. Yes, a Man drink's often with a Fool, as he tosses with a Marker, only to
keep his hand in Ure; but do the Ladies drink?


Hor. Yes, Sir, and I shall have the pleasure at least of laying'em flat with a
Bottle; and bring as much scandal that way upon'em, as formerly the other.


Har. Perhaps you may prove as weak a Brother amongst'em that way, as the other.


Dor. Foh, drinking with Women, is as unnatural, as scolding with them; but it is
a pleasure of decayed Fornicators, and the basest way of quenching Love.


Har. Nay, it is drowning Love, instead of quenching it; but leave us for civil
Women too!


Dor. Ay, when he cannot be the better for'em; we hardly pardon a Man, that
leaves his Friend for a Wench, and that is a pretty lawful call.


Hor. Faith, I would not leave you for'em, if they would not drink.


Dor. Who would disappoint his Company at Lewis's, for a Gossiping?


Har. Foh, Wine and Women good apart, together as nauseous as Sack and Sugar:
But hark you, Sir, before you go, a little of your advice, an old maimed
General, when unfit for action is fittest for Counsel; I have other designs
upon Women, than eating and drinking with them: I am in love with Sparkish's
Mistress, whom he is to marry to morrow, now how shall I get her?


Enter Sparkish, looking about. Hor. Why, here comes one will help you to her.


Har. He! he, I tell you, is my Rival, and will hinder my love.


Hor. No, a foolish Rival, and a jealous Husband assist their Rivals designs;
for they are sure to make their Women hate them, which is the first step to
their love, for another Man.


Har. But I cannot come near his Mistress, but in his company.


Hor. Still the better for you, for Fools are most easily cheated, when they
themselves are accessaries; and he is to be bubled of his Mistress, as of his
Money, the common Mistress, by keeping him company.


Spar. Who is that, that is to be bubled? Faith let me snack, I have not met with
a buble since Christmas: gad; I think bubles are like their Brother Woodcocks,
go out with the cold weather.


Har. A Pox, he did not hear all I hope.

[Apart to Horner.
Spar. Come, you bubling Rogues you, where do we sup -- Oh, Harcourt, my
Mistress tells me, you have been making fierce love to her all the Play long,
hah, ha -- but I --


Har. I make love to her?


Spar. Nay, I forgive thee; for I think I know thee, and I-know her, but I am
sure I know my self.


Har. Did she tell you so? I see all Women are like these of the Fxchange, who
to enhance the price of their commodities, report to their fond Customers
offers which were never made'em.


Hor. Ay, Women are as apt to tell before the intrigue, as Men after it, and so
show themselves the vainer Sex; but have thou a Mistress, Sparkish? it is as
hard for me to believe it, as that thou ever had a buble, as you bragged just
now.


Spar. O your Servant, Sir; are you at your raillery, Sir? but we were some of
us beforehand with you to day at the Play: the Wits were something bold with
you, Sir; did you not hear us laugh?


Har. Yes, But I thought you had gone to Plays, to laugh at the Poets wit, not
at your own.


Spar. Your Servant, Sir, no I thank you; gad I go to a Play as to a
Country-treat, I carry my own wine to one, and my own wit to the other, or else
I Am sure I should not be merry at either; and the reason why we are so often
louder, than the Players, is, because we think we speak more wit, and so become
the Poets Rivals in his audience: for to tell you the truth, we hate the silly
Rogues; nay, so much that we find fault even with their Bawdy upon the Stage,
whilst we talk nothing else in the Pit as loud.


Hor. But, why should thou hate the silly Poets, thou have too much wit to
be one, and they like Whores are only hated by each other; and thou do scorn
writing, I Am sure.


Spar. Yes, I Would have you to know, I scorn writing; but Women, Women, that make
Men do all foolish things, make'em write Songs too; every body does it: it is
even as common with Lovers, as playing with fans; and you can no more help
Rhyming to your Phyllis, than drinking to your Phyllis.


Har. Nay, Poetry in love is no more to be avoided, than jealousy.


Dor. But the Poets damned your Songs, did they?


Spar. Damn the Poets, they turn'd'em into Burlesque, as they call it; that
Burlesque is a Hocus-Pocus-trick, they have got, which by the virtue of Hictius
doctius, topsey turvey, they make a wise and witty Man in the World, a Fool
upon the Stage you know not how; and it is therefore I hate'em too, for I know
not but it may be my own case; for they will put a Man into a Play for looking a
Squint: Their Predecessors were contented to make Serving-men only their
StageFools, but these Rogues must have Gentlemen, with a Pox to'em, nay
Knights: and indeed you shall hardly see a Fool upon the Stage, but he is a
Knight; and to tell you the truth, they have kept me these six years from being
a Knight in earnest, for fear of being knighted in a Play, and dubbed a Fool.


Dor. Blame'em not, they must follow their Copy, the Age.


Har. But why should thou be afraid of being in a Play, who expose your self
every day in the Play Houses, and as public Places.


Hor. It Is but being on the Stage, instead of standing on a Bench in the Pit.


Dor. Don't you give money to Painters to draw you like? and are you afraid of
your Pictures, at length in a Playhouse, where all your Mistresses may see you.


Spar. A Pox, Painters don't draw the Small Pox, or Pimples in ones face; come
damn all your silly Authors whatever, all Books and Booksellers, by the World,
and all Readers, courteous or uncourteous.


Har. But, who comes here, Sparkish?


Enter Mr. Pinchwife, and his Wife in Man's Clothes, Alithea, Lucy her Maid.
Spar. Oh hide me, there is my Mistress too.

[ Sparkish hides himself behind Harcourt.
Har. She sees you.


Spar. But I will not see her, it is time to go to Whitehal, and I must not fail
the drawing Room.


Har. Pray, first carry me, and reconcile me to her.


Spar. Another time, faith the King will have sup't.


Har. Not with the worse stomach for thy absence; thou art one of those Fools,
that think their attendance at the King's Meals, as necessary as his
Physicians, when you are more troublesome to him, than his Doctors, or his Dogs.


Spar. Pshaw, I know my interest, Sir, prithee hide me.


Hor. Your Servant, Pinchwife, -- what he knows us not --


Mr. Pin. Come along.

[To his Wife aside.
Mrs. Pin. Pray, have you any Ballads, give me six-penny worth?


Clasp. We have no Ballads.


Mrs. Pin. Then give me Covent-garden-Drollery, and a Play or two -- Oh here is
Tarugos Wiles, and the Slighted Maiden, I Will have them.


Mr. Pin. No, Plays are not for your reading; come along, will you discover
your self?

[Apart to her.
Hor. Who is that pretty Youth with him, Sparkish?


Spar. I believe his Wife's Brother, because he is something like her, but I
never saw her but once.


Hor. Extremely handsome, I have seen a face like it too; let us follow'em.

[Exeunt Pinchwife, Mistress Pinchwife. Alithea, Lucy, Horner, Dorilant
following them.
Har. Come, Sparkish, your Mistress saw you, and will be angry you go not to
her; besides I would fain be reconciled to her, which none but you can do, dear
Friend.


Spar. Well that is a better reason, dear Friend; I would not go near her now,
for here is, or my own sake, but I can deny you nothing; for though I have known
thee a great while, never go, if I do not love thee, as well as a new
Acquaintance.


Har. I am obliged to you indeed, dear Friend, I would be well with her only,
to be well with thee still; for these ties to Wives usually dissolve all ties
to Friends: I would be contented, she should enjoy you a nights, but I would
have you to my self a days, as I have had, dear Friend.


Spar. And thou shall enjoy me a days, dear, dear Friend, never stir; and I Will
be divorced from her, sooner than from thee; come along --


Har. So we are hard put to it, when we make our Rival our Procurer; but neither
she, nor her Brother, would let me come near her now: when all is done, a Rival
is the best cloak to steal to a Mistress under, without suspicion; and when we
have once got to her as we desire, we throw him off like other Cloaks.

[Aside. [Exit Sparkish, and Harcourt following him.
Re-enter Mr. Pinchwife, Mistress Pinchwife in Man's Clothes. Mr. Pin. Sister,
if you will not go, we must leave you --

[To Alithea. The Fool her Gallant, and she, will muster up all the young
santerers of this place, and they will leave their dear Seamstresses to follow
us; what a swarm of Cuckolds, and Cuckold-makers are here?

[Aside. Come let us be gone Mistress Margery.


Mrs. Pin. Don't you believe that, I have not half my belly full of sights yet.


Mr. Pin. Then walk this way.


Mrs. Pin. Lord, what a power of brave signs are here! stay -- the Bull's-head,
the Rams-head, and the Stags-head, Dear --


Mr. Pin. Nay, if every Husbands proper sign here were visible, they would be
all alike.


Mrs. Pin. What do you mean by that, Bud?


Mr. Pin. It Is no matter -- no matter, Bud.


Mrs. Pin. Pray tell me; nay, I will know.


Mr. Pin. They would be all Bulls, Stags, and Rams heads.

[Exeunt Mr. Pinchwife, Mrs. Pinchwife.
Re-enter Sparkish, Harcourt, Alithea, Lucy, at the other door. Spar. Come, dear
Madam, for my sake you shall be reconciled to him.


Alith. For your sake I hate him.


Har. That Is something too cruel, Madam, to hate me for his sake.


Spar. Ay indeed, Madam, too, too cruel to me, to hate my Friend for my sake.


Alith. I hate him because he is your Enemy; and you ought to hate him too, for
making love to me, if you love me.


Spar. That Is a good one, I hate a Man for loving you; if he did love you, it is
but what he cannot help, and it is your fault not his, if he admires you: I hate
a Man for being of my opinion, I Will never do it, by the World.


Alith. Is it for your honor or mine, to suffer a Man to make love to me, who
am to marry you to morrow?


Spar. Is it for your honor or mine, to have me jealous? That he makes love to
you, is a sign you are handsome; and that I am not jealous, is a sign you are
virtuous, that I think is for your honor.


Alith. But it is your honor too, I am concerned for.


Har. But why, dearest Madam, will you be more concerned for his honor, than
he is himself; let his honor alone for my sake, and his, he, he, has no honor
--


Spar. How Is that?


Har. But what, my dear Friend can guard himself.


Spar. O ho -- that is right again.


Har. Your care of his honor argues his neglect of it, which is no honor to
my dear Friend here; therefore once more, let his honor go which way it will,
dear Madam.


Spar. Ay, ay, were it for my honor to marry a Woman, whose virtue I
suspected, and could not trust her in a Friends hands?


Alith. Are you not afraid to loose me?


Har. He afraid to loose you, Madam! No, no -- you may see how the most
estimable, and most glorious Creature in the World, is valued by him; will you
not see it?


Spar. Right, honest Franck, I have that noble value for her, that I cannot be
jealous of her.


Alith. You mistake him, he means you care not for me, nor who has me.


Spar. Lord, Madam, I see you are jealous; will you wrest a poor Man's meaning
from his words?


Alith. You astonish me, Sir, with your want of jealousy.


Spar. And you make me guiddy, Madam, with your jealousy, and fears, and
virtue, and honor; gad, I see virtue makes a Woman as troublesome, as a little
reading, or learning.


Alith. Monstrous!


Lucy. [Well to see what easy Husbands these Women of quality can meet with, a
poor Chamber maid can never have such Lady-like luck; besides he is thrown away
upon her, she will make no use of her fortune, her blessing, none to a Gentleman,
for a pure Cuckold, for it requires good breeding to be a Cuckold.

[Behind.
Alith. I tell you then plainly, he pursues me to marry me.


Spar. Pshaw --


Har. Come, Madam, you see you strive in vain to make him jealous of me; my
dear Friend is the kindest Creature in the World to me.


Spar. Poor fellow.


Har. But his kindness only is not enough for me, without your favor; your
good opinion, dear Madam, it is that must perfect my happiness: good Gentleman
he believes all I say, would you would do so, jealous of me! I would not wrong
him nor you for the World.


Spar. Look you there; hear him, hear him, and do not walk away so.

[ Alithea walks carelessly, to and fro.
Har. I love you, Madam, so --


Spar. How Is that! Nay -- now you begin to go too far indeed.


Har. So much I confess, I say I love you, that I would not have you miserable,
and cast your self away upon so unworthy, and inconsiderable a thing, as what
you see here,

[Clapping bis hand on his breast, points at Sparkish.
Spar. No faith, I believe thou would not, now his meaning is plain: but I
knew before thou would not wrong me nor her.


Har. No, no, Heavens forbid, the glory of her Sex should fall so low as into
the embraces of such a contemptible Wretch, the last of Mankind -- my dear
Friend here -- I injure him.

[Embracing Sparkish.
Alith. Very well.


Spar. No, no, dear Friend, I knew it Madam, you see he will rather wrong
himself than me, in giving himself such names.


Alith. Do not you understand him yet?


Spar. Yes, how modestly he speaks of himself, poor Fellow.


Alith. Methinks he speaks impudently of your self, since -- before your self
too, insomuch that I can no longer suffer his scurrilous abusiveness to you, no
more than his love to me.

[Offers to go.
Spar. Nay, nay, Madam, pray stay, his love to you: Lord, Madam, has he not
spoke yet plain enough?


Alith. Yes indeed, I should think so.


Spar. Well then, by the World, a Man cannot speak civilly to a Woman now, but
presently she says, he makes love to her: Nay, Madam, you shall stay, with your
pardon, since you have not yet understood him, till he has made an
eclaircisment of his love to you, that is what kind of love it is; answer to
thy Catechism: Friend, do you love my Mistress here?


Har. Yes, I wish she would not doubt it.


Spar. But how do you love her?


Har. With all my Soul.


Alith. I thank him, methinks he speaks plain enough now.


Spar. You are out still.

[to Alithea. But with what kind of love, Harcourt?


Har. With the best, and truest love in the World.


Spar. Look you there then, that is with no matrimonial love, I Am sure.


Alith. How Is that, do you say matrimonial love is not best?


Spar. Gad, I went too far e're I was aware: But speak for thy self Harcourt,
you said you would not wrong me, nor her.


Har. No, no, Madam, e'n take him for Heaven's sake.


Spar. Look you there, Madam.


Har. Who should in all justice be yours, he that loves you most.

[Claps his hand on his breast.
Alith. Look you there, Mr. Sparkish, who is that?


Spar. Who should it be? go on Harcourt.


Har. Who loves you more than Women, Titles, or fortune Fools.

[Points at Sparkish.
Spar. Look you there, he means me still, for he points at me.


Alith. Ridiculous!


Har. Who can only match your Faith, and constancy in love.


Spar. Ay.


Har. Who knows, if it be possible, how to value so much beauty and virtue.


Spar. Ay.


Har. Whose love can no more be equaled in the world, than that Heavenly form
of yours.


Spar. No --


Har. Who could no more suffer a Rival, than your absence, and yet could no
more suspect your virtue, than his own constancy in his love to you.


Spar. No --


Har. Who in fine loves you better than his eyes, that first made him love you.


Spar. Ay -- nay, Madam, faith you shall not go, till --


Alith. Have a care, lest you make me stay too long --


Spar. But till he has saluted you; that I may be assured you are friends,
after his honest advice and declaration: Come pray, Madam, be friends with him.


Enter Master Pinchwife, Mistress Pinchwife. Alith. You must pardon me, Sir,
that I am not yet so obedient to you.


Mr. Pin. What, invite your Wife to kiss Men? Monstrous, are you not ashamed? I
will never forgive you.


Spar. Are you not ashamed, that I should have more confidence in the chastity
of your Family, than you have; you must not teach me, I am a man of honor,
Sir, though I am frank and free; I am frank, Sir --


Mr. Pin. Very frank, Sir, to share your Wife with your friends.


Spar. He is an humble, menial Friend, such as reconciles the differences of
the Marriage Bed; you know Man and Wife do not always agree, I design him for
that use, therefore would have him well with my Wife.


Mr. Pin. A menial Friend -- you will get a great many menial Friends, by
showing your Wife as you do.


Spar. What then, it may be I have a pleasure in it, as I have to show fine
Clothes, at a Playhouse the first day, and count money before poor Rogues.


Mr. Pin. He that shows his wife, or money will be in danger of having them
borrowed sometimes.


Spar. I love to be envied, and would not marry a Wife, that I alone could
love; loving alone is as dull, as eating alone; is it not a frank age, and I am
a frank Person? and to tell you the truth, it may be I love to have Rivals in a
Wife, they make her seem to a Man still, but as a kept Mistress; and so good
night, for I must to Whitehal. Madam, I hope you are now reconciled to my
Friend; and so I wish you a good night, Madam, and sleep if you can, for to
morrow you know I must visit you early with a Canonical Gentleman. Good night
dear Harcourt.

[Exit Sparkish.
Har. Madam, I hope you will not refuse my visit to morrow, if it should be
earlyer, with a Canonical Gentleman, than Mr. Sparkish's.


Mr. Pin. This Gentlewoman is yet under my care, therefore you must yet
forbear your freedom with her, Sir.

[Coming between Alithea and Harcourt.
Har. Must, Sir --


Mr. Pin. Yes, Sir, she is my Sister.


Har. It Is well she is, Sir -- for I must be her Servant, Sir. Madam --


Mr. Pin. Come away Sister, we had been gone, if it had not been for you, and
so avoided these lewd Rakehells, who seem to haunt us.


Enter Horner, Dorilant to them. Hor. How now Pinchwife?


Mr. Pin. Your Servant.


Hor. What, I see a little time in the Country makes a Man turn wild and
unsociable, and only fit to converse with his Horses, Dogs, and his Herds.


Mr. Pin. I have business, Sir, and must mind it; your business is pleasure,
therefore you and I must go different ways.


Hor. Well, you may go on, but this pretty young Gentleman --

[Takes hold of Mrs. Pinchwife.
Har. The Lady --


Dor. And the Maid --


Hor. Shall stay with us, for I suppose their business is the same with ours,
pleasure.


Mr. Pin. 'Sdeath he knows her, she carries it so sillily, yet if he does not,
I should be more silly to discover it first.

[Aside.
Alith. Pray, let us go, Sir.


Mr. Pin. Come, come --


Hor. Had you not rather stay with us? [to Mrs. Pinchwife. Prithee Pinchwife,
who is this pretty young Gentleman?


Mr. Pin. One to whom I Am a guardian. [I wish I could keep her out of your
hands --

[Aside.
Hor. Who is he? I never saw any thing so pretty in all my life.


Mr. Pin. Pshaw, do not look upon him so much, he is a poor bashful youth, you will
put him out of countenance. Come away Brother.

[Offers to take her away.
Hor, O your Brother!


Mr. Pin. Yes, my Wifes Brother; come, come, she will stay supper for us.


Hor. I thought so, for he is very like her I saw you at the Play with, whom I
told you, I was in love with.


Mrs. Pin. O Jeminy! is this he that was in love with me, I am glad on it I vow,
for he is a curious fine Gentleman, and I love him already too.

[Aside. Is this he Bud?

[to Mr. Pinchwife.
Mr. Pin. Come away, come away.

[To his Wife.
Hor. Why, what have are you in? why wont you let me talk with him?


Mr. Pin. Because you will debauch him, he is yet young and innocent, and I would
not have him debauched for any thing in the World.

How she gazes on him! the Devil --

[Aside.
Hor. Harcourt, Dorilant, look you here, this is the likeness of that Dowdey he
told us of, his Wife, did you ever see a lovelyer Creature? the Rogue has
reason to be jealous of his Wife, since she is like him, for she would make all
that see her, in love with her.


Har. And as I remember now, she is as like him here as can be.


Dor. She is indeed very pretty, if she be like him.


Hor. Very pretty, a very pretty commendation -- she is a glorious Creature,
beautiful beyond all things I ever beheld.


Mr. Pin. So, so.


Har. More beautiful than a Poets first Mistress of Imagination.


Hor. Or another Man's last Mistress of flesh and blood.


Mrs. Pin. Nay, now you jeer, Sir; pray don't jeer me --


Mr. Pin. Come, come. [By Heavens she will discover her self.

[Aside.
Hor. I speak of your Sister, Sir.


Mr. Pin. Ay, but saying she was handsome, if like him, made him blush. [I am
upon a wrack --

[Aside.
Hor. Methinks he is so handsome, he should not be a Man.


Mr. Pin. O there it is out, he has discovered her, I am not able to suffer any
longer.

[Come, come away, I say --

[To his Wife.
Hor. Nay, by your leave, Sir, he shall not go yet -- Harcourt, Dorilant, let
us torment this jealous Rogue a little.

[To them.
Har. How?


Dor. How?


Hor. I Will show you.


Mr. Pin. Come, pray let him go, I cannot stay fooling any longer; I tell you
his Sister stays supper for us.


Hor. Does she, come then we will all go sup with her and thee.


Mr. Pin. No, now I think on it, having staid so long for us, I warrant she is
gone to bed -- [I wish she and I were well out of their hands --

[Aside. Come, I must rise early to morrow, come.


Hor. Well then, if she be gone to bed, I wish her and you a good night. But
pray, young Gentleman, present my humble service to her.


Mrs. Pin. Thank you heartily, Sir.


Mr. Pin. God's Death, she will discover her self yet in spite of me.

[Aside. He is something more civil to you, for your kindness to his Sister,
than I am, it seems.


Hor. Tell her, dear sweet little Gentleman, for all your Brother there, that
you have revived the love, I had for her at first sight in the Playhouse.


Mrs. Pin. But did you love her indeed, and indeed?


Mr. Pin. So, so.

[Aside. Away, I say.


Hor. Nay stay; yes indeed, and indeed, pray do you tell her so, and give her
this kiss from me.

[Kisses her.
Mr. Pin. O Heavens! what do I suffer; now it is too plain he knows her, and yet
--

[Aside.
Hor. And this, and this --

[Kisses her again.
Mrs. Pin. What do you kiss me for, I am no Woman.


Mr. Pin. So -- there it is out.

[Aside. Come, I cannot, nor will stay any longer.


Hor. Nay, they shall send your Lady a kiss too; here Harcourt, Dorilant, will
you not?

[They kiss her.
Mr. Pin. How, do I suffer this? was I not accusing another just now, for this
rascally patience, in permitting his Wife to be kissed before his face? ten
thousand ulcers gnaw away their lips.

[Aside. Come, come.


Hor. Good night dear little Gentleman; Madam goodnight; farewell Pinchwife.
[Did not I tell you, I would raise his jealous gall.

[Apart to Harcourt and Dorilant. [Exeunt Horner, Harcourt, and Dorilant.
Mr. Pin. So they are gone at last; stay, let me see first if the Coach be at
this door.

[Exit.
Hor. What not gone yet? will you be sure to do as I desired you, sweet Sir?

[ Horner, Harcourt, Dorilant return.
Mrs. Pin. Sweet Sir, but what will you give me then?


Hor. Any thing, come away into the next walk.

[Exit Horner, haling away Mrs. Pinchwife.
Alith. Hold, hold, -- what do you do?


Lucy. Stay, stay, hold --


Har. Hold Madam, hold, let him present him, he will come presently; nay, I will
never let you go, till you answer my question.

[ Alithea, Lucy struggling with Harcourt, and Dorilant.
Lucy. For God's sake, Sir, I must follow'em.


Dor. No, I have something to present you with too, you shall not follow them.


[ Pinchwife returns. Mr. Pin. Where? -- how? -- what is become of? gone --
whither?


Lucy. He Is only gone with the Gentleman, who will give him something, an't
please your Worship.


Mr. Pin. Something -- give him something, with a Pox -- where are they?


Alith. In the next walk only, Brother.


Mr. Pin. Only, only; where, where?

[Exit Pinchwife, and returns presently, then goes out again.
Har. What Is the matter with him? why so much concerned? but dearest Madam --


Alith. Pray, let me go, Sir, I have said, and suffered enough already.


Har. Then you will not look upon, nor pity my sufferings?


Alith. To look upon'em, when I cannot help'em, were cruelty, not pity,
therefore I will never see you more.


Har. Let me then, Madam, have my privilege of a banished Lover, complaining
or railing, and giving you but a farewell reason; why, if you cannot condescend
to marry me, you should not take that wretch my Rival.


Alith. He only, not you, since my honor is engaged so far to him, can give me
a reason, why I should not marry him; but if he be true, and what I think him
to me, I must be so to him; your Servant, Sir.


Har. Have Women only constancy when it is a vice, and like fortune only true to
fools?


Dor. Thou shall not stir thou robust Creature, you see I can deal with you,
thereforefore you should stay the rather, and be kind.

[To Lucy, who struggles to get from him.
Enter Pinchwife. Mr. Pin. Gone, gone, not to be found; quite gone, ten
thousand plagues go with them; which way went they?


Alith. But into the other walk, Brother.


Lucy. Their business will be done presently sure, an't please your Worship, it
cannot be long in doing I Am sure on it.


Alith. Are they not there?


Mr. Pin. No, you know where they are, you infamous Wretch, Eternal shame of
your Family, which you do not dishonor enough your self, you think, but you
must help her to do it too, thou legion of Bawds.


Alith. Good Brother.


Mr. Pin. Damned, damned Sister.


Alith. Look you here, she is coming.


Enter Mistress Pinchwife in Man's clothes, running with her hat under her arm,
full of Oranges and dried fruit, Horner following. Mrs. Pin. O dear Bud, look
you here what I have got, see.


Mr. Pin. And what I have got here too, which you cannot see.

[Aside rubbing his forehead.
Mrs. Pin. The fine Gentleman has given me better things yet.


Mr. Pin. Has he so? [Out of breath and colored -- I must hold yet.

[Aside.
Hor. I have only given your little Brother an Orange, Sir.


Mr. Pin. Thank you, Sir.

[To Horner. You have only squeezed my Orange, I suppose, and given it me
again; yet I must have a City-patience.

[Aside. Come, come away --

[To his Wife.
Mrs. Pin. Stay, till I have put up my fine things, Bud.


Enter Sir Jaspar Fidget. Sr. Jas. O Master Horner, come, come, the Ladies stay
for you; your Mistress, my Wife, wonders you make not more have to her.


Hor. I have staid this halfhour for you here, and it is your fault I am not now
with your Wife.


Sr. Jas. But pray, don't let her know so much, the truth on it is, I was
advancing a certain Project to his Majesty, about -- I Will tell you.


Hor. No, let us go, and hear it at your house: Good night sweet little
Gentleman; one kiss more, you will remember me now I hope.

[Kisses her.
Dor. What, Sir. Jaspar, will you separate Friends? he promised to sup with us;
and if you take him to your house, you will be in danger of our company too.


Sr. Jas. Alas Gentlemen my house is not fit for you, there are none but civil
Women there, which are not for your turn; he you know can bear with the society
of civil Women, now, ha, ha, ha; besides he is one of my Family; -- he is -- heh,
heh, heh.


Dor. What is he?


Sr. Jas. Faith my Eunuch, since you will have it, heh, he, he.

[Exit Sir Jaspar Fidget, and Horner.
Dor. I rather wish thou were his, or my Cuckold: Harcourt, what a good Cuckold
is lost there, for want of a Man to make him one; thee and I cannot have
Horners privilege, who can make use of it.


Har. Ay, to poor Horner it is like coming to an estate at threescore, when a
Man cannot be the better for it.


Mr. Pin. Come.


Mrs. Pin. Presently Bud.


Dor. Come let us go too: Madam, your Servant. Good night Strapper. --

[To Alith. [To Lucy.
Har. Madam. though you will not let me have a good day, or night, I wish you
one; but dare not name the other half of my wish.


Alith. Good night, Sir, for ever.


Mrs. Pin. I don't know where to put this here, dear Bud, you shall eat it;
nay, you shall have part of the sine Gentleman's good things, or treat as you
call it, when we come home.


Mr. Pin. Indeed I deserve it, since I furnished the best part of it.

[Strikes away the Orange. The Gallant treates, presents, and gives the Ball;
But it is the absent Cuckold, pays for all.

ACT 4. SCENE 1.
In Pinchwife's house in the morning. Lucy, Alithea dressed in new Cloths.
Lucy. Well -- Madam, now have I dressed you, and set you out with so many
ornaments, and spent upon you ounces of essence, and pulvilio; and all this for
no other purpose, but as People adorn, and perfume a Corpse, for a stinking
second-hand-grave, such or as bad I think Master Sparkish's bed.


Alith. Hold your peace.


Lucy. Nay, Madam, I will ask you the reason, why you would banish poor Master
Harcourt for ever from your sight? how could you be so hard-hearted?


Alith. 'Twas because I was not hard-hearted.


Lucy. No, no; 'twas stark love and kindness, I warrant.


Alith. It was so; I would see him no more, because I love him.


Lucy. Hey day, a very pretty reason.


Alith. You do not understand me.


Lucy. I wish you may your self.


Alith. I was engaged to marry, you see, another man, whom my justice will not
suffer me to deceive, or injure.


Lucy. Can there be a greater cheat, or wrong done to a Man, than to give him
your person, without your heart, I should make a conscience of it.


Alith. I Will retrieve it for him after I am married a while.


Lucy. The Woman that marries to love better, will be as much mistaken, as the
Wencher that marries to live better.No; Madam, marrying to increase love, is
like gaming to become rich; alas you only loose, what little stock you had
before.


Alith. I find by your Rhetoric you have been bribed to betray me.


Lucy. Only by his merit, that has bribed your heart you see against your word,
and rigid honor; but what a Devil is this honor? it is sure a disease in the
head, like the Megrim, or Falling Sickness, that always hurries People away to
do themselves mischief; Men loose their lives by it: Women what is dearer to'em,
their love, the life of life.


Alith. Come, pray talk you no more of honor, nor Master Harcourt; I wish the
other would come, to secure my fidelity to him, and his right in me.


Lucy. You will marry him then?


Alith. Certainly, I have given him already my word, and will my hand too, to
make it good when he comes.


Lucy. Well, I wish I may never stick pin more, if he be not an errant Natural,
to the other fine Gentleman.


Alith. I own he wants the wit of Harcourt, which I will dispense withal, for
another want he has, which is want of jealousy, which men of wit seldom want.


Lucy. Lord, Madam, what should you do with a fool to your Husband, you intend
to be honest don't you? then that husbandly virtue, credulity, is thrown away
upon you.


Alith. He only that could suspect my virtue, should have cause to do it; it is
Sparkish's confidence in my truth, that obliges me to be so faithful to him.


Lucy. You are not sure his opinion may last.


Alith. I am satisfied, it is impossible for him to be jealous, after the proofs
I have had of him: Jealousy in a Husband, Heaven defend me from it, it begets
a thousand plagues to a poor Woman, the loss of her honor, her quiet, and her
--


Lucy. And her pleasure.


Alith. What do you mean, Impertinent?


Lucy. Liberty is a great pleasure, Madam.


Alith. I say loss of her honor, her quiet, nay, her life sometimes; and
what is as bad almost, the loss of this Town, that is, she is sent into the
Country, which is the last ill usage of a Husband to a Wife, I think,


Lucy. O does the wind lie there?

[Aside. Then of necessity, Madam, you think a man must carry his Wife into the
Country, if he be wise; the Country is as terrible I find to our young English
Ladies, as a Monastery to those abroad: and on my Virginity, I think they would
rather marry a London-Goaler, than a high Sheriff of a County, since neither
can stir from his employment: formerly Women of wit married Fools, for a great
Estate, a fine seat, or the like; but now it is for a pretty seat only in
Lincoln's Inn-fields, St. James's-fields, or the Pall Mall.


Enter to them Sparkish, and Harcourt dressed like a Parson. Spar. Madam, your
humble Servant, a happy day to you, and to us all.


Har. Amen. --


Alith. Who have we here?


Spar. My Chaplain faith -- O Madam, poor Harcourt remembers his humble service
to you; and in obedience to your last commands, refrains coming into your sight.


Alith. Is not that he?


Spar. No, fie no; but to show that he never intended to hinder our Match has
sent his Brother here to join our hands: when I get me a Wife, I must get her a
Chaplain, according to the Custom; this is his Brother, and my Chaplain.


Alith. His Brother?


Lucy. And your Chaplain, to preach in your Pulpit then --

[Aside.
Alith. His Brother!


Spar. Nay, I knew you would not believe it; I told you, Sir, she would take
you for your Brother Frank.


Alith. Believe it!


Lucy. His Brother! hah, ha, he, he has a trick left still it seems --

[Aside.
Spar. Come my dearest, pray let us go to Church before the Canonical hour is
past.


Alith. For shame you are abused still.


Spar. By the World it is strange now you are so incredulous.


Alith. It Is strange you are so credulous.


Spar. Dearest of my life, hear me, I tell you this is Ned Harcourt of
Cambridge, by the world, you see he has a sneaking College look; it is true he is
something like his Brother Frank, and they differ from each other no more than
in their age, for they were Twins.


Lucy. Hah, ha, he.


Alith. Your Servant, Sir, I cannot be so deceived, though you are; but come
let us hear, how do you know what you affirm so confidently?


Spar. Why, I Will tell you all; Frank Harcourt coming to me this morning, to
wish me joy and present his service to you: I asked him, if he could help me to
a Parson; whereupon he told me, he had a Brother in Town who was in Orders, and
he went straight away, and sent him, you see there, to me.


Alith. Yes, Frank goes, and puts on a black-coat, then tell's you, he is Ned,
that is all you have for it.


Spar, Pshaw, pshaw, I tell you by the same token, the Midwife put her Garter
about Frank's neck, to know'em asunder, they were so like.


Alith. Frank tell's you this too.


Spar. Ay, and Ned there too; nay, they are both in a Story.


Alith. So, so, very foolish.


Spar. Lord, if you will not believe one, you had best try him by your Chamber
maid there; for Chamber-maids must needs know Chaplains from other Men, they
are so used to'em.


Lucy. Let Us see; nay, I Will be sworn he has the Canonical smirk, and the
filthy, clammy palm of a Chaplain.


Alith. Well, most reverend Doctor, pray let us make an end of this fooling.


Har. With all my soul, Divine, Heavenly Creature, when you please.


Alith. He speaks like a Chaplain indeed.


Spar. Why, was there not, soul, Divine, Heavenly, in what he said.


Alith. Once more, most impertinent Black-coat, cease your persecution, and let
us have a Conclusion of this ridiculous love.


Har. I had forgot, I must suit my Style to my Coat, or I wear it in vain.

[Aside.
Alith. I have no more patience left, let us make once an end of this
troublesome Love, I say.


Har. So be it, Seraphick Lady, when your Honor shall think it meet, and
convenient so to do.


Spar. Gad I Am sure none but a Chaplain could speak so, I think.


Alith. Let me tell you Sir, this dull trick will not serve your turn, though
you delay our marriage, you shall not hinder it.


Har. Far be it from me, Munificent Patroness, to delay your Marriage, I desire
nothing more than to marry you presently, which I might do, if you your self
would; for my Noble, Good-natured and thrice Generous Patron here would not
hinder it.


Spar. No, poor man, not I faith.


Har. And now, Madam, let me tell you plainly, no body else shall marry you by
Heavens, I Will die first, for I Am sure I should die after it.


Lucy. How his Love has made him forget his Function, as I have seen it in real
Parsons.


Alith. That was spoken like a Chaplain too, now you understand him, I hope.


Spar. Poor man, he takes it hainously to be refused; I cannot blame him, it is
putting an indignity upon him not to be suffered, but you will pardon me Madam, it
shall not be, he shall marry us, come away, pray Madam.


Lucy. Hah, ha, he, more ado! it is late.


Alith. Invincible stupidity, I tell you he would marry me, as your Rival, not
as your Chaplain.


Spar. Come, come Madam.

[Pulling her away.
Lucy. I pray Madam, do not refuse this Reverend Divine, the honor and
satisfaction of marrying you; for I dare say, he has set his heart upon it, good
Doctor.


Alith. What can you hope, or design by this?


Har. I could answer her, a reprieve for a day only, often revokes a hasty
doom; at worst, if she will not take mercy on me, and let me marry her, I have
at least the Lovers second pleasure, hindering my Rivals enjoyment, though but
for a time.


Spar. Come Madam, it is e'ne twelve a clock, and my Mother charged me never to
be married out of the Canonical hours; come, come, Lord here is such a deal of
modesty, I warrant the first day.


Lucy. Yes, an't please your Worship, married women show all their Modesty the
first day, because married men show all their love the first day.

[Exeunt Sparkish, Alithea, Harcourt, and Lucy.
The Scene changes to a Bed chamber, where appear Pinchwife, Mrs. Pinchwife.
Mr. Pinch. Come tell me, I say.


Mrs. Pinch. Lord, have NOT I told it an hundred times over.


Mr. Pinch. I would try, if in the repetition of the ungrateful tale, I could
find her altering it in the least circumstance, for if her story be false, she
is so too.

[Aside. Come how was it Baggage?


Mrs. Pinch. Lord, what pleasure you take to hear it sure!


Mr. Pinch. No, you take more in telling it I find, but speak how was it?


Mrs. Pinch. He carried me up into the house, next to the Exchange.


Mr. Pin. So, and you two were only in the room.


Mrs. Pin. Yes, for he sent away a youth that was there, for some dried fruit,
and China Oranges.


Mr. Pin. Did he so? Damn him for it -- and for --.


Mrs. Pin. But presently came up the Gentlewoman of the house.


Mr. Pin. O 'twas well she did, but what did he do whilst the fruit came?


Mrs. Pin. He kissed me an hundred times, and told me he sancied he kissed my
fine Sister, meaning me you know, whom he said he loved with all his Soul, and
bid me be sure to tell her so, and to desire her to be at her window, by eleven
of the clock this morning, and he would walk under it at that time.


Mr. Pin. And he was as good as his word, very punctual, a pox reward him for it.

[Aside.
Mrs. Pin. Well, and he said if you were not within, he would come up to her,
meaning me you know, Bud, still.


Mr. Pin. So -- he knew her certainly, but for this consession, I am obliged to
her simplicity.

[Aside. But what you stood very still, when he kissed you?


Mrs. Pin. Yes I warrant you, would you have had me discovered my self?


Mr. Pin. But you told me, he did some beastliness to you, as you called it,
what was it?


Mrs. Pin. Why, he put --


Mr. Pin. What?


Mrs. Pin. Why he put the tip of his tongue between my lips, and so musl'd me
-- and I said, I Would bite it.


Mr. Pin. An eternal canker seize it, for a dog.


Mrs. Pin. Nay, you need not be so angry with him neither, for to say truth, he
has the sweetest breath I ever knew.


Mr. Pin. The Devil -- you were satisfied with it then, and would do it again.


Mrs. Pin. Not unless he should force me.


Mr. Pin. Force you, changeling! I tell you no woman can be forced.


Mrs. Pin. Yes, but she may sure, by such a one as he, for he is a proper,
goodly strong man, it is hard, let me tell you, to resist him.


Mr. Pin. So, it is plain she loves him, yet she has not love enough to make her
conceal it from me, but the sight of him will increase her aversion for me, and
love for him; and that love instruct her how to deceive me, and satisfy him,
all Idiot as she is: Love, 'twas he gave women first their craft, their art of
deluding; out of natures hands, they came plain, open, silly and fit for
slaves, as she and Heaven intended 'em; but damned Love -- Well -- I must
strangle that little Monster, whilst I can deal with him.

Go fetch Pen, Ink and Paper out of the next room:


Mrs Pin. Yes Bud.

[Exit Mrs. Pinchwife
Mr. Pin. Why should Women have more invention in love than men? It can only
be, because they have more desires, more soliciting passions, more lust, and
more of the Devil.

Mistress Pinchwife returns. [Aside,. Come, Minks, sit down and write.


Mrs. Pin. Ay, dear Bud, but I cannot do it very well.


Mr. Pin. I wish you could not at all.


Mrs. Pin. But what should I write for?


Mr. Pin. I Will have you write a Letter to your Lover.


Mrs. Pin. O Lord, to the fine Gentleman a Letter!


Mr. Pin. Yes, to the fine Gentleman.


Mrs. Pin. Lord, you do but jeer; sure you jest.


Mr. Pin. I am not so merry, come write as I bid you.


Mrs. Pin. What, do you think I am a fool?


Mr. Pin. She Is afraid I would not dictate any love to him, therefore she is
unwilling; but you had best begin.


Mrs. Pin. Indeed, and indeed, but I will not, so I will not.


Mr. Pin. Why?


Mrs. Pin. Because he is in Town, you may send for him if you will.


Mr. Pin. Very well, you would have him brought to you; is it come to this? I
say take the pen and write, or you will provoke me.


Mrs. Pin. Lord, what do you make a fool of me for? Don't I know that Letters are
never writ, but from the Country to London, and from London into the Country;
now he is in Town, and I am in Town too; therefore I cannot write to him you know.


Mr. Pin. So I am glad it is no worse, she is innocent enough yet

[Aside. Yes you may when your Husband bids you write Letters to people that
are in Town.


Mrs. Pin. O may I so! Then I Am satisfied.


Mr. Pin. Come begin -- Sir --

[Dictates.
Mrs. Pin. Shall Not I say, Dear Sir? You know one says always something more than
bare Sir.


Mr. Pin. Write as I bid you, or I will write Whore with this Penknife in your
Face.


Mrs. Pin. Nay good Bud -- Sir --

[She writes.
Mr. Pin. Though I suffered last night your nauseous, loathed Kisses and
Embraces -- Write


Mrs. Pin. Nay, why should I say so, you know I told you, he had a sweet breath.


Mr. Pin. Write.


Mrs. Pin. Let me but put out, loathed.


Mr. Pin. Write I say.


Mrs. Pin. Well then.

[Writes.
Mr. Pin. Let Us see what have you writ?

Though I suffered last night your kisses and embraces --

[Takes the paper, and reads. Thou impudent creature, where is nauseous and
loathed?


Mrs. Pin. I cannot abide to write such filthy words.


Mr. Pin. Once more write as I Would have you, and question it not, or I will spoil
thy writing with this, I will stab out those eyes that cause my mischief.

[Holds up the penknife.
Mrs. Pin. O Lord, I will.


Mr. Pin. So -- so -- Let Us see now!

[Reads. Though I suffered last night your nauseous, loathed kisses, and
embraces; Go on -- Yet I would not have you presume that you shall ever repeat
them -- So --

[She writes.
Mrs. Pin. I have writ it.


Mr. Pin. On then -- I then concealed my self from your knowledge, to avoid
your insolences --

[She writes.
Mrs. Pin. So --


Mr. Pin. The same reason now I am out of your hands --

[She writes,
Mrs. Pin. So --


Mr. Pin. Makes me own to you my unfortunate, though innocent frolic, of being
in man's cloths.

[She writes.
Mrs. Pin. So --


Mr. Pin. That you may for ever more cease to pursue her, who hates and detests
you --

[She writes on.
Mrs. Pin. So -- h --

[Sighs.
Mr. Pin. What do you sigh? -- detests you -- as much as she loves her Husband
and her Honor --


Mrs. Pin. I vow Husband he will never believe, I should write such a Letter.


Mr. Pin. What he would expect a kinder from you? come now your name only.


Mrs. Pin. What, shall not I say your most faithful, humble Servant till death?


Mr. Pin. No, tormenting Fiend; her style I find would be very soft.

[Aside. Come wrap it up now, whilst I go fetch wax and a candle; and write on
the back side, for Mr. Horner.

[Exit Pinchwife.
Mrs. Pin. For Mr. Horner -- So, I am glad he has told me his name; Dear Mr.
Horner, but why should I send thee such a Letter, that will vex thee, and make
thee angry with me; -- well I will not send it -- Ay but then my husband will
kill me -- for I see plainly, he will not let me love Mr. Horner -- but what care
I for my Husband -- I will not so I will not send poor Mr. Horner such a Letter --
but then my Husband -- But oh -- what if I writ at bottom, my Husband made me
write it -- Ay but then my Husband would see it -- Can one have no shift, ah, a
London woman would have had a hundred presently; stay -- what if I should write
a Letter, and wrap it up like this, and write upon it too; ay but then my
Husband would see it -- I don't know what to do -- But yet y vads I Will try, so I
will -- for I will not send this Letter to poor Mr. Horner, come what will on it.

[She writes, and repeats what she has writ. Dear, Sweet Mr. Horner -- So --
my Husband would have me send you a base, rude, unmannerly Letter -- but I
will not -- so -- and would have me forbid you loving me -- but I wont -- so --
and would have me say to you, I hate you poor Mr. Horner -- but I will not tell a
lie for him -- there -- for I Am sure if you and I were in the Country at cards
together, -- so -- I could not help treading on your Toe under the Table -- so
-- or rubbing knees with you, and staring in your face, 'till you saw me --
very well -- and then looking down, and blushing for an hour together -- so --
but I must make haste before my Husband come; and now he has taught me to write
Letters: You shall have longer ones from me, who am Dear, dear, poor dear Mr.
Horner, your most Humble Friend, and Servant to command 'till death, Margery
Pinchwife.

Stay I must give him a hint at bottom -- so -- now wrap it up just like
the other -- so -- now write for Mr. Horner, -- But oh now what shall I do with
it? for here comes my Husband.


Enter Pinchwife. Mr. Pin. I have been detained by a Sparkish Coxcomb, who
pretended a visit to me; but I fear 'twas to my Wife.

[Aside. What, have you done?


Mrs. Pin. Ay, ay Bud, just now.


Mr. Pin. Let Us see it, what do you tremble for; what, you would not have it go?


Mrs. Pin. Here -- No I must not give him that, so I had been served if I had
given him this.

[He opens, and reads the first Letter. [Aside.
Mr. Pin. Come, where is the Wax and Seal?


Mrs. Pin. Lord, what shall I do now? Nay then I have it --

[Aside. Pray let me see it, Lord you think me so errand a fool, I cannot seal a
Letter, I will do it, so I will.

[Snatches the Letter from him, changes it for the other, seals it, and
delivers it to him.
Mr. Pin. Nay, I believe you will learn that, and other things too, which I
would not have you.


Mrs. Pin. So, have NOT I done it curiously?

I think I have, there is my Letter going to Mr. Horner; since he will needs have
me send Letters to Folks.

[Aside.
Mr. Pin. It Is very well, but I warrant, you would not have it go now?


Mrs. Pin. Yes indeed, but I would, Bud, now.


Mr. Pin. Well you are a good Girl then, come let me lock you up in your
chamber, 'till I come back; and be sure you come not within three strides of
the window, when I am gone; for I have a spy in the street.

[Exit Mrs. Pin. Pinchwife locks the door. At least, it is fit she think so, if
we do not cheat women, they will cheat us; and fraud may be justly used with
secret enemies, of which a Wife is the most dangerous; and he that has a
handsome one to keep, and a Frontier Town, must provide against treachery,
rather than open Force -- Now I have secured all within, I Will deal with the Foe
without with false intelligence.

[Holds up the Letter. [Exit Pinchwife.
The Scene changes to Horner's Lodging. Quack and Horner. Quack. Well Sir, how
fadges the new design; have you not the luck of all your brother Projectors, to
deceive only your self at last.


Hor. No, good Domine Doctor, I deceive you it seems, and others too; for the
grave Matrons, and old ridgid Husbands think me as unfit for love, as they are;
but their Wives, Sisters and Daughters, know some of 'em better things already.


Quack. Already!


Hor. Already, I say; last night I was drunk with half a dozen of your civil
persons, as you call 'em, and people of Honor, and so was made free of their
Society, and dressing rooms for ever hereafter; and am already come to the
privileges of sleeping upon their Pallats, warming Smocks, tying Shoes and
Garters, and the like Doctor, already, already Doctor.


Quack. You have made use of your time, Sir.


Hor. I tell thee, I am now no nore interruption to 'em, when they sing, or
talk bawdy, than a little squab French Page, who speaks no English.


Quack. But do civil persons, and women of Honor drink, and sing bawdy Songs?


Hor. O amongst Friends, amongst Friends; for your Bigots in Honor, are just
like those in Religion; they fear the eye of the world, more than the eye of
Heaven, and think there is no virtue, but railing at vice; and no sin, but
giving scandal: They rail at a poor, little, kept Player, an dkeep themselves
some young, modest Pulpit Comedian to be privy to their sins in their Closets,
not to tell 'em of them in their Chapels.


Quack. Nay, the truth on it is, Priests amongst the women now, have quite got
the better of us Lay Confessors, Physicians.


Hor. And they are rather their Patients, but --

Enter my Lady Fidget, looking about her. Now we talk of women of Honor, here
comes one, step behind the Screen there, and but observe; if I have not
particular privileges, with the women of reputation already, Doctor, already.


La. Fid. Well Horner, am not I a woman of Honor? you see I Am as good as my
word.


Hor. And you shall see Madam, I Will not be behind hand with you in honor; and
I Will be as good as my word too, if you please but to withdraw into the next
room.


La. Fid. But first, my dear Sir, you must promise to have a care of my dear
Honor.


Hor. If you talk a word more of your Honor, you will make me incapable to wrong
it; to talk of Honor in the mysteries of Love, is like talking of Heaven, or
the Deity in an operation of Witchcraft, just when you are employing the Devil,
it makes the charm impotent.


La. Fid. Nay, fie, let us not be smooty; but you talk of mysteries, and
bewitching to me, I don't understand you.


Hor. I tell you Madam, the word money in a Mistresses mouth, at such a nick of
time, is not a more disheartning sound to a younger Brother, than that of
Honor to an eager Lover like my self.


La. Fid. But you cannot blame a Lady of my reputation to be chary.


Hor. Chary -- I have been chary of it already, by the report I have caused of
my self.


La. Fid. Ay, but if you should ever let other women know that dear secret, it
would come out; nay, you must have a great care of your conduct; for my
acquaintance are so censorious, (oh it is a wicked censorious world, Mr. Horner)
I say, are so censorious, and detracting, that perhaps they will talk to the
prejudice of my Honor, though you should not let them know the dear secret.


Hor. Nay Madam, rather than they shall prejudice your Honor, I Will prejudice
theirs; and to serve you, I Will lie with 'em all, make the secret their own, and
then they will keep it: I am a Machiavel in love Madam.


La. Fid. O, no Sir, not that way.


Hor. Nay, the Devil take me, if censorious women are to be silenced any other
way.


La. Fid. A secret is better kept I hope, by a single person, than a multitude;
therefore pray do not trust any body else with it, dear, dear Mr. Horner.

[Embracing him.
Enter Sir Jaspar Fidget. Sir Jas. How now!


La. Fid. O my Husband -- prevented -- and what is almost as bad, found with my
arms about another man -- that will appear too much -- what shall I say?

[Aside.
Sir Jaspar come hither, I am trying if Mr. Horner were ticklish, and he is as
ticklish as can be, I love to torment the confounded Toad; let you and I tickle
him.


Sir Jas. No, your Ladyship will tickle him better without me, I suppose, but
is this your buying China, I thought you had been at the China House?


Hor. China-House, that is my Cue, I must take it

[Aside. A Pox, cannot you keep your impertinent Wives at home? some men are
troubled with the Husbands, but I with the Wives; but I Would have you to know,
since I cannot be your Journey-man by night, I will not be your drudge by day,
to squire your wife about, and be your man of straw, or scarecrow only to Pyes
and Jays; that would be nibling at your forbidden fruit; I shall be shortly the
Hackney Gentleman Usher of the Town.


Sir Jas. Heh, heh, he, poor fellow he is in the right on it faith, to squire
women about for other folks, is as ungrateful an employment, as to tell money
for other folks; heh, he, he, ben't angry Horner --

[Aside.
La. Fid. No, it is I have more reason to be angry, who am left by you, to go
abroad indecently alone; or, what is more indecent, to pin my self upon such
ill bred people of your acquaintance, as this is.


Sir Jas. Nay, pr'ythee what has he done?


La. Fid. Nay, he has done nothing.


Sir Jas. But what do you take ill, if he has done nothing?


La. Fid. Hah, hah, hah, Faith, I cannot but laugh however; why do you think the
unmannerly toad would not come down to me to the Coach, I was fain to come up
to fetch him, or go without him, which I was resolved not to do; for he knows
China very well, and has himself very good, but will not let me see it, lest I
should beg some; but I will find it out, and have what I came for yet.

[Exit Lady Fidget,and locks the door, followed by Horner to the door.
Hor. Lock the door Madam --

[Apart to Lady Fidget So, she has got into my chamber, and locked me out; oh
the impertinency of womankind! Well Sir Jaspar, plain dealing is a Jewel; if
ever you suffer your Wife to trouble me again here, she shall carry you home a
pair of Horns, by my Lord Major she shall; though I cannot furnish you my self,
you are sure, yet I Will find a way.


Sir Jas. Hah, ha, he, at my first coming in, and finding her arms about him,
tickling him it seems, I was half jealous, but now I see my folly.

[Aside. Heh, he, he, poor Horner.


Hor. Nay, though you laugh now, 'twill be my turn e're long: Oh women, more
impertinent, more cunning, and more mischievous than their Monkeys, and to me
almost as ugly -- now is she throwing my things about, and rifling all I have,
but I Will get into her the back way, and so rifle her for it --


Sir Jas. Hah, ha, ha, poor angry Horner:


Hor. Stay here a little, I Will ferret her out to you presently, I warrant.

[Exit Horner at the other door.
Sir Jas. Wife, my Lady Fidget, Wife, he is coming into you the back way.

[Sir Jaspar calls through the door to his Wife, she answers from within.
La. Fid. Let him come, and welcome, which way he will.


Sir Jas. He Will catch you, and use you roughly, and be too strong for you.


La. Fid. Don't you trouble your self, let him if he can.


Quack. [Behind] This indeed, I could not have believed from him, nor any but
my own eyes.


Enter Mistress Squeamish. Squeam. Where Is this Woman-hater, this Toad, this
ugly, greasy, dirty Sloven?


Sir Jas. So the women all will have him ugly, methinks he is a comely person;
but his wants make his form contemptible to'em; and it is even as my Wife said
yesterday, talking of him, that a proper handsome Eunuch, was as ridiculous a
thing, as a Gigantick Coward.


Squeam. Sir Jaspar, your Servant, where is the odious Beast?


Sir Jas. He Is within in his chamber, with my Wife; she is playing the wag with
him.


Squeam. Is she so, and he is a clownish beast, he will give her no quarter, he will
play the wag with her again, let me tell you; come, let us go help her -- What,
the door's locked?


Sir Jas Ay, my Wife locked it --


Squeam. Did she so, let us break it open then?


Sir Jas. No, no, he will do her no hurt.


Squeam. No -- But is there no other way to get into 'em, whither goes this? I
will disturb'em.

[Aside. [Exit Squeamishat another door.
Enter old Lady Squeamish. Old L. Squeam. Where is this Harlotry, this Impudent
Baggage, this rambling Tomrigg? O Sir Jaspar, I Am glad to see you here, did you
not see my vil'd Grandchild come in hither just now?


Sir Jas. Yes,


Old L. Squeam, Ay, but where is she then? where is she? Lord Sir Jaspar I have
e'ne ratled my self to pieces in pursuit of her, but can you tell what she
makes here, they say below, no woman lodges here.


Sir Jas. No.


Old L. Squeam. No -- What does she here then? say if it be not a woman's
lodging, what makes she here? but are you sure no woman lodges here?


Sir Jas. No, nor no man neither, this is Mr. Horners Lodging.


Old L. Squeam. Is it so are you sure?


Sir Jas. Yes, yes.


Old L. Squeam. So then there is no hurt in it I hope, but where is he?


Sir Jas. He Is in the next room with my Wife.


Old L. Squeam. Nay if you trust him with your wife, I may with my Biddy, they
say he is a merry harmless man now, e'ne as harmless a man as ever came out of
Italy with a good voice and as pretty harmless company for a Lady, as a Snake
without his teeth.


Sir Jas. Ay. ay poor man.


Enter Mrs. Squeamish. Squeam. I cannot find'em -- Oh are you here, Grandmother,
I followed you must know my Lady Fidget hither, it is the prettyest lodging, and
I have been staring on the prettyest Pictures.


Enter Lady Fidget with a piece of China in her hand, and Horner following. La.
Fid. And I have been toyling and moyling, for the pretti'st piece of China, my
Dear.


Hor. Nay she has been too hard for me do what I could.


Squeam. Oh Lord I Will have some China too, good Mr. Horner, don't think to give
other people China, and me none, come in with me too.


Hor. Upon my honor I have none left now.


Squeam. Nay, nay I have known you deny your China before now, but you shall not
put me off so, come --


Hor. This Lady had the last there.


La. Fid. Yes indeed Madam, to my certain knowledge he has no more left.


Squeam. O but it may be he may have some you could not find.


La. Fid. What d'y think if he had had any left, I would not have had it too,
for we women of quality never think we have China enough.


Hor. Do not take it ill, I cannot make China for you all, but I will have a
Rol-waggon for you too, another time.


Squeam. Thank you dear Toad.

[To Horn. Aside.
La Fid. What do you mean by that promise?


Hor. Alas she has an innocent, literal understanding.

[Apart to Lady Fidget.
Old L. Squeam. Poor Mr. Horner, he has enough to do to please you all, I see.


Hor. Ay Madam, you see how they use me.


Old L. Squeam. Poor Gentleman I pity you.


Hor. I thank you Madam, I could never find pity, but from such reverend
Ladies as you are, the young ones will never spare a man.


Squeam. Come come, Beast, and go dine with us, for we shall want a man at
Hombre after dinner.


Hor. That Is all their use of me Madam you see.


Squeam. Come Sloven, I Will lead you to be sure of you.

[Pulls him by the Crevat.
Old L. Squeam. Alas poor man how she tuggs him, kiss, kiss her, that is the way
to make such nice women quiet.


Hor. No Madam, that Remedy is worse than the Torment, they know I dare suffer
any thing rather than do it.


Old La. Squeam. Prithee kiss her, and I Will give you her Picture in little,
that you admired so last night, prithee do.


Hor. Well nothing but that could bribe me, I love a woman only in Effigy, and
good Painting as much as I hate them -- I Will do it, for I could adore the Devil
well painted.

[Kisses Mrs. Squeam.
Squeam. Foh, you filthy Toad, nay now I Have done jesting.


Old L. Squam. Ha, ha, ha, I told you so.


Squeam. Foh a kiss of his --


Sir Jas. Has no more hurt in it, than one of my Spaniels.


Squeam. Nor no more good neither.


Quack. I will now believe any thing he tells me.

[Behind.
Enter Mr. Pinchwife. La.Fid. O Lord here is a man, Sir Jaspar, my Mask, my
Mask, I would not be seen here for the world.


Sir Jas. What not when I am with you.


La. Fid. No, no my honor -- let us be gone.


Squeam. Oh Grandmother, let us be gone, make have, make have, I know not how
he may censure us.


La. Fid. Be found in the lodging of any thing like a man, away.

[Exeunt Sir Jas. La. Fid. Old La. Squeam.Mrs. Squeamish.
Quack. What Is here another Cuckold -- he looks like one, and none else sure
have any business with him,

[Behind.
Hor. Well what brings my dear friend hither?


Mr. Pinch. Your impertinency.


Hor. My impertinency -- why you Gentlemen that have got handsome Wives, think
you have a privilege of saying any thing to your friends, and are as brutish,
as if you were our Creditors.


Mr. Pinch. No Sir, I Will never trust you any way.


Hor. But why not, dear Jack, why diffide in me, thou know so well.


Mr. Pin. Because I do know you so well.


Hor. Have NOT I been always thy friend honest Jack, always ready to serve thee,
in love, or battle, before thou were married, and am so still.


Mr. Pin. I believe so you would be my second now indeed.


Hor. Well then dear Jack, why so unkind, so grum, so strange to me, come
prithee kiss me dear Rogue, gad I was always I say, and am still as much thy
Servant as --


Mr. Pin. As I am yours Sir. What you would send a kiss to my Wife, is that it?


Hor. So there it is -- a man cannot show his friendship to a married man, but
presently he talks of his wife to you, prithee let thy Wife alone, and let thee
and I be all one, as we were wont, what thou art as shye of my kindness, as a
Lumbard-street Alderman of a Courtiers civility at Lockets.


Mr. Pin. But you are over kind to me, as kind, as if I were your Cuckold
already, yet I must confess you ought to be kind and civil to me, since I am so
kind, so civil to you, as to bring you this, look you there Sir.

[Delivers him a Letter.
Hor. What is it?


Mr. Pinch. Only a Love Letter Sir.


Hor. From whom -- how, this is from your Wife -- hum -- and hum --

[Reads.
Mr. Pin. Even from my Wife Sir, am I not wondrous kind and civil to you, now
too? But you will not think her so.

[Aside.
Hor. Ha, is this a trick of his or hers

[Aside.
Mr. Pin. The Gentleman's surpised I find, what you expected a kinder Letter?


Hor. No faith not I, how could I.


Mr. Pin. Yes yes, I Am sure you did, a man so well made as you are must needs
be disappointed, if the women declare not their passion at first sight or
opportunity.


Hor. But what should this mean? stay the Postscript. Be sure you love me
whatsoever my husband says to the contrary, and let him not see this, lest he
should come home, and pinch me, or kill my Squirrel.

[Reads aside. It seems he knows not what the Letter contains.

[Aside.
Mr. Pin. Come never wonder at it so much.


Hor. Faith I cannot help it.


Mr. Pin. Now I think I have deserved your infinite friendship, and kindness,
and have showed my self sufficiently an obliging kind friend and husband, am I
not so, to bring a Letter from my Wife to her Gallant?


Hor. Ay, the Devil take me, art thou, the most obliging, kind friend and
husband in the world, ha, ha.


Mr. Pin. Well you may be merry Sir, but in short I must tell you Sir, my
honor will suffer no jesting.


Hor. What do thou mean?


Mr. Pin. Does the Letter want a Comment? then know Sir, though I have been so
civil a husband, as to bring you a Letter from my Wife, to let you kiss and
court her to my face, I will not be a Cuckold Sir, I will not.


Hor. Thou art mad with jealousy, I never saw thy Wife in my life, but at the
Play yesterday, and I know not if it were she or no, I court her, kiss her!


Mr. Pin. I will not be a Cuckold I say, there will be danger in making me a
Cuckold.


Hor. Why, were thou not well cured of thy last clap?


Mr. Pin. I wear a Sword.


Hor. It should be taken from thee, lest thou should do thy self a mischief
with it, thon art mad, Man.


Mr. Pin. As mad as I am, and as merry as you are, I must have more reason from
you e're we part, I say again though you kissed, and courted last night my Wife
in man's clothes, as she confesses in her Letter.


Hor. Ha --

[Aside.
Mr. Pin. Both she and I say you must not design it again, for you have
mistaken your woman, as you have done your man.


Hor. Oh -- I understand something now --

[Aside. Was that thy Wife? why would thou not tell me 'twas she? faith my
freedom with her was your fault, not mine.


Mr. Pin. Faith so 'twas --

[Aside.
Hor. Fie, I Would never do it to a woman before her husbands face, sure.


Mr. Pin. But I had rather you should do it to my wife before my face, than
behind my back, and that you shall never do.


Hor. No -- you will hinder me.


Mr. Pin. If I would not hinder you, you see by her Letter, she would.


Hor. Well, I must e'ne acquiess then, and be contented with what she writes.


Mr. Pin. I Will assure you 'twas voluntarily writ, I had no hand in it you may
believe me.


Hor. I do believe thee, faith.


Mr. Pin. And believe her too, for she is an innocent creature, has no
dissembling in her, and so fare you well Sir.


Hor. Pray however present my humble service to her, and tell her I will obey
her Letter to a tittle, and fulfill her desires be what they will, or with what
difficulty soever I do it, and you shall be no more jealous of me, I warrant
her, and you --


Mr. Pin. Well then fare you well, and play with any man's honor but mine, kiss
any man's wife but mine, and welcome --

[Exit Mr. Pinch.
Hor. Ha, ha, ha, Doctor.


Quack. It seems he has not heard the report of you, or does not believe it.


Hor. Ha, ha, now Doctor what think you?


Quack. Pray let us see the Letter -- hum -- for -- dear -- love you --

[Reads the Letter.
Hor. I wonder how she could contrive it! what say thou to it, it is an
Original.


Quack. So are your Cuckolds too Originals: for they are like no other common
Cuckolds, and I will henceforth believe it not impossible for you to Cuckold
the Grand Signior amidst his Guards of Eunuchs, that I say --


Hor. And I say for the Letter, it is the first love Letter that ever was
without Flames, Darts, Fates, Destinies, Lying and Dissembling in it.


Enter Sparkish pulling in Mr. Pinchwife. Spar. Come back, you are a pretty
Brother-in-law, neither go to Church, nor to dinner with your Sister Bride.


Mr. Pin. My Sister denies her marriage, and you see is gone away from you
dissatisfied.


Spar. Pshaw, upon a foolish scruple, that our Parson was not in lawful Orders,
and did not say all the Common Prayer, but it is her modesty only I believe, but
let women be never so modest the first day, they will be sure to come to
themselves by night, and I shall have enough of her then; in the mean time,
Harry Horner, you must dine with me, I keep my wedding at my Aunts in the
Piazza.


Hor. Thy wedding, what stale Maid has lived to despair of a husband, or what
young one of a Gallant?


Spar. O your Servant Sir -- this Gentleman's Sister then -- No stale Maid.


Hor. I Am sorry for it.


Mr. Pin. How comes he so concerned for her --

[Aside.
Spar. You sorry for it, why do you know any ill by her?


Hor. No, I know none but by thee, it is for her sake, not yours, and another
man's sake that might have hoped, I thought --


Spar. Another Man, another man, what is his Name?


Hor. Nay since it is past he shall be nameless. Poor Harcourt I am sorry thou
have mist her --

[Aside
Mr. Pin. He seems to be much troubled at the match --.

[Aside.
Spar. Prithee tell me -- nay you shall not go Brother.


Mr. Pin. I must of necessity, but I Will come to you to dinner.

[Exit Pinchwife.
Spar. But Harry, what have I a Rival in my Wife already? but withal my heart,
for he may be of use to me hereafter, for though my hunger is now my sauce, and
I can fall on heartily without, but the time will come, when a Rival will be as
good sauce for a married man to a wife, as an Orange to Veale.


Hor. O thou damned Rogue, thou have set my teeth on edge with thy Orange.


Spar. Then let us to dinner, there I was with you again, come.


Hor. But who dines with thee?


Spar. My Friends and Relations, my Brother Pinchwife you see of your
acquaintance.


Hor. And his Wife.


Spar. No gad, he will nere let her come amongst us good fellows, your stingy
country Coxcomb keeps his wife from his friends, as he does his little Firkin
of Ale, for his own drinking, and a Gentleman cannot get a smack on it, but his
servants, when his back is turned broach it at their pleasures, and dust it
away, ha, ha, ha, gad I am witty, I think, considering I was married to day, by
the world, but come --


Hor. No, I will not dine with you, unless you can fetch her too.


Spar. Pshaw what pleasure can thou have with women now, Harry?


Hor. My eyes are not gone, I love a good prospect yet, and will not dine with
you, unless she does too, go fetch her therefore, but do not tell her husband,
it is for my sake.


Spar. Well I Will go try what I can do, in the mean time come away to my Aunts
lodging, it is in the way to Pinchwifes.


Hor. The poor woman has called for aid, and stretched forth her hand Doctor, I
cannot but help her over the Pale out of the Briars.

[Exeunt Sparkish, Horner, Quack.
The Scene changes to Pinchwifes house. Mrs. Pinchwife alone leaning on her
elbow. A Table, Pen, Ink, and Paper. Mrs. Pin. Well 'tis'ene so, I have got the
London disease, they call Love, I am sick of my Husband, and for my Gallant; I
have heard this distemper, called a Fever, but methinks it is liker an Ague,
for when I think of my Husband, I tremble and am in a cold sweat, and have
inclinations to vomit, but when I think of my Gallant, dear Mr. Horner, my hot
fit comes, and I am all in a Fever, indeed, and as in other Fevers, my own
Chamber is tedious to me, and I would fain be removed to his, and then methinks
I should be well; ah poor Mr. Horner, well I cannot, will not stay here,
therefore I Will make an end of my Letter to him, which shall be a finer Letter
than my last, because I have studied it like any thing; O Sick, Sick!

[Takes the Pen and writes.
Enter Mr. Pinchwife who seeing her writing steals softly behind her, and
looking over her shoulder, snatches the paper from her. Mr. Pin. What writing
more Letters?


Mrs. Pin. O Lord Budd, why do you fright me so?

[She offers to run out: he stops her, and reads.
Mr. Pin. How Is this! nay you shall not stir Madam.

Dear, Dear, dear, Mr Horner -- very well -- I have taught you to write
Letters to good purpose -- but let us see it.

First I am to beg your pardon for my boldness in writing to you, which I Would
have you to know, I would not have done, had not you said first you loved me so
extremely, which if you do, you will never suffer me to lie in the arms of
another man, whom I loath. nauseate, and detest -- [Now you can write these
filthy words] but what follows -- Therefore I hope you will speedily find some
way to free me from this unfortunate match, which was never, I assure you, of
my choice, but I Am afraid it is already too far gone; however if you love me, as
I do you, you will try what you can do, but you must help me away before to
morrow, or else alas I shall be for ever out of your reach, for I can defer no
longer our -- our -- what is to follow our -- speak what? our Journey into [The
Letter concludes. the Country I suppose -- Oh Woman, damned Woman, and Love,
damned Love, their old Tempter, for this is one of his miracles, in a moment,
he can make those blind that could see, and those see that were blind, those
dumb that could speak, and those prattle who were dumb before, nay what is more
than all, make these dow-bak'd, senseless, indocile animals, Women, too hard for
us their Politic Lords and Rulers in a moment; But make an end of your Letter,
and then I Will make an end of you thus, and all my plagues together.

[Draws his sword.
Mrs. Pin. O Lord, O Lord you are such a Passionate Man, Budd.


Enter Sparkish. Spar. How now what is here to do.


Mr. Pin. This Fool here now!


Spar. What drawn upon your Wife? you should never do that but at night in the
dark when you cannot hurt her, this is my Sister in Law is it not? ay faith e'ne
our Country Margery, one may know her, come [Pulls aside her Handkercheife. she
and you must go dine with me, dinner's ready, come, but where is my Wife, is she
not come home yet, where is she?


Mr. Pin. Making you a Cuckold, it is that they all do, as soon as they can.


Spar. What the Wedding day? no, a Wife that designs to make a Cully of her
Husband, will be sure to let him win the first stake of love, by the world, but
come they stay dinner for us, come I Will lead down our Margery.


Mrs. Pin. No -- Sir go we will follow you.


Spar. I will not wag without you.


Mr. Pin. This Coxcomb is a sensible torment to me amidst the greatest in the
world.


Spar. Come, come Madam Margery.


Mr. Pin. No I Will lead her my way, what would you treat your friends with mine,
for want of your own Wife?

[Leads her to the other door, and locks her in and returns. I am contented my
rage should take breath --

[Aside
Spar. I told Horner this.


Mr. Pin. Come now.


Spar. Lord, how shye you are of your Wife, but let me tell you Brother, we men
of wit have amongst us a saying, that Cuckolding like the small Pox comes with
a fear, and you may keep your Wife as much as you will out of danger of
infection, but if her constitution incline her to it, she will have it sooner or
later by the world, say they.


Mr. Pin. What a thing is a Cuckold, that every fool can make him ridiculous --

[Aside. Well Sir -- But let me advise you, now you are come to be concerned,
because you suspect the danger, not to neglect the means to prevent it,
especially when the greatest share of the Malady will light upon your own head,
for --

How'sere the kind Wife's Belly comes to swell.
The Husband breeds for her, and first is ill.

ACT 5. SCENE 1.
Mr. Pinchwifes House. Enter Mr. Pinchwife and Mrs. Pinchwife, a Table and
Candle. Mr. Pin. Come take the Pen and make an end of the Letter, just as you
intended, if you are false in a tittle, I shall soon perceive it, and punish
you with this as you deserve, write what was to follow -- let us see --

[Lays his hand on his Sword. [You must make haste and help me away before to
morrow, or else I shall be for ever out of your reach, for I can defer no
longer our -- ] What follows our? --


Mrs. Pin. Must all out then Budd? -- Look you there then.

[Mrs. Pin. takes the Pen and writes.
Mr. Pin. Let Us see -- [For I can defer no longer our -- Wedding -- Your
slighted Alithea] What Is the meaning of this, my Sisters name to it, speak,
unriddle?


Mrs. Pin. Yes indeed Budd.


Mr. Pin. But why her name to it speak -- speak I say?


Mrs.Pin. Ay but you will tell her then again, if you would not tell her again.


Mr. Pin. I will not, I am stunned, my head turns round, speak.


Mrs. Pin. Will Not you tell her indeed, and indeed.


Mr. Pin. No, speak I say.


Mrs. Pin. She Will be angry with me, but I had rather she should be angry with me
than you Budd; and to tell you the truth, 'twas the made me write the Letter,
and taught me what I should write.


Mr. Pin. Ha -- I thought the style was somewhat better than her own, but how
could she come to you to teach you, since I had locked you up alone.


Mrs. Pin. O through the key hole Budd.


Mr. Pin. But why should she make you write a Letter for her to him, since she
can write her self?


Mis. Pin. Why she said because -- for I was unwilling to do it.


Mr. Pin. Because what -- because.


Mrs. Pin. Because lest Mr. Horner should be cruel, and refuse her, or vain
afterward, and show the Letter, she might disown it, the hand not being hers.


Mr. Pin. How Is this? ha -- then I think I shall come to my self again -- This
changeling could not invent this lie, but if she could, why should she? she
might think I should soon discover it -- stay -- now I think on it too, Horner
said he was sorry she had married Sparkish, and her disowning her marriage to
me, makes me think she has evaded it, for Horner's sake, yet why should she
take this course, but men in love are fools, women may well be so. --

[Aside. But hark you Madam, your Sister went out in the morning, and I have
not seen her within since.


Mrs. Pin. A lack a day she has been crying all day above it seems in a corner.


Mr. Pin. Where is she, let me speak with her.


Mrs. Pin. O Lord then he will discover all --

[Aside. Pray hold Budd, what d'y mean to discover me, she will know I have told
you then, pray Budd let me talk with her first --


Mr. Pin. I must speak with her to know whether Horner ever made her any
promise; and whether she be married to Sparkish or no.


Mrs. Pin. Pray dear Budd don't, till I have spoken with her and told her that
I have told you all, for she will kill me else.


Mr. Pin. Go then and bid her come out to me.


Mrs. Pin. Yes, yes Budd --


Mr. Pin. Let me see --


Mrs. Pin. I Will go, but she is not within to come to him, I have just got time
to know of Lucy her Maid, who first set me on work, what lie I shall tell next,
for I am e'ne at my wits end --

[Exit Mrs. Pinchwife.
Mr. Pin, Well I resolve it, Horner shall have her, I Would rather give him my
Sister than lend him my Wife, and such an alliance will prevent his pretensions
to my Wife sure, -- I Will make him of kinn to her, and then he will not care for
her,

[Mrs. Pin. returns.
Mrs. Pin. O Lord Budd I told you what anger you would make me with my Sister.


Mr. Pin. Will Not she come hither?


Mrs. Pin. No no, alack a day, she is ashamed to look you in the face, and she
says if you go in to her, she will run away down stairs, and shamefully go her
self to Mr. Horner, who has promised her marriage she says, and she will have
no other, so she will not --


Mr. Pin. Did he so -- promise her marriage -- then she shall have no other, go
tell her so, and if she will come and discourse with me a little concerning the
means, I will about it immediately, go -- [Exit Mrs. Pin. His estate is equal
to Sparkish's, and his extraction as much better than his, as his parts are,
but my chief reason is, I Would rather be of kin to him by the name of
Brother-in-law, than that of Cuckold --

Well what says she now? --

[Enter Mrs. Pin.
Mrs. Pin. Why she says she would only have you lead her to Horners lodging --
with whom she first will discourse the matter before she talk with you, which
yet she cannot do; for alack poor creature, she says she cannot so much as look
you in the face, therefore she will come to you in a mask, and you must excuse her
if she make you no answer to any question of yours, till you have brought her
to Mr. Horner, and if you will not chide her, nor question her, she will come out
to you immediately.


Mr. Pin. Let her come I will not speak a word to her, nor require a word from
her.


Mrs. Pin. Oh I forgot, besides she says, she cannot look you in the face,
though through a mask, therefore would desire you to put out the Candle.


[Exit Mrs. Pin, puts out the Candle. Mr. Pin. I agree to all, let her make
haste -- there it is out -- My case is something better, I Would rather fight with
Horner for not lying with my Sister, than for lying with my Wife, and of the
two I had rather find my Sister too forward than my Wife; I expected no other
from her free education, as she calls it, and her passion for the Town -- well
-- Wife and Sister are names which make us expect Love and duty, pleasure and
comfort, but we find 'em plagues and torments, and are equally, though
differently troublesome to their keeper; for we have as much a do to get
people to lie with our Sisters, as to keep 'emfrom lying with our Wives.

Enter Mrs. Pinchwife Masked, and in Hoods and Scarves, and a night Gown and
Petticoat of Alitheas in the dark. What are you come Sister? let us go then --
but first let me lock up my Wife, Mrs. Margery where are you?


Mrs. Pin. Here Budd.


Mr. Pin. Come hither, that I may lock you up, get you in, Come Sister where
are you now?

[Locks the door. [Mrs. Pin. gives him her hand, but when he lets her go, she
steals softly on the other side of him, and is lead away by him for his Sister
Alithea.]
The Scene changes to Horners Lodging. Quack Horner. Quack. What all alone, not
so much as one of your Cuckolds here, nor one of their Wives! they use to take
their turns with you, as if they were to watch you.


Hor. Yes it often happens, that a Cuckold is but his Wifes spy, and is more
upon family duty, when he is with her gallant abroad hindering his pleasure,
than when he is at home with her playing the Gallant, but the hardest duty a
married woman imposes upon a lover is, keeping her husband company always.


Quack. And his fondness wearies you almost as soon as hers.


Hor. A Pox, keeping a Cuckold company after you have had his Wife, is as
tiresome as the company of a Country Squire to a witty fellow of the Town, when
he has got all his Money,


Quack. And as at first a man makes a friend of the Husband to get the Wife, so
at last you are feign to fall out with the Wife to be rid of the Husband.


Hor. Ay, most Cuckold-makers are true Courtiers, when once a poor man has
cracked his credit for 'em, they cannot abide to come near him.


Quack. But at first to draw him in are so sweet, so kind, so dear, just as you
are to Pinchwife, but what becomes of that intrigue with his Wife?


Hor. A Pox he is as surly as an Alderman that has been bit, and since he is so
coy, his Wife's kindness is in vain, for she is a silly innocent.


Quack. Did she not send you a Letter by him?


Hor. Yes, but that is a riddle I have not yet solved -- allow the poor creature
to be willing, she is silly too, and he keeps her up so close --


Quack. Yes, so close that he makes her but the more willing, and adds but
revenge to her love, which two when met seldom fail of satisfying each other
one way or other.


Hor. What here is the man we are talking of I think.


Enter Mr. Pinchwife leading in his Wife Masqued, Muffled, and in her Sisters
Gown. Hor. Pshaw.


Quack. Bringing his Wife to you is the next thing to bringing a Love Letter
from her.


Hor. What means this?


Mr. Pin. The last time you know Sir I brought you a love Letter, now you see a
Mistress, I think you will say I am a civil man to you.


Hor. Ay the Devil take me will I say thou art the civillest man I ever met
with, and I have known some; I fancy, I understand thee now, better than I did
the Letter, but hark thee in thy ear --


Mr. Pin. What?


Hor. Nothing but the usual question man, is she sound on thy word?


Mr. Pin. What you take her for a VVench and me for a Pimp?


Hor. Pshaw, wench and Pimp, paw words, I know thou art an honest fellow, and
have a great acquaintance among the Ladies, and perhaps have made love for me
rather than let me make love to thy Wife --


Mr. Pin. Come Sir, in short, I am for no fooling.


Hor. Nor I neither, therefore prithee let us see her face presently, make her
show man, art thou sure I don't know her?


Mr. Pin. I am sure you do know her.


Hor. A Pox why do thou bring her to me then?


Mr. Pin. Because she is a Relation of mine.


Hor. Is she faith man, then thou art still more civil and obliging, dear Rogue.


Mr. Pin. Who desired me to bring her to you.


Hor. Then she is obliging, dear Rogue.


Mr. Pin. You Will make her welcome for my sake I hope.


Hor. I hope she is handsome enough to make her self welcome; prithee let her
unmask.


Mr. Pin. Do you speak to her, she would never be ruled by me.


Hor. Madam --

[Mrs. Pin. whispers to Hor. She says she must speak with me in private,
withdraw prithee.


Mr. Pin. She Is unwilling it seems I should know all her undecent conduct in
this business --

[Aside. Well then I Will leave you together, and hope when I am gone you will
agree, if not you and I shall not agree Sir. --


Hor. What means the Fool? -- if she and I agree it is no matter what you and I
do.

[Whispers to Mrs Pin, who makes signs with her hand for him to be gone.]
Mr. Pin. In the mean time I Will fetch a Parson, and find out Sporkish and
disabuse him.

You would have me fetch a Parson, would you not, well then -- Now I think I am
rid of her, and shall have no more trouble with her -- Our Sisters and
Daughters like Usurers money, are safest, when put out; but our Wifes, like
their writings, never safe, but in our Closets under Lock and Key.

[Exit Mr.Pin.
Enter Boy. Boy. Sir Jaspar Fidget Sir is coming up.


Hor. Here Is the trouble of a Cuckold, now we are talking of, a pox on him, has
he not enough to do to hinder his Wifes sport, but he must other women's too.
-- Step in here Madam.

[Exit Mrs. Pin.
Enter Sir Jaspar. Sir Jas. My best and dearest Friend.


Hor. The old style Doctor --

Well be short, for I am busy, what would your impertinent Wife have now?


Sir Jas. Well guessed y' faith, for I do come from her.


Hor. To invite me to supper, tell her I cannot come, go.


Sir Jas. Nay, now you are out faith, for my Lady and the whole knot of the
virtuous gang, as they call themselves, are resolved upon a frolic of coming
to you to night in a Masquerade, and are all dressed already.


Hor. I shall not be at home.


Sir Jas. Lord how churlish he is to women -- nay prithee don't disappoint 'em,
they will think it is my fault, prithee don't, I Will send in the Banquet and the
Fiddles, but make no noise on it, for the poor virtuous Rogues would not have it
known for the world, that they go a Masquerading, and they would come to no
man's Ball, but yours.


Hor. Well, well -- get you gone, and tell 'em if they come, 'twill be at the
peril of their honor and yours.


Sir Jas. Heh, he, he -- we will trust you for that, farewell --

[Exit Sir Jaspar.
Hor. Doctor anon you too shall be my guest. But now I Am going to a private
feast.

The Scene changes to the Piazza of Covent Garden. Sparkish, Pinchwife.
[ Spar. with the Letter in his hand. Spar. But who would have thought a woman
could have been false to me, by the world, I could not have thought it.


Mr. Pin. You were for giving and taking liberty, she has taken it only Sir,
now you find in that Letter, you are a frank person, and so is the you see
there.


Spar. Nay if this be her hand -- for I never saw it.


Mr. Pin. It Is no matter whether that be her hand or no, I am sure this hand at
her desire lead her to Mr. Horner, with whom I left her just now, to go fetch a
Parson to 'em at their desire too, to deprive you of her for ever, for it seems
yours was but a mock marriage.


Spar. Indeed she would needs have it that 'twas Harcourt himself in a Parsons
habit, that married us, but I Am sure he told me 'twas his Brother Ned.


Mr. Pin. O there it is out and you were deceived not she, for you are such a
frank person -- but I must be gone -- you will find her at Mr. Horners, go and
believe your eyes.

[Exit Mr. Pin.
Spar. Nay I Will to her, and call her as many Crocodiles, Sirens, Harpies, and
other heathenish names, as a Poet would do a Mistress, who had refused to hear
his suit, nay more his Verses on her.

But stay, is not that she following a Torch at the other end of the Piazza, and
from Horners certainly -- it is so --

Enter Alithea following a Torch, and Lucy behind. You are well met Madam
though you don't think so; what you have made a short visit to Mr. Horner, but
I suppose you will return to him presently, by that time the Parson can be with
him.


Ali. Mr. Horner, and the Parson Sir --


Spar. Come Madam no more dissembling, no more jilting for I am no more a frank
person.


Alith. How Is this.


Lucy. So 'twill work I see --

[Aside.
Spar. Could you find out no easy Country Fool to abuse? none but me, a
Gentleman of wit and pleasure about the Town, but it was your pride to be too
hard for a man of parts, unworthy false woman, false as a friend that lends a
man money to lose, false as dice, who undo those that trust all they have to
'em.


Lucy. He has been a great bubble by his similes as they say --

[Aside.
Ali. You have been too merry Sir at your wedding dinner sure.


Spar What d'y mock me too?


Ali. Or you have been deluded.


Spar. By you.


Ali. Let me understand you.


Spar. Have you the confidence, I should call it something else, since you know
your guilt, to stand my just reproaches? you did not write an impudent Letter
to Mr. Horner, who I find now has club'd with you in deluding me with his
aversion for women, that I might not forsooth suspect him for my Rival.


Lucy. D'y think the Gentleman can be jealous now Madam --

[Aside.
Ali. I write a Letter to Mr. Horner!


Spar. Nay Madam, do not deny it, your Brother showed it me just now, and told
me likewise he left you at Horners lodging to fetch a Parson to marry you to
him, and I wish you joy Madam, joy, joy, and to him too much joy, and to my
self more joy for not marrying you.


Ali. So I find my Brother would break off the match, and I can consent to it,
since I see this Gentleman can be made jealous.

[Aside. O Lucy, by his rude usage and jealousy, he makes me almost afraid I
am married to him, art thousure 'twas Harcourt himself and no Parson that
married us.


Spar. No Madam I thank you, I suppose that was a contrivance too of Mr.
Horners and yours, to make Harcourt play the Parson, but I would as little as
you have him one now, no not for the world, for shall I tell you another truth,
I never had any passion for you, 'till now, for now I hate you, it is true I
might have married your portion, as other men of parts of the Town do
sometimes, and so your Servant, and to show my unconcernedness, I Will come to
your wedding, and resign you with as much joy as I would a stale wench to a new
Cully, nay with as much joy as I would after the first night, if I had been
married to you, there is for you, and so your Servant, Servant.

[Exit Spar.
Ali. How was I deciv'd in a man!


Lucy. You Will believe then a fool may be made jealous now? for that easiness in
him that suffers him to be led by a Wife, will likewise permit him to be
persuaded against her by others.


Ali. But marry Mr. Horner, my brother does not intend it sure; if I thought he
did, I would take thy advice, and Mr. Harcourt for my Husband, and now I wish,
that if there be any over-wise woman of the Town, who like me would marry a
fool, for fortune, liberty, or title, first that her husband may love Play, and
be a Cully to all the Town, but her, and suffer none but fortune to be mistress
of his purse, then if for liberty, that he may send her into the Country under
the conduct of some housewifely mother-in law; and if for title, may the world
give 'em none but that of Cuckold.


Lucy. And for her greater curse Madam, may he not deserve it.


Ali. Away impertinent -- is not this my old Lady Lanterlus?


Lucy. Yes Madam. [and here I hope we shall find Mr. Harcourt --

[Aside. [Exeunt Ali. Lucy. The Scene changes again to Horner's Lodging.
Horner, Lady Fidget, Mrs. Daynty Fidget, Mrs. Squeamish, a Table, Banquet, and
Bottles.
Hor. A Pox they are come too soon -- before I have sent back my new --
Mistress, all I have now to do, is to lock her in, that they may not see her --

[Aside.
La. Fid. That we may besure of our welcome we have brought our entertainment
with us, and are resolved to treat thee, dear Toad.


Dayn. And that we may be merry to purpose, have lest Sir Jaspar and my old
Lady Squeamish quarrelling at home at Baggammon.


Squcam. Therefore let us make use of our time, lest they should chance to
interrupt us.


La. Fid. Let us sit then.


Hor. First that you may be private, let me lock this door, and that, and I Will
wait upon you presently.


La. Fid. No Sir, shut 'em only and your lips for ever, for we must trust you
as much as our women.


Hor. You know all vanity's killed in me, I have no occasion for talking.


La. Fid. Now Ladies, supposing we had drank each of us our two Bottles, let us
speak the truth of our hearts.


Dayn. and Squeam. Agreed.


La. Fid. By this brimmer, for truth is no where else to be found, [Not in thy
heart false man.

[Aside to Hor.
Hor. You have found me a true man I Am sure.

[Aside to Lady Fid.
La. Fid. Not every way -- But let us sit and be merry.

[Aside to Hor. [Lady Fidget sings. I.
Why should our damned Tyrants oblige us to live,
On the pittance of Pleasure which they only give.
We must not rejoice,
With Wine and with noise.
In vain we must wake in a dull bed alone.
Whilst to our warm Rivai the Bottle, they are gone.
Then lay aside charms,
And take up these arms The Glasses.

2.
It Is Wine only gives 'em their Courage and Wit,
Because we live sober to men we submit.
If for Beauties you would pass.
Take a lick of the Glass.
Twill mend your complexions, and when they are gone,
The best red we have is the red of the Grape.
Then Sisters lay't on.
And dam a good shape.

Dayn. Dear Brimmer, well in token of our openness and plain dealing, let us
throw our Masks over our heads.


Hor. So 'twill come to the Glasses anon.


Squeam. Lovely Brimmer, let me enjoy him first.


La. Fid. No, I never part with a Gallant. till I Have tried him. Dear Brimmer
that make our Husbands short sighted.


Dayn. And our bashful gallants bold.


Squeam. And for want of a Gallant, theButler lovely in our eyes, drink Eunuch.


La. Fid. Drink thou representative of a Husband, damn a Husband.


Dayn. And as it were a Husband, an old keeper.


Squeam. And an old Grandmother.


Hor. And an English Bawd, and a French Surgeon.


La. Fid. Ay we have all reason to curse 'em.


Hor. For my sake Ladies.


La. Fid. No, for our own, for the first spoils all young gallants industry.


Dayn. And the others art makes 'em bold only with common women.


Squeam. And rather run the hazard of the vile distemper amongst them, than of
a denial amongst us.


Dayn. The filthy Toads choose Mistresses now, as they do Stuffs, for having
been fancied and worn by others.


Squeam. For being common and cheap.


La. Lid. Whilst women of quality, like the richest Stuffs, lie untumbled, and
unasked for.


Hor. Ay neat, and cheap, and new often they think best.


Dayn. No Sir, the Beasts will be known by a Mistress longer than by a suit.


Squeam. And it is not for cheapness neither.


La. Fid. No, for the vain fopps will take up Druggets, and embroider 'em, but
I wonder at the depraved appetites of witty men, they use to be out of the
common road, and hate imitation, pray tell me beast, when you were a man, why
you rather chose to club with a multitude in a common house, for an
entertainment, than to be the only guest at a good Table.


Hor. Why faith ceremony and expectation are unsufferable to those that are
sharp bent, people always eat with the best stomach at an ordinary, where every
man is snatching for the best bit.


La.Fid. Though he get a cut over the fingers -- but I have heard people eat
most heartily of another man's meat, that is, what they do not pay for.


Hor. When they are sure of their welcome and freedom, for ceremony in love
and eating, is as ridiculous as in fighting, falling on briskly is all should
be done in those occasions.


La. Fid. Well then let me tell you Sir, there is no where more freedom than
in our houses, and we take freedom from a young person as a sign of good
breeding, and a person may be as free as he pleases with us, as frolic, as
gamesome, as wild as he will.


Hor. Have NOT I heard you all declaim against wild men.


La. Fid. Yes, but for all that, we think wildness in a man, as desirable a
quality, as in a Duck, or Rabbet; a tame man, foh.


Hor. I know not, but your Reputations frightened me, as much as your Faces
invited me.


La. Fid. Our Reputation, Lord! Why should you not think, that we women make
use of our Reputation, as you men of yours, only to deceive the world with less
suspicion; our virtue is like the State-man's Religion, the Quakers Word, the
Gamesters Oath, and the Great Man's Honor, but to cheat those that trust us.


Squeam. And that Demureness, Coyness, and Modesty, that you see in our Faces
in the Boxes at Plays, is as much a sign of a kind woman, as a Vizard-mask in
the Pit.


Dayn. For I assure you, women are least masked, when they have the Velvet
Vizard on.


La. Fid. You would have found us modest women in our denyals only.


Squeam. Our bashfulness is only the reflection of the Men's.


Dayn. We blush, when they are shame-fac'd.


Hor. I beg your pardon Ladies, I was deceived in you devilishly, but why, that
mighty pretense to Honor?


La. Fid. We have told you; but sometimes 'twas for the same reason you men
pretend business often, to avoid ill company, to enjoy the better, and more
privately those you love.


Hor. But why, would you never give a Friend a wink then?


La. Fid. Faith, your Reputation frightened us as much, as ours did you, you
were so notoriously lewd.


Hor. And you so seemingly honest.


La. Fid. Was that all that deterred you?


Hor. And so expensive -- you allow freedom you say.


La. Fid. Ay, ay.


Hor. That I was afraid of losing my little money, as well as my little time,
both which my other pleasures required.


La. Fid. Money, foh -- you talk like a little fellow now, do such as we expect
money?


Hor. I beg your pardon, Madam, I must confess, I have heard that great Ladies,
like great Merchants, set but the higher prizes upon what they have, because
they are not in necessity of taking the first offer.


Dayn. Such as we, make sale of our hearts?


Squeam. We bribed for our Love? Foh.


Hor. With your pardon, Ladies, I know, like greeat men in Offices, you seem to
exact flattery and attendance only from your Followers, but you have receivers
about you, and such fees to pay, a man is afraid to pass your Grants; besides
we must let you win at Cards, or we lose your hearts; and if you make an
assignation, it is at a Goldsmiths, Jewellers, or China house, where for your
Honor, you deposit to him, he must pawn his, to the punctual Citt, and so
paying for what you take up, pays for what he takes up.


Dayn. Would you not have us assured of our Gallants Love?


Squeam. For Love is better known by Liberality, than by Jealousy.


La. Fid. For one may be dissembled, the other not -- but my Jealousy can be
no longer dissembled, and they are telling ripe:

[Aside. Come here is to our Gallants in waiting, whom we must name, and I Will
begin, this is my false Rogue.

[Claps him on the back.
Squeam. How!


Hor. So all will out now --


Squeam. Did you not tell me, 'twas for my sake only, you reported your self no
man?

[Aside to Horner.
Dayn. Oh Wretch! did you not swear to me, 'twas for my Love, and Honor, you
passed for that thing you do?

[Aside to Horner.
Hor. So, so.


La. Fid. Come, speak Ladies, this is my false Villain.


Squeam. And mine too.


Dayn. And mine.


Horn. Well then, you are all three my false Rogues too, and there is an end
on it.


La. Fid. Well then, there is no remedy, Sister Sharers, let us not fall out,
but have a care of our Honor; though we get no Presents, no Jewels of him, we
are savers of our Honor, the:Jewel of most value and use, which shines yet to
the world unsuspected, though it be counterfeit.


Hor. Nay, and is even as good, as if it were true, provided the world think
so; for Honor, like Beauty now, only depends on the opinion of others.


La. Fid. Well Harry Common, I hope you can be true to three, swear, but it is
no purpose, to require your Oath; for you are as often forsworn, as you swear
to new women.


Hor. Come, faith Madam, let us even pardon one another, for all the difference
I find betwixt we men, and you women, we forswear our selves at the beginning
of an Amor, you, as long as it lasts.


Enter Sir Jaspar Fidget, and old Lady Squeamish. Sir Jas. Oh my Lady Fidget,
was this your cunning, to come to Mr. Horner without me; but you have been no
where else I hope.


La. Fid. No, Sir Jaspar.


Old La. Squeam. And you came straight hither Biddy.


Squeam. Yes indeed, Lady Grandmother.


Sir Jas. It Is well, it is well, I knew when once they were thoroughly acquainted
with poor Horner, they would never be from him; you may let her masquerade it with
my Wife, and Horner, and I warrant her Reputation safe.


Enter Boy. Boy. O Sir, here is the Gentleman come, whom you bid me not suffer
to come up, without giving you notice, with a Lady too, and other Gentlemen --


Hor. Do you all go in there, whilst I send 'em away, and Boy, do you desire
'em to stay below 'til I come, which shall be immediately.

[Exeunt Sir Jaspar, Lad. Squeam. Lad. Fidget, Mistress Dainty, Squeamish.
Boy. Yes Sir.

[Exit.
[Exit Horner at the other door, and returns with Mistress Pinchwife. Hor. You
would not take my advice to be gone home, before your Husband came back, he will
now discover all, yet pray my Dearest be persuaded to go home, and leave the
rest to my management, I Will let you down the back way.


Mrs. Pin. I don't know theway home, so I don't.


Hor. My man shall wait upon you.


Mrs. Pin. No, don't you believe, that I Will go at all; what are you weary of me
already?


Hor. No my life, it is that I may love you long, it is to secure my love, and
your Reputation with your Husband, he will never receive you again else.


Mrs. Pin. What care I, do you think to frighten me with that? I don't intend to
go to him again; you shall be my Husband now.


Hor. I cannot be your Husband, Dearest, since you are married to him.


Mrs. Pin. O would you make me believe that -- don't I see every day at London
here, women leave their first Husbands, and go, and live with other men as
their Wives, pish, pshaw, you would make me angry, but that I love you so mainly.


Hor. So, they are coming up -- In again, in, I hear'em:

[Exit Mistress Pinchwife. Well, a silly Mistress, is like a weak place, soon
got, soon lost, a man has scarce time for plunder; she betrays her Husband,
first to her Gallant, and then her Gallant, to her Husband.


Enter Pinchwife, Alithea, Harcourt, Sparkish, Lucy, and a Parson. Mr. Pin.
Come Madam, it is not the sudden change of your dress, the confidence of your
asseverations, and your false witness there, shall persuade me, I did not bring
you hither, just now; here is my witness, who cannot deny it, since you must be
confronted -- Mr. Horner, did not I bring this Lady to you just now?


Hor. Now must I wrong one woman for another sake, but that is no new thing
with me; for in these cases I am still on the criminal's side, against the
innocent.

[Aside.
Alith. Pray, speak Sir.


Hor. It must be so -- I must be impudent, and try my luck, impudence uses to
be too hard for truth.

[Aside.
Mr. Pin. What, you are studying an evasion, or excuse for her, speak Sir.


Hor. No faith, I am something backward only, to speak in women's affairs or
disputes.


Mr. Pin. She bids you speak.


Alith. Ay, pray Sir do, pray satisfy him,


Hor. Then truly, you did bring that Lady to me just now,


Mr. Pin. O ho --


Alith. How Sir --


Har. How, Horner!


Alith. What mean you Sir, I always took you for a man of Honor?


Hor. Ay, so much a man of Honor, that I must save my Mistress, I thank you,
come what will on it.

[Aside.
Spar. So if I had had her, she would have made me believe, the Moon had been made
of a Christmas pie.


Lucy. Now could I speak, if I durst, and 'solve the Riddle, who am the Author
of it.

[Aside.
Alith. O unfortunate Woman! a combination against my Honor, which most
concerns me now, because you share in my disgrace, Sir, and it is your censure
which I must now suffer, that troubles me, not theirs.


Har. Madam, then have no trouble, you shall now see it is possible for me to
love too, without being jealous, Iwill not only believe your innocence my self,
but make all the world believe it --

Horner I must now be concerned for this Ladies Honor.

[Apart to Horner.
Hor. And I must be concerned for a Ladies Honor too.


Har. This Lady has her Honor, and I will protect it.


Hor. My Lady has not her Honor, but has given it me to keep, and I will
preserve it.


Har. I understand younot


Hor. I would not have you.


Mrs. Pin. What Is the matter with 'em all.

[Mistress Pinchwife peeping in behind.
Mr. Pin. Come, come, Mr. Horner, no more disputing, here is the Parson, I
brought him not in vain.


Hor. No Sir, I Will employ him, if this Lady please.


Mr. Pin. How, what do you mean?


Spark. Ay, what does he mean?


Hor. Why, I have resigned your Sister to him, he has my consent.


Mr. Pin. But he has not mine Sir, a woman's injured Honor, no more than a
man's, can be repaired or satisfied by any, but him that first wronged it; and
you shall marry her presently, or --

[Lays his hand on his Sword.
Enter to them Mistress Pinchwife. Mistress Pin. O Lord, they will kill poor Mr.
Horner, besides he shall not marry her, whilst I stand by, and look on, I Will not
lose my second Husband so.


Mr.Pin. What do I see?


Alith. My Sister in my clothes!


Spark. Ha!


Mrs. Pin. Nay, pray now don't quarrel about finding work for the Parson, he
shall marry me to Mr. Horner; for now I believe, you have enough of me.

[To Mr. Pinchwife.
Hor. Damned, damned loving Changeling.


Mrs. Pin. Pray Sister, pardon me for telling so many lies of you.


Har. I suppose the Riddle is plain now.


Lucy. No, that must be my work, good Sir, hear me.

[Kneels to Mr. Pinchwife, who stands doggedly, with his hat over his eyes.
Mr. Pin. I will never hear woman again, but make 'em all silent, thus --

[Offers to draw upon his Wife.
Hor. No, that must not be.


Mr. Pin. You then shall go first, it is all one to me.

[Offers to draw on Hor. stopped by Harcourt.
Har. Hold --


Enter Sir Jaspar Fidget, Lady Fidget, Lady Squeamish, Mrs. Dainty Fidget, Mrs.
Squeamish. Sir Jas. What Is the matter, what is the matter, pray what is the
matter Sir, I beseech you communicate Sir.


Mr. Pin. Why my Wife has communicated Sir, as your Wife may have done too Sir,
if she knows him Sir --


Sir Jas. Pshaw, with him, ha, ha, he.


Mr. Pin. Do You mock me Sir, a Cuckold is a kind of a wild Beast, have a care
Sir --


Sir Jas. No sure, you mock me Sir -- he cuckold you! it cannot be, ha, ha, he,
why, I Will tell you Sir.

[Offers to whisper.
Mr. Pin. I tell you again, he has whor'd my Wife, and yours too, if he knows
her, and all the women he comes near; it is not his dissembling, his hypocrisy
can wheedle me.


Sir Jas. How does he dissemble, is he a Hypocrite? nay then -- how -- Wife --
Sister is he an Hypocrite?


Old La. Squeam. An Hypocrite, a dissembler, speak young Harlotry, speak how?


Sir Jas. Nay then -- O my head too -- O thou libinous Lady!


Old La. Squeam. O thou Harloting, Harlotry, have thou don't then?


Sir Jas. Speak good Horner, art thou a dissembler, a Rogue? have thou --


Hor. Soh --


Lucy. I Will fetch you off, and her too, if she will but hold her tongue.

[Apart to Hor.
Hor. Can thou? I Will give thee --

[Apart to Luc.
Lucy to Mr. Pin. Pray have but patience to hear me Sir, who am the unfortunate
cause of all this confusion, your Wife is innocent, I only culpable; for I put
her upon telling you all these lies, concerning my Mistress, in order to the
breaking off the match, between Mr. Sparkish and her, to make way for Mr.
Harcourt.


Spark. Did you so eternal Rotten-tooth, then it seems my Mistress was not
false to me, I was only deceived by you, brother that should have been, now man
of conduct, who is a frank person now, to bring your Wife to her Lover -- ha --


Lucy. I assure you Sir, she came not to Mr. Horner out of love, for she loves
him no more --


Mrs. Pin. Hold, I told lies for you, but you shall tell none for me, for I do
love Mr. Horner with all my soul, and no body shall say me nay; pray don't you
go to make poor Mr. Horner believe to the contrary, it is spitefully done of
you, I Am sure.


Hor. Peace, Dear Idiot.

[Aside to Mrs. Pin.
Mrs. Pin. Nay, I will not peace.


Mr. Pin. Not 'til I make you.


Enter Dorilant, Quack. Dor. Horner, your Servant, I am the Doctors Guest, he
must excuse our intrusion.


Quack. But what is the matter Gentlemen, for Heavens sake, what is the matter?


Hor. Oh it is well you are come -- it is a censorious world we live in, you may
have brought me a reprieve, or else I had died for a crime, I never committed,
and these innocent Ladies had suffered with me, therefore pray satisfy these
worthy, honorable, jealous Gentlemen -- that --

[Whispers.
Quack. O I understand you, is that all -- Sir Jasper, by heavens and upon the
word of a Physician Sir, --

[Whispers to Sir Jasper.
Sir Jas. Nay I do believe you truly -- pardon me my virtuous Lady, and dear of
honor.


Old La. Squeam. What then all is right again.


Sir Jas. Ay, ay, and now let us satisfy him too.

[They whisper with Mr. Pinch.
Mr. Pin. An Eunuch! pray no fooling with me.


Quack. I Will bring half the Chirurgions in Town to swear it.


Mr. Pin. They -- they will swear a man that bled to death through his wounds
died of an Apoplexy.


Quack. Pray hear me Sir -- why all the Town has heard the report of him.


Mr. Pin. But does all the Town believe it.


Quack. Pray inquire a little, and first of all these.


Mr. Pin. I Am sure when I left the Town he was the lewdest fellow in it.


Quack. I tell you Sir he has been in France since, pray ask but these Ladies
and Gentlemen, your friend Mr. Dorilant, Gentlemen and Ladies, have not you all
heard the late sad report of poor Mr. Horner.


All Lad. Ay, ay, ay.


Dor. Why thou jealous Fool do thou doubt it, he is an errant French Capon.


Mrs. Pin. It Is false Sir, you shall not disparage poor Mr. Horner, for to my
certain knowledge --


Lucy. O hold --


Squeam. Stop her mouth --

[Aside to Lucy.
Old La. Fid. Upon my honor Sir, it is as true.

[To Pinch.
Dayn. D'y think we would have been seen in his company --


Squeam. Trust our unspotted reputations with him!


Old La. Fid. This you get, and we too, by trusting your secret to a fool --

[Aside to Hor.
Hor. Peace Madam, -- well Doctor is not this a good design that carries a man
on unsuspected, and brings him off safe. --

[Aside to Quack.
Mr. Pin. Well, if this were true, but my Wife --

[Aside [ Dorilant whispers with Mrs. Pinch.
Ali. Come Brother your Wife is yet innocent you see, but have a care of too
strong an imagination, least like an overconcern'd timorous Gamester by
fancying an unlucky cast it should come, Women and Fortune are truest still to
those that trust 'em.


Lucy. And any wild thing grows but the more fierce and hungry for being kept
up, and more dangerous to the Keeper.


Ali. There Is doctrine for all Husbands Mr. Harcourt.


Har. I edify Madam so much, that I am impatient till I am one.


Dor. And I edify so much by example I will never be one.


Eew. And because I will not disparage my parts I Will never be one.


Hor. And I alas cannot be one.


Mr. Pin. But I must be one -- against my will to a Country-Wife, with a
Country-murrain to me.


Mrs. Pin. And I must be a Country Wife still too I find, for I cannot like a
City one, be rid of my musty Husband and do what I list.

[Aside.
Hor. Now Sir I must pronounce your Wife Innocent, though I blush whilst I do
it, and I am the only man by her now exposed to shame, which I will straight
drown in Wine, as you shall your suspicion, and the Ladies troubles we will divert
with a Ballet, Doctor where are your Maskers.


Lucy. Indeed she is Innocent Sir, I am her witness, and her end of coming out
was but to see her Sisters Wedding, and what she has said to your face of her
love to Mr. Horner was but the usual innocent revenge on a Husbands jealousy,
was it not Madam speak --


Mrs. Pin. Since you will have me tell more lies -- [Aside to Lucy and Horner. Yes
indeed Budd.


Mr. Pin. For my own sake fain I would all believe.
Cuckolds like Lovers should themselves deceive.
But --

sighs -- His honor is least safe, (too late I find)
Who trusts it with a foolish Wife or Friend.

A Dance of Cuckolds. Hor. Vain Fopps, but court, and dress, and keep a puther,
To pass for Women's men, with one another.
But he who aims by women to be prized,
First by the men you see must be despised.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE
spoken by Mr. Heart:
Now you the Vigorous, who daily here
Over Vizard Mask, in public domineer,
And what you would do to her if in Place where;
Nay have the confidence, to cry come out,
Yet when she says lead on, you are not stout;
But to your well-drest Brother straight turn round
And cry, Pox on her Ned, she cannot be sound:
Then slink away, a fresh one to engage,
With so much seeming heat and loving Rage,
You Would frighten listening Actress on the Stage:
Till she at last has seen you huffing come,
And talk of keeping in the Tyreing-Room,
Yet cannot be provoked to lead her home:
Next you Fallstaffs of fifty, who beset
Your Buckram Maidenheads, which your friends get;
And whilst to them, you of Achievements boast,
They share the booty, and laugh at your cost,
In fine, you Essens't Boys, both Old and Young,
Who would be thought so eager, brisk, and strong,
Yet do the Ladies, not their Husbands, wrong:
Whose Purses for your manhood make excuse,
And keep your Flanders Mares for show, not use;
Encouraged by our Woman's Man to day,
A Horners part may vainly think to Play;
And may Intreagues so bashfully disown
That they may doubted be by few or none,
May kiss the Cards at Picquet, Hombre, -- Lu,
And so be thought to kiss the Lady too;
But Gallants, have a care faith, what you do.
The World, which to no man his due will give,
You by experience know you can deceive,
And men may still believe you Vigorous,
But then we Women, -- there is no cous'ning us.
FINIS.

