THE GREAT DUTY OF Self-Resignation TO THE DIVINE WILL.

By the late Pious and Learned JOHN WORTHINGTON, D.D.

Luke xxii. 42. -- Nevertheless not my will but thine be done.

Romans vi. 13. -- But yield your selves unto God.

LONDON: Printed by A. C. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, M. DC. LXXV.

The Preface.
THe following Treatise contains the Substance of several Sermons, which were
Preached on diverse Texts relating to each other, and most of them at Benet Fink
in London, where the worthy Author was for some time Preacher, till his Church
and Parish were laid in Ashes; and they were the last that were heard from him
in that place.

On that Lord's Day whereon the dreadful Fire of London brake forth, he was
come to insist on the Exemplary Resignation of holy Job to the Divine Will
under those dismal Sufferings he was exercised with, which is the Argument of
the Ninth Chapter of the Second Section of this Discourse. And it is to be
believed that he was directed by a very special Providence to so highly useful
and seasonable a Subject, for the preparing his Hearers for that heavy Calamity
which was so nearly approaching them.

Some of those Sermons I heard much commended about the time they were
Preached, and since the much lamented Death of the good Doctor, a worthy Friend
having found them all tied together, among a confused company of Papers, with
this Inscription, Self-Resignation, he delivered them into my hands, signifying
withal that he had for the most part perused them, to his great satisfaction:
And I quickly saw cause to believe that it would be a good work to make them
public.

And had it not been for multiplicity of business, which forced me frequently,
and that for a considerable time together, to lay it aside, this Treatise might
have been completed, and seen the light above a year ago.

And now that it is (through the goodness of God) at length come abroad, I hope
the same allowance will be made for it, that uses to be for Posthumous Pieces;
and also that none will expect that the Author should have written with such
accuracy for the Pulpit, as he would have done for the Press.

But yet, as it is, I doubt not but all understanding and ingenuous Readers
will acknowledge it highly worthy a serious perusal; and that it is excellently
fitted for the promoting a Christian's proficiency in his Master's School.

As for the Subject it treats of, Self-Resignation, there is no Duty more
evident: Nothing is more apparently reasonable, than that we are obliged to
give up our selves to God, to be used and acted by him as shall seem best to
his unerring Wisdom. Nor is any thing so unnatural as for the Wills of
dependent Creatures to oppose themselves to the Will of their great Creator,
which is inseparably conjoined with, and ever founded upon, the highest Reason,
Righteousness and Goodness. There is not such a Prodigy or Monster in Nature,
as he that will not suffer that same Will to rule him that governs the World,
and refuses to be entirely at his dispose, who being the Original, must needs
be the absolute Lord of all things.

This Duty is also most comprehensive and of largest extent; the whole of that
which the Grace of God that brings Salvation teaches is reduceable to it:
And it is very obvious that there is nothing either commanded or forbidden for
it self in our Savior's Religion, but is a necessary and natural expression
and instance of Self-Resignation. I mean there is not any thing we are required
in the Gospel to perform or forbear for its own sake, and not in order to the
better enabling us to some other Duty, and guarding us from some other Sin, but
it is of that nature, that Self-Resignation is, antecedently to the Command or
Prohibition, inconsistent with the not doing what is so commanded, or the doing
what is so forbidden. And where a Resigned Temper is, through the Divine Grace,
in some good measure acquired, it will naturally draw after it most cheerful
Obedience and willing Submission to the good pleasure and appointments of our
blessed Lord: So that we shall not complain of any of those Precepts he has
given us as harsh or grievous, nor of any affliction he tries us with as
over-severe.

Let me add, that the entire Resignation of our Wills to the Will of God must
needs be a Subject, than which there cannot be any one handled of more weighty
importance, in that the restoring Mankind to this excellent Temper was the
grand and main Errand upon which God the Father sent his Son into the World:
This is as evident as that our Fall (which brought us under the necessity of a
Savior) was no other than the loss of this Temper accompanied with the
necessary and immediate consequents thereof. Man's affecting independence on
his Maker, his being impatient to be restrained within those limits which his
Creator had appointed him, and choosing to gratify his senses and fond
imagination without consulting with the Divine Will made known to him by the
Dictates of Natural Light and External Revelation, this was truly his Loss of
Paradise, this was his Lapse from the heavenly to the hellish state. And
therefore the restoring mankind to their original constitution, the reducing
our Wills to a perfect harmony and compliance with the Will of God, was an
undertaking of all other the most worthy of his only begotten Son's
manifesting himself in our flesh, and his doing and suffering what he did in
the humane nature.

And as our Author could not have made choice of a more noble or necessary
Subject, so I presume his Method and way of mannaging it will not be thought
unworthy of it.

First, he presents us with the most powerful Considerations in order to our
being fully convinced, and affected with a great sense, of our indispensable
and eternal Obligation to Self-Resignation, and to the exciting and awakening
us to the most serious endeavors to subdue our Wills to the Will of God.

Secondly, he directs us to the most effectual means for the rendering this Duty
as easy as is possible to our frail and corrupt natures. And under these two
general Heads, he has taken occasion, without digressing from his business, to
acquaint his Readers with most, if not all, the best and most important notions
and principles, (I mean such as have the most apparent tendency to the
promoting of true Holiness) and to rectify the most dangerous and fatal
mistakes, which are such as either directly strike at, or in their Consequences
undermine a good life.

The Reader will likewise observe an excellent and most Christian Spirit
running through this whole Discourse, and see great reason to believe that the
Author was very much affected with what he has written; that his heart was
powerfully touched with the Arguments he pursues; and that he had not a mere
notional but experimental knowledge of the Excellency of a Self-denying,
Resigned temper; and was acted with a great zeal for the propagation of it, as
being truly sensible that it is the very Life and Soul of Christianity.

He appeared to all that knew him to have a vigorous sense of this Principle,
most of his Discourses in the Pulpit were much tinctured with it, and he gave
many singular proofs of his living under the power and government of it.

If the Author's Copiousness of Style, and repeating (according to his usual
manner) the same thing somewhat often in different expressions shall offend
any, I would desire them to consider that this way is not without its
advantages both to Hearers and Readers: For by this means the matters
discoursed are made the more intelligible to the meaner Capacities, and apt to
make in all sorts the deeper and more abiding impression. And, however it
happens, we find by experience that one manner of expressing a thing does
frequently more affect us, than another that is as proper, as significant and as
easily understood.

If any shall object against the Author's repeating some of his Motives to the
seeking among his Directions for the obtaining a Resigned Temper, they ought to
remember that the same Considerations may serve very properly both those
purposes in different respects.

If some of the Arguments in the former Section shall seem in effect and for
substance the same, this will not be looked upon as a just ground of exception
by those that shall perceive, that they occasion, however, distinct Discourses,
and those very pertinent and profitable; and it is sufficient if there be but a
modal difference betwixt heads of discourse.

Now the God of all Grace, without whose Blessing all our Endeavors prove
ineffectual, make this Treatise, with all other the pious Labors of his
Servants, instrumental to the furthering the great End of our Christian Faith:
The conforming us more and more to the Divine Will and Likeness, the qualifying
us by Purity of Heart, and a participation of that Image of God, which consists
in Righteousness and true Holiness, for his special favor and complacential
love in this World, and a glorious Immortality in the complete enjoyment of the
ever blessed Trinity in the World to come. And (to conclude with that excellent
Prayer in our Liturgy) Prevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most
gracious favor, and further us with thy continual help, that in all our works
begun, continued and ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally
by thy Mercy obtain Everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Edward Fowler.
THE CONTENTS Of the following Treatise.
SECT. I. Considerations recommending the Duty of SELF-RESIGNATION, to our most
serious and diligent Practice. page 7
CHAP. I. THat it is the Law of our Creation both first and second. The
Consideration of God, as a second Creator, showed, mightily to enforce our
Engagement to this Duty upon a fourfold account. 7 CHAP. II. That
Self-Resignation is that which does eminently difference a good man from the
Devil and the wicked: And that mere external Performances do not distinguish
between the one and the other. 12 CHAP. III. That Self-Resignation is the most
acceptable way of glorifying God, and that he is honored by no performances
separated from this. 17 CHAP. IV. That Self-Resignation is the way to light,
even in the greatest difficulties and perplexities: whether they be in
reference to our duty, or in reference to our condition and state. 21 CHAP. V.
That Self-Resignation is the way to rest and peace: That those that have
attained thereunto find satisfaction and pleasure both in doing, and suffering
the Will of God: That it procures outward as well as inward peace; and that
Self-willedness is that which puts the World into Confusion. 30 CHAP. VI. That
Self-Resignation is the way to true Liberty and Freedom of Spirit; and the
contrary to perfect Slavery and Thraldom. 37 CHAP. VII. That Self-Resignation
is the Sum of the Gospel-Commands: That all the Ordinances of the Gospel, and
even Faith it self, are in order to this. 46 CHAP. VIII. That Self-Resignation
is that wherein consists the power of Godliness; and that, as it
distinguishes both from the insincere and the weak Christian. 50 CHAP. IX.
That Self-Resignation is the Establishment of God's Kingdom in us here, and is
an Introduction to his Kingdom of Glory hereafter. 58 CHAP. X. That Self-will
is the Root of all Sin and Misery. 61 CHAP. XI. That the Love of Christ in
dying for Sinners makes the Duty of Self-Resignation most highly reasonable,
and lays the greatest obligation upon us thereunto. 64 CHAP. XII. That the high
and holy Example of Christ lays a mighty Obligation on Christians to
Self-Resignation. 68
SECT. II. Directions for the attaining this most excellent Temper of
SELF-RESIGNATION. 75
CHAP. I. THat in order to the resigning our Wills entirely to the Will of God,
we should frequently consider such principles as are most available to the
effectual subduing them thereunto: And several such Principles further enlarged
on. 75 CHAP. II. That humble and fervent Prayer is a necessary and effectual
means to the attaining the grace of Self-Resignation. 90 CHAP. III. That in
order to our being entirely resigned to the Divine Will, we must be willing
pati Deum, to suffer God, and abide the power of his Spirit working in us. 95
CHAP. IV. That we are not only to suffer the Spirit to work in us, but ought
also to work with him in heartily opposing our Self-desires; and what
endeavors we should use is showed in five Particulars. 99 CHAP. V. Of the
great power and efficacy of Faith in God; Faith in his Power and Goodness. 106
CHAP. VI. Of the wonderful efficacy of Love to God and Divine things. 120 CHAP.
VII. That Humility is a powerful means to the attaining of Self-Resignation;
where it is particularly shown, how it is effectual thereunto both as it
implies obedience to God's Commands, and as it implies patient submission to
his disposals. 136 CHAP. VIII. That the serious observation of the great
Examples of Self-Resignation, which are recorded in the Scriptures, is of great
use and advantage: And first of the Example of ABRAHAM. 147 CHAP. IX. Of the
Example of JOB. 158 CHAP. X. Of the Example of ELY. 177 CHAP. XI. Of the
Example of DAVID. 180 CHAP. XII. Of the Example of our BLESSED SAVIOR. 190
CHAP. XIII. Of the Example of the Apostle Saint PAUL. 195 CHAP. XIV. That the
consideration of Christ crucified is a very effectual means for the crucifying
of the old man. 205 CHAP. XV. That the frequent consideration of the great
Recompense of Reward is a mighty help to the attaining of Self-Resignation. 226
Errata.
Page 82. lin. 1. for power r. prosper. p. 233. in the marg. r. (...) p. 235.
l. 13. for momentary r. momentany.

THE INTRODUCTION.
AMongst all Divine Truths, none are more frequently, more powerfully, to be
pressed and urged, than those that are wholly practical, that refer to Spiritual
Obedience, that pertain (...), to life and godliness, that tend to the real
bettering of Man, and transforming him into the Divine Image; such as are most
powerful to the subduing our own Wills, as divided from God's, and the bringing
them unto a conformity to the Will of God.

But alas! these great practical Truths have been too commonly either
sparingly, or but coldly and insignificantly, not fully, clearly and vigorously
recommended. The great noise and ado in the Christian World has been about the
lighter matters of the Law, Mint, Annise and Cummin, Meats and Drinks, wherein
the Kingdom of God does not consist. The great talk and zeal has been about
things less necessary and more obscure and doubtful: men doting about questions
and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings and evil
surmisings. It pleases men to hear of speculative Doctrins, and to be
entertained with a luscious Preaching of the Gospel, made up all of Promises
and these wholly unconditional; it gratifies them to hear what is done without
them rather than what is to be done within them, and the necessity of sincere
and entire obedience to our Saviors Precepts urged upon them. All would reign
with Christ, but they would not suffer with him; they would hear only of
Christ's dying for sin, of his being crucified for them; but to hear of their
dying to sin and their own corrupt will, of their being crucified with him, and
suffering their wills to be resigned to the will of the Father as Christ's was,
to hear of making an entire oblation of themselves to God, this is a hard
saying, few will bear it, it is very unpleasing to flesh and blood, it is too
spiritual a Gospel for the carnal mind to relish. But how unpleasing soever it
be, it is not therefore to be forborne; Gal. i. 10.
for if we should seek to please men, we should not be the servants of Christ.
If we should gratify and humor insincere people in their soft and delicate
self-chosen Religion, and their willing their own will, we should not be
faithful to their souls, whose grand interest and necessary concernment it is
to know and practice this first and great Lesson in the School of Christ.
Self-Resignation is a great part of the Doctrine that is according to godliness.
(...)
They are the wholesome (or healing) words of our Lord Jesus Christ, viz. Luke
xiv. 27. Mat. x.38.
He that does not take up his Cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple:
Nor is he worthy of me.

This is healing Doctrine that alone can cure the inward Distempers of our
Souls, and therefore absolutely necessary to be taught and pressed with all
authority. It matters not that the carnally minded and delicate Christian does
not relish it. We that are the Ministers of the Gospel are to imitate careful
and prudent Physicians, who, when they come to their Patients, do not ask them
what they love best, and then prescribe them what is most pleasing to their
Palates, though most hurtful; but, informing themselves well of the case of the
diseased, they appoint what they judge most proper for them, though it be no
whit grateful or acceptable to them.

But howsoever the resigning their wills to the will of God be as loathsome
Physic to the carnal, it is to the truly spiritual both meat and drink, as it
was to their great Master: It is their constant Diet, the savoury Meat which
their Souls love and live by: They esteem the forementioned and the like words
of their Saviors mouth, more than their necessary food: to borrow Job's
expression, Chap. xxiii. 12.

And this so little minded, so much neglected Doctrine of Self-Resignation is
that which I design to treat of, and with all seriousness to recommend to those
that name the name of Christ. For the more distinct understanding whereof, we
must know that Self-Resignation does relate either, First, to the Commands of
God, particularly such Commands as are difficult to nature, and grievous to
flesh and blood (for to obey in lesser and more easy instances, is no worthy
proof of our Resignation) and thus considered, it implies an entire Obedience
to the Preceptive Will of God. Or, Secondly it relates to hard Trials, great
hardships and sufferings, such as God does allot and appoint to humble us and
to know what is in our hearts: And thus considered it implies a meek patience
and quiet submission to the divine Disposals and Will of Providence.

But I shall not speak to these two distinctly, but join them both together in
this Aphorism, wherein is comprised the grand Fundamental and Mystery of
Practical Religion, viz. That a Christian is to resign his Will wholly to the
Will of God, to make an entire Oblation of himself to him.

In discoursing on which we shall first present you with several weighty
Considerations that do most effectually recommend to us this Self-Resignation:
And secondly set down such Helps and Directions as are most proper to attain it.

SECT. I. Considerations recommending the Duty of SELF-RESIGNATION, to our most
serious and diligent Practice.
CHAP. I. That it is the Law of our Creation both first and second. The
Consideration of God as a second Creator showed, mightily to enforce our
Engagement to this Duty upon a fourfold account.
1. SElf-Resignation is the Law of our Creation; our necessary condition and
property, both as we are Creatures, and as New-Creatures; as we are made and as
we are renewed after God's Image. It is not a new thing introduced first by
Christ, it is not an Institution peculiar to the times of the Gospel, so that
for almost four thousand years Man was not obliged to it; but it is our
unchangable property arising from our dependence upon God and relation to him.
There is a Law written within us that requires this, nor can any thing free us
from our Obligation hereunto. We were made by God for himself, and therefore
must needs be under an eternal Obligation to yield universal Obedience to him.
This is an old Commandment which man had from the beginning, rooted in and
interwoven with his very Being, all the Duties enjoined therein are Branches of
the everlasting Righteousness, and are of an eternal and unchangable nature.

It Is the Character of Angels, that they do his Commandments, hearkening to the
voice of his word, and that they do his will: Psalm. ciii. 20, 21.
And the Self-Resignation of Angels, their doing God's Will in Heaven, is the
model of Men's Resignation and Obedience on Earth; for our Savior has taught
us thus to pray, Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven. Angels and Men
are under the same Moral Obligation of Religion, the same Law for substance
concerns both. Love is the sum of the whole Law, and Angels are to love God
with all their might, as well as Men, and one Angel is to love another as
himself.

Religion obliges every rational and understanding Creature, and the
Quintessence of Religion is Resignation; and therefore it is impossible this
could ever have not been, or should ever for the future cease to be our Duty.
Omnia sunt in manu Coeli, excepto timore Coeli, was an ancient Maxim of the
Hebrew Doctors, implying that God himself cannot absolve and free men from the
religious fear and observance of himself, and a most obedient regard to his
holy Will.

What the Apostle says of Love, that it is an old and yet a new Commandment,
is true also of this high and holy Commandment of Self-Resignation. It is a new
Commandment; not as if it were first brought in by Christ, as was said, for men
were never free to will their own wills, to walk in the ways of their own
hearts; but it is new, as the Commandment of Love is new, in that it was
enlivened and enforced anew by Christ, had its power and virtue renewed and
increased, and the engagement to it heightened both by the Doctrine and Example
of our Savior: Both tending to the advancement of Self-Resignation in a way
beyond any Doctrine or Example of Life that ever appeared before or since in the
world. And therefore it is also the Law of the new Creation, and by virtue
thereof its Obligation is now doubled. The Consideration of God as our second
Creator mightily inforceth our engagement to this Duty. For, 1. The relation of
the New Creature is more noble and honorable. Ab eo tempore censemur, ex quo
in Christo renascimur. S. Ierom in his Epitaph on Nepotianus.
In the second Creation the Image of God is repaired in the soul, and man that
was a disfigured and disordered thing, by reason of his Apostasy and fall from
God, is restored now to that better and more excellent state. As he is a
New Creature, he partakes of the Spirit, and is heavenly and spiritual: Which
is far more than having a natural Being, by which (as the Apostle speaks) he is
of the earth earthy. 1 Cor. xv.
2. It is also a sweeter relation; there is a most dear Love, to be admired
rather than to be expressed, manifested herein. 1 John iii. I. Behold what
manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
Sons of God. Gal. iv.6.
Abba Father comes more freely from the lips and heart of the New Creature.
Such may draw near to God with a filial freedom, and humble boldness. 3.
Besides it is a more advantageous relation: Romans viii. 17.
For if children (says the Apostle) then heirs, heirs of God and joint-heirs
with Christ. And the Inheritance they are heirs to, is uncorruptible and
undefiled, reserved in the heavens for them; such as eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, and the glory and advantages of which no heart can conceive. Of which
according to the abundant grace of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
they are begotten again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead. 1 Pet. i.3.
4. This new Creation impowers, capacitates and enables us for this Duty. These
things might be largely insisted upon; but thus much is briefly intimated, that
the Obligation to Self-Resignation may appear more from the notion of a
New Creature, than from that of a Creature. And to this purpose is that of the
Apostle, Ephesians. ii. 10. We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, created unto entire obedience to the Will of God, the Foundation and
also the Sum and Abridgment whereof is Self-Resignation.


CHAP. II. That Self-Resignation is that which does eminently difference a good
man from the Devil and the wicked: And that mere external Performances do not
distinguish between the one and the other.
II. SElf-Resignation is that which does eminently difference a good man from
the Devil and the wicked. The Angels that would not continue in Resignation,
that would have another will of their own, that rended their wills from the
will of God, they are the evil and miserable Angels; and still they are
impetuously acted by a boisterous Self-Will, and are impatient of having it
checked. Quasi (...) absque iugo, (...).
Belial is the Devils name, and that word signifies without Yoke; and the
Children of Belial are for a boundless lawless liberty, Psalm. ii. 3.
they set themselves against the Lord and his Christ, saying, Let us break
their bands insunder and cast away their cords from us. They altogether break
the yoke and burst the bonds, Jer. v. 5.
are impatient of restraint.

Wicked men in whose hearts the Apostate Spirit works, are (...), the
children of disobedience: Ephesians. ii. 2.
they are not for entire subjection to the Divine Will, though wise, good, sure
and perfect; but addicted to their own will, which is childish, vain, perverse
and boisterous; and all for gratifying their (...). 1 Timothy vi. 9.
many foolish and hurtful desires and longings. They are all for walking after
the imagination and stubbornness of their own hearts (a phrase often used in
the Prophecy of Jeremiah) and for (...). Ephesians. ii. 3.
fulfilling the wills of the flesh and of the mind. Whereas the children of God
are (...), children of obedience, 1 Pet. i. 14. not conformed to their former
lusts, but to the will of God, as it was said of David, Acts xiii. 22,36.

And here it is fit to advertise and admonish Christians, that it is a piece of
Mystery-Wickedness, a policy of Satan in all ages, to set up and magnify some
pieces of Outward Religion, and put such a value upon them, as from them to
denominate men Good and Religious: and so men are reputed Saints and the
Children of God by such and such Opinions and Notions, such Expressions, such
Observances, such things as may be performed by very bad men. So that on these
different Forms are founded different Parties and Sects, and each magnifies its
own mode; and thereupon men are tempted and invited to associate and link
themselves with one or other, because hereby they shall be reputed Religious,
and apologized for by those of that rank and way, and all others shall be
unsainted and decried. But in the mean while the main thing is little minded,
that which does intrinsecally and eminently difference the good from the
wicked, and that is Self-Resignation; that which our Savior makes the
essential Character of a true Christian, Self-Denial.

Now this Doctrine of denying and resigning our selves, the Doctrine of the
inward Cross, of being dead to self-desires and self-interest is very
unacceptable and grievous to the Pharisaical and formal Christians; they would
fain live to themselves, please themselves, being lovers of their own selves,
covetous, proud, incontinent, fierce, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures
more than lovers of God; as the Apostle speaks of some, who hereby denied the
Power of Godliness, whereof yet they had a Form.

Now it is a good service done to Religion to endeavor both by Life and
Doctrine, to rescue it from these abuses, from being thought to consist in such
outward shows, and to place the Kingdom of God where it should be. It is for
the interest of the pure and undefiled Religion, and for the advancement of
real Holiness, to lessen the credit of such appearances, viz. such an habit,
tone, form of words, mere Outward performances: to lessen the repute of any
sort of Mock-Holiness, a mere outward Profession and Observance of only the
externals of Religion, be they such as are commanded and appointed by God, or
be they mere arbitrary and voluntary tasks, which have a show of Wisdom and
Holiness, but indeed are a Holiness or their own framing, and a self-chosen
Righteousness.

But yet, this is not spoken to lessen the repute of what is external, with a
design to make men regardless thereof, but only to awaken them from resting in
these externals, to the minding of a greater strictness and holiness, a
righteousness which exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees; who
were men that were very observant of a many of the Outward parts of Religion,
and were strict as to several things that did not cross and prejudice their
carnal interests; but yet notoriously loose as to what was most strictly and
mainly required by God. And therefore our Savior in the sixth of Matthew,
required his Disciples to beware of strengthening that Babel, that false
imaginary Holiness of the Pharisees, who by their specious appearances of
Austerity and the like, grew into a great reputation among the people, as if
there were much of Religion in them.

Among the Externals of Religion, some are of God's own requiring, and suitable
to our state and condition here; as, Praying, reading, preaching, hearing the
word, discoursing of it, etc. now as for these (not to mention such as men do
voluntarily impose upon themselves) we are not to value men as religious by any
thing in the use of them, which is common to the regenerate and unregenerate,
and may be performed and attained to by the Hypocrite or formal Christian, who
may make a fair show in the flesh and outward part of Religion, and yet be
unacquainted with the spirit and power of it.

It is the doing these things from a resigned heart, so to pray as in praying
to have an humble submission to the Will of God, so to read, so to preach, so
to hear, as to be willing to be formed into all that truth, the good and
acceptable will of God, this is all in all; this is that which does distinguish
the formal and the real Christian. Others can perform all that is outward in
Religion, and in such a way as to have the praise of men, but to deny our
selves, to resign our wills entirely to the Divine Will, this is proper and
peculiar to the inward and sincere Christian.

CHAP. III. That Self-Resignation is the most acceptable way of glorifying God,
and that he is honored by no performances separated from this.
III. SElf-Resignation and a Conformity to the Divine Will is the most
excellent, the truest and most acceptable way of glorifying God, and doing
honor to him. The greatest honor and respect we can express to an excellent
and worthy person is to endeavor to be as like him as may be, to imitate him
in whatsoever accomplishment commends and represents him justly exemplary.

And the most excellent way of honoring God is to endeavor to be transformed
into his likeness, to have our will the same with his, to will as he wills.

Indeed the mere outward Christian thinks that he does God great honor and
service, when he gives him the fruit of his lips in goodly expressions and
specious Praises; when he gives him the fruit of a bodily Worship in
multiplying external devotions and religious observances: hereby he thinks he
does highly please God, and oblige him to him, as if God were such an one as
himself, and were apt to be taken with such words and shows, and did seek and
passionately thirst after such praises and respects.

But thus to judge of God and deal with him, is really to dishonor him, as
much as thou pretendest by this means to honor him: it is plainly called in
Scripture a flattering God, Psalm. lxxviii. 36. They remembered God their Rock,
and the high God their Redeemer, nevertheless they did flatter him with their
mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues. (...).
It was a good Maxim of the Pythagoreans, Thou shall then in the most excellent
and becoming way glorify and honor God, when in thy mind, thine inward man,
thou art like to God: When thou art affected as God is affected, when thou
willest as he wills, art willing to have that destroyed in thee which is
contrary to the Divine Nature.

That which the Chaldee Paraphrast does gloss on those words in Psalm. l. ult.
whosoever offers praise glorifieth me, is very pertinent, viz. whosoever subdues and
destroys (...) the principle of inordinate affection in him, it shall be
accounted to him as (...) a sacrifice of praise. The mortifying of earthly
members, the slaying undue desires, corrupt interests, and uncurbed affections
is more, infinitely more, pleasing than all those costly and pompous Services
under the Law; than the utmost that the Lip-service and Tongue-devotion can
make show of.

That great bulk of Rites and Ceremonies, those burdensome Services under the
Law, those multitudes of Sacrifices of Bulls, Goats, Lambs, etc. they did not,
they could not avail, were but mean inconsiderable things and vain cost,
without the inward Sacrifice of an heart sweetly, sincerely, kindly and
ingenuously affected toward God. This, this heart, such a temper of Spirit did
Psalm. lxix. 31.
please the Lord, better than a bullock that has horns and hoofs. 1 Samuel xv.
22.
Behold to obey is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rams,
the best of the Sacrifice.

Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, and ten thousands of rivers
of oil? with multitudes of outward Services and bodily Austerities, with long
Fastings or Prayings, or Prophesyings in his Name, with large Discourses,
glorious Expressions, vehement Disputings, or the like? these he shall have,
any thing shall be given rather than the Sin of the Soul, the corrupt will
should be destroyed. But it is the walking with God in Humility and
Resignation, Micah vi. 6, 7, 8.
which is that good thing which God has showed thee, O man, and which the Lord
thy God requires of thee.

Prove. xxi. 27.
The Sacrifice of the wicked, those whose wills are opposite to the Will of
God, is an abomination unto the Lord.

And now under the Gospel-state, wherein those Legal and Carnal Ordinances are
ceased, our more seemingly Spiritual Exercises of Religion, our Prayings, our
Fastings, our saying Lord, Lord, and naming the name of Christ, and great
Profession of Christianity, and all other religious outward observances are but
fruitless empty things, of no account with God, utterly unavailable, except
there be at the bottom of all a Resigned heart.

As St. James says, If any man seems to be religious and bridleth not his
tongue, so is it most true, If any man seems to be religious and bridleth not
his Will, which is more hard, that man's Religion is vain.

CHAP. IV. That Self-Resignation is the way to light even in the greatest
difficulties and perplexities: whether they be in reference to our duty, or in
reference to our condition and state.
IV. FOurthly, Self-Resignation is the way to light, and that in the greatest
difficulties and darkest perplexities. There is a kind of Divine Oracle within
the Self-resigning Soul which speaks clearly and plainly, not darkly and
ambiguously, as that Oracle in Greece. There is a Spiritual Priesthood which
has the Vrium and Thummim (not upon the breast as Aaron had, but) within the
breast: Light and Integrity go together. Psalm. xxv. 14.
The secret of the Lord is with them fear him, and he will show them his
Covenant: or, as it is better in the Margent, and his Covenant to make them
know it. That is, it is part of God's gracious Covenant, not to conceal from
them, but to make them know his Will. That which concerns them to know and
practice God will not hide from the sincerely obedient.

God makes such to know Wisdom in the hidden part, Psalm. li. 6.
or in the hidden man of the heart, to use St. Peter's phrase.

That may safely be understood, and is most true of the Self-resigning Soul,
which the Son of Syrach does affirm, Chap. 37. 13. Let the counsel of thine own
heart stand, for there is no man more faithful unto thee then it: for a man's
mind is sometime wont to tell him more than seven watchmen that sit above in an
high tower.

But to speak more particularly. Where this inward Principle of
Self-Resignation is, there are the fewest doubts and perplexities; or in case
of such doubts, there are the speediest and surest resolutions.

Now the Doubts and Sollicitudes, that perplex and disquiet Christians, may be
chiefly ranked under these two heads: They are either about their Duty, or
about their State.

And in both, Self-Resignation is the way to Light, and affords the greatest
advantages of knowing aright.

1. Be the doubts and perplexities about our Duty, what we are to do: The
Self-resigning Soul is in the best disposition to give a right judgment in
this case, is the best prepared to receive Divine Light, and the guidance of
God's Counsel.

1. This Soul is best prepared to receive Divine Light. Such a Soul is wholly
made for Obedience and quiet Submission to the Will of God: it is brought up at
the feet of Christ, sits there (with Mary) in the posture and Spirit, and all
the becoming qualities of a willing and obedient Disciple; and the Teacher of
Souls will not neglect to show unto such the path of life. God will write his
Law in the humble and obedient heart; the Laws and Rules of Life and Obedience
shall be written within it by the Spirit of the Living God. Those Eternal
Characters of Goodness and Righteousness which are in the mind of God are
copied out and transcribed in the Soul of a Resigned Christian. We have the
mind of Christ, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. ult. The meek shall he guide in
judgment, the meek shall he teach his way, Psalm. 25. 9. And those Letters are
not dead Letters, like those written with Ink on Paper; but they are living
Characters, as they are in God, and writ on living tables. Romans viij. 2.
They are the Law of the Spirit of Life, an inward living Principle in such
Souls.

Again, the Self-resigning Soul is still and silent before the Lord: Lusts and
corrupt Interests are here quelled and silenced, which make a continual noise
and clamor in the unregenerate, and unresigned by their importunate
Solicitations, and fill them with din and tumult; and therefore such a Soul is
better prepared to hear God coming to it in the still small voice, as once he
did to Elias, 1 Kings 19.

Those soft and gentle Whispers of the Spirit, Venae Divini murmuris, as
Prudentius calls them, those inward manifestations of himself are best
discerned and attended to in this solemn silence. When the Wind is high, and
beats upon the windows and doors of the house, it is hard to hear what is said
within. All tumultuous and boisterous passions must be calmed, and the Soul be
in a state of due stillness and tranquillity to hear what God speaks to it. And
when this is the language of our hearts, (as it was of Samuel) Speak Lord, for
thy servant hears, then it is that we hear a voice behind us saying, this is
the way, walk in it. And thus shall the path of the righteous be as the shining
light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4. 18.

2, The Self-resigning Soul is in the best disposition to give a right
judgment, and to discern the Will of God. When men are unresigned, unwilling to
be wholly God's, and have some design and interest to serve contrary to the
design of Christ, and Righteousness, and are passionately and eagerly carried
out to it, it is no wonder if they err in their hearts, and know not the way
of God, the way wherein he has declared he will have them to walk: For they
are easily brought to fancy that to be right which they strongly will, and to
judge things to be thus from their impetuous willing them to be thus. And it is
just with God to give them up to an injudicious and undiscerning mind, so that
things appear to them, not as they are, but as they would have them to appear;
not according to their own inward form and nature, but according to the lusts
of their own heart. Lusts and Passions cast such a mist before our minds, that
we cannot see our way, nor well discern between good and evil.

It is easy to observe, that the same men when they are free from Temptations,
and from under the power of Passions, clearly see many things to be evil, and
condemn them, which at other times they will not be convinced are so, but
pronounce the quite contrary concerning them. Therefore the Self-resigning
Christian, having that subdued in him that would tempt him to judge amiss, is
in the ready way to the clearest discerning the Will of God. What is said of
Christ is, according to his measure, true of a faithful Christian, Isa. xi. 3.
he is of a quick understanding in the fear of the Lord; of a quick scent or
smell, as the Hebr. (...) does import, of a more sagacious spirit; he has a
more exact (...), Heb. v. ult.
his senses are spiritually exercised to discern both good and evil.

Such as are not conformed to this world, but transformed by the renewing of
their minds, shall prove and discern what is that good, acceptable and perfect
Will of God, Romans xii. 2.

Unpurified reason and understanding is far from being a sure and safe guide
and director about the (...), what ought to be done; for it looks at what is
profitable rather than at what is honest. Though it may be quick enough to
discern in matters merely speculative and notional, yet it is very apt to
miscarry in Morals and matters of Practice. Psalm. cxi. ult.
But a good understanding have all they that do his Commandments; a better
light shines into holy and purged hearts, and in this light they see light, and
the day star is risen in their hearts.

This is the Privilege of the Self-resigning Soul, that knows no Will of its
own divided from the Will of God, and would not will any thing, but what he
does will; Prove. ij. 5.
such a Soul shall understand the fear of the Lord, and has great and frequent
occasions of saying with David, Psalm. xvi. 7.
I will bless the Lord who has given me counsel.

2. Be the doubts about our Condition and State, what it is to Godward, and in
reference to Eternity: as S. James speaks, Chapter iv. 1.
Whence come Wars and fightings? I may add, Whence come those fears, anxieties
and uncertainties, that are to be observed in many about the state of their
Souls, those fears that have torment in them, come they not from hence, even
from the lusts that war in their members? One lust often wars against another,
scelera dissident; but all war against the Soul.

Are not most of those tormenting fears and troubles in Christians to be
resolved into the want of an entire Self-Resignation as the proper and true
ground? Men will not come off thoroughly to this, they would be indulged in some
thing or other, and yet would be at peace and rest; they would be cured of
their distemper, and yet are unwilling to have the root of it taken away.
Consider therefore, is there not something of Self-will that works and is too
powerful within thee? Would thou not be unresigned, and please thy self in
this or that thing? do thou not say with Naaman the Syrian, the Lord pardon
thy servant in this thing? and as Lot in another case, is it not a little one?
If this be so, God, who sees the heart, sees all this, and he will not be
mocked, nor be bribed to give thee peace in thy making a great show of being
subdued and resigned in other things.

But if by the power of God's Grace our Wills be entirely subjected to the
Divine Will, we cannot have the least reason upon any account whatsoever to
torment our selves with anxious thoughtfulness about our state; we may be sure
that the outward Hell shall not be our portion if we are delivered from the
Hell within; and that we cannot miss of the Heaven above, while we have a
Heaven within us, and are put into a fit disposition for it by a free
Resignation to the Will of God. They to whom the doing God's Will is
connaturall, and their meat and drink have eternal life, as in the Epistles of
St. John the phrase is more than once; they in a lower degree live the life of
Souls in Glory, are affected as they are, and have the disposition and temper
of Heaven.

Indeed it is as impossible for Souls, whose sincere care it is to purify
themselves as God is pure, and only to will as he wills, to be in Hell, as it
is for impure, self-willed and disobedient Souls to be in Heaven: It Is as
impossible for Love, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
Meekness, Temperance, and the like fruits of the Spirit, to be in Hell, as it
is for Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Hatred, Strife, Wrath, Envyings, Cruelty,
Unrighteousness, and the like works of the Flesh, to grow in Heaven. That Soul
cannot be miserable, and is incapable of the Hellish state which is entirely
resigned; for such a Soul dwells in love, 1 John iv. 16.
and therefore in God, and God in him: Nor can the infinitely good God abandon
and cast off any Soul that cleaves to him with full purpose of heart, and
prefers his Will above her chief Joy. Thirstings and holy breathings after
the enjoyment of God, Godlike dispositions, and a frame of heart agreeable to
the heart of God, cannot fail to be united to him their Original.

CHAP. V. That Self-Resignation is the way to rest and peace: That those that
have attained thereunto find satisfaction and pleasure both in doing, and
suffering, the Will of God: That it procures outward as well as inward peace;
and that Self-willedness is that which puts the World into Confusion.
V. SElf-Resignation is the way to true Peace, Rest and Joy; Joy unspeakable,
as St. Peter calls it; Peace which passes all understanding, as St. Paul. By
the way observe, that neither words nor thoughts can reach Spiritual
Excellencies, this is their sole privilege that they can never be over-valued,
over-praised. Other things we may easily speak too highly of, but we can never
invent too magnificent expressions concerning these; we cannot raise men's
expectations too high concerning them; they will ever prove better then they
are reported to be. It will be said by the Soul that comes to know these things
by experience, as it was by the Queen of Sheba, Behold half was not told me.

This Self-Resignation, I say, it is the way to an holy rest, to the Sabbatum
cordis, the Sabbath of the heart, as St. Austin calls it. If thou will enjoy
the true rest, and keep the inward Sabbath, thou must not do thine own ways,
nor speak thine own words, nor find thine own pleasure; to borrow those words
in Isaiah lviij. Thou must cease from thine own works; as the phrase is Hebr.
iv. 10. All desire rest, peace, and pleasure, but no where shall we find it,
but in yielding our selves to God; and that it is to be found in this way, our
Savior has told his Disciples, Mat. xi. 29. Take my yoke upon you and learn
of me, and ye shall find rest to your Souls.

In taking Christ's Yoke upon us, in bearing his burden, in a sincere, free and
entire obedience to his Laws, in learning of him who was meek and lowly in
heart a pliable and obedient frame and temper of spirit, we shall undoubtedly
find the sweetest ease and tranquillity of mind.

As the Soul grows in Resignation, it returns more to its rest, it comes to
be more as it would be by being more restored toward its original
constitution, its first state. Man was made after God's Image, and while his
Will was the same with the Divine Will, he dwelt in peace and joy: But when he
would needs have a Will of his own divided from the Will of God, in falling
from Resignation, he fell also from peace and rest, into trouble, fears, shame
and confusion.

The Resigned Soul enjoys Religion in all the Sweetnesses and Privileges of
it, it is prepared to taste and see how good the Lord is; and the more a man is
conformed to the Will of God, and grows in Obedience, the more he enjoys the
peaceable fruits of Righteousness. To him that overcomes (that overcomes his
own Will, those Lusts that war against his Soul) shall be given the hidden
manna, Rev. ii. 17.
the white stone with a new name in it, known by him only that receives it;
and a stranger intermeddleth not with his joy. Prove. xiv. 10.
Such an one has meat which the world knows not of, and is fed with the food
of Angels.

Those which have the Holy Spirit for their Guide, shall undoubtedly have him
for their Comforter. The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect
of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever, If. xxxij. 17.

A man can have no peace that lodges and cherishes his deadly Enemy in his
bosom; it cannot be well with him in whom Selfness, the morbifick Matter, and
root of all Distempers, abounds. Self-desires and Lusts are the diseases of the
Soul, they are the corrupt humors that disturb the inward man; and till these
be purged out there can be no health, no soundness, no joy, no rest. Inordinate
Self-love breeds perpetual tumults and disorders in our breasts; for having
many appetites to be satisfied, so long as any of them are crossed or not fully
pleased, (as they can never be) they must necessarily be very troublesome; but
a sweet Calm and composure of Soul enters in with Self-Resignation; and it must
needs so do, as it removes the cause of trouble and disquiet.

There is indeed pain in the first tearing off our Wills from those things they
cleaved and stuck fast to: As it is said of the Milch-kine that drew the Ark,
their Calves being shut up, they went lowing all the way that they went to
Beth-shemesh, so it is with Souls in their passage to Resignation, they then
parting with what was dear to them, fondly beloved, and eagerly pursued by
them, with that which was their life and nature. But they are no sooner arrived
at this state, but the bitterness of death is past, the bitterness of the death
of the Old corrupt man, the hour of travel is over, and they remember no more
the anguish, for joy that the New man created after the Image of God is born
within them. They have now broken through the difficulties in the way, are got
out of the Wilderness over Jordan, and their feet are on the holy Land, the
Land of righteousness and rest. The ways of Religion are not, as before,
grievous, but paths of peace and pleasantness, flowery and sweet, rosy and soft
ways.

Religion is now become their temper, constitution and life, and sin is
grievous, strange, and hard to them. It Is not so troublesome to them to be
patient as to be passionate, to forgive as to revenge; Humility is more easy
to them than Pride, Sobriety than Intemperance, Chastity and Purity are more
sweet than Lust and Sensuality; and the like may be said of the other Graces
and Virtues. It is no longer well with them than while they are true to
Resignation; when at any time they fail here they are sensible they take great
hurt, they find themselves immediately ill at ease. To the Self-resigning Soul
Christ's Commandments are so far from being grievous, that the inward voice of
such a Soul is, I delight to do thy Will, O my God; the Divine Will is its just
satisfaction, its full content, joy and pleasure.

And as the jugum legis, the yoke of Christ's Law, so the jugum crucis, the
yoke of his Cross, is not grievous to the Self-resigned. He says, with his
Savior, the Cup which my Father gives me to drink shall I not drink it? Let
God feed him with bitterness and wormwood, yet his meditation of him is sweet:
his spirit is not imbittered against the Divine Providence, he is still and
silent before the Lord: He possesses his Soul with patience, and often also
with joyfulness.

It is sweet and pleasant to a Christian to find himself willing to be without
that which he desired, and to suffer that which he was most averse to, and goes
most against the hair, when after his requests made known to God by Prayer and
Supplication, and making known his troubles and difficulties to others with
desire of their help, and other due means used, it appears to be the Will of
God that he should have such trialls, and continue in such circumstances. How
sweet is such a temper of Patience to the Soul! it is far sweeter than the
obtaining and enjoying of that we desire.

But as for the Unresigned, his impatience and Self-willedness makes his Cup
more bitter, and his Cross whatever it is, far heavier than it is in it self.
To such an one even the Grasshopper is a burden, and a light affliction
intolerable. He is sick for this or that, as Ahab was for Naboth's Vineyard,
and will not be satisfied without it; he is sowred with discontent, and his
spirit is embittered against Providence. He would be carried through the world
in a Sedan, nor is he able to bear being jogged or disturbed in the way; so
distempered, crazy and rotten is he.

I may in the close of this add, that Self-Resignation is the way to peace
among men, and that it is stiff Self-willedness which puts the world into
Confusions, and makes it so uncomfortable, so unhabitable a place. Men that are
passionately carried out to please themselves, are neither themselves at rest,
nor will they suffer others so to be. These create differences, heighten
animosities, (...). James iii. 6.
blow the coals of strife, are ready to set on fire the course of nature, or
the wheel of affairs; and from the abounding of such comes complaining and
crying in our Streets. From this Self-will it is that we cannot sit down
quietly under our own Vine, and our own Fig Tree: and from hence it is that the
World is become a great Akeldama, a Field of Blood, and a Vale of Tears.

Those that despise Government, and speak evil of Dignities are such as are
presumptuous and self-willed, 2 Pet. 2. 10.

They that make the times perilous are such as in the first place are called
(...) Lovers of their own selves, 2 Timothy 3. 1.

CHAP. VI. That Self-Resignation is the way to true Liberty and Freedom of
Spirit; and the contrary to perfect Slavery and Thraldom.
VI. SElf-Resignation is the way to true liberty and freedom of spirit; which
confirms the former. That which some call freedom and liberty, namely, to walk
in the ways of their own heart, and in the sight of their eyes, is in truth
straitness, bondage, and perfect slavery. The Apostle Peter says, that of whom
a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage. But he that lives to
the pleasing his own will is overcome of Pride, Envy, Covetousness, unruly
Passions, fleshly or spiritual Lusts, and therefore is in bondage to them.
Wicked men are described as serving diverse lusts and pleasures; Titus iii. 3.
not one, but many Lords, and these such as to be under the power of whom is a
most ignominious and shameful bondage. But if the Son make us free we shall be
free indeed, free with a true and excellent freedom. Now he makes men free by
delivering them from their Self-will: By bringing them to will as his Father
and he wills: By uniting their wills with those things that are
intrinsecally, immutably and indispensably holy; things which are in their own
nature good: By enabling them to act conformably to the Idea of everlasting and
unchangable righteousness and goodness. But those that would have nothing
unchangably good or evil to them, that would live as they list in giving
indulgence to the flesh, and fulfilling it in the lusts thereof, they affect
such a kind of freedom as God himself has not; and therefore that which is
utterly unworthy of so excellent a name, and is indeed the vilest and most
intolerable slavery.

The Commands of Sin are most tyrannical and unreasonable; never was poor
Israelite so abused by Egyptian Taskmasters, as the Soul of man is by sensual
Lusts; they command impetuously and cruelly, and one or other of them is
continually putting upon such offices and employments as are no less contrary
to freedom than to the excellency and dignity of our nature. To be acted by hot
and eager Ambition, or greedy and unsatiable Covetousness, or a vehement thirst
after bodily Pleasures, what a miserable bondage and servitude must it needs be
to the free and heaven-born Spirit of man.

But there is no such liberty as to be free to good, and enlarged to spiritual
Obedience. He that is so has an Empire within him, he is in his own power, he
has victory over the world, both the good and evil things of it: His mind is
unhampered, disintangled and set loose, and it is Lord over those whom it
before obeyed. Solomon expresses the excellency of the freedom this man
enjoys in these words, He that rules his own spirit (or passions) is better
than he who takes a City, Prove. xvi. 32. Nulla est major victoria quam quae de
cupiditatibus refertur.
There is no victory more glorious than that whereby we become Conquerours over
inordinate affections, says St. Cyprian.

Nor is there any Victory so glorious.

To do good with a free and willing spirit, with readiness of mind and without
reluctance is the most glorious of liberties; and this is the happy consequent
of Self-Resignation.

For the farther clearing of this grand Truth, know that God is not cruel or
over-severe in his restraint of our Wills. He does not like Rehoboam and wicked
Rulers affect to lay any unmerciful burdens and loads on men: Nor does he, as
one ambitious to show his Superiority and absolute Sovereignty over us, give
out his Laws and Commands merely for his own will and pleasure. But be we
possessed with this important Truth, That the business of Religion is wholly for
the good of man; therein God seeks not any advantage that may accrue to
himself, for he is Self-happy, All-sufficient, and an infinitely perfect Being.
He is not worshipped with men's hands as though he needed any thing, Acts xvii.
25. Our goodness extends not unto him, Psalm xvi. 2. If thou be righteous
what give thou him, or what receives he at thine hands? Job xxxv. 7. In all
his injunctions he seeks the good, the well-being, the spiritual interest of
his Creatures.

We cannot hurt God by our Self-willedness and Disobedience, but we shall
thereby most certainly wrong our selves, destroy our own Souls; and knowing
that this pleasing our own will is no better than sweet poison, the Lover of
our Souls warns us of the danger of so doing.

In short thus: God most Holy and Wise, our Creator and Lord, as he is worthy
and most fit to give us a Law and Rule to walk by, so is that he has given us
most holy, just and good. He does not command us any thing, nor is there any
thing in that Law written in men's hearts, and more fully declared in the Holy
Scripture, but it is absolutely better for us to be obliged to the observance
of it than otherwise; nor has he forbidden us any thing but it is absolutely
better for us that it should not be allowed us than that it should be; (as
would be easy to demonstrate by enumerating the particular Commands and
Prohibitions declared in the Gospel) and therefore it cannot be doubted but
that the truest Liberty consists in the Resignation of our Wills to the Divine
Will.

This excellent and weighty Truth is most clearly discerned by the
Self-resigning Soul; for he never feels himself so free, or so much master of
himself, and in his own power, as when he is engaged in God's Service. But the
Natural (that is the Sensual) man cannot receive this Doctrine, and it is
foolishness to him. He looks upon the Laws of his Creator and Redeemer as too
nice and severe, and the entire observance of them as unnecessary and
troublesome strictness, as if the Wisdom of God did not better know the just
bounds and measures, where man was to be restrained, and where he might be
indulged than he does: As if God did not best know what belongs to humane
nature, and the ordering and regulating men's affections and actions: As if
there were envy in the infinitely good God, ill will and an evil eye toward us
in denying us any thing that is for our good. But to suppose this, to have such
an inward thought is blasphemy in an high degree.

It becomes us therefore to have our minds deeply affected with this Truth,
That it cannot be Liberty to be loose from God; the substance of all he
commands us being in its own nature unchangably good, and all his Laws being
such as it is most fit for us to be governed by: That both his Commands and
Restraints proceed from his tender love, and care of us.

Though Souls as yet unskilful and unexperienced in Religion do not understand
thus much at first, but are apt to think that God might have dealt less
severely with them than he has done, yet they come to be of another mind when
they are once grown up to good maturity in Christ; then they evidently see that
all God commands or forbids was out of the most tender Goodness: And therefore
what at first was grievous to them becomes their choice; nor do they wish to be
indulged in this or that which is forbidden; nor that they might be free from
this or that which is commanded. They esteem (with David) all God's precepts
concerning all things to be right: They do not think the way too strait or
narrow that leads to life, nor wish it broader than it is: They do not wish the
yoke and burden of Christ to be more easy or lighter then it is; all they wish
is, that they were more strong to bear it, to obey more cheerfully and
constantly. They choose the Way of God's Precepts, they choose it as that which
best tends in it self to their happiness and welfare. That which grieveth them
is, that they are not so strong in Obedience as they should be, and pray for
Grace to enable them to obey better; but they seek not an indulgence or
relaxation. They know for certain that the only way to have their wills, is to
give and resign them to God: And that it is for their own advantage not God's,
that he calls for their hearts; and that he requires them for this end, that he
may fill them with true peace, rest, and Heaven. That he commands them to quit
and forsake their false selves, that they may enjoy their best and true selves;
that he forbids them to gratify that which the world accounts Self-love,
because it is indeed no other than Self-hatred.

The great foundation of men's backwardness to receive this Doctrine, is their
mistake of that which they call themselves, their generally valuing themselves
by their Body, and their reference to this present world; by which means they
are chiefly carried out in their affections toward the things thereof, to the
pleasing the Body, and satisfying its appetites though never so unreasonable
and prejudicial to their Souls welfare. The vulgar opinion is, that the Body
is the Man, and consequently to love the Body is for a man to love himself, and
to make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, is to make
provision for himself.

But the Ancient and wisest Philosophers, as also the Primitive Greek Fathers
especially, and great Lights of the Church, would not so much as allow the Body
to be one half or part of the Man: But this was their sense, Animus cujusque is
est quisque, Every man's Soul is he; and, (...) The man is not that part which
is seen: and the Holy Scripture puts (...) Soul for the person very frequently.
Man is a Creature that can think, reason and understand; and that which does
this is the Soul only, and therefore this is the true Man. To do acts proper
to a Man is above the power of Body or matter; and therefore the Body is called
by those low names of an house and tabernacle wherein the Soul dwells, both
in the holy Scripture and the Writings of Philosophers.

Upon this account God (though he allows us to provide for the necessities and
due conveniences of the Body) forbids us to love our Bodies better than our
Souls, or equally with them; and permits us not to satisfy the cravings of our
bodily appetites to the hurt and damage of our Souls. And all the declarations
of his will concerning us are for the great end of restoring to the Soul its
dominion over the Body and sensual part, and maintaining its dignity and
superiority.

And when it is able so to do by cleaving to God, and willing as he wills, its
slavery cease, and it has recovered true amplitude, largeness and liberty. I
will walk at liberty, (says the Psalmist) for I seek thy precepts, Psalm. cxix.
95. Adam affecting to be loose from the will of God, thought to have gained
more liberty, but he was sadly mistaken; for he hereby became a poor contracted
and straightened thing. David would once be free to gratify the unwarrantable
desires of his heart; but by this licentious and false freedom he lost the
true, he miserably sunk himself into a poor narrow and slavish spirit: And
therefore he prays that God would renew a right spirit within him; and that he
would establish him with a free spirit, Psalm. lj. 10, 12.

CHAP. VII. That Self-Resignation is the Sum of the Gospel-Commands: that all
the Ordinances of the Gospel, and even Faith it self, are in order to this.
VII. SElf-Resignation is the Sum of the Gospel-Commands, the totum hominis,
the whole Concernment of a Christian. If there be any other Commandment, (as
the Apostle says of Love) it is briefly comprehended in this, Thou shall
resign thy self, thou shall deny thine own will, and surrender it up to the
Divine Will. This is the great Lesson in the School of Christ: He (says our
Savior) that will be my Disciple must deny himself, and take up his cross and
follow me.

As Plato would have it written upon his School-door, (...).
Let none enter that is unskilled in Geometry; so this is the most proper Motto
for the School of Christ, Let none enter in here that is not resolved on
Resignation. Lord, what would thou have me to do? (as it was St. Paul's
first saying to Christ) is the first Lesson to be minded by all his Disciples.

And as it is the Alpha, so is it the Omega also; it is both the first and the
last lesson of Christianity: All is done when this is done, and till this
lesson be learnt, all that we have done or learnt signifies but very little.
When we have well gotten this, we are Disciples indeed: Mat. vii.
It Is not the saying, Lord, Lord, but the doing the will of God that will give
us that title.

It Is observable that in Romans xii. (a Chapter as full and thick set with
practical Rules, as richly fraught with divine Morality, and matters of
Christian Practice, as any one Chapter in the Epistles) I say, it is observable
that in this Chapter the Apostle describing and inculcating the most excellent
and becoming instances of Practical Christianity, sets this first as
comprehensive of all the particular duties mentioned afterward, viz. the
giving up our selves as a sacrifice and entire oblation to God, v. 1. I beseech
you by the mercies of God that ye present your bodies (that is your selves,
bodies being here put for the whole man, because of the decorous allusion to
the bodies of Beasts offered in Sacrifice under the Law) a living Sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. In this general
Exhortation (together with the words following, which are an illustration of
it) is summed up whatsoever is particularly mentioned in the following verses,
relating to the practice of the several graces required of a Christian in this
world. From hence flow the particular duties hereafter expressed, and they are
all contained herein as in the seed and root. Plainly thus -- If ye give up
your selves as an entire Oblation to God, and so your will is resigned to his,
and not conformed to this world, Ye will show mercy with cheerfulness, love
without dissimulation, be fervent in spirit; you will rejoice in hope, be
patient in tribulation, and continue instant in prayer: you will distribute to
the necessity of Saints, and be given to hospitality: ye will not recompense
evil with evil, but overcome evil with good: ye will as much as in you lies
live peaceably with all men. And so for all other duties which concern a
Christians life in this world.

So that the Root, the Basis and Foundation of Christian Practice is
Self-Resignation, and from it may be expected every duty and act of a religious
life.

There is nothing difficult in Christianity but this one thing, when our Wills
are once resigned, all other duties will flow as naturally from us, as streams
from a Fountain.

Let me add, that Prayer and all the Ordinances of the Gospel are in order to
this; the business of them all is to fasten and unite our Wills more and more
firmly and inseparably to the Divine Will.

And even that great and high grace of Faith, it is wholly subservient to the
attainment of this Self-Resignation. The design of Faith in the power of God is
to encourage us to go forth against those Anakims, those lusts that war against
our Souls, that at last all may be destroyed in the mind and will of man which
is contrary to the Will of God; and that we may be perfectly free to obedience.

And as for Faith in the Goodness and Mercy of God in Christ as to the pardon
of Sin, the end of that is not merely that we may have a sense of our being
forgiven, but it has a farther aim, viz. that we being delivered from anxious
and tormenting fears about the pardon of our sins, may love God and Christ
more, may obey more, and our obedience may be more free, ingenuous, natural,
and constant, as that is which flows from Love.

In a word, Faith looks at the Divine Promises, that thereby we may be
partakers of the Divine Nature; for to this end were the Promises given, 2 Pet.
i. 3. And to this end they are to be applied: And when we partake of the Divine
Nature, our Wills become one with the Divine Will.

CHAP. VIII. That Self-Resignation is that wherein consists the power of
Godliness; and that, as it distinguishes both from the insincere and the weak
Christian.
VIII. THis Self-Resignation (as is manifest by the last Chapter) is that
wherein consists the Power of Godliness; it is the great instance, proof, and
expression of it.

By the Power of Godliness I do not mean that only which is opposed to an
empty form and slight appearnce of Godliness, but also Godliness in its
strength and vigor, that which is powerful as well as sincere and real. To
suffer no Will to rule in us, but what is agreeable to God's Will; to regulate
all our inordinate desires and unruly passions, to cross their cravings, and to
have the love of the world and all Self-love overcome in us, these are the
worthy Achievements of those Souls who are strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might. These are the mighty Acts of those Christians that quit
themselves like men; these are the Magnalia, the Great things of Religion.

1. This Self-Resignation is the only expression of that power of Godliness
that differs from the false and insincere Christians. These are, as the
Publicans and Sinners, so the Pharisees and formal. To die to their own will,
and through the Spirit to mortify all the deeds of the body, is death indeed
to these, and the King of Terrors. The separation of their hearts from the
lusts they have cleaved to is like the separation of Soul and body to them, and
their spirits and lives declare that (as much as they may excel in some
commendable things) here they are sadly short.

And it is worth our observation, that these people being inwardly conscious of
their deficiency herein, love to represent some outward Observances in Religion
as high and hard matters; some things that any carnal man may do if he please,
as well as they, as the great instances of the power of Godliness.

The phrase is very common both in their Lips and Books, but it is not
therefore to be found in their spirits and lives. They are not able to hide
their being acted by, and under the power of either sins of the flesh or of the
spirit. They cannot so artificially ape a Christian, as not to bewray an
inordinate affection to the world, either the profits, pleasures or honors of
it, and, in too many instances, a Will unresigned to his, whose Disciples and
Followers they pretend to be. And from what has been discoursed it therefore
appears, that the power of Godliness is but a word in fashion among them, a
mere sound, named, but not known and experimented by them. There is a form of
Godliness which may very well agree with the power of Self-will: And men may
discover a great zeal for this or that mode and way, for these or those
opinions, and against some certain sins, profess a great love to Christ, faith
in his merits, and zeal for his honor; they may speak in such a strain of
words as is wonderfully taking with the vulgar, have notable gifts in
discoursing about the things of God, and in praying to him, and herein discover
much life and affection: They may strain at Gnats, and be very scrupulous in
some small and disputable things, and yet be self-lovers, seek, relish and
please themselves, 1 Timothy iii. chap.
be lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, covetous, envious, proud,
high-minded, unrighteous, unfaithful, unmerciful, uncharitable; and such as are
any one of these, for all their specious form, are perfect strangers to the
power of Godliness.

Now I would offer that Question of our Savior, (...), what do ye more than
others? What excellent, what difficult thing, such as is worthy to be thought
an instance of the power of Godliness, do ye? You constantly, it may be,
frequent the public Worship of God, you hear God's Word, and read the Bible
and religious Books frequently, you pray in your Closets and with your
Families, you do not run with the profane to their excess of riot: these are
good things (and woe be to them that despise or neglect the external duties of
Religion) but if you do no more than this comes to, what extraordinary thing do
you? May not any man void of the Spirit do the same?

Thou can pray without the same form of words, thou can dispute and
discourse about matters of Religion, and in such a way as is apt to affect
others; thou can deny thy self in some things which will not disadvantage thy
more beloved sins, thou do reform in some things, as to outward garb and
deportment: but in all this, what do thou more than others? Shall the power
of Godliness be placed in those things which mere outward notional Christians
and unregenerate persons may be as ready and dextrous in as others? Alas! what
are all these and the like to that which the Scripture calls cutting off the
right hand, plucking out the right eye, selling all for the pearl of great
price? What are these to the mortifying of earthly members, to the crucifying
of the body of sin, to the being dead to sin? All which expressions are not to
be looked upon as high Metaphors, or Hyperbolical Schemes of Speech, but as
sober realities, and our necessary duty. And these are the things wherein that
power of Godliness shines forth, which distinguishes between those that are
indeed alive, and those which have only a name to live.

Thou show that thou have read much, and heard much, have had good
Education, have kept good company, and art of good natural parts, but how have
thou prospered in Self-Resignation? Art thou more crucified to the world? Have
thou more power over thy Spirit? Is the power of thy Self-will more broken? Art
thou more free and ingenuous in thy obedience? God looks at the heart, the
temper and quality of the mind, the difference between men and men is mainly
within, in the influences and impressions of Religion upon their spirits, in
its bettering their inward frame, and by this means mending the outward
conversation and course of life.

2. Self-Resignation is likewise the only proof of the power of Godliness in
the second sense, that (as was said) which differenceth strong from weak
Christians, those that are grown nearer to a perfect stature in Christ, and
others which, though they be sincere, are but Weaklings and Babes in Christ.

It Is according as men excel more or less in Self-Resignation, that they are
denominated stronger or weaker Christians: this fully appears by what has been
already said.

Now who sees not that there is exceeding much in this Consideration also to
recommend this great Duty effectually to us, and to make us in love with it.
For weak Christians, though never so well-meaning, do bring nothing so much
honor to Religion as the strong do; nay, oftentimes they much discredit it.
But none can doubt that it is exceedingly more for the honor of our Lord and
his Religion to have his Servants strong, healthy and in good heart, than to
have only a company of sickly, crazy, impotent persons to attend him, such as
are always complaining of difficulties, and to whom every Service that calls
for any thing of Self-denial is grievous. It Is much more for his honor that
his Church should be an Academy of persons strong and hardy, than that it
should be a spiritual Hospital, a Spittal of distempered infirm things: That it
should be an Orchard of well grown, fair and goodly Trees bringing forth much
fruit, rather than a Nursery of tender young Plants and little Shrubs. It is
not for the honor of Christ the Physician of Souls, that his Patients should
be always feeble, querulous, infirm, sore and faint, pale and meager, creeping
by the walls, and at best but between sick and well; but that they should grow
up to an healthy Constitution, a good Complexion and sound temper conduces
greatly to his honor. Herein is my Father glorified that ye bear much fruit,
John xv. 8.

And though it be true that God will not despise the day of small things, and
that Christ is far from insulting over the weaknesses of young Christians,
where there is at the bottom simplicity and plain-heartedness, the good and
honest heart: Yet will he not encourage or indulge them neither in a lazy
continuing in a state of weakness and Childhood; but is displeased with those,
that when for the time they might have been at strong meat, are yet but at
milk; that while they should be fighting the good fight of faith, and running
with patience the race set before them, shall lie on the ground complaining,
discouraged and disheartened.

And I add also, that according to the power or vigor of our Godliness, our
strength and growth in Grace, we shall have more or less assurance of the
goodness of our state, and higher or lower degrees of Glory in the life to come.

CHAP. IX. That Self-Resignation is the Establishment of God's Kingdom in us
here, and is an Introduction to his Kingdom of Glory hereafter.
IX. SElf-Resignation is the Establishment of God's Kingdom within us here, and
is an Introduction to his Kingdom of Glory hereafter.

1. It is the Establishment of the Kingdom of God and Christ within us here. No
sooner has a man obtained, by the grace of God, a power over his own Spirit,
but this glorious Empire is set up in his Soul. When Selfness is mastered, and
our will brought into compliance with the Divine Will, then is King Jesus
crowned and inthroned within us.

David in his Troubles and in his Triumphs was a Figure and historical Type of
Christ: He met with many troubles and difficulties before he was established in
his Throne; and the Spiritual David meets with many also. His difficulties
arise altogether from the opposition of our wills: They rage and set themselves
against the Lord and against his Anointed, as the Moabites, Philistines,
Amonites, and house of Saul did against David. We will not have Christ to reign
over us is the inward Language of the Vnresigned. But no sooner is Self-will
persuaded to yield, but the Kingdom of Christ is come into us. We may then cry
Hallelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns.

A most joyful and high day is this, it is the day of Christ's Inauguration. The
State and Government of a Resigned Soul is (as Josephus observes of the Jewish
Polity) a Theocracy.

2. It is also a necessary preparation and introduction to the Kingdom of
Glory. Nay, it is the very Constitution and Essence of Happiness, and without
Self-Resignation there can be no such thing.

The Happiness of glorified Souls does not consist in their being above the
Stars; for a Soul not resigned to the Will of God would be as far from Heaven,
though mounted to such a height, as if it were in the lowest Abyss.

A good Angel while he converseth on Earth, and is fulfilling the pleasure of
God here below, is most happy, and carries his Paradise and Heaven always with
him: And if such an Angel might be supposed to repine and struggle with the
Will of God, and so not to continue in Resignation, he would consequently not
continue to be happy, though his residence were always in the Mansions above.

This is a most fundamental Maxim, and of great importance in Practical
Religion, That Happiness, as to the main, is to be transformed into the Divine
Image and likeness, to partake of the Divine Nature, to have one Will with God,
to be free to Obedience: And that the unspeakable and glorious joy of blessed
Souls arises chiefly from that harmonious agreement and consort which is
between God and them.

Other notions of Heaven are unspiritual and carnal, and argue men not to have
sufficiently tasted the powers of the world to come, but to savor too much the
things of this earth; and, as St. Austin does fitly express it, Cum hoc mundo
velle exire extra hunc mundum, to desire to carry this world along with them,
when they leave it.

And because it is absolutely impossible that man should be in an happy state
while he is otherwise affected than God is, thence it is that the Infinite,
Sovereign, and Perfect Goodness requires our Conformity to himself, and will
have a participation of his Holiness and Image the condition of attaining a
participation of his Happiness, nor will dispense with purity of heart in order
to the seeing of him. For without this, without the agreeableness of our Wills
to the Divine Will, we shall be wholly unqualified and unmeet for God's
Kingdom, and incapable of the happiness thereof.

CHAP. X. That Self-will is the Root of all Sin and Misery.
X. SElf-will on the contrary is the Root of all Sin and Misery. Every Lust and
Sin grows out of this root of uncurbed desire and Self-will, which is a root of
bitterness, a root that bears gall and wormwood.

It may be fit here again to observe, That in that large enumeration of those
sins and evil dispositions which make times perilous, this is mentioned in the
first place, Men shall be lovers of their own selves. 2 Timothy iii. 2.
This is mentioned first as being the root and ground of all the rest.

It was well observed by St. Austin, Civitas Diaboli incipit as amore sui. The
Devil's City is founded in self-love and self-pleasing. Where Self-will is set
up, there the Soul is impetuously carried out to all iniquity with greediness,
so far as it is judged safe, and that such or such a sin is not prejudicial to
another more beloved sin, or to any worldly advantage or Interest.

The Soul wherein Self-will is set up says with proud Pharaoh, Who is the Lord
that I should obey him? This is another abomination of desolation standing in
the holy place, erected in the Soul which should be holy to the Lord.
Self-will, it is an inward and mysterious Antichrist, opposing and exalting it
self above God, it sits as God in the heart, that inward temple of God, showing
it self that it is God.

It is an Anti-God, and will be obeyed in all things. It sets up its threshold
by God's threshold, and its posts by God's posts.

In the Scripture, the pleasing of our own will is frequently put in the
general for all sin. In Ecclesiastes xi. 9. going on in sinful and wicked
courses is expressed by walking in the way of thine heart, and in the sight of
thine eyes. In Jeremy men's wickedness is often styled, walking after the
imagination of their own heart. And in Isaiah lviij. 13. doing of sinful
actions is called doing thine own ways, and finding thine own pleasure. In
Numbers xv. 39. sinning against God is called seeking after thine own heart,
and thine own eyes.

And as Self-will is the Root of all Sin, so is it likewise the Root of Misery
both here and hereafter.

It being the root of the former, it must needs be so of the latter also; Sin
and Misery being inseparable.

And as we showed that the Happiness of Heaven, as to the main, consists in
being transformed into the Divine Image, or the having but one Will with God,
so by consequence the Hellish State does chiefly consist in a perfect
contrariety to God, and the Soul's opposition to the Divine Will. Therefore is
the Devil a most miserable creature because he is made up of Self-will, because
the Will of God is most grievous to him, he sets himself against it, and goes
about the world soliciting and endeavoring to draw others from complying with
it: And those with whom he prevails, he by so doing makes them as miserable as
himself.

If there were no Self-will there would be no Hell, according to that of St.
Bernard, Cesset voluntas propria and infernus non erit. Let Self-will cease,
and there will be no Hell.

To suppose Self-Resignation in a damned and miserable Soul, and Self-will in
an happy and glorified one, is to suppose the greatest contradictions and
inconsistences.

There can be nothing of Self-Resignation in Hell, and nothing of Self-will in
Heaven.

In speaking to the fourth and fifth Considerations, it has been showed, that
it is impossible that that Soul should be miserable which is sincerely and
entirely resigned to the Will of God; and on the contrary, that that Soul
cannot but be miserable that wills contrary to him; and therefore I shall
proceed no farther upon this Argument.

CHAP. XI. That the Love of Christ in dying for Sinners makes the Duty of
Self-Resignation most highly reasonable, and lays the greatest obligation upon
us thereunto.
XI. IN the eleventh place, The Love of Christ in dying for us is most powerful
to oblige Christians to this great Duty of Self-Resignation. Christ's giving
himself a Sacrifice and Offering to God in a way of atonement and expiation,
lays the strongest engagement on Christians to offer up themselves as a
Sacrifice to him in a way of Resignation and Obedience.

This improvement the Apostle makes of this Consideration, 2 Cor. v. 14, 15.
The Love of Christ constrains us; because we thus judge, that if one died for
all, then were all dead; and that he died for all, that they which live, should
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them. What
could he more express? -- Should not live unto themselves, not please
themselves, gratify their own Self-will and Lusts, but please Christ, do his
will, give him the pre-eminence in all things: Not seek our own, but the things
which are Jesus Christ's: Not mind and pursue our own ease, profit and honor
chiefly, and above all, but live to his honor and glory, and prefer his
Interest before our own.

The like inference the same Apostle makes in 1 Cor. vi. 20. Ye are bought with
a price, (viz. with the precious blood of Jesus Christ) therefore glorify God
in your body and in your spirit, which are God's: And what is the best way of
glorifying God, has been showed in the third Chapter.

The Death of Christ is the great manifestation of his Love; by the bitterness
of his Cup, by the depth of his Sorrows and Sufferings for us we may make an
Estimate of the exceeding height of his dear affection. Behold and see, was
there any Sorrow like unto his Sorrow? and therefore was there any Love like
unto his Love? Greater love has no man than this, (said Christ himself) that a
man lay down his life for his friends, but he laid down his life for us when
Enemies.

Out of Love he left Heaven and the bosom of his Father, and the glorious
attendance of the Angels, and humbled himself to a mean, low and afflicted life
upon Earth. He who was rich became poor, that we through his poverty might be
rich: 2 Cor. 8.9.
Such was the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Out of Love he died, he who was Lord of all, the Lord of Glory, the brightness
of God's Glory, and the express Image of his Person, he humbled himself to
death, even the death of the Cross, a death of the greatest pain and shame. And
notwithstanding the pains and sorrows, both inward and outward, which he felt,
were inexpressibly great; yet after his Resurrection, he would have gone into
the Garden again, gone over his Agony again, and drunk that bitter Cup which
made his Soul so sorrowful: He would have gone to Calvary and been crucified
again; he would have poured out his life to death again and again, if it had so
pleased God, had it been the will of his Father that he should repeat his
Sorrows and Sufferings, for the Redemption of man; for he knew nothing but to
be obedient and perfectly resigned to the Will of his Father.

This is that Love of Christ which passes knowledge, Love beyond compare, Love
beyond expressions or conceptions; and can there be a more natural, a more
powerful engagement to Self-Resignation than such a Love? Did Christ so freely
give himself for thee, and should not thou most heartily and willingly give
up thy self to him? Was all of Christ turned into a Sacrifice for thee, and
should not thou make an entire Oblation of thy self, without any reserve to
him?

It Is not only Ingenuity but Justice wholly to live to him that died for thee,
and bought thee with so dear a price. Did he suffer such unexpressible pains
for us, and shall not we be willing to endure some pain and smart, which at
first will be, in denying the solicitations of our fleshly mind; and in going
about to cross our own will: And shall not we also patiently undergo any
sorrows the Divine Wisdom sees it meet to exercise us with? the worst we can
undergo in this world being far short of our Saviors Sufferings in our behalf.

CHAP. XII. That the high and holy Example of Christ lays a mighty Obligation
on Christians to Self-Resignation.
XII. IN the last place, The high and holy Example of our Lord Jesus Christ
obliges us very strongly to the practice of this Duty of Self-Resignation.
There never appeared in the world so perfect and lovely a Pattern and Idea of
the best life, as was the life of Christ. There never shined in the world such
a Light, nor was he in any thing more a bright and shining Example to us than
in Self-Resignation. A famous instance whereof we have (not to name other
places) in that one speech of his, in his Agony in the Garden, recorded in
Matthew xxvi. 39. and Luke xxii. 42. viz. Father if thou be willing let this
Cup pass from me, nevertheless not my will but thine be done. How bitter this
Cup was, how great beyond compare the last Sufferings of Christ were, which
began in the Garden of Gethsemane, and ended in his death on Mount Calvary, may
appear,

First, By those significant words that occurr in the story of his Suffering
and Agony, Mat. xxvi. 37. Then he began, not only (...) to be very sorrowful,
but (...) to be very heavy, and (...) ( Mark xiv. 34.) to be sore amazed, and
that even to an Agony. And both in Matthew and Mark is that Expression, (...),
etc. My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death.

Secondly, By the great weakness of his Body: In his Agony he sweat as it were
drops of blood, an extraordinary, unnatural sweat, it falling from him in
thick, viscous, clammy drops, and this in a cold Season too. Jo. 18. 18.
And so weak was his body at this time, that an Angel comes down from Heaven to
strengthen him, Luke xxiij. 43. This was a visible manifestation of excessive
heaviness and a great colluctation within him, his mind so strangely affecting
his body.

Thirdly, By his prayers and tears. He prayed thrice to this purpose, Father if
thou be willing let this Cup pass from me: And the third time he prayed (...)
with more earnestness and vehemence. And when he prayed, he kneeled down, says
St. Luke; he fell on his face, says St. Matthew; he fell on the ground, says
St. Mark: He lay prostrate on the ground, and put himself into the posture of
lowest humiliation. And besides, his prayers and supplications were offered up
with strong cryings and tears, as says the Author to the Hebrews, chap. v. 7.

By all this (and more might be added) it appears that this Cup was an
exceedingly bitter Cup, and his Sufferings and Sorrows were beyond compare. And
yet he was willing to undergo them; though there was that in his humane,
natural will which had a great antipathy against this Cup, yet it was not
overcome and carried away thereby; but the Divine Principle in him did bring
this will into a due acquiescence, and by the power thereof he freely resigned
it up to the will of his Father. He was most willing to undergo these direful
sufferings, notwithstanding they were inflicted without any the least demerit
of his own, he being perfectly innocent and without sin.

Now the consideration of his holy Example lays a great obligation upon us to
follow him, as in every other grace, so particularly in his Resignation: For
the Gospel represents him not only as Romans 3.
(...) a propitiatory Sacrifice, but also as 1 Pet. 2.
(...) a pattern and example. The Gospel does not only represent the Doctrine
of Christ to be believed, but the Life of Christ to be followed: Nor shall any
have him for their Advocate and Propitiation, but such as are willing to have
him for their Pattern and Example, to copy out and imitate his Humility,
Patience, Purity, Benignity and Self-Resignation. None shall be benefited by
his Death, that are unwilling to live his Life.

So far was it from being the intention of our Saviors Death, to make void or
lessen the necessity of our being conformed to his Life, that one of the great
ends of his coming into the World, and clothing himself with humane nature, was
that he might give us an example of living, and be a pattern for our imitation:
As we may learn from 1 Pet. ii. 21, 22, 23. Mat. xi. 29. John xiii. 15, etc.

That God might the more plainly and familiarly teach us how to be like
himself, he was pleased to manifest himself in flesh, pitch his Tabernacle
among us, go in and out before us in our likeness, and thus visibly exhibit
himself, and become the most excellent pattern of Purity and Holiness, that as
he was so we might be in this world.

And I heartily wish that Christians did more feriously consider what a
transcendent privilege and advantage it is that they have the Spirit and Life
of Christ set before them in the New Testament, to show what a Spirit they
should be of, and what a life they should live. This is such a favor as the
people of God had not vouchsafed to them in the Old Testament. There were
several manifestations of God to the Jews, but they were all far short of this
manifestation of his in the flesh; there was nothing in those for imitation,
and for the forming of their lives into a conformity to his. And therefore if
our lives be not better than theirs, we do not live as becomes Christians, nor
are we faithful to this and other advantages we have above them.

But I fear we are too insensible of this privilege, and that we do not think
sufficiently of this, that he who was in the form of God, took upon him the
form of a servant, clothed himself with humanity, put himself into the lowest
and hardest circumstances, was tempted in all points as we, that so we might
have a complete Pattern and Guide in those many varieties of Conditions,
difficulties and temptations we may meet withal, and be more particularly
instructed how to behave our selves therein worthy of Christ.

This I know and have observed (and I doubt not but others can testify the
same) That those Christians who are most sensible of this extraordinary
privilege; that have high and dear thoughts of the Life of Christ, which is
the Life of God manifested in our flesh, that have it most in their eye, and
are most affected and enamoured with it, are most visibly bettered, and differ
eminently from others, that there is a more excellent spirit in them, that they
are more pure, meek and lowly, more benign and merciful, more resigned, and
every way more exemplary, more of God is in them of a truth, they are greater
Ornaments to the holy Religion which they profess, and more qualified with such
a disposition as renders them more universally useful to mankind than other
Christians.

And thus we have seen what a many most powerful Considerations there are, that
demonstrate the exceeding reasonableness of this Duty of Self-Resignation, and
strongly oblige and excite us to the Practice of it. Concerning which there
shall yet more be immediately said in the next Section.

SECT. II. Directions for the attaining this most excellent Temper of
SELF-RESIGNATION.
CHAP. I. That in order to the resigning our Wills entirely to the Will of God,
we should frequently consider such principles as are most available to the
effectual subduing them thereunto: And several such Principles further enlarged
on.
ANd now hoping that what has been discoursed may have persuaded the Readers
to some desires after the attainment of this excellent temper of
Self-Resignation, we proceed to direct to the use of certain means and helps
thereto: Some of which refer more particularly to Active, some to Passive
Resignation, and others to both alike.

First, Let us often eonsider and labor to be fully possessed with the truth and
power of such Principles as are available, and have a proper tendency to the
effectual subduing our Wills to the Will of God. This sort of Principles has
been largely spoken to; but because we cannot insist overmuch upon so highly
useful an Argument, nor indeed well speak sufficiently to it, we will dwell a
while longer upon it, and entreat the Reader to fix deeply in his mind these
following Truths also, which, though they are the same for substance with some
of the foregoing, deserve to be farther and more particularly enlarged on.

1. That the Will we are to submit to is the Will of our great Creator,
Preserver and Benefactor. It is the Will of our Creator, of him who has given
us our Being, and by whom we are whatsoever we are. Now we have shown that
man's receiving his Being from God, and his dependence upon him for the
continuance of it, does speak it necessarily his duty to be ruled, ordered and
disposed by him, so that he can never be disobliged from willing agreeably to
the Will of God.

As God is our Creator, he has a right to be our absolute Lord and Sovereign;
and he being so we must needs acknowledge that we ought to will nothing nor do
any thing but what God allows. That we are not to take leave to do what we
list, but what God likes best.

Again, it is the Will of our great Preserver and Benefactor, who has ever
since we had a Being laid new Obligations upon us, in the continued care of his
gracious Providence, and by his renewed mercies and favors. We are nothing
without God, we have nothing but from him, and therefore we should do and will
nothing, but what he would have us. He, the overflowing Spring of Goodness has
not left himself without witness, is always doing us good, and filling our
hearts with food and gladness; doing all that is fit for him to do to please
us, being not at all niggardly in the comforts of this life, but bestowing them
in such a proportion as is able to content moderate and modest desires, and
being richly gracious in affording us advantages and suitable means for a
better life. And therefore if we have any the least sense of what is worthy and
ingenuous, we will acknowledge it most reasonable and becoming we should do all
we can to please him, who has done so infinitely much to please us. The Apostle
well knew the power of this Argument, when he said, I beseech you by the
mercies of God, that you present your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service, Romans xii. 1.

Nor can there be a more powerful Argument than this to persuade to Patience,
to a quiet and meek submission to all the disposals of the Divine Providence;
seeing for one cross we have many hundred blessings. Vbi mali gutta est, ibi
immensum mare beneficiorum Dei. Where there is one drop of evil there is a
large sea of divine favors and benefits. And this men would be forced to
confess, if they were as curious and careful to consider the many mercies they
enjoy, as they are to consider the few evil things that they suffer: If they
were duly sensible that they are less than the least of the many mercies they
possess; but in all their sufferings God punishes them less than their sins
deserve. Holy Job thought it reasonable thus to argue, as prodigious and
unparalled as his sufferings were, Shall we receive good at the hand of God,
and shall we not receive evil? Job ij. 10. What? is God bound to be always
heaping favors upon us? must we have nothing but Sunshine, fair and calm days,
must we be fed with nothing but marrow and fatness, taste nothing but what is
sweet and dainty? If God gives us sometimes to taste of the sour and bitter, to
drink of the waters of Marah, shall we repine and murmr, and think much of
it? Far be it from us so to do.

2. The Will we are to obey and submit to is the Will of the infinitely perfect
Being, that is most holy, most good, most wise, most powerful: And accordingly
his Will is most holy, good, wise and perfect, and therefore infinitely more
worthy to be followed than our own Will, which is vain, foolish and perverse,
when not governed by his, and has many foolish and hurtful desires.

If a Child be left to his own Will, it would be his ruin, and it would be
much more pernicious to us not to be guided, governed and restrained by the
Will of God.

And when God does restrain and abridg us as to some things which our Will
would be free and loose to, we have no cause to complain; as those that are
come to be grown men, and to have a right judgment of things, do clearly see
that they had no cause to be froward and complain when Children, that their
careful and wise Parents would not suffer them to eat green trash, nor humor
them in every thing they longed for.

God, who is the great Physician of Souls, sees it fit in his infinite Wisdom
to restrain us from certain things, as a wise and careful Physician does his
Patient from what he knows would be his bane, however grateful to his
appetite.

And so for the other part of Resignation, Submission to God's disposals, and
Patience under afflictions, when it is the will of God we should be exercised
with them, it is to be yielded to and preferred above our own will, as being
the Will of a most wise and good God, the great Physician of Souls, who
perfectly knows our frame, and what affliction is necessary Physic for us.

God is not only to be considered as the great King and Sovereign of the Would,
and therefore his Will to be received with all regard, but he is also to be
considered as the wise Physician of the World, that has care of Mankind as of
sick persons, this World being a great Hospital or Pesthouse, a place for
diseased and infected Souls, and afflictions are his Physic which he
prescribes and applies according to the several cases of his Patients. The sick
Soul is not for this kind of Physic, but would rather be pleased and
gratified; but God's thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor his will as ours. He
will have his Patients to submit to his method and way of Cure, and not quarrel
his appointments; herein he is wise and good also, it is an act of great mercy
in him to do thus. It would be an act of cruelty in the Physician to comply
with his Patients humor, and to suffer his will to prevail and rule. And there
is no true Christian, however chastening is not joyous but grievous to him for
a time, but he finds afterward that it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness, and that it was good for him to have been afflicted.

I added that it is the Will of God most Powerful as well as most holy and
wise, that we are to submit to; and this teaches us how vain and fruitless an
attempt it is to struggle with and resist his Will. Woe unto him that striveth
with his Maker; let the potsheard strive with the potsheards of the earth,
Isaiah xlv. 9. So that if we will not be persuaded to a compliance with the
Will of God either from the consideration of his Holiness, Wisdom or Goodness,
let us dread the terrible effects of his Power. How many instances of
Irresignation and stubborn Self-willedness are to be found in Scripture, whom
God made to know, before he had done with them, that it is impossible to oppose
his Will and Power.

3. The Will we are to be resigned to commands such things for the most part as
are in their own nature good, and carry their own reason in them; and
whatsoever things else are commanded, they are in order to such things. The
goodness and reasonableness of all God's primary Commands, and our Obligation
to them, does not merely depend upon his Sovereign Authority: Though they are
to be observed because God commands them, yet he does not command them only
pro imperio, to show his absolute Sovereignty and Dominion over us, but because
they are intrinsecally and essentially good, most agreeable to his holy nature,
and greatly for our good and advantage, infinitely better for us as we are
Reasonable Creatures to observe, than to be disobliged from.

This is the will of God even our sanctification, 1 These. iv. 3. This is the
sum of all he wills concerning us; and judge in your selves, is not a life of
Chastity better than that of Uncleanness? Is not Temperance and Sobriety better
than Surfeiting and Drunkenness? Is not Humility and Meekness more lovely and
commendable than Pride and Insolence? Is not Justice, Vprightness and Truth
better than Injustice, Falsehood and Oppression? Is not Charity and Pity better
than Hatred, Cruelty, and Hard-heartedness? Is it not more worthy and
reasonable to love God above all, than to prefer any thing before him, he being
the highest Good, our infinitely best Friend and Father, from whom our selves
and all we enjoy are? Nay, whose reason does not tell him, that as the former
are most amiable and most becoming humane nature, so the latter are as hateful
and unworthy of us?

Is it not better beyond all comparison to love the Soul which is Spiritual and
Immortal, more than the Body which is corruptible and but for a short time, and
whose welfare depends wholly upon the Wellbeing of the Soul? And when we have
sined against the Law written in our hearts, or more clearly and largely
revealed in the Scriptures, is it not reasonable and most becoming us to
repent, to be sensible of our unkind and unworthy behavior toward God, to be
grieved that we have offended the Father of mercies, and amend our ways, and do
so no more, as ever we would expect his favor, and the light of his
wellpleased Countenance, and those mercies which we most need, and which none
but he can bestow upon us? And is not this better than to continue in
disobedience, impenitence, and to harden our necks against God, and not to be
affected with any ingenuous sense of our carriage toward him? So that we see
Repentance is most agreeable to the quality and condition of our state here;
and so is also patient Submission to the Will of God in his disposals of us,
both in respect of his Wise Goodness and Sovereign Power, nor can any thing
more become us. And nothing is more manifestly unreasonable than to fret and
repine at any of the Divine Providence.

And as for the other things God commands, those which are our duty only by
positive institution; as they are but very few under the Gospel, so are they
only commanded for this end, that they may better secure the weightier matters
of the Law, the primary commands, and to fit us for a mindful regard and
observance of them. And he, who is infinitely wise and good, knowing best what
is fittest to be required of us in order to so great an end, it cannot but be
highly unreasonable and unworthy not to comply cheerfully with his Will
declared in these also as well as in the other Commands.

4. The Resignation of our Wills to the Will of God has the promise of a
Reward infinitely above the labor of any services he requires of us, and the
pain of any sufferings he inflicts upon us. Our services are due to God as we
are his Creatures, and therefore it would be our duty to yield our selves to
his Will without the consideration of any future Reward. And besides we have
more than our services are worth, and our labors and sufferings amount unto.
We are less than the least of the multitude of mercies we daily receive. And
the very comforts and pleasures which arise from the sense of doing our duty,
and from the being busied in that work and employment which is most agreeable
to the primitive and proper constitution of our Souls, are a great Reward. But
that God should confer a Reward upon us upon the account of poor mean services,
than which nothing can be better; a Reward so rich and glorious beyond
expression and apprehension, what a consideration is this! What we do or suffer
in compliance with the Will of God is far from being above what the heart can
conceive, or the tongue express: But the Reward which God will bestow for this
doing and suffering is such as is unspeakable and full of Glory, and passes
all understanding. It is such as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor have
entered into the heart of man the things which God has prepared for them that
love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

Again, our Services and Sufferings are but for a short time, they are but for
this life, Jam. iv. 14.
which is but as a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes
away: But God will reward them with an eternal Reward, 2 Cor. iv. 17.
with an exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. So that well might the Apostle
reckon the sufferings of this present time (and consequently the services also)
not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans
viii. 18. Thou art not far from thy journeys end, thou have but a short life; a
little time to testify thy love to God here on earth, and he has an Eternity
to reward thee in; which therefore should encourage our patience to persevere
and hold out to the end. Especially when we consider, that though this Reward
be future, yet it is near, at least, part of it, and a considerable part too.
Though there will be a further completion of our felicities at the Resurrection
of the just, and the great day of recompense, yet the Souls of the faithful may
expect to receive a very considerable part of the recompense of reward before
that day.

And even in this life they have some earnests of that glorious Reward, some
foretastes of the pleasures of God's right hand, some bunches of the Grapes
that grow in the upper and heavenly Canaan. And the more Christians endeavor
to live the life of Heaven, the more heavenly their affections and
conversations are here, the more shall they have here of heavenly Enjoyments.
And in these respects the Scripture sometimes speaks of those that are
excellently religious, even whilst they are in this life, that they have
eternal life, John vi. 54. 1 John v. 13. And that they sit with Christ in
heavenly places, Ephesians. ii. 6.

Lastly, This Resignation to the Will of God is also highly conducing to our
Temporal Good: And that not only because it has the promise of the life that
now is, as well as of that to come, but because it tends in its own nature
hereunto. Here I will particularly and very briefly show that it makes for our
profit and advantage, as to our outward estate, as to our ease and quiet, and
as to our health and strength.

1. As to our outward estate. This it does, 1. As it engages men against Pride,
and to Humility and Modesty. By this means are avoided vast and needless
expenses about Attire and Dressing, Building, Feastings, and a great number of
pompous Vanities: And also the great charges which men of aspiring and
ambitious spirits are at for the procuring of Dignities, Honors and high
Places; and the supporting of their Grandeur that they may be the more
esteemed, reverenced, and admired by the world. 2. As it engages to Temperance
and Sobriety, against all Sensuality, and a delicious luxurious life. And so,
expensive Divertisements, Sports and Revellings, Incontinence, and making
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, which impair and consume
men's Estates, and bring not a few to a morsel of bread, are all avoided. The
desires of Temperance are cheap, easy and soon satisfied. 3. As it engages to
Meekness in opposition to Wrath, Malice and Revenge: And by this means,
Quarrels, which often cost men dear, and abundance of expensive Lawsuits are
prevented. It costs men much more usually to revenge Injuries than to bear
them. 4. As it engages to Labor and Industry in lawful Callings in opposition
to Carelessness and Sloth, which (as Solomon says) shall clothe a man with
rags, whereas the hand of the diligent makes rich. Prove. x. 4.


2. It makes for our ease and quiet in the world. And this 1. As it engages to
Meekness and peaceable spiritedness, which as it is a grace most lovely in it
self, so it makes those that are endued with it lovely and acceptable to
others, and wins and attracts good will. 2. As it engages to Mercifulness both
in giving and forgiving. None but a Monster, and one prodigiously wicked and
unworthy, will put affronts upon and procure trouble to those that are
merciful in these two respects. 3. As it engages to Justice, Truth and
Uprightness, in giving to every one his due, in not defrauding, wronging or
defaming any; all which plainly tend to the procuring of Peace.

3. It makes for our health and strength, the good habit and constitution of
our Bodies, as well as of our Souls. This it does 1. As it engages to Sobriety
against Excess, which both begets and feeds diseases and Distempers.
Incontinence and Intemperance weaken both the body and the mind, shorten life,
and make it painful and uncomfortable while it lasts. 2. As it engages against
heart-tearing Cares, and such anxious Solicitudes as waste natural strength,
and prey upon the spirits. 3. As it engages against all inordinate affections,
all fleshly as well as worldly lusts. These make men lean and sick, as Amnon's
lust after Tamar made him. 4. As it begets cheerfulness and tranquillity of
spirit, which has a proper efficacy to the preservation of health. As a broken
spirit dries the bones, so a cheerful heart does good like a medicine, Prove.
xvii. 22. 5. As it engages to honest labor in opposition to a soft and
delicate life. Exercise has a natural tendency to the making men hardy, strong
and healthful.

Now then, would we be fully, and in all things resigned to the holy and good
will of God, let us observe this first Direction, and labor after a great
sense of the truth of the foregoing Principles, and all those Considerations
which have been proposed to our view, which are most powerful arguments to
persuade to this Duty.

CHAP. II. That humble and fervent prayer is a necessary and effectual means to
the attaining the grace of Self-Resignation.
II. IN the second place, Being humbled in a deep sense of thy Irresignation
and Disobedience, (wherein thou have hitherto walked to the hurt and danger of
thy Soul) beg of God this high and holy temper of Soul. This one thing desire
thou of God, and seek after it all thy days.

Humble and holy Prayer is one of the greatest helps to the obtaining of any
grace or good thing from God. Let us then carefully apply our selves to him for
this great blessing; it being such a one as none but himself can give; and he
who is our Father in Heaven, the Father of mercies, will give this, and all
good things to them that ask him.

If any of you lack wisdom (says S. James) let him ask of God, chap. i. 5.
that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not: and it shall be given
him. Now this Resignation of our wills to the Will of God is the highest point
of wisdom; and this sort of wisdom is particularly meant in the Text, as
appears by the foregoing verses.

But then our Prayers must be with fervency and in faith.

First, They must be fervent. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much: James v. 16. Not cold and languid desires, or faint wishes.

But we are not to judge of the true fervency of Prayer by the heat of the head
or fancy, but by the heat of the heart and the ardency of our affections. My
heart (says David) (...) boils or bubbles forth a good matter. We are to judge
thereof by the passionateness and earnestness of our desires, not by any thing
that is obvious to sense, not by the loudness or length of Prayer, (be it
without or with a form of words) though it were as long as that prayer of Baals
Priests, from morning to noon, or as that prayer among the Papists of forty
hours, by which they amuse the weak and injudicious in spiritual things.

There may be as much, yea more, of the Spirit of Prayer, when there are no
words at all. There are times when the Spirit makes intercession with
groanings that cannot be uttered, affections too quick and strong for
expressions, and which would cool, if put into words. Thus Hannah spoke in her
heart to God, her voice was not heard, but she poured out her Soul before the
Lord; and God heard, who knows the secrets of the heart, and the mind of the
Spirit. These inward breathings of the Soul are ever very precious to God, and
find favor with him.

When a Soul prays out of a deep sense and feeling of its wants, and is full
of affectionate breathings after God, and has the most ardent and inflamed
desires after Spiritual things, this is true praying with fervency, and in the
Holy Ghost. And the silence of the Soul is louder, and much sooner reaches the
ears of the Almighty, than the greatest loudness and volubility of speech.

If we would therefore obtain this best and most divine of all blessings, let
us pray for it with the greatest ardour of affection: we may be assured that
God will never cast away so rich a Pearl as this, upon those that declare
themselves insensible of its worth, by asking it in a cold and formal manner.

And the more to excite and quicken our desires after it, let us know, that if
God accepts our prayers, and gives us this holy temper of Spirit, he does
infinitely more for us than what Herod promised the daughter of Herodias. If he
gives thee this Empire over thine own Will, he bestows that on thee which
incomparably excells the greatest earthly Kingdom. The Kingdom of God (as has
been said) is then within us here, and we are thereby made meet for his Kingdom
of Glory hereafter. And who that duly considers this, can be flat and heavy in
his prayers for this Grace?

Secondly, Our Prayers must be also in Faith. Thus S. James tells us we must
ask this Spiritual Wisdom, in the following verse: But let him ask in faith,
nothing wavering -- That is, we must believe that as God is able, so he is as
willing and ready to give us what we ask, if we ask according to his will, as
S. John qualifies it, 1 Ep. v. 14. And it is according to his Will, and
pleases him highly that we ask Spiritual Wisdom.

This Faith is the ground of all address to God, Heb. xi. 6. He that comes to
God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him. And this he will assuredly be in his own time, which is always the
best. God may sometimes make as if he did not hear, that we may seek him more
diligently and pray more fervently, that he may prove our patience and just
valuation of his blessings, and that we may be the more thankful for them when
we have them, prize them the more, and improve them the better; but if we
persevere in earnest and believing praying, we shall undoubtedly in due time
obtain. And as for such spiritual good things as are necessary to Salvation, we
are to pray for them with such a faith, as to assure our selves that God will
give them, if we ask aright; his most gracious nature and promises assuring us
that he cannot deny them to such askers.

CHAP. III. That in order to our being entirely resigned to the Divine Will, we
must be willing pati Deum, to suffer God, and abide the power of his Spirit
working in us.
III. THirdly, Having poured out thy Soul before God in humble and earnest
Prayer, thou must be willing pati Deum, to suffer God, and abide the power of
his Spirit working in thee.

To this purpose there is an observable passage in St. Austin on Psalm cli. 3.
Magni languores, sed major medicus, etc. Be the maladies of thy Soul never so
great, yet there is a Physician that is greater, and who never fails to cure;
for to an all-powerful Physician nothing is incurable, only thou must
patiently suffer thy self to be cured. Do not thrust back his hand when he
begins to touch thy sores, and search thy Souls wounds: He well knows what he
is a doing, do not hinder and resist when it begins to pain, be not so delicate
and tender to thine own hurt, but with a quiet patience bear for a while the
anguish when he cuts and lanceth, considering that the present pain makes way
for thy future health and soundness.

Let not Christ and his holy Spirit have cause to say of thee, (as it was said
of Babylon) we would have healed him, but he would not be healed.

Vt corpus redimas ferrum patieris and ignes.
For the health and safety of the body (in case of a Gangreen or other
dangerous disease) how do men endure a tedious course of Physic and much
torment?

Vt valeas animo quicquam tolerare negabis?
And for the health of thy Soul, infinitely more considerable than a little
longer life and ease of the body, (which is all that Physic or Surgery can
at any time effect, but can never secure) will thou not endure the pain of
being cured of its diseases, which let alone will make thee eternally miserable?

Let us be therefore entreated, as ever we would obtain this Divine temper of
Self-Resignation, 1 These. v. 19. Acts vii. 51.
to take heed of quenching the Spirit, of resisting the holy Ghost, as the Jews
did, and paid dear for it. Take we heed of stifling any of his Convictions, and
rejecting his Motions: Let us not seek to shift off and put by serious and
awakening thoughts working in us, as the usual practice of sinners is, by
diverting to the vain entertainments and false pleasures of the world and the
flesh, nor endeavor to drown the voice of Conscience, which is the voice of
God, and to be heard with a reverend regard.

If we would have Christ sit as a Purifier and refiner in the midst of us, to
purge us as gold and silver, that we may offer our selves unto the Lord an
offering in righteousness; we must abide the day of his coming.

But alas! I must needs observe by the way, there are but few of the Christian
Profession who are thus patient, and will endure the refining and purifying
work of the Spirit. Most would with Simon Magus have the Holy Ghost in his
Gifts, such as may make them seem some great ones, and procure admiration to
them, but few would have the renewing of the Holy Ghost, and the Sanctification
of the Spirit unto obedience. Many would be glad to have the Spirit to sit as a
Refiner upon their Lips, that they may be able to speak spiritually, but few
are willing that he should sit as a Refiner in their Hearts to melt and consume
their Self-will, and purge out of them all secret inclinations to Sin.
Abundance have learnt Parrot-like, to talk of the Spirit, and pretend greatly
to things Spiritual, which yet declare by their lives as those in St. Jude,
that they are altogether Sensual, having not the Spirit, that they have
received no other Spirit but that of the world.

It has been a great and common fault, which has been the occasion of a world
of mischief to Souls, that men have been valued as Spiritual by the gifts of
the Spirit, (such as the veriest hypocrites may have) rather than by the Graces
and fruits of the Spirit, such as those Gal. v. 21, 22.

But to return to our present Direction: Would we have our Wills fully resigned
to the Will of God, let us above all things beware of grieving his holy Spirit,
according to the Apostles Caution, Ephesians. iv. 30. Let us take heed of rejecting
him, when he offers to work this work in us, and of giving him any the least
check or discouragement, but permit him to have his full scope and liberty of
doing what he pleases within us without disturbance. When Christ stands at the
door and knocks, and waits to be gracious to us, let us not refuse to open to
him, nor seem not to hear him; but say with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant
hears.

CHAP. IV. That we are not only to suffer the Spirit to work in us, but ought
also to work with him in heartily opposing our Self-desires; and what
endeavors we should use is showed in five Particulars.
IV. FOurhtly, We must not be merely passive, and only suffer the Holy Spirit
to do his work in us, but we must likewise work with him in vigorously
resisting and crossing our Self-desires. We must put on heroical resolutions
stoutly to oppose the impetuous desires of our sensitive powers. It is God that
works in us both to will and to do, but yet we must also work out our own
salvation with fear and trembling. Col. 1 ult.
We must strive according to his working which works in us mightily. We must
be faithful to that lesser light and strength which is in us, and we shall have
more light and strength. If we be faithful in fewer Talents, we shall receive
more. And here take these following Directions.

1. Deny the first Solicitations, and resist the first motions of inordinate
appetites, depress them at their first rising. Quench (...) Lust when it does
begin to smoke, (as Justin Martyr phraseth it) before it bursteth out into a
flame; for then it will be unruly and too hard to master. Think not to ease thy
self by giving some satisfaction to thy lusts; Facilius est initia affectuum
prohibere, quam impetum regere. Seneca epist. 86.
for by this means they will solicit and vex thee the more; and the yielding
to commit a sin leaves a greater propension and desire to sin again. Thou shall
best silence the clamours and importunities of a temptation, by not listening
in the least to them. As one act of mortification prepares for and enables to
another; so on the contrary, by once yielding to corrupt nature, thou art made
less able to resist another time.

2. As to those sins which either through Constitution or Custom thou have the
strongest inclination to, thou must show a more than ordinary roughness and
severity against them. It is not safe so much as to dispute or argue with
temptations to such sins. It was a good observation of Aristotle, that some
passions are not to be vanquished (...), by reason but by force; that is, not
so much by the one as by the other. Not so much by arguments as by a holy
violence and resolution.

And there is not more need of taking this course against any temptations, than
those that solicit to the Sin of Uncleanness. Duriora sunt praelia castitatis,
says S. Cyprian: The battles of Chastity are more sharp than any other.

The forementioned Philosopher in his Ethics observing that man is (...),
(...). Arist. Eth.
a creature very apt to be taken and ensnared by pleasures, advises, that for
the attaining of virtue (the middle between two extremes) we should shun that
extreme most, and keep farthest from it, which pretends to most pleasure (...),
. This is good advice, and there cannot be better given for the attaining the
virtue of Chastity, and the overcoming temptations to Uncleanness, which of all
other sins does promise the most pleasure, than not to trust our selves to
enter into the least parley with them, but presently to fly from them, by
diverting our selves to other thoughts, and forcing our minds to other objects.

3 We ought, as much as lies in us, to shun whatsoever may probably be an
occasion of our being tempted, especially to such sins as we are most inclined
to. Art thou prone to excess either in meat or drink? Art thou apt suddenly to
take fire, and to be inflamed with passion? Art thou of a lustful temper, or
the like? Avoid all thou can such places, company, and objects as may be
incentives to those appetites. Thus in order to the avoiding of the Sin
Uncleanness, the Wiseman advises, not to come near the house of the whorish
woman: and for the prevention of the Sin of Drunkenness, not so much as to look
on the wine when it is red, and gives its color in the glass.

4. It is of good use for the better securing our perseverance in the spiritual
warfare, with humble dependence on God for the aids of his grace, to engage our
selves in solemn vows against those sins especially which have gotten most
power and dominion over us. I cannot commend the obliging our selves by vows to
certain tasks (as the manner of some is) which have not an immediate and
special tendency to the mortifying of Sin, and advancement of Holiness. Such
vows are found by experience to be both unprofitable and burdensome, to be
insnaring and hampering, and rather to gratify Superstition, and minister
questions and scrupulosities, than godly edifying. But to vow against things
unquestionably evil, and to the use of certain means that are necessary to the
destroying the body of Sin, and that first, for a shorter space of time, and
afterward for a longer; and so, that time being expired, to renew these vows
as long as we shall see it needful, and till we be well grounded and established
in Holiness, till Religion become our nature, the temper and constitution of
our Souls, the joy of our hearts, and our deliberate choice and settled
practice, till we have gotten the complete mastery over those lusts which we
have been most carried away captive by; I say, to vow with such cautions is
found by experience to be of exceeding great benefit and advantage.

And when we have thus vowed, we should frequently reflect upon what we have
done; and then especially, when we are solicited by the Tempter within or
without to sin. Let us then say with holy David, Psalm. lvi. 12. Psalm. cxix. 106.
Thy vows are upon me, O God: I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will
keep thy righteous judgments. Neither hopes nor fears, neither the terrors nor
allurements of the world shall dissuade me from a faithful obedience to them.

Vows prudently managed are of great use to secure us to Religion; and this is
the only end of them. Vovere nihil alind est, quam animum immobilitare ne
possit retrogredi.
To vow (says Cajetan) is nothing else, but to fix the mind, and make it
immovable, that it may not start back from the practice of Religion.

And as for those that are shye or slack thus to engage and devote themselves
to God, (which I fear in most proceeds from a too dear affection to some sin or
sins) let them know that God's Vows are already upon them, they are under the
Obligation of the Baptismal Vow, to renounce the Devil and all his works, the
vain pomp and glory of the world, the covetous desires of the same, and the
carnal desires of the flesh, so as not to follow nor be led by them. So much is
implied in being baptized in, or into, the Name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost. And besides, those that have received the Lord's Supper, have
thereby virtually renewed their Vow in Baptism. In this other Sacrament we make
a Profession, that we offer and present unto God our selves, our Souls and
Bodies, to be a Holy and Lively Sacrifice to him: Than which there is nothing
more due or reasonable, considering the great Love of God in giving his Son for
us, the great Love of our Savior Christ in his Death and Sufferings
represented in this Sacrament, and the great Blessings procured for us by the
Blood of that spotless Lamb. So that all of us, young or old, have already
bound our Souls with a Bond, (as to vow is described Numb. xxx.) being under
the engagement of either one or both these Sacramental Vows; and therefore in
exhorting you to oblige your selves by solemn Vows to the duties of Religion, I
do not advise you to a new thing, but only to repeat what you have already
done; and if you intend to stand to the Vows you have made, what should deter
you from reiterating them whilst you have need of them.

But always remember when you vow to the Lord, to do it with a trust and faith
in his power and all-sufficient Grace, and with a distrust of your own natural
ability to perform your Vows: And when at any time you have failed in the
performance of them, be deeply humbled before God, and renew your Engagements
with a greater sense of your weakness and falseness of heart, and be more
watchful over your selves, and let your falls make you more narrowly look to
your feet for the time to come.

5. Fasting is another means to be used for the mortification of the body of
Sin. It is of great consequence, and necessary to the health of the inward man,
to keep under the body, to humble, chastise, and bring it into due subjection.
This was the practice of St. Paul himself, who had not such unruly passions and
appetites to tame as we have.

Religious Fasting is of great use to the subduing of the Body to the Spirit,
and to the starving of corruptions by cutting off their provision, as the
ungovernable beast is made tame by taking away his provinder. And there are a
sort of Devils that will not go out without Fasting added to Prayer, and other
means; but it is most especially of force for the casting out the Unclean Devil:
And according as we find we stand in more or less need of this remedy, we
should oftener or seldomer make use of it.

CHAP. V. Of the great power and efficacy of Faith in God; Faith in his Power
and Goodness.
V. FIfthly, The next Direstion I shall give in order to subduin gour Wills to
the Will of God, is that of our Savior, Have Faith in God, Mark xi. 22. Have
faith in his Power and Goodness; this will add life to our prayers, this will
animate and strengthen all our endeavors.

Take heed of doubting whether the Lord's hand be not shortened, that it cannot
save; whether his ear be not heavy, that it cannot hear; or his bowels shut up,
that he is not ready to help.

Take heed of questioning, whether thine own Will and selfish desires be not
stronger than can be subdued, of entertaining suspicious thoughts, that after
all thy endeavors to win the Spiritual Canaan, there will be no arriving at
that Land of Rest, but that at last thou shall die in the Wilderness; that
there is none or but little hope of overcoming (...), the Giant-like mind, (as
the expression is in Ecclesiasticus xxiii. 4.) and those sons of Anak that thou
find vigorous and strong in thee. For by this thine unbelief or weakness of
faith thou greatly dishonourest either the Power or Goodness of God, who is
able, and as willing as able to save the Soul that trusts in him. And by this
means will the Chariot-wheels of thy Soul be taken off, thou will extremely
discourage and infeeble thy self, and blunt the edge of those weapons wherewith
thou art to encounter thy Spiritual Enemies.

If thy Soul be upright in thee, if thou art sincere and hearty in imploring
the aids of God's Grace and the assistances of his Spirit, and have faith to be
healed, and delivered from the Lusts that fight against thee, thou shall
undoubtedly see the salvation of the Lord. He will teach thine hands to war,
and thy fingers to fight; he will gird thee with strength, and thou shall be
more than conqueror through Christ that loves thee.

Though thou have no might against that great company that comes against thee,
against flesh and blood, principalities and powers, yet if thou waitest on the
Lord, and art of good courage, he will strengthen thine heart, he will
strengthen thee with strength in thy soul, and through him thou shall do
valiantly, and tread down thine enemies. He that is in thee will be greater
than they that are in the world, viz. the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and the pride of life.

Take heed therefore of all such reasonings, suggestions and principles as tend
to beget a despondency and fainting of Spirit, but lift up the hands which hang
down, and the feeble knees. To the Soul that believes all things are possible.
Let Faith say unto any mountain of difficulty, be thou removed, and it shall be
done. Who art thou, O great mountain? before this blessed Grace, and in the
exercise of it, thou shall become a plain. Thy Self-will and Lusts are
therefore strong, because thy Faith is weak, and thou in that regard make but
a faint resistance. But if thou were strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, if thou did resist, steadfast in faith, thou should see thine
Adversaries fly before thee. This is the victory that overcomes the world,
even our faith, I John 5. 4. Above all take the shield of faith, wherewith ye
shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, Ephesians. vi. 16.

Glorious things are spoken of thee, O Faith, who can recount the mighty acts
and great achievements of those holy Souls who have strongly confided in the
gracious power of God and Christ Jesus for the subduing of sin, as well as in
God's mercy and Christ's merits for the pardon of it. These through this Faith
(that I may borrow those expressions in the Eleventh to the Hebrews) have
subdued Kingdoms, even the Kingdoms of diverse lusts and pleasures, and the
Kingdoms of the Prince of this world to which they were once subject: Through
Faith they have wrought righteousness, even the righteousness of God, far
excelling that outward slight and partial righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisee: Through Faith they have stopped the mouths of Lions, the impetuous
and ravening solicitations and greedy desires of their selfish will: Through
Faith they have quenched the violence of fire, (or the Lusts of Passion, Malice
and Uncleanness, which burned like fire within them) out of weakness were made
strong, and turned to flight the armies of the Aliens.

Now there are many exceeding great and precious promises scattered through the
Scriptures which are of sovereign force and virtue for the encouragement of our
Faith and Hope in God, for the strengthening of us against his and our enemies;
But there is abundantly enough in that one passage, Luke xi. 13. If ye then,
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children: how much more shall
your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him. What could our
Savior have spoken more plainly and fully for our encouragement to a
dependence on God for Grace and Spiritual strength, and to a quiet unsolicitous
expectation of assistance from him?

This promise concerned not only those Disciples that heard Christ preach then
from the Mount, but all his Disciples and Followers, all that shall believe on
his Name to the end of the world. It is said -- to them that ask him, without
any limitation either to a certain age or people, language or nation; and
therefore we may be as much comforted from these words, as if we had been in
the number of those in whose hearing our Savior preached that best of Sermons,
wherein they were uttered: For, as there is the same need of the Holy Spirit
for us as there was for them who were then present with our Savior, so there
is now, and ever will be, the same benignity and philanthropy in God, the same
good will, compassion, and love to men, that there was then and in former ages.
He is without variableness or shadow of turning, the same yesterday, and to
day, and for ever.

But this word of promise is so rich and precious, that it deserves a more
particular Consideration.

If ye that are evil] Earthly Parents are too commonly envious and niggardly,
close, hard and cruel to others, being all for themselves, and not caring for
the good of others.

-- Know how to give good gifts unto your Children] As backward as they are to
give to others, they cannot find in their hearts when their Children ask to
withhold from them, they will be free, open-handed, and bountiful to them: And
such is the tenderness of their affection to their Children; that they will not
give them any thing that they know to be evil and hurtful to them; they will
not give them Stones for Bread, a Serpent for a Fish, or a Scorpion for an Egg.

How much more shall your heavenly Father] He who being good cannot but do
good; He who is the Father of Mercies, the God of Love and Goodness, and Love
it self; He who best knows what is good, and is best able to bestow whatsoever
is so; He who is as willing to do us good as he is able, and as able as
willing, (as no earthly Parent is) He in whom is nothing of envy toward
others, and has in himself all fullness, is Infinite, Almighty, and
All-sufficient.

-- Give the holy Spirit to them that ask him; so says one Evangelist, and
give good things, says another. The greatest good that Omnipotence it self and
infinite Goodness can do for us, is the giving the holy Spirit, and with him
spiritual light to know, and spiritual strength to do his Will, and to subdue
our own Wills, and whatsoever is contrary to him in us. To be endued with the
holy Spirit does import an accession both of light and strength, knowledge and
power.

So that our Savior argues from the less to the greater, from the drop of
goodness and benignity in Creatures, and those sinful Creatures too, to that
Fountain-fulness which is in God. What good soever children may expect from
their Parents, that, and infinitely more, may God's Children expect from him.
And it is impossible to conceive that the infinitely good God will be more
wanting to his Childrens Souls, than are evil men to their Childrens Bodies.

All that (...), those affections and tendernesses which God has implanted in
all Parents for the good of their Offspring, are but a little drop to that
ocean of Love and Mercy that is in himself; are but a dark and short
representation of those unconceivable riches of Goodness, and bowels of
Compassion which are in him. Nullus Pater tam Pater, No Father is so fatherly,
so much a Father as God is, said Tertullian. He is (...) (as Clemens
Alexandrinus styles him out of Orpheus) the tendernesses of both a Father and
Mother are in God. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not
have compassion on the son of her womb, yea, they may forget, (it is possible,
but very prodigious) yet will not I forget, says God, Isaiah xlix. 15.

God does not take empty titles to himself, but fills up the utmost of
whatsoever relation he is set forth by in the Holy Scriptures. Whatsoever the
wisest, most careful and loving Parents are to theirs, God is such, and
incomparably more, to his Children.

If the affections of ten thousand Parents were in one Father or Mother, how
secure would the Child be of their tender care, (who indeed is secure without
such a supposal) but all these in one person are far short of God's affection,
who is the Spring and Original of all the Fatherly tenderness which is dissused
in the hearts of so many millions of Fathers, as are in the world.

Let me add this, That the promise of the Spirit is the great promise of the
Gospel, the great privilege of the Evangelical Dispensation or New Covenant.
Greater aids and supplies of Grace, for the subduing our corruptions, we are
encouraged to hope for under the Gospel. The Apostle says, Titus iii. 6. that
the Holy Ghost is shed on us abundantly ((...), in a rich and plentiful manner)
through Jesus Christ our Savior.

If therefore we be not stronger, if we are not better, it is because we
resist, or at least neglect, the Holy Spirit. It is because we have not faith
in God, not because he is unwilling to help and assist us: For what says St.
James, chap. iv. 5, 6. The Spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy, such but
gives more grace: He gives grace in such a measure as to overpower that spirit
that lusts in us. So that, for that (...), abundance of wickedness, (as the
expression is James 1. 21.) there is (...), an abundance of grace, (as the
phrase is Romans 5. 17.) which the regenerate and believing Soul receives by
Jesus Christ. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell,
that of his fullness all might receive even grace for grace. Col. 1. 19. Romans v.
21.
And this grace shall reign through righteousness unto eternal life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Thus you see what abundant encouragement we have to have faith in God for the
supplies of his Grace and Spirit, and what reason we have to take heed of
unbelief, if ever we would master our sinful affections; and bring our wills
into compliance with the Will of God.

And there is a double unbelief we are to beware of, as very hurtful to our
Souls.

First, An Unbelief in relation to the mercy of God for the pardon of Sin.

Secondly, An Unbelief in relation to the power and goodness of God for the
subduing of Sin.

Now it is much to be lamented that whereas the former sort of unbelief is much
taken notice of and condemned in Sermons and Books, the latter is but little
mentioned. But if the evil of this were no less clearly and powerfully
represented than the evil of the other, and men were as effectually warned to
beware of this as of that Unbelief, it would, through the blessing of God, be
an excellent means to make more sincere, strong and healthy Christians: Whereas
alas! the spirits and lives of the generality of Professors do now too plainly
declare that they had rather have sin pardoned than subdued, that they had
rather sin should not be imputed to them than destroyed in them.

But the complete Faith is this in opposition to that twofold Unbelief.

First, To believe that Christ came to make expiation for sin, so that it shall
be pardoned to those that do truly repent. That is, to those that being
sensible of their sins, and are affected with a godly sorrow for them, and an
holy hatred and abhorrence of them, desire and purpose above all things to walk
before God in newness of life. Which conditions of pardon and non-imputation of
sin are by too many either not at all, or but slightly insisted on, while they
press the duty of recumbence, and relying on Christ's merits for Justification
and Salvation.

Secondly, To believe that as Christ came to make atonement for sin, so he was
manifested also for this purpose, that he might destroy the works of the Devil:
1 John iii. 8.
And to procure grace for us, whereby sin may have no more dominion over us.
But this part of faith, I say, is little urged in comparison of the other,
whereas it is of as great concernment to our eternal happiness to have Faith in
the Power of Christ, as to have Faith in his Blood. Nay, (as appears from what
has been said) to have sin mortified, and to be enabled to will after the Will
of God, is far more than to be merely pardoned for willing otherwise than God
does will.

Now their defect in this latter part of Faith, is a great cause of Christians
continuing so low and weak, lazy and faint, in a sickly and even bedridden
condition, and of their fancying that they honor and please God by complaining
of their impotence and infirmities; whereas the true way to please and honor
him is, confiding in his omnipotent grace, to get up and be doing.

But I fear I may also add another reason why most of those that will confess
their sins, and pray for grace and strength against them, are still as
impotent, as if there were no grace or assistance promised; namely, their not
being heartily desirous of grace, as well as their want of faith in the
promises of it: Their unwillingness, whatsoever they pretend, to have some lust
or other mortified, and to be thoroughly purified: Their secret fear of the
searching and purging work of the Spirit, and of that light and grace that
would disquiet them, and not let them alone in some sins to which they are
fondly and tenderly devoted. It was one of St. Austin's Confessions: Ego
adolescens petieram a te Castitatem, and dixeram, Da mihi Castitatem, sed noli
modo: timebam enim ne me cito exaudires, and cito sanares, mallebam explore
quam extingui. Confess. l. 8. cap. 7.
I, when I was a young man, begged of thee that thou would indue me with the
grace of Chastity, and said, Give me Chastity, but not yet; for I feared lest
thou should presently hear me, and immediately heal me, and I had rather
satisfy lust than have it extinguished.

If this be thy case, (whosoever thou art that read these lines) if this be
the state and temper of thy Soul, then in thy complaining of weakness, and that
the sons of Zervia are too hard for thee, and in thy praying for the assistance
of God's grace against them, thou do no better than add sin to sin, the sin
of false dealing with God, and wicked hypocrisy to that of Unbelief; thy heart
is not right with God, and thou lie unto him with thy tongue.

But to conclude this: Let us take heed lest there be in any of us an evil
heart of Unbelief, and so we fall short of the Spiritual Canaan, and entering
into the rest of God, as it befell the unbelieving Israelites, who perished in
the Wilderness, and none of all that came out of Egypt entered into Canaan but
Caleb and Ioshuah, men of another Spirit, and that followed God fully; who were
full of Faith, and encouraged the people to believe and prosper.

And it is observable that Caleb asked for the mountainous Country where the
Anakims dwelt, Joshuah xiv. 12.
and the Cities were great and fenced, by the news of which the evil Spies
dismayed Israel; but Caleb gave proof of the strength of his Faith, in freely
choosing to expose himself to the hard and seemingly impossible service of
gaining this Country, and was rewarded with success answerable to so great a
faith: for we read that he drove out the three sons of Anak, Chap. xv. 14.
notwithstanding that it was commonly said, Who can stand before the sons Anak?
He made it manifest that Faith could stand before them and overcome them.

And if we have Calebs Faith in the power and goodness of God in fighting with
the Spiritual Anakims, we may be most undoubtedly assured of Calebs success.

Let the Spiritual Israel therefore encourage themselves in the Lord their God,
and they may be certain that it shall be unto them according to their faith;
his grace shall be sufficient for them; and when the enemy shall come in like a
flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against them.

CHAP. VI. Of the wonderful efficacy of Love to God and Divine things.
VI. SIxthly, Labor to be affected as much as is possible with the Love of God
and Divine things. To Faith add Love, they are joined together in Scripture, 1 Timothy i. 14.
and should be conjoined in the hearts of Christians. 2 Timothy i. 13.
In 1 Thessalonians 5.8. Love as well as Faith is called a breast plate,
whereby we may be secured against the assaults of temptations.

If the Love of God be perfected in us, we shall find Self-denial and
Self-Resignation as easy and pleasant as heart can wish. Love will make us
think nothing precious that God will have us part with: it will make us with
great cheerfulness to part with a right eye, a right hand, our own will if it
offend us. It will make us without grudging to cross our own will, when it
contradicts the Will of our Beloved. It will cause us to believe no suffering
harsh that God shall inflict, no duty difficult which he shall command. This is
the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not
grievous, 1 John 5. 3.

If you love me is a familiar and potent form of speech with us, to persuade
one another to the doing or forbearing any thing; and what humane love does
work among men, that and wuch more will be effected by divine Love. This is a
far more powerful and vigorous principle of action. And yet the effects of that
Love have been very strange and wonderful, the observation whereof has caused
them to be sung by Poets, and copiously set forth in Romances, which are
imitations of true Histories.

Confess. lib. 3.
Solus amor est qui nomen difficultatis erubescit: It is Love alone that is
ashamed to mention difficulty, says St. Austin. Nay, Love welcomes
difficulties, and pleases itself in hard instances of obedience, because by
them it shows forth more of its reality, strength and power: Easy and
ordinary performances being but mean and short significations of a hearty love.
And the greatest and bravest achievements, such acts as are most heroic, as
denying our selves in what is most dear to us, are the true and proper results
and expressions of divine Love; these are the worthy exploits of this holy
affection.

Love makes the noblest Champions in the Holy War against Sin, the World, and
Satan, and animates a Christian to the greatest adventures. As for easy and
common performances, (...), a cheap and costless Religion, and Self-denial in
small matters, viz. in such things as a man is but little inclined to, and are
less for his pleasure and advantage, the divine Love is less solicitous about
them: But it chooses rather to awaken and animate the Soul to the harder
services of Religion. It does not think it quitteth it self in engaging against
the weaker lusts, or in taking some of the slight outworks, but it sets its
self against the most powerful Corruptions, it plants its batteries against
(...), the strong holds, the inmost Fort where Self-will has ensconced her
self. The weapons of its warfare are not carnal but mighty through God, to the
pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations (or reasonings, (...))
and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

There is a lion in the way is the voice of the cold and lazy Sluggard, but
this is no discouragement to the Lover of God, it affrights him not: Nay, so
far is this Love from being cooled and disheartened by difficulties and
oppositions, that it is rather kindled and improved: By these it heightens it
self into an holy indignation against whatsoever would attempt to draw it from
God. Many waters cannot quench love; neither can the floods drown it: Cant.
viii. 6.
Nay, as water cast into lime, they increase instead of lessening its heat.

Love, though it be a soft and delicate affection, yet it is hardy and strong
withal: Love is strong as death; and it is as ingenuous and noble as strong:
Cant. viii. 7.
for if a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would
utterly be contemned. Neither the hard and evil things which the world
threatens, nor the most tempting allurements of the world or the flesh, can
either affright or corrupt that heart, where the divine Love rules, from a
faithful adhering to the will of God. But to the several temptations it meets
with in the world, this is the constant resolute answer of every holy Lover,
(as it was Joseph's) How can I do this wickedness and sin against God?

Yea, Love enables a Christian to do his duty much sooner and better. That
which is in others the effect of great severity to the body, long fastings and
other toilsome exercises often repeated, is done in a more compendious and
effectual way by the power of Love, in such Christians, as are endued with a
more than ordinary measure of it.

Now that this Divine Love may be inkindled in us, and the flame of it more and
more increased;

First, Let us very often lift up the eyes of our mind, and fix them upon those
infinitely lovely perfections, glories and excellencies that are in God, which
the holy Scriptures do so abound with the mention and celebrations of. Let us
view these frequently in the Scriptures, and also in the works of Creation and
Providence. Let us often consider with our selves how that all the lovelinesses
and sweetnesses that are in Creatures, are but so many drops from the fountain
of them, that is God: and that every Love-attracting excellency, every thing
which the world calls precious and desirable, is but a very weak resemblance
of what is to be tasted and enjoyed in him.

Secondly, Let us also as frequently contemplate those transcendent and
invaluable mercies and favors, those numberless benefits and kindnesses which
we stand obliged to God for. And above all, that Gift of Gifts, his Son, in
whom he expressed a Love to us that passes knowledge.

Would we have the fire of holy Love kindled in our Breasts, let us, I say,
dwell very much in the admiring contemplation of the Divine Excellencies, and
the Divine Benefits.

The Contemplation of the infinite Perfections that are in God will render all
things contemptible compared with him, and consequently make them weak,
unperswading, untempting things.

What Pythagoras said he learned by his Philosophy, (...), to admire nothing,
we shall learn by this Contemplation. When the Soul has inured her self to
view the Divine Glories, Videnti Deum omnis creatura est angusta. Dejecit se de
culmine generositatis suae, qui admirari aliquid post Deum potest. Cyprian de
spectaculis.
how near to nothing is this, (...), the whole Universe in its eyes, what a
little spot and point? When she has been upon the Mount with God, and ravished
her self with his astonishing beauty, she must needs be affected with such a
magnanimity and generosity of spirit, as will courageously repel the strongest
temptations she meets with to withdraw her from a close union and conjunction
of will and affection to him.

And the consideration of the innumerable and transcendent Blessings, we
receive from God, will work in us such an ingenuous gratitude, as will excite
us to give up our hearts and our all to him.

The excellencies of his Nature, and the exceeding riches of his Bounty, will
represent him as most worthy to be known (...), with the flower of our mind, as
Zoroaster expresses it, and our highest apprehensions: And to be loved with
the flower of our hearts; so that our sweetest and dearest affections will not
be thought too precious for him.

Let us briefly reflect upon the power of worldly and sensual Love, and see
what this will do.

First, The Love of Money. How does this oblige and enforce the men of this
world to hard labors, dangerous adventures, anxious cares? To rise early, sit
up late, eat the bread of sorrows, to deny themselves many of the comforts and
contents of this life, to fare hardly, and to live a toylsom and painful life;
and in a word, (to use the Apostles phrase) to pierce themselves through with
many sorrows?

Secondly, The Love of Honor, Dignities and Preferments. How does it put
ambitious men upon restless labors, tedious attendances, servile offices, base
flatteries and compliances? Such stick at nothing for the obtaining their ends,
devote and surrender themselves to the will and humor of their Patron, as if
he were their God, and they his Creatures more than God's. They deport and
address themselves to him, by whose favor they hope to be raised, in such a
form of respect and devotion, as approaches near to that regard and reverence
which is only due to the most high God. So full of zeal and observance is this
civil kind of Superstition.

Thirdly, The Love of Beauty. What a strange power and force has it upon the
fond man? To him no services, no sufferings seem grievous that his Mistress
wills him to undertake. With all submission and devotion he admires and adores
this his Souls Idol, this Deity of Clay, and that in such strains, as
blasphemously resemble that most affectionate and humble devotion which none
but his Creator may challenge from him. He gives her his whole heart, and
resigns his whole will to her will, complies with all her humors, yields an
entire obedience to all her commands, be they never so unreasonable. He
patiently suffers tedious delays and waitings, meekly bears her frowns,
affronts and disdains, her harsh language and hard usage, and all the other
arts she has of afflicting him; besides the troubles and hazards he sometimes
meets with from his Rivals. This Love Bigot, such is his devotion, neglects
himself, his rest, his food, his health, renounceth all his own contentments,
and denies himself in whatsoever is for either his delight or advantage, if he
understands it to be the pleasure of his Mistress: He mortifies himself, pines
and consumes, and is lean from day to day for her, as lustful Amnon was for
Tamar. These, and such like, are the severe Penances, Mortifications and
Austorities that this man is wont to undergo in this idolatrous Love-service:
yea, and sometimes he sacrifices his very life, which the poor wretch calls
Love's Martyrdom.

Here is Self-denial, Self-Resignation with a witness. With what a deal of
pains and trouble does this poor creature purchase to himself misery? With much
more ease and less vexation, had his love been placed upon the best of objects,
he might have been happy to eternity: He might have lived with God, who is Love
it self, holy and unspotted Love, and reigned with Christ the faithful lover of
his Soul in a Kingdom of peace and joy for ever.

By these instances we may discern the strange force of a degenerate and impure
Love, and what a degree of Self-renunciation it forces those to, in whom it
reigns.

And is the Love of uncertain Riches, a little white and yellow Clay so
powerful with men, and shall not the Love of the true durable Riches, the
glorious Inheritance in Heaven, which is incorruptible, and fades not away, be
more forceable?

Has the Love of airy Honor such power, and shall not the Love of that Honor
which is from God, that honor and glory that he has promised to every soul
that works good, that honor of shining forth as the sun in the Kingdom of
the Father, shall not the love, I say, of such inexpressible honor as this,
have as powerful effects upon us, and much more powerful? Shall the Love of a
fading Skin-beauty, the love of a little red and white, the love of withering
Roses, and Lillies and Violets, with which fond Lovers bestick the Cheeks, and
Hands and Veins of their Mistresses, besides I know not how many more such gay
embellishments of their foolish fancies; shall this impotent kind of love so
potently command poor mortals, and shall not the Love of God do much more? who
is (...), the first-fair and original Beauty, as well as (...), the first good,
whom Angels, the flower and top of the Creation, admire and adore with the
greatest complacency and ardor of affection.

Shall not Love fixed upon such an object as this inflame us with an holy
resolution to undertake or undergo any thing for the fulfilling and
satisfaction of his Will? Considering withal, that his Commands are (as has
been shown) in themselves most reasonable, most fit to be approved and observed
by us, agreeable to the dignity of our Souls, in their own nature most lovely,
excellent and worthy, and have moreover a mighty recompense of reward; which
cannot be said of the Commands of Lust, and sensual impure Love, but the
perfectly contrary; they being most vain and foolish, unreasonable and cruel,
and obedience to them of most pernicious and sad consequence.

Nor is there any thing that God would have us part withal, but what it is
better for us to be without; better for our ease, peace and pleasure, and more
for our liberty to be freed and disintangled from: As has been already proved.

And so I pass to that other branch of this Direction, viz. that we should
labor to be affected with a strong and ardent Love, as of God, so of Divine
things: of Virtue and Holiness, the impressions of the Divine Image upon the
Soul.

Had we a worthy resentment of Spiritual Excellencies, and a due sense of the
beauty of Holiness, they would even ravish our hearts, and mirabiles amores
excitare, excite in us strange and wonderful affections to them, (as Tully
speaks of Virtue) and consequently secure us from the allurements and
attractions of any earthly vanity whatsoever.

But till a man comes to admire and be enamoured with the Divine Graces and
Virtues, every thing will be ready to get his heart which gratifieth
sensuality, and to carry him away captive.

By one unacquainted with the loveliness of Holiness will the least twinkling
of this worlds glory be admired; but there can be no better way to put by and
frustrate the attempts and temptations of the things below, than to be well
acquainted and greatly affected with the things above, the things that are
Holy, Heavenly, and Divine.

That of Plutarch was a most true and excellent observation, (...), etc. It is
impossible for men not to have a great affection and ambition for the things
which the world admires and pursues, except there be a principle within them to
admire virtue, whose alone beauty and luster would darken and put out all other
glories, and gayeties whatsoever.

Be fully possessed then with the importance of this truth, that the most
sovereign way for a man to take off his mind and heart from the admired
vanities of this world, and consequently to deny himself, is plainly this: To
turn his mind and affections to better objects, to admire the uncreated and
original beauty, and to have an high esteem of the participations and
impressions thereof.

The affections will not be stopped or pent in, they will run out upon something;
let them therefore issue forth, but let it be to the noblest objects, let them
stream forth freely, but, to better things. There is such a way approved by
Physicians for the stopping of blood, viz. When it issues out one way, to open
a vein elsewhere, and so to stay it by revulsion, and diverting the course.

Nor is that Fable of the Poet unfit to be applied here, as containing an
excellent Moral, which tells us the best means of defeating the Sirens, the
most dangerous temptations of the world. Ulysses and his Companions stopped their
ears with wax, as they sailed by, that they might not hear them, and so avoided
the danger: But Orpheus, by singing divine Hymns, by celebrating the praises of
God, and recounting his Excellencies and Favors, is said to have overcome
them, which was the more noble way of Conquest.

But to prevent all mistake and scruple, I add that what has been said does
not imply that a Christian is to dam and stop up his affections from issuing
out to any thing here in this world: But thus we are to consider.

There are undue and forbidden, and there are due and allowed objects of the
affections.

Now as for undue objects, the pleasures of any kind of sin, the things which
God expressly forbids in the Holy Scriptures, we are to have no affection at all
for, but the greatest antipathy against. There must not be the least tasting of
the forbidden Tree, though its fruit be never so fair and tempting.

But as for due objects of the affections, and such as God allows, our care
must be that they be carried forth toward them in a due order, and a due
degree.

First, in a due order. Our Love must first be placed upon God and Christ, his
Kingdom and his Righteousness, and thence descend to inferior good things.
Things Divine must have the precedence and priority in our care and endeavors,
according to that advice of our Savior, Matthew. vi. 33.

Secondly, In a due degree and measure. God and the things above must be most
desired, loved and delighted in. Whom (says the Psalmist) have I in heaven but
thee, and there is none on earth I can desire in comparison of thee, Psalm
lxxiii. 25. God allows us to give a lesser love to the lesser goodness; but
the highest affection is to be given to the Highest and Original Goodness.

I will conclude this Direction with the agreeing advice of Taulerus in his
eighth Epistle: Omnem diem inter amissos deputate, in quo, Dei amore propriam
non fregistis voluntatem. Account that day as misspent and lost, wherein you
have not subdued your own will by the Love of God.

This advice imports two things.

First, That a Christian is to make this great Duty of Self-Resignation his
daily business; that it is a lesson which he is to be every day learning, and an
Exercise in which he is to make continual progress.

Secondly, That the Love of God is of most sovereign force and virtue to break
and subdue a man's own will.

CHAP. VII. That Humility is a powerful means to the attaining of
Self-Resignation, where it is particularly shown, how it is effectual thereunto
both as it implies obedience to God's Commands, and as it implies patient
submission to his disposals.
VII. SEventhly, Endeavor after the deepest humility, and sink thy self into
the greatest Self-nothingness, if thou would be truly resigned to the Will of
God. Humility is a most powerful and excellent means to the attaining of
Self-Resignation, both as it implies obedience to God's Commands, and
submission to his disposals.

First, As it implies Obedience to the Commands of God. The humble Christian
cannot think much of doing any thing God requires of him, or forbearing any
thing he forbids him: for,

First, He considers that there is an unconceiveable infinite distance between
God and him. That God is infinite in Essence and all Perfections, in Glory and
Majesty: That he is the Lord of all things, the Sovereign of Men and Angels,
and therefore it is most fit that he should have the pre-eminence in all things;
and most disbecoming him to oppose his Will when he commands things never so
ungrateful to flesh and blood.

And he considers also that himself is a limited, dependent, indigent Being,
that he is nothing but what he is by God, and can have nothing but what comes
from him; and consequently, that it is the most unreasonable thing in the world,
that his Will should ever take place of the Will of God. The infinite
Superiority of God's Being must justly and plainly infers the precedence and
superiority of his Will.

He considers that God is the inexhaustible Fountain of Life, the great Ocean
of Being, whence all the Rivers of particular Beings flow, and whither they
return again; whereas man is a poor, feeble Creature, altogether vanity, and
that at his best estate, Psalm. 39. 5.
(as the Psalmist speaks) even all the nations of the earth are counted but as
a drop of the bucket, or small dust of the balance, Chap. xl. 15.
(as Isaiah speaks) nay, they are all as nothing before God, and are counted to
him less than nothing. Ver. 17.
What then shall we think of each particular man, he being so inconsiderable a
part of that drop, that dust, that nothing, and less than nothing. The humble
Christian, I say, has a due sense of his unconceiveably vast and infinite
disproportion and disparity to God; and thence concludes, that nothing can be
so unreasonable as to expect his will should be humoured, or to take it ill to
have it crossed by the Will of God.

He is deeply sensible that nothing is so intolerable, as for the will and
pleasure of a creature in any thing to control and overrule the Lord of Life
and Glory, the Father of the Universe, the great Maker and Preserver of all
things, and therefore that it is much more, the greatest petulancy, the vilest
sauciness, and most horrible presumption for such a Creature as himself to
dispute and quarrel with the Divine Commands.

Secondly, The humble Christian considers also, that God, being Self-happy and
Self-sufficient, cannot design his own advantage in laying his Commands upon
us; that we are not able to gratify him by any service, but, being infinitely
good, he aims at our benefit in so doing: That God in the business of Religion,
and the precepts he requires our observance of, seeks not his own, but merely
our interest and welfare; in that, I say, he needs not, nor is capable of
receiving any additions of happiness, much less from without himself, and
therefore he gratifieth, and means kindness to, us in all his Commands; and his
Laws are to be numbered among his Favors, even his most endearing and obliging
ones. And he who is thus assured must needs be strongly excited to perform a
most hearty, ingenuous and cheerful obedience to all the declarations of the
Divine Will.

Secondly, Humility fits and enables us for Resignation, as it also imports
patient Submission to all God's Disposals: And that,

First, Upon the same account that we now said it disposes to active
Obedience: Namely, because it makes us sensible of the infinite disproportion
that is between God and us; the consideration of which will necessarily
convince us, that it becomes such despicable Creatures as we are, to humble our
selves under his mighty hand, to lay our selves down in the dust before him,
instead of fretting and repining at his Providence.

Secondly, Humility disposes to Patience, as it will make us sensible of our
moral defects and imperfections, our sins and transgressions, whereby we are
become obnoxious to God's displeasure. The sense whereof will force us to
acknowledge that he is most righteous whenever he punishes, and therefore we
should accept of the punishment of our iniquity.

Murmuring and complaining thoughts arise from Pride, and a too good opinion of
our selves: It Is Self-conceit that makes us misconstrue any of God's dealings
as over-rigorous and harsh toward us. but to the humble man, who is sensible
of his manifold miscarriages, they appear most just, right and equal, nay, very
gentle too, in comparison of his deserts.

He having a deep sense of the Evil of Sin, how unreasonable, unjust, and
disingenuous, and therefore how unspeakably heinous a thing it is to oppose the
Will of the most High God, the Supreme Governor of the World, and Judge of all
the Earth, to offend infinite Goodness, and to return evil to him from whom we
have always received good, and to whom our Engagements are inexpressibly many
and great; I say, the humble Christian having a great sense of this, and being
conscious to himself that he has been this unreasonable, unrighteous, and
disingenuous Creature, will under the sharpest afflictions he can suffer in
this world, say with Ezra: Thou have punished me less than mine iniquities do
deserve.

Thirdly, Humility disposes to Submissive bearing afflictions, as it will make
us sensible of the exceeding shortness of our understandings, our great folly
and utter disability to fathom God's Counsels, and the reasons of his
Providence. The Humble Christian will cry out with the blessed Apostle, O the
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable
are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! He knows that infinite and
unsearchable Wisdom must needs administer the affairs of the world in general,
and of every person in particular, in the best and wisest way, and therefore
that there is very great reason for whatsoever sufferings he undergoes,
although they may seem to his shallow capacity to be never so unreasonable.

Murmuring at any of the Divine Providence is a tacit charging of God, as with
unrighteousness, so with folly, and a setting up our Wisdom above God's.

Fourthly, The Humble Christian is likewise sensible of the great need he has
of afflictions. That he needs them as Medicines to cure his spiritual Maladies,
that they are needful as they are preventions of Sin, and secure against many
temptations, and as they are very instructive; much of God and himself being to
be learnt in the School of the Cross.

This man knows, that not to be corrected in order to his amendment is the
greatest of punishments; and that no judgment is so dreadful as sin it self,
and to be given up to an hard heart and seared conscience; and therefore he
accounts those straits, troubles and difficulties, he ever and anon meets with,
as expressions of God's unwillingness he should undo himself.

It is most certain that the Holy, Wise and Good God does not directly and
primarily will punishment, (as neither does any good and wise Lawgiver) to do
thus is not justice but cruelty: Nor does he desire the occasions of inflicting
punishments, viz. the transgression of his Laws. Justice is wise and good, it
has ever the best of ends, namely the discountenancing and preventing of sin
and evil, and the cherishing and encouragement of goodness, and securing the
authority of righteous Laws. And the humble person considering that God's
design in afflicting him is to cure the greater evil of sin, by the lesser of
suffering, and that afflictions are so necessary, as that he is seldom long
well without them, by this means is he the better enabled quietly to submit
when he suffers under them.

Lastly, Humility enables a Christian both to Obedience and Patience, as it
makes him capable of more grace: And the more grace the more power he has both
to do and suffer the Will of God. Surely (says the Wise man) he scorneth the
scorners, but he gives grace to the lowly, Prove. iii. 34. And St. Peter 1
Epistle v. 5. God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. And
again St. James, Chap. iv. 5, 6. The Spirit that dwells in us lusts to
envy, but he gives more grace, wherefore he says, God resists the proud,
but gives grace unto the humble.

The high mountains are barren, but the low valleys are covered over with Corn,
and the showers of God's grace fall into lowly hearts and humble souls. The
more poor in spirit, the more self-empty, the more earnestly desirous of
spiritual things, and such shall be filled, according to Christ's promise,
Matthew. v. 6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for
they shall be filled.

You know the story in 2 Kings 4 chap. So long as the Widow had an empty
Vessel the Oil flowed, but when there was not another to be gotten, it
immediately stayed. And fo long as God sees an empty soul that is ready to
receive and desirous of his grace, he is ready to communicate of his fullness to
it.

A Soul that is poor in its own eyes, void of self-glorying and acknowledging
its own indigence, and withal its utter unworthiness to receive any the least
favor from the Divine Bounty is such a one as God looks for, to communicate
more and more of his Grace and Spirit to. To this man will I look, Isaiah lxvi.
2.
(says God) even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, etc. And thus
says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy, I
dwell in the high and holy place; with him also that is of a contrite and
humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the spirit of
the contrite ones, Isaiah lvii. 15.

Humility disposes to gratitude, and gratitude fits us to receive more from
God; for a grateful Soul will set a high value upon his blessings, and most
gladly give him the glory of his grace. The humble Christian thinks himself,
with Jacob, less than the least of all God's mercies, and consequently he will
be heartily thankful for the least; and by being thus affected, he becomes meet
for the greatest, and therefore cannot fail of it.

It is to be observed, that when Jacob was in this humble and self-abasing
temper, it was that he saw God face to face at Peniel: Then it was that he was
honored with the name Israel, and as a Prince had power with God and men, and
prevailed.

But on the contrary, Pride and Self-fulness, which is ever accompanied with
unthankfulness, makes men incapable of receiving the Divine Grace: And
therefore the Pharisees, who gloried in themselves that they were righteous,
and despised others, that were not sick but whole and healthy in their own
conceit, died of their diseases, notwithstanding the great Physician of Souls
was so long among them.

Now there are two graces that Humility gives a peculiar fitness for, two of
the first magnitude and greatest influence, of the greatest use and consequence
in a Christians life, viz. The Love of God, and Faith or Trust in him.

It Is evident that Humility has a peculiar fitness to cherish and increase the
grace of Love, for the more sensible any one is of his great unworthiness and
ill-deservings, the more he must needs love God for having so gracious a regard
to him, the more will he admire and adore the riches of his Grace.

And it is as evident that Humility affords the like advantage for the Grace
of Faith, or trust in God; for the more sensible a Christian is of his own
impotence, the more will he rely upon the Divine Power and Goodness for the
supply of his wants, having so many promises to encourage him. The sense of our
own weakness will make us distrust our selves, the more we distrust our selves,
the more shall we stay our Souls on God, and confide in his Wisdom, Power, and
Grace.

Now we have particularly shown, of how great efficacy both these Virtues are
to enable us to this Duty of Self-Resignation.

CHAP. VIII. That the serious observation of the great Examples of
Self-Resignation, which are recorded in the Scriptures, is of great use and
advantage: And first of the Example of ABRAHAM.
VIII. EIghthly, Look to those lively Patterns and Examples of Self-Resignation
set before us in the Holy Scriptures. These are of singular use and advantage
to be seriously considered: For they plainly show this holy disposition of
spirit to be attainable, and that God requires herein nothing of us that is
impossible.

Could they do thus, and cannot we by the same divine help and power do the
like, which we have shown is attainable by us as well as them? They were (...),
subject to like passions with us; they were flesh and blood as we are, and
naturally as weak and infirm as our selves, and God is the same in Power and
Goodness now that ever he was.

And this may commend to us the fullness of the Scriptures, that besides the
best Precepts and Rules, we have the best Patterns and Examples recorded in
them of every grace and virtue: So that by the guidance and assistance of the
Holy Spirit, the Christian man may be perfected, thoroughly furnished unto every
good work.

The best Rules of the best life are laid down in the divinely inspired
Writings, and they are plain and intelligible, especially to those that have
the good and honest heart; but Examples superadded to Rules, and Patterns to
Precepts, make both more instructive, and as well encourage as direct our
Practice. And we having a many worthy Examples upon record of this
Self-Resignation, the Lesson becomes neither too high nor hard for us to
understand or practice.

How many Precepts have we in Scripture to engage us to Chastity and Purity,
Meekness and Patience, Faith and Charity, to an holy resolvedness in owning of
God, and adhering to his ways, and unweariedness in doing good, and to every
other grace and virtue?

And have we not, besides others, the Example of Joseph for Chastity, Moses for
Meekness, Job for Patience, Abraham for Faith, Dorcas and Cornelius for
Charity, Daniel for an holy resolvedness of spirit in owning God, S. Paul for
an unwearied Zeal, and above all, that Example of all Examples for every thing
that is holy, pure and lovely, our Lord Jesus Christ?

Take we heed then that we be not found ingentium exemplorum parvi imitatores,
small imitators of mighty examples, as Salvian expresses it. But let it be our
serious care and holy ambition to transcribe their virtues, to write after
those fair Copies they have set us, to be followers of those blessed Souls
wherein they were followers of God and Christ.

But our present argument determining us to Self-Resignation, let us consider
some Examples hereof for our guidance and encouragement.

First, I will present you with that of Abraham, Faithful Abraham, as he is
styled by the Apostle St. Paul. There were ten trials wherewith God was pleased
to exercise this good man, as they are collected out of his Story by the Hebrew
Writers: The first and last of which ten were the sorest of all.

The first was his being called and commanded of God, Genesis the twelfth, to
leave his own Country, his House and Lands, his Friends and Kindred, and to go
to a place he knew not.

This Command as unpleasant and grievous as it must needs have been to his
flesh and blood, he did not in the least demurr upon obeying: But by Faith
Abraham when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive
for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went out, not knowing whither he went, Heb.
xi. 8.

The last was his being commanded to take his only Son Isaac, and to slay and
offer him for a Burnt-offering, than which there could not be a greater trial.

We have the Command in Genesis xxii. 2. every word of which has a singular
Emphasis, and deserves attention.

Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee into
the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt-offering, upon one of the
mountains which I will tell thee of.

Take now thy Son -- Not a Beast for Sacrifice, not any of the best of his
great store of Cattle, but his Son.

Take him now, forthwith, without any delay (...) is the same here with (...)
says Aben Ezra.
.

Thy Son Isaac: Not Ishmael but Isaac, his and his Mothers delight and joy, as
the name signifies.

Thine only Son: He and Sarah had no other to solace themselves in, nor were
they ever like to have any other.

And besides there is another observable thing mentioned Heb. xi. 27. He that
had received the promises offered up his only begotten Son, of whom it was
said, that in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

Whom thou love: That is, very dearly and passionately, as being the Son of
their old age, their only Son, and a Son of the promise. These two go
together, tender and the only one, Prove. iv. 3. The only one and the choice
one, Cant. vi. 9. To lose the only Son is that which causes bitter
lamentation; and the mourning for such a one is used to express the most
passionate and doleful mourning, Amos viii. 10. Zech. xii. 10. Ier. vi. 26.

-- And get thee into the land of Moriah, and offer him there. Abraham himself
must offer him, he might not command his two servants to do it; and they went
no farther than till they came within sight of the place where he was to be
offered.

The tender Father must take his only Son, whom he loved, and bind him with
his own hands upon the Altar, and take the knife to slay him. As his eyes must
behold him bleeding, and gasping, and burning, so must he be himself the
Executioner.

-- And offer him there for a burnt-offering, on one of the mountains, which I
will tell thee of. This was the place where the Temple was to be built by
Solomon, the place of offering Sacrifices.

And it was three days journey from Abraham's habitation, which might make the
Command yet more grievous. As often as in that journey he looked upon the Wood,
or Fire for burning the Sacrifice, or the Knife that must do the Execution, or
the place where it was to be done, which he saw afar off, how could it be
otherwise but that his eye must most deeply affect his heart.

It follows ver. vi. And Abraham took the wood of the burnt-offering and laid
it upon Isaac his Son, and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife, and they
went both of them together. What an affecting and heart-piercing sight was
this! And herein was Isaac a Figure of our Blessed Savior, who bare the wood
of the Cross upon his Shoulders, whereon he was to be offered up for a
Sacrifice to God.

And it is hence to be concluded, that Isaac was now no Child or weak
Stripling, in that he was able to travel with so great a burden; such a
quantity of wood as was sufficient to burn his body to ashes could be no small
weight. Josephus makes Isaac to be now twenty five years old, but an Hebrew
Tradition, about thirty and three. If so, (and for what end should they feign
it?) he was in this circumstance also a Figure of our Savior, who was offered
up at about the same age.

Now Isaac being at this time grown up to a good age and strength, The word
(...) is used of one that is of an adult age, as of Joshua, Exodus xxxiii. 11.
when about 53 years old; of Benjamin, when he was 30 years old, Genesis xliii. 8.
and of Joseph, when about 28 years old: And the two young men accompanying them
are called also (...) So that it should be rendered the young man, not Lad.
it might make his Father the more unwilling to part with him, and considerably
added to the greatness of his Trial.

And those words of Isaac which he spoke in a strain of sweet innocence and
simplicity, v. 7. My Father, behold the fire and the wood, but where is the
Lamb for a Burnt-offering? they must needs cause a great colluctation within
him, and yerning of bowels: No doubt Abraham's affections did strangely work
now, and he was pained at the very heart.

There is one thing more which we may take notice of in this Command of God, it
is said, Offer him there for a Burnt-offering; (...): This kind of Offering was
an Holocaust, all of which was to be consumed by fire, so that there was not
the least Relick to remain of him.

This was the Command, and was it not a most difficult one? could there have
been a sorer trial? But, behold the signal Resignation and Obedience of Abraham
to the Will of God! He without the least delay or demurring, betook himself to
the performance of the divine pleasure. It is said v. 3. that Abraham rose up
early in the morning: it is like the Command came secretly to him in a dream,
or vision of the night, and (...) manicavit diluculo, or as the vulgar Latin,
surrexit de nocte.
at or before the first peep of day, he addressed himself to obey it. Thus he
denied his natural and very great affection to his Son, and gave a most
illustrious proof, that nothing was so dear to him, nothing so powerful with
him as the Will of God: Wisdom kept him strong against his tender compassion
toward his son, says the Author of the Book of Wisdom, chap. x. 5.

The completion of his Obedience is set forth in the ninth verse: And Abraham
built an Altar in the place which God told him of, and laid the wood in order,
and bound Isaac his Son, and laid him on the Altar upon the wood.

By the way, not only Abraham, but Isaac too, was herein a rare example of
Resignation: To those words, they went both of them together, v. viii. the
Jerusalem Targum adds (...) with a just and upright heart; and Jonathan (...)
with a quiet, humble and submiss heart. Yea, both the Targum of Jerusalem, and
Jonathan Ben-Usiel, make Isaac speak to Abraham, that he would bind him
strongly, and then meekly and quietly to offer himself to become a Sacrifice.
He was doubtless, (as appears by what was said of his age and strength) able
to have resisted his Father now stricken in years, but he expressed no
reluctance, he quietly and meekly suffered himself to be bound, and laid upon
the Altar. And herein again (as in several other particulars) was he a Figure
of our Savior, who, though he could have rescued himself from the power of the
Jews and Romans, yet permitted them to take and bind him, to heap a many vile
indignities upon him, and at last to nail him to his Cross.

And then it follows, -- And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the
knife to slay his Son: Completa voluntas pro facto aestimatur.
This God accounted to him as if he had done it; because he was fully purposed
in his mind to do it, and had it not been for God's interposition, had
performed his purpose. Therefore the Scripture reports it as if he had actually
offered up his Son: Heb. xi. 17. By faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up
Isaac: and he that had received the promises offered up his only begotten Son.
And James ii. 21. Was not Abraham our Father justified by works, when he had
offered Isaac his Son upon the Altar? And hereupon (as it follows ver. 23.) he
was called the friend of God. He eminently approved him as such for this high
act of obedience. This is a title thrice given him in Scripture, in this place,
in 2 Chronicles. xx. 7. and Esaias xli. 8. and implied in Genesis xviii. 17. Shall I hide
from Abraham the thing that I do? Where Philo adds (...), Shall I hide from
Abraham my friend. And by this Periphrasis the friend of God, without any
mention of his name, is he described in the Alcoran the Turks Bible.

I will conclude this great Example of Resignation with that in Esaias xli. 2.
who raised up the righteous man from the East, and called him to his foot:
Abraham was sequacious, and obeyed God in all things; he had him at his call,
as the Faulconer has a well manned Hawk, and calls her to his hand.

And shall not the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, for so Christians are, be
sequacious and observant of every call of God, though he call them to such
trials as are very difficult and ungrateful? Let us walk in the steps, of the
faith and obedience, of our Father Abraham, in readily sacrificing our Isaac,
our delight and joy, that sin which is most beloved, the sin of our souls, (as
the phrase is Micah vi. 7.) which seems to bring us most profit, and most
delight and pleasure. By thus doing shall we be owned as the especial Friends
and Favorites of God, as Abraham was, and receive the reward of such, as he did.

CHAP. IX. Of the Example of JOB.
IX. SEecondly, The next Example of Self-Resignation shall be that of upright
and holy Job: And he will appear to be a most memorable and eminent one, by
these following Particulars.

First, He was a Great man: Great for Estate and Riches. We read that he had
seven thousand Sheep, three thousand Camels, Job i. 3.
five hundred yoke of Oxen, five hundred She-Asses, and very great store of
Servants: That he was the greatest of all the men of the East, that is of
Arabia, which lay Eastward from the Land of Canaan. He was great for Wisdom,
and by that means for Honor and Esteem: of which there is a particular
account, Chap. xxix. The aged men when they saw him arose and stood up, ver. 8.
The Princes refrained talking, and laid their hand upon their mouth; the Nobles
held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth, ver. 9,
10. Such a reverence had they for him, for the greatness of his Wisdom and
excellent accomplishments, that the car that heard him blessed him, ver. 11.
All gave ear to him, and waited and kept silence at his counsel: After his
words they spoke not again, his speeches dropped upon them, and they waited for
him as for the rain, and opened their mouth wide as for the latter rain, ver.
22. 23. They received his discourse as a welcome and most desirable rain, and
such especially was (...) the latter rain, before Harvest, for making the Corn
more plump and fair.

Secondly, He was as Good as Great and Honorable. Such was his Humility, that
he did not despise the cause of his manservant or maidservant, when they
contended with him, Chap. xxxi. 13.

His Sobriety and Moderation of spirit is to be seen, v. 25. etc.

His Charity and Compassion, Chap. xxix. 13, 15, 16. Chap. xxx. 25. Chap. xxxi.
16, 17, 19, 20, 32.

His great Chastity, Chap. xxxi. 1, 9. So far was he from making his great
Estate to serve Sensuality and Lust.

His Integrity and Honesty, Chapter xxix. 14. Chap. xxxi, 7, 38, 39.

His readiness to employ his power and interest for the relief, and not for the
crushing, of oppressed Innocents, Chapter xxix. 12. Chapter xxxi. 21. And this he did
boldly and resolvedly, Chapter xxxi. 34.

His exemplary Piety in keeping himself from the Idolatries of the Arabians,
Chapter xxxi. 26, 27. His pious solicitude for his Children, in their yearly
Feastings, lest they might have offended God in the heat of their Banquets,
Chap. i. 5. And Chap. xxiii. 11, 12. we have him expressing the great devotion
of his Soul toward God, in the constancy and universality of his Obedience. My
foot (says he) has held his steps, his way have I kept, and not declined,
neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips: I have esteemed the
words of his mouth more than my necessary food.

And God himself gives this character of Job, Chap. ii. 3. That there was none
like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God, and
escheweth evil.

Thus was this excellent Person a great Pattern of all kinds of Virtue in his
flourishing estate, and he was no less a Pattern of Self-Resignation in his
afflictions and trials: For

Thirdly, This Great and Good man was sorely afflicted and tried by God. There
were three Messengers that brought him the tidings of sad Calamities that
befell him in his Possessions; his Oxen, Asses, Sheep and Camels, with his
Servants being carried away by the Sabeans and Chaldeans, or consumed by fire
from heaven. But the fourth Messenger brings the heaviest news of all, viz.
That all his Sons and Daughters were crushed to pieces by the fall of the house
wherein they were feasting.

This was dismal indeed, to lose all his Children at once, and that not by a
natural but violent death, and to have them destroyed with such a sudden
destruction, and that also in the midst of their feasting and mirth.

But besides, the more to aggravate his affliction, these several Messengers
came immediately one after another, while one was speaking another came in; one
wave, the more to overwhelm him, came upon the neck of the other; so that he
had no respite, no time to concoct his sorrows, no diversion, no time of
breathing to prepare himself to bear the next.

But after all this, affliction comes nearer still and more close to him. God
permitted Satan to exercise his cruelty upon his Body, which was stricken with
sore boyls, and that all over, even from the crown of his head to the sole of
his foot, Chap. ii. 7. He was full of anguish in every part The word for biles
in this place is (...) which signifies burning biles, from the Chaldee (...)
to be hot.
. There was nothing about him left whole and entire but the skin of his teeth,
Chap. xix. 20. or the skin about his gums or lips: nothing was whole about him
but his mouth to complain with. To have one such bile is very painful, but to
have such angry, and noisome things all over the body, how exquisitely
tormenting must it needs be? They were inflaming ulcers. But here is added also
(...) sore or malignant biles.


And in this sad plight he sat down (not on an easy Couch or soft Bed, but)
among the ashes, v. 8. or upon a Dunghill without the city, as the Septuagint
has it (...).
: Where he had none to dress his sores but himself, nor any thing (that we read
of) to help himself with, but some piece of earthen vessel cast on the
Dunghill. Instead of using Oils and Salves that were proper for the mitigation
of his pain, and the healing his Sores, he scraped them, or squeezed out the
raging matter of them, with a potsherd. He was so changed by his blains and
botches, and in so squalid a condition, that his Friends knew him not, Chap.
ii. 12. His Brethren went far from him, and his acquaintance were estranged
from him, his kinsfolk failed him, and his familiar friends forgot him; they
that dwelt in his house, and his maids counted him for a stranger, he was an
alien in their sight. He called his servant, and he gave him no answer, he
entreated him with his mouth. His breath was strange to his wife, though he
entreated for the Childrens sake of his body. The young Children despised him
and spoke against him: His inward friends abhorred him, and those whom he
loved were turned against him: as he most pathetically complains, Chap. xix.

His three Friends, Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar, when they first came to see
him, sat down upon the ground seven days and nights, and could not speak for
astonishment at so strange a spectacle; and what they afterward spoke was both
impertinent and highly uncharitable: instead of giving him any relief it added
more to his grief, and aggravated his torment. They were Physicians of no
value, Chapter xiii. 4.
and miserable comforters, as Job told them. Chapter xvi. 2.


And whereas he might have hoped that the Wife of his bosom, she to whom he had
been so true and faithful, (Chapter xxxi.9.) might have been some comfort to him,
she on the contrary was not only estranged from him, but also a disheartner of
his patience, and assisted Satan in his designs against him. Satan had touched
his bones and his flesh, but that speech of his Wife, Chapter 2. 9.
Do thou still retain thine integrity? Curse God and die, must needs smite
him to the heart.

And now have I not set before you a sad and most pitiable condition, full of
such difficult circumstances as might be apt, any one of them, to make the duty
of quiet submission to the Will of God, very hard and grievous? For this rich
and wealthy man to lose all his Estate, and that Estate which he had done so
much good with, by acts of mercy and pity; and together with his Estate, all
his ten Children by one sudden stroke: For this great and honorable Person to
be brought so low as to sit upon an Ash-heap, to be debased to a Dunghill: For
this so greatly reverenced and esteemed person, and that had been so humble in
the height of his Honors, and employed his power for the relief of the
oppressed, to be now the object of the greatest contempt, and vilified by the
most vile: For so good a man, that feared God and eschued evil, to be delivered
up to the malice of the Devil, who would be sure not to spare him, but to lay
on hard enough: For such a man, I say, to be thus lamentably afflicted both by
men and devils, foes and friends too, and not to have so much as one comfort
left him, who can sufficiently set forth the pittifulness of this case? The
Scriptures mention Job's Wealth, Greatness, and Goodness, that the greatness of
his sufferings, and his patient submission might the more appear.

For one that had but little before, to lose that, that was low before, to fall
lower, is not so sharp a trial, as from possessing a great abundance, to be
deprived of all, and that at once, to be immediately brought out of the extreme
of Prosperity into the extreme of Adversity.

Had he by a riotous course, like the Prodigal in the Gospel, brought himself
to streights; or had he by some heinous sin provoked the Almighty to inflict
upon him some sore judgment, he had had no such trial of patience, but might
thank himself for what was come upon him: But for one who had always kept a
conscience void of offense both toward God and men, that walked in all the
Commandments of God with a perfect and upright heart, to be so strangely and
fearfully plagued, what a trial is here!

But Behold now Job's Resignation, and Submission to the Will of God, it was
great to admiration, as great as his sufferings.

As soon as the last Messenger had delivered the heaviest tidings of all the
four, (for they came, as was said, so thick one upon another, that he had not
time to say any thing before, the latter coming while the former was yet
speaking) I say the last had no sooner brought him the dismal news of all his
ten Children being slain at once, but he put himself into the lowest and most
humble posture, rent his mantle, (or robe) shaved his head, and fell down on
the ground and worshipped, and said: Job. 1. 21.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return Namely to the
womb of the earth, to which it is like in uttering these words he pointed with
his finger.
thither; the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of
the Lord.

What more emphatical expression of an humble and profound submission to the
Divine Will could have been uttered by the tongue of a man? Naked came I out of
my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither: I have as much still as I
brought into the world with me: For we brought nothing into this world, and it
is certain we can carry nothing out, 1 Timothy vi. 7. That which I have lost it
was not mine own, it was but lent me by God, who might call for it again
whenever he pleased: I came into the world without it, and without it may I
go again out of the world, and be never the less happy.

The Lord gave; I acknowledge his goodness and favor in what I once enjoyed,
and that I so long enjoyed it: And the Lord has taken away; I acknowledge and
submit to the Lord's good pleasure in stripping me of all these comforts and
enjoyments. He does not say, the Lord has given, but the Sabeans and Chaldeans
have taken away, but he looks beyond men and all inferior causes to God, and
says, The Lord has taken away. The Seventy add here somewhat more, (...), as
it pleases the Lord, so things come to pass.

Blessed be the name of the Lord: To bless God when he bestows his blessings
on us is very easy: It is no hard thing to say, The Lord has given, blessed
be the name of the Lord: But to bless God even when he has taken away, and
deprived us at once of all our comforts, this is hard indeed, this is heroic,
this argues an excellent spirit, more than thousands of thanksgivings in a
prosperous condition; this is an admirable instance of Self-Resignation.

Not to murmur and repine at such exceedingly severe providence is a great
expression of a resigned temper; how great an evidence then is an heart born up
in such miserable circumstances in a thankful and praising frame?

And that Job should now bless God when Satan hoped and was so confident that
he would curse him to his face, Chapter i. 11.
was a great foil and defeat given to him, such a disappointment as could not
but vex him at the very heart.

Nor is that other Expression of Job's, Chap. ii. 10. unlike to this, namely
his answer to that wretched speech of his wife's, He said unto her, Thou
speak as one of the foolish women speaks; what? shall we receive good at
the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? What? is God bound always to be
heaping his favors upon us? Must we have nothing but sunshine, fair and calm
days, without wind, or clouds or rain? Must we be fed with nothing but marrow
and fatness, taste nothing but what is sweet and delicious, must we have all
smooth and flowery way in our journey? And if he for a while cloud himself, if
he stop the streams of his comforts that flowed so abundantly upon us, if he
give us to taste of the sour and bitter, the waters of Marah, must we therefore
repine and complain, and think evil of him, and grow weary of his service?
Having received so much good from him, is it not equitable and fit that we
should bear some evil and hardship when he sends it? Should not the memory of
his many and long continued mercies more sweeten and endear our good God to us,
than some present crosses and adversities imbitter our thoughts of him, and
sour our spirits with discontent?

Oh the height and excellency of Grace in this holy man! He was Vir ante
Evangelia Evangelicus: A person of the true Evangelical and Christian spirit
before Christ or his Gospel came into the world. How had patience its perfect
work in him! There could not be a braver spectacle, a more lovely sight on the
whole earth for God and Angels to behold, than such a Soul in the midst of such
trials; the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit being in the sight of God (...)
of great price. If Seneca could say of Cato, Ecce spectaculum ad quod respiciat
operi suo intentus Deus.
Behold a sight which that God who diligently observes the work of his own
hands may fix his eye upon, well may it be said of holy Job.

This honorable Elogium is given of him Chap. 2. 10. In all this Job sinned
not with his lips: And the like in Chap. i. 22. where it is added, nor charged
God foolishly. He did not speak unworthily of God or his disposals, nor had he
any disbecoming thoughts of him or them: Nay, he was so far from repining and
fretting at the severest of them, that, as was said, he took them gratefully at
his hands.

As deformed and diseased a Creature as Job was, as to his outward man, he was
most sound, fair and lovely within: Though his Body lay among the ashes and
potsherds, yet was he as to the inward Constitution of his Soul as the wings of
a Dove, beautified with such interchangeable colors, by the Sun shining upon
her, Ps. lxviii. 13.
that they are as it were covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow
gold.

In the Song of Hannah it is said, that God raises up the poor out of the
dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill: But here we have a far
greater wonder, God exalted Job even when he debased him to the dust, and made
him in his lowest estate a glorious person; more glorious to all ages than ever
he would have been had there been nothing in his story, but that he was for his
Wealth and Honor the greatest of all the men of the East. So that Job even
whilst he was of this low degree, might rejoice in that he was exalted, to
allude to that of St. James, Chap. 1. 9.

Great afflictions accompanied with an unconquerable patience canonize men, and
advance them to a peculiar degree of honor and glory above the rest of
mankind. Behold we count them happy that endure, (...), we call them blessed,
James v. 11.

St. Chrysostom thus magnificently speaks of Job's (...), his Dunghill, that it
was (...), more stately than any Kingly Throne: And of his (...), his Sores,
that they were (...), richer than any jewels and precious stones; nay, that
they were (...), more splendid and glorious than the very Sunbeams: And again,
(...), that no King sitting upon his Throne is so illustrious, as was Job then
upon the Dunghill, honorable and glorious.

That very Ash-heap or Dunghill where the illustrious debased Job sat was a
Throne of glory, no Royal Seat of Majesty or Chair of State was so glorious;
here his patience was inthroned, here the humble Greatness and Majesty of his
mind shined forth, and the Spirit of Glory rested on him.

What a pleasure was it to Heaven to see this Champion come off so bravely, and
to baffle all the attempts and arts that the Devil could use to break his
spirit, and force him to impatience and unworthy reflections upon God and his
Providence!

God said twice to Satan: Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is
none like him in all the earth? (...) Have thou set thine heart upon my servant
Job? Have thou taken special notice of him? God seems to glory and make his
boast of this excellent person, as a more worthy sight than any that presented
it self to the view of observation in any part of the world. But he was much
more worthy of esteem and admiration after he had been proved by such sore
trials: when the trial of his faith and patience was found unto praise and
honor and glory. So great was his Patience, so exemplary his Resignation, that
the holy Scripture sets a special mark both upon it and him. Upon it James 5.
11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job: upon him, in that he is mentioned as
one of God's three most peculiar Favorites, Ezech. 14.

And now, having given some account of his woeful afflictions and his great
patience under them, we will speak briefly of the reward this his submission
and Resignation of himself to the Will of God was at last crowned with. After
the Apostle had said, in the forementioned place, Ye have heard of the patience
of Job, it follows, and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very
pitiful and of tender mercy. And in the 42. Chapter of Job we find him most
amply rewarded even in this life. In the seventh and eighth verses we read that
he found such special favor in the eyes of God, that his three friends, who
had added to the heavy weight of his afflictions, and had not spoken of God
that which was right as Job had done, could not atone his anger with a
Burnt-offering without Job's intercession in their behalf. And in the tenth
verse it is said, that the Lord turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for
his friends; also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before. And in the
twelfth verse, that the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his
beginning: for he had fourteen thousand Sheep, and six thousand Camels, and a
thousand yoke of Oxen, and a thousand She-asses: whereas he had before but half
this number of each of these, as has been shown.

Thus in his Goods and Possessions which were either destroyed by fire, or
carried away by his thievish Neighbors the Sabeans and Chaldeans, and so were
never to be enjoyed by him more, God gave him (in these) double: But as to his
Children he gave him the just number he had before, viz. seven sons and three
daughters, v. 13. These it is likely were not doubled, because though they were
taken away by death, yet they were not utterly lost, but their spirits returned
to God that gave them, they were still alive with God, where their Father
should again meet them in the other life.

But there is this said concerning these new daughters of Job which was not
said of the former, that in all the land were no women found so fair as they,
ver. 15. And lastly we read in ver. 16. that after this lived Job an hundred
and forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons sons, even four generations.
After which, the happy days he enjoyed here concluded in an unspeakably more
happy Eternity.

And thus, as Satan said, does Job serve God for naught? so we see that his
great Patience and exemplary Submission to the Will of God under the sorest and
severest trials, was not in vain in the Lord, but abundantly recompensed.

But before I conclude this Example of Resignation, I must take notice that so
great was Job's Patience, that some of the Rabbis of old, and some of late,
have imagined the account that we have of him to be rather a moral fiction, a
Romance and Parable, than a real History. So very averse are men to think any
higher degrees of goodness attainable than what they themselves are willing to
come up to.

But that we may not doubt whether it were a true History, besides other
arguments, that in Ezech. xiv. 14. 20. does evidently prove it so to be. There
it is twice said, Though these three men, Noah, Daniel and Job were in it, they
should but deliver their own souls by their righteousness: intimating, that if
there were any hope or help for a Nation, none were more likely to prevail than
these three persons, most dear to God for their singular Piety.

A like expression there is Ier. xv. 1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before
me, yet my mind could not be to this people. Now Noah and Daniel, Moses and
Samuel being no imaginary but real persons, why should it be thought that Job
only was so?

Let it be farther considered, that in Iam. 5. 10, 11. we are directed to the
Prophets and to Job as examples of Patience. Now the Prophets being no
fictions, but such as really spoke in the name of the Lord, how should Job come
to be joined with them, if there were never such a one in being? Surely are not
exhorted to the imitation of one who never was, nor encouraged to a real duty
by an imaginary and feigned reward.

If this Story were a mere fiction, the argument to patience which St. James
uses in those words, Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the
end of the Lord, etc. might have been thus excepted against by those suffering
Christians to whom he there speaks, viz. What do you tell us of one Job, of
his patience and reward, there was never such a person, there were never such
things practiced as are said of him, and therefore how can what you have told
us concerning him signify any thing to our encouragement?

CHAP. X. Of the Example of ELI.
X. A third Example shall be that of Eli. He was both the High Priest and
Judge, the chief of both Capacities, Sacred and Civil, and judged Israel forty
years: But being greatly faulty in not using his power to the restraining his
two sons Hophni and Phinehas, that rendered the Service of God and the
Priesthood vile, by their Covetousness, Luxury, and Uncleanness, God sent
Samuel with this sad message to him, namely, that he would judge his house for
ever for the iniquity which he knew of, but did not restrain by his authority:
That his two sons should die on one day; that the dignity of the Priesthood
should be taken from his Family, and given to another.

This sentence, though most righteous, was so severe, that it is said that both
the ears of every one, that heard of the execution of it, should tingle, 1 Samuel
iii. 11. And it was an irreversible sentence; for God says, that he has sworn
unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged
with sacrifice, nor offering for ever, ver. 14. A dreadful expression of his
great displeasure.

And now how was Eli affected with this message? His Resignation of himself,
and free Submission to the Will of God is expressed ver. 18. in that speech of
his, It is the Lord: Let him do what seems him good: or, what is good in his
eyes. Let him do, not what I, but what he thinks best, who is both infinitely
wise and just, and knows better than I how to dispose of all for his own
glory. He is holy in all his ways, and therefore it is fit his will should take
place.

His heart did not fret against the Lord, nor was he cut to the heart when this
sad cutting message was brought him, which was no less than the cutting off of
his arm, and the arm of his fathers house: As it is expressed Chap. ii. 31. And
he gave proof of it: For when he heard that his two sons were slain in Battle,
(which was the sign God gave of the approaching ruin of his house, Chap. ii.
34.) he seemed to bear this unconcernedly in comparison of the following
tidings.

For when he heard that the Ark of God was taken, that sad word strikes him
backward, and made him sink down in a deadly swound: Then he fell off from his
Seat, and brake his neck with the fall, Chap. iv. 18. The good old man was so
resigned to the Will of God as to his own concerns, that he could patiently
bear the departure of the glory of his house, but the departure of the Glory
from Israel, of the Ark, which was the token of God's special favor and
residence among them, this he could not bear.

CHAP. XI. Of the Example of DAVID.
XI. THe fourth Example. I shall propose of Self-Resignation is holy David, a
man after God's own heart, that would fulfill (...), all his wills, as it is
Acts xiii. 22. He was eminent for obedience to the Divine Commands; he
delighted to do the will of God, yea his law was within his heart, Psalm. xl.
11. And had respect unto all his Commandments, Psalm. cxix. 6. And he was
likewise eminent for a patient submissive temper under great trials and
sufferings.

That was an exceeding great trial, when, with his household and loyal Subjects,
he was forced to fly with all speed out of Jerusalem, for the saving his life
from the bloody machinations of his own Son Absalom. We have the Story in 2 Samuel 15, and 16. Chapters. Absalom, his third son by birth, but now his eldest,
and therefore Heir apparent to the Crown, being impatient to stay for it till
the natural death of his Father, designed first by flattering civilities to
insinuate himself into the hearts of the people, and afterward by armed power
to force his way into his Throne.

For his person, he was of a very lovely aspect and taking presence, so that in
all Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom for his beauty; Chapter
xiv.
from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish
in him.

He had also a fair and smooth tongue, Chapter xv. 2, 3, 4, 5.
was of a winning and insinuating behavior, so that he stole away the hearts
of the men of Israel. V. 6, 13.
And having so done it was an easy business to get himself chosen and
proclaimed King, which was done by the men of Israel, and that in Hebron too,
the very place where his Father was first anointed by the men of Judah, Chapter xv.
10.
and seven years and an half after by the Tribes of Israel.

And now Absalom endeavors to confirm himself in his usurped dominion by the
best arts of power and policy he could imagine. He gains Achitophel to be of
his side, who was the King's Counselor, a man of that venerable esteem for his
great wisdom, that his Counsel is said to be, as if a man had enquired at the
Oracle of God, Chap. xvi. 23.

He is busy in preparing a great Army against his Father; the Conspiracy was
strong, and the people increased continually with Absalom, which made him cry
out, as he did, in the third Psalm, ver. 1, 2. (a Psalm penned upon this
occasion) Lord, how are they increased that trouble me? many are they that rise
up against me, many there be which say of my soul, there is no help for him in
God. And that these many were not the (...), Philistims, Moabites, Amalakites,
Amonites, and other Heathens, but his own Subjects, was a more afflicting
trouble. And that among these should be found Achitophel, his Friend and
Counselor, that his head and hand should be in all this, this made it more
afflicting still, as he complains 55. 12. It was not an enemy that reproached
me, then I could have born it: Neither was it he that hated me, that did
magnify himself against me, then would I have hid my self from him. But it was
thou, a man, mine equal, my guide and my acquaintance: we took sweet counsel
together, and walked unto the house of God in company.

And that the General, he that headed the Army against him should be Amasa, the
son of his sister Abigail, and therefore so near to him, as that David says of
him, that he was bone of his bone, 2 Samuel ix. 13.
and flesh of his flesh; this was another aggravation of his affliction.

And lastly, This made the affliction most sharp of all, that he that was at
the head of all, that animated this rebellious body should be Absalom. That the
Son should thirst after the Fathers blood, that he which came forth of his
bowels should seek his life, as he complains Chap. xvi. 11. And that he should
be the son whom he loved most passionately, (...).
even so passionately, that after his three years absence from Court, it is
said Chap. xiii. 39. That the soul of David longed ((...) was consumed) to go
forth unto Absalom. And then, all this to befall him in his old age too, and
after he had by his valor and prudent conduct saved his people out of the
hands of their enemies.

Put all these sad circumstances together, and was not David in sore troubles
and trials? But how does he behave and acquit himself herein? Does he quarrel
with Providence, and the instruments of his trouble? Nothing less: But his
disposition and carriage was all composed of meekness and submission to the
Will of God.

Being sensible of the eminent danger he was in, he prudently provides for his
security by removing from Jerusalem, which he and his servants did with all
speed, lest Absalom should suddenly overtake them, Chapter xv. 14. (...)
and thrust (or push) evil upon them, as the word is: For his enemies were most
quick and active in their preparations against him: which therefore he calls
the stormy wind and tempest, Psalm. lv. 8. Of his hasty fleeing he speaks, Psalm.
lv. 6, 7. (which refers to this occasion, as appears by ver. 14.) where he
cries: Oh that I had wings like a dove; for then would I flee away and be at
rest: Lo then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. Selah. I
would hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest.

Being gotten out of the City in haste, he and his Guard, they tarry in a place
that was far off (v. 17.) to refresh themselves; not knowing whither to go, or
where to be at rest, (as he then told Ittai the Gittite, who was come to him
resolving to fare as he did) v. 20.

Having made a little pause, here he passes over the Brook Kidron, ver. 23. (a
Brook between the City and Mount Olivet) the Country weeping with a loud voice
at this sad Procession: As also when they were going up Mount Olivet, they went
weeping as they went up, every one covering his had, after the manner of
mourners, ver. 30. And in the midst of these hardships and sorrowful
sympathizings of the people, which could not but much affect his heart, (having
given order to Zadok the Priest to return back to the City with the Ark of God,
which thus far accompanied him, desiring that that Monument of God's Glory and
Presence might not wander up and down with him in his desolate condition, but
be placed again in the City of God) he thus expresses the humble and quiet
resignation of his spirit, Chapter xv. 25, 26. If I shall find favor in the eyes
of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it (the Ark) and his
habitation, ( Jerusalem the City of the great King) but if he thus say, I have
no delight in thee, behold here am I, let him do unto me as seems good unto
him.

Though I be brought to excessive straits, though I be deprived of all my glory
in this my old age, after all the good services I have done for Israel and
Judah, yet here am I, let him do as seems good to him, not as seems good to
me. Thy will, O Lord, shall be my will, thy pleasure I will rest satisfied with
and acquiesce in. Thou shall choose for me, and to thy choice will I accommodate
my self. Be it so as thou would have it to be, O thou most holy and wise,
and the Lord of all, who do whatsoever pleases thee both in heaven and
earth. My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready, it is fixed and resolved to
drink of that Cup which thou have appointed me.

And his humble disposition of Soul discovered it self immediately after in his
penitential behavior (already mentioned) as he went up the Mount. V. 30.
He wept as he went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot, which
were the most significant expressions of a great humiliation and submissness of
spirit.

And this meek frame of Soul in reference to God's disposals did dispose him to
a rare meekness and patience in reference to men.

There happened a little after he was past Mount Olivet a very provoking
occasion: For Shimei a Benjamite threw stones at him and his men, and cast dust
at them all along in the way, and added to this indignity curses and revilings
of the person of the King. Abishai, Chapter xvi. 7, 8.
one of his three chief Commanders, was so incensed at the horrid insolence of
this dead dog, as he called Shimei, that he prays the King that he might go
over to him and take off his head. But David was so far from permitting this,
that he was more offended at Abishai's Zeal for him, than at Shimei's injuries,
and thus replies to him: What have I to do with you ye sons of Zeruiah? so let
him curse, because the Lord has said unto him, Curse David, (that is, because
the Lord saw it good to permit him to curse me for my punishment) who then
shall say, Wherefore have thou done so? Again, Behold, (says he) my son which
came forth of my bowels seeks my life: how much more now may this Benjamite
do it? Let him alone, and let him curse: for the Lord has bidden him.

David was not a person of a dull phlegmatic temper, of a slow and stupid
disposition, but of a vigorous active spirit; he was sensible what a barbarous
act this was in Shimei thus to insult over his King, and that in his great
distress, but being also sensible of God's Providence in permitting this
wretched man thus to affront, revile and curse him, to correct him for his
sins, he quietly and meekly submitted to it.

And David lost nothing by his humble submission; for God delivered him from
the policies of Achitophel, from the powerful Army of Absalom, and brought him
back with joy and triumph to Jerusalem.

And as for Shimei, God returned his wickedness upon his own head, and David
found that true, which he did but modestly suppose upon Shimei's cursing: Ver.
12.
It may be (says he) the Lord will look upon mine asfliction, and that the
Lord will requite good for his cursing this day. And he that spoke with such an
humble resigned mind, But if he say, I have no delight in thee, behold here am
I, let him do to me as seems good to him, found that God did delight in him,
and therefore delivered him: As he himself expresses it, Psalm xviii. 19. He
delivered me because he delighted in me. God did what seemed good to David,
seeing he was willing he should do what seemed good to himself.

I will add one more passage expressive of David's Resignation: It is in Psalm.
xxxix. The particular occasion is not mentioned, but that he was in a most
afflicted condition we find in the tenth verse: Remove thy stroke away from me,
I am consumed by the blow of thine hand: And v. 13. he prays, that God would
spare him that he might recover strength. But yet he was patient, submissive
and quiet, ver. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it: As
in another case he says, Surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a child
that is weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child, Psalm. cxxxi. 2.

See how this great man expresses himself in words of greatest lowliness and
humility. When he has to do with God, he is as a little child, a poor, low,
contemptible thing in his own esteem; as a worm and no man, as he speaks Psalm.
xxii. 6. Though when he had to do with men, and was to fight the Lord's
Battles, whom more a man than David? Who more courageous and stout-hearted?
When he was but a stripling, he encountered and slew a Lion and a Bear, and the
great Giant Goliath.

Now if David a King, one of such height and dignity, one of so great fame and
renown in the world, one of such incomparable courage and magnanimity, did with
such meekness and subjection of Soul submit to the Divine Providence, and in
such instances as these, wherein as a King and as a Father he was most highly
provoked and unworthily dealt with: is it not a shame for us, who are so much
his inferiors, to be impatient and unresigned, and that in far less trials than
his were.

CHAP. XII. Of the Example of our BLESSED SAVIOR.
XII. OUr fifth Example of Holy Resignation is our Lord Jesus Christ: Of all
Examples the greatest: the brightest and fairest Pattern of all: for none ever
obeyed, none ever suffered so much as the holy and blessed Jesus, and through
sufferings was this Captain of our Salvation made perfect, Heb. ii. 10.

He is the (...), the Captain and brave Leader of the noble Army of Martyrs, as
all self-resigning Souls are: For to give their body of Sin, and Self-desires
to be burnt, their own Wills to be consumed by the flames of Divine Love, what
is it less than Martyrdom?

And I choose to mention our Savior next to David, (though he was indeed far
before him in Obedience and Submission) because he is the Spiritual David, and
called by the name David by the Prophets, ( David being an Historical Type and
Figure of Christ both in his Troubles and Triumphs, and therefore the second
Psalm is applicable both to David and Christ) and because there are some
memorable conformities between them as to this particular of Resignation.

1. Christ had his Judas, as David his Achitophel: one near to him, and that
did eat at his table, conspired and lift up the heel against him. 2. Israel,
whom God calls his Son, dealt as unworthily with Christ as Absalom did with
David. 3. David (as we have shown) being conspired against, goes with his
servants out of Jerusalem, passes over the Brook Kidron, goes up by the ascent
of Mount Olivet, he weeps as he went, his heart was sore pained within him, the
storms of death were fallen upon him, and horror overwhelmed him: as he
complained upon this occasion Psalm lv. 2, 4, 5. And now it was that he expressed
his humble Resignation to the Will of God in those words: Behold here am I, let
him do to me as seems good unto him.
And this Spiritual David, beginning to undergo his last and greatest
Sufferings, goes out of Jerusalem, where his enemies were conspiring to destroy
him, and Judas helping to facilitate their cruel enterprise. He, with his
Disciples, passes over the Brook Cedron, (the same with Kidron) John xviii. 1.
he comes to the mount of Olives, (the same with Mount Olivet) Matthew. xxvi. 30.
and in a Garden there, he began to be sorrowful and sore amazed, Mat. xxvi. 37.
and very heavy: Told his three Disciples that his Soul was exceeding sorrowful
even unto death. Ver. 38. Heb. v. 7.
Here he wept, he offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and
tears: And, being in an Agony, sweat as it were drops of blood. And here he
expressed his humble Resignation to the Will of his Father in these words: O my
Father, if this Cup may not pass away from me except I drink it, thy will be
done, Matthew. xxvi. 14. Or as it is in St. Luke: Father, if thou be willing,
remove this Cup from me, nevertheless not my will, but thine be done. And those
words whereby David expresses his Resignation, Psalm. xl. 7, 8. we find applied
unto Christ, Heb. x. 7. Lo I come, in the volume of the book it is written of
me, I delight to do thy will, O my God. And in him were they verified in a far
more eminent degree.

There was no compare between David's Resignation and our Saviors, his Cup was
much more bitter, his Sufferings were not such as are common to men, but were
of an extraordinary nature, being designed for an extraordinary end, viz. The
making atonement and expiation for the sins of the world. He bare our sins in
his own body on the tree; was wounded for our iniquities, bruised for our sins.
And he was a Person far from deserving the least of sufferings by any the least
default: For he was spotlesly, innocent, and ever lived in most perfect
Obedience to the Will of God.

Yet notwithstanding the unspeakable greatness of his Sufferings, and his
non-desert of them, he did not in the least complain of his Father for giving
him up to them, but entirely submitted to and acquiesced in his will and
pleasure. The Cup that my Father gives me to drink, (says he) shall I not
drink it? Not as I will but as thou willest.

And the Resignation of his Soul was also expressed by the most wonderful
Meekness and Charity he discovered toward his bloody Enemies, even in the
midst of their unsufferable abuses and barbarous cruelties. He was led as a
Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep dumb before the shearers he opened not
his mouth. Wherein also David was a Type of our Savior, viz. in his behavior
toward the reviling Shimei already mentioned.

But the Resignation of our Blessed Savior (which was of all others
incomparably the greatest) I shall not farther enlarge on, because I have
discoursed already of it, and shall have yet farther occasion to speak more in
another Chapter; I will only add, that this is the Copy we are to eye most,
though we are encompassed about with a great cloud of other Witnesses, and
noble Examples of this Virtue.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Example of the Apostle Saint PAUL.
XIII. THe sixth and last Example I shall mention is Blessed Paul: A follower
of Christ, as he styles himself, 1 Cor. xi. 1. And he imitated him in nothing
more than in Self-Resignation.

The very first words he spoke at his Conversion did speak the great
preparedness of his Soul for this Grace: Lord, said he, what will thou have me
to do? Acts ix. 6. There then shone round about him a light from Heaven above
the brightness of the Sun, but a more glorious light shined into his heart; and
as that light struck his Body down to the earth, so did this his Soul, and
humbled it to the lowest degree of Self-abasement and submissive compliance
with the Will of God.

Lord, what will thou have me to do? was as well the language of his heart, as
the voice of his lips. And whatsoever the Will of God was that he should either
do or suffer afterward, he was most pliable and yielding to it. He would will
or act nothing but according to the Will of Christ. To him to live was Christ,
Phil. i. 21. His own proper will was swallowed up in his will, so that he did
not so much live as Christ lived in him, Gal. ii. 20.

None of the holy Writers spoke more frequently or vigorously than St. Paul of
the necessity of our being crucified to the world, and of having the world
crucified unto us, of crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts, of
mortifying through the Spirit the deeds of the body, as being the only way to
eternal life, of putting off the old man which is corrupt according to
deceitful lusts: By all which expressions is meant the subduing our own will
and every inordinate affection, whatsoever is contrary to the Will of God and
opposite to Self-Resignation.

These things this excellent Apostle does inculcate and press with all
seriousness, and in expressions of greater significancy, of a more spiritual
force and fuller energy than any forms of speech that occur in the Old
Testament.

And what he thus teaches and exhorts to, he was an eminent Example of the
Practice of. He himself was crucified with Christ; he suffered the loss of all
things, Gal. ii. 20.
and accounted all other gains and advantages but loss and dung that he might
win Christ, that he might know the power of Christ's resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death, Phil. iii.
8, 10.

He professed that it is most reasonable and becoming us, that if Christ died
for us we should live to him and not to our selves, or the pleasing our own
wills, and that the Love of Christ does with a sweet force constrain hereunto;
and that the mercies of God do powerfully engage us to make an entire oblation
of our selves to him, which is our reasonable service. Romans xii. 1.

And (I say) his practice and behavior was fully agreeable to these his
professions. At his first Conversion God showed him how great things he must
suffer for his names sake, Acts ix. 16.
but the hardships he was to endure did not at all startle him. The Holy Ghost
witnessed in every City, that bonds and afflictions did await him, but says
he, none of these things trouble me, nor count I my life dear unto my self,
(and what is dearer than life?) so that I might finish my course with joy, and
the ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of
the grace of God, Acts xx. 24. And therefore he went to Jerusalem, (where he
was to expect very great afflictions) (...), bound in Spirit, constrained by a
holy violence, ver. 22.

Nor could he be persuaded by those Disciples at Tire that, by revelation from
the Spirit, told him that he would incur much hazard by going up to Jerusalem,
and therefore advised him not to go: Nor was he wrought upon by those other
Disciples who endeavored by their tears, added to their earnest entreaties, to
stay him: But his answer to them was, What mean you to weep, and to break mine
heart, for I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem, for
the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts xxi. 13. And by the steadfast purpose of his
Soul to be resigned to the Will of God herein, did he at last win them over to
the same Resignation, ver. 14. And when he would not be persuaded we ceased,
saying, The will of the Lord be done.

And what severe trials he was exercised with, how many and great things he
suffered, we have an account in 1 Cor. iv. 11, etc. 2 Cor. vi. 4, 5. and Chap.
xi. 23, etc. in which place are mentioned together above twenty instances of
his sufferings.

So far was he from living a self-pleasing life, that, if he pleased himself in
any thing, it was in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake, Chap. xii. 10.

So far was he from impatience and shrinking at those disposals of Providence,
that he rejoiced in his sufferings, while he filled up that which was behind of
the sufferings of Christ in his flesh, for his bodies sake which is the Church,
Col. i. 24.

But there is one passage in St. Paul's Writings which I had chiefly in mine
eye when I thought him, next to our blessed Savior, most worthy to be
presented as a Pattern for Christians to follow: And it is a passage which
expresses the great progress he had made in Self-Resignation both as to the
active and passive part of it: Both as it consists in a free and entire
obedience to difficult commands, and in patient bearing hard trials and
sufferings.

The passage is that in Phil. iv. 11, 12, 13. I have learned in whatsoever
state I am therewith to be content. I know both how to be abased, and I know
how to abound, every where and in all things, I am instructed both to be full
and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me.

Of which words I may say as Ausonius of the Emperors words, O mentis aureae
verba bracteata! O plated (or rich and most excellent) words, expressing a
golden (or most beautiful and goodly) mind. Yea, such is the preciousness of
this Wisdom, to know how to be either abased or to abound, to have learned in
every condition to be content, that it is not to be valued with pure gold, with
the precious Onyx or the Sapphire, the price of it is above Rubies.

To know how to abound and to be full, and not deny God, not to forget and
forsake him in fullness, not to be high-minded and trust in uncertain riches,
not to make the abundance of these outward things to administer to pride and
haughtiness, luxury and sensuality; but on the contrary, to be humble, to trust
in God, and acknowledge him in all his Gifts, to be moderate in abundance, and
strictly religious, this is no easy thing, it is a lesson that few will learn,
but St. Paul had learnt it.

To know how to be abased, how to want and to be kept short, to look upon
others full portions in this life without Covetousness or envying what they
have, to bear adversity, to endure afflictions, losses and difficulties of all
sorts without impatience and murmuring at the allotment of Providence, to be
quiet and meek, and much more, to be cheerful and rejoice under all; not to
love God the less, nor trust in him the less, nor to flag or be discouraged by
this means in his service; this is also a difficult and uneasy lesson, but
holy Paul was likewise herein instructed.

(...), We glory in tribulations, says this great Apostle, Romans v. 3. Glorying
is not mere joy, but joy exalted to its utmost height. And what a full
expression is that he uses, 2 Cor. vii. 4. (...), I do more than abound with
joy in all tribulation: or, I rejoice with a superlative joy. What a mighty
Proficient was this blessed person in the School of Christ! Yea, he farther
says, that he could do all things through Christ strengthening him: And he had
learned to be content not only in some conditions, but in whatsoever state: He
knew how to be abased and how to want not only in some circumstances, but
every where and in all things. Here was the power of Godliness indeed, and the
Kingdom of God not in word but in power. And after all this he ascribes nothing
to himself, but gives Christ the glory of all. He was (he says) able to do all
this through Christ strengthening him; through the power of his grace, which
was sufficient for him.

This is somewhat of the much more that might be observed concerning this
blessed Apostle, who, in resignation and submission to the Will of God, was one
of the best Copies, and nearest the Original, that ever was drawn by the finger
of God, the Holy Spirit: And, next to the Life of Christ (the fairest picture
of Purity and Holiness represented by the four Evangelists) the life of Paul is
set forth at large; above one half of the Acts of the Apostles being spent in
his Character. Nor was it out of any vainglorious design, nor from any undue
love or valuation of himself, that he entreated others to be followers of him,
as he was of Christ, but from the inward sense of the great sweetness, peace
and comfort, and the many advantages he found in the imitation of him, and from
the absolute necessity of this Duty. And these great reasons induced him to
propound himself as a pattern particularly to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. xi. 1.
Chap. iv. 16. to the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. iii. 7, 9. and to the Philippians,
Chap. iii. 17. and Chap. iv. 9. Those things which ye have both learned and
received, and heard and seen in me, do, and the God of peace shall be with you.

Now then, O feeble and faint-hearted Christian, take heart and courage from
these great Examples, up and be doing, be strong in the Lord and in the power
of his might. Wait upon God, and apply thy self heartily to him, that thou
may be clothed with the same Spirit, and endued with power from on high. And
as Elisha said of old: 2 Kings ii. 14.
Where is the Lord God of Elijah? So rouse up thy self and say, Where is the
God of Paul, the God of Abraham, Job, David, and the rest? The same God who
wrought effectually in these to such an exemplary Resignation, will be mighty
in thee also, if thou have the same Spirit of faith, the same sincerity and
singleness of heart. He that is mighty will magnify thee, will do great things
for thee and in thee. Heb. xiii. 8.
Jesus Christ, the same yesterday and to day and for ever; what he was to St.
Paul and others like him heretofore, he will be unto thee to day, and to all
believing Souls for ever; such as walk in the same Spirit, and in the same
steps.

Have thou not known, Isa. xl. 28.
have thou not heard that the everlasting God faints not, neither is weary?
Nor has he forgotten to be gracious; but his tender mercies are the same, and
the arm of his strength the same. The same Lord over all is rich unto all that
call upon him, Romans x. 2.

Only take heed of being wearied and fainting in your minds, but wait on the
Lord, and he shall strengthen your heart, wait I say on the Lord. You shall
then be enabled to run the race that is set before you with patience; though a
long and an hard race, you shall run it and not be weary, you shall walk in the
most difficult paths of obedience, Isa. li. 9.
and not faint. The arm of the Lord shall awake as in the ancient days, in the
generations of old: As it did in the days of the forementioned Worthies: And
you shall be strengthened, as they were, Col. i. 11.
with all might according to his glorious power, unto all patience and
long-suffering, and that with joyfulness.

CHAP. XIV. That the consideration of Christ crucified is a very effectual
means for the crucifying of the old man.
XIV. NInthly, Let thy mind dwell much upon the meditation of Christ crucified.
Bring thy Self-will and inordinate affections to Mount Calvary, and there nail
them to the Cross of Christ. As Christ blotted out the handwriting of
ordinances that was against us, and contrary to us, viz. the Jewish Law, the
Mosaical Rites, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross; so should
a Christian do with the law in his members, or the law of sin and death. The
nailing it to the Cross of Christ is a most effectual means to take it out of
the way.

The Cross of Christ, I say, is a proper instrument for the crucifying the old
man, and the body of sin, and the consideration of Christ crucified a powerful
Engine, mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, to the beating
down of all those fortifications sin has raised in the Soul, all imaginations,
all carnal reasonings and affections, every high thing that would exalt it self
against the knowledge of God, and the obedience of Christ.

St. Paul speaks his own experience of the success he found in the serious
consideration of Christ crucified; Gal. vi. 14. God forbid that I should glory
save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto
me, and I unto the world. That is, the vanities and hurtful allurements of the
world, whether they be those of its riches, honors or pleasures, are become
liveless and untempting to me, have no energy or force to persuade me to an
eager pursuit or fond embracement of them; I am so little affected toward
them, so mortified to them, as to place no part of my happiness in such things.

Now then the meditation on Christ crucified is a means greatly available to
the subduing our Self-will, and irregular appetites, in that

1. His dying on the Cross, as the Scripture declares that it was to make
atonement and expiation for sin, so it affirms that it was also designed to
root out and destroy it. This is asserted in many Texts.

Particularly in 1 Pet. ii. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body
on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness, by
whose stripes ye were healed.

2 Cor. v. 14, 15. For the Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus
judge: that if one died for all, then were all dead: And that he died for all,
that they which live should not henceforth live to themselves, but unto him
which died for them, and rose again.

1 Pet. i. 18, 19. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation, etc. but
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without
spot.

Gal. i. 4. Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this
present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father.

Titus ii. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

Romans viii. 3, 4. For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh: That the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit.

2. Christ's dying on the Cross was designed to be an exemplary pattern of our
crucifying the body of sin. As his Resurrection is a figure of the Spiritual
Resurrection of Christians, their rising up to a life holy, heavenly and
divine, so his Death on the Cross is a figure and representation of that
Spiritual Death that is to pass upon the old man.

And because this is a necessary important truth, as well as pertinent to the
point in hand, I shall observe three passages of Scripture to this purpose, and
a little discant upon them.

First, that in 1 Pet. iv. 1. For as much then as Christ has suffered for us in
the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind: for he that has
suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin.

The suffering in the flesh which the Apostle here tells us we are to imitate
our Savior in, is not to be merely understood of suffering afflictions in the
body, but of resembling the suffering and dying of Christ, in dying unto sin.
This appears from what next follows, he that has suffered in the flesh has
ceased from sin. Some Greek Copies leave out the Particle (...), and read (...)
he that has suffered or died to the flesh: the same with that phrase, Romans vi.
2. dead to sin. He that has suffered or died to the flesh, or he that has
suffered pain and smart in the flesh, in the mortifying of his sinful life, and
the deeds of the body, has ceased from sin, as he that is dead cease from
the actions that belong to the natural life.

This also appears from Ver. 2. That he no longer should live the rest of his
time in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God; not live any
longer in the gratification of those fleshly appetites that captivate and
inslave the greater part of mankind; but on the contrary live a life of entire
obedience and conformity to the Will of God.

A second passage to the like purpose is that in Philippians iii. 10. That I
may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable unto his death: Which last words are a key
to the foregoing; and this conformity to the death of Christ implies that it
has in it something of Pattern and exemplary Consideration, to be spiritually
resembled and imitated by a Christian.

There is a knowing of the power of Christ's Resurrection and Sufferings
without us, as they refer to God the Father, in purchasing his favor,
procuring the Pardon of our sins, and Reconciliation with him: For Christ was
delivered (to death) for our offenses, and rose again for our justification,
Romans iv. 5. And besides there is the knowing of the power of Christ's Death and
Resurrection within us, there is something to be done and transacted in us that
is answerable and bears conformity thereunto. There is a (...), a partaking of
his Sufferings in a spiritual sense; when we are enabled by the power of God to
suffer the pain and agonies that accompany the crucifying of the flesh or body
of sin, and to die unto sin as he died for it. And there is a partaking of
Christ's Resurrection in a spiritual sense, when we are enabled to rise to a
new and heavenly life, when we seek, and savor, those things which are above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God, Col. iii. 1.

This is that excellent knowledge of Christ for which the Apostle counted all
things but loss and dung, ver. 8. Had he rested in a mere speculative,
historical knowledge of the Death and Resurrection of Christ without him, and
been impatient of the energy and power of both within him, had he not so known
Christ dying and raised again to life, as to be spiritually crucified with him,
and to rise with him to newness of life; such a knowledge would not have
availed him in the end.

The third passage is that in Romans vi. 4, 5, 6. Like as Christ was raised up
from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
newness of life: For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his
death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection.

By this likeness of Christ's Death, and likeness of his Resurrection, it
appears that there is a lively resemblance of both which a Christian is obliged
to endeavor after. Then it follows: Knowing this that our old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve sin.

3. The Death and Sufferings of Christ are very powerful to engage and enable
us to the great duties of crucifying worldly lusts, and mortifying corrupt
affections, as they are effectual to work in us the most heart-bleeding sorrow
for sin, the most vehement hatred and detestation of it, and to raise the soul
to the greatest degrees of love and ingenuous gratitude.

1. To work in us the most heart-bleeding sorrow for sin. Who can seriously
consider Christ crucified, Christ bleeding on the Cross, bleeding from the
sixth to the ninth hour, (from our twelve a Clock to three) his bleeding Head,
crowned with sharp thorns, his bleeding Hands and Feet, and Side; I say, who
can consider this and not bleed within? Who can look upon him that was pierced,
and not be inwardly pierced himself, not be pricked to the heart, as they are
said to be Acts ii. 37. at the preaching of Christ crucified.

And when we consider that he was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised
for our iniquities, or (as the words are rendered by some) of our transgressions
and iniquities: When we consider that we have crucified the Lord of Life and
Glory, that our sins nailed him to the Cross, wounded him to the heart, and put
him to all the grief and pain he underwent, how can it be that our hearts
should not be wounded within us? How can we forbear to express our sorrow for
sin in some such words as those of Jeremiah, My bowels, my bowels, I am pained
at the very heart: O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears!

And can we consider his Agony in the Garden, the exceeding sorrowfulness of
his Soul, his extreme heaviness and sore amazement, his strong crying and
tears, and his sweating great drops of blood, and not be melted into holy
mournings and relentings for our sins, and for all our unkind and unworthy
behavior toward Christ, who thus suffered for us?

How hard is that heart, which the so great and dolorous sufferings of our
Savior cannot melt and dissolve!

At the Passion of Christ (besides other Prodigies) it is said the rocks rent;
and are our hearts harder than rocks, not to be affected with remorse at the
consideration of Christ crucified?

Omnis creatura Christo morienti compatitur; sol obscuratur, terra movetur,
petrae scinduntur, velum Templi dividitur, sepulchra aperiuntur: Solus homo non
compatitur, pro quo solo Christus moritur.
It is Saint Hierom's observation: When Christ died, all creatures were his
fellow sufferers; the sun was eclipsed, the earth shook, the rocks were cleft
in sunder, the veil of the Temple was rent in twain, the graves opened: Man
alone, for whom only Christ died, suffered not with him.

Certainly, if the consideration of our Savior's Sufferings for our sakes
cannot prevail to melt our hearts into an holy sorrow for our sins, nothing
will ever do it.

And if it has such a peculiar and sovereign efficacy to work an
heart-bleeding sorrow for Sin, it will consequently be very effectual to the
disengaging us from it, to the taking us off from all those vanities and lusts
which were formerly most dear and pleasing to us.

If we are grieved at the heart for our Self-will, Self-love, and manifold
disobediences, we will not continue to make provision for the flesh to fulfill
the lusts thereof.

2. The Death and Sufferings of Christ are effectual to work in us the most
vehement hatred and detestation of Sin. It appears from thence how hateful and
abominable a thing Sin is to God, who is original Rectitude and infinite
Purity. For how could he demonstrate a greater antipathy and displeasure
against Sin, than in being pleased to bruise and put to grief the Son of his
love, and to give up the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his
person to inexpressible dolours to the end he might make expiation for it.

If Sin were a slight inconsiderable thing, if it were not a thing of a most
odious and vile nature, a high injury to God, and of sad and dismal consequence
to man, he would not have required such a Sacrifice for it.

This consideration must needs be most forceable to the working in us
detestation of Sin, whatsoever grace and favor it has found in our eyes.
Suppose we our selves to have seen Christ in the last Scene of his Sufferings,
and to have accompanied him from the Garden of Gethsemene, where he was in his
Agony, and sweat drops of blood, to the High Priests house, thence to the
Judgment Hall before Pilate, thence to Mount Calvary, in which places he was
reproached, spit upon the face, scourged, and at last nailed alive to the
Cross: And suppose him speaking to us, as in another sense Pilate spoke of him,
Behold your King; Behold your Lord and Savior: See the wounds which your Sins
have given me; See how they have torn my flesh, and despitefully used me: But
the unseen wounds, the inward sorrows of my Soul are such, as the heart of man
cannot conceive, as neither has the eye seen, nor the ear heard what may
compare to them. Thus have your lusts dealt with me, and in all this see their
cruelty. If we had, I say, beheld our blessed Lord in his direful Sufferings,
and heard him thus expressing himself to us, do we think we could still cherish
and entertain, hug and embrace those Enemies of his which have put him to all
this shame and torment?

But if we have an inward knowledge and feeling of Christ crucified, it will
most undoubtedly inflame us into a just indignation against those Lusts which
sucked the Life-bloud of Christ, which slew and crucified the Lord of Glory. We
shall say concerning them, what the Jews cried concerning him, Away with them,
away with them, they are not worthy to live: Let these murderers of the just
one die the death, but let Jesus live, and let the Life of Christ be manifested
in us. How can that be longer sweet to me, which made Christ's Cup so exceeding
bitter? How can I delight in that which made his Soul sorrowful unto death? How
shall that be my pleasure, which was his pain, and put him to grief, such
grief, that there was no sorrow like unto his sorrow? How should I glory in
that, which put him to such an open shame?

3. The Death and Sufferings of Christ are powerful to raise the Soul to the
greatest degrees of Love and Gratitude. We have already shown that there never
was a Love like the Love of Christ, comparable to that Love he expressed in
giving himself an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for us.

Now, not to part with our Lusts for him, who parted with Life it self for us,
not to put our selves to some smart and pain in crucifying the Lusts of the
Flesh, in denying our Self-will, and taking up the Cross and following him, who
has, to amazement denied himself, and taken upon him the greatest of
Sufferings for our sakes; this would be an instance of the unworthiest and
vilest ingratitude, and the greatest unkindness imaginable done to Christ. This
will be more grievous to him, than all his Sufferings from the Jews and Romans,
it being a frustration and disappointment of him in the great design, which we
showed, he had in submitting to those Sufferings.

But a Soul truly sensible of the Love of Christ in giving himself for us, can
think nothing too dear and precious to part with for him, cannot look upon his
Commands of Self-denial and Self-Resignation as grievous and unsufferable.

I will add, that the particular circumstances of Christ's last Sufferings
have a special force to the enabling a Christian against such and such
particular sins, as prevail most among men, and which are the fruitfullest
sprouts and branches that grow out of that cursed stock of Self-will: As,

1. Self-esteem: An over-dear valuing a man's self, his fame and regard in the
world; a seeking the praise and respects of men, and being disturbed at their
disrespects.

Now of how great efficacy must it needs be to the subduing this corruption to
consider him who endured such contradictions of sinners against himself, and
how he was exercised with all manner of scorns and derisions, all sorts or
abuses, reproaches, injuries, and indignities, that the wit and malice of his
enemies could devise, to render him base and despicable before men.

He was called a blasphemer, a deceiver, an enemy to Caesar, (or traitorous
person) a seditious stirrer up of the people, and all this about the time of
his last Passion; as before he was called a Samaritan, (or Heretic) and
Beelzebub.

And as an expression of their contempt, they spit upon his Face, that sacred
Face which the glorious Angels delighted to look upon, which Abraham and many
Kings and Prophets, and righteous persons did desire to see. What indignity
like to this! Then they smote him on the Face, adding father contempt
accompanied with pain, to the disgrace of having his Face besmeared with their
filthy spittle. And withal they covered his Face, saying, Prophecy unto us,
thou Christ, who it is that smote thee.

Thus contumeliously did they use the Anointed of the Lord; and as in the last
passage they mocked at his Prophetical, so did they afterward at his Kingly
Office; putting on him a gorgeous Robe, platting Thorns into the form of a
Crown, and putting it on his head, and a Reed for a Scepter into his hand, and
then bowing the knee before him, saying, Hail King of the Jews.

These are some few instances of the many dishonours and disgraceful
indignities done unto him. -- I might add that the kind of Death he suffered
was as ignominious as painful, the death of slaves and vile offenders; and to
add to the disgrace, they crucify him between two Thieves.

Yea, even when he was bleeding upon the Cross they would not forbear to deride
and revile him, expressing their scorn both in words was gestures. Nor were
they that did thus, the (...), the rude rabble only, but the chief Priests,
Scribes and Elders.

Now consider this, O Christian, how it fared with Christ thy great Lord and
Master, what affronts, what dishonours and reproaches he endured, and how
unconcernedly and undisturbedly he bare them, how he despised the shame, how
little he cared either for the applause or contempt of the world, how he chose
rather to be reputed and dealt with as the most abject and basest of men, than
to be glorious in the world, and to shine in its vain honors: And will not
this prevail with thee to set thy self against thy Pride and Self-esteem?
Surely it is not possible that thou, who art infinitely beneath thy blessed
Savior, should set a high value on thy self, and affect the praises of men,
or be greatly concerned at the contemptuous behavior and affronts of the
world, when thou seriously considerest how Christ was used, reproached,
contemned and despised, and with what calmness and sedateness of spirit he bore
it. The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his Lord,
Matthew. x. 24. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the
servant as his Lord, ver. 25.

2. As for that lust of Self-pleasing, the love of ease and pleasure, an
averseness to endure hardships, a studious care to gratify the cravings of our
fleshly appetites, is there not enough in the consideration of Christ crucified
to cure also this distemper of the Soul? Did not Christ out of dear compassion
toward men leave his Fathers house, where was all fullness and all joy, and
humbled himself to become man, and took upon him the form of a servant? He
endured cold and heat, hunger and thirst, wearisome labors, long fastings, and
faintness, he bare our griefs, and carried our sorrows, and (as has been
shown) endured inexpressibly worse griefs and sorrows than any of ours.

Now how can we consider this, and be any longer dearly affected to our
Carcasses, sollicitous for the pleasing of our appetites, and pampering our
Bodies, curious about Meats and Drinks, and studious for that which is most
delicious and grateful to the flesh? And as for the impure pleasures of the
world, no consideration can be more powerful to extinguish in us all desires to
them, than that of Cum me pulsat turpis aliqua cogitatio, recurro ad vulnera
Christi, and sanabor.
Christ upon the Cross.

3. Revenge and Hatred: Who can harbor these Lusts in his Soul that considers
that Christ laid down his life for his enemies? And that almost the last words
he spoke on the Cross, amidst that shame and torment they put him to, were a
prayer for them: Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke
xxiii. 34.

4. Covetousness, or the Love of Money: Who that considers, that though Christ
was rich, yet he became poor, that we through his poverty might be rich; and
that it was this lust that betrayed the Lord of Life to his merciless enemies,
can find it difficult to mortify and subdue his inclinations to it?

To conclude this: To the serious Christian the word of the Cross of Christ is
sharper than any two-edged sword, to the destroying all our evil and corrupt
affections.

But I fear that it is not considered, as it ought, by most of us. Christians
generally consider the Sufferings of Christ only as they were designed to
expiate sin, and in reference to what he has done for them without them, not
to the extirpation of sin, not to the crucifying the flesh with the affections
and lusts: And hence it is that their consideration thereof is no more
available to this great end.

CHAP. XV. That the frequent consideration of the great Recompense of Reward is
a mighty help to the attaining of Self-Resignation.
15. TEnthly and lastly: In order to the attaining of Self-Resignation, let us
look to the great recompense of Reward. Let us with an eye of faith frequently
look upon the promise of eternal life, the prize that is set before us, the
Crown of Life and Glory, that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for all
obedient and resigned Souls.

It is said of Jesus, Heb. xii. 2. that for the joy that was set before him, he
endured the Cross, (as exquisitely painful as it was) and despised the shame;
all the mockings and insultings of his enemies over him, and the vile ignominy
and infamy of his Death.

And in conformity to him a Christian may be enabled to endure the inward
Cross, in being crucified to the world, in dying to sin and his own corrupt
will, by eying steadfastly the joy and glory set before him, by often
contemplating the future Reward, which is infinitely above all the labors that
accompany Self-Resignation, and the pains and sorrows that do attend it.

The Great Apostle of the Gentiles, who was acquainted not only with the
greatest sufferings from the world, and the labors and pains of Mortification
and Self-denial, but also with this blessed Reward, (having been rapt up into
Paradise, where he saw and heard unutterable things) he (I say) having well
weighed both, does thus pronounce, Romans viii. 18. I reckon that the sufferings
of this present time are not worthy to be compared (bear no proportion) with
the glory that shall be revealed in us. If the sufferings be laid in one
balance, and the glorious Reward in the other, the Glory will unspeakably
outweight them: For it is a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; in
comparison of which our heaviest afflictions are but light, and our longest but
for a moment.

That God is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, 2 Cor. iv. 17.
is the first principle to be believed in Religion, without which all our
motions and endeavors therein will be weak and feeble. And the End of our
Faith and Obedience being much in our eye, the excellency and infinite
desireableness thereof will sweeten all that sowrness, and take away all that
unpleasantness which may be in the means.

A firm Belief and frequent fixed thoughts on the heavenly Reward would fill
our hearts with joy and strength, and carry us with great ease through
whatsoever difficulties lie before us in the way of entire Obedience and
Self-Resignation. None of the Divine Commandments can can be grievous to the
heavenly minded, no trials over-burdensome.

The serious believing thoughts of the glory to be enjoyed will put such life,
spirit and vigor into us, as will cause us to run the race set before us, not
only with patience, but with delight and joyfulness: So that we shall sing in
the ways of the Lord, as the expression is Psalm. cxxxviii. 5. and glorify him
even in the jires, Esaias. xxiv. 15. We shall be enabled to submit to God's Will
under great afflictions, as without murmuring, so with thankfulness.

They that grudge to give God more than the fruit of their lips, than some good
words, wishes, or intentions, or some formal ceremonious observances, or some
reformation in lesser and easier matters, and think they have done as became
those that sought God's Kingdom, surely these have a very mean esteem of, and
miserably undervalue the glory and felicities of the life to come. They never
spent so many thoughts on Heaven as to have any true and worthy conception of
the happiness of it; otherwise they could never imagine the doing and suffering
no more than this comes to, to be fit to be recompensed with such a Reward: or
that God will ever reward such a shadow of Religion, with so real and
substantial a Happiness, their withering leaves of outward profession, with
such a Crown of Glory as shall never fade. But those that frequently affect
their Souls with the thoughts of that bliss which is promised in the Gospel to
those who deny themselves, and take up their Cross and follow Christ in
spiritual Obedience and Resignation, can never think much of any pains or
trouble this may put them to. If the Devil can prevail and persuade as he does
by those aerie and imaginary satisfactions he promises, what influence would
God's promises of fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, and an
everlasting Kingdom, have upon all those that duly consider them?

How will men deny themselves, what labors will they undergo, what hardships
will they suffer for some worldly advantages which fall far short of a Kingdom?
for some petty principality and dominion over others, for a preferment that
has some little authority in it, or brings in some profit? But had any such
ambitious ones hopes of a Kingdom, how would they be transported with all
excesses of joy, what difficulties, dangers and painful labors would they go
through and think them nothing? And can we grudge to do or suffer as much, if
it were necessary, for an infinitely more glorious Kingdom than any in this
world, if we really believed it attainable by us?

If we were promised a great earthly reward upon condition we would abstain
from such and such things as are very pleasing and grateful to us, would we not
do it? And shall not the eternal blessedness which God, who is as faithful as
able to perform, has promised, be of like power and force with us? Nay, shall
it not be of far greater force proportionable to the quality of the Reward?
When all that we can do is but very little and utterly unworthy to be compared
with this glorious Reward, is it possible we should do less than we can, for
the obtaining of it, if we consideratively and believingly thought of it?

Know ye not (says the Apostle) that they which run in a race, run all, but
one receives the prize? so run that ye may obtain. And every man that striveth
for the mastery, is temperate in all things: Now they do it to obtain a
corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible, 1 Cor. ix. 24, 25. If they in the
Isthmian Games were so careful to observe an accurate diet for the preparing
and enabling them to those exercises; if they were temperate and continent in
all things, denying themselves in their sensitive desires; if they were willing
to weary and spend themselves in the race, to endure blows and wounds in their
combat; and thought no diligence, no labor, no pains nor hazards too great for
but a flowery or leafy, a fading and corruptible Crown, a short and perishing
Reward; would not Christians much more run their race with patience, fight the
good fight of faith, endure hardship, deny themselves and their fleshly
desires, while an exceeding and eternal weight of Glory is in their eye? If the
men of this world shall think no pains too great for uncertain riches, and
which, while they enjoy them, are imbittered with many fears and anxious cares;
would not the lively hope of eternal life, and a treasure in Heaven, which
neither the moth can eat, nor rust corrupt, nor thieves steal, engage us to
greater labors and self-denials? Would it not more enravish our hearts, more
strongly affect us, and make us more intent, earnest and industrious? Surely it
would.

Awake, awake then, O thou delicate and lazy Christian! rouse up thy self, and
stir up the gift of God in thee: Go up to Mount Nebo, and take a fair view of
Canaan, that pleasant and glorious Land: See what a goodly Heritage is reserved
for theee, and how great that goodness is which God has laid (or (...) Psalm
xxxi. 10.
stored) up for them that fear him Eye the fullness of the Reward: Keep it in
thy mind, believe it with thine heart, and then how cheerfully will thou travel
through the Wilderness to Canaan before thee. Yea, this will make the very
Wilderness a little Canaan, or Land of rest and delight to thee; it will make
it a little Eden, and Garden of the Lord. Nor will thou then grudge at it, if
God shall prove and humble thee by a long journey in the Wilderness, to know
what is in thine heart, Deuteronomy. viii.
(as it is said of Israel in the figure and letter) whether there be in thee an
obedient will, a resigned, patient, submissive temper as to his commands and
disposals. Thou will not be difficultly persuaded to believe that Canaan will
make an abundant recompense for all thy travels and wearisome labors. And if
in the mean while God feeds thee with the bread of heaven, sustains thee with
Manna in the Wilderness, art thou not well dealt with and kindly treated by
him? Hereafter to feed with Angels; to sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
in the Kingdom of Heaven, and here to be provided for with Angels food (as
Manna is called) to the full: To have joy unspeakable and glorious, an eternity
of pleasures hereafter, and with all peace which passes all understanding
here; inward pleasures and delicious satisfactions from reflections upon the
doing of thy duty; the peaceable fruit of righteousness, which thy sowing to
the Spirit will yield thee, in this life: To be crowned with Glory in Heaven,
and on Earth to be crowned with loving kindness and tender mercies: These
fore-tastes of happiness and earnests of the great Reward, these aureolae, and
little Coronets for the present, and the assurance of a massy Crown, a weight
of glory, in the other life, methinks should be of force to endear obedience,
and greatly to sweeten patience to thee; to remove all apprehension of
difficulty and harshness in what God will have thee either do or suffer.

If there be any Generosity in thee, thou can not but be very angry with, and
condemn, thy self, whenever thou feel any secret grudging and repining at
what God would have thee undertake, seeing he has proposed such a Reward to
animate thee to it.

If there were any Ingenuity in thee, thou could not choose but blush and be
ashamed at that little thou either suffer or do for the Kingdom of God.

Thy Obedience is due to his Commands, and thy submission, to his wise,
righteous, and good will, though there were no future Reward for thee: But will
God bestow on thy Obedience and thy Patience (the two parts of
Self-Resignation) so glorious a reward? Will he reward an obedience for a short
time, and that far short of perfection too, and a momentary suffering of
affliction, with an eternity of bliss, with a glory so transcendently and
astonishingly great?

And is this great Reward so near? this present life is but short, thou have
but a few days to continue here, there is but a step between thee and eternal
life: There is between this and the other world the Vale of the shadow of
death, a darksome passage, but a very short one, and thou shall enter upon
possessing the reward of the inheritance; which at the glorious appearance of
Jesus Christ shall be grown up to its full proportion.

Can thou seriously consider these things, and think any thing too dear and
precious, which God would have thee part with, and deny thy self in; or call
any thing grievous, which he either commands or tries thy Resignation to his
Will by?

The End.
Books Printed for, and sold by Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-head in Saint
Paul's Churchyard.
H. Mori Opera Theologica, Folio. Price 1 l. 10 s. 0 d. Dr. More's Reply to a
late Answer to his Antidote against Idolatry, with the Appendix, Octavo. Price
4 s. Spencer dissertatio de Vrim and Thummim, Octavo. Price 3 s. 6 d. Frederici
Lossi Observationes Medici, Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d. Epigrammata Juvenilia in
quatuor parts divisa, Encomia, Seria, Satyras and Iocosa, per Guilielmum
Speed. Price bound 9 d. Dr. Smyth's unjust man's doom: as examined by the
several kinds of Justice, and their obligation with a particular representation
of Injustice, and danger of partial Conformity, Octavo. Price 1 s. Dr. Smyth's
two Sermons at the Assizes in Suffolk, Octavo. Price 1 s. Mr. Hallywell's
Discourse of the Excellency of Christianity, Octavo. Price 6 d. -- Account of
Familism, as it is revived, and propagated by the Quakers, Octavo. Price 1 s.
Some Opinions of Mr. Hobbes considered in a second Dialogue between Philantus
and Timothy, Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d. Breerwood's Enquiries into the Diversities
of Languages, Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d. A Stop to the Course of Separation, or
the Separation of the new Separatists condemned, etc. Octavo. Price 1 s.
Libertas Ecclesiastica, by William Falkner, Octavo. Price 5 s. The Mystery of
Iniquity unfolded, or the false Apostles and the Authors of Popery compared, in
their Secular Design, and means of accomplishing it, by corrupting the
Christian Religion, under pretense of promoting it, Octavo. Price 1 s. Mr.
Sherlock's Discourse of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and our Union and
Communion with him, etc. Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d. Mr. Sherlock's Defense, and
Continuation of the Discourse concerning the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and our
Union and Communion with him, with a particular respect to the Doctrine of the
Church of England, and the Charge of Socinianism and Pelagianism, Octavo. Price
5 s. Dr. Webster's History of Metals, wherein is declared the signs of Ores and
Minerals both before and after digging, etc. Quarto. Price 5 s.

