Charitas Evangelica.

A DISCOURSE OF Christian Love.

BY The late Pious and Learned JOHN WORTHINGTON, D. D.

Published by the Author's Son.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's ChurchYard, 1691.

Imprimatur.

October 20. 1690.

Z. Isham, R. P. D. Henrico

Episc. Land. a sacris.

THE PREFACE.
IT would be an unnecessary trouble, for me to endeavor, by a long and
elaborate Preface, to evince the Usefulness of the Author's Subject; seeing it
is both apparently most Seasonable, and also confessedly of the greatest
Importance.

But since the Discourse is Posthumous, I must not forbear to give some account
thereof; it requiring that in regard to the Author, which is the common and
indeed always a just and becoming Civilty to the Reader.

In short, What I here publish, are the Remains of several Sermons, which he
preached upon one Text; but where, I cannot positively affirm. Most probably
they were some of his First Lectures at Hackney: And this I conclude from one
of them, which bears Date 1670. the Year in which He was chosen Lecturer there;
where, in the following Year, He Died.

Had the Author in his lifetime designed these Papers for the Public, it is
not to be doubted, but they would have received some further Polishing, as well
as Enlargements; and have come into the World with more Advantages.

What he could have made them, is well known to those who are acquainted with
his Labors, in the Revising and preparing of Mr. Mede's and Mr. Smith's Works
for the Press; as also, with his not to be unmentioned Edition of Thomas a
Kempis.

But I would not lessen the Esteem of the following Discourse: Of which, this I
may say (without breach of Filial Modesty) and only this I shall add, That
whosoever peruses it with a becoming Candor, cannot but acknowledge it, if not
Worthy of the Author, at least not Unworthy of the Public View.

LONDON, October. 13. 1690. John Worthington.

THE HEADS OF THE Following Discourse.
CHAP. I. THE Rule and Measure of Christian Love Page 1 CHAP. II. The
Universality of Christian Love 15 CHAP. III. The Purity of Christian Love 55
A DISCOURSE OF Christian Love. THE INTRODUCTION.
THAT we may more fully apprehend the Doctrine of Christian Love (a Duty so
frequently, so continuedly inculcated in the New Testament) it will be fit to
consider the Characters or Qualifications of the true Christian Love wherein we
are to walk. And to this purpose, what lies more dispersedly in several places
of Scripture, which may bestlead us into the true and full notion of this so
lovely a Grace, I shall collect and bring into your view; both to the clearing
of the Truth it self, and for the illustrating by the way several expressions
in Scripture.

CHAP. 1. THE RULE and MEASURE OF Christian Love.
FIRST, It is to be (...) Fervent Love, or Charity, 1 Pet. 4. 8. Charitas
intensa (as Beza renders it) an intense Love: Above all things have fervent
Charity, or Love, among your selves: And 1 Pet. 1. 22. See that ye love one
another (...) fervently; earnestly, as the Greek Word is used when joined with
Prayer (...) Acts 12. 5. and (...) Luke 22. 44. And crying unto God, (...)
mightily (fortitudine, Vulg. Lat.) is rendered by the LXX. (...)

The (...) is not therefore a slight, formal, weak, cold affection, but an
earnest fervent, intense, a great and vehement Love. The Coals of this Love
must be as Coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame, Cant. 8. 6. It must
be a Love raised up to a great degree of dearness and affectionateness, even to
a kind of (...) Hence that in Romans 12. (a Chapter enricht with excellent
Precepts) ver. 10. Be ye (...) kindly affectioned to one another. The Greek
word (...) implies vehementem and genuinum amandi affectum, a strong affection
of Love, such as is reciprocal between Parents and Children, etc. such as is
betwixt those of the nearest Relation.

HOW Fervent, how Dear this Love ought to be, He who was Love Incarnate (the
Wisdom of God, and the great token of his Love) our Blessed Savior has shown
us in a few words, but so fully expressive, as none can be better, in that
Royal Law (as S. James calls it, chapter 2. 8.) Thou shall love thy Neighbor as
thy self. In this one Commandment are comprehended the Six Commandments of the
Second Table, Matthew. 22. 39. containing our Duty to our Neighbor, that is
another, every other Man: For by Neighbor is not meant only (as we commonly
use the word) one that dwells near us: But according to the Style of the
Scripture, Neighbor signifies another, (...) (says Isiodore Pelusiote Lib. 4.
Ep. 123.) not him only that is near us in place or habitation, but any one of
the same common stock with us, partaker of the same nature, all men, all of our
kind; especially (...) such a one as is in want, and needs our Love in
relieving him. Thus in Romans 13. 9. (...) is in Ver. 8. (...) And in the Old
Test. (...) Neighbor, sometimes signifies no more than another. Genesis 11. 3.
Prove. 18. 17. Exodus 21. 18.

Of the same import and sense is that other Excellent Rule of Christ, delivered
in his Sermon on the Mount, Matthew. 7. 12. All things what soever ye would that
men should do unto you, do ye even so to them; or as it is in Luke 6. 31. As ye
would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise.

TO the same sense is that Rule delivered in a Negative style, Quod tibi fieri
non vis, alteri ne feceris. And concerning this, Lampridius the Historian, in
the Life of that Roman Emperor Alexander Severus, reports, That that Excellent
Emperor (who flourished 206 years after Christ) was so much in love with it,
Quam sententiam usque adeo dilexit, ut and in palatio and publicis operibus
inscribi juberet, he caused it to be writ upon the Walls of his Palace and
public Buildings (as Sentences of Scripture are written on our Church Walls).
And though he was an Heathen, yet he was better affected toward Christians for
this Rule and Precept of their Masters, and showed them favor. And as he loved
this Rule (which is Radix Justitiae and omne fundamentum aequitatis, as
Lactantius speaks) so he practiced it: For when there was cause to inflict
punishment upon any for acts of Injustice and Injury to others, he ordered that
the Officer should thus admonish the party of his unjust Carriage, and proclaim
aloud this Dicate of Conscience, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris:
And in case, the Army being on their march, a person of Quality had offended in
doing any hurt to the field or possessions of another, and his dignity excused
him from such corporal punishments and disgraces which the inferior sort had
inflicted on them, yet the Emperor would vehemen'ly reprove him with this,
Visne in agro tuo fieri, quod alteri facis? Would thou have that done to thy
own Field and Possession, which thou do to another? And such a reproof and
check as this must needs affect and forcibly strike the Conscience of the
guilty offender, espe c^ally when it comes from the lips of a Person of
integrity and exemplary worth. And such a one was this Emperor, as the same
Historian reports of him, Dies nunquam translit quin aliquid man suetum,
civil, pium faceret, Not a day past him, but he expressed the benignity and
the integrity of his Spirit in some acts of goodness, kindness and equity, and
in acts of exact justice; and therefore he is by the best Interpreters of the
Apocalypse fitly supposed to be meant by the Rider of the black horse (Rev. 6.
6.) with the pair of balances in his hand.

BUT to return from this digression, to that forementioned Rule and Measure of
the Love which we are to express to our Neighbor, Thou shall love thy
neighbor ( i. e. another, every other) as thy self; or, As ye would that men
should do to you, do ye also to them: None can pretend that the Rule is obscure
and intricate, hard to understand, though it be through Men's own fault hard to
practice.

For every one may know, without much study and beating his brains, what it is
to love himself. No man ever hated his own flesh (says the Apostle.) No man is
coldly or slightly affected toward himself. No, The Love wherewith a man loves
himself, is a servent, intense Love: And if this must be the Rule and Measure
of thy Love to thy Neighbor (for thou must love him as thy self) then surely
the Love wherein Christians are to walk, is not to be a cold, remiss, slight,
and formal Love, but earnest, intense and ardent.

To prevent and obviate any cavils or mistakes about this Love of thy self,
which is to be the Rule and Measure of thy loving thy Neighbor; and for a
further explaining of those two forementioned Precepts of Christ, we are to
consider,

First, That here is meant a regular Love of our selves; not an inordinate,
vicious Self-love; not a love that breaks or transgresses the bounds of
righteousness. No man must do an unjust or unlawful act in his own behalf, or
for his own advantage; nor for the interest or advantage of another: For such a
Love as this, is not (as the Apostle speaks of the right Love, Romans 13.) (...)
the fulfilling of the Law, but the transgressing thereof.

If the thing be unlawful or forbidden by God, which thou would have others
do to thee, thou must not do the same to them: Which yet is the practice of
those that style themselves Good-Fellows and are Brethren in iniquity; all that
entangle others, or strengthen one another in their sins which they have chosen.

Thou must therefore do that to another, which thou would have done to thee,
that is, which thou may rightly and lawfully will; that which is agreeable to
the Holy Scripture, and Right Reason, to the light of Nature shining in thy
Conscience, and shining with a greater luster in the Divinely-inspired
Scripture: And so that thy Love be regulated by a right Judgment, by purified
Reason, so it be agreeable to the Rule of Righteousness, let the Love of thy
Self, and of thy Neighbor, be as Intense and Fervent as it can; so that the
Spirit of Love be accompanied with the spirit of a sound mind, to borrow those
words of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.

Secondly, That Evil which thou would not have done to thy self, thou must
not do, or wish, or contrive to be done to another. Thou must not do that to
another which is unjust, and would seem so to thee, if thou were that other.

And if thou have been that other, and therefore by experience know more
feelingly what it is to be evil dealt with, and unworthily used by others;
thou, even thou especially should not deal so with others: For if they did
evil therein, thou art not to practice the like. What was evil and unjust in
them, when done to thee, will be also evil in thee, if thou do the like to
them.

Do not therefore render evil for evil, or railing for railing, as S. Peter
speaks (1 Ep. Chapter 3.); who also tells us (in Chapter 2.) that Christ, our Pattern
as well as our Propitiation, did not so: He, when he was reviled, reviled not
again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself, and his
cause, to him that judges righteously.

Do not return slander for slander, wrong for wrong, or any the like for the
satisfying of a revengeful humor: Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says
the Lord, Romans 12. Leave that therefore to God, and to his Vicegerents.

There is a Rule which many walk by [ Do as thou have been done to: or, What
others do to you, do ye the same to them likewise] which they do not so much
mean and practice in that better sense, wherein only it is allowable, viz. in
doing good to others, in rendering good for good, in a way of Gratitude, as one
good turn asks another; there is ingenuity and justice in this: But they
generally understand and practice it in returning, or doing evil for evil.

But there is a vast difference between this Rule, Do as thou has been done to,
and our Savior's Rule, Do as thou would be done to: Tho'they differ but
little in words (in a word or two) yet they are as distant as Heaven and Hell,
as Christ and Belial.

Do as thou have been done to: or, What others do to you, do ye the same to
them likewise: This is the Devil's Maxim; it is a branch of that Wisdom, which
(as S. James speaks, Chapter 3.) descends not from above, but is earthly and
devilish, such as the Devil does insuse into the minds of men.

But, Do as thou would be done to: or, What ye would others should do to you,
do ye the same to them likewise: This is our Savior Christ's Rule; it is the
Royal Law of him who is King; its a branch of that Wisdom which is from above
(from Heaven) which is peaceable, gentle, full of mercy and good fruits, (as S.
James speaks in the same Chapter.)

Thirdly, Thou must make thy Neighbor's, or another's, condition thine own;
thou must look upon his Concernments, his Case and Circumstances, as if they
were thine own: And then, that pity, that counsel, that help, that relief and
comfort which thou would expect or wish for from others, if thou were in
straits and difficulties, and uncomfortable circumstances; the like must thou
now afford to them in such hardships.

This is that true (...) Benignity, Kindness and Goodness of disposition and
deportment, to which our Religion does exhort and oblige us. And Phavorinus
does very pertinently describe it, when he says, it imports (...) such a
disposition and temper of mind as makes a Man to look upon the case and
circumstances of another as his own. And then what he would desire or endeavor
for himself, the like will he desire and do for another, if he loves his
Neighbor as himself, with as unfeigned and Fervent a Love as he loves himself.

And here it may be fit to remember that Wise Saying of the Son of Syrach,
which contains a great deal of sense in a few words, Ecclus. 31. 15. Judge of
thy Neighbor by thy self. That which thou judge unworthy, and unbecoming,
yea and injurious in reference to thy Self; judge the same of it, if done to
thy Neighbor in the like circumstances: And that kindness, those Civilities,
that fair respect, that which thou would judge fit and decent in thy own
behalf; judge the same in behalf of thy Neighbor in the like Capacities.

I may also superadd that wholesome and short counsel which Tobias had from his
Father (Tob. 4. 15.) Do that to no man which thou hate.

Fourthly, But to rise higher yet, and to prevent an Exception against this
Rule and Measure of the Love of our Neighbor, ladd (for a further explaining
of it, this, which is to be observed) That which thou would should be done to
thee, if thou were of such a Rank and Condition, if thou were in such a place,
or (to look more inward) if thou were so qualified and accomplished, do thou
the same to thy Neighbor, to any other, of such a rank and condition, of such
qualifications and accomplishments.

And if thy Neighbor, if another be of an higher rank, degree and condition;
or if he be more excellently qualified, and more worthily accomplished;
particularly, if he partake more of God, of true Holiness which is the fairest
Image and resemblance of God, and consequently has more real Divine worth in
him; Thou art then to judge that he is to be loved and esteemed (not only as
thy self, or equally with thy self, as thou art for the present, but) above thy
self, viz. whilst thou art not such.

And yet still the Rule holds good, still this is to love him as thy self,
(...) (though above thy self as thou art now) this is to love him as thou thy
self would judge thou were to be loved, esteemed and regarded, if thou were
in his estate, if thou were such as he is.

Fifthly and Lastly, There is yet an higher pitch and degree of Love, which at
some time, and in some cases, is due from thee to thy Neighbor or
Fellow-Christian; whom thou art to love, not only as thy self, but more then,
or above, thy self, though he be not superior or above thee in those respects
mentioned in the last particular: 1 John 3. 16. Christ laid down his life for
us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.

Here is Love raised up to the greatest Fervency, to the highest degree
possible; for (as our Savior Christ told his Disciples, Joh. 15.) Greater love
has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.

Now the Rule and Measure of this Love, Love in its utmost height, and that
which obliges a Christian to this Love, is the Love of Christ manifested in
laying down his Life for us. As in the former Particulars the Rule and Measure
of thy Love to thy Neighbor was thy own Love, thy loving thy self; thou wast
to love him as thy self: So the Rule and Measure of this highest degree of
Love, is the Love of Christ to thee; Thou must love a Christian as Christ loved
thee.

Thus he Commands, Jo. 15. 12. This is my Commandment, that ye love one
another, (...), as I have loved you: How Is that? In laying down his life for
them, as appears by the following words.

As I have loved you.] These words carry in them the greatest force and reason,
the greatest obligation to this degree of Love, and make it a duty full of
equity. Nothing can sound so high, nothing can have such an obliging Virtue as
this of Christ, [ As I have loved you.] If we consider, either,

1. The excellency of the person of Christ, who this I is [ as I have loved
you]. He that spoke this, and thus loved us, was Jesus Christ, the brightness
of God's glory and the express image of his person; God manifest in the flesh,
the Lord of life and glory, the Sovereign of Men and Angels, Messiah the
Prince, the Lord of all. And if he loved us at this rate, so as to lay down his
Life for us; He that was so far exalted above, not Men only, but Angels; He the
Head of all Principality and Power, higher then Thrones and Dominions, and any
of the Angelick Orders: Then should a Christian thus love his
Fellow Christians, those of the same mould, and make with himself, in laying
down (if need be) his Life for them.

2. Or if we consider the vileness and unworthiness of those for whom Christ
did thus much. If he the Prince, and only Son of God, laid down his Life for us
who were Enemies (Romans 5.) Rebels against Heaven, Enemies to the Crown and
Dignity of his Father, the King of Heaven and Earth: Should not a Christian
then do as much for his Friends, his Brethren, born of God; He and they having
one God for their Father, one Christ for their Redeemer and Head, who paid as
dear a price and ransom for them as for thee, and who owns them as much for his
living Members as thee; partakers of the same precious Faith with himself (2
Pet. 1.) and therefore as valuable and dear in God's sight as he is; nay it may
be more, if they be more like to God in eminent degrees of Holiness, and if the
continuance of their Life, and being in the World, be more considerable they
being fitted to be more useful in the World.

3. Or if we consider the infinite advantages, the richest benefits and best of
blessings, which came and redounded to us by the Love and Death of Christ: As
Christ has done and suffered so much for us, even to the laying down of his
Life for us, and pouring out his Life to Death, even to the Death of the Cross
(a Death of shame and pain) amidst the contradictions, and derisions of his
insulting Enemies If he has done so much for us, when the case of our Souls so
much needed it; more than can be done, by any, or all the Men in the World;
then ought we (it is a reasonable service, an equitable duty) to lay down our
lives for the brethren, if the necessity of their case so require it, no other
means appearing; and if such a considerable good may thereby come to them, or
others, or to the furtherance of the Faith or Gospel, as may justly call for
this highest degree and demonstration of Love.

Nor have there wanted Instances of this among the noble Army of Martyrs, whose
Love was as strong as Death.

A fair Instance of this was S. Paul, who tells the Thessalonians (in 1 Ep. 2.
8.) That he had such an affectionate desire or love for them, and that they
were so dear to him, that he was willing to impart to them not only the Gospel
of God, but also his own Soul or Life. And yet more affectionate is that which
he writes to the Philippians (chapter 2. 17.) telling them, That it would be matter
of greatest joy to him, if it should so fall out that he should be offered upon
the sacrifice and service of their faith.

And though the Apostle S. John, whose words these are; [ Because Christ laid
down his life for us, therefore ought we to lay down our lives for the
brethren.] He of all the Apostles is said by Ecclefiastical Historians, alone
not to have laid down his life by Martyrdom, but quietly and in a good old age
to have died at Ephesus: Yet he was in his Mind prepared to have suffered
Martyrdom; which he had done; had he not been miraculously preserved by God
when he was cast into the Vessel of hot scalding Oil, from whence coming forth
unhurt, (as the three Children out of the fiery Furnace) he was by Domitian
banished into the Isle of Patmos, for the word of God, and testimony of Jesus
Christ: And he calls himself in his Epistle to the Seven Asiatick Churches,
their brother and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and putience of
Jesus Christ, Rev. 1. 9. The full purpose and noble resolution of his Mind was
for the utmost Sufferings, even unto Death.

And the same Spirit of Love, Love ready to express it self in this highest
Degree that is possible, lived and continued in the first and best Christians.
It was so conspicuous in Tertullian's time, that the very Heathens took special
Notice, as Tertullian reports in his Apology; Vide (in(...)) ut invicem se
diligunt Christiani, and ut pro alicratro mori parati sunt. See (said the
Heathens) how the Christians love one another, how ready they are to lay down
their lives for each other. Till these days that Love (which afterward grew
cold) continued warm and vigorous; and by this loving one another, did all men
know that they were Christ's Disciples, as he had said, John 1. 3.

But I shall not insist any further upon this fifth Particular, viz. Love
raised up to the greatest height possible, in loving others more then thy self,
by laying down Life it self for them: The occasions of expressing Love in this
degree of Fervency, are more rare; God does not so frequently call to this, as
to that Fervency of Love expressed in the four foregoing Particulars of Loving
thy Neighbor as thy self.

And yet this fifth Particular, this loving another, in laying down thy life
for him, may be in some sort reduced to the loving him as thy self; i.e. as
thou would he should do for thee, in. case thy Case and Necessities did as
much require that he should lay down his life for thee, as his do that thou
should do this for him.

TO conclude then, seriously think on this Rule of our blessed Savior's, then
which nothing better could ever have been said, nothing more need to be said.

There is enough comprised in this short Rule of Love, as to instruct and
govern the Conscience of a Man in matters of Justice and Equity toward those
he has to deal with; so likewise to engage and raise him up to a Fervency and
excellent degree of Love.

There is more in these few words of Christ, that which is more fully
instructive to a Christian, than all that has been said in the Voluminous
Writings of the Schoolmen, Casuists, and other Writers; more than in the
Pandects, Code, and Institutes of the Civil Law.

In a word, Such is the excellency of this Law, or Rule of Christ, [ Whatsoever
things ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them.] That
immediately after it is said ( Matthew. 7.) For this is the Law and the Prophets:
Which two words signify the Old Testament, the whole Scripture then in being.
Moses and the Prophets are epitomized and contracted in this one Rule.

And as it is Moses and the Prophets, so it is also the Law of Nature, the Law
written upon the Hearts and Consciences of all Men, and written upon the Tables
of the Heart before the Law was written upon Tables of Stone in Mount Sinai.

And this Law of Love is more cleared, more improved, the obligation to it more
enforced and strengthened by many peculiar considerations which the Gospel
affords, in which respects it is a New Commandment, though a Commandment too
from the beginning; writ fairer, and in more legible and lasting Characters
then before, upon the Hearts of all true Christians.

CHAP. II. THE UNIVERSALITY OF Christian Love.
SECONDLY, It is to be a Love extended and enlarged to all; according to the
other sense and obvious notion of the Word (...) And so to love (...) is to
love Universally.

To this purpose the same Apostle S. Peter in his 2d Ep. Chapter 1. 7. in that rich
Chain of Christian Graces, Unto brotherly kindness, or Love (says he) add
Charity. In the former Epistle he does thrice commend Brotherly love, Chapter 1.
22. Chapter 2. 17. Chapter 3. 8. But Christians must not only be (...) but to the love
of the Brotherhood must be superadded Charity, an Universal Love, a Love more
enlarged, even to all men.

This Chain of Graces mentioned in ver 5, 6, 7. (whereof the first is Faith,
and the last Charity or Love) is not complete without such a Love. A Christian
is not clothed and adorned completely, has not on all that he should have,
except he be clothed with humility ( as S. Peter speaks, chapter 5.) or (as S.
Paul in Col. 3.) except he put on humbleness of mind, kindness, meekness,
long-suffering, and (...) above ( or over) all these put on Charity, or Love,
which is the bond of perfectness.

AND this Chain of Graces mentioned by S. Peter is a greater Ornament to the
inward Man, and is more valuable in the sight of God, then the richest Chain or
Necklace of Pearls; as the same Apostle in 1 Ep. Chapter 3. 4. speaks of the
Ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, that it is of great price, highly
valuable, and of as great account in the sight of God, as the bravery of
Jewels, rich and gay attire, and curious dressings, are in the eyes of any in
the World.

And accordingly this inward Ornament and Excellency of Moses his Soul, made
him to be (...) fair to God, as the phrase is used otherwise, in Acts 7.

Moses is said to be the meekest man upon earth, Number. 12. 3. and consequently
most removed from bitterness, anger, hatred, malice; all which are contrary to
Meekness and Charity, two Graces near akin, and inseparable Companions. And
God being highly pleased with him, conferred the greatest Honors and Favors
upon him, and dignified him above any under the Old Testament: He made choice
of him for the greatest and highest trusts. He was a Prophet and a Prince, the
first Ruler of his People in Israel for forty years, a King in Jeshurun, Deuteronomy.
33. and as God to Aaron ( Exodus 4. 17. and chapter 7. 1.) He was a kind of Mediator
between God and the People; an illustrious Type of Christ, the Great Mediator,
and the Great Prophet, of whom Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. 18. A Prophet shall the Lord
your God raise up unto you, like unto me. God spoke to him Face to Face, Mouth
to Mouth, as one Friend to another; took him into a more inward converse with
him upon the Mount; where he was enabled to fast forty days; which abstinence
was so far from impairing the amiable air of his Countenance, that his Face
shined with a glory and luster too bright for the People's Eyes to look upon,
till he put a Veil over his Face; as he afterward appeared in Glory on Mount
Tabor, he and Elias, who had the Favor and Honor (of all under the Old
Testament) to be and speak with Christ on the Mount.

Such Honor from God had Moses, who was eminent for Meekness, that inward
Ornament of his Soul; so precious in the sight of God, though mean in the
World's account: As also eminent for his Charity, his most Fervent and Heroic
Charity, that he had for all the People of Israel, offering himself to die for
them, to be blotted out of the Book of Life, Exodus 32.

God values a Christian by the inward Graces of the Soul, by what the Soul
wears and is adorned with; by Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Charity, Enlarged
Love, and all other Virtues which are the just accomplishment of a Christian.
God values not a Man by what is outward in him; not by what he wears; not by
the Titles by which he is called; not by his Relations, his Honors or Riches;
not by the Train and Retinue he has: These and the like add no inward real
Worth, no true Perfection to a Man.

BUT now to return. Besides this observable place in S. Peter, which contains
an enumeration of those Christian Graces which adorn and complete a Christian,
the last of which is Love or Charity, added to Brotherly Love, a Love extended
to all; It may not be amiss for the further clearing and enforcing of this
Duty, to recount some other passages of Scripture, whereby it may appear, that
a Christian is obliged to this Enlarged and Universal Love.

S. Paul presses the same Duty, whom S. Peter calls his beloved Brother. To
name some few places. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 12. The Lord make you to increase and abound
in love one toward another, and toward all men: not only in Brotherly love
(of which he tells them in this Epistle he needs not write to them) but in a
love extended to all men.

To which purpose is that other passage in this Epistle, Chapter 5. Ver. 14. Be
patient toward all men: And Ver. 15. See that none render evil for evil unto
any man: but ever follow that which is good, both among your selves, and to all
men.

The like in Titus 3. 2. Put them in mind to be gentle, showing all meekness
unto all men. And this in opposition to that in ver. 3. to living in malice and
envy, hateful and hating one another: and such we our selves also were
sometimes (says the Apostle) namely before we were converted to Christ, before
the power of the Gospel had changed us into a better temper of Spirit.

BUT what if men hate and curse us, and persecute us and despitefully use us,
must our Love be Enlarged to such Enemies? Yes, unto these, and surely then
unto all men; for none seem less to deserve Love then such. And therefore I
will only add one place of Scripture more, that in Matthew. 5. where Christians
(all that name the Name of Christ) are strictly enjoined, Ver. 44.

First, To love their Enemies: Here Is the affection of Love in the Heart,
diligite cord; in opposition to inward grudging, spite, rancour and malice.

Secondly, To bless them that Curse them: Here Is diligite ore, here is Love in
Word and Language; in opposition to the returning of railing for railing. To
bless them is to speak, either well or friendly to them, without bitter, or
reviling, or defaming words; or to speak well of them, so far forth as there is
any thing commendable or praiseworthy in them, or done by them.

Thirdly, And not only to bless, but to do good to them: Here Is diligite opere,
Love in deed and real acts. Some are mentioned in Rom, 12. 20. If thine enemy
hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink: which are put for all other
acts of Beneficence.

Fourthly To pray for them. Which fort of spiritual Beneficence the poorest
Christian may show to his Enemies, who may have left him little or nothing, and
so disabled him from doing good in an outward way; and if he had wherewithal to
do it, yet the Enemies might proudly scorn to receive it: But true Christians
whether poor or not poor, may pray for their Enemies in secret, and in this way
desire and endeavor to do them good against their wills, and they cannot avoid
this kind of Beneficence.

Thus our Lord who practiced what he preached, prayed for his most violent and
virulent Enemies, when he was upon the Cross; and they are the first words
which he spoke when he was lifted up on the Cross, in the midst of all the pain
and shame they put him to, (as S. Luke records it, Chap. 23. 34.) Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do. And that diverse were the better
for this Prayer of Christ, (which was an act of real Beneficence to them) may
appear by what is said, verse 48. That the people beholding the things which
were done, smote their breasts and returned: Which was the beginning of that
remorse which did more deeply affect them at S. Peter's Sermon, where three
thousand did not only smite their breasts, but were smitten to the heart,
pricked and wounded in their hearts unto repentance, Acts 2.

Thus also S. Stephen, the first Martyr that suffered for Christ, and who had
much of the Spirit of Christ in him, the Spirit of Benignity and Charity,
prayed for his Enemies at his death, when they expressed the most violent and
barbarous rudeness and cruelty, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And
that some also were better for his Prayer, there is no cause to doubt. That it
was for S. Paul, then Saul who had an hand in his death, appeared by his
Conversion soon after. Hence that Saying, Si Stephanus non or asset, Ecclesia
Paulum non habuisset. And to gain such a one as he was to the Church, was to
the gain of many. His famous Conversion is rolated in Acts 9. where it is also
recorded, That the Churches then had rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee,
and Samaria, and were edified and multiplied.

THUS I have particularly explained the several Expressions in Matthew. 5. where
is enjoined by our Savior Christ, a Love extended and enlarged to all, even to
Enemies, such as seem least to deserve it.

But then I must not omit the Reason of this Command so grievous to flesh and
blood: It is said, in verse 45. That ye may be the children of your father
which is in Heaven, for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and the good, and
sends Rain on the just and on the unjust: i. e. That ye may approve your
selves, both to others, and in your own Consciences, that ye are the Children
of God, born of him, having the same benign Nature, and this God-like affection
in you. Take it briefly thus.

First, God has his Enemies, those that hate him; and he is wronged and
injured by them, more than you are or can be by yours.

Secondly, God has done nothing at any time to provoke or hurt them; but you
may have done it more or less at sometimes to your Enemies. God may justly say,
as he does in Micah 6. 3. O my people, what have I done unto thee? and wherein
have I wearied thee? testify against me.

Thirdly, God has always done them good; It is of his mercies that they are
not consumed: His mercies are new every morning: And therefore he had greater
reason to be otherwise dealt with, having deserved infinitely better of them,
then you can of your Enemies.

Fourthly, God is their Lord and Maker; the infinitely perfect Being; they are
but vanity, and as nothing before him.

Fifthly, And yet God is neglected, hated, worse dealt with, and more
unworthily used; worse and more frequently and for a longer time wronged, then
you are by yours.

Sixthly, But though he is thus dealt with, and though he is sensible of all
the Wrongs done to him, yet he is patient and long-suffering; and this not per
force and of necessity, because he cannot help himself, (which may be your
case;) but when it is in his power to revenge himself every moment, and to
break his Enemies in pieces, as easily as a Potter may dash in pieces his
Vessel; yet he is strong and patient, and He is, (as it is Luke 6. 35.) kind to
the unthankful, and to the evil; kind to those that do not worthily resent his
kindnesses, but return evil for good, which is the greatest provocation that
may be among men.

And God has showed these riches of his goodness, forbearance, and
long-sufferings, upon a merciful design; that by heaping these coals of fire on
their heads, he may melt them, that this his Goodness might lead them to
Repentance; and that by Repentance they might be qualified for the receiving of
richer Blessings, and choicer Favors, Spiritual blessings in heavenly places
in Christ; that a better Sun, the Sun of righteousness might rise and shine
upon them; that showers of blessing (Ezekiel 34. 26.) the sweetest Influences of
Heaven, might descend upon them.

This is God's nature and disposition: And if ye are born from above, the
Children of God, then ye must be God-like, partakers of the Divine Nature,
Imitaters of God as dear Children, living Pictures of your heavenly Father in
such an enlarged Charity and Goodness.

Christians are obliged to a Love as large and unconfined as God's Love, who is
good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works, (Psalm. 145.) The
earth is full of the goodness and mercy of the Lord, (Psalm. 3. and Psalm. 119.)
The beams of our love of Benevolence are to shine upon all, as God's Sun shines
upon all. ( Sol non oritur uni aut alteri, sed omnibus in commune, says Pliny
in his Panegyric.) The love of our Beneficence (as his Rain) must shower down
upon the just and unjust.

And the Spirit that is otherwise affected, (that is not thus enlarged into
Desires and Endeavors of doing good to all) is not the true Christian Spirit
of Love, but is either ( 1st.) a kind of Jewish Spirit, or (2ly,) the Spirit of
the World: But the true Christian Spirit differs from both these. Not the
contracted and self-pleasing Spirit of the Pharisees, or of the Publicans and
Sinners of the World; but the more kindly and nobly-enlarged Spirit of Love,
(as it is in God and Christ) must be our Pattern, that so we may be the
Children of God.

And here it may be of great use to describe these two sorts of Spirit, from
which the right Christian Spirit must be at the greatest distance, more
enlarged than either of these two.

1. THE Jewish Spirit was a low, contracted, limited Spirit, confined only to
some few in respect of Mankind, to their fellow-Jews, those only of their own
Nation, or of their way; viz. the Proselytes who came over to their Religion,
as the Greek word (...) imports.

A thing so obvious, that Juvenal the Satyrist, (who lived not long after
Christ) took notice of this temper of their Spirit in his days, so devoid of
Civility and Charity. Non monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti,
Quaesitum ad fontem solos deducere verpos.
in Sat. 14.
To show the way to a Stranger that was at a loss; to show a Spring of Water to
a thirsty Traveller, that was not of their Religion; was but an easy and
ordinary Courtesy, a cheap Civility, that which any, the least sense of common
Humanity, should have made them willing to. And therefore to deny this to any,
except he were a Jew, whatsoever his Distress was for want of a little Drink, a
draught of cold Water; and though he knew not which way to turn in a strange
Country, how pressing soever his Occasions might be; was a barbarous and
monstrous piece of Inhumanity. And even such it was judged to be by the very
Heathens: And therefore as Tully relates, (in Offic. lib. 3.) The Athenians
were wont in their Devotions to curse aloud those (amongst the rest) that would
not monstrare viam. And yet the Jews were observed to deny to do this so easy,
and yet necessary, a kindness to any, but those of their own Nation or Way.

Nor did their Inhumanity stay here; but to give you a further taste of their
bitter Spirit, and out of their own Authors, (which by the way will make what
was said by Juvenal, though an Heathen, to be their practice, more credible:)
Maimonides (one of the most Eminent of the Jewish Writers) in Halach Rotsach,
affirms it to be their Duty, not to endeavor the saving of any Gentile from
the most imminent danger of Death; instancing in this, (...), viz. If a Gentile
had fallen into the Sea, and was in manifest danger of drowning, they were not
to lend him an helping hand to save him from drowning: And he adds, that in
Levit. 19. 16. Thou shall not stand against the blood of thy Neighbor; ( i. e.
Thou shall not stand by and see thy Neighbor perish, and withold thy help
from him.) This, say they, is to be done in behalf of a fellow-Jew; but as for
a Gentile, (...) He is not thy Neighbor, and so by this Law thou art not
obliged to save him, though in a case of most imminent danger. Which verifies
that which Tacitus ( Hist. 5.) observes of the Jews, Apud ipsos misericordia in
promptu, They were ready enough to show mercy and kindness to those of their
own Nation and Religion; but Adversus omnes alios hostile odium, They had a
deadly hatred against and abhorrence of all others: Which the Apostle S. Paul
does also observe of them, 1 These. 2. 15. That they were (...) contrary to all
men. And what he immediately adds, [ Forbidding us to speak unto the Gentiles,
hindering us from preaching Christ to them, that they might be saved, in
turning from their Idolatries and other sins] is the worst of their cruelty,
the very Gall of their bitterness.

So loath were they that the Gentiles should have any benefit by Messiah, whom
they would engross to their own Nation, that when S. Paul in his Apology came
to those words, That God bade him to depart from Jerusalem, (where he was then
praying in the Temple, Acts 22. 8.) For I will send thee unto the Gentiles;
it is said verse 22. That they gave him audience to this word: But then, as
being full of impatience and rancour, it is said, They lift up their voices, and
said, Away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that he should
live; and they cast off their clothes, and threw dust into the air; which were
expressions of their fury. And so when our Savior Christ had mentioned to the
Jews at Nazareth (in Luke 4.) God's particular favors and kindnesses to two
Gentiles; one to the Sidonian Widow of Sarepta, whose Barrel of Meal did not
waste, nor her Cruse of Oil fail, all the time that the Famine lasted, (whereas
no such thing was done for any of the Widows in Israel,) and whose Son also
Elias raised from the dead; the other Favor done to Naaman a Syrian, whose
Leprosy Elisha healed (whereas no such thing was then done for any of the
Lepers then in Israel) both which Stories are recorded in the first and second
Book of Kings; it is said (Ver. 28.) That all in the Synagogue when they heard
these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust him out of the
City, and led him to the brow of the hill, that they might cast him down
headlong; they that before (in Ver. 22.) are said to have wondered at the
gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth (the words seemed words of
Grace to them, while he preached on those Privileges in Isaiah 61. 1.) but now
are out of patience, and furiously design his ruin, when he speaks of any acts
of Grace and Favor which God showed to the Gentiles.

BY this (little of the much which I might observe) may appear, how distant the
Jewish Spirit was from that better Spirit and temper which Christ came to plant
in the World; how strait and contracted their Love was, determined only to
those of their Nation and Way; and how their Spirit (about our Savior's time)
was more rigid and strait then God ever commanded or allowed.

For though God forbad them of old to have any intimate familiarity with the
Nations that were near them, which were then Idolatrous and abominably Wicked,
lest they should be drawn to do after their Works, and depart from the true God
and his Service: Yet God did no where forbid them to express that Humanity,
those Civilities due to any Stranger by the Law of Nature, which is God's own
Law writ in the heart of every Man, Jew or Gentile. Much less did God command
them to be Inhumane and Barbarous to all that were not their Countrymen, to all
other Nations in the World, and when the case of any distressed Gentile did
need their merciful relief.

Nor did they learn this narrowness, this harshness and Cruelty of Spirit, from
either Abraham their father, Jo. 8. or from Moses, whose Disciples they gloried
to be, Jo. 9.

1. For as for Abraham, the Story of his Life in Genesis shows him to have been
a person of another Spirit, a better, a larger, and more benign Spirit. To
select only two passages in his Story; as that in Genesis 18. from Ver. 1. to the
9th.

The Text says, It was in the heat of the day that he was sitting at the door
of his Tent, as if he waited and longed for an opportunity to show kindness to
Travelers, at a time when their traveling might make them more faint, and
therefore more to need refreshment. He espies three Strangers (whom he knew not
then to be Angels) He runs to meet them; bows himself to the ground. according
to the Civil Custom of those Countries: And addressing himself to one of the
three, that was of the most genteel presence, and probably stood foremost, the
other two Angels standing behind (and this was Christ, whom in his Journey
toward Sodom he calls Jehovah, and the Judge of the whole earth, and before
whom he intercedes for Sodom, they two being left alone, the other two Angels
being gone toward Sodom, Ver. 22.) Abraham entreats him to do him the favor
to accept of a short Dinner ( If I have found favor in thy sight, etc. Ver.
3.) He makes have to get it provided for them. And though he calls it but (...)
a morsel of bread, Ver. 5. (or a bit of meat; Bread being put for all food) a
small Treat: Yet it was of the best things he had; Butter and milk, and a Calf
that was tender and good, Ver. 7. (which he himself ran to fetch from the Herd)
and bread or cakes of fine meal, Ver. 6. and of this there were used three
Measures, or Seahs, which made up our Bushel: And all this for the Dinner of
three Guests; which as it was of the best he had for Quality, so the Quantity
of his Provision showed his Liberality, as his (no mean Person) waiting upon
them at Table, did his Humility, Ver. 8. which did further verify the reality
of his Hearty Complement, when twice in the Story he calls himself their
Servant. This is a short Descant upon some parts of this Story; the whole (if
well considered) is full of most Hearty Kindness, a generous and cheerful
singleness of Heart, being the Character of those Ancient days, the Primitive
Ages.

The other passage in Genesis 23. (which I shall but mention) relating his
Carriage to the Hittites, or Sons of Heth (when he would purchase of them a
place for the Burial of his Dead) is full of Respect and Civility to them who
were uncircumcised Heathens: As they had showed themselves civil to him, so he
was not short of them in returning Civilities; and accordingly he testified his
Respect and Thankfulness to them, by Bowing himself before them, and that
twice, as is expressed in Genesis 23. And this Behavior of Abraham's (besides the
former instance) argued a better and larger Spirit, a better deportment toward
Strangers, and even to Heathens; a temper of mind far different from the temper
of the Jews in AfterAges: Though they called him Father, and gloried that they
were his Children, yet they did not the works of Abraham.

2. As for Moses, their Lawgiver; they learnt not their straitness and sowrness
of Spirit from him. For as he was a Man of the Meekest, the sweetest Spirit
upon Earth: So his Law did command kindness to be showed to Strangers, that
they should not vex and oppress them, because they were also Strangers in
Egypt, Exodus 22. 21. but on the contrary should love them, as God loves the
Stranger in giving him food and raiment, Deuteronomy. 10. 19. Yea it is said in Levit.
19. 34. The Stranger that dwells with you, thou shall love as thy self; as in
Ver. 18. and elsewhere, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Exodus 23. 9.
Thou shall not oppress a Stranger, for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing
ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.

The words are very moving and pathetical. Ye know how a Stranger's heart is
affected in a strange land; what the troubles, and sorrows of his Soul are;
what it is to be vexed and oppressed; by your being in Egypt, where your lives
were made bitter by reason of your hard service and bondage: And therefore
having had but lately such a smart and sensible knowledge of being hardly and
cruelly used, there is all the reason that ye should not vex and oppress
Strangers; but rather love them. And as you, when Strangers in that land, would
not that the Egyptians should have vexed and oppressed you: So neither should you
do the like evil to those that are Strangers in your land. It would be the
greater evil in you to do thus, because ye, by suffering evil in this kind, are
from experience and feeling, more convinced of the grossness of this evil.

BUT see how the Jews in our Savior's time, (yea before and after his time)
did evacuate these Laws of Moses, so full of Charity, and by what Arts they
would excuse themselves from a Love enlarged and extended to all.

1. By the (...) or Stranger, they would have to be understood only the
Stranger (...) that was become a Proselyte to their Religion, that was
Circumcised, and took upon him the Observance of all the Laws and Ordinances of
Moses: And this sort of Strangers or Proselytes, were called Proselytes within
the Covenant (...) and were (...) as the Native Jews. But as for the (...) the
Proselytes that sojourn d with them, (called in Scripture, the Stranger within
thy Gates) that came to dwell amongst them, and was not Circumcised, nor took
upon him the Observance of all the Ordinances of Moses's Law, but only the
Observation of the Seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah (the two first whereof
were to renounce Idolatry, and to worship the only true God): And especially
the Stranger that dwelt not within their Gates, but belonged. to other
Countries: They exclude both these Strangers from having any interest in that
Charity which those Laws required; and not only this latter, but the other
Stranger-Proselyte, were by them accounted (...) as Gentiles.

But though it be granted that the Stranger that was circumcised and a perfect
Proselyte, was to be regarded by them more especially; (as suppose Two were in
equal danger or distress; the one a Proselyte of Justice, or within the
Covenant; the other an uncircumcised Proselyte, or Proselyte of the Gate) yet
this was not to exclude the Proselyte of the Gate, or any other Stranger, that
needed their Relief and Charity: For these were of the same common stock and
root of Mankind, partaking of the same Humane Nature; and such to whom they
were bound by the Law of Nature to show Kindness and Mercy, as well as to do
Justice and Equity, as they themselves would expect and desire that the (...)
the Strangers of the Gate, or other Gentile-strangers, should do to them in the
like Circumstances.

To think and practice otherwise, was highly to dishonor the God of Nature; as
if he were not the God of Love and Peace, but of sour Severity and barbarous
Cruelty to all but to one Nation of the World, the Nation of the Jews; or as if
God (who is infinite Love, and Goodness, and Rectitude, and no Respecter of
persons, the Father of all Mankind) were so fond of the Jews, that they only
were to receive kindnesses of others, but to return none; but on the contrary
to return evil for good, to any but their own Countrymen.

2. Another way whereby the Jews did excuse themselves from a larger and more
extensive Love, was by straitning the Notion, (as of (...) a Stranger, so) of
(...) a Neighbor, whom the Law did command them to love, and by restraining it
to a fellow-Jew; which was more then they needed, or ought to have done. For
(not to repeat what I observed of a larger acception of this Word [ Neighbour]
in Scripture) although it be granted that a fellow-Jew, one born or made a Jew,
was in the first place meant by Neighbor in those places of the Law: Yet the
Word is not appropriate to such, but the Notion of Neighbor is to be enlarged,
to signify any other, though a Proselyte of the Gate, or a Gentile-Stranger;
especially if he either needed, or had showed Charity and Kindness. Yea,
suppose such a Stranger or Gentile, did show Kindness and Charity to a Jew in
Distress when yet those of his own Country and Religion did not: Such a one was
more that Jew's Neighbor, then any of those his Countrymen; and he was more
bound to love that Stranger (thus discharging the Office of a Neighbor) as
himself.

And in this sense our Savior Christ determined it, in the case of that Jew,
that lay wounded and half-dead, in the way from Jerusalem to Jericho; showing
(in Luke 10.) that the Samaritan who had mercy on him, and took care of him in
that sad condition, was his Neighbor; and more truly and really his Neighbor,
then the Priest and Levite, that only looked on him, and then passed by on the
other side, not ministering any charitable Relief to him in such a sad case;
though the Priest and Levite were his Countrymen, of his own Religion, and the
Samaritan a Stranger from the Commonwealth of Israel, yea, and much scorned and
hated by the Jews.

BUT if Moses's Laws did not so expressly and literally oblige them to Kindness
and Charity to Strangers, where did they oblige them to an eternal Hatred of
all Nations but their own? What pretense had they for hating of all other Men
as Enemies? that it seemed to go for a Precept with them, and so our Savior
quoted it as their sense, Matthew. 5. 43. Ye have heard that it has been said,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor, and hate thine Enemy. Where, by the way, our
Savior does not say, (...) to them of old time (i. e. your Ancestors the Jews)
as in Verse. 21, 27, 33. where Three of the Ten Commandments are mentioned,
which were God's express Precepts to them. This of hating Enemies was no where
said to them in the Law, but was their own sense, which they inferred from
this, because God commanded them to exercise Severity to Seven Nations,
(mentioned in Deuteronomy. 7. 1, 2.) Not to make a league with them, or show them
mercy.

But the weakness of this Inference may thus appear.

1. They were not commanded to be so severe to those of any other Nation in the
World besides: Nay, in Deuteronomy. 23. 7. they are Commanded not to abhor an Edomite,
nor an Egyptian; though the Edomites were Enemies to them, and had showed
themselves such in an high degree, Numb. 20. 18. and though the Egyptians were
Idolatrous, and therein different from them.

2. This Severity allowed against the seven Nations, was not unlimited; so as
they might be as severe to them as they would, and to be so for ever. For it is
more probable (from Josh. 11. 19.) that they were to proclaim peace to them, as
well as to other Cities and Nations (according to that in Deuteronomy. 20.) which, by
the way, shows, that Moses did not oblige them to an hostile hatred of all but
themselves; for to offer Peace is an expression of Good Will: And if they
accepted of Peace, then they were to become Tributaries unto them. And thus
Solomon did not destroy the remainders of those seven Nations in his Age, but
levied a Tribute of Bond-service upon them (1 Kings 9.) And because none of the
seven Nations, but the Gibeonites (that were part of the Hivites, one of those
seven Nations) made Peace with Israel (which implies Peace was offered them)
but hardened their hearts, and stood it out, and would not submit to Israel, to
their terms of Peace (one whereof was the relinquishing of their Idolatry, and
owning the only true God) therefore were they destroyed.

3. This Severity was allowed and appointed them, upon particular reasons, and
at that time, and for that Age: For these seven Nations were those that
possessed the Land of Canaan, which by their abominable wicked practices had so
provoked God, that he having shown much patience to them, and yet they
continuing and increasing in their wickedness; when the iniquity of the
Ammonites and other Nations was full (as it is Genesis 15.) when the measure of
their sins was filled up, he made use of the Israelites to execute his Sentence
of wrath against them, to destroy them, and possess that Land. And the
Israelites were to be more severe against them, least, if they were spared,
they might seduce them to Idolatry (a sin to which Israel was prone) and to do
after their abominations, as it is in Deuteronomy. 20. 18. and chapter 7. 4.

But this was no just ground for the Jews to express their Hatred and
Severities to all other Nations, and in all Ages; and that upon the account of
their differing from them in Religion, or their not being of their Way.

And here, observe the strange temper of the Jewish Spirit. Where God commands
them to love their Neighbor, to love and not to vex the stranger, they
straiten the Commandment of love to fewer then are meant, or the Law of nature
requires: But where God commands them to exercise hostility against, and not to
spare seven Nations, they extend this to more then are meant: And under the
pretense of their being obliged, to abhor, and to oppose seven Nations
expressed in Scripture, and for a particular reason, they think themselves
allowed to hate nine times seven Nations, 63 of the LXX Nations into which they
supposed the World to be divided, from that in Deuteronomy. 32. 8.

AND by this time you have a full Discovery of the Jewish Spirit; a labor of
some pains, which I might have willingly spared, and not insisted so long upon
this Argument; but that I thought it might be of good use (besides the
expiaining of several Scriptures by the way) to lay before you the Narrowness
and Straitness of the Jewish Spirit, and to engage you, as you would tender the
Honor of Christianity, to beware of this sour leaven of the Pharisees; as
also, that by setting before you the Unbecomingness and Unloveliness of this
temper of Mind, you might be the more enamored with, and endeavor after the
true Christian Spirit of Love, of a Love more enlarged, into all Kindnesses and
Charities to all.

II. THE Spirit of the World is a mean and strait Spirit, a poor contracted
Spirit.

The temper and fashion of the men of the World, the men of this earth, (as the
Psalmist calls them) is to love those that love them, Matthew. 5. 47. If ye love
them which love you, etc. And there is no harm in this, to render good for
good, to show kindness, and pay Love where it is owing (and it is owing to such
as have been friendly, and showed kindness to us.) But here is to be understood
(...) only, which is expressed in the following words.

If ye love them [Onely] which love you, is that which our Savior reproves and
forbids, as being an instance of that strait, and low, and contracted Spirit in
the men of the World; yea, in the vilest and worst of them; above which he
would raise the Spirit of Christians, all his Disciples: He would have their
Love enlarged and advanced above that pitch which the Men of the World (earthly
men, who only relish and mind earthly things) attain to.

Publicans, and Sinners, and Heathens, love at this rate; they can love those
that love them, those that have been kind to them; but as for others, those
whom they account Enemies, those that have provoked and ill-treated them; they
are so far from loving them, from doing any good to them, that they meditate
revenge, they bear ill will to them, they plot mischief against them, they
desire and contrive their hurt; and if they succeed herein, they rejoice at the
calamity they bring upon them. If others revile them, they revile again; if
others have injured them, they are impatient till they be even with them; and
(as it is said in Prove. 4. 16.) they sleep not except they have done mischief,
and their sleep is taken away unless they cause some to fall.

It is possible indeed; yea, usual, for Publicans and Sinners, to love in word
and in tongue; to pretend fair in looks or words, when as, at the same time,
enmity and war is in their hearts, rancour and malice boils within them; when
they flatter with their tongue, their inward part is very wickedness (as it is
Ps. 5. 9.) But this falseness and dissimulation in pretending Love and
Kindness, when nothing less is meant, is worse then open Hostility and
professed Enmity: It is but a cover and vizard to a more deeply meditated
revenge, and a certainly intended mischief; as it is also an Argument of a more
course and ignoble spirit, a more sneaking temper, to dissemble.

But our Blessed Savior (in whose spirit and mouth there was no guile) would
have his followers to love in deed and truth; to love Enemies so; to love them
heartily; to be as hearty and real in desiring and endeavoring their good, as
the others are in doing evil to them.

And thus to love not only Friends and Benefactors, those that have loved us,
or are our Brethren; but to love our Enemies, those that are Unthankful, and
render evil for good: And to love these, not only in word or appearance, out of
a design to do them a mischief more successfully; but to love them in truth and
reality; to overcome their evil with good: To love at such a rate as this, with
a love enlarged into true desires and endeavors for the good of others, those
that are contrary to us; this is to do more then Publicans and Sinners do; this
is a more Noble, Heroic, and God-like Love; a Love resembling the Divine Love,
far exalted above that low, and narrow, and selfish Spirit of the World, and
above that vulgar and ordinary sort of Love practiced by the men of the World.

TO return therefore to those excellent words of our Savior in Matthew. 5. 46.

If ye love them which love you] i. e. If ye love them only, If ye show
kindness, and express good will to those only who have obliged you by
kindnesses and favors,

What reward have ye?] (...) or as it is in Luke 6. (...) What thank have ye?
Both come to one; for (...) is the same with (...) here, and upon the like
occasion in Scripture.

Do not even Publicans the same?] Or as it is in Luke, for Sinners do also the
same. Publicans, Men of the worst note and Character; and therefore in
Scripture, Publicans and Sinners, Publicans and Harlots are joined together.

Christ puts it here by way of Question, What reward have ye? What Reward can
ye expect from God? He appeals to their own Consciences; they themselves could
not think that the Publicans (Men of so vile a Character) should have a Reward
from God: But if ye do but as they do, as they can do; What Reward can ye
expect from God for so doing? The very Publicans, the worst of Men, do as much
as this; they love those that love them: And if a Christian is to excel and
outdo the Scribes and Pharisees, who were deemed the strictest Sect; else no
reward, no entrance into God's Kingdom ( Ver. 20.) much more then is he to
outdo the Publicans and Sinners of the World.

TO the same purpose, and to engage Christians to a Love enlarged above the
Spirit of the World, is that which follows in Matthew. 5. 47. And if ye salute
((...)) your Brethren only; (Some Greek Copies have (...) your Friends only;)
(...) What do ye more then others? What extraordinary what excellent, or
eminent thing above others, do ye? Do not even the Publicans so? (Some Copies
read (...), Do not even the Heathens so?)

By Brethren are here meant, those of your Kindred, or Acquaintance, or those
of your own Country and Religion, Fellow-Jews; brethren and kinsmen according
to the flesh, as S. Paul calls them, Romans 9. 3. Or those which have obliged
you, done good to you, so in Luke 6. 33.

By Salute ((...), If ye Salute) is meant all outward expressions of affection,
as by Friendly embracing one another (which was the custom of those Eastern
Nations in their meeting) or by courteous Compellations and Friendly askings of
their health and welfare (so the Syriack here) and wishing well to them.
Salute it, in Matthew. 10. 12. is in Luke 10. 5. Say, Peace be to this house: And
so it is as much as If ye be Friendly to --; as our old Translation not unfitly
renders the sense, and in Luke 6. 33. If ye do good to --.

What do you more then others? Do not even Publicans so? Or as it is in Luke 6.
33. for Sinners also do even the same. And what (...) (to use the word in I
Pet. 2. 20.) What Honor, what Glory and Praise is it to do no more in this
kind then they? Publicans and Sinners do all this, they can return Civilities
and pay kindnesses to such as have been friendly and kind to them. This is no
such difficult thing; to love with such a strait and consined affection: It is
the common practice of Publicans, and Heathens, and Sinners of the World. This
is the way of Love wherein they walk.

BUT there is (...), a more excellent way (as the Apostle calls it, I Cor. 12.
ult.) And this more excellent way is the way of an higher and more enlarged
Charity; an excellent Description whereof we have in Chapter 13.

It becomes a Christian to do more then others here, as he expects to have more
then others hereafter; a full Reward. It becomes him to excel others in what is
commendable and praiseworthy, and to out-go them in somewhat they cannot reach
to: Otherwise he might have done what he does, and lived according to this
rate, had he never heard of Christ, nor been acquainted with the Gospel.

It seems the Life of Christ, (that fairest and highest Pattern and Copy of the
best Life) it seems the Precepts of Christ, (the best Rules of the best Life)
it seems the Eternal Reward, promised in the Gospel, which has more brought to
light Life and Immortality, then all the Philosophy in the World did: It seems
that these, and none of these, have had such a prevailing influence and power
over him, as to engage and excite him to do more then those others; to do that
which is eminent above others; and particularly in this duty of Enlarged Love.

For as for the Life of Christ: His Life (as his Spirit) was a Life of the most
Enlarged Benignity and Goodness. He has done all things well, say they of him,
( Mark 7. ult.) who at his diffusive goodness were astonished above measure,
(...) more then above measure. Jesus of Nazareth, who went about doing good,
(...) is the short Character S. Peter gives of him in his Sermon to Cornelius,
Acts 10. 38.

And for his Precepts and Rules of Love; of Love to Enemies, to those that hate
and persecute us; there were never any Precepts or Rules so full and strictly
pressing, as those given by Christ, the Great Lawgiver, Prophet and Teacher
sent from God: As never such a Reward, so great Reward, promised, and assured,
as the Reward of Eternal Life in the Gospel, which has brought to light Life
and Immortality.

To conclude: It becomes a Christian to be a living Testimony to this, That
Grace does overmatch Nature The Scripture speaks of the Power of Godliness, of
the mighty Spirit and power of Christianity: And is it indeed such a powerful
thing? Then it must sweeten the sour and harsh Spirit; rectify the crooked
disposition; cool the hot and passionate Spirit; ennoble the servile, and fix
the vain heart; and enlarge the strait and contracted Spirit to a Spirit of
Enlarged Love; Love to all, to Enemies; to more then Friends, and Brethren, or
those that love us.

BUT now to prevent all mistake, and to remove any scruple which may arise upon
what has been said of the Extensiveness and Enlargedness of that Love, which
is to be in Christians: We are to consider, that there is a Threefold Love,
which we are to deal forth agreeably to the respective Objects thereof.

1. Of Benevolence, or Good Will. 2. Of Beneficence, or Bounty. 3. Of
Complacence, Good-liking, or Well-pleasedness.
1. As for the Love of Benevolence, or Good Will, this is to be extended to all
men; of what rank and condition, or of what quality soever; though they be
never so unlike and contrary to us. All men whatsoever are the objects of this
Love, of Love under the manifestation of hearty Good Will, and inward Pity.

And of such Love and Compassion, and the Fruits thereof, Sinners have most
need, because they do not truly wish well to themselves, they do not pity and
love their own Souls; as on the contrary, of a good man it is said, He loves
his own Soul, and, Does good to his own Soul (as it is expressed in Prove. 19.
ver. 8. and Chapter 11. 17.)

The Sinners of this world, that relish and pursue the forbidden pleasures of
the Flesh, or the unjust gains and advantages of the World; those that mind
either filthy Lucre, or filthiness of Flesh or Spirit; that walk after their
own ungodly Lusts, walk in the ways of their own Hearts, a^nd in the sight of
their Eyes, committing Iniquity with greediness; and thus are busy to destroy
themselves (as if the Devil were not active enough, who goes about seeking whom
he may devour; but they will be active to help forward their own Destruction.)
Are not these to be bewailed, and pitied?

These (if any) should be lamented; and thou should testify thy Good Will
and Compassion to them in mourning over their souls; in discovering to them the
danger their souls are in; in seasonably reproving and admonishing them; in
affording them thy prayers, thy counsel, and best help for their good.

AND that which does most strictly oblige, and should powerfully excite us to
such a Charity toward the worst of men, is the consideration of Christ's
Practice, whose Example is to be transcribed by us.

For our Savior Christ manifested this Love of Benevolence and Good Will and
Pity toward sinful and unworthy Jerusalem, which was then designing to kill
him, and therein expressing its greatest hatred and enmity against him; as it
had Killed the other Prophets, and stoned those that were sent of God, ( Math.
23.) and so the City was become Macellum Prophetarum, and Civitas Sanguinum,
the City of bloods, as it is thrice called in Ezekiel.

And (which is another circumstance most remarkable) when he Rode in Triumph to
Jerusalem, such Hosanna's and Gratulations, such Respects and Honors being
then performed to him, the meek King of Zion, Prophesied of in Zach. 9. as were
never done to David or Solomon, or any the most magnificent King in Israel: In
the midst of all these triumphs, these Hosanna's and joyous Acclamations, his
Heart was melted into all Charity and Compassion to the unworthy and bloody
Jerusalem. So we read in Luke 19. 41. That when he was come near the City, as
soon as he beheld it, he wept over it. (And here it might have been said, as
the Jews said at his weeping upon the sight of Lazarus's Grave, Behold how he
loved it) saying ( ver. 42.) If thou had known, even thou, at least in this
thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace.

Never did a bleeding heart express its inward compassion in more pathetical
Language, in words more full of Pity and Charity. This form of words seems
abrupt, his Sighs and Tears supplied the room of other words, which should have
made the Sentence complete. And indeed, such abrupt forms of Speech are most
Pathetical, they are the becoming graces and elegancies of Sorrow: It Is the
proper Idiom of Grief, thus to express it self in half-Sentences, when the
vehemence of the inward Affection, or a flow of Tears will not suffer the
speaker to utter all.

He wept over Jerusalem, because of its Stupidity, and Blindness, and Hardness
of Heart; and because of the utter Destruction and Misery which would therefore
follow, about Forty Years after, at which time a strange Stupid hardness did
possess them, as Ananus one of their Priests complained, who was weary to live
(...) as Josephus relates.

Christ had for three Years spoken to the Jews by his Word and Miracles;
endeavored to gain them to the minding of the things of their Peace: And now
at this his last Visitation of them, he speaks to them by his Tears as well as
his Words, to try whether these would affect them whom it so nearly concerned.
If thou had known (or O that thou had known, or knew, as some render
(...)) at least in this thy day; though hitherto, thou have not known, but
neglected and rejected my Doctrine and Miracles, and the things of thy Peace;
yet if now, at least in this thy day, the day spoken of by Zachary, the day of
thy Visitation, and that in a way of Mercy and Favor. O that thou would
discern and believe to the securing of thy own good and welfare.

By this Love of Benevolence, Pity and Good Will, which Christ testified in so
remarkable an Instance to Jerusalem, he showed himself to be the express Image
of his Father, the God of Love, and who is Love it self: And the Example of
God, is a further Engagement to this sort of Enlarged Charity to all.

GOD wishes well, and bears a Good Will to the Souls of men. He is (...) the
truest Lover of Souls, and wishes better to us then we do to ourselves, or any
Friend to us. We have God's Oath and his affectionate Expostulation in Ezekiel.
33. 11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in (or, I desire not) the
death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn ye,
turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O House of Israel? Why are ye
so stupid, so hard of heart, as not to know and consider what concerns you so
nearly?

And if these words (and the like in Chapter 18. 32.) be meant of Temporal evil and
ruin; and God desires not, nor delights in that which is the lighter and less
considerable evil; much less does he desire, or delight in their Spiritual and
Eternal Ruin, and in their Sin, the proper cause thereof.

No, he discovers riches of Goodness, Long-suffering and Forbearance; and the
end of this is to lead us to Repentance. He speaks in a still voice to our
Hearts, by the gentle Solicitations of his Spirit: He speaks to our
Consciences in inward rebukes and checks for Sin: He speaks by his Providence,
his works of Judgment and Mercy: He speaks by his Word; and by the Ministers
thereof does beseech us to be reconciled to him, and so mind the things of our
peace. He, who has been injured and dishonored by us; He, who is Almighty,
and fears us not, if Enemies; He, who is All-sufficient, and needs us not, if
Friends; He seeks unto us, that we be at Peace with him, from whence no Benefit
will redound to Him, but to Us.

Thus we have a short View of God's Good Will, and of Christ's Charity. And O,
how should the same Free Charity and Good Will show forth it self in us to
others; to the Souls especially of others!

2. AS for the Love of Beneficence, this is also to be extended to all men.
It Is not enough to wish well. Bare Benevolence the Philosopher in his Ethics
calls (...), a lazy, vain and fruitless Friendship. As Faith without works is a
dead faith, a vain faith, being alone ( James 2.) So Love without agreeable
effects is a cold, dead and vain Love, being alone. To (...), Benevolence, then
must be added (...), Beneficence: And it will be so, where the inward Affection
is sincere and real. The same Greek word [(...)] Simplicity or Sincerity of
Affection, imports also Liberality and Bountifulness, as it is well translated
in 2 Cor. 9.

To Wish well, is Friendship in the root, Love in the Springhead: To Do well is
Friendship in the fruitful Branches, Love in the Streams. Our doing good
therefore, must spread as large as our wishing good; Both must be to all men.
This is fitly called Humanity, which is to extend as far as Mankind, all of
Human Race; though evil and unthankful; for God's Beneficence is as large.

(...), said the Philosopher, when he was reproved for giving to a bad man; I
consider not his manners (says he) but his needs; I give it to him as a man,
not as a bad man.

BUT here we are to consider, that this Love of Beneficence is not equally to
be distributed to all men. The Apostle who commends the Corinthians for their
liberal communicating unto the Saints, and to all men (2 Cor. 9. 13.) and who
exhorts the Galatians ( Chapter 6. 10.) to do good as they had opportunity, or
ability, to all men, yet adds a (...), especially unto them who are of the
household of Faith; Caeteris paribus to them in the first place, or rather then
to Heathens; to the believing Christians who are of Gods Family and Household;
the greater part of this Love is due to these.

And such a (...) or especially is observed by God in his Beneficence toward
men, who is therefore said (1 Timothy 4. 10.) to be the Savior of all men; (...),
especially of them that believe, or of the faithful, i. e. of Christians. God
by the care of his merciful Providence preserves all his Creatures, is the pre
server of man and beast (Ps. 36.) the Savior of all men, but especially (more
particularly) of Christians and Believers, those of his household; to save them
from, or support them under their pressures and troubles, when they labor, and
suffer reproach, (as in this Verse, (...), or (...), as some Greek Copies read
it) and when they hope in the Living God.

And as we are especially to do good to Christians, those of God's Family, to
testify a greater measure and degree of this Love of Beneficence to them then
to Heathens and Unbelievers, Cateris paribus: So amongst Christians, those that
do most answer that worthy name, that approve themselves most such in all those
Graces and Virtues which accomplish and adorn a Christian, they are to have the
greater share of our Love; as also those that have been instrumental to our
good.

Yea further as to those that are of God's household, so to those that are of
our own household, those that are our kindred and nearly related to us. If any
provide not for his own, (...), and especially for those of his own house, he
is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8.

SOME under the pretense of this place (which by the context appears, rather to
command the care of Children for their Parents, then Parents care in providing
for their Children; though that be also so be minded) think that they can never
exceed in thoughtfulness, or do too much in providing for theirs, that so they
may not be worse then Infidels: Whereas by this means they become, what they
would avoid, Infidels, and worse then Infidels, through their unbelief and
distrust of God's Providence and Blessing; while they are so sollicitous and
eager about the World, with all their might and art, to scrape still more of
the World, to leave them as wealthy as they can, and make them as great as they
can; by which means, they more hazard the eternal estate and concerns of their
Relations, who are tempted hereby, to live according to the course of a vain
and wicked world, tempted to pride and luxury, and the like sins, which not
seldom bring them to want and ruin here also. Whereas by a moderate care and
decent Provision for them, they might have better secured the welfare of their
Souls, and the continuance of their Houses. And besides, some part of such
great abundance, might have been reserved for, and employed upon, pious and
charitable uses and occasions (and so their Beneficence would have spread to
the Comfort of many, and they might have been as Fathers to the needy, as Job
says of himself.) And some part of such an Estate employed to a more Public
Good, would have been a means to secure that other proportion of Estate,
disposed to the more particularly related to them: And if it were so, there is
a greater ground of hope that God would bless it, and them that enjoy it.
Besides, a truer Greatness, a fairer Name, and greater Honor is procured by
such diffusive Charities, that respect the good of many: While they live they
are Loved and Honored by all, and when they are dead their name is had in
everlasting remembrance. It Is not Absalom's Pillar that he built, nor a stately
Mausolaeum, nor magnificent Palaces which men call after their own Names, nor
costly Tombs, nor pompous Epitaphs that shall secure the Memory of rich and
great men, or Eternize their Names so much, as the devoting of somewhat of
their Estates to the service of Religion (whereby the welfare of many Souls is
endeavored) or to other Public Uses; either for the comfortable being of
others that are Aged, or Sick, or Needy, (as in erecting, or better endowing
Hospitals, or Almshouses) or for the training up of those that are young, and
rendering them more fit to be useful in the World, (as in founding, or endowing
Schools and Colleges) the fruit of which Charities is likely to be for ever.

ONE thing more is to be added, that although this Love of Beneficence, is
Caeteris paribus (where circumstances are alike) first, and more especially and
in a greater measure to be extended to those of our own House, and are near us,
rather then to others that are more removed from us; to Christians, rather then
to Heathens and Infidels; and amongst Christians to those that are such in
reality, and in an eminent degree, rather then to Christians in name and
profession only; to good men rather then to the evil: Yet it may so fall out
that even to Vicious and Unworthy Persons this sort of Love is rather to be
extended; and that is upon the exigency of their present condition, if it be
sadly calamitous, and their wants are pressing above measure.

3. AS for the Third and Last sort of Love, the Love of Complacence,
Good-liking, and Well-pleasedness; This being the most precious sort of Love,
is not to be poured out so diffusively as that either of Benevolence or
Beneficence; it is not to spread out so large as either of them. We may wish
well to all men (even to those that are evil) but we may not delight or take
pleasure in all men; but only in such as are truly good, or at least are (...)
in a hopeful preparation for the Kingdom of God, and not far from it.

Thus did David, as he speaks, Psalm. 16. 3 -- to the Saints that are in the
earth (or upon the earth) to the excellent, in whom is all my delight. Where by
the way observe, that he calls the Saints or Good Men, (...) great men; the
word is rendered the Nobles in Judge. 15. 13. Nehem. 3. 5. Jer. 14. 3. It
signifies Illustrious and Magnificent and Glorious; Such are the Saints in
God's esteem, and in his, as partaking of the Holiness and Image of God, then
which nothing does more ennoble the Soul, and makes it more Honorable and
Glorious. In these Saints, good men, and therefore great men, the truly
excellent ones, was his delight, all his delight. I will not know a wicked
person (says he, Psalm. 101.) not know so as to approve and delight in; But I
am a companion (says he, Psalm. 119. 63.) of all them that fear thee and keep
thy precepts. With such he loved to associate himself, he delighted to converse
with them: And herein David's heart was after God's heart, The Lord takes
pleasure in them that fear him, Psalm. 147.

IT is true that our Savior Christ did converse (while he was upon earth) with
all sorts of men, with Jews, Samaritans, and Gentiles, with Publicans and
Sinners: Upon which score the Pharisees did twit him more then once, murmuring
at his going to the House of Levi or Matthew a Publican, when invited to Dinner
there, where there were also many Publicans and Sinners at Dinner. But this was
rather an High Praise and Virtue in Christ, then a thing to be reproved; and
showed the great Benignity of his Spirit, accompanied with a design of doing
them good: For where should a Surgeon or Physician be but among the diseased
and sick, where there are most that stand in need of their relief? Christ was
sent by God upon a merciful design into the world, as the Great Physician to
heal the World, to call Sinners to Repentance. The Pharisees were as sick and
diseased as others, but they thought themselves righteous, and whole, and not
to need this Physician. The Publicans and Sinners were made more sensible of
their danger, and their need of him: And he is as ready to cure them; and to
this end does freely converse with them; and if invited by them, or falling
into their company, he did not decline them; yea sometimes he would invite
himself, as he did to Zacheus's house.

Not that any man is hence to embolden himself to a free and inwardly familiar
and delightful frequent converse with Sinners; especially with obdurate and
hardened Sinners, settled in Sin, and scandalously Wicked. For as Christ was
rooted and grounded in the Love of God, and not to be shaken with any tentation
from the world; as he was of a perfectly healthful and strong (as well as pure)
Constitution of Soul, so that he was not in danger of any hurtful infection or
contagion from the worst company: So Christ conversed with Sinners, not out of
Delight and Complacence in such company, but out of Charity and Compassion in
order to their Cure, as the great and gracious Physician of Souls. And if thou will imitate him therein, thy conversing with the Sinners of the world must be
out of the same design of Spiritual Charity; in order to the winning of them to
Goodness and Virtue, or at least to the restraining and checking of their Sin:
It should be accompanied with the showing of thy dislike and detestation of
their wicked courses.

Otherwise there is to be no frequent and familiar and complacential converse
with such; especially when upon thy endeavor to reclaim them they appear
obdurate sinners, settled in their wickedness, and small hope appears of
working any Good upon them.

And though Christ's Love of Good Will was to all, yet his love of Complacence
and Good-liking was to his obedient Disciples, his spiritual kindred; according
to that passage in Matthew. 12. ult. He stretched forth his hand toward his
Disciples, and said, Behold my Mother and my Brethren; For whosoever shall do
the will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister,
and Mother.

AND thus S. Paul, though out of tender Good Will and Compassion to Souls, he
was willing to become all things unto all men (yet so as without Sin) that he
might by any means save some (2 Cor. 9. 21. and Chapter 10. ult.) Yet those who
were truly Saints, were his Joy and Crown, his dearly beloved and longed for,
or much desired) so he accounts the Saints at Philippi; whose Faith and
Conversation worthy of the Gospel, he remembers with joy and greatest
satisfaction, in his Epistle to them. Others had his Good Will, these his
Delight and Complacence; these he had in his heart, as he speaks, Chapter 1. 7.

There is to the same purpose a pathetick Expression of S. Paul concerning the
Believing Romans, (Chapter 15. 24.) I trust to see you in my journey toward Spain,
and to be brought on my way thither, if first I be somewhat filled with you,
(...) with your company. Somewhat filled, or in some sort (so the same words
(...) are rendered Ver. 15.) in some measure be filled, or have satisfied my
self in the pleasure of having some Communion with you. But the Syriack rendered
the Greck (...) by (...) which Tremelins thus renders, postquam quast odore
aromatum perfusus fuero in videndo vos. The Communion of Holy Souls, the
Spiritual Converse of such, how sweet and delightful, how aromatical, more then
a bundle of Spices; no sweet Odors so grateful, so refreshing, so delightful as
the Society of well-agreeing Souls!

THAT therefore which makes a person an Object most properly capable of this
Love of Complacence (the most precious sort of Love) is true and real Goodness,
the participation of the Divine Nature in Holy Souls, or Divine Beauty shining
out in the Spirit and Life of a Christian.

It may be Evidenced thus,

God most High, is the First Fair as the First Good, the First Beauty,
Excellency and Perfection: And consequently nothing can make a Creature more
Lovely, nothing can raise a Soul to more Excellency and Perfection, then the
Participation of God, the nearer a Creature comes to resemble God: There is
nothing Higher, nothing Better in a Soul, then the Image of God; and there is
nothing more precious and dear to God then resembling of him in Righteousness
and true Holiness. This is his Delight, and should be ours.

Righteousness and true Holiness (which is the most Excellent Participation and
Image of God) qualifies us for Converse with God, and Angels, and the Spirits
of just men made perfect, who would rejoice in us; as it qualifies us to be the
proper Objects of this Love of Complacence in Good Men. Without this, we cannot
be of the Household of God, nor Fellow-Citizens with the Saints: Without this,
we are not in a capacity for the Enjoyments and Delights of Heaven, we should
not know what to do in Heaven, how to behave ourselves there, how to consort
with the Citizens of the Jerusalem above.

CHAP. III. THE PURITY OF Christian Love.
THIRDLY, It is to be a Pure Love, Love out of a pure heart.

This is another Scripture-Character of that Love wherein Christians are to
walk. Love out of a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1. 5. And 1 Pet. 1. 22. See that ye love
one another with a pure heart ( or out of a pure heart, (...), so rendered, 1 Timothy 1. 5.)

Pure it must be,

1. To distinguish it from that gross, Sensual, Carnal Love, which is found
amongst those that are Companions in iniquity.

1. Whether it be in doing violence to others. Such a Love, and Friendship
amongst a knot of Thieves and murdering Robbers, Solomon does describe, Prove.
1. Come with us (say they) Cast in thy lot among us, let us all have one purse,
We shall find all precious substance, and fill our houses with spoil. Thus they
entice others to their Society, and their Sin (for Nemo facile solus peccat,
says S. Austin lib. 2. Confess. Cap. penult.) But such a Love as this tends to
the hurt and ruin of such Companions here and hereafter: And they lay wait for
their own blood, and lurk privily for their own lives ( i. e. they are active
to their own destruction) says Solomon, Ver. 18. even when they are designing
the destruction of others, as it is in Ver. 11. They say, Come with us, let us
lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause.

2. Or whether it be in running to the same excess of riot, with those whose
course of Life is a course of Luxury and Intemperance, Men that are mighty to
drink Wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink; for which these
Sensualists love and delight in one another.

But it is no true kindness to entice others to such a course of life as tends
(besides the wast of Estate, and of what is most precious, Time) to the ruin of
Health and Body; and to the woeful ruin of the Soul, if unrepented of, and
unforsaken.

3. Or whether it be in Chambering and Wantonness, lasciviousness, or the lust
of the flesh, which is an Impure Love, and particularly called Uncleanness.

AND this Impure Love (or rather Lust; for inordinate, impure and forbidden
Love is Lust) as it was amongst the Gentiles, who for their sins were by the
just judgment given up to vile affections ( Romans 1. (...) dishonorable
passions) so it was found amongst a vile sort of Christians, called by the
Ancients Gnostics, from their Pretense to greater Knowledge, but it was (...)
(as S. Paul calls it) a knowledge falsely so called; for it did not tend to
better them, but their principles did lead them to all Impurity, and to work
all uncleanness with greediness.

Such as these began betimes to dishonor the pure and undefiled Religion of
Christ, and to turn the grace of God into lasciviousness, as S. Jude speaks, in
whose Epistle they are called Spots in your Feasts of Charity. They came to the
Christian (...), or Love Feasts, but they were the repraoch and dishonor of
the Christian Profession. And in the 2 Epistle of S. Peter, chap. 2. they are
called Spots and Blemishes. They spoke indeed (as he says, ver. 18.) great
swelling words of vanity. (this was an instance of that sublime and unordinary
(...) to which they pretended) but it was to allure to the lusts of the flesh,
through much wantonness; and ( ver. 19.) while they promised liberty to them
that they did thus allure, they them selves were the Servants of corruption,
Slaves of lust and debauchery, being entangled in the pollutions of the World,
Ver. 20.

Much more of their vile Character we have in these 2 Epistles; as also in some
of the ancients, in Irenaeus, Clem. Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Epiphanius,
Eusebius; yea, in a Philosopher, Plotinus, who wrote against them an excellent
Discourse.

And yet for all this, they gloried in a strong conceit of their special
relation to God, and nearness to him. Plotinus says they were wont to speak to
their Proselytes in such flattering Language as this, (...), etc. Thou art a
Child of God, but others are not. And so Irenaeus says, they called
themselves, (...), the seed of election, and (as Clem. Alex.) (...), the
Children of the King; and therefore above the Law: For others indeed which were
(...), Carnal (as they called all but themselves) they were to mind Temperance,
and Chastity, and good Works, else they could not be saved; but as for
themselves, they had no such need to mind them; but because they were
Spiritual, they should be saved; and they affirmed, it was impossible for them
not to be saved, in whatsoever actions they were engaged; and therefore the
(...) might (...) do all things without fear: And such was their Filthiness,
that they were fitly called Barbaritae by the Ancients, the dirty Sect; to
which that of S. Peter agrees, where he compares them to the Sow wallowing in
the mire.

THERE is the Filthiness of Flesh and of Spirit, mentioned in 2 Cor. 7. 1. to
both which, this Pure Love, or Love out of a Pure Heart, is opposed.

[ Love out of a pure Heart.] The Scripture still lays the great stress upon
the Heart, and requires that should be first looked to, for out of it are the
issues of Life or Death. Prove. 4. Except this Spring be pure, and kept clean
from all defilement, the Streams will never be pure and Chrystalline. And if
there be Purity in the Heart (if the heart be cleansed from the love or liking
of all, either Worldly, or Fleshly Lusts) then all other Purity will follow,
Purity in Life and Conversation.

It was therefore the best Counsel, and the only right Method, which our
Savior Christ-did prescribe, (He, who was the Wisdom of God, the best Guide
and Director of Souls, as the best Physician for sick and diseased mankind)
that in Matthew. 23. 26. Cleanse first that which is within, that the outside may
be clean also.

But more fully does our Savior Christ insist upon this, in that best of
Sermons, his Sermon on the Mount. For whereas the Scribes and Pharisees thought
it enough for the keeping of the Sixth Commandment, to abstain from actual
outward Murder; and so for the keeping of the Seventh Commandment, to abstain
from the gross and outward acts of Adultery and Uncleanness; whereas in the
mean time they cared not though their Hearts were full of Raneour and Malice,
and inveterate hatred against their Brother; and though they had their Hearts
full of Lust, and Eyes full of Adultery: Our Blessed Savior (the best Master
of Morality and good Life) forbids the undue motions of the Heart to either
Sin, the inward tendencies and inclinations to Sin, with the first occasions
and incitements thereunto: He forbids the murder of the Heart, as well as of
the Hand; and not only the Lust of the Flesh, but the Lust and Adultery of the
Heart; and the Lust of the Eye, he affirms it to be Adultery it self in the
account of God, Matthew. 5. 28. And God's account, Christ's esteem of things we
are chiefly to consider and regard. It Is not so material how men account of
things or call them: They call evil good, and good evil; they put darkness for
light, and light for darkness: The world calls many things by softer and more
plausible names then the Holy Scripture does. But it will be our Wisdom and
Safety to judge of all things according to God's measures, and to account and
call them as God does; to his Infinite Wisdom it is fit our weak understandings
should submit; to him we stand or fall (Rom 14.) he only can clear or condemn
in the great Day of Accounts.

And, O take heed (as thou love thy Soul, or tendrest the Honor of Christ)
of thinking that what Christ has here or elsewhere in the Gospel prescribed
and enjoined us to avoid, is any part of unnecessary strictness, and that his
Doctrines and Laws are too nice and severe. To think thus, is to undervalue the
Wisdom of Christ, the Lawgiver, the Head of the Church, the Lord of all, the
Great Prophet sent by God to teach the World, testified by a voice from Heaven
to be the Son of God, whom we are to hear: As if He (who was the Wisdom of God)
did not better know the true natures and properties of things, the just
measures and bounds within which Humane nature was to be determined and kept,
where man was to be restrained, and may not be allowed to do otherwise. And for
thee not to restrain thy self as Christ has ordered thee, and told thee it
must be thus for thy Souls welfare; not to govern thy self according to his
Rules and Institutions, is plainly to deny the Lord that bought thee, to deny
thy Christian Profession. For by professing thy self a Christian, thou
professest Christ to be thy Teacher, Lord and Ruler; and that he is the Person
whom thou have made choice of to serve; and that there is no way so likely and
sure to bring thee to Blessedness and Salvation as what he has prescribed. But
then to practice contrary, is to deny all this thy profession: It Is to mock and
despise Christ, as if he were guilty of prescribing thee some things which were
unnecessary, dishonorable, or ridiculous to observe; which is plainly to deny
the Faith, to deny the Lord that bought thee, and has showed thee what is
good, and for thy good; and consequently, it is to bring upon thy self swift
Destruction.

But, O be so kind, so good to thy Soul, as to flee these things, and abstain
from fleshly lusts which war (as against Christ and his Laws, so) against thy
own Soul, 1 Pet. 2. And avoid such Discourse and corrupt Communication, such
Sighs and Representations, such Books and Poems, as cross the Laws and Precepts
of Christ, and tend to feed, and cherish, and inflame that which Christ came to
extinguish and destroy; and which tend to make that seem ridiculous nicety,
which Christ has made thy necessary and just Duty.

AND a most faithful follower of Christ, Blessed S. Paul, does often in his
Epistles press and inculcate that Purity of Heart and Life, which our Savior
Christ so indispensably requires. Flee youthful lusts, says he (not long
before his departure) to Timothy (2 Ep. 2. 22.) but follow after righteousness,
faith, charity; that is Love out of a pure heart, and within its due bounds, in
opposition to the youthful lusts; Youth being the more wild, untamed,
impetuous, inconsiderate part of Life, more obnoxious to the temptations and
defilements of Sin: And therefore thou have need to watch and pray against
tentations; to look unto thy Eyes, to make a Covenant with them, as Job did; to
look to thy words, as David did, that he might not sin with his tongue; and
above all keeping, to keep thy heart (as the words are literally to be rendered,
Prove. 4. 23.) that the Heart, the Spring of thy Affections and Actions, may be
free from all mud and defilement.

The same Apostle, S. Paul, in 1 Ep. Cor. Chap. 6. presses this Duty, Flee
fornication, says he, Ver. 18. And he presses it with six Arguments; heaping
one Argument upon another (as you may read from Ver. 13. to the end of the
Chapter) one whereof (in Ver. 20.) is taken from this, that they were bought
with a price, the precious blood of Christ, the Lamb without spot and blemish,
(a price above Silver and Gold, which yet are the most precious of corruptible
things, as S. Peter in 1 Ep. Chap. 1.) Ye are bought with a price; It cost
Christ dear to redeem you, even the price of his Blood to purchase you, your
whole man, Bodies as well as Souls. As the same Apostle in Col. 3. from another
consideration of Christ, of Christ as risen from the dead, and in his Body
ascended into Heaven and sitting at the right Hand of God, does earnestly
exhort Christians (as they believe and expect that God will also after death,
raise up their Bodies by his Power to an incorruptible, pure and undefiled
State, and heavenly Glory) to keep their Bodies undefiled and in a state of
purity, in a rising condition, so as they may be qualified for that Spiritual
and Heavenly State and Glory, to which at the Resurrection they shall be
advanced. And in order and preparation thereunto, that they would mortify
fornication, uncleanness, their inordinate affection and evil concupiscence (
Ver. 5.) contrary to the Love and Affection out of a pure heart; Mortify, (a
word of great importance and significancy) not only abate, or lessen, or
weaken their Lusts, that so they may not be so lively and stirring in them; but
Mortify, put them to Death, Crucify them, as he speaks, Gal. 5. 24. They that
are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts.
Christians should be dead to them (as dead to all Sin, Romans 6.) and therefore
not walk in them: And all forbidden pleasures, all sensual objects should be
dead to them, without force to tempt or persuade them; and as dead things, out
of mind, should they be forgotten, uncared for, unremembred ( i. e. not
remembered with any complacence or delight) not once named, as the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 5. 3, 4. But fornication and all uncleanness let it not be once
named amongst you, as becomes Saints: Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking,
nor jesting; by which two last Words the Apostle means obscene Discourses,
Stories or Tales, Songs and Jests (much of the wit and jesting of wicked men
being in obscene Arguments, and in behalf of that Sin which is called Folly,
(...) in the Old Testament, to work or commit folly in Israel). Concerning
these the Apostle adds, (...) which are not convenient; that is too soft a word,
rather which are not beseeming, but altogether unbecoming Christians.

Purity of Heart, and Affections, and Life, and Actions is that which thou art
called and obliged to as a Christian, 1 These. 4. 7. God has not called us unto
uncleanness but unto Holiness or Sanctification. And if thou would attain to
this state of Purity, and continue in it,

First, Seek unto God by humble and earnest prayer. Say with David ( Ps. 51.)
Purge me, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter then Snow:
Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me; or (...)
a firm, constant, resolved Spirit, so as never to fall again into the like
Defilements. Say with the poor Leper, who kneeled down, and in this humble
posture earnestly besought Christ ( Mark 1.) Lord, if thou will, thou can
make me clean. And know and be assured for thy encouragement, That Christ is as
willing, as able to do it; and as willing to make thee clean, as thou thy self
can be willing to be cleansed.

Secondly, But see then that thou art willing: For God complains of the
unwillingness of many ( Jer. 13. ult.) O Jerusalem, will thou not be made
clean, when shall it once be? Thou must be willing, thou must not resist; Thou
must pati Deum, suffer God to work in thee without disturbance; not oppose, not
hinder him when he is at work in thy Conscience, to convince and humble thee:
And whatever method God shall please to use for the purifying of thee,
patiently submit and yield to it, be it longer and sharper Afflictions, inward
or outward.

Thirdly, Nor must thou only quietly and willingly suffer God to work in thee,
but thou must also work with him, and strive according to the working which
works in thee. Thou must use thy serious and best endeavors to keep thy self
unspotted from the World, and always labor after that thou prayest for, Jer.
4. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be
saved; How long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee?

Fourthly, And if thou have begun to set upon the work of Self-purification, go
on to purge and cleanse thy heart yet more and more. If thou have escaped the
pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; if thou have begun to purify thy Soul in obeying the truth through the
Spirit, (as S. Peter speaks) take heed lest thou again be entangled therein and
overcome: For then thy latter end would be worse with thee then the beginning.

Fifthly, Pray and watch against tentations. None can be secured from sin
further then they are careful to shun the occasions or tentations of Sin. Prove.
6. 27. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? Can one
go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burnt? says Solomon, who by sad
experience found the hurt of tampering with tentations. Thus the silly Moth
plays about the Candle, and at last burns it self to death.

Sixthly, And as thou must be Watchful, so thou will have need of Courage and
Resolution, and Fortitude of Spirit: And this thou shall not want, if thou have
Faith in God. Resist then, steadfast in the Faith. Be strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might. Put on the whole armor of God; that thou may be
able to withstand in the evil day, in the day of tentation; and having done all
to stand, keep the Field, and come off with Victory and Triumph: Which thou
shall not fail of, if thou have Faith in the Goodnessand Power of God, if thou
be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus; His Grace shall be sufficient
for thee, and thou shall be able to do all things through Christ strengthening
thee; thou shall be more then Conqueror through him that loved thee, a
Conqueror over those Fleshly Lusts that warred against thy Soul: And to thee
and every one that overcomes, will Christ (that with Contentment and Delight
beheld thy Conflict, Courage and Conquest) give a Crown of Life and Glory that
fades not away.

And thus I have done with the First Particular; A Pure Love, 1. To distinguish
it from that gross, sensual, carnal Love which is found amongst them that are
companions in Wickedness.

II. PURE Love it must be, To distinguish it from a Love for by-ends and
self-respects, founded only upon Politic Considerations and Worldly Interest.

The most of that Love and Amity which is in the World is (as Tully does fitly
express it) Mercatura magis quam amicitia, a kind of Traffic and Merchandise,
rather then pure Love and true Friendship. Men drive on a Trade and pursue
Designs and serve their Interests, by seeming Courtesies and Civilities. This
is the guise and fashion of the World; Thoughts and Designs to oblige others,
and to advantage themselves thereby, and to make themselves Friends here on
earth of the Mammon of unrighteousness; these are the Springs of all the
motions this kind of Love has: It moves not, it goes not out to any but upon
these accounts; it arises wholly from Interest; And therefore when any cease
or are incapable to be further serviceable and advantageous to them, their Love
also cease to such whom they now cast by and lay aside as unprofitable Tools,
as a broken Vessel, a Vessel wherein is no pleasure (as Jeremy speaks) and
therefore to be cast away.

But consider that this is not to love thy Neighbor as thy self (which God
commands) but merely for thy self: Whereas this is one of the excellent
Characters and Properties of the Pure Christian Love (1 Cor. 13. 5) (...)
seeks not her own, the things which are only for its own advantage; but
minds and cares for the Interests of others, and is concerned for their good
and welfare, without any respect to its own advantage thereby. Christian
Religion does oblige and would excite us to a greater Purity of Love, such as
should express it self in doing good for goodness sake; and this is a nobler
and higher sort of Love, grounded upon the best principle and end.

AND to this purpose we have two very observable Speeches of our Savior
Christ, quite opposite to the Spirit of the World.

The first is that in Luke 14. 13. where he wills that when they make a Feast,
they should invite and entertain the poor, lame and maimed and blind, who
cannot recompense them; rather then their friends or rich neighbors, who would
invite them again and make them recompense. The main scope of which words, is
to persuade them to do good for Goodness sake; and that it should be as great a
pleasure and satisfaction to them, to do good and show kindness to those that
are in want, as to the rich and great in the World. And surely to a Soul that
is Generously good, there is nothing so Pleasant and Delicious (as nothing more
Honorable and Worthy in it self) then to be making others full of Comforts;
and the greatest pleasure is, when they cannot requite them.

The Second passage of a like noble import is that Speech of our Savior's in
Matthew. 10. two last Verses, where Christ commends the receiving ( i. e. the
entertaining, showing Love and Kindness; yea the least office of Love, as the
giving a Cup of cold Water to) a righteous man, or one of his Disciples, in the
name of a righteous man, or in the name of a Disciple, eo nomine, quatenus such
a one; mainly upon this account and consideration.

There may be a receiving and a kind treating of a righteous man, or a Disciple
of Christ, upon other names, regards and considerations; as in the name of a
Friend, one that has done some courtesies; or in the name of a Kinsman, or one
related to us; or in the name of a man of Wit or Learning, and Accomplishments
of Body or Mind; or in the name of a man of some Interest and Power, or related
to and in favor with men of Interest and Power; and so this righteous man, or
Disciple of Christ, or this Christian may be thought to be in a capacity to
befriend us.

But there is a purer Love-fire which Christ would enkindle in the Hearts of
Christians, viz. to love a righteous man for Righteousness and true Holiness
shining in him, to love him chiefly for Goodness sake; to show kindness to any
of these little ones, (so Christ in Matthew. calls his Disciples) little in the
esteem of the World, little in worldly Interests and Possessions, and so not
likely to recompense those that show them the least kindness: This is above
that common Love and Friendship in the World, which is founded chiefly upon
Self-respects, by-ends and politic Considerations.

Nor shall this Love lose its reward: Though these little ones, these least of
Christ's Disciples, be also little in the account of the World, and have little
of the World to recompense thee, yet thou shall have a Reward from God, and a
great Reward for this thy Service of Love.

And though to give but a Cup of cold Water to a Christian, to a Disciple of
Christ, to a Righteous man, seem but a cheap kindness; yet it being done
seasonably (and so a draught of cold refreshing Water may be a great kindness
to one that is afflicted with thirst, as it might fall out in those hot Eastern
Countries, and in such a case may be worth a Treasure) he that does it, (...)
(two Negatives) shall in no wise lose his Reward, Mat. 10. ult.

AND if to give a Cup of cold Water shall have its Reward, What a Reward shall
be given to thee if thou cloth, and feed, and visit a Disciple of Christ, that
is naked, or hungry, or sick and in prison; and do all this in the name of a
Disciple?

It may be thou have forgotten thy Cup of cold water, thy clothing, feeding,
or visiting a Disciple of Christ; and it is better that thou should not
remember it, better to have no self-pleasing reflections on what thou have
done; as the righteous said ( Matthew. 25.) Lord when saw we thee (or any
Disciple of thine, any that belongs to thee) an hungered, and fed thee? Or
thirsty, and gave thee drink? Or naked, and clothed thee? Or sick, or in
prison, and visited thee? But though thou remembrest not these things, to
please and pride thy self therein, yet God will remember thee concerning all
this, and for good; and the rather remember thee, if thou do not remember
them to thy own praise and glory. God is not unrighteous to forget your work
and labor of Love, which ye have showed to (or in) his name, in that ye have
ministered to the Saints, and do minister, Heb. 6. 10. says the Apostle to the
charitable Hebrews; and for such their Charity he was persuaded better things
of them, and things that did accompany Salvation, as in Ver. before.

AND if the least Kindness and labor of Love be so rewarded with God; if to
give a small refreshment, a little water, be so acceptable with God;
proportionably the Reward will be greater, as the Service of Love was greater
that is done out of a pure heart to a Christian, a Disciple of Christ; and
greater still if done to a Prophet, and in the name of a Prophet, one whose
care and desire is faithfully to Preach the Gospel, to declare the whole
Counsel of God, for the better instructing and winning Souls to Christ: We are
to esteem such very highly in love for their works sake (1 These 5. 12) and to
treat them (...), worthy of God, as that observable Phrase is 3 Ep. John Ver.
6. So as is worthy of God, whose Messengers they are, on whose Errand and
Business they are employed, whom they serve in the Gospel; as it follows in
Ver. 7. because that for his names sake they went forth, viz. to Preach the
Gospel. And thus the words [(...)] being rendered literally and properly worthy
of God, the (...) [or his] is plain, as referring to (...) [ God] in the
foregoing Verse: But our Translation rendering the Phrase thus (which needed
not) [ after a godly sort] the [ his] in the following Verse [ for his names
sake] is made more obseure, there being in our Translation no person mentioned
before, to which the [ his] does refer: As also the word (...) in Ver. 6. [
whom if thou bring forward after a godly sort, or worthy of God] is not so
fully rendered; For the word does not only imply to bring part of the way such
as went forth to Preach the Gospel, but it further signifies (as in other
places, so here) to provide what is needful for them in their journey upon so
great an occasion and work; and this is to be done (...) worthy of God, in a
worthy and becoming measure to testify their regards to God, whose work this
is. And what is thus done to the Prophet, and in the name of a Prophet, is done
to Christ, and done to God; and such shall receive a Prophet's Reward.

THE END.

