Certain Errors in NAVIGATION.

Detected and Corrected By Edw. Wright.

With many Additions that were not in the former Editions

London. Printed by joseph Moxon. and sold at his Shop at the Atlas on
Cornhill. 1657.



Additions To this Edition that were not in the former.
THe Table for the true dividing of a Meridian of the Sea-Chart, here called
the Table of Latitudes, made to every minute of the Quadrant, which in the
former edition was to every tenth minute, from page. 14 to the 36.

2 Diverse additions concerning the true graduating and making both of a general
and particular Sea-Chart, and touching the use of the Table of Latitudes, in
the 4, 5, 6, and 7 Chapter.

3 The angle of any Rumb or Helisphaerical line with the Equinoctial being
given, to find presently the Latitude thereof for any Longitude given, page. 46.

4 The Table of Rumbs more exactly calculated then before, and a Table of the
eighth Rumb calculated to every tenth minute, and added to the former: from
page. 25, to 54.

5 The use and making of the Sea-rings, from page. 75, to 79.

6 A Table of the Magnetical inclination, calculated to every degree of the
Quadrant, together with the Geometrical demonstration of the making thereof.

7 To find the angle of the true Horizontal line, with the visuall line
touching the roundness of the Sea, at any height of the eye above the water,
and to this end an Observation and demonstration for the finding of the
quantity of the Earths Semidiameter: from page 87, to 96.

8 A Table of Refractions of the Sun and fixed Stars, page 97.

9 The Table of Declination of every minute of the Ecliptic, newly and exactly
calculated in degr. min. and seconds, to the greatest obliquity of 23 degrees,
31 min. 30 seconds, from page 100, to 115.

10 The Table of Observations of the Sun, corrected by his Parallax, from page
124, to 141.

11 The eccentricitie of the Sun, the place of his Apogaeum, and Tables of his
middle motions, found out and corrected according to the said observations in
Chap. 20, 21.

12 A new Theorick of the Sun, and the manner of making the Table of the Suns
Prosthaphaereses thereby, from page 154.158.

13 New Ephemerides of the Sun for five years, and how to make them and
continue them for many years past or to come, from page 159, to 168.

14 A new Table of the Suns Declination for the Mariners use, and how by
certain Prosthaphaereses to continue the same for many years, from pa. 170, to
181.

15 The errors of Simon Stevin in finding fault with my Table of Rumbs, from
the 214 page to the 224.

16 A short Treatise of the whole Art of Navigation.

17 A ^ew and exact Table of the Suns Declination made, and to be used
according to the ordinary manner wherewith English Mariners have been most
acquainted from page ^7 to 80.

18 A most easy and exact way to find the true height of the Pole in any North
Latitude, by knowledge of the height of the Pole Star, when the Guard is in
any of those 8 ordinary positions commonly noted amongst Seamen: from page 81
to 90.

19 A Table of Observations of the variation of the Compass, taken in all
parts of the world almost whither any Navigation has been made in our age*
from page 91, to 101*

20 The Haven finding Art or the way to find any Haven or place at Sea, by the
Latitude and Variation.

To the Worshipful Captain Thomas Whetstone Esquire.
Much honored Sir,
THe loving respects which your pains expressed to mewards, when some occasions
urged me to make application to your Worship, has so far obliged me, that I
should not acquit my self of ingratitude if I should let slip the opportunity I
have to render your Worship Thanks:

And with all Sir, knowing your good affection to and perfection in Sciences
Mathematical, and especially that most necessary, most profitable, and
Honorable branch thereof, Navigation; I further make bold to Dedicate this the
third Edition of Mr Edward Wrights Correction of errors in the Art of
Navigation, to the acceptance and Patronage of you most honored Sir.

The Author in his Time thought it a Present for a Prince, nay a splendent and
illustrious Prince, and therefore Dedicated it to the eldest Son of James King
of great Britain; viz. Henry, then Prince of Wales; whose budding virtues grow
in you, whose Heroic spirit acts in you, and whose hopeful valor and Courage
powerfully and effectually manifests its self in you.

But Sir, Its Patron is Dead, and so is the Elementary part of its Author; and
a shame it were so worthy a work should again enter on the stage of the world
without either Author to own it, or Patron to Protect it: And therefore Sir, as
this motive moved me (who am now become the Disposer of the Book) to Dedicate
it to your Worship, so let the same argument persuade you to accept it; that so
as the former Impressions have found a current vent, this the latter Edition
may by your good Countenancing thereof, receive the quicker sail, to the Profit
of the Printer, the benefit of the Buyer, and the general profit and benefit of
the whole Art of Navigation.

I desire the Almighty to bless your Worship with health and prosperity, and to
carry you along in all your Worthy adventures: I wish your increase of Honor,
and honorable actions; and that you may shine at Sea as a Star of the first
Magnitude fixed in the Zenith; that so your Name may afright your Enemies, your
deserts engage your friends, and your Example be as a Whetstone for all truly
honorable, to set the edge of their virtues on.

I subscribe my self, Your Worships most affectionate and humble servant.
Joseph Moxon.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
WHen I considered the elaborate pains of that able Mathematician Mr Edward
Wright, I thought it very uncommendable to our English Nation that his so
useful a book should (as it were) sleep it self to death; and therefore for
the benefit of Seamen have I printed a third Impression.

I shall not need to enconiumize upon the skill of the Author, nor excellency of
the work; many learned and famous men having already eased me of that Task: Nay
the book it self tho others were silent (being the most Authentic Testimony)
can speak for the abilities of the one, and accomplishment of the other.

Some perhaps may think that because the Tables of the Suns Epemerides and
Declination were Calculated to the year 1608 etc. that they are for these
present years useless, because of the lenghth of time that is since then
already past; and therefore that they ought to be new Calculated to this
present time but herein they are over Curious; for our Author himself (then
whom, I never heard of any man more precise) in an Example for finding the
place and Declination of the Sun by those Tables, mentions a year yet to come,
Page 171. and tells us that they will serve for many following years without
any sencible error; which insencible error if the over nice will avoid, our
Author has not left him unfurnished with Rules sufficient for his purpose.
Besides if in the New Calculation there had bin any Difference (tho never so
small) the Tables would not have agreed with the Observations that he made at
that Time, nor the opperations that were wrought upon those Observations.

I have added the Treatise called The Haven finding Art, to the end of this
book; the subject being both suitable and serviceable to every Seaman, and the
more Notable because of the great probability there is thereby to find the
Longitude; which doubtless, if there be two such Magnetical Poles as our
Countryman Mr Anthony Linton in his small Treatise entitled News of the
Complement of the Art of Navigation, and diverse other learned men have
affirmed, (tho our Author herein Dissent from them) then may it not be very
Difficult by the Latitude and Variation of the Compass observed to find the
Longitude. I confess it may be thought that that opinion may be refuted by the
Variation of Variation; But Time who has lately revealed the Variation of
Variation, has also discovered the Regularity of the Motion of this Variation:
by which, the Variation of any Place being already known, may be Calculated
what the Variation shall be for any year to come. But it were to be wished that
this knowledge had bin revealed to our Author Mr Wright, or some other so
public spirited as he was.

Another way of finding Longitude there is, and that is by Celestial
Observations, lately set forth by Andreas Berlicome of Rotterdam, which indeed
I have translated into English, and intended to have annexed to this Book; but
two Considerations Diverted my purpose, the one was, because the way Berlicome
shows, was long since set forth by a Countryman of our own; viz. Mr Anthony
Linton aforesaid, and therefore I was unwilling to applaud a Stranger for the
Credit an English man had Deserved. The other Consideration was because those
Observations cannot well be made at Sea, in regard of the Ships continual
Tossing; and therefore not useful for Seamen.

Thus Courteous Reader wishing you to mend such litteral faults with your pen
as may have escaped the Press, I commend the book to your acceptance, and
desire, that as formerly the name of Mr Wright has bin famous all the world
over, where Navigation does flourish, so still his memory may be remembered, and
every leaf of this book may be as so many Heralds to proclaim the worth and
Deserts of so excellent a Man.

Farewell, Joseph Moxon.

The Preface to the Reader.
THe Art of Navigation (as it is called) though it has now been in use some
thousands of years, yet how far it is at this day from the perfection which
is and were to be desired, we would scarce believe (as a wonder that a thing
of so great commodity, should no more be sought into, in so many ages:) but
that both the books of the learned are extant, to testify, and reason
(approved by often trial) does plainly show that the principal means, and
Instruments this Art uses, have been thus long so far from this perfection,
that contrariwise they have been and are much stained with many blots and
blemishes of error and imperfection.

1 The Sea-Chart (the best mean the Mariner has to know the course from place
to place) as it has bin hitherto generally made, is so faulty in the very
foundation and groundwork thereof (that is, in the Geometrical lineaments of
the Meridians, Parallels, and Rumbs described therein) that hereof there may
arise so gross error, as may cause the Mariner to miss one, two, yea three
whole points of the Compass (and more sometimes in a far Northerly or
Southerly Navigation) in finding the course from place to place. Whereof it may
also be necessarily inferred, that following the direction of his Chart, in
such sort as has been used for finding the distances of places, he may err
twice, yea thrice so much as the whole distance comes to, and more sometimes
in those Northern parts, in taking the distance to be twice, thrice, yea four
times greater then indeed it is.

2. The Compass, the chiefest Instrument for keeping the course^ showed by the
Chart, by the Variation neglected (as by some it has been) may cause you err
an whole point or two in the courses of diverse places: and not rightly used,
has bred much confusion in many parts of the Chart, in laying out many places
in false courses: which must needs follow when the Chart is made according to
the direction showed by the points of the Compass, without abatement or
alowance, answerable to the variation in every place. This may especially be
seen in those places where the variation is greatest; as upon the coast of
Florida, Nova Francia, and Newfound land: where some also seeking to avoid
this inconvenience, have fallen into another as ill or worse then the former,
in making a double scale of Latitude. And thus one error as a fruitful mother
breeding another, and one absurdity admitted drawing many with it: it will
manifestly appear by exact discourse out of these grounds (that partly through
the false projection of the Chart, and partly through neglecting, or not
rightly using the variation of the Compass) that it cannot otherwise be, but
that the ordinary Charts are in many places much like an inextricable
labyrinth of error, out of which it will be very hard for a man easily to
unwinde himself.

Hereto accord the often experiments and usual practice of many well
experienced and judicial Mariners and Seamen of our time, who confess that in
sailing from the West Indies to the Azores, they have often fallen with those
Islands, when by their account, according to the Chart, they should have been
150, or two hundred leagues to the Westwards of them. The like has been found
in sailing from the Azores for Vshent, as I have also partly seen in the little
experience I have had at Sea; where we were come within sight of that Island,
when by account of the ordinary Chart we should have been fifty leagues short
of it

And as concerning the Courses from place to place, I have observed that some
of our Masters take a wise course, in not trusting to those courses which are
showed by their Charts. But first getting themselves into the height or
Parallel of the place to which they are going, and withal knowing assuredly
whether they be more Eastward or Westward then that place; they then proceed,
always heedfully keeping themselves under that Parallel till they come to the
place desired. Then which way of sailing there is none more certain and
infallible, for the sure finding of the place assigned: but it has this
inconvenience, that it makes the way longer then otherwise in should be, if
the straight course where kept.

But to return to that from whence we have a little digressed: by these
experiments and practice of the skilfullest Mariners, it is manifest that they
themselves do often find the imperfections of their Charts, in showing the
courses and distances of many places each from other, whereto we may adjoyne the
experience of the best Hydrographers of our time, who daily making their Charts
after the accustomed manner with straight lined rumbes and degrees of Latitude
every where equal have found such difficulties in laboring to bring their
Marine descriptions to some due correspondence of truth in the courses,
heights, and distances; that tired herewith in the end, they have holden it
impossible, to make the Chart agree in all these with the Globe. Wherein
notwithstanding they err, by making too general a conclusion, in holding that
to be simply impossible, which cannot be done by such a way and means as they
know and use.

3 The Crosse-staffe, the principal Instrument, that has at Sea been most
generally used, for observing the Altitudes of the Sun or Stars, thereby to
know more assuredly the Latitude, and so to examine and rectify the account of
the course kept by direction of the Compass upon the Chart, if there be not
abatement made answerable to the eccentricitie of the eye (that is, to the
distance wherewith the center or point wherein the sight beams concur within
the eye is further backward then the end of the staff) may through neglect of
this abatement cause error in taking the height observed to be greater then
indeed it is by 10, 20, 30 minutes, yea an whole degree, and more sometimes, if
the height be much, the staff small, and the eccentricitie of the eye great.

4 But both this staff and all other Instruments (though never so well made
and used) can do us but small pleasure, for finding the Latitude at Sea, if the
declination of the Sun and Stars which we observe be not also known. To
this end therefore there have been made tables of the Declinations, both of the
Sun and fixed Stars: yet such as even that which has been publicly
commended, as not differing from truth in any place above one minute (I mean
the Regiment of the Sun, set forth by R. N.) does notwithstanding differ from
truth in many places eleven, twelve, or thirteen minutes. And as for the fixed
Stars, scarce one of them has his declination truly set down, and agreeable
to observation. Yea even the Pole-starre it self, though it be better known
and more observed by the most part of Seamen then all the rest; and indeed as
it might be used (being to be observed at any time of the night all the year
long) might stand them in as much stead for finding the Latitude as all of the
rest almost: yet in the books of Navigation that are most common amongst
English Mariners, the distance thereof from the Pole is made to be in our time
above 40 minutes more then it should be. No marvel therefore if the Mariners
complain (as I have heard them sometimes) that they cannot make their
observations of the Latitude, by the Sun and this Star to agree.

Neither is there more truth to be looked for in the declination of many other
principal fixed Star^s, published in those books, diverse of them erring from
truth one, two, yea (some of them) three whole degrees and more, as in the
treatise following shall be showed. And these errors in the declination of the
Sun and fixed Stars, not only I, but also the right worshipful Sir
Christopher Heydon Knight, and the noble Lord of Knudstrupp, Tycho Brahe
founder of Vraniburg* with the gracious Prince William Landtgrave of Hassia,
father of him that now is, have often found by many and most diligent
observations, with large and exact Instruments, wherein both minutes and half
minutes might be easily discerned. Notwithstanding, if any stand in doubt
hereof, I wish that he himself also would bestow no less cost, time and
diligence to make often heedfull and exact observations then either the Prince
of Hassia, or Tycho Brahe, or at least as I my self have done; and then, let
him believe that which he shall see to be true with his own eyes.

These errors therefore in the Chart, Compass, Crosse-staffe, and declinations
of the Sun and Stars, I have in the treatise following labored to reform to
the utmost (yea rather beyond the utmost) of my poor ability* neglecting in
the mean time other studies, and courses that might have been more beneficial
to me: which may argue my good will to have proceeded further, to the amendment
of such other faults and imperfections as yet remain, besides those that are
already specified, and that especially in two points, that is, in the courses,
and Longitudes of places.

The reforming of the Chart in reducing all places from those varying courses,
wherein now they are set down, to the true positions they have each from other,
by separating the variation (wherewith they are in the ordinary Charts for the
most part intermingled were a busy piece of work: yet as were most worthy,
and necessary to be labored in, as without which the Charts, Maps, and
Globes, or any other Hydrographicall or Geographical descriptions, cannot be
freed from many intricate absurdities, wherewith now they must needs in many
parts be pestered: because the courses and positions of places are in them set
down as they were observed by the varying Compass, without separating the
variation afterward, that so the true courses and positions of places might be
known.

The Longitude also would well deserve both labor and cost to be both
skilfully and liberally bestowed, for the finding thereof, whereby it were
possible to bring it to that pass (the motions of the Sun and Moon, and
places of the fixed Stars being verified, whereof that noble Tycho Brahe has
afforded great hope) that the industrious and willing minded Mariner might be
capable thereof, in such sort that for the most part, when the Moon and fixed
Stars appear, he might be able hereby to know what Longitude he is in (yea
even at Sea) more truly then many have done by their dead reckonings in sailing
out of the bay of Mexico to the Azores, or from New Foundland to England, or
almost from the Azores to England. But on land the Longitude might by this
means be found exactly as the Latitude has been by many observers at Sea. And
so opportunities of observation with meet Instruments on shore, not being
neglected, (especially in long Voyages, far Eastward or Westward) many most
notorious errors in the Longitudes of places would in short time be corrected,
wherewith the most excellent arts of Geographie, and Navigation are very much
blemished. For who that loves truth, can patiently endure to hear the
Mariners common and constant complaint of 150, or 200 leagues error in the
distance between the bay of Mexico and the Azores; or (that which is yet most
intolerable and monstrous) of 600 leagues difference in the distance between
Cape Mendosino and Cape California, some making that distance to be twelve or
thirteen hundred leagues, where others will have it (and that more probably)
to be no more then six or seven hundred.

But for as much as the charge, though not great, (to speak of) of providing
meet means for supply of these wants in the courses and Longitudes, (but
chiefly in the latter) exceeds the mean ability of the most part of them that
are most addicted to these ungainfull studies (I must not say ungrateful,
although in these days they prove most unprofitable to their greatest lovers)
therefore they are for my part like to rest (as hitherto they have done)
untouched, and only commended unto a certain kind of hope (whether vain or no
I know not) of some Mecaenas at length of manificent spirit to be stirred up,
to have some due consideration both of these, and other such wants and
imperfections, as yet remain in so excellent an Art as this of Navigation is.

For surely there is no man (considering how many other both ingenious and
ingenuous, as well Liberal as M^chanicall Arts do yield their aid and service
unto this of Navigation) that can deny the excellency thereof, or the
profitablenes either. But if he will, my purpose is not to stand upon it, nor
to convince him by reasons, by records, or by the more wonderful discoveries
that have bin performed in this our age, even to the furthest parts of all the
earth, and round about the whole compass of the same, whereby we have been
made partakers of the most rare and richest commodities and treasures of the
utmost Indies and Islands of the world, and they likewise have participated
with us (or else they have had the more wrong) in the most precious treasures
of heavenly truth. All which and much more then can be thought, or now spoken
of, performed chiefly (next under Gods providence) by the rules and directions
of this art, who sees not that by how much the more excellent, and unto
mankind abudantly profitable it is, so much the less ought any notorious error
to be tolerated therein, and so much the more ought all whom it may concern
(yea but in good will only where it may do good) to endeavor themselves that
it may be brought to the highest pitch of perfection. I know not then if any
one be unto so excellent an enterprise drawn on to give the best furtherance he
can, why he should for his labor fall into any danger of reprehension at all.
Yet it may be, I shall be blamed by some, as being too busy a fault-finder my
self. For when they shall see their Charts and other Instruments controlled,
which so long time have gone for current, some of them perhaps will scarcely
with patience endure it. But they may be pacified, if not by reason of the good
that ensues hereupon, yet toward me at the least, because the errors I point
at in the Chart, have been heretofore complained of by others* especially by
Martin Cortese. and Petrus Nonius, out of whom most part of the first Chapter
of the Treatise following is almost word for word translated; I for my part
desiring rather that faults should be found by others then by my self, and
laboring much more, as for a thing much better, and far more needful, and
profitable, to be a fault-mender, then a fault-finder. Or else I may so much
the more be misliked, because in seeking to amend, some will think I take too
much upon me: For some will say, and of those perhaps that have been employed
in Sea affairs all their life long, that all this we go about is more then
needs. For they without all this ado have ever performed their charge with good
success, and are now too old to give ear to these innovations and new school
tricks. But other Seafaring men who acknowledge the need hereof, are ashamed
peradventure to receive (as it were) either correction from the schools, or
direction from the land: and therefore stick not to condemn Universities, and
all in comparison of their long and daily experience. Others also as more
indifferent for the matter, will yet have a fling at the person, thinking this
reformation, which is professed, to spring out of other men's fountains: All
which (because we are now about a work of amendment) must also (if they will
hear reason) amend their opinions. For the first, which seem most
unreasonable, do not consider (being addict to these unreformed Instruments)
how like they are to those old ship-masters, of whom Master Bourne makes
mention, who not many years since, wedded likewise too much to their old
accustomed usage, have mocked them that have used Charts, or Crosse-staves,
saying, they cared not for their sheep-skinnes, they could keep a better
account upon a board: and them that observed the Sun or stars for finding
the Latitude, they would call Sun-shooters, and Star-shooters, and ask if they
had hit it. But mark what comes hereof: for one of these Masters was he, as
I take it, of whom an ancient Seaman (yet living, as I think) once told me, who
having undertaken the charge of conducting a ship from England to Saint
Michaels, (the Eastermost of the Azores) and after long seeking, not able to
find it, for shame and sorrow cast himself over board. Wherefore these men, if
they consider it well, have no cause to boast of success without skill; but to
thank God for both, that is, for their great and often good hap and safety,
and for their skill also were it smaller then it is. For I will do them no
wrong, but do freely grant and acknowledge, that from any one place to other,
the course, height and distance may be truly set down in the ordinary Chart,
wherein the Rumbes are right lines, and the degrees of Latitude every where
equal: and so by that Chart they may sail truly enough from hence to Russie,
or Island, or any other place. But if by the way they should cross over from
the one to the other, following the direction that their Chart shows them,
they cannot but err a great deal, either in course or distance, or both;
especially in those Northerly Navigations. Why then should they, where there is
danger of wandering, refuse help of any that is willing to show a better course.

But to come to those that may perhaps object I do but actum agere, in doing
no more then has bin done already by Gerardus Mercator in his universal
Map of the World many years since: and in publishing something already set
forth by Iodocus Hondius, in his greater Map of the World and of Europe, now
of late: I must answer, that indeed by occasion of that Map of Mercator, I
first thought of correcting so many, and gross errors, and absurdities, as I
have already touched, and are hereafter at large showed in the common
Sea-Chart, by increasing the distances of the Parallels from the Aequinoctial
toward the Poles, in such sort, that at every point of Latitude in the Chart,
a small part of the Meridian might have the same proportion almost to the like
part of the Parallel, that it has in the Globe. But the way how this should be
done, I learned neither of Mercator, nor of any man else. And in that point I
wish I had been as wise as he in keeping it more charily to my self. For so
perhaps it might have been more beneficial to me: neither should any man have
had cause to think at the first sight of the fourth Chapter of this book* that
all I have there set down is stolen out of one of the foresaid Mappes of
Iodocus Hondius. But were I brought before a Judge, I should for my absolution,
and Iodocus his condemnation, make the contrary to appear, and that by his own
confession in his letters to me, and to a friend of mine, which I have to show;
written in Latin with his own hand: To me his writing englished is thus much in
effect:

I hear that you are somewhat offended with me, because I have taken those few
things out of your manuscript book, whereas I promised you that I would not
publish it: which also I would in no wise do without your leave. For my
conscience something grudged, even to publish this little, if the distance of
places would have suffered me conveniently to send letters unto you. I was
purposed to have set this forth under your name: but I feared that you would be
displeased therewith, because I have but rudely translated it into Latin.

And in a letter to M Briggs, now Professor of Geometry in Gresham College,
he writes thus:

I have written to M. Wright in excuse of my self; I am very sorry that he is
angry with me for that cause. I pray you learn of him how he is affected
toward me, and write back unto me, and excuse me unto him as much as you can.
I would have published his whole book for the common good, if I might have done
it without breach of my faithful promise. And surely my conscience grudged to
publish even this little which I have taken out of his book: but the profit
thereof moved me, etc.

The truth is, that at his own instant request, when he wrought as an Ingraver
here at London, some of my friends also procured by his flattery, persuading
me thereto, he also assuring me upon his faith and credit that he would not
publish it, or any part thereof without my knowledge and consent. But how well
and honestly he has performed that protestation grounded upon faith and
credit, the World may now see: and how unthankful he has been to me for that
which has been so gainful to himself, (as may appear by so common sale of
his Mappes of the World, of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, all which had
yet been unhatched, had he not learned the right way to lay the ground work of
them out of this book) I my self know too well. But let him go as he is.

Now if any shall think it to be beyond a Land-mans skill, to find faults in
matters belonging to the Seamans profession; they must know, if they be yet to
learn, that one that is but reasonably well acquainted with Geometrical
conceits, may as well, if not better then most Seamen, know the nature and
properties of the sphaerical form of the Earth and Sea, with all consequents
and dependances thereof. By consideration whereof, the true understanding and
reason of the Nautical Planisphaere, or Sea-Chart, may by him that has been
but meanly conversant in Mathematical meditations, be better apprehended, then
otherwise it can by the Seafaring man, though he spend his whole life in
sailing over all the Seas in the World. The like may be said of the
Crosse-staffe, and Compass, and of the Regiments or Tables of Declination of
the Sun and fixed stars, and of all other the principal means and
Instruments serving for the Art of Navigation. But it is strange to see the
difference of things that in this World is made by the difference of hands from
which they are received, howsoever the things themselves be. For let Hannibal a
Captain discourse of Warlike affairs, be it never so slightly and out of
reason or season, yet all (forsooth) must needs be greatly esteemed and
admired, because he so great a Captain has spoken it. But let Phormio a
Philosopher speak of the same matter, especially in the hearing of Hannibal,
be his speech furnished with never so much learning and Judgment, yet must he
(there is no remedy) be either a fool or a madman for his hire. So by all
likelihood, the case may stand with this poor Treatise of mine; which if it
had come forth to public view, from out of the bosom (as once it was like) of
a Master at Sea, of great reputed excellency, it had no doubt then found the
favor, which now like enough it shall want: all winds then would have sweetly
blown it into the pleasantest haven of every man's (at least of every Sea-mans)
favorable entertainment. I shall therefore with their patience set down the
matter as it was, that none may mistake a truth, which is daughter, not only of
time, but of occasion, as hereby may appear. It is not unknown to some of good
place and reckoning, that one of the skilfullest Navigators (as he was by many
accounted) of our time and Nation, (who died in Sir Francis Drakes last Voyage)
when he came to that extremity of sickness, that he saw there was no other way
with him but one, was reported to have gathered and bound together into a
bundle all his Nautical notes and observations, and to have cast them into the
Sea. But soon after, notwithstanding that report, there came more comfortable
news by a Captain that was familiarly acquainted and conversant with him in
all that Voyage, and during the whole time of his sickness, in whose arms also
he died: who moving some speech unto him touching something of Sir Francis
Drakes, that might then after his death be expected to come to light concerning
Navigation; Tush (says he) for that matter there is not much to be looked for
at his hands, he had but small skill in that Art. Why, and what will your self
then do: (quoth that Captain) Whereupon this great Navigator drew forth a book
out of his bosom, and delivered it to this Captain a little before his death.
This book was showed by the same Captain to the Right Honorable the Lord high
Admiral of England in the Cales Voyage, as being made by that famous Navigator,
which his Lordship also (as it was reported) thought good should be perused and
published. These news moved some expectation of that book: so as the Right
Honorable the Earl of Cumberland hearing of it, was desirous also to have a
sight thereof, and remembered me unto that Captain, as one not insufficient to
peruse and correct the same* And hereupon the book was brought unto his
Lordship, at the time and place appointed at Westminster, and was there also
delivered unto me to be perused and corrected. Having therefore opened it, and
beginning a little to turn over the leaves, to take some general view what
matter might be contained therein: I first espied a Diagram, the like whereof I
knew very well I had made in a book of min^. And herewithall I was the more
moved to see if there were any more that I could know as well as the former:
turning over therefore two or three leaves more, I presently espied another
figure also, wherewith I was as well acquainted, as with the former for I found
not only the very same figure, but (that which made me the more to marvel for
the present) following also in the same order, as I well remembered it did in my
book. Being therefore yet more earnestly stirred up hereat, and wondering what
the reason might be, that we should thus agree, I betook my self to the reading
of that book. And looking first upon the first leaf thereof, and afterward in
many other places, I found it every where to agree with mine, and to be a
coppie of the same book, word for word, which I made, and presented unto his
Lordship almost seven years before, as the next morning it plainly appeared,
both to his Lordship and to the Captain himself that brought it, by comparing
it in all points, with the original exemplar of the same book, which I then
brought unto his Lordship.

One crime there yet remains which Simon Stevin of late has charged me with,
in the former edition of my Tables of Rumbs, namely, that I have erred about 12
minutes in the Latitude of the fourth Rumb at 78 degrees of Longitude, and
above two minutes in the Latitude of the first Rumb from the Meridian, before I
come to so little as two degrees of Longitude: whereby he would prove that my
way of making the Table of Rumbs should be erroneous. But the truth is, the
error is not so much in my Tables, as in his own too rash unadvisednes, who out
of no better ground then so gross a manner of trial, as he uses in finding
out the Latitudes of the Rumbs, working by whole degrees of Longitudes, would
make the world believe I had committed so great errors in those Tables; which
Latitudes if he had sought by single minutes, he should not by his own way and
manner of account have found so much as the sixtieth part of one minute
difference from my way whereby I made those Tables; which as it is of all other
the most easy, so it is not inferior in truth to any way that he has or can
devise: his account, according to his own ways, yielding always more then
truth, and mine something less; and yet not differing so much as one second
one from another, if you work his way exactly by small differences of Longitude.

But I fear that whilst I labor to satisfy all, I shall offend some, as
making too long a Preface to so small a volumne: I will therefore hasten to an
end: Only showing the sum of this Treatise; which I thought good to offer unto
your view, as a short abridgement of all that follows, and rather to set it
apart by it self, then to include it, as I was purposed, within this Preface,
which is beyond his bounds already.

The sum of the Treatise following.
THe Treatise following contains four principal parts; whereof the first may
be called Hydrographicall; wherein are set down the errors of the common
Sea-Chart, with right lined Rumbs, and degrees of Latitudes every where equal:
then the way to avoid these errors is Geometrically demonstrated, and out of
this demonstration a Table is calculated and the use thereof showed, for the
true and easy dividing of the Meridians in the Chart, both general and
particular, in to single minutes of Latitude, increasing in due proportion
toward the Poles, whereto is adjoined, as arising from thence, the Table of
the seven first Rumbs, showing by what points of Longitude and Latitude each of
those Rumbs is to be drawn, from the Equinoctial till you come within a minute
of the Pole: with help of which Tables, the Rumbs may in any Chart, Map, or
Globe, much more truly be described, then by those maechanicall ways, long
since published by Petrus Nonius, or lately practiced by some Globe-makers in
England. To which is annexed a Table of the eighth Rumb, showing the quantity
of one degree of Longitude at any Latitude, in minutes seconds and thirds of
one degree of the Equinoctial. Which degree of Longitude being divided by 3 at
any Latitude, gives you the number of leagues contained in one degree of the
Parallel at that Latitude. By means of this Table, the Table of Rumbs may
(according to Stevins way) be more truly and easily made or examined, then by
that which he has lately set forth, 4 libr. Geogr. de Histiodromia. After this
follows a most plain and sensible demonstration of the disagreement of the
common Sea-Chart, and of the agreement of the Globe with the Chart before
described, the use of which Chart is showed in the Chapter next following:
where also (the Longitudes and Latitudes of any two places being given) the way
is set down how to find their distance, measured either in the segment of the
Rumb, or in the arch of the great circle that is drawn between them, both
mechanically with Ruler and Compass, and Mathematically by the doctrine of
Triangles; whereby it may without much difficulty be conceived how Navigation
may by Arithmetical calculation only be performed without Chart or Globe, the
Longitudes only and Latitudes of the places from whence you come and whither
you go, being first known.

The second principal part of this Treatise may be called Magnetical; because
it entreats of the Variation of the Compass, showing how the same may be
found at Sea (the Latitude being given) by one observation of the Suns height,
and point of the Compass whereupon he is at the same instant, before or after
noon, with help of the Globe or Astrolabe: which way of finding the Variation
is also exemplified, with a Table of such observations as I took both at Sea
and on shore, in the Voyage of the Right Honorable the Earl of Cumberland, in
the year 1589. But this way of finding the Variation, being something tedious,
I have now therefore hereto newly adjoined the making and use of the Seamans
Rings; an Instrument which long since I devised for the present finding both of
the Variation and time of the day, at one instant, even together with the
observation, without any further trouble of using any other Instrument, or
working, either Mechanical or Arithmetical, after you have observed. Yet
because these Rings, and the Globe and Astrolabe also are such Instruments as
every one cannot easily have and use at Sea; I have further showed how by the
Suns point of the Compass (or Magnetical Azimuth) and altitude given by
observation the Variation may be found, either mechanically, with Ruler and
Compass, or Mathematically by the doctrine of Triangles, and Arithmetical
calculation. And seeing moreover that of late years, diverse industrious Seamen
of our Nation have begun to make some observation of that new found property
of the magnetical needles inclination, or dipping under the Horizon, after it
is touched with the Loadstone; by means whereof, it seems something probable,
that Seamen may have some help to know their height or Latitude in dark and
cloudie weather, when neither Sun, nor Stars for many days appear, to be
observed: I thought it should not be impertinent to this place to set down the
Theorick that has been devised of this magnetical inclination, together with a
demonstration for the making of a Table thereof, to every degree of Latitude,
according to that Theorick* to the end that such of our Seamen as mean to be
diligent observers hereof, may make heedfull trial of that inclining property:
and compare the same with this Table, in all parts of the world where they
shall travel; especially in those long Voyages to the East and West Indies,
and in their Northeast or Northwest discoveries.

The third part may be called Geometrical entreating of the Crosse-staffe, and
showing how such errors may be avoided, as have been commonly committed in the
use thereof, either by reason of the parallax, or eccentricitie of the eye, or
by the height of the eye above the water, or by the parallax or refraction of
the Sun. And because for finding the quantity of the angle that is to be
abated out of the apparent altitude of the Sun or stars, observed by this
staff, for any height of the ey above the water it was needful to know the
quantity of the earths semidiameter, concerning which there is great variety
of opinions amongst learned authors: I have therefore in this part of this
treatise now showed diverse ways for the more certain finding thereof; one of
which ways I have also for my more assurance exemplified by observation, as
means and opertunitie served me, near Plimmouth sound anno 1589.

The fourth and last part may be called Astronomical, wherein my chief intent
was to correct the errors that are in the ordinary Tables of declination of the
Sun, and fixed stars. To which end there is first set down a table of the
declination of every minute of the Ecliptic, in degrees, minutes and seconds,
calculated for the greatest obliquitie of the Zodiac as it is found by
observation in this age, 23 degrees, 21 minutes and an half. Whereto is
adjoined the use thereof for the ready finding of the place of the Sun by his
declination given: or contrariwise for finding the Suns declination, his place
being first known. After this is showed the way and means I used for exact
observation of the Suns Meridian altitudes, with a table of those observations,
for four years together, that so the more certainty might be had of the
declinations and places, and consequently of the whole course and motion of the
Sun: and that by comparing together so many observations, the Suns
Eccentricitie and Apogaeum might the more assuredly be known. By knowledge
whereof, the way was laid open for the correcting, and true making, of the
Tables of the Suns middle motions and Prosthaphaereses, which were necessary
helps and means for calculating the Ephemerides of the Sun there set down,
without which the regiment or table of declination of the Sun next following
(which I may commend as free from error observable at sea, and seldom
differing one minute from observation on land, and for which principally all
the former pains were undertaken) could not so easily have been made. Now if
any shall think that most of this fourth part going before this regiment, might
have been omitted as being impertinent to the use of Mariners, and exceeding
their capacity: I answer, that it was not my purpose, neither could I in all
places apply my self to the most part of sea-mens capacity, knowing many that
would not be content with this regiment alone, but that desired more to know
the ground and root from whence this fruit grew: whose desire I was also
willing to satisfy as I could for the present, having seldom had a more
inconvenient season for such a purpose. Then after some caution given,
concerning the use of this table of Declination, and the Equation thereof in
places far differing in longitude from hence, there follows a Table of 32
principal fixed stars about the Aequinoctiall, that have been most commonly
known and observed by Seamen with their Declinations corrected: and another
Table of as many more of the notablest stars about the North Pole is thereto
annexed, with their distances from the Pole, corrected also and verified by
diligent Observation on land. To these is added a Table of the Suns Right
Ascensions (resolved into hours and minutes) for every day of the year with the
use thereof, for finding at what hour any of those stars comes to the
Meridian at any time of the year: that hereby the Mariner might find at all
times when they come to the Meridian, and so the easilier learn to know and
observe them. Hereunto I have newly adjoined the description and use of an
Instrument, which way not unfitly be called a Sea-quadrant; whereby is showed,
how the height of the Sun at sea, may by two observers, be much more exctly
observed then by any other means before published: and how the height of the
Pole may readily be found at any time of the night, by observation of the
Pole Star and Guard, without making any abatement or allowance (as the manner
has been) in regard of the point of the compass whereupon the Guard is
situate. But now for further satisfaction in every one of these particulars, I
refer the friendly Reader to the Treatise it self here following, which Simon
Stevins inconsiderate desire of finding fault with my Tables of Rumbs, has
caused me to conclude with an Answer to him plainly showing himself and not me,
to be in the same fault that he would find with me.

To this Treatise (for the benefit of the younger and unskilfuller sort of
Seamen) it was thought not unmeet to adjoyn the short Treatise following
containing the sum of the whole Art of Navigation, first set forth in Spanish
by Roderigo Samorano and since translated into English, by a friend of mine,
for the benefit of our Nation: which Treatise I would wish all them that are
but New beginners in that Art, first to peruse, and understand well, before
they come to the reading of the former, which (for the reading thereof with the
greater profit) requires such a one as is already reasonably well acquainted
with the rules and principles of that Art: which I have not hitherto known to
be more briefly and plainly, nor yet more fully set down and published in any
other book, then they are in that little Treatise. This notwithstanding I must
admonish the Reader, that in stead of the Sea-Chart therein described,
according to the common error, with equal degrees of Latitude, he follow that
manner of making the same, which I have in the former Treatise set down, Chap.
3, 4, 5, and 6. And that in stead of the rules and allowances for finding the
Latitude by the height of the Pole Star (which are many ways, and much
erroneous) he must follow the Tables adjoined to the end of that Treatise;
which for any of those eight positions of the Guards, at which Seamen use to
take the height of the Pole Star, do in any Latitude truly show the height of
the Pole by the height of the Pole Star truly observed. Which Tables, together
with some others in the former Treatise; as namely, that of the Declination of
every minute of the Ecliptic in the 17 Chapter, together with those of the
Suns Prosthaphaereses and Ephemerides in the 22 and 25 Chapters, as also that
of the Suns Declination Chapter the 27: I could not by reason of my many
distractions intend to make my self: but was enforced to procure my kind friend
M. Henry Brigs to undertake that labor for me: which notwithstanding (I
persuade my self) many will think might well have been spared; being all
undertaken upon no greater occasion then the error of one minute and a half in
the Suns greatest Declination, which (by following the example of Copernicus
and others, the chiefest Arts masters in Astronomy, in not regarding the
Suns Parallax, when by his Solstitiall altitude, and the height of the Pole,
I sought the obliquitie of the Zodiac, and distance of the Tropicks) was
committed in those Tables in the former edition of my book of Errors in
Navigation.

But howsoever I may perhaps for this cause be censured by some, of too much
curiosity; yet this I am sure of, that all Mariners and Seamen, and whosoever
else shall have occasion to make use of this book, have just cause to think
well of my carfulness herein; who would have so much labor undertaken, as to
have all those Tables with great diligence newly calculated throughout: rather
then so small a fault as that should in this edition also pass on uncorrected.
This labor therefore together with the rest, I commend to thy friendly
acceptance. Farewell.

Certain Errors IN NAVIGATION CORRECTED.
CHAP. I. Faults in the common Sea-Chart, with Rumbes expressed by right lines,
and degrees of Latitude, every where equal.
AS the Sea-Chart is one of the most principal Instruments that Mariners have
for their direction in sailing, so there is not any, wherein there are so great
and dangerous errors.

1. For first, what places so ever are described therein, Error in the
proportion of the length and breadth of places in the common Sea-chart
the length of them (from East to west) has a greater proportion to the
breadth (from North to South) then indeed it ought to have (except it be at the
Aequinoctial.) And so much the more this error increases, by how much the
further distant those places are from the Aequinoctial: even as the proportion
of the Meridian to the Parallel, increases the more, the nearer you come to
either Pole; so that at the Parallel of 60 degr. of latitude, the proportion of
the length to the breadth is twice greater then indeed it should be; and that
because the Meridian is double to that Parallel, and so in all the rest, the
proportion of the length to the breadth shall be greater then the truth* in the
same proportion, wherewith the Meridian exceeds the Parallel.

As for example: In the common Sea-Chart, the proportion of the length of
Friesland, to the breadth thereof, is twofold greater then in the Globe, (which
shows the true proportion of the length to the breadth) because the Meridian
is double to the parallel of that Island. In the Islands of Groenland and
Grocland, the length to the breadth has a fourfold greater proportion in the
common Mariners Chart, then it has in the Globe; because the meridian is
fourfold greater then the Parallel of those places.

2. The way to find out the difference of longitude, by the common Sea-Chart,
Error in finding out the difference of longitude by the common sea Chart.
is true at the Aequinoctial only, and near about the same may be used without
sensible error: because there only the Meridian and parallel are equal But on
this side or beyond the Aequinoctial, there is error committed proportionally
to the difference of the Meridian and Parallel; that is, the difference of
longitude found out by the Chart* has the same proportion to the true
difference of longitude, that the Parallel has to the Meridian.

As for example: At the Parallel of 60 degrees in the common Mariners Chart
(wherein the degrees of the Meridians and Parallels are equal) admit BD be two
places, bearing each from other South-west and North-east, differing in
latitude so much as is the Ark of the Meridian BC, which for example sake we
will suppose to be one degree, therefore by the ordinary Charts, the difference
of Longitude CD, shall be likewise one degree: but yet in truth, because the
Meridian is double to that Parallel, (and consequently, a degree of the
Meridian double to a degree of that Parallel,) therefore B differing a degree
in latitude from D should be placed twice so far from C, that is at A, so as
ABC may all be counted but for one degree of the Meridian, and so be equal to
two degrees of the Parallel; whereof should follow, that EC should be the
difference of longitude: that is, two degrees, (as the truth is in the Globe)
whereas the common Mariners Chart shows the difference of longitude to be but
half so much. And yet notwithstanding if you go nearer to the Poles, you shall
err by their Chart a great deal more, even as the proportion of the Meridian
to the Parallel increases more and more.

But this error in showing the difference of longitude, shall yet further
appear by this example of Petrus Nonius.

In the Mariners Chart, the distance betwixt Lisbon and Tercaera, is set down
to be 262 Spanish leagues, (whereof 17 and one half make a degree of the
Aequinoctial, or of any of the greatest Circles) for so much the Mariners do
find that distance to be, not only by estimation of the way that the ship
makes, when they sail from East to West to that Island, but by another account
which is more certain; and that is this In sailing from Lisbon to Madera, they
keep their course South-west, and from this Island to Tercaera, they sail
North-west. Now because Lisbon and Tercaera have both almost the same latitude
of 39 Degrees: and in sailing from North-east to South-west* and likewise from
South-east to North-west, you alter the longitude as much as the latitude
(because that in both those courses the angle that the way of the ship makes
with the Meridian, is equal to half a right angle: and the Island of Madera has
almost 31 degrees and an half of latitude toward the North, so that the
difference of the latitudes of Lisbon and Madera, as also of Madera and
Tercaera is about 7 degrees and.) Therefore the difference of the longitudes of
Lisbon and Madera, and likewise of Madera and Teraeera shall be 7 and. of the
same degrees of the Meridian, both which added together make the whole
difference of longitude betwixt Lisbon and Tercaera, to be 15 degrees of the
Meridian, which are equal to 262, and one half Spanish leagues. But in the
Parallel that passes by the 39 degree of latitude, wherein (almost) Lisbon and
Tercaera are placed, there are more degrees in the same space, according to
that proportion wherewith the Meridian is greater then that Parallel. Therefore
the true difference of longitude betwixt Lisbon and Tercaera, (that is the ar^
of the Parallel or Aeqinoctial contained betwixt the Meridians of those places)
shall thus be found out:

It is a rule in Geometry, that the Diameters and Peripheries, and consequently
the semidiameters, and like arks of Circles have the same proportion.

Also it is manifest, that the Sine of the complement of the distance of any
Parallel from the Aequinoctial, is the Semediameter of the same Parallel.

Now the distance of the Parallel of Lisbon and Tercaera from the Aequinoctial
is about 39 degrees, the complement whereof is 51 degrees: whose sine is 777,
which is the Semidiameter of the foresaid Parallel, in such parts whereof the
whole sine contains 1000. which is the Semidiameter of the Meridan. Therefore
by the rule of proportion inversed, if 262 Spanish leagues make 15 degrees in
the Meridian, whose Semidiamiter is 1000 parts: then in the Parallel whose
Semidiameter is 777 of the same parts, they shall make 19 degrees, and 237/777
parts of one degree, that is, 18 min. and little more: which (if it be true
that the course from Lisbon to Madera is South-west, and from Madera to
Tercaera North-west: and that the Latitude of Madera is 31 degrees 30 min. and
the Latitude of Lisbon and Tercaera 39 degrees.) shall be the difference of
Longitude betwixt Lisbon and Tercaera. Whereas Ortelius and Mercator following
(as it seems) the Mariners Charts without correction in their universal
Maps, make them to differ in Longitude scarce 15 degrees of their Parallel, as
if it were equal to the Aequinoctial line.

3. Moreover, they are deceived not only in the situation of many places, Error
in the lying and bearing of places one from another in the common Sea-Chart.
which the Marine Chart shows to be under the same Meridian: but also in the
lying* or bearing of other places each from other. For the Meridian is a
certain rule of the positions of places. If therefore error shall be committed
in the situation of the Meridian, there must needs be error in the Inclinations
of the other Rumbs, points, or lines of the Compass. And therefore not every
Inclination, or respective position of place to place, which is set down in the
Marine Chart, is to be taken for true: but that position or inclination only,
by which some have sailed from the one place to the other. This may be seen in
sailing to India. For the Marine Chart places that promontorie of Africa,
called the promontorie of 3 points, being in Latitude toward the North, 4
degrees and one half, and the Islands of Tristan Acugna (which have 36 degrees
of Southern Latitude) under the self same Meridian: Also the Marine Chart
shows the distance between these Islands and the promontorie of Good Hope, to
be almost 400 leagues: both which notwithstanding cannot stand together. For if
all the shore from the promontorie of 3 points unto the promontorie of Good
Hope be rightly described, and the promontorie of 3 points also lie under the
same Meridian with those Islands; the foresaid distance must needs be much
less: but if it be not less it cannot be that they should have the same
Meridian with the promontorie of 3 points, but must needs be more to the
Westward. Hereof it comes, that the Mariners are very often deceived, when they
go from one place to another, following that direction which the Sea-Chart
shows them. Which place, when they find not by that course, they think that
the cause of that error is either some swift current of the Sea, that carries
them another way: or else the declination of the Poles of the Loadstone, from
the true Poles of the World: although (perchance) they erred only because they
knew not how those places did bear one from another. Error in setting of places
out of the common Sea-Chart into the Globe.


4. Neither are they only deceived in that* because they think that the
Sea-Chart can show the situations of all places: but also because that when
they will translate the Sea coasts out of the Chart into the Globe, they do it,
having respect only to the numbers of the degrees of Longitude, and Latitude
found therein; and no otherwise then when they set the fixed stars into a
Celestial Globe. So it comes to pass, that not only those errors are
committed, which do necessarily arise out of the common Sea-Chart: but other
errors also which might be avoided, if they first turned into degrees those
distances of Longitude which they have truly known, and then followed the
Longitudes and Latitudes of places. Error in showing the distances of places in
the common Sea-Chart.


5. In showing the distance of places, there is as great error committed, as in
any of the former. For example: If you imagine 2 ships to be under the
Aequinoctial 100 leagues asunder, and that each of them should sail from thence
due North or South under his Meridian, until they come to the Parallel of 60
degrees Latitude: they should be there but only 50 leagues distant, because at
that Parallel the Meridians are distant but half so much one from another, as
they were at the Aequinoctial; as it may most manifestly appear by the Globe:
and yet the Chart will show that those two ships have the self same distance of
100 leagues, being under the parallel of 60 degrees* which they had before,
when they were under the Aequinoctial line.

Error in keeping always the same point of the Compass.
6 There is yet another error remaining (though all the former were avoided)
which arises hereof, because that by the direction of the Compass, they bend
and turn the ship, in such sort, that they constrain it always to make the
same angles with the Meridian. As when they sail from Vshent to Cape Raso, both
lying under the same Parallel, they guide the ship in such sort, that it makes
always right angles with the Meridian, and so holding on their course due
West, they keep themselves always under the same Parallel; whereas
notwithstanding, there is a more certain course, whereby they may go from one
place to another without that loss of way, which they must needs make that
keep themselves always under the same Parallel.

There is moreover another commodity in this kind of sailing, that we may find
every day by a more certain account what way we have made, and know in what
place we are.

But this way is not to be defined by any of the lesser Circles, but by a great
Circle, which is to be drawn by those two places: and the ark of that great
Circle contained betwixt the same places is less then the ark of the Parallel
which lies between them, as may be concluded by an evident and necessary
reason out of the principles of Geometry: much like as a straight line is
shorter then a crooked, both being extended between, the same pricks. Therefore
this commodity is also hereunto adjoined, that in sailing by a great Circle,
the way is more short, and compendious. But he that enters into this course of
sailing, must know, that he must often change the point of the Compass
whereupon he guides the ship, because of the variable, and inconstant
inequality of the angles, which that great Circle makes with every new
Meridian. Of which angles the Invention indeed (by the Chart especialy) is very
subtle, and consists herein, to wit, in knowing how much such kind of angles
do decrease or increase, as the ship goes forwards. And he that so shapeth his
course, goes the straight and nearest way. Otherwise it cannot be that a man
should keep a straight course, if he shall continually follow one and the same
point, or line of the Compass, (except he sail under a Meridian, or under the
Aequinoctial line:) but he must change the point of the Compass so often as
that straight course shall sensibly require.

And therefore it cannot be by any means, that the Mariners when they go
perpetualy toward the same part of the world, keeping the same angle of
position in respect of the Meridian, or the same point of the Compass, should
go the shortest and nearest way.

This kind of sailing under a great Circle, is of special use in our Northern
Navigations, for the discovery of the North-east or North west passage: which
as it may most easily be performed by help of an Hydrographical Globe, with the
Helisphaericall lines drawn thereupon: so for them that list not to be troubled
with the cumbersome carriage and charge of the Globe, it may be done (in a
manner) with no less facility by a nautical Planisphere, made after the
projection of Gemma Erisius his Astrolabe, whereof more hereafter, when God
shall give leisure.

There be some also that hold it for erroneous, that the Rumbs in the Mariners
Chart should be expressed by right lines, The expressing of the Rumbs by right
lines defended: which some hold for erroneous.
and consequently that the Meridians should be Parallels, or equidistant every
where; which because it is but barely affirmed, and the contrary may be proved,
as well as that each Rumb, except the rumb of North and South makes equal
angles with every Meridian: we hold it not only as true, but also as most meet
and commodious for the Mariners common use, that the Meridians in the Sea-Chart
should be every where equidistant each from other and consequently; that the
Rumbs should be straight lines for these two causes.

First, because the rumbs or points of the Compass may so most easily be drawn
in the Nautical Planisphaere, only by a straight ruler. For seeing that any
one and the same rumb (saving only the rumb of North and South, which is all
one with the Meridian) makes always equal angles with every Meridian, without
either sensible, numerable, or measurable, though not without intelligible
error (for indeed those angles are less and less as they come nearer to the
Pole, much like as the angle of a little semicircle is less then the angle of
a greater semicircle) all the rumbs must needs be straight lines, if the
Meridians be equidistant and right lines, by the 27 and 28 prop. 1. Euclid.

Secondly, the respective situation of any place to other in the Chart (which
they commonly call the lying or bearing of one place from another, according to
the points of the Compass) may most easily be known by the Nautical
Planisphaere with right lined rumbs and equidistant Meridians. For that rumb
from which both places are equidistant shows how those two places lie one
from another.

And for these two causes of so great facility, both in the making, and using
of the Mariners Chart, with equidistant Meridians, and straight-lined rumbs, it
ought to be preferred before any other Instrument heretofore published to that
end, for the common use of the Mariner, at Sea especially. And though the Globe
be commended by some as most absolute and perfect for all courses and Climates
whatsoever: yet for the chargeableness thereof, troublesome carriage, stowage
and tedious usage for the most part in Navigation, following any other course,
save East or West, North or South: it will for the most part be found unmeet
and cumbersome, and nothing so fit and ready for the Mariners common use at
sea, as the Nauticall Planisphaere truly made.

CHAP. II. How the former Errors may be avoided.
THese Errors notwithstanding they have been much complained of by diverse, as
namely by Martine Cortese in his third book, and second chapter of the Art of
Navigation, but specially by Petrus Nonius in his second book of Geometrical
Observations, Rules, and Instruments: And although Gerardus Mercator in his
universal Map of the World seems to correct them, by making the distances
of the parallels greater and greater toward the Poles: yet none of them
teaches any certain way how to amend such gross faults, whereby the Mariner
may be deceived many times an whole point of the Compass, yea sometimes two or
three points and more, in judging by his ordinary Chart how one place bears
from another: especially if he sail far Northwards, or Southwards, whereby we
may easily guess, how indirect a course he shall make to come to the desired
haven, that shall follow so false and erroneous direction with great danger (at
the least) many times to lose ship, goods, lives, and all.

The fountain of all the errors aforesaid (the last only excepted) is in the
very foundation and groundwork of the Mariners Chart, that is, in the first
Geometrical lineaments thereof: namely, because the Meridians are not rightly
divided, (the divisions being every where equal:) nor the Parallels rightly
drawn (having in all places the same distances each from other that the
Meridians have at the Aequinoctial:) Whereas the spaces betwixt the Parallels
should increase more and more as you go from the Aequinoctial toward either of
the Poles, which Martin Cortese also notes is his 3 book and 2 chapter of the
Art of Navigation. But he omitteth that wherein all the difficulty lies: that
is, how much, or in what proportion those spaces should increase. Which, that
it may the better be perceived, I think it not unmeet first to show by what
kind of projection (or extension rather) the nauticall planisphaere may not
unfitly be conceived to be geometrically made, after this manner.

Suppose a sphaerical superficies with Meridians, Parallels, Rumbes, and the
whole hydrographicall description drawn thereupon, to be inscribed into a
concave cylinder, their axes agreeing in one.

Let this Sphaerical superficies swel like a bladder, (whiles it is in blowing)
aequally always in every part thereof (that is, as much in longitude as in
latitude) till it apply, and join it self (round about, and all along also
toward either pole) unto the concave superficies of the cylinder: each
parallel upon this sphaerical superficies increasing successively from the
Aequinoctial toward either pole, until it come to be of aequal diameter with
the cylinder, and consequently the Meridians still widening themselves, till
they come to be so far distant every where each from other as they are at the
Aequinoctial. Thus it may most easily be understood, how a sphaerical
superficies may (by extension) be made a cylindrical, and consequently a plain
Parallelogram superficies; because the superficies of a cylinder is nothing
else but a plain parallelogram wound about two equal equidistant circles that
have one common axtree perpendicular upon the centers of them both, and the
peripheries of each of them equal to the length of the parallelogram as the
distance betwixt those circles, or height of the cylinder is equal to the
breadth thereof. So as the nauticall planisphaere may be defined to be nothing
else but a parallellogram made of the sphaerical superficies of an
Hydrographical Globe inscribed into a concave cylinder, both their axes
concurring in one; The definition of the Nautical Planisphaere.
and the sphaerical superficies swelling in every part equally in longitude and
latitude, till every one of the Parallels thereupon be inscribed into the
cylinder (each parallel growing as great as the Aequinoctial:) or till the
whole sphaerical superficies, touch and apply it self every where to the
concavity of the cylinder.

In this nauticall planisphaere thus conceived to be made, all places must
needs be situate in the same longitudes, latitudes, and directions or courses,
and upon the same Meridians, Parallels, and Rumbes, that they were in the
Globe, because that at every point between the Aequinoctial and the Pole, we
understand the Spherical superficies whereof this Plani-sphere is conceived to
be made, to swell equally as much in longitude as in latitude (til it join it
self unto the concavity of the cylinder, so as hereby no part thereof is any
way distorted or displaced out of his true and natural situation upon his
Meridian, Parallel, or Rumbe, but only dilated and enlarged: the Meridians
also, Parallels, and Rumbes dilating and enlarging themselves likewise, at
every point of latitude in the same proportion.

Now then let us diligently consider of the Geometrical lineaments, that is,
the Meridians, Rumbs, and Parallels of this imaginary nautical Planisphere,
that we may in like manner express the same in the Mariners Chart. For so
undoubtedly we shall have therein a true hydrographical description of all
places, in their longitudes, latitudes, and directions, or respective
situations each from other according to the points of the Compass in all
things correspondent to the Globe, without either sensible, or explicable error.

First therefore in this planisphaer, because the Parallels are every where
equal each to other (for every one of them is equal to the Aequinoctial or
circumference of the circumscribing cylinder) the Meridians also must needs be
Parallel and straight lines: 27 Prop. 1. Euclid 17.
and consequently the rumbs (making equal angles with every Meridian) must
likewise be straight lines.

Secondly, because the Sphaerical superficies whereof this Planisphaere is
conceived to be made, swells in every part thereof equally, that is, as much
in latitude, as in longitude till it apply it self round about, to the
concavity of the cylinder: therefore at every point of latitude in this
planisphaere, a part of the Meridian keeps the same proportion to the like
part of the parallel, that the like parts of the Meridian, and Parallel have
each to other in the Globe, without any explicable error.

Now because like parts of wholes keep the same proportion that their wholes
have, therefore the like parts of any Parallel and Meridian of the Globe, have
the same proportion that the same Parallel and Meridian have.

For example sake, as the Meridian is double to the Parallel of 60 degrees, so
a degree of the Meridian is double to a degree of that Parallel* or a minute to
a minute, etc. and what proportion the Parallel has to the Meridian, the same
proportion have their diameters and semidiameters each to other, 26.18. c. 2,
c. 15. Ram.

But the sine of the complement of the Parallels latitude, or distance from the
Aequinoct. is the Semidiameter of the Parallel;

As here you see, ae the sine of ah the complement of af the latitude or
distance of the Parallel abcd, from the Aequinoctial, is the Semidiameter of
the same Parallel abcd.

And as the Semidiameter of the Meridian (or the whole sine) is to the
Semidiameter of the Parallel, so is the Secans, or Hypotenusa of the Parallels
latitude (or of the Parallels distance from the Aequinoctial) to the
Semidiameter of the Meridian, or to the whole sine; as fk, (that is) ak, to ae
(that is) gk; so is ik, to kf.



Therefore in this nautical planisphaere, the Semidiameter of each Parallel
being equal to the Semidiameter of the Aequinoctial (that is) to the whole
sine; the parts of the Meridian at every point of latitude must needs increase
with the same proportion wherewith the Secants of the ark, contained between
those points of latitude and the Aequinoctial do increase.

Now then we have an easy way laid open for the making of a table (by help of
the Canon of Triangles) whereby the Meridians of the Mariners Chart may most
easily and truly be divided into parts, in due proportion from the Aequinoctial
toward either Pole.

For (supposing each distance of each point of latitude, or of each Parallel
from other, to contein so many parts as the Secans of the latitude of each
point or Parallel contains) by perpetual addition of the Secantes answerable
to the latitudes of each point or Parallel unto the sum compounded of all the
former secantes, beginning with the secans of the first Parallels latitude, and
thereto adding the secans of the second Parallels latitude, and to the sum of
both these adjoining the secans of the third Parallels latitude, and so forth
in all the rest, we may make a table which shall truly show the sections and
points of latitude in the Meridians of the nautical planisphaere: by which
sections, the Parallels are to be drawn.

As in the table following, we make the distance of each Parallel from other,
to be one minute: and we suppose the space between any two Parallels each next
to other in the planisphaere to contein so many parts as the secans answerable
to the distance of the furthest of those two Parallels from the Aequinoctial,
and so by perpetual addition of the secans of each minute to the sum compounded
of all the former secants, I make the whole table. As for example, the secans
of one minute is 10,000,000. which also shows the section of one minute of
the Meridian from the Aequinoctial in the nauticall planisphaere. Whereunto
add the secans of 2. minutes that is 10,000,002, the sum is 20,000,002. which
shows the section of the second minute of the Meridian from the Aequinoctial,
in the planisphaere: to this sum add the secans of 3. minutes, which is
10,000,004, the sum will be 30,000,006, which shows the section of the third
minute of the Meridian from the Aequinoctial: and so forth in all the rest:
saving that in this table we have of purpose omitted in every secans the 3
first ciphers next the right hand: not only for the easier, but also for the
truer making of the table, because that indeed, at every point of latitude, a
minute of the Meridian in this nautical planisphaere, has somewhat less
proportion to a minute of the Parallel adjoining toward the Aequinoctial, then
the secans of that Parallels latitude has to the whole sine. But in this table
it was thought sufficient to use such exactness as that thereby (in drawing the
lineaments of the nautical planisphaere) sensible error might be avoided. He
that lists to be more precise may make the like table to decades or tennes of
seconds. out of Ioachimus Rhaeticus his Canon magnus triangulorum.
Notwithstanding the Geometrician that desires exact truth, cannot be so
satisfied neither: for whose sake and further satisfaction, I thought good to
adjoyn also this Geometrical conceit of dividing a Meridian of the nautical
planisphaere.

Let the Aequinoctial and a Meridian be drawn upon a Globe: Let the Meridian
(divided into degrees, minutes, seconds, etc.) roll upon a straight line
beginning at the Aequinoctial, the Globe swelling in the mean time in such sort
that the Semidiameter thereof may be always equal to the secans of the angle,
or arch contained between the Aequinoctial and Semediameter insisting at right
angles upon the foresaid straight line: The degrees, minutes, seconds, etc. of
the Meridian, noted in the straight line, as they come to touch the same, are
the divisions of the Meridian in the nautical planisphaere. And this conceit of
dividing the Meridian of the nautical planisphaere may satisfy the curious
exactness of the Geometritian: but for mechanical use, the table before
mentioned (which here now follows) may suffice.

This Table (serving principally for the true dividing of the Meridians of the
Sea Chart, in such sort that in any part thereof, a minute of the Meridian
shall have the same proportion to a minute of the Parallel thereto adjoining
that it has in the Globe) may not unfitly be called, A Table of Latitudes.

For as in Geographie, the latitude of a place is nothing else but the shortest
distance thereof from the Aequinoctial line, measured upon the convexitie of
the earth or sea in degrees and minutes; and therefore Tables containing such
distances are ordinarily called Tables of Latitudes: So this Table, showing the
distance of every minute of a Meridian in the Sea Chart from the Aequinoctial
line thereof toward the North or South, in such equal parts whereof one minute
of the Aequinoctial is supposed to contain 10,000, may with like reason, by a
certain analogy and resemblance it holds with the foresaid tables, be very
well called. A Table of Latitudes of every minute of a Meridian of the Sea
Chart, in such parts whereof each minute of the Aequinoctial contains 10,000.

This Table is divided into three columns; whereof the first contains, in
the head thereof the degrees, and in the rest of that column, minutes of a
Meridian of the nautical planisphaer, beginning at the Aequinoctial line. In
the second column are placed equal parts of the same Meridian, beginning
likewise to be numbered from the Aequinoctial (of which parts each minute of the
Aequinoctial is supposed to contain 10,000) and shows how many of these parts
each minute of latitude in the Sea Chart must be distant from the Aequinoctial.
The third column shows the differences of the numbers set down in the second
column.

The use hereof follows after this Table.

A Table of Latitudes etc.
Min. 0 Degr. 1 Degr. 2 Degr. 3 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of
equ* par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a
Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par.
0 00.000 10.000 600.012 10.001 1.200.196 10.006 1.800.749 10.013 1 10.000
10.000 610.013 10.001 1.210.202 10.006 1.810.762 10.014 2 20*000 10.000 620.014
10.001 1.220.208 10.006 1.820.776 10.014 3 30.000 10.000 630.015 10.001
1.230.214 10.006 1.830.790 10.014 4 40.000 10.000 640 016 10.001 1.240.220
10.006 1.840.804 10.014 5 50.000 10.000 650.017 10.001 1.250.226 10.006
1.850.818 10.014 6 60 000 10.000 660.018 10.001 1.260.232 10.006 1.860.832
10.014 7 70 000 10.000 670.019 10.001 1.270.238 10.006 1.870.846 10.014 8
80.000 10.000 680.020 10.002 1.280.244 10.007 1.888.860 10.015 9 90.000 10.000
690.022 10.002 1.290.251 10.007 1.890.875 10.015 10 100 000 10.000 700.024
10.002 1.300.258 10.007 1.900.890 10.015 11 110 000 10.000 710.026 10.002
1.130.265 10.007 1.910.905 10.015 12 120.000 10.000 720.028 10.002 1.320.272
10.007 1.920.920 10.015 13 130.000 10.000 730.030 10.002 1.330.279 10.007
1.931.935 10.015 14 140^000 10.000 740.032 10.002 1.340.286 10.007 1.940.950
10.016 15 150.000 10.000 750.034 10.002 1.350.293 10.007 1.950.966 10.016 16
160.000 10.000 760.036 10.002 1.360.300 10.007 1.960.982 10.016 17 170.000
10.000 770.038 10.002 1.370.307 10.008 1.970.998 10.016 18 180.000 10.000
780.040 10.002 1.380.315 10.008 1.981.014 10.016 19 190.000 10.000 790.042
10.002 1.390.323 10.008 1.991.030 10.016 20 200.000 10.000 800.044 10.002
1.400.331 10.008 2.001.046 10.017 21 210.000 10.000 810.046 10.002 1.410.339
10.008 2.011.063 10.017 22 220.000 10.000 820.048 10.002 1.420.347 10.008
2.021.080 10.017 23 230.000 10.000 830.050 10.002 1.430.355 10.008 2.031.097
10.017 24 240.000 10.000 840^052 10.003 1.440.363 10.008 2.041.114 10.017 25
250.000 10.000 850.055 10.003 1.450.371 10.009 2.051.131 10.017 26 260.000
10.000 860.058 10.003 1.460.380 10.009 2^061.148 10.018 27 270.000 10.000
870.061 10.003 1.470.389 10.009 2^071.166 10.018 28 280.000 10.000 880.064
10.003 1.480.398 10.009 2^081.184 10.018 29 290.000 10.000 8^0 067 10.00^
1.490.407 10.009 2^091.201 10.018 30 300.000 10.000 900.070 10.003 1.500.416
10.009 2.101.220 10.018 31 310.000 10.000 910.073 10.003 1.510.425 10.009
2.111.238 10.019 32 320.000 10.000 920.076 10.003 1.520.434 10.009 2.121.257
10.019 33 330.000 10.000 930.079 10.003 1.530.443 10.010 2.131.276 10.019 34
340.000 10.000 940.082 10.003 1.540.453 10.010 2.141.295 10 019 35 350.000
10.000 950.085 10.003 1.550.463 10.010 2.151.314 10.019 36 360.00^ 10 000
960.088 10.003 1.560.473 10.010 2.161.333 10.019 37 370.00^ 10.000 970.091
10.004 1.570.483 10.010 2.171.352 10.020 38 380.000 10.000 980.095 10.0^4
1.580.493 10.010 2.181.372 10.020 39 390.000 10.000 990^099 10.004 1.590.503
10.010 2 191*392 10.020 40 400.000 10.0^0 1.000.103 10.004 1.600.513 10.010
2.201.412 10.020 41 410.000 10.000 1.010.107 10.004 1.610.523 10.011 2.211.432
10.021 42 420.000 10.000 1.020.111 10.004 1.620.534 10.011 2.221.4^2 10.021 43
430.000 10.000 1.030.115 10.004 1.630.545 10.011 2.231.473 10.021 44 440.000
10*000 1.040.119 10.004 1.640.556 10.011 2.241.494 10.001 45 450.000 10.000
1.050.123 10.004 1.650.567 10.011 2.251.515 12.021 46 460.000 10.000 1.060.127
10.004 1.660.578 10.011 2.261 536 12.021 47 470.000 10.000 1.070.131 10.004
1.670.589 10.011 2.271.557 11.002 48 480.000 10.001 1.080.135 10.005 1.680.600
10.012 2.281.570 10.022 49 490.000 10.001 1.090.140 10.005 1.690.612 10.012
2.291.601 10.022 50 500.00^ 10.001 1.100.145 10.005 1.709.624 10.012 2.301.62^
10.022 51 510.000 10.001 1.110.150 10.005 1.710.636 10.012 2.311.645 10.022 52
520.000 10.001 1.120.155 10.005 1.720.648 10.012 2.321.667 10.023 53 530.000 10
001 1.130.160 10.005 1.730.660 10.012 2.331.690 10.023 54 540.000 10.001
1^140.165 10.005 1.740.672 10.012 2.341.713 10.023 55 550.000 10.001 1.150.170
10.005 1.750.684 10.013 2.351.736 10.023 56 560.000 10.001 1.160.175 10.005
1.760.697 10.013 2.361.759 10.023 57 570.000 10.001 16170.180 10.005 1.770.710
10.013 2.371.782 10.024 58 580.000 10.001 1.180.185 10.005 1.780.723 10.013
2.381.806 10.024 59 590.000 10 001 1.190.190 10.006 1.790.736 10.013 2.391.830
10.024 Min. 4 Degr. 5 Degr. 6 Degr. 7 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference
of equ par. Equal parts of a Merid Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a
Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par.
0 2.401.854 10.024 3.003.694 10.038 3.606.455 10.055 4.210.328 10.075 1
2.411.878 10.024 3.013.732 10.038 3.616.510 10 055 4.220.403 10.075 2 2.421.902
10.025 3.023.770 10.038 3.626.565 10.056 4.230.478 10 076 3 2.431.927 10.025
3.033.808 10.039 3.636.621 10 056 4.240 554 10.076 4 2.441.952 10.025 3.043.847
10 039 3 646.677 10.056 4.250.630 10.076 5 2.451.977 10.025 3.053.886 10 039
3.656.733 10.056 4.260.706 10.077 6 2.462.002 10.025 3.063.925 10.040 3.666.789
10.057 4.270.783 10.077 7 2.472.027 10.026 3.073.965 10 040 3.676.846 10.057 4
280.860 10.078 8 2.482.053 10.026 3.084.005 10 040 3^686.903 10.057 4.290.938
10.078 9 2.492.079 10.026 3.094.045 10.040 3.696.960 10.058 4.301.016 10.078 10
2.502.105 10.026 3.104.085 10.041 3.707.018 10 058 4.311.094 10 079 11
2.512.131 10.026 3.114.126 10.041 3.717.076 10.058 4.321.173 10 079 12
2.522.157 10.027 3 124.167 10 041 3.727.134 10 059 4.331.252 10.079 13
2.532.184 10.027 3.134 208 10.041 3.737.193 10.059 4.341.331 10.080 14
2.542.211 10.027 3.144 249 10.042 3.747.252 10.059 4 351.411 10.080 15
2.552.238 10.027 3.154.291 10.042 3.757.311 10.060 4.361.491 10.080 16
2.562.265 10.028 3.164 333 10.052 3.767.371 10.060 4.371.571 10.081 1^
2.572.293 10.028 3.174.375 10 042 3 777.431 10.060 4.381.652 10.081 18
^.582.321 10.028 3.184 417 10.043 3.787.491 10.061 4.391.733 10.082 19
2.592.349 10.028 3.194.460 10.043 3 797.552 10 061 4.401.815 10.082 20
2.^02.377 10.028 3^204 503 10.043 3.807.613 10.061 4^411.897 10.082 21
^.^22.405 10.029 3.214.546 10 044 3.817.674 10.062 4 421.979 10.083 22
2.622.434 10.029 3^224 590 10.044 3.827 736 10.062 4.432.062 10.083 2^
2.63^.463 10.029 3^234^634 10.044 3.837.798 10.062 4.442^145 10.083 2^
2.642.492 10.029 3 244.678 10 044 3.847.860 10.063 4.452.228 10.084 25
2.652.521 10.039 3.254.722 10.045 3.857 923 10.063 4.462.312 10.084 26
2.662.551 10.030 3.264.767 10.045 3.867.986 10.063 4.472.396 10.085 27
2.672.581 10.030 3.274^812 10 045 3.878.049 10.064 4.482.481 10.085 28
2.682.611 10.030 3.284^857 10.045 3.888.113 10.064 4.492.566 10.085 29
2.692.641 10.030 3.294.902 10.046 3.898.177 10.064 4.502.651 10.086 30
2.702.671 10.031 3.304.948 10 046 3.908.241 10.065 4.512.737 10.086 31
2.712.702 10.031 3.314.994 10 046 3.918.306 10.065 4.522.823 10 087 32
2.722.733 10.031 3 325.040 10.047 3.928.371 10 065 4.532.910 10.087 33
2.732.764 10.031 3.335.087 10.047 3.938.436 10.066 4.542.997 10.087 34
2.742.795 10.032 3.345.134 10.047 3.948.502 10.066 4.553.084 10.088 35
2.752.827 10.032 3.355 181 10.047 3.958.568 10.066 4.563.172 10.088 36
2.762.859 10.032 3.365 228 10.048 3.968.934 10.067 4.573.260 10.889 37
2.772.891 10.032 3 375.276 10.048 3.978.701 10 067 4.583.349 10 089 38
2.782.923 10.033 3.385.324 10.048 3 988.768 10.067 4.543.438 10 099 39
2.792.956 10.033 3 395 372 10 049 3.998.835 10.068 4.603.527 10.090 40
2.802.989 10.033 3.405.421 10.049 4.008.903 10.068 4.613.617 10 090 41
2.813.022 10.033 3.415.470 10 049 4.018.971 10.068 4.623.707 10.090 42
2.823.055 10.033 3.425.519 10.049 4.029 039 10.069 4.633 797 10 091 43
2.833.088 10.034 3.435.568 10.050 4.039.108 10.069 4.643.888 10.091 44
2.843.122 10.034 3^445 618 10.050 4.049.177 10.069 4 653^979 10 092 45
2.853.156 10.034 3.455.668 10 050 4 059.246 10 070 4 664.071 10 092 46
2.863.190 10.034 3.465.718 10.051 4.069.316 10.070 4.674.136 10.092 47
2.873.224 10.035 3.475.769 10 051 4.079.386 10 070 4 684 228 10 093 48
2.883.259 10.035 3.485 820 10.051 4.089 456 10.071 4 694.321 10.093 49
2.893.294 10.035 3 495.871 10 052 4.099.527 10.071 4.704 414 10.094 50
2.903.329 10.035 3.505.923 10.052 4.109.598 10.071 4.714.508 10 094 51
2.913.364 10.036 3.515 975 10.052 4.119.669 10 072 4.724 602 10 095 52
2.923.300 10.036 3.526 027 10.052 4.129.741 10 072 4 734.697 10.095 53
2.933.436 10.036 3.536.079 10.053 4.139.813 10.072 4.744.792 10 095 54
2.943.^72 10.036 3.546.132 10.053 4.149.885 10 073 4.754.887 10 096 55
2.953.508 10.037 3.556.185 10 053 4.159 958 10.073 4.764.983 10.096 56
2.963.545 10.037 3.566.238 10.054 4 170.031 10 074 4.775*070 10.097 57
2.973.582 10.037 3.576.292 10.054 4.180.105 10.074 4.785.17^ 10 097 58
2.983.619 10.037 3.586.346 10.054 4 190.179 10.074 4.795.273 10 097 59
2.993.656 10.038 3.596.400 10 055 4.200.253 10.075 4.805 370 10.098 Min* 8
Degr. 9 Degr. 10 Degr. 11 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par
Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid.
Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. 0
4.815.468 10.098 5.422.133 10.125 6 030.475 10 154 6.640.679 10.187 1 4.825 566
10.099 5.432.258 10 125 6.040.629 10 155 6.650.866 10.188 2 4.835.665 10.099
5.442.383 10.126 6.050.784 10 155 6.661.054 10.188 3 4.845.764 10.099 5.452 509
10.126 6 060 939 10.156 6.671 242 10 189 4 4.855.863 10.100 5.462.635 10.126 6
071 098 10 156 6.681.431 10.190 5 4.865.963 10.100 5.472.761 10.127 6 081.251
10.157 6.691.621 10.190 6 4.876 063 10.101 5.482.888 10.127 6.091.408 10 157
6.701.811 10 191 7 4.886.164 10.101 5.493.015 10.128 6.101.565 10.158 6.712.002
10.191 8 4.896.265 10.102 5.503.143 10.128 6.111.723 10 158 6.722.219 10.192 9
4.906.367 10.102 5.513 271 10.129 6.121.881 10 159 6.732.385 10.192 10
4.916.469 10.102 5.523.400 10.129 6.132.040 10 160 6 742.577 10 193 11
4.926.571 10.103 5.533.529 10.130 6 142.200 10.160 6.752.770 10.194 12 4 936
674 10.103 5.543.659 10.130 6.152.360 10 161 6 762.964 10.194 13 4.946.777
10.104 5.553.789 10.131 6.162.521 10.161 6 773.158 10.195 14 4.956.881 10.104 5
563 920 10 131 6.172.682 10.162 6 783.353 10.195 15 4.966.985 10.104 5.574.051
10.132 6.182.844 10.162 6.793.548 10.196 16 4.977.089 10.105 5.584.183 10.132
6.193 006 30.163 6.803 744 10.197 17 4.987 194 10.105 5.594*315 10.133
6.203.169 10.163 6.813.941 10.197 18 4.997.299 10.106 5.604.448 10.133
6.213.332 10.164 6.824.138 10.198 19 5.007.405 10.106 5.614.581 10 134 6
223.496 10 165 6.834 336 10.198 20 5.017.511 10.107 5.624.715 10 134 6.233.661
10 165 6 844.534 10.199 21 5.027.618 10.107 5.634.849 10.135 6.243.826 10 165
6.854.733 10.200 22 5.037.725 10 108 5.644.984 10.135 6.253 991 10.166 6.864
933 10 200 23 5.047.833 10.108 5 655.119 10.136 6*264.157 10.167 6.875.133
10.201 24 5*057.941 10 108 5.665.255 10.136 6.274 324 10 167 6.885.334 10 201
25 5.068.049 10.109 5.675.391 10.137 6.284*491 10.168 6.895.535 10.202 26
5.078.158 10.109 5 685.528 10.137 6 294.659 10.168 6.905.737 10.203 27
5.088.267 10.110 5.695.665 10.138 6.304 827 10.169 6.915 940 10 203 28 5.098
377 10.110 5.705.803 10.138 6.314.996 10 169 6.926.143 10.204 29 5.108.487
10.111 5 715 941 10.139 6.325^165 10.170 6 936.347 10.204 30 5.118.598 10.111
5.726.080 10.139 6.335.335 10.170 6.946.551 10.205 31 5.128.709 10.111 5
736.219 10.140 6 345.505 10 171 6 956.756 10.206 32 5 138.820 10 112 5.746.359
10.140 6.355 676 10.171 6 966.962 10 206 33 5.148.932 10.112 5.756.499 10.141
6.365.847 10 172 6.977.168 10.207 34 5.159.044 10.113 5.766.640 10.141 6.379
019 10.17^ 6.987.375 10.207 35 5.169 157 10.113 5.776.781 10.142 6.386.192 10
173 6.997.582 10.208 36 5.179 270 10.114 5 786.923 10.142 6.396.365 10.174 7
007 790 10 209 37 5.189.384 10.114 5.797 065 10.143 6.406.539 10 174 7.017.999
10.209 38 5.199.498 10.115 5.807.208 10.143 6.416.713 10*175 7.028 208 10 210
39 5.209.613 10 115 5.817.351 10.144 6.426.888 10 175 7.038 418 10.210 40
5.219.728 10 115 5.827 495 10.144 6.437.063 10 176 7.048 628 10 211 41
5.229^843 10.116 5.837.639 10 145 6.447.239 10 176 7.058.839 10 212 42
5.239.959 10.116 5.847.784 10.145 6.457.415 10.177 7.06^.051 10.212 43
5.250.075 10.117 5.857.929 10.146 6.467.592 10 178 7.07^.263 10 213 44
5.260.193 10.117 5.868.075 10.146 6 477 770 10*178 7.08^ 476 10 214 45 5.270
309 10.118 5.878.221 10.147 6.487.948 10.179 7.099.690 10.214 46 5.280 427
10.118 5.888.368 10.147 6.498.127 10.179 7.109 904 10.215 47 5.290.545 10.119
5.898.515 10.148 6.508.306 10 180 7.120 119 10 215 48 5.300.664 10.119
5.908.663 10.148 6 518.486 10.180 7 130 334 10.216 49 5.310.783 10 120
5.^18.811 10 149 6.528 666 10.181 7.140 550 10.217 50 5.320.903 10.120 5
928.960 10.149 6.538.847 10.182 7 150 767 10 217 51 5.331.023 10.120 5 939.109
10.150 6.549.029 10.182 7.160 984 10 218 52 5.341 143 10.121 5.949 259 10.150
6.559.211 10.183 7.171.202 10 219 53 5.351.264 10.121 5 959.409 10.151
6.569.394 10 183 7 181 421 10 219 5^ 5.361^385 10.122 5 969*560 10.151
6.579.577 10.184 7 191.640 10.220 55 5 371.507 10.122 5 979.711 10.152 6
589.761 10 184 7.201.860 10.220 56 5.381.629 10.123 5.989 863 10 152 6.599.945
10.185 7.212.080 10 221 57 5 391.752 10.123 6 000.015 10 153 6.610 130 10.186
7.222.301 10 222 58 5.401.875 10.124 6.010.168 10.153 6.620.316 10 186
7.232.323 10.222 59 5.411 999 10.124 6.020.321 10.154 6.630 502 10 187
7.242.745 10.223 Mni 12 Degr. 13 Degr. 14 Degr. 15 Degr Equal parts of a Merid
Difference of equ par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal
parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of
equ. par. 0 7.252.968 10.224 7 867.534 10.263 8.484 584 10.306 9^104.325 10.353
1 7 263.192 10 224 7.877.797 10.264 8.494.890 10.307 9 114.678 10.354 2
7.273.416 10.225 7.888 061 10.265 8 505.197 10.308 9.125.032 10.355 3 7.283.641
10.225 7 898.326 10 265 8.515.505 10.309 9.135.387 10 355 4 7 293.866 10.226
7.908.591 10.266 8 525.814 10.309 9.145.742 10.356 5 7 304.092 10.227 7.918.857
10.267 8.536.123 10*310 9.156.098 10 357 6 7.314.319 10.227 7.929.124 10.267
8.546.433 10.311 9.166.455 10 358 7 7.324.546 10 228 7.939.391 10.268 8.556.744
10.312 9.176.813 10.359 8 7.334 774 10.229 7.949.659 10.269 8.567.056 10.312
9.187.172 10 360 9 7.345 003 10.229 7.959.928 10.269 8.577.368 10 313 9.197.532
10.360 10 7.355 232 10 230 7 970.197 10.270 8.587.681 10.314 9.207.892 10.361
11 7.365.462 10.231 7.980.467 10.271 8.597.995 10.315 9.218.253 10.362 12
7.375.693 10.231 7.990.738 10.272 8.608.310 10.315 9.228.615 10.363 13
7.385.924 10.232 8.001.010 10.272 8.618.625 10 316 9.238.978 10 364 14
7.396.156 10.232 8.011.282 10.273 8.628.941 10.317 9.249.342 10.364 15
7.406.388 10.233 8.021.555 10.274 8.639.258 10.318 9.259.706 10 365 16
7.416.621 10.234 8.031.829 10.274 8 649.576 10.^18 9.270 071 10.366 17
7.426.855 10.234 8.042.103 10.275 8.659.894 10.31^ 9.280.437 10.367 18
7.437.089 10.235 8.052.378 10.276 8 670.213 10.320 9.290.804 10.368 19
7.447.324 10.236 8.062.654 10.277 8.680.533 10.321 9.301.172 10.369 20
7.457.560 10.236 8.072.931 10.277 8.690.854 10.322 9.311.541 10.369 21
7.467.796 10.237 8.083.208 10.278 8.701.176 10.322 9.321.910 10.370 22
7.478.033 10.238 8.093.486 10.279 8.711.498 10.323 9.332.280 10.371 23
7.488.271 10.238 8.103.765 10.279 8.721 821 10.324 9.342.651 10.372 24
7.498.509 10.239 8.114.044 10.280 8.732.145 10.325 9.353.023 10.373 25
7.508.748 10.240 8.124.324 10.281 8 742.470 10.325 9.363.396 10.374 26
7.518.988 10.240 8.134.605 10.282 8.752.795 10.326 9.373.770 10 374 27
7.529.228 10.241 8.144.887 10.282 8.763.121 10.327 9.384.144 10.375 28
7.539.469 10.242 8.155.169 10.283 8.773.44^ 10.328 9.394.519 10.376 29 7.549
711 10.242 8.165.452 10.284 8.783.776 10.329 9.404.895 10.377 30 7.559^953
10.243 8.175.736 10.284 8.794.105 10.329 9.415.272 10.378 31 7.570.196 10.244
8.186.020 10.285 8.804.434 10.330 9.425.650 10 379 32 7.580.440 10.244 8.196
305 10.286 8.814.764 10.331 9.436 029 10.379 33 7.590.684 10.245 8.206.591
10.287 8.825.095 10.332 9.446.408 10.380 34 7.600.929 10.246 8.216.878 10.287
8.835.427 10.332 9.456.788 10.381 35 7.611.175 10.246 8.227.169 10.288
8.845.759 10.333 9.467 169 10.382 36 7.621.421 10.247 8.237^453 10.289
8.856.092 10 334 9.477.551 10 383 37 7.631.668 10.248 8.247.742 10.289
8.866.426 10.335 9.487.934 10.384 38 7.641.916 10.248 8 258.031 10.290
8.876.761 10.336 9.498.318 10.384 39 7.652 164 10.249 8.268.321 10.291
8.887.097 10.336 9.508.702 10 385 40 7.662.413 10.250 8.278.612 10.292 8
897.433 10.337 9.519.087 10.386 41 7.672.663 10.250 8.288.904 10.292 8.907.770
10.338 9.529.473 10.387 42 7.682.913 10.251 8.299.196 10.293 8.918.108 10 339
9.539 860 10.388 43 7.693.164 10.252 8.309.489 10.294 8.928.447 10.339
9.550.248 10.389 44 7.703.416 10.252 8.319.783 10.295 8 938.786 10.340 9
560.637 10.390 45 7.713.668 10.253 8.330.078 10.295 8.949.126 10.341 9.571.027
10.390 46 7.723.921 10.254 8.340.373 10.296 8.959.467 10.342 9.581.417 10.391
47 7.734.175 10.254 8.350.669 10.297 8.969.809 10.343 9.591.808 10.392 48
7.744.429 10.255 8.360.966 10.297 8.980.152 10.343 9.602 200 10.393 49
7.754.684 10.256 8 371.263 10.298 8.990.495 10.344 9.612.593 10.394 50
7.764.940 10.256 8.381.561 10.299 9 000.839 10.345 9.622.987 10.395 51
7.775.196 10.257 8.391.860 10.300 9.011.184 10.346 9.633.382 10.396 52
7.785.453 10.258 8.402.160 10 300 9 021.530 10.347 9 643.778 10.396 53
7.795.711 10.258 8.412.460 10.301 9.031.877 10.347 9.654.174 10.397 54 7
805.969 10.259 8.422.761 10.302 9.042.224 10.348 9.664 571 10.398 55 7.816.228
10.260 8.433.063 10.303 9 052.572 10.349 9.674.969 10 399 56 7.826.488 10.260
8.443.366 10.303 9.062.921 10.350 9.685.368 10.400 57 7.836.748 10.261
8.453.669 10.304 9.073.271 10.351 9.695.768 10.401 58 7.847.009 10.262
8.463.973 10.305 9.083.622 10.351 9.706.169 10.402 59 7.857.271 10.263
8.474.278 10.306 9.093.973 10.352 9.716.571 10.402 Min 16 Degr. 17 Degr. 18
Degr. 19 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a
Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par.
Equal parts of a merid. Difference of equ. par. 0 9 726.973 10.403 10.352.748
10.457 10.981.870 10.515 11.614.570 10.577 1 9.737.376 10.404 10.363.205 10.458
10.992.383 10.516 11.625.147 10.578 2 9.747.780 10.405 10.373 663 10 459
11.002.899 10.517 11.635.725 10.579 3 9.758.1^5 10 406 10.384.122 10.460
11.013.416 10.518 11.646.304 10.580 4 9.768.591 10 407 10.394.582 10.461
11.023.934 10.519 21.656.884 10.581 5 9.778.9^^ 10 408 10.405 043 10.462
11.034.453 10.520 11.667.465 10.582 6 9 789.40^ 10 409 10.415 505 10.463
11.044.973 10 521 11.678.047 10.583 7 9 799 815 10.409 10.425.968 10.464
11.055.494 10.522 11.688.630 10.584 8 9 810.224 10.410 10.436.432 10 465
11.066.016 10.523 11.699.214 10.585 9 9.820.634 10 411 10.446.897 10.466
11.076.539 10.524 11.709.799 10.586 10 9.831.045 10.412 10.457.363 10 467
11.087.063 10.525 11.720.385 10 587 11 9.841.457 10.413 10.467.830 10 468
11.097.588 10.526 11 730.972 10.588 12 9.851.870 10.414 10.478.298 10.469
11.108.114 10.527 11.741.560 10.590 13 9.862.284 10.415 10.488.767 10.470
11.118.641 10.528 11.752.150 10.591 14 9.872.699 10.416 10 499.237 10.470
11.129.169 10.529 11.762.741 10.592 15 9.883.115 10.417 10.509.707 10.471
11.139.698 10.530 11.773.333 10.593 16 9.893.532 10.417 10 520.178 10.472
11.150.228 10.531 11.783.926 10.594 17 9.903.949 10.418 10.530.650 10.473
11.160.759 10.532 11.794.520 10.595 18 9.914.367 10.419 10.541.123 10.474
11.171.291 10.533 11.805.115 10.596 19 9.924.786 10.420 10 551.597 10.475
11.181.824 10.534 11.815.711 10.597 20 9.935 206 10.421 10.562 072 10.476
11.192.358 10.535 11.826.308 10.598 21 9.945.627 10.422 10.572 548 10.477
11.202.893 10.536 11.836.906 10.599 22 9.956.049 10.423 10.583.025 10.478
11.213.429 10.537 11.847.505 10.600 23 9 966 472 10.424 10.593.503 10.479
11.223.966 10.538 11.858.105 10.601 24 9.976 896 10.425 10.603.982 10.480
11.234.504 10.539 11.868.706 10.603 25 9.987.321 10.425 10.614.462 10.481
11.245.043 10.540 11.879.309 10.604 26 9.997.746 10.426 10.624.943 10.482
11.255.583 10.541 11.889.913 10.605 27 10.008.172 10.427 10.635.425 10 483
11.266.124 10.542 11.900.518 10.606 28 10.018.599 10.428 10.645.908 10.484
11.276.666 10.543 11.911.124 10 607 29 10.029.027 10.429 10.656.392 10.485
11.287.209 10.544 11.921.731 10.608 30 10.039.456 10.430 10.666.877 10.486
11.297.753 10.545 11.932.339 10.609 31 10 049 886 10.431 10.677.363 10.487
11.308.298 10.546 11.912.948 10.610 32 10.060.317 10.432 10.687.850 10.488
11.318.844 10.548 11.953.558 10 611 33 10.070.749 10.433 10 698.338 10.489
11.329.392 10.549 11.964.169 10.612 34 10.081.182 10.433 10 708.827 10.490
11.339.941 10.550 11.974.781 10.613 35 10 091.615 10.434 10.719.317 10.491
11.350.491 10 551 11.985.394 10.615 36 10 102.0^9 10.435 10.729 808 10.492
11.361.042 10.552 11.996.009 10.616 37 10.112.484 10 436 10*740.30^ 10.493
11.371.594 10.553 12.006.625 10.617 38 10.122 920 10.437 10.750.793 10.493
11.382.147 10.554 12.017.^42 10 618 39 10.133.357 10.438 10 761.286 10.494
11.392.701 10.555 12.027.860 10.619 40 10.143.795 10.439 10.771.780 10.495
11.403.256 10.556 12.038.479 10.620 41 10.154.234 10.440 10 782.275 10.496
11.413.812 10.557 12.049.099 10 621 42 10.164.674 10.441 10.792.771 10.497
11.424.369 10.558 12.059.720 10 622 43 10.175.115 10.442 10 803.268 10.498
11.434.927 10.559 12.070.342 10.623 44 10.185.557 10.443 10 813.766 10.499
11.445.486 10.560 12.080.965 10.625 45 10.196.000 10.443 10 824.265 10.500
11.456.046 10.561 12.091.590 10.626 46 10.206.443 10.444 10.834.765 10.501
11.466.607 10 562 12.102.216 10.627 47 10.216 887 10.445 10.845.266 10.502
11.477.169 10.563 12.112.843 10 628 48 10.227.332 10.446 10.855 768 10.503
11.487.732 10.564 12.123.471 10 629 49 10.237 778 10.447 10.866.271 10.504 11
498.296 10.565 12.134.100 10 630 50 10 248.225 10.448 10.876.775 10.505
11.508.861 10.566 12.144.730 10.631 51 10 258.673 10.449 10.887.280 10.506
11.519.427 10.567 12.155.361 10.632 52 10.269.122 10.450 10.897.786 10.507
11.529.994 10.568 12.165.993 10.633 53 10 279.572 10*451 10.908.293 10.508
11.540.562 10.569 12.176.636 10.635 54 10.290.023 10.452 10.918.801 10.509
11.551.131 10.570 12.187.261 10.636 55 10.300 475 10 453 10.929.310 10.510
11.561.701 10.571 12.197.897 10.637 56 10.310.928 10 454 10.939.820 10.511
11.572.272 10.573 12.208.534 10.638 57 10.321 382 10.455 10.950 331 10.512
11.582.845 10.574 12.219.172 10.639 58 10.331 837 10.455 10.960 843 10.513
11.593.419 10.575 12.229.811 10.640 59 10.342 292 10.456 10.971.356 10.514
11.603.994 10.576 12.240.451 10.641 Min. 20 Degr. 21 Degr, 22 Degr. 23 Degr.
Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par Equal parts of a Merid.
Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Me^id. Difference of equ. par. Equal
part of a Merid. Difference of equ par. 0 12.251 292 10.642 12 891.873 10 712
13.536 762 10 786 14 186.216 10 864 1 12.261.934 10.644 12.902.585 10 713
13.547.548 10.787 14.197.080 10.866 2 12 272.578 10.645 12.913.29^ 10.715
13.558.335 10.789 14.207.946 10.8^7 3 12*283 223 10.646 12.924.013 10.716
13.569 124 10.790 14.218.813 10 868 4 12.293 869 10.647 12 934 729 10.717
13.579.914 10.791 14.229.681 10.870 5 12.304.516 10.648 12.945.446 10.718
13.590.705 10.792 14.240.551 10.871 6 12.315 164 10.649 12.956.164 10 719
13.601.497 10 794 14.251.422 10 873 7 12.325.813 10.650 12.966 883 10.721
13.612 291 10.795 14.262.275 10.874 8 12.336.463 10.651 12.977.604 10 722
13.623.086 10.796 14.273.149 10.875 9 12 347 114 10.653 12.988.326 10.723 13
633.882 10.798 14.284.024 10.877 10 12.357.767 10.654 12.999.049 10.724 13
644.680 10.799 14.294.901 10.878 11 12.368 421 10.655 13.009 773 10.725 13.655
479 10.800 14.305.779 10.879 12 12.379.076 10.656 13.020.498 10.727 13.666 279
10.801 14.316.658 10.881 13 12.389.7^2 10.657 13.031.225 10.728 13.677.070
10.803 14.327 539 10 882 14 12.400.389 10.658 13.041.953 10.729 13.687.873 10
804 14 338.421 10.883 15 12.411.047 10.659 13 052 682 10.730 13.698.677 10.805
14.349.304 10.885 16 12.421.706 10.661 13.063.412 10.731 13.709.492 10.807
14.360.189 10.886 17 12.432.367 10.662 13.074 143 10.733 13.720.299 10.808
14.371.075 10.887 18 12.443.029 10.663 13.084.876 10.734 13.731.107 10*809 14
381.962 10.889 19 12.453.692 10.664 13.095.610 10.735 13.741.916 10 810 14
392.851 10.890 20 12.464.356 10.665 13.106.345 10.736 13.752 726 10.812
14.403.741 10.892 21 12.475.021 10.666 13.117 081 10.738 13.763.538 10.813
14.414.633 10.893 22 12.485 687 10.667 13.127.819 10.739 13.774.351 10 814
14.425.526 10.894 23 12 496.354 10.669 13.138.558 10 740 13.785.165 10.816
14.436 420 10.896 24 12 507.023 10.670 13.149.298 10.741 13.795.981 10.817
14.447.316 10.897 25 12 517.693 10.671 13.160 039 10.742 13.806.798 10.818
14.458.213 10.898 26 12.528.364 10.672 13.170.781 10.744 13.817.616 10.820
14.499.111 10.900 27 12.539.036 10 673 13.181.525 10.745 13 828.436 10.821
14.480 011 10.901 28 12.549.709 10.674 13.192.270 10.746 13.839.257 10 822
14.490 912 10.903 29 12.560.383 10.676 13.203.016 10.747 13.850.079 10 823
14.501.815 10.904 30 12.571.059 10.677 13.213.763 10.749 13.860.902 10.825
14.512.719 10.905 31 12.581.736 10.678 13.224.512 10.750 13.871.727 10.826
14.523.624 10.907 32 12.592.414 10.679 13.235.262 10.751 13.882.553 10.827
14.534.531 10.908 33 12.603.093 10.680 13.246.013 10.752 13.893.380 10.829 14
545 439 10.909 34 12.613.773 10.681 13.256.765 10.754 13.904.209 10.830 14.5^6
348 10.911 35 12.624.454 10.683 13.267.519 10.755 13.915.039 10 831 14 567.259
10 912 36 12.635.137 10.684 13.278.274 10.756 13.925.870 10.833 14.578 171
10.914 37 12.645.821 10.685 13.289.030 10 757 13 936.703 10.834 14.589.085
10.915 38 12.656.506 10.686 13.299.787 10.7^8 13 947 537 10.835 14.600.000
10.916 39 12.667.192 10.687 13.310.545 10.760 13.958 372 10.837 14.610.916
10.918 40 12.677.879 10.688 13.321.305 10.761 13.969.209 10.838 14 621.834
10.919 41 12.688.567 10.690 13.332.066 10.762 13.980.047 10.839 14.632.753
10.921 42 12.699.257 10 691 13.342.828 10.763 13.990.886 10.840 14 643.674
10.922 43 12 709.948 10.692 13.353.591 10^765 14.001.726 10 842 14.654.596
10.923 44 12.720.640 10.693 13.364.356 10 766 14.012.568 10.843 14.665.519 10
925 45 12 731.333 10.694 13.375.122 10.767 14.023.411 100844 14.676.444 10.926
46 12.742.027 10.696 13 385.889 10 768 14.034.255 10.846 14.687.370 10.928 47
12.752.723 10.697 12.396.657 10.770 14.045 101 10 847 14.698 298 10.929 48
12.763.420 10.698 13.407.427 10.771 14.055.948 10.848 14 709.227 10 930 49 12
774.118 10.699 13.418.198 10.772 14.066.796 10.850 14.720 157 10.932 50
12.784.817 10.700 13.428 970 10.773 14.^77.646 10.851 14.731 089 10.933 51 12
795.517 10.701 13.439.743 10.775 14.088.497 10.852 14.742.022 10.935 52
12.806.218 10.703 13.450.518 10.776 14.099.349 10.854 14.752.957 10 936 53
12.816.921 10.704 13.461.294 10.777 14.110.203 10 855 14.763 893 10 937 54
12.827.625 10.705 13 472.071 10.779 1^.121.058 10.856 14.774.830 10.939 55 12
838.330 10.706 13.482.850 10.780 14.131.914 10.858 14.785.769 10.940 56
12.849.036 10.707 13.493.630 10.781 14.142.772 10.859 14.796.709 10.942 57
12.859.743 10.709 13.504.411 10.782 14.153.631 10.860 14.807.651 10.943 58
12.870.452 10.710 13.515.193 10 784 14.164 491 10.862 14 818 594 10.944 59
12.881.162 10.711 13.525.977 10.785 14.175.353 10.863 14.829.538 10.946 Min 24
Degr. 25 Degr. 26 Degr. 27 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ.
par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid.
Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a merid. Difference of equ. par. 0
14.840 484 10.947 15.499.878 11.035 16.164 663 11.127 16.835.136 11.224 1
14.851.431 10.949 15.510.913 11.036 16.175.790.129 16.846.360 11 226 2
14.862.380 10.950 15.521.949.038 16.186.919.130 16.857.586 11.228 3 14.873.330
10 952 15.532.987 039 16.198.049.132 16.868.814 11.229 4 14.884.282 10.953
15.544.026.041 16.209.181.133 16.880.043 11.231 5 14.895.235 10 954
15.555.067.042 16.220.314.135 16.891.274 11.233 6 14.906 189 10 950
15.566.109.044 16.231.449.137 16.902.507 11.234 7 14.917.145 10.957
15.577.153.045 16.242.586.138 16.913.741 11.236 8 14.928.102 10.959
15.588.198.047 16.253.724.140 16.924.977 11.238 9 14.939.061 10 960
15.599.245.048 16.264.864.141 16.936.215 11.239 10 14.950.021 10.962 15.610 293
11.050 16.276.005 11.143 16.947.454 11.241 11 14 960.983.963 15.621.343.051
16.287.148.145 16.958.695 11.243 12 14.971.946.964 15.632.394.053
16.298.293.146 16.969.938 11.245 13 14.982 910.966 15.643.447.054
16.309.439.148 16.981.183 11.246 14 14.993.876.967 15.654.501.056
16.320.587.149 16.992.429 11.248 15 15.094.843.969 15.665.557.057
16.331.736.151 17.003.677 11.250 16 15 015.812.970 15.676.614.059 16.342.887
153 17.014.927 11.251 17 15.026.782.972 15.687.673.060 16.354.040.154
17.026.178 11.253 18 15.037.854.973 15.698 733.062 16.365.194.156 17.037.431
11.255 19 15.048.727.974 15.709 805.063 16.376.350.157 17.048.686 11.256 20
15.059.701 10.976 15.720.858 11.065 16.387.507 11.159 17.059.942 11.258 21
15.070.677.977 15.731.923.067 16.398.666.161 17.071.200 11.260 22
15.081.654.979 15.742.990.068 16.409.827.162 17.082 460 11.261 23 15
092.633.980 15.754.058.070 16.420.989.164 17.093.721 11.263 24 15.103.613.982
15.765.128.071 16.432.153.165 17.104 964 11.265 25 15.114.595.983
15.776.199.073 16.443.318.167 17.116.229 11 267 26 15.125.578.985
15.787.272.074 16.454.485.169 17.127.496 11.268 27 15.136.563.986
15.798.346.076 16.465.654.170 17.138.764 11.270 28 15.147.549.988
15.809.432.077 16.476.824.172 17.150.034 11.272 29 15 158.53^.989
15.820.499.079 16.487.996.174 17.161.306 11.273 30 15.169.526 10.990 15.831.578
11.080 16.499 170 11.175 17.172 579 11.275 31 15.180.516.992 15.842.658.082
16.510.345.177 17.183.854 11.277 32 15.191.508.993 15.853.740.083
16.521.522.178 17.195 131 11.278 33 15.202 501.995 15.864.823.085
16.532.700.180 17.206.409 11.280 34 15.213.496.996 15 875.908.086
16.543.880.182 17.217.689 11.282 35 15.224.492.998 15.886 994.088
16.555.062.183 17.228.971 11.284 36 15.235.490.999 15.898.082.090
16.566.245.185 17.240.255 11.285 37 15.246.489 11.001 15.909.172.091
16.577.430.187 17.251.540 11.287 38 15.257.490 11.002 15.920.263.093
16.588.617.188 17.262.827 11.289 39 15.268.492 11.004 15.931.356.094
16.599.805.190 17.274.116 11.290 40 15.279.496 11.005 15.942.450 11.096
16.610.995 11.191 17.285 406 11.292 41 15.290 501.007 15.953.546.097
16.622.186.193 17.296.69^ 11.294 42 15.301 508.008 15.964.643.099
16.633.379.195 17.307.992 11.296 43 15.312.516.010 15.975.742.100
16.644.574.196 17.319 288 11.297 44 15.323.526.011 15.986.842.102
16.655.770.198 17.330.585 11.299 45 15.334.537.012 15.997.944.104
16.666.968.200 17.341.884 11.301 46 15.345.549 014 16.009.048.105
16.678.168.201 17.353.185 11.303 47 15.356.563.015 16.020.153.107
16.689.369.203 17.364.488 11.304 48 15.367.578.017 16 031.260.108 16
700.572.205 17.375.792 11.306 49 15.378.595.018 16.042.368.110 16.711.777.206
17.387.098 11.308 50 15.389.613 11.020 16.053.478 11.111 16.722.983 11.208
17.398.406 11.309 51 15.400.633.021 16.064.589.113 16.734.191.210 17.409.715
11.311 52 15 411.654.023 16 075.702.115 16.745.401.211 17.421.026 11.313 53
15.422.677.024 16 086.817.116 16.756.612.213 17.432.339 11.315 54
15.433.7^1.026 16.097 933.118 16 767.825.214 17.443.654 11.316 55 15.444
727.027 16 109 051.119 16.779.039.216 17.454.970 11.318 56 15.455.754.029
16.120.170.121 16.790.255.218 17.466.288 11.320 57 15.466 783.030
16.131.291.122 16.801.473.219 17.477.608 11.322 58 15.477.813.032 16.142.413
11.124 16.812.692.221 17.488.930 11.323 59 15.488 845 11.033 16.153 537 11.126
16.823.913 11.223 17.500.253 11 325 Min. 28 Degr. 29 Degr. 30 Degr. 31 Degr.
Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid.
Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal
parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par 0 17.511.578 11.327 18.194 351 11.435
18 883.768 11.548 19.580 154 11.668 1 17.522.905 11.329 18 205 786 11.437
18.895.316 11.550 19 591.822 11.670 2 17.534.234 11.330 18.217 223 11.439
18.906 866 11.552 19.603.492 11.672 3 17.545.564 11.332 18.228.662 11.440
18.918.418 11.554 19 615.164 11.674 4 17.556.896 11.334 18.240.102 11.442
18.929.972 11.556 19.626.838 11.676 5 17.568 230 11.336 18.251.544 11.448 18
941.528 11.558 19.638.514 11.678 6 17.579.566 11.337 18 262.988 11.446
18.953.066 11.560 19.650.192 11.680 7 17.590.903 11.339 18.274.434 11.448
18.964.646 11*562 19.661.872 11.682 8 17.602 242 11.341 18.285.882 11 450 18
976.208 11.564 19 673.554 11.684 9 17.613.583 11.343 18.297.332 11.452
18.987.772 11.566 19 685.238 11.686 10 17.624.926 11.345 18.308.784 11.453
18.999.338 11.568 19.696.924 11.688 11 17.636.271 11.346 18.320.237 11.455
19.010.906 11.570 19.708 612 11.690 12 17.647.617 11.348 18.331.692 11.457
19.022 476 11.572 19.720.302 11.692 13 17.658.965 11.350 18.343.149 11.459
19.034.048 11.574 19.731 994 11.695 14 17.670.315 11.352 18.354 608 11.461
19.045.622 11 576 19.743.699 11 697 15 17.681.667 11.353 18.366.069 11.463
19.057.198 11 578 19.755.396 11 699 16 17.693.020 11.355 18.377.532 11.465
19.068.776 11.580 19.767.085 11.701 17 17.704.375 11 357 18.388*997 11.466 19
080.356 11 582 19 778 786 11.703 18 17.715.732 11.359 18.400.403 11.468
19.091.938 11.584 19 790.489 11.705 19 17.727.091 11.361 18.411 931 11.470
19.103 522 11.586 19.802.194 11.707 20 17.738.452 11.362 18 423.401 11.472
19.115.108 11.588 19.813 901 11.709 21 17.749.814 11.364 18.434.873 11.474 19
126.696 11.590 19.825 610 11.711 22 17.761.178 11.366 18.446.347 11 476
19.138.286 11.592 19.837.321 11.713 23 17.772.544 11.368 18.457.823 11.478
19.149.878 11.594 19.849 034 11.715 24 17.783.912 11.369 18.409.301 11.480
19.161.472 11 595 19.860.749 11 717 25 17.795.281 11.371 18.480.781 11.482
19.173 067 11.597 19.872 466 11.719 26 17.806.652 11.373 18.492.263 11.483
19.184.664 11.599 19 884.185 11.722 27 17.818.025 11.375 18 503.746 11.485 19
196 263 11 601 19.895 907 11.724 28 17.829.400 11.377 18.515.231 11^487 19.207
864 11.603 19 907 631 11.726 29 17.840.777 11.378 18.526 718 11 489 19.219.467
11.605 19 919 357 11.728 30 17 852.155 11.380 18.538.207 11 491 19.231.072
11.607 19.931.085 11.730 31 17.863.535 11.382 18.549.698 11 493 19.242.679
11.609 19 942.815 11.732 32 17.874 917 11.384 18 561.191 11 495 19 254.288
11.611 19 954.547 11.734 33 17.886.301 11.386 18.572.686 11.497 19.265.899 11
613 19 966 281 11.736 34 17 897 687 11.387 18.584.183 11.499 19 277.512 11 615
19.678 017 11 738 35 17.909.074 11.389 18.595.682 11.500 19.289.127 11.617
19.989 755 11.740 36 17 920.463 11.391 18 607.182 11.502 19 300.734 11.619 20
001 495 11.742 37 17.931.854 11.393 18.618.684 11.50^ 19 312.353 11 621 20.013
237 11.745 38 17.943.247 11.395 18.630.188 11.506 19.323 974 11.623 20.024.982
11 747 39 17 954.642 11.396 18.641.694 11.50^ 19 335 597 11.425 20.036.729
11.749 40 17.966.038 11.398 18.653.202 11.510 19.347.222 11.627 20 048.478
11.751 41 17.977.436 11.400 18.664.712 11.512 19.358.849 11 629 20.060.229 11
753 42 17.988.836 11.402 18.676.224 11.514 19.370.478 11.631 20.071 982 11.755
43 18 000.238 11.404 18 687.738 11.516 19.382.109 11.633 20.083.737 11.757 44
18.011.642 11.406 18.699.254 11.518 19.393.742 11.635 20.095.4^4 11 759 45
18.023.048 11.407 18.710 772 11 520 19.4^5 377 11.6^^ 20 107 253 11.761 46
18.034.455 11.409 18.722*292 11.521 19.417.014 11.63^ 20.119.014 11.764 47 18
045.864 11.411 18.733.813 11.523 19.428.653 11 641 20 130.778 11 766 48 18
057.275 11.413 18.745.336 11.525 19.440.294 11.644 20.142.544 11 768 49 18.068
688 11 415 18.756.861 11.527 19.451 938 11.646 20 154.312 11.770 50 18.080 103
11.417 18 768.388 11.529 19.463.584 11.648 20.166 082 11.772 51 18.091.520
11.418 18.779.917 11 531 19 475.232 11 650 20.177.854 11.774 52 18.102 938
11.420 18.7^1.448 11.533 19.486.882 11.652 20.189.628 11.776 53 18.114 358
11.422 18.802.911 11.535 19.4^8.534 11.654 20.201.404 11.778 54 18.125.780
11.424 18 814 516 11.537 19.510.188 11 6^6 20.213.1^2 11.781 55 18.137 204
11.426 18.826 053 11.539 19.521.^4^ 11.658 20.224.963 11 783 56 18.148.630
11.428 18.837.592 11.541 19 ^33.502 11.6^0 ^0 2^6 746 11.785 57 18.160.058
11.429 18.849.133 11.54^ 19 ^45.162 11.^^^ 20 ^18.^^1 12.7^7 58 18.171.487
11.431 18.860.676 11.545 19 556 8^^ 11 66^ 2^.260.318 11.789 59 18 182 918
11.433 18 872.221 11.547 1^.568.48^ 11 ^66 20 272.1^7 11.791 Min 32 Degr. 33
Degr. 34 Degr. 35 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal
parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of
equ par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. 0 20.283.898 11.793
20.995.367 11 925 21.714.945 12.064 22.443 047 12 210 1 20 295.691 11.79^ 21
007 292 11 928 21.727.009 12 066 22.455.257 12 212 2 20.307.487 11.798 21
019.220 11.930 21.739.075 12.069 22.467.469 12 215 3 20 319.285 11.800 21.031
150 11.932 21.751.144 12 071 22.479.684 12 217 4 20.331.085 11 802 21.043 0^2
11 934 21.763.215 12.074 22.491.901 12 220 5 20.342 ^87 11.804 21.055.016 11
937 21.775.2^9 12.076 22.504.221 12 222 6 20 354 691 11.80^ 21 066.953 11.939
21.787.365 12 078 22.516.443 12 225 7 20.366.497 11.808 21.078.892 11.941
21.799.443 12.081 22.528.668 12.227 8 20.37^ 305 11.811 21.090.833 11.943
21.811.524 12.083 22.540.895 12.230 9 20 390.116 11.813 21.102 776 11.946 21
823 607 12 085 22.553.125 12.232 10 20.401.929 11 815 21.114.722 11.948
21.835.692 12 0^8 22 565 357 12 235 11 20.413 744 11 817 21 126.670 11.950
21.847.780 12.090 22.577.592 12.237 12 20.425 561 11.819 21.138.620 11 953
21.859.870 12 093 22.589.829 12.240 13 20.437.380 11.821 21.150 573 11.955
21.871 963 12.095 22 602 069 12 242 14 20.449.201 11.824 21 162.528 11.957
21.884.058 12.097 22.614.311 12.245 15 20.^61.025 11.826 21.174.485 11.959
21.896.155 12.100 22 626.556 12.247 16 20.472.851 11.828 21.186.444 11.962
21.908.255 12.102 22.638.803 12 250 17 20 484.679 11.830 21.198.406 11.964
21.920.357 12.105 22.651.053 12 252 18 20.496 509 11 832 21 210.370 11.966 21
932.462 12 107 22.663.305 12.255 19 20.508.311 11.835 21.222 336 11.969
21.944.569 12.109 22.675 560 12.257 20 20.520.176 11.837 21.234.305 11.971 21
956 678 12.112 22 687.817 12.260 21 20.532 013 11.839 21 246.276 11.973 21.968
790 12 114 22.700.077 12.262 22 20.543 852 11.841 21 258.249 11.975 21.980.904
12.117 22.712.339 12.265 23 20 555 693 11.843 21.270.224 11 978 21.993 021
12.119 22.724.604 12.268 24 20 567.536 11.845 21.282.202 11.980 22.005 140
12.121 22 736.872 12.270 25 20 579.381 11.848 21.294.182 11.982 22.017.261
12.124 22.749.142 12.273 26 20 591 229 11.850 21.306 164 11.985 22.029.385
12.126 22.761.415 12.275 27 20 603.079 11.852 21.318.149 11.987 22.041 511 12
129 22.773 690 12.278 28 20 614.031 11.854 21 330.136 11.989 22.053.640 12.131
22.785.968 12.280 29 20 626.785 11 856 21 342.125 11.992 22 065.771 12.134
22.798.248 12.283 30 20.638.641 11.859 21.354 117 11.994 22 077.905 12.136
22.810.531 12.285 31 20.650 500 11.861 21 366 111 11.996 22.090.041 12.138
22.822.816 12.288 32 20 662 361 11.863 21.378 107 11.998 22.102.179 12 141
22.835.104 12.290 33 20 674.224 11.865 21.390.105 12.001 22.114 320 12 143
22.847.394 12.293 34 20.686.089 11.867 21.402.106 12.003 22 126.463 12.146
22.859.687 12.296 35 20 697.956 11.870 21.414.109 12.005 22.138 609 12.148
22.871.983 12.298 36 20.709.826 11.872 21.426.114 12.008 22.150 757 12.150 22
884.281 12.301 37 20.721 702 11.874 21.438 122 12.010 22 162.907 12.153
22.896.582 12 303 38 20 733.576 11.876 21.450.132 12 012 22.175.060 12 155
22.908.885 12 306 39 20 745.452 11.878 21.462.144 12.015 22.187 215 12.158
22.921.191 12.308 40 20.757.330 11 881 21.474.159 12 017 22.199 373 12 160
22.933.499 12.311 41 20.769 211 11.883 21.486.176 12.019 22.211.533 12 163
22.945.810 12.314 42 20.781 094 11.885 21.498.195 12.022 22.223.696 12 165 22
958.124 12.316 43 20 792.979 11.887 21.510.217 12.024 22.235.861 12.168
22.970.440 12 319 44 20.801.866 11.890 21.522.241 12.026 22.248.029 12.170
22.982.759 12.321 45 20.816.756 11.892 21.534.267 12.029 22.260.199 12.173
22.995.080 12.324 46 20.828.648 11.894 21.546.296 12.031 22 272.372 12.175 23
007.404 12 326 47 20 840.542 11.896 21.558.327 12.033 22 284.547 12.178
23.019.730 12.329 48 20.852 438 11.898 21.570.360 12.036 22.296.725 12 180
23.032 059 12.332 49 20.864.336 11.901 21.582.396 12.038 22.308.905 12.182 23
044.391 12 334 50 20.876.237 11.903 21 594.434 12.040 22.321.087 12.185
23.056.725 12.337 51 20.888.140 11.905 21.606.474 12.043 22.333.272 12 187
23.069.062 12.339 52 20.900.045 11.907 21.618 517 12 045 22.345.459 12.190
23.081.401 12.342 53 20.911.952 11.910 21.630.562 12.048 22.357.649 12.192
23.093.743 12.345 54 20.923 862 11.912 21.642 610 12.050 22.369.841 12.195
23.106.088 12.347 55 20.935.774 11.914 21.654.660 12.052 22.382.036 12.197
23.118.435 12.350 56 20.947.688 11.916 21.666.712 12.055 22.394.233 12.200
23.130 785 12.352 57 20.959.604 11.919 21.687.767 12.057 22.406.433 12.202
23.143.137 12.355 58 20.971.523 11 921 21.690.824 12 059 22.418.635 12.205
23.155.492 12.358 59 20.983 444 11.923 21.720.883 12.062 22.430.840 12.207
23.167.850 12.36^ Min. 36 Degr. 37 Degr. 38 Degr. 39 Degr. Equal parts of a
Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par.
Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid.
Difference of equ. par. 0 23.180.210 12 363 23.926.786 12.524 24 683.145 12.693
25.449.892 12.870 1 23.192.573 12.365 23 939 310 12.526 24.695.838 12.695
25.462.762 12.873 2 23.204.938 12.368 23.951.836 12.529 24.708.533 12 698
25.475.635 12.876 3 23 217.306 12.371 23 964.365 12.532 24.721 231 12 701
25.488.511 12.879 4 23.229.677 12.373 23 976.897 12 5^5 24.733.932 12.704
25.501.390 12.882 5 23.242 050 12.376 23.989 432 12.537 24.746.636 12.707
25.514.272 12.885 6 23.254.426 12.379 24 001.969 12.540 24.659.343 12.710
25.527.157 12.888 7 23 266.805 12.381 24.014.509 12.543 24 772.053 12 713
25.540.045 12 891 8 23.279 186 12 384 24 027.052 12.546 24 784.766 12.716 25
552.93^ 12.894 9 23.291.570 12.386 24.039.598 12.548 24 797.482 12.719 25.565
830 12 898 10 23.303 956 12.389 24 052 146 12.551 24.810.201 12.722 25.578.738
12 901 11 23 316.345 12 392 24 064.697 12.554 24 822 923 12.724 25.591.639
12.904 12 23.328 737 12.394 24.077.251 12 557 24.835 647 12 727 25 604.533
12.907 13 23.341.133 12.397 24.089.808 12.560 24 848.374 12 730 25 617.440
12.910 14 23.353.530 12.400 24.102.368 12.562 24.861.104 12.733 25.630.350
12.913 15 23.365.930 12 402 24 114 930 12.565 24.873.837 12.736 25.643 263
12.916 16 23.378 332 12 405 24 127 495 12 568 24.886.573 12.739 25 65^.179
12.919 17 23.390 837 12.408 24.140.063 12.571 24.899.312 12 742 25.669.098 12
922 18 23.403.245 12.410 24 152.634 12 573 24.912.054 12.745 25.6^2 020 12.925
19 23.415.655 12.413 24.165.207 12.576 24.924.799 12 748 25.694.945 12.928 20
23.428.068 12 416 24 177.783 12.579 24.937.547 12.751 25.707.873 12.931 21
23.440.484 12.418 24 190 362 12.582 24.950.298 12.754 25.720.804 12.934 22
23.452 902 12.521 24.202.944 12 585 24.963.052 12.757 25.733 738 12.937 23
23.465.323 12 423 24.215.520 12.587 24.975.809 12.760 25.746.675 12 941 24
23.477.746 12.426 24.228.116 12.590 24.988.569 12.763 25.759.616 12.944 25
23.490.172 12.429 24 240.706 12.593 25.001 332 12.765 25.772 560 12.947 26
23.502.601 12.432 24.253^299 12.596 25 014.097 12.768 25.785.507 12 950 27
23.515.033 12.434 24.265.895 12.599 25.026.865 12 771 25.798.457 12.953 28
23.527.467 12.437 24.278.494 12 601 25 039 636 12 774 25 811.410 12.956 29 22
539.904 12 440 24 291.095 12.604 25.052 410 12.777 25.824.366 12.959 30 23
552.344 12.442 24.303.699 12 607 25.065.187 12 780 25.837 325 12.962 31
23.564.786 12.445 24.316 306 12 610 25.077 967 12.783 25 850.287 12.965 32
23.577.231 12.448 24 328.916 12 613 25 090.750 12 786 25.863.252 12.969 33
23.589.679 12.450 24.341 529 12.615 25.103 536 12.789 25.876.221 12.972 34 23
602.129 12.453 24.354.144 12 618 25 116 325 12.792 25.889 193 12 975 35
23.614.582 12.456 24.366.762 12.621 25.129 117 12.795 25 902 168 12.978 36
23.627.038 12.458 24.379.383 12.624 25.141.912 12.798 25 915.146 12.981 37
23.639.496 12 461 24 392 007 12.627 25.154 710 12.801 25.928 127 12.984 38 23
651.957 12 464 24 404.634 12.630 25.167.511 12.804 25.941.111 12.987 39
23.664.421 12.466 24.417.264 12.632 25.180.315 12 807 25 954.098 12.990 40
23.676.887 12.469 24.429.896 12.635 25.193.122 12.810 25.967.088 12.994 41
23.689.356 12.472 24.442.531 12.638 25.205.932 12.813 25.980 082 12 997 42
23.701 828 12.475 24.455.169 12.641 25.218.745 12 816 25.993 079 13 000 43
23.714.303 12 477 24.467.810 12 644 25 231.561 12.819 26.006.079 13 003 44
23.726.780 12.480 24 480.454 12.647 25.244.380 12 822 26.019.072 13 006 45
23.739.260 12.483 24.493.101 12.650 25.257.202 12 825 26.032 078 13.009 46
23.751.743 12.485 24.505.751 12.652 25 270.027 12.828 26.045 097 13.012 47
23.764.228 12 488 24.518.403 12 655 25.282 855 12.831 26.058.109 13 016 48
23.776.716 12.491 24 531.058 12.648 25.295.686 12.834 26.071.125 13.019 49
23.789.207 12.494 24.543.716 12.661 25.308.520 12.837 26.084 144 13.022 50
23.801.701 12.496 24.556 377 12.664 25.321.357 12.840 26.097 166 13.025 51
23.814.197 12.499 24.569.041 12.667 25.334 197 12.84^ 26.110.191 13.028 52
23.226.696 12 502 24.581.708 12.670 25.347 040 12.846 26.123 219 13.031 53 23
839.198 12.504 24.594.378 12.672 25.3^^ 886 12.84^ 26 1^6 250 13.035 54
23.851.702 12.507 24.607.050 12 675 25 ^72.7^5 12.852 26 149 285 13.038 55
23.864.209 12.510 24.619.725 12.678 25.385.587 12 855 26.162.32^ 13.041 56
23.876.719 12.51^ 24.632.403 12.681 25.398 442 12.85^ 26.175.3^4 13.044 57
23.889.232 12.515 24.645.084 12.684 25.411.300 12.^61 26.188 40^ 13.047 58
23.901.747 12.518 24.657.768 12.687 25.424 161 12.864 26.201.45^ 13.050 59
23.914.265 12.521 24.670.455 12.690 25.437.025 12 867 26 214.505 13.054 Min. 40
Degr. 41 Degr. 42 Degr. 43 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ par.
Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid
Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. 0 26
227.559 13.057 27.016 632 13.253 27.817.839 13.459 28.631.657 13.676 1 26.240
616 13.060 27.029.885 13.256 27.831.295 13.463 28 645.333 13.680 2 26.253 676
13.063 27 043.141 13.260 27.844.758 13.466 28 659.013 13 684 3 26.266.739
13.06^ 27.056.401 13.263 27.858.224 13 470 28 672.697 13 688 4 26.279.805
13.070 27 069.664 13.266 27.871 694 13 473 28.686.385 13 691 5 26.292.875
13.073 27.082.930 13.270 27.885 167 13.477 28 700 076 13.695 6 26.305 948
13.076 27.096.200 13.273 27.898 644 13.481 28 713 771 13.699 7 26 319.024 13
079 27.109.473 13.277 27.912.125 13.484 28 727.470 13.703 8 26.332.103 13.082
27.122 750 13.280 27.925 609 13.488 28.741.173 13.706 9 26.345.18^ 13.086
27.136.030 13 283 27.939.097 13.491 28.754 879 13.710 10 26.358.271 13 089
27.149.313 13.287 27 952.588 13.495 28 768.589 13.714 11 26 371.36 13.092
27.162.600 13.290 27.966.083 13.498 28.782.303 13.718 12 26.384.452 13.095
27.175.890 13 293 27.979.581 13.502 28.796.021 13.721 13 26.397.547 13.098
27.189.183 13.297 27 993.083 13.505 28.809.742 13.725 14 26.410 645 13 102
27.202 480 13.300 28.006.588 13.509 28 823.467 13.729 15 26.423.747 13.105
27.215.780 13.304 28.020.097 13.513 28 837.196 13.733 16 26.436.852 13.10^
27.229.084 13.307 28.033.610 13.516 28.850.929 13.736 17 26 449 960 13.111 27
242 391 13.310 28.047.126 13.520 28.864.665 13.740 18 26.463 071 13.115 27
255.701 13 314 28.060 646 13.523 28.878*405 13.744 19 26.476.186 13.11^
27.269.015 13.317 28.074 169 13.527 28.892.149 13 748 20 26.489.304 13.121
27.282.332 13.321 28.087 696 13.531 28.905.897 13.751 21 26.502.425 13.124
27.295.653 13.324 28.101.227 13.534 28.919.648 13.755 22 26 515.549 13.128
27.308.977 13.327 28.114.761 13.538 28 933.403 13.759 23 26.528 677 13.131
27.322.304 13.331 28.128.299 13.541 28.947.162 13.763 24 26.541 808 13.13^
27.335.635 13.334 28.141.840 13 545 28.960.925 13.766 25 26.554.942 13.137 27
348.969 13.338 28.155.385 13.548 28.974 691 13.770 26 26.568.079 13.141
27.362.307 13 341 28.168.933 13.552 28.988.461 13.774 27 26.581.220 13.144 27
375.648 13 345 28.182.485 13.556 29.002.235 13.778 28 26.594.364 13.147
27.388.993 13.348 28.196.041 13.559 29.016.013 13.782 29 26.607.511 13.150
27.402.341 13 351 28.209 600 13.563 29.029.795 13.785 30 26.620 661 13 154
27.415.692 13.355 28.223.163 13.567 29.043.580 13.789 31 26.633 842 13.157
27.429.047 13.358 28.236.730 13 570 29.057.369 13.793 32 26.646.999 13.160
27.442.405 13.362 28.250.300 13 574 29.071 162 13.797 33 26.660 159 13 163
27.455.767 13 365 28.263.874 13 577 29.084 969 13.801 34 26.673.322 13.167
27.469.132 13.369 28.277.4^1 13.581 29.098.760 13.805 35 26.686.489 13.170
27.482.501 13.372 28.291.032 13.585 29.112.565 13.808 36 26.699.659 13 173 27
495 873 13.376 28 304.617 13.588 29.126.373 13.812 37 26.712.832 13.177
27.509.249 13.379 28.318.205 13.592 29.140.185 13.816 38 26.729 009 13.180
27.522.628 13.382 28.331.807 13.596 29 154.001 13.820 39 26.739.189 13.183
27.536.010 13.386 28.345.403 13.599 29.167 821 13.824 40 26.752.372 13 186 27
549.396 13.389 28.358.902 13.603 29.181.645 13.828 41 26.765.558 13.190
27.562.785 13.393 28.372 505 13.607 29.195.473 13.831 42 26.778.648 13.193
27.576.178 13.396 28.386 112 13.610 29.209.304 13.839 43 26.791.841 13.196
27.589.574 13.400 28.399 722 13.614 29.223.139 13.835 44 26.805.037 13.200
27.602.974 13.403 28.413.336 13 617 29.236.978 13.843 45 26.818.237 13.20^ 27*
616 377 13.407 28.426.953 13.621 29.250.821 13.847 46 26.831.440 13.20^
27.629.784 13.410 28.440.574 13 625 29.264 668 13.851 47 26.844.646 13.210
27.643.194 13.141 28.454.199 13 628 29.278.519 13.855 48 26.857.856 13.21^
27.656.608 13.417 28.467.827 13.632 29.292.374 13.858 49 26.871.069 13.21^
27.670.025 13.421 28.481.459 13.636 29.306 232 13.862 50 26.884.285 13.220
27.683.446 13.424 28.495.095 13.640 29.320 094 13.866 51 26.897.505 13 223
27.696.870 13.428 28.508.735 13.643 29.333.960 13.870 52 26 910.728 13.226
27.710.298 13.431 28.522.378 13 646 29.347.830 13.874 53 26.923.954 13 230
27.723.729 13.435 28.536.025 13.651 29.361 704 13.878 54 26.937 184 13.233
27.737.164 13.438 28.549.676 13.654 29.375.582 13.882 55 26.950 417 13.23^
27.750 602 13.442 28.563.330 13.658 29.389.464 13.886 56 26.963.653 13.240
27.764.044 13.445 28.576.988 13.662 29 403.350 13.889 57 26.976.893 13 243
27.777.489 13.449 28.590.650 13.665 29.417.239 13 893 58 26.990.136 13.246
27.790.938 13 452 28.604.315 13 669 29.431.132 13.897 59 27.003.382 13.250
27.804.380 13 456 28.617.984 13.673 29.445.029 13.901 Min. 44 Degr. 45 Degr. 46
Degr. 47 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal part of a
Merid. Difference of equ. par Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par.
Equal parts of a merid. Difference of equ. par. 0 29.458.930 13.905 30.301 271
14 146 31.156.423 14.399 32.028.087 14.667 1 29 472 835 13.909 30 314.417 14
150 31.170 822 14.404 32.042.754 14.671 2 29.486.744 13.913 30 328.567 14.154
31.185 226 14.408 32.057.425 14 676 3 29.500.657 13.917 30.342 721 14.158 31
199.634 14.412 32.072.101 14.681 4 29.514.574 13 921 30 356.879 14 162 31.214
046 14.417 32.086.782 14.685 5 29.528.495 13.925 30.371.041 14.166 31.228 463
14 421 32.101.467 14.690 6 29.542.420 13.929 30.385.207 14.171 31.242.884
14.426 32.116 157 14.694 7 29.556.349 13 932 30.399.378 14.175 31.257 310
14.430 32.130.851 14.699 8 29.570.281 13.936 30 413.553 14.179 31.271.740
14.434 32 145.550 14.704 9 29.584.217 13.940 30.427.732 14.183 31.286.174 14
439 32.160.254 14 708 10 29.598 157 13.944 30 441.915 14 187 31.300 613 14.443
32.174.962 14.713 11 29 612.101 13 948 30 456.102 14.191 31.315.056 14.447
32.189 675 14.717 12 29 626.049 13.952 30 470.293 14.195 31.329.503 14.452
32.204 392 14.722 13 29 640.001 13.956 30.484 488 14.200 31.343.955 14.456
32.219 114 14 727 14 29.653.957 13.960 30.498 688 14.204 31.358.411 14.461
32.233 841 14.731 15 29 667 917 13.964 30.512.892 14.208 31.372.872 14.465
32.248.572 14.736 16 29 681.881 13.968 30.527 100 14.212 31.387.337 14.469
32.263.308 14.741 17 29 695 849 13.972 30.541.312 14.216 31.401.806 14 474 32
278.049 14.745 18 29.709.821 13 976 30.555.528 14.220 31.416.280 14.478 32
292.794 14.750 19 29 723.797 13 980 30 569.748 14.225 31.430.758 14.483
32.307.544 14.755 20 29 737 777 13.984 30.583.973 14.229 31.445.241 14.487
32.322.299 14 759 21 29.751.761 13.988 30 598.202 14.233 31.459 728 14.491
32.337.058 14.764 22 29.765.749 13.992 30.612.435 14.237 31.474 219 14.496
32.351.822 14.769 23 29.779 741 13.996 30.626.672 14.241 31.488.715 14.500
32.366.591 14.773 24 29 793.737 14.000 30.640.913 14.246 31.503 215 14 505
32.381.364 14.778 25 29.807 737 14.004 30.655.159 14.250 31.517.720 14.509
32.396.142 14.783 26 29 821.741 14.008 30.669.409 14.254 31 532.229 14.514
32.410 925 14.787 27 29 83^.749 14.012 30.683.663 14.258 31.546.743 14.518
32.425.712 14.792 28 29.849.761 14 016 30.697 921 14.262 31.561.261 14.522 32
440.504 14.797 29 29 863.777 14 0^0 30.712.183 14.267 31.575.783 14.527
32.455.301 14.801 30 29.877.797 14.024 30 726.450 14.271 31.590.310 14.531
32.470.102 14.806 31 29 891 821 14.028 30.740.721 14.275 31.604.841 14 536 32
484.908 14.811 32 29 905.849 14.032 30.754 996 14.279 31.619 377 14 540 32
499.719 14.815 33 29.919.881 14.036 30 769.275 14 284 31.633 917 14.545
32.514.534 14.820 34 29.933.917 14.040 30 783.559 14.288 31.648.462 14.549
32.529.354 14.825 35 29.947 957 14.044 30 7^7 847 14 292 31.663.011 14.554
32.544.179 14.830 36 29.962 001 14.048 30.812.139 14.296 31.677.545 14.558
32.559.009 14.834 37 29 976.049 14.052 30.826.435 14.301 31.692.103 14.563 32
573.843 14.839 38 29.990.101 14.056 30.840.73^ 14.305 31.706 666 14.567
32.588.682 14.844 39 30 004.157 14.060 30.855.041 14.309 31^721 133 14.572
32.603.526 14.849 40 30*018.217 14.064 30.869.350 14.313 31.735*705 14 576
32.618.375 14.853 41 30.032.281 14.068 30 883 663 14.318 31.750.281 14.581
32.633.228 14.858 42 30 046 349 14.072 30 897 981 14.322 31.764.862 14.585
32.648.086 14.863 43 30.060.421 14.076 30.912.303 14 326 31.779 447 14.590 32
662 949 14.868 44 30.074.497 14.080 30.926 629 14.330 31.794.037 14.594
32.677.817 14.872 45 30.088.577 14 084 30 940.959 14.335 31.808.631 14.599 32
692.689 14.877 46 30.102.661 14 088 30 955.294 14.339 31^823.230 14 603
32.707.566 14.882 47 30.116.749 14 093 30.969.633 14 343 31^837 833 14 608
32.722.448 14.887 48 30.130 842 14.097 30 983.97^ 14.348 31^852.441 14.612 32
737.335 14.891 49 30.144.939 14.100 30.99^.324 14.352 31^867.053 14.617
32.752.22^ 14 896 50 30 159.039 14.105 31.012 676 14.356 31.881.670 14.621 32
767 122 14.901 51 30.173.144 14 109 31.027.032 14.360 31.896.291 14.626
32.782.02^ 14.906 52 30 187.253 14.113 31.041.392 14.365 31.910 917 14.6^0 32
796.929 14.911 53 30 201 366 14.117 31.055.757 14.369 31.925.547 14.635
32.811.840 14.915 54 30*215.483 14.121 31.070.126 14 373 31.940.182 14.6^0
32.826 755 14.920 55 30.229.^04 14.125 31.084 499 14.378 31.954.821 14.64^
32.841.675 14.925 56 30.243.729 14.129 31.098.877 14.382 31.969 465 14.64^
32.856 595 14 930 57 30.257.858 14.133 31 113.250 14.386 31.984.114 14.653
32.871 525 14.935 58 30.271.991 14.138 31.127.635 14.391 31 998.767 14 65^
32.8^6.460 14 939 59 30.286.129 14.142 31 142.026 14 20^ 32 01^.425 14.662 32
901 399 14.9^4 Min. 48 Degr. 49 Degr. 50 Degr^ 51 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid.
Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par Equal
parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of
equ. par. 0 32.916.343 14.949 33 822.018 15.247 34 746.045 15.562 35 689 522
15.895 1 32 931 292 14.954 33.837.265 15.252 34.761 607 15.568 35 705.417
15.901 2 32*946 246 14.959 33.852 517 15.257 34.777.175 15.573 35.721.318 15
907 3 32.961.205 14.964 33.867.774 15.262 34.792.748 15.578 35 737 225 15.913 4
32.976.169 14.968 33.883 036 15.268 34.808 326 15.584 35 753.138 15 918 5 32
991.137 14.973 33.898.304 15.273 34.823.910 15.589 35.769 056 15.924 6
33*006.110 14.97^ 33.913.577 15 27^ 34.839 499 15.595 35.784 980 15 930 7
33.021.088 14.983 33.928.855 15 283 34.855.094 15 600 35.800.910 15 936 8
33.036.071 14.988 33.944.138 15.288 34.870 694 15 605 35.816.846 15 941 9
33.051.059 14 993 33.959.426 15 293 34 886.299 15.611 35.832 787 15 947 10
33.066.052 14 998 33.974 719 15.298 34.901.910 15.616 35.848.734 15.953 11 33
081 050 15 003 33.990.017 15.304 34.917.526 15.622 35.864.687 15.959 12 33^096
053 15.007 34 005.321 15 309 34.933.148 15.627 35.880.646 15.964 13 33.111.060
15.012 34.020.630 15.314 34.948.775 15.633 35 896.610 15.970 14 33.126.072
15.017 34.035.944 15.319 34.964.408 15 638 35.912 580 15.976 15 33.141 089
15.022 34.051.263 15.324 34.980.046 15.644 35 928 556 15.982 16 33 156.111
15.027 34.066.587 15.329 34.995.690 15.649 35 944.538 15 987 17 33 171.138
15.032 34 081.916 15.335 35 011.339 15.655 35.960.525 15.993 18 33.186.170
15.037 34 097.251 15.340 35.026.994 15.660 35.976.518 15.999 19 33.201.227
15.042 34.112.591 15 345 35.042.654 15 666 35 992 517 16.005 20 33.216.269
15.047 34.127.936 15.350 35 058.320 15 671 36 008 522 16.011 21 33.231 316
15.052 34.143.286 15.355 35.073.991 15.677 36 024 533 16.017 22 33.246 368
15.056 34.158 641 15.361 35 089.668 15 682 36.040 550 16.022 23 33.261.424
15.061 34.173.102 15.366 35.105 350 15 688 36.056.572 16.028 24 33.276.485
15.066 34.189.368 15.371 35 121 038 15.693 36 072.600 16 034 25 33.291.551
15.071 34.204.739 15 376 35.136 731 15.699 36.088.634 16.040 26 33.306 622
15.076 34 220.115 15 381 35.152.430 15.704 36.104 674 16.046 27 33.321.698
15.081 34.235.496 15.387 35.168.134 15.710 36.120 720 16 052 28 33.336.779
15.086 34.250.883 15 392 35.183 844 15 715 36.136 772 16.058 29 33.351.865 15
091 34.266.275 15.397 35.199.559 15.721 36.152.830 16.063 30 33 366.956 15 096
34.281.672 15.402 35.215.280 15.726 36.168 893 16.069 31 33 382.052 15.101
34.297 074 15.408 35.231 006 15.732 36.184.962 16.075 32 33.397.153 15.106
34.312.482 15.413 35.246.738 15.738 36.201.037 16.081 33 33.412.259 15 111
34.327.895 15 418 35 262.476 15.743 36.217.118 16.087 34 33.427.370 15.116
34.343.313 15.423 35.278.219 15.749 36 233.205 16.093 35 33.442.486 15.121
34.358.733 15.429 35.293.968 15.754 36 249 298 16.099 36 33.457.607 15 126 34
374.162 15.434 35.309 722 15.760 36 265.397 16.105 37 33.472.733 15.131
34.389.596 15 439 35 325.482 15 765 36.281 502 16.111 38 33 487.864 15.136
34.405.035 15.445 35.341 247 15.771 36.297.613 16.116 39 33.503.000 15.141
34.420.480 15.450 35.357.028 15.777 36.313 729 16.122 40 33.518.141 15 146 34
435 930 15.455 35.372.805 15.782 36.329.851 16.128 41 33.533.287 15 151
34.451.385 15.460 35.388.587 15.78^ 36.345.979 16.134 42 33.548 438 15.156
34.466.845 15.466 35.404.375 15 793 36.362.113 16 140 43 33.563.594 15.161
34.482.311 15 471 35.420.168 15 799 36.378.253 16.146 44 33.578.755 15.166
34.487.782 15.476 35 435.967 15.805 36.394.399 16.152 45 33.593.921 15.171
34.513.258 15.482 35.451.772 15.810 36.410 551 16 158 46 33.609.092 15.176
34.528.740 15 487 35 467.582 15.816 36.426 709 16.164 47 33.624.268 15.181 34
544 227 15 402 35.483.398 15 822 36.442.873 16.170 48 33.639.449 15.186
34.559.719 15 498 35.499.220 15.827 36.459.043 16.176 49 33.654.635 15.191
34.575 217 15.503 35 515 047 15 833 36.475^219 16 182 50 33 669.826 15.196 34
590.720 15.508 35.530.880 15.839 36 491.401 16 188 51 33 685.022 15.201
34.606.228 15.514 35.546.719 15.844 36.507 589 16.194 52 33.700.223 15.206
34.621.742 15.519 35.562.563 15 850 36.523.783 16.200 53 33.715.429 15.212
34.637.261 15.524 35.578 413 15.856 36.539.983 16.206 54 33 730.641 15.217
34.652.785 15.530 35.594 269 15 861 36.556.189 16.212 55 33 745.858 15.222 34
668 315 15.535 35.610.130 15.867 36 572 401 16.218 56 33.761.080 15.227 34.683
850 15.541 35.625.997 15.873 36.588.619 16.224 57 33.776.307 15 232 34 699.391
15 546 35 641 870 15.878 36.604 843 16.230 58 33.791.539 15 237 34.714.937 15
551 35.657.748 15.884 36.621.073 16.236 59 33.806.776 15.242 34 730.488 15.557
35 673.632 15.890 36 637 309 16.242 Min 52 Degr. 53 Degr. 54 Degr. 55 Degr.
Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid.
Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal
parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. 0 36.653.551 16.248 37.639.370 16 622
38.648.311 17.019 39.681.879 17.441 1 36.669.799 16.254 37 655.992 16.629
38.665 330 17.026 39.699 320 17.448 2 36.686.053 16.260 37.672.621 16.635 38
682.356 17.033 39.716.768 17.456 3 36.702.313 16.266 37.689.256 16.642 38.699
389 17.040 39.734.224 17.463 4 36 718.579 16.273 37.705.898 16.648 38 716.429
17 047 39.751.687 17 470 5 36.734.852 16.279 37.721.546 16.655 38 733.476
17.054 39.769.157 17.478 6 36 751.131 16 285 37.739.201 16 661 38.750.530
17.060 39.786.635 17 485 7 36.767 416 16.291 37.755.862 16.667 38.767.590
17.067 39.804.120 17.492 8 36.783.707 16.297 37.772 529 16.674 38.784 657
17.074 39.821.612 17.499 9 36.800.004 16.303 37 789.203 16 680 38.801 731
17.081 39.839.111 17.507 10 36.816 307 16 309 37 805.883 16 687 38.818.812
17.088 39 856.618 17.514 11 36 83^.616 16.315 37.822.570 16.693 38 835.900
17.095 39.874.122 17.521 12 36.848.931 16.321 37.839.263 16.700 38.852 99^ 17
102 39.891.643 17 529 13 6.865.252 16.327 37.855.963 16.706 38.870.097 17 109
34.909.172 17.536 1^ 36.881.579 16.334 37.72.669 16.713 38.887.206 17.115
39.926.708 17.5^3 15 36 897.913 16.340 37 889.382 16.719 38.904 321 17.122
39.944.251 17.551 16 36.914.253 16 346 37.906.101 16 726 38 921.443 17.129 39
961.802 17.558 17 36 930.599 16.352 37.922 8^7 16.732 38 938.572 17.136 39 979
360 17.566 18 36 946.951 16 358 37 939.559 16.73^ 38.955 708 17.143 39 996.926
17.573 19 36 963 30^ 16 364 37.959.298 16.745 38.972 851 17.150 40.014 499
17.580 20 36.979 672 16 370 37 973.043 16.752 38.990.001 17 157 40.032.07^
17.588 21 36 9^6.043 16.^77 37.989.795 16.75^ 38.007.158 17 164 40.049.667
17.595 22 ^7.^12 ^20 16.383 38.006.554 16.76^ ^9.024.324 17.171 40 067.262
17.603 23 ^7 ^^^.^0^ 16.38^ 38 023.319 16 77^ 39.041.495 17 178 40.084.865
17.610 24 ^7.^45.19^ 16 395 38 040 091 16.77^ 39.058 073 17.185 40.102.465
17.617 25 37.0^1 5^^ 16.401 38.056 869 16.7^^ 39 075 858 17.192 40.120.092
17.625 26 37.077.958 16.408 38.073 654 16.791 39.0^3 050 17 199 40.137.717 17
632 27 37.094.39^ 16 414 38 090.445 16 798 39 110 24^ 17.206 40.155.349 17.640
28 37.110 810 16.420 38.107 243 16 805 39.127.455 17.21^ 40.172.989 17 647 29
37.127.230 16.426 38.124.048 16 811 39.144 668 17 220 40 190.636 17.655 30
37.143.656 16 433 38.140 859 16.818 39.161.88^ 17 227 40 208.291 17.662 31
37.160.089 16.439 38.157 677 16.8^4 39 179.115 17 234 40.225 953 17 670 32
37.176.528 16.445 38.174.501 16.831 39 196.349 17.241 40 243 623 17.677 33
37.192 ^73 16.451 38 191 332 16.83^ 39 213 590 17 248 40.261.300 17.685 34
37.200.424 16 458 38.208.170 16 84^ 39.230.838 17.255 40.278 985 17.692 35 37
225.882 16.464 38.225.014 16 85^ 39.248 093 17.262 40.296.677 17 700 36
37.242.346 16.470 38 241.865 16.8^^ 39 265.356 17.269 40.314 377 17.707 37 37
258.816 16.476 38 258.723 16 864 39.282.625 17.276 40.332.084 17.715 38 37
275.292 16.483 38.275.587 16.871 39.299 901 17.284 40.349.799 17.722 39 37.291
775 16.489 38.292.458 16 878 39.317 185 17.291 40.367 521 17 730 40 37.308.264
16.495 38.309.336 16 884 39.334.476 17.29^ 40.385 251 17.737 41 37.324.759 16
501 38^326 220 16.891 39.351.774 17 305 40 402.988 17 745 42 37 341.260 16.508
38.343.111 16.898 39.369.179 17.302 40.420.733 17.752 43 37.357.768 16.514
38.360.009 16.904 39 386 4^1 17.3^^ 40.438.485 17.760 44 37.374.282 16 420
38.376.913 16.911 39 403 800 17.32^ 40.456.245 17.768 45 37 390.802 16.527
38.393 824 16 918 39.421.126 17.33^ 40.474.013 17.775 46 37.407.329 16.533 38
410.742 16.925 39.438.459 17 340 40 491 788 17.783 47 37.423.862 16.539 38
427.667 16 931 39.455.799 17.348 40 509.571 17.790 48 37.440.401 16.546
38.444.598 16.948 39.473.147 17 35^ 40.527.361 17.798 49 57 456.947 16.55^
38.4^1 546 16.945 39 490.502 17.362 40.545.159 17.806 50 37.473.49^ 16.558 38
478 491 16.501 39.507.864 17 369 40.562.965 17 813 51 37.490.057 16.56^
38.495.442 16.958 39.525.233 17.376 40.580.778 17 821 52 37.506.622 16 571
38.512.4^ 0 16.965 39.542.609 17.383 40 598.599 17.829 53 37.523 193 16.578
38.529 365 16 972 39 559.992 17.^9^ 40.616.428 17.836 54 37 529.771 16.584
38.546 337 16.979 39.57^.383 17 398 40.634.264 17.844 55 37 556.355 16.590
38.563.316 16.985 39 594 781 17.405 40.652 108 17.^52 56 37 572 945 16 597
38.580.301 16 992 39.612.186 17.412 40 669 960 17 859 57 37.589 542 16.603
38.597 293 16 999 39.629.598 17.420 40 687 819 17.867 58 37.606.145 16.609
38.614.292 17 006 39.647.018 17.427 40.705.6^6 17 875 59 37.622.754 16.616
38.631 268 17.013 39.664.445 17.434 40.723.^61 17.832 Min 56 Degr. 57 Degr. 58
Degr. 59 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a
Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par.
Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. 0 40 741.423 17.890 41.828.810
18 369 42.945.909 18.879 44.094.550 19.425 1 40 759.313 17.898 41.847 179
18.377 42.964.788 18.888.113.975 19 434 2 40.777.211 17.906 41.865 556 18.385
42.983.076 18.897.133.409 19.4^4 3 40 795.117 17 913 41.883.941 18 393 43
002.573 18.90^.152.853 19 453 4 40.813 030 17.921 41.902.334 18.402 43.021.479
18 914.172 30^ 19.463 5 40.830.951 17 929 41.920.736 18 410 43.040.393 18.923
44.191.769 19.472 6 40.848 880 17.937 41.939.146 18.418.059.316 18.932.211.241
19.482 7 40 866.817 17.944 41.957.564 18.426.078 248 18.941.230.723 19.491 8
40.884.761 17.952 41.975 990 18.435.097.189 18.950.250 214 19.501 9 40.902.713
17.960 41.994*425 18.443.116.139 18 959.269.715 19.510 10 40 920.673 17.96^
42.012 868 18 451 43.135.098 18.96^ 44 289 225 19.520 11 40.938 641 17.976
42.031.319 18.460.154.006 18.976.308.745 19 529 12 40.956.617 17.983 42.049.779
18 468.173.042 18 985.328.27^ 19^539 13 40.974.601 17.991 42.068.247 18.470.192
027 18.994.347.^13 19.548 14 40.992 592 17 999 42.086.723 18.485.211.021
19.003.3^7.3^1 19.558 15 41.010 591 18 007 42 105.208 18.493 43.230.024 19.012
44.386.^19 19.567 16 41.028.598 18 015 42.123.701 18.501.249 03^ 19.021 406 486
19.577 17 41.046 613 18.023 42.142.202 18.510.268.05^ 19.030.420.063 19 586 18
41.064 63^ 18 030 42 160.712 18.518.287 0^7 19.03^.445 049 19 596 19 41.082 666
18 038 42.179.230 18 527.306.126 19 04^.465.245 19 606 20 41.100.70^ 18.046
42.197^757 18.535 43.325.174 19 057 44.484.851 19.615 21 41.118 750 18.054
42.216 392 18.543.344.231 19.06^.504 466 19.625 22 41.136.804 18.062 42.234 935
18 552.363 297 19 075.524.091 19.635 23 41^154 866 18.070 42.253.487 18
560.382.372 19 084.543 726 19.644 24 41 172.936 18.078 42.272.047
18.56^.401.458 19.093.563.370 19.654 25 41.191.014 18 086 42.290 608 18.577 43
420.551 19.102 44.583 024 19 664 26 41.209.100 18 094 42.309.185 18.58^ 439.653
19 111 602 688 19.673 27 41.227.194 18.102 42.327.771 18.594.458 794 19.120
622.361 19.683 28 41.245.296 18.110 42 346.365 18.603.477 880 19 129.642.044 19
693 29 41.263.406 18.118 42.364 968 18.611 497 009 19.138.661 737 19.702 30
41.281.524 18 125 42.383.579 18.620 43.516.147 19.147 44.681.439 19 712 31
41.299.649 18 133 42 402.199 18 62^ 535.294 19.156.701.151 19.722 32 41.317.782
18.141 42.420.827 18.637.554 450 19.166.720 873 19.732 33 41 335.923 18.149
42.439.464 18.645.573.616 19.175.740.605 19.741 34 41.354.072 18 157 42.458.109
18.654.592.791 19 184.760.346 19.751 35 41.372.229 18.165 42 476.763 18.662
43.611.975 19.193 44.780 097 19.761 36 41 390 394 18.173 42 495.425 18*671.631
168 19.202.799 857 19.771 37 41.408 567 18.181 42.514.096 18.679.650.370 19
211.819 628 19 781 38 41.426.748 18.190 42.532.775 18.688.669.581 19
220.839.409 19.790 39 41 444.938 18 198 42.551.463 18.697.688.801 19
230.859.199 19.800 40 41.463.136 18 206 42.570.160 18.705 43.708 031 19 239 44
878.999 19.810 41 41.481.342 18 214 42.588.865 18.714.727.270 19.248.898.809
19.820 42 41.499.556 18.222 42.607.579 18.722.746.518 19.257.918.629 19.830 43
41.517.778 18.230 42.626.301 18.731.765.775 19.267.938.459 19.840 44 41.536.008
18.238 42.645.032 18.740.785.042 19.276.958.299 19.850 45 41.554.246 18.246
42.663.772 18.748 43.804.318 19.285 44.978.14^ 19.^60 46 41.572.492 18.254
42.682.520 18.757.823.603 19.294 44 998.009 19.869 47 41.590.746 18 262 42
701.277 18.766.842 897 19 304 45.017.878 19.879 48 41 609 008 18.270 42.720.043
18.774.862 201 19.313 45.037.757 19.889 49 41.627.278 18.278 42.738.817
18.783.881.514 19 322 45 057.646 19.899 50 41.645.556 18.287 42.757.600 18.792
43.900.836 19.331 45.077 545 19.909 51 41.663.843 18.295 42.776.392
18.800.920.167 19.341.097.454 19 919 52 41 682.138 18.303 42.795.192 18.809.939
508 19.350.117.373 19.929 53 41.700.441 18.311 42 814.001 18.818.958.858
19.359.137.302 19.939 54 41.718.752 18.319 42.832.819 18 826.978 217 19
369.157.241 19.949 55 41.737.071 18.327 42.851.645 18.835 43.997.586 19 378
45.177.199 19.959 56 41.755.398 18 336 42.870.480 18 844 44.016.964
19.387.197.149 19 969 57 41.773.734 18.344 42.889 324 18 853 44.936.351 19
397.217.118 19.979 58 41.792.078 18 352 42 908.177 18.862 44 055.748 19
406.237.097 19.989 59 41.810.430 18 360 42.927 039 18 87^ 44.075.154 19.416.257
086 20 000 Min. 60 Degr. 61 Degr. 62 Degr. 63 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid.
Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ par. Equal
parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of
equ. par. 0 45.277.106 20.010 46.495.960 20.637 47.753 829 21.312 49.053.607
22.039 1 45.297.116 20 020 46.516.597 20.648 47.775.141 21 323 49.075 646
22.052 2 45.317.136 20.030 46 537 245 20.659 47 796.464 21.335 49 097.698
22.064 3 45.337.166 20.040 46 557.9^4 20.670 47.817.799 21.347 49 119.762
22.077 4 45.357 206 20.050 46.576.574 20.680 47.839.146 21.358 49 141.839
22.089 5 45.377.25^ 20.060 46.599.250 20.691 47 860.504 21.370 49.163.928
22.102 6 45.397 31^ 20.070 46 619.941 20.70^ 47 881 874 21 382.1^^.030 22.115 7
45.417.38^ 20.080 46.640.643 20.713 47.903.25^ 21.394.208.145 22.128 8
45.437.466 20.091 46.661.356 20.724 47.924.650 21 406.230 273 22.140 9
45.457.557 20.101 46.682*080 20.735 47.946.056 21.417.252.413 22.153 10
45.477.658 20.111 46.702.815 20.746 47.9^7.473 21.429 49.274.566 22*166 11
45.497.769 20.121 46*723.561 20.757 47.988.902 21.441.296 732 22.178 12 45.517
890 20.132 46.744.318 20.768 48.010.343 21.453.318.910 22 191 13 45.538.022
20.142 46.765.086 20.779 48 031.796 21.465.341.101 22.204 14 45.558.164 20.152
46.785.865 20.790 48.053 261 21.476.363.305 22.217 15 45.578.316 20.162 46.806
655 20.801 48.074.737 21.488 49.385.522 22.230 16 45.598.478 20.173 46 827.456
20.812 48.096 225 21.500.407.752 22 243 17 45.618.651 20.163 46.848.268 20.823
48.117.725 21.512.429 995 22.255 18 45.638 834 20.193 46.809.091 20.834
48.139.237 21.524.452 250 22.268 19 45.659.027 20.203 46.889.925 20.845
48.160.761 21.536.474.518 22.281 20 45.679.230 20.214 46.910.770 20.85^
48.182.297 21 548 49 496.799 22 294 21 45.699.444 20.224 46.931.626 20.868
48.203.845 21.560.519.093 22.307 22 45.719 668 20.234 46.952.494 20.879
48.225.405 21.572.541.400 22.320 23 45.739 902 20.245 46.973.373 20.890
48.246.977 21.584.563 720 22.333 24 45^760.147 20.255 46.994 263 20.901
48.268.561 21.596.586.053 22.346 25 45.780.402 20 266 47.015.164 20.912
48.290.157 21.608 49.608.399 22.359 26 45.800.668 20.276 47.036 076 20.923
48.311.765 21.620.630 758 22.372 27 45.820.944 20.286 47.056.999 20.934
48.333.385 21.632.653.130 22.385 28 45.841.230 20.297 47.077.923 20.94^
48.355.017 21.644.675.515 22.398 29 45.801 527 20.307 47.098.879 20.957
48.376.661 21.656.697.913 22.411 30 45.881.827 20.318 47.119.836 20.968 48.398
317 21.668 49.720.324 22.424 31 45 902 145 20.320 47.140.804 20.979 48.419.985
21.681.742.748 22.437 32 45.922 473 20 339 47.161.783 20.991 48.441.666
21.693.765.185 22.450 33 45.942 812 20.349 47 182 774 21.002 48.463.359
21.705.787 635 22.464 34 45.963.161 20.360 47.203.77^ 21.013 48.485.064
21.717.810.099 22.477 35 45.983.521 20 370 47.224 709 21.025 48.506.781 21 729
49.832.576 22.490 36 46.003.891 20.381 47.245*814 21.03^ 48.528 510 21.741
855.066 22.503 37 46.024 272 20.391 47.266.850 21^047 48.550.251 21.754 877.568
22 516 38 46.044.663 20.402 47.287.897 21^058 48.572.005 21.766.900.084 22.529
39 46.065.065 20.412 47.308.955 21^070 48.593.771 21.778.922.613 22 543 40
46.085.477 20.423 47.330.025 21.081 48 615 549 21.790 49 945.156 22 556 41
46.105.900 20.433 47 351.106 21.093 48.637.339 21.803 49.967.712 22 569 42
46.126.333 20.444 47.372.199 21.104 48.659.142 21.815 49.990.281 22.583 43
46.146.777 20.455 47.393.383 21.115 48.680.957 2^.827 50 012.864 22.596 44
46.167.232 20.465 47.414.418 21.127 48.702*784 21 840 50.035.460 22.609 45
46.187.697 20.476 47.435.545 21.138 48.724.624 21.852 50.058.069 22.623 46
46.208.173 20.487 47.456.683 21.150 48.746.476 21.864 50.080.692 22.636 47
46.228.660 20.497 47.477.833 21.161 48.768.340 21.877 50.103 328 22 649 48
46.249.157 20.508 47.498.984 21.173 48.790.217 21 889 50.125.977 22.663 49
46.269.665 20 519 47.520.167 21.184 48.812.106 21.901 50.148.640 22.676 50
46.290 184 20.529 47.541.351 21.196 48 834.017 21.914 50.171.316 22.690 51
46.310.713 20.540 47.562.547 21.207 48.855 821 21.926 50.194.006 22.703 52
46.331.253 20 551 47.583.754 21.219 48.877.747 21.939 50.216.709 22.716 53
46.351.814 20.561 47.604 973 21.230 48.899.686 21 951 50.239.425 22.730 54
46.372.365 20.572 47.626.203 21.242 48.921.637 21.964 50 262.155 22.743 55
46.382.937 20.583 47.647.445 21.254 48.943.601 21.976 50.284.898 22.757 56
46.413.520 20.594 47.668.699 21.265 48.965.557 21.989 50 307.655 22.770 57
46.434.114 20 605 47.689.964 21.277 48.987.566 22.001 50 330.425 22.784 58
46.454.719 20.615 47.711 241 21.288 49.009.567 22 014 50.353.209 22.798 59
46.475.334 20.626 47.732.529 21.300 49.031.581 22.026 50.376 007 22.811 Min 64
Degr. 65 Degr. 66 Degr. 67 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ.
par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid.
Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a merid. Difference* of equ. par 0
50.398 818 22 825 51.793.079 23.676 53.240.555 24.602 54.745.956 25.610 1
50.421.643 22.838 51.816.755 23.691 53.265.157 24 618 54.771.566 25.628 2
50.444.461 22.852 51.840.446 23 706 53.289.775 24.634 54.797.194 25.645 3
50.467.313 22 866 51.864.152 23.721 53.314.409 24.650 54.822.839 25.663 4
50.490.179 22.879 51.887.873 23.736 53.339.059 24.666 54.848.502 25.681 5
50.513.058 22.893 51.911.609 23 750 53.363.725 24.682 54.874.183 25 698 6 50
535.951 22.907 51.935.359 23.765 53.388.407 24.698 54.899.881 25.716 7
50.558.858 22.921 51.959.124 23.780 53.413.105 24.715 54.925.597 25.734 8
50.581.779 22.934 51.982.904 23.795 53.437.820 24.731 54.951.331 25.751 9 50
604.713 22.948 52.006.699 23.810 53.462.551 24 747 54.977.082 25.769 10
50.627.661 22.962 52.030.509 23.825 53.487.298 24.764 55.002.851 25.787 11 50
650.623 22.676 52 054.334 23.840 53.512.062 24 780 55.028.638 25.805 12
50.673.599 22.990 52.078.174 23 855 53.536.842 24.796 55.054.443 25.823 13
50.696.589 23.003 52.102.029 23 870 53.561.638 24.813 55.080.266 25.841 14
50.719.592 23.017 52.125.899 23.885 53.586 451 24.829 55.10^.107 25.859 15
50.742.609 23.031 52.149 784 23 900 53.611.280 24.845 55.131.966 25.877 16
50.765.660 23.045 52.173.684 23.915 53.636.125 24.862 55.157.843 25.895 17
50.788.705 23.059 52.197.599 23.931 53.^60.9^7 24.878 55.1^3.738 25.913 18
50.811.764 23.073 52.221.530 23 946 53*685.865 24.895 55.209.651 25 931 1^
50.834 837 23.087 52.245.476 23.961 53.710.760 24.911 55.235.5^2 25 949 20
50.^57 924 23.101 52.269.437 23.976 53.735.671 24.928 55 261.531 25.967 21
50.881.025 23.115 52 293.413 23.991 53.760.599 24.944 55 287 498 25 985 22
50.904.140 23.129 52.317.404 24.006 53.785.543 24.961 55 313.483 26.003 23
50.927.269 23.143 52 341.410 24.022 53.810.514 24.978 55.339.486 26.021 24
50.950.412 23 157 52.365.432 24.037 53.835 482 24.994 55 365.507 26 039 25
50.973.569 23.171 52.389 469 24 052 53.860.476 25.011 55 391.546 26.058 26 50
996.740 23.185 52 413.521 24.068 53.885.487 25.028 55 417.604 26.076 27
51.0^9.925 23.199 52 437 589 24.083 53.910.515 25.044 55 443.680 26.094 28 51
043.124 23.214 52.461.672 24.098 53.935.559 25.061 55.469.774 26.112 29 51
066.338 23.228 52.485.770 24.114 53.960.620 25.078 55.495.886 26.131 30
51.089.56^ 23.242 52.509.884 24.129 53.985.698 25.095 55.522.017 26.149 31
51.112.808 23.256 52.534 013 24.145 54.010.793 25.112 55.548.166 26.168 32
51.136.064 23.270 52.558.158 24.160 54.035.905 25.128 55.574.334 26.186 33
51.159.334 23.285 52.582 318 24.175 54.061.033 25.145 55.600.520 26.204 34
51.182.619 23.299 52.606.493 24.191 54.086.178 25.162 55.626.724 26.223 35 51
205.918 23.313 52.630.684 24.206 54.111.340 25.179 55.652.947 26.241 36
51.229.233 23.327 52 654.890 24.222 54.136.519 25.196 55.679.188 26.260 37
51.252.560 23.342 52.679.112 24.238 54.161.715 25.213 55.705.448 26.278 38
51.275.902 23.356 52*703 350 24.253 54.186.928 25.230 55.731.726 26.297 39
51.299 258 23.270 52.727.603 24.269 54 212.158 25.247 55.758.023 26.316 40
51.322.628 23.385 52 751.872 24.284 54.237.405 25.264 55.784.339 26.334 41
51.346 013 23 399 52.776.156 24.300 54.262.669 25.281 55.810.670 26.353 42
51.369 41^ 23 414 52 800.456 24.316 54.287.950 25.298 55.837.026 26 372 43
51.392.826 23.42^ 52.824.772 24.331 54.313 248 25.315 55.863.398 26.390 44 51
416.^54 23.442 52.849.103 24.347 54.338.563 25.332 55.889.788 26.409 45
51.439.696 23 457 52.873.450 24.363 54.363.895 25 350 55.916.197 26.428 46
51.463.153 23.471 52.897.813 24.379 54.389.245 25.367 55.942.625 26.447 47
51.486 624 23.486 52 922.192 24.394 54.414.612 25.384 55.969 072 26.466 48 51
510.110 23.500 52.946.586 24.410 54.439.996 25.401 55.995.538 26.485 49 51.533
610 23 515 52.970.996 24.426 54.465.397 25.41^ 56 022.023 26.503 50 51.557.125
23.529 52.995.422 24.442 54.490.815 25.436 56 048.526 26.522 51 51.580.654
23.544 53.019.864 24.458 54.516.251 25.453 56.075.048 26.541 52 51 604.198 23
559 53.044.322 24.474 54.541.704 25.470 56.101 589 26.560 53 51.627.757 23.573
53.068.796 24.489 54.567.174 25.488 56.128.149 26.579 54 51.651.330 23.588 53
093 285 24.505 54 592.662 25.505 56.154.728 26.598 55 51.674.918 23 603
53.117.790 24.521 54.618.167 25.523 56.181 326 26 618 56 51.698.521 23 617
53.142.311 24.537 54.643.690 25.540 56.207 944 26.637 57 51.722.138 23.632
53.166.848 24.553 54.669.230 25.558 56.234 581 26.656 58 51.745.770 23 647
53.191.401 24 569 54.694.788 25.575 56.261.237 26.675 59 51.769.417 23.662
53.215.970 24 585 54 720.363 25 593 56.287.912 26 694 Min. 68 Degr 69 Degr. 70
Degr. 71 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a
Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par.
Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. 0 56.314.606 26.713 57.952.571
27.925 59.666.811 29.261 61.465.263 30 741 1 56 341.319 26 733 57 980 496
27.946 59.696.072 29.284 61.496.004 30.767 2 56.368.052 26.752 58.008.442
27.967 59.725 356 29.308 61.526.771 30.793 3 56.394.804 29.771 58.036.409 27
989 59.754.664 29 331 61.557.564 30.819 4 56.421.575 26.791 58.064.398 28.010
59 783.995 29 355 61.58^.383 30845 5 56.448.36^ 26.810 58.092.408 28.031 59.81^
350 29.378 61.619.228 30 872 6 56.475.17^ 26.829 58.120.439 28 053 59.842.728
29 402 61 650.100 30.898 7 56.502 00^ 26.849 58.148.492 28.074 59.872.130
29.426 61.680 998 30.924 8 56.528 854 26.868 58 176.566 28.095 59.901.556
29.449 61.711.922 30.950 9 56 555 722 26.888 58.204.661 28.117 59.931.015
29.473 61.742.872 30 977 10 56.582.610 26.907 58 232.778 28.138 59.960.488
29.497 61.773.849 31.003 11 50.609.517 26.927 58 260 916 28.160 59 989.985 29
521 61.804 852 31.030 12 56.636.444 26.947 58.289 076 28.182 60.019.596 29 545
61.835.882 31.056 13 56.663 391 26 966 58.317.258 28 203 60 049.051 29.569
61.866.938 31 083 14 56.690.357 26.986 58.345.461 28.225 60.078.620 29.593 61
898.021 31.110 15 56.717 343 27.006 58.373.686 28.247 60.108.213 29.617
61.929.131 31.136 16 56.744.349 27.025 58.401.933 28.26^ 60.137.830 29 641
61.960.267 31.163 17 56.771.374 27.045 58.430.201 28.290 60.167.471 29 665
61.991.430 31.190 18 56 7^8 419 27.065 58.45^.491 28.312 60.197.136 29.689
62.022 620 31.217 19 56.825.484 27 085 58.486 803 28.334 60.220.825 29 713
62.053.837 31.243 20 56.852 569 27.104 58.515.137 28.356 60.256.538 29 737
62.085.080 31.270 21 56.879 673 27.124 58.543.493 28.377 60.286.275 29.761 62
116.350 31.297 22 56.906.797 27.144 58.571 870 28.39^ 60.316.036 29.786 62
147.647 31.324 23 56.933 941 27.164 58 600.269 28.421 60.345.822 29.810
62.178.971 31.351 24 56.961 105 27.1^4 58 628.690 28.443 60.375.632 29.834
62.210.322 31.379 25 56.988.2^9 27.204 58.657.133 28.465 60.405 466 29.859
62.241.701 31 406 26 57.015 493 27.224 58 685 598 28.488 60.435.325 29.883
62.273.097 31.433 27 57.042.717 27 244 58.714 086 28.510 60.465.208 29 908
62.304 540 31.460 28 57.069.961 27.264 58.742.596 28.532 60 495.116 29 932
62.336.000 31.488 29 57.097.225 27.285 58.771.128 28 554 60.525.048 29.957 62
367.488 31.515 30 57.124.510 27.305 58 799.682 28.576 60.555.005 29.982
62.399.003 31.542 31 57.151.815 27.325 58.^28.258 28.599 60 584.987 30.006
62.430.545 31.570 32 37.179.140 27 345 58.856 857 28 621 60.614.993 30.031
62.462.115 31.597 33 57.206.485 27.365 58.885 478 28.643 60.645.024 30 056
62.493.712 31.625 34 57.233 850 27.386 58 914.121 28.666 60.675.080 30.081
62.525.337 31.653 35 57.261.236 27.406 58.942.787 28.688 60.705.161 30 105
62.556.990 31.680 36 57.288.642 27.426 58.971.475 28.710 60.735.266 30.130
62.588.670 31.708 37 57.316 068 27.447 59.000.185 28.733 60.765.396 30.155
62.620.378 31^736 38 57.343.515 27.467 59 028.918 28.755 60.795.551 30 180
62.652.114 31.764 39 57.370.982 27.488 59.057.673 28.778 60.825.731 30.205
62.683 878 31 791 40 57.398.470 27.508 59.086.451 28.801 60.855.936 30.230 62
715 669 31 819 41 57.425.978 27.52^ 59.115.252 28.823 60.886.166 30.255 62.747
478 31.847 42 57.453.507 27.549 59.144.075 28.846 60.916 421 30.281 62 779.335
31 875 43 57.481.056 27.570 59.172 921 28.869 60.946.702 30 306 62.811.210
31.904 44 57.508.626 27.590 59.201 790 28.891 60.977.008 30.331 62.843.114
31.932 45 57.536.216 27.611 59.230.681 28.914 61.007.339 30.356 62.875.046
31.960 46 57.563.827 27.632 59.259.595 28.937 61.037 695 30.382 62 907.006
31.988 47 57 591.459 27.652 59.288.532 28.960 61.068.077 30 407 62.938.994
32.016 48 57.619.11^ 27.673 59.317.492 28.983 61.098.484 30*432 62.971.010
32.045 49 57.646.7^4 27.694 59 346.475 29 006 61.128.916 30.458 63 003 055
32.073 50 57.674.478 27.715 59.375.481 29.029 61.159.374 30.483 63.035.128
32.102 51 57.702.193 27.736 59.404.510 29.052 61.189.857 30 509 63.067.230
32.130 52 57.720.929 27 757 59.433.562 29.075 61.220.366 30 535 63.099.360
32.159 53 57.757.686 27.778 59.462.637 29.098 61.250.901 30.560 63.131.519
32.187 54 57.785 464 27.798 59.491.735 29 121 61.281.461 30.586 63.163.706
32.216 55 57.813.262 27.819 59.520.856 29.144 61.311.947 30.612 63.195.922
32.245 56 57.841.081 27.841 59 550.000 29.168 61.342.559 30.637 63 228.167
32.274 57 57 868.922 27.862 59.579.168 29.191 61.373.196 30.6^3 63.260 441 32
302 58 57.896 784 27.883 59.608.359 29.214 61.403.85^ 30.689 63.292.743 32.331
59 57 924 667 27.904 59.637.573 29.238 61.434.548 30.715 63.325.074 32.360 Min.
72 Degr. 73 Degr. 74 Degr. 75 Degr Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ
par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid.
Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. 0
63.357.434 32.389 65.354.167 34.235 67.468.378 36.316 69^715.485 38.679 1 63
389 823 32.41^ 65.388.402 34.268 67.504.694 36 353 69.754 164 38.721 2 63 422
241 32.447 65.422.670 34.300 67.541.047 36.390 69.792 885 38.763 3 63.454.688
32.477 65.456 970 34.333 67.577.437 36 427 69.831.648 38.805 4 63.487.165
32.506 65.491.303 34.366 67.613 864 36.464 69.870 453 38.847 5 63.519.671
32.535 65.525.669 34.399 67.650 328 36.501 69.909.300 38.890 6 63.552 206
32.564 65.560.068 34.432 67.686 829 36 539 69.948 190 38.932 7 63.584.770
32.594 65 594^500 34.465 67.723.368 36 576 69.987.142 38 975 8 63.617.364
32.623 65 628.965 34.498 67 759.944 36 613 70.026.117 39.018 9 63 649.987 32
653 65.663.463 34.531 67.796.557 36 651 70.065 135 39.061 10 63.682.640 32 682
65.697^994 34.564 67 833.208 36.689 70 104^196 39.104 11 63.715.322 32.712
65.732.558 34.598 67.869.897 36.726 70.143.300 39.147 12 63.748.034 32.741
65.767.150 34.631 67 906 623 36.764 70.182.447 39 190 13 63.780.775 32.771
65.801 7^7 34.665 67.943 387 36.802 70.221.637 39 233 14 63.813.546 32.801
65.836.452 34 698 67.9^0.189 36.840 70.260 870 39.277 15 63.846.347 32.831 65
871.150 34 732 68 017.029 36.878 70.300.147 39.320 16 63 879.178 32.861
65.905.882 34 765 68.053.907 36.916 70.339.467 39.363 17 63*912.039 32.891
65.940 647 34 799 68 090.823 36.954 70 378.830 39 407 18 63 944.930 32.921 65
975.446 34 833 68 127 777 36.993 70.418 237 39.451 19 63.977.851 32.951 66 010
279 34.867 68 164.770 37 031 70.457.688 39 495 20 64 010.802 32 981 66.045 146
34 901 68 201.801 37.069 70.497.183 39.539 21 64.043 783 33.011 66.080.047 34
935 68.238 870 37.108 70.536.722 39.583 22.076 794 33 041 66.114 9^2 34 969 68
275.978 37 147 70.576.305 39 627 23.109.835 33 072 66.149.951 35 003 68.313.125
37.1^5 70.615.932 39.671 24.142.907 33 102 66.184.954 35.037 68 350 310 37.224
70.655 ^03 39 715 25 64.176 009 33.132 66.219.991 35.071 68 387 534 37.263
70.695.318 39.7^0 26.209.141 33.163 66.255^062 35.105 68 424.797 37.302 70.735
078 39.804 27.242.304 33 193 66.290.107 35.140 68 462 099 37.341 70.774 882
39.849 28.275.497 33.224 66.325.307 35.174 68.499.440 37 380 70 814.731 39.894
29.308.721 33.2^5 66 3^0.481 35.209 68.536.820 37.419 70 854.^25 39.939 30
64.341.976 33.285 66.395.690 35 243 68 574.239 37.459 70 894.564 39.984 31
375.261 33.316 66 430 933 35.278 68.611.698 37 49^ 70 934.548 40.029 32.408 577
33.347 66.406.211 35.313 68 649.196 37 537 70 974.577 40.074 33.441.924 33.378
66.501.524 35.348 68.686.733 37.577 71 014.651 40.119 34.475 302 33.40^
66.536.872 35.383 68.714.310 37 617 71 054.770 40.165 35 64.508.711 33.440
66.572 255 35.418 68.761.927 37.656 71.094.935 40.210 36.542.171 33 471 66.607
673 35 453 68 799.5^3 37.696 71.135.145 40.256 37.575.622 33.502 66 643.126
35.488 68.837.279 37^736 71.175.401 40 302 38.609 124 33.53^ 66 678 614 35 523
68.874.915 37.776 71.215.703 40 347 39.642.657 33 564 66.714.137 35.558 68.912
791 37.816 71.256 051 40 393 40 64.676.221 33.5^^ ^6.748.695 35.594 68.950 607
37 856 71.296.444 40.439 41.709 817 33 627 ^6.785 289 35 629 68.988 463 37.897
71.336.883 40 485 42 743.444 33 65^ 66.820.918 35 664 69 026.360 37 937
71^377.358 40 532 43.777.102 33.690 66.856.582 35.700 69.064.297 37.977 71
417.900 40.578 44.810 792 33.722 66 892.282 35.736 69.102 274 38.^18 71 458 478
40 625 45 64 844.514 33.753 66.928.018 35.771 69 140.292 38 058 71.499.103
40.671 46 878.267 33 785 66.963 789 35.807 69 178.350 38.099 71 53^.774 40.718
47.912.052 33.^17 66 999.596 35 843 69.216 449 38.1^0 71.580.4^2 40.765
48.945.869 33.848 67 035.439 35.879 69.254 589 38 181 71.621 257 40.812 49
64.979 717 33.880 67.071 318 35.915 69.292 770 38.222 71.662.06^ 40.859 50
65.013.597 33.91^ 67.107.233 35.951 69.330.992 38.263 71 702 92^ 40.906 51
65.047 509 33.944 67 143.184 35.987 69 369.255 38.304 71 743.834 40.953 52
65.0^1.453 33 97^ 67 179.171 36.023 69.407 559 38.345 71.7^4 787 41.000 53
65.115.429 34.00^ 67 215.194 36.060 69.445 904 38.387 71 825.787 41 048 54
65.149.437 34 041 67.251 254 36 096 69 484 291 38.428 71.866 835 41.095 55 65
183.478 34 073 67.287.350 36.132 69.522 719 38.470 71 907 930 41.143 56 65.217
551 34 105 67.323 482 36.1^9 69.561.189 38.511 71.949.073 41.191 57 65 251 656
34.13^ 67 359 651 36.206 69 599 700 38.553 71.990.264 41*239 58 65.285 794
34.170 67.395.857 36.242 69.63^.253 38.595 72 031 503 41.287 59 65 ^19.964 34
2^^ 67 432.099 36.279 ^9.676.848 38 637 72 072 790 41 33^ Min 76 Degr. 77 Degr.
78 Degr. 79 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par Equal parts of
a Merid. Difference of equ. pa^ Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par
Equal parts of a Merid Difference of equ. par. 0 72 114 125 41 383 74 687.014
44.510 77.462.411 48.163 80.475.935 52.486 1 72 155.508 41 432 74.731.524
44.566 77.510.574 48.229 80.52^.421 52.563 2 72.196 940 41.480 74 776.090
44.622 77.558.803 48.295 80.580.986 52.^44 3 72.238.420 41 529 74.820 712
44.679 77.607.098 48.362 80.633.63^ 52.724 4 72.279.949 41.578 74.865.391
44.7^5 77.655.4^0 48.428 80.686.^54 52.^^^ 5 72.321.527 41.627 74 910.126
44.792 77.703.8^8 48.405 80.739.1^7 52.^^^ 6 72.363.154 41.676 74.954.918
44.849 77.752.383 48.5^^ 80.7^2.04^ 52.9^^ 7 72.404.830 41 725 74.999.767
44.906 77.800.945 48.62^ 80.845.^03 5^ 043 8 72 446 555 41.774 75.044.673 44
964 77.849 574 48.69^ 80.898.046 53.12^ 9 72.488.329 41*823 75.089.637 45.021
77.898 2^^ 48.7^^ 8^.951.170 53.204 10 72.530.152 41.873 75.134.658 45.079
77.947.035 48.832 81.004.374 53 285 11 72.572.025 41.922 75 179 737 45.136
77.995.867 48.900 81.057.659 53.367 12 72.613.947 41.972 75.224.873 45.194
78.044.767 48.96^ 81.111.026 53.448 13 72 655 919 4^.022 75.270 067 45 252
78.093.735 49.037 81.164.474 53.530 14 72.697.941 42.072 75.315.319 45.310
78.142.772 49.105 81.218.0^4 53 612 15 72 740 013 42.122 75.360.629 45.369 78
191.877 49.174 81.271.616 53 694 16 72.782.135 42.172 75.405.998 45.427
78.241.051 49.243 81.325.310 53.777 17 72.824.307 42.222 75 451.425 45 486
78.290.294 49.312 81.379.087 53.859 18 72.866.529 42.273 75 496 911 45.545
78.339.^06 49.382 81.432.946 53.943 19 72.908.802 42.323 75 542.456 45 604
78.388.988 49 451 81.486.889 54.026 20 72.951.125 42 374 75.588.060 45.663
78.438.439 49.521 81.5^0.^15 54.109 21 72.993.499 42.425 75.633.723 45.722 78
487.9^0 49.591 81.5^5.024 5^ 1^3 22 73 035.924 42.476 75.679.445 45.781
78.537.551 49.661 81.649.217 54 277 23 73.078.400 42.527 75.725 226 45.841
78.587.212 49.731 81.703.494 54 362 24 73.120 927 42.578 75.771.067 45.901
78.636.943 49.802 81.757.856 54.446 25 73 163.505 42.629 75 816.968 45 961
78.686.745 49.873 81.812.^02 54 531 26 73.206.134 42.681 75.862 929 46 021
78.736.6^8 49.94^ 81.8^^.833 54.616 27 73.248.815 42.732 75 90^.950 46.081
78.^76 592 50.015 81.921.449 54.702 28 73.291.547 42 784 75 955.031 46.141
78.836.577 50.086 81.9^^ 151 54.7^8 29 73.334 331 42.83^ 76.001 1^2 46.202
78.886.663 50.158 82.^30.939 54.874 30 73.377 107 42 888 76.047.374 46.262
78.936.821 50.230 82.085.813 54.960 31 73.420.055 42 940 76.093.636 46 323
78.987.051 50.302 ^2.140 773 55*046 32 73.462.995 42.992 76 139.959 46.384
79.037.353 50.374 82.195 819 55.133 33 73 505.987 43.045 76 18^.343 46.446
79.087.727 50.447 82.2^0.952 55.22^ 34 73.549.032 43 097 76.232.789 46 507
79.138.174 50.519 82.30^ 172 55 30^ 35 73.592 129 43.150 76.279.29^ 46.56^
79.188.693 50.592 82.361 480 55 397 36 73 635.279 43 203 76.325.864 46.630
79.239.285 50.665 82.416.875 55 483 37 73.678 482 43 255 76 372 394 46.692
79.289.950 50.739 82.472.358 55 571 38 73.721 737 43 309 76.419 186 46.754
79.340.689 50.812 82.527 929 55 660 39 73.765.046 43.362 76.465.94^ 46.816
79.391^501 50.^86 82.583.589 55 749 40 73 808.408 43 415 76.512.75^ 46.879
79.442.387 50.960 82 639.338 55.838 41 73.851 823 43.468 76.559.635 46 941
79.493.347 51.034 82.695 17^ 55.^2^ 42 73.895.291 43.522 76.606.576 47.004
79.544.381 51.108 82.751.103 56.01^ 43 73.938 813 43 576 76.653.580 47.067
79.5^5.489 51.183 82 807 122 56.1^^ 44 73.982.389 43 629 76.700.647 47 130
79.646.672 51.258 82.863.227 56.1^^ 45 74.026.018 43.683 76.747.777 47.193
79.697.930 51.333 82.919.424 56 2^^ 46 74.069 701 43.738 76.794.970 47.256
79.749.263 51.408 82 975.712 56 ^7^ 47 74.113.439 43 792 76.842.226 47.320 79
8^0.671 51.484 83.032.090 56 ^^^ 48 74.157 231 43.846 76.889.546 47.384
79.852.155 51.559 83.088.5^0 56.5^^ 49 74 201.077 43.901 76 936.930 47 448
79.903.714 51.635 83 149 121 56.^^^ 50 74.244.978 43.955 76.984.378 47.512
79.955.349 51.712 83.201 774 5^.7^^ 51 74.288 933 44 010 77 031.890 47.576
^0.007.061 51.788 83 258 519 5^ ^3^ 52 74.332.943 44 065 77.079.466 47 641
80.058.849 51.865 83 315.356 56.9^^ 53 74 377.008 44.120 77.127 107 47 705
80.110.714 51.^42 83.3^2.286 57.^^^ 54 74.421 128 44.175 77.174 812 47.77^
80.162.656 52.019 83.4^9 30^ 5^.1^^ 55 74 465.303 44.231 77.222.582 47 835
80.214.675 52.^^^ 83 ^^6 425 57.2^^ 56 74.509.534 44.286 77 270.417 47.900
80.266.771 52.174 83.^43.6^5 (...) 57 74.553.82^ 44.342 77.318.317 47.966
80.318.945 52.25^ 83 600.9^9 (...) 58 74.598.162 44 398 77.366.283 48.031
80.371.197 52.^^^ 83 698.337 (...) 59 74.642.560 44 454 77.414.314 (...)
^0.423.527 52.^^^ ^3 71^.^29 (...) Min 80 Degr. 81 Degr. 82 Degr. 83 Degr Equal
parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of
equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ par. Equal parts of a Meid*
Difference of equ. par. 0 83.773.416 57 682 87.415.219 64 042 91.483.111 72.001
96 091.773 82.249 1 83.831.098 57.778 87.479 261 64.160 91.555.113 72.151
96.174.022 82.445 2 83.888.876 57.874 87 543.421 64.278 91 627.264 72.301
96.256 467 82.642 3 83.946.750 57.970 87.607.699 64.397 91.699.565 72 452
96.339 00^ 82.840 4 84 004 720 58.066 87.672.096 64.517 91.772 017 72.604
96.421.949 83 038 5 84.062.786 58.163 87.736 613 64.636 91.844.621 72.756
96.504.987 83 238 6 84.120.949 58.260 87 801.249 64.757 91.917 377 72 909
96.588.225 83.439 7 84.179 209 58 358 87.566.006 64.877 91.990.286 73.062
96.671.664 83 640 8 84.237.567 58 455 87 930.883 64.999 92.063.348 73.217
96.755.304 83.843 ^ 84.296.022 58 553 87.995.882 65.120 92.136.565 73.371
96.839.147 84.046 1^ 84.354.575 58.652 88.061.002 65.242 62.209 936 73.527
96.923.193 84.251 11 84.413.227 58.751 88.126 244 65.365 92.283 463 73.683
97.007 444 84.456 12 84.471.978 58 850 88.191.609 65.488 92 357.146 73.840
97.091.900 84.663 13 84.530 828 58 949 88.257.097 65.612 92.430.986 73.997
97.176.563 84.870 14 84 589.777 59 049 88.322.709 65.736 92.504 983 74.155
97.261.433 85.079 15 84.648.826 59.149 88.388.445 65 860 92.579.138 74.314
97.346.512 85.288 16 84.707 975 59.250 88.454.305 65.985 92.653.452 74.474
97.431.800 85.499 17 84.767.225 59 350 88.520 290 66 110 92 727.926 74.634
97.517.299 85.711 18 84.826.575 59.452 88.586 400 66.236 92 802.560 74.795
97.603.010 85.924 19 84.886 027 59.553 88.652.636 66 363 92.877.355 74.957
97.688.934 86 137 20 84.945 580 59.655 88.718.999 66.490 92.952.312 75.119
97.775.071 86.352 21 85.005.235 59 757 88 785.489 66.617 93.027.431 75.282
97.861.423 86.568 22 85.064.992 59.860 88.852.106 66 745 93.102.713 75.446
97.947.991 86.785 23 85.124 852 59.963 88 918.851 66.873 93.178.159 75.610
98.034.776 87.004 24 85.184.815 60 066 88.985.724 67 0^2 93.253.769 75 775
98.121 780 87.223 25 85.244.881 60.170 89.052.726 67.132 93.329.544 75.941 98
209.003 87.443 26 85.305.051 60.274 89 119.858 67.261 93.405.485 76 108
98.296.446 87.665 27 85.365 325 60.378 89.187.119 67.392 93.481.593 76.275
98.384.111 87.887 28 85.425 703 60 483 89.254.511 67.523 93.557.868 76.444 98
471.998 88.111 29 85.486.186 60 588 89.322.034 67.654 93.634.312 76.612
98.560.109 88.336 30 85.546.774 60.694 89.389 688 67.786 93.710.914 76.782
98.648.445 88.562 31 85.607.468 60 799 89.457.474 67.919 93.787.706 76.953
98.737.007 88.790 32 85.668.267 60.906 89.525.393 68.052 93.864.659 77.124
98.825.797 89.018 33 85.729.173 61.012 89.593.445 68.185 93.941.783 77.296
98.914.815 89.248 34 85.790.185 61.119 89.661 630 68.319 94.019.079 77.468
94.004.063 89.479 35 85.851.304 61.227 89.729 749 68.454 94 096.547 77.642
99.093.542 89.711 36 85.912.531 61.335 89.798.403 68.589 94.174.189 77.816 99
183.253 89 944 37 85.973.866 61.443 89.866.992 68.724 94.252.005 77.991
99.273.197 90.178 38 86 035.209 61.551 89.935.716 68.861 94.329.996 78.167
99.363.375 90.414 39 86.096.860 61.660 90.004.577 68 997 94.408.163 78.344
99.453.789 90.651 40 86.158 520 61.770 90.073.574 69.135 94.486.507 78.521
99.544.440 90 889 41 86.220.290 61.879 90 142.709 69.273 94.565.028 78.700
99.635.329 91.129 42 86.282.169 61 989 90.211 982 69.411 94.643.728 78.879
99.726 458 91.369 43 86.344 158 62.100 90.281.393 69.550 94.722 607 79.059
99.817 827 91.611 44 86.406.258 62.211 90.350 943 69.689 94.801.666 79 239
99.909.438 91 855 45 86.468.469 62.322 90.420.632 69.830 94.880.905 79.421
100.001.293 92.099 46 86.530 791 62.434 90 490.462 69 970 94.960.326 79.603
100.093.392 92.345 47 86.593.225 62.546 90.560.432 70.111 95.039 929 79.787 100
185.737 92.593 48 86 655.771 62.658 90.630.543 70.253 95.119.716 79.971
100.278.330 92.841 49 86.718.429 62 771 90.700.796 70.396 95.199.687 80 156
100.371.171 93.091 50 86.781 200 62.885 90.771.192 70.539 95.279.843 80.342
100.464.262 93.342 51 86 844 085 62.999 90.841 731 70.682 95.360.185 80 529
100.557.604 93.595 52 86.907.084 63.113 90 912.413 70.826 95.440.714 80.716
100.651.199 93.849 53 86.970.197 63.227 90.983.239 70.971 95 521.430 80.905
100.745 048 94 105 54 87.033.424 63.342 91.054 210 71.117 95.602.335 81.094 100
839.153 94.361 55 87.096.766 63.458 91.125.327 71.263 95.683 429 81 284 100
933.514 94 620 56 87.160.224 63.574 91.196 590 71 409 95.764.713 81.476 101.028
134 94.879 57 87.223.798 63.690 91.267.999 71.556 95.846.189 81.668 101.123 013
95.141 5^ 87 287.488 63.807 91.339.555 71.704 95.927.857 81.861 101.218 154
95.403 59 87.351.295 63.924 91 411.159 71.852 96.009.718 82 055 101.313.557
95.667 Min. 84 Degr. 85 Degr. 86 Degr. 87 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid.
Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal
parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of
equ. par. 0 101.409.224 95.933 107.696.200 115 119 115.389.469 143.954 125
209.226 192.139 1 101.505.157 96.200 107.811 319 115.505 115 533.423 144.558
125.401.365 193.218 2 101.601.357 96 468 107.926.824 115.893 115.677.9^1
145.167 125.594.583 194.308 3 101 697.825 96.738 108.042.717 116.283
115.823.148 145.781 125 788.^91 195.411 4 101.794.563 97.010 108.159.002
116.676 115.968.929 146.401 125.984.102 196.527 5 101.891.573 97.283 108
275.678 117.072 116.115.330 147.025 126.180 829 197.656 6 101.988.856 97.557
108.392 750 117 471 116.262.355 147.655 126.378.485 198.797 7 102.086.413
97.834 108.510.221 117.872 116.410.010 148.291 126.577.282 199.952 8
102.184.247 98.111 108.628.093 118 276 116.558 001 148.932 126.777.234 201.120
9 102.282.358 98.391 108.746.369 118 683 116.707.233 149.578 126.978 354
202.302 10 102.380.749 98.672 108.865.052 119.093 116.856 811 150.230 127.180
656 203.498 11 102.479.421 98.954 108.984.145 119.506 117.007.041 150.888
127.384 154 204.709 12 102.578.375 99.238 109.103.651 119 921 117.157.92^
151.552 127.588 863 205.934 13 102.677.613 99 524 109 223.572 120 339 117 309
481 152.222 127.794 797 207.173 14 102.777.137 99.812 109.343.911 120.760
117.461.703 152.897 128.001.970 208.428 15 102 876 949 100 101 109.464.671
121.185 117.614.60^ 153.579 128.210.398 209.698 16 102.977.050 100.392
109.585.856 121.612 117 768.17^ 154.267 128 420 096 210 983 17 103.077.442
100.684 109.707.468 122.042 ^17 622.441 154.961 128 631.079 212 285 18
103.178.126 100 979 109 829.510 122.476 118.077 407 1^5.661 128.843.364 213.602
19 103.279.105 101.275 109.951.986 122 912 118.233.068 156.367 129.056 966
214.936 20 103.380.380 101.572 110.074.898 123 352 118.389.435 157.080
129.271.902 216.287 21 103.481.952 101 672 110.198.250 123.794 118 546.515
157.800 129.488 189 217.655 22 103.583 824 102.173 110 322.044 124.240 118.704
315 158 526 129 705 844 219.040 23 103.685.997 102.476 110.445.628 124 989
118.862 841 159.259 129.924.884 220.444 24 103.788 473 102.781 110.570.973 125
142 119.022 100 15^.999 130.145 328 221.865 25 103.891.254 103.088 110 696.115
125.598 119.182 099 160.746 130.367.193 223.304 26 103.994.342 103.397
110.821.713 126.057 119.342 845 161.499 130 590.497 224.763 27 104.097 739 103
707 110.947.770 126.519 119.504.344 162.260 130 815.260 226 241 28 104.^01.446
104 019 111 074 289 126.985 119 666.604 163.02^ 131.041.501 227.738 29
104.305.465 104 334 111 201.274 127.454 119.829.632 163.804 131 269 239 229.255
30 104.409.799 104.650 111.328.728 127.927 119.993.436 164.586 131.498.494
230.793 31 104.514 449 104.968 111.456.655 128 404 120.158 022 165.377
131.729.287 232 351 32 104 619 417 105.288 111 585.059 128 884 120.323.399
166.175 131.961 638 233.936 33 104.724 705 105.610 111 713.943 129.367
120.489.574 166.98^ 132 195 574 235 532 34 104.830.315 105.934 111.843 310
129.854 120 656.554 167 794 132 431.106 237.156 35 104.936.249 106.260
111.973.164 130.345 120 824 348 168.615 132.668.262 238.802 36 105.042.509
106.588 112 103.509 130.840 120.992.963 169 445 132.907.064 240.470 37
105.149.097 106 918 112.234.349 131.338 121.162 40^ 170.283 133 147 534 242.163
38 105.256.015 107.250 112.365 887 131 841 121.332.691 171.129 133.389 697
243.880 39 105.363.265 107.584 112.497 528 132.347 121.503.820 171.98^
133.633.577 2^5.621 40 105.470.849 107.921 112.029.875 132 857 121.675 ^04
172.847 133 879 19^ 247.3^7 41 105.578 770 108.259 112.762 732 133.371
121.848.651 173.719 134.126.585 249.178 42 105 687.029 108.600 112.895.803
133.889 122 022.370 174.600 134.375.7^3 250.996 43 105.795.629 108 942 113.029
992 134.411 122.196 ^7^ 175.4^0 134 626.759 252.841 44 105.904 571 109 287
113.164.403 134 937 122 372.460 176.389 134.879.600 254 713 45 106.013.858
109.634 113.299 340 135.467 122 548.849 177 297 135.134.313 256.613 46 106 123
492 109.984 113.434 807 136.002 122.726.14^ 178.215 135.390 926 258 541 47
106.233.476 110.335 113.570.809 136.540 122.904.361 179.142 135.649.467 260.499
48 106.343.811 110.689 113 707.349 137.083 123.083.503 180 078 135.909.966
262.486 49 106 454.500 111.045 113.844.432 137 631 123.263.581 181.025
136.172.452 264.505 50 106 565 545 111.403 113.982 063 138.183 123.444.608 181
983 136.436.957 266.554 51 106.676.948 111.764 114.120 246 138.739 123 626.589
182 95^ 136.703.511 268.636 52 106.788 712 112.127 114.258.685 139 299 123
809.539 183 927 136 972.147 270.750 53 106.900.839 112.493 114 398.284 139.865
123.993.466 184.915 137.242.897 272 898 54 107.013.332 112.861 114.538.149 140
435 124 078.381 185.913 137.515.795 275 080 55 107.126.193 113.231 114 678.584
141.009 124.264.294 186.923 137 790 87^ 277.297 56 107.239.424 113.604 114
819.593 141.588 124.451.217 187.943 138 068.172 279.551 57 107.353 128 113.979
114.961.181 142.172 124 639 160 188.975 138.347.723 281.8^1 58 107.467.107
114.356 115.103.353 142.761 124.828.135 190 018 13^ 629.564 284.169 59 107
581.463 114.737 115.246.114 143.355 125.018.153 191 073 138 913 73^ 286 537
Min. 88 Degr. 89 Degr. Equal parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. Equal
parts of a Merid. Difference of equ. par. 0 139.200.270 288.943 163.175.324
582.696 1 139.489 213 291.391 163.758.020 592.743 2 139.780.604 293.881 164.350
763 603.141 3 140.074.485 296.413 164.953.904 613.910 4 140 370 898 298.990
165.567.814 625 071 5 140 669.888 301.612 166.192.885 636.645 6 140.971.500
304.281 166.829.530 648.657 7 141.275.781 306.995 167.478 187 661.130 8 141
582.776 309.760 168.139.317 674 092 9 141.892.536 312.575 168.813.409 687 573
10 142.205 111 315.442 169.500.982 701.604 11 142.520.553 318.361 170.202.586
716.220 12 142.838.914 321.336 170.918 806 731.458 13 143 160.250 324.367
171.650.264 747 358 14 143.484.617 327.455 172.397.622 763.965 15 143 812.072
330.602 173.161.587 781.327 16 144 142 674 333.811 173.942.914 799.496 17
144.476 485 337.083 174^742.410 818.531 18 144.813.568 340.419 175.560.941
838.494 19 145.153.987 343.823 176.399.435 859.456 20 145.497.810 347.295
177.285.891 881.492 21 145.845.105 350.838 178.140.383 904.688 22 146 195.943
354.453 179.045.071 929 138 23 146.550 396 358.145 179.974.209 954.947 24
146.908.541 361.914 180 929.156 982.230 25 147.270.455 365.763 181.911.386
1.011.118 26 147.636.218 369.695 182.922.504 1 041.757 27 148 005.913 373.712
183.964.261 1.074.311 28 148 379.625 377.818 185.038.572 1.108.965 29
148.757.443 382.015 186 147.537 1.145.930 30 149.139 458 386.306 187.293 467
1.185.443 31 149.525.764 390.695 188.478.910 1.227.780 32 149.916.459 395.185
189.706.690 1.273.252 33 150 311.944 399 779 190.979.942 1.322.222 34
150.711.423 404.482 192.302.164 1.375.110 35 151.115.905 409.296 193.677.274
1.432.406 36 151.525.201 414 226 195.109.680 1.494.683 37 151 939.427 419.277
196.604.363 1.562.622 38 152 358.704 424.452 198.166.985 1.637 032 39
152.783.156 429.752 199.804.017 1.718.883 40 153 212.913 435 196 201 522.900
1.809.349 41 153.648.109 440 774 203.332.249 1.909.868 42 154.088.883 446.497
205.242.117 2 022.212 43 154.535.380 452.371 207.264.329 2 148.599 44 154
987.751 458.402 209.412 928 2.291.838 45 155 446.153 464.596 211.704.766
2.455.540 46 155.910.749 470.959 214.160 306 2.644 426 47 156.381.708 477 499
216.804.732 2.864.794 48 156.859.207 484.224 219.669.526 3.125 229 49 157
343.431 491.140 222.794.755 3 437.751 50 157.834.571 498 257 226.232.506
3.819.723 51 158.332.828 505.583 230.052.229 4.297.187 52 158.838 411 513.129
234 349.416 4.911.090 53 159 351.540 520.902 239.260.506 5.729.580 54 159 872
442 528.915 244.990.086 6.875.496 55 160 401.357 537.178 251.865.582 56 160
938.535 545.704 260.459.920 8.594.338 57 161 484.239 554.505 271 919.077
11.459.157 58 162 038 744 563.594 289 107.811 17.188.734 59 162.602.338 572.986
323.485.279 34.377.468

CHAP. III. The use of the two first columns of the Table of Latitudes, for
graduating a Meridian in the general Sea-Chart.
BEfore you can make use of this Table, for the true graduating, or dividing of
a Meridian of this Chart into his degrees, or other parts of Latitude,
increasing from the Aequinoctial toward the North and South, in such
proportion, as before has been showed, there must be first some preparation
made to that end; which may be done after this manner: Overthwart the midst of
the plain superficies, whereupon you will draw the lineaments of the Chart,
describe a right line, (representing the Aequinoctial circle) which you shall
divide into 360 parts or degrees, and cross the same squirewise with right
lines, by every fifth or tenth degree. Then take with your compasses the length
of half the Aequinoctial, (that is, 180 degrees) and setting one foot of your
compasses in the mutual intersection of the Aequinoctial, with the
perpendicular or Meridian that passes by either end of the Aequinoctial, with
the other foot make a prick in the same perpendicular or Meridian: the space
contained betwixt this prick and the Aequinoctial, divide first into three
equal parts, and every one of these into other three, so have you nine in all:
and again every one of these into three, so have you 27 parts, and every one
of these parts divide into four, so have you 108 parts: And again (if there be
space enough) divide every one of these into 10 or 100. So shall you have 1080,
or 10800 parts, which will bring you to the Latitude of 85 degrees and
something more. But if you would make your Chart to any greater Latitude, you
shall continue forth the foresaid perpendicular, and divide it into so many
more of the same parts as you shall find needful to attain to the Latitude you
desire. Then note every fifth and tenth part with black lead, and set figures at
them, beginning at the Aequinoctial* The use of the two first Columns of the
Table of Latitudes.
and from thence proceeding Northwards and Southwards. Then look what numbers
in the second column are answerable to each degree, or minute in the first
column of this Table of Latitudes (omitting always four or five of the first
figures toward the right hand) and at the same numbers of parts in the
perpendiculars, make pricks on either side the Aequinoctial: by which (pricks)
draw right lines equidistant from the Aequinoctial, for they shall be the
Parallels of the true Nautical Planisphere, or Sea-Chart.

Notwithstanding these Parallels are all o^ them a little further distant from
the Aequinoctial then in truth they should be: and so much the more, the
further they are from the Aequinoctial. Which error might be something the
less, if the former Table had been first made to smaller parts then minutes.
But that were a matter more curious then necessary, the Table here before set
down being so near the truth, that it is not possible by any rules or
Instruments of Navigation, to discover any sensible error in the Sea-Chart, so
far forth as it shall be made according thereto.

The figure following contains only one part of the Nauticall Planisphaere,
from the Aequinoctial Northwards, because the other part from the Aequinoctial
Southwards must be altogether like and equal to this. Herein first I drew the
Aequinoctial line AC, and divided it into 36 equal parts, whereof every one is
understood to contain ten degrees, and I raised perpendiculars from every one
of those parts; which are the Meridians of the Nauticall Planisphaere, every
where aequidistant each from other. Then I took half the length of the
Aequinoctial with the compasses, and setting one foot in the end of the
Aequinoctial at C, with the other foot I made a prick at D in the perpendicular
or Meridian CD. The space contained betwixt C and D, I divided into 1080 parts,
(understanding every one of the smaller parts, or segments of the line CD to
contain ten lesser parts) in such sort as before has been showed, and set
figures to them, as here you see, for the readier numbering and finding out of
any of those parts. Then I looked in the former Table what number of equal
parts of the Meridian answered to every tenth degree* and casting away five of
the first figures next the right hand (because I conceive the space betwixt C
and D to be divided only into 1080 parts) I found out the parts answerable to
the numbers remaining in the line CD: and at those parts I made pricks, by
which I drew the Parallels.

As for example: in the Table, the number answerable to ten degrees, is 60,
casting away the five first figures toward the right hand: therefore I look 60
in the line CD, and by that part I draw the Parallel of ten degrees distance
from the Aequinoctial. Likewise the number answering to twenty degrees
(omitting the five first figures) is 122: therefore by that number of equal
parts I draw the parallel of twenty degrees Latitude from the Equinoctial,
etc. And after this manner I drew all the rest, as you may see in the former
draught.

The Draught of the Meridians, Parallels and Rumbs, of the Nautical
Planisphear, truly made.


CHAP. IIII. (...) way for graduating the Meridian of a general Sea-Chart.
OTherwise for the dividing of the Meridian of a general Sea-Chart into his
degrees, and other smaller parts of Latitude, when the Chart has not so great
Latitude or breadth from the Equinoctial toward the North or South, as has
the figure before set down; you may go thus to work: First find out what
proportion the whole Longitude (or lenght of the Chart from West to East) must
have to the whole breadth thereof betwixt the Parallels of the most Northerly
and Southerly places, that are to be set down therein: which may be done after
this manner: Out of the second Column of the table of Latitudes, take the
numbers of equal parts of the Meridian answerable to the greatest North and
South Latitudes that are to be set down in the Chart: divide those numbers by
600,000 (that is the number of equal parts of the Meridian answerable to one
degree of the Equinoctial) the Quotients will show how many degrees of the
Equinoctial the breadth of the Chart must be on either side the Equinoctial
toward the North and South. As for example, in the general Sea-^hart to be
adjoined to this book, the Latitude of the North (...) of the New land, found
by the Hollanders about the year ^596, and by them called Gebrooken land (lying
Northwards from Norway) is about 80 degrees. And the Latitude of Queen
Elizabeth's Island (first found by Sir Francis Drake, lying to the ^outhwards of
Magellanes streights) is about 53 degrees. The ^umbers of equal parts of the
Meridian answerable to these La^^tudes, found out in the foresaid Table of
Latitudes, are 83, ^^ 73, 416, and 37, 639, 370; which being divided by 600,
^^00, the Quotients are 140 and 63 almost, showing the breadth (...) the Chart
from the Equinoctial Northwards and South^ards, in such parts whereof the
Equinoctial contains 360; which added together shall show that the whole
breadth of (...) Chart from North to South must be about 203 such parts. ^aving
therefore divided the length of the Equinoctial or any ^ther parallel of the
Chart (because they are all equal) into ^60 parts, take with a pair of
compasses 210 of the same parts because that is the next greater number apt for
division) and so keeping them unaltered, set both feet in the Meridian at one
of the ends, or in the midst of the Chart, and divide the space contained
between them first into seven parts, and every one of them into three, so have
you 21 in all: then divide each of these into two, and these again into five;
so shall you have in all 210, the number of the parts required. Now beginning
at the Southermost of these parts, tell on Northwards, till you come to 66, and
thereby draw the Equinoctial, overthwart the Meridian, at right Angles. After
this you may divide the said parts of the Meridian every one into six, drawing
forth every fifth or tenth, a little further then the rest, and setting
figures to every hundredth part, for the readier finding out of any number of
those parts that shall be required. This being done, the Meridian may be
divided into his degrees of Latitude, and the parallels drawn after the same
manner that we have already showed for the drawing of the former figure of a
general Sea-Chart, in the Chapter next going before.

CHAP. V. The use of the table of Latitudes for the true graduating of a
particular Sea-Chart.
TO make a particular Sea-Chart: first, consider at wha^ Latitudes your Chart
must begin and end: Ther^ look in the former table of Latitudes what numbers
of equal parts are answerable to both those Latitudes and subtract the equal
parts answering to the lesser Latitude, ou^ of the equal parts answerable to
the greater Latitude; and drawing a line overthwart the breadth of the Chart
from North to South (at one of the ends, or in some other vacant place thereof
divide the same line into so many equal parts, as the differenc^ remaining
shall amount unto: if that difference be a compoun^ number that may be divided
into his unities by small diviso^^ But if it fall out that the number of equal
parts remining (...) either a prime number, or else such a number as cannot
othe^^wise be divided into his unities, but by some great divisors (...) may
then take the next compound number that is greater (...) the said difference
which may be divided into his unities (...) small divisors. Thus having
divided the line drawn (...) thwart the breadth of the Chart, into so many
equal parts, as (...) compound number contains unities, and beginning at
(...) end thereof which is supposed to be Southwards, or next the Equinoctial,
set thereto the next number of whole hundreds, or thousands, less then the
number of equal parts answerable to the lesser Latitude, and drawing forth
every fifth, or tenth part, a little further then the rest, set figures to
every tenth, hundred, or thousandth part, that you may readily number and find
out any of them.

Then look in the table of Latitudes which of these equal parts answer to each
degree or half degree, or each tenth minute of Latitude (if your Chart be of a
very large prick) and with the point of your pen or compasses make marks
there, and so finish the graduation of the Meridian of your Chart after the
accustomed manner before showed in the former Chapter.

As for example: In the Particular Chart for the Azores hereunto adjoined, the
least Latitude is 36 degrees 10 minutes; the greatest 52 degrees 20 minutes;
the equal parts answerable to these in the table of Latitudes, (casting away
the four first figures toward the right hand) are 2330 for the first, and 3698
for the second Latitude. The difference of these is 1368. Then at the West end
of the Chart I draw the line AB something longer then the breadth of the Chart
which I purpose to make, and divide it into 1400 parts, supposing every one of
those smallest parts to stand for two. And this I do by dividing the whole
line first into two parts, and each of these again into seven; so have you 14
parts in all, whereof every one must be understood to be divided into 100
equal parts after the ordinary manner, first dividing each of them into two
parts, then every one of those into five, and these again every one into five
parts, etc.

Now because the least Latitude in this Chart begins at 2330 equal parts, I
do therefore account the beginning of the line AB at A to be at 2300, and so
proceed setting down numbers at every 100 part, as in that Chart you may see.

Now for graduating the Meridian that is adjoining, or rather all one with the
line AB, you may proceed in like sort, as before was showed, for the making of
a general Sea-Chart in the thid chapter: looking what number of equal parts
answer to each degree in the table of Latitudes; and at the same number of
equal parts in the Chart, making marks signifying those degrees, etc. As for
example: In the table I find answerable to 37 dgrees 0 minutes 2393, (casting
away the four first figures next the right hand) therefore at the same number
of equal parts in the line AB in the Chart, I draw forth the line of 37 degrees
Latitude. In like manner, at 2468 equal parts in the Chart I set down 38
degrees, because in the table of Latitudes I find that number answerable to 38
degrees: And at 2545 I set 39 degrees. And so forth for all the rest.

In like sort you may out of the table of Latitudes set down every tenth or
fifth minute into this Chart; or else (which is also something easier, and not
altogether so tedious) you may with a pair of compasses divide each degree in
the Chart into 12 equal parts. In which division, although indeed there will
be some error; yet in this particular Chart, or others not much exceeding this
in the greatness either of the Latitude, or of the degrees thereof, that error
will be so small, as that by sense it can either not at all, or very hardly be
discerned.

CHAP. VI. The breadth of a particular Chart being given, to divide the same
into the degrees and minutes contained in the difference of the least and
greatest Latitudes therein to be expressed.
But if you would make your Chart to a certain breadth limited, which you
also desire to divide unequally in due proportion (as has been showed) into
the number of degrees and min, contained between the least and greatest
latitudes which you would have therein set down: you may then go thus to
work: Draw a line equal to the breadth of the Chart (as for example, the line
CD at the East end of the particular Chart for the Azores) from the South end
hereof draw another line something longer, making an angle therewith of some 20
or 30 degrees, or thereabouts, as the line CE: And having found out (as before
in the former chapter) the number of equal parts answerable to the difference
of the least and greatest Latitudes, (as the number of 1368) divide this line
CE into some compound number of parts that may be divided by small divisors;
(that compound number exceeding the number of those equal parts so little as
conveniently may be) as into 1400. In this line, beginning from the angle at C,
tell out the said number of equal parts 1368, from thence draw the base of that
angle to the end of the first line (as the line F D:) for Parallels to this
base, drawn by the divisions of the second line CE, shall divide the first
line CD (that measures the breadth of the Chart) into the number of equal
parts answerable to the difference of the least and greatest Latitude in the
Chart. But because the drawing of so many Parallels would not only be
troublesome and tedious, but may also something deface the Chart; it will be
better to draw Parallels by some few principal compound numbers of parts in
the second line, as by every 100 or 1000 etc. to sub-divide with the compasses
the segments of the first line contained between those Parallels, as in this
particular Chart you may see. Thus having divided the breadth of the Chart into
the number of parts required, and beginning at C the South end thereof to tell
2330, (which is the number of equal parts answerable to the least Latitude
purposed to be set down in the Chart) tell on Northwards till you come to make
up an even hundred (as till you come to 2400) and there begin to set figures,
showing the number of the parts; and so proceed, setting figures to every
hundred part, and finishing the graduation of the Meridian or division thereof
into his unequal parts in due proportion, as before you were directed in the
former chapter.

CHAP. VII. The use of the third column of the table of Latitudes.
THe third Column being nothing else but the table of Secants, in such parts
whereof the whole sine or semidiameter of the circle is supposed to contain
10,000, may serve for all such purposes for which the table of Secans may be
used. Moreover, as it served for the making of the second column of the table
of Latitudes, as before is showed in the second chapter, page 11 and 12, so may
it be of needful use for the more easy examination and correction thereof, if
any error has been committed therein.

Hereby also may be known very exactly the proportion of any parallel to the
Equinoctial. For what proportion the difference answerable to any degree and
minute in this table has to 10000, the same proportion has the Equinoctial
to the parallel answering to that degree and minute: (The difference answerable
to any degree and minute is that which is placed next above the line of the
same minute:) And consequently, because the like parts of circles are
proportional to their wholes, you may hereby very easily and truly find out
how many leagues any arch of any Parallel contains: for as the difference
answerable to the Latitude of the Parallel is to 10,000, so are the minutes
contained in that arch to the miles thereof; which divided by 3, give the
leagues.

As for example, if you would know how many leagues make a degree in the
Parallel of London, whose Latitude is 51 degrees 32 minutes: as 16,075 the
difference answering to that Latitude page 26 is to 10,000, so is 20 (the
number of leagues contained in one degree of the Equinoctial) to 12 294/^43
the number of leagues making one degree in the Parallel of London. Thus the
difference of Longitude in any Parallel being given in degrees, may easily be
reduced into leagues, multiplying the same by the leagues contained in one
degree. But it may be done easier by multiplying the difference of Longitude
(reduced into minutes) by 10,000, and dividing the product by the difference of
equal parts (in the table of Latitudes) answerable to the Latitude of the
Parallel wherein that difference of Longitude is taken; for then the quotient
shows the miles in the difference of Longitude, which being divided by 3, you
have the leagues.

As for example: admit the difference of Longitude between the Lizard and
Fayal be 22 degrees 52 minutes, that is 1372 minutes, which multiplied by
10,000, make 13,720,000: and this divided by 12,898 (which is the difference of
the equal parts answerable to 39 degrees 10 minutes, the latitude of the
Northeast corner of Fayal Island) shall give you 1064 miles almost, that is 354
leagues, the difference of their Longitudes counted in the Parallel of Fayal.

Moreover, by the differences set down in the third column may easily be
found the sine of any arch of the quadrant: For as the difference answerable to
any arch, or number of degrees and minutes in this table is to 10,000; so is
10,000 to the sine of the same arch.

The demonstration hereof may easily be conceived out of the Diagramme set down
in the second chapter, page. 11, wherein ik to fk. and ak to gk, that is ae,
have all one and the same proportion; and therefore it shall here be needless
any further to insist hereupon*

CHAP. VIII. How to describe the Rumbes mechanically in any Sea-chart, Globe,
or Map of what form soever.
NOw because the nauticall planisphaere (as before has been showed) is nothing
else but a plain Parallellogramme superficies, made by extension of a
sphaerical superficies inscribed into a concave cylinder, wherein the tumbes
make equal angles with very Meridian: therefore in this nauticall planisphaere,
if a circle be drawn and divided into 32 equal parts, beginning at the
Meridian passing by the center, of that circle: right lines drawn from the
center by those divisions shall be the rumbes or lines which the ship
describes in sailing upon those points, because they make equal angles with
every Meridian of the nautical planisphaere, those Meridians being every where
equidistant one from another, Example hereof you have in the former figure, and
in the charts adjoined hereunto.

By help of this planisphaere with the Meridians, rumbes, and Parallels thus
described therein, the rumbes may much more easily and truly be drawn in the
Globe, then by those mechanical ways which Petrus Nonius teaches, cap. 26.
lib, 2. de obser* Reg. and Instr. Geom. Hereby also they may with no less
facility be inscribed into any other Chart or Map of what form or
projection soever, if it be first divided by Meridians and Parallels into
degrees of Longitude and Latitude: For by what points of Longitude and Latitude
in this Planisphaere the rumbes are described, by the same points must they be
drawn in the Globe, or in any other Chart or Map whatsoever. Notwithstanding
this may much more exactly be performed by the table of Rumbes following which
I have made for that purpose, showing for every degree of Longitude, by what
degree, and minute of Latitude every rumbe is to be drawn till you come
within a minute of the Pole.

CHAP. IX. The use of the table of Latitudes for making the table of Rumbs.
THis table of Rumbes is most easily made by addition only with help of the
former table of Lati^udes after this manner: Multiply the Tangent of the angle
that the rumbe makes with the Equinoctial by 60 (because every degree of the
Equinoctial in that table is understood to contain 60 times 10000 parts, each
minute containing (by supposition) 10000 parts:) the product shall be the first
number at the beginning of the table of each rumbe, to be set over against one
degree of Longitude, and all the rest are found by perpetual addition of this
number, first to it self (for the sum is the number answerable to two degrees
of Longitude) then to this sum; (the product is the number that answers to
three degrees of Longitude) and so forth in all the rest. These numbers being
found out in the table of Latitudes, did show at what point of Latitude each
rumbe should cross the Meridian for every degree of Longitude, till you come
within a minute of the Pole. But these numbers were not thought needful to be
set down in the table following, because they serve only for finding out the
Latitudes, by which the rumbes must be drawn at every degree of Longitude;
which Latitudes being once found, these numbers serve to no further use.

Take for example the first rumbe from the Equinoctial, making an angle
therewith of 11 degrees 15 minutes the tangent whereof 1,989,122 (the whole
sine being 10000000) multiplied by 60, makes 119,347,320: but cutting off the
three first figures, and seeking out the rest in the table of Latitudes, you
shall find answerable thereto 12 minutes the Latitude of that rumbe at one
degree of Longitude. Also the same number doubled (that is 238,694) and found
out in the same table, shall give you 24 minutes almost, the Latitude of the
same rumbe for two degrees of Longitude: and so forth in the rest.

Hereby it may appear that the Latitude of any rumbe, whatsoever angle it make
with the Equinoctial, may presently be found for any Longitude you shall
desire, if you do but multiply the number answering to one degree of
Longitude (found as before) by the Longitude given, and find out the product
in the second column of the foresaid table of Latitudes: for the number the
degrees, minutes, etc. answering thereto in the first column of that table
shall be the Latitude desired.

As for example, suppose a rumbe that makes an angle of 5 degrees with the
Equinoctial, I would know what Latitude this rumbe must have at 360 degrees of
Longitude: the tangent of five degrees is 874,887, which multiplied by 60, make
52, 493* 220, and this again by 360 makes 18* 897* 559.200; but cutting off
the three first figures, the rest found in the foresaid table shall give us ^0
degrees, 1 minute, the Latitude of that Rumb at 360 degrees of Longitude.

The Table of Rumbs.
The first Rumb from the Meridian; viz. North and by East, North and by West.
South and by East, South and by West.
long Latit long Latitude gr. gr. m gr. gr. mi. sec 1 5 1 61 89 27 2 2 10 0 62
89 29 46 3 14 55 63 89 32 15 4 19 43 64 89 34 33 5 24 22 65 89 36 39 6 28 52 66
89 38 33 7 33 10 67 89 40 19 8 37 16 68 89 41 56 9 41 10 69 89 43 24 10 44 50
70 89 44 45 11 48 18 71 89 46 0 12 51 32 72 89 47 8 13 54 33 73 89 48 10 14 57
22 74 89 49 7 15 59 5^ 75 89 49 57 16 62 24 76 89 50 47 17 64 38 77 89 51 31 18
66 42 78 89 52 11 19 68 37 79 89 52 38 20 70 22 80 89 53 5 21 72 0 81 89 53 43
22 73 29 82 89 54 20 23 74 51 83 89 54 46 24 76 7 84 89 55 11 25 77 16 85 89 55
30 26 78 20 86 89 55 53 27 79 18 87 89 56 11 28 80 12 88 89 56 28 29 81 1 89 89
56 44 30 81 46 90 89 56 58 31 82 27 91 89 57 10 32 83 5 92 89 57 22 33 83 40 93
89 57 33 34 84 12 94 89 57 43 35 84 40 95 89 57 53 36 85 8 96 86 58 2 37 85 32
97 89 58 9 38 85 55 98 89 58 15 39 86 15 99 89 58 21 40 86 34 100 89 58 27 41
86 51 101 89 58 33 42 87 8 102 89 58 38 43 87 22 103 89 58 43 44 87 35 104 89
58 47 45 87 47 105 89 58 51 46 87 58 106 89 58 55 47 88 ^ 107 89 58 59 48 88 18
108 89 59 3 49 88 26 109 89 59 6 50 88 34 110 89 59 9 51 88 41 111 89 59 12 52
88 48 112 89 59 15 53 88 54 113 89 59 18 54 88 59 114 89 59 20 55 ^9 5 115 89
59 22 56 89 9 116 89 59 24 57 89 13 117 89 59 26 58 89 17 118 89 59 28 59 89 21
119 89 59 30 60 89 24 120 89 59 32 The second Rumb from the Meridian, viz.
North North-east. North North-west: South South-east, South South-west.
long Latit long Latit gr. gr. m gr. gr. mi 1 2 25 61 81 15 2 4 49 62 81 36 3 7
14 63 81 57 4 9 37 64 82 17 5 11 59 65 82 36 6 14 20 66 82 54 7 16 40 67 83 12
8 18 58 68 83 28 9 21 14 69 83 44 10 23 27 70 84 0 11 25 39 71 84 15 12 27 49
72 84 29 13 29 55 73 84 42 14 32 0 74 84 56 15 34 1 75 85 8 16 36 0 76 85 20 17
37 55 77 85 32 18 39 48 78 85 43 19 41 38 79 ^5 53 20 43 25 80 86 3 21 45 8 81
86 13 22 46 49 82 86 22 23 48 27 83 86 31 24 50 1 84 86 40 25 51 33 85 86 48 26
53 1 86 86 57 27 54 27 87 87 4 28 55 50 88 87 11 29 57 10 89 87 18 30 58 27 90
87 25 31 59 41 92 87 37 32 60 53 94 87 49 33 62 2 96 87 59 34 63 9 98 88 9 35
64 13 100 88 13 36 65 15 102 88 26 37 66 14 104 88 34 38 67 12 106 88 41 39 68
7 108 88 47 40 69 0 110 88 53 41 69 50 112 88 58 42 70 39 114 89 3 43 71 26 116
89 8 44 72 12 118 89 12 45 72 55 120 89 16 46 73 37 122 89 19 47 74 17 124 89
23 48 74 55 126 89 26 49 75 32 128 89 28 50 76 8 130 89 31 51 76 42 134 89 35
52 77 14 138 89 39 53 77 46 142 89 42 54 78 16 146 89 45 55 78 44 150 89 47 56
79 12 158 89 51 57 79 39 166 89 53 58 80 4 178 89 56 59 80 29 201 89 58 60 80
52 225 89 59 The third Rumb from the Meridian, viz* North-east by North,
Northwest by North: South-east by South, South west by South.
long Latit long Latit long Latit long Lati^ gr. gr. m gr. gr. m gr. gr. m gr
gr. m 1 1 30 61 67 1 121 85 8 181 88 59 2 3 0 62 67 36 122 85 16 182 89 0 3 4
29 63 68 10 123 85 23 183 89 2 4 5 59 64 68 43 124 85 30 184 89 3 5 7 28 65 69
15 125 85 37 185 89 5 6 8 57 66 69 46 126 85 43 186 89 6 7 10 25 67 70 17 127
85 50 187 89 8 8 11 53 68 70 47 128 85 57 188 89 9 9 13 21 69 71 16 129 86 3
189 89 10 10 14 48 70 71 44 130 86 9 190 89 12 11 16 14 71 72 12 131 86 15 191
89 13 12 17 40 72 72 39 132 86 21 192 89 14 13 19 6 73 73 6 133 86 27 192 89 15
14 20 30 74 73 32 134 86 32 194 89 16 15 21 54 75 73 57 135 86 37 195 89 17 16
23 17 76 74 21 136 86 43 196 89 19 17 24 39 77 74 45 137 86 48 197 89 20 18 26
0 78 75 8 13^ 86 52 198 89 21 19 27 20 79 75 31 139 86 58 199 89 22 20 28 39 80
75 53 140 87 3 200 89 23 21 29 58 81 76 15 141 87 7 201 89 24 22 31 15 82 76 36
142 87 12 202 89 24 23 32 31 83 76 56 143 87 16 203 89 25 24 33 46 84 77 16 144
87 20 204 89 26 25 35 0 85 77 36 145 87 24 205 89 27 26 36 13 86 77 55 146 87
28 206 89 28 27 37 25 87 78 14 147 87 32 207 89 29 28 38 36 88 78 32 148 87 36
20^ 89 30 29 39 46 89 78 49 149 87 40 209 89 30 30 40 54 90 79 6 150 87 43 210
89 31 31 42 1 91 79 23 151 87 47 212 89 33 32 43 8 92 79 40 152 87 50 214 89 34
33 44 12 93 79 55 153 87 54 216 89 35 34 45 16 94 80 11 154 87 57 218 89 36 35
46 19 95 80 26 155 88 0 220 89 38 36 47 20 96 80 41 156 88 3 222 89 39 37 48 21
97 80 55 157 88 6 224 89 40 38 49 20 98 81 9 158 88 9 226 89 41 39 50 18 99 81
23 159 88 12 228 89 42 40 51 14 100 81 36 160 88 15 230 89 43 41 52 10 101 81
49 161 88 17 234 89 44 42 53 5 102 82 2 162 88 20 23^ 89 46 43 53 58 103 82 14
163 88 22 24^ 89 47 44 54 50 104 82 26 164 88 25 24^ 89 48 45 55 41 105 82 37
165 88 27 250 89 49 46 56 31 106 82 49 166 88 30 25^ 89 50 47 57 20 107 83 0
167 88 32 258 89 51 48 58 8 108 83 11 168 88 34 262 89 52 49 5^ 55 109 83 21
169 88 37 266 89 53 50 59 41 110 83 31 170 88 3^ 270 89 54 51 60 26 111 83 41
171 88 41 27^ 89 54 52 61 10 112 83 51 172 88 43 2^2 89 55 53 61 52 113 84 1
173 88 45 288 89 56 54 62 34 114 84 1^ 174 88 47 294 89 56 55 63 15 115 84 19
175 88 49 300 89 57 56 63 55 116 84 28 176 88 50 312 89 58 57 64 34 117 84 36
177 88 52 324 89 58 58 65 12 118 84 44 178 88 54 33^ 89 58 59 65 49 119 84 5^
179 88 5^ 348 89 59 60 66 26 120 85 1 180 88 57 3^0 89 59 The fourth Rumb from
the Meridian, viz. North-east, North-west. South-east, South-west.
long Latit long Latit long Latit long Latit long Latit long Latit gr. gr m gr.
gr. m gr gr. m gr. gr. m gr. gr. m gr. gr. m 1 1 0 61 51 57 121 76 12 181 85 8
241 88 17 302 89 24 2 2 0 62 52 33 122 76 26 182 85 13 242 88 19 304 89 25 3 3
0 63 53 10 123 76 40 183 85 18 243 88 21 306 89 27 4 4 0 64 53 45 124 76 54 184
85 23 244 88 23 308 89 28 5 5 0 65 54 21 125 77 7 185 85 27 245 88 24 310 89 29
6 5 59 66 54 55 126 77 20 186 85 32 246 88 2^ 312 89 30 7 6 59 67 55 30 127 77
33 187 85 37 247 88 28 314 89 31 8 7 58 68 56 3 128 77 46 188 85 41 248 88 2^
316 89 32 9 8 58 69 56 37 129 77 59 189 85 46 249 88 31 318 89 33 10 9 57 70 57
9 130 78 11 190 85 50 250 88 32 320 89 34 11 10 56 71 57 42 131 78 23 191 85 54
251 88 34 322 89 35 12 11 55 72 58 13 132 78 35 192 85 59 252 88 35 324 89 36
13 12 53 73 58 45 133 78 47 193 86 3 253 88 37 326 89 36 14 13 52 74 59 16 134
78 59 194 86 7 254 88 38 328 89 37 15 14 50 75 59 46 135 79 10 195 86 11 255 88
39 330 89 38 16 15 48 76 60 16 136 79 21 196 86 15 ^56 88 41 332 89 39 17 16 45
77 60 46 137 79 32 197 86 1^ 257 88 42 334 89 39 18 17 43 78 61 15 138 79 43
198 86 2^ 258 ^8 44 336 89 40 19 18 40 79 61 43 139 79 53 199 86 2^ 259 88 45
338 89 41 20 19 36 80 62 12 140 80 4 200 86 30 260 88 46 340 89 41 21 20 33 81
62 39 141 80 14 201 86 3^ 261 88 47 342 89 42 22 21 20 82 63 7 142 80 24 202 86
37 262 88 49 344 89 43 23 22 24 83 63 34 143 80 34 203 86 41 263 ^8 50 346 89
43 24 23 20 84 64 0 144 80 44 204 86 44 264 88 51 34^ 89 44 25 24 15 85 64 26
145 80 53 205 86 48 265 88 52 350 89 44 26 25 9 86 64 52 146 81 3 206 86 51 266
88 53 352 89 45 27 26 3 87 65 17 147 81 12 207 86 55 267 88 55 354 89 45 28 26
57 88 65 42 148 81 21 208 86 58 268 88 56 356 89 46 29 27 51 89 66 6 149 81 30
209 87 1 269 88 57 358 89 46 30 28 43 90 66 31 150 81 39 210 87 4 270 88 58 360
89 47 31 29 35 91 66 54 151 81 48 211 87 7 271 88 59 6 89 48 32 30 28 92 67 18
152 81 56 212 87 10 272 89 0 12 89 49 33 31 19 93 67 41 153 82 4 213 87 13 273
89 1 18 89 50 34 32 10 94 68 3 154 82 13 214 87 16 274 89 2 24 89 51 35 33 0 95
68 25 155 82 21 215 87 19 275 89 3 30 89 52 36 33 50 96 68 47 156 82 29 216 87
22 276 89 4 36 89 53 37 34 40 97 69 9 157 82 36 217 87 2^ 277 89 5 42 89 53 38
35 29 98 69 30 158 82 44 218 87 27 278 89 6 48 89 54 39 36 18 99 69 51 159 82
51 219 87 30 279 89 7 54 89 55 40 37 6 100 70 11 160 82 59 220 87 32 280 89 8
60 89 55 41 37 53 101 70 31 161 83 6 221 87 35 281 89 9 66 89 55 42 38 41 102
70 51 162 83 13 222 87 37 282 89 10 72 89 56 43 39 27 103 71 11 163 83 20 223
87 4^ 283 89 10 78 89 56 44 40 13 104 71 30 164 83 27 224 87 42 284 89 11 84 89
57 45 40 59 105 71 49 165 83 34 225 87 44 285 89 12 90 89 57 46 41 44 106 72 7
166 83 41 226 87 47 286 89 13 96 89 57 47 42 28 107 72 26 167 83 47 227 87 49
287 89 14 102 89 57 48 43 12 108 72 44 168 83 54 228 87 51 288 89 15 108 89 58
49 43 56 109 73 1 169 84 0 229 87 54 289 89 15 114 89 58 50 44 39 110 73 19 170
84 6 230 87 56 290 89 16 120 89 58 51 45 21 111 73 36 171 84 12 231 87 58 291
89 17 126 89 58 52 46 3 112 73 53 172 84 18 232 88 0 292 89 18 132 49 58 53 46
44 113 24 9 173 84 24 233 88 2 293 89 18 138 89 58 54 47 25 114 74 25 174 84 30
234 88 4 294 89 19 144 89 58 55 48 6 115 74 41 175 84 36 235 88 6 295 89 20 150
89 59 56 48 45 116 74 57 176 84 41 236 88 8 296 89 2^ 156 89 59 57 49 25 117 75
12 177 84 47 237 88 10 297 89 21 162 89 59 58 50 3 118 75 28 178 84 52 238 88
12 298 89 22 168 89 59 59 50 42 119 75 43 179 84 57 239 88 14 299 89 2^ 174 89
59 60 51 19 120 75 57 180 85 2 240 88 16 300 80 ^^ 180 8^ 59 The fifth Rumb
from the Meridian, viz. North-east and by East, South-east and by East:
North-west and by West, South west and by West.
long Latit long Latit gr. gr. m gr. gr. m 1 0 40 61 37 42 2 1 20 62 38 14 3 2
0 63 38 45 4 2 40 64 39 16 5 3 20 65 36 47 6 4 0 66 40 18 7 4 40 67 40 48 8 5
20 68 41 18 9 6 0 69 41 48 10 6 40 70 42 18 11 7 20 71 42 48 12 8 0 72 43 17 13
8 39 73 43 46 14 9 19 74 44 14 15 9 58 75 44 44 16 10 38 76 45 12 17 11 17 77
45 40 18 11 56 78 46 8 19 12 36 79 46 36 20 13 15 80 47 3 21 13 54 81 47 30 22
14 32 82 47 57 23 15 11 83 48 24 24 15 50 84 48 50 25 16 28 85 49 17 26 17 7 86
49 43 27 17 45 87 50 9 28 18 33 88 50 34 29 19 1 89 50 59 30 19 39 90 51 25 31
20 17 91 51 49 32 20 54 92 52 14 33 21 31 93 52 39 34 22 9 94 53 3 35 22 46 95
53 27 36 23 23 96 53 50 37 23 59 97 54 14 38 24 36 98 54 37 39 25 12 99 55 0 40
25 48 100 55 23 41 26 24 101 55 46 42 27 0 102 56 8 43 27 36 103 56 31 44 28 11
104 56 53 45 28 47 105 57 14 46 29 22 106 57 36 47 29 56 107 57 57 48 30 31 108
58 19 49 31 5 109 58 40 50 31 40 110 59 0 51 32 14 111 59 20 52 32 48 112 59 41
53 33 21 113 60 1 54 33 55 114 60 21 55 34 28 115 60 41 56 35 1 116 61 0 57 35
33 117 61 20 58 36 5 118 61 3^ 59 36 38 119 61 58 60 37 10 120 62 17 long Latit
long Latit long Latit long Latit long Latit long Latit gr. gr. m gr. gr. m gr
gr. m gr. gr. m gr, gr. m gr. gr. m 121 62 35 181 76 11 241 83 6 301 86 34 1 88
18 92 89 24 122 62 53 182 76 20 242 83 11 302 86 36 2 88 19 94 89 25 123 63 12
183 76 30 243 83 16 303 86 39 3 88 20 96 89 26 124 63 30 184 76 39 244 83 21
304 86 41 4 88 21 98 89 27 125 63 47 185 76 48 245 83 25 305 86 43 5 88 22 100
89 27 126 64 6 186 76 57 246 83 30 306 86 46 6 88 23 102 89 28 127 64 22 187 77
6 247 83 34 307 86 48 7 88 25 104 89 29 128 64 40 188 77 15 248 83 39 308 86 50
8 88 26 106 89 30 129 64 57 189 77 24 249 83 43 309 86 57 9 88 27 108 89 30 130
65 14 190 77 33 250 83 47 310 86 55 10 88 28 110 89 31 131 65 30 191 77 41 251
83 52 311 86 57 11 88 29 112 89 32 132 65 47 192 77 50 252 84 56 312 86 59 12
88 30 114 89 32 133 66 3 193 77 58 253 84 0 313 87 1 13 88 31 116 89 33 134 66
19 194 78 6 254 84 4 314 87 3 14 88 32 118 89 33 135 66 35 195 78 15 255 84 8
315 87 6 15 88 33 120 89 34 136 66 51 196 78 23 256 84 13 316 87 8 16 88 34 122
89 35 137 67 7 197 78 31 257 84 17 317 87 10 17 88 35 124 89 35 138 67 22 198
78 39 258 84 21 318 87 12 18 88 36 126 89 36 139 67 38 199 78 47 259 84 24 319
87 13 19 88 37 128 89 36 140 67 53 200 78 54 260 84 28 320 87 15 20 88 38 130
89 37 141 68 8 201 79 2 261 84 32 321 87 17 21 88 39 132 89 37 142 68 2^ 202 79
10 262 84 36 322 87 19 22 88 40 134 89 38 143 68 37 203 79 17 263 84 40 323 87
21 23 88 41 136 89 38 144 68 52 204 79 24 264 84 43 324 87 23 24 88 42 138 89
39 145 69 6 205 79 32 265 84 47 325 87 25 25 88 43 140 89 39 146 69 21 20^ 79
39 266 84 51 326 87 26 26 88 43 142 89 40 14^ 69 35 207 79 46 267 84 54 327 87
28 27 88 44 144 89 40 148 69 49 208 79 53 268 84 58 328 87 30 28 88 45 146 89
41 149 70 2 209 80 0 269 85 1 32^ 87 32 29 88 46 148 89 41 150 70 16 210 80 7
270 85 5 330 87 33 30 88 47 150 89 42 151 70 29 211 80 14 271 85 8 331 87 35 32
88 49 155 89 43 152 70 43 212 80 21 272 85 12 33^ 87 37 34 88 50 160 89 44 153
70 50 213 80 27 273 85 15 333 87 38 36 88 52 165 89 44 154 7^ 9 214 80 34 274
85 18 334 87 40 38 88 53 170 89 45 155 71 22 215 80 41 275 85 21 335 87 42 40
88 55 175 89 46 156 71 35 216 80 47 276 85 25 336 87 43 42 8^ 56 180 89 47 157
71 47 217 80 53 277 85 2^ 337 87 45 44 88 58 185 89 48 158 72 0 218 81 0 278 85
31 338 87 47 46 88 59 190 89 48 159 72 12 219 81 6 279 85 34 339 87 48 48 89 1
195 89 49 160 72 24 220 81 12 280 85 37 340 87 5^ 50 89 2 200 89 49 161 72 36
221 81 1^ 281 85 40 341 87 51 52 89 3 210 89 51 162 72 48 222 81 24 282 85 43
342 87 53 54 89 5 220 89 52 163 73 0 223 81 30 283 85 46 343 87 54 56 89 6 230
89 52 164 73 11 224 81 36 284 85 49 344 87 55 58 89 7 240 89 53 165 73 23 225
81 42 285 85 52 345 87 57 60 89 8 250 89 54 166 73 3^ 226 81 4^ 286 85 55 346
87 58 62 89 10 260 89 55 16^ 73 4^ 227 81 53 287 85 58 347 88 0 64 89 11 270 89
55 16^ 73 57 22^ 81 5^ 288 86 0 348 88 1 66 89 12 280 89 56 16^ 74 8 229 82 ^
289 86 3 349 88 2 68 89 13 290 89 56 170 74 19 230 82 10 290 86 6 550 88 4 70
89 14 300 89 56 171 74 29 231 82 15 291 86 8 351 88 5 72 89 15 310 89 57 172 74
40 232 82 21 292 86 11 352 88 6 74 89 16 320 89 57 17^ 74 51 233 82 26 293 86
14 353 88 8 76 89 17 330 89 57 174 75 1 234 82 31 294 86 17 354 88 9 78 89 18
340 89 58 175 75 11 235 82 36 295 86 1^ ^55 88 10 80 89 19 350 89 58 176 75 22
236 82 42 296 86 22 356 88 12 82 89 20 360 89 58 177 75 32 237 82 47 297 86 24
357 88 13 84 89 2^ 30 89 58 178 75 42 238 82 52 298 86 27 358 88 14 86 89 22 60
89 59 179 75 51 239 ^2 57 299 86 29 359 88 15 88 89 23 90 89 59 180 76 1 240 83
2 300 86 32 ^60 88 17 90 89 23 120 89 59 The sixth Rumb from the Meridian East
Northeast, East Southeast: West Northwest, West Southwest.
long Latit long Latit long Latit gr. gr. m gr. gr. m gr. gr. m 1 0 25 61 24 29
121 44 43 2 0 50 62 24 52 122 45 1 3 1 15 63 25 14 123 45 18 4 1 39 64 25 37
124 45 36 5 2 4 65 25 59 125 45 53 6 2 29 66 26 21 126 46 10 7 2 54 67 26 44
127 46 28 8 3 19 68 27 6 128 46 45 9 3 44 69 27 28 129 47 2 10 4 8 70 27 50 130
47 19 11 4 33 71 28 12 131 47 35 12 4 58 72 28 34 132 47 53 13 5 23 73 28 55
133 48 9 14 5 47 74 29 17 134 48 25 15 0 12 75 29 39 135 48 42 16 6 37 76 30 0
136 48 59 17 7 1 77 30 22 137 49 14 18 7 2^ 78 30 43 138 49 31 19 7 51 7^ 31 5
139 49 47 20 8 15 80 31 20 140 50 3 21 8 40 81 31 46 141 50 1^ 22 9 4 82 32 8
142 50 34 23 9 2 83 32 29 143 50 51 24 9 54 84 32 50 144 51 6 25 10 17 85 33 10
145 51 21 26 10 42 86 33 32 146 51 37 27 11 7 87 33 52 147 51 53 28 11 31 88 34
12 148 52 7 29 11 56 89 34 33 149 52 23 30 12 20 90 34 54 150 52 38 31 12 44 91
35 14 151 52 53 32 13 8 92 35 34 152 53 8 33 13 32 93 35 55 153 53 23 34 13 57
94 36 15 154 53 37 35 14 21 95 36 35 155 53 53 36 14 45 96 36 55 156 54 7 37 15
9 97 37 14 157 54 21 38 15 33 98 37 34 15^ 54 36 39 15 57 99 37 54 159 54 50 40
16 21 100 38 13 1^0 55 4 41 16 44 101 38 32 161 55 18 42 17 8 102 38 52 162 55
33 43 17 31 103 39 12 163 55 47 44 17 55 104 39 31 164 56 0 45 18 20 105 39 49
165 56 14 46 18 42 106 40 8 166 56 2^ 47 19 6 107 40 27 167 56 42 48 19 29 108
40 47 168 57 55 49 19 53 109 41 6 169 57 9 50 20 1^ 110 41 24 170 57 22 51 20
40 111 41 42 171 57 36 52 21 2 112 42 1 172 57 50 53 21 26 113 42 20 173 58 2
54 21 49 114 42 38 174 58 15 55 22 12 115 42 56 175 58 28 56 22 35 116 43 14
176 58 41 57 22 5^ 117 43 32 177 5^ 54 58 23 20 118 43 50 178 59 7 59 23 44 119
44 8 179 59 20 60 24 6 120 44 26 180 59 3^ long Latit long Latit long Latit
long Latit long Latit long Latit long Latit gr. gr. m gr. gr. m gr. gr. m gr.
gr. m gr. gr^ m gr. gr. m gr. gr. m ^81 59 45 241 70 8 301 77 3 1 81 35 61 84
32 122 86 29 244 88 32 182 59 58 242 70 16 302 77 8 2 81 38 62 84 34 124 86 32
248 88 35 183 60 10 243 70 25 303 77 14 3 81 42 63 84 37 126 86 35 252 88 37
184 60 22 244 70 33 304 77 19 4 81 46 64 84 39 128 86 38 256 88 40 185 60 35
245 70 41 305 77 25 5 81 49 65 84 41 130 86 41 260 88 42 186 60 47 246 70 49
306 77 30 6 81 53 66 84 44 132 86 43 264 88 44 187 60 59 247 70 57 307 77 35 7
81 56 67 84 46 134 86 46 268 88 46 188 61 11 ^48 71 6 308 77 41 8 82 0 68 84 48
136 86 49 272 88 48 189 61 23 249 71 14 309 77 46 9 82 3 69 84 50 138 86 52 276
88 50 190 61 35 250 71 22 310 77 51 10 82 7 70 84 53 140 86 55 280 88 52 191 61
47 251 71 29 311 77 56 11 82 9 71 84 55 142 86 58 284 88 54 192 61 58 252 71 37
312 78 2 12 82 13 72 84 57 144 87 0 288 88 56 193 62 10 253 71 45 313 78 7 13
82 17 73 84 59 146 87 3 292 88 58 194 62 21 254 71 53 314 78 12 14 82 20 74 85
1 148 87 5 296 89 0 195 62 33 255 72 1 315 78 17 15 82 23 75 85 4 150 87 8 300
89 1 196 62 44 256 72 8 316 78 22 16 82 27 76 85 6 152 87 10 304 89 3 197 62 56
257 72 16 317 78 27 17 82 30 77 85 8 154 87 13 308 89 5 198 63 7 258 72 23 318
78 32 18 82 33 78 85 10 156 87 15 312 89 6 199 63 18 259 72 31 319 78 37 19 82
36 79 85 12 158 87 17 316 89 8 200 63 29 260 72 38 320 78 42 20 82 39 80 85 14
160 87 20 320 89 9 201 63 40 261 72 46 321 78 47 21 82 43 81 85 16 162 87 22
324 89 11 202 63 51 262 72 53 322 78 51 22 82 46 82 85 18 164 87 24 328 89 12
203 64 2 263 73 0 323 78 56 23 82 49 83 85 20 166 87 27 332 89 13 204 64 13 264
73 7 324 79 1 24 82 52 84 85 22 168 87 29 336 89 15 205 64 24 265 73 15 325 79
6 25 82 55 85 85 24 170 87 31 3^0 89 16 206 64 36 266 73 22 326 79 10 26 82 58
86 85 26 172 87 33 344 89 17 207 64 45 267 73 29 327 79 15 27 83 1 87 85 28 174
87 35 348 89 18 208 64 56 268 73 36 328 79 20 28 83 4 88 85 30 176 87 37 352 89
20 209 65 6 269 73 43 329 79 24 29 83 7 89 85 32 178 87 39 356 89 21 210 65 17
270 73 50 330 79 29 30 83 10 90 85 34 180 87 41 360 89 22 211 65 27 271 73 57
331 79 33 31 83 13 91 85 36 182 87 43 8 89 24 212 65 37 272 74 4 332 79 38 32
83 16 92 85 38 184 87 4^ 16 89 26 213 65 48 273 74 10 333 79 42 33 83 19 93 85
40 186 87 47 24 89 28 214 65 58 274 74 17 334 79 47 34 83 22 94 85 42 188 87 49
32 89 30 215 66 8 275 74 24 335 79 51 35 83 25 95 85 43 190 87 51 40 89 31 216
66 18 276 74 31 336 79 55 36 83 27 96 85 45 192 87 53 48 89 33 217 66 28 277 74
37 337 80 0 37 83 30 97 85 47 194 87 55 56 89 34 218 66 38 278 74 44 338 80 4
38 83 33 98 85 49 19^ 37 56 64 89 36 219 66 48 279 74 50 339 80 8 39 83 36 99
85 51 198 87 58 72 89 37 220 66 57 2^0 74 57 340 80 12 40 83 39 100 85 52 20^
88 0 80 89 38 221 67 7 281 75 3 341 80 17 41 83 41 101 85 54 202 88 2 88 89 40
222 67 17 282 75 9 342 80 21 42 83 44 102 85 56 204 88 3 96 89 41 223 67 26 283
75 16 343 80 25 43 83 47 103 85 57 2^^ 88 5 104 89 42 224 67 36 284 75 22 344
80 29 44 83 49 104 85 59 20^ 88 7 112 89 43 225 67 45 285 75 28 345 80 33 45 83
52 105 86 1 210 88 8 120 89 44 226 67 54 286 75 35 346 80 37 46 83 55 106 86 3
212 88 10 136 89 45 227 68 4 287 75 41 347 80 41 47 83 57 107 86 5 214 88 11
152 89 47 228 68 13 288 75 47 348 80 45 48 84 0 108 86 6 216 88 13 168 89 48
229 68 22 289 75 53 349 80 49 49 84 2 109 86 8 218 88 14 184 89 50 230 ^8 31
290 75 59 350 80 53 50 84 5 110 86 10 220 88 16 200 89 51 231 68 40 291 76 5
351 80 57 51 84 8 111 86 11 222 88 17 216 89 52 232 68 49 292 76 11 352 81 1 52
84 10 112 86 13 224 88 19 240 89 53 233 68 58 293 76 17 353 81 5 53 84 13 113
86 15 226 88 20 264 89 54 234 69 7 294 76 22 354 81 9 54 84 15 114 86 16 228 88
22 288 89 55 235 69 16 295 76 29 355 81 13 55 84 18 115 86 17 230 88 23 312 89
56 236 69 2^ 296 76 34 356 81 16 56 84 20 116 86 19 232 88 25 336 89 56 237 69
34 297 76 40 357 81 20 57 84 22 117 86 21 234 88 2^ ^60 89 57 238 69 42 298 76
46 358 81 24 58 84 25 118 86 2^ 236 88 27 90 89 58 239 69 51 299 76 51 359 81
28 59 84 27 119 86 24 238 88 2^ ^80 ^9 59 240 69 59 300 76 57 360 81 31 60 84
30 120 86 26 240 88 30 270 89 59

The seventh Rumb from the Meridian. East and by North, East and by South, West
and by North, West and by South.
long Latit long Latit gr. gr. m gr. gr* m 1 0 12 61 12 3 2 0 24 62 12 14 3 0
36 63 12 25 4 0 48 64 12 38 5 1 0 65 12 49 6 1 12 66 13 1 7 1 24 67 13 13 8 1
35 68 13 24 9 1 47 69 13 36 10 1 59 70 13 47 11 2 11 71 13 59 12 2 23 72 14 11
13 2 35 73 14. 22 14 2 47 74 14 34 15 2 59 75 14 45 16 3 11 76 14 57 17 3 23 77
15 8 18 3 35 78 15 20 19 3 47 79 15 31 20 3 59 80 15 43 21 4 10 81 15 54 22 4
22 82 16 6 23 4 34 83 16 17 24 4 46 84 16 29 25 4 58 85 16 40 26 5 10 86 16 51
27 5 22 87 17 3 28 5 34 88 17 14 29 5 45 89 17 26 30 5 57 90 17 37 31 6 9 91 17
48 32 6 21 92 18 0 33 6 33 93 18 11 34 6 45 94 18 22 35 6 57 95 18 34 36 7 9 96
18 44 37 7 20 97 18 56 38 7 32 98 19 8 39 7 44 99 19 20 40 7 56 100 19 30 41 8
8 101 19 41 42 8 19 102 19 53 43 8 32 103 20 4 44 8 43 104 20 15 45 8 5^ 105 20
26 46 9 7 106 20 37 47 9 18 107 20 49 48 9 30 108 21 0 49 9 42 109 21 11 50 9
53 110 21 22 51 10 6 111 21 33 52 10 17 112 21 44 53 10 29 113 21 55 54 10 40
114 22 6 55 10 53 115 22 17 56 11 4 116 22 28 57 11 16 117 22 39 58 11 28 118
22 50 59 11 39 119 23 1 60 11 51 120 23 12 long Latit long Latit long Latit
long Latit long Latit long Latit long Latit long Latit gr. gr. m gr. gr. m gr.
gr. m gr. gr. m gr. gr m gr. gr. m gr. gr. m gr. gr. m 121 23 23 181 33 51 241
43 10 301 51 15 1 58 7 61 63 53 121 68 40 181 72 37 122 23 34 182 34 1 242 43
18 302 51 22 2 58 14 62 63 58 122 68 45 182 72 40 123 23 45 183 34 10 ^43 43 27
303 51 30 3 58 20 63 64 4 123 68 49 183 72 44 124 23 56 184 34 20 244 43 36 304
51 37 4 58 26 64 64 9 124 68 53 184 72 47 125 24 7 185 34 30 245 43 44 305 51
44 5 58 32 65 64 14 125 68 58 185 7 251 126 24 18 186 34 40 246 43 53 306 51 52
6 58 39 66 64 19 126 69 2 186 72 54 127 24 29 187 34 50 247 44 1 307 51 59 7 58
45 67 64 24 127 69 6 187 72 58 128 24 40 188 35 0 248 44 10 308 52 6 8 58 51 68
64 30 128 69 10 188 73 1 129 24 51 189 35 9 249 44 19 309 52 14 9 58 57 69 64
35 129 69 15 189 73 5 130 25 1 190 35 19 250 44 27 310 52 21 10 59 3 70 64 40
130 69 19 190 73 8 131 25 12 191 35 29 251 44 36 311 52 28 11 59 9 71 64 45 131
69 23 191 73 12 132 25 23 192 35 38 252 44 44 312 52 36 12 59 16 72 64 50 132
69 27 192 75 15 133 25 34 193 35 48 253 44 53 313 52 43 13 59 22 73 64 55 133
69 31 193 73 18 134 25 45 194 35 58 254 45 1 314 52 50 14 59 28 74 65 0 134 69
36 194 73 22 1^5 25 ^5 195 3^ 7 255 45 9 315 52 57 15 59 34 75 65 5 135 69 40
195 73 25 1^6 2^ ^ 196 36 17 256 45 18 316 53 4 16 59 40 76 65 10 136 69 44 196
73 29 137 26 ^7 197 36 26 257 45 26 317 53 12 17 59 46 77 65 15 137 69 48 197
73 32 138 26 27 1^8 36 36 258 45 35 318 53 19 18 59 52 78 65 20 138 69 52 198
73 36 139 2^ ^8 199 36 46 259 45 43 319 53 26 19 59 58 79 65 25 139 69 56 199
73 39 140 2^ 49 200 36 55 260 45 51 320 53 33 20 60 4 80 65 30 140 70 0 200 73
42 141 26 59 201 37 5 261 46 0 321 53 40 21 60 10 81 65 35 141 70 4 201 73 46
1^2 27 10 202 37 14 262 46 8 322 53 47 22 60 16 82 65 40 142 70 8 202 73 49 143
27 21 203 37 24 263 46 16 323 53 54 23 60 22 83 65 45 143 70 12 203 73 52 144
27 31 204 37 33 264 46 24 324 54 1 24 60 27 84 65 50 14^ 70 16 204 73 56 145 27
42 205 37 43 265 46 33 325 54 8 25 60 33 85 65 55 145 70 20 205 73 59 146 27 ^2
20^ 37 52 266 46 41 326 54 15 26 60 39 86 66 0 146 70 24 206 74 2 147 28 3 207
38 2 267 46 49 327 54 22 27 60 45 87 66 4 147 70 28 207 74 6 148 28 13 208 38
11 268 46 57 328 54 29 28 60 51 88 66 9 148 70 32 208 74 9 149 28 24 209 38 20
269 47 5 329 54 36 29 60 57 89 66 14 149 70 36 209 74 12 150 28 34 210 38 30
270 47 13 330 54 43 30 61 2 90 66 19 150 70 40 210 74 15 151 28 45 211 58 39
271 47 21 331 54 50 31 61 8 91 66 24 151 70 44 211 74 19 152 28 55 212 38 48
272 47 29 332 54 57 32 61 14 92 66 28 152 70 48 212 74 22 153 29 6 213 38 58
273 47 38 333 55 ^3 33 61 20 93 66 33 153 79 52 213 74 25 154 29 16 214 39 7
274 47 46 334 55 10 34 61 25 94 66 38 154 70 56 214 74 28 155 29 27 215 39 16
275 47 54 335 55 17 35 61 31 95 66 43 155 71 0 215 74 31 156 29 37 216 39 25
276 48 2 336 55 24 36 61 37 96 66 47 156 71 4 216 74 35 157 29 47 217 39 35 277
48 10 337 55 31 37 61 42 97 66 52 157 71 8 217 74 38 158 29 58 218 39 44 278 48
17 338 55 37 38 61 48 98 66 57 158 71 12 218 74 41 159 30 8 219 39 53 279 48 25
339 55 44 39 61 54 99 67 1 159 71 15 219 74 44 160 30 18 220 40 2 280 48 33 340
55 51 40 61 59 100 67 6 160 71 19 220 74 47 161 30 29 221 40 11 281 48 41 341
55 58 41 62 5 101 67 11 161 71 23 221 74 50 162 30 39 222 40 20 282 48 49 342
56 4 42 62 10 102 67 15 162 71 27 222 74 53 163 30 49 223 40 30 283 48 57 343
56 11 43 62 16 103 67 20 163 71 31 223 74 56 164 30 59 224 40 39 284 49 5 344
56 17 44 62 22 104 67 24 164 71 34 224 75 0 165 31 10 225 40 48 285 49 13 345
56 24 45 62 27 105 67 29 165 71 38 225 75 3 166 31 20 226 40 57 286 49 20 346
56 31 46 62 33 106 67 34 166 71 42 226 75 6 167 31 30 227 41 6 287 49 28 347 56
37 47 62 38 107 67 38 167 71 46 227 75 9 168 31 40 228 41 15 288 49 36 348 56
44 48 62 44 108 67 43 168 71 49 228 75 12 169 31 50 229 41 24 289 49 44 349 56
50 49 62 49 109 67 47 169 71 53 229 75 15 170 32 0 230 41 33 290 49 51 350 56
57 50 62 54 110 67 52 170 71 57 230 75 18 171 32 10 231 41 41 291 49 59 351 57
3 51 63 0 111 67 56 171 72 0 231 75 21 172 32 20 232 41 50 292 50 7 352 57 10
52 63 5 112 68 1 172 72 4 232 75 24 173 32 31 233 41 59 293 50 14 353 57 16 53
63 11 113 68 5 173 72 8 233 75 27 174 32 41 234 42 8 294 50 22 354 57 23 54 63
16 114 68 10 174 72 11 234 75 30 175 32 51 235 42 17 295 50 29 355 57 29 55 63
21 115 68 14 175 72 15 235 75 33 176 33 1 236 42 26 296 50 37 356 57 36 56 63
27 116 68 18 176 72 19 236 75 36 177 33 11 237 42 35 297 50 45 337 57 42 57 63
32 117 68 23 177 72 22 237 75 39 178 33 21 238 42 43 298 50 52 358 57 48 58 63
37 118 68 27 178 72 26 238 75 42 179 33 31 239 42 52 299 51 0 359 57 55 59 63
43 119 68 32 179 72 30 239 75 45 180 33 41 240 43 1 300 51 7 360 58 1 60 63 48
120 68 36 180 72 33 240 75 48 long Latit long Latit long Latit long Latit long
Latit long Latit gr. gr. m gr. gr. m gr. gr. m gr. gr^ m gr. gr. m gr. gr. m
241 75 51 301 78 29 2 80 40 122 83 50 273 86 21 126 88 15 242 75 54 302 78 31 4
80 44 124 83 53 276 86 23 132 88 17 243 75 56 303 78 34 6 80 48 126 83 55 279
86 25 13^ 88 20 244 75 59 304 78 36 8 80 52 128 83 5^ 282 86 28 144 88 22 245
76 2 305 78 38 10 80 55 130 84 0 285 86 30 150 88 24 246 76 5 306 78 41 12 80
59 132 84 3 288 86 32 156 88 26 247 76 8 307 78 43 14 81 3 134 84 5 291 86 34
162 88 28 248 76 11 308 78 46 16 81 7 136 84 8 294 86 36 168 88 29 24^ 76 14
309 78 48 18 81 10 138 84 10 297 86 38 174 88 31 250 76 16 310 78 50 20 81 14
140 84 13 300 86 40 180 88 33 251 76 19 311 78 52 22 81 18 142 84 15 303 86 42
189 88 36 252 76 22 312 78 55 24 81 21 144 84 17 30^ 86 44 198 88 38 253 76 25
313 78 57 26 81 25 146 84 20 309 86 46 207 88 41 25^ 76 2^ 314 78 59 28 81 28
148 84 22 312 86 48 216 88 43 255 76 30 315 79 2 30 81 32 150 84 24 315 86 50
225 88 46 256 76 33 31^ 79 4 32 81 35 152 84 26 318 86 52 234 88 48 257 76 36
317 79 6 34 81 39 154 84 29 321 86 55 243 88 50 258 76 39 318 79 8 36 81 42 156
84 31 324 86 57 252 88 52 259 76 42 319 79 11 38 81 46 158 84 34 327 86 59 261
88 54 260 76 44 320 79 13 40 81 49 160 84 36 330 87 1 270 88 56 261 76 47 321
79 15 42 81 52 162 84 38 333 87 2 279 88 5^ 262 76 50 322 79 17 44 81 56 164 84
40 336 87 4 288 89 0 263 76 52 323 79 19 46 81 59 166 84 42 339 87 6 297 89 2
264 76 55 324 79 22 48 82 2 168 84 45 342 87 8 306 89 4 265 76 58 325 79 24 50
82 6 170 84 47 345 87 10 315 89 5 266 77 1 326 79 26 52 82 9 172 84 49 348 87
11 324 89 7 267 77 3 327 79 28 54 82 12 174 84 51 351 87 13 333 89 9 268 77 6
328 79 30 56 82 15 176 84 53 354 87 15 342 89 10 269 77 9 329 79 33 58 82 19
178 84 55 357 87 17 351 89 12 270 77 11 330 79 35 60 82 22 180 84 58 360 87 18
360 89 13 271 77 14 331 79 37 62 82 25 183 85 1 3 87 20 12 89 15 272 77 16 332
79 39 64 82 28 186 85 4 6 87 22 24 89 17 273 77 19 333 79 41 66 82 31 189 85 7
9 87 23 36 89 19 274 77 22 334 79 43 68 82 34 192 85 10 12 87 25 48 89 20 275
77 24 335 79 45 70 82 37 195 85 13 15 87 26 60 89 22 276 77 27 336 79 48 72 82
40 198 85 16 18 87 28 72 89 24 277 77 29 337 79 50 74 82 43 201 85 19 21 87 30
84 89 25 278 77 32 338 79 52 76 82 47 204 85 20 24 87 31 98 89 27 279 77 35 339
79 54 78 82 49 207 85 24 27 87 33 114 89 28 280 77 37 340 79 56 80 82 52 210 85
27 30 87 34 130 89 30 281 77 40 341 79 58 82 82 55 213 85 30 33 87 36 146 89 32
282 77 42 342 80 0 84 82 58 216 85 33 36 87 37 162 89 33 283 77 45 343 80 2 86
83 1 219 85 36 39 37 39 178 89 35 284 77 47 344 80 4 88 83 4 222 85 38 42 87 40
194 89 36 285 77 50 345 80 6 90 83 7 225 85 41 45 87 42 210 89 37 286 77 52 346
80 8 92 83 10 228 85 44 48 87 43 240 89 39 287 77 55 347 80 10 94 83 13 231 85
46 51 87 44 270 89 41 288 77 57 348 80 12 96 83 15 234 85 49 54 87 46 300 89 43
289 78 0 349 80 14 98 83 18 237 85 52 57 87 47 330 89 4^ 29^ 78 2 350 80 16 100
83 21 240 85 54 60 87 49 360 89 46 291 78 5 351 80 18 102 83 24 243 85 57 66 87
51 36 ^9 48 292 78 7 352 80 20 104 83 27 24^ 85 59 72 87 54 72 89 49 2^^ 78 10
353 80 22 10^ 83 29 249 86 2 7^ 87 56 10^ 89 50 2^^ 78 12 354 80 24 108 83 32
252 86 4 84 87 59 144 89 51 2^^ 78 15 355 80 26 110 83 35 255 86 7 90 88 1 180
89 52 ^96 78 17 356 80 28 112 83 37 25^ 86 9 9^ 88 4 240 ^9 5^ 297 78 19 ^57 80
30 114 ^3 40 261 86 11 102 88 6 36^ 8^ ^^ 298 78 22 3^8 80 32 116 83 43 264 86
14 10^ 88 9 1^^ 89 57 299 78 24 359 80 34 118 83 45 267 86 16 ^14 88 11 360 89
58 ^^^ ^^ 27 360 80 36 110 82 4^ 270 86 1^ 120 88 13 180 89 5^ The eighth Rumb
from the Meridian. East: West.
Latit 1. gr. of lo^ diff. gr. m m. s thy s. thy 0 10 59 59 59 0 1 0 20 59 59
56 0 3 0 30 59 59 52 0 4 0 40 59 59 45 0 7 0 50 59 59 37 0 8 1 0 59 59 27 0 10
1 10 59 59 15 0 12 1 20 59 59 2 0 13 1 30 59 58 46 0 16 1 40 59 58 29 0 17 1 50
59 58 9 0 20 2 0 59 57 48 0 21 2 10 59 57 26 0 22 2 20 59 57 1 0 25 2 30 59 56
34 0 27 2 40 59 56 6 0 28 2 50 59 55 36 0 30 3 0 59 55 4 0 32 3 10 59 54 30 0
34 3 20 59 53 55 0 35 3 30 59 53 17 0 38 3 40 9 52 38 0 39 3 50 ^9 51 57 0 41 4
0 59 51 14 0 43 4 10 59 50 29 0 45 4 20 59 49 43 0 46 4 30 59 48 54 0 49 4 40
59 48 4 0 50 4 50 59 47 12 0 52 5 0 59 46 18 0 54 5 10 59 45 22 0 56 5 20 59 44
25 0 57 5 30 59 43 26 0 59 5 40 59 42 24 1 2 5 50 59 41 21 1 3 6 0 59 40 17 1 4
6 10 59 39 10 1 7 6 20 59 38 2 1 8 6 30 59 36 52 1 10 6 40 59 35 39 1 13 6 50
59 34 26 1 13 7 0 59 33 10 1 16 7 10 59 31 52 1 18 7 20 59 30 33 1 19 7 30 59
29 12 1 21 7 40 59 27 49 1 23 7 50 59 26 24 1 25 8 0 59 24 58 1 26 8 10 59 23
30 1 28 8 20 59 21 59 1 31 8 30 59 20 27 1 32 8 40 59 18 54 1 33 8 50 59 17 18
1 36 9 ^0 59 15 41 1 37 9 10 59 14 1 1 40 9 20 59 12 20 1 41 9 30 59 10 38 1 42
9 40 59 8 53 1 45 9 50 59 7 7 1 46 10 ^0 59 5 18 1 49 Latti 1. g. of lo^ diff.
Latit 1. g of lo^ diff. Latit 1 g. of lo^ diffe Latit 1. g. of lo^ diffe gr. m
m. s. th s. thy gr. m m. s. thy s. th gr. m m. s thy s. th gr* m m. s. thy s.
th 10 10 59 3 28 1 50 20 10 56 19 18 3 36 30 10 51 52 26 5 15 40 10 45 51 1 6
45 10 20 59 1 37 1 51 20 20 56 15 40 3 38 30 20 51 47 10 5 16 40 20 45 45 15 6
46 10 30 58 59 43 1 54 20 30 56 12 1 3 39 30 30 51 41 52 5 18 40 30 45 37 28 6
47 10 40 58 57 49 1 54 20 40 56 8 20 3 41 30 40 51 36 32 5 20 40 40 45 30 39 6
49 10 50 58 55 50 1 59 20 50 56 4 38 3 42 30 50 51 31 11 5 21 40 50 45 23 49 6
50 11 0 58 53 51 1 59 21 0 56 0 53 3 45 31 0 51 25 48 5 23 41 0 45 16 57 6 50
11 10 58 51 51 2 0 21 10 55 57 7 3 46 31 10 51 20 24 5 24 41 10 45 10 4 6 53 11
20 58 49 48 2 3 21 20 55 53 20 3 47 31 20 51 14 58 5 26 41 20 45 3 10 6 54 11
30 58 47 44 2 4 21 30 55 49 30 3 50 31 30 51 9 30 5 28 41 30 44 56 14 6 56 11
40 58 45 38 2 6 21 40 55 45 39 3 51 31 40 41 4 1 5 29 41 40 44 49 17 6 57 11 50
58 43 30 2 8 21 50 55 41 48 3 51 31 50 50 58 31 5 30 41 50 44 42 19 6 58 12 0
58 41 20 2 10 22 0 55 37 52 3 56 32 0 50 52 58 5 33 42 0 44 35 19 7 0 12 10 58
39 8 2 12 22 10 55 33 55 3 57 32 10 50 47 25 5 33 42 10 44 28 18 7 1 12 20 58
36 55 2 13 22 20 55 29 58 3 57 32 20 50 41 47 5 36 42 20 44 21 16 7 2 12 30 58
34 40 2 15 22 30 55 25 58 4 0 32 30 50 36 13 5 36 42 30 44 14 12 7 4 12 40 58
32 23 2 17 22 40 55 21 57 4 1 32 40 50 30 34 5 39 42 40 44 7 7 7 5 12 50 58 30
4 2 19 22 50 55 17 54 4 3 32 50 50 24 54 5 40 42 50 43 0 0 7 7 13 0 58 27 44 2
20 23 0 55 13 49 4 5 33 0 50 19 13 5 41 43 0 43 52 52 7 8 13 10 58 25 22 2 22
23 10 55 9 43 4 6 33 10 50 13 30 5 43 43 10 43 45 43 7 9 13 20 58 22 58 2 24 23
20 55 5 35 4 8 33 20 50 7 45 5 45 43 20 43 38 33 7 10 13 30 58 20 32 2 26 23 30
55 1 25 4 10 33 30 50 1 59 5 46 43 30 43 31 21 7 12 13 40 58 18 4 2 28 23 40 54
57 14 4 11 33 40 49 56 12 5 47 43 40 43 24 8 7 13 13 50 58 15 35 2 29 23 50 54
53 1 4 13 33 50 49 50 23 5 49 43 50 43 16 53 7 15 14 0 58 13 4 2 31 24 0 54 48
46 4 15 34 0 49 44 32 5 51 44 0 43 9 37 7 16 14 10 58 10 31 2 33 24 10 54 44 29
4 17 34 10 49 38 40 5 52 44 10 43 2 20 7 17 14 20 58 7 56 2 35 24 20 54 40 11 4
18 34 20 49 32 46 5 54 44 20 42 55 2 7 18 14 30 58 5 20 2 36 24 30 54 35 52 4
19 34 30 49 26 51 5 55 44 30 42 47 42 7 20 14 40 58 2 42 2 38 24 40 54 31 30 4
22 34 40 49 20 55 5 56 44 40 42 40 21 7 21 14 50 58 0 2 2 40 24 50 54 27 07 4
23 34 50 48 14 56 5 59 44 50 42 52 59 7 22 15 0 57 57 20 2 42 25 0 54 22 42 4
25 35 0 49 8 57 5 59 45 0 42 25 35 7 24 15 10 57 54 36 2 44 25 10 54 18 16 4 26
35 10 49 2 56 6 1 45 10 42 18 10 7 25 15 20 57 51 51 2 45 25 20 54 13 48 4 28
35 20 48 56 53 6 3 45 2^ 42 10 44 7 26 15 30 57 49 4 2 47 25 30 54 9 18 4 30 35
30 48 50 49 6 4 45 30 42 3 16 7 28 15 40 57 46 15 2 49 25 40 54 4 47 4 31 35 40
48 44 43 6 6 45 40 41 55 48 7 28 15 50 57 43 25 2 50 25 50 54 0 14 4 33 35 50
48 38 36 6 7 45 50 41 48 18 7 30 16 0 57 40 33 2 52 26 0 53 55 40 4 34 36 0 48
32 28 6 8 46 0 41 40 46 7 32 16 10 57 37 38 2 55 26 10 53 51 3 4 37 36 10 48 26
18 6 10 46 10 41 33 14 7 32 16 20 57 34 43 2 55 26 20 53 46 25 4 38 36 20 48 20
6 6 12 46 20 41 25 40 7 34 16 30 57 31 45 2 58 26 30 53 41 46 4 39 36 30 48 13
53 6 13 46 30 41 18 ^ 7 34 16 40 57 28 46 2 59 26 40 53 37 5 4 41 36 40 48 7 39
6 14 46 40 41 10 28 7 38 16 50 57 25 45 3 1 26 50 53 32 22 4 43 36 50 48 1 23 6
16 46 50 41 2 51 7 37 17 0 57 22 42 3 3 27 0 53 27 37 4 45 37 0 47 55 5 6 18 47
0 40 55 12 7 39 17 10 57 19 37 3 5 27 10 53 22 51 4 46 37 10 47 48 46 6 19 47
10 40 47 32 7 40 17 20 57 16 31 3 6 27 20 53 18 4 4 47 37 20 47 42 26 6 20 47
20 40 39 50 7 42 17 30 57 13 23 3 8 27 30 53 13 14 4 50 37 30 47 36 4 6 22 47
30 40 32 7 7 43 17 40 57 10 13 3 10 27 40 53 8 23 4 51 37 40 47 929 41 6 23 47
40 40 24 24 7 43 17 50 57 7 2 3 11 27 50 53 3 31 4 52 37 50 47 23 16 6 25 47 50
40 16 39 7 45 18 0 57 3 48 3 14 28 0 52 58 37 4 54 38 0 47 16 50 6 26 48 0 40 8
52 7 47 18 10 57 0 33 3 15 28 10 52 53 41 4 56 38 10 47 10 23 6 27 48 10 40 1 5
7 47 18 20 56 57 16 3 17 28 20 52 48 44 4 57 38 20 47 3 54 6 29 48 20 39 53 16
7 49 18 30 56 53 58 3 18 28 30 52 43 44 5 0 38 30 46 57 23 6 31 48 30 39 45 26
7 50 18 40 56 50 38 3 22 2^ 40 52 38 44 5 0 38 40 46 50 52 6 31 48 40 39 37 35
7 51 18 50 56 47 16 3 22 28 50 52 33 42 5 2 38 50 46 44 18 6 34 48 50 39 29 42
7 53 19 0 56 43 52 3 24 29 0 52 28 38 5 4 39 0 46 37 44 6 34 49 0 39 21 49 7 53
19 10 56 40 27 3 25 29 10 52 23 32 5 6 39 10 46 31 7 6 37 49 10 39 13 54 7 53
19 20 56 36 59 3 28 29 20 52 18 25 5 7 39 20 46 24 30 6 37 49 20 39 5 58 7 55
19 30 59 33 31 3 2 29 30 52 13 17 5 8 39 30 46 17 51 6 39 49 30 38 58 1 ^ 57 19
40 56 30 0 3 31 29 40 52 8 7 5 10 39 4^ 46 11 11 6 40 49 40 38 50 2 7 59 19 50
56 26 28 3 32 29 50 52 2 55 5 12 39 50 46 4 29 6 42 49 50 38 42 3 ^ 59 20 0 56
22 54 3 34 30 0 51 57 41 5 14 40 0 ^5 ^^ 46 6 4^ ^^ ^^ ^^ ^^ ^ 8 1 Latit 1. g.
of lo^ diff. Latit 1. g of lo^ diff. Latit 1 g. of lo^ diffe Latit 1. g. of lo^
diffe. gr. m m. s. th s. thy* gr. m m. s. thy s. th gr. m m. s thy s. thy gr. m
m. s. thy* s. thy 50 10 38 26 0 8 2 60 10 29 50 55 9 5 70 10 20 21 26 9 50 80
10 10 14 49 10 19 50 20 38 17 57 8 3 60 20 29 41 50 9 5 70 20 20 11 34 9 52 80
20 10 4 30 10 19 50 30 38 9 53 8 4 60 30 29 32 43 9 7 70 30 20 1 42 9 52 80 30
9 54 10 10 20 50 40 38 1 47 8 6 60 40 29 23 36 9 7 70 40 19 51 50 9 52 80 40 9
43 50 10 20 50 50 37 53 41 8 6 60 50 29 14 28 9 8 70 50 19 41 56 9 54 80 50 9
33 30 10 20 51 0 37 45 33 8 8 61 0 29 5 19 9 9 71 0 19 32 3 9 54 81 0 9 23 10
10 20 51 10 37 37 24 8 9 61 10 28 56 09 9 10 71 10 19 22 8 9 55 81 10 9 12 49
10 21 51 20 37 29 14 8 10 61 20 28 46 58 9 11 71 20 19 12 13 9 55 81 20 9 2 28
10 21 51 30 37 21 3 8 11 61 30 28 37 46 9 12 71 30 19 2 17 9 56 81 30 8 52 7 10
21 51 40 37 12 52 8 12 61 40 28 28 34 9 12 71 40 18 52 22 9 55 81 40 8 41 45 10
22 51 50 37 4 37 8 14 61 50 28 19 20 9 14 71 50 18 42 25 9 57 81 50 8 31 23 10
22 52 0 36 56 23 8 14 62 0 28 10 06 9 14 72 0 18 32 28 9 57 82 0 8 21 1 10 22
52 10 36 48 7 8 16 62 10 28 0 51 9 15 72 10 18 22 30 9 58 82 10 8 10 39 10 22
52 20 36 39 50 8 17 62 20 27 51 35 9 16 72 20 18 12 31 9 59 82 20 8 0 16 10 23
52 30 36 31 32 8 18 62 30 27 42 18 9 17 72 30 18 2 23 9 59 82 30 7 49 54 10 22
52 40 36 23 13 8 19 62 40 27 33 00 9 18 72 40 17 52 33 9 59 82 40 7 39 31 10 23
52 50 36 14 53 8 20 62 50 27 23 41 9 19 72 50 17 42 33 10 0 82 50 7 29 7 10 24
53 0 36 6 32 8 21 63 0 27 14 22 9 19 73 0 17 32 32 10 1 83 0 7 18 ^4 10 23 53
10 35 58 10 8 22 63 10 27 5 02 9 20 73 10 17 22 31 10 1 83 10 7 8 20 10 24 53
20 35 49 46 8 24 63 20 26 55 41 9 21 73 20 17 12 29 10 2 83 20 6 57 56 10 24 53
30 35 41 22 8 24 63 30 26 46 19 9 22 73 30 17 2 27 10 2 83 30 6 47 32 10 24 53
40 35 32 56 8 26 63 40 26 36 56 9 23 73 40 16 52 24 10 3 83 40 6 37 8 10 24 53
50 35 24 2^ 8 27 63 50 26 27 33 9 23 73 50 16 42 21 10 3 83 50 6 26 43 10 25 54
0 35 16 2 8 27 64 0 26 18 08 9 25 74 0 16 32 18 10 3 84 0 6 16 18 10 25 54 10
35 7 33 8 29 64 10 26 8 43 9 25 74 10 16 22 13 10 3 84 10 6 5 53 10 25 54 20 34
59 3 8 30 64 20 25 59 17 9 26 74 20 16 12 9 10 4 84 20 5 55 28 10 25 54 30 34
50 32 8 31 64 30 25 49 50 9 27 74 30 16 2 3 10 6 84 30 5 45 3 10 25 54 40 34 42
0 8 32 64 40 25 40 23 9 27 74 40 15 51 58 10 5 84 40 5 34 37 10 26 54 50 34 33
27 8 33 64 50 25 30 55 9 28 74 50 15 41 5^ 10 6 84 50 5 24 10 10 27 55 0 34 24
53 8 34 65 0 25 21 26 9 29 75 0 15 31 45 10 7 85 0 5 13 46 10 27 55 10 34 16 17
8 36 65 10 25 11 56 9 30 75 10 15 21 38 10 7 85 10 5 3 20 10 26 55 20 34 7 41 8
36 65 20 25 2 25 9 31 75 20 15 11 30 10 8 85 20 4 52 53 10 27 55 30 33 59 4 8
37 65 30 24 52 54 9 31 75 30 15 1 22 10 8 85 30 4 42 27 10 26 55 40 33 50 25 8
39 65 40 24 43 22 9 32 75 40 14 51 14 10 8 85 40 4 32 1 10 26 55 50 33 41 46 8
39 65 50 24 33 49 9 33 75 50 14 41 5 10 9 85 50 4 31 34 10 27 56 0 33 33 6 8 40
66 0 24 24 15 9 34 76 0 14 30 55 10 10 86 0 4 11 7 10 27 56 10 33 24 24 8 42 66
10 24 14 41 9 34 76 10 14 20 45 10 10 86 10 4 0 41 10 26 56 20 33 15 42 8 42 66
20 24 5 6 9 35 76 20 14 10 35 10 10 86 20 3 50 14 10 27 56 30 33 6 58 8 44 66
30 23 55 30 9 36 76 30 14 0 24 10 11 86 30 3 39 46 10 28 56 40 32 58 14 8 44 66
40 23 45 53 9 37 76 40 13 50 13 10 11 86 40 3 29 19 10 27 56 50 32 49 28 8 46
66 50 23 36 16 9 37 76 50 13 40 1 10 12 86 50 3 18 52 10 27 57 0 32 40 42 8 46
67 0 23 26 38 9 38 77 0 13 29 49 10 12 87 0 3 8 25 10 27 57 10 32 31 55 8 47 67
10 23 16 59 9 39 77 10 13 19 37 10 12 87 10 2 57 57 10 28 57 20 32 23 6 8 49 67
20 23 7 20 9 39 77 20 13 9 24 10 13 87 20 2 47 29 10 28 57 30 32 14 17 8 49 67
30 22 57 40 9 40 77 30 12 59 11 10 13 87 30 2 37 2 10 27 57 40 32 5 26 8 51 67
40 22 47 59 9 41 77 40 12 48 57 10 14 87 40 2 26 34 10 28 57 50 31 56 35 8 51
67 50 22 38 17 9 42 77 50 12 38 43 10 14 87 50 2 16 6 10 28 58 0 31 47 43 8 52
68 0 22 28 35 9 42 78 0 12 28 29 10 14 88 0 2 5 38 10 28 58 10 31 38 49 8 54 68
10 22 18 52 9 43 78 10 12 18 14 10 15 88 10 1 55 10 10 28 58 20 31 29 55 8 54
68 20 22 9 9 9 43 78 20 12 7 59 10 15 88 20 1 44 42 10 28 58 30 31 21 0 8 55 68
30 21 59 24 9 45 78 30 11 57 43 10 16 88 30 1 34 14 10 28 58 40 31 12 3 8 57 63
40 21 49 39 9 45 78 40 11 47 27 10 16 88 40 1 23 46 10 28 58 50 31 3 6 8 57 68
50 21 39 54 9 45 78 50 11 37 11 10 16 88 50 1 13 18 10 28 59 0 30 54 8 8 58 69
0 21 30 7 9 47 79 0 11 26 55 10 16 89 0 1 2 50 10 28 59 10 30 45 9 8 59 69 10
21 20 21 9 47 79 10 11 16 37 10 18 89 10 0 52 21 10 29 59 20 30 36 9 9 0 69 20
21 10 33 9 48 79 20 11 6 20 10 17 89 20 0 41 53 10 28 59 30 30 27 8 9 1 69 30
21 0 45 9 48 79 30 10 56 3 10 17 89 30 0 31 25 10 28 59 40 30 18 6 9 2 69 40 20
50 56 9 49 79 40 10 45 45 10 18 89 40 0 20 56 10 29 59 50 30 9 4 9 2 69 50 20
41 6 9 50 79 50 10 35 27 10 18 89 50 0 1 28 10 28 60 0 30 0 0 9 4 70 0 80 31 16
9 50 80 0 10 25 08 10 19 90 0 0 0 0 0 0

CHAP. X. The use of this Table of Rumbs.
THe especial use of this Table is for the true drawing of the Rumbs in the
Globe and in the Chart, which some (with a name astonishing with an empty
sound) call Paradoxal: but to speak plain English, it is nothing else but a
Chart, whose center is the Pole, and may best be made after the kind of
projection used by Gemma Frisius in his general Astrolabe: wherein the
Meridians will be right lines passing by the center, and the Parallels
peripheries of a circle: supposing one half of the Sphaerical superficies of
the Terrestrial Globe to be projected into the plain of the Equinoctial, Whose
principal use may be in our Northerly Navigations and discoveries, wherein the
Rumbs may most easily and truly be drawn by help of this Table, thus: Having an
Index hanged upon the center, and garduated with degrees of Latitude, with
figures set to every fifth or tenth degree, beginning at the Equinoctial:
having also divided the Equinoctial into degrees of Longitude, beginning at the
first Meridian, lay the Index to every degr. of Longitude in order one after
another; looking always withal in this Table, the Latitudes of the Rumb you
desire to describe, and at the same Latitudes found in the fiducial line of the
Index, make pricks in the Chart, for by th^se pricks, the Haelisphaerical line
or Rumb desired must be drawn.

After the same manner must you work with the Globe, having first truly hanged
it upon his Poles within his Meridian divided into degrees, and subdivided also
into smaller parts (if room will serve) with numbers set to every fifth, or
tenth degree from the Equinoctial to the Pole, and then proceeding in all
points, as before you did, with the Chart, only using the Meridian in stead of
the Index.

Hereby also the Rumbs may most exactly be discribed in those distorted
heart-formed maps of Orontius and Vopelius, or in any other amongst Ptolemies
or Ortelius his Geographical Tables, or any else whatsoever, so it be first
distinguished by Meridians and Parallels, whereby the Longitude and Latitude of
any point assigned therein may be readily found; seeing it may easily be known
out of this Table by what points of Longitude and Latitude each rumbe must be
drawn from the Equinoctial to the Pole almost. But those two kinds of
projection before mentioned, I mean of the Nautical Planisphaere, and Gemma
Frisius his Astrolabe, are such as of all others do best represent in a plain,
the true forms of all places that are upon the Sphaerical face of the earth.

The Table of eighth Rumb serves to show how many minutes, seconds and thirds
of one degree of the Equinoctial, are contained in one degree of Longitude for
every tenth minute of Latitude: whereby the whole Table of Rumbs may be made
and examined more truly, and easily, then by that of Appian, lately set forth
by Simon Stevin in his Hypomnemat, Mathemat.

CHAP. XI. A most plain and sensible demonstration of the agreement of the
Nautical Planisphaere, before described, with the Globe and of the disagreement
of the common Sea-chart from them both.
HAving thus showed the manifold uses of the Table of Latitudes, as well for the
true graduating of Sea-charts both general and particular, with degrees of
Latitude increasing in their due proportion, as also for the making of the
table of Rumbes, together with the use thereof; I will now come again to the
matter, and mark principally intended and aimed at in this first book, and
show how greatly the common Sea-chart (with Parallel Meridians and degrees of
Latitude every where equal) does differ from the truth, as also how well the
Chart, before described, agrees with the same; which may most manifestly
appear by comparing together these three figures following, whereof the first
is in all points answerable to a part of a Sphaerical superficies, contained
betwixt two Meridians, differing in Longitude ten degrees, and extended from
the Equinoctial to the Pole. The second contains ten degrees in Longitude,
and 90 degrees from the Equinoctial in Latitude, of the common Sea-chart with
equidistant Meridians and degrees of Latitude every where equal. The third
contains 10 degrees in Longitude, and 80 in Latitude of the Nautical
Planisphaere, truly described with Meridians in all places aequidistant, and
degrees of Latitude increasing proportionally toward the Pole, as before we
have showed.

Now all the other parts of the Globe or Charts are like unto Past this upon
the Margin of Letter M. fol. 52
these; therefore what agreement or disagreement is found in these parts must
needs be also in their wholes. The first figure is a part of the Globe, and
therefore in all things shows the very truth: therefore we make it the rule
to examine the rest by, for so far forth as they agree with it, they are
true, and as much as they differ from it, they are false. Now therefore let us
bring them to examination.

If there be two places differing in Longitude and Latitude 10 degrees (that
which has the greater Latitude being more to the Eastwards) the second figure
(as you see) makes them lie each from other Northeast and Southwest, in what
Latitude soever they be situate, either nearer or further from the Equinoctial,
as in 50 and 60, or in 60 and 70; or in 70 and 80 degrees of Latitude. But in
the first and third figure, these places shall bear almost Northeast and
Southwest each from other, at the Equinoctial only. And one place being
situate in 50, and the other in 60 degrees of Latitude, they shall lie one from
another Northeast and by North, and almost half a point Northerly. In 60 and
70 degrees of Latitude they lie almost North Northeast: in 70 and 80 they bear
each from other scarce so much as North and by East. Therefore the common
Sea-Chart, in showing how one of those places bears from another, erreth in
the first one point of the Compass and almost an half; in the second, two
whole points almost; but in the third, more then three whole points. Neither is
it possible to avoid these so gross and intolerable errors (if the Rumbs be
right lines, and the degrees of Longitude and Latitude every where equal) but
we must needs fall into other errors as gross as these, either in the
difference of Longitudes, or in the difference of Latitudes, or in the
respective situation, which they commonly call, the lying or bearing of them
one from another as may most plainly appear by comparing the common Sea-Chart
and the Globe together. But in this Nauticall planisphaere heretofore
described, all these errors are avoided, as well in the Longitudes and
Latitudes* as also in the directional distances and respective situations of
all places, each from other according to the points of the Compass, as by like
comparison of it with the Globe, will be most manifest.

CHAP. XII. The use of this Planisphaere.
OF the use of this Planisphaere much more might be written then now I have
leisure or cause to set down, a great part hereof being in such sort to be
performed, as has bin heretofore accustomed in the ordinary Sea-Chart, saving
that this Nautical planisphaere generally brings you to more certain truth
in conclusion, then the ordinary Chart hitherto has done, or possibly can
do. Something notwithstanding (for the better satisfaction of the Reader) I
thought meet at this time to add to the former treatise, especially in those
points which may be most serviceable for Sea men, and wherein the use of this
Nautical Planisphaere differs from the use of the common Sea-Chart,
heretofore ordinarily practiced.

To know upon what point of the Compass one place in this Chart lies from
another, try with your Compasses from what Rumb both places have equal
distance, which may be found truly enough, for the Mariners use, for the most
part, by estimation only. But if you would be precise, do thus: Draw a
straight line by both places, for a line Parallel to it from the center of the
next Rose or Fly (as it is called) is the Rumb of those two places, showing
upon what point of the Compass you must go from the one to the other.

Or thus, (if you list not draw any lines upon your Chart) lay the edge of a
long ruler (reaching overthwart the Chart) to both places: take with your
Compasses the distance of the center of the next Fly from the edge of the
ruler, then guiding and carrying one foot along by the edge of the ruler,
lead the other foot Parallel-wise (that is, keeping it always equally at
that distance from the ruler) for so it shows you how those places lie one
from another.

The distance of two places (as the Mariners commonly take it, and measure it
in their Charts) is the segment or part of the Rumbe contained between them;
which how much it is in the ordinary measure of leagues, shall truly be found
out by this Planisphaere, thus.

If both places have the same Latitude, take with your Compasses the length of
a degree of the Meridian at that Latitude (take half the degree above, and
half beneath that Latitude) for so often as you shall find that lenght between
the two places, so many score leagues are there betwixt them. If the distance
be great, for the more expedition, you may take five times the length of that
degree, and counting it for an hundred leagues, proceed as before.

If both places have not the same Latitude, the Equinoctial also not coming
between them, subtract the lesser Latitude out of greater; but if the
Equinoctial come betwixt them, add both Latitudes together, so have you the
difference of Latitude betweeene both places.

Now if both places have the same Longitude, so many degrees as there is in the
difference of Latitude, so many score leagues is the distance.

But if they differ also in Longitude as well as in Latitude, look how many
degrees the difference of Latitude contains, so many degrees of the
Equinoctial take with your Compasses, and leading one foot in the Equinoctial,
move forwards the other also Parallel-wise, keeping always that distance, till
it cross the Rumb of those two places, in such sort, that one foot resting in
that crossing, the other carried about, may but only touch the Equinoctial.
Then having taken with your Compasses the segment or part of that Rumb between
that crossing and the Equinoctial, set both feet in the Equinoctial, and see
how many degrees are contained betwixt them, for so many score leagues is the
distance of those two places.

Or if that segment of the said Rumb be greater then well can be taken with the
Compasses, take the length of five degrees of the Equinoctial, between the feet
of your compasses, and look how often you can find that length in the segment
aforesaid of the Rumb' for so many hundred leagues is the distance of those two
places.

The demonstration hereof cannot be obscure to him that well considers the
Geometrical reason of the projection, and making of this Nauticall
planisphaere, before set down in the second Chapter, from whence it follows,
that because the sphaericall superficies (whereof this planisphaere is
conceived to be Geometrically made) extends it self every way equally, at
every point of Latitude betwixt the Equinoctial and Pole, till it apply and
join it self round about to the concavitie of the circumscribed Cylinder,
therefore the segments of the Meridian, and of any other Rumb contained betwixt
any the same two Parallels, must needs increase in one and the same proportion.

And consequently, as often as the segment of a Meridian between any two
Parallels, is contained in the segment of any Rumb intercepted betwixt the same
Parallels in the Globe, so often is the like segment of a Meridian contained in
the segment of the same Rumb intercepted between the Parallels correspondent
in this planisphaere. Therefore (supposing the said segment of the Meridian in
this planisphaere, to be divided into so many equal parts as it contains
degrees) it follows that so often as one of these parts is contained in the
segment of the Rumb aforesaid in this planisphaere, so many score leagues is
the distance of the two places set at the ends of that segment.

Now it is manifest, that by these three segments, that is the segment of the
Rumb between the two places the segment of the Meridian betwixt one of the
places, and the Parallel of the other (that is, the difference of Latitude) and
the segment of the Parallel contained betwixt one of these places, and the
Meridian of the other (which is the difference of Longitude) I say it is
manifest, that by these three segments a right angled Triangle is made, because
the segments of the Meridian and Parallel (which are two sides of this
Triangle) include a right angle.

Again it is plain, that taking with your Compasses so many degrees of the
Equinoctial as are contained in the difference of Latitude, then guiding one
foot in the Equinoctial, and carrying forwards the other Parallel wise, till
it cross the Rumb of those two places in such sort that one foot of the
Compasses being set in that crossing* the other moved about, may but only touch
the Equinoctial: and lastly, drawing from that crossing a line perpendicular to
the Equinoctial: It is plain, I say, that by this perpendicular and the two
segments (one of the Equinoctial* between this perpendicular and the Rumb; the
other of the Rumb, between the perpendicular and the Equinoctial:) by these
segments, I say, and the said perpendicular, there is comprehended another
right angled Triangle: which by the 14. e 4. and c* 3. e. 7 Ram. Is like to the
former right angled Triangle, because two angles, of them both are equal, that
is, the right angles* and the angles of the same Rumb. In the last of these
Triangles* the side perpendicular to the Equinoctial, is proportional to the
difference of Latitude, and the segment of the Rumb between the end of this
perpendicular and the Equinoctial, is proportional to the segment of the same
Rumb contained betwixt the two places. Therefore by the 2 p 6. and 17 p. 11
Eulc. Because the line perpendicular to the Equinoctial, contains so many
equal degrees of the Equinoctial, as there are equal parts in the difference of
Latitude (that is) so many as there are degrees in the difference of Latitude
these equal parts also of the perpendicular and difference of Latitude are
proportional. Whereof it follows, that so often as one of these equal parts of
the difference of Latitude is contained in the segment of the Rumb betwixt the
two places (which before we showed to be so often as a degree of the Meridian in
the Globe is contained in the segment of the Rumb betwixt the same places in
the Globe) so often is one of the said equal parts of the perpendicular aforesaid
(that is a degree of the Aequinoctial) contained in the segment of the same
Rumb between the foresaid crossing or end of the perpendicular, and the
Aequinoctial. Therefore look how many degrees of the Aequinoctial there are
found in the segment of the Rumb of the two places, so many score leagues is
the distance of those two places which was to be demonstrated.

Thus have you a way infallible to find out the distance between any two places
measured in their Rumb: which because it is then only their true distance
(that is the shortest space betwixt them upon the superficies of the
Terrestrial Globe) when both places lie North and South each from other, or
East and West, having no Latitude, as under the Aequinoctial, whereas otherwise
the segment of the Rumb between the two places is always greater then the
true distance (yea sometime by half and more, in places far Northward, or
Southward) I tho^ght good also here to set down the way to find out the true
distance of any two places, according to the arch of a great circle drawn
between them, wherein I have been, and yet am publicly charged with my
promise, and mean at this time to discharge my self thereof.

The true distance between two places is the arch of a great circle contained
betwixt them, which is thus to be found out.

If both places have no Latitude (as when they are both under the Aequinoctial)
and one of them also no Longitude, the Longitude of the other being less, or
not more then 180 degrees* the Longitude is the distance;

But if the Longitude be greater then 180 degrees subtract it out of 360; the
remainder is the distance.

If both places have either none, or the same Longitude (as when they are in
the same semicircle of the Meridian betweeene the Poles) and one of them only
have Latitude; that Latitude is the distance. But if both places agreeing in
Longitude have Latitudes also of like denomination (as both Northerly, or both
Southerly) subtract the lesser Latitude out of the greater, the distance
remains: If one place have Northerly Latitude, and the other Southerly, add
them together; for the sum is the distance.

If one or both places have atitude, Land differ also in Longitude: in a great
circle divided exactly into degrees (with figures set to every fifth or tenth
degree) note the Longitudes of both places.

Now if one place only have Latitude, draw a diameter from the Longitude
thereof, noted in the circle, and with your Compasses take so many degrees and
minutes in the same circle, as that Latitude contains: then setting one foot
of the Compasses in the Longitude of that place, with the other make a prick
in the circle, which may be called the point of Latitude. From this point draw
a line perpendicular, crossing the diameter drawn from the Longitude of that
place. Take with your Compasses the distance of this crossing, from the point
of the other places Longitude, noted in the circle, and leaving one foot in
the said crossing, with the other make a prick, in the foresaid diameter: take
the distance of this prick from the point of Latitude noted in the circle.
Then setting one foot of the Compasses in that point of the circle where the
degrees begin to be numbered, the other foot extended that way, which the
numbers proceed, shall show you in the circle the distance of the places.

Take for example the City of London, and Saint Thomas Island, which lies
right under the Aequinoctial line, in 32 degrees of Longitude. The Longitude of
London admit to be 22 degrees, the Latitude 51 degrees, 32 minutes. Mark the
Longitudes of Saint Thomas Island and of London with A and B. From the Longitude
of London (because London has also Latitude) draw the diameter BC. Having
taken with the compasses the Latitude of London in the circle, set one foot in
B, and with the other make the prick E in the circle, and draw the
perpendicular OF, crossing the diameter BC at F. Make FG equal to FA, which is
the distance of Saint Thomas Island from the sine of Londons Latitude. Then GE
shall be the line subtending the distance of those two places. Taking therefore
the length of GE with the Compasses, and setting one foot in H (where the
degrees begin) the other stretched forwards in the circle, will point you out
the distance of Saint Thomas Island and London, 52 degrees of a great circle,
and about one half, that is, 1050 leagues, or 3150 English miles.

If both places have Latitude, do the like for both places as before you did
for the one place having Latitude, till you have crossed both diameters with
perpendiculars: then take with your Compasses the distance of those crossings.
Now if both their Latitudes be of one denomination (that is, both Northerly or
both Southerly) and equal, set one foot of the Compasses where the degrees
begin to be numbered in the circle, and the other foot extended therein that
way which the numbers succeed, will show you the distance.

As for example, London and Cape Blanco (near the coast of Newfound land)
have both Northerly and almost equal Latitudes of 51 degrees, 32 minutes.
Having therefore drawn as well the diameters BC and DL from B, determining the
Longitude of London (viz. 22 degrees) and from the point of the Longitude of
Cape Blanco (which admit to be 331 degrees, as also the perpendiculars or sines
of both their Latitudes, OF, and KL, (as before was showed) crossing the
diameters in F and L: the distance FL taken with the Compasses, and translated
into the circle (as in the former example) will show you the distance of Cape
Blanco from London, to be almost 31 degrees, of a great circle that is 620
leagues, or 1860 miles.

If the Latitudes be not both equal, and also of one denomination, leaving one
foot of the Compasses in the crossing of the sine or perpendicular descending
from the point of the greater Latitude, with the other foot make a prick in
the same diameter, wherein that crossing is: then if the Latitudes be both of
one denomination, ^ake with the Compasses the length of the perpendicular or
sine drawn from the point of the lesser Latitude: and setting one foot in the
point of the greater Latitude, with the other make a prick in the perpendicular
descending from it, that is, in the sine thereof: Take the distance of this
prick from the former, made in the diameter: This distance transferred into
the circle (as in the first example) will give you the distance of the places
given.

As London and Jerusalem have both Northerly and unequal Latitudes,
Hierusalems Latitude being only 32 degrees. First therefore note in the circle
both their Longitudes: the Longitude of London (viz. 22 degrees) as before with
B: The Longitude of Jerusalem (68 degrees) note with M: Let the perpendicular
or the sines of the Latitudes of London and Jerusalem, OF, and NO be drawn as
in the former examples Make FP equal to OF, and PQ equal to NO: The space
betwixt P and Q taken with the Compasses, and then both feet set in the circle
(in such sort as in the first example was showed) shall contain between them
the desired distance of Jerusalem from London, 38 degrees, and about, that is
775 leagues, which are 2325 miles.

But if the Latitudes be of diverse denominations; (that is, one Northerly, and
the other Southerly) continue forth the perpendicular (that crosses the
diameter, wherein the foresaid prick was made) till it be equal to both
perpendiculars, that is to the sines of both Latitudes. The distance of the end
of this continued perpendicular from the prick aforesaid in the diameter,
taken with the Compasses, and translated into the graduated peripherie of the
circle (as before) will show you how many degrees of a great circle are
contained between both places.

To shut up this matter with one example, suppose you would know how far
Cusco in Peru is from London. Let the Longitude of Cusco be 295 degrees, the
Latitude 11 degrees Southerly: The Longitude of London, as before, 22 degrees
the Latitude 51 degrees, 32 minutes From both these Longitudes noted in the
circle with B and R, draw the diameters, as before, BC, and RV: as also the
perpendiculars or sines of their Latitudes OF, and TS: Make FX equal to FS, the
distance of those sines* and EY equal to ST the sine of Cuscoes Latitude. Take
the distance XY between the feet of the Compasses, and set them both in the
circumference of the circle, as in the first example, so shall you find that
there are betwixt London and Cusco almost 97 degrees, of a great circle that is
1940 leagues, or 5820 miles.

If you had rather keep within the compass of the circle, make the
perpendicular XZ equal to ST, and proceed with EZ as you did before with XY.

He that desires a demonstration of the former rules, must suppose the circle
ABHDR and C to be the Equinoctial circle: let him also understand the sines of
Latitude OF, KL, NO, TS, to stand perpendicularly erect from their diameters of
Longitude BC, DIM and VR, and from the plain of the Aequinoctial; and
consequently by the 3 e. 21. Ram. or 4. pr. 11. Eucl. from the lines FA* FL*
FO, FS, which lines are imagined to be in the plain of the Aequinoctial, and
are the distances of the sines of Latitude. Therefore if FG be made equal to
FA, (which is a line drawn in the plain of the Aequinoctial from S. Paste this
upon the Margin of Letter N. fol. 65. so as it may ly open all the while the
foregoing matter of the same Chap. is reading.
Thomas Island to the sine of Londons Latitude.) EG must needs be equal to the
line subtending the distance of London and S. Thomas Island by the 2. e. 7. Ra.
4.26. pr. 1. Eucl.

Also, because all the sines of Latitude (being perpendicular to the same plain
of the Aequinoctial) are Parallels, by the 5. e 21. Ram. 6. pr. 11. Eucl.
Therefore by the 11. e 2. Ram. or 35. d. 1. Eucl. FL is the line subtending the
distance of London and Cape ^^anco.

Again because FP whereto OF is perpendicular is made equal to FO, (the
distance of the sines of London and Jerusalem, to which (distance) OF is also
perpendicular in the Globe) and EQ also equal to NO: Therefore FQ being the
difference (...) the sines of Londons and Hierusalems Latitudes* there must
needs be the same distance betwixt P and Q that there is between the tops of
the sines of Hierusalems and Londons Latitudes in the Globe.

Lastly, FX being equal to FS (the distance of the sines of Latitude of London
and Cusco in Peru) and XZ perpendicular to FX, and equal to ST the sine of
Cuscoes Latitude: as OF is the sine of Londons Latitude and perpendicular to
the same line XF: EZ (to which XY is equal by the 6. c. 12. e 5 Ram. 33. pr. 1.
Eucl. YE being equal and Parallel to XZ) must needs be equal to a straight line
extended within the Globe between the points of Latitude of Cusco and London.

Now out of this demonstration it were an easy matter (if any list take the
pains to be so curious) to find out the distance of any two places
Arithmetically by the doctrine of Triangles, having always two sides given,
which are the sines of the complements of the Latitudes of the two places, as
OP* FP: LP, FP: RP, FP: AP, FP: together with the angle contained between them,
that is the difference of their Longitudes: whereby FA: FO: FL: FS, the
distances of the sines of Latitude being found by (...) 2, 3, 4, 5, Copernic.
de Triang. planis, the lines also subtending the distances of the places may
most easily be found by the 3. Copernic. de Triang. plan. For the squares of
the distance of the sines and of the difference of the sines of their Latitudes
(if both be Northerly or both Southerly) or of the sum of the sines of their
Latitudes (if one be Northerly* another Southerly) are equal to the square of
the line subtending the distance of the places 5. e 12. Ram. 47. pr. 1. Eucl.

With no less facility also by help of the former Tables, and the Canon of
Triangles, any two places being given, there may Arithmetically and most
exactly be found out, first, by their Longitudes and Latitudes, the Rumb, and
distance measured in the Rumb: secondly, by their distance, and Latitudes, the
Rumb and difference of Longitude: thirdly, by their Rumb, and Latitudes* the
distance and difference of Longitude: fourthly, by their Longi^udes, Rumb, and
one Latitude, the other Latitude and Distance: fifthly, by the Rumb distance and
one Latitude, the other Latitude, and the difference of Longitude; or any other
Nauticall or Geographicall problem that by the Chart may mechanically be
performed: and the whole Art of Navigation Arithmetical (as some call it) may
as easily be practiced: So as having only the Longitudes and Latitudes of the
places (by which, and to which you are to Sail) set down in a Table, you may by
Arithmetical Calculation only (if you list take the pains without any Chart,
Map or Globe* show the Course and Distance from any place to other* and so give
most exact direction for the performance of an whole Voyage to any known place
assigned, how often soever you have traversed or been tossed this way, and that
way, by reason of scant, violent, or contrary winds, or any other occasion.

But seeing the first grounds of this Art, that is, the observations of the
Latitudes, but especially of the Courses at Sea, can not but be far from such
exquisite truth as is to be found in those Arithmetical operations: how exact
soever you be in the rest of the means, you can look for no more truth in
conclusion then such as is answerable to the first grounds and principles, out
of which the conclusion is gathered. So as the Mariner shall not need to
trouble himself any further herewith, but only to cast up his accounts upon the
Chart truly made (as before is showed) which of all other is most fit and ready
for his ordinary use. Now therefore it may be sufficient, only to show how the
former Problems may mechanically be performed upon the Nauticall Planisphaere
before described.

First, by the Longitudes and Latitudes of both places given, the Rumb and
Distance may thus be found: 1. By the longitudes and latitudes of two places,
to find the rumb and distance.
Draw parallels by both Latitudes: take the distance of those parallels:
according to which distance draw a parallel to the Equinoctial. Then from the
end of the difference of Longitude, reckoned from the concurse of the Rumbs in
the Equinoctial erect a perpendicular crossing the said Parallel: A line drawn
by this crossing from the concurse of the Rumbs is the Rumb of the two places.
Now to find out the Distance, take so many degrees of the Equinoctial as the
difference of Latitude contains: and guiding one foot of the Compasses in the
Equinoctial, with the other foot carried parallel-wise at equal distance from
the Equinoctial, cross the Rumb newly found out: take the distance of this
crossing from the concurse of the Rumbs, and set both feet of the Compasses in
the Equinoctial, for the degrees contained between them show you the distance
desired.

2. By the distance and latitudes, to find the rumbe and difference of
longitude.
Secondly, by the distance and latitudes (knowing which place is more Eastwards,
or Westwards) the Rumb and difference of Longitude is thus found: Take with the
compasses so many degrees and minutes of the Equinoctial as the difference of
Latitude contains: According to that distance draw a parallel to the
Equinoctial; take so many degrees of the Equinoctial with your Compasses as the
distance given comes to: then one foot being set in the concurse of the Rumbs
in the Equinoctial, with the other cross the parallel aforesaid: A line drawn
by that crossing from the concurse of the Rumbs in the Equinoctial gives you
the Rumb desired. Then both Laititudes being noted in the graduated Meridian,
therein take their difference with the Compasses, and guiding one foot in the
Equinoctial* with the other carried at that distance parallel-wise from the
Equinoctial cross the Rumb of the two places, the distance of that crossing
from the Meridian (that comes from the common meeting of the Rumbs in the
Equinoctial) taken with the Compasses, and brought to the Equinoctial, shall
there show you the difference of Longitude. Or a perpendicular to the
Equinoctial from that crossing shall point you out therein, the difference of
longitude.

Thirdly, 3. By the Rumb and latitudes to find the distance and difference of
longitude.
by the Rumb and Latitudes (being both Northerly or both Southerly) the
distance and difference of longitude is thus found: Take the difference of
Latitudes in the Equinoctial: according to that distance draw a parallel to the
Equinoctial (as before crossing the Rumb of the two places given: take the
distance of this crossing from the concurse of the Rumbs: Then both feet of the
compasses set in the Equinoctial will show the distance of the places. The
difference of Longitude is found as before.

Fourthly, 4. By the longitudes, rumb, and one latitude, to find the other
latitude and the distance.
by the longitudes, Rumb and one Latitude (knowing whether it be the lesser or
greater) to find the other Latitude, and the distance, do thus: From the point
of concurse of the Rumbs in the Equinoctial count the difference of longitude:
from hence erect a perpendicular crossing the Rumb: the distance of this
crossing from the Equinoctial translated into the graduated Meridian (setting
one foot in the known Latitude, and extending the other Northwards or
Southwards according as the unknown Latitude is greater or lesser) shall show
you the Latitude desired. Now to find the distance, work as before in the first
Problem.

Fifthly, by the Rumb, distance and one Latitude, you may find the other
Latitude and the difference of Longitude after this manner: 5 By the Rumb, the
distance, and one Latitude, to find the other Latitude and the difference of
Longitude
Take the distance given with the Compasses in the Equinoctial: set one foot in
the concurse of the Rumbs, and with the other cross the Rumb given: from this
crossing draw a perpendicular to the Equinoctial: the length of that
perpendicular taken with the compasses and brought into the Equinoctial, shall
show you the difference of Latitude. Thus having both Latitudes given, the
difference of longitude may also be found as before. Prob. 2.

Now in every one of these Problemes there may be some particular cases whereof
some diversity of working may arise, yet such as can breed but small trouble
to him that well does conceive the reason of that is already set down in these
five former Problems: which are especialy to be applied to such places as are
both on the same side of the Equinoctial, and differ also both in Longitude and
Latitude: of which sort is the greatest number, and in which the greatest use,
and most difficulty of working consists. To prosecute every particularitie
at large (whereof some perhaps less acquainted with the reason of these
Mathematical practices may be desirous) would be now for me too long and
tedious. For some taste therefore of the use of this Nauticall Planisphere, let
thus much for this time breefly suffice.

CHAP. XIII Error in the use of the Compass, by the Variation neglected, and
how to observe and avoid the same.
NExt the Sea-chart there is not any instrument of Navigation whereby greater
error may ensue then by the Compass, if the Variation be neglected* By which
neglect alone we may often times miss an whole Point and more, in directing
the Course from place to place. Notwithstanding, M. Peter of Medina labors
greatly to prove that there is no Variation of the Compass, and that many
inconveniences and absurdities must needs follow out of that opinion (as he
esteems it) thinking it to have no better ground then the gross and
erroneous observations of unskilful Mariners, as by the third Chapter of his
sixth book of the Art of Navigation, may appear more at large. But daily
experience (by many and diligent observations, with exact instruments,
heed^ully used by skillful Observers, not only at sea, the unconstancie whereof
(which causes the ship to be always unsteadie) might give some color to M.
Peter's conceit of no Variation: but also on firm land, where most stedie and
certain observation may easily be made:) I say daily experience has so often,
so constantly, so manifestly proved this varying property to be in the
Compass, that it cannot by any means with reason be denied.

Now then for the better finding of this Variation there must be conceived two
Meridians; a true Meridian, and a Magnetical Meridian: also a true Azimuth, and
a Magnetical Azimuth of the Sun.

The true Meridian is an Azimuth passing by the Poles of the world*

The Magnetical Meridian is an Azimuth that passes by the points of the wires
in the Compass, or of the Needle touched with the Loadstone.

The true Azimuth of the Sun is showed by the arch of the Horizon contained
betwixt the Azmiuth of the Sun, and the true Meridian.

The Magnetical Azimuth of the Sun is showed by the arch of the Horizon
contained between the Magnetical Meridian and the Azimuth of the Sun.

The difference of these two arks of the Horizon is always equal to the
Variation of the Compass.

To find out the Magnetical Azimuth of the Sun, we must first know upon what
point of the Compass the Sun is: which although it may be done by aim very
near the truth by him that is experienced, especially when the Sun is low, or
at the Horizon, rising or setting: yet it may better be done with help of such
a ruler and sights, as land-measurers use with their Plain Tables, wherewith
you may thus find upon what point of the Compass the Sun is: Lay the edge of
the ruler right over the center of the Compass: then holding the ruler so
fixed, and the Compass level so near as you can aim, turn it about until the
midst of the Sunbeams passing through one of the sights* fall along upon the
edge of the ruler, or midst of the opposite sight. Then holding your eye in
such sort over the Compass, that the rulers edge may lie right upon the center
of the Fly, look also upon what point of the Compass the edge of the ruler
lies to the Sun-wards for that is the point whereupon the Sun is at that time:
which for brevities sake may be called the Suns point. This point you shall
look in the instrument following, and it shall show you amongst the degrees the
Magnetical Azimuth of the Sun, As for example, when the Sun is due East by the
Compass, I would know in what Magnetical Azimuth he is: Therefore I look the
East point in this Instrument, which directs me to 84 degrees. which is the
Magnetical Azimuth desired, And the difference betwixt this and the true
Azimuth of the Sun is the Variation of the Compass, which we seek for. This
difference therefore shall thus be found out: At the same time when you observe
the Suns point, let the height of the Sun be also observed. It is best to take
both these observations about the midst of the forenoon, or afternoon, for then
the height of the Sun alters quickly, and the Refraction and Parallax cannot
much deceive you; therefore at that time the true Azimuth of the Sun shall
easily be known thus: First find-out the Declination of the Sun, remembering
always to give allowance, or take away (according as the Declination
increases or decreaseth) for the place and time of your Observation: Then set
your Astrolabe to the Latitude of the place where you observe, and follow the
Parallel of the Suns Declination, until you come to the Almicantarath or
height of the Sun known by observation: for the Azimuth that passes by their
mutual intersection is the true Azimuth of the Sun that was sought for: which
if you follow down to the Horizon, you shall have that Azimuth given. Now of
these two given Azimuths (that is the true and Magnetical Azimuth of the Sun)
substract the lesser from the greater, for the difference remaining is the
Variation of the Compass: the denomination whereof (that is, whether it be
Easterly or Westerly) shall easily be discerned thus: if the true Azimuth of
the Sun counted from the South point in the forenoon, be less then the
Magnetical Azimuth, the Variation is Easterly: otherwise it is Westerly.
Contrariwise, in the afternoon: if the true Azimuth of the Sun be greater then
the Magnetical Azimuth, the Variation of the Compass from the point of true
North is Eastwards, otherwise it is Westwards. And for the better understanding
of these rules, I have in the Table following exemplified them by such
Observations as I took both at Sea and Land, in the year 1589.

The instrument following is then to be used when Observation is made, as
before has bin showed, by a Compass, wherein the North points of the wires
are set half a point to the Eastwards from the North point of the Compass (of
which sort are the Compasses that are commonly used by English Mariners)
whereas if the points of the w^res were set just under the points of North and
South: and the circumference of the Compass divided into degrees both
Eastwards and Westwards, beginning at the North and South points* and ending
with 90 at East and West: we might at the first have the Magnetical Azimuth of
the Sun by Observation, and so there should be no need of this Instrument.

In the Table here following the letters N, W, S, E, b, in the first and second
columns, signify North, West, South, East, by. The fractions in the second
column are parts of the point whereto they are annexed. In the column
entitled* The time of Observation. the letters BN, and AN signify, before
noon and After noon.

An Instrument for the ready finding of the Suns Magnetical Azimuth by the
ordinary Compass.


The place of Observation. The Suns point of the Compass. The hight of the sun
The Suns Magnetic. Azimuth. Degrees Min Degrees Min About twenty leag. from Spain. W
WNW N 0 0 69 30 30 or 40 leagues from Spain. W ENE E 0 0 56 15 About midway
betwixt Lisbone and Saint Mic^^^ls. ENE 0 0 61 40 WNW 0 0 73 7 Betwixt S.
Michaels and Tercaera. E by N N 2 0 70 52 About 3. leag. from Tercaera SSW E by
N N 2 30 70 53 At Saint Cruz in Flores. 29 25 83 30 These Observations made in
the town of Fayal and the former also at S. Cruz in Flores were taken by M.
William Borowes Instrument of Variation (published in his book of the
Variation of the Compass) and by a Quadrant, whose semidiameter was almost
three foot. 18 0 73 0 16 36 74 40 20 30 62 20 20 0 62 54 19 20 63 35 18 16 64
45 30 41 57 15 46 13 17 53 46 18 16 36 40 42 32 45 or 4 leagues from Tercaera
SE ESE E 0 0 75 50 From S. Mary's W by S 6 leagues WSW 13 0 61 50 From S.
Mary's W by S 6 leagues W by S 0 0 67 25 From S. Mary's South 5. leagues ESE S
0 0 69 30 From Saint Mary's 16 leagues ESE E 0 0 75 50 NW by W Northerly. ESE 2
30 73 7 From S. Georges SE by E 3 leag ESE E 0 0 75 50 From the East part of S.
Michael WSW S 0 0 59 0 NE by N, about 15 or 20 leag. ESE E 0 0 70 23 From the
rock W about 66 leag. SE by S S 26 37 30 From C. Finisterre N Easterly ESE S 0
67 30 ESE S 2 65 37 SW 11 39 22 The Time of Observation. The Latitude of the
place of observation The Declination of the Sun. The true Azimuth of The Sun.
The Variation of the Compass The middle Variation. The part of Variation De.
Mi De. Mi De. Mi De. Mi De. Min. Iul. 9 AN 39 50 20 53 62 0 7 30 Eastward 12 BN
39 0 20 25 63 20 6 45 Eastward 23 BN 38 0 17 55 67 0 5 20 5 38 Eastward 23 AN
38 0 17 46 67 10 5 57 Eastward Aug 8 B N 38 20 13 13 74 10 3 18 Eastward 9 BN
38 20 12 54 75 0 4 7 Eastward 14 AN 39 50 11 5 79 30 4 0 westward Se. 13 AN 38
54 0 8 74 35 1 35 3 5 Eastward 13 AN 38 54 0 9 76 0 1 20 Eastward 22 AN 38 54 3
39 67 10 4 50 Eastward 22 AN 38 54 3 39 67 30 4 36 Eastward 22 AN 38 54 3 30 68
15 4 40 Eastward 22 AN 38 54 3 40 69 20 4 35 Eastward 23 BN 38 54 3 53 54 20 2
55 Eastward 23 BN 38 54 3 54 14 0 3 53 Eastward 23 BN 38 54 3 54 13 30 3 6
Eastward 23 AN 38 54 4 0 35 15 2 30 Eastward Oc. 18 BN 38 20 13 5 73 0 2 5
Eastward 23 AN 37 0 14 50 60 0 1 50 0 55 Westward 23 AN 37 0 14 51 71 5 3 40
Eastward 24 BN 37 0 15 2 70 50 3 20 Westward 26 BN 37 30 15 38 69 50 6 0 5 34
Eastward 26 BN 37 30 15 39 68 0 5 7 Eastward 28 BN 38 40 16 16 68 45 7 5
Eastward No. 1 AN 38 40 17 30 67 10 8 10 Eastward 2 BN 38 40 17 41 66 50 3 33
Eastward 6 BN 38 35 18 43 31 0 6 30 Eastward 12 BN 44 25 20 5 61 0 6 30 7 4
Eastward 12 BN 44 25 20 5 58 0 7 37 Eastward 12 AN 44 30 20 11 46 15 6 52
Eastward

Notwithstanding there be much difference betwixt some of these Variations
taken at the same place with the same Instruments, yet we used with what
diligence we could such Instruments as then we had prepared for that purpose:
which I speak, that others that shall go about hereafter to observe the
Variation (at Sea especially) may be the more circumspect to foresee and
prevent all causes of error herein. Exact truth amongst the unconstant waves of
the Sea is not to be looked for, though good Instruments be never so well
applied to their use. Yet with heedfull diligence we may come so near the
truth, as the nature of the Sea and of our sight and Instruments will give us
leave. Neither if there be some disagreement betwixt Observations, are they all
by and by to be rejected. But as when many arrows are shot at a mark, and the
mark afterward taken away, he may be thought to work according to reason, who
to find the place where the mark stood, shall seek out the middle place amongst
all the arrows: so amongst many different Observations, the middlemost is
likest to come nearest the Truth.

Causes of error herein: Some cannot be avoided, as the unsteadinesse of the
Ship, the imperfection of the sense and Instruments, the weak respective force
of the needle or wires, be they never so well touched. Others may be eschued,
as that there be no iron near the Compass in the time of Observation, that the
wires be kept clean from rust, and that they be not kept too long untouched
from the stone, that such Instruments be used for Observation as need least
working afterward for finding out the Variation: wherein the Instruments
heretofore published for this purpose, are faulty; being such as serve for
Observation only o^ Land: as also requiring many workings afterward, unfit
for Mariners before the matter can come to issue, wherein are as many lurking
holes of error, without great diligence. I have therefore here set down the
making and use of a certain Instrument, whereby the Variation of the Compass
and time of the day is presently given, together with the Observation (the
Latitude of the place being known) and that universally throughou^ the World,
both at Sea and Land. As also the Variation being given, the height of the
Pole, and hour of the day may thereby be known, without those inconveniences,
wherewith Martin Curtis his instrument, Chap. 11. part 3. of the Art of
Navigation, and Michael Coignet his Nautical Hemisphere, are much encumbered: to
omit the Observation of the height of the Sun, which (as I have often made trial
at Sea) may thereby be more exactly performed, then has been hitherto by
Staff, Ring, or Astrolabe, as they are commonly used.

The making of the Sea-Rings.
MAke four Rings of equal thickness and breadth covenient, so as they may not
easily bend: let them be fitted that each of them may go close within other.
The two greatest of these Rings must be so made and framed together, that the
innermost may slide about within the outermost, both sides agreeing always,
even together in one and the same plain superficies. Within the innermost of
these two Rings must the third ring be hanged upon two round pins diametrally
opposite each to other; so as upon them it may be turned aside, till it make
right angles with the former. Again, within this third ring must the fourth be
hanged likewise upon two pins diametrally opposite, 90 degrees. distant from the
former pins. The uppermost Ring represents the Meridian fixed: the next
within it represents a Meridian moveable: the third signifies the
Equinoctial or parallel of the Sun: the fourth, the circle passing by the
points of East and West, and by the poles of the world. Upon one of the sides
of the innermost and moveable Meridian (90 degrees from the pins whereupon the
Equinoctial Ring hangs) must be fixed an Index or pointer, the point whereof
may reach unto the midst of the convexitie of the innermost circle, into a
little hole, distant from the middle point between the pins or poles whereupon
it hangs so much as half the thickness of that circle comes to, as the
point of that Index being put into this hole, the Meridian and the inner
circles may cross each other precisely at right angles. Ninety degrees from
the pins or poles of this innermost Ring, through the midst of the concavitie
and convexitie thereof, must two small holes be made; and a thread stretched
straight betwixt them (representing the axeltree of the World) with a small
bead (about the bigness of a pins head) put hereupon, representing the center
of the earth. Let the upper half of the uppermost and fixed Meridian be divided
into 180 degrees, setting figures to every tenth or fifth degree, beginning at
either end, and ending in the midst with 90, which represents the Zenith:
where a Ring must be set thereto, to hang the whole instrument by, as the
manner is in the use of the Astrolabe. Diametrally opposite to the midst of
this semicircle, there must be fastened to the convexitie of this fixed Meridian
the foot-piece of this Instrument, made of some such The figure of the
Sea-rings.
fashion and proportion as here you see, agreeing in one and the same plain
superficies with the Meridian, and the line passing by the feet thereof making
right angles with the Zenith line. To the feet of this piece must be annexed
the Sea Compass, in such sort that the Zenith line of the graduated side of
the Meridian may fall perpendicularly upon the center there of the plain
superficies of the Meridian making right angles with the plain of the Compass.
All these circles, and Compass being thus joined together, the whole
Instrument must be rectified and equally counterpoized by the help of a
plumb-line hanging on a small pin at the Zenith point directly under the Ring,
that hanging the Instrument by the Ring (like an Astrolabe) the plumb-line may
fall precisely upon the Nadir point of the fixed Meridian, scarcely touching
the same: for so the Instruments own weight, hanging it only by the Ring (like
an Astrolabe) shall make it hang exactly perpendicular, when soever you use it.
Let the points of the wires in the Compass be placed just upon the points of
North and South in the Fly; the circumference whereof must be divided into
degrees, beginning at those points, and from thence proc^eding both ways, set
figures at every fifth or tenth degree, ending with 90 at the points of East
and West. Through the midst of the concave side of the third Ring (representing
the Equinoctial) must a periphery be drawn round about, which may be called the
parallel of the Sun. It shall be good also (though not needful for finding the
Variation) to divide it into 24 equal parts or hours, and quarters, or smaller
parts, for knowing the time of the day.

Upon the concave side of the innermost Ring let be described the degrees of
the Suns declination, for the right placing of the little bead upon the thread
according to the time of the year. Which may easiliest be done after this
manner.

Draw upon a pastbord the peripherie ABCD equal to the foresaid parallel of the
Sun drawn through the midst of the concavitie of the Equinoctial Ring: cross
this peripherie at right angles with the diameters AC, BD at the center E. Then
take with your compasses the semidiameter ED, and setting one foot in the end
of the diameter D, with the other draw the arch GEF; in which arch prick out
both ways from E so many deg^ees, as the Suns greatest declination amounts
unto* and laying your ruler to D, and to every one of those degrees; cross the
diameter AC with short strokes, as you see in this diagram, and laying the
ruler to every one of those crosses and the prick at B, make pricks by the side
of the ruler in the innermost peripherie HIKL, which must be equal to the
concavitie of the innermost Ring of the Instrument: And then laying the
concavitie and quarters of that Ring justly agreeable with this peripherie, and
the ends of the diameters thereof (the thread upon which the little bead rides)
lying right over the diameter HK, you may with a sharp point of steel strike up
the said pricks made in the innermost peripherie into the concavitie of the
innermost Ring, and to every fifth or tenth degree set figures, as the manner
is. There must also be made in the said innermost Ring a point answerable to
the point at B in this former figure, in which point there must be fastened a
small stump, standing upright, from the side of that Ring about the height of a
pins head. By means whereof and the degrees of the Suns declination (projected,
as we have showed, into the concavitie of the innermost Ring) the little bead
must be right placed upon the thread, by bringing it into a straight line
between the stump and the Suns declination answerable to the time of your
Observation: which may be done by laying the edge of a straight ruler, or a
small thread stretched from that stump, to the degree and part of the Suns
declination, and then bringing the midst of the bead under that edge or thread:
Or else by sight only, with one of your eyes, laying the top of that stump upon
the Suns declination, and then bringing the bead between; so as you may see
them all three in one straight line.

The bead being thus rightly placed, put aside the Equinoctial Ring from the
brass pointer (representing the Pole Actick) that it may cross the meridian
at right angles, which it shall precisely do, if you bring the prick or little
hole, upon the outside of the innermost circle to the end of the foresaid
brass pointer, so as the end thereof may enter thereinto. Then set the line
that is drawn from the end of the brass pointer, to the elevation of the Pole
at the place of your Observation, and so have you all parts of your Instrument
rightly placed for Observation.

Now when you will make Observation with this Instrument, The use of this
Instrument.
hang the same by this Ring upon your finger, as you do when you Observe the
height of the Sun with the Astrolabe, turning the foresaid brass pointer
Northwards, till you find the midst of the shadow of the bead to fall upon the
peripherie, drawn round about through the midst of the concavitie of the
Equinoctial ring, which peripherie we called the parallel of the Sun: and so
keep the whole Instrument and Compass as steady as you can, till the fly of
the Compass remain quiet and still; keeping in the mean time the midst of the
shadow of the bead always upon the foresaid parallel of the Sun; and withal
looking close by the graduated side of the Meridian, directly down upon the
midst of the Compass; and mark what degree and minute you see close thereby in
the North part of the Fly: for so much as the North point of the needle or
wiers is from thence toward the East or West, so much is the Variation
Eastwards or Westwards. And the shadow of the bead lighting upon the Parallel
of the Sun shows the hour and time of the day.

The best time for the taking of these Observations is about the midst of the
forenoon or afternoon, because that about those times the height of the Sun
alters quickly, and his Refraction also can breed no sensible error. But
because there be many that want both this Instrument, and also the Globe and
Astrolabe beforementioned, I have for their sakes thought it good to set down
a way whereby (the Declination and height of the Sun being given, together with
the Latitude of the place) the Suns true Azimuth may be found with Ruler and
Compasses only, after this manner: Draw the circle ABCDEFGH, representing the
Meridian, by the center hereof draw the diameter, of the Horizon AF. From A the
end of this diameter, reckon the elevation of the Equinoctial AC; from whence
draw a line by the center (which may be called the diameter of the Equinoctial)
AC; from C the end of this diameter count the declination of the Sun CD;
thereby draw a Parallel to the diameter of the Equinoctial, which may be called
the diameter of the Suns Parallel DG: Likewise from the diameter of the Horizon
count the height of the Sun AB, known by Observation, and thereby also draw BE
a Parallel to the diameter of the Horizon, which may be called the diameter of
the Suns Almicantar. From I, the intersection of these two Parallels, draw IK,
a line perpendicular to the diameter of the Horizon. Then setting one foot of
the Compasses in L, the midst of BE the diameter of the Suns Almicantar, and
stretching out the other foot to B the end of this diameter: from thence draw
therewith the arch BK till you come to the said perpendicular: This arch
resolved into degrees shall give you the true Azimuth of the Sun.

Now (for them that list) by the doctrine of Triangles also, MN (the sine of
the Suns Declination) being given, with the angle MON (equal to the height of
the Pole) in the right angled Triangle, ONM: the side OM shall likewise be
given: which subtracted out of MOL (the sine of the Suns height) there remains
LO* whereby LI, in the Triangle LIO, having one right angle at L, and
consequently ILK the angle desired, are given.

CHAP. XIIII. To find the Inclination or dipping of the Magnetical needle under
the Horizon.
LEt OBR be a Meridian of the Earth, wherein let O be the Pole, B the
Equinoctial, R the Latitude (suppose 60 degrees) let BD be perpendicular to AB
in B, and equal to the subtense OB; and drawing the line AD, describe therewith
the arch DSV. Then draw the subtence OR, wherewith (taking R for the center)
draw the arch OS. To the meeting of these two arches at S draw the lines RS
equal to TO, and AS equal to AD. Also because BR is assumed to be 60 degrees
therefore let ST be 60/90 parts of the arch STO, and draw the line RT, for the
angle ART shall be the complement of the Magnetical Needles Inclination under
the Horizon. Which may be found by the solution of the two Triangles OAR and
RAS, after this manner:

First the angle OAR is given because of the arch OBR, measuring the same 150
degrees and consequently the angle at R 15 degrees being equal to the equal
sided angle at O; both which together are 30 degrees because they are the
complement of the angle OAR (150 degrees) to a semicircle or 180 degrees.

Secondly, in the Triangle ARS all the sides are given, AR the Radius or
semidiameter 10,000,000: RS equal to TO the subtense of 150 degrees 19,318,516:
and AS equal to AD triple in power to AB, because it is equal in power to AB
and BD, that is BO; which is double in power to AB. Or else thus: The arch OB
being 90 degrees, the subtense thereof OB, that is, the Tangent BD is
14,142,126, which sought in the Table of Tangents, shall give you the angle BAD
54 degrees 44 minutes 8 seconds: the Secant whereof is the line AD that is AS
17,320,508. Now then by 4 Axiom of the 2 book of Ptisc. As the base or greatest
side SR 19,318,516 is to the sum of the other two sides SA and AR 27,320,508;
so is the difference of them SX 7,320,508 to the segment of the greatest side
SY 10,352,762; which being taken out of SR 19,318,516, there remains YR
8,965,754, the half whereof RZ 4,482,877, is the sine of the angle RAZ 26
degrees 38 minutes 2 seconds, the complement whereof 63 degrees 21 minutes 58
seconds is the angle ARZ, which added to the angle ARO 15 degrees makes the
whole angle ORS, 78 degrees ^1 minutes 58 seconds; whereof 60/90 make 52
degrees 14 minutes 38 seconds which taken out of ARZ 63 degrees 21 minutes 58
seconds there remains the angle TRA 11 degrees 7 minutes 20 seconds the
complement whereof is the Inclination sought for, 78 degrees, 52 minutes, 40
seconds.

The sum and difference of the sides SA and AR being always the same, viz.
27,320,508 and 7,320,508, A shorter way to calculate the Table of Magnetical
Inclination*
the product of them shall likewise be always the same, viz.
199,999,997,378.064 to be divided by the side SR that is TO the subtense of
RBO. Therefore there may be some labor saved in making the Table of Magnetical
Inclination, if in stead of the said product you take continually but the half
thereof that is 99,999,998,689,032, and so divide it by half the subtense TO,
that is, by the sine of half the arch OBR. Or rather thus: As half the base RS
(that is, as the sine of half the arch OBR) is to half the sum of the other two
sides SA and AR 13,660,254, so is half the difference of them 3,660,254 to half
of the segment SY, which taken out of half the base, there remains RZ the
sine of RAZ, The Table of Magnetical Inclination.
First col. Second col. First col^ Second col First col* Second col. Height of
the Pole Magnetical Inclination. Height of the Pole. Magnetical Inclination.
Height of the Pole. Magnetical Inclination^ Degrees Degr. Min. Degrees Degr.
Min Degrees Degr. Min. 1 2 11 31 52 27 61 79 29 2 4 20 32 53 41 62 80 4 3 6 27
33 54 53 63 80 38 4 8 31 34 56 4 64 81 11 5 10 34 35 57 13 65 81 43 6 12 34 36
58 21 66 82 13 7 14 32 37 59 28 67 82 43 8 16 28 38 60 33 68 83 12 9 18 22 39
61 37 69 83 40 10 20 14 40 62 39 70 84 7 11 22 4 41 63 40 71 84 32 12 24 52 42
64 39 72 84 57 13 25 38 43 65 38 73 85 21 14 27 22 44 66 35 74 85 44 15 29 4 45
67 30 75 86 7 16 30 45 46 68 24 76 86 28 17 32 24 47 69 17 77 86 48 18 34 0 48
70 9 78 87 8 19 35 36 49 70 59 79 87 26 20 37 9 50 71 48 ^0 87 44 21 38 41 51
72 36 81 88 1 22 40 11 52 73 23 82 88 17 23 41 39 53 74 8 83 88 33 24 43 6 54
74 52 84 88 47 25 44 30 55 75 35 85 89 1 26 45 54 56 76 17 86 89 14 27 47 15 57
76 57 87 89 27 28 48 36 58 77 37 88 89 39 29 49 54 59 78 15 89 89 50 30 51 11
60 78 53 90 90 0 whose complement to a quadrant is the angle sought for ARZ.

According to this Diagram and demonstration, was calculated the Table here
following; the first column whereof contains the height of the Pole for every
whole degree; the second column shows the Inclination or Dipping of the
Magnetical Needle answerable thereto in degrees and minutes.

CHAP. XV. Error in using the Crosse-staffe, and how they may be avoided.
AFter the Chart and Compass, the Crosse-staffe may with good reason succeed,
as in the use whereof more error is committed, then in any other Instrument of
Navigation, the two former excepted; and that four several ways: First in
neglecting the Paralax or Eccentricitie of the eye: Secondly, in not
considering the height of the eye above the Water: Thirdly and Fourthly, in not
regarding the Paralax and Refraction of the Sun.

For the first, they count the height of the Sun and Stars in such sort as if
the center of the eye, or vertex of the visual cone in using the Staff, were
even with the end thereof, that is set to the eye. Therefore how much the
center of the sight is distant from the end of the Staff, so much are they
deceived. But how much the Eccentricitie or Paralax of the eye is, it may be
known after this manner: Make two Transversaries, the one twice so long as the
other. The longest of these two set fast at the further end of the Index, the
other of them move up or down upon the Index, until such time that your eye
placed at the end of the Index (in such sort as you use to place it when you
observe) you may see both ends of both Transversaries lie even together. For
then look how much the segment of the Index betwixt the two Transversaries
exceeds the segment from the shorter Transversarie unto the eye, so much is
the Parallax or Eccentricitie of your sight, or the point wherein your eye,
wherein the visual beams concur, is so much distant from the end of the Index.

As for example, in this figure let the Transversarie HEI placed at E the end
of the Index be double to the Transversarie FDG, which is placed in such sort
upon the Index, that the visual lines (AFH, AGI) of the eye placed at the end
of the Index, do pass straight on by FH and GI* the ends of the
Transversaries. For in this figure, A is the center of the sight or eye,
wherein the visual lines (AFH, AGI) do concur: B represents the end of the
Index, placed at the corner of the eye, and then AB is the Eccentricitie: C
signifies the end of the Index set against the bone underneath the eye, for
observing of distances, and then AC is the Eccentricitie, which is thus
demonstrated:

As HE is to FD, so EDA to DA, 13. e 5, Ra. But HE is double to FD by
supposition: therefore EDA is double to DA, and DA the half of EDA equal to the
other half DE. Therefore how much BD or CD is shorter then DE, so much is the
Paralax or Eccentricitie of the eye, and so much must the Transversarie be
removed forwards (from the place where he was set in the time of your
Observation) toward the far end of the Index, after you have observed any
height or distance of the Sun or Stars, that so you may have the true height or
distance desired. Or else you may have a plate of brass, so Artificially
fitted close within, by the side of the square hole in the Transversarie,
through which the Index is to be put, that you may slip it forwards or
backwards like the cover of a Box, and so set the foreedge thereof so much
before the Transversarie, as the Eccentricitie of your eye comes to (having
first turned the flat and straight side of the Transversarie from you ward, and
pared the ends thereof, in such sort that the visual beams may touch the
extremes of that side) that so the edge of the place may at the first show
upon the Index the true height or distance of the Sun or Stars observed without
any further correction. Otherwise if this Paralax of the sight be neglected,
there may be error of an whole degree and more sometimes, in observing with
those small Crosse-staves which have been commonly used.

Secondly, they increase the former error by not regarding the height of the
eye above the Water. Which although it be not so great a fault as the other,
yet it may deceive them by increasing the former error, five or six minutes or
more in a tall Ship. For the higher the eye is above the water, the greater is
the angle contained betwixt the two visual lines, whereof one touches the
unequal superficies of the Sea, the other passes on to the Sun or Stars: And
the lower the eye is, the less is the foresaid angle: and then only it
shows the true Altitude, when the center of the sight is in the same line of
level with the superficies of the Water. But if the eye be higher then the
Water, that angle is greater then the true Altitude, and therefore subtraction
must be made accordingly, that you may have the true Altitude.

Now to find how much it is that should be subtracted at any height of the eye
above the Water there be two ways; the one without knowledge of the Earths
semidiameter, the other with knowledge of the same. For the first, you must
have some such convenient place at the Water side where you may have a free and
clear prospect unto the Sea without impediment, and where you may also have
such provision made, that you may place both your self, and also an exact and
large Water Level in convenient manner to make exact observation at what
height soever you desire above the superficies of the Sea, till you come to the
height of the tallest Ships that go upon the Seas: that level having the sight
that you must look through at the end thereof next the eye so fitted, that you
may both easily and steadily set it higher then the fore sight (that is the
sight that is at the fore-end of the Level) so much as shall be needful to
lay the foresight precisely to the touching of the Sea; and that you may also
perfectly know how much the back-sight, or sight at your eye, is higher then
the foresight above the line of Level: For by the difference of the heights
of those sights above the line of Level, and the distance between them, it may
easily be found how much the visual line touching the roundnes of the Sea,
Dippeth under the line of level, or true Horizon, from whence the height of
the Sun and Stars is to be accounted, thus: As the distance betwixt the sights
is to the difference of their heights above the line of level; so is the whole
sine to the Tangent of the angle of Dipping, which we desired to know.

This angle may otherwise be found, the quantity of the Earth; semidiameter
being first known, which is to be done diverse ways; but they may be all
reduced to two heads or kinds, whereof the first requires the certain measure
of some arch of the Meridian to be first given, which is also diverse ways to
be performed. But the best and perfectest way of all others is to observe so
axactly as is possible the Summer solstitiall Altitude of the Sun at two
places, A most exact way to find the quantity of the Earths semidiameter
so far distant asunder, and lying so near North and South each from other
with so direct and fair a way between them as conveniently may be chosen.
Suppose for example Portsmouth and Barwick, or some other place in the furthest
parts of Scotland; for the further these places are each from other, the more
perfectly may this business be performed. Then measure, and plat down so truly
as is possible all the way between those two places, with all the turnings and
windings, ascents and descents that are therein; out of which the arch of the
great circle, or shortest distance betwixt them. together with the angle of
declination thereof from the true Meridian line truly found by observation at
either of those places, may most exactly be known: whereby (with help of the
doctrine of right angled sphaericall triangles) the difference of the latitudes
of those two places in miles and forlongs etc. may easily appear; which
compared with the difference of the latitudes of the same places, found by
observation of the Sun in degrees and minutes, etc. will show how many miles
and furlongs answer to one, or more degrees of the meridian: and so the whole
circumference, diameter, and semidiameter of the earth will easily, and more
truly be found, then any other way yet used for this purpose. But means
convenient for the trial hereof have hitherto been wanting, and so I must omit
it, till some better opportunity, if any shall befall hereafter, by the bounty
of any such as are of more ability to bear the charge hereof. Yet besides our
purpose now in hand, this would be the best ground that can be both for the
making and continuing of a Standard, and all other measures thereon depending,
at a certainty for ever; insomuch that although all the Standards, weights and
measures in the world were lost, they might notwithstanding upon record of such
Observation and means as here we have mentioned, be again restored much more
perfectly then by the ordinary way of beginning all our measures from a barley
grain taken out of the midst of the Ear, whereof there is no such certain
determinate bigness that can be set down, but that they may be something
greater in one Ear then another; neither can there be any certain rule or
reason given how to know which Ear to choose rather then other* for this
purpose. And if any error be committed herein, though insensible (which cannot
be avoided) yet in going about to make other greater measures by often taking
this least* and so proceeding a minimis ad maxima, so often as you take your
first or least measure, so often do you increase and multiply your error:
which though at the first it seem very small and scarcely perceivable, yet
comes at the last to be very notorious and intolerable. But the other way I
here speak of taking the length of all England, or of the whole Island, for our
first measure, and out of it by subdivision dividing all the rest, although we
may err something in taking the length hereof (which notwithstanding, I dare
undertake* may be so handled, that it shall not be so much as the thousand part
of the whole distance between the two places, before mentioned) yet because we
proceed a maximis ad minima, so still dividing, and the more diminishing this
error, the further we proceed; it will in the end* when we come to our ordinary
measures most in use, become very insensible and not worth the regarding

But to return to our purpose from whence we have a little digressed: The
Earths semidiameter may in like manner be found by Observation of the Meridian
Altitudes of any notable fixed Star at the two places before mentioned: but
because the heights of Stars cannot by any means be so exactly observed as the
height of the Sun may be; the difference of the Latitudes of the two^places and
consequently the Perimeter (that is the Cir^uite or Compass and the diameter
of the Earth cannot be so perfectly found by this way as by the former.

As for that way which finds the height of the Sun and so the Latitudes. by
the length of the shadow of a (...) o^ Gnomon perpendicularly erected, it is
like to be more uncertain then either of the former. by reason of the
scattering and uncertain determining of the end of the shadow; beside the
knowledge of the Suns semidiameter hereunto required, which inconveniences may
in the former ways be avoided.

The quantity of the Earths diameter is also to be found more easily, though
not so exactly (without observing any height of Sun or Star, or measuring any
arch of the Meridian) by means of some great height given near the Sea side; as
namely the height of some high mountain, from whose top you may have a free
prospect so far as you can see upon the Sea. Which Maurolycus endeavors to
do after this manner. Clau Comm. in 1 Cap Joan. de Sacrobosc.


Let BCD be the Circuit of the Earth AB the height of some hig mountain to be
found by the rules of measuring heights (But here he should have done well to
have showed us by what rules; for the ordinary rules will not serve the turn)
AC a visual line from the top of the mountain to C the point of the touching
thereof with the Sea or plain Land where no hills are; (but such Land will very
hardly be found that may serve for this purpose) CB the distance (without
sensible error) of that point of touching from the perpendicular showing the
height of the mountain; to be found also by the rules of measuring lengths so
far as we can see from the top of the mountain A. Maurolycus and Cladius his
gross demonstration.
(But here also he should have showed some certain rule how to find both the
point of touching C, and also the distance to it from B, and not so grossly to
slubber over so nice a point as this is, in bidding us measure so far as we
can see) Then rudely taking ABC for a plain right angled Triangle with the
sides AB and BC found as before, we may without any further rub, proceed, and
find both the Hypotenusa or Tangent AC by the 47.1 Eucl* As also the Earths
diameter BD by the 37.3 Eucl. Yet here I cannot but marvel that so great a
Clerk as Clavius should so slightly pass over such gross absurdities as
these, without any touch or warning at all given to his Readers, that they
might not be abused by them; much less correcting them, or showing any better
means how to resolve this problem; which may notwithstanding much more easily
and geometrically be done by finding the height of the mountain with an exact
water level, beginning at the superficies of the Sea water, in some Creek
where it rests smooth and clame; and from thence proceeding till you come to
the top of the mountain, always placing the level (so near as may be) in the
middle between the back-marke and fore-marke, which are used in levelling and
so adding all your ascents together, you shall have very exactly the true
height of the mountain above the roundnesse of the Sea. Then having the sights
fitted in such sort, as before we have showed, that you may raise the
back-sight (or sight at your eye) higher then the foresight (at the far end
of the Level) so much as shall be needful; place the Level, so truly and
steadily as you can, upon the top of the mountain; and so dispose the sight at
your eye, that you may see the fore sight lie even with the touching of the
Sea, whereby the angle of depression or Dipping of the visuall line under the
line of Level may be found by the difference of the heights of the sights, as
before is showed. And then as the excess of the Secant of that angle above the
whole Sine is to the whole Sine: so is the height of the mountain AB (already
found) to the semidiameter of the Earth, BF, For FC being continued to E and AE
representing the line of Level or true Horizon; EAC the angle of dipping shall
be equal to the angle AEC (by 16.3 and 8.6 Eucl) the Secant whereof is AF; the
whole Sine BF (proportional to the Earths semidiameter) and the difference of
them AB, proportional to the height of the mountain.

But having not hitherto had means requisite to make trial of any of these
ways already mentioned, I have thought of another way, whereby the height of
the mountain, and consequently the quantity of the Earths semidiameter may be
known; wherein because there is great variety of Opinions amongst the Ancient
and later Writers, some making it to be almost 8000 miles; some little more
then 5500, some others not much exceeding 5000; others making it less then
3600; and others not much more then 3200, as Alphraganus* though Fernelius,
according to his Observation, finds it to be 3900 miles, whereas others of
late will have it little more then 3000: therefore in so great diversity and
uncertainty of opinions, I took it to be the best course, both for mine own and
others satisfaction, to rest my self upon such grounds as I could find by mine
own experience and observation, and that after this manner:

First, I made for this purpose an Instrument in form of a right angled
Triangle, whose sides containing the right angle were about six foot long; one
of which sides was divided into 10,000 equal parts, whereby the degrees and
minutes answerable to them were easily to be found out of the Table of
Tangents. This Instrument thus prepared and placed flatlings upon his Bases,
about three foot above ground, on a hill near Plimmouth sound I directed one
side thereof about the right angle, as exactly as I could, to the midst of a
small Rock, appearing a little above the Sea water, near the great Rock called
the Meustone, lying at the entrance of Plymouth sound: Then, as the other side
of the Instrument about the right angle directed me, I took my second standing
664 foot by just measure from the first* which distance was so much as the
ground would well give me leave to take, for otherwise I would have gone
further. At this second station I found the angle contained between the visuall
lines directed to the first station and that small Rock to be 87 degrees. 52
minutes; the Tangent whereof is 26,845 such parts whereof the distance of the
standing or whole sine contains 1000: whereby the distance from the first
station to the said small Rock was found to be 17,825 foot: for as 1000 to
26,845; so are 664 foot to 17,825 foot.

Then coming again to the first station, and setting the Instrument steady up
on edge I first directed one of the sides about the right angle (lying near the
ground) to the said little Rock, and then a Plumbline hanging at the upper
corner of this Triangular Instrument did fall 1 degree 14 minutes from the
right angle forwards. After this I directed the same side, as truly as I could,
to the very touching of the Sphaericall superficies of the Sea; and then the
Plumbline fell 22 minutes from the same right angle forwards toward the Sea.

Out of these observations the semidiameter of the earth was found thus: Let O
be the center of the earth. SVCE the circumference of the Sea: B the place of
observation. BVFO a perpendicular line drawn from thence to the center of the
earth: BD, the line of Level or true Horizon: BC, the distance from the place
of observation to the mark in the Sea 17,825 foot: the angle CBD found by
observation 1. degree 14 minutes: BRE a visuall line from the place of
observation, touching the Sea: E, the point of touching: EBD, the angle betwixt
that visuall line and the line of Level or true Horizon, 22 minutes: RCFS, a
Parallel to BD, or line of Level drawn by the mark C: OFV, and OP,
semidiameters of the Seas circumference at the time of observation: ED, the
continuation of the semidiameter OE to the line of Level or true Horizon BD.

Now in the Triangle BCF, right-angled at F, the side BC being 17,825 foot, and
the angle at B, 88 degrees 46 minutes, (because it is the complement of the
angle CBD 1 degree 14 minutes) the side FC shall be 17,821 foot; which doubled
makes CFS 35,642 foot, and the angle at C (being the complement of the angle
at B) is 1 degr. 14 minutes.

Then in the Triangle BCR, the angle at C (being the Complement of the angle
BCF to a semicircle) is 178 degrees 46 minutes, and the angle at B (being the
difference of the angles DBR 22 min. and DBC, 1 degr. 14 minutes) shall be 52
min. and consequently the angle at R (the complement of the two former, to two
right angles) 22 min. Now because in all plain Triangles the sides and Sines of
the opposite angles are proportional; therefore as 63,995 (the sine of BRC 22
minutes, in such parts whereof the whole Sine contains 10,000,000) is to BC
17,825 foot; so is 151,256 the Sine of CBR 52 min. to CR 42,130 foot: which
added to CFS 35,642 foot, gives you the whole line RCFS. 77,772 foot.



Also in the same Triangle as 63*995 the Sine of BRC 22 min. is to BC 17,825
foot; so is 215,241 the Sine of BCR 178 degrees 46 minutes, to BR 59,95^ foot.

Moreover (by the 36 prop. 3 Eucl.) because the oblong of the Secant RS, and
the utter Segment thereof RC is equal to the square of the Tangent RE;
therefore multiplying SR 77,772 foot by RC 42,130 foot, the product will be
3,276,534,360, the square root or side whereof is the line RE 57,241 foot:
which added to BR 59,953 foot, makes the whole line BRE 117,194 foot.

Lastly, in the Triangle BOD, right-angled at B, because the Tangent BE is
perpendicular to OD by the 16 pr. 3. Eucl. therefore by the 8 pr. 6. Eucl. EBD
and EOB are like Triangles* and consequently* the angle EOB equal to the angle
EBD 22 minutes. Therefore BE and EO having the same proportion each to other
that 6,399,628 the Tangent of BOE 22 min. has to the whole Sine 100,000,0000,
the Tangent BRE being already found to be 117,194 foot, the Semidiameter of the
Earth OE shall be 18,312,621 foot.

And as the same Tangent 6,399,628 is to 20477 the excess of the secant of 22
min. above the whole Sine; so is BRE (117,194 foot) to VB (375 foot) the height
of the place of observation above the convexitie of the Seas superficies at the
same time.

Hereby it may be easily found, how much the visible or apparent Horizon is
lower then the true Horizon, at any other height of the eye above the water,
thus: As 375 is to 20477, so is any other height of the eye above the water to
a number, which added to the whole Sine, makes the Secant of the angle that
shows how much the apparent Horizon dippeth under the true Horizon at that
height.

As for example: if the height of your eye above the water be 20 foot, you
shall find by the former rule the fourth proportional number to be 1092, which
added to the whole Sine 1,000,000,000, makes 1,000,001,092; which is the
secant of 5 min. 5 sec. the angle of dipping answerable to that height.

After this manner was made this table here adjoined; in the first column
whereof is set down the height of the eye above the water, from one foot to 50.
The second column shows how much the visual line touching the sea, dippeth
under the true Horizon, at any height of the eye above the water, not exceeding
50 foot. The use of which table is this: When you observe the height of the Sun
or Stars at Sea with the Crosse-staffe, you shall also find out how many foot
high your eye is above the water with a plumb-line or otherwise: Height of the
eye Angle of dipping Foot min. se 1 1 8 2 1 36 3 1 58 4 2 16 5 2 33 6 2 47 7 3
0 8 3 13 9 3 24 10 3 35 12 3 56 14 4 15 16 4 33 18 4 40 20 5 5 22 5 20 24 5 3^
26 5 40 28 6 1 30 6 13 32 6 25 34 6 38 36 6 49 38 7 0 40 7 11 42 7 21 44 7 32
46 7 42 48 7 52 50 8 2
seek that height in the first column of this Table; and in the second colume
entitled Angle of dipping, you shall find the number of minutes and seconds
that are to be subtracted from the apparent height of the Sun or Stars above
the superficies of the Sea, observed with the Staff* that you may have the
apparent height above the true Horizon.

The third error has place in taking the height of the Sun or Moon with the
Staff Ring Quadrant, or Astrolabe, or any other Instrument, whether by Sea or
Land: but in taking the height of the fixed Stars* this error is not to be
regarded, being altogether in sensible, by reason of their exceeding great
distance from the Earth, which is so much that in comparison thereof the
semidiameter of the whole Earth has not any sensible proportion* and therefore
the fixed Stars cannot have any sensible Paralax. But the Sun by reason of his
lesser distance from the Earth, has a sensible Paralax, in so much that in
taking his height we may for this cause only be deceived sometimes about three
minutes* by counting it less then indeed it is, and that especially in Winter
Time, when the Sun draws near the Horizon: which although it be no great
error, yet it is not altogether to be neglected in the rules and grounds of
Art, which so much as is possible, ought to be without error. Suns height Suns
Paralax gr. M Sec 0 3 0 5 2 59 10 2 57 15 2 54 20 2 50 25 2 44 30 2 36 35 2 27
40 2 18 45 2 7 50 1 56 55 1 43 60 1 30 65 1 16 70 1 2 75 0 46 80 0 31 85 0 15


For this cause I have adjoined this Table following of the Suns Paralax: the
use whereof is this, in the first column entitled Suns height, look the Suns
apparent height, and in the same line in the Second column, you shall have the
Paralax of the Sun, which always is to be added to the apparent height, that
so you may have the true height of the Sun above the Horizon. As for example,
admit I find the apparent height of the Sun to be 25 degrees therefore I seek
that number in the first column, and in the Second column I find the Paralax
answerable thereto to be two minutes, 44 seconds, which added to 25 degrees,
make the true height of the Sun to be 25 degrees, two minutes, 44 seconds. The
Suns The Suns The fix St. Altitude. Refraction. Altitude. Refraction. Altitude.
Refraction. De. Mi. se De. Mi. se De. Mi. se 0 34 0 23 3 10 0 30 0 1 26 0 24 2
50 1 21 30 2 20 0 25 2 30 2 15 30 3 17 0 26 2 15 3 12 30 4 15 30 27 2 0 4 11 0
5 14 30 28 1 45 5 10 0 6 13 30 29 1 35 6 9 0 7 12 45 30 1 25 7 8 15 8 11 15 31
1 15 8 6 45 9 10 30 32 1 5 9 6 0 10 10 0 33 55 10 5 30 11 9 30 34 45 11 5 0 12
9 0 35 35 12 4 30 13 8 30 36 30 13 4 0 14 8 0 37 25 14 3 30 15 7 30 38 20 15 3
0 16 7 0 39 15 16 2 30 17 6 30 40 10 17 2 0 18 5 45 41 9 18 1 30 19 5 0 42 8 19
1 0 20 4 30 43 7 20 0 30 21 4 0 44 6 21 0 0 22 3 30 45 5


A fourth cause of error is the refraction of the Beams of the Sun or Stars,
which we observe, by reason of the Vaporous thickness of the air that is
betwixt us and them, especially when they are near the Horizon. For the finding
whereof; not having hitherto had sufficient means by mine own observation for
my full satisfaction herein: I have therefore thought good to adjoyne these
Tables of the Suns and fixed Stars refractions out of Tycho Brahe, which differ
little from such observations as I have made for trial hereof: the use whereof
is this* In the first column seek the Altitude or height of the Sun or fixed
Star, and in the second you shall have the refraction answering thereto, which
being subtracted out of the observed height, you shall have the height of the
Sun or Star remaining, without refraction.

CHAP. XVI. Faults amended in the Table of the Suns Declination: commonly
called the Regiment of the Sun.
NOtwithstanding the Sun and Stars are at Sea the most certain marks and
guides the Navigator has, whereby he may direct himself to rectify his course,
and know where he is after many turnings, and traversings this way and that
way, especially in long Voiages, wherein he may be forced many times by
contrary Winds and Calms, to sing with the Poet for many Weeks and Months
together.

Coelum undique and undique Pontus: and
Nihil est nisi Pontus and ether:
Yet the Tables of Declinations of the Sun and fixed Stars hitherto published,
which I have compared together and examined by observation, are often times very
faulty: the declination of the Sun in them set down, being many times less
then truth, by 10, 11, or 12 minutes, especially in the months of February and
March: and some of the principal fixed Stars that are of most use in
Navigation, differing in declination from that is set down in the Tables more
then one whole degree, as I have found by many observations.

For the easier mending of these faults in the Tables of the Suns declination,
I thought it meet, first, to set down the Table following* which shows the
declination of every minute of the Ecliptik in degrees, minutes, and seconds,
whereby the place of the Sun is presently known, his declination being first
given by observation, and consequently, his Eccentricity and Apogeum were
easily found, and the Theorick of the Sun corrected: out of which the
Ephemerides hereafter following, were calculated, showing the true place of the
Sun for every day of five years, agreeable, (without notable error) to the
truth of the Heavens: and out of these with help of this Table of declination,
a new Regiment (or Table of the Suns declination, for every day of five years)
was most easily made: free from such errors wherewith the Tables hitherto
published and commonly used, have been too much pestered: as by comparison of
this, and those Tables with the observations hereafter following may evidently
appear.

CHAP. XVII Of the Table of declination of every minute of the Ecliptic in
degrees, minutes and seconds: Made according to the greatest obliquitie of the
Zodiak this present age: which by exact observation, is found to bo 23 degrees
31 minutes and an halfe^
BEcause the table of declination here following, does differ something from
the Table heretofore published by others, whereof some make the greatest
declination of the Sun to be 23 degr. and 28 minutes only, as Copernicus and
his followers (according to which the Tables of declination and regiments of
the Sun, that have been used for the most part by our English Mariners are
made): whereas others of late, as that noble Astronomer Thyco Brahe in his
second book De recentioribus aetherei mundi phoenomenis, finds the same to be
by his observations 23 degr. 27 mi. page 38. 23 degr. 31 mi. page 386. 23 degr.
31 mi. 30 sec. page 217. (according to which there is a Table of Declination
already published by Maginus) and that excellent Geometrician Regiomontanus
(whom Petrus Nonius compared by Ramus to Archimedes and Clavius, chose rather
to follow) makes it to be but 23 degr. 30 min. I thought it therefore needful
to show what reasons moved me to make choice of the greatest of all the
Declinations before recited, being thereunto induced, not only by the
authority of that famous Astronomer of our time Tycho Brahe: but resting also
upon many and diligent observations of mine own, (taken by a quadrant of more
then six foot semidiameter, so exactly made and divided into minutes and half
minutes, as I could, and as heedfully used and truly rectified by Plumbline
(every time I observed as my sight could discern:) All which observations do
prove with one consent, that the greatest declination of the Sun in this our
age. is 23 degrees, 31 minutes and an half; as thus it may appear.

In the year 1594 the 11 and 12 days of June, the apparent Meridian altitude
of the Sun was observed to be 61 degr. 58 min. whereto the observations of the
8, 9, 10, 13, 14 and 15 days of the same month do well agree, wherein the
apparent Meridian altitudes of the Sun, were 61 degr. 55 mi. 61 degr. 56 mi. 61
degr. 57 mi. 61 degr. 57 mi. 61 degr. 57 mi. 61 degr. 56 mi. almost, as also
the observations of the 9, 11, 12 and 13 days of June, in the year 1597 in
which days the apparent Meridian altitudes of the Sun, were 61 degr. 57 mi. 61
degr. 58 mi. almost, 61 degr. 58 mi. 61 degr. 57. mi. By all which observations
it may be certainly concluded. that the greatest apparent height of the Sun
here at London, is 61 degr. and 58 minutes.

Moreover by many, and heedfull observations of the Pole Star, taken about the
year 1593 and 1594 I found the greatest height thereof at that time here in
London, to be 54 degrees, 24 minutes and an half, and the least height 48 degr.
39 minutes the difference of which heights is 5 degrees 45 minutes: the half
whereof is 2 degrees 52 min. that is, (the distance of the Pole Star from the
Pole) at that time added to the lowest height of the Pole Star, shows the
height of the Pole at London, to be 51 degrees, 32 minutes: the complement
whereof (38 degrees, 28 minutes) is the height of the Equinoctial, which
subtracted out of the greatest apparent height of the Sun, 61 degrees 58
minutes: there remains the greatest apparent declination of the Sun, 23
degrees 30 minutes: whereto if we ad 1 minute 22, seconds, that is the
parallax of the Sun answerable to that height, we shall have the greatest true
height of the Sun, 61 degrees, 59 minutes, 22 seconds: and consequently the
greatest true declination of the Sun for our time, 23 degrees, 31 minutes, 22
seconds, differing but half a quarter of one minute from the greatest
declination finally determined and resoluedly set down by Tycho Brahe for this
our age 23 degrees, 31 minutes and one half.

Aries. Libra.
Degr. 0 di Degr. 1 di Degr. 2 di 3 di 4 di 5 di m gr. mi. se^ se gr. m. sec
se. gr. mi sec se gr. mi. se se. gr. mi. se. se. gr. mi se se. m. 0 0 0 0 24 0
23 57 24 0 47 53 24 1 11 49 24 1 35 44 24 1 59 37 24 59 1 0 0 24 24 0 24 21 24
0 48 17 24 1 12 13 24 1 36 8 24 2 0 1 24 58 2 0 0 48 24 0 24 45 24 0 48 41 24 1
12 37 24 1 36 32 24 2 0 25 24 57 3 0 1 12 24 0 25 9 24 0 49 5 24 1 13 1 24 1 36
56 23 2 0 49 24 56 4 0 1 36 24 0 25 33 24 0 49 29 24 1 13 25 24 1 37 19 24 2 1
13 23 55 5 0 2 0 24 0 25 57 24 0 49 53 24 1 13 29 24 1 37 43 24 2 1 36 24 54 6
0 2 24 24 0 26 21 23 0 50 17 24 1 14 13 24 1 38 7 24 2 2 0 24 53 7 0 2 48 24 0
26 44 24 0 50 41 24 1 14 37 24 1 38 31 24 2 2 24 2^ 52 8 0 3 12 24 0 27 8 24 0
51 5 24 1 15 1 23 1 38 55 24 2 2 48 24 51 9 0 3 36 24 0 27 32 24 0 51 29 24 1
15 24 ^4 1 39 19 24 2 3 12 24 50 10 0 4 0 23 0 27 56 24 0 51 53 24 1 15 48 24 1
39 43 24 2 3 36 24 49 11 0 4 23 24 0 28 20 24 0 52 17 24 1 16 12 24 1 40 7 24 2
4 0 24 48 12 0 4 47 24 0 28 44 24 0 52 41 24 1 16 36 24 1 40 31 23 2 4 23 24 47
13 0 5 11 24 0 29 8 24 0 53 5 23 1 17 0 24 1 40 54 24 2 4 47 24 46 14 0 5 35 24
0 29 32 24 0 53 28 24 1 17 24 24 1 41 18 24 2 5 11 24 45 15 0 5 59 24 0 29 56
24 0 53 52 24 1 17 48 24 1 41 42 24 2 5 35 24 44 16 0 6 23 24 0 30 20 24 0 54
16 24 1 18 12 24 1 42 6 24 2 5 59 24 43 17 0 6 47 24 0 30 44 24 0 54 40 24 1 18
36 24 1 42 30 24 2 6 23 24 42 18 0 7 11 24 0 31 8 24 0 55 4 24 1 19 0 24 1 42
54 24 2 6 47 24 41 19 0 7 35 24 0 31 32 24 0 55 28 24 1 19 24 24 1 43 18 24 2 7
11 23 40 20 0 7 59 24 0 31 56 24 0 55 52 24 1 19 48 23 1 43 42 24 2 7 34 24 39
21 0 8 23 24 0 32 20 24 0 56 16 24 1 20 11 24 1 44 6 24 2 7 58 24 38 22 0 8 47
24 0 32 44 24 0 56 40 24 1 20 35 24 1 44 30 23 2 8 22 24 37 23 0 9 11 24 0 33 8
24 0 57 4 24 1 20 59 24 1 44 53 24 2 8 46 24 36 24 0 9 35 24 0 33 32 23 0 57 28
24 1 21 23 24 1 45 17 24 2 9 10 24 35 25 0 9 59 24 0 33 55 24 0 57 52 24 1 21
47 24 1 45 41 24 2 9 34 24 34 26 0 10 23 24 0 34 19 24 0 58 16 24 1 22 11 24 1
46 5 24 2 9 58 23 33 27 0 10 47 24 0 34 43 24 0 58 40 24 1 22 35 24 1 46 29 24
2 10 21 24 32 28 0 11 11 24 0 35 7 24 0 59 4 23 1 22 59 24 1 46 53 24 2 10 45
24 31 29 0 11 35 23 0 35 31 24 0 59 27 24 1 23 23 24 1 47 17 24 2 11 9 24 30 30
0 11 58 24 0 35 55 24 0 59 51 24 1 23 47 24 1 47 41 24 2 11 33 24 29 31 0 12 22
24 0 36 19 24 1 0 15 24 1 24 11 23 1 48 5 23 2 11 57 24 28 32 0 12 46 24 0 36
43 24 1 0 39 24 1 24 34 24 1 48 28 24 2 12 21 24 27 33 0 13 10 24 0 37 7 24 1 1
3 24 1 24 58 24 1 48 52 24 2 12 45 23 26 34 0 13 34 24 0 37 31 24 1 1 27 24 1
25 22 24 1 49 16 24 2 13 8 24 25 35 0 13 58 24 0 37 55 24 1 1 51 24 1 25 46 24
1 49 40 24 2 13 32 24 24 36 0 14 22 24 0 38 19 24 1 2 15 24 1 26 10 24 1 50 4
24 2 13 56 24 23 37 0 14 46 24 0 38 43 24 1 2 39 24 1 26 34 24 1 50 28 24 2 14
20 24 22 38 0 15 10 24 0 39 7 24 1 3 3 24 1 26 58 24 1 50 52 24 2 14 44 24 21
39 0 15 34 24 0 39 37 24 1 3 27 24 1 27 22 24 1 51 16 23 2 15 8 23 20 40 0 15
58 24 0 39 55 24 1 3 51 24 1 27 46 24 1 51 39 24 2 15 31 24 19 41 0 16 22 24 0
40 19 24 1 4 15 24 1 28 10 24 1 52 3 24 2 15 55 24 18 42 0 16 46 24 0 40 42 24
1 4 39 23 1 28 34 23 1 52 27 24 2 16 19 24 17 43 0 17 10 24 0 41 6 24 1 5 2 24
1 28 57 24 1 52 51 24 2 16 43 24 16 44 0 17 34 24 0 41 30 24 1 5 26 24 1 29 21
24 1 53 15 24 2 17 7 24 15 45 0 17 58 24 0 41 54 24 1 5 50 24 1 29 45 24 1 53
39 24 2 17 31 24 14 46 0 18 22 24 0 42 18 24 1 6 14 24 1 30 9 24 1 54 3 24 2 17
55 23 13 47 0 18 46 24 0 42 42 24 1 6 38 24 1 30 33 24 1 54 27 24 2 18 18 24 12
48 0 19 10 23 0 43 6 24 1 7 2 24 1 30 57 24 1 54 51 23 2 18 42 24 11 49 0 19 33
24 0 43 30 24 1 7 26 24 1 31 21 24 1 55 14 24 2 19 6 24 10 50 0 19 57 24 0 43
54 24 1 7 50 24 1 31 45 24 1 55 38 24 2 19 30 24 9 51 0 20 21 24 0 44 18 24 1 8
14 24 1 32 9 24 1 56 2 24 2 19 54 24 8 52 0 20 45 24 0 44 42 24 1 8 38 24 1 32
33 24 1 56 26 24 2 20 18 23 7 53 0 21 9 24 0 45 6 24 1 9 2 24 1 32 57 23 1 56
50 24 2 20 41 24 6 54 0 21 33 24 0 45 30 24 1 9 26 24 1 33 20 24 1 57 14 24 2
21 5 24 5 55 0 21 57 24 0 45 54 24 1 9 50 23 1 33 44 24 1 57 38 24 2 21 29 24 4
56 0 22 21 24 0 46 18 24 1 10 13 24 1 34 8 24 1 58 2 23 2 21 53 24 3 57 0 22 45
24 0 46 42 24 1 10 37 24 1 34 32 24 1 58 25 24 2 22 17 24 2 58 0 23 9 24 0 47 6
23 1 11 1 24 1 34 56 24 1 58 49 24 2 22 41 24 1 59 0 23 33 24 0 47 29 24 1 11
25 24 1 35 20 24 1 59 13 24 2 23 5 23 0 29 28 27 26 25 24 6 di 7 di 8 di 9 di
10 di 11 di m gr* mi. se s. gr. mi s se. gr. mi se s. gr. mi. se. se gr. mi. se
se. gr. mi sec se. m 0 2 23 28 24 2 47 18 23 3 11 4 24 3 34 48 23 3 58 28 24 4
22 5 23 59 1 2 23 52 24 2 47 41 24 3 11 28 24 3 35 11 24 3 58 52 23 4 22 28 24
58 2 2 24 16 24 2 48 5 24 3 11 52 23 3 35 35 24 3 59 15 24 4 22 52 23 57 3 2 24
40 24 2 48 29 24 3 12 15 24 3 35 59 23 3 59 39 24 4 23 15 24 56 4 2 25 4 24 2
48 53 24 3 12 39 24 3 36 22 24 4 0 3 23 4 23 39 23 55 5 2 25 28 23 2 49 17 23 3
13 3 24 3 36 46 24 4 0 26 24 4 24 2 24 54 6 2 25 51 24 2 49 40 24 3 13 27 23 3
37 10 24 4 0 50 23 4 24 26 24 53 7 2 26 15 24 2 50 4 24 3 13 50 24 3 37 34 23 4
1 13 24 4 24 50 23 52 8 2 26 39 24 2 50 28 24 3 14 14 24 3 37 57 24 4 1 37 24 4
25 13 24 51 9 2 27 3 24 2 50 52 23 3 14 38 24 3 38 21 24 4 2 1 23 4 25 37 23 50
10 2 27 27 24 2 51 15 24 3 15 2 23 3 38 45 23 4 2 24 24 4 26 0 24 49 11 2 27 51
23 2 51 39 24 3 15 25 24 3 39 8 24 4 2 48 24 4 26 24 23 48 12 2 28 14 2^ 2 52 3
24 3 15 49 24 3 39 32 24 4 3 12 23 4 26 47 24 47 13 2 28 38 24 2 52 27 24 3 16
13 24 3 39 56 23 4 3 35 24 4 27 11 24 46 14 2 29 2 24 2 52 51 25 3 16 37 23 3
40 19 24 4 3 59 24 4 27 35 23 45 15 2 29 26 24 2 53 14 24 3 17 0 24 3 40 43 24
4 4 23 23 4 27 58 24 44 16 2 29 50 24 2 53 38 24 3 17 24 24 3 41 7 23 4 4 46 24
4 28 22 23 43 17 2 30 14 23 2 54 2 24 3 17 48 24 3 41 30 24 4 5 10 23 4 28 45
24 42 18 2 30 37 24 2 54 26 24 3 18 12 23 3 41 54 24 4 5 33 24 4 29 9 23 41 19
2 31 1 24 2 54 50 23 3 18 35 24 3 42 18 24 4 5 57 24 4 29 32 24 40 20 2 31 25
24 2 55 13 24 3 18 59 24 3 42 42 23 4 6 21 23 4 29 56 23 39 21 2 31 4^ 24 2 55
37 24 3 19 23 23 3 43 5 24 4 6 44 24 4 30 19 24 38 22 2 32 13 23 2 56 1 24 3 19
46 24 3 43 29 24 4 7 8 23 4 30 43 24 37 23 2 32 36 24 2 56 25 2^ 3 20 10 24 3
43 53 23 4 7 31 24 4 31 7 23 36 24 2 33 0 24 2 56 48 24 3 20 34 24 3 44 16 24 4
7 55 24 4 31 30 24 35 25 2 33 24 24 2 57 12 24 3 20 58 23 3 44 40 24 4 8 19 23
4 31 54 23 34 26 2 33 48 24 2 57 36 24 3 21 21 24 3 45 4 23 4 8 42 24 4 32 17
24 33 27 2 34 12 24 2 58 0 24 3 21 45 24 3 45 17 24 4 9 6 24 4 32 41 23 32 28 2
34 36 23 2 58 24 2^ 3 22 9 24 3 45 51 24 4 9 30 23 4 33 4 24 31 29 2 34 59 24 2
58 47 24 3 22 33 23 3 46 15 23 4 9 53 24 4 33 28 23 30 30 2 35 23 24 2 59 11 24
3 22 56 24 3 46 38 24 4 10 17 23 4 33 51 24 29 31 2 35 47 24 2 59 35 24 3 23 20
24 3 47 2 24 4 10 40 24 4 34 15 24 28 32 2 36 11 24 2 59 59 23 3 23 44 23 3 47
26 23 4 11 4 24 4 34 39 23 27 33 2 36 35 24 3 0 22 24 3 24 7 24 3 47 49 24 4 11
28 23 4 35 2 24 26 34 2 36 59 23 3 0 46 24 3 24 31 24 3 48 13 24 4 11 51 24 4
35 26 23 25 35 2 37 22 24 3 1 10 24 3 24 55 24 3 48 37 23 4 12 15 23 4 35 49 24
24 36 2 37 46 24 3 1 34 24 3 25 19 23 3 49 0 24 4 12 38 24 4 36 13 23 23 37 2
38 10 24 3 1 58 23 3 25 42 24 3 49 24 24 4 13 2 24 4 36 30 24 22 38 2 38 34 24
3 2 21 24 3 26 6 24 3 49 48 23 4 13 26 23 4 37 0 23 21 39 2 38 58 23 3 2 45 24
3 26 30 24 3 50 11 24 4 13 49 24 4 37 23 24 20 40 2 39 21 24 3 3 9 24 3 26 54
23 3 59 35 24 4 14 13 23 4 37 47 23 19 41 2 39 45 24 3 3 33 23 3 27 17 24 3 50
59 23 4 14 36 24 4 38 10 24 18 42 2 40 9 24 3 3 56 24 3 27 41 24 3 51 22 24 4
15 0 24 4 38 34 23 17 43 2 ^0 33 24 3 4 20 24 3 28 5 23 3 51 46 24 4 15 24 23 4
38 57 24 16 44 2 ^^ 57 23 3 4 44 24 3 28 28 24 3 52 10 23 4 16 47 24 4 39 21 23
15 45 2 4^ 20 24 3 5 8 23 3 28 52 24 3 52 33 24 4 16 11 23 4 39 44 24 14 46 2
41 44 24 3 5 31 24 3 29 16 24 3 52 57 24 4 16 34 24 4 40 8 23 13 47 2 42 8 24 3
5 55 24 3 29 40 23 3 53 21 23 4 16 58 24 4 40 31 24 12 48 2 42 32 24 3 6 19 24
3 30 3 24 3 53 44 24 4 17 22 23 4 40 55 24 11 49 2 42 56 24 3 6 43 24 3 30 27
24 3 54 8 24 4 17 45 24 4 41 19 23 10 50 2 43 20 23 3 7 7 23 3 30 51 23 3 54 32
23 4 18 9 23 4 41 42 24 9 51 2 43 43 24 3 7 30 24 3 31 14 24 3 54 55 24 4 18 32
24 4 42 6 23 8 52 2 44 7 24 3 7 54 24 3 31 38 24 3 55 19 23 4 18 56 24 4 42 29
24 7 53 2 44 31 24 3 8 18 24 3 32 2 23 3 55 42 24 4 19 20 23 4 42 53 23 6 54 2
44 55 24 3 8 42 23 3 32 25 24 3 56 6 24 4 19 43 24 4 43 16 24 5 55 2 45 19 23 3
9 5 24 3 32 49 24 3 56 30 23 4 20 7 23 4 43 40 23 4 56 2 45 42 24 3 9 29 24 3
33 13 24 3 56 53 24 4 20 30 24 4 44 3 24 3 57 2 46 6 24 3 9 53 24 3 33 37 23 3
57 17 24 4 20 54 23 4 44 27 23 2 58 2 46 30 24 3 10 17 23 3 34 0 24 3 57 41 23
4 21 17 24 4 44 50 24 1 59 2 46 54 24 3 10 40 24 3 34 24 24 3 58 4 24 4 21 41
24 4 45 14 23 0 23 22 21 20 19 18 12 di 13 di 14 di 15 di 16 di 17 di m gr. mi.
se* se gr. mi. se se gr. mi. se se gr. mi^ s. s. gr. mi. s. s. gr. mi. s. s. m
0 4 45 37 23 5 9 5 24 5 32 29 23 5 55 47 23 6 18 59 24 6 42 6 23 59 1 4 46 0 24
5 9 29 23 5 32 52 23 5 56 10 23 6 19 23 23 6 42 29 23 58 2 4 46 24 24 5 9 52 24
5 33. 15 24 5 56 33 23 6 19 46 23 6 42 52 23 57 3 4 46 48 23 5 10 16 23 5 33 39
23 5 56 56 24 6 20 9 23 6 43 15 23 56 4 4 47 11 24 5 10 39 23 5 34 2 23 5 57 20
23 6 20 32 23 6 43 38 23 55 5 4 47 35 23 5 11 2 24 5 34 25 24 5 57 43 23 6 20
55 23 6 44 1 23 54 6 4 47 58 24 5 11 26 23 5 34 49 23 5 58 ^ 24 6 21 18 23 6 44
24 23 53 7 4 48 22 23 5 11 49 24 5 35 12 23 5 58 30 23 6 21 41 24 6 44 47 23 52
8 4 48 45 24 5 12 13 23 5 35 35 24 5 58 53 23 6 22 5 23 6 45 10 24 51 9 4 49 9
23 5 12 36 24 5 35 59 23 5 59 16 23 6 22 28 23 6 45 34 23 50 10 4 49 32 24 5 13
0 23 5 36 22 23 5 59 39 24 6 22 51 23 6 45 57 23 49 11 4 49 56 23 5 13 23 23 5
36 45 24 6 0 3 23 6 23 14 23 6 46 20 23 48 12 4 50 19 24 5 13 40 24 5 37 9 23 6
0 26 23 6 23 37 23 6 46 43 23 47 13 4 50 43 23 5 14 10 23 5 37 32 23 6 0 49 23
6 24 0 23 6 47 0 23 46 14 4 51 6 24 5 14 33 23 5 37 55 24 6 1 12 23 6 24 23 24
6 47 29 23 45 15 4 51 30 23 5 14 56 24 5 38 19 23 6 1 35 24 6 24 47 23 6 47 52
23 44 16 4 51 53 24 5 15 20 23 5 38 42 23 6 1 59 23 6 25 10 23 6 48 15 23 43 17
4 52 17 23 5 15 43 24 5 39 5 24 6 2 22 23 6 25 33 23 6 48 38 23 42 18 4 52 40
24 5 16 7 23 5 39 29 23 6 2 45 23 6 25 5^ 23 6 49 1 23 41 19 4 53 4 23 5 16 30
23 5 39 52 23 6 3 8 24 6 26 19 23 6 49 24 23 40 20 4 53 27 24 5 16 53 24 5 40
15 24 6 3 32 23 6 26 42 23 6 49 47 23 39 21 4 53 51 23 5 17 17 23 5 40 39 23 6
3 55 23 6 27 5 24 6 50 10 23 38 22 4 54 14 24 5 17 40 24 5 41 2 23 6 4 18 23 6
27 29 23 6 50 33 23 37 23 4 54 38 23 5 18 4 23 5 41 25 24 6 4 41 23 6 27 52 23
6 50 56 23 36 24 4 55 1 23 5 18 27 2^ 5 41 49 23 6 5 5 23 6 28 15 23 6 51 19 23
35 25 4 55 24 24 5 18 50 24 5 42 12 23 6 5 28 23 6 28 38 23 6 51 42 23 34 26 4
55 48 23 5 19 14 23 5 42 35 23 6 5 51 23 6 29 1 23 6 52 5 23 33 27 4 56 11 24 5
19 37 24 5 42 58 24 6 6 14 23 6 29 24 23 6 52 2^ 23 32 28 4 56 35 23 5 20 1 23
5 43 22 23 6 6 37 24 6 29 47 23 6 52 51 23 31 29 4 56 58 24 5 20 24 24 5 43 45
23 6 7 1 23 6 30 10 23 6 53 14 23 30 30 4 57 22 23 5 20 48 23 5 44 8 24 6 7 24
23 6 30 33 24 6 53 37 23 29 31 4 57 45 24 5 21 11 23 5 44 32 23 6 7 47 23 6 30
57 23 6 54 0 23 28 32 4 58 9 23 5 21 34 24 5 44 55 23 6 8 10 23 6 31 20 23 6 54
23 23 27 33 4 58 32 24 5 21 58 23 5 45 18 24 6 8 33 24 6 31 43 23 6 54 46 23 2^
34 4 58 56 23 5 22 21 24 5 45 42 23 6 8 57 23 6 32 ^ 23 6 55 9 23 25 35 4 59 19
24 5 22 45 23 5 46 5 23 6 9 20 23 6 32 29 23 6 55 32 23 24 36 4 59 43 23 5 23 8
23 5 46 28 23 6 9 43 23 6 32 52 23 6 55 55 23 23 37 5 0 6 24 5 23 31 24 5 46 51
24 6 10 6 23 6 33 15 23 6 56 18 23 22 38 5 0 30 23 5 23 55 23 5 47 15 23 6 10
29 24 6 33 38 23 6 56 41 23 21 39 5 0 53 23 5 24 18 23 5 47 38 23 6 10 53 23 6
34 1 24 6 57 4 23 20 40 5 1 16 24 5 24 41 24 5 48 1 24 6 11 16 23 6 34 25 23 6
57 27 23 19 41 5 1 40 23 5 25 5 23 5 48 25 23 6 11 39 23 6 34 48 23 6 57 50 23
18 42 5 2 3 24 5 25 28 23 5 48 48 23 6 12 2 23 6 35 11 23 6 58 13 23 17 43 5 2
27 23 5 25 51 24 5 49 11 23 6 12 25 24 6 35 34 23 6 58 36 23 16 44 5 2 50 24 5
26 15 23 5 49 34 24 6 12 49 23 6 35 57 23 6 58 59 23 15 45 5 3 14 23 5 26 38 24
5 49 58 23 6 13 15 23 6 36 20 23 6 59 22 23 14 46 5 3 37 24 5 27 2 23 5 50 21
23 6 13 35 23 6 36 43 23 6 59 45 23 13 47 5 4 1 23 5 27 25 23 5 50 44 24 6 13
58 23 6 37 6 23 7 0 8 23 12 48 5 4 24 23 5 27 48 24 5 51 8 23 6 14 21 24 6 37
29 23 7 0 31 23 11 49 5 4 47 24 5 28 12 23 5 51 31 23 6 14 45 23 6 37 52 23 7 0
54 23 10 50 5 5 11 23 5 28 35 23 5 51 54 23 6 15 8 23 6 38 15 23 7 1 17 23 9 51
5 5 34 24 5 28 58 24 5 52 17 24 6 15 31. 23 6 38 38 24 7 1 40 23 8 52 5 5 58 23
5 29 22 23 5 52 41 23 6 15 54 23 6 39 2 23 7 2 3 23 7 53 5 6 21 24 5 29 45 24 5
53 4 23 6 16 17 23 6 39 25 23 7 2 20 23 6 54 5 6 45 23 5 30 9 23 5 53 27 23 6
16 40 24 6 39 40 23 7 2 49 23 5 55 5 7 8 24 5 30 32 23 5 53 50 24 6 17 4 23 6
40 11 23 7 3 12 23 4 56 5 7 32 23 5 30 55 24 5 54 14 23 6 17 27 23 6 40 3 23 7
3 35 23 3 ^7 5 7 55 23 5 31 19 23 5 54 37 23 6 17 50 23 6 40 57 23 7 3 ^8 23 2
58 5 8 18 2^ 5 31 42 23 5 55 0 24 6 1^ 13 23 6 41 20 23 7 4 21 23 1 59 5 8 42
2^ 5 32 5 2^ 5 55 24 23 6 18 30 23 6 41 43 23 7 4 44 22 0 17 16 15 14 13 12 18
di 19 di 20 di 21 di 22 di 23 di m. gr. mi. se se gr. mi. s se gr. mi. s. s.
gr. mi. s. s. gr. mi^ se se. gr. mi. se se m 0 7 5 6 23 7 28 0 23 7 50 47 23 8
13 26 23 8 35 58 22 8 58 21 22 59 1 7 5 29 23 7 28 23 23 7 51 10 22 8 13 49 22
8 36 20 23 8 58 43 23 58 2 7 5 52 23 7 28 46 23 7 51 32 23 8 14 11 23 8 36 43
22 8 59 6 22 57 3 7 6 15 23 7 29 9 23 7 51 55 23 8 14 34 22 8 37 5 22 8 59 28
22 56 4 7 6 38 23 7 29 32 22 7 52 1^ 22 8 14 56 23 8 37 27 23 8 59 50 22 55 5 7
7 1 23 7 29 54 23 7 52 40 23 8 15 19 23 8 37 50 22 9 0 12 23 54 6 7 7 24 23 7
30 17 23 7 53 3 23 8 15 42 22 8 38 12 23 9 0 35 22 53 7 7 8 47 23 7 30 40 23 7
53 26 23 8 16 4 23 8 38 35 22 9 0 57 22 52 8 7 8 10 23 7 31 3 23 7 53 49 22 8
16 27 22 8 38 57 23 9 1 16 23 51 9 7 8 33 23 7 31 26 22 7 54 11 23 8 16 49 23 8
39 20 22 9 1 42 22 5^ 10 7 8 56 23 7 31 48 23 7 54 34 23 8 17 12 23 8 39 42 23
9 2 4 22 49 11 7 9 19 23 7 32 11 23 7 54 57 22 8 17 35 22 8 40 5 22 9 2 26 23
48 12 7 9 42 23 7 32 34 23 7 55 19 23 8 17 57 23 8 40 27 22 9 2 49 22 47 13 7
10 5 23 7 32 57 23 7 55 42 23 8 18 20 22 8 40 49 23 9 3 11 22 46 14 7 10 28 22
7 33 20 23 7 56 5 22 8 18 42 23 8 41 12 22 9 3 33 22 45 15 7 10 51 23 7 33 43
22 7 56 27 23 8 19 5 22 8 41 34 23 9 3 55 23 44 16 7 11 13 23 7 34 5 23 7 56 50
23 8 19 27 23 8 41 57 22 9 4 18 22 43 17 7 11 36 23 7 34 28 23 7 57 13 22 8 19
50 22 8 42 19 22 9 4 40 22 4^ 18 7 11 59 23 7 34 51 23 7 57 35 23 8 20 12 23 8
42 41 23 9 5 2 23 41 19 7 12 22 23 7 35 14 23 7 57 58 23 8 20 35 23 8 43 4 22 9
5 25 22 40 20 7 12 45 23 7 35 37 22 7 58 21 22 8 20 58 22 8 43 26 23 9 5 47 22
39 21 7 13 8 23 7 35 59 23 7 58 43 23 8 21 20 23 8 43 49 22 9 6 9 22 38 22 7 13
31 23 7 36 22 23 7 59 6 23 8 21 43 22 8 44 11 23 9 6 31 23 37 23 7 13 54 23 7
36 4^ 23 7 59 29 22 8 22 5 23 8 44 34 22 9 6 54 22 36 24 7 14 17 23 7 37 8 23 7
59 51 23 8 22 28 22 8 44 56 22 9 7 16 22 35 25 7 14 40 23 7 37 31 22 8 0 14 23
8 22 50 23 8 45 18 23 9 7 38 22 34 26 7 15 3 22 7 37 5^ 23 8 0 37 22 8 23 13 22
8 45 41 22 9 8 0 23 33 27 7 15 25 23 7 38 1^ 23 8 0 59 23 8 23 35 23 8 46 3 23
9 8 23 22 32 28 7 15 48 23 7 38 39 23 8 1 22 23 8 23 58 22 8 46 26 22 9 8 45 22
31 29 7 16 11 23 7 39 2 22 8 2 45 23 8 24 20 23 8 46 48 22 9 9 7 22 30 30 7 16
34 23 7 39 2^ 23 8 2 8 23 8 24 43 22 8 47 10 23 9 9 29 23 29 31 7 16 57 23 7 39
47 23 8 2 31 23 8 25 5 23 8 47 33 22 9 9 52 22 28 32 7 17 20 23 7 40 10 23 8 2
54 22 8 25 28 22 8 47 55 22 9 10 14 22 27 33 7 17 43 23 7 40 33 23 8 3 16 23 8
25 50 23 8 48 17 23 9 10 36 22 26 34 7 18 6 23 7 40 56 22 8 3 39 23 8 26 13 22
8 48 40 22 9 10 58 23 25 35 7 18 29 23 7 41 1^ 23 8 4 2 22 8 26 35 23 8 49 2 23
9 11 12 22 24 36 7 18 52 22 7 41 41 23 8 4 24 23 8 26 58 23 8 49 25 22 9 11 43
22 23 37 7 19 14 23 7 42 4 23 8 4 47 22 8 27 21 22 8 49 47 22 9 12 5 22 22 38 7
19 37 23 7 42 27 22 8 5 9 22 8 27 43 23 8 50 9 23 9 12 27 23 21 39 7 20 0 23 7
42 49 23 8 5 31 23 8 28 6 22 8 50 32 22 9 12 50 22 20 40 7 20 23 23 7 43 12 23
8 5 54 23 8 28 28 23 8 50 54 22 9 13 12 22 19 41 7 20 46 23 7 43 35 23 8 6 17
22 8 28 51 22 8 51 16 23 9 13 34 22 18 42 7 21 9 23 7 43 58 22 8 6 39 23 8 28
13 23 8 51 39 22 9 13 56 22 17 43 7 21 32 23 7 44 20 23 8 7 2 22 8 29 36 22 8
52 1 23 9 14 18 23 16 44 7 21 55 22 7 44 43 23 8 7 24 23 8 29 58 23 8 52 24 22
9 14 41 22 15 45 7 22 17 23 7 45 6 23 8 7 47 23 8 30 21 22 8 52 46 22 9 15 3 22
14 46 7 22 40 23 7 45 29 22 8 8 10 22 8 30 43 22 8 53 8 23 9 15 25 22 13 47 7
23 3 23 7 45 51 23 8 8 32 23 8 31 5 23 8 53 31 22 9 15 47 22 12 48 7 23 26 23 7
46 14 23 8 8 55 23 8 31 28 22 8 53 53 22 9 16 9 23 11 49 7 23 49 23 7 46 37 23
8 9 18 22 8 31 50 23 8 54 15 23 9 16 32 22 10 50 7 24 12 23 7 47 0 22 8 9 40 23
8 32 13 22 8 54 38 22 9 16 54 22 9 51 7 24 35 22 7 47 22 23 8 10 3 22 8 32 35
23 8 55 0 22 9 17 16 22 8 52 7 24 57 23 7 47 45 23 8 10 25 23 8 32 58 22 8 55
22 23 9 17 38 22 7 53 7 25 20 23 7 48 8 23 8 10 48 23 8 33 20 23 8 55 45 22 9
18 0 23 6 54 7 25 43 23 7 48 31 22 8 11 11 22 8 33 43 22 8 56 7 22 9 18 23 22 5
55 7 26 6 23 7 48 53 23 8 11 33 23 8 34 5 23 8 56 29 22 9 18 45 22 4 56 7 26 29
23 7 49 16 23 8 11 56 22 8 34 28 22 8 56 51 23 9 19 7 22 3 57 7 26 52 23 7 49
39 22 8 12 18 23 8 34 50 23 8 57 14 22 9 19 29 22 2 58 7 27 15 22 7 50 1 23 8
12 41 23 8 35 13 22 8 57 36 23 9 19 51 23 1 59 7 27 37 23 7 50 24 23 8 13 4 22
8 35 35 23 8 57 59 22 9 20 14 22 0 11 10 9 8 7 6 24 di 25 di 26 di 27 di 28 di
29 di m. gr. mi. se. se. gr. mi. sec se. gr. mi. se. se. gr. mi. se. s. gr. mi.
se s. gr. mi. se. s. M 0 9 20 36 22 9 42 42 22 10 4 38 22 10 26 25 22 10 48 2
21 11 9 28 21 59 1 9 20 58 22 9 43 4 22 10 5 0 22 10 26 47 21 10 48 23 22 11 9
49 22 58 2 9 21 20 22 9 43 26 22 10 5 22 22 10 27 8 22 10 48 45 21 11 10 11 21
57 3 9 21 42 22 9 43 48 22 10 5 44 21 10 27 30 22 10 49 6 22 11 10 32 21 56 4 9
22 4 23 9 44 10 22 10 6 5 22 10 27 52 21 10 49 28 21 11 10 53 22 55 5 9 22 27
22 9 44 32 22 10 6 27 22 10 28 13 22 10 49 49 22 11 11 15 21 54 6 9 22 49 22 9
44 54 22 10 6 49 22 10 28 35 22 10 50 11 21 11 11 36 21 53 7 9 23 11 22 9 45 16
22 10 7 11 22 10 28 57 21 10 50 32 22 11 11 57 22 52 8 9 23 33 22 9 45 38 22 10
7 33 22 10 29 18 22 10 50 54 21 11 12 19 21 51 9 9 23 55 22 9 46 0 22 10 7 55
22 10 29 40 22 10 51 15 22 11 12 40 21 50 10 9 24 17 22 9 46 22 22 10 8 17 21
10 30 2 21 10 51 37 21 11 13 1 22 49 11 9 24 39 23 9 46 44 22 10 8 38 22 10 30
23 22 10 51 58 22 11 13 23 21 48 12 9 25 2 22 9 47 6 22 10 9 0 22 10 30 45 22
10 52 20 21 11 13 44 21 47 13 9 25 24 22 9 47 28 22 10 9 22 22 10 31 7 21 10 52
41 22 11 14 5 22 46 14 9 25 46 22 9 47 50 22 10 9 44 22 10 31 28 2 10 53 3 21
11 14 27 21 45 15 9 26 8 22 9 48 12 22 10 10 6 21 10 31 50 22 10 53 24 22 11 14
48 21 44 16 9 26 30 22 9 48 34 22 10 10 27 22 10 32 12 21 10 53 46 21 11 15 9
22 43 17 9 26 52 22 9 48 56 21 10 10 49 22 10 32 33 22 10 54 7 22 11 15 31 21
42 18 9 27 14 23 9 49 17 22 10 11 11 22 10 32 55 22 10 54 29 21 11 15 52 21 41
19 9 27 37 22 9 49 39 22 10 11 33 22 10 33 17 21 10 54 50 22 11 16 13 21 40 20
9 27 59 22 9 50 1 22 10 11 55 22 10 33 38 22 10 55 12 21 11 16 34 22 39 21 9 28
21 22 9 50 23 22 10 12 17 21 10 34 0 22 10 55 33 22 11 16 56 21 38 22 9 28 43
22 9 50 45 22 10 12 38 22 10 34 22 21 10 55 55 21 11 17 17 21 37 23 9 29 5 23 9
51 7 22 10 13 0 22 10 34 43 22 10 56 16 21 11 17 38 22 36 24 9 29 27 22 9 51 29
22 10 13 22 22 10 35 5 21 10 56 37 22 11 18 0 21 35 25 9 29 49 22 9 51 51 22 10
13 44 22 10 35 26 22 10 56 59 21 11 18 21 21 34 26 9 30 11 22 9 52 13 22 10 14
6 21 10 35 48 22 10 57 20 22 11 18 42 21 33 27 9 30 33 23 9 52 35 22 10 14 27
22 10 36 10 21 10 57 42 21 11 19 3 22 32 28 9 30 56 22 9 52 57 22 10 14 49 22
10 36 31 22 10 58 3 22 11 19 25 21 31 29 9 31 18 22 9 53 19 22 10 15 11 22 10
36 53 22 10 58 25 21 11 19 46 21 30 30 9 31 40 22 9 53 41 22 10 15 33 21 10 37
15 21 10 58 46 22 11 20 7 21 29 31 9 32 2 22 9 54 3 22 10 15 54 22 10 37 36 22
10 59 8 21 11 20 28 22 28 32 9 32 24 22 9 54 25 22 10 16 16 22 10 37 58 21 10
59 29 21 11 20 50 21 27 33 9 32 46 22 9 54 47 22 10 16 38 22 10 38 19 22 10 59
50 22 11 21 11 21 26 34 9 33 8 22 9 55 9 22 10 17 0 22 10 38 41 22 11 0 12 21
11 21 32 21 25 35 9 33 30 22 9 55 31 22 10 17 22 21 10 39 3 21 11 0 33 22 11 21
53 22 24 36 9 33 52 22 9 55 53 22 10 17 43 22 10 39 24 22 11 0 55 21 11 22 15
21 23 37 9 34 14 22 9 56 15 21 10 18 5 22 10 39 46 21 11 1 16 22 11 22 36 21 22
38 9 34 36 23 9 56 36 22 10 18 27 22 10 40 7 22 11 1 38 21 11 22 57 21 21 39 9
34 59 22 9 56 58 22 10 18 49 21 10 40 39 22 11 1 59 21 11 23 18 22 20 40 9 35
21 22 9 57 20 22 10 19 10 22 10 40 51 21 11 2 20 22 11 23 40 21 19 41 9 35 43
22 9 57 42 22 10 19 32 22 10 41 12 22 11 2 42 21 11 24 1 21 18 42 9 36 5 22 9
58 4 22 10 19 54 22 10 41 34 21 11 3 3 22 11 24 22 21 17 43 9 36 27 22 9 58 26
22 10 20 16 21 10 41 55 22 11 3 25 21 11 24 43 21 16 44 9 36 49 22 9 58 48 22
10 20 37 22 10 42 17 21 11 3 46 21 11 25 4 22 15 45 9 37 11 22 9 59 10 22 10 20
59 22 10 42 38 22 11 4 7 22 11 25 26 21 14 46 9 37 33 22 9 59 32 22 10 21 21 22
10 43 0 22 11 4 29 21 11 25 47 21 13 47 9 37 55 22 9 50 54 22 10 21 43 21 10 43
22 21 11 4 50 21 11 26 8 21 12 48 9 38 17 22 10 0 16 21 10 22 4 22 10 43 43 22
11 5 11 22 11 26 29 21 11 49 9 38 39 22 10 0 37 22 10 22 26 22 10 44 5 21 11 5
33 21 11 26 50 22 10 50 9 39 1 22 10 0 59 22 10 22 48 21 10 44 26 22 11 5 54 22
11 27 12 21 9 51 9 39 23 22 10 1 21 22 10 23 9 22 10 44 48 21 11 6 16 21 11 27
33 21 8 52 9 39 45 22 10 1 43 22 10 23 31 22 10 45 9 22 11 6 37 21 11 27 54 21
7 53 9 40 7 22 10 2 5 22 10 23 53 22 10 45 31 21 11 6 58 22 11 28 15 21 6 54 9
40 29 22 10 2 27 22 10 24 15 21 10 45 52 22 11 7 20 21 11 28 36 22 5 55 9 40 41
22 10 2 49 22 10 24 36 22 10 46 14 22 11 7 41 22 11 28 58 21 4 56 9 41 13 22 10
3 11 21 10 24 58 22 10 46 36 21 11 8 3 21 11 29 19 21 3 57 9 41 35 22 10 3 32
22 10 25 20 21 10 46 57 22 11 8 24 21 11 29 40 21 2 58 9 41 57 22 10 3 54 22 10
25 41 22 10 47 19 21 11 8 45 22 11 30 1 21 1 59 9 42 19 23 10 4 16 22 10 26 3
22 10 47 40 22 11 9 7 21 11 30 22 22 0 5 4 3 2 1 0 Taurus. Scorpio.
0 di 1 di 2 di 3 di 4 di 5 di M gr. mi. se. s. gr. mi. se s. gr. m. se. s. gr.
mi. se s. gr. mi. se. s. gr. mi sec s M 0 11 30 44 21 11 51 48 21 12 12 41 20
12 33 21 21 12 53 50 20 13 14 5 21 59 1 11 31 5 21 11 52 9 21 12 13 1 21 12 33
42 20 12 54 10 20 13 14 26 20 58 2 11 31 26 21 11 52 30 21 12 13 22 21 34 2 21
54 30 21 14 46 20 57 3 11 31 47 21 11 52 51 21 12 13 43 21 34 23 21 54 51 20 15
6 20 56 4 11 32 8 21 11 53 12 21 12 14 4 20 34 44 20 55 11 20 15 26 20 55 5 11
32 29 21 11 53 33 21 12 14 24 21 35 4 21 55 31 21 15 46 20 54 6 11 32 50 22 11
53 54 21 12 14 45 21 35 25 20 55 52 20 16 6 20 53 7 11 33 12 21 11 54 15 21 12
15 6 21 35 45 21 56 12 21 16 26 20 52 8 11 33 33 21 11 54 36 20 12 15 27 20 36
6 20 56 33 20 16 46 21 51 9 11 33 54 21 11 54 56 21 12 15 47 21 36 26 21 56 53
20 17 7 20 50 10 11 34 15 21 11 55 17 21 12 16 8 21 36 47 20 57 13 21 17 27 20
49 11 11 34 36 21 11 55 38 21 12 16 29 21 37 7 21 57 34 20 17 47 20 48 12 11 34
57 21 11 55 59 21 12 16 50 20 37 28 20 57 54 20 18 7 20 47 13 11 35 18 22 11 56
20 21 12 17 10 21 37 48 21 58 14 20 18 27 20 46 14 11 35 40 21 11 56 41 21 12
17 31 21 38 9 21 58 34 21 13 47 20 45 15 11 36 1 21 11 57 2 21 12 17 52 21 38
30 20 58 55 20 19 7 20 44 16 11 36 22 21 11 57 23 21 12 18 13 20 38 50 21 59 15
20 19 27 20 43 17 11 36 43 21 11 57 44 21 12 18 33 21 39 11 20 59 35 21 19 47
21 42 18 11 37 4 21 11 58 5 21 12 18 54 21 39 31 21 59 56 20 20 8 20 41 19 11
37 25 21 11 58 26 21 12 19 15 20 39 52 20 13 0 16 20 20 28 20 40 20 11 37 46 21
11 58 47 21 12 19 35 21 40 12 21 13 0 30 21 20 48 20 39 21 11 38 7 21 11 59 8
21 12 19 56 21 40 33 20 0 57 20 21 8 20 38 22 11 38 28 21 11 59 29 20 12 20 17
21 40 53 21 1 17 20 21 28 20 37 23 11 38 49 22 11 59 49 21 12 20 38 20 41 14 20
1 37 21 21 48 20 36 24 11 39 11 21 12 0 10 21 12 20 58 21 41 34 21 1 58 ^0 22 8
20 35 25 11 39 32 21 12 0 31 21 12 21 19 21 41 55 20 2 18 20 22 28 20 34 26 11
39 53 21 12 0 52 21 12 21 40 20 42 15 21 2 38 20 22 48 20 33 27 11 40 14 21 12
1 13 21 12 22 0 21 42 36 20 2 58 21 23 8 20 32 28 11 40 35 21 12 1 34 21 12 22
21 21 42 56 21 3 19 20 23 28 20 31 29 11 40 56 21 12 1 55 21 12 22 42 20 43 17
20 3 39 20 23 4^ 20 30 30 11 41 17 21 12 2 16 21 23 2 21 43 37 21 3 59 20 24 8
20 29 31 11 41 38 21 12 2 37 20 23 23 21 43 58 20 4 19 21 24 28 20 28 32 11 41
59 21 12 2 57 21 23 44 20 44 18 20 4 40 20 24 48 20 27 33 11 42 2^ 21 12 3 18
21 24 4 21 44 38 21 5 0 20 25 8 20 26 34 11 42 41 21 12 3 39 21 24 25 21 44 59
20 5 20 20 25 28 20 25 35 11 43 2 21 12 4 0 21 24 46 20 45 19 21 5 40 21 25 48
21 24 36 11 43 23 22 12 4 21 21 25 6 21 45 40 20 6 1 20 26 9 20 23 37 11 43 45
21 12 4 42 21 25 27 21 46 0 21 6 21 20 26 29 20 22 38 11 44 6 21 12 5 3 20 25
48 20 46 21 20 6 41 20 26 49 20 21 39 11 44 27 21 12 5 23 21 26 8 21 46 41 21 7
1 21 27 9 20 20 40 11 44 48 21 12 5 44 21 26 29 21 47 2 20 7 22 20 27 29 20 19
41 11 45 9 21 12 6 5 21 26 50 20 47 22 20 7 42 20 27 49 20 18 42 11 45 30 21 12
6 26 21 27 10 21 47 42 21 8 2 20 28 9 20 17 43 11 45 51 21 12 6 47 21 27 31 21
48 3 20 8 22 20 28 29 20 16 4^ 11 46 12 21 12 7 8 20 27 52 20 48 23 21 8 42 21
28 49 20 15 45 11 46 33 21 12 7 28 21 28 12 21 48 44 20 9 3 20 29 9 20 14 46 11
46 54 21 12 7 49 21 28 33 20 49 4 21 9 23 20 29 29 20 13 47 11 47 15 21 12 8 10
21 28 53 21 49 25 20 9 43 20 29 49 1^ 12 48 11 47 36 21 12 8 31 21 29 14 21 49
45 20 10 3 20 30 8 20 11 49 11 47 57 21 12 8 52 21 29 35 20 50 5 21 10 23 21 30
28 22 10 50 11 48 18 21 12 9 13 20 29 55 21 50 26 20 10 44 20 30 48 20 9 51 11
48 39 21 12 9 33 21 30 16 21 50 46 21 11 4 20 31 8 20 8 52 11 49 0 21 12 9 54
21 30 37 20 51 7 20 11 24 20 31 28 20 7 53 11 49 21 21 12 10 15 21 30 57 21 51
27 20 11 44 20 31 48 20 6 54 11 49 42 21 12 10 36 21 31 18 20 51 47 21 12 4 21
32 8 20 5 55 11 50 3 21 12 10 57 20 31 38 21 52 8 20 12 25 20 32 28 20 4 56 11
50 24 21 12 11 17 21 31 59 21 52 28 21 12 45 20 32 48 20 3 57 11 50 45 21 12 11
38 21 32 20 20 52 49 20 13 5 20 33 8 20 2 58 11 51 6 21 12 11 59 21 32 40 21 53
9 20 13 25 20 33 28 20 1 59 11 51 27 21 12 12 20 21 33 1 20 53 29 21 13 45 20
33 48 20 0 29 28 27 26 52 24 6 di 7 di 8 di 9 di 10 di 11 di m. gr. mi. se. s.
gr. mi. sec se. gr. mi. se. se. gr. mi. se. se. gr. mi se s. gr. mi. se. s. M 0
13 34 8 20 13 53 57 20 14 13 32 20 14 32 53 19 14 51 59 19 15 10 51 19 59 1 13
34 28 20 13 54 17 19 14 13 52 19 14 33 12 20 14 52 10 19 15 11 10 18 58 2 34 48
20 54 36 20 14 11 20 14 33 32 19 14 52 37 19 15 11 28 19 57 3 35 8 20 54 56 20
14 31 19 14 33 51 19 14 52 56 19 15 11 47 19 56 4 35 28 20 55 16 19 14 50 20 14
34 10 19 14 53 15 19 15 12 6 18 55 5 35 48 09 55 35 20 15 10 19 14 34 29 19 14
53 34 19 15 12 24 19 54 6 36 7 20 55 55 20 15 29 19 14 34 48 20 14 53 53 19 15
12 43 19 53 7 36 27 20 56 15 19 15 48 20 14 35 8 19 14 54 12 19 15 13 2 19 52 8
36 47 20 56 35 20 16 8 19 14 35 27 19 14 54 31 19 15 13 21 18 51 9 37 7 20 56
54 20 16 27 20 14 35 46 19 14 54 50 19 15 13 39 19 50 10 37 27 20 57 14 20 16
47 19 14 36 5 19 14 55 9 19 15 13 58 19 49 11 37 47 20 57 34 10 17 6 20 14 36
24 20 14 55 2^ 19 15 14 17 18 48 12 38 7 20 57 53 20 17 26 19 14 36 44 19 14 55
47 19 15 14 35 19 47 13 38 27 20 58 13 19 17 45 19 14 37 3 19 14 56 ^ 19 15 14
54 19 46 14 38 47 19 58 32 20 18 4 20 14 37 22 19 14 56 25 19 15 15 13 19 45 15
39 6 20 58 52 20 18 24 19 14 37 41 19 14 56 44 19 15 15 31 19 44 16 39 26 20 59
12 19 18 43 20 14 38 0 19 14 57 3 19 15 15 50 19 43 17 39 46 20 59 31 2^ 19 3
19 14 38 19 20 14 57 22 18 15 16 9 18 42 18 40 6 20 59 51 2^ 19 22 19 14 38 39
19 14 57 40 19 15 16 27 19 41 19 40 26 20 14 0 11 19 19 41 20 14 38 58 19 14 57
59 ^9 15 16 4^ ^9 40 20 40 46 20 0 30 20 20 1 19 14 39 17 19 14 58 18 19 15 17
5 1^ 39 21 41 6 20 0 50 20 20 20 20 14 39 36 19 14 58 37 19 15 17 23 19 38 22
41 26 20 1 10 19 20 4 19 14 39 55 19 14 58 5^ 19 15 17 42 18 37 23 41 46 19 1
29 20 20 59 19 14 40 14 19 14 59 15 19 15 18 0 19 36 24 42 5 20 1 49 19 21 18
20 14 40 33 20 14 59 34 1^ 15 18 19 19 35 25 42 25 20 2 8 20 21 38 19 14 40 53
19 14 59 53 19 15 18 38 18 34 26 42 45 20 2 2^ 20 21 57 19 14 41 12 19 15 0 12
18 15 18 56 1^ 33 27 43 5 20 2 48 19 22 16 20 14 41 31 19 15 0 30 19 15 19 15
19 32 28 43 25 19 3 7 20 22 36 19 14 41 50 19 15 0 ^9 19 15 19 34 1^ 31 29 43
44 20 3 2^ 19 22 55 20 14 42 9 19 15 1 8 19 15 19 ^^ 19 30 30 44 4 20 3 46 20
23 15 19 14 42 28 19 15 1 27 19 15 20 11 1^ 29 31 44 24 20 4 6 19 23 34 19 14
42 47 19 15 1 4^ 19 15 20 29 19 28 32 44 44 20 4 29 20 23 53 20 14 43 6 19 15 2
5 19 15 20 48 19 27 33 45 4 19 4 45 19 24 13 19 14 43 25 20 15 2 24 18 15 21 7
18 26 34 45 23 20 5 5 19 24 32 19 14 43 45 19 15 2 44 19 15 21 25 19 25 35 45
43 20 5 24 20 24 51 20 14 44 4 19 15 3 1 19 15 21 44 18 24 36 46 3 20 5 44 19
25 11 19 14 44 23 19 15 3 20 19 15 22 2 19 23 37 46 23 20 6 3 20 25 30 19 14 44
42 19 15 3 39 19 15 22 21 18 22 38 46 43 19 6 23 20 25 49 19 14 45 1 19 15 3 5^
19 15 22 39 19 21 39 47 2 20 6 43 19 26 8 20 14 45 20 19 15 4 17 18 15 22 58 19
20 40 47 22 20 7 2 20 26 28 19 14 45 39 19 15 4 35 19 15 23 17 18 19 41 47 42
20 7 22 19 26 47 19 14 45 58 19 15 4 54 19 15 23 35 19 18 42 48 2 19 7 41 20 27
6 20 14 40 17 19 15 5 13 19 15 23 54 18 17 43 48 21 20 8 1 19 27 26 19 14 46 30
19 15 5 32 19 5 24 12 19 16 44 48 41 20 8 20 20 27 45 19 14 46 55 19 15 5 51 18
15 24 31 18 15 45 49 1 20 8 40 19 28 4 20 14 47 14 19 15 6 9 19 15 24 49 19 14
46 49 21 20 8 59 20 28 24 19 14 47 33 19 15 6 28 19 15 25 8 18 13 47 49 41 19 9
19 19 28 43 19 14 47 52 19 15 6 47 19 15 25 26 19 12 48 50 0 20 9 38 20 29 2 19
14 48 11 19 15 7 0 19 15 25 45 18 11 49 50 20 20 9 58 19 29 21 20 14 48 30 19
15 7 25 18 15 26 3 19 10 50 50 40 20 10 17 20 29 41 19 14 48 49 19 15 7 43 19
15 26 22 18 9 51 51 0 19 10 37 19 30 0 19 14 49 8 20 15 8 2 19 15 26 40 19 8 52
51 19 20 10 56 20 30 19 19 14 49 28 19 15 8 21 19 15 26 59 18 7 53 51 39 20 11
16 19 30 38 20 14 49 47 19 15 8 40 18 15 27 17 19 6 54 51 59 19 11 35 20 30 58
19 14 50 6 19 15 8 58 19 15 27 36 18 5 55 52 18 20 11 55 19 31 17 19 14 50 25
19 15 9 17 19 15 27 54 19 4 56 52 38 20 12 14 20 31 36 19 14 50 44 19 15 9 36
19 15 28 13 18 3 57 52 58 20 12 34 19 31 55 20 14 51 3 19 15 9 55 18 15 28 31
19 2 58 53 18 19 12 53 20 32 15 19 14 51 22 19 15 10 13 19 15 28 50 18 1 59 53
37 20 13 13 19 32 34 19 14 51 41 18 15 10 32 19 15 29 8 19 0 23 22 21 20 19 18
12 di 13 di 14 di 15 di 16 di 17 di M gr. mi. se. s. gr. mi. se s. gr. mi sec
s. gr. m. sec s. gr. mi. se. s. gr. mi. s. s. M 0 15 29 27 18 15 47 47 18 16 5
51 18 16 23 38 18 16 41 9 17 16 58 22 17 59 1 15 29 45 19 15 48 5 18 16 6 9 18
16 23 56 18 16 41 26 18 16 58 39 18 58 2 15 30 4 18 15 48 23 18 16 6 27 18 16
24 14 17 41 44 17 16 58 57 17 57 3 15 30 22 19 15 48 41 19 16 6 45 18 16 24 31
18 42 1 17 16 59 14 17 56 4 15 30 41 18 15 49 0 18 16 7 3 18 16 24 49 18 42 18
18 16 59 31 17 55 5 15 30 59 18 15 49 18 18 16 7 21 19 16 25 7 17 42 36 17 16
59 48 17 54 6 15 31 17 19 15 49 36 18 16 7 38 18 16 25 24 18 42 53 17 17 0 5 17
53 7 15 31 3^ 18 15 49 54 18 16 7 56 18 16 25 42 17 43 10 18 17 0 22 17 52 8 15
31 54 19 15 50 12 19 16 8 14 18 16 25 59 18 43 28 17 17 0 39 17 51 9 15 32 13
18 15 50 31 18 16 8 32 18 16 26 17 18 43 45 17 17 0 56 17 50 10 15 32 31 19 15
50 49 18 16 8 50 18 16 26 35 17 44 2 18 1 13 17 49 11 15 32 50 18 15 51 7 18 16
9 8 18 16 26 52 18 44 20 17 1 30 17 48 12 15 33 8 18 15 51 25 18 16 9 26 18 16
27 10 18 44 37 17 1 47 17 47 13 15 33 26 19 15 51 43 18 16 9 44 17 16 27 28 17
44 54 18 2 4 17 46 14 15 33 45 18 15 52 1 18 16 10 1 18 16 27 45 18 45 12 17 2
21 17 45 15 15 34 3 19 15 52 19 19 16 10 19 18 16 28 3 17 45 29 17 2 38 17 44
16 15 34 22 18 15 52 38 18 16 10 37 18 16 28 20 18 45 46 18 2 55 17 43 17 15 34
40 18 15 52 56 18 16 10 55 18 16 28 38 17 46 4 17 3 12 17 42 18 15 34 48 19 15
53 14 18 16 11 13 18 16 28 55 18 46 21 17 3 29 17 41 19 15 35 17 18 15 53 32 18
16 11 31 18 16 29 13 18 46 38 17 3 46 17 40 20 15 35 35 19 15 53 50 18 16 11 49
17 16 29 31 17 46 55 18 4 3 17 39 21 15 35 54 18 15 54 8 18 16 12 6 18 16 29 48
18 47 13 17 4 20 17 38 22 15 36 12 18 15 54 26 18 16 12 24 18 16 30 6 17 47 30
17 4 37 17 37 23 15 36 30 19 15 54 44 18 16 12 42 18 16 30 23 18 47 47 17 4 54
17 3^ 24 15 36 49 18 15 55 2 19 16 13 0 18 16 30 41 17 48 4 18 5 11 17 35 25 15
37 7 18 15 55 21 18 16 13 18 18 16 30 58 18 48 22 17 5 28 17 34 26 15 37 25 19
15 55 39 18 16 13 36 17 16 31 16 17 48 39 17 5 45 17 33 27 15 37 44 18 15 55 57
18 16 13 53 18 16 31 33 18 48 56 17 6 2 17 32 28 15 38 2 18 15 56 15 18 16 14
11 18 16 31 51 17 49 13 18 6 19 17 31 29 15 38 20 19 15 56 33 18 16 14 29 18 16
32 8 18 49 31 17 6 36 17 30 30 15 38 39 18 15 56 51 18 16 14 47 18 16 32 26 17
49 48 17 6 53 16 29 31 15 38 57 18 15 57 9 18 16 15 5 17 16 32 43 18 50 5 17 7
9 17 28 32 15 39 15 19 15 57 27 18 16 15 22 18 16 33 1 17 50 22 18 7 26 17 27
33 15 39 34 18 15 57 45 18 16 15 40 18 16 33 18 18 50 40 17 7 43 17 26 34 15 39
52 18 15 58 3 18 16 15 58 18 16 33 36 17 50 57 17 8 0 17 25 35 15 40 10 19 15
58 31 18 16 16 16 17 16 33 53 18 51 14 17 8 17 17 24 36 15 40 29 18 15 58 39 18
16 16 33 18 16 34 11 17 51 31 17 8 34 17 23 37 15 40 47 18 15 58 57 18 16 16 51
18 16 34 24 18 51 48 18 8 51 17 22 38 15 41 5 19 15 59 15 18 16 17 9 18 16 34
46 17 52 6 17 9 8 17 21 39 15 41 24 18 15 59 33 18 16 17 27 17 16 35 3 18 52 23
17 9 25 17 20 40 15 41 42 18 15 59 51 18 16 17 44 18 16 35 21 17 52 40 17 9 42
16 19 41 15 42 0 19 16 0 9 18 16 18 2 18 16 35 38 18 52 57 17 9 58 17 18 42 15
42 19 18 16 0 27 18 16 18 20 18 16 35 56 17 53 14 17 10 15 17 17 43 15 42 37 18
16 0 45 18 16 18 38 17 16 36 13 18 53 31 18 10 32 17 16 44 15 42 55 18 16 1 3
18 16 18 55 18 16 36 31 17 53 49 17 10 49 17 15 45 15 43 13 19 16 1 21 18 16 19
13 18 16 36 48 18 54 6 17 11 6 17 14 46 15 43 3^ 18 19 1 39 18 16 19 31 18 16
37 6 17 54 23 17 11 23 17 13 47 15 43 50 18 16 1 57 18 16 19 49 17 16 37 23 17
54 40 17 11 40 16 12 48 15 44 8 18 16 2 15 18 16 20 6 18 16 37 40 18 54 57 17
11 5^ 17 11 49 15 44 26 19 16 2 33 18 16 20 24 18 16 37 58 17 55 14 17 12 13 17
10 50 15 44 45 18 16 2 51 18 16 20 42 17 16 38 15 18 55 31 18 12 30 17 9 51 15
45 3 18 16 3 9 18 16 20 59 18 16 38 33 17 55 49 17 12 47 17 8 52 15 45 21 18 16
3 27 18 16 21 17 18 16 38 50 17 56 6 17 13 4 17 7 53 15 45 39 19 16 3 45 18 16
21 35 17 16 39 7 18 56 23 17 13 21 16 6 54 15 45 58 18 16 4 3 18 16 21 52 18 16
39 25 17 56 40 17 13 37 17 5 55 15 46 16 18 16 4 21 18 16 22 10 18 16 39 42 18
56 57 17 13 54 17 4 56 15 46 34 18 16 4 39 18 16 22 28 17 16 40 0 17 57 14 17
14 11 17 3 57 15 46 52 18 16 4 57 18 16 22 45 18 16 40 17 17 57 31 17 14 28 17
2 58 15 47 10 19 16 5 15 18 16 23 3 18 16 40 34 18 57 48 17 14 45 16 1 59 15 47
20 18 16 5 33 18 16 23 21 17 6 40 52 17 58 5 17 15 1 17 0 17 16 15 14 13 12 18
di 19 di 20 di 21 di 22 di 23 di M gr. mi. se. s. gr. mi. sec s. gr. mi. s. s.
gr. mi. se. s. gr. mi. se s. gr. mi. se s. M 0 17 15 18 17 17 31 56 16 17 48 15
16 18 4 16 16 18 19 58 15 18 35 20 15 59 1 17 15 35 17 17 32 12 17 17 48 31 17
18 4 32 16 18 20 13 16 35 35 15 58 2 15 52 16 32 29 16 48 48 16 4 48 16 20 29
15 35 50 15 57 3 16 8 17 32 45 17 49 4 16 5 4 15 20 44 16 36 5 10 56 4 16 25 17
33 2 16 49 20 16 5 19 16 21 0 15 36 21 15 55 5 16 42 17 33 18 17 49 36 16 5 35
16 21 15 16 36 36 15 54 6 16 59 16 33 35 16 49 52 16 5 51 16 21 31 15 39 51 15
53 7 17 15 17 33 51 17 50 8 16 6 7 16 21 46 16 37 6 15 52 8 17 32 17 34 8 16 50
24 17 6 23 15 22 2 15 37 21 15 51 9 17 49 17 34 24 16 50 41 16 6 38 16 22 17 16
37 36 16 50 10 18 6 16 34 40 17 50 57 16 6 54 16 22 33 15 37 52 15 49 11 18 22
17 34 57 16 51 13 16 7 10 16 22 48 16 38 7 15 48 12 18 39 17 35 13 17 51 29 16
7 26 16 23 4 15 38 22 15 47 13 18 56 16 35 30 16 51 45 16 7 42 15 23 19 16 38
37 15 46 14 19 12 17 35 46 17 52 1 16 7 57 16 23 35 15 38 52 15 45 15 19 29 17
36 3 16 52 17 16 8 13 16 23 50 15 39 7 15 44 16 19 46 17 36 19 16 52 33 16 8 29
26 24 5 16 39 22 16 43 17 20 3 16 36 35 17 52 49 17 8 45 15 24 21 15 39 38 15
42 18 20 19 17 36 52 16 53 6 16 9 0 16 24 36 16 39 53 15 41 19 20 36 17 37 8 16
53 22 16 9 16 16 24 52 15 40 8 15 40 20 20 53 16 37 24 17 53 38 16 9 32 16 25 7
16 40 23 15 39 21 21 9 17 37 41 16 53 54 16 9 48 15 25 23 15 40 38 15 38 22 21
26 17 37 57 17 54 10 16 10 3 16 25 38 15 40 53 15 37 23 21 43 16 38 14 16 54 26
16 10 19 16 25 53 16 41 8 15 36 24 21 59 17 38 30 16 54 42 16 10 35 16 26 9 15
41 25 15 35 25 22 16 17 38 46 17 54 58 16 10 51 15 26 24 16 41 38 15 34 26 22
33 16 39 3 16 55 14 16 11 6 16 26 50 15 41 53 15 33 27 22 49 17 39 39 16 55 30
16 11 22 16 26 55 15 42 8 15 32 28 23 ^ 17 39 35 17 56 46 16 11 38 16 27 10 16
42 23 15 31 29 23 3 16 39 52 16 56 2 16 11 54 15 27 21 15 42 38 10 30 30 23 39
17 40 8 16 56 18 16 12 9 16 27 41 16 42 54 15 29 31 23 56 17 40 24 17 56 34 16
12 25 16 27 57 15 43 9 15 28 32 24 13 16 40 41 16 56 50 16 12 41 15 28 12 15 43
24 15 27 33 24 29 17 40 57 16 57 6 16 12 56 16 28 27 16 43 39 15 26 34 24 46 16
41 13 16 57 22 16 13 12 16 28 43 15 43 54 15 25 35 25 2 17 41 29 17 57 38 16 13
28 15 28 58 15 44 9 15 24 36 25 19 17 41 46 16 57 54 16 13 43 16 29 13 16 44 24
15 23 37 25 36 16 42 2 16 58 10 16 13 59 16 29 29 15 44 39 15 22 38 25 52 17 42
18 17 58 26 16 14 15 15 29 44 15 44 54 15 ^1 39 26 9 16 42 35 16 58 42 16 14 30
16 29 59 16 45 9 15 20 40 26 25 17 42 51 16 58 58 16 14 46 16 30 15 15 45 24 15
19 41 26 42 17 43 7 16 59 14 16 15 2 15 30 30 15 45 39 15 18 42 26 59 16 43 23
17 59 30 16 15 17 16 30 45 16 45 54 15 17 43 27 15 17 43 40 16 59 46 16 15 33
15 31 1 15 46 9 15 16 44 27 32 16 43 56 16 18 0 2 16 15 48 10 31 16 15 46 24 14
15 45 27 48 17 44 12 16 18 0 18 16 16 4 16 31 31 15 46 38 15 14 46 28 5 16 44
28 17 0 34 16 16 20 15 31 46 16 46 53 15 13 47 28 21 17 44 45 16 0 50 15 16 35
16 32 2 15 47 8 15 12 48 28 38 16 45 1 16 1 5 16 16 51 15 32 17 15 47 23 15 11
49 28 54 17 45 17 16 1 21 16 17 9 16 32 32 15 47 38 15 10 50 29 11 16 45 33 17
1 37 16 17 22 16 32 47 16 47 53 15 9 51 29 27 17 45 50 16 1 53 16 17 38 15 33 3
15 48 8 15 8 52 29 44 16 46 6 16 2 9 16 17 53 16 33 1^ 15 48 23 15 7 53 30 0 17
46 22 16 2 25 16 18 9 15 33 33 15 48 38 15 6 54 30 17 16 46 38 16 2 41 16 18 24
16 33 48 16 48 53 15 5 55 30 33 17 46 54 17 2 57 16 18 40 15 34 4 15 49 8 15 4
56 30 50 16 47 11 16 3 13 15 18 55 16 34 19 15 49 23 15 ^ 57 31 6 17 47 27 16 3
28 16 19 11 1^ 34 34 15 49 38 14 2 58 31 23 16 47 43 16 3 44 16 19 27 15 34 49
1^ 49 52 15 1 59 31 39 17 47 59 16 4 0 16 19 42 16 35 5 14 50 7 15 0 11 10 9 8
7 6 24 di 25 di 26 di 27 di 28 di 29 di M gr, mi. sec s. gr. mi. s. s. gr. mi.
se. s. gr. mi. sec s. gr. m. se s. gr. mi. se s. M 0 18 50 22 15 19 5 5 14 19
19 26 15 19 33 27 14 19 47 7 14 20 0 26 13 59 1 18 50 37 15 19 5 19 15 19 19 41
14 19 33 41 14 19 47 21 13 10 0 39 13 58 2 50 52 15 5 34 14 19 55 14 33 55 14
47 34 14 0 52 13 57 3 51 7 15 5 48 15 20 9 14 34 9 14 47 48 13 1 5 13 56 4 51
22 15 6 3 15 20 23 14 34 23 14 48 1 14 1 18 13 55 5 51 37 14 6 17 15 20 37 14
34 37 13 48 15 13 1 31 13 54 6 51 51 15 6 32 14 20 51 15 34 50 14 48 28 14 1 44
14 53 7 52 6 15 6 4^ 15 21 6 14 35 4 14 48 42 13 1 58 13 52 8 52 21 15 7 1 14
21 20 14 35 18 14 48 55 13 2 11 13 5^ 9 52 36 15 7 15 15 21 34 14 35 32 14 49 8
14 2 24 13 50 10 52 51 15 7 30 14 21 48 14 35 4^ 13 49 22 13 2 37 13 49 11 53 6
14 7 44 15 22 2 14 35 59 14 49 35 14 2 50 13 48 12 53 20 15 7 59 14 22 16 14 36
13 14 49 49 13 3 3 13 47 13 53 35 15 8 13 14 22 30 14 36 27 14 50 2 14 3 1^ 13
46 14 53 50 15 8 27 15 22 44 15 36 41 13 50 16 13 3 29 13 45 15 54 5 15 8 42 14
22 59 14 36 54 14 50 29 13 3 42 13 44 16 54 20 14 8 56 15 23 13 14 37 8 14 50
42 14 3 55 13 43 17 54 34 15 9 11 14 23 27 14 37 22 14 50 56 13 4 8 13 42 18 54
49 15 9 25 15 24 41 14 37 3^ 13 51 9 14 4 21 ^^ 41 19 55 4 15 9 40 14 24 55 14
37 49 14 51 23 13 4 34 13 40 20 55 19 14 9 54 15 24 9 14 38 3 14 51 30 13 4 47
1^ 39 21 55 33 15 10 9 14 24 23 14 38 17 14 51 49 14 5 0 1^ 38 22 55 48 15 10
23 14 24 37 14 38 31 13 52 3 13 5 13 13 37 23 56 3 15 10 37 15 24 51 14 38 44
14 52 10 13 5 2^ 13 36 24 56 18 14 10 52 14 25 5 14 38 58 14 52 29 14 5 39 1^
3^ 25 56 32 15 11 6 15 25 19 14 39 12 13 52 43 13 5 52 ^^ 34 26 56 47 15 11 21
14 25 33 14 39 25 14 52 56 13 6 ^^ ^^ ^3 27 57 2 15 11 35 14 25 47 14 39 39 14
53 9 14 6 1^ ^^ ^^ 28 57 17 14 11 49 15 26 1 14 39 53 13 53 23 13 6 31 1^ 31 29
57 31 15 12 4 14 26 15 15 40 6 14 53 30 13 6 44 13 30 30 57 46 15 12 18 14 26
30 14 40 20 14 53 49 14 6 57 1^ 29 31 58 1 14 12 32 15 26 44 14 40 34 13 54 3
13 7 10 ^^ 28 32 58 15 15 12 47 14 26 58 14 40 47 14 54 10 13 7 23 13 27 33 58
30 15 13 1 14 27 12 14 41 ^ 14 54 29 13 7 36 13 26 34 58 45 14 13 15 15 27 26
14 41 15 13 54 42 14 7 49 13 25 35 58 59 15 13 30 14 27 40 14 41 28 14 54 56 13
8 2 12 24 36 59 14 15 13 44 14 27 54 13 41 42 14 55 9 13 8 14 13 23 37 59 29 14
13 58 15 28 7 14 41 56 13 55 22 14 8 27 13 22 38 59 43 15 14 13 14 28 21 14 42
9 14 55 36 13 8 40 13 21 39 59 58 15 14 27 14 28 35 14 42 25 13 55 49 13 8 53
13 20 40 19 0 13 14 14 41 15 28 49 14 42 36 14 56 2 13 9 6 13 19 41 19 0 27 15
14 50 14 29 3 14 42 50 14 56 15 14 9 19 13 18 42 0 42 25 15 10 14 29 17 14 43 4
13 56 29 13 9 32 13 17 43 0 57 14 15 24 15 29 31 14 43 17 14 56 42 13 9 45 12
16 44 1 11 15 15 39 14 29 45 14 43 31 13 56 55 13 9 57 13 15 45 1 26 15 15 53
14 29 59 14 43 44 14 57 8 13 10 10 13 14 46 1 41 14 16 7 14 30 13 14 43 58 13
57 21 14 10 23 13 13 47 1 55 15 16 21 15 30 27 14 44 11 14 57 35 13 10 3^ 13 12
48 2 10 14 16 36 14 30 41 14 44 25 14 57 48 13 10 49 13 11 49 2 24 15 16 50 14
30 55 14 44 39 13 58 1 13 11 2 13 10 50 2 39 14 17 4 14 31 9 14 44 52 14 58 14
13 11 15 12 9 51 2 53 15 17 18 15 31 23 13 45 6 13 58 27 14 11 27 13 8 52 3 8
15 17 33 14 31 36 14 45 19 14 58 41 13 11 30 13 7 53 3 23 14 17 47 14 31 50 14
45 33 13 58 54 13 11 43 13 6 54 3 37 15 18 1 14 32 4 14 45 46 14 59 7 13 12 6
13 5 55 3 52 14 18 15 15 32 18 14 46 0 13 59 20 13 12 19 12 4 56 4 6 15 18 30
14 32 32 14 46 13 14 59 33 13 12 31 13 3 57 4 21 14 18 44 14 32 46 14 46 27 13
59 46 14 12 44 13 2 58 4 35 15 18 58 14 33 0 14 46 40 14 20 0 0 13 12 57 13 1
59 4 50 51 19 12 14 33 14 13 46 54 13 20 0 13 13 13 10 12 0 5 4 3 2 1. 0
Gemini. Sagit.
0 di 1 di 2 di 3 di 4 di 5 di M gr. mi. se. s. gr. mi. s. s. gr. mi se. s. gr.
mi. se s. gr. mi. sec s. gr. mi. se s. M 0 20 13 22 13 20 25 57 12 20 38 9 12
20 49 59 11 21 1 25 11 21 12 28 11 59 1 20 13 35 13 20 26 9 13 20 38 21 12 20
50 10 12 21 1 36 12 21 12 39 11 58 2 20 13 48 13 20 26 22 12 20 38 33 12 50 22
11 1 48 11 12 50 11 57 3 20 14 1 12 20 26 34 13 20 38 45 12 50 33 11 1 59 11 13
1 11 56 4 20 14 13 13 20 26 47 12 20 38 57 12 50 45 12 2 10 11 13 12 10 55 5 20
14 26 13 20 26 59 12 39 9 12 50 57 11 2 21 11 13 22 11 54 6 20 14 39 13 20 27
11 13 39 21 12 51 8 12 2 32 12 13 33 11 53 7 20 14 52 12 20 27 24 12 39 33 12
51 20 11 2 44 11 13 44 11 52 8 20 15 4 13 20 27 36 12 39 45 12 51 31 12 2 55 11
13 55 11 51 9 20 15 17 13 20 27 48 13 39 57 12 51 43 12 3 6 11 14 0 10 50 10 20
15 30 12 20 28 1 12 40 9 12 51 55 11 3 17 11 14 16 11 49 11 20 15 42 13 20 28
13 12 40 21 12 52 6 12 3 28 12 14 27 11 48 12 20 15 55 13 20 28 25 13 40 33 12
52 18 11 3 40 11 14 38 11 47 13 20 16 8 13 20 28 38 12 40 45 12 52 29 12 3 51
11 14 49 11 46 14 20 16 21 12 20 28 50 12 40 57 12 52 41 11 4 2 11 15 0 10 45
15 20 16 33 13 20 29 2 12 41 9 12 52 52 12 4 13 11 15 10 11 44 16 20 16 46 13
20 29 14 13 41 21 11 53 4 11 4 24 11 15 21 11 43 17 20 16 59 12 20 29 27 12 41
32 12 53 15 12 4 35 11 15 32 11 42 18 20 17 11 13 20 29 39 12 41 48 12 53 27 11
4 46 12 15 43 10 41 19 20 17 24 12 20 29 51 13 41 56 12 53 38 12 4 58 11 15 53
11 40 20 20 17 36 13 20 30 4 12 42 8 12 53 50 11 5 9 11 16 4 11 39 21 20 17 49
13 20 30 16 12 42 20 12 54 1 12 5 20 11 16 15 10 38 22 20 18 2 12 20 30 28 12
42 32 12 54 13 11 5 31 11 16 25 11 37 23 20 18 14 13 20 30 40 13 42 44 12 54 24
12 5 42 11 16 36 11 36 24 20 18 27 13 20 30 53 12 42 56 12 54 36 11 5 53 11 16
47 11 35 25 20 18 40 12 20 31 5 12 43 8 ^^ 54 47 12 6 4 11 16 58 10 34 26 20 18
52 13 20 31 17 12 43 19 12 54 59 11 6 15 11 17 8 11 33 27 20 19 5 12 20 31 29
12 43 31 12 55 10 12 6 26 11 17 19 11 32 28 20 19 17 13 20 31 41 13 43 4^ 12 55
22 11 6 37 11 17 30 10 31 29 20 19 30 13 20 31 54 12 43 55 12 55 33 12 6 48 12
17 40 11 30 30 20 19 43 12 20 32 6 12 44 7 12 55 45 11 7 0 11 17 51 11 29 31 20
19 55 13 20 32 18 12 44 19 11 55 50 12 7 11 11 18 2 10 28 32 20 20 8 12 20 32
30 12 44 30 12 56 8 11 7 22 11 18 12 11 27 33 20 20 20 13 20 32 42 13 44 42 12
56 19 11 7 33 11 18 23 10 26 34 20 20 33 12 20 32 55 12 44 54 12 56 30 12 7 44
11 18 33 11 25 35 20 20 45 13 20 33 7 12 45 6 12 56 42 11 7 55 11 18 44 11 24
36 20 20 58 12 20 33 19 12 45 18 11 56 53 12 8 6 11 18 55 10 23 37 20 21 10 13
20 33 31 12 45 29 12 57 5 11 8 17 11 19 5 11 22 38 20 21 23 12 20 33 43 12 45
41 12 57 16 11 8 28 11 19 16 11 21 39 20 21 35 13 20 33 55 13 45 53 12 57 27 12
8 39 11 19 27 10 20 40 20 21 48 12 20 34 8 12 46 5 11 57 39 11 8 50 11 19 37 11
19 41 20 22 0 13 20 34 20 12 46 16 12 57 50 12 9 1 11 19 48 10 18 42 20 22 13
12 20 34 32 12 46 28 12 58 2 11 9 12 11 19 58 11 17 43 20 22 25 13 20 34 44 12
46 40 12 58 13 11 9 23 11 20 9 11 16 44 20 22 38 12 20 34 56 12 46 52 11 58 24
12 9 34 11 20 20 10 15 45 20 22 50 13 20 35 8 12 47 3 12 58 36 11 9 45 11 20 30
11 14 46 20 23 3 12 20 35 2 12 47 15 12 58 47 11 9 50 11 20 41 10 13 47 20 23
15 13 20 35 32 13 47 27 12 58 58 12 10 7 10 20 51 11 12 48 20 23 28 12 20 35 45
12 47 39 11 59 10 11 10 17 11 21 2 10 11 49 20 24 40 13 20 35 57 12 47 50 12 59
21 11 10 2^ 11 21 12 11 10 50 20 24 53 12 20 36 9 12 48 2 12 59 32 12 10 39 11
21 23 10 9 51 20 24 5 13 20 36 21 12 48 14 11 59 44 11 10 50 11 21 3^ 11 8 52
20 24 18 12 20 36 33 12 48 25 12 59 55 11 11 1 11 21 4^ 10 7 53 20 24 30 13 20
36 45 12 48 37 12 21 0 6 11 11 12 11 21 54 1 6 54 20 24 43 12 20 36 57 12 48 49
11 21 0 17 12 11 23 11 22 5 10 5 55 20 24 55 12 20 37 9 12 49 0 12 0 29 11 11
34 11 22 15 11 4 56 20 25 7 13 20 37 21 12 49 12 12 0 40 11 11 45 11 22 26 10 3
57 20 25 20 12 20 37 33 12 49 24 11 0 51 12 11 56 10 22 3^ 11 2 58 20 25 32 13
20 37 45 12 49 35 12 1 3 11 12 ^ 11 22 47 10 1 59 20 25 45 12 20 37 57 12 49 47
12 1 14 11 12 17 11 22 57 11 0 29 28 27 26 25 24 6 di 7 di 8 di 9 di 10 di 11
di M gr. mi. sec s. gr. mi. se. s. gr. mi. sec s. gr. m. se s gr. mi. se. s.
gr. mi. s. s. M 0 21 23 8 10 21 33 23 10 21 43 15 10 21 52 42 9 22 1 45 9 22 10
22 9 59 1 21 23 18 11 21 33 33 11 21 43 25 9 21 52 51 10 12 1 54 8 22 10 31 8
58 2 23 29 10 33 44 10 43 34 10 53 1 9 2 2 9 10 39 9 57 3 23 39 11 33 54 10 43
44 10 53 10 9 2 11 9 10 48 8 56 4 23 50 10 34 4 10 43 54 9 53 19 9 2 20 9 10 56
8 55 5 24 0 10 34 14 10 44 3 10 53 28 10 2 29 9 11 4 9 54 6 24 10 11 34 24 10
44 13 9 53 38 9 2 38 8 11 13 8 53 7 24 21 10 34 34 10 44 22 10 53 47 9 2 46 9
11 21 9 52 8 24 31 11 34 44 10 44 32 10 53 56 9 2 55 9 11 30 8 51 9 24 42 10 34
54 10 44 42 9 54 5 9 3 4 9 11 38 8 50 10 24 52 11 35 4 10 44 51 10 54 14 10 3
13 9 11 46 9 49 11 25 2 11 35 14 10 45 1 9 54 24 9 3 22 8 11 55 8 48 12 25 13
10 35 24 10 45 10 10 54 33 9 3 30 9 12 3 8 47 13 25 23 11 35 34 10 45 20 10 54
42 9 3 39 9 12 11 9 4^ 14 25 34 10 35 44 10 45 30 9 54 51 9 3 48 9 12 20 8 45
15 25 44 10 35 54 10 45 39 10 55 0 9 3 57 8 12 28 8 44 16 25 54 11 36 4 9 45 49
10 55 9 9 4 5 9 12 36 9 43 17 26 5 10 36 13 10 45 59 9 55 18 10 4 14 9 12 45 8
42 18 26 15 10 36 23 10 46 8 9 55 28 9 4 23 8 12 53 8 41 19 26 25 11 36 33 10
46 17 9 55 37 9 4 31 9 13 1 8 40 20 26 36 10 36 43 10 46 26 10 55 46 9 4 40 9
13 9 9 39 21 26 46 10 36 53 10 46 36 10 55 55 9 4 49 9 13 18 8 ^^ 22 26 56 11
37 3 10 46 46 9 56 4 9 4 58 8 13 26 8 ^^ 23 27 7 10 37 13 10 46 55 10 56 13 9 5
6 9 13 34 9 3^ 24 27 17 10 37 23 10 47 5 9 56 22 9 5 15 9 13 43 8 3^ 25 21 27
27 10 37 33 10 47 14 10 56 31 9 5 24 8 13 51 8 3^ 26 27 37 11 37 43 10 47 24 9
56 40 9 5 32 9 13 59 8 3^ 27 27 48 10 37 53 9 47 33 10 56 49 9 5 41 8 14 7 8 3^
28 28 58 10 38 2 10 47 43 9 56 58 10 5 4^ 9 14 15 9 3^ 29 28 8 11 38 12 10 47
52 10 57 8 9 5 58 9 14 24 8 3^ 30 28 19 10 38 22 10 48 2 9 57 17 9 6 7 8 14 32
8 2^ 31 28 29 10 38 32 10 48 11 10 57 26 9 6 15 9 14 40 8 2^ 32 28 39 10 38 42
10 48 21 9 57 35 9 6 24 9 14 48 9 27 33 28 49 9 38 52 10 48 30 9 57 44 9 6 33 8
14 57 8 26 34 29 0 10 39 2 9 48 39 10 57 53 9 6 41 9 15 5 8 2^ 35 29 10 10 39
11 10 48 49 9 58 2 9 6 50 8 15 13 8 2^ 36 29 20 10 39 21 10 48 58 10 58 11 9 6
58 9 15 21 8 23 37 29 30 10 39 31 10 49 8 9 58 20 9 7 7 9 15 29 8 22 38 29 40
11 39 41 10 49 17 9 58 29 9 7 16 8 15 37 9 21 39 29 51 10 39 51 9 49 26 10 58
38 9 7 24 9 15 46 8 20 40 30 1 10 40 0 10 49 36 9 58 47 9 7 33 8 15 54 8 19 41
30 11 10 40 10 10 49 45 10 58 56 9 7 41 9 16 2 8 1^ 42 30 21 10 40 20 10 49 55
9 59 5 9 7 50 8 16 10 8 17 43 30 31 11 40 30 10 50 4 9 59 14 9 7 58 9 16 18 8
16 44 30 42 10 40 40 9 50 13 10 59 23 8 8 7 8 16 26 8 15 45 30 52 10 40 49 10
50 23 9 59 31 9 8 15 9 16 34 8 14 46 31 2 10 40 59 10 50 32 9 59 40 9 8 24 8 16
42 8 13 47 31 12 10 41 9 10 50 41 10 59 49 9 8 32 9 16 50 9 12 48 31 22 10 41
19 9 50 51 9 59 58 9 8 41 8 16 59 8 11 49 31 32 10 41 28 10 51 0 9 22 0 7 9 8
49 9 17 7 8 10 50 31 42 11 41 38 10 51 9 10 22 0 16 9 8 58 8 17 15 8 9 51 31 53
10 41 48 10 51 19 9 0 25 9 9 6 9 17 23 8 8 52 32 3 10 41 58 9 51 28 9 0 34 9 9
15 8 17 31 8 7 53 32 13 10 42 7 10 51 37 10 0 43 9 9 23 9 17 39 8 6 54 32 23 10
42 17 10 51 47 9 0 52 9 9 32 8 17 47 8 5 55 32 33 10 42 27 9 51 56 9 1 1 8 9 40
9 17 55 8 4 56 32 43 10 42 36 10 52 5 9 1 9 9 9 49 8 18 3 8 3 57 32 53 10 42 46
10 52 14 10 1 18 9 9 57 9 18 11 8 2 58 33 3 10 42 56 9 52 24 9 1 27 9 10 6 8 18
19 8 1 59 21 33 ^3 10 21 43 5 10 21 52 33 9 1 36 9 10 14 8 18 27 8 0 23 22 21
20 19 18 12 di 13 di 14 di 15 di 16 di 17 di m. gr. m. sec. se gr. mi. s. se
gr. mi. se se. gr. mi. se se gr. mi^ se s. gr. mi. s. se. m 0 22 18 35 8 22 26
22 8 22 33 44 7 22 40 40 7 22 47 10 6 22 53 14 6 59 1 22 18 43 8 22 26 30 7 22
33 51 7 22 40 47 6 22 47 16 7 22 53 20 6 58 2 22 18 51 8 22 26 37 8 22 33 58 7
22 40 53 7 22 47 23 6 22 53 26 6 57 3 22 18 59 8 22 26 45 8 22 34 5 8 22 41 0 7
22 47 29 6 22 53 32 5 56 4 22 19 7 8 22 26 53 7 22 34 13 7 22 41 7 7 22 47 35 6
22 53 37 6 55 5 22 19 15 8 22 27 0 8 22 34 20 7 22 41 14 6 22 47 41 7 22 53 43
6 54 6 22 19 23 8 22 27 8 7 22 34 27 7 22 41 20 7 22 47 4^ 6 22 53 49 6 53 7 22
19 31 8 22 27 15 8 22 34 34 7 22 41 27 7 22 47 54 6 22 53 55 6 52 8 22 19 39 8
22 27 23 7 22 34 41 7 22 41 34 6 22 48 0 6 22 54 1 5 51 9 22 19 47 8 22 27 30 8
22 34 48 7 22 41 40 7 22 48 6 7 22 54 6 6 50 10 22 19 55 8 22 27 38 7 22 34 55
7 22 41 47 7 22 48 13 6 22 54 12 6 49 11 22 20 3 8 22 27 45 8 22 35 2 7 22 41
54 6 22 48 19 6 22 54 18 6 48 12 22 20 11 7 22 27 53 7 22 35 9 7 22 42 0 7 22
48 25 6 22 54 24 5 47 13 22 20 18 8 22 28 0 8 22 35 16 7 22 42 7 6 22 48 31 6
22 54 29 6 46 14 22 20 26 8 22 28 8 7 22 35 23 7 22 42 13 7 22 48 37 7 22 54 35
6 45 15 22 20 34 8 22 28 15 8 22 35 30 8 22 42 20 7 22 48 44 6 22 54 41 6 44 16
2^ 20 4^ 8 22 28 23 7 22 35 38 7 22 42 27 6 22 48 50 6 22 54 47 5 43 17 22 20
5^ 8 22 28 30 8 22 35 45 7 22 42 33 7 22 48 56 6 22 54 52 6 42 18 22 20 5^ 8 22
28 38 7 22 35 52 7 22 42 40 6 22 49 2 6 22 54 58 6 41 19 22 21 6 8 22 2^ 45 7
22 35 59 7 22 42 46 7 22 49 8 6 22 55 4 6 40 20 22 21 14 7 22 28 52 8 22 36 6 7
22 42 53 7 22 49 14 6 22 55 10 5 39 21 22 21 21 8 22 29 0 7 22 36 13 7 22 43 0
6 22 49 20 7 22 55 15 6 38 22 22 21 29 8 22 29 7 8 22 36 20 7 22 43 6 7 22 49
27 6 22 55 21 6 37 23 22 21 37 8 2^ 29 15 7 22 36 27 7 22 43 13 6 22 49 33 6 22
55 27 5 36 2^ 22 21 45 8 22 29 22 7 22 36 34 7 22 43 19 7 22 49 39 6 22 55 32 6
35 25 22 21 53 8 22 29 29 8 22 36 41 6 22 43 26 6 22 49 45 6 22 55 38 6 34 26
22 22 1 7 22 29 37 7 22 36 47 7 22 43 32 7 22 49 51 6 22 55 44 5 33 27 22 22 8
8 22 29 44 8 22 36 54 7 22 43 39 6 22 49 57 6 22 55 49 6 32 28 22 22 16 8 22 29
52 7 22 37 1 7 22 43 45 7 22 50 3 6 22 55 55 6 31 29 22 22 24 8 22 29 59 7 22
37 8 7 22 43 52 6 22 50 9 6 22 56 1 5 30 30 22 22 32 8 22 30 6 8 22 37 15 7 22
43 58 7 22 50 15 6 22 56 6 6 29 31 22 22 40 7 22 30 14 7 22 37 22 7 22 44 5 6
22 50 21 6 22 56 12 5 28 32 22 22 47 8 22 30 21 7 22 37 29 7 22 44 11 7 22 50
27 7 22 56 17 6 27 33 22 22 55 8 22 30 28 8 22 37 36 7 22 44 18 6 22 50 34 6 22
56 23 6 26 34 22 23 3 8 22 30 36 7 22 37 43 7 22 44 24 7 22 50 40 6 22 56 29 5
25 35 22 23 11 7 22 30 43 7 22 37 50 7 22 44 31 6 22 50 46 6 22 56 34 6 24 36
22 23 18 8 22 30 50 8 22 37 57 7 22 44 37 7 22 50 52 6 56 40 5 23 37 22 23 26 8
22 30 58 7 22 38 4 7 22 44 44 6 22 50 58 6 56 45 6 22 38 22 23 34 8 22 31 5 7
22 38 11 6 22 44 50 7 22 51 4 6 56 51 6 21 39 22 23 42 7 22 31 12 8 22 38 17 7
22 44 57 6 22 51 10 6 56 57 5 20 40 22 23 49 8 22 31 20 7 22 38 24 7 22 45 3 6
22 51 16 6 22 57 2 6 19 41 22 23 57 8 22 31 27 7 22 38 31 7 22 45 9 7 22 51 22
6 57 8 5 18 42 22 24 5 7 22 31 34 7 22 38 38 7 22 45 16 6 22 51 28 6 57 13 6 17
43 22 24 12 8 22 31 41 8 22 38 45 7 22 45 22 7 22 51 34 6 57 19 5 16 44 22 24
20 8 22 31 49 7 22 38 52 6 22 45 29 6 22 51 40 6 57 24 6 15 45 22 24 28 8 22 31
56 7 22 38 58 7 22 45 35 6 22 51 46 6 22 57 30 5 14 46 22 24 36 7 22 32 3 8 22
39 5 7 22 45 41 7 22 51 52 5 57 35 6 13 47 22 24 43 8 22 32 11 7 22 39 12 7 22
45 48 6 22 51 57 6 57 41 5 12 48 22 24 51 8 22 32 18 7 22 39 19 7 22 45 54 7 22
52 3 6 57 46 6 11 49 22 24 59 7 22 32 25 7 22 39 26 7 22 46 1 6 22 52 9 6 57 52
5 10 50 22 25 6 8 22 32 32 7 22 39 33 6 22 46 7 6 22 52 15 6 22 57 57 6 9 51 22
25 14 7 22 32 39 8 22 39 39 7 22 46 13 7 22 52 21 6 58 3 5 8 52 22 25 21 8 22
32 47 7 22 39 46 7 22 46 20 6 22 52 27 6 58 8 6 7 53 22 25 29 8 22 32 54 7 22
39 53 7 22 46 26 6 22 52 33 6 58 14 5 6 54 22 25 37 7 22 33 1 7 22 40 0 6 22 46
32 7 22 52 39 6 58 9 6 5 55 22 25 44 8 22 33 8 7 22 40 6 7 22 46 39 6 22 52 45
6 22 58 25 5 4 56 22 25 52 8 22 33 15 8 22 40 13 7 22 46 45 6 22 52 51 6 58 30
6 3 57 22 26 0 7 22 33 23 7 22 40 20 7 22 46 51 7 22 52 57 5 58 36 5 2 58 22 26
7 8 22 33 30 7 22 40 27 6 22 46 58 6 22 53 2 6 58 41 5 1 59 22 26 15 7 22 33 37
7 22 40 33 7 22 47 4 6 22 53 8 6 58 46 6 0 17 16 15 14 13 12 18 di 19 di 20 di
21 di 22 di 23 di m gr. mi s se. gr. mi. se s. gr. mi se. s gr. mi. se. se gr.
mi. se s. gr. mi. se se. m 0 22 58 52 5 23 4 3 5 23 8 48 4 23 13 6 4 23 16 57 4
23 20 21 3 59 1 22 58 58 6 23 4 8 5 23 8 52 5 23 13 10 4 23 17 1 3 23 20 24 3
58 2 22 59 3 5 23 4 13 5 23 8 57 4 23 13 14 4 23 17 4 4 23 20 27 4 57 3 22 59 8
5 23 4 18 5 23 9 1 5 23 13 18 4 23 17 8 3 23 20 31 3 56 4 22 59 13 6 23 4 23 5
23 9 6 4 23 13 22 4 23 17 11 4 23 20 34 3 55 5 22 59 19 5 23 4 28 5 23 9 10 5
23 13 26 4 23 17 15 4 23 20 37 3 54 6 22 59 24 5 23 4 33 5 23 9 15 4 23 13 30 4
23 17 19 3 23 20 40 3 53 7 22 59 29 6 23 4 38 5 23 9 19 5 23 13 34 4 23 17 22 4
23 20 43 3 52 8 22 59 35 5 23 4 43 4 23 9 24 4 23 13 38 4 23 17 26 3 23 20 46 3
51 9 22 59 40 5 23 4 47 5 23 9 28 5 23 13 42 4 23 17 29 4 23 20 4^ 4 50 10 22
59 45 6 23 4 52 5 23 9 33 4 23 13 46 4 23 17 33 3 23 20 53 3 49 11 22 59 51 5
23 4 5^ 5 23 9 37 5 23 13 50 4 23 17 36 4 23 20 56 3 48 12 22 59 56 5 23 5 2 5
23 9 42 4 23 13 54 4 23 17 40 3 23 20 59 3 47 13 23 0 1 6 23 5 7 5 23 9 46 4 ^3
13 58 4 23 17 43 4 23 21 2 3 46 14 23 0 7 5 23 5 12 5 23 9 50 5 23 14 2 4 23 17
47 4 23 21 5 3 45 15 23 0 12 5 23 5 17 5 23 9 55 4 23 14 6 4 23 17 51 3 23 21 8
3 44 16 23 0 17 6 23 5 22 4 23 9 59 5 23 14 10 4 23 17 54 4 21 11 3 43 17 23 0
23 5 23 5 26 5 23 10 4 4 23 14 14 4 23 17 58 3 21 14 3 42 18 23 0 28 5 23 5 31
5 23 10 8 4 23 14 18 4 23 18 1 4 21 17 3 41 19 23 0 33 5 23 5 36 5 23 10 12 5
23 14 22 4 23 18 5 3 21 20 3 40 20 23 0 38 6 23 5 41 5 23 10 17 4 23 14 26 4 23
18 8 3 23 21 23 3 39 21 23 0 44 5 23 5 46 5 23 10 21 4 23 14 30 4 23 18 11 4 21
26 3 38 22 23 0 49 5 23 5 51 4 23 10 25 5 23 14 34 4 23 18 15 3 21 29 3 37 23
23 0 54 5 23 5 55 5 23 10 30 4 23 14 38 3 23 18 18 4 21 32 3 36 24 23 0 59 6 23
6 0 5 23 10 34 5 23 14 41 4 23 18 22 3 21 35 3 35 25 23 1 5 5 23 6 5 5 23 10 39
4 23 14 45 4 23 18 25 4 23 21 38 3 34 26 23 1 10 5 23 6 10 4 23 10 43 4 23 14
49 4 23 18 29 3 21 41 3 33 27 23 1 15 5 23 6 14 5 23 10 47 5 23 14 53 4 23 18
32 4 21 44 3 32 28 23 1 20 5 23 6 19 5 23 10 52 4 23 14 57 4 23 18 36 3 21 47 3
31 29 23 1 25 6 23 6 24 5 23 10 56 4 23 15 1 4 23 18 39 3 21 50 3 30 30 23 1 31
5 23 6 29 4 23 11 0 4 23 15 5 4 23 18 42 4 23 21 53 3 29 31 23 1 36 5 23 6 33 5
23 11 4 5 23 15 9 3 23 18 46 3 21 56 3 28 32 23 1 41 5 23 6 38 5 23 11 9 4 23
15 12 4 23 18 49 4 21 59 3 27 33 23 1 46 5 23 6 43 5 23 11 13 4 23 15 16 4 23
18 53 3 22 2 3 26 34 23 1 51 6 23 6 48 4 23 11 17 5 23 15 20 4 23 18 56 3 22 5
3 25 35 23 1 57 5 23 6 52 5 23 11 22 4 23 15 24 4 23 18 59 4 23 22 8 3 24 36 23
2 2 5 23 6 57 5 23 11 26 4 23 15 28 4 23 19 3 3 22 11 3 23 37 23 2 7 5 23 7 2 4
23 11 30 4 23 15 32 3 23 19 6 3 22 14 3 22 38 23 2 12 5 23 7 6 5 23 11 34 5 23
15 35 4 23 19 9 4 22 17 2 21 39 23 2 17 5 23 7 11 5 23 11 39 4 23 15 39 4 23 19
13 3 22 19 3 20 40 23 2 22 5 23 7 16 5 23 11 43 4 23 15 43 4 23 19 16 3 23 22
22 3 19 41 23 2 27 5 23 7 21 4 23 11 47 4 23 15 47 3 23 19 19 4 22 25 3 18 42
23 2 32 6 23 7 25 5 23 11 51 4 23 15 50 4 23 19 23 3 22 28 3 17 43 23 2 38 5 23
7 30 4 23 11 55 5 23 15 54 4 23 19 26 3 22 31 3 16 44 23 2 43 5 23 7 34 5 23 12
0 4 23 15 58 4 23 19 29 4 22 34 3 15 45 23 2 48 5 23 7 39 5 23 12 4 4 23 16 2 3
23 19 33 3 23 22 37 2 14 46 23 2 53 5 23 7 44 4 23 12 8 4 23 16 5 4 23 19 36 3
22 39 3 13 47 23 2 58 5 23 7 48 5 23 12 12 4 23 16 9 4 23 19 39 3 22 42 3 12 48
23 3 3 5 23 7 53 5 23 12 16 4 23 16 13 4 23 19 42 4 22 45 3 11 49 23 3 8 5 23 7
58 4 23 12 20 5 23 16 17 3 23 19 46 3 22 4^ 3 10 50 23 3 13 5 23 8 2 5 23 12 25
4 23 16 20 4 23 19 49 3 23 22 51 2 9 51 23 3 18 5 23 8 7 4 23 12 29 4 23 16 24
4 23 19 52 4 22 53 3 8 52 23 3 23 5 23 8 11 5 23 12 33 4 23 16 28 3 23 19 56 3
22 56 3 7 53 23 3 28 5 23 8 16 4 23 12 37 4 23 16 31 4 23 19 59 3 22 59 3 6 54
23 3 33 5 23 8 20 5 23 12 41 4 23 16 35 4 23 20 2 3 23 2 3 5 55 23 3 38 5 23 8
25 5 23 12 45 4 23 16 39 3 23 20 5 3 23 23 5 2 4 56 23 3 43 5 23 8 30 4 23 12
49 5 23 16 42 4 23 20 8 4 23 7 3 3 57 23 3 48 5 23 8 34 5 23 12 54 4 23 16 46 4
23 20 12 3 23 10 3 2 58 23 3 53 5 23 8 39 4 23 12 58 4 23 16 50 3 23 20 15 3 23
13 3 1 59 23 3 58 5 23 8 43 5 23 13 2 4 23 16 53 4 23 20 18 3 23 16 2 0 11 10 9
8 7 6 24 di 25 di 26 di 27 di 28 di 29 di m gr. mi sec se. gr. mi. s. s. gr.
mi. s. s. gr. mi s. se gr. mi. se* th. th gr. mi. se. th t^ m 0 23 23 18 3 23
25 48 3 23 27 51 2 23 29 27 1 23 30 35 16 53 23 31 16 17 27 59 1 23 21 3 25 51
2 27 53 2 29 28 1 30 36 9 54 23 31 16 44 27 5^ 2 23 24 3 25 53 2 27 55 2 29 29
2 30 37 3 54 23 31 17 11 26 5^ 3 23 27 2 25 55 2 27 57 2 29 31 1 30 37 57 54 23
31 17 37 26 5^ 4 23 29 3 25 57 3 27 59 1 29 32 1 30 38 51 51 23 31 18 3 25 5^ 5
23 23 32 3 23 26 0 2 23 28 0 2 23 29 33 1 23 30 39 42 52 23 31 18 28 25 5^ 6 23
35 2 26 2 2 28 2 2 29 34 2 30 40 34 52 23 31 18 53 24 5^ 7 23 37 3 26 4 2 28 4
2 29 36 1 30 41 26 52 23 31 19 17 24 5^ 8 23 40 2 26 6 3 28 6 1 29 37 1 30 42
18 50 23 31 19 41 24 51 9 23 42 3 26 9 2 28 7 2 29 38 2 30 43 8 50 23 31 20 5
23 5^ 10 23 23 45 3 23 26 11 2 23 28 9 2 23 29 40 1 23 30 43 58 50 23 31 20 28
22 4^ 11 23 48 3 26 13 2 28 11 2 29 41 1 30 44 48 51 23 31 20 50 22 4^ 12 23 51
2 26 15 2 28 13 1 29 42 2 30 45 39 49 23 31 21 12 22 4^ 13 23 53 3 26 17 3 28
14 2 29 44 1 30 46 28 48 23 31 21 34 21 4^ 14 23 56 2 26 20 2 28 16 2 29 45 1
30 47 16 48 23 31 21 55 21 4^ 15 23 23 58 3 23 26 22 2 23 28 18 2 23 29 46 1 23
30 48 4 48 23 31 22 16 21 44 16 24 1 3 ^6 24 2 28 20 1 29 47 2 30 48 52 47 23
31 22 37 19 4^ 17 24 4 2 ^6 26 2 28 21 2 29 49 1 30 49 39 47 23 31 22 56 20 4^
18 24 6 3 26 28 2 28 23 2 29 50 1 30 50 26 46 23 31 23 16 19 41 19 24 9 2 26 30
2 28 25 1 29 51 1 30 51 12 46 23 31 23 35 18 4^ 20 2^ 2^ 11 3 23 26 32 3 23 28
26 2 23 29 52 1 23 30 51 58 44 23 31 23 53 18 3^ 21 24 14 3 26 35 2 28 28 2 29
53 2 30 52 42 45 23 31 24 11 18 3^ 22 24 17 2 26 37 2 28 30 1 29 55 1 30 53 27
45 23 31 24 29 17 37 23 24 19 3 26 39 2 28 31 2 29 56 1 30 54 12 45 23 31 24 46
17 3^ 24 24 22 2 26 41 2 28 33 1 29 57 1 30 54 57 42 23 31 25 3 16 35 25 23 24
24 3 23 26 43 2 23 28 34 2 23 29 58 1 23 30 55 39 43 23 31 25 19 16 34 26 24 27
2 26 45 2 28 36 2 29 59 2 30 56 22 43 23 31 25 35 15 33 27 24 29 3 26 47 2 28
38 1 30 1 1 30 57 5 43 23 31 25 50 15 32 28 24 32 2 26 49 2 28 39 2 30 2 1 30
57 48 41 23 31 26 5 14 31 29 24 34 3 26 51 2 28 41 2 30 3 1 30 58 29 41 23 31
26 19 14 30 30 23 24 37 2 23 26 53 2 23 28 43 1 23 30 4 1 23 30 59 10 41 23 31
26 33 14 29 31 24 39 3 26 55 2 28 44 2 30 5 1 30 59 51 41 23 31 26 47 13 28 32
24 42 2 26 57 2 28 46 1 30 6 1 31 0 32 40 23 31 27 0 12 27 33 24 44 3 26 59 2
28 47 2 30 7 2 31 1 12 40 23 31 27 12 12 26 34 24 47 2 27 1 2 28 49 1 30 9 1 31
1 52 38 23 31 27 24 12 25 35 23 24 49 3 23 27 3 2 23 28 50 2 23 30 10 1 22 31 2
30 39 23 31 27 36 11 24 36 24 52 2 27 5 2 28 52 1 30 11 1 31 3 9 37 23 31 27 47
11 23 37 24 54 3 27 7 2 28 53 2 30 12 1 31 3 46 38 23 31 27 58 10 22 38 24 57 2
27 9 2 28 55 2 30 13 1 31 4 24 37 23 31 28 8 10 21 39 24 59 2 27 11 2 28 57 1
30 14 1 31 5 1 37 23 31 28 18 10 20 40 23 25 1 3 23 27 13 2 23 28 58 2 23 30 15
1 23 31 5 38 35 23 31 28 28 9 19 41 25 4 2 27 15 2 29 0 1 30 16 1 31 6 13 35 31
28 37 8 18 42 25 6 3 27 17 2 29 1 2 30 17 1 31 6 48 36 31 28 45 8 17 43 25 9 2
27 19 2 29 3 1 30 18 1 31 7 24 37 31 28 53 8 16 44 25 11 2 27 21 2 29 4 2 30 19
1 31 8 1 33 31 29 1 7 15 45 23 25 13 3 23 27 23 2 23 29 6 1 23 30 20 1 23 31 8
34 34 23 31 29 8 6 14 46 25 16 2 27 25 2 29 7 2 30 21 1 31 9 8 34 31 29 14 7 13
47 25 18 3 27 27 2 29 9 1 30 22 1 31 9 42 34 31 29 21 5 12 48 25 21 2 27 29 2
29 10 1 30 23 1 31 10 16 33 31 29 26 6 11 49 25 23 2 27 31 2 29 11 2 30 24 1 31
10 49 32 31 29 32 5 10 50 23 25 25 3 23 27 33 2 23 29 13 1 23 30 25 1 23 31 11
21 31 23 31 29 37 4 9 51 25 28 2 27 35 1 29 14 2 30 26 1 31 11 52 31 31 29 41 4
8 52 25 30 2 27 36 2 29 16 1 30 27 1 31 12 23 31 31 29 45 3 7 53 25 32 3 27 38
2 29 17 2 30 28 1 31 12 54 30 31 29 48 3 6 54 25 35 2 27 40 2 29 19 1 30 29 1
31 13 24 30 31 29 51 3 5 55 23 25 37 2 23 27 42 2 23 29 20 1 23 30 30 1 23 31
13 54 30 23 31 29 54 2 4 56 25 39 3 27 44 2 29 21 2 30 31 1 31 14 24 29 31 29
56 2 3 57 25 42 2 27 46 2 29 23 1 30 32 1 31 14 53 28 31 29 58 1 2 58 25 44 2
27 48 1 29 24 2 30 33 1 31 15 21 28 31 29 59 1 1 59 25 46 2 27 49 2 29 26 1 30
34 1 31 15 49 28 31 30 0 0 0 5 4 3 2 1 0

CHAP. XVIII. The use of the Table of Declination
THis Table of Declination is made so particularly to every min. of the
Ecliptic, to avoid tediousness, in seeking the part proportional, when you
would find out thereby either the Declination of the Sun, his place being first
given in degrees and minutes: or else the place of the Sun in the Zodiac; his
Declination being first known by Observation, for which cause especially this
labor was undertaken, that hereby it might presently appear how well the
Ephemerides and Astronomical Tables hitherto published, agree with the truth of
the heavens. Wherein many times no small difference is found, even in the
Prutenick Tables themselves, (which have been hitherto accounted the most
perfect in that kind) disagreeing half a degree and more from the truth, and
that in the place of the Sun, whose motion of all others is accounted most
simple and regular, and most easy to be found out.

To find out the Declination of the Sun by his place first given, by help of
this table do thus: If the Sun be in Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Libra, Scorpio,
Sagittarie, seek the Sign and degree of the Sun in the upper margin or head of
the Table, and the odd minutes (if there be any) in the first column toward
the left hand: then look where the line proceeding toward the right hand from
the minute of the Sun crosses the column coming downwards from the degree of
the Sun, for there you have the Declination of the Sun. But if the Sun be in
Cancer, Leo Virgo, Capricorn, Aquarie, or Pisces, do contrariwise, that is,
seek the sign and degrees of the Sun in the nether margin or foot of the
Table, and the minutes (if there be any) in the last column next the right
hand: and following the line of the minute of the Sun toward the left hand:
and the column of the degree of the Sun upwards, in the common meeting of that
line and column you shall find the declination of the Sun.

Example of the first: the first of May 1609, the place of the Sun is in 20
degrees 45 minutes of Taurus according to the Ephemerides of the Sun hereafter
following, made agreeable to many exact Observations, taken by a Quadrant of
six foot and a quarter semidiameter in the years 1594. 1595. 1596. 1597.
Finding therefore Taurus and the 20 degree in the upper part of this Table, and
45 minutes in the first column, I have in the common meeting (of the column
descending from 20. and of the line proceeding from 45. minutes toward the
right hand) 18. degrees, 0* minutes 18. seconds, the Declination of the Sun the
same day at noon here at London.

Example of the second: The 15. of August the same year by the same
Ephemerides, the Sun is in 2, degr. 2. minutes of Virgo, Therefore I seek
Virgo, and 2. in the nether part of this Table and 50. minutes in the last
column toward the right hand ascending upwards. Then following the line of 2
minutes leftwards and the column of 2. degrees upwards in the common meeting of
the line and column, I find ten degres, 47. minutes, 19. sec. the declination
of the Sun the same day at noon, for the Meridian of London.

But the Declination of the Sun being first known (by Observation or otherwise)
the place of the Sun shall most easily be found out by this Table, after this
manner: Seek the Suns Declination in the Area of the Table: then if the sign
wherein the Sun is (which you may for the most part easily know by estimation)
be in the head of the Table, ascend upwards to the top of the same column in
which you found the Declination given, for there you shall have the degree of
the Sun: follow also the line wherein you find the given Declination toward
the left hand till you come to the first column leftwards, and there you shall
have the minute also.

But if the name of the sign wherein the Sun is, be in the nether part of the
Table, you must do all things contrariwise; descending from the Declination
found in the Area of this Table in the same column, till you come to the
lowest part thereof, where you shall find the degree of the Sun: and proceeding
from the Declination toward the right hand in the same line till you come to
the last column, where you shall find the minutes to be adjoined, that you may
have the true place of the Sun.

This way of finding out the place of the Sun by his Declination, first known
by Observation, is then of especial use and truth, when the Sun is near the
Equinoctial points; for there, his Declination alters quickest, increasing or
decreasing about 24 min. in 24. hours. But when the Sun is near either of the
Tropicks, the missing of one minute, yea or half a minute in observing the
Declination, may cause you err an whole degree and more, in the place of the
Sun. He therefore that lists try how well the Ephemerides and Astronomical
Tables hitherto published agree with the truth of the heavens, had best make
Observation when the Sun is in Pises, Aries, Virgo, and Libra, where mising one
whole minute in Observing the declination, will cause you miss not past two
minutes and an half in the true place of the Sun.

When the Sun is near either of the Equinoctial points, there may sometimes be
some small difficulty in finding out what sign the Sun is in, which may easily
be avoided thus: The Meridian Altitude of the Sun increasing (as in Winter and
Spring time) if the height of the Sun be less then the complement of the Poles
elevation, the Sun is in Pisces: otherwise in Aries. But if the Meridian
Altitudes of the Sun be every day less then other, (as in Summer and Autumn,
and the height of the Sun at noon greater then the height of the Equinoctial,
the Sun is in Virgo, otherwise in Libra.

There may likewise be some doubt in what sign the Sun is, being near either of
the Tropicks, which may be resolved thus: the Sun having South Declination
increasing, is in Sagittarie: but if the Declination of the Sun be Southerly
and decreasing, he is in Capricorn. Contrariwise the Declination of the Sun
being Northerly and increasing, he is in Gemini, if decreasing he is Cancer.

Now whether the Declination of the Sun increase or decrease, you may know by
comparing the Declinations of two days together. For if the Declination
answerable to the second day be greater, the Declination increases: otherwise
it decreaseth. If both days have equal Declination, the first day the Sun is
in Gemini, the second in Cancer, if his Declination be Northerly; if Southerly,
the first day he is in Sagittarie, the second in Capricorn.

An example or two will make all plain: The eighth day of April 1597. the
Declination of the Sun was found by Observation to be 10. degrees, 55. minutes,
27. seconds, which I seek out in the Area of this Table: and in the head of the
same column, in which I find the Declination that comes nearest unto this,
that is 10 degr. 55. min. 33. sec. I see 28. degrees of Aries, (for in April,
the Sun cannot be in Libra,) and in the same line wherein I found this
Declination, in the furthest column toward the left hand I find 21. minutes,
out of which abate 17. seconds, that is the part proportional answerable to 6.
sec. which is the excess of 10, degr, 55. minutes, 33. sec. (the Declination
found in the Table) above. 10. degr. 55. min 27. sec. (the Declination found by
Observation) and there shall remain the true place of the Sun the same year and
day 28. degr. 20. min. 43. sec. of Aries. Which Maginus following Copernicus
and the Prutenical Tables (as he professes) makes to be the 27. degr. 57.
minutes of Aries almost: that is, 24. minutes, less then truth, that equation
also being abated, which is answerable to the difference of Longitude betwixt
London and Venice.

The 11. of March the same year at London (whereby many and diligent
Observations by large and several Instruments, the height of the Pole is found
to be 51 degrees, 32 minutes) the apparent Meridian Altitude of the Sun was
exactly Observed to be 38 degrees, 49 minutes: but being corrected by the
Parallax and Refraction of the Sun, answerable to that height, his true height
shall be 38 degr. 51 min. 4 sec. Whereby it appears that his true Declination
the same day at Noon was 0 degr. 23 min, 4 sec. And that Northerly, because the
height of the Sun was greater then the height of the Equinoctial. It is plain
therefore that at that time the Sun was entered into Aries. But now to know how
far he was entered; seek out 0 degr. 23 min. 4 sec. Or the number next to it,
which is 0 degr. 23 min. 9 sec. In the Area of this Table: wherewith you shall
also find in the same line in the column next the left hand 58 minutes, and in
the top of the column right over this Declination you shall have 0 degr.
Therefore it is manifest that at that time the Sun was in 0 degr. 58 min. of
Aries almost, for there wants only 12 seconds hereof, that is the Part
Proportional answerable to the excess of 9. sec. above 4 sec. Where Maginus,
after the Prutenick account, makes it to be in 0 degr. 25 min. of Aries; that
is, 33 minutes wanting of the truth found by Observation.

The like difference I have often found by many and diligent Observations,
especially for the space of the four years before mentioned: the whole
Catalogue of which Observations I thought good (for thy further satisfaction
herein) to set down in a Table. (after I have first showed with what
Instrument, and after what manner I Observed the same) that if any error herein
has been committed, it may the more easily appear, and be amended.

CHAP. XIX. The description and use of a great Quadrant, for Observation of the
Sun on Land.
THe Instrument therefore wherewith I took those Observations was a Quadrant of
more then six foot and a quarter semidiameter, (for the room wherein I was to
use it, could not well admit a greater quantity) which by reason of his
largeness was so exactly made and divided, that both minutes and half minutes
might therein be easily discerned. The Limb and sides of the Quadrant were
about two inches and a quarter in thickness; the breadth of the Limb about four
inches: the breadth of the Sides about two inches and an half.

In the midst of the ends of one side of this Quadrant were two round holes
made, in either end one: whereby the Quadrant was hanged (like a gate on his
hinges, upon two round pins, fitted to those holes, and fixed in the ends of a
copple of sockets, put close upon a strong square post, Perpendicularly
erected, and the upper end thereof fastened to the side of a principal rafter in
an upper chamber, where a window (according to the Reclination of the Roof of
the house) was made between it and the next rafter, in such sort, that carrying
your eye along by the circumference of the Quadrant, you might by the Center
thereof placed at the window; see any part of the Heavens near the Meridian,
from the Zenith to the Horizon. The nether end of this post resting on the
floor was put into the midst of a socket nailed to the floor, which was so
wide, that on every side the post, wedges might be put in to coin it at
pleasure this way or that way, till the side of the Quadrant were found to
stand exactly Perpendicular, by the hanging of the plum-line all along most
precisely upon a line Parallel to the Zenith line of the Quadrant. To the
Center of the Quadrant was fastened a strong Ruler of one inch in thickness, two
inches in breadth, and almost six foot and an half in length, carrying two
Sights upon it ( viz. at either end one) of equal breadth and length, the end
of the middle line of each Sight falling Perpendicularly upon the middle or
fiducial line and plain Superficies of the Ruler. Through the upper Sight
placed at the Center, was made a square hole as great as it could well be.
Through the midst of this Sight and hole was put a straight wyre, erected
Perpendicularly from the Fiducial line and plain of the Ruler, and so much of
it made flat and thin, as was between the top and base of that square hole.
This wire served for Observing the Stars, the flat side whereof was to be
turned toward the eye in Observing of great Stars, and the narrow side or edge
of it was turned to the eye-ward when small Stars were to be Observed. Through
the midst of the nether Sight (from the top of it to the Base thereof) was made
a narrow slit Perpendicularly erected likewise from the Fiducial line and plain
of the Ruler and Quadrant. When I Observed the Stars* I looked through this
slit, Elevating and Depressing the Ruler, till the wire (being first fitted to
bigness of the Star) did even cover the Star from my sight: in such sort, that
I might see both edges of the Star alike on either side above and beneath the
wyre. The square hole in the Sight had a cover fitted to it like the cover of a
box; wherewith it was wholly covered when the Sun was to be Observed. The
nether end of the Ruler carrying the Sights, was to be fastened with a
screw-pin, at any part of the Circumference of the Quadrant as need required,

With this Quadrant (always rectified by the Plumb line in time of
Observation, as before is showed) the height of the Sun was most easily and
exactly Observed, by turning the Quadrant this way or that away, and Elevating
or depressing the Ruler carrying the Sights, till the top and sides of the
shadow of the Upper Sight, placed at the center fell upon the nether Sight
placed at the center fell upon the nether Sight placed at the Circumference,
equidistantly from the top and sides thereof; For then the upper edge of the
Ruler shows precisely the height of the Sun desired in degrees and minutes
upon the limb of the Quadrant: saving that one whole degree was always to be
added thereto, because the breadth of that part of the Ruler that lay upon the
Limb of the Quadrant was made to be just equal to two degrees: that is on
either side one degree from the fiducial line.

Now for finding out the Meridian Altitudes of the Sun and Stars, I first found
the Meridian line thus: with the quadrant rectified and used, as before is
showed, I Observed the height of the Sun in the forenoon; and so warily letting
the Quadrant stand immovable, and laying the side of a straight Ruler (that
was about seven foot in length) close along to the perpendicular side of the
Quadrant: close by the end of that side of the Ruler (touching the floor of the
chamber, I made a prick upon the floor: Also laying the side of the Ruler to
the perpendicular side, and limb of the Quadrant, I made in like manner another
prick (so far as conveniently I could from the former) upon the floor, close by
the corner of that side of the Ruler.

By these two pricks, I drew a right line which represented the intersection of
the Suns Azimuth, or of the continued plain of the Quadrant, and of the plain
of the floor, in the time of Observation. Likewise in the afternoon (the Ruler
of the Quadrant carrying the Sights, being fixed in the same place, where it
was in time of Observation in the forenoon) I Observed diligently till the Sun
came to the same height that he had when I Observed in the forenoon, which I
did by following the motion of the Suns shadow with the Quadrant, till the
edges of the top and sides of the shadow of the upper Sight fell upon the
nether Sight, equidistantly from the top and Sides thereof.

Then carefully letting the quadrant stand immovable, and drawing the line of
intersection of the floor, and Suns Azimuth, in time of the afternoon
Observation, in like manner as I did in the forenoon, setting one foot of the
Compasses in the intersection of those two lines, with the other, drawing an
arch, so great as I could between the same lines and finding out the midst of
this arch, a line from the Center drawn by this midst, was the Meridian line:
over which, with help of a long Ruler laid to the upright Side, and Limb of the
Quadrant, and extended to the floor, (as before) I always placed and fastened
the plain of the Quadrant (understood to be continued to the floor) so often as I
Observed the Meridian Altitudes of the Sun or Stars.

Notwithstanding there is some little error in finding the Meridian after this
manner, except it be when the Sun is in, or so near one of the Tropical points,
that there can be no sensible alteration of his Declination between the times
of the forenoon and afternoon Observations. But the consequents of this error
in Observing Meridian Altitudes, may for their smalness justly be neglected and
easily avoided if you attend your Observation, but a little before and after
the Sun or Stars to be Observed, come upon the Meridian thus found. And for the
more certainty, I took three Observations in the forenoon, and as many in the
afternoon, and so found out three Meridian lines, all Parallels each to other,
without notable difference; which if it should have chanced to be any, the
middlemost Meridian should be like to be the truest.

A Table of OBSERVATIONS Of the Meridian Altitudes of the Sun, taken by a large
Quadrant, of more then six foot Semidiameter, in the years 1594, 1595, 1596,
1597, at London, where the Elevation of the Pole was by the same Quadrant, and
otherwise also exactly observed and found to be 51 degr. 32 min.
1594 May. The Suns apparent height. The Suns true height. The Suns apparent
declination. Day. Degr. Min. Sec. Degr. Min. Sec Degr. Min. Sec. 9 Thursd. 58
14 58 15 36 19 46 0 11 Satur. 58 41 58 42 33 20 13 0 13 Mund. 59 4 59 5 33 20
36 0 14 Tuesd. 59 15 59 16 33 20 47 0 17 Frid. 59 45 59 46 30 21 17 0 26 Sund.
61 1 30 61 2 58 22 33 30 27 Mund. 61 8 61 9 28 22 40 0 28 Tuesd. 61 14 61 15 28
22 46 0 29 Wednes. 61 20 30 61 21 58 22 52 30 31 Frid. 61 31 61 32 25 23 3 0
June 1 Saturd. 61 35 61 36 25 23 7 0 2 Sund. 61 40 61 41 25 23 12 0 4 Tuesd. 61
46 30 61 47 55 23 18 30 6 Thurs. 61 52 30 61 53 55 23 24 30 7 Frid. 61 54 61 55
25 23 26 0 8 Saturd. 61 55 30 61 56 55 23 27 30 9 Sund. 61 56 30 61 57 55 23 28
30 10 Mund 61 57 61 58 25 23 29 0 11 Tuesd. 61 58 61 59 25 23 30 0 12 Wednes 61
58 61 59 25 23 30 0 13 Thursd 61 57 30 61 58 55 23 29 30 14 Frid. 61 57 61 58
25 23 29 0 15 Saturd. 61 56 61 57 25 23 28 0 22 Saturd. 61 35 61 36 25 23 7 0
23 Sund. 61 32 61 33 25 23 4 0 24 Mund. 61 26 30 61 27 58 22 58 30 July 6
Saturd. 59 56 00 59 57 30 21 28 0 8 Mund. 59 36 30 59 38 00 21 8 30 9 Tuesd. 59
26 0 59 27 33 20 58 0 15 Mond. 58 14 0 58 15 34 19 46 0 16 Tuesd. 58 1 0 58 2
36 19 33 0 The Suns true declination. The Suns place by observation. The Suns
place by Prutenick Tables. The difference. Degr. Min. Sec Degr. Min. Sec. Degr.
Min. Sec. Min. Sec. 19 47 36 28 2 0 27 43 0 19 0 20 14 33 5 30 29 39 0 26 30 20
37 33 1 57 0 1 34 0 23 0 20 48 33 2 52 40 2 32 0 20 40 21 18 30 5 33 40 5 25 0
8 40 22 34 58 14 10 30 14 2 0 8 30 22 41 28 15 7 0 15 0 0 7 0 22 47 28 16 3 0
15 57 0 6 0 22 53 58 17 7 30 16 55 0 12 30 23 4 25 19 4 30 18 50 0 14 30 23 8
25 19 55 0 19 47 0 8 0 23 13 25 21 5 0 20 44 0 21 0 23 49 55 22 52 0 22 39 0 13
0 23 25 55 25 3 0 24 34 0 29 0 23 27 25 25 46 0 25 31 0 15 0 23 28 25 26 19 0
26 29 0 10 0 23 29 55 27 22 0 27 26 0 4 0 23 30 25 27 50 0 28 23 0 33 0 23 31
25 29 24 0 29 21 0 3 0 23 31 25 0 35 0 0 18 0 17 0 23 30 55 1 36 0 1 15 0 21 0
23 30 25 2 10 0 2 12 0 2 0 23 29 25 3 1 30 3 10 0 8 30 23 8 25 10 5 0 9 51 0 46
0 23 5 25 10 43 0 10 48 0 5 0 22 59 58 11 47 30 11 45 0 2 0 21 29 30 23 23 0 23
13 0 10 0 21 10 0 25 13 40 25 8 0 5 40 20 59 33 26 10 0 26 5 0 5 0 19 47 34 1
58 0 1 50 0 8 0 19 34 36 2 55 0 2 47 0 11 0 1594 Iul^. The Suns Apparent
height. The Suns True height The Suns apparent Declination. Day. Degrees. Min. Sec.
Degrees. Min. Sec. Degr. Min. Sec. 19 Frid. 57 20 0 57 21 39 18 52 0 25 Thursd. 55
50 0 55 51 41 17 22 0 31 Wednes. 54 9 30 54 11 11 15 41 30 August. 3 Saturd. 53
15 30 53 17 18 14 47 30 6 Tuesd. 52 19 30 52 21 21 13 51 30 7 Wednes. 52 0 0 52
1 51 13 32 0 8 Thurs. 51 40 30 51 42 21 13 12 30 9 Frid. 51 21 30 51 23 24 12
53 30 12 Mond. 50 23 0 50 24 54 11 55 0 15 Thursd. 49 21 0 49 22 58 10 53 0 19
Mond. 47 57 0 47 47 59 9 29 0 23 Frid. 46 30 0 46 32 2 8 2 0 24 Satur. 46 7 30
46 9 35 7 39 30 26 Mond. 45 23 30 45 25 32 6 55 30 29 Thursd. 44 16 0 44 18 4 5
48 0 September. 16 Mond. 37 18 0 37 19 58 1 10 0 17 Tuesd. 36 54 0 36 55 58 1
34 0 19 Thursd. 36 7 0 36 8 55 2 21 0 20 Frid. 35 44 0 35 45 55 2 44 0 October.
1 Tuesday. 31 28 0 31 29 19 7 0 0 3 Thursd. 30 43 30 30 44 49 7 44 30 4 Friday.
30 21 0 30 22 11 8 7 0 5 Saturd. 29 58 30 29 59 41 8 29 30 16 Wednes. 26 0 30
26 0 58 12 27 30 18 Friday. 25 20 30 25 20 44 13 7 30 19 Saturd. 25 0 0 25 0 14
13 28 0 21 Mond. 24 20 0 24 19 45 14 8 0 25 Friday. 23 5 0 23 4 16 15 23 0 29
Tuesd. 21 52 0 21 50 48 16 36 0 The Suns true declination. The Suns place by
Observation. The Suns place by Prutenick Tables The difference. Degr. Min. Sec.
Degr. Min. Sec Degr. Min. Sec. Min. Sec. 18 53 39 5 47 45 5 39 0 8 45 17 23 41
11 29 52 11 25 0 4 52 15 43 11 17 15 6 17 10 0 5 6 14 49 18 20 8 30 20 3 0 5 30
13 53 21 23 2 0 22 57 0 5 0 13 33 51 24 1 0 23 54 0 7 0 13 14 21 24 59 0 24 52
0 7 0 12 55 24 25 55 20 25 50 0 5 20 11 56 54 28 45 24 28 44 0 1 24 10 54 58 1
40 36 1 38 0 2 36 9 19 59 6 1 40 5 30 0 31 40 8 4 2 9 25 0 9 22 0 3 0 7 41 35
10 24 15 10 21 0 3 15 6 57 32 12 19 45 12 17 0 2 45 5 50 4 15 14 45 15 12 0 2
45 1 8 2 2 50 30 2 48 0 2 0 1 32 2 3 50 42 3 47 0 2 42 2 19 5 5 49 0 5 45 0 2 0
2 42 5 6 46 52 6 44 0 2 52 6 58 41 17 43 13 17 35 0 6 13 7 43 11 19 40 0 19 34
0 6 0 8 5 4^ 20 39 48 20 33 0 6 48 8 28 19 21 39 36 21 33 0 6 36 12 27 2 2 40
36 2 30 0 10 0 13 7 16 4 42 42 4 30 0 12 42 13 27 46 5 40 51 5 30 0 10 51 14 8
15 7 43 45 7 30 0 13 45 15 23 44 11 41 30 11 30 0 11 30 16 37 12 15 46 20 15 31
0 14 20 1594 November. The Suns Apparent height. The suns True height The ^uns
apparent Declination. Day. Degr^ Min. Sec. Degr. Min. Sec. Degr. Min. Sec. 1
Friday 21 0 0 20 58 19 17 28 0 3 Sund. 20 27 0 20 24 50 18 1 0 4 Mund. 20 12 0
20 9 50 18 16 0 7 Thursd. 19 27 0 19 24 20 19 1 0 10 Sund. 18 43 0 18 40 20 19
45 0 19 Tuesd. 16 55 0 16 51 22 21 33 0 20 Wednes^ 16 45 0 16 41 22 21 43 0 22
Friday. 16 27 0 16 22 53 22 1 0 23 Saturd. 16 18 0 16 13 53 22 10 0 27 Wednes.
15 48 0 15 43 53 22 40 0 28 Thursd. 15 41 0 15 36 53 22 47 0 29 Friday. 15 35 0
15 30 53 22 53 0 December. 17 Tuesd. 15 6 0 15 1 24 23 22 0 18 Wednes. 15 9 0
15 4 24 23 19 0 20 Friday. 15 16 0 15 11 24 23 12 0 22 Sunday. 15 25 0 15 20 24
23 3 0 29 Sunday. 16 10 30 16 6 23 22 17 30 January. 9 Thursd. 18 4 30 18 1 21
20 23 30 18 Saturd. 30 13 0 20 10 50 18 15 0 23 Thursd. 21 35 0 21 33 48 16 53
0 26 Sunday. 22 28 30 22 27 18 15 59 30 31 Friday. 24 3 0 24 2 45 14 25 0
February. 1 Saturd. 24 22 0 24 21 45 14 6 0 5 Wednes. 25 43 0 25 43 28 12 45 0
8 Satur. 26 46 0 26 46 41 11 42 0 13 Thursd. 28 33 0 28 34 2 9 55 0 15 Saturd.
29 19 0 29 20 2 9 9 0 16 Sund. 29 40 30 29 41 41 8 47 30 17 Mond. 30 3 0 30 4
11 8 25 0 20 Thursd 31 11 30 31 12 49 7 16 30 The Suns true declination. The
Suns place by Observation. The Suns place by Prutenick Tables The difference.
Degr. Min. Sec. Degr. Min. Sec. Degr. Min. Sec. Min. Sec. 17 29 41 18 51 48 18
32 0 19 48 18 3 10 20 55 48 20 33 0 22 48 18 18 10 21 53 4 21 33 0 20 4 19 3 40
24 54 12 24 35 0 19 12 19 47 40 28 2 25 27 36 0 26 25 21 36 38 7 19 30 6 43 0
36 30 21 46 38 8 21 12 7 43 0 38 12 22 5 7 10 23 6 9 45 0 38 6 ^2 14 7 11 27 0
10 46 0 41 0 22 44 7 15 31 20 14 49 0 42 20 22 51 7 16 38 30 15 50 0 48 30 22
57 7 17 40 50 16 48 0 52 50 23 26 36 4 38 30 5 10 0 31 30 23 23 3^ 5 53 30 6 11
0 18 30 23 16 36 8 5 45 8 13 0 7 15 23 7 36 10 15 36 10 16 0 0 24 22 21 37 17
37 0 17 23 0 14 0 20 26 39 28 56 40 28 35 0 21 4 18 17 10 8 10 45 7 43 0 27 45
16 54 12 13 14 38 12 47 0 27 38 16 0 42 16 17 10 15 50 0 27 10 14 25 15 21 23
48 20 53 0 30 48 14 6 15 22 22 24 21 53 0 29 24 12 44 32 26 27 18 25 56 0 31 18
11 41 19 29 29 54 28 57 0 32 54 9 53 58 4 29 14 3 59 0 30 14 9 71 58 6 34 6 5
59 0 35 6 8 46 19 7 32 18 6 59 0 33 18 8 23 49 8 32 23 7 59 0 33 23 7 15 11 11
33 36 11 0 0 33 36 1595. February. The Suns apparent height. The Suns True
height The Suns apparent Declination. Day. Degr. Min. Sec. Degr. Min. Sec.
Degr. Min^ Sec. 21 Friday. 31 34 0 31 35 27 6 54 0 27 Thursd. 33 54 0 33 55 44
4 34 0 March. 1 Saturd. 34 40 0 34 41 52 3 48 0 3 Mond. 35 27 0 35 28 52 3 1 0
12 Wednes. 39 0 0 39 2 4 0 32 0 15 Saturd. 40 10 0 40 12 8 1 42 0 17 Mond. 40
58 0 41 0 7 2 30 0 18 Tuesd. 41 22 0 41 24 7 2 54 0 19 Wednes. 41 45 0 41 47 6
3 17 0 20 Thurs. 42 9 0 42 11 6 3 41 0 21 Friday. 42 31 0 42 33 5 4 3 0 25
Tuesd. 44 4 0 44 6 4 5 36 0 26 Wednes. 44 26 30 44 28 34 5 58 30 27 Thursd. 44
49 0 44 51 2 6 21 0 31 Monday. 46 19 0 46 21 5 7 51 0 April. 3 Thursd. 47 25 0
47 27 3 8 57 0 7 Monday. 48 51 0 48 52 58 20 23 0 8 Tuesd^y 49 12 0 49 13 58 10
44 0 14 Mond^y. 51 14 0 51 15 54 12 46 0 May. 3 Satur^. 56 47 0 56 48 39 18 19
0 6 Tuesday* 57 29 30 57 31 9 19 1 31 14 Wednes. 59 10 0 59 11 33 20 42 0 17
Tuesday. 59 43 30 59 45 0 21 25 30 21 Wednes. 60 21 30 60 23 0 21 53 30 23
Friday. 60 38 0 60 39 28 22 10 0 24 Saturd. 60 46 0 60 47 28 22 18 0 29 Thursd.
61 19 0 61 20 28 22 51 0 June. 7 Saturd. 61 54 0 21 55 25 23 26 0 9 Monday 61
56 30 61 57 55 23 28 30 The Suns true declination. The Suns Place by
observation. The Suns place by Prutenick Tables. The difference^ Degr. Min.
Sec. Degr. Min. Sec Degr. Min. ^ec. Min. Sec. 6 52 33 12 32 45 12 0 0 32 45 4
32 16 18 34 3 17 59 0 35 3 3 46 8 20 31 17 19 59 0 32 17 2 59 8 22 30 8 21 58 0
32 8 0 34 4 1 25 22 0 55 0 30 22 1 44 8 4 21 5 3^ 53 0 28 5 2 32 7 6 21 45 5 51
0 30 45 2 56 7 7 22 15 6 50 0 32 15 3 19 6 8 20 18 7 50 0 30 18 3 43 6 9 21 3 8
49 0 32 3 4 5 5 10 16 48 9 48 0 28 48 5 38 4 14 14 23 13 44 0 30 23 6 0 34 15
12 20 14 43 0 29 20 6 23 2 16 10 30 15 42 0 28 30 7 53 5 20 6 5 19 38 0 28 5 8
59 3 23 1 52 22 34 0 27 52 10 24 58 26 56 0 26 28 0 28 0 10 45 58 17 54 16 27
27 0 27 16 12 47 54 3 42 33 3 18 0 24 33 18 20 39 22 2 40 21 42 0 20 40 19 3 9
24 52 4 24 36 0 16 4 20 43 33 2 27 10 2 17 0 10 10 21 17 0 5 25 12 5 10 0 15 12
21 55 0 9 15 0 9 1 0 14 0 22 11 28 11 7 45 10 56 0 11 45 22 19 28 12 6 38 11 53
0 13 38 22 52 28 16 52 10 16 40 0 12 10 23 27 25 25 46 0 25 17 0 29 0 32 29 55
27 22 0 27 12 0 10 0 1595 June. The Suns apparent height The Suns true height.
The Suns apparent Declination. Day. Degr. Min Sec. Degr Min. Sec. Degr. Min.
Sec. 21 Saturd. 61 40 30 61 41 55 33 21 30 23 Mond. 61 32 0 61 33 25 23 4 0 26
Thursd. 61 16 0 61 17 28 22 48 0 July. 30 Wednes. 54 30 0 54 31 45 16 2 0 31
Thursd. 54 14 0 54 15 46 15 46 0 August. 1 Frid. 53 56 0 53 57 46 15 28 0 2
Saturd. 53 37 0 53 38 46 15 9 0 8 Frid. 51 45 0 51 46 51 13 17 0 9 Saturd. 51
26 0 51 27 54 12 58 0 10 Sund. 51 6 0 51 7 54 12 38 0 19 Tusd. 48 2 0 48 4 0 9
34 0 21 Thursd. 47 20 0 47 22 3 8 52 0 23 Friday 46 57 30 46 59 33 8 29 30 26
Tuesd. 45 30 0 45 32 4 7 2 0 29 Friday. 44 22 0 44 24 4 5 54 0 September. 7
Sund. 40 54 0 40 56 7 2 26 0 8 Mond. 40 30 0 40 32 7 2 2 0 9 Tuesd. 40 7 0 40 9
8 1 39 0 10 Wed. 39 44 0 39 46 8 1 16 0 11 Thursd. 39 20 0 39 22 5 0 52 0 16
Tuesd. 37 23 30 37 25 29 1 4 30 17 Wed. 37 0 0 37 1 58 1 28 0 18 Thursd. 36 36
0 36 37 58 1 52 0 19 Friday. 36 12 0 36 13 55 2 16 0 20 Saturd. 35 48 30 35 50
25 2 39 30 23 Tuesd. 34 38 0 34 39 52 3 50 0 26 Friday 33 29 0 33 30 39 4 59 0
October. 2 Thursd. 31 11 30 31 12 49 7 16 30 3 Friday. 30 48 0 30 49 19 7 40 0
The Suns true declination The Suns place by Observation. The Suns place by
Prutenick Tables. The difference. Degree. Min. Sec Degr. Min. Sec. Degr. Min.
Sec. Min. Sec. 28 13 55 8 47 45 8 39 0 8 45 23 5 25 10 43 15 10 34 0 9 15 22 49
28 13 37 50 13 26 0 11 50 16 3 45 16 7 0 15 58 0 9 0 15 47 46 17 0 3 16 0 2 4 3
15 29 46 17 58 57 17 54 0 4 57 15 10 46 19 0 16 18 51 0 9 16 13 18 51 24 45 48
24 38 0 7 48 12 59 54 25 42 6 25 36 0 6 6 12 39 34 26 40 54 26 34 0 6 54 9 36 0
5 18 14 5 15 0 3 14 8 54 3 7 11 32 7 12 0 0 28 8 31 33 8 11 46 8 10 0 1 46 7 4
4 12 2 44 12 3 0 0 16 5 56 4 14 59 16 14 58 0 1 16 2 28 7 23 48 18 23 44 0 4 18
2 4 7 24 48 42 24 43 0 5 42 1 41 8 25 46 25 25 41 0 5 25 1 18 8 26 44 10 26 40
0 4 10 0 54 5 27 44 27 27 39 0 5 27 1 2 31 2 36 40 2 33 0 3 40 1 26 2 3 35 40 3
32 0 3 40 1 50 2 4 35 35 4 31 0 4 55 2 14 5 5 36 22 5 30 0 6 22 2 37 35 6 35 32
6 29 0 6 32 3 48 8 9 33 52 9 26 0 7 52 4 57 21 12 29 57 12 24 0 5 57 7 15 11 18
26 22 18 20 0 6 22 7 38 41 19 28 5 19 19 0 9 5 1595 October. The Suns Apparent
height. The Suns True height* The Suns apparent Declination. Day. Degrees. Min.
Sec. Degr. Min. Sec. Degrees. Min. Sec. 9 Thursd. 28 35 0 28 35 55 9 53 0 11
Saturd. 27 12 0 27 52 54 10 36 0 12 Sund. 27 30 0 27 30 47 10 58 0 15 Wednes.
26 26 30 26 27 3 12 1 30 17 Friday. 25 45 0 25 45 25 12 43 0 30 Thursd. 21 37
30 21 36 8 16 50 30 November. 18 Tuesd. 17 8 0 17 4 26 21 20 0 19 Wed. 16 58 0 16
54 21 21 30 0 20 Thursd. 16 48 0 16 44 16 21 40 0 24 Mond. 16 13 30 16 9 30 22
14 30 December. 2 Tusd. 15 20 30 15 15 34 23 7 30 10 Wednes. 15 0 0 14 55 30 23
28 0 12 Friday. 14 58 0 14 53 23 23 30 0 18 Thursd. 15 8 0 15 3 28 23 20 0 20
Saturd. 15 14 0 15 9 31 23 14 0 21 Sund. 15 18 0 15 13 33 23 10 0 24 Wed. 1 34
0 15 29 40 22 54 0 30 Tuesd 16 16 0 16 12 0 22 12 0 January. 1 Thursd. 16 34 0
16 30 7 21 54 0 3 Saturd. 16 53 0 16 44 18 21 35 0 10 Saturd. 18 14 0 28 18 58
20 14 0 12 Mond. 18 39 30 18 36 40 19 48 30 14 Wednes. 19 8 0 19 5 24 19 20 0
22 Thursd. 21 14 0 21 12 26 17 14 0 24 Wednes. 21 48 0 21 16 42 16 40 0
February. 13 Friday. 28 29 0 28 29 58 9 59 0 17 Tuesd. 29 57 0 29 58 10 8 31 0
18 Wed. 30 10 0 30 11 12 8 18 0 24 Tuesd. 32 37 30 32 39 2 5 50 30 The Suns
true declination. The Suns place by observation. The Suns place by Prutenick
Tables. The difference. Degr. Min. Sec^ Degr. Min. Sec. Degr. Min. Sec Min.
Sec. 9 52 1 25 25 27 25 17 0 8 27 10 35 6 27 24 3 27 16 0 8 2 10 57 13 28 25 40
28 16 0 9 40 12 0 57 1 26 14 1 15 0 11 14 12 42 35 3 26 57 3 15 0 11 57 16 51
52 16 37 14 16 16 0 21 14 21 23 34 6 2 30 5 27 0 35 30 21 33 39 7 1 33 6 28 0
33 33 21 43 44 8 3 0 7 28 0 35 0 22 18 30 11 59 22 11 32 0 27 22 23 12 26 20 50
15 16 39 0 23 32 30 27 47 0 23 34 37 29 50 0 23 24 32 5 32 0 5 56 0 24 0 23 18
29 7 34 0 7 58 0 24 0 23 14 27 8 39 45 8 59 0 19 15 22 58 20 12 5 50 12 3 0 2
50 22 16 0 18 19 15 18 9 0 10 15 21 57 53 20 26 0 20 11 0 15 0 21 38 42 22 28 0
22 24 0 14 0 20 17 2 29 42 45 29 22 0 20 45 19 51 20 1 41 13 1 23 0 18 13 19 22
36 3 46 34 3 25 0 21 34 17 15 34 11 59 4 11 32 0 27 4 16 41 18 13 59 30 13 30 0
29 30 9 58 2 4 18 6 3 40 0 38 6 8 29 50 8 16 22 7 44 30 31 52 8 16 48 8 51 3 8
45 0 6 3 5 48 57 15 18 10 14 45 0 33 10 1595 February. The Suns Apparent
height. The Suns True height The Suns apparent Declination. Day. Degr. Min.
Sec. Degr. Min. Sec. Dege. Min. Sec. 25 Wed. 33 1 0 33 2 35 5 27 0 26 Thursd.
33 24 0 33 25 39 5 3 0 29 Sund. 34 34 30 34 36 19 3 53 30 March. 13 Saturd. 39
42 0 39 44 7 1 14 0 14 Sund. 40 6 0 40 8 8 1 38 0 16 Tuesd. 40 52 0 4 54 7 2 24
0 April. 20 Tuesd. 53 23 0 53 24 48 14 55 0 24 Saturd. 54 35 0 54 36 44 16 7 0
25 Sund. 54 51 30 54 53 13 16 23 30 26 Mond 55 8 30 55 10 13 16 40 0 28 Wed. 55
41 0 55 42 41 17 13 0 19 Thursd 55 57 0 55 58 36 17 29 0 May. 4 Tuesd 57 13 0
57 14 39 18 45 0 11 Tuesd. 58 45 30 58 47 5 20 17 30 Iund. 15 Tuesd. 61 54 0 61
55 25 23 26 0 18 Friday. 61 47 0 61 48 25 23 19 0 July. 24 Saturd. 55 56 0 55
57 41 16 28 30 27 Tuesd. 55 8 0 55 9 43 16 40 0 29 Thursd. 54 34 0 54 35 44 16
6 0 30 Friday 54 17 0 54 18 46 15 49 0 31 Saturd. 54 0 0 54 1 46 15 32 0 August
10 Tuesd. 50 51 0 50 52 54 12 23 0 13 Friday 49 50 30 49 52 26 11 22 30 16
Mond. 48 48 0 48 49 58 10 20 0 21 Saturd. 47 1 30 47 3 33 8 33 30 30 Mond. 43
41 0 43 43 4 5 13 0 The Suns true declination The Suns place by Observation.
The Suns place by Prutenick Tables. The difference Degree. Min. Sec Degr. Min.
Sec. Degr. Min. Sec. Min. Sec. 5 25 25 16 18 8 15 45 0 33 8 5 2 21 17 17 15 16
45 0 32 15 3 51 41 20 17 12 19 45 0 32 12 1 16 7 3 10 48 2 39 0 31 48 1 40 8 4
11 2 3 38 0 33 2 2 26 7 6 6 40 5 37 0 29 40 14 56 48 10 15 13 9 51 0 24 13 16 8
44 14 9 40 13 44 0 25 40 16 25 13 15 5 20 14 42 0 23 20 16 42 13 16 3 42 15 40
0 23 42 17 14 41 17 57 45 17 36 0 21 45 17 30 36 18 55 10 18 34 0 21 10 18 46
39 23 45 4 23 24 0 21 4 20 19 5 0 27 0 0 8 0 19 0 23 27 25 4 14 0 3 39 0 35 0
23 20 25 6 58 40 6 31 0 27 40 17 29 41 11 8 11 10 56 0 12 11 16 41 43 13 58 3
13 49 0 9 3 16 7 44 15 53 40 15 44 0 9 40 15 50 46 16 50 10 16 42 0 8 10 15 33
46 17 45 3 17 39 0 6 3 12 24 54 27 24 24 27 17 0 7 24 11 24 26 0 17 48 0 11 0 6
48 10 21 58 3 12 17 3 5 0 7 17 8 35 33 8 1 5 7 55 0 6 5 5 15 4 16 44 40 16 40 0
4 40 1596 August. The Suns apparent height The Suns true height. The Suns
apparent Declination. Day. Degr. Min. Sec. Degr. Min. Sec Degr. Min. Sec. 31
Tuesd. 43 17 30 43 19 35 4 46 30 September. 5 Sund. 41 22 30 41 24 37 2 54 30 6
Mond. 40 59 0 41 1 7 2 31 0 7 Tuesd. 40 36 0 40 38 7 2 8 0 8 Wed. 40 12 30 40
14 38 1 44 30 13 Mond. 38 16 0 38 18 1 0 12 0 14 Tuesd. 37 52 0 37 54 1 0 36 0
25 Saturd. 33 34 30 33 36 10 4 53 30 27 Mond. 32 48 0 32 49 34 5 40 0 October.
4 Mond. 30 9 0 30 10 12 8 19 0 November. 2 Tuesd. 20 35 0 20 33 7 17 53 0 5
Friday. 19 47 30 19 45 14 18 40 30 January. 1597
25 Tuesday* 22 19 0 22 17 57 16 9 0 29 Saturd. 23 34 0 23 33 32 14 54 0 March.
11 Friday. 38 49 0 38 51 4 0 21 0 12 Saturd^ 39 13 0 39 15 4 0 45 0 13 Sund. 39
36 30 39 38 36 1 8 30 14 Monday 40 0 0 40 2 8 1 32 0 15 Tuesd. 40 23 0 40 25 8
1 55 0 16 Wednes. 40 46 30 40 48 37 2 18 30 20 Sund. 42 21 30 42 23 36 3 53 30
21 Mond. 42 44 0 42 46 5 4 16 0 April^ 8 Friday. 49 21 30 49 23 27 10 53 30 30
Saturd. 56 9 0 56 10 41 17 41 0 May. 2 Mond. 56 40 0 56 41 40 18 12 0 The Suns
true declination The Suns place by Observation. The Suns place by Prutenick
Tables. The difference. Degr. Min. Sec. Degr. Min. Sec. Degr. Min. Sec. Min.
Sec* 4 51 35 17 44 47 17 38 30 6 17 2 56 37 22 36 26 22 31 0 5 26 2 33 7 23 35
43 23 30 0 5 43 2 10 7 24 33 40 24 28 0 5 40 1 46 38 25 32 38 25 27 0 5 38 0 9
59 0 25 0 0 21 0 4 0 0 33 59 1 25 10 1 19 30 5 40 4 51 50 12 15 52 12 9 0 6 52
5 38 26 14 15 18 14 8 0 7 18 8 17 48 21 11 35 21 3 0 8 35 17 54 53 20 24 41 20
3 0 21 41 18 42 46 23 29 30 23 4 0 25 30 16 10 3 15 45 53 17 20 0 25 53 14 54
28 19 52 9 19 22 0 30 9 0 23 4 0 57 48 0 25 0 32 48 0 47 4 1 57 55 1 25 0 32 55
1 10 36 2 56 58 2 24 0 32 58 1 34 8 3 56 0 3 23 0 33 0 1 57 8 4 53 45 4 23 0 30
45 2 20 37 5 52 50 5 22 0 30 50 3 55 36 9 52 45 9 19 0 33 45 4 18 5 10 49 50 10
18 0 31 50 10 55 27 28 20 43 27 57 0 23 43 17 42 41 19 39 22 19 18 0 21 22 18
13 40 21 35 48 21 14 0 21 48 1597 June. The Suns Apparent height. The Suns True
height The Suns apparent Declination. Day Degr. Min. Sec Degr. Min Sec. Degr.
Min. Sec. 9 Thursd 61 57 0 61 58 25 23 29 0 11 Saturd. 61 58 0 61 59 25 23 30 0
12 Sund. 61 58 0 61 59 25 23 30 0 13 Mond. 61 57 30 61 58 55 23 29 30 16 Sund.
61 46 0 61 47 25 23 18 0 July. 4 Mond. 60 12 30 60 14 0 21 44 30 5 Tuesd. 60 3
30 60 5 0 21 35 30 6 Wed. 59 54 0 59 55 30 21 26 0 8 Friday 59 34 0 59 35 31 21
6 0 24 Sund. 56 1 30 56 3 11 17 33 30 26 Tuesd. 55 30 0 55 31 42 17 2 0 August
3 Wed. 53 11 0 53 12 48 14 43 0 9 Tuesd. 51 16 0 51 17 53 12 48 0 September. 22
Thursd. 34 50 0 34 51 51 3 38 0 30 Friday 31 44 30 31 45 55 6 43 30 October. 6
Thursd 29 29 0 29 30 6 8 59 0 12 Wed. 27 19 0 27 19 45 11 9 0 14 Friday. 26 36
30 26 37 5 11 51 30 24 Mond. 23 16 0 23 15 23 15 12 0 27 Thursd. 22 22 0 22 20
50 16 6 30 29 Saturd. 21 46 0 21 44 41 16 42 0 November. 3 Thursd. 20 24 0 20
22 2 18 4 0 7 Mond. 19 21 30 19 19 0 19 6 30 22 Tuesd 16 24 0 16 20 5 22 4 0
The Suns true declination. The Suns place by Observation. The Suns place by
Prutenick Tables The difference. Degr. Min. Sec. Degr. Min. Sec. Degr. Min.
Sec. Min. Sec. 23 30 25 27 50 0 27 41 0 9 0 23 31 25 29 24 0 29 35 0 11 0 23 31
25 0 36 0 0 33 0 3 0 23 30 55 1 35 0 1 30 0 5 0 23 19 25 7 17 20 7 14 0 3 20 21
46 0 21 43 0 21 33 0 10 0 21 37 0 22 38 18 22 31 0 7 18 21 27 30 23 34 42 23 28
0 6 42 21 7 31 25 27 11 25 23 0 4 11 17 35 11 10 48 8 10 42 0 6 8 17 3 42 12 41
14 12 37 0 4 14 14 44 48 20 22 41 20 18 0 4 41 12 49 53 26 11 36 26 5 0 6 36 3
36 9 9 3 26 8 57 0 6 26 6 42 5 16 59 57 16 51 0 8 57 8 57 54 22 58 13 22 48 0
10 13 11 8 15 28 56 34 28 46 0 10 34 11 50 55 0 57 28 0 45 0 12 28 15 12 37 11
5 41 10 46 0 19 41 16 17 10 14 4 23 13 46 0 18 23 16 43 19 16 7 30 15 47 0 20
30 8 5 58 21 6 26 20 48 0 18 26 16 9 0 25 16 16 24 50 0 26 16 22 7 55 10 42 36
10 1 0 41 36

CHAP. XX. The finding of the Suns Apogeum and Eccentricitie, out of the former
Observations.
NOw by the whole course of these Observations, it manifestly appears, that
the Declinations set down in the Regiments of the Sun, that are, and have bin
hitherto ordinarily used by our Seamen, do for the most part notably err from
the truth of the Heavens. Which errors as they may most truly be corrected by
Observation only in those days wherein certain Observation was made: so for
finding out the Declinations of the middle days between the Observations, I
thought it the best way, first to make the Ephemerides of the Sun hereafter
following, agreeable to the former Observations, and then to find out the
Declinations answerable to the places of the Sun for every day of four years
together, because that after that number of years the same places of the Sun,
and the same Declinations return again without sensible error, which also by a
certain Equation may be corrected: and for the easier finding out of this
Equation, I have continued these Tables for one year more, making them for five
years, and so including two Leap years, by the difference of which years we may
easily find the said Equation, by means whereof these Tables may be made
serviceable for many years.

First therefore for making these Ephemerides, it is needful to know the time
of the Suns entrance into certain principal points of the Zodiac: as also the
time of the Suns continuance in the arches of the Zodiac contained between
those points, whereby the proportion of the Suns motion may Geometrically be
found out, his Eccentricitie and place of his Apogeum being hereby known.

To know the time of the Suns commnig to any point of the Ecliptic, To know
the time of the Suns coming to any point of the Ecliptick^
it is best to Observe exactly the Meridian Altitude of the Sun, not only the
same day wherein he is like to enter into the point desired, but every day
also, for two or three days together, both before and after that day, that
both by the testimony of so many Observations compared together, you may have
the more assured truth: as also, that if the day you most desire fall not out
to be so clear as you would wish, you may notwithstanding, by the Observations
of the days going before, and following after, or either of them, obtain your
desire.

Having thus Observed the Meridian Altitudes of the Sun, and thereby also found
his Declinations for every one of those days wherein you Observed, you shall
easily know also the true place of the Sun in every each one of the same days,
with help of the former Table of the Declination of every minute of the
Ecliptic, in such sort as before was declared, when I showed the use of that
Table.

Now if it fall out so happily, that both the day be clear, when the Sun
enters into the desired point of the Ecliptic, and that the place of the Sun
answerable to the Declination of that day, be all one with the point desired,
you have already that you sought for, without any more ado, viz. That the Sun
enters that day at Noon into the point desired. Otherwise subtract the
Observed place of the Sun, next before the point desired out of the Observed
place of the Sun, next following that point, and the remainder shall show you
the true motion of the Sun, answerable to the time between those Observations.
Subtract also the former place of the Sun, from his place in the point desired,
and note the difference: for as the former remainder (that is the apparent
motion of the Sun between the Observations) is to the time between those
Observations: so is this difference to the time between the first Observation,
and the Suns entrance into the point desired.

Example of the first: I desired to know the time of the Suns entrance into 17
degrees, 0 min. of in the year 1595. I Observed therefore (at London) the
apparent height of the Sun at Noon, the 31 of July the same year, and found it
to be 54 degrees, 14 minutes, out of which his true height (corrected by his
Parallax) was found to be 54 degr. 15 min. 46 sec. Whereby his Declination was
gathered to be 15. degrees, 47 minutes, 46 sec. And consequently his place in
17 degrees, 0 minutes of that day at Noon.

Example of the second: admit the year following 1596, You would know the time
of the Suns entrance into the midst of Taurus. Having therefore to this end
Observed the apparent Meridian Altitudes of the Sun, the 24, 25, and 26. Days
of April, in that year (within the space of which days I am sure the Sun must
needs be in that point) to be 54 degrees, 35 minutes, 54 degrees, 51 min., 55
degrees, 8 min., and consequently the true heights 54 degr. 36 min. 44 sec. 54
degr. 53 min. 13 sec. 55 degrees, 10 min. 13 sec And out of these the true
Declinations 16 degr. 8 min. 44 sec. 16 degr. 25 min. 13 sec. 16. degr. 52 min.
13. sec. Hereby I found the true places of the Sun the same days to be 14
degr. 9 min. 40 sec. Of Taurus, 15 degr. 5 min. 20 sec. of Taurus, 16 degr. 3
min. 42 sec. Of Taurus. Subtracting therefore 14 degr. 9 min 40 sec. Of Taurus,
(that is, the place of the Sun the 24 day) out of 15 degr. 5 min. 20 sec. of
Taurus, the place of the Sun the 25 day) the remainder shall be 55 min. 40 sec.
Which is the true motion of the Sun, between the 24, and 25. Days at Noon,
that is, the Diurn motion of the Sun at that time. Subtracting also 14 degr. 9
min. 40 sec. Of Taurus, out of 15 degr 0 min. of Taurus, the difference is 50
min. 20 sec. Now as 55 min. 40 sec is to 50 min. 20 sec. so are 24 hours, to
21 hours, 42 min. and 2 sec* It appears therefore by subtracting 21 hours,
42 min. 2 sec. Out of 24 hours, that the Sun should enter into the midst of
Taurus, the 25 day about two hours and almost 18 min. before Noon, that is, at
nine a clock and 42 minutes.

Now supposing I had not, or could not have Observed the 25 day, I may
notwithstanding find the time of the Suns entrance into the midst of Taurus, by
the Observations of the 24 and 26 days after this manner: Subtract 14 degr. 9
min. 40 sec. Of Taurus, out of 16 degr. 3 min. 42 sec. of Taurus, the remainder
will be one degr. 54 min. 2 sec. that is the motion of the Sun for two days,
between the 24 and 26 days at Noon. Therefore as 1 degr. 54 min. is to 48
hours: so are 50 min. 20 sec. (That is the Difference of the place of the Sun
the 24 day from the midst of Taurus, found out as before) to 21 hours and 12.
min. almost. So as hereby it seems the Sun should enter into the midst of
Taurus the 25 day about two hours and 48 minutes before Noon, that is, at nine
of the clock and 12 minutes.

But if it so fall out that you do not or cannot Observe, both before and after
the time of the Suns coming to the point desired, (as suppose I could not have
Observed the 24 day, but only the 25 and 26 days, in both which days the Sun
is gone past the point desired) notwithstanding you may Obtain your desire
thus: Subtract 15 degr. 5 min. 20 sec, Taurus, (the place of the Sun the 25
day) out of 16 degr, 3 min. 42 sec. Taurus (the place of the Sun the 26 day)
there will remain 58 min. 22 sec. the Diurn motion of the Sun between the
Noon-tides of the 25 and 26 days. Now because that on the 25 day at Noon the
Sun was gone 5 min. 20 sec. past the point desired: therefore as 58. min. 20
sec. Are to 24 hours, so are 5 min. 20 sec. to 2 hours 12 min. almost. By this
account then the Sun should enter into the midst of Taurus the 25 day, 2 hours
and about 12 min. before Noon: that is, at nine of the clock and 48 minutes.
Neither ought that small difference that appears between these accounts to be
greatly regarded, which amounts not to so much as half an hour, in which time
the motion of the Sun is little above a minute, and the Declination of the Sun
in that part of the Zodiac cannot alter so much as of a minute, which is so
small, as can by sense very hardly be Observed or discerned. Neither yet ought
that little difference of a minute or two that appears between the Diurn
motions of the Sun; found by Observation, greatly move any man (in that by the
first and second Observations the Diurn motion should be almost 56 min. by the
first and third 57 min. by the second and third 58 min. and more) the greatest
of which differences may almost arise by erring but one half minute only, in
taking the height of the Sun; which error is in a manner altogether insensible,
and will be easily pardoned by them that have or shall accustom themselves to
make the like Observations, when besides their own experience they shall find
that they which have most excelled in this Art, as Tycho Brahe de recentior^b.
Aetherei mundi phaenom. lib 2 cap. 10. part 1. Copern. Revol. Libr. 4. cap. 21.
and Ptoleme himself in all his Catalogue of the fixed Stars, Almagest. lib. 7.
cap. 5. When they shall find (I say) that even these Princes in Astronomy, so
greatly exercised in Observations, have accounted an whole minute or two,
hardly sensible: Ptoleme also in his Almagest. Contenting himself, for the most
part, to have set down the places of the fixed Stars to sixth parts of degrees,
and very seldom coming to twelfth parts, thinking it sufficient (as it may
seem by the perpetual course of that Catalogue) to come within five or ten
minutes of the truth.

But to return again to that from whence we have a little digressed. After this
manner now showed, we found the time of the Suns entrance into the beginning of
and, and into the midst of,,, and, as into places serving most fitly for
finding out of the Suns Eccentricitie and Apogeum: following also herein the
example of Copernicus, lib. 3. cap. 16. Revol. Who well perceiving how hard,
yea rather impossible a thing it is, to find by Observation the time of the
Suns entrance into the Sols^itial points (where the Meridian Altitudes, and
Declinations of the Sun continue almost the same, without any sensible
difference, for two or three days together) chose rather the parts of the
Zodiac already mentioned, where the place of the Sun may more truly be known
by reason of the quicker altering of his Declination, the difference thereof in
the space of 24 hours amounting to more then 17 min. The times therefore of the
Suns coming to the foresaid points in the years 1594, 1595, 1596, 1597. We
found to be such as are set down in the Table following.

1594 1595 1596 1597 Da. Ho. Mi. Da. Ho. Mi. Da. Ho. Mi. Da. Ho. Mi. Sig. De.
Ian. 24 17 35 25 0 7 24 5 54 15 Mar. 10 13 26 9 18 43 10 0 37 0 April. 25 16 50
24 21 47 25 3 54 15 July. 28 15 35 28 20 4 28 1 43 28 9 56 15 Sept. 13 2 45 13
7 39 12 13 48 12 19 15 0 October. 28 5 46 28 9 36 27 15 23 272 1 50 15

Hereby the times of the Suns continuance in the arks of the Zodiac betwixt
those points, as also the arks of the Eccentrick answerable to those times,
were more easily found then that it should now be needful for me to be further
tedious, in setting down the manner of finding the same, wherein
notwithstanding there may some difference of an hour or two sometimes appear,
by comparing together those times in several years: yet this error being such
as may arise by missing little more then one minute in (one Observation: or
little more then half a minute in two Observations of the Meridian Altitudes of
the Sun, one Observation being made when the Sun is about the beginning of the
ark, the other when he is about the ending thereof) I make no doubt, but that
it will at the least be favorably censured by them that have acquainted
themselves with some practice of Observing: wherein he shall (in my opinion)
quit himself meetly well who neither through imperfection of sense, either in
making or dividing, or in rectifying, or in using his Instrument, and every
part thereof: nor through the difficulty of noting precisely the edges of the
shadow of the upper sight falling upon the nether: (the limits or bounds of
which shadow are but a confused mixture (as it were) of light and darkness* or
else a mean equally compounded of them both, which can no better be discerned
then by guessing:) nor yet by Rrefraction of the Sun beams through the
thickness of the air; especially when the Sun is in the Southerly Semicircle of
the Zodiac, which Refraction admits some alteration, according to the
diversity of the raritie or densitie of the Vapors in the air interposed
betwixt our sight and the Sun; he shall (I say) quit himself well that neither
by one, nor some, nor all these, shall miss a minute, and more sometimes, in
Observing the meridian Altitude of the Sun: whereby if error be committed both
at the beginning and ending of the aforesaid arks (especially of those arks
that are contained between the midst of Taurus, and Leo, of Leo, and Scorpio,
of Scorpio, and Aquarius, of Aquarius, and Taurus,) the place of the Sun found
by such Observation, may be more or less then truth by three or four minutes,
and both errors together may amount to six or eight min. error in the motion of
the Sun, whereof may follow two or three hours error in the time of the Suns
abiding in one of those arks.

Out of the former Table I found (by the Observations of the two last years
especially) that the time of the Suns Revolution through the Zodiac in our
time, is 365. days 5. hours, and about 48. min. Also the Suns continuance in
the Northerly Semicircle of the Ecliptic, from the beginning of Aries to the
beginning of Libra, to be 186. days, 18. hours, and about one half, and
consequently in the Southerly Semicircle from Libra to Aries 178. days 11.
hours 18. minutes: whereby the arks of the Suns Eccentrick, answerable to
those Semicircles, appeared to be 184 degrees, 5, min. 25. sec. from Aries to
Libra, and 175 degrees, 54. min. 35. sec. from Libra to Aries.

Therefore because the place of the Sun being at, or near the Equinoctial
points, is most certainly known (his Meridian Altitude and Declination altering
there most swiftly) and consequently the ark of the Eccentrick contained
betwixt those points are most certainly found: it appears to be most certain
that the Eccentricitie of the Sun at this time must needs be at the least
3.569. such parts whereof the Semidiameter of the Eccentrick contains
100,000. though the Suns Apogeum were but in the beginning of Cancer: whereas
if it be in 9. degr. 22. min. of Cancer (as Copernicus would have it) the
Eccentricitie cannot be less then 3616. of the same parts; notwithstanding he
makes it to be little more then 3220. such parts in this Age.

But finding by the Observations I took in the year 1596. that the Sun is also
in going from the beginning of Aries to the midst of Taurus 46. days, and
about three hours and four minutes, and consequently the arch of the Suns
Eccentrick, answerable to that time and arch of the Ecliptic 45. degr. 27 min.
56. sec. I found hereby, the Suns Eccentricitie and place of his Apogeum, as
follows.

Let Ie QS be the Suns Eccentrick: Degr. Mi. Sec. The arks thereof IEQ from the
beginning of Aries to the beginning of Libra 184 5 26 QSI from the Suns
entrance into Libra to his entrance into Aries 175 54 34 and IL from the
beginning of Aries to the midst of Taurus 45 27 56 the half whereof is the
angle ISL 22 43 58. Also the angle IAL from the beginning of Aries to the 15 of
Taurus 45 0 0 The complement whereof to a Semicircle is the angle IAS ^35 0 0
which added to the angle ISA, makes 157 43 58 the complement whereof to a
Semicircle is the angle AIS 22 16 2 the double whereof is the arch of the
Eccentrick SQ 44 32 4 which taken out of QSI 175 54 34 there remains the arch
SI 131 22 30 the subtense whereof SI is 18,226,268 whereof the whole sine
contains 10,000,00^ And this arch added to IL, makes the whole arch SIL 176
50 26 the complement hereof to a Semicircle is 3 9 34 and the half of this
complement is the arch LM 1 34 4^ the Sine whereof is the line OB 275,678
Moreover, the half of the arch SIL is 88 25 13 the Sine whereof is the line SAO
9,996,199 Now in the Triangle SIA, because the sides are proportional to the
Sines of the opposite Angles: therefore as the Sine of the Angle SAI 7,071,068
is to the side SI 18,226,268 so is the Sine of the angle SIA 3,789,268 to the
side SA 9,842,653 which taken out of SAO, there is left AO 226,04^ which has
the same proportion to 10,000,000 that the right line OB 275,67^ has to
12,036,02^ Past this upon the Margin of Letter Z. fol. 148 so as it may ly open
all the while the following matter of the 20 and 21 chap, are reading.
Degrees. Mi. Se. which is the Tangent of the Angle BAO 50 16 42 the distance of
the Suns Apogeum from the midst of Taurus; that is, from the beginning of
Cancer; 5 16 42 which, to avoid scrupulositie, we will make 5 17 0 the Sine
whereof 7,692,137 is to the whole Sine 10,000,000 as the right line OB 275,678
is to BA the Suns Eccentricitie 358,388 whereof BE, the Radius of the
Eccentrick, is 10,000,000

Which may yet also be more easily found by the Tetragonical Table, or Table of
Roots and Squares, for taking AO and OB to be 2290, and 2757, their Squares
will be 5,244,100. And 7,601,049. Which added together make 12,845,149. The
Square Root or side whereof is 3584. The Suns Eccentricitie, in such parts
whereof the Semidiameter of the Eccentrick Be contains 100,000. Agreeing
exactly with the Suns Eccentricitie, found by Tycho Brahe Progymnasmat. Page 26.

The same may also be further confirmed thus: We have found the arch of the
Suns Eccentrick from the beginning of Aries to the beginning of Libra, to be
184 5 26, the excess whereof above a Semicircle is 4 5 26, the half of this is
the arch IK 2 2 43 the Sine whereof IX (equal to AD) is 356,892 (whereof the
semidiameter of the Eccentrick is 10,000,000) which should be the Suns
Eccentricitie, if his Apogeum were in the beginning of Cancer. But having found
that the Suns Apogeum is about 5 degrees 17 minutes of Cancer; therefore as the
whole Sine 10,000,000 is to the Secant of 5 degr. 17 min. 10,042,667 so is AD
in the Right Angled Triangle ADB 356,892 to AB the Eccentricitie of the Sun
358,414, which has not any sensible difference from that we found before.

But the place of the Suns Apogeum, found by the foresaid Observations,
differs from Tycho twenty minutes (if we add ^o his place of the Apogeum of
the Sun 7 minutes, for the Mo^^on of the Suns Apogeum in the ten years space
betwixt his Observation and mine.) All which difference notwithstanding may
arise by erring little more then half a quarter of a minute in Observing the
the Suns height about the midst of Tarus. Which error although it be so small
that it may worthily be neglected, for whether of them soever you follow either
his (Apogeum) or mine, for the making of the Ephemerides and Tables ensuing,
there cannot hereof arise any such disagreement as can by sight be diserned:
yet in that small difference that is (though insensible) I shall not unwillingly
yield unto him, considering with how great Preparation, cost, skill, diligence,
and circumspection every way he went about this business, as all they that have
any judgment and use of Observation will easily grant. I say therefore not
building only upon his authority (though in this kind it be greater then any
others, yet known to the world) that following the ordinary received Hypothesis
of an Eccentrick for sa^ving the Suns apparent inequality of motion) the Suns
Eccentricitie and place of his Apogeum, set down by Tycho, as before we have
showed, are in this our Age very agreeable to truth and without all such error
as can by sense be discerned. And as for the difference that seems to be
betwixt us, being so small and insensible; so far ought it to be from breeding
doubtfulness in any, that it may rather make not a little for the confirmation
of the truth both of his and my Observations; so as none shall need to make
scruple of the certainty and infallibility of those Tables of the Suns
Declination, which for the Navigators use shall out of these grounds be
gathered and diduced.

CHAP. XXI. The middle motion of the Sun, Corrected out of the former
Observations.
THE Eccentricitie therefore and Apogeum of the Sun being thus known, together
with his true place (which by so exact Observation as we could in the year
1597. the 11. of March at noon, we found to be 0 degr. 57. min. 48. sec. of
Aries:) his middle motion from the beginning of Aries was also easily found
after this manner.

Let a be the place of the Sun in his Eccentrick; b the Suns true place in the
Zodiac.

B a a line drawn from the center of the Eccentrick to the center of the Sun.

A d a line drawn from the center of the Ecliptic Parallel to B a, showing the
middle place of the Sun in the Zodiac.

AB, a line drawn from the center of the Ecliptic, by the center of the Sun to
the Zodiac, showing the true place of the Sun.

Therefore the Angle BAD being 5. degr. 37. min. and consequently the Angle BAI
95. degr. 37, min. because DAI is a right Angle: the Angle aAI, found by
Observation to be 0 degrees 57. min. 48. seconds, being subtracted from the
Angle BAI, there shall remain the angle BA a in the Triangle BA a 94. degr. 39.
min. 12 sec. and two sides also of the same Triangle being given aB 100.000
parts, and BA 3584 of the same parts, therefore by the doctrine of Triangles,
the Angle B aA equal to aA d (because B a and AD are Parallels) shall likewise
be found to be 2. degrees 2. min. 52. sec. (the Prostapheraeresis or equation
of the Sun at that time; which subtracted from E b the true motion of the Sun,
that is 57. min. 58. sec (adding thereto an whole circle) there shall remain
the middle motion of the sun from the beginning of Aries, EFGH d, 358. degr.
54. min 56. sec. According to Tycho his Tables Progymnasmat, part. 1. page. 59.
(if we account the difference of Longitude between London and Vraniburg to be
about 11. degrees. 15. min. as by our best Sea-Charts it seems it should be) it
is then 358. degr. 55. min. 45. sec. differing from the former only 49. sec-
Which difference may arise almost of one third part of a minute error in
Observing the Meridian Altitude of the Sun: Notwithstanding the account of the
Prutenick Tables makes it to be 358, degrees, 35. min. 15. sec. differing from
both the former about 20 minutes.

Thus having found, that neither in the place the Suns Apogeum, nor in his
Eccentricitie or middle motion, there is any sensible difference betwixt the
accounts arising out of Tycho Brahe his Observations and mine own; I have
therefore here set down the Tables of the Suns middle motions altogether
agreeable to those of his; Progymnasmat. part. 1. page 57.58.59. allowing only
to his Epochaes so much more as is answerable to the difference of Longitude
between the place of his Observation and mine, that is, to the Epochaes of the
Suns middle motion of Longitude, 1. min. 52. sec. answerable to 45. min. of an
hour almost, or 11 degr. and, that is, so much as the City of London seems
to be more Westerly then Vraniburg.

EPOCHAES OF THE MIDDLE MOTIONS OF THE SUN.
Apogeum. Longitude. Apogeum. Longitude. Years Si. P. Mi. Se^ Si. P. Mi. Se.
Years Si. P. Mi. Se. Si. P. Mi. Se. 1500 3 4 24 45 9 20 10 52 1625 3 5 58 30 9
20 53 50 1520 3 4 39 45 9 20 20 6 1626 3 5 59 15 9 20 39 30 1540 3 4 54 45 9 20
29 20 1627 3 6 0 0 9 20 25 11 1560 3 5 9 45 9 20 38 35 1628 3 6 0 45 9 21 10 0
1580 3 5 24 45 9 20 47 49 1629 3 6 1 30 9 20 55 40 1600 3 5 39 45 9 20 57 4
1630 3 6 2 15 9 20 41 21 1601 3 5 40 30 9 20 42 44 1631 3 6 3 0 9 20 27 2 1602
3 5 41 15 9 20 28 25 1632 3 6 3 45 9 21 11 51 1603 3 5 42 0 9 20 14 6 Middle
motions in single years until 20. 1604 3 5 42 45 9 20 58 54 1605 3 5 43 30 9 20
44 35 1 0 0 0 45 11 29 45 41 1606 3 5 44 15 9 20 30 16 2 0 0 1 30 11 29 31 21
1607 3 5 45 0 9 20 15 56 3 0 0 2 15 11 29 17 2 1608 3 5 45 45 9 21 0 45 4 0 0 3
0 0 0 1 51 1609 3 5 46 30 9 20 46 26 5 0 0 3 45 11 29 47 32 1610 3 5 47 15 9 20
32 7 6 0 0 4 30 11 29 33 12 1611 3 5 48 0 9 20 17 47 7 0 0 5 15 11 29 18 53
1612 3 5 48 45 9 21 2 36 8 0 0 6 0 0 0 3 42 1613 3 5 49 30 9 20 48 17 9 0 0 6
45 11 29 49 22 1611 3 5 50 15 9 20 33 58 10 0 0 7 30 11 29 35 3 1615 3 5 51 0 9
20 19 38 11 0 0 8 15 11 29 20 44 1616 3 5 51 45 9 21 4 7 12 0 0 9 0 0 0 5 33
1617 3 5 52 30 9 20 50 8 13 0 0 9 45 11 29 51 13 1618 3 5 53 15 9 20 35 48 14 0
0 10 30 11 29 36 54 1619 3 5 54 0 9 20 21 29 15 0 0 11 15 11 29 22 35 1620 3 5
54 45 9 21 6 18 16 0 0 12 0 0 0 7 24 1621 3 5 55 37 9 20 52 1 17 0 0 12 45 11
29 53 4 1622 3 5 56 15 9 20 37 39 18 0 0 13 30 11 29 38 45 1623 3 5 57 0 9 20
23 20 19 0 0 14 15 11 29 24 26 1624 3 5 57 45 9 21 8 9 20 0 0 15 0 0 0 9 14 THE
SVNS EQVAL MOTION OF LONGITVDE.
In months of the common year- In days: In hours In minutes: S. D. M. Se. Da
De. M. Se H Mi. S. M M. S. M M. S. Ianu. 1 0 33 18 1 0 59 8 1 2 28 0 0 0 30 1
14 Febr. 1 28 9 11 2 1 58 17 2 4 56 1 0 2 31 1 16 Mar. 2 28 42 30 3 2 50 25 3 7
24 2 0 5 32 1 19 April. 3 28 16 39 4 3 56 33 4 9 51 3 0 7 33 1 21 May. 4 28 49
58 5 4 55 42 5 12 19 4 0 10 34 1 24 June. 5 28 24 7 6 5 54 50 6 14 47 5 0 12 35
1 26 July. 6 23 57 26 7 6 53 58 7 17 15 6 0 15 36 1 29 Aug. 7 29 30 44 8 7 53 7
8 19 34 7 0 17 37 1 31 Sept. 8 29 4 54 9 8 52 15 9 22 11 8 0 20 38 1 34 October.
9 29 38 12 10 9 51 23 10 24 38 9 0 22 39 1 36 Nov. 10 29 12 22 11 10 50 32 11
27 6 10 0 25 40 1 39 Dec. 11 29 45 40 12 11 49 40 12 29 34 11 0 27 41 1 41 In
months of the leap year. 13 12 48 48 13 32 2 12 0 30 42 1 43 14 13 47 57 14 34
30 13 0 32 43 1 46 15 14 47 5 15 36 58 14 0 34 44 1 48 16 15 46 13 16 39 26 15
0 37 45 1 51 S. D. M. Se^ 17 16 45 21 17 41 53 16 0 39 46 1 53 18 10 44 30 18
44 21 17 0 42 40 1 56 Ianu. 1 0 33 18 19 18 43 38 19 46 49 18 0 44 48 1 58
Febr. 1 29 8 20 20 19 42 47 20 49 17 19 0 47 49 2 1 Mar. 2 29 41 38 21 20 41 55
21 51 45 20 0 49 50 2 3 April. 3 29 15 48 22 21 41 3 22 54 13 21 0 52 51 2 6
May. 4 29 49 6 23 22 40 12 23 56 40 22 0 54 52 2 8 June. 5 29 23 16 24 23 39 20
24 59 8 23 0 57 53 2 11 July. 6 29 56 34 25 24 38 28 In hours 24 0 59 54 2 13
Aug: 8 0 29 53 26 25 37 37 25 1 2 55 2 15 Sept: 9 0 4 3 27 26 36 45 26 1 4 56 2
18 October. 10 0 37 21 28 27 35 53 27 1 7 57 2 20 Nov: 11 0 11 31 29 28 35 1 28 1
9 58 2 23 Dec: 0 0 44 49 30 29 34 10 29 1 11 59 2 25 In Months. 31 30 33 18 30
1 14 60 2 28

CHAP. XXII. A new Theorick of the Sun for the making of the Table of the Suns
Prosthaphaereses following.
But for the making of the table of the Suns Prosthaphaereses, because it may
be gathered not only out of the observations of Mars, that both my self,
together with that honorable and learned Knight Sir. Christopher Heyden, have
taken for many years; but also by the observations of that famous Tycho (as
appears in the Appendix annexed to his Progymnasmata, page 821) that the Suns
eccentricitie should be but half so much, as out of the former Hypothesis we
have found, the place of his Apogaeum notwithstanding and greatest
Prosthapaereses remaining as before: we have therefore in stead of the former
Hypothesis of an Eccentrick devised another Theorick for the Sun, of an
Homocentrick with a double Epicycle answerable to those Observations after this
manner: Let BCD be an homocentrical circle equal to the Eccentrick aforesaid,
(whose Semediameter AB admi: to be 100,000 parts) in the circumference whereof,
taking the center B, describe the greater Epicycle EG, whole Semidiameter EB
let be 2688. of the same parts, that is, three quarters of the fore said
Eccentricitie 3584. Also upon the center E, taken in the greater Epicycle,
describe the little Epicycle FH, and let the Radius or Semediameter thereof EH
be 896 such parts, that is one quarter of the former Eccentricitie of the
Eccentrick. Let all these circles be moved about their own centers equally; the
Homocentrick carrying about the center of the greater Epicycle from the West
Eastwards in the time that the Sun returns again to his Apogaeum; the
greater Epicycle moving about from East Westward in the same time also, and the
lesser Epicycle carrying about the center of the Sun contrariwise from West
Eastwards in half that time.

Moreover, let them be moved with this condition, that whenever the center of
the great Epicycle B comes to the place of the Suns Apogaeum, the center of
the little Epicycle shall be in the Apogeum of the greater, and the Sun in F
next to B the great Epicycles center, and consequently BE and F (that is, the
centers of both the Epicycles and of the Sun coming all together into the same
right line of the Suns Apogaeum AGBFEH. Hereof it will follow that the Diameter
of the greater Epicycle shall always be Parallel to the line of the Suns
Apogaeum BAD, and whiles the center of the greater Epicycle from B to I, and
the center of the lesser Epicycle from O to E moves half a Quadrant, the
center of the Sun from R to L shall move an whole Quadrant. Also the greater
Epicycle having moved a whole Quadrant from B to C, and the lesser likewise a
whole Quadrant from P to E, the Sun shall move an whole Semicircle from F to M.
Therefore by this compound motion of the Homocentrick and both Epicycles, the
Sun shall seem to describe as it were an Eccentrical circle FLMNO, according to
the Eccentricitie AS, which is but half so much as before, and yet the greatest
Prostaphaeresis MAC, shall be the same almost as before, according to the
Hypothesis of a simple Eccentrick, whose Eccetricitie were AT.

According to this Hypothesis was made the Table of Prostaphaeresis here
following, to every degree of the Suns Anomalie, and that after this manner.

Admit the angle BAI of the Suns middle motion from his Apogeum be 30 degrees:
The making of the Table of the Suns Prosthaphaereses,
hereby are given the angles OIE likewise 30 degrees, and REL 60 degrees.
Moreover, in the little Triangle EIL, the two sides including this angle, being
also given, that is IE 2688, and EL 896, such parts whereof IA contains
100,000: therefore as the sum of these sides 3584 is to their difference 1792,
that is, as 2 is to 1, so is 17, 320, 508 the Tangent of half the sum of the
two opposite angles ELI and LIE (that is 60 degrees) to 8,660,254, The Tangent
of 40 degr. 53 min 36 sec. that is, half the difference of those opposite
angles, which subducted from half the sum 60 degrees, there remains the angle
EIL 19 degrees, 6 minutes, 24 seconds. Moreover, as 3,273,278. The sine of the
angle LIE 19 degr. 6 min. 24 sec. is to EL 896: so is 8,660,254. The sine of
the angle IEL 60 degrees to the side LI 2370. Now then in the greater Triangle
AIL two sides being given AI 100,000, and IL 2370, together with the angle LIA
130 degr. 53 min. 36 sec. (because it is the complement of the angle OIL to a
semicircle, which angle being compounded of the angles OIE, 30 degr. and EIL 19
degr. 6 min. 24 sec. is 49 degr. 6 min. 24 seconds) as the sum of those sides
102,370 is to their difference 97*630, so is 45,685, (the Tangent of 24 degr.
33 min. 12 sec. that is, the half of 49 degrees, 6 min. 24 sec. which is the
sum of the angles at A and L) to 43,570, the Tangent of half the difference of
those angles 23 degr. 32 min. 24 sec. which being taken out of half the sum of
them 24 degr. 33 min. 12 sec. there remains 1 degr. 0 min. 38 sec. the Suns
Prosthaphaeresis, when his motion of Anomalie or middle distance from his
Apog^um is 30 degrees.

Thus we may find the Suns Prosthaphaereses for every degree of his Anomalie,
and so make this Table following.

0 Subt. Diff. ad. 1 Subtr. Di. ad 2 Subtr. Di. ad De Dig. Mi. Se Mi. Sec. Degrees.
M. S. Mi. Se. De. Mi. Se. Mi. Se^ De 0 0 0 1 0 38 1 45 41 30 1 0 2 7 2 7 1 2 28
1 50 1 46 46 1 5 29 2 0 4 13 2 6 1 4 17 1 49 1 47 48 1 2 28 3 0 6 20 2 7 1 6 5
1 48 1 48 49 1 1 27 4 0 8 26 2 6 1 7 51 1 46 1 49 48 0 59 26 5 0 10 33 2 7 1 9
37 1 46 1 50 45 0 57 25 6 0 12 39 2 6 1 11 21 1 44 1 51 40 0 55 24 7 0 14 45 2
6 1 13 4 1 43 1 52 33 0 53 23 8 0 16 51 2 6 1 14 46 1 42 1 53 24 0 51 22 9 0 18
56 2 5 1 16 26 1 40 1 54 11 0 48 21 10 0 21 1 2 5 1 18 5 1 39 1 54 59 0 47 20
11 0 23 6 2 5 1 19 43 1 38 1 55 44 0 45 19 12 0 25 10 2 4 1 21 19 1 36 1 56 27
0 43 18 13 0 27 14 2 4 1 22 54 1 35 1 57 7 0 40 17 14 0 29 17 2 3 1 24 27 1 33
1 57 46 0 39 16 15 0 31 20 2 3 1 25 59 1 32 1 58 22 0 36 15 16 0 33 22 2 2 1 27
29 1 30 1 58 57 0 35 14 17 0 35 24 2 2 1 28 58 1 29 1 59 29 0 32 13 18 0 37 25
2 1 1 30 25 1 27 1 59 59 0 30 12 19 0 39 26 2 1 1 31 51 1 26 2 0 26 0 27 11 20
0 41 26 2 0 1 33 15 1 24 2 0 52 0 26 10 21 0 43 25 1 59 1 34 37 1 22 2 1 15 0
23 9 22 0 45 23 1 58 1 35 58 1 21 2 1 37 0 22 8 23 0 47 20 1 57 1 37 17 1 19 2
1 56 0 19 7 24 0 49 17 1 57 1 38 34 1 17 2 2 12 0 16 6 25 0 51 13 1 56 1 39 50
1 16 2 2 27 0 15 5 2^ 0 53 8 1 55 1 41 4 1 14 2 2 39 0 12 4 ^^ 0 55 2 1 54 1 42
16 1 12 2 2 50 0 11 3 28 0 56 55 1 53 1 43 26 1 10 2 2 58 0 8 2 19 0 58 47 1 52
1 44 34 1 8 2 3 3 0 5 1 30 1 ^0 38 1 51 1 45 41 1 7 2 3 7 0 4 0 D. 11 Add. Dif.
S. 10 Add^ Dif. S. 9 Add. Dif. S^ D. 3 Subtr. Dif. S. 4 Subtr. Dif. S. 5.
Subtr. Dif. S. D. Degrees. Mi. Se. M. Sec. Degrees. M. S. Mi. Se. De. Mi. Se. Mi. Se.
D. 0 2 3 7 1 47 35 1 2 33 30 1 2 3 8 0 1 1 46 31 1 4 1 0 39 1 54 29 2 2 3 7 0 1
1 45 25 1 6 0 48 45 1 54 28 3 2 3 3 0 4 1 44 17 1 8 0 56 49 1 56 27 4 2 2 58 0
5 1 43 7 1 10 0 94 52 1 57 26 5 2 2 50 0 8 1 41 54 1 13 0 52 55 1 57 25 6 2 2
40 0 10 1 40 40 1 14 0 50 56 1 59 24 7 2 2 28 0 12 1 39 24 1 16 0 48 56 2 0 23
8 2 2 13 0 15 1 38 7 1 17 0 46 55 2 1 22 9 2 1 56 0 17 1 36 47 1 20 0 44 53 2 2
21 10 2 1 37 0 19 1 35 25 1 22 0 42 51 2 2 20 11 2 1 16 0 21 1 34 2 1 23 0 40
47 2 4 19 12 2 0 52 0 24 1 32 37 1 25 0 38 43 2 4 18 13 2 0 27 0 25 1 31 10 1
27 0 36 38 2 5 17 14 1 59 59 0 28 1 29 42 1 28 0 34 33 2 5 16 15 1 59 28 0 31 1
28 11 1 31 0 32 26 2 7 15 16 1 58 56 0 32 1 26 39 1 32 0 30 19 2 7 14 17 1 58
21 0 35 1 25 6 1 33 0 28 12 2 7 13 18 1 57 44 0 37 1 23 30 1 36 0 26 4 2 8 12
19 1 57 5 0 39 1 21 54 1 36 0 23 55 2 9 11 20 1 56 24 0 41 1 20 15 1 39 0 21 46
2 9 10 21 1 55 41 0 43 1 18 43 1 40 0 19 37 2 9 9 22 1 54 55 0 46 1 16 54 1 41
0 17 27 2 10 8 23 1 54 8 0 47 1 15 11 1 43 0 15 17 2 10 7 24 1 53 18 0 50 1 13
27 1 44 0 13 6 2 11 6 25 1 52 26 0 52 1 11 41 1 46 0 10 56 2 10 5 26 1 51 32 0
54 1 9 54 1 47 0 8 45 2 11 4 27 1 50 36 0 56 1 8 6 1 48 0 6 34 2 11 3 28 1 49
38 0 58 1 6 16 1 50 0 4 23 2 11 2 29 1 48 38 1 0 1 4 25 1 51 0 2 11 2 12 1 30 1
47 35 1 3 1 2 33 1 52 0 0 0 2 11 0 8 Add. Dif. ad 7 Add. Dif. ad 6. Add. Dif.
ad

CHAP. XXIII. The making of the Ephemerides of the Sun here following.
WIth help of the two former Tables of the Suns middle motions and of his
prosthaphaereses, the Suns true place may be readily found, and so the
Ephemerides following easily made, after this manner: Reduce the apparent time
given to the equal time answering thereto, with help of Tycho Brahe his table
of Equation of natural days; and for that time so reduced add together the
Suns middle motions of longitude in years, months, days, hours, and minutes:
out of the sum subtract the place of the Suns Apogaeum; the remainder shall
be the Suns motion of Anomaly, or his distance from his Apogaeum.

Now if this Anomaly be less then a semicircle, look the sign thereof in the
head of the table of the Suns prostaphaereses, and the degree in the first
column toward the left hand descending, and proceed in the same line toward
the right hand, till you come under the foresaid sign of the Suns Anomaly, for
there shall you have the Suns prostaphaeresis for that t^me; remembering this
withal, that if there be any minutes adhering to those degrees of Anomaly, that
prostaphaeresis must be corrected by the part of the adjacent difference
proportional to those minutes, adding or subtracting the same hereto: according
as you are directed in the head of the column, wherein that difference is set
down.

But if the Suns Anomaly be more then a semicircle, you must find the signs
thereof in the foot of the table, and the degrees in the last column next the
right hand ascending, and in the common meeting of the line wherein you find
this degree, and of the column of the said sign of the Suns Anomaly, you shall
find the Suns Prostaphaeresis, as before; which if there be any minutes
adherent to the Suns Anomaly, must be corrected by the part proportional of the
disterence adjoining, as before; adding or subtracting the same, according as
you find your direction in the foot of the column containing that difference.

As for example: Suppose you would know the Suns true place the 6 of May at
noon (that is, the 5 of May complete according to Astronomical account) in the
year 1608, which time reduced to equality by the foresaid Table, shall be the 4
of May complete 23 hours, 48 minutes; for the Sun being at that time about the
26 degree of Taurus, that Table shows you that 12 minutes are to be
subtracted from the apparent time to make it equal. For this time therefore let
the middle motions of the Sun be gathered together in this manner: The Suns
middle motion of Longitude for
Si. D. M. Se. the year of Christ 1607 complete, 9 20 15 56 Four months of the
leap year, 3 29 15 48 Four days, 3 56 33 23 hours, 56 40 48 minutes. 1 58 Si.
D. M S. The sum of all these is the Suns middle motion of Longitude for the
time aforesaid. 1 24 26 55 The place of the Suns Apogaeum for the year of
Christ 1607 complete, is 3 5 45 0 The motion thereof in the months, days,
hours, etc. remaining, is 15 which put together, make the place of the Suns
Apogaeum for the time aforesaid 3 5 45 15 This being subducted out of the Suns
middle motion, 1 24 26 55 There shall remain the Suns motion of Anomaly 10 18
41 40 The Prosthaphaeresis answerable to 10 signs, 18 degr. you shall find in
the Table of Prosthaphaeresis 1 21 19 with the difference answering thereto 1
36 the part proportional whereof answering to 41 min. 40 seconds, you shall
find to be 1 7 which subtracted out of the Prosthaphaeresis answering to 10
sig. 18 de. 1 21 19 there remains the Prosthaphaeresis corrected 1 20 12
which being added to the Suns middle motion of Longitude for the time aforesaid
1 24 26 25 you shall have the Suns true place for that time 1 25 47 7 agreeing
justly with the Ephemerides following, where you shall find the Sun at that
time to be in 25 degr. 47 min, 7 sec. of Taurus.

Admit also I would know the true place of the Sun the 27. of October 1609. at
noon, as we commonly account, (that is) for the 26. of October complete, by the
foresaid account Astronomical, which reduced to the equal time, will make 25.
days, 23. hours, 36. min. The Suns middle motion therefore, together with the
rest of the account, for finding the Suns true place for that time, may be
shortly gathered after this manner: The Suns middle motion of Longitude for
Si. D. M Se the year of Christ 1608 complete, 9 21 0 45 September of the
common year, complete 8 29 4 54 Five and twenty days 24 38 28 Twenty three
hours 56 40 Thirty six minutes 1 29 The sum of these is the Suns middle
motion of Longitude for that time: 7 15 42 14 From whence subtract the place of
the Suns Apogaeum, 3 5 46 18 there remains the Suns Anomalie; 4 9 55 56
whereby is found the Suns Prosthaphaeresis: 1 35 31 and by subtraction hereof,
his true Longitude, 7 14 6 45 agreeing likewise justly with the Emphemerides
following: after which manner also they may be wholly made. Notwithstanding it
is sufficient to make some convenient part of them in this manner, and (for
sparing time and labor) to supply the rest by convenient parts proportional,
whereof there may sometimes arise some small difference of a few seconds, which
may worthily be neglected, seeing they can breed no sensible error in this
business.

CHAP. XXIV. How to reduce the apparent time to the equal time answering
thereto.
NOtwithstanding the greatest difference between the apparent and equal time to
be small, that by neglect thereof there can scarce at any time arise thereof so
much as one minute error in the place of the Sun; and consequently not so much
as half a minute error in his declination: yet because the rules and grounds of
Arts ought so much as may be to be free from all error, I have therefore
thought it better here to set down the foresaid Table of Equation of natural
days, rather then to leave the Reader to seek any further for so small a
matter, if any perhaps shall be desirous to exercise himself in calculating the
Suns true place, according to the manner here before set down, either for the
examining of the Suns Ephemerides here following, or any other; or for making
some other like to these, when the date of them shall be expired; wherein, if
perhaps you find some little difference of a few seconds from your
calculation, you need not therewith to be any thing troubled, seeing it cannot
produce any sensible error, neither in the Suns declination, nor yet in his
place.

A Table of Equation of natural days.
S S S S S S S S S S A A D. M Mi Mi. M M Mi. Mi. Mi. Mi. Mi. M M 2 0 9 12 6 2 6
16 24 21 7 5 7 4 1 9 11 6 2 7 17 24 20 6 6 7 6 1 10 11 5 2 7 18 24 19 5 6 7 8 2
10 11 5 2 8 18 24 19 4 6 6 10 3 11 11 5 2 9 19 24 18 3 7 6 12 3 11 10 4 2 9 20
24 17 2 7 6 14 4 11 10 4 3 10 20 24 16 2 7 5 16 5 11 10 3 3 11 21 24 15 1 8 5
18 5 11 9 3 3 11 21 24 14 0 8 4 20 6 12 9 3 3 12 22 23 13 A 1 8 4 22 6 12 8 3 4
13 22 23 12 1/^ 2 8 3 24 7 12 8 2 4 13 23 23 11 3 8 2 26 7 12 8 2 5 14 23 22 10
3 8 2 28 8 12 7 2 5 15 23 22 9 4 8 1 30 8 12 7 2 6 16 24 21 8 5 7 0

This Table must be thus used: With the sign and degree of the Suns true place
take out in the common meeting the minutes of time; which according to the
letters A* S, in the head of the Table, must be added to or subtracted from the
apparent time to make it equal: remembering to do contrariwise if the equal time
must be changed into the apparent.

CHAP. XXV. A Table of Equations of the Suns Ephemerides.
January Febr. March. April. May. June. Day. Mi. Se Mi. Se Mi. Se Mi. Se Mi. Se
Mi. Se 3 1 53 1 51 1 49 1 47 1 46 1 45 6 1 52 1 50 1 49 1 47 1 46 1 45 9 1 52 1
50 1 49 1 47 1 45 1 45 12 1 52 1 51 1 48 1 46 1 46 1 44 15 1 52 1 50 1 49 1 47
1 45 1 45 18 1 52 1 50 1 48 1 46 1 45 1 45 21 1 51 1 50 1 48 1 46 1 45 1 45 24
1 52 1 50 1 48 1 46 1 45 1 44 27 1 51 1 50 1 48 1 46 1 45 1 45 30 1 52 1 47 1
46 1 45 1 45 July. August Sept. October Novem December. Day. Mi. Se* Mi. Se. Mi. Se.
Mi. Se. Mi. Se. Mi. Se. 3 1 45 1 45 1 48 1 49 1 51 1 52 6 1 45 1 46 1 48 1 50 1
52 1 52 9 1 45 1 46 1 48 1 50 1 52 1 52 12 1 45 1 46 1 48 1 50 1 52 1 53 15 1
45 1 47 1 49 1 50 1 52 1 52 18 1 45 1 47 1 48 1 51 1 52 1 52 21 1 45 1 47 1 49
1 50 1 52 1 52 24 1 46 1 47 1 49 1 51 1 52 1 53 27 1 46 1 47 1 49 1 51 1 52 1
52 30 1 45 1 47 1 49 1 52 1 53 1 52

By means of this Table, and these Ephemerides, the true place of the Sun may
most easily be found, for many years, either past, or to come; as shall
hereafter be showed in the next Chapter.

Ephemerides the Sun 1608. Leap year.
January. Februar. March. April. May. June. D gr. mi. sec D gr. mi. se. D gr.
mi. se. D gr. mi se D gr. mi. sec D gr. mi. sec 1 20 47 21 1 22 17 51 1 21 23 9
1 21 56 7 1 20 59 3 1 20 37 23 2 21 48 38 2 23 18 28 2 22 22 49 2 22 54 41 2 21
56 43 2 21 34 31 3 22 49 52 3 24 19 3 3 23 22 27 3 23 53 13 3 22 54 21 3 22 31
38 4 23 51 6 4 25 19 37 4 24 22 2 4 24 51 42 4 23 51 58 4 23 28 46 5 24 52 18 5
26 20 8 5 25 21 36 5 25 50 10 5 24 49 33 5 24 25 52 6 25 53 30 6 27 20 39 6 26
21 7 6 26 48 35 6 25 47 7 6 25 22 58 7 26 54 40 7 28 21 7 7 27 20 37 7 27 46 58
7 26 44 40 7 26 20 4 8 27 55 49 8 29 21 34 8 28 20 4 8 28 45 19 8 27 42 11 8 27
17 10 9 28 56 57 9 21 59 9 29 19 28 9 29 43 37 9 28 39 41 9 28 14 15 10 29 58 5
10 1 22 22 10 18 51 10 41 55 10 29 37 9 10 29 11 20 11 59 11 11 2 22 43 11 1 18
12 11 1 40 10 11 34 36 11 8 24 12 2 0 16 12 3 23 2 12 2 17 31 12 2 38 24 12 1
32 2 12 1 5 29 13 3 1 21 13 4 23 19 13 3 16 47 13 3 36 35 13 2 29 27 13 2 2 33
14 4 2 25 14 5 23 35 14 4 16 2 14 4 34 45 14 3 26 51 14 2 59 37 15 5 3 27 15 6
23 49 15 5 15 14 15 5 32 53 15 4 24 14 15 3 56 41 16 6 4 28 16 7 24 0 16 6 14
24 16 6 30 59 16 5 21 36 16 4 53 45 17 7 5 29 17 8 24 10 17 7 13 32 17 7 29 4
17 6 18 56 17 5 50 49 18 8 6 28 18 9 24 18 18 8 12 37 18 8 27 6 18 7 16 16 18 6
47 53 19 9 7 26 19 10 24 23 19 9 11 40 19 9 25 6 19 8 13 35 19 7 44 57 20 10 8
22 20 11 24 27 20 10 10 41 20 10 23 5 20 9 10 53 20 8 42 1 21 11 9 18 21 12 24
29 21 11 9 40 21 11 21 3 21 10 8 10 21 9 39 5 22 12 10 11 22 13 24 28 22 12 8
37 22 12 18 58 22 11 5 26 22 10 36 9 23 13 11 4 23 14 24 25 23 13 7 32 23 13 16
52 23 12 2 41 23 11 33 14 24 14 11 55 24 15 24 21 24 14 6 25 24 14 14 44 24 12
59 55 24 12 30 19 25 15 12 45 25 16 24 14 25 15 5 15 25 15 12 34 25 13 57 9 25
13 27 24 26 16 13 33 26 17 24 5 26 16 4 4 26 16 10 23 26 14 54 22 26 14 24 29
27 17 14 20 27 18 23 54 27 17 2 50 27 17 8 10 27 15 51 33 27 15 21 24 28 18 15
5 28 19 23 41 28 18 1 34 28 18 5 56 28 16 48 45 28 16 18 40 29 19 15 49 29 20
23 26 29 19 0 15 29 19 3 40 29 17 45 55 29 17 15 47 30 20 16 31 30 19 58 54 30
20 1 22 30 18 43 5 30 18 12 53 31 21 17 12 31 20 57 32 31 19 40 14 July. August
September October. Novem. December. D gr. mi. se. D gr. mi. se. D gr. mi. se D gr.
mi. se. D gr. mi. se. D gr. mi. se 1 19 10 0 1 18 47 12 1 18 46 59 1 18 19 25 1
19 24 15 1 19 53 44 2 20 7 7 2 19 44 50 2 19 45 33 2 19 19 3 2 20 24 55 2 20 54
58 3 21 4 15 3 20 42 30 3 20 44 8 3 20 18 44 3 21 25 36 3 21 56 13 4 22 1 24 4
21 40 10 4 21 42 46 4 21 18 26 4 22 26 19 4 22 57 29 5 22 58 33 5 22 37 53 5 22
41 26 5 22 18 11 5 23 27 3 5 23 58 45 6 23 55 43 6 23 35 37 6 23 40 7 6 23 17
58 6 24 27 49 6 25 0 2 7 24 52 53 7 24 33 23 7 24 38 51 7 24 17 47 7 25 28 37 7
26 1 19 8 25 50 4 8 25 31 10 8 25 37 37 8 25 17 38 8 26 29 25 8 27 2 37 9 26 47
16 9 26 28 59 9 26 36 26 9 26 17 32 9 27 30 15 9 28 3 55 10 27 44 28 10 27 26
49 10 27 35 17 10 27 17 28 10 28 31 7 10 29 5 13 11 28 41 41 11 28 24 41 11 28
34 10 11 28 17 26 11 29 32 0 11 6 32 12 29 38 55 12 29 22 35 12 29 33 5 12 29
17 27 12 32 55 12 1 7 50 13 36 10 13 20 31 13 32 2 13 17 29 13 1 33 51 13 2 9 9
14 1 33 26 14 1 18 28 14 1 31 1 14 1 17 33 14 2 34 49 14 3 10 29 15 2 30 42 15
2 16 27 15 2 30 2 15 2 17 39 15 3 35 47 15 4 11 48 16 3 28 0 16 3 14 28 16 3 29
6 16 3 17 47 16 4 36 47 16 5 13 7 17 4 25 19 17 4 12 31 17 4 28 12 17 4 17 57
17 5 37 48 17 6 14 26 18 5 22 3^ 18 5 10 35 18 5 27 20 18 5 18 9 18 6 38 50 18
7 15 45 19 6 19 5^ 19 6 8 42 19 6 26 30 19 6 18 23 19 7 39 53 19 8 17 3 20 7 17
2^ 20 7 6 50 20 7 25 43 20 7 18 40 20 8 40 58 20 9 18 22 21 8 14 43 21 8 5 0 21
8 24 5^ 21 8 18 58 21 9 42 3 21 10 19 40 22 9 12 6 22 9 3 12 22 9 24 15 22 9 19
18 22 10 43 9 22 11 20 58 23 10 9 31 23 10 1 26 23 10 23 34 23 10 19 39 23 11
44 17 23 12 22 16 24 11 6 57 24 10 59 42 24 11 22 55 24 11 20 3 24 12 45 25 24
13 23 34 25 12 4 25 25 11 57 59 25 12 22 18 25 12 20 29 25 13 46 34 25 14 24 52
26 13 1 53 26 12 56 18 26 13 21 43 26 13 20 56 26 14 47 ^4 26 15 26 9 27 13 59
23 27 13 54 40 27 14 21 11 27 14 21 25 27 15 48 55 27 16 27 26 28 14 56 54 28
14 53 0 28 15 20 41 28 15 21 55 28 16 50 6 28 17 28 43 29 15 54 27 29 15 51 29
29 16 20 13 29 16 22 28 29 17 51 18 29 18 ^9 59 30 16 52 1 30 16 49 57 30 17 19
48 30 17 23 1 30 18 52 30 30 19 31 15 31 17 49 36 31 17 48 82 31 18 23 38 31 20
32 ^0 Ephemerides of the Sun 1609. First year.
January. Februar March. April. May June. D gr. mi. s. D gr. mi. s. D gr. mi
se. D gr. mi. se. D gr. mi. se. D gr. m. se 1 21 33 47 1 23 3 46 1 21 8 40 1 21
41 55 1 20 45 5 1 20 23 32 2 22 35 2 2 24 4 22 2 22 8 21 2 22 40 29 2 21 42 44
2 21 20 40 3 23 36 16 3 25 4 56 3 23 8 0 3 23 39 2 3 22 40 23 3 22 17 48 4 24
37 29 4 26 5 28 4 24 7 36 4 24 37 32 4 23 38 0 4 23 14 55 5 25 38 40 5 27 5 59
5 25 7 10 5 25 36 0 5 24 35 36 5 24 12 2 6 26 39 51 6 28 6 2^ 6 26 6 42 6 26 34
25 6 25 33 10 6 25 9 8 7 27 41 0 7 29 6 55 7 27 6 12 7 27 32 49 7 26 30 43 7 26
6 14 8 28 42 9 8 7 20 8 28 5 39 8 28 31 10 8 27 28 14 8 27 3 19 9 29 43 16 9 1
7 43 9 29 5 4 9 29 29 29 9 28 25 44 9 28 0 25 10 44 22 10 2 8 5 10 4 28 10 27
47 10 29 23 13 10 28 57 30 11 1 45 28 11 3 8 25 11 1 3 49 11 1 26 3 11 20 41 11
29 54 34 12 2 46 33 12 4 8 43 12 1 3 8 12 2 24 17 12 1 18 7 12 51 39 13 3 47 37
13 5 8 59 13 3 2 25 13 3 22 29 13 2 15 32 13 1 48 43 14 4 48 39 14 6 9 13 14 4
1 41 14 4 20 40 14 3 12 56 14 2 45 47 15 5 49 41 15 7 9 25 15 5 0 53 15 5 18 48
15 4 10 19 15 3 42 51 16 6 50 42 16 8 9 35 16 6 0 4 1^ 6 16 55 16 5 7 41 16 4
39 55 17 7 51 41 17 9 9 43 17 6 59 12 1^ 7 14 59 17 6 5 3 17 5 36 59 18 8 52 39
18 10 9 50 18 7 58 18 18 8 13 2 18 7 2 23 18 6 34 3 19 9 53 36 19 11 9 54 19 8
57 21 19 9 11 3 19 7 59 42 19 7 31 7 20 10 54 32 20 12 9 56 20 9 56 23 20 10 9
2 20 8 57 0 20 8 28 11 21 11 55 26 21 13 9 56 21 10 55 22 21 11 7 0 21 9 54 17
21 9 25 15 22 12 56 19 22 14 9 54 22 11 54 20 22 12 4 56 22 10 51 33 22 10 22
20 23 13 57 10 23 15 9 49 23 12 53 15 23 13 2 50 23 11 48 49 23 11 19 24 24 14
5^ 0 24 16 9 43 24 13 52 8 24 14 0 42 24 12 46 3 24 12 16 29 25 15 58 49 25 17
9 35 25 14 51 0 25 14 58 33 25 13 43 17 25 13 13 34 26 16 59 36 26 18 9 24 26
15 49 49 26 15 56 22 26 14 40 30 26 14 10 39 27 18 0 22 27 19 9 12 27 16 48 35
27 16 54 10 27 15 37 42 27 15 7 34 28 19 1 6 28 20 8 57 28 17 47 20 28 17 51 56
28 16 34 53 28 16 4 50 29 20 1 49 29 18 46 0 29 18 49 40 29 17 32 4 29 17 1 56
30 21 2 30 30 19 44 41 30 19 47 23 30 18 29 14 30 17 59 3 31 22 3 9 31 20 43 19
31 19 26 23 July. August. September October. Novomb Decembe D gr. mi. se. D gr
mi. se. D gr. mi. se. D gr^ mi. se. D gr. mi. sec D gr. m. sec. 1 18 56 9 1 18
33 14 1 18 32 48 1 18 4 58 1 19 9 34 1 19 38 53 2 19 53 17 2 19 30 52 2 19 31
21 2 19 4 36 2 20 10 13 2 20 40 7 3 20 50 24 3 20 28 31 3 20 29 56 3 20 4 16 3
21 10 54 3 21 41 22 4 21 47 33 4 21 26 12 4 21 28 33 4 21 3 58 4 22 11 36 4 22
42 38 5 22 44 42 5 22 23 54 5 22 27 12 5 22 3 42 5 23 12 20 5 23 43 54 6 23 41
51 6 23 21 37 6 23 25 54 6 23 3 29 6 24 13 6 6 24 45 11 7 24 39 2 7 24 19 23 7
24 24 38 7 24 3 17 7 25 13 53 7 25 46 2^ 8 25 36 13 8 25 17 10 8 25 23 23 8 25
3 8 8 26 14 41 8 26 47 45 9 26 33 24 9 26 14 58 9 26 22 11 9 26 3 1 9 27 15 31
9 27 49 3 10 27 30 36 10 27 12 48 10 27 21 1 10 27 2 57 10 28 16 22 10 28 50 22
11 28 27 49 11 28 10 40 11 28 19 53 11 28 2 54 11 29 17 15 11 29 51 40 12 29 25
3 12 2^ 8 33 12 29 18 48 12 29 2 54 12 18 9 12 52 5^ 13 22 18 13 6 28 13 17 45
13 2 56 13 1 19 5 13 1 54 18 14 1 19 33 14 1 4 25 14 1 16 43 14 1 2 59 14 2 20
2 14 2 55 37 15 2 16 49 15 2 2 24 15 2 15 44 15 2 3 5 15 3 21 1 15 3 56 56 16 3
14 7 16 ^ 0 2^ 16 3 14 47 16 3 3 13 16 4 22 0 16 4 58 15 17 4 11 25 17 3 58 27
17 4 13 52 17 4 3 22 17 5 23 1 17 5 59 34 18 5 8 44 ^^ 4 56 31 18 5 13 0 18 5 3
34 18 6 24 3 18 7 0 53 19 6 6 ^ 19 5 5^ ^7 19 6 12 10 19 6 3 48 19 7 25 6 19 8
2 11 20 7 3 2^ ^0 6 5^ ^^ 20 7 11 22 20 7 4 3 20 8 26 10 20 9 3 30 21 8 0 ^^ 21
7 ^^ ^^ 21 8 10 36 21 8 4 21 21 9 27 15 21 10 4 49 22 8 58 1^ ^2 8 49 6 22 9 9
5^ 22 9 4 40 22 10 28 21 22 11 6 7 23 9 55 3^ 23 9 47 2^ 23 10 9 11 23 10 5 2
23 11 29 28 23 12 7 25 24 10 53 2 2^ 10 45 3^ 24 11 8 32 24 11 5 25 24 12 30 3^
24 13 8 43 25 11 50 20 ^5 11 43 52 25 12 7 54 25 12 5 50 25 13 31 45 25 14 10 1
26 12 47 5^ ^^ 12 4^ 10 26 13 7 19 26 13 6 17 26 14 32 55 26 15 11 18 27 13 45
27 ^^ 13 40 3^ 27 14 6 4^ 27 14 6 45 27 15 34 5 27 16 12 35 28 14 42 5^ 28 14
^8 54 2^ 15 6 16 28 15 7 15 28 16 35 16 28 17 13 52 29 15 40 30 29 15 37 19 29
16 5 47 29 16 7 47 29 17 36 2^ 29 18 15 8 30 16 38 ^ 30 16 35 47 30 17 5 22 30
17 8 21 30 18 37 40 30 14 16 24 31 17 35 3^ 31 17 34 16 31 18 8 57 31 20 17 39
Ephemerides of the Sun 1610. Second year
January. Februar. March. April. May June. D gr. mi. se. D gr. mi. se. D gr.
mi. se. D gr. mi. se. D gr. mi. se* D gr. mi. se. 1 21 18 56 1 22 49 5 1 20 54
12 1 21 27 43 1 20 31 6 1 20 9 41 2 22 20 11 2 23 49 41 2 21 53 53 2 22 26 18 2
21 28 46 2 21 6 49 3 23 21 25 3 24 50 15 3 22 53 32 3 23 24 50 3 22 26 25 3 22
3 57 4 24 22 38 4 25 50 48 4 23 53 9 4 24 23 21 4 23 24 2 4 23 1 4 5 25 23 50 5
20 51 19 5 24 52 44 5 25 21 50 5 24 21 38 5 23 58 11 6 26 25 1 6 ^7 51 48 6 25
52 16 6 26 20 16 6 25 19 13 6 24 55 18 7 27 26 51 7 28 52 16 7 26 51 46 7 27 18
40 7 26 16 40 7 25 52 24 8 28 27 19 8 29 52 41 8 27 51 15 8 28 17 2 8 27 14 18
8 26 49 29 9 29 28 27 9 53 5 9 28 50 40 9 29 15 21 9 28 11 48 9 27 46 35 10 29
34 10 1 53 27 10 29 50 4 10 13 39 10 29 9 17 10 28 43 40 11 1 30 40 11 2 53 48
11 49 26 11 1 11 56 11 6 45 11 29 40 44 12 2 31 45 12 3 54 6 12 1 48 46 12 2 10
10 12 1 4 12 12 37 49 13 3 32 49 13 4 54 22 13 2 48 3 13 3 8 23 13 2 1 37 13 1
34 53 14 4 33 52 14 5 54 37 14 3 47 19 14 4 6 34 14 2 59 2 14 2 31 57 15 5 34
54 15 6 54 50 15 4 46 32 15 5 4 43 15 3 56 25 15 3 29 2 16 6 35 54 16 7 55 0 16
5 45 44 16 6 2 50 16 4 53 47 16 4 26 6 17 7 36 54 17 8 55 9 17 6 44 52 17 7 0
55 17 5 51 9 17 5 23 9 18 8 37 53 18 9 55 16 18 7 43 59 18 7 58 58 18 6 48 29
18 0 20 13 19 9 38 50 19 10 55 20 19 8 43 3 19 8 56 59 19 7 45 48 19 7 17 17 20
10 39 46 20 11 55 23 20 9 42 5 20 9 54 59 20 8 42 7 20 8 14 21 21 11 40 40 21
12 55 23 21 10 41 5 21 10 52 57 21 9 40 24 21 9 11 25 22 12 41 34 22 13 55 22
22 11 40 2 22 11 50 53 22 10 37 41 22 10 8 30 23 13 42 25 23 14 55 18 23 12 38
58 23 12 48 48 23 11 34 56 23 11 5 34 24 14 43 16 24 15 55 12 24 13 37 52 24 13
46 41 24 12 32 11 24 12 2 39 25 15 44 5 25 16 55 4 25 14 36 44 25 14 44 32 25
13 29 25 25 12 59 43 26 16 44 52 26 17 54 54 26 15 35 33 26 15 42 22 26 14 26
38 26 13 56 49 27 17 45 38 27 18 54 43 27 16 34 20 27 16 40 10 27 15 23 50 27
14 53 44 28 18 46 23 28 19 54 28 28 17 33 5 28 17 37 56 28 16 21 1 28 15 51 0
29 19 47 6 29 18 31 48 29 18 35 41 29 17 18 12 29 16 48 6 30 20 47 47 30 19 30
28 30 19 33 24 30 18 15 22 30 7 45 12 31 21 48 27 31 20 29 7 31 19 12 32 July
August. Sete^be October. November. December. D gr. mi. se D gr. mi. se D gr. mi.
sec D gr. mi se. D gr, mi. sec D gr. mi. sec 1 18 42 19 1 18 19 17 1 18 18 37 1
17 50 31 1 18 54 52 1 19 24 3 2 19 39 26 2 19 16 54 2 19 17 10 2 18 50 9 2 19
55 31 2 20 25 17 3 20 36 34 3 20 14 33 3 20 15 44 3 19 49 48 3 20 56 11 3 21 26
32 4 21 33 42 4 21 12 13 4 21 14 21 4 20 49 30 4 21 56 53 4 22 27 47 5 22 30 51
5 22 9 55 5 22 12 59 5 21 49 13 5 22 57 37 5 23 29 3 6 23 28 0 6 23 7 38 6 23
11 40 6 22 48 59 6 23 58 22 6 24 30 20 7 24 25 10 7 24 5 23 7 24 10 23 7 23 48
47 7 24 59 3 7 25 31 37 8 25 22 21 8 25 3 9 8 25 9 8 8 24 48 37 8 25 59 57 8 26
32 54 9 26 19 32 9 26 0 57 9 26 7 56 9 25 48 30 9 27 0 46 9 27 34 12 10 27 16
45 10 26 58 47 10 27 6 45 10 26 48 25 10 28 1 37 10 28 35 30 11 28 13 57 11 27
56 38 11 28 5 37 11 27 48 22 11 29 2 30 11 29 36 49 12 29 11 11 12 28 54 31 12
29 4 31 12 28 48 22 12 3 23 12 38 7 13 8 25 13 29 52 26 13 3 27 13 29 48 23 13
1 4 19 13 1 39 26 14 1 5 40 14 50 23 14 1 2 25 14 48 26 14 2 5 16 14 2 40 45 15
2 2 57 15 1 48 21 15 2 1 26 15 1 48 31 15 3 6 14 15 3 42 4 16 3 0 14 16 2 46 21
16 3 0 28 16 2 48 38 16 4 7 13 16 4 43 24 17 3 57 32 17 3 44 23 17 3 59 33 17 3
48 47 17 5 8 14 17 5 44 43 18 4 54 51 18 4 42 26 18 4 58 40 18 4 48 58 18 6 9
15 18 6 46 1 19 5 52 11 19 5 40 32 19 5 57 49 19 5 49 12 19 7 10 18 19 7 47 20
20 6 49 32 20 6 38 39 20 6 57 1 20 6 49 27 20 8 11 22 20 8 48 39 21 7 46 54 21
7 36 49 21 7 56 15 21 7 49 44 21 9 12 26 21 9 49 57 22 8 44 17 22 8 35 0 22 8
55 31 22 8 50 3 22 10 13 32 22 10 51 16 23 9 41 42 23 9 33 13 23 9 54 49 23 9
50 24 23 11 14 39 23 11 52 34 24 10 39 7 24 10 31 27 24 10 54 9 24 10 50 47 24
12 15 47 24 12 53 52 25 11 36 34 25 11 29 44 25 11 53 31 25 11 51 11 25 13 16
56 25 13 55 9 26 12 34 2 26 12 28 0 26 12 52 55 26 12 51 38 26 14 18 5 26 14 56
27 27 13 31 31 27 13 26 22 27 13 52 21 27 13 52 6 27 15 19 15 27 15 57 44 28 14
29 2 28 14 24 45 28 14 51 50 28 14 52 36 28 16 20 2^ 2^ 16 59 1 29 15 26 33 29
15 23 10 29 15 51 22 29 15 53 7 29 17 21 38 29 18 0 17 30 1^ 24 7 30 16 21 36
30 16 50 55 30 16 53 40 30 18 22 50 30 19 1 33 ^1 17 21 41 ^1 17 20 5 31 17 54
15 31 20 2 48 Ephemerides of the Sun 1611. Third year.
January. Februar. March. April. May. June. D gr. mi. sec D gr mi. se. D gr.
mi. se. D gr. mi se D gr. mi. sec D gr. mi. sec 1 21 4 5 1 22 34 23 1 20 39 44
1 21 13 31 1 20 17 7 1 19 55 50 2 22 5 21 2 23 35 0 2 21 39 26 2 22 12 6 2 21
14 48 2 20 52 58 3 23 6 35 3 24 35 35 3 22 39 5 3 23 10 39 3 22 12 27 3 21 50 6
4 24 7 48 4 25 36 8 4 23 38 43 4 24 9 10 4 23 10 4 4 22 47 14 5 25 9 0 5 26 36
39 5 24 38 18 5 25 7 39 5 24 7 41 5 23 44 21 6 26 10 11 6 27 37 9 6 25 37 51 6
26 6 6 6 25 5 16 6 24 41 27 7 27 11 21 7 28 37 37 7 26 37 21 7 27 4 31 7 26 2
49 7 25 38 33 8 28 12 30 8 29 38 3 8 27 36 50 8 28 2 53 8 27 0 21 8 26 35 39 9
29 13 38 9 38 27 9 28 36 17 9 29 1 13 9 27 57 52 9 27 32 44 10 14 45 10 1 38 50
10 29 35 41 10 29 53 32 10 28 55 22 10 28 29 50 11 1 15 51 11 2 39 10 11 35 3
11 57 49 11 29 52 50 11 29 26 54 12 2 16 56 12 3 39 29 12 1 34 23 12 1 56 4 12
50 17 12 24 0 13 3 18 1 13 4 39 46 13 2 33 41 13 2 54 17 13 1 47 43 13 1 21 3
14 4 19 4 14 5 40 1 14 3 32 58 14 3 52 28 14 2 45 7 14 2 18 8 15 5 20 6 15 6 40
14 15 4 32 12 15 4 50 37 15 3 42 31 15 3 15 12 16 6 21 7 16 7 40 25 16 5 31 23
16 5 48 45 16 4 39 53 16 4 12 16 17 7 22 7 17 8 40 35 17 6 30 33 17 6 46 50 17
5 37 15 17 5 9 20 18 8 23 6 18 9 40 42 18 7 29 40 18 7 44 54 18 6 34 35 18 6 6
24 19 9 24 4 19 10 40 47 19 8 28 44 19 8 42 56 19 7 31 55 19 7 3 28 20 10 25 0
20 11 40 50 20 9 27 47 20 9 40 56 20 8 28 14 20 8 0 32 21 11 25 55 21 12 40 51
21 10 26 47 21 10 38 54 21 9 26 31 21 8 57 36 22 12 26 48 22 13 40 50 22 11 25
45 22 11 36 51 22 10 23 48 22 9 54 40 23 13 27 40 23 14 40 47 23 12 24 42 23 12
34 46 23 11 21 4 23 10 51 44 24 14 28 31 24 15 40 41 24 13 23 36 24 13 32 39 24
12 18 18 24 11 48 49 25 15 29 21 25 16 40 34 25 14 22 28 25 14 30 31 25 13 15
33 25 12 45 53 26 16 30 8 26 17 40 25 26 15 21 18 26 15 28 21 26 14 12 46 26 13
42 58 27 17 30 55 27 18 40 13 27 16 20 6 27 16 26 9 27 15 9 54 27 14 39 54 28
18 31 40 28 19 40 0 28 17 18 51 28 17 23 56 28 16 7 10 28 15 37 9 29 19 32 23
29 18 17 35 29 18 21 41 29 17 4 21 29 16 34 15 30 20 33 5 30 19 16 15 30 19 19
25 30 18 1 31 30 17 31 22 31 21 33 45 31 20 14 54 31 18 58 41 July. August.
September October. Novem. December. D gr. mi. se. D gr. mi. se. D gr. mi. se D gr.
mi. se. D gr. mi. se. D gr. mi. se 1 18 28 28 1 18 5 19 1 18 4 25 1 17 36 4 1
18 40 11 1 19 9 13 2 19 25 35 2 19 2 56 2 19 2 48 2 18 35 41 2 19 40 49 2 20 10
26 3 20 22 43 3 20 0 34 3 20 1 32 3 19 35 21 3 20 41 29 3 21 11 41 4 21 19 51 4
20 58 14 4 21 0 8 4 20 35 2 4 21 42 10 4 22 12 56 5 22 17 0 5 21 55 55 5 21 58
46 5 21 34 45 5 22 42 54 5 23 14 12 6 23 14 9 6 22 53 38 6 22 57 26 6 22 34 30
6 23 43 38 6 24 15 29 7 24 11 19 7 23 51 23 7 23 56 9 7 23 34 17 7 24 44 19 7
25 16 45 8 25 8 29 8 24 49 9 8 24 54 53 8 24 34 7 8 25 45 12 8 26 18 3 9 26 5
41 9 25 46 56 9 25 53 40 9 25 33 59 9 26 46 2 9 27 19 20 10 17 2 53 10 26 44 56
10 26 52 30 10 26 33 54 10 27 47 52 10 28 20 39 11 28 0 5 11 27 42 37 11 27 51
20 11 27 33 50 11 28 47 44 11 29 21 57 12 28 57 19 12 28 40 29 12 28 50 14 12
28 33 49 12 29 48 38 12 23 16 13 29 54 33 13 29 38 24 13 29 49 10 13 29 33 50
13 49 33 13 1 24 34 14 51 48 14 36 20 14 48 8 14 33 52 14 1 50 29 14 2 25 54 15
1 49 4 15 1 34 18 15 1 47 7 15 1 33 57 15 2 51 27 15 3 27 13 16 2 46 21 16 2 32
17 16 2 46 9 16 2 34 4 16 3 52 26 16 4 28 32 17 3 43 39 17 3 30 19 17 3 45 13
17 3 34 12 17 4 53 26 17 5 29 51 18 4 40 57 18 4 28 22 18 4 44 20 18 4 34 23 18
5 54 28 18 6 31 10 19 5 38 17 19 5 26 27 19 5 43 29 19 5 34 36 19 6 55 30 19 7
32 29 20 6 35 38 20 6 24 34 20 6 42 40 20 6 34 50 20 7 56 33 20 8 33 47 21 7 33
0 21 7 22 43 21 7 41 53 21 7 35 7 21 8 57 38 21 9 35 6 22 8 30 23 22 8 20 53 22
8 41 9 22 8 35 26 22 9 58 44 22 10 36 24 23 9 27 47 23 9 19 6 23 9 40 26 23 9
35 46 23 10 59 50 23 11 37 42 24 10 25 12 24 10 17 20 24 10 39 46 24 10 36 8 24
12 0 58 24 12 39 0 25 11 22 38 25 11 15 36 25 11 39 7 25 11 36 32 25 13 2 6 25
13 40 18 26 12 20 6 26 12 13 54 26 12 38 31 26 12 36 58 26 14 3 16 26 14 41 35
27 13 17 35 27 13 12 14 27 13 37 57 27 13 37 26 27 15 4 26 27 15 42 53 28 14 15
5 28 14 10 36 28 14 37 25 28 14 37 56 28 16 5 36 28 16 44 9 29 15 12 37 29 15 9
0 29 15 36 56 29 15 38 27 29 17 6 48 29 17 45 26 30 16 10 9 30 16 7 26 30 16 36
29 30 16 38 59 30 18 8 0 ^0 18 4^ 42 31 17 7 44 31 17 5 55 31 17 39 34 31 1^ 47
58 Ephemerides of the Sun 1612. Fourth year.
January. Februar March. April. May. June. D gr m^. se. D gr mi. se. D gr. mi.
se. D gr. mi se D gr mi. se. D gr. mi. se 1 20 49 14 1 22 19 42 1 21 24 58 1 21
57 55 1 21 0 49 1 20 39 8 2 21 50 30 2 23 20 19 2 22 24 38 2 22 56 28 2 21 58
29 2 21 36 16 3 22 51 45 3 24 20 54 3 23 24 16 3 23 55 0 3 22 56 7 3 22 33 23 4
23 52 58 4 25 21 28 4 24 23 52 4 24 53 29 4 23 53 43 4 23 30 30 5 24 54 11 5 26
21 59 5 25 23 25 5 25 51 57 5 24 51 19 5 24 27 37 6 25 55 22 6 27 22 29 6 26 22
56 6 26 50 22 6 25 48 53 6 25 24 23 7 26 56 32 7 28 22 58 7 27 22 26 7 27 48 45
7 26 46 25 7 26 21 49 8 27 57 41 8 29 23 24 8 28 21 53 8 28 47 5 8 27 43 56 8
27 18 54 9 28 58 49 9 23 49 9 29 21 17 9 29 45 24 9 28 41 26 9 28 16 0 10 29 59
57 10 1 24 12 10 20 40 10 43 41 10 29 38 54 10 29 13 4 11 1 1 3 11 2 24 33 11 1
20 1 11 1 41 57 11 36 22 11 10 10 12 2 2 8 12 3 24 53 12 2 19 19 12 2 40 10 12
1 33 48 12 1 7 13 13 3 3 13 13 4 25 10 13 3 18 36 13 3 38 22 13 2 31 12 13 2 4
18 14 4 4 16 14 5 25 25 14 4 17 51 14 4 36 32 14 3 28 36 14 3 1 22 15 5 5 10 15
6 25 39 15 5 17 3 15 5 34 40 15 4 25 59 15 3 58 26 16 6 6 20 16 7 25 51 16 6 16
13 16 6 32 46 16 5 23 21 16 4 55 30 17 7 7 20 17 8 26 0 17 7 15 20 17 7 30 50
17 6 20 42 17 5 52 34 18 8 8 20 18 9 26 8 18 8 14 25 18 8 28 52 18 7 18 1 18 6
49 38 19 9 9 17 19 10 26 14 19 9 13 28 19 9 26 53 19 8 14 20 19 7 46 42 20 10
10 14 20 11 26 17 20 10 12 29 20 10 24 52 20 9 12 38 20 8 43 46 21 11 11 9 21
12 26 19 21 11 11 28 21 11 22 49 21 10 9 55 21 9 40 50 22 12 12 3 22 13 28 18
22 12 10 25 22 12 20 44 22 11 7 11 22 10 37 54 23 13 12 56 23 14 26 15 23 13 9
20 23 13 18 38 23 12 4 26 23 11 34 59 24 14 13 47 24 15 26 11 24 14 8 13 24 14
16 30 24 13 1 40 24 12 32 3 25 15 14 36 25 16 26 4 25 15 7 3 25 15 14 20 25 13
58 54 25 13 29 8 26 16 15 24 26 17 25 55 26 16 5 51 26 16 12 9 26 14 56 6 26 14
26 4 27 17 16 11 27 18 25 44 27 17 4 37 27 17 9 56 27 15 53 18 27 15 23 19 28
18 16 57 28 19 25 31 28 18 3 21 28 18 7 42 28 16 50 29 28 16 20 25 29 19 17 41
29 20 25 16 29 19 2 2 29 19 5 25 29 17 47 40 29 17 17 31 30 20 18 23 30 20 0 42
30 20 3 8 30 18 44 50 30 18 14 38 31 21 19 3 31 20 59 19 31 19 41 59 July.
August. September. October. November December D gr. mi. se. D gr. mi se. D gr. mi. se
D gr. mi. sec D gr. mi. se. D gr. mi se. 1 19 11 45 1 18 48 58 1 18 48 46 1 18
21 14 1 19 26 7 1 19 55 36 2 20 8 52 2 19 46 36 2 19 47 20 2 19 20 53 2 20 26
46 2 20 56 50 3 21 6 0 3 20 44 15 3 20 45 56 3 20 20 33 3 21 27 27 3 21 58 5 4
22 3 9 4 21 41 56 4 21 44 33 4 21 20 16 4 22 28 10 4 22 59 21 5 23 0 18 5 22 39
39 5 22 43 13 5 22 20 0 5 23 28 55 5 24 0 37 6 23 57 28 6 23 37 23 6 23 41 55 6
23 19 48 6 24 29 41 6 25 1 54 7 24 54 38 7 24 35 8 7 24 40 39 7 24 19 37 7 25
30 28 7 26 3 11 8 25 51 49 8 25 32 56 8 25 39 25 8 25 19 28 8 26 31 17 8 27 4
29 9 26 49 1 9 26 30 45 9 26 38 14 9 26 19 22 9 27 32 7 9 28 5 47 10 27 46 13
10 27 28 35 10 27 37 5 10 27 19 18 10 28 32 59 10 29 7 5 11 28 43 26 11 28 26
27 11 28 35 58 11 28 19 17 11 29 33 52 11 8 24 12 29 40 40 12 29 24 21 12 29 34
53 12 29 19 17 12 34 47 12 1 9 43 13 37 55 13 22 17 13 33 50 13 19 19 13 1 35
43 13 2 11 2 14 1 35 11 14 1 20 14 14 1 32 49 14 1 19 23 14 2 36 40 14 3 12 21
15 2 32 27 15 2 18 14 15 2 31 51 15 2 19 29 15 3 37 39 15 4 13 40 16 3 29 45 16
3 16 15 16 3 30 54 16 3 19 37 16 4 38 39 16 5 14 59 17 4 27 4 17 4 14 7 17 4 30
0 17 4 19 47 17 5 39 40 17 6 16 18 18 5 24 23 18 5 12 2^ 18 5 29 8 18 5 20 0 18
6 40 4^ 18 7 17 37 19 6 21 44 19 6 10 2^ 19 6 28 19 19 6 20 14 19 7 41 45 19 8
18 56 20 7 19 5 20 7 8 37 20 7 27 32 20 7 20 30 20 8 42 50 20 9 20 14 21 8 16
28 21 8 6 47 21 8 26 47 21 8 20 48 21 9 43 55 21 10 21 33 22 9 13 52 22 9 4 59
22 9 26 4 22 9 21 8 22 10 45 1 22 11 22 51 23 10 11 17 23 10 3 13 23 10 25 23
23 10 21 30 23 11 46 9 23 12 24 9 24 11 8 43 24 11 1 29 24 11 24 44 24 11 21 54
24 12 47 17 24 13 25 27 25 12 6 10 25 11 59 46 25 12 24 7 25 12 22 19 25 13 48
26 25 14 26 44 26 13 3 39 26 12 58 5 26 13 23 32 26 13 22 47 26 14 49 36 26 15
28 1 27 14 1 9 27 13 56 27 27 14 23 0 27 14 23 16 27 15 50 47 27 16 29 18 28 14
58 40 28 14 54 50 28 15 22 30 28 15 23 46 28 16 51 58 28 17 30 35 29 15 56 12
29 15 53 16 29 16 22 3 29 16 24 19 29 17 53 10 29 18 31 51 30 16 53 46 30 16 51
44 30 17 21 37 30 17 24 53 30 18 54 23 30 19 33 7 31 17 51 21 31 17 50 14 31 18
25 29 31 20 34 22

CHAP. XXVI. The use of these Ephemerides.
OF the use of these Ephemerides, because they be altogether of the same form,
that others generally are, and have bin heretofore: and to be used also in all
points after the same manner, for finding out by them the true place of the Sun
at any time desired, for so many years as they serve: I think it needless for
me in this place to make any further mention: it being my purpose in this book,
rather to make supply of that is wanting in others, then to meddle with that
which is by them sufficiently handled and already published. This
notwithstanding I thought good to advertise the Reader, that these Ephemerides,
though they be made for five years only* yet may profitably serve for many
years to come after this manner: Subtract 1612 out of the year of Christ given,
divide that remains by four; if any thing remain after division made, it
shows which of the three common years in these Ephemerides answers to the
year given: if nothing remain, the fourth year is answerable to the year given.
Then seek out the month and day of the time given both in these Ephemerides
for that year, and in the Table of their Equations; and out of them take both
the place of the Sun, and the Equation answerable to that month and day: for
the product of this Equation by the quotient* added to the said place of the
Sun, if the number of the year given be more then 1612; or subtracted, if it be
less, shall give you the true place of the Sun for the time given.

As for example, the 1 of July 1620* suppose you would know the place of the
Sun: Subtracting therefore 1612 out of 1620, the remainder is 8, which being
divided by 4, the quotient is 2, and nothing remaining; which shows that the
fourth year ( viz. 1612) answers to the year given. Also the said month and
day sought out in these Ephemerides, and in the Table of their Equations, give
you the place of the Sun 19 degr. 11 min. 45 sec. of Cancer; and the Equation 1
min. 45 seconds which multiplied by the quotient 2, make 3 min. 30 sec. And
this added to the said place of the Sun the 1 of July 1612, shows you the
true place of the Sun, for the time given, to be 19 degr. 15 min. and 15 sec.
of Cancer.

CHAP, XXVII* The making of the Table of the Suns Declination.
THE place of the Sun being thus easily known by these Ephemerides for every
day of five years, the Declinations of the Sun for every day of the same years
were easily found out of the former Table of the Declination of every minute of
the Ecliptic, in such sort as was showed in the use of that Table before set
down, chap. 18. page 116. and 117: And so was made with no less facility the
Table following of the Suns Declination for every day of five years together,
commonly called by Seamen, A Regiment of the Sun. For although it has been
thought sufficient in books of Navigation hitherto published, to make the
Regiment of the Sun, or the Table of the Suns Declination for every day of 4
years, beginning with the first year after the leap year, and ending with the
next Leap year, because the Declinations of the Sun for the 4 years following
have bin supposed to be the same, in a manner that they were the 4 years
before; and so to continue alike, without any notable difference for many
years: yet to bring this matter to some more certainty* I have to this Table of
Declination prefixed the fifth year also viz. the leap year going before the
first of the said common years; that by comparing the Declinations of both leap
years together it might the better appear what difference of Declination there
is in every 4 years: by addition or subtraction of which difference, to the
Declinations set down in this Table, this Table may be made to serve for a
great many years yet to come, as truly as if it were made of purpose for them.

And for the more easy and readier use of all Seamen, I have to this end
gathered into this little Table, the differences of the Suns Declinations for
every day of the first and last years, set down in this Table of the Suns
Declinations here following; which differences may be called the
Prosthaphaereses, or Equations of the Suns Declination; because that by adding
them to, or subtracting them from the Declinations contained in this Table, the
true Declination of the Sun for any day (though many years hence) may easily be
found; and that after this manner.

Out of the number of the year of Christ given, subtract 1612; divide the
remainder by four, and set aside the quotient; if any thing remain, that
remainder shows in which of the 3 common years you are to seek the Suns
Declination: if nothing remain, you must look the Suns Declination in the
fourth and last year, which is leap year. Then seek the month and day of the
time given, both in that year so found in the Table of the Suns Declination,
and also in this little Table of Prosthaphaereses of the Suns Declination, here
immediately following; taking out of that the Suns Declination, and out of this
little Table the Equation of that Declination for four years; which Equation
you shall multiply by the said quotient, and add the product to the Declination
found in the Table, in the Spring and Autumn; that is, if the Sun be in Aries,
Taurus, Gemini, Libra, Scorpio, or Sagittarie; or subtract it in Summer and
winter, viz. the Sun being in Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Capricorn, Aquarie, or
Pisces* for so shall you have the Suns true Declination for the time given.

Take for example the 15 of March in the year of Christ 1630: out of this
subtract 1612, the remainder is 18; which being divided by 4, the quotient is
also 4, and 2, remain; which shows that you must seek the Suns Declination in
the second year after the leap year for the month and day aforesaid. Therefore
I find the Suns Declination in that year ( viz. 1610) to be 1 degr. 54 min. 16
sec. and in this little Table of Prosthaphaereses his difference of Declination
for 4 years, 44 sec. which multiplied by the foresaid quotient 4, make 2 min.
56 sec. to be added to the said Declination 1 degr. 54 min 16 sec. that so you
may have the true Declination of the Sun for that time, viz. 1 degr. 57 min. 12
sec.

Take also the 30 of August, in the year of our Lord 1659; out of which, if you
subtract 1612, there shall remain 47; which being divided by 4, the quotient
will be 11, and 3 remaining. I find therefore in the Table of the Suns
Declination in the third year, for the month and day aforesaid, the Suns
Declination 5 degr 29 min. ^5 sec. Also in this little Table of
Prosthaphaereses of the Suns Declination, I find for the same month and day,
the difference of the Declination of the Sun for 4 years, to be 42 sec. which
multiplied by the quotient 11, make the product 7 min. 42 sec. which subtracted
out of the Declination aforesaid 5 degr. 29 min. 35 seconds, shall leave you
the Suns true Declination for the 30 of August 1659, 5 degr. 21 min. 53 sec.

Prosthaphereses of the Suns Declination.
Ia Fe. M A. M Ju Ju A. Se. O. N D. Day. Se. Se. Se. Se. Se. Se. Se Se. Se. Se.
Se. Se. 1 17 36 42 40 28 8 15 33 42 41 30 9 2 18 37 43 39 28 7 15 34 43 42 29 8
3 19 37 43 40 27 6 16 35 43 42 29 7 4 20 38 44 40 27 5 17 35 43 42 28 6 5 20 37
44 39 26 4 18 34 43 41 28 5 6 21 37 43 39 25 4 19 35 43 41 28 4 7 21 38 43 38
25 3 19 35 44 41 27 3 8 22 39 43 38 24 2 19 35 43 40 26 2 9 24 38 44 38 23 2 20
36 44 40 25 1 10 24 39 45 37 23 1 21 36 43 40 24 1 11 25 39 44 37 22 0 21 37 43
40 24 0 12 25 40 44 37 22 1 22 38 43 39 23 0 13 26 41 43 37 21 1 22 38 43 39 22
1 14 26 40 44 37 20 2 23 38 44 38 21 2 15 27 41 44 35 20 3 23 38 43 38 21 3 16
28 42 43 35 19 4 24 39 44 37 20 4 17 28 41 42 35 19 4 25 39 43 38 20 5 18 29 41
43 35 18 5 26 39 43 37 19 6 19 30 41 43 34 17 6 26 39 43 37 18 7 20 31 42 42 34
17 7 27 40 43 36 17 8 21 31 42 43 33 16 8 27 40 43 36 16 9 22 32 42 43 33 15 8
28 41 44 35 16 10 23 32 43 43 32 14 9 29 40 43 35 15 11 24 32 43 42 32 14 10 29
41 42 34 14 12 25 33 44 42 31 12 11 30 41 43 34 13 12 26 33 44 41 31 12 12 30
41 42 33 13 13 27 34 43 41 30 11 13 30 41 42 34 12 14 28 35 43 41 29 11 13 31
42 42 33 11 15 29 35 43 41 29 9 14 31 41 43 32 11 16 30 35 41 29 9 14 32 42 42
32 10 16 31 36 41 8 33 42 31 17 A Table of the Suns Declination, 1608. Leap
year.
Jan. decl differ Feb. decl differ Mar. decl differ Apr. decl differ D gr. mi.
s. mi. se D gr. mi. s mi. se D gr. mi se. mi. se D gr mi. se. mi. se 1 21 54 39
9 35 1 14 7 44 20 11 1 3 25 38 23 36 1 8 34 21 21 52 2 21 45 4 9 59 2 13 47 33
19 45 2 3 2 2 23 38 2 8 56 23 21 42 3 21 35 5 10 24 3 13 27 48 21 18 3 2 38 24
23 41 3 9 18 5 21 33 4 21 24 41 10 54 4 13 6 30 20 52 4 2 14 43 23 41 4 9 39 38
21 25 5 21 13 45 11 7 5 12 46 38 20 23 5 1 51 2 23 43 5 10 1 3 21 14 6 21 2 38
11 37 6 12 26 15 20 54 6 1 27 19 23 43 6 10 22 17 21 4 7 20 51 1 12 2 7 12 5 21
21 6 7 1 3 36 23 43 7 10 43 21 20 53 8 20 38 59 12 24 8 11 44 15 21 18 8 0 39
53 23 42 8 11 4 14 20 36 9 20 26 35 12 48 9 11 22 57 21 27 9 0 16 11 23 42 9 11
24 50 20 38 10 20 13 47 13 10 10 11 1 30 21 39 10 0 7 31 23 42 10 11 45 28 20
20 11 20 0 37 13 34 11 10 39 51 21 47 11 0 31 13 23 39 11 12 5 48 20 8 12 19 47
3 13 54 12 10 18 4 21 56 12 0 54 52 23 39 12 12 25 56 19 56 13 19 33 9 14 17 13
9 56 8 22 7 13 1 18 31 23 36 13 12 45 52 18 43 14 19 18 52 14 24 14 9 34 1 22
14 14 1 42 7 23 34 14 13 4 35 20 31 15 19 4 28 15 12 15 9 11 47 22 22 15 2 5 41
23 31 15 13 25 6 19 18 16 18 49 16 15 33 61 8 49 25 22 31 16 2 29 12 23 28 16
13 44 24 19 4 17 18 33 43 15 26 17 8 26 54 22 37 17 2 52 40 23 24 17 14 3 2^ 18
50 18 18 18 17 15 59 18 8 4 17 22 45 18 3 16 4 23 20 18 14 22 18 18 37 19 18 2
18 16 18 19 7 41 32 22 50 19 3 39 24 23 16 19 14 40 55 18 22 20 17 46 0 16 38
20 7 18 42 22 58 20 4 2 40 23 12 20 14 59 17 18 9 21 17 29 22 16 55 21 6 55 44
23 3 21 4 25 52 23 7 21 15 17 26 17 50 22 17 12 27 17 14 22 6 32 41 23 8 22 4
48 59 23 2 22 15 35 16 17 38 23 16 55 13 17 31 23 6 9 33 23 13 23 5 12 1 22 58
23 15 52 54 17 20 24 16 37 42 17 49 24 5 46 20 23 17 24 5 34 59 22 50 24 16 10
14 17 6 25 16 19 53 18 6 25 5 23 3 23 22 25 5 57 49 22 45 25 16 27 20 16 49 26
16 1 47 18 21 26 4 59 41 23 27 26 6 20 34 22 37 26 16 44 9 16 33 27 15 43 26 18
38 27 4 36 14 23 28 27 6 43 11 22 31 27 17 0 42 16 16 28 15 24 48 18 54 28 4 12
46 23 32 28 7 5 42 22 24 28 17 16 58 15 58 29 15 5 54 19 9 29 3 49 14 23 36 29
7 28 6 22 16 29 17 32 56 15 41 30 14 46 45 19 23 30 7 50 22 22 8 30 17 48 37 15
24 31 14 27 22 19 38 31 8 12 30 22 1 Ma. decl differ. Ju decl. Diff. Ju decl
Diff. Au decl Diff. D gr. mi. se. mi se D gr. m. se mi. se D gr. mi. se mi. se
D gr. mi se. mi. s* 1 18 4 1 15 5 1 23 11 32 3 50 1 22 8 57 8 16 1 15 14 50 18
3 2 18 19 6 14 48 2 23 15 22 3 26 2 22 0 42 8 39 2 14 56 47 18 17 3 18 33 54 14
28 3 23 18 48 3 1 3 21 52 3 9 2 3 14 38 30 18 32 4 18 48 22 14 10 4 23 21 49 2
38 4 21 43 1 9 23 4 14 19 58 18 47 5 19 2 32 13 51 5 23 24 27 1 12 5 21 33 38 9
45 5 14 1 11 18 58 6 19 16 23 13 21 6 23 25 39 2 47 6 21 23 53 10 8 6 13 42 13
19 13 7 19 29 54 13 12 7 23 28 26 1 23 7 21 13 45 10 29 7 13 23 0 19 24 8 19 43
6 12 52 8 23 29 49 0 58 8 21 3 16 10 50 8 13 3 36 19 38 9 19 55 58 12 35 9 23
30 47 0 34 9 20 52 26 11 10 9 12 43 58 19 50 10 20 8 33 12 8 10 23 31 21 0 9 10
20 41 16 11 33 10 12 24 8 20 ^ 11 20 20 41 11 49 11 23 31 30 0 16 11 20 29 43
11 53 11 12 4 7 20 13 12 20 32 30 11 30 12 23 31 14 0 42 12 20 17 50 12 13 12
11 43 54 20 25 13 20 44 0 11 9 13 23 30 32 1 5 13 20 5 37 12 34 13 11 23 29 20
36 14 20 55 9 10 8 14 23 29 27 1 29 14 19 53 3 12 53 14 11 2 53 20 46 15 21 6 7
10 14 15 23 27 58 1 56 15 19 40 10 13 12 15 10 42 7 20 56 16 21 16 21 10 3 16
23 26 2 2 19 16 19 26 58 13 33 16 10 21 11 21 6 17 21 26 24 10 42 17 23 23 43 2
44 17 19 13 25 13 51 17 10 0 5 21 17 18 21 36 6 9 19 18 23 20 59 3 2 18 18 59
34 14 10 18 9 38 48 21 25 19 21 45 25 8 57 19 23 17 57 3 39 19 18 45 24 14 28
19 9 17 23 21 34 20 21 54 22 8 34 20 23 14 18 3 57 20 18 30 56 14 47 20 8 55 59
21 44 21 22 2 56 8 12 21 23 10 21 3 22 21 18 16 9 15 6 21 8 34 5 21 5^ 22 22 11
8 7 48 22 23 4 59 3 45 22 18 1 3 15 22 22 8 12 14 22 0 23 22 18 56 7 25 23 23 1
14 5 10 23 17 45 41 15 40 23 7 50 14 22 7 24 22 26 21 7 3 24 22 56 4 5 33 24 17
30 1 15 57 24 7 28 7 22 15 25 22 33 24 9 48 25 22 50 31 5 57 25 17 14 4 16 14
25 7 5 52 22 21 26 22 40 2 6 15 26 22 44 34 6 19 26 16 57 50 16 31 26 6 43 31
22 28 27 22 46 17 5 50 27 22 38 15 6 45 27 16 41 19 16 46 27 6 21 3 22 33 28 22
52 7 5 28 28 22 31 30 7 8 28 16 24 33 17 3 28 5 58 30 22 43 29 22 57 35 5 3 29
22 24 22 7 3 29 16 7 30 17 18 29 5 35 47 22 40 30 23 2 38 4 39 30 22 16 51 7 53
30 15 50 12 17 33 30 5 13 1 22 52 31 23 7 17 4 15 31 15 32 39 17 49 31 4 50 9
22 58 Sep. decl diff. Oct. Decl Diff. No. decl, Diff. Dec. decl dffe, D gr. mi.
se. mi. s. D gr. mi. sec mi. s. D gr^ mi. se. mi. s. D gr. m. sec mi. s* 1 4 27
11 23 1 1 7 12 32 22 43 1 17 38 34 16 23 1 23 8 20 4 25 2 4 4 10 6 2 7 35 15 22
37 2 17 54 57 16 3 2 23 12 45 3 58 3 3 41 4 10 3 7 57 52 22 30 3 18 11 0 15 55
3 23 16 43 3 30 4 3 17 54 14 4 8 20 22 22 23 4 18 26 55 15 14 4 23 20 13 3 2 5
2 54 40 18 5 8 42 45 22 16 5 18 42 9 15 5 5 23 23 15 2 33 6 2 31 22 20 6 9 5 1
22 8 6 18 57 14 14 44 6 23 25 48 2 6 7 2 8 2 23 23 7 9 27 9 22 0 7 19 11 58 14
23 7 23 27 54 1 36 8 1 44 39 26 8 9 49 9 21 52 8 19 26 21 14 3 8 23 29 30 1 9 9
1 21 13 28 9 10 11 1 21 42 9 19 40 24 13 41 9 23 30 49 0 39 10 0 57 45 30 10 10
32 43 21 33 10 19 54 5 13 18 10 23 31 18 0 12 11 0 34 15 30 11 10 54 16 21 24
11 20 7 23 12 56 11 23 31 30 0 18 12 0 10 45 32 12 11 15 40 21 13 12 20 20 19
12 24 12 23 31 12 0 46 13 0 12 47 32 13 11 36 53 21 3 13 20 32 43 12 21 13 23
30 26 1 14 14 0 36 19 33 14 11 57 56 20 51 14 20 45 4 11 47 14 23 29 12 1 43 15
0 59 52 33 15 12 18 47 20 40 15 20 56 51 11 24 15 23 27 29 2 11 16 1 23 25 33
16 12 39 27 20 27 16 21 8 15 10 59 16 23 25 18 2 40 17 1 46 58 31 17 12 59 54
20 17 17 21 19 14 10 35 17 23 22 38 3 8 18 2 10 29 31 18 13 20 11 20 3 18 21 29
49 10 12 18 23 19 30 3 36 19 2 34 0 29 19 13 40 14 19 50 19 21 40 1 9 44 19 23
15 54 4 4 20 2 57 29 28 20 14 0 4 19 37 20 21 49 45 9 21 20 23 11 50 4 32 21 3
20 57 25 21 14 19 41 19 23 21 21 59 6 8 53 21 23 7 18 5 1 22 3 44 22 23 22 14
39 4 19 7 22 22 7 59 8 29 22 23 2 17 5 28 23 4 7 55 20 23 14 58 11 18 55 23 22
16 28 8 3 23 22 56 49 5 54 24 4 31 5 16 24 15 17 6 18 38 24 22 24 31 7 29 24 22
50 55 6 23 25 4 54 21 13 25 15 35 44 18 23 25 22 32 0 7 17 25 22 44 32 6 50 26
5 17 34 9 26 15 54 7 18 6 26 22 39 17 6 43 26 22 37 42 7 17 27 5 40 43 5 27 16
12 13 17 51 27 22 46 0 6 16 27 22 30 25 7 43 28 6 3 48 22 59 28 16 30 4 17 34
28 22 52 16 5 48 28 22 22 42 8 10 29 6 26 47 55 29 16 47 38 17 16 29 22 58 4 5
21 29 22 14 32 8 36 30 6 49 42 50 30 17 4 54 16 59 30 23 3 25 4 55 30 22 5 56 9
2 31 17 21 53 16 41 31 21 56 54 9 27 First year. 1609.
Ian. decl. diff. Feb. decl Diff. Mar. dec diffe. Apr. decl diffe. D gr. m. se.
mi se D gr mi. se. mi. se D gr. mi. se mi se D gr. mi. se. mi. se 1 21 47 27 9
54 1 13 52 43 20 2 1 3 31 22 23 36 1 8 29 11 21 54 2 21 37 33 10 19 2 13 32 41
20 15 2 3 7 46 23 39 2 8 51 5 21 46 3 21 27 14 10 43 3 13 12 26 20 28 3 2 44 7
23 40 3 9 12 51 21 35 4 21 16 31 11 7 4 12 51 58 20 40 4 2 20 27 23 41 4 9 34
26 21 27 5 21 5 24 11 33 5 12 31 18 20 52 5 1 56 46 23 43 5 9 55 53 21 16 6 20
53 51 11 55 6 12 10 26 21 3 6 1 33 3 23 42 6 10 17 9 21 7 7 20 41 56 12 19 7 11
49 23 21 15 7 1 9 21 23 43 7 10 38 16 20 46 8 20 29 37 12 41 8 11 28 8 21 26 8
0 45 38 23 43 8 10 59 12 20 44 9 20 16 56 13 6 9 11 6 42 21 35 9 0 21 55 23 42
9 11 19 56 20 34 10 20 3 50 13 27 10 10 45 7 21 45 10 0 1 47 23 42 10 11 40 30
20 23 11 19 50 23 13 49 11 10 23 22 21 55 11 0 25 29 23 39 11 12 0 53 20 11 12
19 36 34 14 13 12 10 1 27 22 4 12 0 49 8 23 39 12 12 21 4 19 59 13 19 22 21 14
31 13 9 39 23 22 12 13 1 12 47 23 37 13 12 41 3 19 47 14 19 7 50 14 54 14 9 17
11 22 20 14 1 36 24 23 34 14 13 0 50 19 34 15 18 52 56 15 15 15 8 54 51 22 29
15 1 59 58 23 32 15 13 20 24 19 20 16 18 37 41 15 35 16 8 32 22 22 35 16 2 23
30 23 29 16 13 39 44 19 8 17 18 22 6 15 53 17 8 9 47 22 43 17 2 46 59 23 25 17
13 58 52 18 54 18 18 6 13 16 15 18 7 47 4 22 50 18 3 10 24 23 21 18 14 17 46 18
39 19 17 49 58 16 31 19 7 24 14 22 55 19 3 33 45 23 17 19 14 36 25 18 26 20 17
33 27 16 52 20 7 1 19 23 25 20 3 57 2 23 14 20 14 54 51 18 11 21 17 16 35 17 9
21 6 37 54 22 44 21 4 20 16 23 8 21 15 13 2 17 51 22 16 59 26 17 28 22 6 15 10
23 12 22 4 43 24 23 3 22 15 30 53 17 47 23 16 41 58 17 44 23 5 51 58 23 16 23 5
6 27 22 58 23 15 48 38 17 26 24 16 24 14 18 2 24 5 28 42 23 21 24 5 29 25 22 52
24 16 6 4 17 9 25 16 6 12 18 18 25 5 5 21 23 25 25 5 52 17 22 47 25 16 23 13 16
53 26 15 47 54 18 34 26 4 41 56 23 29 26 6 15 4 22 38 26 16 40 6 16 37 27 15 29
20 18 50 27 4 18 27 23 31 27 6 37 42 22 34 27 16 56 43 16 20 28 15 10 30 19 5
28 3 54 56 23 34 28 7 0 16 22 24 28 17 13 3 16 2 29 14 51 25 19 19 29 7 22 40
22 19 29 17 29 5 15 46 30 14 32 6 19 35 30 7 44 59 22 10 30 17 44 51 14 32 31
14 12 31 19 48 31 8 7 9 22 2 Ma. decl diff. Iu. decli. diff. Jul decl diff. Au.
decl diff. D gr* mi. se. mi. s. D gr. mi. se mi. se D gr. mi se. mi. se D gr.
mi. sec mi. s. 1 18 0 23 15 6 1 23 10 32 3 57 1 22 10 55 8 11 1 15 19 11 18 1 2
18 15 29 14 52 2 23 14 39 3 31 2 22 2 44 8 34 2 15 1 10 18 14 3 18 30 21 14 33
3 23 18 0 3 8 3 21 54 10 8 56 3 14 42 56 18 28 4 18 44 54 14 16 4 23 21 8 2 43
4 21 45 14 9 17 4 14 24 28 18 42 5 18 59 10 13 53 5 23 23 51 2 18 5 21 35 57 9
40 5 14 5 46 18 56 6 19 13 3 13 37 6 23 25 9 2 53 6 21 26 17 10 2 6 13 46 50 19
9 7 19 26 40 13 16 7 23 28 2 1 29 7 21 16 15 10 24 7 13 27 41 20 22 8 19 39 56
12 57 8 23 29 31 1 4 8 21 5 51 10 45 8 13 7 19 18 34 9 19 52 53 12 36 9 23 30
35 0 40 9 20 55 6 11 6 9 12 48 45 19 48 10 20 5 29 12 16 10 23 31 15 0 15 10 20
44 0 11 29 10 12 28 57 19 58 11 20 17 45 11 55 11 23 31 30 0 10 11 20 32 31 11
47 11 12 8 59 20 11 12 20 29 40 11 35 12 23 31 20 0 35 12 2^ 20 44 12 6 12 11
48 48 20 22 13 20 41 15 11 13 13 23 30 45 1 0 13 20 8 38 12 30 13 11 28 26 20
32 14 20 52 28 10 52 14 23 29 45 1 24 14 19 56 8 12 48 14 11 7 54 20 43 15 21 3
20 10 32 15 23 28 21 2 49 15 19 43 20 13 9 15 10 47 11 20 55 16 21 13 52 10 9
16 23 25 32 1 13 16 19 30 11 13 27 16 10 26 16 21 4 17 21 24 1 9 47 17 23 24 19
2 38 17 19 16 44 13 47 17 10 5 12 21 13 18 21 33 48 9 24 18 23 21 41 3 2 18 19
2 57 14 5 18 9 43 59 21 23 19 21 43 12 9 2 19 23 18 39 3 28 19 18 48 52 14 24
19 9 22 36 21 33 20 21 52 14 8 41 20 23 15 11 3 50 20 18 34 28 14 42 20 9 1 3
21 41 21 22 0 55 8 16 21 23 11 21 4 12 21 18 19 46 15 1 21 8 39 22 21 49 22 22
9 11 7 55 22 23 7 9 5 44 22 18 4 45 15 19 22 8 17 33 21 59 23 22 17 6 7 30 23
23 2 25 5 3 23 17 49 2^ 15 36 23 7 55 34 22 4 24 22 24 36 7 7 24 22 57 22 5 28
24 17 33 50 15 52 24 7 33 30 22 19 25 22 31 43 6 45 25 22 51 54 5 53 25 17 17
58 16 19 25 7 11 16 14 26 22 38 28 6 20 26 22 46 3 6 14 26 17 1 48 16 36 26 6
48 57 17 27 22 44 48 5 57 27 22 39 49 6 40 27 16 45 21 16 52 27 6 26 30 33 28
22 50 45 5 32 28 22 33 9 7 1 28 16 28 38 16 58 28 6 3 57 39 29 22 56 17 5 9 29
22 26 8 7 25 29 16 11 40 17 15 29 5 41 18 22 46 30 23 1 26 4 46 30 22 18 43 7
48 30 15 54 25 17 29 30 5 18 32 50 31 23 6 12 4 20 31 15 36 56 17 45 31 4 55 42
56 Sep decl* Diff. Oct. decl Diff Nov. dec diff. Dec. decl diff. D gr. mi. se
mi. se D gr. mi. se* mi. se D gr. mi. se. mi. se D gr. mi. se. mi. se 1 4 32 46
23 1 1 7 7 0 22 45 1 17 34 33 16 28 1 23 7 10 4 33 2 4 9 45 5 2 7 29 45 22 39 2
17 51 1 16 7 2 11 43 4 5 3 3 46 40 9 3 7 52 24 31 3 18 7 8 15 50 3 15 48 3 37 4
3 23 31 14 4 8 14 55 25 4 18 22 58 15 29 4 19 25 3 9 5 3 0 17 16 5 8 37 20 19 5
18 38 27 15 10 5 22 34 2 40 6 2 37 1 20 6 8 59 39 9 6 18 53 37 14 4^ 6 25 14 2
12 7 2 13 41 22 7 9 21 48 2 7 19 8 25 14 29 7 27 26 1 44 8 1 50 19 25 8 9 43 51
21 53 8 9 22 54 14 7 8 29 10 1 14 9 1 26 54 27 9 10 5 44 21 45 9 19 37 1 13 46
9 30 24 0 48 10 1 3 27 29 10 10 27 29 21 35 10 19 50 47 13 24 10 23 31 12 0 18
11 0 39 58 23 31 11 10 49 4 21 26 11 20 4 11 13 2 11 31 30 0 11 12 0 16 27 32
12 11 10 30 21 16 12 20 17 13 12 39 12 31 19 0 39 13 0 7 5 32 13 11 31 46 21 5
13 20 29 52 12 10 13 30 40 1 7 14 0 30 37 33 14 11 52 51 20 54 14 20 42 8 11 53
14 29 33 1 36 15 0 54 10 33 15 12 13 45 20 43 15 20 54 1 11 30 15 27 57 2 4 16
1 17 43 31 16 12 34 28 20 30 16 21 5 31 11 5 16 25 53 2 34 17 1 41 14 33 17 12
54 58 2^ 19 17 21 16 36 10 42 17 23 19 3 1 18 2 4 47 31 18 13 15 17 20 7 18 21
27 1^ 10 16 18 23 20 18 3 29 19 2 28 18 23 30 19 13 35 24 19 53 19 21 37 34 9
52 19 16 49 3 57 20 2 51 48 28 20 13 55 17 19 40 20 21 47 26 9 2^ 20 12 52 4 26
21 3 15 16 26 21 14 14 57 19 2^ 21 21 56 51 9 1 21 8 26 4 54 22 3 38 42 23 22
14 34 23 19 12 22 22 5 52 8 3^ 22 3 32 5 20 23 4 2 5 21 23 14 53 35 18 57 23 22
14 2^ 8 8 23 22 58 12 5 49 24 4 25 26 17 24 15 12 32 18 42 24 22 22 36 7 43 24
22 52 23 6 16 25 4 48 43 14 25 15 31 14 18 27 25 22 30 19 7 16 25 46 7 6 43 26
5 11 57 10 26 15 49 41 18 10 26 22 37 35 6 50 26 39 24 7 10 27 5 35 7 5 27 16 7
51 17 55 27 22 44 25 6 23 27 32 14 7 37 28 5 58 12 23 1 28 16 25 46 17 38 28 22
50 48 5 54 28 24 37 8 4 29 6 21 13 56 29 16 43 24 17 21 29 22 56 42 5 26 29 22
16 33 8 2^ 30 6 44 9 22 1 30 17 0 45 17 3 30 23 2 8 5 2 30 8 4 8 5^ 31 17 17 48
16 45 31 21 59 8 9 2^ A Table of the Suns Declination, 1610. Second year.
Jan. decl diff. Feb. decl diff. Mar. dec diff. Apr. decl diff. D gr. mi. se.
mi se D gr. mi. sec mi. se D gr. mi. se. mi s D gr. mi. se. mi. s. 1 21 49 46 9
48 1 13 57 32 19 59 1 3 37 5 23 36 1 8 23 52 21 56 2 21 39 58 10 11 2 13 37 33
20 11 2 3 13 29 23 38 2 8 45 48 21 46 3 21 29 47 10 38 3 13 17 22 20 25 3 2 49
51 23 40 3 9 7 34 21 39 4 21 19 9 11 1 4 12 56 57 20 37 4 2 26 11 41 4 9 29 13
21 28 5 21 8 8 11 26 5 12 36 20 20 49 5 2 2 30 41 5 9 50 41 21 20 6 20 56 42 11
50 6 12 15 31 21 1 6 1 38 49 43 6 10 12 1 21 9 7 20 44 52 12 14 7 11 54 30 21
11 7 1 15 6 43 7 10 33 10 20 58 8 20 32 38 12 36 8 11 33 19 21 24 8 0 51 23 43
8 10 54 8 20 47 9 20 20 2 12 59 9 11 11 55 21 32 9 0 27 30 42 9 11 14 55 20 37
10 20 7 3 13 23 10 10 50 23 21 54 10 0 3 58 41 10 11 35 32 20 26 11 19 53 40 13
44 11 10 28 29 21 42 11 0 19 43 41 11 11 55 58 20 14 12 19 39 56 14 6 12 10 6
47 22 1 12 0 43 24 39 12 12 16 12 20 2 13 19 25 50 14 29 13 9 44 46 22 11 13 1
7 3 38 13 12 36 14 19 49 14 19 11 21 14 47 14 9 22 35 22 19 14 1 30 41 35 14 12
56 3 19 38 15 18 56 34 15 9 15 9 0 16 22 26 15 1 54 16 23 32 15 13 15 41 19 24
16 18 41 25 15 29 16 8 37 50 22 35 16 2 17 48 29 16 13 35 5 19 10 17 18 25 56
15 51 17 8 15 15 22 41 17 2 41 17 27 17 13 54 15 18 57 18 18 10 5 16 8 18 7 52
34 22 48 18 3 4 44 22 18 14 13 12 18 43 19 17 53 57 16 29 19 7 29 46 22 54 19 3
28 6 18 19 14 31 55 18 30 20 17 37 28 16 4^ 20 7 6 52 23 0 20 3 51 24 26 20 14
50 25 18 14 21 17 20 42 17 ^ 21 6 43 52 23 5 21 4 14 50 23 58 21 15 8 39 17 59
22 17 3 36 17 22 22 6 20 47 23 11 22 4 37 48 4 22 15 26 38 17 44 23 16 46 14 17
41 23 5 57 36 23 16 23 5 0 52 0 23 15 44 22 17 29 24 16 28 33 17 58 24 5 34 20
23 20 24 5 23 52 22 53 24 16 1 51 17 14 25 16 10 35 18 13 25 5 11 0 23 4 25 5
46 45 22 48 25 16 19 5 16 57 26 15 52 22 18 31 26 4 47 56 23 47 26 6 9 33 22 41
26 16 36 2 16 41 27 15 33 51 18 45 27 4 24 9 23 30 27 6 32 14 34 27 16 52 43 16
24 28 15 15 6 19 2 28 4 0 39 23 34 28 6 54 48 27 28 17 9 7 16 7 29 14 56 4 19
16 29 7 17 15 20 29 17 25 14 16 49 30 14 36 48 19 31 30 7 39 35 13 30 17 41 3
15 33 31 14 17 17 19 4^ 31 8 1 48 44 May. dec diffe. Jun. decl Diff. Iul. decli
Diffe Aug. dec Diff. D gr. mi. se mi. s* D gr. mi. s. mi. se D gr. mi. se mi.
s. D gr. mi. se. mi. s^ 1 17 56 36 15 14 1 23 9 31 4 2 1 22 12 50 8 5 1 15 23
30 17 56 2 18 11 50 15 6 2 23 13 33 3 38 2 22 4 45 8 28 2 15 5 34 18 1^ 3 18 26
56 14 30 3 17 11 3 13 3 21 56 17 8 51 3 14 47 22 18 24 4 18 41 26 14 17 4 20 24
2 50 4 21 47 26 9 13 4 14 28 58 18 39 5 18 55 43 14 0 5 23 14 2 24 5 21 38 13 9
34 5 14 10 19 18 5^ 6 19 9 43 13 41 6 25 38 1 59 6 21 28 39 9 57 6 13 51 26 19
6 7 19 23 24 13 21 7 27 37 1 35 7 21 18 42 10 18 7 13 32 20 19 18 8 19 36 45 13
1 8 29 12 1 10 8 21 8 24 10 40 8 13 13 2 19 32 9 19 49 46 12 41 9 30 22 0 46 9
20 57 44 11 1 9 12 53 30 19 44 10 20 2 27 12 22 10 31 8 0 21 10 20 46 43 11 22
10 12 33 46 20 16 11 20 14 49 12 1 11 31 29 0 4 11 20 35 21 10 52 11 12 13 30
19 49 12 20 26 50 11 38 12 23 31 25 0 29 12 20 24 29 12 54 12 11 53 41 20 17 13
20 38 28 11 19 13 30 56 0 54 13 20 11 35 12 24 13 11 33 2^ 20 31 14 20 49 47 10
57 14 30 2 1 18 14 19 59 11 12 44 14 11 12 53 20 40 15 21 0 44 10 37 15 28 44 1
43 15 19 46 27 13 7 15 10 52 13 20 52 16 21 11 21 10 14 1^ 27 1 2 7 16 19 33 20
13 18 16 10 31 21 21 2 17 21 21 35 10 2 17 24 54 2 33 17 19 20 2 13 43 17 10 10
19 21 11 18 21 31 37 9 20 18 22 21 2 56 18 19 6 19 14 1 18 9 49 8 21 21 19 21
40 57 8 59 19 19 25 3 21 19 18 52 18 14 19 19 9 27 47 21 30 20 21 49 56 8 55 20
16 4 3 46 20 18 37 59 14 38 20 9 6 17 21 39 21 21 58 51 8 22 21 12 18 4 9 21 18
23 21 14 57 21 8 44 38 21 48 22 22 7 13 8 0 22 23 8 9 4 34 22 18 8 24 15 13 22
8 22 50 21 56 23 22 15 13 7 35 23 23 3 35 4 57 23 17 53 11 15 32 23 8 0 54 22 2
24 22 22 48 7 14 24 22 58 38 5 22 24 17 37 39 15 49 24 7 38 52 22 12 25 22 30 2
6 49 25 53 16 5 45 25 17 21 50 16 6 25 7 16 40 22 17 26 22 36 51 6 27 26 47 31
6 9 26 17 5 44 16 22 26 6 54 23 22 26 27 22 43 18 6 2 27 41 22 6 34 27 16 49 22
16 40 27 6 31 57 22 31 28 22 49 20 5 39 28 34 48 6 56 28 16 32 42 16 54 28 6 9
36 22 39 29 22 54 59 5 15 29 27 52 7 20 29 16 15 48 17 11 29 5 46 47 22 43 30
23 0 14 4 51 30 20 32 7 42 30 15 58 37 17 26 30 5 24 4 22 50 31 32 5 5 4 26 31
15 41 11 17 41 31 5 1 14 22 55 Sep. decl diff. Oct. Decl Diff. Nov. dec. diffe,
Dec. decl diff. D gr. mi. se. mi. s. D gr. mi. sec mi* s. D gr, mi. sec mi. s.
D gr. m. se* mi. se 1 4 38 19 22 59 1 7 1 29 22 47 1 17 30 31 16 32 1 23 5 0 5
40 2 4 15 20 23 4 2 7 24 16 22 39 2 17 47 3 16 13 2 23 10 40 4 11 3 3 52 16 8 3
7 46 55 22 34 3 18 3 16 15 53 3 23 14 51 3 44 4 3 29 8 12 4 8 9 29 22 26 4 18
19 9 15 34 4 23 18 35 3 15 5 3 5 56 16 5 8 31 55 22 20 5 18 34 43 15 15 5 23 21
50 2 48 6 2 42 40 19 6 8 54 15 22 12 6 18 49 58 14 55 6 23 24 38 2 18 7 2 19 21
23 22 7 9 16 27 22 3 7 19 4 53 14 32 7 23 26 56 1 51 8 1 55 59 24 8 9 38 30 21
57 8 19 19 25 14 13 8 23 28 47 1 22 9 1 32 35 27 9 10 0 27 21 46 9 19 33 38 13
51 9 23 30 9 0 54 10 1 9 ^ 29 10 10 22 13 21 38 10 19 47 29 13 30 10 23 31 3 0
25 11 0 45 39 30 11 10 43 51 21 28 11 20 0 59 13 7 11 23 31 28 0 4 12 0 22 9 32
12 11 5 19 21 18 12 20 14 6 12 45 12 23 31 24 0 32 13 0 1 23 32 13 11 26 37 21
8 13 20 26 51 12 21 13 23 30 52 1 1 14 0 24 55 32 14 11 47 45 20 57 14 20 39 12
12 10 14 23 29 51 1 28 15 0 48 27 33 15 12 8 42 20 45 15 20 51 22 11 24 15 23
28 23 2 58 16 1 1^ 0 33 16 12 29 27 20 34 16 21 2 46 11 12 16 23 25 25 1 23 17
1 35 33 32 17 12 50 1 20 21 17 21 13 58 10 46 17 23 24 2 2 7 18 1 59 5 32 18 13
9 22 20 10 18 21 24 44 10 23 18 23 21 5 3 23 19 2 22 37 29 19 13 30 32 19 57 19
21 35 7 9 57 19 23 17 42 3 50 20 2 46 6 29 20 13 50 29 19 43 20 21 45 4 9 33 20
23 13 52 4 19 21 3 9 35 26 21 14 10 12 19 30 21 21 54 37 9 7 21 23 9 33 4 47 22
3 33 1 25 22 14 29 42 19 15 22 22 3 44 8 41 22 23 4 46 5 14 23 3 56 26 21 23 14
48 57 19 1 23 22 12 25 8 15 23 22 59 32 5 42 24 4 19 47 18 24 15 7 58 18 56 24
22 20 40 7 50 24 22 53 50 6 10 25 4 43 5 14 25 15 26 44 18 30 25 22 28 30 7 23
25 22 47 40 6 36 26 5 6 19 11 26 15 45 14 18 15 26 22 35 53 6 55 26 22 41 4 7 4
27 5 29 30 7 27 16 3 29 17 59 27 22 42 48 6 29 27 22 34 0 7 30 28 5 52 37 3 28
16 21 28 17 41 28 22 49 17 6 2 28 22 26 30 7 57 29 6 15 40 22 56 29 16 39 9 17
25 29 22 55 19 5 34 29 22 18 33 8 23 30 6 38 36 53 30 16 56 34 17 7 30 23 0 53
4 7 30 22 10 10 8 50 31 17 13 41 16 50 31 22 1 20 9 16 Third year. 1611.
Ian. decl. diff. Feb. decl diff. Mar. dec diffe. Apr. decl diffe* D gr. mi. se
mi. se D gr mi. e. mi se D gr. mi. se mi se D gr. mi* se. mi. se 1 21 52 4 9 41
1 14 2 20 19 55 1 3 42 48 23 35 1 8 18 31 21 58 2 21 42 23 10 6 2 13 42 25 20 9
2 3 19 13 23 38 2 8 40 29 21 49 3 21 32 17 10 31 3 13 22 16 20 21 3 2 55 35 23
39 3 9 2 18 21 41 4 21 21 46 10 56 4 13 1 55 20 35 4 2 31 56 41 4 9 23 59 21 31
5 21 10 50 11 20 5 12 41 20 20 45 5 2 8 15 42 5 9 45 30 21 21 6 20 59 30 11 44
6 12 20 35 20 58 6 1 44 33 42 6 10 6 51 21 12 7 20 47 46 12 8 7 11 59 37 21 10
7 1 20 51 43 7 10 28 3 21 1 8 20 35 38 12 31 8 11 38 27 21 27 8 0 57 8 43 8 10
49 4 20 50 9 20 23 7 12 54 9 11 17 0 21 23 9 0 33 25 42 9 11 9 54 20 40 10 20
10 13 13 16 10 10 55 37 21 41 10 0 9 43 23 42 10 11 30 34 20 28 11 19 56 57 13
39 11 10 33 5^ 21 50 11 0 13 59 41 11 11 51 2 20 16 12 19 43 18 14 1 12 10 12 6
22 0 12 0 37 40 39 12 12 11 18 20 6 13 19 29 17 14 22 13 9 50 6 22 7 13 1 1 19
38 13 12 31 24 19 52 14 19 14 55 14 44 14 9 27 59 22 17 14 1 24 57 36 14 12 51
16 19 40 15 19 0 11 15 4 15 9 5 42 22 25 15 1 48 33 33 15 13 9 56 19 27 16 18
45 7 15 25 16 8 43 17 22 32 16 2 12 6 30 16 13 30 23 19 15 17 18 29 42 15 45 17
8 20 45 22 40 17 2 35 36 23 27 17 13 49 38 19 0 18 18 13 57 16 4 18 7 58 5 22
46 18 2 59 3 24 18 14 8 38 18 47 19 17 57 53 16 24 19 7 35 19 22 53 19 3 22 27
19 19 14 27 25 18 32 20 17 41 29 16 42 20 7 12 26 22 59 20 3 45 46 15 20 14 45
57 18 18 21 17 24 47 17 1 21 6 49 2^ 23 4 21 4 9 1 10 21 15 4 15 18 3 22 17 7
46 17 17 22 6 26 23 10 22 4 32 11 6 22 15 22 18 17 48 23 16 50 29 17 37 23 6 3
13 14 23 4 55 17 1 23 15 40 6 17 33 24 16 32 52 17 53 24 5 39 59 19 24 5 18 18
22 55 24 15 57 59 17 17 25 16 14 59 18 10 25 5 16 40 23 25 5 41 13 22 49 25 16
14 56 17 1 26 15 56 49 18 27 26 4 53 17 26 26 6 4 2 42 26 16 31 57 16 45 27 15
38 22 18 42 27 4 29 51 30 27 6 26 44 37 27 16 48 42 16 28 28 15 19 40 18 58 28
4 6 21 33 28 6 49 21 28 28 17 5 10 16 11 29 15 0 42 19 13 29 29 7 11 49 22 29
17 21 21 15 5^ 30 14 41 29 19 27 30 30 7 34 11 14 30 17 37 15 15 3^ 31 14 22 2
19 42 31 31 7 56 25 6 Ma. decl diff. Iu. decl^* diff. Jul. dec. diff. Au. decl
diff. D gr* mi. se. mi. s. D gr. mi. se* mi* se D gr. mi. se. mi. se D gr. mi.
sec mi. s. 1 17 52 51 15 19 1 23 8 29 4 8 1 22 14 44 7 59 1 15 27 48 17 52 2 18
8 10 15 1 2 23 12 37 3 43 2 22 6 45 8 2^ 2 15 9 56 18 7 3 18 23 11 14 42 3 23
16 20 3 20 3 21 58 23 8 46 3 14 51 49 18 22 4 18 37 53 14 23 4 23 19 40 2 55 4
21 49 37 9 7 4 14 33 27 18 35 5 18 52 16 14 5 5 23 22 35 2 30 5 21 40 30 9 30 5
14 14 52 18 50 6 19 6 21 13 45 6 23 25 5 2 5 6 21 31 0 9 51 6 13 56 2 19 3 7 19
20 6 13 26 7 23 27 10 1 41 7 21 21 9 10 13 7 13 36 59 19 15 8 19 33 32 13 6 8
23 28 51 1 16 8 21 10 56 10 35 8 13 17 44 19 29 9 19 46 38 12 47 9 23 30 7 0 52
9 21 0 21 10 56 9 12 58 15 19 40 10 19 59 25 12 26 10 23 30 59 0 27 10 20 49 25
11 17 10 12 38 35 19 54 11 20 11 51 12 5 11 23 31 26 0 2 11 20 38 8 11 38 11 12
18 41 20 4 12 20 23 56 11 45 12 23 31 28 0 23 12 20 26 30 11 58 12 11 58 37 20
17 13 20 35 41 11 23 13 23 31 5 0 48 13 20 14 32 12 18 13 11 38 20 20 27 14 20
47 4 11 4 14 23 30 17 1 11 14 20 2 14 12 40 14 11 17 53 20 39 15 20 58 8 10 41
15 23 29 6 1 40 15 19 49 34 12 58 15 10 57 14 20 49 16 21 8 49 10 19 16 23 27
26 1 59 16 19 36 36 13 18 16 10 36 25 20 59 17 21 19 8 9 58 17 23 25 27 2 26 17
19 23 18 13 37 17 10 15 26 21 9 18 21 29 6 9 35 18 23 23 1 2 51 18 19 9 41 13
57 18 9 54 17 21 19 19 21 38 41 9 4 19 23 20 10 3 15 19 18 55 44 14 15 19 9 32
58 21 29 20 21 47 4^ 9 0 20 23 16 55 3 39 20 18 41 29 14 34 20 9 11 31 21 38 21
21 56 45 8 28 21 23 13 16 4 4 21 18 26 55 14 52 21 8 49 53 21 45 22 22 5 13 8 6
22 23 9 12 4 29 22 18 12 3 15 9 22 8 2^ 8 21 53 23 22 13 1^ 7 41 23 23 4 ^3 4
51 23 17 56 54 15 29 23 8 6 17 2^ 2 24 22 21 0 7 19 24 22 59 52 5 16 24 17 41
25 15 43 24 7 44 13 22 9 25 22 18 19 6 55 25 22 54 36 5 40 2^ 17 25 42 16 2 25
7 22 4 17 26 22 35 14 6 33 26 22 48 56 6 2 26 17 9 40 16 19 2^ 6 59 47 23 27 22
41 47 6 8 27 22 42 54 6 1^ 27 16 53 21 16 34 27 6 37 ^^ 30 28 22 47 55 5 44 28
22 36 2^ 6 51 28 16 36 47 16 51 28 6 14 54 ^2 29 22 53 39 5 21 29 22 29 35 7 14
29 16 19 ^^ 17 8 29 ^ 52 17 22 47 30 22 59 0 4 56 30 22 22 21 7 37 30 16 2 48
17 22 30 5 ^^ ^^ 48 31 23 3 56 4 33 31 15 45 26 17 38 31 5 ^ ^^ ^4 Sep decl*
Diff. Oct. decl Diff Nov. dec d^ffe* Dec dec diff. D gr. mi se mi. se D gr. mi.
se. mi. se D gr. mi se. mi. se D gr. mi se mi se 1 4 43 53 22 58 1 6 55 57 22
48 1 17 26 28 16 36 1 23 4 48 4 47 2 4 20 55 23 3 2 7 18 45 22 41 2 17 43 4 16
1^ 2 23 9 35 4 18 3 3 57 52 7 3 7 41 26 37 3 17 59 22 15 58 3 13 ^3 3 50 4 3 34
45 11 4 8 4 3 27 4 18 15 20 15 37 4 17 4^ 3 23 5 3 11 34 15 5 8 26 30 21 5 18
30 57 15 22 5 21 6 2 53 6 2 48 19 19 6 8 48 51 51 6 18 46 19 14 57 6 23 59 1 26
7 2 25 0 21 7 9 10 42 29 7 19 1 16 14 40 7 25 25 2 58 8 2 1 39 24 8 9 33 11 21
58 8 19 15 56 14 18 8 28 23 1 28 9 1 38 15 26 9 9 55 9 21 49 9 19 30 14 13 56 9
29 51 1 1 10 1 14 49 28 10 10 16 58 21 39 10 19 44 10 13 35 10 30 52 0 32 11 0
51 21 23 31 11 10 38 37 21 31 11 19 57 45 13 12 11 31 2^ 0 4 12 0 27 50 31 12
11 0 8 21 20 12 20 10 57 13 50 12 31 28 0 25 13 0 4 19 32 13 11 21 28 21 10 13
20 24 47 11 28 13 31 3 0 54 14 0 19 13 32 14 11 42 38 21 0 14 20 36 15 12 4 14
23 30 9 1 22 15 0 42 45 33 15 12 3 38 20 48 15 20 48 19 11 41 15 28 47 1 51 16
1 6 18 32 1^ 12 24 26 20 37 16 21 0 0 11 17 ^ 26 56 2 19 17 1 29 50 33 17 12 45
3 20 25 17 21 11 17 10 53 17 24 37 2 47 18 1 53 23 32 18 13 5 28 20 12 18 21 22
10 10 28 18 21 50 3 16 19 2 16 55 23 30 19 13 25 40 20 0 19 21 32 38 10 4 19 18
34 3 44 20 2 40 25 28 20 13 45 40 19 46 20 21 42 42 9 38 20 23 14 50 4 11 21 3
3 53 20 21 14 5 26 19 34 21 21 52 20 9 14 21 10 39 4 41 22 3 27 13 32 22 14 25
0 19 19 22 22 1 34 8 47 22 5 58 5 1 23 3 50 45 22 23 14 44 19 19 4 23 22 10 21
8 22 23 0 57 5 42 24 4 14 7 19 24 15 3 23 18 49 24 22 18 43 7 55 24 22 55 15 6
3 25 4 37 26 16 25 15 22 12 18 34 25 22 26 38 7 29 2^ 22 49 12 6 30 26 5 0 42
12 26 15 40 46 18 19 26 22 34 7 7 3 2^ 42 42 6 56 27 5 23 54 7 27 15 59 5 18 3
27 22 41 10 6 35 27 35 46 7 24 28 5 47 1 23 3 28 16 17 8 17 46 28 22 47 45 6 9
28 28 22 7 52 29 6 10 4 22 59 29 16 34 54 17 29 29 22 53 54 5 41 29 20 30 8 16
30 6 33 3 22 54 30 16 52 23 17 12 30 22 59 35 5 13 30 12 14 8 44 31 17 9 35 16
53 31 3 30 ^ 8 Jan. decl differ Feb. decl differ Mar. decl differ Apr decl
differ D gr. mi s. mi. se D gr. mi. s mi. se D gr. mi se. mi. se D gr mi. se.
mi. se 1 21 54 22 9 36 1 14 7 8 19 52 1 3 24 56 23 37 1 8 35 11 21 51 2 21 44
46 9 59 2 13 47 16 20 5 2 3 1 19 24 3 2 8 57 2 21 43 3 21 34 47 10 26 3 13 27
11 21 1^ 3 2 37 16 23 17 3 9 18 45 21 33 4 21 24 21 10 50 4 13 5 52 19 31 4 2
13 59 23 41 4 9 40 18 21 24 5 21 13 31 11 14 5 12 40 21 20 43 5 1 50 18 23 42 5
10 1 42 21 14 6 21 2 17 11 3 6 12 25 38 20 55 6 1 26 36 23 43 6 10 22 56 21 3 7
20 51 14 12 37 7 12 4 43 21 7 7 1 2 53 23 43 7 10 43 5^ 20 53 8 20 38 37 12 26
8 11 43 36 21 17 8 0 39 10 23 43 8 11 4 52 20 42 9 20 26 11 12 48 9 11 22 19 21
28 9 0 15 27 23 44 9 11 25 34 20 31 10 20 13 23 13 11 10 11 0 51 21 39 10 0 8
17 23 39 10 11 46 5 20 20 11 20 0 12 13 34 11 ^0 39 12 21 4^ 11 0 31 56 23 40
11 12 6 25 20 8 12 19 46 38 13 55 12 10 17 24 21 57 12 0 55 36 23 38 12 12 26
33 19 56 13 19 32 43 14 17 13 9 55 27 22 8 13 1 19 14 23 27 13 12 46 29 19 43
14 19 18 20 14 39 14 9 33 21 22 15 14 1 42 41 23 43 14 13 6 12 19 29 15 19 3 47
14 59 15 9 11 6 22 23 15 2 6 24 23 31 15 13 25 41 19 18 16 18 48 48 15 20 61 8
48 43 22 30 16 2 29 55 23 27 1^ 13 44 59 19 4 17 18 33 2^ 15 40 17 8 26 13 22
37 17 2 53 22 23 25 17 14 4 3 18 50 18 18 17 48 16 0 18 8 3 36 22 45 18 3 16 47
23 20 18 14 22 53 18 36 19 18 1 48 16 19 19 7 40 51 22 52 19 3 40 7 23 15 19 14
41 29 18 22 20 17 45 29 16 37 20 7 17 59 22 57 20 4 3 22 23 13 20 14 59 51 18 6
21 17 28 5^ 16 57 21 6 55 2 23 49 21 4 2^ 35 23 7 21 15 17 57 17 52 22 17 11 55
17 14 22 6 31 13 22 22 22 4 49 42 23 2 22 15 35 49 17 36 23 16 54 41 17 31 23 6
8 51 23 13 23 5 12 44 22 50 23 15 53 25 17 21 24 16 37 10 17 5^ 24 5 45 38 23
19 24 5 35 40 22 51 24 16 10 4^ 17 5 25 16 19 20 18 6 25 5 22 19 23 22 25 5 58
31 22 44 25 16 27 51 16 49 26 16 1 14 18 22 26 4 58 57 23 25 26 6 21 15 22 37
26 16 44 4^ 16 32 27 15 42 52 18 39 27 4 35 42 23 29 27 6 43 52 22 31 27 17 1
12 16 15 28 15 24 13 18 54 28 4 12 3 23 32 28 7 6 23 22 24 28 17 17 27 15 58 29
15 5 19 19 9 29 3 48 31 23 35 29 7 28 47 22 16 29 17 33 25 15 41 30 14 46 10 19
24 30 7 51 3 22 8 30 17 49 6 15 23 31 14 26 46 19 38 31 8 13 11 ^^ 0 Ma decl
differ Ju decl. Diff Ju decl. Diff. Au decl. Diff* D gr. mi. se. mi se D gr. m.
se mi. se D gr. mi. se mi. se D gr. mi* se. mi s* 1 18 4 29 15 5 1 23 11 40 3
49 1 22 8 43 8 17 1 15 14 18 18 5 2 18 19 34 14 47 2 23 15 2^ 3 25 2 22 0 26 8
39 2 14 56 13 18 18 3 18 34 21 14 2^ 3 23 18 54 3 0 3 21 51 47 9 3 3 14 37 55
18 32 4 18 48 49 13 9 4 23 21 54 2 37 4 21 42 44 9 24 ^ 14 19 23 18 46 5 19 2
58 13 50 5 23 24 31 2 11 5 21 33 20 9 46 5 14 0 37 18 59 6 19 16 48 13 31 6 23
26 42 1 48 6 21 23 34 10 8 6 13 41 38 19 13 7 19 30 19 13 11 7 23 28 30 1 21 7
21 13 26 10 29 7 13 22 25 19 26 8 19 43 30 12 51 8 23 29 51 0 58 ^ 21 2 57 10
51 8 13 2 59 19 57 9 19 56 21 12 31 9 23 30 49 0 33 9 20 52 6 11 11 9 12 43 22
19 50 10 20 8 52 12 10 10 23 31 22 0 8 10 20 40 55 11 33 10 12 23 32 20 2 11 20
21 2 11 50 11 23 31 30 0 17 11 20 29 22 11 55 11 12 3 30 20 14 12 20 32 52 11
29 12 23 31 13 0 42 12 20 17 27 12 13 12 11 43 1^ 20 25 13 20 41 21 11 8 13 23
30 31 1 6 13 20 5 14 12 34 13 11 22 51 20 36 14 20 55 29 10 46 14 23 29 25 1 31
14 19 52 40 12 53 14 11 2 15 20 46 15 21 6 15 10 22 15 23 27 54 1 55 15 19 39
47 13 13 15 10 41 29 20 57 16 21 16 37 10 6 16 23 25 59 2 20 16 19 26 34 13 34
16 10 20 32 21 3 17 21 26 43 9 40 17 23 23 39 2 45 17 19 13 0 13 52 17 9 59 29
21 20 18 21 36 23 9 10 18 23 20 54 3 10 18 18 59 8 14 10 18 9 38 19 21 25 19 21
45 33 9 6 19 23 17 44 3 33 19 18 44 58 14 29 19 9 16 44 21 35 20 21 54 39 8 33
20 23 14 11 3 57 20 18 30 20 14 40 20 8 55 9 21 44 21 22 3 12 8 11 21 23 10 13
4 22 21 18 15 41 15 5 21 8 33 25 21 52 22 22 11 23 7 47 22 23 5 51 4 46 22 18 0
3^ 15 24 22 8 11 33 21 59 23 22 19 10 7 25 2^ 23 1 5 5 10 23 17 45 12 15 40 23
7 49 34 22 8 24 22 26 35 7 1^ 24 22 55 55 5 35 24 17 29 32 15 58 24 7 27 26 22
15 25 22 33 36 6 38 25 22 50 20 5 55 25 17 13 34 16 14 25 7 5 11 22 21 26 22 40
14 6 14 26 22 44 24 6 22 26 16 57 20 16 31 26 6 42 50 22 28 27 22 46 28 5 50 27
22 38 2 6 45 27 16 40 49 16 47 27 6 20 22 22 35 28 22 52 18 5 26 28 22 31 17 7
9 28 16 24 2 17 3 28 5 57 47 22 41 29 22 57 44 5 3 29 22 24 8 7 31 29 16 6 59
17 19 29 5 35 6 22 47 30 23 2 47 4 38 30 22 16 37 7 54 30 15 49 40 17 34 30 5
12 19 22 52 31 23 7 25 4 15 31 15 32 6 17 48 31 4 49 27 22 58 Sep, decl diffe.
Oct. decl, Diff. No. decl, diff. Dec. decl Diff. D gr. mi. sec mi* s. D gr. mi.
se mi. s. D gr. mi. se. mi. se D gr. m. sec mi. se 1 4 26 29 23 2 1 7 13 13 22
44 1 17 39 5 16 21 1 23 8 28 4 25 2 4 3 27 6 2 7 35 57 34 2 17 55 26 16 3 2 12
53 3 57 3 3 40 21 10 3 7 58 34 30 3 18 11 29 15 44 3 16 50 3 29 4 3 17 11 14 4
8 21 4 22 4 18 27 13 15 24 4 20 19 3 1 5 2 53 57 18 5 8 43 26 17 5 18 42 37 15
3 5 23 20 2 33 6 2 30 39 21 6 9 5 43 8 6 18 57 40 14 45 6 25 53 2 4 7 2 7 18 22
7 9 27 51 21 58 7 19 12 25 14 23 7 27 57 1 45 8 1 43 56 27 8 9 49 49 52 8 19 26
48 14 1 8 29 32 1 8 9 1 20 29 27 9 10 11 41 42 9 19 40 49 13 40 9 30 40 0 39 10
0 57 2 29 10 10 33 23 33 10 19 54 29 13 18 10 31 19 0 11 11 0 33 33 31 11 10 54
56 21 23 11 20 7 47 12 55 11 31 30 0 18 12 0 10 2 32 12 11 16 19 13 12 20 20 42
12 34 12 31 12 0 48 13 0 13 30 33 13 11 37 32 2 13 20 33 16 12 9 13 30 24 1 14
14 0 37 3 32 14 11 58 34 20 51 14 20 45 25 11 48 14 29 10 1 44 15 1 0 35 23 34
15 12 19 25 39 15 20 57 12 11 23 15 27 26 2 13 16 1 24 9 32 16 12 40 4 28 16 21
8 35 10 59 16 25 13 2 40 17 1 47 41 31 17 13 0 32 16 17 21 19 34 10 34 17 22 33
3 9 18 2 11 12 31 18 13 20 48 20 3 18 21 30 8 10 9 18 19 24 3 37 19 2 34 43 29
19 13 40 51 19 49 19 21 40 17 9 46 19 15 47 4 5 20 2 58 12 28 20 14 0 40 19 36
20 21 50 3 9 19 20 11 42 4 34 21 3 21 40 26 21 14 20 16 19 23 21 21 59 22 8 53
21 7 8 5 0 22 3 45 6 22 22 14 39 39 19 8 22 22 8 15 8 28 22 2 8 5 29 23 4 8 28
19 23 14 58 47 18 53 23 22 16 43 8 2 23 22 56 39 5 56 24 4 31 47 17 24 15 17 40
18 38 24 24 45 7 36 24 50 43 6 23 25 4 55 4 12 25 15 36 18 18 22 25 32 21 7 9
25 44 20 6 51 26 5 18 16 9 26 15 54 40 18 7 26 39 30 6 42 26 37 29 7 10 27 5 41
25 23 5 27 16 12 47 17 50 27 46 12 6 15 27 30 19 7 52 28 6 4 30 0 28 16 30 37
17 33 28 52 27 5 48 28 22 27 8 11 29 6 27 30 22 54 29 16 48 10 17 16 29 58 15 5
20 29 14 16 8 36 30 6 50 24 22 49 30 17 5 26 16 58 30 23 3 35 4 53 30 5 40 9 3
31 17 22 24 16 41 31 21 56 37 9 26

CHAP. XXVIII. The use of the former Table, or regiment of the Sun.
THis Table of the Suns declinations, as it differs nothing in form from
others that have been published heretofore: so likewise the manner of using it,
is altogether the same that has been accustomed in former Tables of this kind,
saving that I must give warning of one error that has been committed herein;
which is (as I have observed) that some of our Seamen do take the Suns
declination out of their regiments, without any aequation by addition or
subtraction of the part proportional, agreeable to the difference of Longitude
of the place where they are, as if they were always at the same place, or
under the same meridian, for which their Regiments were made; for which cause
alone, (though they avoid all other errors, it may so fall out, that they may
be deceived sometimes 10, or 12. minutes (or more in a long voyage) in taking
the Suns declination. For there is not any Table of the Suns declination, but
that it must needs be made for some one meridian (as this former Table was made
for the meridian of London) and therefore cannot be truly used in any other,
without some Equation answerable to the distance of the meridians or difference
of Longitude.

To avoid this error therefore, first learn how much you differ in Longitude
from the place for which your Table was made, (and though you miss half a
dozen, or half a score degrees herein, it cannot in this point breed any
sensible error.) Secondly, take out the difference of the Suns declination,
agreeable to the space of 24. hours, about the time of your observation.
Thirdly, as 360. is to this difference of declination; so is the difference of
Longitude to the part proportional, or Equation of the declination; which
Equation is to be added to the declination of the day of observation, if the
declination of the Sun be either increasing, and the place of observation
westward; or else decreasing, and the place of observation eastwards from the
place for which your Table of declination was made: otherwise this Equation is
to be subtracted from the declination of your day of observation, that you may
have the true declination of the Sun, for the time and place of your
observation.

But if the time of your observation be the noontide immediately before or
after the Suns entrance into either of the aequinoctial points, you must follow
another rule, and that is this: divide the difference of Longitude by 15, mark
how many unites the quotient contains, and so many minutes add to the
Declination found in the former Table, if you be either Eastward from the
Meridian of London and observe the noontide before the Equinoctium: or if you
be Westward from that Meridian and, observe the noontide after the Equinoctium;
for the sum shall be the Declination desired. Otherwise, if you be either
Westward from the Meridian of London, and observe the noontide next before the
Equinoctium, or Eastward from that Meridian, and Observe the day immediately
after the Equinoctium, compare the Declination found in the Table with the
foresaid quotient, and subtract the lesser out of the greater, for that
remains is the Declination desired: Which Declination has the same
denomination of North or South that the Table shows, if the quotient be less
then the Declination found in the Table: but if the quotient be greater the
denomination must be altered from North to South, or from South to North,
contrary to that the Table shows. If the quotient be equal to the Declination
found in the former Table, the Sun is in the very Equinoctial point, and has
no Declination at all.

A few examples will make these rules more plain: suppose therefore the 30 of
March 1610. you were sailing in the bay of Mexico, differing in Longitude to
the Westwards from the Meridian of London, about 90 degrees by estimation: the
Declination of the Sun for that day found in the former Table, is 7 degrees, 39
minutes, 35 seconds, the difference of the declination in 24 hours at that time
22 minutes, 13 seconds. Now as 360 is to 22 minutes, 13 seconds; so is 90
degrees, to 5 minutes, 33 seconds, (the part proportional or equation desired)
which because the Declination increases, and the bay of Mexico is also
Westward from the Meridian of London, must be added to the Declination before
found in the Table, and so shall you have the true Declination of the Sun that
day at noon for that place, 7 degr. 45 min. 8 sec. But admit you had sailed
Eastwards* and were in the East Indian Ocean sea, differing likewise in
Longitude from London about 90 degrees. therefore the difference of Declination,
and the part proportional thereof, or equation of the Declination shall be the
same they were before. But because you are gone so much Eastwards, the Sun
comes 6 hours sooner to your Meridian there, then it does to ours here at
London: and therefore because the Declination also is increasing* and will be
greater when the Sun comes to our Meridian then it was, the Sun being under
the Meridian of the East indies, that equation of Declination must there be
subtracted out of the Declination found in the Table, which before was to be
added when we supposed you to be in the bay of Mexico, because the Sun comes
later by six hours to the Meridian of that place, then to ours; and therefore
the Declination of the Sun increasing in the mean time, will be greater there
then here.

Now imagine you sail in the year 1612 through the Streights of Magellan, and
having passed over the South Sea, come the 12 of September to the Philippinas,
differing in Longitude from London VVestwards about 210 degrees.

In this example, because the Sun is near the Equinoctial point (altering his
Declination about 24 min. in 24 hours, that is, for every hour one minute)
therefore divide 210. (the difference of Longitude) by 15 (the number of
degrees contained in one hour) the Quotient will be 14 minutes (the difference
of Declination answerable to that difference of Longitude) The Declination
found in the Table for that day is 10 minutes, 2 seconds Northerly: which
(Declination) because it decreaseth (the Sun not being yet come to the
Equinoctial) must be subtracted out of 14. and there shall remain 3 min. 58
sec. the Declination of the Sun that day at noon, for that place. But this
Declination is Southerly, because the Quotient 14 min. is greater then 10 min.
2 sec. the Declination found in the Table. It would be at this time too tedious
for me further to exemplify every particularity specified in the former Rules*
which may cause some small diversity in the use of the Suns Declination,
having already given examples of the hardest cases that may befall herein,
which if they be well considered, and especially compared with the Globe or
Sphere, (wherein the whole manner of the Suns motion and Declinations may most
easily, not only be seen, but also felt as it were with the fingers ends) the
reason and Demonstration of all those Rules, and of all the diversities of
working therein specified, may most plainly appear to him that is but of a mean
capacity.

CHAP. XXIX. The Declinations of the principal fixed stars about the
Equinoctial, corrected by Observation.
BUt because the Declination of the Sun is then only of good use for knowing
the Latitude at Sea when his Meridian Altitude may be Observed: so as although
all the rest of the day and night be fair and clear, if a Cloud cover the Sun
but one quarter of an hour only, about noon, your Tables of the Suns
Declination will stand you in no stead: there have been therefore other means
divised for attaining to the knowledge of the height of the Pole, not only in
particular, by Observation of the Pole Star and Guards, but also in general by
the Meridian Altitude and Declination of any notable fixed star whatsoever. So
as not in the day time alone, and that only at noon, but almost at any time of
the night, if any small portion of the heavens toward the North or South,
appear but a small time clear through the raking Clouds, the Latitude of the
place where you are, may hereby be more easily known, then by Observation of
the Suns Meridian Altitude. For to omit the changing of the Suns Declination
from North to South; and from South to North twice in every year, which
notwithstanding breeds some diversity of working (by neglect whereof some
have gros^y erred) the Sun by reason of his swiftness of motion, increases or
diminishes his Declination daily, yea hourly, and that very sensibly many
times, whereof there must needs arise many several considerations to be had of
the right use and application of the Suns Declination found in the Table, as
well in respect of the part of Declination, (whether it be North or South) as
also in regard of the difference of Longitude between the place, for which the
Tables of the Suns Declination were made, and the place of Observation, whether
it be Easterly or VVesterly from thence, besides many other particularities
lately related, and needless here to be repeated. But the fixed stars mooving
so exceeding slowly, that in more then 70 years, they go not so much as one
degree in there proper motion from the west Eastwards, keep not only the same
part of the North, or South, but almost the same point and minute of
Declination for many years together, I mean those stars especialy that are
placed in the signs of Gemini, Cancer, Sagittarie, or Capricorn, near the
Solstitiall Colure, which in an hundred years or two, can alter their
Declination scarce one minute: whereas those stars that be in Pisces, Aries,
Virgo, or Libra, especialy if they be near the Equinoctial colure, may differ
in there Declinations about one minute in 3 years; which difference, though it
be something, yet for a dozen or twenty years, will hardly be so much as can at
Sea be Observed by any Instrument hitherto had in use there.

For these two causes therefore (that is, for the more easy and general use
of the Declinations of the fixed stars then of the Sun) I wish they were more
generally known and observed by our seamen then they are, as whereby they
might not only most easily know the elevation of the Pole at any time of the
night, but also in any place of the world, much more commodiously then
otherwise they can, because that in what latitude, and how far soever they
should come either Northwards or Southwards, they might always have their
choice of diverse fixed stars near the meridian, both toward the North and
South, of a convenient height to be observed. But herewith it were also to be
wished, that the tables of the fixed stars declinations, which are most common
amongst English Mariners had been more free from error then they are; I mean,
especially the Tables published in Bourns regiment, and Normans new Attractive,
which (tables agreeing almost in every tittle one with another) seem to be
taken word for word one out of another, errors and all; so as you cannot find
any error in the one, but you shall be sure also to have the same in the
other: notwithstanding some of those errors are more then two or three whole
degrees, (which because being neglected, or unknown to the Mariner that shall
use those tables) they may bring him in greater danger then many a hidden rock
under sea: I have therefore by diligent observation, with a quadrant of more
then six foot semidiameter, detected and corrected those errors* showing not
only the truth to be heedfully followed, but those errors also to be as
carefully avoided, in such sort as is set down in the Table following, wherein
the first column contains the names of the stars; the second, the true
declinations (as they were found by observation) in degrees and minutes,
together with the part of declination, signified by the letters N and S,
whereof N signifies the declination to be North, and S South; the third column
contains the declinations published in Bourns and Normans tables; the fourth
shows the difference of these declinations from the truth; the fifth gives
the right ascensions of those stars, resolved into hours and minutes: in the
sixth and last column are set down the magnitudes or bigness of the same stars.

Fixed Stars about the Equinoctial.
The names of the Stars. Declinat. by observa. B. and N Declin. Difference.
Right Ascens. Bigness Degrees. Min. D. M. D M H. M. Whales back 12 20 S 12 11 09 0
50 3 Whales belly 12 22 S 12 20 02 1 32 3 Rams horn 17 17 N 17 19 02 1 32 3
Rams head 21 33 N 21 16 17 1 46 3 Bulls eye 15 38 N 15 42 04 4 13 1 Orions left
foot 08 43 S 09 14 29 4 55 1 Orions left shoulder 05 56 N 04 37 1 19 5 04 2
First in Orions girdle 00 38 S 01 19 41 5 12 2 Orions right shoulder 06 17 N 06
18 01 5 34 1 Great Dog 16 12 S 15 30 42 6 27 1 Lesser Dog 06 13 N 06 04 09 7 18
1 Brightest in Hydra 06 53 S 04 47 2 06 9 08 2 Lions heart 13 55 N 21 59 17 9
57 1 Lions neck 21 52 N 14 03 08 9 46 2 Lions back 22 43 N 22 30 13 10 52 2
Lions tail 16 50 N 16 46 04 11 29 1 Ravens head 20 45 S 19 53 52 11 50 3 Ravens
wing 15 16 S 17 08 1 52 11 56 3 Virgins spike 09 00 S 08 53 07 13 05 1 Betwixt
Boots thighs 21 20 N 22 09 49 13 56 1 South Balance 14 14 S 13 44 30 14 30 2
North Balance 07 46 S 07 33 13 14 55 2 Sco^pions heart 25 25 S 24 47 38 16 06
1 Hercules head 14 57 N 15 20 23 16 56 3 Serpentaries head 12 57 N 14 07 1 10
17 16 3 Eagles heart 17 54 N 17 28 26 19 32 2 Dolphins tail 10 00 N 10 01 01 20
16 3 Goats tail 17 51 S 14 13 3 38 21 27 3 Water powrers leg 18 10 S 15 52 2 18
22 35 3 Pegasus shoulder 12 58 N 13 01 03 22 46 2 Pegasus leg 25 58 N 26 30 32
22 44 2 Whales tail 20 12 S 21 47 1 35 00 24 3

CHAP, XXX. The use of the former Table.
THe declinations of the fixed stars contained in this table, being to be used
altogether after the same manner, as the declination of the Sun, for finding
out the height of the Pole; it would be but needless for me in this place, to
write any more of the use thereof, being a thing so easy and so commonly known
amongst mariners, and already sufficiently delivered by others.

CHAP. XXXI. The true distances of certain principal fixed Stars from the North
Pole, found by late observation.
BUt seeing this former table contains almost no other stars* but such as are
be^wixt the Tropicks, and near about the Equinoctial circle, which are not so
fit to be observed by them that sail far Southwards, or under the burnt Zone
(for there they will be too high above the Horizon) I thought good here to
adjoyn another table of as many more principal fixed stars (heedfully observed
also with the same quadrant) that are placed near about the North Pole, which
may stand you in as much stead, as twice so many taken out of other parts of
the heavens, because they come twice to the meridian above our horizon, in
every 24 hours; so as in wintertime many of them may be observed both evening
and morning, twice in one night, both above and beneath the Pole.
Notwithstanding* for them that sail Northwards, it shall be best to observe
these stars when they come to the meridian under the Pole. Contrariwise, they
that travel far Southwards, may best observe their meridian altitudes above the
Pole. Herein also this table differs from the former; that whereas in the
former were set down the declinations of the stars, or their distances from the
Equinoctial; in this contrariwise are set down the complements of their
declinations, or their distances from the Pole; whereby the height of the Pole
may more easily be found* then by their declinations, only by adding the
height of the star observed beneath the Pole, to the distance thereof from
the Pole: or by subtracting only the distance of the star from the Pole out of
the Northerly meridian altitude, observed above the Pole.

But if the meridian altitude of the star be southerly (the star observed being
southwards from the Zenith) subtract the height of the star from 180, and out
of the remainder subtract the distance of the star from the Pole, so shall you
have the height of the Pole: thus also there would be a more easy way, then
that is commonly used for knowing the latitude by the Sun or stars, having
southerly declination. For if instead thereof, the complement of declination
were set down in the table; the height of the Sun or stars always subtracted
out of this complement, should leave you the height of the Pole, or latitude
desired.

But to return to the table of fixed stars here following, the first column
therein contains (as before) the names of the stars: the second, their
complements of declination, or distances from the Pole: the third column gives
you their right ascensions, reduced into hours and minutes of an hour: the
fourth shows their bigness or magnitudes.

The names of the stars. Distance from the Pole: Right ascension. Bigness. D.
M. H. M. In the breast of Cassiopeia 35 35 0 19 3 In her lip 31 26 0 32 3 The
Pole Star 02 52 0 50 3 At the knees of Cassiopeia 31 50 1 00 3 In her leg 28 18
1 25 3 Perseus right shoulder 38 05 2 35 3 Perseus right side 41 38 2 56 2 The
goat, or wagoners left shoulder 44 30 4 49 1 The wagoners right shoulder 45 11
5 30 2 The first in the great bears fore-foot 40 30 8 24 3 The second in the
same foot 41 28 8 32 3 In her former left knee 36 37 8 58 3 The great bears
side 31 26 10 58 2 The great bears back 26 05 10 40 2 The end of the Dragons
tail 18 26 11 08 3 The great bears thigh 34 03 11 32 2 The great bears rump 30
41 11 54 2 The next to the end of the Dragons tail 17 57 12 14 3 The first in
the great bears tail next her rump 31 49 12 32 2 The middlemost in her tail 32
55 13 06 2 In the end of her tail 38 37 13 32 2 The next before the turning of
the Dragons tail 23 40 13 53 3 The foremost guard 14 11 14 54 2 In the turning
of the Dragons tail 29 37 15 14 3 The hindmost guard 16 42 15 26 2 Next after
the turning of the Dragons tail 30 20 15 54 3 The Dragons eye 37 18 17 22 3 The
Dragons head 38 22 17 44 3 In the Swans right wing 45 44 19 34 3 In her tail 46
06 20 30 2 Cepheus his right shoulder 29 00 21 10 3 The back of Cassiopeia's
chair 33 02 23 48 3

CHAP. XXXII. To know at what time any of the foresaid fixed stars come to the
Meridian for any day of the year.
NOw because the fixed stars are then only meet to be observed for finding the
latitude, when they are in the meridian; it is therefore good for him that
means to observe them, to know at what time they come to the meridian. To
this end there are tables published, and almost in every mariners hands,
pretending to show at what hour and minute every star in the first of these two
former tables comes to the meridian, for the beginning and midst of every
month in the year, agreeing likewise in every error one with another: but
because these errors breed not (at any time) greater danger or damage to the
Mariner that is ware of them, then to make him watch for their coming to the
meridian, a quarter, or half an hour longer then otherwise he needed (this
inconvenience only provided for) those tables may serve the turn well enough,
for them that list not trouble themselves to learn a better way.

But for them that are desirous of a more true and general way, I have also
made the table following of the Suns right ascensions, reduced into hours and
minutes for every day of this present year 1599, according to the Ephemerides
of the Sun, before set down; with help of which table it may easily be known
for any day of any year in our age, at what time not only any of the foresaid
fixed stars about the Equinoctial* but those also about the Pole, or any other,
(whose right ascensions are known in hours and minutes) come to the meridian,
and that after this manner. Find out in the table following the month and day
wherein you observe; the month in the upper margin of the table, the day in
the first column thereof next the left hand, the common meeting of the column
descending from the month, and of the line proceeding from that day toward
the right hand, shall give you the Suns right ascension in hours and minutes
for the same day. This right ascension of the Sun, subtract always out of the
right ascension of the star, adding 24 hours to the stars right ascension, if
it be less then the right ascension of the Sun: the remainder shows how many
hours and minutes after noon the star comes to the upper part of the meridian;
which if they be more then 12 hours, subtract 12 from them, and the remainder
shall show you how many hours and minutes after midnight the star comes to the
upper part of the meridian. The upper part of the meridian I call that which
passes from the Pole, by the Zenith to the Horizon southwards. But it shall be
needful also many times when you would observe the stars about the Pole (which
never set) to know the time of their coming to the nether part of the meridian,
which may easily be done, only by adding 12 hours to the time of their coming
to the upper part of the meridian, if it be less then 12 hours, or by
subtracting as much, if it be more.

Suppose for example, the 25 of February 1599, I would know the time of the
great dogs coming to the meridian. First therefore (in the next table)
following the column descending from February downwards, and the line
proceeding from the 25 day toward the right hand, in the common meeting of
them both, I find 23 hours, 10 min. the Suns right ascension that day at noon.
Then in the first table of fixed stars, I find the great dogs right ascension
to be 6 degr. 27 min. to which (because it is less then the Suns right
ascension) I add 24 hours, and the sum of both comes to 30 hours, 27 min. out
of this I subtract the Suns right ascension, 23 hours, 10. min. and there
remais 7 hours, 17 min. the time of the great dogs coming to the upper part of
the meridian in the afternoon.

Take one example also of a star that never sets: and admit the 20 of
December the same year, you would know what time the foremost Guard comes to
the Meridian beneath the Pole: First therefore you shall find, as before, the
Suns right ascension that day to be 18 hours, 36 min. and the right ascension
of that star (in the second table of fixed stars) 14 hours, 54 min. to which
(being less then the Suns right ascension) add 24 hours, and from the sum (38
hours, 24 min.) subtract the Suns right ascension 18 hours 36 min so there
shall remain 20 hours 18 min. the time of the foremost Guards coming to the
upper part of the meridian, from which subtract 12, so you have the time when
it comes to the nether part of the meridian, 8 hours, 18 min. after noon.

A Table of the Suns Right Ascension in hours and minutes, for every day of the
year.
January February March April May June D. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. 1
19 30 21 39 23 25 1 18 3 11 5 15 2 19 34 21 43 23 28 1 22 3 15 5 19 3 19 39 21
47 23 32 1 26 3 19 5 25 4 19 43 21 50 23 36 1 29 3 23 5 27 5 19 47 21 54 23 40
1 33 3 27 5 31 6 19 52 21 58 23 44 1 36 3 30 5 36 7 19 56 22 02 23 47 1 40 3 34
5 40 8 20 00 22 06 23 51 1 43 3 38 5 45 9 20 04 22 09 23 55 1 47 3 42 5 49 10
20 08 22 14 23 58 1 51 3 46 5 53 11 20 13 22 18 0 02 1 55 3 50 5 57 12 20 17 22
21 0 06 1 58 3 54 6 01 13 20 22 22 25 0 09 2 02 3 58 6 05 14 20 26 22 29 0 12 2
06 4 03 6 09 15 20 30 22 32 0 16 2 10 4 07 6 13 16 20 34 22 36 0 20 2 14 4 11 6
18 17 20 38 22 40 0 23 2 18 4 15 6 22 18 20 42 22 44 0 27 2 22 4 19 6 26 19 20
46 22 48 0 31 2 26 4 23 6 30 20 20 50 22 52 0 35 2 30 4 27 6 34 21 20 54 22 56
0 38 2 33 4 31 6 38 22 20 58 22 59 0 42 2 37 4 35 6 42 23 21 03 23 03 0 46 2 41
4 39 6 46 24 21 07 23 07 0 49 2 44 4 43 6 51 25 21 11 23 10 0 53 2 48 4 47 6 55
26 21 15 23 14 0 57 2 52 4 51 6 59 27 21 19 23 18 1 00 2 56 4 56 7 03 28 21 23
23 22 1 03 3 00 5 00 7 07 29 21 27 1 07 3 04 5 03 7 11 30 21 31 1 11 3 07 5 07
7 15 31 21 35 1 15 5 11 July August September. October. November. December D. H. M.
H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. 1 7 19 9 22 11 16 13 05 15 05 17 12 2 7 23 9 26
11 20 13 08 15 09 17 17 3 7 27 9 30 11 23 13 12 15 13 17 21 4 7 31 9 33 11 27
13 16 15 17 17 25 5 7 35 9 36 11 30 13 19 15 21 17 30 6 7 40 9 40 11 33 13 23
15 25 17 34 7 7 44 9 44 11 37 13 27 15 29 17 39 8 7 48 9 48 11 41 13 31 15 33
17 43 9 7 52 9 52 11 44 13 34 15 37 17 47 10 7 56 9 56 11 48 13 38 15 42 17 52
11 8 00 9 59 11 52 13 42 15 46 17 56 12 8 04 10 03 11 55 13 45 15 50 18 00 13 8
08 10 07 11 59 13 49 15 54 18 05 14 8 12 10 11 12 03 13 53 15 58 18 10 15 8 16
10 15 12 07 13 57 16 03 18 14 16 8 20 10 18 12 11 14 01 16 07 18 18 17 8 24 10
22 12 14 14 05 16 11 18 23 18 8 28 10 26 12 18 14 09 16 16 18 27 19 8 31 10 29
12 22 14 13 16 20 18 32 20 8 35 10 33 12 25 14 17 16 24 18 36 21 8 39 10 36 12
29 14 20 16 28 18 41 22 8 43 10 40 12 32 14 24 16 33 18 45 23 8 47 10 44 12 36
14 28 16 37 18 50 24 8 52 10 47 12 40 14 32 16 41 18 55 25 8 55 10 51 12 43 14
36 16 46 18 59 26 8 59 10 54 12 47 14 40 16 50 19 03 27 9 03 10 58 12 51 14 44
16 55 19 07 28 9 07 11 02 12 54 14 48 16 59 19 12 29 9 11 11 06 12 58 14 53 17
03 19 16 30 9 15 11 09 13 02 14 57 17 08 19 21 31 9 19 11 13 15 01 19 25

CHAP. XXXIII. By the former Tables of the fixed Stars, and the Suns right
ascensions, to know the hour of the night, at any time of the year.
BY these tables of fixed stars, and right ascensions of the Sun, you may
easily know also the hour of the night at any time of the year, after this
manner: look which of those stars is at the meridian; which may easily be
known by a Needle-Dial or Compass: or if you will observe the North stars,
that never set, (which indeed are fittest for this purpose, especially when
they come to the meridian under the Pole) you shall first find the place of the
Pole in the heavens, so near as you can by estimation (for a little error
herein breaks no square) which may be done thus; From the Pole Star directly
toward the first star next the rump in the great Bears tail, imagine almost so
much space as the Guards are distant asunder, for near thereabouts is the place
of the Pole. Now betwixt your eye and this place of the Pole, hold a plumb-line
hanging as perpendicularly, and steadfastly as you may, and mark withal if that
plumb-line come betwixt your sight, and any of the stars noted in the table of
fixed stars about the Pole; for that star is at the meridian. Then learn (as
before was showed) at what time that star comes to the meridian, and so you
shall have the hour of the night.

Suppose for example, the 10 of February you find after this manner the Swans
tail at the meridian, under the Pole, desiring hereby to know the hour of the
night at that time. The right ascension of the Sun for that day you shall find
as before to be 22 hours, 14 minutes, whereto you may add a minute or two more
(because that star will come to the meridian very late in the evening) so
making the Suns right ascension 22 hours, 16 minutes. The right ascension of
that star in the second table of fixed stars, you shall find to be 20 hours,
30 minutes. From which (because now you desire to know the time of that stars
coming to the nether part of the meridian) you may subtract 12 hours, and there
shall remain 8 hours 30 minutes. To this remainer (because it is less then
then the Suns right ascension) add 24 hours, and from the sum (32 hours, 30
minutes) subtract the right ascension of the Sun 22 hours, 16 minutes, so there
shall remain 10 hours, 14 minutes, the time of the night desired.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of finding the elevation of the Pole, by observation of the
Pole Star and Guard.
BEsides the ways already spoken of to find the elevation of the Pole by the
meridian altitudes, and declinations of the Sun and fixed stars in general:
there has been also used another way more special, by the height of the
pole star, when the fore-guard is situate from it, either toward the East,
West, North or South, or else upon the middle points betwixt these principal,
as upon the Northeast, Northwest, Southeast, and Southwest points. Of which
way, as it has been hitherto published and used, I must for the present only
give the Mariner warning that he trust not to it, being very erroneous, and
grounded upon two false positions. The one is, that the distance of the
pole star from the pole is 3 degrees 30 minutes, which by often and exact
observation is found to be at this time not above 2 degrees, 48 minutes. The
other is, that the equations or allowances to be added to, or subtracted from
the height of the pole star, to find thereby the height of the pole, are made
the same for all latitudes.

But having already showed sufficiently how to know the latitude almost at any
time of the night, by the fixed stars in the former tables, I hope to be the
easilier excused for finding a fault herein, and not amending it at this time,
and that so much the rather, because that (according to promise made in the
first Edition of this Book) I will now show the means how by observation of
the pole star and guards, to find presently the height of the pole; not only
when the fore-guard is in some one of those eight principal positions
beforementioned, as the manner has been hitherto; but in any other position
also, and at any time of the night, when the pole star and guards may be seen,
and that without any allowance or abatement, giving or taking by addition or
subtraction of any Equation, in regard of the pole-stars being higher or lower
then the Pole. All which, besides diverse other pleasant and profitable
conclusions, may easily be performed by means of an Instrument by me divised,
which may not unfitly be called the Sea-Quadrant, the description and use
whereof here follows.

The figure of the Sea-quadrant.


CHAP. XXXV. The description and parts of the Sea-Quadrant.
THis Quadrant consists of many parts, whereof some may be called principal,
and some less principal.

The principal parts of this Quadrant are the Semidiameter thereof, and the
Arch.

The Semidiameter I call the straight square Ruler.

The arch, I call that part of the Quadrant that is made crooked like a bow.

The less principal parts are the double box or ^ocket, and the sights or
Vanes.

The double box or socket has two square holes made crossewise through it, in
such sort that the arch and semidiameter of the Quadrant may be fitly put
through them, the flat side of the one passing close by the flat side of the
other. By means of this double cross socket the arch and semidiameter of the
Quadrant are so to be joined together, that the two angles made by the hollow
side of the arch, with the semidiameter, may be equal each to other.

The sights or vanes are either fixed or moveable.

There be two fixed sights; the one greater, the other lesser.

The greater fixed sight is fastened upon the double socket, and has a narrow
slit cut through the midst thereof.

The lesser fixed sight is fastened to the end of the arch of the Quadrant, and
has a small sight-hole bored through it, even with the end of the Arch.

The moveable sights are three in number; whereof two are to be moved up and
down upon the arch of the Quadrant, as need shall require for observation. The
third is to be put on, or taken off that end of the semidiameter of the
Quadrant where the center is, which center is showed by the little round hole
bored overthwart through the midst of the thickness of the square Ruler, near
the end thereof; which Ruler we called the Semidiameter of the Quadrant.

This sight (whenever it is to be used) must so be put on upon the end of
that Ruler, that the flat side thereof (which must be set toward the arch of
the Quadrant) may divide the foresaid round hole even by the midst thereof, the
sharp edge of that sight arising perpendicularly from the very midst or center
of that hole; which is also the center of the Quadrant, when the other end of
the square Ruler, or Semidiameter thereof being put into his socket, is thrust
so far forwards, that the end thereof comes to be even with the fore-end of
the socket.

Two sides of the arch of the Quadrant, that is to say, one of the straight or
plain sides, and the hollow side thereof are divided into 90 degrees, and every
degree into 6 parts, each part containing 10 min. and upon the straight side of
the Quadrant there be figures set to every fifth degree, and that in two ranks
or limbs; the one beginning from that end of the arch, where the small fixed
sight is placed; the other beginning and proceeding from the other end of the
arch, where the Nocturnal is to be fastened or put on, that so the number of
the degrees and minutes might the easilier be reckoned from either end of the
arch, as need shall require.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Nocturnal or Night-dial.
THe Nocturnal contains three circles; that is, the hour circle, the day
circle, and the pole star circle.

The biggest of these circles (which is to be fastened to the end of the arch
of the Quadrant) I call the Hour-circle, and it is divided into 24 hours, and
half hours, with figures set to every hour, for the easier reckoning of them.

Next within this is the Day-circle, or circle of days, because it contains
the days of all the months of the year; which days are signified by the small
divisions round about, at the circumference of this circle. Every fifth day
has his stroke drawn a little longer then the rest, that so any day you desire
may the easilier be found. The small divisions contein but one day apiece. The
lines showing the beginnings and endings of the months are drawn overthwart
the whole breadth of this circle. The beginning of January is known by the two
lines drawn near together overthwart this circle; whereof one shows the end
of the month of December, and the other shows the beginning of the month of
January, which is marked with two pricks. February is easily known in this
circle, because it has but only 28 days. March is by the little pole star
circle: and so all the rest of the months may easily be known by their order.
Upon the center of this arch (which represents the Pole of the World) there
be two Indices fastened: the longer of them may be called the Guard-Index,
whereto a short pin is fastened underneath, which serves to set this Index
right upon the place of the middle Guard in the day-circle, by putting it into
the small hole that there is made in that circle. The shorter Index reaching
from the center of the day-circle, unto the limb or circumference thereof, that
is divided into days, may be called the Day-Index.

This small circle placed between the center of the day-circle, and the month
of March, may not unfitly be called the Pole Star circle; because the distance
of the center thereof, from the center of the day-circle, is answerable to the
distance of the pole star from the Pole; which at this time I have often found
by exact observation, not to be more then 2 degrees, and 48 minutes.

CHAP. XXXVII. The use of the Sea-Quadrant: and that first in observing the
height of the Sun, looking only by the sight at the center, to the Horizon at
Sea.
TUrn the center of the Quadrant toward the Sun, so as the shadow of the Vane
or sight placed at the center may fall upon the hollow side of the arch of the
Quadrant: then looking through the little sight fastened in the end of the arch
of the Quadrant, lay the upper edge of the sight placed at the center even with
the Horizon, and at the same instant let one that stands by, mark deligently
upon what degree and minute of the Quadrant, the edge of the shadow coming from
the said edge of the sight, falls: for that edge of the shadow, upon the
hollow side of the arch of the Quadrant, shows the height of the upper edge
of the Sun. From this therefore subtract 16 minutes, and so much also as is
answerable to the height of your eye above the water (in such sort, as I have
showed in the use of the Crosse-staff, in the 15 Chapter of this Book) and so
you shall have the apparent height of the Sun above the true Horizon.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How with this Quadrant to observe the height of the Sun, with
your back turned toward the Sun.
SEt the edge of one of the broad moveable sights or vanes even with that end
of the Quadrant where the little sight is fixed. Then looking through the slit
which is made through the midst of the middle sight that is fastened to the
double box or socket, turn your back toward the Sun, and laying the edge of the
vane at the center even with the Horizon, lift up, or put down the arch of the
Quadrant, till the upper edge of the shadow of the broad moveable sight, placed
even with the upper end of the arch of the Quadrant, agree justly with the edge
of the sight or vane placed at the center. Then reckoning from the upper end of
the arch of the Quadrant downwards, see what number of degrees and minutes you
find at the upper edge or end of the socket, through which the Quadrant
moves, adding always thereto two degrees; for so shall you have the height of
the Sun (if you abate from hence 16 min* for the Suns semidiameter) and the
surplussage answerable to the height of the eye above the water, as before is
showed in the former Chapter.

CHAP. XXXIX. How to observe with this Quadrant, the height of the Sun, or
Star, looking both to the Sun or Star, and to the Horizon.
SEt the upper edge of the uppermost moveable sight of the Quadrant at some
even number of degrees, as at 10, 20, or 30, etc. And setting the end of the
semidiameter of the Quadrant, where the center is, to the corner of the eye (as
you do when you observe with the Crosse-staffe) lay that edge of the sight even
with the upper edge of the Sun, and move the nether moveable sight up or down,
till the upper edge thereof lie even with the Horizon. Then see how many
degrees and minutes are contained between the upper edges of both sights* from
which abate as before 16 minutes for the Suns semidiameter, and the surplus
answerable to the height of your eye above the water: so shall you have the
apparent height of the Sun above the true Horizon. But when you observe the
height of any star, lay the upper edge of the upper sight, even with the mids^
of the star, and from the number of degrees and minutes contained between the
upper edges of both sights, abate only the surplus answerable to the height of
your eye above the water and so you shall have the true height of the star. But
here i^ must be remembered, that before you observe the Sun or star after this
manner, you must find out the eccentricity of your eye in such sort as I have
showed in the 15 Chapter of this book which eccentricity you must add to the
distance of the center o^ the Quadrant, from the end of the Semidiameter where
you se^ your eye: for so much as the sum of this distance and eccentri^city
amounts unto, so much must you thrust forward the fore^end of the
semidiameter of the Quadrant beyond the further end of the square socket through
which it is put, that so the center o^ your eye may be brought to the center of
the Quadrant.

CHAP. XL. How to find the height of the Pole, by Observation of the Pole Star
and Guard, without giving or taking any allowance or abatement, at any time
when the Pole Star, the Guard, and Horizon may be seen.
THe long Index of the Nocturnal (which I called the Guard Index) being fixed
upon the place of the middle Guard in the day-circle and the Nocturnal being
put upon the end of the arch of the Quadrant, placing also the end of the
Semidiamter to your eye, as before, and holding the Quadrant upright, with the
Nocturnal toward the Pole Star, till the Diameter of the Semicircular hole of
the Pole Star circle lie (by estimation) aequidistant from the Horizon, both
ends of the Diameter being level or of like height one with another, and so
keeping the Pole Star so near as you can guess, upon the midst of that
Diameter, and the fiducial line of the Guard-Index upon the Guard, move one of
the moveable sights of the Quadrant up or down, till the edge thereof lie even
with the Horizon. Thus therefore the Pole Star lying upon the midst of the
Diameter, (that is, upon the center of the Pole Star circle) and the fiducial
line of the Guard Index upon the Guard, and the edge of the sight even with the
Horizon; the number of degrees and minutes from the end of the Quadrant (where
the Nocturnal is placed) to the edge of the sight, adding thereto five degrees,
that is, the distance of the center of the Nocturnal from the end of the
Quadrant, shall be the height of the Pole; saving that you must abate (as
before) so much as is answerable to the height of your eye above the water.

To know the Hour of the Night by the Nocturnall.
ANd the point of the short Index (which we called the Day-Index) being first
set to the day of the month, shows in the Hour-circle the Hour of the night,
at the time of your Observation.

SIMON STEVIN his Errors, in blaming me of error in my Tables of Rumbs.
BEfore I end this Treatise, I think it meet to say something for satisfaction
of the courteous Reader, concerning some faults that Simon Stevin of late
pretends to find in my Table of Rhumbs, published in the former edition of my
Book of Errors in Navigation. For not long since, there came forth a great
Volumne of Mathematical Remembrances; gathered and set forth by the said
Stevin, concerning such points of the Mathematics wherein that worthy general
count Maurice of Nassaw has for these many years spent his spare hours: whose
example I wish that more of his rank would follow, for the better inabling them
to the discharge of their duties. In this Volumne Stevin going about to show
diverse ways for the making of the Table of Rhumbs, Lib. 4. Geogr. page 95.
comes in the second place to that way which I have already showed in this
book, chap. 9. page 127. which although he acknowledges to be most easy, and
finds no fault with the demonstrated ground thereof; yet he says my Tables of
Rhumbs made according to that way, Quodam vitio laborant sed heus tu, Nulla ne
habes vitia? (...) haud non ^oriasse minora.
have some fault in them: but we shall (I make no doubt) find a greater fault
in his fault-finding. Though I never durst presume to imagine I could set forth
any thing without some fault. It suffices me if the fault be so little that it
cannot sensibly be discerned; which I hope I shall hereafter show. But Stevin
does here give us occasion to expect his Tables of Rumbs, that shall have no
fault in them, For otherwise he should no^ have blamed mine for having some
fault ^n them.
though now he excuse himself that he had not leisure to make them. Yet in the
mean time he should have done well (in my opinion) to bear with the faults in
mine, except they were greater then he has yet showed any, seeing he has bin
content (for want of better to serve his turn) to furnish out thirty Pages of
his book in Folio, with my Tables of Rhumbs: besides six other pages which he
has filled with my Table for the true dividing of the Meridians in the Sea
Chart, under the name, I confess, not unfitly, of The Table of Collected
Secants, which in this book I call A Table of Latitudes, etc. though he
something mistake the manner of making the same; supposing it to be made by
continual Addition of the Secants of every tenth minute, whereas indeed I added
together the Secants of every single minute (as he might have seen in the Page
immediately going before) whereby that Table is more exact then if it had bin
made to tens of minutes only. But to return to the fault he finds in my Table
of Rhumbs; de quo (he says) in (...) Appendice pressius edisseram in his
Appendix or addittament concerning the Rhumbs, he shows by what kind of trial
he found so much fault as he speaks of in that Table, making proof of the
fourth Rhumb, which he might easily do by Addition only, without any
Multiplycation or Division; because there the whole Sine and Tangent of the
Rhumbs angle, (that is 45 degrees) are equal, and this trial he makes
according to his first way for the making of the Table of Rhumbs, page 93. and
94. Lib. 4. Geogr. by the solution of a right angled Sphaerical Triangle,
wherein (beside the right angle) there is given the angle of the Rumb, with the
side adjacent to both those angles* As in the Triangle RQX having given the
angle at Q being a right angle and that at R 45 degrees, with the side R Q 11.
degrees he finds the side QX 59. minutes, 59. seconds, the Latitude of the
fourth Rumb for one degree of Longitude. Then drawing XC Parallel to QP, so
that CP may be equal to QX, he resolves in like manner the Triangle YCX
suposing the angle at C and X aequal to those at Q and R* and the side XC,
aequal to a degree of the Parallel at that Latitude 59. minutes 58. seconds,
(but more truly 59. seconds) whereby he finds the side CY (in like manner as
before) 59 minutes, 57. seconds, (but more truly 58 seconds) which added to PC,
59 minutes 59 seconds, shall make PY 1 degree, 59 minutes, 56 seconds, as he
says; but more truly it should be 1 degree, 59 minutes, 57 seconds, the
Latitude of that Rumb for two degrees of Longitude: and thus he proceeds in
all the rest* till he come to 78 degrees of Longitude, (where he says) he
found the Latitude of that Rumb to be 61 degrees, 26 minutes, my Table having
no more but 61 degrees 14 minutes, and so the difference of Latitude arising to
no more then 12 minutes, for so great a Longitude as 78 degrees. And yet he
says, Certis rationibus cognorat, he certainly knew that the true Latitude
must needs be less then 61 degrees, 26 minutes, which was to him no small
argument, that my Table of Rumbs came very near the truth, though it hit not
the nail on the head (as they say,) Surely therefore Master Stevin might have
eased me of some trouble, and have saved himself some labor and reputation,
both; if he had spared his pains in seeking to find fault with me for so small
a matter, whereby Navigators could incur neither damage nor danger, although
mine error were so much as he supposes. For (in the practice of Navigation)
what inconveniencie can arise to the Seaman by such an error as shall cause
him to go wide of his course no more then 12 minutes, in sailing so far that
he must first alter his Longitude 78 degrees, and his Latitude, 61 degrees and
more? but the truth is upon due trial, (yea even according to Stevins own way)
this error will not be found so much as a minute; and to assure my self and
others thereof, I took the pains to examine throughout the ground of my Table
of Rumbs, that is, the Table of Latitudes, or collected Secants before set
down, newly calculating the same twice over for every minute, with the help of
two Calculators, always comparing their Calculations together, that when any
difference chanced betwixt them, they might sttill find and amend there fault
(if they chanced to make any) before they proceeded any further therein; and by
comparing these newly calculated Tables with my former, I could not any where
find such difference as could breed any sensible error. Then something to
satisfy Master Stevins desire (because he accounts not his Table of the 8
Rumb taken out of Appian, exact enough, showing only how many minutes and
seconds of a degree of the Equinoctial, one degree of each Parallel contains
for every half degree of Latitude, and that not truly sometimes, as I have
tried, I have therefore newly and more exactly calculated such a Table to
minutes, seconds, and thirds, and that for every 10 minutes of Latitude, I made
also the like Table, to show how many minutes, seconds, and thirds, of one
degree of the Equinoctial, answer to 10 minutes of each Parallel for every 10
minutes of Latitude. By the first of these Tables, I made trial what Latitude
the fourth rumb would have at 78 degrees of Longitude, proceeding as Stevin did
by whole degrees, according to his first way of making the Table of Rumbs, and
found the Latitude not much above a minute less then his ( viz.) 61 degrees,
24 minutes, 44 seconds, which difference might partly arise from the
imperfection of the foresaid Table of Appian, which it seems he followed in
his calculation. Then by help of the second of these Tables, I made the like
trial for every 10 minutes of Longitude, and so found the Latitude of that
Rumb at 78 degrees of Longitude to be 61 degrees 15 minutes, 42 seconds, 40
thirds which also must needs be greater then the true Latitude thereof at that
place, by the very same reasons whereby Stevin says, he knew certainly that
the true Latitude was less then 61 degrees 26 minutes: so then the true
Latitude of that Rumb for that Longitude, must needs be less then 61 degrees,
15 minutes, 43 seconds: therefore by Stevins own rule more fitly applied, my
Table of Rumbs accounting that Latitude to be no more then 61 degrees 14
minutes, shall not err so much as two minutes. Yet indeed more exactly it
would rather have been 61 degrees 15 minutes, for to set it down more
scrupleously (according to the way I then followed in making that Table) it
should be 61 degrees, 14 minutes, 41 seconds. But the truth is, I did not then
purpose, nor care to be so curious, thinking it would be sufficient, if my
Table of Rumbs erred not any where so much as a minute in the Latitude of any
Rumb; which by this trial already made, I assure my self they do not.

Wherein also I am the more confirmed by the like trial I have made of the
first Rumb (counted from the Meridian) though Simon Stevin in his solemn
demonstration continued almost in three whole pages in folio (wherein he
professes that the scope or mark he aims at, Page 153. Page 154. Page 155.
is to demonstrate that my Table of Rumbs is erroneous) would make the world
believe that my Table erreth above two minutes in the Latitude of that Rumb,
before I come to so little as two degrees of Longitude. But the truth is, he
much mistaketh the matter, the error being indeed in his own gross manner of
trial, much more then in my Table: for working after his own way by whole
degrees, as he does, it falls out even so as he says, that the Latitude of
that Rumb for two degrees of Longitude will be above 2 minutes greater then my
Table has. But if he work the very same way by sixth parts of degrees, or
tens of minutes, he shall find but little above half a minute more then is in
my Table of Rumbs. Nay moreover, if it shall please him at his leisure to take
the pains to make trial hereof to every single minute, he shall not find so
much as one second more then my account gives. For following the very same way
that he prescribes for the true making of the Table of Rumbs in his (...)
Appendice page 154.155. and so calculating the Latitude of the first Rumb for
every single minute of Longitude, the Latitude of that Rumb for two degrrees of
Longitude, shall be found to be not so much as 10 degrees 0 minutes 14 sec. 46
third. which Latitude according to my manner of making my Table of Rumbs, is
not so little as 10 degr. 0 min. 13 sec. 47 third. differing not so much as one
second from the former. But according to M Stevins account by whole degrees, it
should be 10 degr. 2 min. 6 seconds, exceeding the truth of both the foresaid
accounts almost two minutes in Latitude, before he be come to so little as two
degrees in Longitude, and so grossly erring himself, whilst he too
unadvisedly, and without just cause indevoureth to publish to the world my
supposed errors. Which that it may the more manifestly appear, either to him,
By whole degrees, the first Rumbes
Lon^ Latitu. gr. m. gr. mi. se. 1 0 5 1 38 2 0 10 2 6 By tins of min. the
first Rumbs
Lon^ Latitude. gr. m. gr. mi. se. th. 0 10 0 50 16 23 0 20 1 40 32 26 0 30 2
30 47 33 0 40 3 21 1 5 0 50 4 11 12 16 1 0 5 1 20 46 1 10 5 51 25 35 1 20 6 41
26 18 1 30 7 31 22 14 1 40 8 21 12 38 1 50 9 10 57 0 2 0 10 0 34 40


or to any other that shall be disposed to make trial, as I have done, I have
here set down the particular account hereof in the Tables following.

The first table accounting by whole degrees, as Stevin does, shows the
latit. of the first rumb for 2 gr. of long. to be 10 gr. 2 m. 6 sec. Whereas
the second table accounting by tens of minutes, gives it to be no more then 10
gr. 0 m. 34 s. 40 th. And the third by single min. finds but 10 gr. 0 m. 14 s*
45 their. 21 fourths.

By single minutes, the first Rumbs. By single minutes, the first Rumbs.
Longit. Latitude. Longit. Latitude. Degrees. mi. gr. mi. sec. th. four. Degr. mi.
gr. mi. sec. th. four. 0 1 0 5 1 38 25 0 31 2 35 47 48 29 0 2 0 10 3 16 50 0 32
2 40 49 8 18 0 3 0 15 4 55 10 0 33 2 45 50 26 56 0 4 0 20 6 33 25 0 34 2 50 51
44 14 0 5 0 25 8 11 30 0 35 2 55 53 0 17 0 6 0 30 9 49 25 0 36 3 0 54 14 59 0 7
0 35 11 27 10 0 37 3 5 55 28 21 0 8 0 40 13 4 40 0 38 3 10 56 40 17 0 9 0 45 14
41 50 0 39 3 15 57 50 48 0 10 0 50 16 18 40 0 40 3 20 58 59 48 0 11 0 55 17 55
10 0 41 3 26 0 7 18 0 12 1 0 19 31 15 0 42 3 31 1 14 3 0 13 1 5 21 6 55 0 43 3
36 2 18 22 0 14 1 10 22 42 4 0 44 3 41 3 21 6 0 15 1 15 24 16 43 0 45 3 46 4 22
9 0 16 1 20 25 50 47 0 46 3 51 5 21 26 0 17 1 25 27 24 15 0 47 3 56 6 19 3 0 18
1 30 28 57 4 0 48 4 1 7 14 49 0 19 1 35 30 29 12 0 49 4 6 8 8 45 0 20 1 40 32 0
40 0 50 4 11 9 0 50 0 21 1 45 33 31 22 0 51 4 16 9 51 0 0 22 1 50 35 1 14 0 52
4 21 10 39 14 0 23 1 55 36 30 16 0 53 4 26 11 25 27 0 24 2 0 37 58 28 0 54 4 31
12 9 39 0 25 2 5 39 25 53 0 55 4 36 12 51 51 0 26 2 10 40 52 14 0 56 4 41 13 31
57 0 27 2 15 42 17 45 0 57 4 46 14 9 53 0 28 2 20 43 42 5 0 58 4 51 14 45 37 0
29 2 25 45 5 20 0 59 4 56 15 19 11 0 30 2 30 46 27 30 1 0 5 1 15 50 29 By
single minutes, the first Rumbs. By single minutes, the first Rumbs. Longitu.
Latitude. Longitu. Latitude. Degr. mi. gr. mi. se. th. four. gr. min. gr. mi.
se th. four 1 1 5 6 16 19 32 1 31 7 36 9 56 9 1 2 5 11 16 46 14 1 32 7 41 8 55
28 1 3 5 16 17 10 35 1 33 7 46 7 51 20 1 4 5 21 17 32 30 1 34 7 51 6 43 41 1 5
5 26 17 52 0 1 35 7 56 5 32 26 1 6 5 31 18 8 59 1 36 8 1 4 17 34 1 7 5 36 18 23
27 1 37 8 6 2 59 7 1 8 5 41 18 35 19 1 38 8 11 1 36 58 1 9 5 46 18 44 40 1 39 8
16 0 11 8 1 10 5 51 18 51 20 1 40 8 20 58 41 32 1 11 5 56 18 55 20 1 41 8 25 57
8 5 1 12 6 1 18 56 38 1 42 8 30 55 30 51 1 13 6 6 18 55 11 1 43 8 35 53 49 46 1
14 6 11 18 50 58 1 44 8 40 52 4 45 1 15 6 16 18 43 54 1 45 8 45 50 15 48 1 16 6
21 18 33 59 1 46 8 50 48 22 54 1 17 6 26 18 21 13 1 47 8 55 46 25 59 1 18 6 31
18 5 31 1 48 9 0 44 25 3 1 19 6 36 17 46 48 1 49 9 5 42 20 1 1 20 6 41 17 25 4
1 50 9 10 40 10 52 1 21 6 46 17 0 9 1 51 9 15 37 57 36 1 22 6 51 16 31 28 1 52
9 20 35 40 9 1 23 6 56 16 0 31 1 53 9 25 33 18 26 1 24 7 1 15 26 23 1 54 9 30
30 52 27 1 25 7 6 14 49 4 1 55 9 35 28 22 11 1 26 7 11 14 8 34 1 56 9 40 25 47
34 1 27 7 16 13 24 48 1 57 9 45 23 8 40 1 28 7 21 12 37 41 1 58 9 50 20 25 20 1
29 7 26 11 47 13 1 59 9 55 17 37 34 1 30 7 31 10 53 24 2 0 10 0 14 45 21 A
Table of the eight Rumb.
Lati. 10 m lon diffe* Lati^ 10 m. lon diffe. Lati 10 m. lon diffe. Lati. 10 m.
lon diffe^ gr. m. m. sec th se. th. gr. m mi. se. th. se. th gr mi mi. se. th.
sec. th gr. mi mi. se. th se. th 0 10 10 0 0 0 0 10 10 9 50 35 0 10 20 10 9 23
13 0 36 30 10 8 38 44 0 53 0 20 9 59 59 0 1 10 20 9 50 16 0 19 20 20 9 22 37 0
36 30 20 8 37 52 0 52 0 30 9 59 59 0 0 10 30 9 49 57 0 19 20 30 9 22 0 0 37 30
30 8 36 59 0 53 0 40 9 59 58 0 1 10 40 9 49 37 0 19 20 40 9 21 23 0 37 30 40 8
36 5 0 54 0 50 9 59 56 0 2 10 50 9 49 18 0 20 20 50 9 20 4^ 0 37 30 50 8 35 12
0 53 1 0 9 59 54 0 2 11 0 9 48 59 0 19 21 0 9 20 9 0 37 31 0 8 34 18 0 54 1 10
9 59 52 0 2 11 10 9 48 39 0 20 21 10 9 19 31 0 38 31 10 8 33 24 0 54 1 20 9 59
50 0 2 11 20 9 48 18 0 21 21 20 9 18 53 0 38 31 20 8 32 30 0 54 1 30 9 59 48 0
2 11 30 9 47 57 0 21 21 30 9 18 15 0 38 31 30 8 31 35 0 55 1 40 9 59 45 0 3 11
40 9 47 36 0 22 21 40 9 17 37 0 38 31 40 8 30 40 0 55 1 50 9 59 41 0 4 11 50 9
47 15 0 21 21 50 9 16 58 0 39 31 50 8 29 45 0 55 2 0 9 59 38 0 3 12 0 9 46 53 0
22 22 0 9 16 19 0 39 32 0 8 28 50 0 55 2 10 9 59 34 0 4 12 10 9 46 31 0 22 22
10 9 15 39 0 40 32 10 8 27 54 0 56 2 20 9 59 30 0 4 12 20 9 46 9 0 22 22 2^ 9
15 0 0 39 32 20 8 26 58 0 56 2 30 9 59 26 0 4 12 30 9 45 47 0 22 22 30 9 14 20
0 40 32 30 8 26 2 0 56 2 40 9 59 21 0 5 12 40 9 45 24 0 23 22 40 9 13 40 0 40
32 40 8 25 6 0 5^ 2 50 9 59 16 0 5 12 50 9 45 1 0 23 22 50 9 12 59 0 41 32 50 8
24 9 0 57 3 0 9 59 11 0 5 13 0 9 44 37 0 24 23 0 9 12 18 0 41 33 0 8 23 12 0 57
3 10 9 59 5 0 6 13 10 9 44 14 0 23 23 10 9 11 37 0 41 33 10 8 22 15 0 57 3 20 9
58 5^ 0 6 13 20 9 43 50 0 24 23 20 9 10 56 0 41 33 20 8 21 18 0 47 3 30 9 58 53
0 6 13 30 9 43 25 0 25 23 30 9 10 14 0 42 33 30 8 20 20 0 58 3 40 9 58 46 0 7
13 40 9 43 1 0 24 23 40 9 9 32 0 42 33 40 8 19 22 0 58 3 50 9 58 40 0 6 13 50 9
42 3^ 0 25 23 50 9 8 50 0 42 33 50 8 18 24 0 58 4 0 9 58 32 0 8 14 0 9 42 11 0
25 24 0 9 8 8 0 42 34 0 8 17 25 0 59 4 10 9 58 26 0 6 14 10 9 41 45 0 26 24 10
9 7 25 0 43 34 10 8 16 27 0 58 4 20 9 58 17 0 9 14 20 9 41 19 0 26 24 20 9 6 42
0 43 34 20 8 15 28 0 59 4 30 9 58 9 0 8 14 30 9 40 53 0 26 24 30 9 5 59 0 43 34
30 8 14 29 0 59 4 40 9 58 1 0 8 14 40 9 40 27 0 26 24 40 9 5 15 0 44 34 40 8 13
29 1 0 4 50 9 57 52 0 9 14 50 9 40 0 0 27 24 50 9 4 31 0 44 34 50 8 12 29 1 0 5
0 9 57 43 0 9 15 0 9 39 33 0 27 25 0 9 3 47 0 44 35 0 8 11 30 0 59 5 10 9 57 34
0 9 15 10 9 39 6 0 27 25 10 9 3 3 0 44 35 10 8 10 29 1 1 5 20 9 57 24 0 10 15
20 9 38 39 0 27 25 20 9 2 18 0 45 35 20 8 9 29 1 0 5 30 9 57 14 0 10 15 30 9 38
11 0 28 25 30 9 1 33 0 45 35 30 8 8 28 1 1 5 40 9 57 4 0 10 15 40 9 37 43 0 28
25 40 9 0 48 0 45 35 40 8 7 27 1 1 5 50 9 56 54 0 10 15 50 9 37 14 0 29 25 50 9
0 2 0 46 35 50 8 6 26 1 1 6 0 9 56 43 0 11 16 0 9 36 46 0 28 26 0 8 59 17 0 45
36 0 8 5 25 1 1 6 10 9 56 32 0 11 16 10 6 36 16 0 30 26 10 8 58 31 0 46 36 10 8
4 23 1 2 6 20 9 56 20 0 12 16 20 9 35 47 0 29 26 20 8 57 44 0 47 36 20 8 3 21 1
2 6 30 9 56 9 0 11 16 30 9 35 18 0 29 26 30 8 56 5^ 0 46 36 30 8 2 19 1 3 6 40
9 55 57 0 12 16 40 9 34 48 0 30 26 40 8 56 11 0 47 36 40 8 1 17 1 2 6 50 9 55
44 0 13 16 50 9 34 17 0 31 26 50 8 55 24 0 47 36 50 8 0 14 1 3 7 0 9 55 32 0 12
17 0 9 33 47 0 30 27 0 8 54 36 0 48 37 0 7 59 11 1 3 7 10 9 55 19 0 13 17 10 9
33 16 0 31 27 10 8 53 49 0 47 37 10 7 58 8 1 3 7 20 9 55 6 0 13 17 20 9 32 45 0
31 27 20 8 53 1 0 48 37 20 7 57 4 1 4 7 30 9 54 52 0 14 17 30 9 32 14 0 31 27
30 8 52 12 0 49 37 30 7 56 1 1 3 7 40 9 54 38 0 14 17 40 9 31 42 0 32 27 40 8
51 24 0 48 37 40 7 54 57 1 4 7 50 9 54 24 0 14 17 50 9 31 9 0 33 27 50 8 50 35
0 49 37 50 7 53 53 1 4 8 0 9 54 10 0 14 18 0 9 30 38 0 31 28 0 8 49 46 0 49 38
0 7 52 48 1 5 8 10 9 53 55 0 15 18 10 9 30 4 0 34 28 10 8 48 57 0 49 38 10 7 51
44 1 4 8 20 9 53 40 0 15 18 20 9 29 33 0 31 28 20 8 48 7 0 50 38 20 7 50 39 1 5
8 30 9 53 25 0 15 18 30 9 29 0 0 33 28 30 8 47 17 0 50 38 30 7 49 34 1 5 8 40 9
53 9 0 16 18 40 9 28 26 0 34 28 40 8 46 27 0 50 38 40 7 48 29 1 5 8 50 9 52 53
0 16 18 50 9 27 53 0 33 28 50 8 45 37 0 50 38 50 7 47 23 1 6 9 0 9 52 37 0 16
19 0 9 27 19 0 34 29 0 8 44 46 0 51 39 0 7 46 17 1 6 9 10 9 52 20 0 17 19 10 9
26 45 0 34 29 10 8 43 55 0 51 39 10 7 45 11 1 6 9 20 9 52 3 0 17 19 20 9 26 10
0 35 29 20 8 43 4 0 51 39 20 7 44 5 1 6 9 30 9 51 46 0 17 19 30 9 25 35 0 35 29
30 8 42 13 0 51 39 30 7 42 59 1 6 9 40 9 51 29 0 17 19 40 9 25 0 0 35 29 40 8
41 21 0 52 39 40 7 41 52 1 7 9 50 9 51 11 0 18 19 50 9 24 25 0 35 29 50 8 40 29
0 52 39 50 7 40 4^ 1 7 0 0 9 50 53 0 18 20 0 9 23 49 0 36 30 0 8 39 37 0 52 40
0 7 39 38 1 7 Lati 10 mi. lon diffe. Lati. 10 m. lon diff. Lat. 10 m lon diff.
Lat. 10 m. lon diffe. gr. mi. mi. se. th se, th. gr. m. mi* se. th. se. th. gr.
m. mi sec. th se. th. gr. m. mi se th se. th 40 10 7 38 30 1 8 50 10 6 24 20 1
20 60 10 4 58 29 1 31 70 10 3 23 14 1 39 40 20 7 37 23 1 7 50 20 6 23 0 1 20 60
20 4 56 58 1 31 70 20 3 21 56 1 38 40 30 7 36 15 1 8 50 30 6 21 39 1 21 60 30 4
55 22 1 31 70 30 3 20 17 1 39 40 40 7 35 7 1 8 50 40 6 20 18 1 21 60 40 4 53 56
1 31 70 40 3 18 38 1 39 40 50 7 33 58 1 9 50 50 6 18 57 1 21 60 50 4 52 25 ^ 31
70 50 3 16 59 1 39 41 0 7 32 48 1 10 51 0 6 17 36 1 21 61 0 4 50 53 1 32 71 0 3
15 21 1 38 41 10 7 31 41 1 7 51 10 6 16 14 1 22 61 10 4 49 22 1 31 71 10 3 13
41 1 40 41 20 7 30 32 1 9 51 20 6 14 52 1 22 61 20 4 47 50 1 32 71 20 3 12 0 1
38 41 30 7 29 22 1 10 51 30 6 13 31 1 21 61 30 4 46 18 1 32 71 30 3 10 23 1 40
41 40 7 28 13 1 9 51 40 6 12 9 1 22 61 40 4 44 46 1 32 71 40 3 8 44 1 39 41 50
7 27 3 1 10 51 50 6 10 46 1 23 61 50 4 43 13 1 33 71 50 3 7 4 1 40 42 0 7 25 53
1 10 52 0 6 9 24 1 22 62 0 4 41 41 1 32 72 0 3 5 25 1 39 42 10 7 24 43 1 10 52
10 6 8 1 1 23 62 10 4 40 9 1 32 72 10 3 3 45 1 40 42 20 7 23 33 1 10 52 20 6 6
38 1 23 62 20 4 38 36 1 33 72 20 3 2 5 1 40 42 30 7 22 22 1 11 52 30 6 5 15 1
23 62 30 4 37 3 1 33 72 30 3 0 25 1 40 42 40 7 21 11 1 11 52 40 6 3 52 1 23 62
40 4 35 30 1 33 72 40 2 58 46 1 39 42 50 7 20 0 1 11 52 50 6 2 29 1 23 62 50 4
33 57 1 33 72 50 2 57 6 1 40 43 0 7 18 49 1 11 53 0 6 1 5 1 24 63 0 4 32 42 1
33 73 0 2 55 25 1 41 43 10 7 17 37 1 12 53 10 5 59 42 1 23 63 10 4 30 50 1 34
73 10 2 53 45 1 40 43 20 7 16 26 1 11 53 20 5 58 18 1 24 63 20 4 29 17 1 33 73
20 2 52 5 1 40 43 30 7 15 14 1 12 53 30 5 56 54 1 24 63 30 4 27 43 1 34 73 30 2
50 25 1 4^ 43 40 7 14 1 1 13 53 40 5 55 29 1 25 63 40 4 26 9 1 34 73 40 2 48 44
1 41 43 50 7 12 49 1 12 53 50 5 54 5 1 24 63 50 4 24 36 1 33 73 50 2 47 4 1 40
14 0 7 11 36 1 13 54 0 5 52 40 1 25 64 0 4 23 1 1 35 74 0 2 45 23 1 41 44 10 7
10 23 1 13 54 10 5 51 16 1 24 64 10 4 21 27 1 34 74 10 2 43 42 1 41 44 20 7 9
10 1 13 54 20 5 49 51 1 25 64 20 4 19 53 1 34 74 20 2 42 2 1 40 44 30 7 7 57 1
13 54 30 5 48 25 1 26 64 30 4 18 18 1 35 74 30 2 40 20 1 42 44 40 7 6 44 1 13
54 40 5 47 0 1 25 64 40 4 16 44 1 34 74 40 2 38 40 1 40 44 50 7 5 30 1 14 54 50
5 45 35 1 25 64 50 4 15 9 1 35 74 50 2 36 59 1 41 45 ^^ 7 4 16 1 14 55 0 5 44 9
1 26 65 0 4 13 14 1 35 75 0 2 35 18 1 41 45 10 7 3 2 1 14 55 10 5 42 43 1 26 65
10 4 11 59 1 35 75 10 2 33 36 1 42 45 20 7 1 47 1 15 55 20 5 41 17 1 26 65 20 4
10 24 1 35 75 20 2 31 59 1 41 45 30 7 0 33 1 14 55 30 5 39 51 1 26 65 30 4 8 49
1 35 75 30 2 30 14 1 41 45 40 6 59 18 1 15 55 40 5 38 24 1 27 65 40 4 7 17 1 35
75 40 2 28 32 1 42 45 50 6 58 3 1 15 55 50 5 36 58 1 26 65 50 4 5 38 1 35 75 50
2 26 51 1 41 46 0 6 56 48 1 15 56 0 5 35 31 1 27 66 0 4 4 3 1 35 76 0 2 25 9 1
42 46 10 6 55 32 1 16 56 10 5 34 4 1 27 66 10 4 2 27 1 36 76 10 2 23 28 1 41 46
20 6 54 17 1 15 56 20 5 32 37 1 27 66 20 4 0 51 1 36 76 20 2 21 46 1 42 46 30 6
53 1 1 16 56 30 5 31 10 1 27 66 30 3 59 15 1 36 76 30 2 20 4 1 42 46 40 6 51 45
1 16 56 40 5 29 42 1 28 66 40 3 57 39 1 36 76 40 2 18 22 1 42 46 50 6 50 29 1
16 56 50 5 28 15 1 27 66 50 3 56 3 1 36 76 50 2 16 50 1 42 47 0 6 49 12 1 17 57
0 5 26 47 1 28 67 0 3 54 26 1 37 77 0 2 14 58 1 42 47 10 6 47 55 1 17 57 10 5
25 16 1 28 67 10 3 52 50 1 36 77 10 2 13 16 1 42 47 20 6 46 38 1 17 57 20 5 23
51 1 28 67 20 3 51 53 1 37 77 20 2 11 34 1 42 47 30 6 45 21 1 17 57 30 5 22 23
1 28 67 30 3 49 37 1 36 77 30 2 9 52 1 42 47 40 6 44 4 1 17 57 40 5 20 54 1 29
67 40 3 48 0 1 37 77 40 2 8 10 1 42 47 50 6 42 47 1 17 57 50 5 19 26 1 28 67 50
3 46 23 1 37 77 50 2 6 27 1 43 48 0 6 41 29 1 18 58 0 5 17 57 1 29 68 0 3 44 46
1 37 78 0 2 4 45 1 42 48 10 6 40 11 1 18 58 10 5 16 28 1 29 68 10 3 43 9 1 37
78 10 2 3 2 1 43 48 20 6 38 53 1 18 58 20 5 14 59 1 29 68 20 3 41 3^ 1 37 78 20
2 1 20 1 42 48 30 6 37 34 1 19 58 30 5 13 30 1 29 68 30 3 39 4^ 1 38 78 30 1 59
37 1 43 48 40 6 36 16 1 18 58 40 5 12 1 1 29 68 40 3 38 17 1 37 78 40 1 57 55 1
42 48 50 6 34 57 1 19 58 50 5 10 31 1 30 68 50 3 36 39 1 38 78 50 1 56 12 1 43
49 0 6 33 38 1 19 59 0 5 9 1 1 30 69 0 3 35 1 1 37 79 0 1 54 29 1 43 49 10 6 32
19 1 19 59 10 5 7 5 1 29 69 10 3 33 24 1 38 79 10 1 52 46 1 43 49 20 6 31 0 1
19 59 20 5 6 2 1 30 69 20 3 31 46 1 38 79 20 1 51 3 1 43 49 30 6 29 40 1 20 59
30 5 4 31 1 31 69 30 3 30 8 1 38 79 30 1 49 21 1 42 49 40 6 28 20 1 20 59 40 5
3 1 1 30 69 40 3 28 9 1 39 79 40 1 47 38 1 43 49 50 6 27 1 1 19 59 50 5 1 31 1
30 69 50 3 26 51 1 38 79 50 1 45 55 1 43 50 0 6 25 40 1 21 60 0 5 0 0 1 31 70 0
3 25 13 1 38 80 0 1 44 11 1 44 Lati. 10 in lon diffe. gr. mi m. sc. th. sec th
80 10 1 42 28 1 43 80 20 1 40 45 1 43 80 30 1 39 0 1 43 80 40 1 37 18 1 44 80
50 1 35 35 1 44 81 0 1 33 52 1 43 81 10 1 32 8 1 44 81 20 1 30 25 1 43 81 30 1
28 41 1 44 81 40 1 26 58 1 43 81 50 1 25 14 1 44 82 0 1 23 40 1 44 82 10 1 21
57 1 43 82 20 1 20 3 1 44 82 30 1 18 19 1 44 82 40 1 16 35 1 44 82 50 1 14 51 1
44 83 0 1 13 7 1 44 83 10 1 11 23 1 44 83 20 1 9 39 1 44 83 30 1 7 55 1 44 83
40 1 6 11 1 44 83 50 1 4 27 1 44 84 0 1 2 43 1 44 84 10 1 0 59 1 44 84 20 0 59
15 1 44 84 30 0 57 31 1 44 84 40 0 55 46 1 44 84 50 0 54 2 1 44 85 0 0 52 18 1
44 85 10 0 50 33 1 45 85 20 0 48 49 1 44 85 30 0 47 5 1 45 85 40 0 45 20 1 45
85 50 0 43 36 1 44 86 0 0 41 51 1 45 86 10 0 40 7 1 44 86 20 0 38 22 1 45 86 30
0 36 38 1 44 86 40 0 34 53 1 45 86 50 0 33 9 1 44 87 0 0 31 24 1 45 87 10 0 29
40 1 44 87 20 0 27 55 1 45 87 30 0 26 10 1 45 87 40 0 24 26 1 44 87 50 0 22 41
1 45 88 0 0 20 56 1 45 88 10 0 19 12 1 44 88 20 0 17 27 1 45 88 30 0 15 42 1 45
88 40 0 13 58 1 44 88 50 0 12 13 1 45 89 0 0 10 28 1 45 89 10 0 9 44 1 44 89 20
0 6 59 1 45 89 30 0 5 14 1 45 89 40 0 3 29 1 45 89 50 0 1 45 1 44 90 0 0 0 0

This Table of the eight Rumb, showing the quantity of 10 minutes of Longitude
at every 10 minutes of Latitude, in minutes seconds, and thirds of one degree
of the Equinoctial, I thought good here to adjoyn for their sakes that may
peradventure be desirous by themselves to make trial of that I have before
written, concerning the gross and rude manner of examination, which Simon
Stevin uses, to make the world believe that my Table of Rumbs is so much
erroneous as he says, and after his fashion would seem to demonstrate. And
lest any should suspect that this Table also may be as faulty as Stevin would
persuade us the other is, I have thought good here to show the way how I made
the same, that if any list take so much pains, he may either examine and
correct this if need shall be, or make a new one if he will, which may be done
after this manner, and by this rule: What proportion the whole sine has to the
sine of the Latitudes complement; the same proportion has one sixth part of a
degree of the Equinoctial, that is, 10 minutes, which make 36000 thirds, to the
number of the same thirds of a degree of the Equinoctial, contained in 10
minutes of Longitude at the same Latitude, which being divided by 60, the
remainder shall be the thirds remaining besides minutes and seconds, and this
first quotient being again divided by 60, the second quotient shall be the
minutes, and the remainder thereof the seconds. For example, suppose you would
find the quantity of 10 minutes of a degree in the Parallel, whose Latitude is
10 degrees; now the complement of this Latitude is 80 degrees; the sine whereof
is 9848,078, the whole sine being 10,000,000: and as this whole sine is to the
sine aforesaid, so is 36,000 (that is, the number of thirds that are in ten
minutes of the Equinoctial) to 35,453, that is, the number of the same thirds
contained in ten min. of a degree of the said Parallel. And these thirds
divided by 60, give in the quotient 590 sec. and 53 thirds remaining, and 590
divided again by 90, the quotient is 9 m, and the remainder 50 sec So then, the
quantity of ten min. of Longitude at ten degr. of Latitude, shall be 9 min. 50
sec. 53 thirds of one degree of the Equinoctial. And thus was made the whole
Table.

The making of the Table of Rumbs.
Now by help of this Table of the eight Rumb, the pr^ceding Table of the first
Rumb next the Meridian, and all the rest may thus be made: As the whole sine,
is to the Tangent of the Rumbs angle with the Equinoctial; so is one minute of
the Equinoctial to the Latitude of the same Rumb for one minute of Longitude.
And so is a minute of Longitude (found out by this Table of the eighth Rumb) at
that Latitude, to the difference of Latitude; which added to the former
Latitude, gives the Latitude of the same Rumb, for two minutes of Longitude:
and again at this Latitude, a minute of Longitude (found by the same Table)
shall have the same proportion to the difference of Latitude; which added to
the Latitude of the same Rumb for two minutes of Longitude, shows the
Latitude of that Rumb for three minutes of Longitude. And after this manner
proceeding in all the rest, you may make up the whole Table of Rumbs.

FINIS.
THE DIVISION OF THE WHOLE ART OF NAVIGATION.
THE whole Art of Navigation, which teaches us to sail by courses and by
heights, is divided into two principal parts; the Theorick, and the Practick.
The Theorick teaches the composition of the Sphere of the World in general;
and in particular informs us of the number, figure, and motions of the
Heavens, especially of the highest moveable heaven, called Primum Mobile, and
of the ninth, eighth, fourth, and first heaven: also it shows us the quantity
and situation of the elements, and principally of the earth and water; and the
circles which are imagined to be in that Sphere; without the knowledge of which
it is impossible to be a Navigator. The Practick part teaches the making and
use of those Instruments which are used in Navigation, as namely the Astrolabe,
the Crosse-staffe, the Sea-compasse, and the Dial, with the Regiment of the
Sun, and of the star, the rules of the Moon, and of the Tides, the declaration
of the Sea-chart, and other things appertaining hereunto.

CHAP. I. The Definition of the Sphere.
A Sphere is a solid or massy body, without hollownesse, and perfectly round;
in the midst whereof there is a prick called the center, by which there passes
a right line, named the Axtree, and the points where this line ends upon the
superficies of the whole body are called Poles, because upon them the Sphere is
moved.

CHAP. II. That the whole World is a Sphere.
AND so it is evident that the whole frame of the World wherein we live is a
Sphere; being as it is solid, so that in the whole World there is no empty
place: also it is perfectly round upon the upper Superficies of the highest
heaven: and it has in the very midst a certain point, to wit, the center of
the earth* by which we do imagine a right line or Axtree, to pass from one
pole to another, upon which the World is moved about from East to West.

CHAP. III. Of the division of the Sphere.
THE whole Sphere of the World is divided into two parts or Regions; the
Elementary and Celestial. The Elementary part or Region has four parts: the
first whereof is the earth, which together with the element of water (which is
the second) makes one perfect Globe: and round about both these are two other
elements, namely, the Air, and above that the fire, which fills the space
between the Air, and the Sphere of the Moon: of which Elements (by virtue of
the heat of the Heavens) are made and compounded all corruptible things in the
world.

The celestial Region consists of other ten parts: the first whereof is the
Sphere of the Moon; the second the Sphere of Mercury; the third, of Venus; the
fourth, is the Sphere of the Sun; the fifth, of Mars; the sixth, of Jupiter;
the seventh, of Saturn; the eighth, is the Sphere of the fixed stars, which is
called the Firmament; the ninth, is the Crystalline heaven; and lastly, the
tenth and highest, is the Sphere, called the Primum mobile, that is, the first
or highest moveable heaven. That which remains, called the Empyreal heaven,
because it has no motion, comes not to be considered on in the Art of
Navigation.

A Figure wherein may be seen the Composition of the whole Sphere of the World.


CHAP. IV. Of the motion of the Heavens.
THe number of the Heavens is known by the motions observed in them, which are
ten, distinct one from another. For the Moon moves her proper and peculiar
motion in 27 days, and 8 hours, which is one Revolution: Mercury, Venus, and
the Sun finish their motion in one year, which contains 365 days, and almost
a quarter of a day: Mars runs his course in two years; Jupiter in twelve
years; Saturn in thirty years; the eight Sphere (according to the opinion of
some) in seven thousand years; the ninth, in five and twenty thousand, and
eight hundred years: and the tenth, in four and twenty hours almost. Which ten
motions are reduced unto three principal: the first is that of the first
moveable upon the two ends of the Axletree, which are called the Poles of the
World from East to West, turning about again unto the East in 24 hours: and
this Sphere, by the force of his motion, carries about with it all the other
lower Spheres in the space of 24 hours. Howbeit, they move also the contrary
way with a second motion, which is from West to East, upon two other poles
distant from the first, about three and twenty, and an half such parts, whereof
the whole compass of heaven contains three hundred and sixty. And this
second motion is accomplished in each of the lower Heavens, in diverse spaces of
time, as is before said. The third motion is proper to the eighth Heaven,
wherein the fixed stars are placed; which motion is the cause that the distance
of the poles of the first motion, from them of the second motion does vary,
being sometimes greater, and sometimes less.

CHAP. V. Of the Figure of the Heavens.
THat the Heavens are round, it is proved, because roundnesse is the most
perfect Figure of all others, being whole and entire, having no need of any
joints, being also of the greatest capacity of all figures that have the same
compass, and in that respect most fit to contain all other things. Also the
principal bodies of the World, as the Sun, the Moon, and the stars are of this
Figure, and we see the same likewise in those things which are bounded by
themselves; as it is manifest in drops of water, and all other liquid things.

CHAP. VI. That the Earth and Water make one perfect Globe.
THere is nothing that shows more clearly that the earth and water make one
round Globe, then the shadow which they make in the Eclipses of the Moon; which
shadow we always see to be a part of a circle. For if the body, which is the
cause of the same shadow, were three-square, or apiece, the shadow it self
also would appear in the same fashion. Wherefore the shadow of these two bodies
together, being round, it is manifest that they are round also.

CHAP. VII. That the Earth is in the center of the World.
ONe sign we have to be assured, that the Earth is in the midst and center of
the World; namely, that wheresoever we are upon the face of the earth, we
always see one half of the Heavens, the other half being hidden out of our
sight. Moreover, the stars (in what part of the Heavens soever they be) either
in the East, West, or South, we see that they are always of the very same
bigness. Whereby we may easily perceive, that they are always equally distant
from our sight: and whereas they move round about it, it follows, that we are
upon the center of that body, on whose superficies the said stars describe
their circles.

CHAP. VIII. The whole quantity of the Earth.
ANd albeit the Globe of the Earth and Water, compared with the Spheres of the
Stars, is as it were a center or prick; yet being considered by it self, it
contains in the greatest circle thereof 6300 common Spanish leagues. Which a
man may easily perceive, by taking two such points or head-lands of the earth,
as are under the same Meridian, and which differ in distance one from another
so much as one of those parts is, whereof the compass of the whole world
contains 360; and it is found both by Navigation at Sea and also by travel on
land, that the two foresaid points are distant each from other 17 leagues and
an half: of which leagues, each one contains 4000 paces, every pace 5 foot,
every foot 16 fingers, and every finger 4 grains of barley.

CHAP. IX. Of the Equinoctial Circle.
BEing to treat of the Circles of the Sphere of the World, the first which
offers it self to be spoken of is the Equinoctial Circle; by means whereof we
do know in what part of the World we are: and in it, in the Sea-Chart are
placed all these points or degrees of Longitude and from it the Latitudes are
accounted. So that the Equinoctial is a Circle which divides the World into
two equal portions, and is equally distant every where from either of the
poles. And it is called the Equinoctial Circle; because that when the Sun
passes under it, upon the 11 of March, and the 13 of September, it makes the
day equal to the night. The knowledge of this Circle in the Art of Navigation,
does help us to find the Latitude or distance from the Line; and from this
Circle are reckoned the declinations of the Sun in the regiment thereof. And
always those Charts of Navigation which are either universal, or half
universal, have this Equinoctial circle, drawn with a great red line, which
passes by the beginning of the account of the degrees of Latitude.

CHAP. X. Of the Poles of the World.
AND here it is to be noted, that one of those two Poles, (from which the
Equinoctial is equally distant) which is always in our sight, (because it is
continually above our Horizon) is called the Pole-artick, the Septentrional, or
North Pole. But the other opposite pole (which we never see, because it is
under our Horizon) is called the Pole-antartick, and the Meridional, or South
Pole. And so that part of the world which is between the Equinoctial and the
North pole, is called the North part and that which is from the Equinoctial to
the South pole, is called the South part.

CHAP, XI. Of the Eclipticke line
THe Equinoctial circle is divided into equal parts by another circle called
the Ecliptic, whereof one half is between the Equinoctial and the North pole,
and the other half between the Equinoctial and the South pole. And that part
thereof which is furthest distant from the Equinoctial, is distant from the
same about 23 degrees and an half. And because the Sun moves in this circle
without departing from it, hereof proceed the Declinations thereof. And this
circle in all parts is equally distant from the Poles of the second motion,
which are called the Poles of the Ecliptic, And through this circle the Sun is
continually move by his propper motion from East to West: by means of which
motion sometimes he passes under the Equinoctial, and at other times departs
from it, both toward the North and toward the South: and the quantity of his
greatest distance is about 23 degrees and an half: and so much is the distance
of the Poles of the Ecliptic, from the Poles of the Equinoctial. And albeit
this circle is not drawn in the Sea Chart, yet is it in some sort represented
in the Table of the Suns Declination, which are gathered from the motion which
the Sun makes under the Ecliptic.

CHAP. XII. Of the Declination of the Sun.
THe motion of the Sun under the Ecliptic, is the cause of his Declination:
which is nothing else but the daily swarving or Declining of the Sun from the
Equinoctial line. And this Declination when the Sun is under the Equinoctial,
upon the eleventh of March, and thirteenth of September, is nothing at all: so
likewise upon the twelfth of June, and twelfth of December, the Declination is
at the greatest. And albeit this greatest Declination be now in our time about
three and twenty degrees and an half; yet has it at other times been found
otherwise, by reason of a third motion proper to the eighth Heaven: but it
always keeps between 23 degrees, 28 minutes; and 23 degrees, 53 minutes.
From hence therefore we do infer, that at diverse times it is meet to make new
and diverse Tables of the Declination of the Sun.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Colures.
There are two Circles of the Sphere, either of which divides in into two
equal parts: and they are called Colures, because that in the revolution which
they make, by force of the Primum mobile, they do not show themselves wholly
unto us; so as we may see all parts of them. One of them is called the
Equinoctial Colure, because it passes by the Poles of the World, and the
points where the Ecliptic cutteth the Equinoctial; and when the Sun by his own
proper motion comes unto it, he makes the day and the night equal, and
divides the Winter from the Spring by the one part; and by the other, Summer
from Autumn; at which times the Sun has no declination at all. The other is
called the Solstitial Colure, because it passes by the Poles of the World and
of the Ecliptic, and by the points where the Ecliptic is furthest distant
from the Equinoctial. And when the Sun by his proper motion comes unto it, in
the one part it makes the longest day, and the shortest night, and divides
the Spring from the Summer, and has his greatest Declination toward the
North: and being in the other part, the Sun makes the longest night, and
shortest day, and divides Winter from Autumn, and is in his greatest
Southerly Declination. These two Colures are noted in the Table of the Suns
Declination because the Equinoctial Colure passes by the two points, where
there is no Declination at all; because the Sun is under the very Equinoctial
circle: and the Solstitial Colure passes by that place where the Sun has his
greatest Declination, which is in 23 degrees and an half, or thereabouts.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Meridian circle.
THe Meridian is a circle drawn by the Poles of the World (which are all one
with the Poles of the Equinoctial) and and by the point directly over our heads
called the Zenith. And it is called the Meridian, because that when the Sun by
the motion of the Primum mobile comes unto this circle, it makes midday,
and then he has been running his course from his rising till he come thither,
just so long time as he shall be running from thence to the place of his
setting. The Zenith is a point in the Firmament, placed directly over our
heads. And it is to be noted, that when the Sun is in that Circle, it has the
greatest altitude above our Horizon, that it can possibly have the same day: by
this and the Declination, we come to know how far we are distant from the
Equinoctial, either toward the North, or toward the South. And hence it is,
that the height of the Sun in Navigation is understood only for that height
which the Sun has, when he is in this Circle. And so the height of the Sun
shall be that part of the Meridian, which is contained between the Sun and our
Horizon. This Circle in the Sea-Chart is represented by all those lines which
are drawn from North to South.

CHAP. XV. Of the Horizon.
THe Horizon is a Circle which divides that part of the Heavens which we see
from the residue which we do not see: and it is properly that Circle by which,
according to our sight, the Heaven seems to be joined with the water, when we
are at Sea, without sight of any land. This Horizon is of two sorts, namely,
right and oblique. The right Horizon is that which they have that live under
the Equinoctial, which passes by their Zenith; and therefore the Equinoctial
line or circle falls perpendicularly and right acrosse with their Horizon,
and both the South and the North Poles are in their Horizon. The oblique
Horizon is that which they have that live not directly under the Equinoctial;
for unto them the Equinoctial divides the Horizon obliquely, and not right
acrosse: and one Pole is always above their Horizon, and the other is beneath
their Horizon, and cannot be seen. This Horizon is represented in the Sea-Chart
by a certain imagined circle, whose center is the point where our ship is From
which center are imagined to proceed unto the said circle 32 lines, which
represent the 32 winds or rumbs; which always are drawn in our Sea-Compasse:
which likewise in a little piece of paper does continually represent unto us,
both by day and night, the whole Horizon, with his 32 divisions.

CHAP. XVI. Of the 32 Winds.
THis right or oblique Horizon is divided into 32 equal parts by 16 lines,
which they call Rumbs: and they cut themselves in the point where we stand: of
which rumbs, that which passes by the points where the Equinoctial begins
and ends (which are where the Sun rises and sets the 11 of March, and the
13 of September) is called East and West; and that which cutteth it right
acrosse, is named North and South. And the four extremes or ends of these two
lines, are distant upon the Horizon one fourth part of a circle, and they make
four quarters. Every one of which quarters being divided in the midst, do make
four other points: and that which falls between the North and the East, is
called North-east; and that between the North and the West, North-west; that
between the South and the East, South-east; and that between the South and the
West, South-west. And so the Horizon is divided by four lines or numbs, into
eight principal winds, noted in the Sea-Chart with black lines. And if you
divide every one of those eight parts in the midst, you shall have other eight
lines, and other four rumbs, which in all are 16 winds. And each one of these
has his name compounded of the names of those principal winds, which are on
either side thereof. As for example, that half wind which is between the
North, and the North-east* is called North-north-east, and that which blows
between the East and the North-east, is called East-north-east; and that
between the East and the South-east, East-south-east; and that between the
South and the South-east, South-south-east; and that between the South-west and
the West VVest-south-west; and that between the West and North-west,
West-north-west; and that between the North-west and the North,
North-north-west. And these are noted in the Chart with green lines.

Finally, if you divide every one of these sixteen winds in the midst, they
will yield you other 16 winds, and will amount to 32 winds in all. Which 16
last mentioned, are drawn in the Sea-Chart with red lines, and are by the
Spaniards called quarters of the eighth first and principal winds: and every
one of these is called by the name of that principal wind which is next it,
together with an addition of the word (By) and the name of another principal
wind which is next unto it. As for example, of the two quarter-winds which fall
next the rumb of the North, that which lies toward the North-east is called
North and by East; and that which falls toward the North-west, is called
North by West. So likewise of those two winds, which blow next the North-east,
that toward the North is called North-east and by North and that toward the
East, North-east and by East. And after the same manner you may name all the
rest.

The Figure of the Sea-Compasse, and of the Horizon, divided into 32 Winds, by
16 Rumbs.


But here is to be noted, Difference between the Rumb and the Wind*
that there is difference between the Rumb and the Wind, because a Rumb is one
direct line continued with two contrary winds, as the Rumb of North and South,
and the Rumb of East and West. And so when we will name the lying of any Coast,
we will say, that it lies North and South, or North and by East, and South and
by West. But the wind is one line of those 32, into which the Horizon is
divided; and it is one part of those two which together are called the Rumb.
And so we say, that Land lies from us toward the South, and toward the South
and by West, or toward the South-south-west, etc.

CHAP. XVII. Of the two Tropicks.
BEsides the six Circles abovementioned, which are drawn upon the superficies
of the Sphere of the World; there are other two which the Sun describes with
the motion of the Primum Mobile, about the 12 day of June and of December; of
which two Circles that which the Sun describes the 12 of June, from the time
of his rising, till the time that he rises the day following, is called the
Tropic of the Summer Sun-standing; or the Tropic of Cancer: for the Sun
having departed from the Equinoctial, and increasing his Declination toward
the North, when he comes to describe that Circle, for two or three days it
seems, that he comes no nearer to our Zenith, nor departs from the
Equinoctial one day more then another: but from thence forward he goes back,
diminishing his Declination, till he come to the Equinoctial; and crossing the
same, he goes on the other side, increasing his Declination until the 12 of
December, upon which day, from the time of his rising, till he be come about to
rise again the next morning, he describes another Circle, called the Tropic
of the Winter Sun-standing, or the Tropic of Capricorn; for the Sun being
departed from the Equinoctial, and increasing his Declination toward the
South, when he comes to describe that Circle, it seems for two or three
days, that he returns not one whit toward the Equinoctial, nor goes
further from our Zenith one day more then other; but from thence forwards he
comes back again, diminishing his Declination, till he be returned to the
Equinoctial, and from thence toward our Zenith. These two Circles in
Sea-Charts are marked with two great red lines drawn from East to West, which
lie on either side of the Equinoctial, being distant from thence about 23 degrees.
and an half. And wheresoever our ship be in any place between these two Circles
or lines, we may in some time of the year take the Sun in our Zenith, at which
time it makes no shadow at all, being then just 90 degr. high above our
Horizon. But they which are without the said two Circles or lines, shall never
have the Sun in their Zenith, because it cannot come to the height of 90 degr.
above their Horizon.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Parallels
THe parallel Circles are those which are in all parts equally distant from the
Equinoctial. And these Circles may be infinite between the Equinoctial, and the
North and South Poles; and in the Sea-chart some of them are represented by the
lines which are drawn from East to West. And two of these Circles are the two
Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorn, which are the bounds of the Suns greatest
Declinations. Likewise all those Circles which the Sun and the stars in Heaven
do by the motion of the first or highest moveable heaven describe from East to
West, are parallels, and serve in the Sphere to show the Latitude. And when a
ship saileth in the same height of the pole, then she saileth in a parallel and
runs always East or West. Which manner of sailing we use at all such times,
when we find our ship in the height of that land, to which we are going.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Degrees.
EVery one of these Circles is divided into 360 equal parts, which they call
degrees, and every degree is divided into other 60 equal parts, which are
called minutes: which degrees and minutes, are the common measure that we use
in Navigation, when we make any account in the Heavens, either in taking the
the height of the Sun and stars above the Horizon, or in measuring the distance
from our Zenith to the Equinoctial. These degrees are marked in a line drawn
from North to South in the most vacant part of the Sea-Chart. This line in
general Sea-Charts is divided into 90 equal parts, which are counted (beginning
at the Equinoctial line) from one to 90, both Northwards and Southwards. And in
those Charts which are not general, this line has such divisions as it is
capable of, according to the largeness of the Chart, beginning to make account
from the Equinoctial.

CHAP. XX. What is meant by Longitude and Latitude.
THe Longitude of any place is a part of the Equinoctial, or of some other
parallel contained between two Meridians, whereof one passes by the Canary
Islands, and the other by the place given; but if neither of the said Meridians
pass by the foresaid Islands, it is called respective Longitude. And this
respective Longitude is called in the Art of Navigation the distance or length
of the right line; which is determined or bounded by two other right lines
running North and South; of which two, the one passes by the Port or Haven
from whence we set sail, and the other by the place where our ship is. And so
shall the distance of the right line be the part of any right line whatsoever
running East and West, comprehended between the two foresaid right lines
extended North and South.

The Latitude of a place is a part of any Meridian whatsoever contained between
two parallels, whereof one is the Equinoctial, and the other the parallel of
the place given. This Latitude the Mariners do call the Distance from the Line;
The Equinoctial is called the line, because it is the principal of all others
which are drawn in the Chart.
understanding by the Line, the most principal of all others, which are drawn
in the Chart, that is, the Equinoctial Line. They use also to call it the
height, which is as much to say, as the height of the Pole above the Horizon.
And so the Distance from the Equinoctial shall be a part of any North and South
Line contained between the Equinoctial and any line running from East to West,
which passes in the graduation of the Chart, by the same degree of Latitude in
which we find our selves to be.

THE SECOND PART OF THE Art of Navigation.
Wherein is handled the Practick Part, showing the making and use of the
principal Instruments belonging to this ART.
CHAP. 1. The making of the Astrolabe.
TO know the Latitude or distance from the Equinoctial line there are required
five things; whereof any one being wanting, we cannot possibly find out how
far we are distant from the said Line. And these are, the Astrolabe or
Quadrant, the height of the Sun, the Shadows, the Declination, the Regiment or
Rules of the Sun.

The Astrolabe is to be made after this manner: In the midst of a round plate
or table of metal or wood, being smooth and plain every where, and about a
finger thick, you shall take the center A, wherein having placed one foot of
your compasses, you shall with the other draw as great a circle as conveniently
you can in the said Table. And within this Circle must be drawn two other
Circles, the one distant from the other about the breadth of a grain of wheat,
and the third must be distant from the second twice so much as the second is
from the first.



And your Ruler being laid just to the center A, you shall draw the line BAC,
which divides every one of the three circles into two equal parts. And putting
one point of your compasses (standing open according to the length of the line
BC) upon the point C, where the greatest Circle is divided by the line BC; with
the other point, you shall draw above the point D a part of a Circle, and
another under E. And then putting one foot of the compasses thus opened upon
the point B, you shall draw other two parts of a Circle, which will cross the
first in F and G. And your Ruler being laid to F and G, you shall draw the line
DE, which must pass by the center A. Then let the Quadrant DB be divided into
3 equal parts, and every one of those into three other parts, and each of those
nine into two, and every one of those 18 into 5; and so the said Quadrant shall
be divided into 90 equal parts or degrees. Unto which degrees shall be placed
the numbers belonging to them from 5 to 5, between the second and the third
circle, beginning from B and ending with 90 at the point D. Then let there be
made at the point D a little hole upon the line DE, through which may be put a
little ring, or some strong riband or string, and you shall make a knot
thereon, whereby your finger may take hold: and the Astrolabe hanging by that
hole, you shall put through a slender thread with a plummet of lead, which may
hang quite under the Astrolabe; which thread, if (while the Astrolabe hangs
immovable) it fall just upon the line DE, then is the Astrolabe well
rectified: If not* you must continue cutting off some thing, and lightning that
side toward which the thread does fall, until it hang even with the foresaid
line. Then must you draw upon a Ruler of the same matter, (being about a finger
and an half broad, the right line HI along through the very midst of the
breadth thereof: which Ruler shall be made after the same fashion that here is
set down, cutting away from one half of the length half of the breadth, always
saving whole the line HI. And so likewise shall you cut off along the half of
the length on the contrary part, half of the breadth; so that the line HI may
remain whole on that side also. And near to the ends of the said Ruler* you
shall set two little square Vanes of the breadth of the Ruler in the midst
standing upright, the very midst of both Vanes being placed upon the line HI.
Through the centers of which two Vanes shall be made two little holes, both
which must stand directly over the line HI, and in equal distance from the
upper face of the Ruler. This Ruler by a hole bored through the midst thereof,
shall be fastened upon the said Astrolabe through another hole of the bigness
of that in the Ruler, at the very center A with a nail, which may be made fast
with a little pin, as is to be seen in the figure.

CHAP. II. Of the height of the Sun.
TO take the height of the Sun, you must hold the Astrolabe by the ring or
knot D, in your left hand: and turning your right side to the Sun, lift up the
Ruler with your right hand, till the beam of the Sun entering by the hole of the
uppermost Vane, does also pierce through the hole of the nethermost Vane. And
then note the degree and part of the degree which the line HI does touch, for
that is the height of the Sun above the Horizon; which if it be the greatest
height that the Sun has that day, it will teach us how far we are distant
from the Equinoctial. This greatest height is to be taken at midday, lifting
up the uppermost Vane, till we be assured that the Sun cease to rise any
higher, but begins to fall again. Then note that greatest height, and keep
it for the making of your account of the Latitude by the Sun.

CHAP. III. Of the Shadows.
THe shadows being compared with the Sun, may be of three sorts, for at high
noon the shadow falls either toward that part of the World ^o which the Sun
declineth. or toward the contrary part, or else we make no shadow at all, The
first and second sort are, when the height of the Sun is less then 90
degrees, and the third is, when it is just 90 degrees high. The first is, when
the Sun keeps his course on the North side of the Equinoctial, which is from
the 1^ of March to the 13 of September; and likewise when the shadows fall
toward the North of the Compass: or when the Sun runs on the South side of
the Equinoctial (which is from the 14 of September to the 10 of March) and the
shadows likewise fall toward the South of the Compass: and this is when the
Sun and the shadows go both one way. The second is, when the Sun coming toward
the North, the shadows are cast toward the South of the Compass; or when the
Sun is on the South side of the Equinoctial, the shadows fall toward the
North; and this is, when the Sun and the shadows are differing.

The rule of the shadows is, that we look well to the lower Vane of the
Astrolabe, when we are taking the height of the Sun at noon: For if the line HI
fall directly upon the line of the Astrolabe DE, then we have no shadow,
because the Sun is in our Zenith 90 degrees high. But if the line HI fall not
upon the line DE* you must mark toward what part of the World the lower part
of the Ruler does decline from the point E; which if it decline toward the
North of the Compass, then the shadows fall Northwards. But if it decline
toward the South of the Compass, then the shadows fall Southwards.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Regiment and Rules of the Sun.
WHen you know the part or parts of the Sun and shadows and desire by the Sun
to know how far you are distant from the Equinoctial, you have five rules: The
first whereof shows in what part of the Heavens the Sun is, that is, whether
he be North or South from the Equinoctial at the time of your observation. The
second teaches what account we are to take of the Sun, when he casts no
shadow, because he is in our Zenith and is found in the Astrolabe to be just 90
degrees. high. The third is of the account to be made by the Sun, when taking the
height thereof in less then 90 degr. it makes a shadow at high noon, and
has no Declination, because it is under the Equinoct^al. The fourth is, of the
account that is to be made* when the Sun and the shadows are both one way from
the line. The fifth is when the Sun and the shadows are different on^ being
toward the North, and the other toward the South.

The first Rule of the Sun.
From the 11 of M^rch, to the 13 of September, the Sun runs on the North
side of the Equinoctial. And from the 14 of September to the 10 of March he
goes on the South side thereof.

The second Rule of the Sun.
When we observe the Sun in 00 degrees of height, we must see what degrees and
minutes of Dec^ination the Sun has the same day: And then we may say that we
are so much distant from the Equinoctial toward that part of the world to
which the Sun declineth.

The third Rule of the Sun.
When the Sun is less then 90 degrees high, if there be no Declination the same
day, then so much as it wants in height of 90 degrees, so much are we distant
from the Equinoctial, toward that part of the world toward which the shadow
falls.

The fourth Rule of the Sun^
When the Sun and the shadows are both toward the same part of the world, we
must note how much the Sun wants of 90 degrees in height; And that which it
wants (being added to the Declination of the Sun the same day) is our just
distance from the Equinoctial toward that part of the world to which the Sun
and shadows decline.

The fifth Rule of the Sun.
When the Declination of the Sun and the shadows be different, we must add the
height of the Sun unto the Declination which it has the same day: And if the
Sun amount to 90 degr. just, then are we under the Equinoctial line: but if it
exceed 90 degrees, we are so much distant from the Equinoctial toward that
part of the world wherein the Sun is* as that excess or overpluss comes to.
And if the height and Declination added together come to less then 90, look
how many degrees and minutes you want of 90, so many are you distant from the
Equinoctial toward that part to which the shadows fall.

And here is to be noted that we must likewise make account of the minutes,
because they may be both in Declination, and in height, and so always in that
Declination where we shall find 60 minutes, we must make of them one degree And
if in taking the height we find half a degree besides all the whole degrees*
it is as much as 30 minutes, and one third part of a degree is 20 minutes, one
fourth 15 minutes, one fifth part 12 minutes, and one sixth part 10 minutes.

CHAP. V. Of the Declination of the Sun, and of his Tables.
THat we may know what use to make of the five foresaid Rules of the
Declination of the Sun, we are to note, that the year (which is the time of the
Suns motion from any point of the Ecliptic till he return again to the same
point) consists not always of an equal number of days. For besides 365 days
it contains almost one quarter of a day: but the year which we commonly
account contains 365 days in common years, and in leap years 366. It was
therefore needful to make four Tables of twelve months apeece (whereof the
three first contain 365 days, and the fourth 366) and in such sort to
distribute the Declination of the Sun among them, that you may make account of
the Declination which is wanting to the Sun at the end of 365 days, for lack of
those six hours almost which the Sun wants to come unto the point, from which
it departed at the beginning of the year: and also of the Declination which
resulteth in the fourth year, because it consists of 366 days, at what time
it comes to recover that which in the three former years it had lost* Therefore
to know at all times which of the four Tables we ought to make use of. I will
set down a Rule whereby you may know whether the present year be leap year, or
whether it be the first, second or third year after the leap year.

And the Rule is this, that taking from the years of our Lord (which run in our
common account) the number of 1600, if the remainder thereof be an even number,
and half of the remainder and even number, then that year is leap year: and if
the remainder be even and the half thereof odd, then that year is the second
year after the leap year. But if the remainder of the years numbered be odd, we
must try the year next going before, to see whether the remainder thereof* and
half the remainder be even numbers, for then the present year is the first
after the leap year. And if the remainder of the year going before be even, and
the half thereof odd, then the present year is the third year after the leap
year.

How the Declination of the Sun may be found out.
Now to know the Suns Declination every day, we must look in that Table which
answers to the present year, and seeking the month in the upper part of the
page, and the day of the month wherein we would know the Declination, in the
column which defends toward the left hand; right over against the said day,
and under the title of our month, we shall find two numbers; one of degrees,
and the other of minutes; which are the Declination of the Sun that day*
toward that part of the world which the first Rule of the Sun does teach.

CHAP. VI. The Equation of the Suns Declination
THey which sail in the month of June and December need not much to make any
Equation, in the Table of the Suns Declination, because that in those months
the Declination of one day differs very little from the Declination of
another. But at all other times of the year we ought to make some kind of
Equation to know precisely our height, or our distance from the Equinoctial.
This Equation is to be made after this manner: You must subtract the
Declination of the Sun for the present day from the Declination of the day
following, or contrariwise (subtract always the less out o^ the greater) and
the difference, or remainder shall be multiplied by the leagues which our ship
has sailed from the Meridian of London; and the product of the multiplication
must be divided by These leagues must be counted in the Equinoctial between the
meridians of the two places. But it were better to find the difference of
Longitude: for then as 360 degrees are to that difference so is the difference
of Declination to the Equation desired,
7200 leagues, which are contained in the compass of the whole earth: then (if
you have sailed Westward) the Quotient must be added to the Declination of the
Sun that day* if it be from the 11 of March to the 12 of June or from the 13 of
September to the 12 of December: or it must (if the ship also has sailed
Westward) be subtracted if you find it in any other time of the year, except in
the days of the Equinoctium, for then this difference is known by taking the
Declination of the present day with that of the day following: but if you be to
the Eastward from the Meridian of London, you must do contrariwise,
subtracting the said Squation where before you added it.

In stead of the Table of the Suns Declination here inserted by Roderigo
Samorano, use the Table before set down from the 174 page, to the 180 page.

CHAP. VII. Four examples for the plainer declaration of that which is said
before.
An example of the second Rule.
IN the year 1608 the 15 of April, suppose I was sailing* and took the height
of the Sun with my Astrolabe at noone, and found the height thereof to be just
90 degrees. First therefore I took from 1608. the number of 1600. and their
remain 8 which remainder being an even number, and four the half thereof being
even also, I say the year 1608 is the Leap year. And so I go unto the fourth
year in the Table of the Suns Declination, which is leap year, and under the
month of April, over against the 15 day, I find 13 degrees and 25 minutes 41
seconds: I say therefore that I am distant from the Equinoctial toward the
North 13 degrees and 26 minutes almost, because it is between the 11 of March
and the 13 of September, in which space falls the 15 day of April.

The second example of the third Rule.
In the year 1602 upon the 13 day of September, admit I took the height of the
Sun, and found it in my Astrolabe to be 70 degrees and an half: and that in the
Table of Declination belonging to the same year, upon the foresaid day of
September, I found that the Sun had no declination, but that it was under the
very Equinoctial line. Now because the degrees of the height which the Sun
wants of 90 are 19 and an half, I say that I am so much distant from the
Equinoctial toward that part of the world unto which the shadow falls.

Example of the fourth Rule.
Upon the 13 of May 1609 suppose I took the height of the Sun at noon in my
Astrolabe, and found it to be 85 degrees and three quarters. Now because 1609
is an odd number. I go back to the former year of 1608. and I find (according
to the Rule of leap years) that the year 1608 is leap year; and hence I judge
that the year 1609 is the year next following the leap year.

Then I go to the Tables of Declination belonging to the first year after the
leap year, and under the month of May against the 13 day, the Suns Declination
is found to be 20 degrees, 41 minutes, 15 seconds; and because that from the 11
of March to the 13 of September the Sun keeps his course to the Northwards of
the Equinoctial, having marked the shadow at midday, I see that the lower vain
of mine Astrolabe, looks to the North of the Compass, and so I say that the
Sun and the shadow are both one way. Then I look for the height which is 85
degrees, and three quarters, so that it lacks of 90 degrees four degrees and
one quarter, which is fifteen minutes. These four degrees and fifteen minutes
being added to the Declination, which is twenty degrees and 41 minutes, amount
in all to 24 degrees and 56 minutes: And so much am I distant from the
Equinoctial toward the North, which is the part of the Sun and of the shadows.

An example of the fifth Rule.
Upon the 17 of October 1609 which is the first year after the leap year) the
Sun now going his course toward the South, suppose I took his Altitude in 50
degrees and one third. And when I took it, the lower vain of mine Astrolabe
Declined toward the North of my Compass: wherefore I say that the Sun and the
shadows are different. And so adding 05 degrees and 20 minutes (which is one
third part of a degree) with 12 degrees and 55 minutes (which upon that day is
the Suns Declination) they amount in all to 63 degrees and 15 minutes: which
are less then 90 degrees by 26 degrees and 45 minutes: and so far I am distant
from the Equinoctial to the part of the shadows, that is, to the North: for
the Sun and shadows being different, the height and Declination came not to 90
degr.

A second example of the fifth Rule.
The same day and year suppose that some man found the Sun in 77 degrees and
five minutes of height, the Sun it self declining to the South, and the
shadows falling to the North; which being added to 12 degrees and 55 minutes
of Declination* amounts in all to 90 degrees, just: whereby I know that the
ship wherein this Altitude is taken, is under the Equinoctial: because the Sun
and shadows being different, the height and Declination make just 90 degrees.

The third example of the fifth Rule.
Upon the 20 of May 1608, suppose a certain man found the Suns height to be 88
degrees and two third parts, the Sun and shadows being different: which being
added to 21 degr. 54 minutes, (the Suns Declination that day) amounts to 110
degrees 34 minutes, which exceed 90 by 20 degrees and 34 minutes. I say
therefore that this man is 20 degrees 34 minutes distant from the Equinoctial,
toward the part of the Sun, which is to the North, because the Sun and the
shadows being diffe^rent, the height of the Sun, and the Declination being
added together exceed 90 degrees.

CHAP. VIII. Another manner of accounting by the Sun, as they use in Portugal.
SOme Astrolabes there be, whose account begins not from the Horizon, but
from the Zenith, and ends with 90 degr. in the Horizon; and the height taken
by them is nothing else but the distance of the Sun from our Zenith: And to
make an account of the Sun, according to the Altitude, taken with such
Astrolabes, there are these Rules following to be Observed,

1. When the Sun and the shadows are both one way, add the height unto the
Declination, and the product will show how far you are distant from the line,
toward the part of the Sun and shadows.

2. If the Sun and the shadow be differing, subduct the Declination from the
height, or the height from the Declination (the lesser from the greater) and
the remainder will show how far you are from the line, toward the part of that
which is greater: and if the height be greater, then are you on the part of the
shadows.

3. When the Sun is in the line and has no Declination, so much altitude as
you shall find, so far are you distant from the Equinoctial toward the part of
the shadows.

4. When you shall take the Sun in your Zenith, having then no altitude, his
Declination will show you how far you are distant from the line toward the
part of the Sun.

These Rules, because they are so easy and plain, need no examples.

CHAP. IX. How the height of the Sun may be known in any place whatsoever
without an Astrolabe; first knowing your distance from the Equinoctial.
SOme Pilots for their curiosities sake desire to know the height of the Sun
for any day without an Astrolabe. For the performance whereof, it is expedient,
that they know three things: that is to say, the Declination of the Sun, the
distance of the place from the Equinoctial, and the part whereunto the shadows
do incline at midday. These three things being known, you shall come to the
knowledge of the Suns height by four Rules.

1 When you and the Sun be both on one side of the Equinoctial, if your
distance from the line be equal to the Suns declination, you shall find the
Sun in your Zenith in 90 degr, and shall have no shadow.

2 When the Sun has no declination, look how much your distance from the
Equinoctial wants of 90 degrees. for so much is height of the Sun.

3 When the Sun and the shadows are both toward one part, subtract out of your
distance from the Equinoctial the Declination of the Sun that day, and that
which the remainder shall want of 90 degrees. shall be the height of the Sun.

4 When the Sun and the shadows are different, if the Equinoctial be between
you and the Sun, add the Declination of the Sun to your distance from the
Equinoctial, and that which these two numbers added together shall want of 90
degrees. shall be the height of the Sun. But if you be between the Sun and the
line, you must subduct your distance from the line out of the Suns Declination,
and then that which the remainder shall want of 90 degrees. shall be the height of
the Sun.

CHAP. X. The Rule or Regiment of the North-star, for the knowledge of the
height of the Pole.
THe Zenith is the Pole of the Horizon, because it is every where distant from
it just 90 degrees. And hence it is, that the Pole of the World is so much elevated
above our Horizon* as our Zenith is distant from the Equinoctial, which is very
manifest: for having 90 degrees. of the Meridian from our Zenith by the Pole of the
World to the Horizon; and other 90 degrees of the Meridian from the Pole of the
World, by our Zenith to the Equinoctial; because they are two quadrants of one
and the same Circle, they must needs be of equal quantity: from both which that
part being taken away, which is common to both (that is, the whole distance
from the Pole of the world to our Zenith) that which remains on both parts
shall be equal. And so that space from our Zenith to the Equinoctial (which is
called the distance from the line) is equal ^o the distance that is between the
Pole of the World and the Horizon, which is called the height of the Pole.

Whereby it is manifest, that the height of the Pole is so much as our
distance from the line is. And although they are two different things yet the
one is taken for the other, because they are equal.

This height of the Pole is known by the help of four things, which are the
Ball^stilla, or Crosse-staffe, the position of the North-star, the height of
the said star, and certain Rules.

CHAP. XI. The making of the Cross-staff.
THe Mariners Crosse-staff is that which by the Astronomers is called Radius
Astronomicus: and the manner how to make it is as follows: First, upon a very
plain and broad table you may draw a semicircle, which from the center to the
circumference must contain at the least four hand breadths. And having drawn
through the center thereof the line ABC, divide the circumference into two equal
parts, in the point E, as likewise you must divide the quadrant EC in the very
midst by the point F. Then must you divide the arch OF into 90 equal parts,
dividing it first into three, and every of these three into other three, and
every of those nine into two, and each of those two into five, which you must
do with much preciseness and care. Then laying your Ruler to the point B
(which is the center) through every one those 90 divisions of the half
quadrant, you must draw 90 lines: And keeping this quadrant so divided, it will
serve you for a pattern to make us many Crosse-staves as you think good, of
what bigness soever you will. But to make the Crosse-staff, you must take a
piece of wood of some three foot in length, and a finger thick, four square,
and very even: and fitting a transversary thereto, which may with facility
slide up and down upon the staff, always right acrosse; take with your
compasses half the length of the transversary, and placing one foot of the
compasses upon the point B, make with the other a mark in the line BC, which
may serve for the point G, and draw through the point G the line GI, which may
run equally distant from the line EB. Finally, laying one end of the staff upon
the point G, let it lie all along just upon the line GI, and make your marks
upon the edges of the staff, by which you may draw 90 lines, putting the number
of every line upon the said edge, beginning to place 90 where the line BE does
cross the staff, and from thence descending unto one or two, which may be put
down according to the length of the staff, and the largeness of the
transversary.



CHAP. XII. Of the position of the North-star, and the Guards.
AMongst the 48 Constellations, which the Astronomers place in the Heavens, the
nearest unto the pole of the World is that which they call the lesser Bear, and
the Mariners Bozina, or the horn, in regard of the fashion thereof: which
Constellation consists of 7 stars, which are placed after this manner: And of
these stars, the three greatest, marked with the letters ABC do serve
especially for our purpose. And so A is called the North-star, B the the
foremost guard, C the other guard behind. And they are so called, because that
by force of the motion of the first moveable Heaven, the star B goes always
before, and the star C behind. Every of these three stars as well as all others
in the Heavens besides, describe th^^ circles round about the pole with the
motion of the first or highest moveable Heaven: (...) which motion sometimes
the (...) stars AB are just of (...) above the Horizon: (...) they are said to
be East and West one from another. Sometimes they are in a perpendicular line
to the Horizon, according to our sight; and then they are said to be North and
South: and sometimes also the two guards BC are East and West one from another*
and then the former guard bears from the North-star, North-east and
South-west. And when these two guards be in a perpendicular line one above
another, the former guard bears from the North star North-east and
South-west. Insomuch that from these four positions do arise eight rules for
the eight Rumbs, wherein the former guard may stand, being considered in
respect of the North star. And so presupposing that the North star is distant
from the Pole three degrees and an half: (according to the opinion of some
Mariners, who love numbers that have not any fractions) sometime the North star
shall be as high as the Pole it self, sometime three degrees and an half lower
or higher then the Pole, and sometime three degrees, and sometimes one and an
half, and sometimes half a degree.

CHAP. XIII. Of the height of the Star taken with the Crosse-staffe.
TO know how much the North Star is elevated above the Horizon, you must take
the height thereof only at such times when as in respect of the former guard
it is in some one of these four Rumbs, that is to say, North and South, East
and West, North-east and South-west, and North-west and South-east. Wherefore
seeing it placed in any of the foresaid Rumbs, you shall put that end of the
Crosse-staffe which is next 90 degrees upon your cheek-bone, at the utter
corner of your eye: and holding it there steadfast, you must move the
transversarie till you see the Horizon joined with the lower end thereof; and
the North Star with the higher end. Then mark the degree, and part of the
degree which the transuersarie shows upon the staff; for that is the height
of the Star.

CHAP. XIIII. The regiment or Rules of the North Star.
The first Rules.
WHEN the guards are in the East, the former guard bears with the North Star
East and West, and then the North Star is a degree and half under the Pole: let
us add this degree and half to the height which we Observed with the
Crosse-staffe; and the whole product shows the number of degrees which the
Pole is elevated above our Horizon. And so much are we distant from the
Equinoctial toward the North.

The second Rule.
When the guards are in the North-east, one guard bears from another East and
West: and the former guard stands from the North Star North-east and
South-west; and then the North Star is under the Pole three degrees and one
half; which being added to the height of the Star, will show you the height of
the Pole.

The third Rule.
When the guards be at the highest, then the former guard bears from the
North Star North and South; the North Star being then three degrees under the
Pole: which three degrees being added to the height of the Star, do show the
true height of the Pole.

The fourth Rule.
When the guards are in the North-west, they bear one from another North and
South, and the former guard lies from the North Star North-east and
South-west: and then the North Star is under the Pole half a degree: which half
degree being added to the height of the Star, gives you the height of the
Pole.

The fifth Rule.
When the guards are in the East, the former guard lies from the North Star
East and West, and then the North Star is a degree and an half above the Pole;
which degree and an half being deducted out of the height of the North Star,
the remainder is the just height of the Pole.

The sixth Rule.
When the guards are in the South-west, one bears from another East and West,
and the former lies from the North Star North-east and South-west, and then
the North Star is above the Pole three degrees and an half: which three degrees
and an half being deducted out of the height of the Star, that which remains
shall be the height of the Pole.

The seventh Rule.
When the guards are at the lowest, the former guard bears with the North
Star North and South: and then the North Star is above the Pole three degrees;
which being deducted, the remainder is the height of the Pole.

The eight Rule.
When the guards are in the South-east, one bears from another North and
South, and the former bears from the North Star North-west and South-east,
and the North Star is above the Pole half a degree: which half degree being
deducted from the height of the Star, the remainder is the height of the Pole
above our Horizon, and just so much are we distant from the Equinoctial toward
the North.

This is the account which always has bin made of the North Star from the
time that it has had three degrees and an half distance from the Pole unto
this present. But because at this time by reason of the compound motion of the
8 and 9 heavens, the fixed Stars have notably varied from their places the Pole
Star has also approached nearer the Pole, being now distant therefrom not above
three degrees and eight minutes, And so I think it convenient to set down the
account which ought now to be made thereof, In stead of all these Rules of the
North Star (which are erroneous) use the Tables of Equations of the Pole Stars
height, set down in the latter end of this book.
according to the foresaid distance: to the end that from henceforth the
height of the Pole taken by the Star may agree justly with the distance from
the Equinoctial taken by the Sun. Which two things have hitherto disagreed and
caused no small confusion unto the Pilots, and some error in Navigation.

The guards being in the East, you shall add unto the height taken by the
Crosse-staffe, 1 degree 20 minutes North-east, 3 degrees 8 minutes North, 2
degrees 41 minutes Northwest, 0 degree 27 minutes

In the contrary Rumbs to these you must deduct these degrees from the height
of the Star, which you take with your Crosse-staffe, and then you shall have
the height of the Pole above the Horizon.

CHAP. XV. Other things to be noted in Observing the height of the Pole.
NEXT unto the constellation of the Horn, here is a Star which is called by the
Spaniards el Guion signified before by the letter D, which standing East and
West from the North-star, gives you to understand, that it and the North Star,
and the very Pole are East and West. And so taking the height of the North
Star, when it is thus situate in regard of the Guion, with out making any other
account, you have the just height of the Pole, and the distance from the
Equinoctial.

Sometimes also it falls out, that being very near unto the line, or for some
other cause, the guards cannot be seen how they lie from the North star. For
remedy whereof there are three stars, by which (seeing any of them and the
North star, albeit you cannot see the guards) you may know the height of the
pole, and these are stars which the Mariners call the third, sixth, and the
ninth. The third is the head of that constellation which the Astronomers call
the Dragon, and it makes with two other stars that follow it, this figure: The
sixth is the right foot of Cepheus: and the ninth is the left foot. The third
was so called, because it comes unto every third rumb three hours after the
former guard; and the sixth is so called, because it comes six hours after the
former guard; and the ninth, because it comes nine hours after the former
guard. Whereof it follows, that when the third star is directly above the
North star, the former guard is in the Northwest, the sixth star in the
Northeast, and the ninth in the East. And to know this is the other rumbs, you
may peruse the Table following; wherein is manifestly set down where the guards
are, and how they are situate, in what rumb soever any of these three stars is
found. So that it will be an easy matter to know the place of the guards, and
the height of the pole, the height of the Pole star being found, and the
place of the third, sixth, or ninth star.

Here follows the Table.

The guards being in the East The third star is in the Southeast The sixth star
in the South The 9 th star in the Southwest Northeast East Southeast South
North Northeast East Southeast Northwest North Northeast East West Northwest
North Northeast Southwest West Northwest North South Southwest West Northwest
Southeast South Southwest West

In this Table, the first column serves for the guards; the second for the
third star; the third column for the sixth star; and the fourth for the ninth
star. Insomuch as if you seek the rumb, seeing any of these four stars in this
Table, right against the same do answer those rumbs where the other three are,
although we cannot see them in the Heavens.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Crosiers.
WHen the Mariners pass the Equinoctial line toward the South, so that they
cannot see the North-star, they make use of another sta^ which is in the
Constellation, called by the Astronomers the Centaur, which star, with other
three notable stars, which are in the same Constellation, makes the figure of
a Cross; for which cause they call it the Crosier. And it is holden for
certain, that when the star A (which of all four comes nearest to the South
Pole) is North and South with the star B, that then it is rightly situate to
take the height by. And because this star A (which they call the Cocks foot)
is thirty degrees from the South Pole, it comes to pass, that if being
situate, as is aforesaid, we take the height thereof (which is then the
greatest that it can have) this height will truly show how far we are distant
from the Equinoctial. For if the said height be thirty degrees, then we are in
the very Equinoctial: and if it be more then thirty degrees, then are we by so
much past the Equinoctial toward the South. And if it be less then 30
degrees, so much as it wants are we to the North of the Equinoctial.

And here it is to be noted, that when the guards are in the North-east, then
are the stars in the Crosier fitly situate for observation, because then they
are in the Meridian.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Sea-Compass.
THe Sea-Compass is one of the most necessary Instruments, which are used in
Navigation; for day and night, in clear and dark weather it shows always the
right way through the Sea. And therefore it is meet that this Instrument be
made with much care; to the end, that it may be most certain and true. And the
manner of making it is, that upon a piece of pastboard, you draw a circle so
big as you will have your Compass to be, which being divided into 32 equal
parts (as we have already showed in the Chapter of the winds) with sixteen
lines crossing one another in the center, then you shall adorn the eight
principal winds, as is to be seen in the figure following, ending in the North
with a Flower deluis: and you shall paint the North and South, and East and
West with blew, and the North-east and South-west, and the North-west and
South-east with red. And then taking two steel wires, which are to be placed
like the head of a lance, you must fasten them on the back side of the said
circle, in such sort, that one meeting of the points of those steel wires be
right under the North, allowing half a point toward the North-east, in regard
of the North-easting of the needle at Sevil: and the other meeting at the
opposite point, which is South, and half a point toward the South-west: and
touching or rubbing those two points of the wires with the ends of the
Lodestone, which look to the North and to the South, to wit, the North points
of the wires, with the South of the stone: and the South point of the wires
with the North of the stone This being done, you must place upon the center of
the said circle a Capitel, which must be very well bored in, from off a round
pyramid; to the end, that the rose or fly may play more nimbly upon the pin.
This pin must be made of lattin, with a very sharp point, and is to be fastened
upright in a round box of wood, which must be of the fashion of a great
cup-dish, containing the rose within it, being covered above with a clear round
glass, and the joints thereof must be stopped with wax, to the end, that no
wind may enter into the rose to disturb it. There must be great care had, that
this rose, with the wires placed upon the pin, may go nimbly, and may not
swerve more to the one side then to the other, but may stand even and level.
And when it inclines toward either part, you must put on the contrary part a
little wax, or a thin plate of lead fastened under the pastboard, which
covers the wires. This box wherein the rose plaieth up and down hangs
within two hoops of lattin, which are two round circles enclosed one within
another, and distant asunder by the space of half a fingers breadth, with two
nails of lattin, which are diametrally opposite. And the box being fitly placed
within these hoops, you must make in the outward hoop two holes, which must be
distant from the foresaid two nails a quarter of a Circle both ways: And by
these two holes must the outward hoop or circle be fastened within a square
box, or a round, so as although that uttermost box be tossed up and down every
way with the motion of the ship, yet always the superficies and glass of the
inner box may lie level with the Horizon. And this being done with care, the
instrument, which they call the Sea-Compasse is fully finished. The manner of
using the same is, when being placed with the box in the midst of the poop of
the ship where the bittacle stands in a right line, which passes from the
bolt-sprit by the midst of the main mast to the poop, it serves continually to
govern the ship by moving of the Rudder, till the wind or the line of your
Compass, toward which we desire to shape our course, stand directly toward
the prow or bolt-sprit of the ship. They use also for the night to mark a point
within the inner part of the inner box, which in respect of the capitel of the
Compass, may stand directly toward the prow of the ship. And always in
guiding the ship* you must take heed that the said point be continually joined
with the wind of the rose toward which you intend your course.

CHAP. XVIII. How the Variation of the Compass may be found.
THe Mariners use to examine whether their Compass North-easteth or
South-westeth, watching for that purpose when the former guard bears with the
North star North-east and South-west, taking a little of the point of North and
South. And placing their Compass in an open place, where the North star may be
seen, if the flowerdeluis of the Rose looks directly toward the star, their
Compass varieth nothing at all: but if the star be to the North-east, so much
as it varieth from the point of the flowerdeluis* so much the Compass
North-westeth: and if it varieth to the North-west of the Compass, how much the
star swerveth from the point of the flowerdeluis, so much the Compass
North-easteth. And in regard of this variation of the Compass there must
always allowance be made in the course which is holden. This manner of finding
out the variation I do account to be somewhat subject unto error: but at land
there is another more certain way by the Meridian line, which is to be taken in
manner following.

The finding of the Meridian-line.
In a superficies, which is plain and level every where, and in a place where
the Sun shines at his rising and setting, you must draw certain circles upon
one center: and having pitched a style upright in the same center (the head
whereof must be approved with a pair of compasses to be equally distant from
all parts of one of those circles) observe you in the morning two or three
hours before noon, when the point of the shadow of the style touches the
circumference of any of those circles: and having made a mark in the touches,
take diligent heed in the afternoon also, when the same point of the shadow
turns about to touch in the same circle, and making another mark in that
second touch, divide in the midst that part of the circle which is between
those two marks. Then laying your Ruler upon the point of the division, and
upon the center of those circles draw a line, which shall be your Meridian, and
the true North and South Rumb; upon which setting your compass* and laying
your Ruler over the glass, that it may pass along over the Meridian, and over
the center or capitel of the rose or fly: eithe said Ruler lies over the
North and South of the Compass (and then is the Compass without variation) or
the Ruler declineth toward the North-east or South-west; and how much it
declineth that way, so much the Compass North-westeth, or else it declineth
toward the North-west, and then it North-easteth so much as the Ruler
declineth that way. But to know the variation of the Compass both at land and
sea, we will deliver another far more easy and certain way* when we come to
entreat of the universal Dial.

CHAP. XIX Of the Sea-chart.
THe Sea-chart is nothing else but a lively picture of the earth and water. And
it contains five notable things, which do concern as well the true making of
the Chart, as also the inabling of the Mariner to know the way which he makes,
the place where he is, and the end of his journey.

The first is the laying out of the Coasts of the Land, which that it may be
truly done, it is meet that every thing be set down in the Chart in the same
course, distance, and height that shall be found in Navigation.

The second is, that it contains not only the coast of the firm land, but
also all other particularities which do occur in sailing, as namely, Islands,
Iselets, Banks, or Bars, Shoalds, Rocks, and Flats.

The third is the lines which signify the 32 winds, by the help whereof we may
see whether the parts of the land be well laid out, and in their true courses
one from another. And of these winds the black are the eight principal, which
are called whole winds. The green be half winds, or half parted winds: and the
red be the quarters of the winds. You may know in your Chart whether these
winds be well drawn, if you try with your compasses that all points of them be
equally distant one from another: and that all winds representing the same Rumb
be parallels: As namely, that one Northeast and Southwest Rumb be parallel to
another Northeast and Southwest Rumb. The fourth is the graduation, in all
parts, whereof it is meet that the degrees Or rather increased proportionally
from the Equinoctial line toward the North and South.
be equal one to another: and that the parts of the land do directly lie East
and West from those degrees under which they are situate. The fifth is the
scale of leagues, which you may see whether it be true, by taking betwixt the
points of your compasses just 4 degr. out of the line of graduation which being
applied to the scale of leagues must there agree exactly with 70 Spanish
leagues or 80 English.

By the Sea-Chart are known five things: The first is the lying or trending of
the Coast. The second is the distance or number of leagues from one coast to
another. The third is, the latitude or distance from the Equinoctial, wherein
all Lands both Continents and Islands, as also every Port, River, Isle, Shoald
or Bank is situate. The fourth is the rumb or rumbs, by which we are to sail
from one place to another. The fifth is the point or place where we are with
our ship when we are sailing. The first is known with a pair of compasses,
putting one foot thereof upon the beginning of the coast, whose trending we
desire to know, and the other foot upon the rumb, which to our thinking is
every where equally distant from the said coast. For if one foot of the
compasses running along the Coast, the other foot keeps by the said Rumb,
then we say the coast lies even with that rumb. And if our compass runs
with out swerving one foot from the rumb, and the other from the Coast, till
the point which runs along the coast leaves it, then from that very place
where it leaves the same, we may say, that unto the other place where it
began, the coast runs by such a rumb, as if a man should say East and West,
Northeast and Southwest, or any other rumb whatsoever.

The second thing (which is the distance) may be found by taking between the
points of your compasses out of your scale of leagues (if the distance be very
great) an hundred leagues, and measuring with your compass so opened from one
place to another: now if in so doing it falls not just, then remembering how
many hundreds of leagues there are, you must for the measuring of the rest
pitch one foot of your compass upon the point where the last hundred ended,
and the other foot upon the land whose distance you desire to know: then
bringing the compass so opened to the scale of leagues, you shall see
manifestly how many leagues the said distance surmounteth above the hundreds.
But if the distance be less then an hundred leagues, then setting the points
of your compasses upon those two places whose distance you desire to know, and
removing the compass so opened to the scale of leagues, you shall easily know
the distance of one of those places from the other.

The third (which is the height or latitude, wherein every Port, River, or
Island stands) is to be found by pitching one foot of your compasses upon the
Land, Haven, or Cape, whose height you desire to know, and the other foot upon
the next East and West parallel, and the compass remaining in that sort, move
the point thereof along the said parallel or rumb, to the line of graduation,
and there the other foot which lay upon the land will show you the height
thereof.

The fourth (which is the rumb or rumbs, by which you must sail from one place
to another) is known after this manner: If you be to sail by one rumb only, you
may know it, by pitching one foot of your compasses upon the place from which
you are to depart; and the other foot upon the very next rumb, which to your
thinking goes most directly to the place whither you would go; and running by
that rumb with one foot of your compass so opened, the other foot will touch
the place whither you are going. But if it touches not the place whither you
are going, then pitch one foot of your compasses upon the same place, and the
other foot upon the second rumb, which you suppose may lead you thither. And
placing one foot of another pair of compasses upon the place from whence we
depart, and the other upon the most direct rumb toward the place desired; these
two compasses running along the rumbs one toward another; you must mark where
those two points join together, one whereof came from the place of your
departure, and the other from the place whither you are to go* and the point
where they both concur is that to which we are to change our course.

As for example, if I sail from the bar of S. Lucan, to fall with Punta de Naga
upon the Isle Teneriffe in time of winter; it is evident, that I must sail
Southwest and by South, till I bring my self East and West with Cape Cantin in
32 degrees and an half: and from thence I must go Southwest and by west, but
not all the way, because putting one point of the compass upon Cape Cantin,
and the other point upon the South west and by west rumb next unto it, my
compass thus running open along the said rumb, the point which departed from
Cape Cantin, will run on the outside of Punta de Naga. But in such a case as
this I place one point of one pair of compasses at Punta de Naga, and the other
point upon the Southwest rumb: Likewise I place one point of another pair of
compasses at Cape Cantin, and the other upon the next Southwest and by west
rumb. Then let these two compasses so opened run by their said rumbs one
against another, and then you must look in what place and height the very
point is, where those two points of the compasses which departed from Punta de
Naga and Cape Cantin do meet: and I say, that when I am come to the said
height and place, having sailed from Cape Cantin Southwest and by west, then I
must change my course, and run South-west.

CHAP. XX. Of the point of Imagination.
THe fifth thing to be known by the Sea-chart is the point of the ships place,
and this they term to cast a point, or to set a prick upon the chart: which is
no other thing but to find a point therein, which is proportionally distant in
the Chart from all the Lands and Islands there described so many leagues of the
scale, as there are leagues of distance upon the sea from the place where you
are to the Lands and Islands round about you, represented by these that are in
the Chart. This point is to be found two ways; either by imagination, or by
traversing, which may properly be called geometrical. The point of imagination
is usually found by the first of these two ways, when we sail directly by a
parallel circle; which is when we sail due East and West, keeping always in
one height and distance from the Equinoctial: or when we sail by any other
rumb in close weather, when neither the Sun at noon, nor the North star in the
night can be seen.

This point does pre-suppose the knowledge of two things; to wit, the rumb, by
which we have sailed, and that is known by the Compass, and the leagues which
we have run; and this has no certainty, but is a little more or less then a
good Mariner, according to his imagination supposes that he has sailed:
whereof the said point took his name.

This point is found in the Chart, by taking out of the scale of leagues so
many leagues as a man can well estimate that the ship has gone: and pitching
one foot of the compass in the place from which you departed, you shall set
the other point in such sort, that both may be equally distant from the Rumb or
wind whereby you have sailed; and where that second point of your Compass
shall fall, there is your ship according to your imagination.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Traverse or Geometrical point.
THe point found by imagination is not so certain as is convenient, because it
often comes to pass, either because the Mariner has not made true account of
the way that his ship has made, or for some other causes therewith concurring,
that if he takes the height by the Sun, or by the North star, after he has
cast his point, he comes not to find himself in that distance from the
Equinoctial, which his point of imagination does show him, but in some other
distance. And to avoid this error there is another way of casting your point in
the Chart, which is called punto de esquadria (the Traverse point) which point
presupposes the assured knowledge of two things; one is the Rumb by which you
have sailed, the other is your distance from the Equinoctial.

For all this art of Navigation is grounded upon the course, and height, which
is in quantity all one with the distance from the Equinoctial. The Rumb or
course is always known by the Compass, the height by the star, and the
distance from the Equinoctial by the Sun.

This being known, set the foot of one Compass at the port or place from
whence you departed, and the other foot in the next Rumb where upon you have
sailed: and placing one point of an other pair of Compasses upon the line of
graduation, in the degree of your distance from the Equinoctial, and the other
point upon the next East and West Rumb, let these two pair of Compasses
standing thus open, run along the Rumbs, one toward another, till the point
which came from the place of your departure, and that other which came from the
height of your graduation meet: and where they meet, there is the place of your
ship. And this point so found out, is most certain, when the height is
carefully taken, and the Rumb known.

CHAP. XXII. Of the amending of the point of imagination.
HE that knows how to find out the point by traversing, shall easily amend
the point of imagination, when having taken his height he finds the said
point not to be good and certain. And here is to be noted, that when you sail
East and West and find the point by imagination, this point cannot be amended,
but you must sail in doubt how many leagues you have gone until you fall with
the land; because that sailing in that course neither the height of the pole,
nor your distance from the Equinoctial, does any whit alter. But when you sail
by any other rumb, your point of imagination may be amended, and the amendment
thereof shall be so much the more certain as the rumb of your Navigation comes
nearer to the North or South, and by so much the more uncertain as it comes
nearer to the East or West. This amendment is made two manner of ways, namely,
either by traversing, or by the amendment of North and South and East and West;
which second amendment, though it be a kind of traversing, yet it is called by
another name, to distinguish it from the first.

The amendment of the point of imagination by the traverse point.
When you will amend your point of imagination by traversing, you must set one
foot of one pair of your compasses in the point found by imagination, and the
other foot upon the next rumb by which you have sailed: and setting the foot of
another pair of compasses in the line of graduation upon the number of degrees,
which you find your self distant from the Equinoctial, and the other foot upon
the next East and West line; run with your compasses so opened by the foresaid
rumbs, till the point proceeding from the graduation, and the other which
proceeds from the point of imagination do meet just together, and then you
may say, that your point of imagination is mended by traversing.

The amendment of the point of imagination by North, South, East, and West.
The amendment by North, South, East, West, is after this manner: Set the foot
of one compass upon the point found by imagination, and the other foot upon
the next North and South rumb: then place one foot of another compass in the
line of graduation upon the degree wherein you find your self, and the other
upon the next East and West rumb, and so let these two compasses run thus open
by their rumbs, till the point which (...) from the point of imagination, and
the other which comes from the graduation do meet; for then is your point of
imagination amended by the amendment of East, West, North, South.

Of these two amendments the first serves when you sail in a large gulf,
because you may run at liberty with the compass: the second serves near unto
any coast.

CHAP. XXIII. The point by imagination, and the height.
WHen you sail by the sixth or seventh rumb, that is, by the East and by North,
or East and by South, or by the West and by North, or West and by South: or
else by the East Northeast, or West Southwest; or by the East Southeast, or
West Northwest, there is a certain difficulty which may breed great error in
finding the traverse point, notwithstanding the latitude be taken; by reason of
the Rudder that guides the ship, which gives certain yawes out of the course
that the Pilot pretends, or by reason of the wind which blows not right in
the poop, but makes the ship fall to the leeward, from the direct and true
course which it ought to keep. Wherefore because in such a case, if you find
your point by traversing, suppose by East and by North, the way which I think
is made, and has been failed may be by the East Northeast: which point so
found, must stand more forward then the true point, by so much difference as
there is between 42 and 88 Spanish leagues, which is 46 leagues, that is, the
difference of distance from the Meridian, or North and South line in those two
points. In such a case as this, it is not meet to find your point by
traversing, to avoid the error which hereupon may ensue, which error arises
of such a cause, as that a man's judgment, be it never so good, cannot easily
determine thereupon, and so consequently he cannot judge precisely. But to
avoid confusion and cause of error, he must cast his point in manner
following, and he shall errer as little as is possible.

Let him examine according to the ordinary running of his ship, how much way
she might make every day that he has sailed; and the leagues that shall amount
in all the days, let him take between the points of one compass: and let him
place one point thereof upon the place from whence he departed: and taking
another compass, let him set one point thereof upon the graduation, according
to the height which he has taken and the other point upon the next East and
West Rumb. Now let this compass run by his East and West rumb, till the point
coming from the graduation meet with the second point of the other Compass
which he holds not upon the Chart: and in the place where they meet, he may
say that there is his point and his ship.

And because in this case all Pilots do not use this point of imagination and
height, there grow great diversities among them concerning their distance from
land, when as in long voyages they confer and communicate their opinions one
with another; insomuch that one according to his conjecture judges himself to
be 50 leagues from land, another 100, another 200, and another thinks he is
hard by the land. The reason is, because some of them cast their point by
traversing, others by imagination only, and others by imagination and height,
who are always more certain then the rest.

CHAP. XXIV. What it is to increase or diminish in height.
THe Mariners call it increasing in height, when they go further and further
from the Equinoctial; and diminishing in height when they approach nearer to
the Equinoctial. So that in our Navigation we either sail from a greater to a
less altitude of the pole, and then we go toward the Equinoctial, and then the
height is said to be diminished: or we sail from a less to a greater height of
the pole, and then we go from the Equinoctial, and are said to increase our
height. And hence it is, that casting our point by imagination, and afterward
(having taken the height) amending it by traversing, either the height,
wherein we find our selves being taken by the Sun or star is greater, or else
it is less then that which we made account of by imagination. And hence do
arise four rules: The first is, that when in sailing we do increase the
height, if the point amended by traversing be of greater height then the
point of imagination, the ship has gone more then the point of imagination
showed us.

The second, when we increase our height, if the point amended by traversing
be in less height then the point found by imagination, then has the ship gone
less way then we imagined.

The third is, when we diminish our height in sailing, if the point amended by
traversing be in a greater height then the point found by imagination, then
has the ship made less way then we ghessed by our imagination.

The fourth is, when we diminish our height, if the point amended by traverse
be in less height then the point found by imagination, then has the ship made
more way then we imagined.

CHAP. XXV. How you may cast a traverse point without Compasses.
IF a Mariner chance to lose his Compasses, he may cast his point of traverse
after this manner: Let him take two slender threads, and putting the end of one
of them upon the place from whence he departed, let him stretch it in equal
distance from the Rumb by which he has sailed, and putting another thread in
equal distance from the next East and West rumb, let him make it to pass by
the degrees of height, in which he finds himself; and where the two threads
cross one another, there is the point of the ship: and always the first thread
(if it has not changed the course) shows the way which the ship has gone,
and the second the parallel wherein the ship is.

CHAP. XXVI. Of another kind of casting a point by traverse.
EXamine the difference of the degrees of distance from the Equinoctial, which
are between the place from whence the ship set forth, and the place where the
ship is: Then taking the heighths of both places very precisely, and
subtracting the lesser out of the greater, that which remains is the
difference: which difference you must multiply by the leagues, which answer to
one degree in the rumb by which you have sailed, and those leagues, which the
degrees and minutes of difference shall make, you shall take between the points
of a pair of compasses out of your scale of leagues: and holding the said
compass so open, set one foot thereof upon the point from whence the ship
departed, and the other foot stretching toward the place whithre the ship has
sailed, you must hold up a little from the Chart: and you must set one foot of
the other Compass at the degree of the distance wherein your ship is from the
Equinoctial, when the said point is sought for, and the other point you must
place upon the next East and West Parallel. And let this second Compass run by
his next East and West Rumb, until the point of the first Compass lifted up,
being set down, that point of the second Compass which came from the said
degree does meet therewithal: and where those two points shall meet, there is
the true point of the ship.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the leagues which in Navigation answer to each degree of
Latitude in every Rumb.
IF we suppose (as we have before said in the chap. ( of the quantity of the
earth) that the greatest circle thereof conaineth in compass 6300 common
Spanish leagues; then unto every degree of the Meridian (which is the greatest
circle) do answer 17 Spanish leagus and an half: so that sailing North and
South, if your height of the Pole, or your distance from the Equinoctial be
varied one degree, you may say that you have gone seventeen leagues and an
half: but if you vary one degree, and hold your course upon the first point,
then have you sailed 17 leagues and: And you have declined from the Meridian or
right line which passes by the place from which you departed, three leagus and
an half. And if you sail upon the second point from the North or South till
your height of the Pole be changed one degree, you have then gone 19 leagues
and, and are distant from your right line 7 leagues and: And varying a degree
upon the third point of the Compass from North or South, you have gone 21
leagues, and are departed from your right line 11 leagues and.

Sailing upon the fourth point of the Compass, there do answer unto every
degree 24 leagues and three fourths, and you are distant from the right line or
Meridian 17 leagues and an half. Upon the fifth point you must allow for one
degree 31 leagues and an half, and then are you distant from your right line 26
leagues and. Upon the sixth point do answer unto one degree of Latitude 45
leagues and, and you are then parted from your right line 42 leagues and. Upon
the seventh point do answer unto one degree of Latitude 89 leagues and, and
you are departed from your right line 88 leagues, as it appears out of the
Table following, The Table of the Author which is more precise.
Leagues of the course or Rumb. Distance from the right line 1 17 ^/6 3 2 19 7
3 21 11 4 24 17 5 31 26 6 45 42 7 89 88 The old Table which is less certain.
Leagus of the course or Rumb. Distance from the right line or Meridian. 18 3
18 7 21 11 25 17 31 26 46 42 88 85

CHAP. XXVIII. How you may come to know the Longitude or the course from East
to West.
THat which the Cosmographers call Longitude, is called by the Mariners the
distance from the right line, and the course of East and West, and the height
of East and West, and it is a part of an East and west Rumb contained between
two Meridians, one of which runs by the point or place from whence we
departed, and the other by the point where the ship is. This distance from the
right line is known by the mean of two things, namely of the course and of the
difference of Latitude, or of the course and distance.

The course and the difference of the height being given, you may know the
said distance by traverse or by numbers. By Geometry, or traverse it is known
in manner following: the height, or the distance of your ship from the
Equinoctial being known, and the Rumb also upon which you have sailed, you must
cast upon your chart a point by traverse, and placing upon that point one of
the points of your Compasses, and the other upon the next Rumb of East and
West; you must place one point of another pair of Compasses at the haven or
point from whence the ship departed, and the other point upon the North and
South Rumb which is next. These two Compasses thus opened, running by their
Rumbs one toward another, you must mark where the two points meet; namely,
that which came out of the part from whence you departed, and that which you
removed from the point where the ship presently is, being found by traverse:
and where those two points do meet, there make another point or prick. Then
look how many leagues there are from the said third point to the point of
traverse where the ship is, (both which do always bear East and West one
from another) so many leagues is your distance from the right line. And if in
stead of the leagues set down in the scale we measure with degrees taken out
of the graduation, This for the most part is not true in the ordinary Sea-chart.
we shall have the degrees of Longitude which are between the point of our
departure, and the point of the place where presently we are.

And it is to be noted, that always when we sail, we either alter our latitude
only, and that is, when we sail North and South, or we alter the longitude
only, that is, when we sail by the self-same latitude, going always East and
West by the same parrallel: or we alter both latitude and longitude, when we
sail by any of the other 28 winds. When we alter the latitude only we swerve
not one jot from the right line or Meridian; when we alter both longitude and
latitude, then must we find the longitude or distance from the right line in
manner abovesaid.

But when your longitude only is altered, because then you must find out the
point where the ship is by imagination only, there is no certain manner to
know the longitude or distance from the right line, but only little more or
less, setting down a point by imagination, and measuring by leagues, or by
degrees, what distance there is between that and the point from which the ship
departed. By numbers you may find out the longitude in manner following: The
difference of your distance from the Equinoctial being known, which is so many
degrees more or less, as you have increased or diminished in the height of the
Pole, look in the Table annexed to the chapter next before this, for the
leagues of distance from the right line, which answer unto one degree by the
rumb or point of the compass upon which you have sailed; and multiplying those
leagues by the number of degrees which you have increased or diminished in the
height of the pole in your Navigation, you shall then see how many leagues you
are distant from the right line, which passes by the place from whence you
came, which leagues if you divide by 17 and an half, then will appear unto you
the degrees of longitude between the place from whence you departed, and the
point where you are.

CHAP. XXIX. How you may set down in your Chart a new Land, never before
discovered.
IT may sometimes fall out in new Discoveries, or when your ship by means of a
tempest is driven out of her right course, that you shall come to the sight of
some Isle, Shoald, or new Land, whereof the Mariner is utterly ignorant. And to
make some relation of the same, or to go unto it some other time, if you desire
to set it down in your Sea-chart, in the true place, you may do it after this
manner: So soon as you have sight thereof, mark it well first with your
compass, observing diligently upon which point thereof it lies. And secondly,
you must there take the height of the Sun, or of the Pole Star, that you may
know in what point your ship is, and that point you must call the first point;
which being so done, your ship may sail on her course all that day, till the
day following, without losing her way: and the next day mark the land again,
and see upon what point it lies, and then take your height, and with it cast
your point of traverse once again; and that you may call your second point.
Then take a pair of compasses, and placing one foot upon the first point, and
the other upon the rumb toward which the land did bear, when you cast your
first point: set also one foot of another pair of compasses in the second
point, and the other foot upon the rumb upon which the land lay when you cast
your second point; and these two compasses thus opened, you must move by their
rumbs, till those two feet of both compasses do meet together, which were moved
from the foresaid two points: and where they do so meet together, there may you
say is the land which you discovered; which land you may point out with the
in-lets and out-lets, or capes and other signs, which you saw thereupon. And
by the graduation you may see the latitude thereof, that thereby you may find
it, if at any time after you go to seek for it.

CHAP. XXX. Seeing two known points or Capes of land as you sail along, how you
may know the distance of your ship from them.
IT is the custom of passengers, when they first descrie that land which they
would arrive at, to ask the Pilot, how far they are from land* Unto which
question he may well answer, if he know two capes, or points, or notable places
thereupon: which places the further they be asunder one from another, the more
certainly may he answer to that question.

Let him pitch therefore one foot of one pair of compasses upon one of the two
foresaid capes, and the other foot upon the rumb which in his compass points
toward that cape. And in like manner shall he do with another pair of
compasses, placing one foot thereof upon the other known cape, and the other
foot upon the rumb, which stretches toward the said second cape; and moving
the two Compasses so opened by their two Rumbs off from the land, the very same
point where the two feet which came from the two capes do meet, you may affirm
to be the very point where your ship is. And then taking measure by the scale
of leagues, you may see what distance there is from the said point to either of
the foresaid capes, or to any other place, which you think good, for it is a
very easy matter if you know the point where your ship is.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the account of the Moon.
THe account of the Moon and of the tides is most necessary to be known of
Mariners, to enter and depart from any Havens, Rivers, or Bars, and to pass
by some banks, and shoalds.

A tide is a regular motion of the Sea whereby at some times it seems more
increased then at other. And these tides are of two sorts: for some are such as
we call spring-tides and neap-tides, and the course of this motion happens from
one half month to another half month. Others be those which we call more
properly by the names of tides; to wit, a full sea, and a low sea, a swelling
and a falling sea; and these are from the one half lunar day, to the other
half. Which tides, as well the first as the second, have their course and
moving from the motion of the Moon: which is of two sorts; one proper from
West to East, by means whereof in thirty days almost, it is in conjunction with
the Sun, which we call the new Moon; and in opposition, which we call the
full of the Moon; and those we name the quarters, when it shines half unto
us. The other motion is from East to West by the force of the Primum mobile, or
the first moveable heaven, whereby in one lunar day the Moon passes over all
the two and thirty points of the compass, or to speak more plainly, it rises
and sets, and returns again to arise, which two motions of the Moon being
known, we may easily discern the manner of both kinds of the foresaid tides.
And because that to the knowledge hereof it is requisite that we know the
middle motion of the Moon; I will first set down how it may be known, and then
how thereby we may discern the seasons of the tides.

For which purpose, we are to note that the golden number, as it is commonly
called, is a certain number of years wherein the Moon has all the diversities
of aspects with the Sun that can happen between them, which is done in every
nineteen years almost.

As for example, if in the year 1588 there be a conjunction of the Sun and
Moon upon the 26 of April, or an opposition upon the 11 of April, I say that
there shall not happen a conjunction of the Sun and Moon upon the 26 of April,
nor an opposition upon the 11 of April, till 19 years be expired, which will be
in the year of our Lord 1607. And so are we to conceive likewise of the
quarters and other aspects.

The second thing to be noted, is, that from this golden number springs
another, which is called the concurrent, being the days of the Moon at the
beginning of the year: which year, according to that account, begins from
the last of February, about twelve a clock at night, which is the beginning of
March. And the days of the Moon which then remain, besides all the whole
lunare months of the year past, are called by Calculators The concurrents;
because they serve to know the account of the Moon, throughout the whole year
that is to come; and they concur with other numbers to know the age of the
Moon. Now by these two numbers, to be able to discern the days of the Moon,
or the distance thereof from the Sun, you are to note the Rules following.

The first Rule of the Golden number.
From the present year of our Lord you must deduct 1500. and out of the
remainder, taking one in every twenty, we shall find the golden number, if
they be just twenties. But if they be not just twenties; above the number of
twenties we must add that which remains above the twenties: all which being
added together, if it exceed not nineteen, shall be the golden number. But if
it exceed nineteen, cast away nineteen, and the remainder is the golden number.

The second Rule of the concurrent.
Divide the golden number by three, and if there remain one, the concurrent is
equal with the golden number; and if there remain two, the concurrent is
greater then the golden number by ten: but if nothing remain, the concurrent
exceeds the golden number by twenty, And if this concurrent exceed the number
of thirty, then the remainder or surplussage shall be the concurent.

The third Rule of the Conjunction.
The number of the concurent being known, you must add it unto the number of
months, which have passed from the beginning of March last past, till the end
of that month wherein you would know the same: and if the whole product
amounts not to thirty, mark how much it wants of thirty: and if it
exceeds thirty, see what it lacks of sixty, and that which it wants
either of thirty or sixty is the number of the days of such a month wherein
the Conjunction happens.

The fourth Rule of the full and quarters of the Moon.
If the day of the Conjunction be before the 15 day of the month, add 15 unto
the day of the Conjunction, and you shall find the day of the full Moon; and
if the Conjunction happen after the 15 day, take away 15 from the number of the
day of the Conjunction, and you shall have the full Moon of that month.

The first quarter is seven days after the Conjunction, and the last quarter
seven days after the full Moon.

The fifth Rule of the Spring-tides and Neap-tides.
Upon the day of the Conjunction, and of the full Moon, are the Spring-tides*
and upon the two quarter days are the Neap-tides: and so much the more do the
waters increase, as the Conjunction or full Moon are nerer: and so much the
more they decrease also the nearer they come unto the quarters.

An example whereby the foresaid Rules are made more plain.
Suppose a fleet of Ships lie within the heaven of San Lucar de barrameda,
expecting a fit time to pass over the bar toward the Indies. It is evident
that if the Ships be great, they have need of much water to pass the bank, or
the bar: which quantity of water is only in the Spring-tides. And because
they are twice in one month, namely in the Conjunction, and in the full of the
Moon, I desire to know when the Spring-tides and Neap-tides of the month of
June in the year 1588 were to be expected, in which month I presuppose the
fleet was to depart. First therefore I cast away 1500* and cut of the 88
remaining I take from each 20. One, which make four in all; which being added
to the 8 that surmount 80. they make the golden number to be 12* according to
the first Rule. I divide these twelve by three, and the quotient is four, and
nothing remains and because there is no remainder, I will take two more of
the concurrent th^n of the golden number, and there shall be two of the
concurrent, casting away thirty; by the second Rule. Adding these two to the
four months which are from the beginning of March past till this present
month of June, These days mentioned in this example, are to be understood
according to the new Roman Gregorian Calendar, which goes always ten days
before ours used in England.
I find that they make six. And because six want twenty four to make up thirty,
I say that in the year 1588, we had a Conjunction of the Moon upon the 24 of
June, by the third Rule, and adding seven unto the day of this Conjunction, you
have the first day of July, which is the day of the first quarter. And taking
away 15 from 24 being the number of the Conjunction day* there remain nine, and
upon that day of the month you have the full Moon. And adding other seven unto
the nine days of the full Moon, you have the last quarter upon the sixteenth of
June by the fourth Rule. I say therefore that the Spring-tides or greatest
waters of the month of June, were in that year upon the ninth, and four and
twentieth days of June; and the Neap-tides, or less waters were upon the
sixteenth-day of June, and the first of July by the fifth Rule.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the daily Tides.
NOW that we know the Rules of the Spring-tides and neap-tides, let us say
somewhat of the Tides that happen every day, which depend upon another swift
motion of the Moon, whereby turning round about the world from East to West, it
passes every day by the 32 points of the Compass: and this daily motion of
the Sea, falls not every day at the same hour, because the Moon does not
always keep one and the same distance from the Sun. For the Moon moves almost
thirteen degrees of her proper motion in one natural day, whereas the Sun
moves scarce one: and so one being taken from thirteen, there remain 12. And
because the Sun does give, and mark out unto us hours, and the Moon Tides, it
comes to pass that an hour being that space of time wherein fifteen degrees
of the Equinoctial pass by every point of the Compass, the part by which the
Moon is distant from the Sun shall be twelve degrees, which twelve are of
fifteen degrees contained in each hour. Insomuch that the Moon by her middle
motion is every day distant from the Sun about twelve degrees; which being
reduced into time, do make parts of an hour, whereby the Moon is every day
slower then the Sun, in coming to each point of the Heavens by the motion from
East to West, in regard of that which she has borrowed for her own proper
motion from West to East. Whereof it comes to pass, that so many days as the
Moon is old* so many times parts of an hour it is slower then the Sun in
passing by each Rumb, until the day of their conjunction, when as they pass
both by the same Rumb, in one and the same hour. And so accordingly, because we
are to set down the certain hour of every day wherein the Tide happens, we
must diligently Observe the Rules following.

The first Rule.
In diverse parts of the Sea coast, the Moon makes a full Sea every day, being
in diverse Rumbs, according to the disposition of the Land. But upon all the
coast of Spain in the Ocean, it is full Sea when the Moon is in the North-east
and South-west.

The second Rule.
Upon the day of the conjunction and full Moon, you have a full Sea at three a
clock in the morning, and at three in the after noon; for at those hours the
Moon goes with the Sun at the North-East and at the South-west. But upon other
days of the Moon, the full Sea falls out at the same hour when the Moon
comes to those two points; which is known by counting the age of the Moon.

The third Rule.
That you may know at all times how many days old the Moon is, you must add
three numbers together; to wit* the concurrent, and the months from the
beginning of March to the month present, and the days of the month wherein
you would know this: and if the whole product exceeds not thirty, it
contains just the days of the Moon; but if it does exceed thirty, the
surplussage shows the days of the Moons age.

The fourth Rule.
Multiply the days of the Moons age by four, and divide the product by five,
and the remainder after division contains the hours whereby the Moon comes
more slowly then the Sun, to the North-east or South-west, or to that Rumb
wherein it makes a full Sea; which hours shall be added to the three hours of
the morning, and then you have the hours of the first Tide or of the full and
swelling Sea; and six hours and almost a quarter after, comes the first ebb,
or low water, and 12 hours and after the first full Sea, comes the second
Tide: and other six hours and after the second Tide, comes the second ebb.

The fifth Rule.
When the days of the Moons age are less then fifteen, we may make by them
our account for the Tides: but if they exceed fifteen, we must make our
account by the surplussage.

An example of the said Rules*
Upon the 29 of July 1588, I desired to know the hours of the full Sea and of
the ebb; to make choice of that which might seem most expedient for my Voyage.
By the form^r example I find that the golden number of this year is 12 and the
concurrent 2, according to the correction of the year by Pope Gregory the 13.
Then I add this number of 2 to the number of 5 months, which have passed from
the beginning of March, and the 29 days of the month of July, all which 3
numbers make 36; then I cast away 30, and there remain six days for the age of
the Moon: and because they exceed not fifteen, I multiply them by of an hour,
according to the fourth Rule, and they may make 24/5 I divide these 24 by 5,
and I find the quotient to be four, and the remainder four. And so I say that
the Moon comes to the North-east four hours and later then the Sun. And
because the Sun comes to the North-east at three a clock in the morning, I
add those 4 hours and unto the 3 hours last mentioned, and they make seven
hours and, which is the hour of the morning wherein the Tide or full Sea
happens. And adding unto these seven hours and other six hours and, they make
in all fourteen hours, which falls out at two a clock in the afternoon,
which is the hour of the first low water or ebb. And adding unto the said hour
of the full Sea twelve hours and, it will amount unto eight of the clock and
part of an hour, which is the hour of the night wherein the second Tide or high
water was. And add unto this second Tide other six hours and, and they make two
of the clock in the morning and, at which time there comes the second ebb or
low Sea.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of a certain Instrument, whereby you may in general judge of
the Tides.
BEcause the Tides (it being supposed that in all places they proceed from the
motion of the Moon) run not in every part of the world by one and the same
Rumb, as it is manifest in the channel of Flanders, and in all the coasts of
the Northern Sea, which is a matter of great confusion and difficulty to
Mariners; I thought good here to set down an Instrument, whereby (the days of
the Moon and the Rumb, whereupon the Moon causes the Tide in every part, being
known) they may judge of the ebb and flood with great facility.

Draw upon a sheet of paper, or upon a plate of tinn, or any other matter, a
circle as bigg as the palm of a man's hand, and half a fingers breadth; within
that circle draw another circle; and having divided them both into 32 equal
parts, with lines drawn from the center to the circumference of the greater
circle, upon the upper end of one of those lines, place a flower-deluis, and
the number of 12, and in the next line thereunto toward the left hand, set down
12 and, and in the third line 1, and so proceed forwards, putting down upon
every line following of an hour more, until you come again to the number of 12
in the lowest line. And from thence forwards set down the same numbers that you
did at the first.

These 32 lines so drawn, do represent the 32 winds, whereby the Sun and Moon
pass every day. And so you may set down the names of the principal Winds, to
the end that you may know them, and those that are next them. And then in like
manner make another round and slender Table, as bigg as the innermost circle of
those two which you drew in the first Table: and dividing it into thirty equal
parts, first into two by a line, dividing it in the midst, and then either of
those two into three, and every of those three into five: these divisions will
represent the days of the Moon. And leaving upon 1 of those parts an Index or
small point, which may reach without the circle, set down the numbers thereof,
beginning with 30 in that part where that point ends, and the number of 1 in
the line following toward the left hand, and then 2, etc. till you end at the
same point with 30, This being done, fasten with a thread or nail, the second
Table or Circle upon the center of the first, so that it may freely without
impediment turn round about.



The use of this Instrument.
The use of this Instrument is, that knowing in every Port or part of any
coast, the Rumb or quarter on which the Moon makes full Sea, or high water,
you must note upon the outward Circle of the Winds that quarter or Rumb: and
placing the tooth or point of the inner Circle were the number of 30 is upon
that quarter or Rumb; make it there fast, putting a little wax underneath, that
it may not move. Then account the days of the Moons age in the inner Circle,
and over against the end of your account you shall see in the uttermost Circle
the hour of the full Sea of that day, together with the Rumb where the Sun is
at that hour. And at the same hour when it is in the contrary part, it will
make a full Sea. The place of the moon at the hour of the tide, is always
either where the point is, or at the point right over against it, and hence you
may easily find both ebbes also. This little Instrument, although it be but of
small Invention, is of great use and profit for the Navigations of Flanders,
France, England, Ireland, and all the Northern regions, where you have much
variety in the tides.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the making of an universal Dial, which may serve Generally
all the World over.
DRaw upon a Table or pastboord the Circle ABCD upon the center E: and half a
fingers breadth within that Circle, upon the same center draw another Circle:
and about the breadth of a wheat corn within the second Circle, draw a third;
and placing your Ruler upon the center E, by the right line AC divide the two
inner Circles in the midst ABC, and CDA in the points BD, upon which, and upon
the center E the Ruler being placed, you may draw the line BD, whereby every
one of the foresaid Circles shall be divided into four equal parts. And
dividing every one of those four Quadrants of the inner Circle, to wit, AB, BC,
CD* DA into 90 parts (as the manner is in the making of an Astrolabe) set
numbers thereto from 5 to 5. beginning your account from the two points AC, and
so proceeding both ways till you end your account in 90, at the points BD; and
this inner Circle thus divided, represents the Meridian.

And the point C is the North, A the South, and the points B D are those where
the Equinoctial cutteth the Meridian. Then count 23 degres and an half from the
point B to F, and to G on both sides. And so much account also from the point D
to H and to I. And then drawing two right lines FH and GI, the line FH shall
represent the Tropic of Cancer, and GI the Tropic of Capricorn. And those two
lines shall cut the line CA, (which is the Axtree of the World, and the Circle
of six of the clock in the morning and evening) upon the points LM. Then count
fifteen degrees from C toward B, and other fifteeen from A toward B* and
placing your Ruler on either side upon the end of your account, you shall cut
the Equinoctial BD upon a certain point which shall represent unto you seven a
clock in the morning* and five of the clock at evening. And counting other
fifteen degrees on both sides, more toward the point B, and placing the Ruler
as before, you shall cut the line BD in another point, which shall represent
eight of the clock in the morning, and four in the afternoon. And accounting
higher fifteen degrees more one both sides, and placing your Ruler upon the end
of your account, it will divide the line BD at another point, which shall be
nine a clock in the morning, and three in the afternoon; and so you shall
proceed from fifteen to fifteen degrees, till you come to eleven of the clock
in the morning, and one in the afternoon. And if you will have the half hours
also, you must account from seven degrees and an half, to seven and an half;
and doing as you did with the fifteenth degrees, you shall have the half hours
also.



Then placing your compasses upon the center E, and upon every division of the
line EB you shall draw the same divisions likewise upon the line ED which being
done, draw certain obscure lines from the point A to the divisions of the line
EB: and drawing the right line GF, see where GF is cut at the highest of the
obscure lines, which must be at the point N, from whence the line NO is to be
drawn equally distant from the line BE. And this line NO shall be divided
proportionally by the obscure lines, even as the line BE. Then let the
divisions of the line NO be transferred into the lines MG, MI, LF, LH, and then
the Tropicks also shall be divided. Then by every three points answerable in
the Equinoctial, and the two Tropicks, you shall draw certain parts of Circles,
seeking the center of those three points in the Equinoctial line extended forth
on either side; and these parts of Circles represent the hours: then make an
account of the degr. of Declination from the point B, and from D on both sides
by every 2 degr. and draw lines Parallel to the Equinoctial from one to
another; and those shall be the Parallels of the Suns Declination. Moreover you
shall make an Horizon as large as the Diameter of the inner Circle, which shall
be divided after this manner: Count from the points AC toward B five degrees;
and putting your Ruler upon the end of the account of both parts, see where it
cutteth the line EB, and there make a mark: and then counting on both sides
other five degrees, and putting the Ruler once again at the end of your
account, make another mark where it cutteth the line EB. And so the line EB
must be divided from five to five degrees; which divisions shall be removed
into the said Horizon, fastening it to the Center, and laying it to the line BD,
and dividing it both ways as the line EB is divided; and set numbers thereinto
from 5 to 5, which may begin in the midst, and end with 90 at the ends of the
Horizon, and let every one of these parts be divided into five other parts or
degrees. Then accounting from the Center E in the Horizon eleven degrees and *
you shall set there a mark, which shall be the seventh point from North and
South, that is, it shall represent the points which are next to the East and
West in the Compass. And accounting another eleven degrees and a quarter, and
making there a mark, it shall represent the sixth point from North and South
And so you must do with the other points, and then your Instrument is finished.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the parts of this Instrument.
IN this Instrument, the first thing is a Circle divided into 360 degrees,
which is the Meridian and the line of twelve a clock. The second are the right
lines, of which that in the midst is the Equinoctial, and the two others are
the Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorn. And the other lines between those are the
Parallels of the Suns Declination* which have their numbers agreeable to them.
And those that are between the Equinoctial, and the Tropic of Cancer, do
serve from the 11 of March to the 13 of September, and the others for the
residue of the year. The crooked lines which cross those Parallels are the hour
lines. And the point of the Meridian, which in 90 degrees distant from the
Equinoctial, toward the left hand, is the North Pole: and the point opposite
to that, is the South Pole. In the Horizon there are first the degrees, and
then the points of the Compass distinguished by the small pricked lines.

CHAP. XXXVI. How you may know what a clock it is by this Instrument.
AT any time of the day, when you would know what a clock it is, take the
height of the Sun with your Astrolabe, and seeking the Table of the Suns
Declination what Declination it has the same day, and the height of the Pole;
which a good Mariner knows at all times, because he must direct his course
thereby.This being known, place the Horizon Instrument on the one side under
the North, and on the other side above the South, so many degrees as his
distance from the Equinoctial is the same day: and fasten it there with a
little wax that it may not move. Then count in the Meridian on either side from
the Horizon (which now stands firm) the height of the Sun above the Horizon,
take with your Astrolabe: and by the end of the account, draw a line or thread
overthwart, which shall be equally distant from the Horizon. Then reckon the
Suns Declination in the parallels, beginning from the Equinoctial of the
Instrument that way which the Sun Declineth, and mark the line or Parallel at
which the account of the Declination ends; where and at what hour it is
crossed by the thread, for that hour is the hour of the day. But note this, that
if the crossing of the thread and Parallel do fall upon the division of the
Parallel and of the hour, it is a just hour; but if it fall beside the common
meeting of the Parallel and of the hour-line upon that side where it falls,
see how much more there is then an hour, whether, or 1/^, or, etc. Now although
every hour line has two numbers, one of the morning and another of the
afternoon, yet it is an easy matter to distinguish which of them will serve
your turn, if you know whether your Observation be before high noon or after;
which is to be known by your Astrolabe: for if the Sun ascend, it is before
noon; but if it descend, it is afternoon.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Variation of the Compass, by this Instrument.
IF you would know by this Instrument the Variation of the Compass, you must
do thus: When the Sun rises or goes down at the Horizon, Observe him with
your Compass, noting very diligently upon what Rumb and part of the Rumb he
rises or falls. And if the compass be divided into 360 parts, beginning to
reckon them from the East and from the West on either side, and ending in the
North and South with 90 degrees, it shall be the fitter for this purpose,
because then you shall see the very degree of the Compass upon which the Sun
rises or sets. Then the Horizon being set fast (as we have showed in the
former chapter) mark in the Instrument by which part or degree of those upon
the Horizon, the Parallel of the Suns Declination that day does cross the same:
counting in the numbers of the Horizon from the center toward the North Pole,
if it be from the 11 of March to the 13 of September; or toward the South
Pole, the other half of the year* And mark also whether this crossing be so
many degrees. distant from the division of the Equinoctial of your Instrument, as
the Sun in his rising was distant from the East of the Compass, or at his
going down was distant from the West thereof; for then you may say that the
Compass has no variation at all. But if it be not so, mark the Rules
following.

1 When the Sun rises by the same Rumb of the Compass which the Instrument
does show, the Compass has no variation at all.

2 When the Sun rises more to the North of the Compass, or goes down more to
the South, then is showed by the Instrument, all the difference between the
Instrument and the Compass is the North-easting, or variation thereof to the
Eastward.

3 If the Sun rises more to the South of the Compass, or seteth more to the
North then the Instrument shows, all the difference between the Instrument
and the Compass is the North-westing, or Westerly variation thereof.

CHAP. XXXVIII. At what hour the Sun rises and sets every day, in all parts
of the world.
THE height of the Pole in that part where you desire to know this, being
known; place the Horizon in such sort as was showed in the 36 chapter. And
finding by the Table of the Suns Declinations the Declination which the Sun
has that day, count the same from the Equinoctial of the Instrument toward
that part whither the Sun declineth among the Parallels, and then mark the
Parallel whereat your account ends, in what hour, and in what part of the
hour it cutteth the Horizon; noting that every hour has two numbers, one
afternoon which is the hour of the Suns setting; and another before noon, which
is that wherein the Sun rises.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the length of the Day and of the Night.
THe hour of the Suns going down being known, double it* and the double number
of hours will show you the length of the day. Also the hour of the Suns rising
being known, and doubled, will manifest unto you the length of the Night, in
that part of the year when you desire to know the same.

CHAP. XL. Of a Night-diall by the North.
THAT being known which is before declared of the situation of the North Star
and of the guards, we may easily know in the night what a clock it is,
wheresoever we can see the North Stars: presupposing that upon the 15 of April
at the very point of midnight, the former guard goes ahead in respect of the
North Star. And because by this account of the hour of the night, we must take
for a beginning, the very instant when the former guard makes midnight; the
Rule following is to be Observed.

The Rule*
The number of the whole months which have passed since the 15 of April
forward being double, you have the number of the hour wherein the former guard
makes midnight, being head-most: and if the months fall not out just, add for
every fifteen days, above the whole months, one day, and for every day four
minutes, and you shall know when it is midnight.

As for example.
If I would know upon the 15 of November, where the former Guard makes
midnight, I account the whole months from the 15 of April, and I find them to
be seven: which being doubled, make fourteen. I say therefore, that upon the 15
of November, it shall be midnight, when the former Guard has passed before the
North or head fourteen hours. And so allowing three to the North-west, three to
the West, and six to the foot, it may be said that the former Guard going two
hours before the foot toward the South-west, that it is midnight, which shall
come to pass when the former Guard goes an hour before from the South-west.
This being thus presupposed, when I would know in the night what a clock it is,
I must note two things: the one is, in what part the former Guard makes
midnight the same night. The second is, in what part the said Guard is at the
same instant, when I would know the time of the night; which being understood,
I will make mine account from that which the Guard wants of being come to the
place where that day it makes midnight; or from so much as it has passed the
same place, making mine account that one third part of four points of the
compass is an hour, and that which it wants of being come, or which it has
passed forward, are the hours before midnight, if it be not come to the place;
or after midnight, if it have gone beyond.

As for example.
I see the former Guard in the Northwest upon the 15 of July; because that upon
the 15 of July, by the account before mentioned, the former Guard makes
midnight in the West: and from the North or head to the West, are six hours;
and from the Northwest, where I saw the Guard, to the West, where it makes
midnight are three hours; I say therefore that it is three hours before
midnight; that is to say, nine of the clock at night.

FINIS
BEcause the Tables of the Suns Declination that have bin most in use amongst
English Seamen, do both in fashion and manner of using something differ from
those before set down, page 173, 174, etc. Least any therefore of the meanner
sort might be mistaken, or should not rightly conceive the manner of using
these Tables; I thought good to adjoyn these also here following, bearing in a
manner the same form and shape, and therefore also to be used altogether almost
in the same sort that those Tables have been, which for these many years have
been most used by English Mariners.

This Table of the Suns Declination contains twelve particular Tables,
showing the Declinations of the Sun for every day of the twelve months of the
year for four years together, from leap year to leap year. In the head of every
one of these Tables is first set down the month for which that Table is made.
Under this are placed the years of our Lord, for which those Tables may serve:
which years are divided into four ranks, signified by the four Arithmeticall
characters 1, 2, 3, 4, that are set over them. The first rank contains the
first years immediately following after the leap year: the next rank contains
the second years after the leap year: in the third rank are set down the years
that follow three years after the leap year: and in the fourth and last rank
are the fourth years after the precedent leap years, which are also leap years
themselves.

Under every one of these ranks of years there are two columns; the first
whereof contains the degrees and min. of the Suns Declination, answerable to
every day of the month, superscribed in each of those years, without sensible
error. In the second column are set down the minutes of the differences of the
Suns Declinations for every one of those days, for the readier finding of the
part proportional of this difference, answering to any difference of Longitude
from London, whereof you may read more page 181, etc. In the first column of
each of these Tables next the left hand are placed the numbers of the days of
the month that is set down in the head thereof. The use of this Table for
knowing the Declination of the Sun at any time is thus: The use of this Table.
look the month and year wherein you would know the same in the head of the
Table, and the day of the month in the first column next the left hand; then
proceeding from that day directly in the same line toward the right hand till
you come right under the same year, you shall there find the Declination you
sought for.

Take for example the 24 day of February in the year 1610. Finding therefore
that month and year in the head of the Table, and the 24 day in the first
column; in the same line proceeding toward the right hand, till you come right
under that year, you have there the Suns Declination for that time 5 degrees 34
minutes toward the South.

January
1 2 3 4 Day 1609 1610 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615 1616 1617 1618 1619 1620 degrees.
mi. di. degrees. mi. di. degrees. mi. di. degrees. mi. di 1 21 47 21 50 21 52 21 54 2 21 37
10 21 40 10 21 42 10 21 45 9 3 21 27 10 21 30 10 21 32 10 21 35 10 4 21 17 10
21 19 11 21 22 10 21 24 11 5 21 6 11 21 8 11 21 11 11 21 13 11 6 20 54 12 20 57
11 21 0 11 21 2 11 7 20 42 12 20 45 12 20 48 12 20 51 11 8 20 30 12 20 33 12 20
36 12 20 39 12 9 20 17 13 20 20 13 20 23 13 20 26 13 10 20 4 13 20 7 13 20 10
13 20 13 13 11 19 50 14 19 54 13 19 57 13 20 0 13 12 19 36 14 19 40 14 19 43 14
19 47 13 13 19 22 14 19 26 14 19 29 14 19 33 14 14 19 8 14 19 11 15 19 15 14 19
18 15 15 18 53 15 18 56 15 19 0 15 19 4 14 16 18 38 15 18 41 15 18 45 15 18 49
15 17 18 22 16 18 26 15 18 30 15 18 33 16 18 18 6 16 18 10 16 18 14 16 18 18 15
19 17 50 16 17 54 16 17 58 16 18 2 16 20 17 33 17 17 37 17 17 41 17 17 45 17 21
17 16 17 17 21 16 17 25 16 17 29 16 22 16 59 17 17 4 17 17 8 17 17 12 17 23 16
42 17 16 46 18 16 50 18 16 55 17 24 16 24 18 16 29 17 16 33 17 16 37 18 25 16 6
18 16 11 18 16 15 18 16 19 18 26 15 48 18 15 52 19 15 57 18 16 1 18 27 15 29 19
15 34 18 15 38 19 15 43 18 28 15 10 19 15 15 19 15 20 18 15 24 19 29 14 51 19
14 56 19 15 1 19 15 5 19 30 14 32 19 14 37 19 14 41 20 14 46 19 31 14 13 19 14
17 20 14 22 19 14 27 19 February
1 2 3 4 Day 1609 1610 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615 1616 1617 1618 1619 1620 degrees.
mi. di. degrees mi. di. degrees. mi. di. degrees. mi. di. 1 13 53 13 58 14 2 14 7 2 13 33
20 13 38 20 13 42 20 13 47 20 3 13 12 21 13 17 21 13 22 20 13 27 20 4 12 52 20
12 57 20 13 2 20 13 6 21 5 12 31 21 12 36 21 12 41 21 12 46 20 6 12 10 21 12 16
20 12 21 20 12 26 20 7 11 49 21 11 55 21 12 0 21 12 5 21 8 11 28 21 11 33 22 11
38 22 11 44 21 9 11 7 21 11 12 21 11 17 21 11 22 22 10 10 45 22 10 50 22 10 56
21 11 1 21 11 10 23 22 10 28 22 10 34 22 10 39 22 12 10 1 22 10 7 21 10 12 22
10 17 22 13 9 39 22 9 45 22 9 50 22 9 55 22 14 9 17 22 9 23 22 9 28 22 9 33 22
15 8 55 22 9 0 23 9 6 22 9 11 22 16 8 32 23 8 38 22 8 43 23 8 49 22 17 8 10 22
8 15 23 8 21 22 8 26 23 18 7 47 23 7 53 22 7 58 23 8 4 22 19 7 24 23 7 30 23 7
35 23 7 41 23 20 7 1 23 7 7 23 7 12 23 7 18 23 21 6 38 23 6 44 23 6 49 23 6 55
23 22 6 15 23 6 21 23 6 26 23 6 32 23 23 5 52 23 5 58 23 6 3 23 6 9 23 24 5 29
23 5 34 24 5 40 23 5 46 23 25 5 5 24 5 11 23 5 17 23 5 22 24 26 4 42 23 4 48 23
4 53 24 4 59 23 27 4 18 24 4 24 24 4 30 23 4 36 23 28 3 55 23 4 1 23 4 6 24 4
12 24 29 3 49 23 March
1 2 3 4 Day. 1609 1610 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615 1616 1617 1618 1619 1620 degr.
mi di Degrees. M di. De. mi. di. Degrees. M di 1 3 31 3 37 3 43 3 23 2 3 8 23 3 13 24 3
19 24 3 1 24 3 2 44 24 2 50 23 2 56 23 2 37 24 4 2 20 24 2 26 24 2 32 24 2 14
23 5 1 57 23 2 3 23 2 8 24 1 50 24 6 1 33 24 1 39 24 1 45 23 1 27 23 7 1 9 24 1
15 24 1 21 24 1 3 24 8 0 46 23 0 51 24 0 57 24 0 39 24 9 0 22 24 0 28 23 0 33
24 0 15 24 24 0 4 24 0 10 23 23 Equinoctal
10 0 2 23 24 24 0 8 24 11 0 25 24 0 20 23 0 14 24 0 32 24 12 0 49 24 0 43 24 0
38 23 0 56 23 13 1 13 23 1 7 24 1 1 24 1 19 24 14 1 36 24 1 31 23 1 25 24 1 43
23 15 2 0 24 1 54 24 1 49 23 2 6 24 16 2 24 23 2 18 23 2 12 24 2 30 23 17 2 47
23 2 41 24 2 36 23 2 53 24 18 3 10 24 3 5 23 2 59 23 3 17 23 19 3 34 23 3 28 23
3 22 24 3 40 23 20 3 57 23 3 51 24 3 46 23 4 3 24 21 4 20 23 4 15 23 4 9 23 4
27 23 22 4 43 23 4 38 23 4 32 23 4 50 23 23 5 6 23 5 1 23 4 55 23 5 13 23 24 5
29 23 5 24 23 5 18 23 5 36 23 25 5 52 23 5 47 23 5 41 23 5 59 22 26 6 15 23 6
10 22 6 4 23 6 21 23 27 6 38 22 6 32 23 6 27 22 6 44 22 28 7 0 23 6 55 22 6 49
23 7 6 23 29 7 23 22 7 17 23 7 12 22 7 29 22 30 7 45 22 7 40 22 7 34 22 7 51 22
31 8 7 8 2 7 56 8 13 April.
1 2 3 4 Day. 1609 1610 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615 1616 1617 1618 1619 1620 degr.
mi di degrees. mi. d. degrees. mi. di degrees. mi. di 1 8 29 8 24 8 18 8 35 2 8 51 22 8 46
22 8 40 22 8 57 22 3 9 13 22 9 8 22 9 2 22 9 19 22 4 9 34 21 9 29 21 9 24 22 9
40 21 5 9 56 22 9 51 22 9 46 22 10 2 22 6 10 17 21 10 12 21 10 7 21 10 23 21 7
10 38 21 10 33 21 10 28 21 10 44 21 8 10 59 21 10 54 21 10 49 21 11 5 21 9 11
20 21 11 15 21 11 10 21 11 26 21 10 11 41 21 11 36 21 11 31 21 11 46 20 11 12 1
20 11 56 20 11 51 20 12 6 20 12 12 21 20 12 16 20 12 11 20 12 26 20 13 12 41 20
12 36 20 12 31 20 12 46 20 14 13 1 20 12 56 20 12 51 20 13 6 20 15 13 20 19 13
16 20 13 10 19 13 26 20 16 13 40 20 13 35 19 13 30 20 13 45 19 17 13 59 19 13
54 19 13 50 20 14 4 19 18 14 18 19 14 13 19 14 9 19 14 23 19 19 14 36 18 14 32
19 14 27 18 14 41 18 20 14 55 19 14 50 18 14 46 19 15 0 19 21 15 13 18 15 9 19
15 4 18 15 18 18 22 15 31 18 15 27 18 15 22 18 15 36 18 23 15 49 18 15 44 17 15
40 18 15 53 17 24 16 6 17 16 2 18 15 58 18 16 11 18 25 16 23 17 16 19 17 16 15
17 16 28 17 26 16 40 17 16 36 17 16 32 17 16 45 17 27 16 57 17 16 53 17 16 49
17 17 1 16 28 17 13 16 17 9 16 17 5 16 17 17 16 29 17 29 16 17 25 16 17 21 16
17 33 16 30 17 45 16 17 41 16 17 37 16 17 49 16 May.
1 2 3 4 Day. 1609 1610 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615 1616 1617 1618 1619 1620 degr.
mi di degr. mi di* degr. mi di degr. mi di. 1 18 0 17 57 17 53 18 4 2 18 15 15
18 12 15 18 8 15 18 19 15 3 18 30 15 18 27 15 18 23 15 18 34 15 4 18 45 15 18
41 14 18 38 15 18 49 15 5 18 59 14 18 56 15 18 52 14 19 3 14 6 19 13 14 19 10
14 19 6 14 19 17 14 7 19 27 14 19 23 13 19 20 14 19 30 13 8 19 40 13 19 37 14
19 34 14 19 43 13 9 19 53 13 19 50 13 19 47 13 19 56 13 10 20 5 12 20 2 12 19
59 12 20 9 13 11 20 18 13 20 15 13 20 12 13 20 21 12 12 20 30 12 20 27 12 20 24
12 20 33 12 13 20 41 11 20 38 11 20 36 12 20 44 11 14 20 52 11 20 50 12 20 47
11 20 55 11 15 21 3 11 21 1 11 20 58 11 21 6 11 16 21 14 11 21 11 10 21 9 11 21
17 11 17 21 24 10 21 22 11 21 19 10 21 27 10 18 21 34 10 21 32 10 21 29 10 21
36 9 19 21 43 9 21 41 9 21 39 10 21 46 10 20 21 52 9 21 50 9 21 48 9 21 55 9 21
22 1 9 21 59 9 21 57 9 22 3 8 22 22 9 8 22 7 8 22 5 8 22 11 8 23 22 17 8 22 15
8 22 13 8 22 19 8 24 22 25 8 22 23 8 22 21 8 22 27 8 25 22 32 7 22 30 7 22 28 7
22 34 7 26 22 38 6 22 37 7 22 35 7 22 40 6 27 22 45 7 22 43 6 22 42 7 22 46 6
28 22 51 6 22 49 6 22 48 6 22 52 6 29 22 56 5 22 55 6 22 54 6 22 58 6 30 23 1 5
23 0 5 22 59 5 23 3 5 31 23 6 5 23 5 5 23 4 5 23 8 5 June.
1 2 3 4 Day. 1609 1610 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615 1616 1617 1618 1619 1620 degr.
mi di. degr. mi di degr. mi di. degr. mi di. 1 23 10 23 10 23 8 23 12 2 23 14 4
23 14 4 23 12 4 23 16 4 3 23 18 4 23 17 3 23 16 4 23 19 3 4 23 21 3 23 20 3 23
20 4 23 22 3 5 23 24 3 23 23 3 23 23 3 23 25 3 6 23 26 2 23 26 3 23 25 2 23 27
2 7 23 28 2 23 28 2 23 27 2 23 29 2 ^ 23 30 2 23 29 1 23 29 2 23 30 1 9 23 31 1
23 30 1 23 30 1 23 31 1 10 23 31 0 23 31 1 23 31 1 23 31 0 11 23 31 0 23 31 0
23 31 0 23 31 0 12 23 31 0 23 31 0 23 31 0 23 31 0 13 23 31 0 23 31 0 23 31 0
23 30 1 14 23 30 1 23 30 1 23 30 1 23 29 1 15 23 28 2 23 29 1 23 29 1 23 28 ^
16 23 26 2 23 27 2 23 27 2 23 26 2 ^^ 23 24 23 25 2 23 25 2 23 24 2 ^8 23 21 3
23 22 3 23 23 2 23 21 3 19 23 18 3 23 19 3 23 20 3 23 18 3 20 23 15 3 23 16 3
23 17 3 23 ^4 4 21 23 11 4 23 12 4 23 13 4 23 10 4 22 23 7 4 23 8 4 23 9 4 23 6
4 23 23 2 5 23 4 4 23 5 4 23 1 5 2^ 22 57 5 22 59 5 23 0 5 22 56 5 25 22 52 5
22 53 6 22 55 5 22 50 6 26 22 46 6 22 48 5 22 49 6 22 44 6 27 22 40 6 22 41 7
22 43 6 22 38 6 ^8 22 33 7 22 35 6 22 36 7 22 31 7 ^9 22 26 22 28 7 22 29 7 22
24 7 ^0 22 19 22 21 7 22 22 7 22 1^ 7 July.
1 2 3 4 Day. 1609 1610 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615 1616 1617 1618 1619 1620 degr
mi di degr. mi di degr, m. di degr. mi di. 1 22 11 22 13 22 15 22 9 2 22 3 8 22
5 8 22 7 8 22 0 9 3 21 54 9 21 56 9 21 58 9 21 52 8 4 21 45 9 21 47 9 21 50 8
21 43 9 5 21 36 9 21 38 9 21 41 9 21 33 10 6 21 26 10 21 29 9 21 31 10 21 24 9
7 21 16 10 21 19 10 21 21 10 21 13 11 8 21 6 10 21 8 11 21 11 10 21 3 10 9 20
55 11 20 58 10 21 0 11 20 52 11 10 20 44 11 20 47 11 20 49 11 20 41 11 11 20 33
11 20 35 12 20 38 11 20 29 12 12 20 21 12 20 24 11 20 27 11 20 17 12 13 20 9 12
20 12 12 20 15 12 20 5 12 14 19 56 13 19 59 13 20 2 13 19 53 12 15 19 43 13 19
46 13 19 50 12 19 40 13 16 19 30 13 19 33 13 19 37 13 19 27 13 17 19 17 13 19
20 13 19 23 14 19 13 14 18 19 3 14 19 6 14 19 10 13 18 59 14 19 18 49 14 18 52
14 18 56 14 18 45 14 20 18 34 15 18 38 14 18 41 15 18 30 15 21 18 20 14 18 23
15 18 27 14 18 16 14 22 18 5 15 18 8 15 18 12 15 18 1 15 23 17 49 16 17 53 15
17 57 15 17 45 16 24 17 34 15 17 38 15 17 41 16 17 30 15 25 17 18 16 17 22 16
17 26 15 17 14 16 26 17 2 16 17 6 16 17 10 16 16 57 17 27 16 45 17 16 49 17 16
53 17 16 41 16 28 16 29 16 16 33 16 16 37 16 16 24 17 29 16 12 17 16 16 17 16
20 17 16 7 17 30 15 54 18 15 59 17 16 3 17 15 50 17 31 15 37 17 15 41 18 15 4^
18 15 3^ 18 August.
1 2 3 4 Day. 1609 1610 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615 1616 1617 1618 1619 1620 degr.
mi di. degr. mi di degr. mi di* degr. mi di. 1 15 19 15 24 15 28 15 14 2 15 1
18 15 6 18 15 10 18 14 56 18 3 14 43 18 14 47 19 14 52 18 14 38 18 4 14 24 19
14 29 18 14 33 19 14 19 19 5 14 6 18 14 10 19 14 15 18 14 1 18 6 13 47 19 13 51
19 13 56 19 13 42 19 7 13 28 19 13 32 19 13 37 19 13 22 20 8 13 8 20 13 13 19
13 18 19 13 ^ 19 9 12 49 19 12 54 19 12 58 20 12 43 20 10 12 29 20 12 34 20 12
39 21 12 24 19 11 12 9 20 12 14 20 12 19 20 12 4 20 12 11 48 21 11 54 20 11 59
20 11 43 21 13 11 28 20 11 33 21 11 38 21 11 23 20 14 11 8 20 11 13 20 11 18 20
11 2 21 15 10 47 21 10 52 21 10 57 21 10 41 21 16 10 26 21 10 31 21 10 36 21 10
20 21 17 10 5 21 10 10 21 10 15 21 9 59 21 18 9 44 21 9 49 21 9 54 21 9 38 21
19 9 23 21 9 28 21 9 33 21 9 17 21 20 9 1 22 9 6 22 9 12 21 8 55 22 21 8 39 22
8 45 21 8 50 22 8 33 22 22 8 18 21 8 23 22 8 28 22 8 11 22 23 7 56 22 8 1 22 8
6 22 7 49 22 24 7 34 22 7 39 22 7 44 22 7 27 22 25 7 11 23 7 17 22 7 22 22 7 5
22 26 6 49 22 6 54 23 7 0 22 6 43 22 27 6 26 23 6 32 22 6 37 23 6 20 23 28 6 4
22 6 9 23 6 15 22 5 58 22 29 5 41 23 5 47 22 5 52 23 5 35 23 30 5 19 22 5 24 23
5 30 22 5 12 23 31 4 56 23 5 1 23 5 7 23 4 49 23 September.
1 2 3 4 Day. 1609 1610 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615 1616 1617 1618 1619 1620 degr.
mi di. degr. mi di degr. mi di. degr. mi di 1 4 33 4 38 4 44 4 26 2 4 10 23 4
15 23 4 21 23 4 3 23 3 3 47 23 3 52 23 3 58 23 3 40 23 4 3 24 23 3 29 23 3 35
23 3 17 23 5 3 0 24 3 6 23 3 12 23 2 54 23 6 2 37 23 2 43 23 2 48 24 2 31 23 7
2 14 23 2 19 24 2 25 23 2 7 24 8 1 50 24 1 56 23 2 2 23 1 44 23 9 1 27 23 1 33
23 1 38 24 1 20 24 10 1 3 24 1 9 24 1 15 23 0 57 23 11 0 40 23 0 46 23 0 51 24
0 34 23 12 0 16 24 0 22 24 0 28 23 0 10 24 -- -- -- 23 -- -- 23 0 4 24 -- -- 24
13 0 7 24 0 1 24 -- -- 23 0 14 23 Equinoctial.
14 0 31 23 0 25 23 0 19 24 0 37 24 15 0 54 24 0 48 24 0 43 23 1 1 23 16 1 18
23 1 12 24 1 6 24 1 24 24 17 1 41 24 1 36 23 1 30 23 1 48 23 18 2 5 23 1 59 24
1 53 24 2 11 24 19 2 28 24 2 23 23 2 17 23 2 35 23 20 2 52 23 2 46 24 2 40 24 2
58 24 21 3 15 24 3 10 23 3 4 23 3 22 23 22 3 39 23 3 33 23 3 27 24 3 45 23 23 4
2 23 3 56 24 3 51 23 4 8 24 24 4 25 24 4 20 23 4 14 23 4 32 23 25 4 49 23 4 43
23 4 37 24 4 55 23 26 5 12 23 5 6 24 5 1 23 5 18 23 27 5 35 23 5 30 23 5 24 23
5 41 24 28 5 58 23 5 53 23 5 47 23 6 5 23 29 6 21 23 6 16 23 6 10 23 6 28 23 30
6 44 6 39 6 33 6 51 October.
1 2 3 4 Day. 1609 1610 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615 1616 1617 1618 1619 1620 degr.
mi di. degr. mi di. degr. mi di. degr. mi di 1 7 7 7 1 6 56 7 13 2 7 30 23 7 24
23 7 19 23 7 36 23 3 7 52 22 7 47 23 7 41 22 7 59 23 4 8 15 23 8 9 22 8 4 23 8
21 22 5 8 37 22 8 32 23 8 27 23 8 43 22 6 9 0 23 8 54 22 8 49 22 9 6 23 7 9 22
22 9 16 22 9 11 22 9 28 22 8 9 44 22 9 38 22 9 33 22 9 50 22 9 10 6 22 10 0 22
9 55 22 10 12 22 10 10 27 21 10 22 22 10 17 22 10 33 21 11 10 49 22 10 44 22 10
39 22 10 55 22 12 11 11 22 11 5 21 11 0 21 11 16 21 13 11 32 21 11 27 22 11 21
21 11 38 22 14 11 53 21 11 48 21 11 43 22 11 59 21 15 12 14 21 12 9 21 12 4 21
12 19 20 16 12 34 20 12 29 20 12 24 20 12 40 21 17 12 55 21 12 50 21 12 45 21
13 1 21 18 13 15 20 13 10 20 13 5 20 13 21 20 19 13 35 20 13 30 20 13 26 21 13
41 20 20 13 55 20 13 50 20 13 46 20 14 1 20 21 14 15 20 14 10 20 14 5 19 14 20
19 22 14 34 19 14 30 20 14 25 20 14 40 20 23 14 54 20 14 49 19 14 44 19 14 59
19 24 15 13 19 15 8 19 15 3 19 15 18 19 25 15 31 18 15 27 19 15 22 19 15 36 18
26 15 50 19 15 45 18 15 41 19 15 55 19 27 16 8 18 16 3 18 15 59 18 16 13 18 28
16 26 18 16 21 18 16 17 18 16 31 18 29 16 43 17 16 39 18 16 35 18 16 48 17 30
17 1 18 16 57 18 16 52 17 17 5 17 31 17 18 17 17 14 17 17 10 18 17 22 17
November.
1 2 3 4 Day. 1609 1610 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615 1616 1617 1618 1619 1620 degr.
mi di. degr. mi di. degr. mi di. degr. mi di. 1 17 35 17 31 17 26 17 39 2 17 51
16 17 47 16 17 43 17 17 55 16 3 18 7 16 18 3 16 17 59 16 18 11 16 4 18 23 16 18
19 16 18 15 16 18 27 16 5 18 39 16 18 35 16 18 31 16 18 43 16 6 18 54 15 18 50
15 18 46 15 18 58 15 7 19 9 15 19 5 15 19 1 15 19 13 15 8 19 23 14 19 19 14 19
16 15 19 27 14 9 19 37 14 19 34 15 19 30 14 19 41 14 10 19 51 14 19 47 13 19 44
14 19 55 14 11 20 4 13 20 1 14 19 58 14 20 8 13 12 20 17 13 20 14 13 20 11 ^3
20 21 13 13 20 30 13 20 27 13 20 24 ^3 20 34 13 14 20 42 12 20 39 12 20 36 12
20 45 12 15 20 54 12 20 51 12 20 48 12 20 57 12 16 21 6 12 21 3 12 21 0 12 21 8
11 17 21 17 11 21 14 11 21 11 11 21 19 18 21 27 10 21 25 11 21 22 11 21 30 1^
19 21 38 11 21 35 10 21 33 11 21 40 10 20 21 47 9 21 45 10 21 43 0 21 50 10 21
21 57 10 21 55 10 21 53 10 21 59 9 22 22 6 9 22 4 9 22 2 9 22 8 9 23 22 14 8 22
12 8 22 11 9 22 17 9 24 22 23 9 22 21 9 22 19 8 22 25 8 25 22 30 7 22 29 8 22
27 8 22 33 8 26 22 38 8 22 36 7 22 34 7 22 40 7 27 22 44 6 22 43 7 22 41 7 22
47 7 28 22 51 7 22 49 6 22 48 7 22 5 6 29 22 56 5 22 55 6 22 54 6 22 59 30 23 2
6 23 1 6 23 0 6 23 4 5 December.
1 2 3 4 Day 1609 1610 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615 1616 1617 1618 1619 1620 degrees.
mi. di. degrees. mi. di. degrees. mi. di. degr. mi di 1 23 7 23 6 23 5 23 8 2 23 12 5
23 11 5 23 10 5 23 13 5 3 23 16 4 23 15 4 23 14 4 23 17 4 4 23 20 4 23 19 4 23
18 4 23 20 3 5 23 23 3 23 22 3 23 21 3 23 23 3 6 23 25 2 23 25 3 23 24 3 23 26
3 7 23 27 2 23 27 2 23 26 2 23 28 2 8 23 29 2 23 29 2 23 28 2 23 30 2 9 23 30 1
23 30 1 23 30 2 23 31 1 10 23 31 1 23 31 1 23 31 1 23 31 0 11 23 31 0 23 31 0
23 31 0 23 31 0 12 23 31 0 23 31 0 23 31 0 23 31 0 13 23 31 0 23 31 0 23 31 0
23 30 1 14 23 30 1 23 30 1 23 30 1 23 29 1 15 23 28 2 23 28 2 23 29 1 23 27 2
16 23 26 2 23 26 2 23 27 2 23 25 2 17 23 23 3 23 24 2 23 25 2 23 22 3 18 23 20
3 23 21 3 23 22 3 23 19 3 19 23 17 3 23 18 3 23 19 3 23 16 3 20 23 13 4 23 14 4
23 15 4 23 12 4 21 23 8 5 23 10 4 23 11 4 23 7 5 22 23 3 5 23 5 5 23 6 5 23 2 5
23 22 58 5 23 0 5 23 1 5 22 57 5 24 22 52 6 22 54 6 22 55 6 22 51 6 25 22 46 6
22 48 6 22 49 6 22 44 7 26 22 39 7 22 41 7 22 43 6 22 37 7 27 22 32 7 22 34 7
22 36 7 22 30 7 28 22 25 7 22 26 8 22 29 7 22 22 8 29 22 17 8 22 18 8 22 21 8
22 14 8 30 22 8 9 22 10 8 22 13 8 22 6 8 31 21 59 9 22 1 9 22 4 9 21 57 9

By the height of the Pole Star to know the height of the Pole.
THe Tables following are calculated for the end of the year 1610. serving
without sensible error for many years to come; they show the height of the Pole
for convenient Latitudes, by the height of the Pole star and the help of the
Guards, in eight several positions: so that you may by help of them, in any
place on the North side of the Equator, to the Latiude of 74 degrees, or
further, once in three hours every clear night, make a good Observation of the
Latitude. In the three last positions, if the height of the Pole be but little,
the Guards will be hid under the Horizon: notwithstanding if by the hour of the
night, or the height of any known star, by the help of a Globe, or Astrolabe,
we know when the stars do come to their due position, we may Observe the Pole
star, and find the height of the Pole near as well, as if they were above the
Horizon. The Positions are carefully to be Observed, that the two stars
mentioned in the head of the Table be either in the same Azimuth one directly
over another (which is known, if looking with the one eye only, a
perpendicular cord will hide or cover them both) or else of the same Altitude
above the Horizon, which is discerned by the Crosse-staffe. At that instant
that any such Position shall happen, take the height of the Pole star; and the
Table answerable to that Position shall give you the height of the Pole.

For example; when the greater Guard is directly under the Pole star, I find
the height of the Pole star to be 47 degrees and twenty minutes: I look in the
seventh Table and find the height of the Pole for 47, to be 44 degrees, 36
minutes: to this I add 20 minutes, because the height of the star is 20 minutes
above 47. then is the height of the Pole 44 degrees 56 min. the seconds may
safely be neglected, though they be inserted in the Table, rather for
satisfaction of the reader, in the certainty of the Calculation, then for any
necessary use.

If when the greater Guard is in the East, of equal height with the Pole star,
I find the height of that star to be 75 degrees, 40 minutes. In the first Table
I find the height of the Pole answering to 75 degrees. to be 77 degrees. 26 min. and
the difference one degree, three minutes: the part proportional whereof for 40
minutes, is 42 min. which added to 77 degrees, 26 min. makes the true
Elevation of the Pole 78 degres. 8 minutes.

Where the height of the Pole star is but little, there you must subduct the
refraction from the height observed: otherwise we shall always find the height
more then in truth it is, this Refraction causes the Observations of the Sun
at the South, and at the North, (when the Sun never sets in Northern
climates) to give several Latitudes in the same place, the Observation at the
North always making the latitude too great. Concerning this Refraction, see
page 97.

When the greater guard is in the same height with the Pole Star.
Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star.
Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Degrees. degrees.
mi. se. Degrees. degr. mi. sec Degr degr. mi. sec 1 2 26 49 28 29 35 46 55 56 50 52
2 3 27 8 29 30 36 9 56 57 51 46 3 4 27 26 30 31 36 33 57 58 52 42 4 5 27 44 31
32 36 57 58 59 53 41 5 6 28 2 32 33 37 22 59 60 54 44 6 7 28 21 33 34 37 47 60
61 55 50 7 8 28 40 34 35 38 13 61 62 57 0 8 9 28 58 35 36 38 39 62 63 58 14 9
10 29 17 36 37 39 6 63 64 59 33 10 11 29 36 37 38 39 34 64 66 0 58 11 12 29 55
38 39 40 3 65 67 2 28 12 13 30 14 39 40 40 31 66 68 4 3 13 14 30 33 40 41 41 1
67 69 5 46 14 15 30 53 41 42 41 32 68 70 7 38 15 16 31 12 42 43 42 3 69 71 9 40
16 17 31 32 43 44 42 36 70 72 11 13 17 18 31 52 44 45 43 9 71 73 14 20 18 19 32
11 45 46 43 44 72 74 17 0 19 20 32 32 46 47 44 20 73 75 19 54 20 21 32 52 47 48
44 57 74 76 23 0 21 22 33 13 48 49 45 36 75 77 26 19 22 23 33 34 49 50 46 15 76
78 29 51 23 24 33 55 50 51 46 57 77 79 33 36 24 25 34 17 51 52 47 40 78 80 37
36 25 26 34 38 52 53 48 25 79 81 41 49 26 27 35 1 53 54 49 12 80 82 46 17 27 28
35 23 54 55 50 1 When the two guards are of equal height betwixt the East and
the highest.
Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star.
Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Degr degr.
mi. sec. Degr degr. mi. sec Degrees. degr. mi. sec 1 3 46 20 28 30 46 37 55 57 42
26 2 4 46 23 29 31 46 36 56 58 41 57 3 5 46 25 30 32 46 33 57 59 41 26 4 6 46
27 31 33 46 31 58 60 40 51 5 7 46 29 32 34 46 29 59 61 40 11 6 8 46 31 33 35 46
26 60 62 39 26 7 9 46 32 34 36 46 22 61 63 38 36 8 10 46 34 35 37 46 19 62 64
37 39 9 11 46 36 36 38 46 15 63 65 36 34 10 12 46 37 37 39 46 10 64 66 35 19 11
13 46 38 38 40 46 5 65 67 33 53 12 14 46 39 39 41 46 0 66 68 32 14 13 15 46 40
40 42 45 54 67 69 30 19 14 16 46 41 41 43 45 47 68 70 28 3 15 17 46 42 42 44 45
40 69 71 25 21 16 18 46 43 43 45 45 32 70 72 22 7 17 19 46 43 44 46 45 23 71 73
18 13 18 20 46 43 45 47 45 14 72 74 13 30 19 21 46 43 46 48 45 3 73 75 7 36 20
22 46 43 47 49 44 52 74 76 0 4 21 23 46 44 48 50 44 39 75 76 50 17 22 24 46 43
49 51 44 25 76 77 36 46 23 25 46 43 50 52 44 10 77 78 17 2 24 26 46 42 51 53 43
53 78 78 47 20 25 27 46 41 52 54 43 35 79 26 28 46 40 53 55 43 14 80 27 29 46
39 54 56 42 51 81 When the greatest guard is directly above the Pole Star.
Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star.
Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Degr degr.
mi. sec Degrees. degr. mi. sec Degrees. degr. mi. sec 1 3 22 29 28 30 21 55 55 57 20 51
2 4 22 28 29 31 21 53 56 58 20 47 3 5 22 27 30 32 21 52 57 59 20 43 4 6 22 26
31 33 21 50 58 60 20 38 5 7 22 25 32 34 21 48 59 61 20 34 6 8 22 23 33 35 21 47
60 62 20 28 7 9 22 22 34 36 21 45 61 63 20 23 8 10 22 21 35 37 21 43 62 64 20
17 9 11 22 20 36 38 21 41 63 65 20 11 10 12 22 19 37 39 21 39 64 66 20 4 11 13
22 17 38 40 21 38 65 67 19 57 12 14 22 16 39 41 21 36 66 68 19 48 13 15 22 15
40 42 21 33 67 69 19 40 14 16 22 14 41 43 21 31 68 70 19 30 15 17 22 13 42 44
21 29 69 71 19 20 16 18 22 11 43 45 21 27 70 72 19 8 17 19 22 10 44 46 21 25 71
73 18 55 18 20 22 9 45 47 21 22 72 74 18 40 19 21 22 7 46 48 21 20 73 75 18 23
20 22 22 6 47 49 21 17 74 76 18 4 21 23 22 5 48 50 21 14 75 77 17 42 22 24 22 3
49 51 21 11 23 25 22 2 50 52 21 8 24 26 22 1 51 53 21 5 25 27 21 59 52 54 21 2
26 28 21 58 53 55 20 59 27 29 21 56 54 56 20 55 When the two guards are
directly one over another betwixt the highest and the West,
Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star.
Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole, Degr degr.
mi. sec Degrees. degr. mi. sec Degrees. degr. mi. sec. 1 1 20 22 28 28 38 3 55 56 8 51
2 2 20 58 29 29 38 50 56 57 10 44 3 3 21 34 30 30 39 37 57 58 12 43 4 4 22 11
31 31 40 25 58 59 14 49 5 5 22 47 32 32 41 15 59 60 17 2 6 6 23 23 33 33 42 5
60 61 19 23 7 7 24 0 34 34 42 57 61 62 21 53 8 8 24 37 35 35 43 50 62 63 24 34
9 9 25 13 36 36 44 44 63 64 27 25 10 10 25 50 37 37 45 40 64 65 30 30 11 11 26
28 38 38 46 37 65 66 33 48 12 12 27 5 39 39 47 35 66 67 37 23 13 13 27 43 40 40
48 36 67 68 41 16 14 14 28 21 41 41 49 38 68 69 45 30 15 15 29 0 42 42 50 42 69
70 50 7 16 16 29 38 43 43 51 48 70 71 55 13 17 17 30 18 44 44 52 56 71 73 0 52
18 18 30 57 45 45 54 7 72 74 7 9 19 19 31 37 46 46 55 20 73 75 14 8 20 20 32 18
47 47 56 36 74 76 21 52 21 21 32 59 48 48 57 55 22 22 33 40 49 49 59 17 23 23
34 22 50 51 0 43 24 24 35 5 51 52 2 12 25 25 35 48 52 53 3 45 26 26 36 33 53 54
5 22 27 27 37 17 54 55 7 4 When the greater guard is in the West, of the same
height with the Pole Star.
Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star.
Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Degrees. degr.
mi. sec. Degr degr. mi. sec Degrees. degr. mi. sec 2 0 34 7 29 27 43 27 56 55 0 53
3 1 34 26 30 28 43 52 57 56 2 1 4 2 34 44 31 29 44 18 58 57 3 12 5 3 35 3 32 30
44 44 59 58 4 26 6 4 35 22 33 31 45 11 60 59 5 43 7 5 35 41 34 32 45 39 61 60 7
8 8 6 36 0 35 33 46 7 62 61 8 39 9 7 36 19 36 34 46 36 63 62 10 18 10 8 36 38
37 35 47 6 64 63 12 5 11 9 36 57 38 36 47 37 65 64 13 59 12 10 37 17 39 37 48 8
66 65 16 4 13 11 37 36 40 38 48 40 67 66 18 21 14 12 37 56 41 39 49 15 68 67 20
53 15 13 38 16 42 40 49 49 69 68 23 37 16 14 38 37 43 41 50 25 70 69 26 38 17
15 38 57 44 42 51 2 71 70 29 40 18 16 39 18 45 43 51 40 72 71 33 13 19 17 39 39
46 44 52 21 73 72 37 28 20 18 40 0 47 45 53 3 74 73 42 42 21 19 40 21 48 46 53
46 75 74 49 8 22 20 40 43 49 47 54 31 76 75 56 59 23 21 41 5 50 48 55 17 77 77
6 26 24 22 41 28 51 49 56 7 78 78 17 40 25 23 41 51 52 50 56 59 79 79 30 54 26
24 42 14 53 51 57 53 80 80 46 22 27 25 42 33 54 52 58 49 28 26 43 2 55 53 59 48
When the two guards are of equal height betwixt the West and the lowest.
Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star:
Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Poe. Degrees, degr.
mi sec. Degrees. degr. mi. sec. Degrees. degr. mi. sec 3 0 13 50 30 27 16 9 57 54 24 47
4 1 13 53 31 28 16 17 58 55 25 31 5 2 13 56 32 29 16 26 59 56 26 19 6 3 14 0 33
30 16 36 60 57 27 12 7 4 14 3 34 31 16 46 61 58 28 10 8 5 14 6 35 32 16 56 62
59 29 14 9 6 14 10 36 33 17 7 63 60 30 26 10 7 14 14 37 34 17 18 64 61 31 45 11
8 14 18 38 35 17 30 65 62 33 14 12 9 14 22 39 36 17 43 66 63 34 54 13 10 14 26
40 37 17 56 67 64 36 47 14 11 14 30 41 38 18 10 68 65 38 57 15 12 14 35 42 39
18 25 69 66 41 26 16 13 14 39 43 40 18 40 70 67 44 22 17 14 14 44 44 41 18 57
71 68 47 48 18 15 14 49 45 42 19 14 72 69 51 48 19 16 14 55 46 43 19 33 73 70
56 40 20 17 15 0 47 44 19 53 74 72 2 46 21 18 15 6 48 45 20 14 75 73 10 39 22
19 15 12 49 46 20 36 76 74 21 29 23 20 15 18 50 47 21 0 77 75 37 16 24 21 15 24
51 48 21 26 78 77 1 13 25 22 15 31 52 49 21 53 26 23 15 38 53 50 22 23 27 24 15
45 54 51 22 55 28 25 15 53 55 52 23 29 29 26 16 1 56 53 24 7 When the greater
guard is directly under the Pole star.
Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star.
Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Degrees. degr,
mi. se. Degrees. degr. mi. sec. Degrees. degr. mi. sec. 3 0 37 26 31 28 36 51 59 56 35
48 4 1 37 25 32 29 36 50 60 57 35 44 5 2 37 24 33 30 36 48 61 58 35 40 6 3 37
23 34 31 36 47 62 59 35 36 7 4 37 22 35 32 36 45 63 60 35 31 8 5 37 21 36 33 36
44 64 61 35 26 9 6 37 19 37 34 36 42 65 62 35 21 10 7 37 18 38 35 36 40 66 63
35 15 11 8 37 17 39 36 36 38 67 64 35 10 12 9 37 16 40 37 36 37 68 65 35 3 13
10 37 15 41 38 36 35 69 66 34 56 14 11 37 14 42 39 36 33 70 67 34 49 15 12 37
12 43 40 36 31 71 68 34 40 16 13 37 11 44 41 36 29 72 69 34 31 17 14 37 10 45
42 36 27 73 70 34 22 18 15 37 9 46 43 36 25 74 71 34 11 19 16 37 7 47 44 36 23
75 72 33 59 20 17 37 6 48 45 36 20 76 73 33 45 21 18 37 5 49 46 36 18 77 74 33
30 22 19 37 4 50 47 36 15 78 75 33 13 23 20 37 2 51 48 36 13 79 76 32 54 24 21
37 1 52 49 36 10 80 77 32 30 25 22 37 0 53 50 36 7 81 78 32 4 26 23 36 58 54 51
36 5 82 79 31 34 27 24 36 57 55 52 36 2 83 80 30 54 28 25 36 56 56 53 35 58 84
81 30 7 29 26 36 54 57 54 35 55 85 82 29 7 30 27 36 53 58 55 35 52 86 83 27 50
When the two guards are in the same Azimuth, or the one directly over the other
betwixt the lowest and the East.
Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Height of the Pole Star.
Height of ^he Pole. Height of the Pole Star. Height of the Pole. Degrees. degr.
mi. sec. Degrees. degr. mi. sec. Degrees. degr. mi. sec. 1 0 40 50 28 27 58 43 55 55 30
47 2 1 41 27 29 28 59 31 56 56 32 47 3 2 42 3 30 30 0 19 57 57 34 54 4 3 42 39
31 31 1 9 58 58 37 9 5 4 43 16 32 32 1 59 59 59 39 32 6 5 43 52 33 33 2 51 60
60 42 4 7 6 44 29 34 34 3 44 61 61 44 46 8 7 45 6 35 35 4 39 62 62 47 41 9 8 45
43 36 36 5 34 63 63 50 48 10 9 46 20 37 37 6 32 64 64 54 11 11 10 46 58 38 38 7
30 65 65 57 51 12 11 47 36 39 39 8 31 66 67 1 49 13 12 48 14 40 40 9 33 67 68 6
11 14 13 48 52 41 41 10 38 68 69 10 59 15 14 49 31 42 42 11 44 69 70 16 16 16
15 50 10 43 43 12 53 70 71 22 11 17 16 50 50 44 44 14 4 71 72 28 54 18 17 51 30
45 45 15 17 72 73 36 34 19 18 52 10 46 46 16 33 73 74 45 18 20 19 52 52 47 47
17 53 74 75 55 14 21 20 53 33 48 48 19 15 22 21 54 15 49 49 20 41 23 22 54 58
50 50 22 11 24 23 55 42 51 51 23 45 25 24 56 26 52 52 25 23 26 25 57 11 53 53
27 5 27 26 57 57 54 54 28 54

An Addition touching the Variation of the Compass.
Whereas there have been some of opinion that there be two Magnetical Poles, by
knowledge whereof, and of the Magnetical Variation Observed in any place, they
have imagined they could find the Longitude thereof: to show the great error
and uncertainty of this their opinion, I have here set down this Table of
observations of the Variation of the Magnetical Needle, which partly by my
self, but for the most part by others, both English and strangers, have bin
taken in all parts of the World almost, whither any Navigation has bin made,
for these many years. Which Observations I wish the Juditious Reader to compare
together, with so good advice and judgment as he can* whereby I assure my self
he will be enforced to acknowledge with me that there can be no such Magnetical
Poles found; as they imagine. To prove these, a few instances may be suffic^ent
amongst many that may be gathered out of these Observations. For if there be
two such Magnetical Poles, there can be but one common Magnetical Meridian
passing by them and the poles of the World: but by these Observations it is
manifest that there be many Magnetical meridians passing by the Poles of the
World: as namely the Magnetical Meridian about Trinidado and Barbudas: also the
Meridian about the Westermost of the Azores also about P. das Agulhas: lastly
amongst the East Indian Islands some what beyond Iava Mayor, the magnetical and
true meridian must needs agree in one. Now seeing that all these Magnetical
Meridians pass by the Poles of the World there can be no reason given why the
magnetical Poles should be said to be in one of them more then in another: and
if in any, then in all: whereof it must needs follow, that as many Magnetical
Meridians as you have that pass by the Poles of the World, so many pair of
Magnetical Poles must you have, which is absurd; and therefore no such
Magnetical Poles.

Now if any shall think that the great difference that is found betwixt diverse
of these Observations, taken at the same place by diverse Observers, does make
any thing against the intention of this Argument, he is much deceived. For
although there be three or four degrees difference betwixt some Observations
taken at the same place; as namely at S. Helena, some make the Variation to be
almost three degrees, some almost four, others will have it to be about five
degrees and an half, and some others seven and an half. And although there be
some four or five score leagues difference in determining the place where the
true and Magnetital Meridian should concur, or where there should be no
variation about Flores and Corvo, and about P. das Agulhas, some making to be
about seventy or eighty leagues Westward from Flores; and some about thirty
leagues Eastward from thence; where some others will have it hard by Flores, or
somewhat to the Eastwards thereof: And at P. das Agulhas some say there is no
variation at all, but according to others we must go 80 leagues further to the
Eastward before we come to no variation. All these differences notwithstanding
how great soever they be, can be of no validity to infringe the force of the
foresaid argument; for still these Observations will necessarily prove, that
either at Flores and at P. das* Agulhas, or at the most, within three or four
score leagues of those places, there is a Magneticall Meridian passing by both
the Poles of the World; which two Meridians differing so much in Longitude each
from other, and having in all Latitudes great variations betwixt them, it
cannot be with any reason imagined how they may be reduced into one, so to make
two Magnetical Poles only. But of all these so great differences either of the
same or of diverse men's Observations, we may justly take occasion to admonish
all Seamen, especially such as are to take charge, that they be very careful
both in providing themselves of the most convenient Instruments that can be
gotten for this purpose, and also in the circumspect and artificial handling
of them whenever they go about to make use of them in Observing to find the
variation, considering how great and excellent use there may be made hereof,
for finding out the place whereabouts you are betwixt East and West upon the
huge and vast Ocean, though you have seen no land for a long time.

Variat. West. Latit. North. De. M De. M. In the Ice Haven at Nova Zembla 22 30
76 0 On the West side of Nova Zembla 26 0 76 0 From Nova Zembla Westward 20
leagues 31 0 73 0 At Cross Island near Nova Zembla 17 0 At the Hollanders
Newland 16 0 81 0 In the Island of Vaygats 7 0 71 0 Amongst the Isles of Vaygats
8 0 70 25 At S. James I Will 7 30 70 40 On Land near the bar of Pechora 3 30 69 10
At the North Cape 1 0 71 30 From Fowlay Island half way almost to Friseland 11
15 From Friseland half way to Labrador, now called Newfoundland 28 0 62 0 East.
Near England sailing from Yarmouth Northwards 12 40 55 14 In the way from
London to Russia 13 0 55 20 West. 3 30 69 0 7 0 70 40 8 0 70 30 East. 4 0 65 40
5 10 64 30 3 0 66 30 At Antwerpe in Brab^^t 9 0 Near London at Limehouse 11 0
51 30 11 15 About Portland 10 0 In S. Ives Churchyard in Cornwall 8 0 50 30
From Cape Lizard South by West 8 leagues 12 50 49 55 South Easterly from C.
Clear coming from our Channel 7 36 At Youghall in Ireland 10 0 At Sylly 10 0
Variat. East Latit. North. De. M. De. M. From Bell I Will Eastward 350 leagues 1
0 52 10 From Syllie West Northwest 235 leagues 0 0 54 0 West. From Syllie West
Northwest five hundred and thirty leagues 10 0 60 0 From that place Northwest
by North 16 0 63 30 From thence North and by West 22 0 66 0 From this last
place North by West 28 0 73 0 From thence due West 40 leagues 33 0 73 0 At the
Earl of Cumberlands Isles 30 0 64 0 At Hope Sanderson 28 0 72 12 At Cape Raze
in Newfoundland 16 0 47 0 From Cape Raze South by West Southerly 2 52 34 35 5
35 35 30 From C. Raze South Southwest Southerly 6 30 39 40 East. At Cape
Finister 8 30 From Cape Finister west by North 38 leagues 7 55 43 20 From the
Rock Westward about 50 leagues 6 15 39 10 From the Rock West Northwest 7
leagues 7 0 About Lisbone 6 30 From Lisbone to Cape Verde almost 8 30 From C.
Saker 3 or 4 leagues Eastward 5 38 From S. Mary's (one of the Azores) 9 leagues
East by South 2 20 At Fayal, and from thence to Tercaera 3 45 From Tercaera to
Lisbon 7 30 8 30 From Flores Eastward scarce 40 leagues, and from C. Blanco 300
leagues 4 0 From Flores Eastward 70 or 80 leagues 0 0 Hard by Flores or betwixt
it and Fayal 0 0 From Flores Westward 30 leagues 0 0 West. Crossing the
Meridian of Flores and Corvo 1 0 From Flores 100 or 120 leagues Westward 2 0 1
0 Within sight of Flores Southeast from thence 5 37 From Flores West 230
leagues 3 30 39 19 Falling with the Pike 1 30 From the Canaries 300 leagues 1 0
19 0 East. At the Canaries 5 37 From the Grand Canarie Northward 4 37 32 0
Northeast from the I Will Salvages 5 37 31 0 On the Southwest side of the Grand
Canarie 5 20 28 0 From the Canaries 230 leagues 0 0 20 0 Sailing for the
Canaries from the West Indies 0 0 33 0 0 0 31 0 Sailing further in 5 37 27 20
From Palma Sailing toward Cape Blanco 3 0 24 0 Near to C. Blanco not two leag.
from shore 2 40 21 0 Riding at anchor near C. Blanco 3 0 20 25 From C. Blanco
West S. w. some 20 leagues 2 40 From C. Blanco Westward 63 leagues 5 37 19 20
From C. Blanco Westward 90 leagues 5 0 18 35 From C. Blanco Westward 100
leagues 6 0 From C. Blanco 436 leagues 7 30 17 42 From C. Blanco 470 leagues 7
30 11 57 From C. Blanco 476 leagues 7 36 16 35 From C. Blanco 535 leagues 7 30
10 59 From C. Blanco 595 leagues 5 0 10 15 From C. Blanco 640 leagues 4 36 10 0
From C. Blanco 700 leagues Westward 1 3 9 20 From C. Blanco going toward the
West Indies in many distances 6 0 5 40 14 54 At Cape Verde 7 0 About the Islands
of C. Verde 4 0 From these Islands 300 leagues Westward 5 38 At S Jago and S.
Nicholas Isles of C. Verde 2 30 From C. Verde 100 or 120 leagues 3 45 14 0 From
the Isles of Brava and Fogo W.N. 12 leag. 4 30 From Maio 46 leagues East by
South 5 8 14 20 From Cape Verde in the way to the East Indies passing the
Equinoctial 4 0 5 0 5 37 At the Island of Trinidado 0 0 9 46 From Trinidado
Island Eastw. 90 leagues 1 30 2 0 West. At Margarita 0 0 At S. Cruce near S.
John de Porto Rico 0 0 At Cape Rosse of S. John's Island 1 52 17 44 In the
Meridian of Porto Rico 2 52 21 30 At anchor on the West side of S. John 1 52 At
the West end of S. John de Porto Rico 2 30 17 44 From S. John de P. Rico North
Northwest northerly half a point 8 0 23 0 Also in the same course 8 0 26 0
Again in the same course 8 0 26 20 From Dominica about some 140 leagues 0 0 14
0 In the Meridian of Barbados fifty leagues from Martinico 0 0 14 20 At the
Island of Guardelupo 1 0 15 18 At Cursands an Island of the West Indies 4 0 12 13
At the town of Rio de Hacha 7 36 11 20 At Cape la vela 7 0 11 50 Thwart Rio de
Mayo 15 0 31 0 15 0 36 0 At Cape Codera 2 30 9 30 At Cape Corientes in Cuba 3 0
At Cape S. Anthony in Cuba 13 0 22 0 At Cape Cameron 5 0 25 40 At Cape Florida
3 0 25 30 To the Northward of the Cape of Florida 13 0 28 0 Near the coast of
America 11 0 35 30 From Barmudas Westward 140 leagues 10 0 30 35 From Barmudas
Westward 100 leagues 10 3 34 0 Again from Barmudas 80 or 85 leagues 11 15 34 0
From Cape Raso S. Southwest Southerly 6 30 39 40 East. From Serraleona West by
South, and from the shoalds of Madrabombe or S. Anne West and by North 160
leagues 6 10 7 0 Varia. West. Latit. South, De. M De. M In the harbor of
Serraleona 1 50 8 30 From the shore of Serraleona 17 leagues 2 2 3 54 From
Serraleona 61 leagues West Southerly 2 56 7 58 From the Meridian of
Sierraleona 76 leagues VVestward 3 29 7 25 From the Meridian of Sierraleona 97
leagues VVestward 3 45 6 0 From the Meridian of Sierraleona 153 leagues
VVestward 4 20 4 50 From the Meridian of Sierraleona 137 leagues VVestward 4 12
4 40 From the Meridian of Sierraleona 127 leagues VVestward 3 56 4 30 From the
Meridian of Sierraleona 142 leagues VVestward 4 20 4 18 From the Meridian of
Sierraleona 160 leagues VVestward 4 58 4 6 From the Meridian of Sierraleona 187
leagues VVestward 4 50 3 0 From the Meridian of Sierraleona 187 leagues
VVestward 5 40 1 50 From the Meridian of Sierraleona 194 leagues VVestward 5 45
0 45 South. From the Meridian of Sierraleona 195 leagues VVestward 5 26 0 10
From the Meridian of Sierraleona 198 leagues VVestward 5 30 0 35 From the
Meridian of Sierraleona 206 leagues VVestward 6 33 2 0 From the Meridian of
Sierraleona 210 leagues VVestward 6 55 2 35 From the Meridian of Sierraleona
220 leagues VVestward 6 45 3 35 From C.S. Augustine North and by West 7 0 7 16
From C.S. Augustine North by East Easterly 6 40 1 4 From C.S. Augustine North
Northeast 8 0 4 0 From Cape S. Augustine East Northerly 30 leagues 8 10 8 20
From C.S. Augustine 100 leagues 11 6 8 30 From C.S. Augustine not 120 leagues 5
37 11 30 At the I Will Fernando Laronho near Brasil 8 30 2 20 Close by the coast
Brasil 3 45 7 0 8 0 10 0 A little West from the Meridian of Trinidad near
Brasil 11 10 18 30 Among the Islands of Trinidad and Ascension 12 8 20 35 On the
backside of the I Will of Ascension 12 10 20 30 At the I Will of Ascension 10 0 20 0
In the Meridian of Trinidad Easterly 14 53 27 0 Between the Isles of Trinidad
and Tristan de Acunha 18 0 19 0 Varia. East. Latit. South. De. M De. M From the
shoalds of Brasil East Southerly about 14 leagues 12 30 19 30 From the same
shoalds South-east about 55 leagues 13 52 20 10 Also from the same shoalds
Southeast by East 13 20 19 37 From the coast of Brasil 150 leagues 10 0 18 0 At
Cape S. Vincent in Brasil 12 0 From the coast of Brasil 100 or 120 leagues 8 30
17 0 7 30 18 0 From Laronho Southwest 12 leagues 8 1 4 20 From Ascension I Will 20
or 30 leagues Eastward at the Cliffe Penedo de S. Pedro 5 30 Betwixt Ascension
I Will and S. Helens 7 30 At S. Helena 2 48 3 46 5 37 7 30 From S. Helena a little
VVestward 9 0 From S. Helens not 19 leagues 5 40 18 30 From S. Helena northwest
by West 16 leagues 3 45 From S, Helena northwest 156 leagues 7 40 10 20 From
S, Helena 230 leagues 5 38 8 20 From Ascension I Will northeast half a point
northerly about 12 leagues 6 0 About the Islands of Martin Vaz 13 0 19 0 Along
by those Isles 11 15 From those Islands northerly 30 leagues 18 30 From the
shore of Africa VVestward some 130 leagues 4 8 27 0 Bearing from thence toward
S. Helena 2 48 25 0 From the main of Africa 160 leagues 2 50 23 0 In the
Longitude of 28 degrees 15 20 32 0 A little VVestward from the Meridian of the
Isles of Martin Vaz 14 58 28 35 Eastward from thence 15 37 28 53 From the former
Observation 60 leagues 16 8 29 0 From the last Observation Eastward 27 leagues
16 52 29 33 Beyond Tristan da cunha 70 or 80 leagues coming from Martin Vaz 16
53 33 0 From Tristan da cunha VVestward 17 52 34 35 14 0 At the Island of
Tristan da cunha 19 0 From thence northward 16 8 33 34 Past the Island toward
C. Bona Speranza 14 0 From Tristan da cunha VV. n. VV. 368 leagues 14 0 2^ 25
At Cape Frio 13 0 Near Cape Frio 12 0 23 30 From Cape Frio Eastward toward
Africa 17 0 18 0 From Cape Frio about 125 leagues Eastward 11 8 About 155
leagues from Cape Frio 14 8 25 0 At Port desire 5 0 47 40 At the East mouth or
entrance into Magellans straits 5 30 In the straits of Magellan 5 0 From Cape
Bonae spei 900 leagues West by north half a point northerly 15 52 26 50 From
Cape Bonae spei almost West by N. 180 leagues 8 50 34 0 At the bay of Soldania
0 20 33 55 1 30 33 20 At Cape Buona Esperanza 0 15 1 30 About Cape Buona
Esperanza 2 0 35 0 From Cape Buona Esperanza VVestwards 30 or 40 leagues 5 38
Betwixt C. Buona Esperanza and S. Helena 3 45 From C. Buona Esperanza South 3
45 From C. Bona Speranza VVestward 40 or 50 leagues 3 0 From C. Buona Esperanza
due northwest 5 37 20 0 West. From C. Bonae spei S.w. by S. 36 leagues 4 10 35
25 From C. Bonae spei S.w. by S. 28 leagues 3 50 35 30 At Cape das Agulhas near
C. Bonae Spei 0 0 From thence 80 leagues Eastward 0 0 At Cape Talhada 40
leagues East from Cape das Agulhas, being in sight of land lying from us north
by East 3 47 34 20 At C. Corientes beyond C. Bonae spei 7 30 11 0 25 0 From C.
Corientes Southwards 8 30 30 30 About the Islands Primeras toward Mozambique 15
0 18 0 In the I Will Mozambique 12 0 14 45 North. At the Isles of Nicobar 7 36 7 30
10 0 From thence till you come to the Line going toward the East Indies 11 0
At the I Will de Almirant near the line 13 0 Near to C. Guarda fui, or Porto
Galeacea 8 15 13 15 At P. de estreito or the mouth of the Red sea 5 15 12 15 At
Baxos de Cuaqem 1 15 19 15 At Port de Igidid 0 40 22 0 At Xuarit 0 15 East. At
Sidon in the bottom of the straigts 2 35 33 30 West. North. From the place that
is 200 leagues Westward from Goa to Cape Comorin 15 0 At Goa 15 0 15 20 At the
Isles Comoro 13 0 In the Bay of S. Augustine in Madagascar 15 0 At Cape Romano
in Madagascar 17 40 26 0 Near Madagascar 8 30 26 0 20 0 From Cape Romano
Southerly 14 4 27 30 From C. Romano West Southwest half a point Southerly 110
leagues 14 14 36 34 Variat. East. Latit. North. De. M De. M. From C. Romano
Southwest 50 leagues 15 25 28 20 In the height of C. Romano 8 leagues off 16
45 25 50 At the I Will of S. Mary entering the Bay of Antongil 17 0 17 0 In the
bottom of the Bay of Antongil by many and exact Observations 20 0 At the Bay
of Tanassarin 5 30 At the West side of the sands of Saya de Malha 15 0 11 30
At the Island Ragapez 22 11 10 0 From the Island of Gratia West S.w. 36 leagues
24 11 9 20 At the shoalds called Baixos de India 8 30 30 0 At Diego Roiz Island
21 0 20 0 From Los Romeros Isles South VVesterly 68 leag. 24 15 31 0 From Los
Romeros East by South 50 leagues 22 16 From Los Romeros East 110 leagues 21 20
At the shoalds of Adu and Candu 19 30 6 0 At the I Will Diego Gratiosa 24 0 9 0
From Diego Gratiosa Westward 20 leagues 22 0 7 30 At Diego Roderigos Island 20 0
From Diego Rodericos Island South, and South and by East 23 35 0 24 25 At
Maldiviae Islands 17 0 North. At Cochin 13 0 9 40 From Cochin till you be past
Maldiviae Isles South and Southwest till you be under 8 and 10 degrees. of South
Latitude 16 52 At Zeilan 15 30 9 0 At the I Will Pulobatum 4 0 4 At Achin in
Sumatra 8 0 In the Road of Achin 6 30 South. In Priaman on the West side of
Sumatra 5 40 0 22 At Bantam in Java 5 0 7 0 4 30 At Madura 2 30 6 50 At the
Northeast corner of Balij 3 0 8 30 At Banda 4 45 4 50

FINIS.
A Table Showing the Contents of this Treatise.
Chap. 1. FAults in the common Sea-Chart with Rumbs expressed by Right lines
and degrees of Latitude every where equal. page 1 1 Error in the proportion of
the length and breadth of places in the common Sea-Chart. 1 2 Error in finding
out the difference of Longitude by the common Sea-Chart. 2 3 Error in the lying
or bearing of places one from another in the common ea-Chart. 4 4 Error in
setting of places out of the common Sea-Chart into the Globe. 5 5 Error in
showing the distances of places in the common Sea-Chart. 5 6 Some Error in
keeping always the same point of the Compass in sailing 6 The expressing of
the Rumbs by right lines defended, which some hold for erroneous. 7
Chap. 2. How the former errors may be avoided. 8 The definition of the
Nautical Planisphaere. 9 A Table of the Latitudes of every minute of a Meridian
of the Nautical Planisphaere or Sea-Chart, in such parts whereof each minute of
the Equinoctial contains 10,000. page 14 etc. 14
Chap. 3. The use of the two first columns of this Table of Latitudes, for
graduating a Meridian in the general Sea-Chart. 37 Example of the graduating of
a Meridian in the general Sea-Chart 38
Chap. 4. Another way for graduating the Meridian of a general Sea-Chart. 39
Chap. 5. The use of the Table of Latitudes, for the true graduating of a
Particular Sea-Chart. 40 Chap. 6. The breadth of a particular Chart being
given, to divide the same into the degrees and minutes, contained in the
difference of the least and greatest Latitudes therein to be expressed. 42
Chap. 7. The use of the third column of the Table of Latitudes 43 An easy way
to reduce the difference of Longitude into leagues 44
Chap. 8. How to describe the Rumbs Mechanically in any Sea-Chart, Globe, or
Mapp, of what form soever. 45 Chap. 9: The use of the Table of Latitudes for
making the Table of Rumbs. 46 To find presently the Latitude of any Rumb for
any Longitude 46 A Table of the first Rumb from the Meridian, that is, the Rumb
of North and by East, North and by West, South and by East, South and by West.
47 The second Rumb from the Meridian, the Rumb of North NorthEast, North
NorthWest, South SouthEast, South SouthWest. 47 The third Rumb from the
Meridian Northeast and by North, Northwest and by North: Southeast and by
South, SouthWest and by South. 47 The fourth Rumb from the Meridian, Northeast
Northwest, Southeast Southwest. 48 The fifth Rumb from the Meridian: Northeast
and by East, Northwest and by West, Southeast and by East, Southwest and By
West. 48 The sixth Rumb from the Meridian, East Northeast, East Southeast, West
Northwest, West Southwest. 49 The seventh Rumb from the Meridian, East and by
North, East and by South* West and by North, West and by South. 50
Chap. 10. The use of this Table of Rumbs. 55 The use of the Table of the
eighth Rumb 56
Chap. 11. A most plain and sensible demonstration of the agreement of the
Nautical Planisphere, before descibed, with the Globe, and of the disagreement
of the common Sea-Chart from them both. 56 Chap. 12. The use of the Nautical
Planisphere or Sea-Chart. 58 To know how one place in the Chart lies from
another. 58 To find the distance of places in their Rumb. 58 If both places
have one Latitude. 58 If both places have the same Longitude. 59 If both places
differ both in Longitude and Latitude. 59 The demonstration of the truth of the
former rules. 59 To find the distance of any two places in the arch of the
great circle drawn by them. 61 If both places have no Latitude. 61 If both
places have the same Longitude. 61 If both places differ in Longitude, and but
one of them have Latitude. 62 If both places have Latitude of one denomination
and equal. 63 If the latitudes be of one denomination and unequal. 63 If the
Latitudes be of diverse denominations. 64 The demonstration of the former Rules.
64 To find the distance of any two places Arithmetically 65 The Art of
Navigation Arithmetical. 66 1 By the Longitudes and Latitudes of two places to
find the Rumb and distance. 66 2 By the distance and Latitudes to find the Rumb
and difference of Longitude. 66 3 By the Rumb and Latitudes to find the
distance and difference of Longitude. 67 4 By the Longitudes, Rumb, and one
Latitude, to find the other Latitude and the distance. 67 5 By the Rumb, the
distance, and one Latitude, to find the other Latitude and the difference of
long. 68
Chap. 13. Error in the use of the Compass by the variation neglected, and how
to Observe and avoid the same. 68 The making of the the Sea Rings. 75 The use
of the Sea Rings. 79
Chap. 14. To find the inclination or dipping of the magnetical Needle under
the Horizon. 82 A short way to calculate the Table of magnetical inclination.
83 The Table of magnetical inclination. 84
Chap. 15. Errors in using the Crosse-staffe. 85 1 Error by reason of the
eccentricity of the eye. 85 How it may be found and corrected. 86 2 Error by
the height of the eye above the water. 87 To find how much this error is at
any height of the eye. First without knowing the quantity of the earths
Semidiameter. 88 Secondly, with knowledge thereof, found either by the highest
Meridian Altitudes of the Sun. 88 Or by the Meridian Altitudes of some
principal fixed Stars. 89 Or by the shadow of a Perpendicular style. 89 The
finding of the earths semidiameter by the height of some Mountain near the
Sea. 90 Maurolycus and Clavius his gross demonstration hereof. 90 A more exact
demonst. with the practice thereof. 92 The angle of dipping for any height of
the eye. 96 3 Error by the Parallax of the Sun, corrected. 96 4 Error in
Observing by the refraction of the Sun or Stars, corrected. 97
Chap. 16^ Faults amended in the Table of the Suns declination, commonly called
the Regiment of the Sun. 97 Chap. 17. Of the Table of Declination of every
minute of the Ecliptic in degrees min. and sec. made according to the greatest
obliquity of the Zodiac this present age; which by exact Observation is found
to be 23 degrees, 31 min. and an half. 98 A Table of the Declination of every
minute of the Ecliptic, in degrees, min. and sec. 101
Chap. 18. The use of the former Table of Declination. 116 Chap. 19. The
description and use of a great Quadrant, for observation of the Sun on Land.
120 A Table of observations of the Suns Meridian Altitudes, taken by the
foresaid Quadrant, in the years 1594, 1595, 1596, 1597 at London.
Chap. 20. The finding of the Suns Apogeum and eccentricity out of the former
observation. 142 To know the time of the Suns coming to any point of the
Ecliptic. 142
Chap. 21. The middle motion of the Sun, corrected out of the former
Observations. 150 A Table of the Suns middle motions. 152
Chap. 22. A new theorick of the Sun, for the making of the Table of the Suns
Prosthaphaereses 154 A Table of the Suns Prosthaphaereses. 157
Chap. 23. The making of the Ephemerides of the Sun. 159 Chap. 24. How to
reduce the apparent time to the equal time answering thereto. 162 A Table of
the Aequation of natural days. 162
Chap. 25. A Table of Aequations of the Suns Ephemerides to make them serve for
many years. 163 Ephemerides of the Sun. 164
Chap. 26. The use of these Ephemerides. 169 Chap. 27. The making of the Table
of the Suns Declination. 170 Prosthaphaereses of the Suns Declination. 172 A
Table of the Suns Declination. 173
Chap. 28^ The use of the former Table of Declination, or Regiment of the Sun.
181 Chap. 29 The Declinations of the principal fixed stars about the
Equinoctial, corrected by Observation. 183 A Table of fixed Stars about the
Equinoctial. 198
Chap. 30. The use of the former Table. 199 Chap. 31. The true distances of
certain principal fixed Stars from the North Pole, found by late Observation.
199 Chap. 32. To know at what time any of the foresaid fixed Stars come to the
Meridian for any day of the year. 202 A Table of the Suns right Ascensions in
hours and minutes, for every day of the year. 204
Chap. 33. By the former Tables of fixed Stars, and the Suns right Ascensions
to know the hour of the night at any time of the year. 206 Chap. 34. Of
finding the Elevation of the Pole, by Observation of the Pole Star and Guard.
207 Chap. 35. The description and parts of the Sea Quadrant 208 Chap. 36. The
description of the Nocturnal or night Dial. 210 Chap. 37. The use of the Sea
Quadrant: first in Observing the height of the Sun, looking only to the Horizon
at Sea. 211 Chap. 38. How with this Quadrant to Observe the height of the Sun,
with ^our back turned toward the Sun. 211 Chap. 39. How to Observe with this
Quadrant the height of the Sun or Star, looking both to the Sun or Star, and to
the Horizon. 212 Chap 40. How to find the height of the Pole by Observation of
the Pole Star and Guard, without giving or taking any allowance or abatement,
at any time when the Pole Star the Guard and Horizon may be seen. 213 To know
the hour of the night by the Nocturnal. 213 An answer to Simon Stevin, showing
his erorrs in blaming me of error in my table of Rumbs. 214

The Contents of the TREATISE Of the ART of NAVIGATION.
The division of the whole Art of Navigation. page 1 Chap. 1. The definition of
the Sphaere. 2 2. That the whole World is a Sphaere. 2 3. Of the division of
the Sphaere* 2 4. Of the motion of the Heavens. 4 5. Of the figure of the
Heavens. 4 6. That the earth and water make one perfect Globe. 5 7. That the
earth is in the center of the world. 5 8. The whole quantity of the earth. 5
9. Of the Equinoctial circle. 6 10. Of the Poles of the world. 6 11. Of the
Ecliptic line. 7 12. Of the Declination of the Sun. 7 13. Of the Colures. 8
14. Of the Meridian circle. 8 15. Of the Horizon. 9 16. Of the 32 Winds. 10
17. Of the two Tropicks. 12 18. Of the Parallels. 13 19. Of the degrees. 13 20.
What is meant by Longitude and Latitude. 14
THE SECOND PART OF THE ART OF Navigation* wherein is handled the Practick
part, showing the making and use of the principal Instruments belonging to this
ART.
Chap. 1. The making of the Astrolabe. page 15 Chap. 2. Of the height of the
Sun. page 17 3. Of the Shadows. 18 4. Of the Regiment and Rules of the Sun. 19
5. Of the Declination of the Sun, and of the Tables thereof. 20 How the
Declination of the Sun may be found out. 21
6. The Equation of the Suns Declination. 22 7. Four examples for the plainer
declaration of that which is said before. 22 8. Another manner of accounting by
the Sun, as they use in Portugal. 25 9. How the height of the Sun may be known
in any place whatsoever, without an Astrolabe; first knowing your distance from
the Equinoctial. 25 10. The Rule or Regiment of the North-star for the
knowledge of the height of the Pole. 26 11. The making of the Crosse-staffe. 27
12. Of the position of the North-star, and the Guards, 28 13. Of the height of
the Star taken with the Crosse-staffe. 30 14. The Regiment or Rules of the
North Star. 30 15. Other things to be noted in observing the height of the
Pole. 32 16. Of the Crosiers. 34 17. Of the Sea-Compasse. 34 18. How the
variation of the Compass may be found. 37 The finding of the Meridian line. 37
19. Of the Sea-Chart. 38 20. Of the point of Imagination. 41 21. Of the
Traverse or Geometrical point. 42 22. Of the amending of the point of
Imagination. 42 The amending of the point of Imagination by the Traverse point.
43 The amendment of the point of Imagination by North, South East, West. 43
23. The point by Imagination and the height. 44 24. What it is to increase or
diminish in height 45 25. How you may cast a traverse point without Compasses.
46 26. Of another kind of casting a point by traverse. 46 27. Of the leagues
which in Navigation answer to each degree of latitude in every Rumb. 47 Chap.
28. How you may come to know the Longitude, or the course from East to West.
page* 48 29. How you may set down in your Chart a new land never before
discovered. 50 30. Seeing two known points or Capes of land as you sail along,
how you may know the distance of the Ship* from them. 51 31. Of the account of
the Moon. 51 The first Rule of the golden number. 53 The second Rule of the
concurrent. 53 The third Rule of the Conjunction. 53 The fourth Rule, of the
full, and quarters of the Moon. 53 The first Rule of the Spring-tides and
Neap-tides. 54 An example whereby the foresaid Rules are made more plain. 54
32. Of the daily tides. 55 The first Rule. 56 The second Rule. 56 The third
Rule. 56 The fourth Rule. 56 The fifth Rule. 57 An example of the said Rules. 57
33. Of a certain Instrument, whereby you may in general judge of the tides.
58 The use of this Instrument. 59
34. Of the making of an uniuersal Dial, which may serve generally all the
World over. 60 35. Of the parts of this Instrument. 62 36. How you may know
what a clock it is by this Instrument. 36 37. Of the variation of the Compass
by this Instrument. 64 38. At what hour the Sun rises and sets every day,
in all parts of the World. 65 39. Of the length of the day and of the night. 65
40. Of a night Dial by the North stars. 65 The use of the Table of the Suns
declnation. 67 A Table of the Suns declination. 69 By the height of the
Pole Star to know the height of the Pole. 81 1 When the greater or former Guard
is in the East of the same height with the Pole Star. 83 2 When the two Guards
are of equal height betwixt the East and the highest. 84 3 When the greatest
or foremost Guard is right above the Pole Star. 85 4 When the two Guards are
directly one over another betwixt the highest and the West. 86 5 When the
greater or foremost Guard is in the West of the same height with the Pole Star.
87 6 When the two Guards are of equal height betwixt the West and the lowest.
88 7 When the greater or former Guard is directly under the Pole Star. 89 8
When the two Guards are directly the one over the other, betwixt the lowest and
the East. 90

FINIS.
Made and sold by Joseph Moxon, at his shop, on Cornhil, at the sign of Atlas.
GLobes Celestial and Terrestrial, of all sizes; and Books for the use of
them. Sphaers, great and small, according to the Ptolemean Systeme Sphaers,
great and small, according to the Tychonean Systeme Sphaers, great and small,
according to the Copernican Systeme With Books for the use of them. Blagraves
Mathematical Jewel. Oughtreds Circles of Proportion. The Spiral Line. Gunters
Quadrant and Nocturnal. Stirrups Universal Quadrat. These, with diverse other
Mathematical Instruments, are printed on Papers, and exactly pasted on Boards,
etc. with Indexes, and other appurtenances proper to each Instrument: very
commodious for any man's use. Also Books for the use of every of the foresaid
Instruments. Sea-plats, printed on paper or parchment, and pasted on Boards.
Vignola, or the complete Architect, useful for all Carpenters, Masons,
Painters, Carvers, or any Gentlemen or others that delight in rare Building. A
new Invention to raise water higher then the Spring, with certain Engines to
produce either motion or sound by the water: very useful, profitable and
delightful for such as are addicted to rare curiosities: by Isaac de Cause. A
Help to calculation By J. Newton. A Mathematical Manuel, showing the use of
Napiers bones, by J. Dansie. A Tutor to Astrology, with an Ephemeris for the
year 1657, intended to be annually continued, by W. E. Also all manner of
Mathematical Books, or Instruments, and Maps whatsoever are sold by the
foresaid Joseph Moxon.
The Haven-finding Art, Or The way to find any Haven or place appointed at Sea.
THere is no man, I suppose, that knows not with how great diligence now of a
long time (especially since men leaving no part of the world unattempted, have
sailed into America, and to the utmost Indies) the searchers out of excellent
things have sought some certain way, whereby they which take charge of Ships
might know assuredly the situation and Longitude of what place soever they
would go unto, and so come to any Haven or place appointed at Sea. But I know
not how it has come to pass, that there could not hitherto any certain
knowledge of that matter be attained unto. For some when they indevoured to
find this thing by the magnetical needle gave the Lodestone it self a Pole,
which of the Lodestone (called also the Magnet) they named the Magnetical
Pole, or Pole of the Lodestone. But that this is otherwise, the thing it self
has taught us, because the variation of the needle is found not to follow the
Rule of that Pole. Yet in the mean time this continual searching gave occasion
of another mean whereby a Ship might certainly direct her course unto any Haven
or place at Sea whereto you would desire to go, although the true Longitude
both of the place wherein the Ship is, as also of the place where the Haven is,
were both unknown. Which that it may in some sort be rudely showed, and that
the circumstances hereof may more clearly be set forth before your eyes,
whereby there may ensue a more certain and general use of the same, first of
all it must be known that we are taught by daily experience, that the
Magnetical Needle touched with the Lodestone or Magnet (which therefore we
call the Magnetical needle) does not always point out the same part of the
world, but without any respect of that Magnetical Pole, (whereof we made mention
before) sometimes indeed it shows the true place of the North: but for the
most part it declineth either toward the East or West: which variation, yea
even in a small distance of places, has most manifestly appeared to them which
have directed their course from the Eastern parts toward the West: For
examples sake at Amsterdam the variation is 9 degrees and 30 min. toward the
East. In the Foreland of England 11 degr. At London 11 degr. 30 min^ Near
Tinmouth in the Sea 12 degr. 40 min. and so forth.

How any Haven or place at Sea may be found, the Latitude and variation of the
same place only being known.
THe variation of the Magnetical Needle and the Latitude of the place being
known the same place may be found although the Longitude be unknown, and that
daily experience plentifully teaches. For (that we may make this matter plain
by examples especially) if the Mariner know that the Latitude of the City of
Amsterdam is 52 degr. and 20 min. and that the variation of the Compass in the
same place is 9 degrees. and 30 min. he must needs not be ignorant, that when he
has brought himself to that Latitude and variation, he is not far from
Amsterdam, what Longitude soever that City have* But some man may object that
there are many places which have the same Latitude and variation that the City
of Amsterdam has: whereto we may readily answer that indeed there be such
places: but yet very far distant from thence, and such as may easily be known
by other circumstances, whereof we shall speak hereafter. And although the
Mariners may find Amsterdam otherwise, as by the places near adjoining, by
conjectures by the soundings, by the sands, and many other signs, without any
regard of the variation: yet I thought good to propound a known place for
example, that the Universality of the same Rule might be known in long
Navigations, wherein no land appears. As for example if the Master of a ship
desire to sail from hence to Cape S. Augustine in Brasile, and know that the
variation there (as it is reported) is 3 degrees. and 10 min. and the Latitude 8
degrees. 30 min. toward the South, when in going thitherwards he shall come to
that Latitude, and variation, he shall then know that he is come to the Cape of
S. Augustine: and although he think otherwise by his conjecture, and reckoning
yet not regarding that conjecture he shall confess himself either to have
guessed ill, or else to have been deceived with some Eastern or western
currents: For reason will not suffer us to think that that variation which
before was found at the Cape of S. Augustine is changed, that he should need to
yield himself to that opinion. So also who will not esteem it to be absurd, and
altogether against reason, that he which knows very well that he finds at
sea another variation then that which is at Cape S. Augustine* of 3 degr. 10
min. should notwithstanding neglecting the experience of the variation, and
resting upon conjecture only affirm that he is near the Cape S. Augustine?
Because he speaks contrary things, when he says that the variation there is
3 degrees 10 minutes, and again avovcheth that it is not.

Neither is this unworthy the marking which has often happened, that he which
should have sailed to the Isle of S. Helena when he was come to the Latitude of
the same Island, and saw not there the Island, and was also ignorant whether he
were to the Eastwards or Westward from the same, by conjectures sought that
place toward the East, which indeed lay from him toward the West: and so the
further he sailed the further always he went from that Island. Now I leave it to
thy consideration if he, (whosoever he were that was Master of that ship, which
diligently sought that Island for the space of cerain weeks, tacking about also
diverse times before he could find any place to abide in) if he I say had not
been ignorant what the variation of the Compass was at S. Helens Island, and
what the use of the variation is at sea, and how to find it out I leave it I
say, to thy consideration, whether he would willingly have floated doubtfully
to and fro following a greater variation, knowing assuredly that the variation
there was lesser.

Hereby it may easily be conceived how great use there is of the variation,
when they especially which in sailing follow the lines showing the courses
(which lines because now they have found this name among the Portugales we call
Rumbs, the ignorance of which (lines) can hardly be permitted in them which
attempt long voyages upon the huge Ocean) ought every where to know certainly
the place of the true North, which is commonly found by the knowledge of the
variation.

If any man likewise consider the uncertain situation of those places which are
set into Globes or Sea Charts by the mariners relation, which uncertainty
takes his beginning from hence, because every man thinks that to be the true
place of the North which is showed by the Flower deluce (as they call it) of
the Compass which they brought with them from home, (which thing also brings
no less doubtfulness to the Mariners themselves) he will think (and that not
without cause) that the Observation of the variation is a very needful thing
even for this cause also: Because it is an easy matter to place the
flower-deluce in such sort that it shall not miss any thing in showing the true
North part of the World, to wit, if one move the Magneticall needle or points
of the wires in the Compass from the flower-deluce so much as need shall
require.

These things therefore have been Observed and granted, and this especially,
that the variation alters according to the variety of countries, (as by the
common testimony of all men it is proved) it is in some sort manifest that
they which deny this varying property to be of very great use for Navigation,
are either wiser then the common sort, and have some hidden secrets which are
not revealed to every man, or else are notable fools and mad men.

Therefore when the most excellent Prince Maurice, having thoroughly considered
hereof, thought that it might assuredly be brought to that pass that Mariners
might receive great profit by this means, He (the high Admiral) gave
commandment to all the companies of the Admiralty (adjoining also thereto a
certain introduction) that they should do their best endeavor, that all Masters
of ships should provide themselves for this purpose: that is to say that to
what place soever they should come, they should seek out the Declination of the
Magneticall needle from the North, or the variation of the Compass, not
lightly, running over the matter as it were by the way, and for fashions sake
only; but with great carefulness and diligence, taking with them meet and
needful Instruments for that purpose: and that after their return into their
own country they should truly and faithfully certify their companies or
brotherhoods of the Admiralty of that matter: that the self same experiments
being by them brought into good order, might be published for the common good.

But that every man may more perfectly learn the circumstances of this matter,
I thought it meet here to set down certain principles of this thing, which is
yet notwithstanding to be further searched into by more experiments, in which
shall be showed a general view or Table of those places, whose variations have
already been Observed by the learned Geographer Petrus Plancius, with continual
labor, and not without great charges, from diverse corners of the earth near
and far off: whom for honors sake I therefore name, that as well they that
shall hereafter find out places or havens after this manner, as also they that
have already found, may know that they are bound to give thanks to Plancius
alone, as to him that is the chief cause of this Observation. But that Table or
general view of variations, whereof there shall hereafter follow a plainer
declaration is this.

A Table or View of variation.
The Northeasting, or the East variation of the first part or space toward the
North. Increasing. Northeasting. Latitude Longitude. Degrees. M Degrees. Mi Degrees. Mi. In
the Flemish Island Corvo 0 0 N 37 0 0 0 In the Flemish Island Saint Mary 3 20 N
37 0 8 20 Near the Island Maio 4 55 N 15 0 11 20 At Palma one of the Canary
Islands 6 10 N 28 30 16 20 At the Rock near Lisbon 10 0 N 38 55 24 30 In the
Westermost part of Ireland 11 0 N 52 8 24 12 In the West part of England 12 40
N 50 21 28 0 Decreasing. About one mile Eastward from Plimmouth 13 24 N ^0 18
30 0 By Tin mouth in the Sea 12 40 N 55 0 33 0 At London in England 11 30 N 51
24 34 6 In the Foreland of England 11 0 N 51 8 35 40 In Amsterdam 9 30 N 52 20
39 30 Northwesting The Northwesting, or the West variation of the second part
or space toward the North Increasing. At Helmshade to the westward from the
North Cape of Finmarke 0 0 60 0 At the North Cape of Finmarke 0 55 N 71 25 61
30 At Norquinda 2 0 N 71 10 63 30 At S. Michael or Archangel in Russia 12 30 N
64 54 83 30 In the South straight of Vaigatz 24 30 N 69 30 103 0 At Langeness
in Nova Zembla 25 0 N 73 20 100 30 Decreasing. In Williams Island In Nova Zembla
33 0 N 75 35 110 0 At Yshouck In Nova Zembla 27 0 N 77 12 120 30 At Winterhouse
In Nova Zembla 26 0 N 76 0 120 30 The Northeasting of the first part or space
toward the South. Increasing. 105 Spanish leagues Westwards from Cape S
Augustine in Brasile 0 0 S 0 0 At Cape S. Augustine in Brasile 3 10 S 8 30 6 0
North and South with Cape das Almas in Guinea 12 15 S 0 0 29 0 Toward the
Northwest Northerly from the Islands of Tristan da Cuneha 19 0 S 31 30 30 0
Decreasing Toward the Northwest, Westerly from the same Islands 15 0 S 31 30 36
0 North and South with the Cape of Good Hope 2 30 S 35 30 57 0 Northwesting The
Northwesting of the second part or space toward the South, except Go, Cochin,
and Cantan. Incr^asing* 17 German miles from Cape das Aguillas Eastwards 0 0 S
60 0 5 miles in the Sea from Terra de Natal 4 30 S 33 0 66 0 At the shoalds of
Indie 11 0 S 22 0 79 30 In M^sambique 11 0 S 14 50 81 40 In the Bay of S.
Augustine in Mada^gascar 13 0 S 23 30 83 0 Southwards from Cape S Roman 16 0 S
28 0 86 20 In Anthony Gills Bay in Madagascar 15 0 S 16 20 91 0 Decreasing. 34
German miles Southeast from Brandaon 22 0 S 19 20 110 0 In Goa a famous Mart
town in Indie 15 10 N 25 30 120 0 In Cochin 15 0 N 9 45 120 0 25 German miles
West. a little Northerly from the Southwest corner of Sumatra 6 0 S 5 28 147 0
In Bantam a Mart town of Java 4 45 S 6 0 150 0 In the Island Lubocqua 2 25 S 6
10 155 0 In the Southwest corner from the I Will of Balij 1 30 S 8 40 157 0 In the
mouth of the river Cantan in China 0 0 N 23 0 160 0 In Bu^^a^ 46 Dutch miles
Eastward^ from the East part of Java 0 0 S 160 0

A declaration of the form ^r Table or veiw of variations.
BEfore we come to the Declaration of this Table, this first of all we would
not have unknown, namely, that if perchance hereafter by more diligent and more
exact experience, any other variation, Longitude, or Latitude of places can be
found, then that which is set down in this Table, so as it should be needful
to change the difinitions and expositions of some things and words here set
down: yet we ought not therefore to be scared from this purpose; but much
rather ought we to strive with all our strength to attain thereto, that by
little and little we may come to a more certain knowledge of things; building
upon these as upon foundations: we therefore following this opinion will
prosecute that as true, which at this time is most like to be true; that if
others also do the same when occasion is given, we may always come nearer to
that which is most true in the nature of things.

Which things being omitted, that we may come to the declaration of the former
Table, first of all we say, that the first of the three columns which thou
see in the Table, shows the variation of the place, the second, the
Latitude to which the third is adjoined containing the Longitudes, as we could
by conjecture attain unto them, that the places might so much the more easily
be found in the Globe, and the manner of the variations might more plainly be
showed in that which follows hereafter. The mark of the letter N in the
second column, signifies North Latitude, and S South.

Then, because in them mention is made of the variation of the Northeasting, or
the Northwesting increasing or decreasing, all which (as proper words of art)
have need of there several definitons: first of all we must know that the
Magneticall needle in one and the same place, does always show the same part
of heaven, but not the same part in all places: for in some places it points
due North, in other places it declineth more or less to the East or West.
Therefore in manner of a definition, we will say thus.

The first definition.
THE Declination of the Magnetical needle from the North toward the East, is
called the Northeasting, toward the West, Northwesting; and with a general
name it is called the variation: but the variation and the North pointing of
the needle (that is the pointing of the needle due North) may by a general
name be called the needle pointing, or pointing of the needle.

As concerning those words of increasing and decreasing, as also of the first
and second part or space, before we come to the definitions of them, they have
need of some precedent declaration. It may be seen in the Table of variations,
that in Corvo the Magneticall needle points due North: but after that, the
more a man shall go toward the East, so much the more also shall he see the
needle vary toward the East, till he come one mile to the eastward from
Plymouth, where the variation coming to the greatest is 13 degr. 24 min. From
hence the Northeasting begins to decrease till you come to Helmshude (which
place is Westwards from the North Cape of Finmark) where again the needle
points due North. Now the Longitude from Corvo to Helmshude is 60 Degr Which
things being well weighed, it appears that the greatest variation 13 degr. 24
minutes at Plymouth (the Longitude whereof is 30 degr,) is in the midst between
the places where the needle points due North. For 30 degrees is the midst
between the beginning and 60 degrees. And what is here said of the North part,
experience teaches that the same takes place in the South part also, for 105
Spanish miles from Cape S Augustine at the beginning of Longitude again it
points due North, as it does 17 German miles from Cape das Aguillas (as it
appears by the Table of variations) which place is in the Longitude of 60
degrees, and in the midst betwixt both at 30 degr. (as in the North part)
again, there is the greatest Northeasting; of which place there was this
mention made in the Table or view of variations: toward the Northwest
Nor^herly from the Islands of Tristan de Cuncha, where the variation is 19
degrees

Out of these we may conclude that the Magneticall needle does point due North
in every place situate in two Meridia^ half Circles drawn from the one pole to
the other by Corvo and Helmshud^. And that the greatest Northeasting is in all
places situate in the Meridian Semicircle drawn by that place, which we said
was distant one mile from Plymouth toward the East. So as that part of the
Earth which is contained between two Meridian Semicircles, distant each from
other 60 degrees in Longitude, is the space wherein the Magneticall needle
always declineth from the North toward the East. And the half of that part,
that is, that portion of the Earth which is included between two Meridian
Semicircles, the first of which is drawn by the beginning, the other by the 30
degr. of Longitude, is every where the place of the Northeasting increasing:
but the other half is the place of the Northeasting decreasing, to wit when one
goes from the west Eastward, following the order, of the degrees of Longitude.

By this that has been spoken of the first Segment, with the Northeasting and
his parts (in one of which parts the Northeasting is increasing, in the other
decreasing) it may easily be understood what the manner of the second Segment
is with the Northwesting, and what is the manner of the parts thereof, whereof
one is the part of the Northwesting increasing, the other is the part of the
Northwesting decreasing: for in the mouth of the River Cantan in China, at the
Longitude of 160 degrees distant from Corvo, the needle points due North the
third time: there therefore drawing the third Meridian Semicircle the portion
of the earth between the foresaid second Meridian Semicircle, and this third
(distant each from other 100 degrees in Longitude) shall be the space wherein
the Magneticall needle declineth from the North toward the West: and in the
middle of both in the Meridian Semicircle 50 degrees distant from the second,
and as much from the third, (or otherwise 110 degrees removed from the first
Meridian drawn by Corvo) shall be the greatest variation of the Magneticall
needle as it appears out of the Table of variations in two places, whereof
one is in Williams Island at Nova Zembla, where the greatest Northwesting is
found to be 33 degrees. The other is distant 34 Dutch miles to the Southeast
from Brandaon, where the greatest variation is found to be 22 degrees, and the
Longitude of each of those places is 110 degrees. So as in the half of the
second space (which portion of the earth is contained between the Meridian
Semicircles of 60 degrees Longitude, and of 110 degr.) the Northwesting is
every where increasing in the other half decreasing.

Of these 160 degrees of Longitude (which arch wants but 20 degrees of half
the compass of the earth) Plancius has attained to the knowledge of the
variation, in such sort as now we have showed. As concerning the other parts of
the World, distant either toward the West from Corvo, or toward the East from
Cantan, the experiments which hitherto the has gotten from the Spaniards, the
Englishmen, and our countrymen (the Netherlanders) do not well agree. Neither
is it any marvel, seeing they had neither perfect knowledge, nor needful
Instruments for that purpose: yet he expects other experiments from the ships
which have now been abroad 14 months and more. In the mean time we will bring
forth that to public view, which a man may without absurdity imagine.

If so be that the property of pointing due North, take place not only in the
three foresaid Semicircles (which we conjecture to be Meridian Semicircles
drawn from the one Pole to the other) but in the whole Circles also; there
should then be six such Semicircles upon the earth, containing also between
them six parts or spaces of the upper face of the earth.

The first with the Northeasting 60 degrees long.

The second with the Northwesting 100 degr. long.

The third with the Northeasting 20 degr. long.

The fourth with the Northwesting 60 degr. long.

The fifth with the Northeasting 100 degr. long.

The sixth with the Northwesting 20 degr. long.

That those things which have been spoken may by certain Geometrical figures
be more clearly conceived let ABCDEFGHIKLM, be the Equinoctial of the earth;
let N be the Po^e: then let NA be the half of the first Meridian Semicircle
drawn by Corvo: NC, half of the second Semicircle: NE of the third: NG, of the
fourth: NI of the fifth: NL of the sixth So as the arch AC. may make 60
degrees: CE. 100 degr. and so AE, 160 degr. EG, 20 degr. and so AG, 180 degr.
GI* 60. degr^ and so AI, 240. IL, 100 degrees, and so AL, 340 degr. LA, 20
degr. and so the whole Circle 360 degrees. Then let the six points BDFHKM be
the middles between AC* CE, EG* GI, IL, LA. Which being supposed, ANC shall
signify the first space with the Northeasting, ANB the Northeasting of the
first space increasing. BNC the Northeasting of the first space decreasing. CNE
the second space with the Northwesting: CND the Northwesting of the second
space increasing. DNE the Northwesting of the second space decreasing ENG the
third space with the Northeasting. ENF the Northeasting of the third space
increasing. FNG the Northeasting of the third space decreasing GNI the fourth
space with the Northwesting. GNH the Northwesting of the 4 space increasing,
HNI the Northwesting of the 4 space decreasing, INL the fifth space with the
Northeasting. INK the Northeasting of the fifth space increasing, KNL the
Northeasting of the fifth space decreasing. LNA the sixth space with the
Northwesting. LNM the Northwesting of the 6 space increasing. MNA the
Northwesting of the 6 space decreasing.

Note, Though a man may not without cause stand in doubt that the three last
Semicircles shall not be found in the same sort, which the former conjecture
has imagined, but peradventure in a quantity either greater or lesser, and in
another form: nevertheless, here the manner is rudely showed how the whole
world may be divided into certain portions by such Semicircles as shall
hereafter be found by observation. Moreover, by that which has been spoken, it
may easily be understood what be the Northeastings or Northwestings increasing
or decreasing, what is the first and second Meridian Semicircle, together with
the parts or spaces. Which that we may comprehend in form of Definitions, I
though good in few words thus to pronounce.

The second Definition.
The Northeasting or Northwesting increasing is that whereby the variation
increases, the Magneticall needle, being carried from the West Eastwards and
the Northeasting or the Northwesting decreasing is that whereby it decreaseth.

The third Definition.
The Semicircles of the Meridian, in which the needle points due North, we
call the first and second Meridian Semicircles, and so forwards according to
the order of the degrees of Longitude, how many soever such Semicircles there
shall be, beginning at the Semicircle drawn by Corvo.

The fourth Definition.
The portion of the Sphaericall superficies, or round upper face of the earth
contained by the first and second Meridian Semicircles, is called the first
part or space, and the rest in order, the second, the third, and so forth unto
the end.

Having thus set down the manner of the variation, it remains that we show by
examples (that which before we promised) that although in diverse places having
the same Latitude there be the same variation also, yet nevertheless the master
of the ship may know in what part of the world, and in what place he is. Let us
therefore again suppose that a ship had appointed to go from Amsterdam to Cape
S. Augustine, in Brasile, the Latitude whereof in the Table of variations is
set down to be 8 degrees 30 minutes, and the variation Northeasting increasing
of the first space 3 degr. 10 minutes. The same ship sailing along by the coast
of England, the variation shall be found to Northeast or vary toward the East
daily more and more until you come to Plymouth, where it comes to the
greatest, and is 13 degr. 24 min. Therefore the Master of the ship shall know
assuredly that hitherto he has sailed in the Northeasting of the first space
decreasing, and that after this he shall have the Northeasting increasing,
which when he shall find to be 10 degrees in the Latitude of 38 degrees. 55 min.
then he may assure himself that he is come to the Rock near Lisbone. Going
forwards again from thence as it were toward the Southwest, he shall daily
find the Latitude to be diminished, and the Magneticall needle declining
toward the North. Or otherwise if the Magniticall needle recline not toward
the North, but either stand still or else decline more toward the East, then
he may assure himself that he is carried Eastwards by some secret current not
perceived: which notwithstanding he may remedy, if he go so much the more
toward the West, until the Magneticall needle recover his due variation. But
if he should come to the Northeasting of 3 degr. 10 minutes, before he have his
Southerly Latitude to be 8 degrees. 30 min. he shall then endeavor as much as in
him lies to keep that variation* and so sail on toward the South part of the
world, guiding the ship so much the more toward the West or East as occasion
shall require. And although he may deem otherwise by conjecture* yet he shall
not follow that conjecture, for the reasons before showed, for so coming to
the Southerly Latitude of 8 degrees. 30 min. with the Northeasting increasing 3
degrees. 10 min. he may assuredly persuade himself that he is near Cape S.
Augustine, whereas otherwise trusting to conjectures he may very easily miss an
hundred leagues of the place to which he had appointed to go, not knowing in
the mean time whether he be to the Eastwards or to the Westwards from thence;
which experience it self has also taught too much in such Navigations. And
therefore the Latitude and variation in all places of the earth being observed,
and the knowledge thereof published, there shall be a much more easy way of
sailing about the World, then ever has been heretofore.

Hitherto we have described the kinds of the variation which are afterward
declared out of those things which were set down in the Table of variations. If
the Mistress of things (experince) shall hereafter teach that any thing is
otherwise, that thing may also out of the same experience be otherwise defined
that the Masters of ships in their Navigations may follow that only which shall
be best and most profitable.

How the North point, and the variation may be found.
ALthough the finding of the variation, (whereof hitherto often mention has
been made) is known to very many; yet we will in few words show this thing to
them which as yet peradventure know not the manner thereof. For here is a
question or demand how to find the Declination of the Magnetical needle. First
therefore the North point must be sought out, that the pointing of the needle
may be compared therewith. The finding thereof in a moveable ship has no small
affinity with the finding of the North point or Meridian line on land, and may
thus be shortly dispached. In the Instrument which some call the Sea-directorie
some the Nauticall box, and we for avoiding ambiguity, name the Sea-Compasse,
in that Instrument I say the Flower-deluce ought to agree with the Norh point
of the needle, or wiers lying underneath: or (that which is far more
commodious) in stead of the flower-deluce the Magneticall needle may be fastened
above upon the paper or pastboard, and the limb or circumference of the
pastboard must be divided into 360 degrees, beginning at the North point of the
needle as you may see hereafter in the Circle A.B.C.D, wherein the Magneticall
needle is signified by A.C. which is fastened above upon the paper or pastboard.
E is the center. The use thereof is this. As the Master of the ship in seeking
the Latitude is wont to tarry for the noonetide, that is to say, until the
shadow of the Perpendicular style or of the plumb-line agree with the Meridian
line in his Instrument: so all things also do here proceed, but that he
begins three or four hours before noone, marking diligently into which
degree of the Compass, or into what division, the shadow of the Perpendicular
style, or plumb-line falls. Let us suppose therefore that he find it in the
40 degrees. which we have noted with the letter F. so as G.E.F. may signify the
whole shadow: then he shall seek the height of the Sun, which for examples
sake admit he find to be 25 degrees: which together with the 40 degrees above
named, he shall note down for helping his memory: After this he shall attend
till the Sun descending afternoon, come to the same height of 25 degrees, and
he shall then also diligently mark what place the shadow of the Perpendicular
style points in the paper, which again let us take to be 40 degrees. to wit, the
other way as at the letter H, so as now IEH may represent the whole shadow.
Which being done, the midst of the arch FH (that is A) is the North point: and
because the Magneticall needle directly points the same, it has no variation
in that place, because it shows due North But if in the same experiment after
noon the shadow had not showed the 40 degr. on the other side beyond A, but
(for examples sake) the 20 degr. only unto K in that case the ark FK making 60
degr. ought by imaginaon to be divided into two parts at L. so as LF and LK may
make either of them 30 degrees and the variation sought for may be from L to A
Eastwards 10 degrees.

But if in the same afternoon experiment, the shadow of the Perpendicular style
L had showed 30 degr. from F the ark FL (containing 30 degrees.) must by
imagination be divided at M, so as MF, ML may either of them contein 15
degrees; which being thus performed, M shall be the North point and A the point
of variation sought for, Northeasting from M to A 25 degr. and so in the rest.

But if the needle only were turned about and not fastened to the paper or
pastboord (as before) and the degrees were marked in the margin or limb of the
Box, or case of the Instrument as is sometimes used, there is the same manner
of using it, that was before rehearsed: saving that in the beginning of the
Observation* the Box must be turned about so far till the Magneticall needle
show the beginning of the degrees.

Others take an Azimuthal or vertical Quadrant, whose Horizontall plain
(whereupon it stands upright) without any impediment received from the motion
of the ship always remains Parallel to the Horizon, in such manner as we
shall show. Thus the height of the Sun is found, together with the Azimuth*

The fashion of this Instrument may be described after this manner: ABC
signifies a Quadrant of a Circle standing at right Angles upon the Circle BDCE
divided into 360 degrees, whereby the plain of the Horizon is s^gnified. The
center thereof is F, upon which the Quadrant may be turned about: and that it
may always remain at right Angles upon the Circle BDCE it is under-propped on
both sides from G to D and E and those props are fastened to the same quadrant,
that they may be turned about together with it. Moreover in the Circle BDCE
there is a glass and under the glass a Magneticall needle, which must be so
long as the box may suffer it. And the box or case has within it 360 degrees,
which the magneticall needle may precisely point unto, which likewise do agree
with as many other degrees inscribed into the Horizontall plain.

This Instrument was made according to the invention of Reginaldus Petraeus,
hanging upon two Axtrees like the Sea-Compass that so the Circle BDCE
notwithstanding the motion of the ship, may always be equally distant from
the Horizon. And that this may be done with the greater security the weight
marked with the letter H is adjoined underneath, containing 25 or 30 pounds, or
so many as the greatness of the Instrument shall require. But this also is
worthy to be noted, to wit, that the Quadrant Perpendicularly erect in his
place is of the same weight on both sides of the center, that is to say, the
side from F to C counterpoyseth the side from F to B, which may be known if a
man take up the Quadrant, hanging it with G downwards* the thread being fastened
in the midst of BC at F, and then cut off so much of the heavier part, as may
suffice, that the line BC may hang level. But because some man may object that
the Ruler or Index which the barbarians call the A^hidada, may bring a great
variety in the weight as it shall be turned higher or lower: we must know that
any such thing need not to be greatly feared because of the great weight H,
and the l^ghtness of the Ruler.

The use of this Instrument in finding the North point and variation is this:
you must begin to Observe (as in the former kind) certain hours before noon,
and the instrument must be turned until the Magneticall needle point to the
beginning of the Circle: then the Quadrant must be turned this way or that way,
and the sight Rule^ of the Quadrant must be lifted up or put down till the Sun
shine through the sight. All which being done, suppose it be found (for
examples sake) that the utmost Margin or Index of the Quadrant show in the
Horizontal plain 40. degr. and admit the height of the Sun be also found to be
25 degrees, which together with the 40. degrees he shall for memories sake have
need to note. And when he has expected afternoon till the Sun descending by
the same Instrument be found placed in the same 25. degr* of Altitude, then the
Box it self must again be turned this way or that way, until (the Sun again
shining through the sights) the Magneticall needle do point to the beginning
of the Circle. Which things being thus dispatched, the middle point of the arch
in the Horizontall plain between the first and second experiment is the North
point, and how much the needle declineth from that point, so much is the
variation sought for, as before we have showed in the first example more at
large.

Whatsoever we have affirmed to be available in the day time, in these
experiments of the Sun, the same may be understood and done in like manner in
the night, by any of the fixed stars, whereof there is the same use in this
matter that there is of the Sun. But there is not the same reason of the Moon,
as well because of the swiftness of her proper motion, as also because of the
greatness of her Parallax (as they call it) which the overmuch neereness of
the Moon to the Globe of the earth brings forth. But this also is to be noted
that two, three, or four, yea and more Observations may be made in the
foore-noon. As for example, let the first be when the Sun is 10 degrees above
the Horizon, the second when it is 15. degr. the third when it is 20. degr. and
if any man will make trial as often after noon, he shall see how every
experiment agrees with other, and when at every moment the same North point is
found, that thing shall give the Master of the ship no small courage, and more
certain confidence of his work.

But notwithstanding, when the Mariner sayleth from the East Westwards, or
contrariwise from the West Eastwards, it may be that in the space of 10 or 12
hours between the first and second experiment, there may be difference of one
degree or more in the variation, whereof may follow that the North point found
by the first forenoon Observation, and the last in the afternoon, shall not
agree with that which was found by the first in the afternoon and the last in
the forenoon: when notwithstanding the Mariner has not erred in Observing.

Which if it shall happen often, the skillful Mariner may judge thereby what
difference of variation is answerable to any determinate time of sailing, and
so find a way whereby the North point may be found with more certainty and
security: which thing may thus also be done* if a man diligently compare the
variation found in the former days with the variation which he presently sees.

FINIS

