THE TRVE EFFIGIES OF Sr HENRY WOTTON KNIGHT EMBASSADOVR IN ORDINARY TO THE MOST
SERENE REPVBLIQVE OF VENICE, AND LATE PROVOST OF EATON COLLEGE.

Anno Aetat is Suae 72



THE STATE OF CHRISTENDOM: OR, A most Exact and Curious Discovery of many
Secret Passages, and Hidden Mysteries of the Times.

Written by the Renowned Sr HENRY WOTTON, Knight. Ambassador in Ordinary to the
most Serene Republique of VENICE, And late Provost of EATON COLLEGE.

LONDON, Printed for HUMPHREY MOSELEY, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Prince's Arms in St Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

To the Judicious Reader.
THe Author of these Politic and Polite discourses, knew the world so well,
and the world him, that not to know Sr Henry Wotton, were an ignorance beyond
Barbarism, in any who have been conversant in the least measure with any
transactions of State: A Knight he was of choice Intellectuals, and noble
Extraction, who may be said to have King'd it abroad half his age in Embassies,
by representing the person of his Sovereign Prince in most of the Courts of
Christendom, amongst the severest and most sagacious sort of Nations; for he
was thrice sent Ambassador to the Republique of Venice, from the most serene
Prince James the first King of Great Britain (by whom the Order of Knighthood
was conferred upon him.) Once to the States of the United Provinces. Twice to
Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy. Once to the United Princes of Upper Germany in
the Convention at Heylbrun. Lastly, He was sent Extraordinary Ambassador to
the Archduke Leopold, the Duke of Wittenberg. Imperial Cities, Strasburgh and
Ulm, and to the Roman Emperor himself, Ferdinand the second: And however it
may be thought by some that after so many great and noble employments, the
Provost ship of Eaton was a place not considerable enough for a personage of
his merit; yet if we consider the sedateness of his temper and spirit, he being
of a speculative and quiescent disposition, it seems to have been rather his
own choice, then any want of regard, in those times, to a man so highly
deserving of the Commonwealth; and consequently, it appears that those weighty
affairs he managed both at home and abroad with so much honor and reputation,
were rather the effects of his zeal to the service of his King and Country,
then of any aspiring or ambitious thoughts; seeing he forsook the highest
places of honor and profit, which he merited at the hands of a great King, for
the more contenting enjoyments of a solitary and studious retirement. Had he
been never known unto the world until the publishing of his late works called
Reliquiae Wottonianae, there is in them contained that which may abundantly
demonstrate how admirably he was accomplished both in the severer and politer
Arts. Not to insist upon the many Elogiums deservedly fixed upon his fame by the
most learned and judicious persons both Native and Foreign; I shall only
insert what the most vogu'd Poet of this age has sung of his skill in Tongues.
He had so many Languages in store, A. Co^ley.

That only Fame can speak of him in more.
It were but needless therefore to premise any thing concerning these following
discourses, written by a person of such a known and celebrated worth, but only
this, that by the high quality of his negotiations in sovereign Courts, he had
the greatest advantage that could be to feel the pulse of Government, and make
inspections into those Arcana Imperii, those mysteries of State, which he
communicates here to the world, in many choice and judicious Observations,
whereby the discerning Reader may be will acqnainted with the state of Europe,
and the interest, dependencies, and power of most Princes, together with the
occasions and motives of most of the Wars that happened the last century, whereof
some came from slight quarrels; for he tells you that Charles the Hardy Duke of
Burgundy, made a war for a Cart-load of Sheepskins, in which he breathed his
last: With these Modern observations he intermingles many ancient passages,
both of Greeks and Romans, which may much conduce to rectify and enrich the
understanding of the Reader.

The Contents of the Several Discourses.
I. THe Occasion of Sir Henry Wootton 's undertaking this Treatise. p. 1. II.
His Opinion both in general and particular concerning Princes, their means and
designs. 5 III. That notwithstanding the Invasion of the Turks, the Civil Wars
among Christian Princes cease not 10 IV. That Princes aiding of Rebels is no
new thing, but has been practiced in former Ages. 13 V. That it was not
without just cause that the Flemmings rebelled against the king of Spain. 16
VI. The several rebellions of the Frenchmen against their King, and the causes
thereof. 19 VII. The practices of Sejanus, Pompey, Crassus, Piso, and Curio,
with a comparison between the Duke of Guise and them, and also other great
Rebels 23 VIII. That the Salique Law of France did not infringe the Title of
former Kings of England to that Crown, and the Frenchmens Objections concerning
the same answered 29 IX. That Kings have often dis-inherited their eldest sons,
and given their Kingdoms either to strangers, or to their younger sons 37 X.
Reasons why the Kings of England having a right to the Crown of France, and
having had so good success in former times in demanding of their right, do not
still continue to presecute their demands, and the causes and means of their
losing all France. 42, 45. XI. How the Kings of Spain Came to arrive to this
height of Power which they enjoy at present, from so small a beginning. 52 XII.
That the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily have been fatal to most Nations of
Europe. 54 XIII. By what means the Spanish King obtained Naples and Navar. 58
XIV. The Spanish King 's Title to the Kingdom of Portugal 59 XV. The Authors
opinion concerning the claim of the several Competitors to the Crown of
Portugal. 60 XVI. The Spanish King's Title to the Indies. 61 XVII. The Spanish
Kings Title to Milan. 62 XVIII. The Spanish Kings Title to the Dukedom of
Burgundy, and how he retains all those States which he possesses 63 XIX.
What inconveniences Armies have bin subject to, going far from home, with the
causes of Hannibal's ill fortune. 69 XX. The manner of the king of Spain's
dealing with the Turk. 71 XXI. The manner of the Spanish King's proceeding with
the French 73 XXII. The Spanish King's proceeding with the Princes of Germany.
79 XXIII. VV hat account the Spanish king makes of the Princes Italy, 80 XXIV.
Queen Elizabeth proved to be the most considerable enemy of the Spaniard. 82
XXV. Diverse examples showing, that what God has decreed, cannot be prevented
by any foresight of man. 87 XXVI. Queen Elizabeth justified in her attempts
against Spain and Portugal. 91 XXVII. Several examples in what manner Princes
have demeaned themselves toward those that have fled to them for succor. 95
XXVIII. That Princes have often broken Leagues with their confederates upon
occasion given, or upon some considerable advantage 98 XXIX. That there was
just occasion given for the intercepting the Spanish money sent into Flanders.
105 XXX. That the Spaniard is generally supposed to be more powerful then
really he is. 110 XXXI. The nature and condition of the Spanish people. 115
XXXII. The false commendations given by diverse Authors unto Spain. 117 XXXIII.
That the King of Spain 's wars with the Low Countries, have deprived him of
that benefit which he might have reaped if they had not been so much
impoverished. 123 XXXIV. That it was no point of Policy in the Spanish King,
not to grant liberty of Conscience to his subjects in Flanders. 128 XXXV. That
it redounded not so much to the Spanish Kings honor as he imagined, to enter
into a League with the Princes of Italy, the Duke of Lorrain, and the House of
Guise against the Lutheran Princes. 136 XXXVI. That many Princes have been less
to blame for entering into a League with the Turk, then the King of Spain for
his League with the Guisards. 139 XXXVII. That Princes oversights are never
forgotten after their deaths, however their virtues may. 142 XXXVIII. The
likelihood of the downfall of the Duke of Guise his faction. 145 XXXIX. That it
is but uncertain trusting to the friendship of Rebels 148 XL. The French King
vindicated from diverse things laid to his charge. 151 XLI. The King of France
his killing of the Duke of Guise justified. 160 XLII. How the Kings of France
have from time to time raised the revenues of that Crown. 166 XLIII. The
commendations of Henry the third of France from diverse eminent Authors. XLIV.
To what a vast power and authority the Popes of Rome are advanced from a small
beginning, with their deceits and cruelties. 172 XLV. What losses and injuries
Princes have sustained by submitting to the Pope's authority 179 XLVI. Queen
Elizabeth unjustly accused by the English fugitives, to the King of Spain for
overcharging her subjects with unaccustomed subsidies and taxes. 183 XLVII. The
Spanish King blamed for giving too easy credit to the reports of the English
fugitives. 189 XLVIII. Certain objections against the Queen of Englands putting
the Scottish Queen to death, answered. 191 XLIX. Whether it be allowable for
Subjects to take up Arms against, or put their Princes to death. 202 L Of the
proceedings of diverse Princes toward those that have fled unto them for
succor. 208 LI. That Ambassadors violating the Laws of Nations, or of Arms,
have oft-times been rigorously dealt with. 210 LII. That neither the death of
the Scottish Queen, nor any other occasion, could warrant the King of Spain's
invading of England. 215 LIII. That it is no easy matter for the King of Spain
to conquer England, 218 LIVE. The Popes and Emperors machinations against the
Lutherans, make them so much the stronger. 224 LV. The cruelty of Princes to
their subjects, proves most commonly prejudicial to themselves. 229 LVI. Many
motives of Rebellion and Discontent among the K. of Spain 's subjects,
threatening inconveniences to him the like whereof have fallen upon Princes in
former ages. 238 LVII. That many famous and learned men have favored wrong
causes for reward or preferments sake. 241 LVIII. That the K. of Spain 's best
friends may be easily won to for sake him, or at least to stand Neutral. 243
LIX. Several Emperors of the House of Austria set forth according to their
true qualities and conditions. 249 LX. That there is as just cause to fear
France if that Kingdom grow too powerful, as Spain it self. 257 LXI. That the
Low Countries joined together under one Form of Government, would grow very
formidable. 258 LXII. How powerful the Switzers are grown since they have
Incanton'd themselves. 260 LXIII. How expedient a Confederacy with the
Low Countries is, in reference to a falling out either with France or Spain.
261
In the Supplement.
I. John de Soto Secretary to Don John de Austria removed, and John de Escovedo
put into his room. p. 2 II. Antonio Perez commanded by the K. of Spain to
poison Escovedo 3 III. Several questions discussed concerning Escovedo 's
murder, and first, whether the K. commanding Escovedo to be murdered, may not
worthily be accounted a murderer. 4 IV. The second question, whether Antonio
Perez obeying the Kings command, be not guilty of Escovedo 's death as well as
the King. 10 V. The third question, whether the King being found a murderer,
deserves not to be deposed or excommunicated, better then the K. of France
deserved to be deprived of his life for murdering the Duke of Guise. 13 VI.
The fourth question, whither this excommunication and deposition may be
warranted by the example of other Prince. 14 VII. Whether wilful perjury, and
breaking of Laws be punishable with deprivation in a Prince, and whether
subjects may lawfully resist such a Prince. 17 VIII. That the Nobility of
Aragon have from the beginning bound their Kings strictly to the maintaining of
their privileges. 22 IX. That Subjects may seek remedies against such Princes
as will not do them Right and Justice. 26 X. The K. of Spain 's actions much
aggravated in respect of those which the K. of France has been charged with.
27
The Table.
A
ADrianus the Emperor's vast Armies and strength in war p. 74 Albertin Coraza
made lord of Padua. p. 53 Alexander the Great, the pattern of a valiant Prince
p. 5 Not superior to diverse of-the Roman Captains p. 232 233 Alexander King of
Epirus his opinion concerning Alexander the Great's victories p. 74 Pope
Alexander the third's prastises against Frederick Barbarossa p. 177 Alonzo King
of Aragon adopted by Joan Queen of Naples p. 55 Alphinus King of the Scots and
Picts openly beheaded p. 214 other examples of the like nature p. 215 Cardinal
Allen compared with Richard Shaw, and John Petit p. 189 The ambition of the
Earl of Anjou 's wife, set him on to get the Kingdom of Naples p. 258 Amulius
his cruelty to his Brother Numitor and his children. p. 89 Anjou quitted by the
King of England p. 45 Don Antonio justifies his Title to Portugal by several
arguments p. 60 Anthony Montefeltro made Duke of Urbin by the Emperor Lewis 53
Appius his severity hurtful to the Commonwealth 233 The Archbishop of Toledo
rebelleth against the King of Aragon, p. 16 and is aided by Alonzo K. of
Portugal. ib. Aristides the pattern of a just Magistrate 5 Armies going far
from home, meet with many occasions of destruction p. 70, 71 Artevild,
Agricola, and Besconius, the chief Ringleaders of the Gantois Rebels 230, 231
Astyages seeks the destruction of his Grandchild Cyrus 87, 88, 89 Attila the
Scourge of God 5 Augustus the pattern of a fortunate King 5 The Duke of Aumale
chosen head of the faction of the Guises 159 The House of Austria their
Original from Hapsburgh p. 17 Their Greatness, Tyranny, and Oppression p. 17,
18 The continuance of their Greatness 50 The Author a voluntary Exile in the
time of Queen Elizabeth p. 1 His Credit with Great men, and Experience in
Foreign Affairs 3
B
BAgeus his Magnanimity and Resolution p. 161, 162 Lords of Bearn heretofore of
great power in France 37 The Duke of Bedford refuses to meet the Duke of
Burgundy 47 Bellemarine a Saracen marries the Daughter of Peter King of Spain,
and turns Christian 140 Bernard King of Italy cruelly used by Lewis the Meek
163 Bernardin Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador sent away not without just cause
p. 211 His practices against Queen Elizabeth, p. 212, 213 He is compared to
Richard Shaw, and John Petit 189 Blemishes of diverse great Captains p. 142, 143
Brennus makes war against the Romans 210 The Britans excuse the breach of
their League with the Picts 99 The Duke of Britain refuses to restore the Earl
of Richmond to Edward the fourth, and Richard the third 95 The Duke of Burgundy
murdered by the Dolphin of France 38 Buchanan 's opinion concerning subjects
taking up Arms against their Prince, 202, 203
C
CAesar his prodigality in his youth, p. 24 His four great Competitors, ibid.
His cunning practices to attain his greatness 25 The King of Calecut drives
the King of Cochin out of his Realm 95 Caligula 's cruelty 231 Caius Marius the
Founder of Cities 5 Cambyses being jealous of his brother Smerdis, murthereth
him, p. 89 The pattern of a cruel Governor 5 Campobasso forsakes the Duke of
Burgundy in the fight against the Prince of Lorrain 253 Duke Casimire comes
into Flanders with an Army, p. 155 A peace concluded between him and the
French, Ibid. Catholics of England the Spaniards chief Enemies at the
Invasion of eighty eight 218 Charles the Great the son of Fortune 5 Charles the
fifth his policy to keep the Kingdom of Aragon, p. 68 What Forces he had in his
chief wars, p. 121 122 His endeavor to subvert Luther, and the Protestant
Princes proves fruitless, p. 224, 225 His Civility to them afterward p. 226 A
deep Dissembler 252, 253 Charles the sixth King of France, his intention to
invade England, p. 190 The cause of his not proceeding falfly charged upon the
Duke of Berry, ibid. He is civilly treated by Henry the fifth 34 Charles the
seventh dis-inherited for his disobedience to his Father 36, 37 Charles the
eighth King of France, his claim unto the Kingdom of Naples 56 Charles Prince of
Tarento crowned King of Sicily by Pope Clement 54 Charles Earl of Flanders
cruelly murdered by rebels 124 Charles Duke of Burgundy slain by the treachery
of Nicholas Campobasso 253 A brief Character of the chief Princes and States of
Christendom 4 A Character of the Spanish Monarchy 84, 85 Cinibaldo Ordelafi
obtains the Cities of Furli and Cesena 53 Pope Clement favored by the French
against Pope Urban 54 Clement the seventh's practices against the Emperor
Henry the fourth 177 Cleomenes his treachery toward Ptolomy King of Egypt 200
The Climate not the only proof of Wits 259, 260 The King of Cochin harbors
the King of Calecut 's enemies 95 A Comparison between the Duke of Guise, and
other great Rebels of other Countries 23, 26, 27 Conrade the Emperor's Law;
the Emperors Law concerning wicked Princes 204, 248 Conradin of Suavia
vanquished and beheaded by Charles, brother to the King of France 55
Constantinople taken in the time of Frederick the third 252 Contention about
the Kingdom between Alphonsus of Castile, and Garcias of Navar, p. 135 Between
Artobarzanes and Zerxes, ibid. Between John Baliol and Robert Bruce of
Scotland, p. 136 A contention between Alonzo de Vargas, and Julio Romero 116
Conversation allowed between men of different opinions in Religion 130, 132,
133 Councels chosen to rectify the mis-government of Princes 206 207 Cruel
Governors the destruction of many brave Nations, p. 126 And the occasion of
sundry Rebellions 127 Cruelty of the French where they have the upper hand 34,
35 Cyrus his Birth and Fortune, p. 87, 88, 89 He is styled the Father of Common
People, p. 5 His humanity to Astyages, and to Croesus 200
D
DAgobert leaves the Kingdom of France to his youngest son Clouis, p. 39. He
commands all those of a different Religion to depart the Kingdom within a
time limited 129 Darius his policy in revenging the injury of Oretes 161
Signior Darrennes his commendation of Henry the third of France 170 Kings
Deposed in several Nations 203, 204 The Diet at Auspurgh a politic pretense
of Charles the fifth 253 Dionysius the pattern of a Tyrant 5 Disobedience to
Parents severely punished, p. 40 The Disobedience of the Spanish Soldiers 116
Dissentions and troubles easily revived in France 261, 262 The Dolphiny
bequeathed to Philip de Valois 50 Dunorix spared by Caesar for his brother
Divitiacus his sake 162, 209
E
EDward the third his success in France, p. 10. He takes his advantage to
invade the Scots, notwithstanding the League between them p. 98 He is favored
by the common people of Flanders against Philip de Valois 261 Edward the
fourth's suspicion of Henry Earl of Richmond, p. 68 His politic proceedings
to regain the Kingdom of England 221 Queen Elizabeth of England blamed for
making a League with France and the United Provinces p. 3 The most considerable
Enemy of the Spaniard, p. 82, 83 Her Virtues and Power extolled, and compared
wi^h the mightiest Princes of former ages, 85. The attempts of many against her
life, p. 86 Her attempts against Spain and Portugal justified p. 91, 93 Her
assisting of Don Antonio justified, p. 94 And her protection of the Low
Countries, p. 102, 103 Her intercepting the Spanish money going into Flanders
excused, p. 105 The English Fugitives answered, who charge her with the raising
of new Subsidies and Taxes 183 Diverse Emperors have admitted Haeretiques in
their Realms, to preserve quietness among their subjects, 133, 134 Ambassadors
justly slain upon some occasions 210 Enemies not suppressed, but augumented by
Caligula's cruelty 231 England 's Title to France how it came to be neglected
p. 43, 45, 46, 47 etc. Its strength and security above other Nations, p. 219
The last of the Romans Conquests 220 English Armies coming into France,
compared by du Haillan to wild Geese resorting to the Fens in winter 83, 84
Englands possessions in Foreign parts 44 Ericus King of Norway demands the
Kingdom of Scotland in right of his daughter 198 Duke Ernestus the fittest
match for the King of Spain 's daughter 257 Escovedo 's murder censured, p. 3
His credit greater upon the Burse of Antwerp then the King of Spain 's 112 The
Duke of Espernon rendered suspected to the French King p. 157 He discovers the
practices of the Guises 165 Eude Earl of Paris made King of France instead of
Charles the Son of Lewis 42 Eumenes his stratagem to preserve his life 65 The
Excommunications of the Pope invalid 171 The Expenses of diverse Princes and
States in their Wars and Buildings, and other occasions. 113
F
FAbius Ambustus the Roman Ambassador, the occasion of the war between Brennus
and the Romans 210 Fabius Maximus the Buckler of the Commonwealth 5 Ferdinand
King of Spain lays claim unto the Kingdom of Naples, p. 56, 57 He excuses
the breach of the League between France and Spain, p. 98 His ingratitude to
Gonsalvo 238 Flanders distressed by plurality of Religions 6 Flemmings, that
they had just cause to rebel against Spain, p. 16, 17 The Flemmings and French
more boldly then justly accused of rebellion 2 Earls of Foix heretofore of
great power in France, p. 37 The Earldom of Foix given to the Earl of Candale
by the King of France 38 France divided into many opinions, p. 6 France has in
former times rebelled against their Kings, p. 19. The principal Kingdom of
Europe for antiquity, good Laws, etc. p. 19. Not subject to the Roman Empire,
p. 35, 36. Has been disposed of by Will and Testament, as well as other
Nations, p. 35, 36 Anciently divided into four Kingdoms, p. 53 Cannot be
lawfully Excommunicated by the Pope p. 248, 249 France and England 195 Francis
the first of France enters into a League with the Turks 139 Francis Sforza is
won by promises to take part with Philip Maria Duke of Milan 242 Frederick King
of Naples entertained by Lewis the French king 95 Frederick Duke of Austria
unlawfully chosen to the Empire 251 The Emperors Frederick the second and the
third oppose the Pope, and are excommunicated p. 174 Frederick the third freed
from the Castle of Vienna by George king of Bohemia 252 The French king's
prodigality in spending the Revenues of the Crown excused p. 168 His imputed
wantonness proceeded from corrupt education 169
G
GAleotto Malatesta made Lord of Armino Pescaro and Fano, by Lewis the
Emperor. 53 The Gantois rebel against Lewis the last Earl of Flanders p. 229
They take Bruges, and put the Earl to flight 230 Gargoris king of Crete his
several cruelties to his Grandchild Atis 89, 90 Gaston Lord of Bearn makes the
Earl of Foix his sole Heir 37 Gavel-kind, a Law pe^uliar but to some parts of
Kent 29 Germany pestered with sundry religions 6 A German Writer's testimony
alleged concerning the vices of Mary Queen of Scots 190, 191 Geytel de Veronio
has la Marca given him by Lewis the Emperor 53 The Golden Bull forbids the
choosing of above four Emperors in one House 254 Gonsalvo beats the French
out of Naples 57 Government strangely interchanged amongst several Nations 9
The Government of the Low Countries taken upon him by the Duke of Alenson 106
Great, to whom given as an attribute, or Surname 8 Guicciardine as well a
Lawyer as Historian 30 Guido Earl of Flanders denied his liberty by the King of
France 123 Guido Polenti made Duke of Camerino by Lewis the Emperor 53 The
Duke of Guise chief head of the Leaguers in France, p. 20 His proceedings and
policies p. 21 His subtle practices against the French King p. 157 He is
murdered in the Kings presence 158 The Guisards of France condemned of
ambition and treason, p. 140, 141 The probability of their ruin, p. 144, 145
Their rash proceedings after the Duke's death, p. 146, 147 Their accusations of
the French King refuted 151, 152
H
HAnnibal the pattern of an expert General, p. 5. His praise, p. 69 His
oversights, ibid. He fights the Romans with a very inferior number 78 Harold
's injuries to William Duke of Normandy the occasion of his invading England
220, 221 The Emperor Henry the third restores Peter King of Hungary his enemy
to his Kingdom 95 Henry the second, King of England, his humiliation to the
Pope for the death of Thomas Becket 180 Henry the third, King of England,
solicited by the Pope to aid him against Conrade the King of Sicily, p. 55. 56
His complaint against Pope Innocent to the General Council at Lions 180 181
Henry the fifth, King of England, his Title to the Crown of France, p. 29 The
Frenchmens objections answered, p. 30, 31, 32, etc. His success in France 10
Henry Base Brother to Peter King of Castile, aided by the Kings of France and
Portugal, p. 15 He drives his Brother from the Kingdom 60, 61 Henry Earl of
Richmond recovereth the Kingdom of England 221, 222 Henry Dandolo the Venetian
Ambassador his eyes plucked out by William King of Sicily 209 Sr Henry Cobham
's opinion concerning Henry the third King of France 189, 170 Hephestion the
pattern of a faithful Counselor 5 Hercul^s the Chastiser of Tyrants, and
Defender of the weak and helpless 108 Hugh Capet, by what means he attained the
Crown of France, p. 25. His practices imitated by the Duke of Guise 150 Hugh
Pudley, Bishop of Durham, his great riches 185 The Hugonots subversion
endeavored by the Guisards 158, 165
I
AJacobin Friar murthereth King Henry the third of France 159 Jam^s king of
Aragon and Sicily leav^h his kingdoms to his second Son Alphonsus 39 James
Prince of Scotland detained prisoner by Henry the first king of England 209
Jealousy the overthrow of diverse great Princes 238 Imbert leaves the Dolphiny
to Philip de Valois 50 The great Injuries done by the House of Austria to other
Princes 254, 255 Interviews between Princes many times dangerous 209 Joan Queen
of Sicily adopteth Lewis of Anjou 54 John king of England, first an enemy,
afterward reconciled to the Pope, p. 178. He enjoys all the Benefices,
Bishoprics, and Abbeys of his Realm p. 187 He is questioned by the French king
for the death of his Nephew Arthur, p. 199 And forfeits his Estates in France
for not appearance 199 John Balliol 's Title to Scotland preferred before
Robert Bruce by Edw. the first king of England 196 The Italian Princes hardly
able to help the Spaniard 138 Pope Julius cited by the College of Cardinals to
appear at the Council of Pisa 206 Justifiers of bad causes for gain or bribery
189 Justinian the Emperor his ingratitude to Narses 238
K
KEmitius king of Scotland, by what means he prevailed with his Nobles to fight
against the Picts 50
L
LAdiflaus king of Hungary dissembleth his grief for the murdering of the Earl
of Cilia 161 A League with Turks more allowable then with the Guisards of
France, p. 140, 141 Leagues may be broken upon just cause given, p. 98 And are
usually broken upon advantages, p. 98, 99, 101 The League between the Pope,
Spain, and Venetian against the Turk 137 The Leaguers in France their
proceedings and policy 19 Lewis the Meek his war against Bernard king of Italy
unjust p. 28 His cruel usage of him 163 Lewis Do-nothing deposed by the Nobles
of France 41 Lewis Oultremer condemned for his discurtesie to Richard Duke of
Normandy 97 Lewis the Emperor his humanity to Frederick his Competitor 200
Lewis the eleventh, king of France, pays a yearly revenue to the king of
England and his Counselors, p. 43 he chose rather to satisfy the demands of
his Nobles, then to hazard a war with his subject 236 Lewis king of Bohemia
brought up by the Marquess of Brandenburgh in all kind of delights 169 Lewis
Prince of France repulsed from England with dishonor 217 Lewis of Anjou
adopted by Joan queen of Sicily 54 Lewis Sforza Duke of Milan makes use of an
Army of Turks 139 Lewis Adolistz has the Cities of Faenza and Imola conferred
upon him by the Emperor 53 The Low Countries a considerable advantage to the
king of Spain 123
M
MAhomet how he grew to the credit and reputation of a God 50 Manlius being in
trouble, the Romans put on mourning weeds 5 Marcus Aurelius leaves the Empire
to his son Commodus unwillingly 39 Marcus Coriolanus reconciled to the Senate
of Rome by the mediation of his wife and mother, p. 1 His death bewailed ten
months by the Roman Dames, p. 5 His reconcilement to his Country proposed to
the Guises for imitation 148 Marcus Marcellus the Sword of the Country 5 The
Marquess of Mantua won by promises to take part with the Duke of Milan 242 The
Marquess of Pescara hardly dissuaded from siding with Charles the fifth The
Marquess of Villona rebelleth against the king of Aragon, and is aided by
Alonzo of Portugal 16 Martin Scala made Lord of Verona and Vincenza by the Pope
53 Mary Queen of Scots, her practices against Queen Elizabeth, p. 107 Several
arguments made in her behalf by her friends, p. 191 Answered, p. 192, 193 etc.
Masistias death greatly bewailed by the Persians 5 Matthew king of Hungary
striveth for precedence with Ladislaus of Bohemia 195 Maximinus his great
strength 231 The Duke of Main displeased with his brother the Duke of Guise 's
proceedings, p. 22 He and the Marquess du Pont Competitors 146 The Country of
Main quitted by the king of England 45 Menemus Agrippa's discreet Oration
appeaseth the rage of the common people 235 Merouingians, Charlemains, and
Capets, the three races of the French kings 36 Monastical Lives voluntarily
assumed by diverse Princes 215 The Murdering of the Duke of Guise excused 160,
161, 162, etc.
N
NAtions have their several qualities according to the Climate they inhabit 9
The Nature of the Italian and Spanish Soldiers 114 Navar conquered by the King
of Spain p. 58 A member of the Kingdom of France 59 New exactions cause
rebellion in the place where they are levied 6 Pope Nicholas the third uses
all means to diminish the French King's power 276, 247 Mr de la Noves opinion
concerning the strength of the French King 77
O
THe Obizes and Estentes made Dukes of Ferrara by the Pope 53 Olaus and Eustus
kill the Ambassador of Malcolm King of Scots 209 Open Enemies less dangerous
to Princes then deceitful friends 106 Othagarius King of Bohemia refuses the
Empire, p. 249 The Electors offer it to Rodolph Master of his Palace, ibid.
Othagar makes war against him, and is slain by reason of Milotas treachery 251
Otho the third the wonder of the world, 5 Otho Duke of Saxony subdueth
Berengarius, and is made Emperor, 173 Otho 's law concerning wicked Princes,
204, 248 The Oversight of the King of France after the murdering of the Duke
of Guise 145
P
THe Duke of Parma politiquely diverted from claiming his right in Portugal 68
Pope Paul the third's distaste against the Emperor Charles the fifth 100, 101
The Persians poll themselves and their Beasts for the death of their King
Masistias 5 The Marquess of Pescara dissuaded from following Charles the fifth
243 Philip the long bestows upon the Duke of Burgundy the County of Burgundy
29 Pipin 's politic designs to gain the Crown of France 26 Pius quintus
enters into a League with Philip of Spain, and the Venetians against the Turk
137 Poictou quitted by the King of England 45 Poland infected with sundry
heresies, p. 6 The kingdom of Poland after much entreaty accepted by the French
king Henry the third, p. 151, 152 The Polanders choose another king in his
absence 154 The Pope 's power small at the beginning, p. 172 By what means
advanced to such a height, p. 172, 173, etc. He flies to the king of France for
aid against the Lombards, p. 173 A perpetual sower of dissension between the
princes of Christendom, p. 177 A procurer of much bloodshed in France and
England, p. 178, 179 Not able to yield the Spaniard any great help 137
Portugal, how it comes of right to belong unto the kingdom of Spain, p. 59.
The several Competitors for that kingdom, p. 60 The Author's opinion concerning
this claim 60 A Prerogative belonging to Princes to sit Judge in their own
causes 213 Pride of the House of Austria by what means it might be pulled down,
255 The Prince of Conde, and the King of Navar join with Duke Casimir, 155
Princes degenerating from their Ancestors, may easily be driven from their
Crowns, p. 6 Princes ought to submit to the observance of their own laws p. 41
They ought to revenge injuries done to private subjects, p. 163 Princes of
small jurisdiction as absolute as those of greater 164 The Prodigality of
diverse Emperors, 168 Public Declarations the usual means of promoting or
justifying any design, 241
Q
QUarrels with Neighbor Princes to be composed before new enterprises are
undertaken 216
R
REbels favored and maintained by Princes of other Nations, 13, 15 Rebellions,
upon what small occasions they have broke out 239 Richard the first ransomed by
the Clergy and Commonalty of England, p. 5. He is taken prisoner by Leopold
Archduke of Austria 208 Richard the third's suspicion of Henry Earl of Richmond
68 Robert King of France leaves his Kingdom to his second Henry 39 Robert
Rudolphy his practices against Queen Elizabeth at the suggestion of Spain and
Rome 106, 107 Rodolph of Hapspurgh bestows the Kingdom of Austria upon his son
Albert, p. 53 He obtains the Empire by cunning, p. 249 Diverse great
Competitors at the same time, p. 249 He resigneth the Exarchat of Italy to the
Pope 254 Romans in enlarging their Dominions, what colorable pretenses they
had, p. 15 Courted or feared by all other Princes or States, p. 64, 65 Their
many and mighty victories 74, 75 Romulus his policy to augment the City of Rome
65
S
THe Salique Law belonged only to Salem a Town in Germany, where it was made,
p. 29 No lawful pretense to exclude Edward the third, and Henry the fifth from
the Crown of France 28, 29 The Earl of Salisbury 's example a warning to the
Guisards 148, 149 Sardanapalus the pattern of a lecherous and effeminate Prince
5 The Saxons and Danes conquer England rather by sub^ilty then force 220 Scipio
the pattern of a chaste Captain 5 The Scots and Picts invade Britain in the
absence of Maximinian 98 Sejanus his greatness and authority under the Emperor
Tiberius 23 Servilius judges gentle means the best to appease the peoples rage
233 Sigibert eldest son of Dagobert contented with the small Kingdom of
Austrasie 39 Sir-names given to Princes upon several occasions, p. 8 The
Surname and Title of a God given to Demetrius by the Athenians 5 Wicked or
foolish Sons succeed wise and good Fathers 7 The Sovereignty of the Kings of
England over Scotland, proved by Records, p. 195 The Scots objections answered
197 Spain 's large Dominions abroad, how it became united with the House of
Austria 54 The Spaniard 's policy commended and admired, p. 2 The Spaniard
censured, p. 3 The Spaniards and French compared with the Romans and
Carthaginians, p. 76 The designs of the Spaniard against the person and state
of Queen Elizabeth, p. 1 By what means his power may be diministed, p. 240, 241
Oftener conquered then any Nation of Europe, p. 219 The twelve Kingdoms of Spain
united in Ferdinand and Isabel 54 The Spanish King's Title to the Indies, p. 62
His Title to the Dukedom of Milan, p. 62 His Title to the Dukedom of Burgundy,
p. 63 By what means he preserves his Dominions, p. 63 His proceedings with the
Turk, p. 71 With the French King, p. 73 With the Princes of Germany, p. 79 With
the Pope, p. 80 With the Venetians, and the rest of the Princes of Italy, p.
81. With the Queen of England, p. 82 Supposed more strong and wealthy then he
really is, p. 111 His Errors in Governing the Low Countries, p. 125 His League
with the Guisards condemned, p. 136, 137, 140, 141 His intention to invade
England proved vain and indiscreet, p. 171, 172, etc. His light credit to the
false reports of English Fugitives, p. 171, 183 The Tyranny and Cruelty of his
Government 237 The Count of Saint Paul proclaimed Traitor by Lewis the eleventh
165 Subjects frame their lives and manners to the example of their Princes 8
Subsidies and Taxes levied by former King of England, 184, 185, 186 Succor
refused to diverse Princes out of politic interests 96 Suchin made Vicount of
Milan by Pope Benedict the twelfth 52 The Earl of Surry 's resolute answer to
the Judges 184 Switzers defrauded of a debt due from France, p. 42 To what
height they are grown from a low beginning 260
T
TEacha Queen of Slavonia, causes a Roman Ambassador to be slain 209 Temporal
Princes to intermeddle in spiritual affairs 182 Theodorick the first of France
deposed by the States of the Realm 41 Theseus his policy to augment the City of
Athens 65 Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury slain by four Assassinates 179, 180
Titus, the delight and love of the people 5 Towns not well inhabited, a main
cause of penury among the Inhabitants 6 Trajan the pattern of a good Emperor,
5 The Treason of the Duke of Bourbon renders him odious to a Spanish Grandee,
p. 139 He is proclaimed Traitor by Francis the first 165 Turain quitted by the
King of England 45 The Turks aid implored by diverse Christian Princes 139 The
Turkish Monarchy strengthened by the divisions between France and Spain, p. 2
And by the sloth and am^bition of Princes and States in several ages 11, 12
V
VAsoeus his immoderate commendations of Spain refuted 118, 119 The Venetians
break their League with the Spaniards upon the not delivering of Brescia 100 J.
Viennensis, his fa^se relation of Scotland, to Charles the sixth King of France
189, 190 The Violent proceedings of the Catholic Princes against the
Protestants, p. 226, 227 Makes their party so much the stronger 227, 228 The
Virgin of Orleans, her proceeding in France 49, 50 Pope Urban gives the Kingdom
of Sicily, and Dukedoms of Pulia and Calabria, unto Charles Earl of Argiers and
Provence, p. 53 Afterward to Lewis K. of Hungary 55 The Duke of Urbin and
Andrea Doria take part with Charles upon hopes of preserment 242, 243
W
WArs waged upon very slight occasions, p. 147, 148 Upon Injuries offered, to
prevent greater mischiefs 148 The Earl of Warwick 's example, a warning to the
Guisards, 148, 149 William K. of Sicily plucketh out the eyes of Henry Dandolo
the Venetian Ambassador 209 William Gonzaga made Lord of Mantua and Rezzo by
the Pope 53 Women's Rule and Government rare, (...) Cardinal Wolfey 's power
with Henry the eight, the French King, and the Emperor, p. 43 His policy in
entertaining Henry the eight with all delights 189
Z
THe Zeal of the French king to the Roman Catholic Religion 151, 160
Table to the Supplement.
ANtonio Peers forsakes Spain to live in England p. 1 He writes a Book
called. The Fragment of History, ibid. He imparteth the transactions between
John de Austria and the Pope, and Duke of Guise unto the K. of Spain, p. 3 He
poysoneth Escovedo, ibid. Aragonian kings subject to the constitutions of the
Country 21, 22, etc. THe Duke of Britany commands Bavilion to murder the
Constable of France 10
C
CArdinal de Guise his death compared with Escovedo 's 13 Clisson high
Constable of France preserved by Bavilion 10 Craesus spared by Cambyses his
servants, who were commanded to kill him 11 The Prince of Conde an enemy to the
Duke of Guise 's party, p. 28 He turns Protestant, and freeth Charles the
ninth out of prison
D
THe Danish King not to make war without consent of the States 21 The Pope's
Delegate in some cases above the Popes Legate 11 Diego de Meneses unjustly
executed by the Spanish King 27
E
THe Emperor may be convented by his own subjects before the Pope, 25 Escovedo
made Secretary to Don John de Austria, in the room of John de Soto, p. 2 The
Duke returning from Spain leaves Escovedo (...) him, where he is poisoned, p. 3
Several questions cleared concerning this fact 4, 5
F
THe French King deserved to lose his Crown for the murder of the Guises 13
G
GHilmesa freeth Antonio Peers out of prison 4 The Duke of Guise his death
compared with Escovedo 's 13
H
HArpagus saves Cyrus notwithstanding Astyages his command, 11 Hector Pinto a
Friar poisoned by the Soldiers of Castile 27 Henry Perera unlawfully executed
by the Spanish King 27
I
James de Moronack beaten to death with Soldiers 27 Indignities offered by
subjects to their Princes, no unusual thing 22 The Inquisition used against all
sorts of offenders as well as heretics 23 John de Soto Secretary to John de
Austria, p. 2 John de Escovedo put in his room 2 Don John de Austria concludes
a great League of friendship with the Duke of Guise 3
L
LAws to be observed by Princes as well as Subjects 21, 22
M
MOntmorency and Chastilian take part with Vendosm and Conde against the
Guises, p. 28 Montmorency made Constable of France ibid.
N
THe Names of several plotters against the life of Q. Elizabeth, 23 De la Nuca
executed by Alonzo de Vargas, at the command of the King Of Spain, 16
O
OAths not grounded upon a just cause, bind not 24
P
PEdro Escovedo accuses Antonio Perez of his fathers death 3, 4 Perjury
excludes a man from all preferment 18 The Polish King not to make war without
leave of the States 21 The Pope plotteth to make Don John of Austria King of
England, p. 2 Next to make him King of Tunis, ib. Princes deposed or
excommunicated for Murder, p. 14, 15 Their contracts bind them as much as Laws
19, 20
R
REmedies of Subjects against unjust Princes 26
S
DOn Sebastian of Portugal intends to aid Muly Mahomet King of Morocco,
against his brother 28 Sforza Ursino, and the Count de Terras Vedras, and
Emanuel Serradas, unjustly executed by the Spanish King 27 The Spanish liable
to be deposed for breaking the Laws of Aragon, p. 17 He enters into a League
with Muly Malucco against his own Nephew Don Sebastian of Portugal 27 The
Swedish King not to make war without leave of the States 21
THE STATE OF CHRISTENDOM.
AFter that I had lived many years in voluntary exile and banishment, and saw
that the most happy and fortunate success, which it pleased the Almighty to
send unto my gracious Sovereign against the malicious and hostile Attempts
which the Spanish Monarch, both openly and covertly, practiced against her
sacred Person, and invincible State and Kingdom, I began to despair of my long
desired return into my native Country, and to consider with my self, with what
price I might best redeem my sweet and inestimable liberty. Sometimes I wished
that her Majesty had, (as the Italian Princes have) many confined and banished
men abroad, upon whose heads there are great Fines set, to invite others to
kill them, in hope to receive those Fines in recompense of their murder: But
my wishes vanished as smoke in the wind, and as long as I dwelt in those
cogitations, me-thought I did nothing else but build Castles in the Air; then I
applied my wits to think upon some other means of better hope, and more
probability; and supposed that to murder some notable Traitor, or professed
enemy to my Prince and Country, might be a ready way to purchase my desire:
But the great difficulty to escape unpunished, the continual terror that such
an offense might breed unto my conscience, and the perpetual infamy that
follows the bloody Executioners of traiterous Murderers, (for I held it
traiterous to kill my friend and acquaintance) made both my heart and my hand
to abhor any such action: Martius Coriolanus seemed unto me a most happy man,
who, when in revenge of a few mistaken injuries, he had wrought his Country
great despite and annoyance, suffered himself with much difficulty, to be
entreated by his Wi^e, his Mother, and the Senate of Rome to return home, and
to become so great a Friend, as he had been a Foe unto his country. That day
should have been more joyful unto me then the day of my birth and nativity,
wherein I might have seen a Letter from any of my friends, with assurance of my
pardon to call me home. But I find my self so much inferior to Coriolanus in
good fortune, as I come behind him in manly valor, and other laudible
qualities. Whilst I lived in this perplexity, I happened (by chance) to meet
with an honest and kind English Gentleman, who was lately come out of Italy,
and meant to sojourn a few months in France, and then to return into England;
He knew both me and my friends very well: And although his License forbad him
to converse with any Fugitives, yet hearing (by common and credible report)
that I was not so malicious as the rest of my Contrymen, but lived only for
my conscience abroad, he adventured now and then to use my company, and with
me, and in my hearing, to use greater liberty of speech then with any other of
our Nation. Whereupon I presumed, that as I was trusted, so I might trust him
again; and as he did conceal nothing from me, so I might adventure to reveal to
him the secret projects of my inward cogitations: I therefore acquainted him
with my ea^nest desire to return, and with the great difficulty which I found
to procure my return; and he perceiving that my words agreed with my wishes,
and that my tongue uttered nothing but what my heart thought, promised me
faithfully to effect my desire, if I would be content to grant his request: I
presuming that he would demand nothing but that which should be both honest and
lawful, gave him my faithful promise to satisfy his demand: He accepted my
offer, and uttered his mind in this manner.

In my travel I have heard many things which I knew not when I came out of
England, and no more then I would, and yet much more then I can be well able to
answer when I come home; if you will be as willing, as I know you are able, to
frame me a good and sufficient answer to all that I have heard, all the friends
which I have in England shall fail me, but that I will purchase your return
home with credit and countenance: And because your promise binds you to
vouchsafe me this favor; I will as briefly as I can possible, show you to what
points I shall need, and most desire your answer. I heard Princes generally
reprehend the Flomings, perhaps more boldly then justly, accused of rebellion;
the French men, I know not how truly, burdened with the same crime; and our
Sovereign in my poor opinion wrongfully blamed for aiding both the French and
Flemish Nations. I heard some men to maintain this strange opinion, that the
Turk had long before this day been utterly subverted, or sorely weakened, had
not her Majesty helped those two Nations, which hindered both the French and
Spanish Kings from employing their united forces to the utter subversion of the
Turk. I heard some men charge us with vainglory, as men that had learned of
the vainglorious Soldier in Terence, to brag of our valor and exploits in
France, where they could hardly believe that we ever obtained the tenth part of
that which we boast to have atcheived: And others who were better acquainted
with our Histories, and more affected with our conquests, do wonder and marvel
greatly howwe could lose in a very few years all that our Predecessors got with
much effusion of blood, and with great difficulty. I heard the Spaniard (our
mortal and professed Enemy) highly commended, for that his Predecessors could
of a mean Earl, make themselves mighty Monarchs, and because that he with his
wisdom does maintain and keep all that they got: I heard his might magnified,
his Policy admired, his Government extolled, his Wisdom commended, his Wealth
feared, and all his Actions justified: I heard contrariwise our Portugal Voyage
condemned, the Cause thereof disliked, the Success dispraised, the
Entertainment given unto Don Antonio disallowed, and her Majesty accused to
have given the Spaniard many and diverse occasions of coffeehouse: The death
of the late Queen of Scots; The intercepting of certain moneys sent into the
Low Countries, The proceeding against Catholics, the expulsion of the Popes
authority out of England, the sending away of the Spanish Ambassador in some
disgrace, and our League and Amity with the United Provinces, are the principal
causes that displeased the Spaniard. I heard it imputed unto her Majesty as a
fault, that her Grace continued in league with the late French King, who was
charged to be a Heretic, a Waster of his Revenues, a Lover of dishonest women,
a Murderer of the Duke and Cardinal of Guise, and a Prince neither able nor
worthy to govern so great and mighty a Kingdom as France. I heard the Spaniards
attempts and enterprises against England justified, because our Queen was
excommunicated, her people not able nor willing to help and succor her, her
Subjects overcharged with unaccustomed Subsidies, our Forces not sufficient to
encounter with his strength, and our Realm easy to be subdued by Forraigners.
I heard again some men condemn the Spaniard of great folly, for ruling the Low
Countries by strangers; for not granting liberty of conscience unto his
Subjects in those Countries, for taking upon him to enforce them to alter and
change their Religion; for intending to reduce all Protestants to the ancient
profession of Papistry, for aiding the Leaguers in France, and for attempting
to make himself Monarch of the world. I heard some think it a thing impossible
to subvert him, others suppose it to be a very easy matter to overthrow him,
and many desirous to know the means how to weaken him; I heard the tumults of
Aragon diversely construed; the murder of Escovedo sundry ways censured, and
the proceedings against Antonio Perez justified by some, and condemned by
others. To be short, I heard many say more then I can well and readily
remember; and yet not so much as I can be content to hear in praise of my
Country, and in disgrace of Spain; in commendation of our Princess, and in
dispraise of the Spaniard; in allowance and approbation of all her actions, and
in reprehension of all, or most part of his Enterprises. These things were in
substance all that I heard; some to my comfort, and others to my grief: And if
in clearing all these things you will vouchsafe me your pains, I will warrant
your return within a very short while, after that you shall have sent me your
Treatise. Your credit with Cardinal Allen, your acquaintance with Morgan, your
Friendship with Thomas Throgmorton, your conversation with Charles Pagett, and
your long experience in foreign affairs, has undoubtedly enabled you to give
me a full satisfaction to all these demands. If you run through them lightly,
you shall rather point at them then please me; If you dwell upon them long, you
may fear to be thought too tedious: And yet because you have leisure enough to
handle them at large, I shall take great delight to see and read them somewhat
largely handled.

Such was his speech, and this my short reply. In hope of performance of your
promise, I will undertake your task; not because I take my self able to answer
your expectation, but to show you that I will hazard my poor credit to recover
my dear Country; and because I trust you will use my labors for your
instruction, and not to my discredit; You may be instructed if you read them
advisedly, and I discredited if you make them common. To be short, with
assurance of his secrecy, I undertook his task; if he shall hold his promise, I
shall think my labors well bestowed: if they may procure my return, I shall
have employed my pains to my contentment. And if my pains may pleasure and
satisfy the Readers, their satisfaction shall double my joys, when I shall
attain safe and free access unto the long desired place of my Nativity.

The singular affection which you bear unto me, and the great good opinion
which unworthily you have conceived of me, have greatly deceived you, in making
especial choice of me, as of one better able then any other of your wise and
discreet friends, to deliver unto you a sound and sure Judgment of the present
Estate of Christendom. You see Flanders in trouble; France in Arms; Scotland
in division; and the whole remainder of the universal Christian world, either
(as Neutrals) idly looking and gazing on their mise^ries, or (as men interessed
in the same cause) voluntarily ayding and abetting them, or their enemies: This
sight seems unto you very strange, because that professing one Christ
Crucified, fighting under one Master, and bearing the general name of
Christians, they give occasion unto the professed enemy of Christianity, by
taking advantage of their unnatural dissension, to to enlarge his (already too
large) Confines and Territories. In truth you have some cause to marvel hereat;
But if it may please you to remember, That things in common are commonly
neglected; that perils which be far off, and not presently imminent, are little
regarded; That dangers which are at hand, and hang daily over our heads, carry
us away with their due confideration from the vigilant care and providence
which we ought to have of common Enormities: And lastly, that this careless
negligence or the common Adversary, is no new thing, but a matter of great
Antiquity, and long continuance: You will leave to wonder thereat, and begin to
pr^y unto the Almighty (as I do) to remove the Causes of our unnatural (...);
to change the minds of our malicious Christians; and to illumina^e the hear^s
of our lawful Princes; that they may with the eyes of Indifferency and (...)
upon the calamity of their loving Subjects: Consider the cause (...) thereof;
consult upon the ways and means to redress the (...) deliberation, put in
present practice those remedies, (...) and singular Wisdom shall seem most meet
and convenien^: (...) and (...) but silly Ship-Boys in this huge Vessel, tossed
with the raging Waves of (...) unmerciful Seas: We may look upon the Masters,
behold the Pilots, and be ready at the Call and Command of the other Officers,
and this is all that we can do; and who so looks for more at our hands,
erreth as much in your Opinion, as you are deceived in your Choice: But the
Interest which you have in me, and the hopes which I conceive of you, make me
rather to hazard my poor Credit, then to incur your heavy Displeasure: You may,
and I hope you will, conceal, or excuse my follies; but I would not, and God
forbid I should, deserve the least diminution that may be, of your accustomed
favors toward me.

In hope therefore of your Secrecy, I will boldly enter into this Tragical
Discourse; The chief Actors whereof are, The mighty Monarch of Spain; The
merciful Queen of England; The unfortunate Don Antonio of Portugal; The valiant
King of France; The Imperious Prelate of Rome; The sleeping and secure States
of Germany; The Politic and Grave Senate of Venice; And the weak, but wise,
Princes of Italy: Spain coveteth more then his own; Portugal and France would
gladly recover their own: Rome and England labor and endeavor only to
conserve and maintain their own: Germany fears not the peril that is far off:
Venice temporizeth wisely; and the rest of Italy shows an outward affection
to him that is mightiest, but inwardly wishes his weakness, and the good and
prosperous success of his Adversaries.

This is in brief the open and hidden Idea of the present Estate of
Christendom, wherein the Princes are (as you see) many; their Designs (as you
have heard) too, viz. to conserve, and to increase their own; and the means to
effe^t and accomplish their Desires (as you shall understand) many in number,
and diverse in nature.

Of the Princes, their Designs, and their Means, I will deliver unto you my
opinion in General, and in Particular. Generally: You see, and I consider, that
by the Competencies, Pretensions, Titles, Quarrels and Debates of all these
Princes, the general Estate of Christendom is greatly weakened, and the strength
of the common Adversary daily increased; That all their Realms and Dominions
are either molested by continual Wars, within the very Bowels, and poor inward
parts of the same; or grieved with intolerable charges, in sending out Men and
Munition, with other things necessary, unto the said Wars; That their Subjects
are greatly impoverished, by reason of these Charges, and their hearts sorely
oppressed with grief and anguish because of these troubles: Lastly, That some
of these Princes fain would, and cannot, others can and will not, redress those
Enormities. Now seeing all this, you cry out with the time against the time;
with the time you accompany their just complaints with your sorrows, who lament
the iniquity of the time; and against the time, both you and they say, that it
is more wicked, dangerous, and troublesome then ever it was: You think it
impossible to find a Magistrate so just as Aristides; An Emperor so good as
Trajan; A King so fortunate as Augustus; A Prince so valiant as Alexander; A
Captain so chaste as Scipie; A Councellor so faithful as Hephestion; A General
so expert as Hannibal; A Conqueror so merciful as the Romans: You see no
Princes in this our corrupt Age, Carrion.
surnamed Gods, as was Demetrius amongst the Athenians; The delight and love of
the people, as was Titus amongst the Romans; The wonder of the world, Plutarch.
as was Otho the third, amongst the Germans; The Founder of their Cities, as
was Caius Marius amongst the Romans; The Father of the common people, Plutarch.
as was Cyrus amongst the Persians; Herodorus.
The Son of fortune, as was Charles the Great amongst the Bohemians; The
Buckler of the Commonwealth, De Hailon.
as was Fabius Maximus; Plutarch.
Or the Sword of the Country, as was Marcus Marcellus: You rather find that
some Princes may be called Tyrants, Carrion.
as was Dionysius; The Scourge of God, as was Attila; Epicures and God Bacchus,
Plutarch.
as was Antonius; Lords and cruel Governors, as was Cambises; Covetous and
Merchants, Herodotus*
as was Darius; Lecherous and Effeminate, as was Sardanapalus. You see no
Honors done unto Princes of our time, Titus Livius.
as was done in times past; If they be in Adversity, their Subjects put not on
mourning weeds, as the Romans did when Manlius was in trouble: If they be in
Prison, the Clergy gives not their Treasure, and the Commonalty the fourth
part of their goods, Holinshed. Polid. Virg.
for their Liberty, as the Clergy and Commonalty of England did for the Ransom
of R. 1. If God calls them to his mercy, neither do the women bewail their
deaths ten Months together, as the Roman Dames did the death of Coriolanus,
nor the men poll their Heads, Plutarch.
their Horses and their Mules, or fill the Air with cries, the Rivers with
tears, Herodot.
or the Fields with continual lamentations, as the Persians did for Masistias:
But contrary wise, some of them are wrongfully driven from their Kingdoms, as
in Don Antonio of Portugal; others continually molested with Domestical Wars,
Don Antonius.
as is Henry King of France; some untimely done to death by their unnatural
Subjects, Apology. R^stbergius
as was the late French King; others unjustly persecuted by their unmerciful
enemies, as is the merciful Queen of England; you see the Godly called ungodly,
as the Princes of France and England are commonly termed Heretics; and those
which are far from the Catholic faith, called Catholics, as the present
King of Spain, and a few of his Predecessors: You see Subjects licensed to
rebel against their Sovereigns, as in France and England; You see Fathers bear
Arms against their children, and Brethren war against the seed of their Mothers
Womb, as they do in France and Flanders. You see Fields that were wont to be
fruitful, to lie now barren and unfertile: Cities that were rich and populous,
to be poor and desolate, Merchants that lived in wealth and prosperity, to
languish in need and penury: Gentlemen that neither wanted ease or pleasure, to
lack all manner of rest and contentment: And lastly, Men, Women, and Children,
that knew not what murder and massacres meant, cruelly murdered, and daily
massacred: You see Germany pestered with diverse Religions; Poland infected with
sundry Heresies; France divided into many opinions; Flanders distressed by
plurality of Religions; and England troubled with Genevian Puritans, and
obstinate Barrowists: You see in all or some of these Regions, Monasteries
subverted, Religious Houses destroyed, Ecclesiastical living abused, and
Benefices unworthily collated: You see Justice corruptly administered, Laws
dissolutely executed, good counsel negligently followed, and dissembling
flattery more then diligently embraced: You see new charges daily invented,
unaccustomed Subsidies yearly imposed, extraordinary grievances hourly
practiced, and unknown Offices unadvisedly established: You see secret wars
under the name of peace, hidden enemies under the color of amity, privy
seditions under the pretense of ancient confederacies: You see Nobility to
degenerate in virtue from their Ancestors; Sons to vary in opinion from their
Fathers; Neighbors to dissent in Religion with their next Inhabitants; and
Judges not to agree in matters of Justice, with their fellows in Office: You
see the Puritan ready in outward appearance to dye for his Religion; the
Anabaptist for his; the Papist for his; the Lutheran for his; the Barrowist for
his; and other Sectaries for their several Sects and Heresies. Briefly, you see
Offices dearly sold, which were wont to be freely given: Women impudently bold,
which were accustomed to be honestly minded: Men transformed into mis-guised
Atires, and children brought up and misled in unknown vices and impersections.
Now, seeing all this, you fear that variety of Religions may subvert the
Countries wherein it is suffered, Dubraevius
as it did in Bohemia and Hungary; That new exactions may chance to cause a
Rebellion in the Regions wherein they are levied, as it did in France and
Flanders: That Princes degenerating from their Antecessors, Dinothus de Bello
Belgico.
may be driven from their Imperial Crowns, as they have been in Spain and
Germany: That Towns not inhabited, may cause penury amongst the Nobility, want
amongst the Merchants, and extreme poverty amongst the other Inhabitants, as
they do in France and Flanders. And lastly, That all and every one of these
Mischiefs and Miseries, may breed further inconveniences, as they have done in
other Countries, in which they have been either in old time, or within our
memory, practiced. This sight therefore, and this fear, ingendreth in your
heart a just and worthy dislike of the present time, and a great desire and
delight in the Age of your Forefathers: You condemned the one because it is
(as you think) very troublesome and vicious; and you commend the other, because
it was (as you suppose) very peaceable and virtuous: But if it may like you to
confer the one with the other, you shall find them both in like manner
reprehensible, and with equal measure laudable: For first you are to remember,
that all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, represent in outward show and appearance,
the figure of a humane body, and have (as our bodies have) their times of
health, and their times of sickness; their seasons of prosperity, and their
seasons of adversity; sometimes they flourish with wealth and plenty, other
times they languish in want and penury: And as in all Ages, as well as in ours,
men's bodies have been disquieted, altered, distempered, yea and destroyed with
burning Agues, Pestilent Fevers, contagious Plagues, and other mortal Diseases;
so in other times, as well as at this present, Commonwealths and Kingdoms,
resembling therein (as I have said) our natural bodies, have suffered
distemperatures, alterations, changes, and subversions, by intolerable
exactions, domestical dissentions, foreign wars, and other such like
inconveniences, as trouble the present Estate of Christendom.

Cast your Eye upon all the same Regions which are now under the general name
Christendom, and see whether in the very Age, or immediately after the Age of
those virtuous and good Princes (of whose glorious Titles Histories make
mention) they felt not, in like manner as we do, the heavy hand of Gods
Indignation; Who (either to plague and punish the sins of the Fathers in their
Children; or to make us know and remember, that our Princes, although they are
constituted and appointed in higher degree then we, yet they are subject both
to his Will and Pleasure, and to our imperfections and vices, as well as we)
sends us most commonly a wicked or foolish Son to rule over us, after a good
and wise Father: So he sent (as we may read in holy Scripture) Roboam after
Solomon, Manasses after Hezekias, Iehohaz after Josias, Iehoram after
Iehosaphat, Ahaz after Iotham; So sent he (as we read in prosane Histories)
Nero after Augustus, Dionisian after Vespasian, and Commodus after Marcus
Aurelius; All bad and wicked children to Rule and Govern after their good and
virtuous Fathers.

So sent he (as we find in our English Chronicles) King John, Edward the
Second, Richard the Second and Third, and Henry the Sixth; That their
Jurisdiction, Wickedness, Folly and Cruelty, might not only succeed, but also
illustrate the Wisdom, Goodness, Prudence, and Lenity of their Predecessors:
for as white appears more clear and bright, being placed nigh unto black; so
virtue is more commendable when it is conferred with vice; and the profits
arising thereby are more esteemed, when the incommodities which always
accompany vice and wickedness, do immediately, or not long after, succeed them.

And surely, as God herein shows his Might and Omnipotency, so he makes us
also see hereby his Divine Wisdom, and heavenly Providence; For, since he has
distinguished Region from Region; some by Rivers, others by Seas; some by
Mountains, and others by Deserts: And in these Regions he has made the people
of diverse natures, and of sundry humors; some inclined to Peace, others given
to War; some to be ruled by gentleness, and others not to be governed but by
rigor and cruelty: For the conservation of this distinction, and for the
preservation of these people, he has found it good and expedient to set over
them Princes of diverse Qualities, and sundry Natures; that agreeing with the
Subjects in exterior dispositions, the inward affection may not always be
perverted by outward inequalities. And because in his unspeakable Wisdom he
knows that if he should give unto every Kingdom a continual Race of
conquering and virtuous Princes, neither the Rivers nor the Seas, the Mountains
nor the Deserts, should contain or restrain their unbridled Ambition, from
molesting and invading the Regions which are nigh or far from them, whereby the
distinction which he has set amongst them, might be utterly subverted; It has
seldom pleased him to bless any one Kingdom with two Princes of like minds,
Plutarch. Justinus.
or of like virtues; Hence it comes, that as in Rome they had their Pompey, in
Macedon their Alexander, Carrion.
in Persia their Cyrus, in Egypt their Antiochus, and in France their Charles,
Du Haillan
which for their continual and happy Conquests were surnamed the GREAT. So in
the same Kingdoms, as well as in others, they have had their Princes, who for
their Pusillanimity, Losses, and ill Fortune, might worthily be baptized by the
Surnames of Weaklings, and Unfortunate. Hence it comes, that the Empire of the
whole world passed from the Chaldeans to the Medes, from the Medes to the
Persians, from them to the Graecians, from the Graecians to the Romans, The
same Author. with Pol. Virg. and Hector Boethius.
from the Romans to the Frenchmen, and from the Frenchmen to the Germans.
Hence it comes, that Italy has triumphed over France, France over Italy;
England over Scotland, and Scotland sometimes (although very seldom) over
England. Hence it comes (to be short) that what the Fathers have got, the
children have lost; what the Conquerors added to their ancient Kingdoms, their
Successors either cowardly or negligently, voluntarily, or forcibly, suffered
to be distracted and dissevered from their Kingdoms.

And as the Empire passed from Nation to Nation, so their calamities, and the
happiness accompanying the Empire and the Emperors, also went from people to
people; for there was never Conqueror that commanded not the conquered to be
obedient unto his will and pleasure, nor Nation subdued, which did not
accomodate himself and his nature unto the disposition and commandment of the
Subduer. Then if the Conqueror was weak and gentle, the conquered lived in ease
and pleasure; if severe and cruel, they wanted no manner of rigor or cruelty;
if poor and needy, they supplied his wants and penury; if wanton and
leacherous, they satisfied his lusts and appetite; If covetous and an
Extortioner, they were subject to Taxes and Subsidies, if unjust and
unrighteous, they suffer wrongs and injuries; briefly, if any way ill given, or
ill disposed, they seldom gave themselves to virtue and goodness: Such
therefore as was the Conqueror, such were the conquered; and whatsoever it
pleased him to prescribe, that they were enforced to perform. His manner of
attire was their fashion in apparel; his Will served them for Laws, his new
Ordinances altered their old Consututions, his meanest Subjects commanded the
best of their Nobility, and his strange and foreign Language, became their
natural and Mother tongue. It they had Lands, his Courtiers enjoyed them; if
Daughters, his Favorites married them; if Wives, his followers deflowred them;
if riches his Soldiers shared them; if Servants, his Slaves commanded them.
Since then many Nations have been subdued, and men of diverse natures have
subdued them: Since conquests have been from the beginning of the world, and
conquerors have always commanded in the world: Since Force has ever been an
enemy unto Justice, and Equity never bore sway where Arms swayed all things:
Since Might overcomes Right, and Blood asks Blood; What man lives in this
Age* whose Predecessors endured not the torments that he suffers? Saw not the
miseries that he seeleth? Tasted not the bitterness that he swalloweth? Felt
not the wrongs that he supporteth? Lost not the blood that he loses? The Sun
shines now as it has done, the Stars keep the course they were wont to do,
the Sea ebbeth and flows as it ever did, and the Rivers run the same way
which they always ran; I mean, (and you may understand how I mean) that all
things proceeding from nature, duly keep and observe their Natures: I mean
therefore (and you may perceive how I mean) that as long as nature has
created, and shall create Princes of diverse dispositions, so long their
Subjects have been and shall be subject unto contrary fortunes; unto good, if
they be good and godly; and unto bad, if they be naught and wicked. In the good
they have enjoyed, and shall enjoy the benefit of Peace: In the bad, they have
felt, and shall feel the discommodities of War. In the good, they had and shall
have all things which they desire: In the bad, they wanted, and shall want
nothing that may discontent them: In the good, their estate was and will be
such as you commend: In the bad, their condition was and shall be such as you
condemn. For as Princes retain the Prerogatives given and granted unto Princes,
so Subjects maintain still the conditions and qualities incident and proper
unto Subjects. Every Prince has his qualities, Mores gentium. Munster.
and every sort of people has his conditions: The Spaniard varieth from the
Italian, the Italian from the French, the French from the German, the German
from the Englishman, and the Englishman from the Scots.

And such as all and every one of these Nations have been, such they will be as
long as they do and shall inhabit the same Climate, and receive breath from the
same Air. And as these Nations naturally hate one another, so by nature they
desire not to be subject one unto another; and therefore, if against their
nature, one of them chance to have never so little authority over the other,
the one commands imperiously, and the other obeys most unwillingly: and yet
it so happens oftentimes, that the Commander is commanded; and they that once
obeyed, many times command, So did Padua command Venice, Fr^^ Lean. Guido
Donato.
and now Venice commands Padua: So did Rome rule Spain, and now Spain rules
Rome: So did France sway the Empire of Germany, Tit. Livi. Du Hailan Carrion.
and now Germany precedeth France: So did France command the King of Navar, and
now Navar either does or should command France: So did Portugal hate Spain, and
now does Spain rule over Portugal: So did Italy bear sway over most part of
Christendom, Terapha de vitis Reg. Hispan.
and now some part of Christendom is Mistress over Italy: And when things happen
as these do, contrary to nature, contrary to men's expectations, contrary to
men's desires, can there be Peace, where there are so many occasions of War?
Love, where there is such cause of hatred? Upright dealing, where there are so
many motives and incitements unto wrong? Is it possible that proud men should
agree with the humble and meek? Plain dealers, with common Deceivers? Men of
peace, with men of war? Simple Subjects, with subtle Princes? Especially since
Kings of strange natures or Countries never ruled well or long, people varying
from them in nature or conditions. Whence came it that the Danes were driven
out of England, the Frenchmen out of Naples, Polid. Vir. Holinshed. Guicardin.
Paradin. Dinothus de bello Belgico. Gio. Giov. Pontavo della guerra di Napoli.
the Englishmen from France, and of late years the Spaniards out of Flanders?
Forsooth, because Conquerors are odious; and why are they odious? truly
because they are most commonly insolent. And wherefore are they insolent?
verily because they think it lawful for them to do what they list. And what
moves them to be of that mind? The good opinion conceived of themselves, and
the bad conceit which they have and hold of the Conquered. What think they of
themselves? marry, that they are valiant, happy, victorious and fortunate. And
what is their opinion of the Conquered? Undoubtedly they hold them for Cowards,
base minded, vile Slaves, and effeminate persons. And what are the effects of
these sundry opinions? Certainly that the Conquerors heaping cruelty upon
cruelty, and the Conquered seeking all means possible to free and mancipate
themselves from bondage and servitude, they by negligence commit many errors,
and these by wary circumspection and providence, take advantage of their
follies: Whence they lose their conquest, and these recover their Liberty.

I take oftentimes great delight to read our English Chronicles, and especially
the Reigns of Edward the Third, Nicolle Giles Annals. de Aquitanie. Du Haillan
Polid. Virg. Holinshed. Hect. Boethius.
and of Henry the Fifth, because I see therein the continual success which they
both had against the Frenchmen; It delights me greatly to consider what sway
Edward the black Prince bare through all Christendom; to see how Princes
Courted him; to read how Kings sought unto him; to behold how he restored Kings
to their Kingdoms, and drove Usurpers from their Usurpations; To remember how
valiantly he fought at Poitiers and Cressy, two of the most famous Battles that
ever were fought in Europe; To Record how he took the French King, and most
part of the French Nobility Prisoners; How he brought the King and them into
England; how reverently he carried himself toward the Captive Prince; how
Honorably he was received by his Father and his Subjects; and how lovingly the
two Kings entertained one another, and in the end departed one from the other:
But my joy is turned into sorrow, and my delight into grief, when I see that
the Frenchmen naturally hating Englishmen; that the Prince forcibly
overcharging the Conquered with new Subsidies, and unaccustomed Tributes; that
the Gascoins disloyalty forsaking their obedience unto their natural Prince,
and that the French King unkindly taking hold of the occasions that were
offered unto him; they with him, and he with them, set upon the poor Prince
when he was unprovided, invaded his Country when he thought little of their
coming, and drove him into England, who had driven them out of France. The like
happened unto Henry the fifth, and his Successors, for the one was not so
fortunate in Conquering, as the other was unfortunate in his losses; but hereof
hereafter: And now more plainly to my purpose, let me confer the miseries of
this Age, with the calamities of former times. They that inveigh against the
present State, wonder at many things; which I will begin in order, and let you
see and understand, that in times past all things were in as evil case, as they
are at this present.

They first wonder that the common Adversary of Christendom being in Arms, and
ready to invade part of Austria; the civil Wars in France and Flanders cease
not, but continue in as great fury, rage and extremity as ever they did; That
the Princes of Christendom labor not to appease and finish the said Wars, but
rather nourish and maintain them; That the Popes Holiness (whose principal use
and commendation has been, and is, to set Princes at unity, which be at
variance) indeavoureth not to reconcile, but to animate them in their Quarrels
who have taken unjust, or not very just occasions to war one against another;
And that by this common negligence, the common enemy is not repulsed, but
encouraged to increase his over-large Confines and Territories.

To this I will Answer before I come unto other Points. This negligence (as I
have said before) is no newthing, nor these troubles in France and Flanders a
strange President; nor the Causes moving or continuing the same, are such as
never happened in any other Age: They therefore who blame our time for this
respect, should remember that the Turk is grown unto his greatness by the
dissension of Christian Princes only. And that they may the better perceive
herein I report a manifest truth, That the Turk is grown great by the
dissension of Christian Princes.
I will prove as much as I have said, by many examples: It is not unknown unto
them that be conversant in Histories, That the Turks first beginning was very
base and obscure; That his power was weak and feeble, and his Dominion small
and of less moment, which he has enlarged by taking advantage of the discord
and variance of Christian Princes; who, when they have been in Arms against him
for and in the defense of the common Cause, have overthrown the common Cause by
sudden jars and debates which arose both untimely and unfortunately amongst
themselves. About the year 1106. Baldwin being Successor unto his Brother
Godfrey of Bulloin, Duke of Lorrain, Mar. Arrogo. Pietro Mexias. Illescas. Du
Haillan Carions Cron. Guyl. Atchives. Di Tyro nella Historia della guerra
Hi^rusalemme.
in the Kingdom of Jerusalem, the Christians besieged Carra in Mesopotamia, and
having with continual Seige and sundry Batteries, driven the same unto great
extremities, they that were in the City determined to yield themselves unto the
mercy of the Christians, amongst whom suddenly there arose a strife and
contention whose the City should be, and so they deferred the entering thereof,
until that controversy was decided; in which interim there came such great
succor of the Turks and Moors, that they overcame the Christians, and cut all
their throats: In like manner the Christians laying Siege unto Damasco, and
having equalled the Walls thereof with the ground, through discord and
dissension growing suddenly amongst them, they departed without taking the
same, and thought it better to leave it unto the Infidels, then for one
Christian to see it in the possession of another. And not long after, the Turk,
by the departure of Conrade the Third, Emperor of the Romans, and of Lewis the
French King, who returned to their homes by reason of civil Wars, begin in
Germany by Gulfin, a Rebel of the Empire, the Christians lost the whole Country
of Edissa, and whatsoever else they held in Mesopotamia. Furthermore, Baldwyne
the seventh King of Jerusalem, being dead, and leaving behind him one only
Infant, while Guydo Lusignian, and Raymond, Earl of Trypoli, Brethren in Law
unto the King, contended who should succeed him, Saladyne King of Damasco,
hearing of their contentions, secretly sent word unto the Earl Raymond, that if
he would circumcise himself, he would help and assist him with all his Forces
against Guido, and make him King of Jerusalem; unto which his offer, although
the Earl gave not open ear at that time, yet by outward shows he declared his
good liking and delight therein, and became Saladines great friend and
confederate, who seeing the Earls inclination, favor, and readiness, assembled
presently a great Army of Moors and Turks, and set upon the City Tyberiades,
belonging unto the Earl Raymond (for so it was secretly agreed betwixt them)
thereby to make his Brother in Law, Guydo Lusignian to come to succor him, and
then either to kill him, or to take him by the Earls treachery, as they indeed
took him in a certain Battle wherein all the Christians were slain; and
Saladine took Jerusalem and all Palestina, in the Month of October, in the
year 1187. And Raymond in hope that Saladine would perform his promise,
circumcised himself; but he failed of his purpose; For the Turk was so far from
keeping of his word, that be drove Raymond from all that he had in possession,
whereupon he dyed suddenly, as some say, and others write that he fell into
such a desperation, that he hanged himself.

So likewise by the discord of the Inhabitants of the City of Acon, the Moors
and Turks slew above 30000. Christians; And the Tartarians came into Hungary
and Polonia, and destroyed both the one and the other Armenia.

The Emperor Frederick, Surnamed Barbarossa, and Philip King of France,
together with Richard the first, King of England, lamenting the late loss of
Jerusalem, resolved to combine themselves, and with their untied Forces to
recover the same; And being come unto Suega, and having obtained diverse great
and important Victories, by reason of discord and dissension betwixt the two
Kings; the French King not only returned into France, but also made War upon
King Richard in his absence, for the Dukedom of Normandy; which King Richard
understanding (although he was then in a readiness to win Jerusalem, and did
great hurt daily unto the Infidels, insomuch that Saladine purposed to yield
Jerusalem up into his hands) returned home into his Country, leaving the most
honorable Enterprise which he had begun; And the Turks (who were sorely
decayed and weakened in strenght) through the benefit of his sudden departure,
not only recovered that which they had once determined to give over unto the
Christians as already lost, but also drove them from those places which before
his departure they quietly possessed.

It is likewise Recorded of Frederick the Second, that he being excommunicated
by Gregory the ninth; and having no other means to purchase his Absolution,
determined to go unto Asia, and to recover Jerusalem at his own proper Charges:
Where the Almighty so favored him, that Jerusalem was delivered unto him by
composition, and he was Crowned King thereof upon Easter day, in the year of
our Lord 1229. and because he was also King of Sicily, the Kings thereof at
this day bear the name of Kings of Jerusalem; But whilst this Emperor was
busied in the Wars and Affairs of the Holy Land, the Pope maligning him for the
Kingdom of Sicily, procured him secret enemies in Italy, mighty Adversaries in
Germany, and such Rebels in every place where there was any thing appertaining
unto him, that the good Emperor was constrained to return, and to employ his
whole power and strength for the recovery and conservation of his own; After
whose departure, the Christians, by the Popes Counsel, breaking the Truce which
the Emperor had taken with the Turk for their advantage, and dividing
themselves into Factions, by the imitation and example of Italy, (which was
divided into Guelfians and Gibbilines) made civil Wars one against another; And
when the other part was assaulted by the Turks and Infidels, they did not only
not help one another, but of set purpose, the one part assisted the very Moors
against the other; by whom they were both destroyed in a very short time, and
Jerusalem yielded up again unto the enemies.

I might tell how Constantinople, by the discord of the Graecians; how
Anatolia, by the same cause, and the subtilty of Ottamon; how Caria, Licaonia,
and Phrygia, by the like occasion; how Harly and Andrynopoly, by the very self
same means; and how by reason of the debate and controversy betwixt Emanuel
Paleologo, Emperor of Constantinople, and the King of Seruia, and the
Valachians; all Albania, Velona, Salona, R^manca, and Thracia, were subdued and
taken by the Turk.

I might tell you how that the discord betwixt Alphonso King of Arragon, and of
Naples, and the Venetians, and betwixt Sextus the Pope, Francis Sforza Duke of
Milan, and the Floentines, enforced the poor Venetians, who otherwise were not
able to withstand their domestical Enemies, to give the Turk Chalcedonia, a
principal City of Anatolia, together with the Island of Stalemina, otherwise
called Lemnos, and an hundred thousand Ducats in ready money, and eight
thousand of yearly Tribute.

I might tell you (as Lewis Fuscarin Ambassador of Venice, in an Oration that
he made unto Pope Pius the second, told him) That the contentions betwixt
Christian Princes have been so many and so obstinate, that the Turk by reason
of them possesses two Empires, which be Constantinople, and Trapesonda: Four
principal Kingdoms of Persia, Arabia, Syria, and Egypt. Twenty great
Provinces, and two hundred fair Cities.

I might tell you how Barbarossa burnt Niza in Provence, and carried above
forty thousand Captives out of the Kingdom of Naples, Pulia, and Calabria,
taking only advantage of the sedition which then reigned in Italy.

I might tell you that the Island of Rhodes was lost because the Christians
were not able to succor the same, by reason of the Wars of Italy, and the
Insurrection of the commonalty of Spain. I might tell you that the Kingdom of
Hungary was lost by the like dissension. And briefly, that in late years the
contentions betwixt the French Kings, and Charles the Fifth, and King Philip of
Spain, have greatly hindered the progress, happy success, and fortunate
accomplishment of such enterprises as were valiantly attempted, and might
worthily have been executed against the aspiring pride of the insatiable Turk.

But to tell you all this, and the circumstances thereof, were somewhat too
tedious: And I hasten unto other points; and I shall have occasion to handle
that which is untouched, and not sufficiently declared in this point, in
another place more aptly hereafter.

The second point whereat they wonder, An answer to an objection, that Princes
aid Rebels, proving that in times past they did the like
is, that Princes hating Rebels as the Enemies of their estates, the Impugners
of their authority, the Adversaries of their absolute power, and the Subverters
of their Kingdoms, do in these days not only bear with Rebels, but also
harbor them; not receive them alone, but also aid and assist them. So say
they, the Queen of England maintains the Rebels of the United Provinces,
commonly called the States of the United Provinces: So say they, the King of
Spain supporteth, yea and helps with money, men, and munition, the Rebels of
France, commonly called Leaguers: So say they, the Popes holiness animateth the
Catholics of France and England to rebel against their Sovereigns.

Truly to nourish Rebels is an action in nature hateful, and in policy
dangerous; for to aid the wicked, is to participate with them in their
wickedness: and he that gives countenance, comfort or succor unto his
Neighbors domestical Enemies, is to look for the like measure, if his Subjects
at any time, and upon any occasion, chance to rebel against him. But because
many things in outward appearance seem good, which indeed are naught, and
vicious; not only in this Age, but also in times past, are and have been
baptized by the names of virtues: It is now, and it has always been usual to
deem all things honest that are profitable, honorable that are expedient, and
lawful that may be justified by examples. Is there any thing that maintains
States, and upholdeth Kingdoms better then Justice? And yet lived there not a
man, that inwardly professed, and openly said, Si violandum est jus regnandi
causa? Is there any thing more odious or unbeseeming a Prince, then to say one
thing and do another? And yet lived there not a Prince that wrote for his
Posie, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit Regnare? Is there any greater sign of an
insatiable mind, and of ambitious covetousness, then having many Kingdoms to
covet more Kingdoms? and yet lived there not a King, who having conquered most
part of the world, wept, because he heard a Philosopher dispute of another
world, which he had not as yet subdued? Is there any thing more cruel or
barbarous, then an Emperor being bound by duty, and commanded by the Almighty
to conserve and preserve his Subjects, to wish and intend the death of all his
Subjects? And yet lived there not an Emperor who wished that all the people of
Rome had but one head, that he might cut it off at one blow? And what moved
these Princes, Kings, and Emperors to violate Justice? to dissemble with all
men? to aspire and desire more Kingdoms? and to covet and imagine the death of
their Subjects, but a colorable show of honor, or of profit? The common
Proverb says, give a man an Inch, and he will take an Ell; and who desires to
do be great, regards no Parentage, cares for no kindred, nor esteems any
Laws.

The ancient Romans, whose fame is notable through all the world, and whose
Actions are imitated by most of the world, seemed outwardly to be just, and
true dealers, never coveting more then their own, but always contented (in
common opinion) with their own; And yet in their inward thoughts they were
never satisfied, till all that belonged to others became their own. They first
conquered Italy, then Spain, next France, afterward Germany, and after them
Scotland and England; their desires and covetousness rested not there, but as
men infected with the Dropsy (the more they drink, the more they desire to
drink) so they, the more they had, the more they desired, and did spread the
wings of their ambitious Avarice over all Africa, and Asia, making themselves
of Lords of one Town, Monarchs of the universal world; In all which their
conquests they carried an outward show of manifest Equity, pretending for all
and every the wars which they undertook, not one but many just causes, which
they used to declare unto their friends and confederates, and not to conceal
them from their very enemies, unto whom they sent usually an Herald of Arms,
who should demand restitution of such things as they pretended to be unjustly
taken from them, or reparation of their supposed wrongs: But if a man should
now with the eyes of indifferency look upon the causes which moved them to
undertake all, or most part of their wars; he should find that they were but
colorable shows; for what cause had they to war with Carthage, but that they
envied Carthages greatness? What moved them to subdue England, but because
England help France in their wars against them? What pretense had they to
conquer Scotland, but that Scotland succored England? Why hindered they the
Switzers going into France. with intention to conquer France, but that they
thought it a better morsel for themselves? What color used they to overcome
the residue of the world, but sometimes a pretense to defend their
Confederates? sometimes a show to maintain the liberties of their Neighbors?
sometimes a feigned and hypocritical zeal of Religion, when as indeed they
oppressed them whom they pretended to defend: brought into bondage for whose
liberty they would seem to fight: and were in all respects as irreligious as
they whose Religion they seemed to condemn: So to be short, they cunningly
enlarged their Confines, by seeming to be careless of Conquests; made
themselves Monarchs, by pretending to suppress Tyrants; and did wrong unto all
men, by bearing an outward show to suffer no manner of injury to be done unto
any man. This cunning in aspiring unto Foreign Dominions, begun in the Infancy
of the Romans prosperity, continued in the riper years thereof, and practiced
even until their declining Age; was not only proper unto them, but passed (as
their Empire did) from them unto other Rulers (by what name or title soever
they were called) taking advantage of the time, omited no means to attain unto
their desires and purposes.

Though therefore the name of Rebels in all Ages has been odious, their Cause
was never unjust, and the voluntary Aid given unto them, never was honorable
unto him that aided them; yet the Chronicles not only of our Nation, but also
of other Regions, Realms, and Dominions, are full of Examples of many Princes
not inferior to the Princes of our Age, be it in Might, in Power, in Authority,
or in Goodness; who rather regarding the propagation and increase of their
Dominions, then the conservation and maintenance of their Honors, did as our
Princes do now, not only receive their Neighbors Rebels into their protection,
but also use them as means and instruments to molest and persecute their
Neighbors, by whose decay and downfall they might rise, and aspire unto higher
Authority. Neither has the League of Amity, the bond of Kindred and Parentage;
the duty of children to their Parents; the affection of one Brother to another,
moved Princes to withdraw their helping hand, succor and assistance from those
who being tied by all, or some of those Bands, rebelled against their
Sovereigns. James King of Scotland, being not only in League with Henry the
seventh, being King of England, but also by Oath and Homage bound unto him, as
his Vassal, did not only favor and receive into his protection a young Man,
named Perkin, who was suborned by Margaret, Duchess of Burgondy, to call and
carry himself for one of the Sons of her Brother King Edward; but also married
the said Perkin unto Katherine, Daughter unto Alexander, Earl of Huntley, and
his own near Kins-woman; and with him, and for him invaded England: Here you
see the Vassal favor and succor the Rebels of his Sovereign; and the near
Kins-woman conspire against her Liege Lord and King. Richard Earl of Poictou,
because his Father Henry the second denied him that Honor (although by the
death of the young King Henry, he was become his eldest Son) to marry him with
the French Kings Sister Alice,, and to declare him immediately for his
immediate Successor, became the French Kings Man to serve him against his
Father. Robert, Son unto William the Conqueror, having tasted the sweetness in
Commanding others, so far that he loathed to be commanded by others, Rebelled
against his Father, and was aided and succored in his Rebellion by the French
King Henry, Son unto Henry surnamed the Gross, because his Father was
Excommunicated by the Pope; and as an Excommunicated person was not in his
opinion to hold and sway the Empire; was not only animated by the Pope to Rebel
against his Father, but also assisted by him, until he took his Father Prisoner.

Here you see the Sons Rebelling against their own Fathers, protected and
succored by them, which either were, or should have been Friends and
Confederates unto their Fathers.

Henry, Terapha Holinshed. Pol. Virg. Du Haillan
base Brother unto Peter King of Castile, knowing that his Brother for his evil
and licentious life, was generally hated of all his Subjects, Rebelled against
him, and with the help of the Kings of France and Portugal, deprived him of his
Life and Crown. Here you see the Brother bearing Arms against his Brother;
aided by two Kings, who should rather have favored a Lawful King then an
Usurper.

The Marquess of Villona, and the Archbishop of Toledo, both near Kinsmen unto
Ferdinando and Isabel, King and Queen of Aragon, and of Castile, Rebelled
against them both, and received aid and succor in their Rebellion from Alonso
King of Portugal. Here you see the Kinsmen Rebelling against their own blood,
aided by their Sovereigns Kinsman and Con^ederate. And seeing all this, how can
you marvel, that in this Age (against the corruption whereof you and others
inveigh most bitterly) Princes aid the Rebels of other Kings, betwixt whom
there is no manner of Alliance; Or if there be any, the same is long since
dissolved, and resolved into hatred and enmity: For albeit the King of Spain
Married the Sister of the Queen of England, and of the late French King; by
which Marriages he was Allied unto both in League of Friendship and Affinity:
Yet you know, and shall hereafter see, that many occasions besides the deaths
of his Wives, have changed his love into hatred, and his good will into malice:
So that it is no marvel, since every injury asks a revenge; every enemy
seeks all means possible to hurt and annoy his Adversary; and every Prince
can be content to take such advantage for the enlargement of his Confines, and
for the maintenance of his Estate, as the time and opportunity does or shall
yield him; If the Spaniard, who has purposed in his heart to devour and
swallow up the Kingdom of France, uses the Rebellion of the Guyzards for his
best means and instruments; or if the Queen of England, who finds no better
ways to keep the Spaniard from invading and subduing her Realms and Dominions,
then to busy and to find him continually occupied in defending, or in
recovering his own, does succor his pretended Subjects of the United Provinces
(for indeed they are not his Subjects) and vouchsafes daily to send them such
supplies of Men and Money as seem most necessary for their defense.

The Third Point whereat they wonder, depends somewhat upon this Point, which
is, Why the Flemmings, being always reputed a fearful and timorous Nation; And
the Frenchmen having at all times most worthily carried the names of the most
Faithful and Loyal Subjects of Europe; the one in hatred of the Spaniard,
Rebelleth against the Spaniard; and the other, at the Instigation of the
Spanish King, bears Arms in his behalf, against their natural Liege Lord and
Sovereign: But if it may please you, and these Wonders, That the Flemming had
just cause to rebel against the King of Spain.
to enter into consideration of the Spaniards Nature, and of the Flemmings
Qualities; and to call to mind the Levity of the one, and the Cruelty of the
other; the Weakness of them, and the Pride of these; and how ready they are to
take, and these to give occasion of Rebellion; you will leave to wonder at
their revolt and distraction from the bondage of the Spaniard. Read the
Chronicles of Flanders, and you shall find that there was never any Nation more
mutinous, Anales Flandriae. Marchantius.
more easy to be displeased, more prone and ready to Rebel, then the
Flemmings. You shall likewise find, that they are far more fit to be Governed
by Gentleness then by Rigor, and by Women then by men; You shall likewise find,
that they have seldom lived in long Peace and Obedience under any of their
natural Princes, if he did not Rule and Govern them with all manner of
humanity: And finding this, you must needs think that there can be no long
Agreement betwixt them and the Spaniard, whose nature is to Command
Imperiously, to Rule Proudly, and to Govern Tyrannically, as it appears in
all places where he bears Sway or Government.

The House of Austria had their beginning in Hasburg in Switzerland; whence (as
you shall read in Smiller) they were driven by the Subjects for their extreme
Tyranny: By Marriage they are grown from poor Earls unto mighty Princes, and
have spread themselves over diverse Nations; Smillerus de Repub Helvetior.
over which how they have Tyrannized, the very Histories of those Nations do
report and witness: You shall read of their persecutions in the Indies; Of
their Exactions in the Kingdom of Naples; Of the^ Extortion in the Duchy of
Millan; Of their Pride and Arrogance in Germany; Of their hard and cruel
dealing in the County of Burgundy; Of their late Cruelty in Portugal; and of
their intolerable oppression in all places. You shall read that ever since they
began to be in Authority in the world, they have troubled the Tranquillity and
Peace of most part of the world: You shall read, that Italy, France and
Germany, have suffered more injuries, wrongs, and indignities by them only,
then by all other Princes and Royal Families of Christendom. You shall read
that Maximilian the Emperor, Charles the fifth, and this present King of Spain,
disquieted and troubled the peaceable Estates of all other Princes that lived,
or live in their time.

Briefly, You shall read, that they have always had high minds, unsatiable
desires, ambitious projects, marvelous designs and purposes; which if it had
not pleased the Almighty to prevent and cross, by sundry unexpected Accidents,
they had long before this time made themselves Monarchs of the universal world.

This is so apparent and well known unto all men that know never so little of
the knowledge which is gathered from Histories; That I shall not need to stand
upon the proof thereof, and to confirm the same by Examples.

No marvel then, since the Low Countries did all at the first, with one mutual
consent, Rebel; and the United Provinces do yet bear Arms against the Spaniard,
Dinothus de bello Belgico. Responce, ala Declaration de D. Jehan de Austrice
Discourse summarie de Estates Generals. du Pags Bas.
defending themselves by power and might from his wrongs and violence, who gave
them many just occasions to Revolt from his Obedience; Before they Revolted, he
Ruled them by Strangers, being bound to Govern them by their own Countrymen;
He brake daily their Privileges and Customs, being sworn duly to keep and
observe them; He preferred mere Strangers, and men of base condition, unto the
best and highest Offices over them, having protested and undertaken by Oath, to
constitute no such Magistrates overthem, as were not born in their own Country;
He altered the State of the Clergy without their consent, having promised not
to innovate any thing therein without their Counsel and permission; He caused
to be done to death the best of their Nobilty, without any such form of
Judgment as their Laws and Privileges required; He charged them with new
Imposts, and intolerable Tributes, without their advice and consent, whose
counsel and consent he was to use therein: He called them to consult upon
matters of weight and importance, in such places as they might not appear.
Lastly, He placed such Governors over them, as sought and wrought the death of
the best Maintainers and Upholders of their Ancient Privileges; as filled the
Country with odious and suspected People; as bandied and combined themselves
with Forrainers against their States; as sought and took all occasions possible
to sow Debate and Sedition betwixt their Nobles and Princes; as charged their
Nobility with false and untrue Accusations; as declared the better part of them
to be Traitors and Rebels, because they would not at their commandment make
open Wars against the Prince of Orange, the only Patron and Pillar of their
Liberties; as seized and took into their hands the frontire Towns and Forts; as
builded Citadels to bridle, and Castles to bridle and keep them in awe:
Briefly, as turned their Peace into War, their Wealth into Poverty, and their
Rest and Tranqu^^ity into Tumults and Troubles: Can any Prince do greater
wrongs unto his Subjects then these are? Or can any Subjects suffer greater
injuries then these? Especially such a Prince as was no longer Prince then he
observed their ancient Privileges; Especially such Subjects as were no longer
bound to their Prince then he kept their Liberties inviolable; Such a Prince as
lost his Authority over them so soon as he brake the Conditions whereupon he
was received: And such Subjects who were freed from all manner of Obedience so
soon as these Conditions were broken; Such a Prince as was requested by all the
Princes of Christendom not to Tyrannize over his Subjects, and would not
hearken to their persuasions and requests; And such Subjects as besought the
Princes of Christendom to be their Intercessors to their Prince, and could not
prevail with him: Briefly, Dinothus D. Chytraeus:
Such a Prince as when he had long vexed and wearied his Subjects with
intolerable charges, and unsupportable wrongs, might have had infinite wealth
of his Subjects to receive them into his good Grace and Favor, and would not
accept their offer; And such Subjects as offered to give their Prince three
Millions of Gold, to suffer them to live in liberty of conscience, and could
not be heard. These Subjects therefore had good occasion to forsake and
renounce this Prince, And the Wars which they undertook against him were in my
simple opinion most lawful; Not that I approve Rebellion, or allow Subjects to
Rebel against their Sovereigns, when, or for what occasions they will; but that
I dis-allow and dislike the Prince that will Govern and Rule his Subjects in
all things as he lists; There is a mutual bond betwixt the Subject and the
Prince; there is a reciprocal League, there is on both sides a certain duty, in
the one to obey reverently, and in the other not to command over rigorously:
The reverence of the Subjects conserveth the Majesty of a Prince; and the
Lenity of a Prince maintains the life and welfare of his Subjects; but when
the Prince casts off humanity, and the Subjects forget their duty; when he
minds nothing less then the public wealth, and they suffer things whereunto
they have not been accustomed; when he breaks Laws, and they desire to live
under their ancient Laws; when he imposes new Tributes, and they think
themselves sufficiently charged and grieved with their old; when he oppreseth
and suppresseth such of the Nobility as favor the common people, their ancient
Laws, Privileges, and Liberties, and they take the wrongs that are done unto
their Favorers, and Patrons, to be done unto themselves and their Posterity:
Then changes love into hatred, and obedience into contempt; then hatred
breeds disdain, and disdain ingendereth disloyalty, after which follow secret
conspiracies, unlawful assemblies, undutiful consultations, open mutinies,
treacherous practices, and manifest rebellions: The chief reasons whereof are,
because the common people are without reason, ready to follow evil counsel,
easy to be displeased, prone to conceive dislike, not willing to remember the
common benefit which they received by a Prince, when they see their private
Estates impoverished by him or his Officers; forgetful of many good turns, if
they be but once wronged; more desirous to revenge an injury, then to remember
a benefit, quickly weary of a Prince, be he never so good, if he be not pleased
to satisfy all their unreasonable demands; easily suspecting those who are
placed in authority over them, commonly affecting time that is past, better
then the present; briefly, all liking what the most like, all inclining where
the greatest part favors; all furthering what the most attempt, and all soon
miscarried, if the most be once misled.

This natural disposition of the common people, is proved by common experience,
observed by wise Politicians, and confirmed by many examples, not of one Realm,
but of many Nations; not of one age, but of many seasons; not of barbarous
people, but of civil Realms; not of Kingdoms alone, but of other manner of
Governments; briefly, not of Subjects living only under Tyrants, but also under
the best Princes that ever were; for there is no Kingdom comparable unto France
for antiquity, or for greatness, for strength, or for continual race of good
and virtuous Kings, for absolute government of Rulers, or for dutiful obedience
of Subjects, for good laws, or for just and wise Magistrates; and yet France
that has this commendation, and these benefits, That France has rebelled
against their Kings before this time.
has many other times besides this, and for other occasions besides the causes
that now moves France to rebel, revolted from her liege Lords and Sovereigns;
for proof whereof, let us examine and consider the causes and motives of this
present Rebellion, begun in the late Kings time, and continued in this Kings
days. They that write thereof at large, and seem to understand the causes of
this revolt more particularly then others, affirm that this Rebellion began
upon these occasions. The Authors and chief Heads thereof saw Justice corruptly
administered, Pedro Corn de la lyga q confederation Francesa.
Offices appertaining unto Justice, dearly sold, Benefices and Ecclesiastical
dignities and livings unworthily collated, new Impositions daily invented and
levied, the Kings Treasures and Revenues prodigally consumed, old Officers
unjustly displaced, and men of base quality unworthily advanced; The causes of
the Leaguers rebellion, their proceeding and policies.
they saw the late King carried away with vanities, governed by a woman, entered
in League and Amity with their Enemies, and fully resolved to follow his
pleasure, and to leave the administration and government of the whole Kingdom
unto their mortal Enemies: They saw him careless in the maintenance of their
Religion, unlikely to have any issue to succeed him, David Chytraeus.
Risembergius.
not willing to establish any succession of the Crown after him, and
obstinately minded not to enter into League with them, that intended and
purposed to uphold and maintain their Catholic Religion. Lastly, they saw that
as long as he lived, the King of Navar and his followers could hardly be
suppressed; and that as soon as he dyed, the said King was likely to be his
Successor; which happening, they considered the desperate estate of their
Religion, the sure and certain advancement of the Protestants, and of their
cause and quarrel, the utter subversion of all their intents and purposes; And
lastly, the final and lamentable end of the greatness of themselves, and of
their Families. Wherefore to withstand all those mischiefs and inconveniences,
and to prevent some of them, and to redress and reform others; they called a
general Assembly of the three Estates; implored the help of foreign Princes;
levied as great Armies as they could possibly gather together; propounded means
of Reformation to the King; and when they found him not willing to yield to
their advise and counsel, they combined themselves against the Protestants, his
pretended, and their open enemies; seized upon greatest part of the Kings
Treasure, took possession of his best Holds and Towns of strength, removed such
Officers as disliked them, and in all Affairs that concerned the advancement of
their Cause, employed men fit for their humors, made for their purpose,
brought up in their Factions, practiced in their Quarrels, affectioned in their
Cause, and wholly devoted to their wills and pleasures. And because they found
themselves unable to encounter with the late King and his Confederates, unless
they were also assisted by some foreign Princes, they sought all ways and means
possible to insinuate themselves into the Grace and Favor of strange and
mighty Potentates, to recommend their Cause and Quarrel unto their protection,
and to join their Domestical power with their foreign Enemies: They consider
therefore that the Popes Holiness by the heat and vehemence of the hatred which
he bears unto Protestants: The King of Spain, by the greatness of his
Ambition; and the Duke of Lorrain, by the ancient envy and enmity which has
been, and which is betwixt him and the House of Bourbon, might easily be
persuaded and induced to favor their party, and further their Attempts and
Enterprises.

The Duke of Guyse as chief Head and Patron of these Actions, sends
Messengers unto every one of these Princes, The Duke of Guise the head of the
League; his proceedings and policies.
beseeching them, as they had heretofore secretly favored him and his
accomplices, so they would now (that matters were grown to ripeness, and secret
Conspiracies to open resistance) vouchsafe him and his Confederates their help
and assistance to the utmost of their power: In which Suit he finds happy
success; and with promise of assured and sufficient aid, is animated to proceed
with courage, and not to omit any manner of cunning and policy, to win unto
himself as many friends as he might possibly; He therefore considering, that
for the better accomplishment of his designs, it was needful and expedient for
him to continue at the Court, and there to draw unto himself as many partakers
as by any means possibly he might obtain, repaireth thither with all diligence;
And knowing that he should undoubtedly fail of his purpose, unless he might
effectually compass three things of special consequence; he labors to the
utmost of his power to bring them to pass: The first of the three was the late
Kings especial Favor: The second an Office of great Account and Dignity: The
third, that the rest of the Court should be at his Will and Commandment, either
for love toward him, or for fear of his Greatness and Authority. For the
purchasing and assurance of the Kings favor, he uses two principal means: The
one, to let the King understand that he was now grown to so great power and
strength, that it was impossible for his Majesty to supplant or suppress the
same. The other, to persuade the King, not only by words but also by good
carriage of himself, that he would never abuse that his power, but always use
it to his Highness benefit, and his Majesty's service; keeping the King by this
means always betwixt love and fear, and increasing the number of his friends
and followers, by gratifying some with Offices, others with money, and still
employing his Purse, his Credit, and his Countenance, for the strengthening of
his Party; and that in such manner as the King could not but perceive it; yet
he dissembleth so cunningly, protests so devoutly, and shows sometimes so
apparent effects of his good will, and dutiful obedience to the King, that his
Majesty distrusteth not his proceedings: And for the better continuance of the
King in that opinion; he marketh what is done in every Province, wills many
things to be done that were acceptable and pleasing to the Kings humors; and
still writes unto his Friends and Kinsmen, that they should show their
obedience in small things, and in matters of no great moment, that they might
the better be trusted in matters of more great weight and profit, to the
furtherance of his and their designs. Now for the obtaining of such an Office
as might both countenance him, and prefer his Friends, he very subtily
insinuates himself into the Queen Mothers favor, unto whom the King had
committed the Administration and charge of the weightiest affairs of his
Kingdom; he makes the Kings principal Secretary sure unto him; causes him to
procure his return to the Court, when he was once commanded by the King to
depart thence in disgrace; brings it to pass by him, that the Duke of
Espernon, his greatest enemy, should be banished the Court, and that after his
departure the same Secretary should continually seek and procure his discredit,
and contrariwise further him in all his Attempts and Endeavors, lest that the
King recalling in time the Duke Despernon, might be induced by him to displace
and discountenance them both. And whilst he is in this favor, he sueth to be
High Constable of France, meaning in time to use the same Office (as Charles
Martel did) for a step and Ladder to climb up to the Kingdom; which Office he
says was of such antiquity and necessity, as that as soon as there was a King
in France, there was also a High Constable; and that their Estate never
flourished better, then when the Crown was provided of such Officers as should
and did execute their Offices and Charges, in as ample manner as their
Commissions gave them power and Authority to do. Besides, seeing that the Queen
Mother, either at the first, or at the last, obtained whatsoever it pleased
her, of the King; and that whosoever he was (were he never so highly in the
Kings favor) that displeased her, in time lost the Kings good will, and good
opinion: He so carried himself toward her, that he seemed to affect nothing
more then her good liking, and yet not to be so desirous thereof, as that he
would wholly depend thereupon; knowing that the King although he did always
attribute much unto his Mother, and was contented that she should be reverenced
and respected next unto himself, yet he could not well brook them that sought
for her good will more then for his Favor; and thus with cunning, continuing a
firm League of love and amity betwixt the Mother and the Son, he hoped in time
to possess them both, in such manner, as before they should be aware thereof,
he would assume unto himself the power and authority of them both: And further,
perceiving that the Kings old Secretaries were not in all respects so pliant
and ready to follow and fulfill his designs as he wished, he labored by all
means possible to prefer them unto Offices of higher dignity, and to place
others in their rooms, who would not fail to further his intents and purposes,
nor disdain to depend wholly upon his favor, and also to make him privy to
whatsoever business or affairs of Estate they were commanded to dispatch by the
King; whereby he came to perfect knowledge of all that was purposed or
determined by the Kings privy Council; And grew into such favor and credit,
that even the principal Officers of the Crown, either for fear or for love, or
by other men's examples, submitted themselves wholly unto his devotion: And he
had such interest in the Kings Court and Courtiers, that all or the most part
of them, seemed to be at his only disposition, and to affect him more then
their King and Sovereign. Having installed himself in this manner in the Court,
and distracted the hearts of the principal Officers thereof from their duty and
love to their King; he thinks it not sufficient to be invested in their
favors, unless he might also captivate the affections and good wills of the
common people; whom by promise to relieve their necessities, to ease their
charges, to supply their wants, and to redress all that was thought or
suggested to be amiss (the common means used in all times, and all ages, by men
of his mind, to seduce and mis-lead a multitude) he easily and quickly
persuades to favor his party; And finding the common sort so ready, willing,
and desirous to perform and accomplish his pleasure, as that in respect of
their obedience toward him, he seems to lack nothing but the only name of
King to be a King: Notwithstanding the great Honor and Reverence that Courtiers
showed unto him; the love and affection that the Commonalty bear to him; the
Offices and Dignities which he partly affected, and partly attained; the high
Attempts and Imaginations which he lodged in his heart and conceit; and the
unaccustomed Authority which he cunningly had usurped; yet he was so far from
being puffed up with pride or disdain toward his inferiors (faults commonly
incident unto men advanced unto extraordinary favor and preferment) that for
the better continuance of his credit, and the peoples good will toward him; he
would debase, and so much deject himself, as that he thought not scorn to go
bare headed from one end of the Street unto another, even unto base Chrochelers
and Porters; with which his demeanor the Duke De Main his Brother was many
times highly displeased, and could not at any time frame himself to follow and
imitate him therein; which has appeared more manifestly since his death: the
common people in regard of that want, not favoring him so highly as they did
the late Duke of Guise: Now where there is a Subject of such credit with the
King, of such authority in Court, of such power in every Province, of such
Alliance in the whole Realm, of such favor with foreign Princes, of such
liking of all sorts of Subjects, of such experience in Martial Affairs, of
knowledge in matters of State; briefly, of such continuance in the love, in the
hearts, in the good liking of all men: Can it possibly be hard or difficult for
him to work his pleasure in any thing that he shall imagine or endeavor? Or
can it be that such a man should not be most dangerous unto his Country and
unto his Prince? Especially in France, where there are many Provinces ruled by
their particular Governors, many Citadels possessed by several Deputies, many
Holds and Towns or strength committed to the custody of certain Lievtenants,
many Bands of men at Arms, and of other Soldiers, under the charge of choice
Captains. And all or the most part of these Governors, Deputies, Lievtenants
and Captains, chosen or appointed out of his Parentage, Kindred, Affinity,
Alliance, Family or Followers.

Look upon men in other States and Kingdoms, The Duke of Guise his imitation of
other great Rebels, and a Comparison betwixt him and them,
under other Princes and Kings, of like mind, and of such Ambition as possessed
the Duke; and consider what dangers they have brought both unto their
Countries, and unto their Sovereigns.

Look upon the means and policies which they have used to b^ing their purposes
to pass; And see whether this Duke did not imitate, or rather go beyond them
all in the course which he took to aspire unto Authority and Greatness.

El^us Sejanus ruled all things under Tiberius the Emperor; whom he had so
cunningly blinded and besotted with love and affection toward him; that
although he was wary enough of all others, C. Tacitus
and could keep his least secrets from them, yet he could not beware of him,
nor conceal the greatest secrets he had from him. This Sejanus had many
qualities fit and proper for his aspiring mind and purpose: He could endure all
kind of labor; he durst adventure to do any thing whatsoever; he was very
secret; he used to reprehend and backbite others boldly; he could flatter
cunningly, behave himself, when occasion served, proudly; again, when he saw
cause, his carriage was very modest outwardly, albeit inwardly he boiled with a
desire of Rule and Government: For the better attaining whereof, he used now
and then liberality, but more often labor and industry; points as dangerous
(when they tend to the purchasing of a Kingdom) as Ambition and Prodigal^ty.
This Sejan had such interest in the Emperor, such power in Rome, such sway and
authority in all the Affairs of the Empire; that after he had persuaded
Tiberius, either for his health, or for recreation, or to live free from the
cares and troubles of Estate, to retire himself unto a little Island; he
presumed to call himself Emperor, and Tiberius a poor Islander, or Prince of
one Island. This Sejan had two Obstacles to hinder his purpose, C: Tacitus.
Drusus and Nero, both Heirs unto Tiberius, both of diverse natures and
conditions, and both so desirous to be Emperors, that the one could have been
content to supplant the other. This Sejan to take away these impediments used
these means, he poluted Livia, Drusus his Wife with Adultery, won her to
promise him Marriage, promised to make her Partner and Fellow in the Empire,
persuaded her to consent to the death of her Husband: To put her out of all
doubt and jealousy; he banished his own Wife Apicata from his house and
company; and when his secret purposes were bewrayed, thinking it time to hasten
Drusus his death, and to work the same so cunningly that it might not be known
or perceived; he cast a kind of poison, which should so kill him, that it might
seem he dyed of some sudden disease: After this he assaulted Nero in another
way; he caused his friends and followers to animate him to affect the Empire,
to tell him that the people of Rome were desirous to make him Emperor, that the
Soldiers were of the same mind, and that Sejan although he Ruled all things,
yet he neither durst nor would withstand him. Nero gave ear to these
persuasions, and could not so dissemble his inward thoughts and cogitations,
but that now and then he uttered some words that bewrayed the secrets of his
mind, which by such Keepers as were set to observe him, his words, and doings,
were brought to Sejans hearing, and by such Accusers as he suborned, carried to
Tiberius his ears, who vouchsafing Nero no indifferent hearing, afforded him no
good countenance, but suspected him the more, if he spoke any thing in his own
defense, and condemned him if he held his peace: And Sejan had so provided,
that his watching his steps, his sights, and his secrets were told by his wife
unto her Mother Livia, and by Livia unto him, who had likewise induced his
Brother Drusus to seek this ruin and subversion of Nero, by telling him that
when his Brother Nero was dead, he was next heir unto the Empire; which
persuasion easily prevailed with Drusus, because he had an aspiring mind, and
secretly hated his Brother Nero; for that their Sister Agrippina loved him
better then she did Drusus: And yet Sejan did not so favor Drusus, but that he
likewise purposed his death and destruction, which he thought he might easily
compass, because he knew him to be stout, and over-bold, and easy to be
overtaken by his slights and subtilties.

You have heard of the Treasons of Sejan, his policies, and his purposes, you
may guess of his success, and read of his end. Now you shall hear of Julius
Caesar, who was more subtle and cunning then he, and had the wit to get more
then he, but not the grace to keep it long. Caesar, before he bare any Office
in Rome, Plutatch.
was in his youth so prodigal, and such a Spend-thrift, Dion.
that he had indebted himself above 700000. Crowns; and although the greatness
of his debts might justly have made him fear to be cast in Prison, Piero Mexias.
and never to hope or look for such preferment, as he afterward attained, yet
he neither feared his creditors, nor doubted of his future advancement: For the
better attaining whereunto, he accommodated his nature to all men's humors, and
vouchsafed to flatter, and make much, not only of Freemen, but also of such
Slaves and Bondmen as he knew well able to do any thing with their Masters; He
thought it no disgrace or discredit to humble himself in the beginning, so that
he might live in assured hope to command all men in process of time.

Besides other subtle devices which he used for the better accomplishment of
his desires, he observed most diligently who were in greatest favor with the
common people, who were best able to further or hinder his purposes; who were
easily to be won to favor him in his attempts and intentions; and what means
he might use and practice to be assured of their Friendship.

There lived in his time four men of especial account, Pompey, and Crassus,
Piso, and Curio: Pompey was so valiant and fortunate in Arms, that he was
worthily surnamed the GREAT. Crassus attained to such wealth, that he was
commonly called the RICH. Piso bare such sway with the people, that no man was
either feared or loved more then he. And Curio was so wise, and so eloquent,
that the people loved him greatly, and he so desirous of their favor, and so
careless and prodigal of money, that to attain any thing for himself, or for
his friend, he would spare no manner of costs or charges. To win these men that
were fit for his purpose, and yet of diverse humors, Caesar thought it
convenient to use diverse means; he married his daughter to Pompey, he took to
wife Pyso's Sister; he paid all Curio's debts; and because there was a
competency and emulation betwixt Pompey and Crassus, by reason whereof he
thought it very difficult to grow in favor with both of them; he being absent
from Ro^e when they were in the heat of their contention, came thither of
purpose, not to extinguish the same, but to use it as a means to deceive them
both; and seeing that each of them sought his friendship against the other, he
would not follow any of them, but carrying himself as neutral and indifferent
betwixt them, he procured all ways possible to make them friends. And knowing
that so long as he declared not himself to be a faithful friend to one of them,
both would do for him, whatsoever he should demand of them; he held them both
in suspense, and made them so jealous of him, that for fear to lose him, both
labored to content and please him; and so much, that first he made himself
equal to either of them; next he brought to pass, that the power and authority
which was in their hands only, was divided betwixt him and them: And in the end
he alone came to rule all; for he drove Pompey out of Rome, and out of Italy,
and made himself Lord and Master of both places, opened the Roman Treasure, and
paid his Soldiers therewithal. What followed, the Histories reports; and I
haste unto another of the like mind, but of better fortune; for Caesar lived
not long after he came to the Empire: And many wise and learned men wonder why
the Emperors at this day carry still his name, since he was the only ruin and
overthrow of his Country, and of the ancient liberty thereof; whereas he, of
whom I intend to speak, not only enjoyed the Crown and Scepter many years
together, which he usurped cunningly, but also transferred the same unto his
posterity, in which it has remained better then these five hundred years, and
Caesar his posterity enjoyed not his purchase the twenti^th part of that time.
You have heard that the last Race of the Kings of France descended from Hugh
Capet, who being but Master of the Kings Palace, governed all things under him,
and so carried himself in that his Government, that he wan the hearts and love
of the common people, and also got into such favor with Lewis the Fifth of
France, a Prince of small worth, and of no great wit, that as some
Historographers write, he dying the year 987. without Heirs Males, not of his
natural death, but by poison, gave his Kingdom unto Blanch his Wife, and willed
her to marry Hugh Capet, which she did according to her Husbands Commandment,
and so Capet became King, albeit the Kingdom appertained ^y right unto Charles
Duke of Lorrain, Brother unto King Lotharius, and Uncle unto the said Lewis.
For Charles being then in Lorrain, and having been called and sent for by some
of the Nobles of France to be crowned King thereof, came not with such speed as
was convenient for him to have used, but gave time and respite unto Capet to
seize upon the Kingdom, pretending himself to have Title thereunto, by the late
Kings will, by reason that he was in some sort by his Mothers side of the race
of Charlemaign, by signifying unto the people, that Charles Duke of Lorrain
deserved not to be chosen King, because in all contentions, debates, and
differences betwixt the Crown of France and the Empire, the said Charles
favored the Emperors more then the French King; and by suggesting that he
being present and always ready to defend the Realm, ought to be preferred
before Charles that was absent, and not willing to come to accept the Crown,
when he was called thereunto; by inducing Anselm Bishop of Laon to deliver the
said Duke his Master with his two Children into his hands very traitorously; by
committing the Duke and his Sons to prison in Orleance, where they dyed, and by
degrading Arnolph Archbishop of Rhemes under color and pretense of Bastardy,
for fear he proving himself to be lawful and legitimate brother unto Charles,
might in time deprive him of the Kingdom; but the especial policy that Capet
used for the obtaining his purpose, was the imitation of Pipin of France, of
whose practices you shall first hear; and then as Plutarch in the lives of the
Worthies of Greece and Rome, compared a Grecian and a Roman together, that the
virtues and excellencies of both may appear the better by that his comparison:
So I will compare the devices of the late Duke of Guise with the practices of
Sejan, Caesar, Capet, and Pipin, to the end you may see in what points he
imitated them fully, and also wherein he failed to follow their footsteps. Da
Haillan
Pipin being Master of the Palace under Childerick the third King of France,
(who for his unworthiness was deprived of his Crown by the Pope Lachary)
thought that the greatness of his Office, and the weakness of his Prince and
Master, might well serve him for a Ladder to climb to the Kingdom, and knowing
that it would not suffice to advance his own credit and commendation, unless he
did also dispraise and discredit his King, he suborned men of purpose, not only
to spread abroad the kings indignities, to inveigh against his insufficiencies,
and to cry out against his evil Government; but also to set forth his own
praise, to commend his valor, and to extol his exploits and services, done as
well for his Country, as for the Sea of Rome; to the end that as soon as the
people began to contemn and dislike their King, they might also begin to love
and affect him, of which affection and love he hoped there might in time
proceed such a good liking, that they would vouchsafe to elect, and c^use him
for their King; and because he knew that the Frenchmen were well affected to
the Pope, and would do any thing at his Commandment; to win the Popes favor
and assistance, he not only promised; but went into Italy, of purpose to
succor his Holiness against the Lombards, who at that time greatly troubled
the universal rest and quiet of Italy, Besides fearing that the Oath which the
Frenchmen make unto their King, and the Love and Loyalty which they bear unto
him, might hinder his designs and purposes, he sent an express Messenger unto
the Pope, to declare unto him the true sense and meaning of their Oath, and to
entreat his Holiness to make such an Interpretation thereof as might serve his
turn; the effect of which Interpretation was, A strange Interpretation of the
Oath of Allegiance.
That since the promise which the Frenchmen made unto their King was
conditional and reciprocal; and that their King was likewise sworn unto them;
they being his Subjects were not bound any longer to their Oath, since he being
their King had broken his, because he was neither religious valiant, just, or
in any respect answerable to those conditions which were inserted and included
in his promise to them. In hope of performance of which conditions they had
sworn unto him all manner of duty, service, succor, faith, and obedience. This
was Pipin's policy to supplant Childerick, and to set the Crown of France upon
his own head. A comparison betwixt the Duke of Guise, and S^jan, Caesar, Pipin,
and Hugh Capet.


Now let me compare the Duke of Guise his practices with these men's devices,
his wit with their wisdom, and his aspiring mind with their ambition. Sejan and
Caesar were lowly and humble when they saw occasion, and what was the Duke of
Guise when he went bate-headed unto Porters and Crochelers? Caesar drove Pompey
out of Italy, and Sejan, Tiberius out of Rome into an Island, and what did the
Duke of Guise when he forced the late French King, not to leave, but to fly
from Paris, Caesar suppresseth Pompey and Crassus; and Sejan endeavored to
destroy Drusus and Nero; and what did the Duke of Guise, when he caused the
Admiral of France to be massacred, and the Duke of Espernon to be banished the
Court? Sejan and Caesar spared no money to win men to their service and
devotion: What did the Duke of Guise, when he spent all his own Patrimony, and
his Wives Inheritance, and the King of Spains yearly Pension, and infinite
Pistolets, to purchase himself Friends and Favorers? Casar and Sejan subverted
their enemies by their own friends; And what did the Duke of Guise when he
sowed sedition betwixt the King and his brother? Caesar and Sejan used the
Marriage of Livia, Drusus his Wife of his own Daughter, and of Pycos Sister for
the furtherance of their purpose: And what did the Duke of Guise, when he
caused the Massacre of Paris to be performed at the Marriage of the present
King of France with the late Kings Sister? Caesar and Sejan could be proud when
occasion was offered? And what was the Duke of Guise when he equalled his power
and strength with the Kings? Caesar could brook no equal; And what could the
Duke of Guise, when he contended with the Kings Brother for Superiority and
Precedence? Sejan set variance betwixt Drusus and Nero, to the end the one
should take occasion to destroy the other? And what did the Duke of Guise, when
he persuaded the French King to send his only Brother into Flanders, where he
devised diverse means to endanger his life? Caesar assumed by cunning and
policy, all the Power and Authority unto himself, which was sometimes equally
divided betwixt him, Pompey and Crassus? And what did the Duke of Guise, when
he suffered no man to be in credit at the Court but himself? Sejan offered the
Empire unto Drusus, not for favor which he bore him, but to incense and
encourage him to seek the ruin of Nero: And what did the Duke of Guise, when
he proffered the Kingdom in the late Kings days, unto the King of Navar, now
King of France, but seek means to breed such a distrust and jealousy betwixt
the King and him, that the one might let no occasion slip that might procure
the destruction or overthrow of the other? Caesar observed diligently the
natures and dispositions of such men as were in special credit with the common
people, and to purchase their favor furthered their purposes, when they tended
not to his own hinderance: And what did the Duke of Guise when he fawned upon
those whom the King loved, and labored to prefer his Secretaries to higher
places, to the end that both they and their Successors might be always willing
and ready to pleasure him? Pipin showed himself wise in using the Kings
weakness, and his own credit for a Ladder to climb to the Kingdom; And the Duke
of Guise came not much behind him in wisdom, when he weakened the late Kings
forces, and strengthened himself and his accomplices, with intention to set the
Crown of France upon his own Head. Hugh Capet pretended right to the Crown,
because he was in some sort alley'd to Jews the fifth, by his Mothers side:
And the Duke of Guise fortified his Right, by pretending Alliance unto the Duke
of Larrain, whom Hugh Capet deprived of the Crown. Pipin hired men to com^end
himself and dispraise Childerick: And the Duke of Guise wanted not his writers
and his flatterers, who in Books and common Table-talk, did daily set forth his
praise, and took hold of every small occasion, to enveigh bitterly against the
King, Pipin again used Religion and Zeal for a means to win the Popes favor,
and to procure him to make a friendly Interpretation of the French Subjects
Oath to their King: And the Duke of Guise with a show of suppressing the
Protestants of France, drew diverse Popes to join with him in alliance, and to
draw other Princes with the same line into the same League, and left not until
the Pope had Excommunicated the late King. Hugh Capit disabled Childerick as a
man not sufficient to Rule, and therefore caused him to be shut up in a
Monastery; And the Duke of Guise was so bold as to bring foreign power into
France, and to tell the King that he had procured their help to suppress the
Protestants, because his Majesty had neither men nor money enough wherewith to
overthrow them; and common fame greatly wrongeth him, if he intended not in
time to have shut the King up in some religious house, and to have put a Friars
Weed upon him. Briefly, Pipin, Julius Caesar, and Hugh Capet, attained their
desires by their cunning practices, and their subtle devises; And the Duke of
Guise by his slights and Stratagems had not failed of his purpose, if the King
had not by doing him suddenly to death prevented his intended Usurpation.

By this that has been said, you may plainly perceive that the Frenchmen
rebelled against their Sovereigns long before this time; And that they are in a
manifest Error who commend their Loyalty so much, as in their Writings to call
them The most Loyal, Loving, and Dutiful Subjects of Europe; For to omit other
Rebellions of the children against their own Fathers in France, whereof their
Histories are full and plentiful: It cannot be denied that both Pipin and Hugh
Capet were Usurpers; and that as many as favored and furthered them against
the lawful Heirs of the Crown, were notable and traitorous Rebels, and in no
respect inferior to those who in these days combine themselves against the
late French King, and still continue their open Revolt, and unlawful
disobedience against his right Heir and lawful Successor: Neither can any man
deny, that all they that took part with Lewis, surnamed the Meek, against
Bernard, King of Italy, were also most famous and disloyal Traitors; For Jews
being younger Brother unto Pipin (who dyed before his Father Charlemain, and
left Bernard King of Italy his sole Heir) had no right to the Crown of France,
so long as the said Bernard his eldest Brothers Son lived, for that as well in
the Succession of Crowns and Kingdoms, as of private men's Lands and
Inheritances; the eldest Brothers Son and Heir is always to be preferred before
his Uncle.

And for as much as Lewis having taken his Nephew Bernard in the field
Prisoner, Du Haillan
did not only detain him, and his chief Counselors in hard Prison, but also in
the end put him to an unlawful and unnatural death. Those Subjects who followed
and assisted him in those his unkind and unjust actions (because it is a most
wicked deed to participate with the wicked in their wickedness) must needs be
accounted as wicked as the present Subjects of France, who consented unto the
cruel Massacre of their late King: Again, all those French Subjects who bore
Arms against Edward the Third, in the behalf of Philip de Valoys were in as
high degree of Rebellion, as these latter Rebels: And so likewise were those
who stood with Charles the seventh against Henry the fifth and sixth of England.
For the only reason and cause which they alleged to debar these English Kings
from the Succession, as lawful Heirs to the Crown of France, was the Law
Salique, (which as they then pretended) excluded not only women, but also other
Heirs males descending from the woman, from the Inheritance of the Crown; Which
Law was no sufficient bar, because it was undoubtedly a local Law, Du Haillan
Holinshed.
made in Salem, a Town about the River of Rhine in Germany; at what time the
French Kings were both Kings of France, and Emperors of Germany; and therefore
as all other local Laws are, was tied to the Inheritance of that Town only, and
could not stretch her Forces to foreign Countries, or to the succession of
Kingdoms, no more then the Law of Gavelkind, being peculiar, not to all, but to
some part of Kent, is of full strength and full force in other places of
England: Besides, it is confirmed that there was never any such Law in France
by the Testimony of the Duke of Burgundy; who when as Philip, surnamed the
Long, was created King, never left to cry out against his Creation, and to
profess openly, That the Kingdom belonged of right unto Joan, Daughter unto
Hutine, sometimes King of France, before that Philip stoppen his mouth with the
gift of the Country of Burgundy, in Dower with his eldest Daughter. I could
stand longer upon the proof that there was never any Salick Law in France, Du
Haillan denies the Law Salique.
were it not that Du Haillan a French Chronicler, in the first Volumn of his
History, eases me of that pain, and clears that point so plainly, that he
being a Frenchman, and refuting a Law, suggested not only to be a Law, but also
one of the chief Pillars and Maintainers of the ancient Dignity of the Crown of
France, cannot be thought to write thereof either partially or untruly: But
although I let pass Ed. 3. his Title, as the less valuable, because it was
impugned and weakened by the only Allegation of that Law; yet I must enlarge
somewhat more Henry, the fifth his Right, because the same (in my simple
conceit and opinion) was far stronger then Edward the Thirds; For Henry the
fifth considering that because his Predecessors did always from the time of
Edward the third, lay continual claim unto the Crown of France; and that
therefore the Kings, or rather Usurpers thereof had do right nor just title
thereunto, because they not having bonam fidem (a point requisite in
Prescription) by reason that they knew the right to be in Kings of England
rather then in themselves, could not lawfully prescribe a right unto the said
Crown, demanded the same by force of Arms of Charles the sixth, and drove him to
such extremities, that he being able no longer to make resistance against his
invincible Forces, was glad to capitulate and agree upon conditions of Peace
with him: The principal Articles of which Peace were; That the said Charles the
sixth should during his life, continue King; That he should dis-inherit his Son
and Heir, who was afterward Charles the seventh; That the King of England
should take to Wife Isabel, Daughter unto the French King; and in regard of
that Marriage he proclaimed Regent of that Kingdom during Charles his Father in
laws life, because he was sometimes Lunatique, and Heir apparent to the Crown
after his death; And lastly, that the Nobility and Peers of France, should not
only consent thereunto, but also take a solemn Oath (which was accordingly
performed and executed) to maintain every point of those Articles, and uphold
and assist Henry the fifth, and his lawful Heirs and Successors, against
Charles, Son unto the French King, the rather because his Father had for very
good and just occasions him moving thereunto, dis-inherited the said Charles,
and by the last Will and Testament, made when he was in perfect sense and
memory, ordained and constituted the said Henry, his sole and lawful Heir of
the Crown. But the Frenchmen have their Objections to all that is said; the
which I cannot lightly pass over, because I know you are desirous to hear their
Exceptions, and also what may be replied in Answer to their Allegations; But I
may not dwell long upon every particular Point, because my leisure will not
serve me, and it is not pertinent to my first purpose.

They say first, The Frenchmens first Objection, and the answer thereunto.
Hottomanus de jure successionis
That their Kingdom goes not by Dissent and Inheritance, from the Father to
the Son, but by succession, which is grounded not upon Law, but upon a Custom;
by virtue whereof, the next of the Blood Royal, be he of the farthest degree
that may be of Kindred, succeeds not as a lawful Heir, but as a Successor by
Custom, not newly invented, but of long continuance, even from the time of the
first King Pharamond.

Which objection I mean briefly to Answer, before I will proceed to any others.
Guicciardine, who wrote an Universal History of all things that happened in his
time, not only in Italy, but also in all other places of Europe (although he
was a very perfect and learned Lawyer) yet when he had occasion to touch any
Point of Law, he handled not the same Lawyer-like, but passed it over lightly,
setting down his opinion of the Case, in as few words as he could possibly,
because if he had done otherwise, he knew that he should not observe the Laws
and Bounds whereunto Histographers are tied and bound. In like manner although
these Questions are merely civil, and ought to be handled by me as a Civilian;
yet because I purpose to write you an historical discourse, I will touch them
lightly; for that I speak of them obiter, and by digression, and I hold it
sufficient to refute the Objections that may be made in this Cause; not by Law,
but by the Histories of France.

For albeit John Bodine, a Frenchman, and notably well seen and read in
Histories, discoursing in his Book de Methodo History, at large, what Rules
are to be observed in judging a right of an Historographer, and what credit may
be given to an History, sets it down in an opinion not controlable, That in
matters touching France or England, you ought not to credit a French or English
History; but rather a stranger writing thereof, with more indifferency and less
partiality; yet, as in Causes which cannot be well decided, or perfectly known
but by Domestical witnesses, their Testimony is to be preferred before all
others; So in matters of State, which cannot be so well known unto Forrainers,
as unto men born and bred within the same State; better credit ought to be
given unto these, then unto them: You shall therefore hear this first Objection
refuted by their own Writers; and especially by Du Haillan, who in my opinion
is the best Historographer that writes of France; who refuteth this Objection,
by reckoning up a bed-roll of Kings who did not succeed one another, but were
chosen one after another; Pharamond (says he, in his third Book) was the first
chosen King of France; After whom Daniel, surnamed Childerick, was chosen:
Pipin likewise was chosen, and after him Charles and Charl^main his Sons: And
the Frenchmen despising the Youth of Charles, King Lewis his Son, who was
betwixt nine and ten years of age, chose Od^n, Son to Robert the Saxon, for
their King; And afterward being discontented with his Government, they
deprived him of his Kingdom, and set up Charles in his place; who governing
them somewhat looslly, was likewise deposed and cast into Prison; and in his
place Ba^ul, King of Burgundy was instituted and created King of France; and
there remains even at this day a certain form of Election which is made at
the consecrating and crowning of the King at Beihins, where the Peer of France,
in the name of the Clergy, Nobility, and People, choose the King that is
present: Here you see an Election begun in Pharamond, continued in others, and
observed at this day; and yet as many as have been Kings since Hugh Capet's
time, have succeeded to their Kingdoms, and claimed the same by Inheritance,
rather then by custom; and you shall see when we come to another of their
Objections, that neither this Election, nor this Custom in succession has been
always duly kept and observed.

The second Objection against this agreement is, That although Contracts do
bind Princes as well as Subjects, The second Objection, with the answer.
yet such Contracts as are made by men not being sufficient and able to
celebrate Contracts; as men distracted of their wits, Lunatiques, and others
not being in perfect sense and memory, do not bind the Contrahents, but are
held in Law as matters of no weight, force, or validity; and therefore Charles
the Sixth who concluded his Peace with the abovementioned conditions, being
both before and after the celebration of the same notoriously reputed and known
to be a Lunatique, this Contract did neither bind him nor his Successors.

To this it is easily answered, That Contracts made by men disabled by Law to
enter into any such compositions, are of force by two ways; The one if they
with due and requisite solemnities be done by such as by Law are deputed to
have the Government of their goods and persons during the time of their
weakness and imbecility: The other, if they themselves having dilucida
intervalla, being (as Lunatiques many times are) in perfect sense and memory to
celebrate any manner of Contract, the same is of full force and strength; and
therefore Charles the sixth being (as their own Histories report) at the time
when this Agreement was made, in his right wits and memory: This contract
wanted not the force and virtue which Law requires, especially since the chief
Nobility of the Realm were then not only present, but consenting thereunto, and
sworn to the performance thereof.

The third Objection is, The third Objection and answer.
That the Kings of France cannot alienate the Demeans, Rights, Titles, and
Interests of the Crown without the privity and consent of the three Estates,
which consent could not possibly be had at this Agreement, Guido Papnis quest.
23. 9. Hostiensis extr^de major. et obedientia. c. dilecti filii.
because a great part of the Peers, Nobles, and others were then absent, and
bore Arms with the young Prince Charles, or at the leastw^se followed him
against the King his Father.

To this I briefly answer, That in matters which go by plurality of voices, it
is not always necessary that all be present, but that the greater or better
part of them that will and do vouchsafe their presence thereat yield their
consents thereunto, especially when the others who are absent have been cited
and warned to be present, Alexander Cent. 25. n. 20. vel 5.
and they either willingly or contemptuously will not appear. For albeit the
thing that concerns all men, Baldus in tit. Si defendo fuerit contra int.
Dom. in general^ n. v.
must be approved of all men, yet when some or all may approve or disallow the
things which concerns them, and they will not be present to show their
consent or dislike, their absence shall not prejudice the Contract that is
celebrated, and there is no wrong offered unto them by proceeding in their
absence, quia volenti non fit injuria. In this case therefore those that were
away, being either voluntarily absent, or traitorously minded to their King
(which appeared in that they followed his Son against him, and animated and
assisted him in his disobedience and rebellion against his Father) could not in
any respect prejudice the force and validity of this contract; for if they were
absent of purpose, then there was no injury done unto them; and if they were
Traitors (as undoubtedly they are, who either bear Arms against their Prince,
or assist his Enemies with their counsels) then they had lost the right of
their consent and voice; And so consequently the Contract which was celebrated
by the more and better part, or by all the Nobility, and of the three Estates
that were present, and true and Loyal Subjects unto their King, notwithstanding
the others voluntary malicious absence, was by Law warrantable, especially
being confirmed and fortified by the Oath of the King, and his Council and
Nobility.

The fourth Objection against this Agreement is, The fourth Objection and
Answer.
That when it was concluded, the King of England had almost Conquered all
France, was there with his power and strength about him, and shut up the French
King as it were in Prison, and utterly disabled him to make any resistance
against his invincible Army, and conquering Forces; And therefore whatsoever he
did, being done by fear and compulsion, was of no better force then a Contract
extorted by violence, or made in Prison by a private man, which when he is set
at liberty, he is not bound by Law to perform except he list.

To this Point I likewise Answer briefly; That the Law that provideth for the
remedy of such as by Imprisonment, or by violence and just fear, and such as
the Law ^aith, cadet in fortem virum, have yielded to any inconveniency,
extends not (in my simple conceit) her force unto the Contracts of Princes,
which are celebrated and concluded after long Wars betwixt them; For if
Conquerors might not impose what conditions of Peace they please upon the
conquered, there would never be any end of Wars; And as private men being in
troubles may even in cases which admit no giving or taking on any side (as for
Ecclesiastical livings betwixt Ecclesiastical persons) redeem their troubles by
giving or taking whatsoever shall be agreed upon, and with the best conditions
they may; so in Wars, Princes who have lost the field, and so weakened their
Forces, that they are able to make no longer resistance, may lawfully alienate
the more part of the Revenues of their Crown, to purchase their liberty, and
their Subjects quiet; who (if their Princes might not capitulate with his and
their Adversary, in such manner as the Conqueror shall demand) should be
deprived of their lives, liberties and Livings; of all which three, every King
is sworn to have a special care and regard, and to seek all means possible to
preserve them all: And in consideration hereof, it is usual amongst Princes
rather to lie in durance a long time, then to yield to the unreasonable demands
of their enemies, whilst they are in the heat of their choler and indignation;
because when their wrath is somewhat assuaged, and either time or intercession
of other Princes (who commonly in such cases interpose their helping hands, and
be Mediators of Peace) mitigated and moderated their anger, they are willing to
yield to reasonable conditions. For confirmation hereof, I could alleadg many
examples, but I will deal with a Frenchman at his own weapon: Guicciardine, in
his before mentioned History, discoursing at large of the hard measure that was
offered unto Francis the first, King of France, after he was taken Prisoner at
Pavia, in Italy, by the Army of the Emperor Charles the fifth, says, That
there were never but two Kings of France taken prisoners in the field, (to wit)
King John, and the said Francis; King John was so kindly used in England,
(where he lay above 2 years pri^oner) that after he was delivered thence, he
would needs go thither again to see his good Host, for so he termed the King of
England, whereas Francis the first, albeit he greatly desired to be transported
out of Italy into Spain, being in great hope and confidence that the Emperor
(who had seen the change and variety of time, and also the inconstancy of
fortune) would have some Princely compassion upon him, found all things
contrary to his conceived hope and expectation; for he was committed to hard
prison, kept with a continual and strong guard, not attended upon as a Prince
of his might and greatness ought to have been, hardly suffered to speak with
his Sister, who was sent out of France on purpose to comfort him, and never
brought unto the Emperors sight and presence, until that through grief and
melancholy he fell into so dangerous a sickness as made the Physicians almost
despair of his recovery; the Emperor not for love (as Guicciaraine affirms)
but for fear to lose by his death all that he hoped to get for his Ransom,
went to visit and comfort him. The reason of this hard usage was, to enforce
him by long durance, and want of liberty, to redeem his troubles upon hard
conditions; And although he had oftentimes answered the Emperor, that he had
rather dye in Prison then yield to his unreasonable demands, which could not be
well performed without the great prejudice, yea almost the utter subversion of
his Kingdom; and had accordingly written unto his Nobility and Council in
France, that they should make no more account of his life or liberty, because
the demands of his Ransom were too too unreasonable, yet he was forced at
length to subscribe and consent unto such hard conditions and Articles, as were
agreed upon by Charles the fifth, and his Council; Which indeed were so hard,
that although his Sons lay in Spain, as Hostages for their performance; yet
after he was delivered, he would not see them accomplished, but fell a fresh to
Wars with the Emperor; and in the end, by the intercession of other Princes,
made a more reasonable end. But King John (as both the French Chronicles and
ours do report) was set at liberty with more equal conditions, and yet the same
were not performed; And the Frenchmen in all Treaties of peace with us, have
either gone so far beyond us with their wits, that they have oftentimes greatly
deceived us, or have so fraudulently violated all, or the more part of the
Articles of their Agreement, that our victories being many against them, never
yielded unto us any great commodity or advantage. The consideration whereof
moved one of their Writers to say, John Bodin.
that we never won any thing of them by the dint of Sword, but they recovered
the same again by the sharpness of their wits. And another Historian of theirs
mocketh us in his writings, and says, Philip de Comines,
That when we come to treat with them of Peace, we sit down proudly, and with
great words extoling our exploits, valor, and good success against them; in
the beginning of our parts we do demand no less then the whole Kingdom of
France, but in the end of them, we fall from Mountains unto Molehills.

Now sithence we by their own confession have been so courteous and reasonable,
that we have yielded them far better favor, and better conditions of peace
then they hoped for, and they contrariwise have dealt so craftily, and so
deceitfully with us, both in the time of King John, and others, before the
Reign of Charles the Sixth, that we cannot be blamed for dealing more hardly
with them in the said contract, and for using the surest way we could devise
for our security and assurance of that which was promised unto us. And
certainly as the Treaties and Conclusions of peace made with King John, and
King Francis, were in the opinion of the best and learned Lawyers of Europe
held lawful, although they were not in all points performed; so the Contract
made betwixt Charles the Sixth, and his Son-in Law Henry fifth of England, was
undoubtedly agreeable to Law and Equity; for otherwise Princes should be in
worse condition then Subjects, who are bound to perform every point of a
reasonable contract or agreement which they make. But it was hard to demand and
take a whole Kingdom. True if conquests were not lawful, we should have dealt
so favorably with Charles the Sixth, as our Predecessor did with King John; it
might be we would have done so, if King John and his Successors had not before
oftentimes deceived us. Princes do not usually take advantage of their enemies
when they have the upper hand over them, with all utmost extremities. But if
they do, what remedy is there? or who can gainsay the Conqueror? Courtesy is
commendable in all men, and especially in Princes, who are to extend the same
at all times, when it is demanded in good manner, and by men worthy of mercy
and compassion. And such was the lamentable estate of Charles the Sixth, who
had at once many miseries heaped upon him by the heavy wrath of God, as namely,
wars within his Realm, rebellion of his own Son against him, revolt of his
Subjects, and distraction of his wits; and so it was extreme cruelty to add
affliction to the afflicted. Indeed mercy is to be extended to persons worthy
of commiseration, and Lunatiques are by all men to be pitied: and in regard
hereof, the King of England, whereas he might have destroyed the whole Realm of
France, burned the Cities, wasted the Countries, led away the people in
captivity, taken their goods to his own use, bestowed the Nobilities and
Gentlemen's Lands upon his own Subjects, altered the Laws of the Country,
changed the Government thereof, deprived the most part of them of their lives,
and seated his own Subjects in their possessions; he suffered them to live at
liberty, to enjoy their ancient possessions, to maintain and use their own
privileges, to dwell in their wonted habitations, and to continue in all
respects as free as they were before they were conquered. And whereas he might
have made the King prisoner, carried him with him into England, and to have
placed another to govern for him, especially he being not in case to rule and
govern by himself: He was so far from so doing, that he suffered him to enjoy
the Kingdom whilst he lived, and by taking his Daughter to wife, transferred
not only the French, but also the English Crown unto the issue of her body, a
thing to be greatly desired of that Father, whose Son by reason of his
disobedience deserved not to succeed him; a thing practiced by all men that
have had the like children, a thing far beyond the custom of Frenchmen
themselves, who in the like cases have not used the like clemency and
moderation. Guicciardine G^oviano Pontavo della guerra di Napoli.
For over what Enemies had the Frenchmen ever the upper hand, whom they used
not most cruelly? What barbarous cruelty exercised they in Italy, and
especially at Naples, where their Tyranny in Government, their extremity in
polling, their insolency in mis-using the common people was such, that in one
night they were all slain; and in hatred of them and their posterity, Du
Haillan.
the wombs of all Neapolitan women that were suspected to be with child by
Frenchmen, were ripped up, and the children plucked out, and likewise murdered
with their Mothers. What cruelty purposed they to have practiced in England, at
what time Lewis the Dolphin of France was called into England by the Barons who
bare Arms against King John? Intended they not to have destroyed the most part
of the Realm? Purposed they not to have killed the very Barons themselves, who
were their friends and confederates? Had they not executed this their purpose,
Polid. Virg. Holinshed.
if a noble Frenchman who was in England had not as well in hatred of their
intended cruelty, as in commiseration of the poor English Nobility, revealed
upon his deathbed their barbarous intentions? To be brief, what severity used
King Lewis surnamed for his lenity toward others, Lewis the M E E K, against
Bernard his own Nephew, Du Haillan. Froissart.
and rightful heir to the Crown of France, (as we have showed in the second
point which we handled) whom he not only deprived of his right, but also held
him a long time in Prison, and condemned him to lose his eyes, which were
accordingly plucked out of his head; and his chief Counselors endured the like
punishment: Of which both he and they complaining, not without just occasion,
were so far from finding such compassion and remedy as they deserved, as that a
new Edictment was framed both against him and them: Now with such Adversaries,
with men of such cruelty, with such as had oftentimes falsified their faith,
and broken their promises, what wise Prince would ever have used greater
lenity, more mercy, or better Justice then the King of England showed them?
Especially considering the immortal hatred, deadly malice, and long emulations,
competentions, quarrels, and contentions that have been always betwixt England
and France.

The fifth Objection that they make against this Contract, is, The fifth
Objection, with the answer.
is, That the Kingdom of France cannot be given unto any man by Will or
Testament: Which privilege seems unto me very strange, because I find by
report of probable Histories, that the Kingdoms of Spain, England, Aragon,
Scotland, Poland, Hottomanus.
and other Countries have been given away by Will and Testament; Gul*
Benedictus, inc. Raghutius in verb. mortui. n. 49. Terrixubeus tract. 2. Con
Clus. q.
and therefore if the Frenchmen will challenge an Immunity contrary to the
custom of other Countries, and repugnant to the Law of all Nations, they must
show how they came by such a Privilege, and why they should not follow the
customs of other Kingdoms: For whosoever will allege an exemption from the
due observance of the Law, must make it appear at what time, for what occasion,
and by whom he or his Predecessors obtained the same, that the quality of the
Giver, and the consideration and cause of the Grant being duly examined and
discreetly considered, Terapha. Holinshed. Hect. Boet.
the strength and validity of his exemption may be well and perfectly seen.
Hist. Poloniae.
I know that there are many degrees of Princes, and that some Kings are in some
manner subject unto others from whom they receive Laws, and by whom they and
their Kingdoms are ruled and directed. So has Scotland been ruled by England,
so has Denmark acknowledged the Empire, so has Sicily obeyed Rome; so has
the Pope challenged power and authority over the Empire. But all Histories
agree in this, that although of other Kingdoms some be subject to the Pope,
others unto the Emperor, yet the Kingdom of France is, and always has been
most absolute, neither depending upon the Emperor, nor being in any respect
subject unto the Pope. That the Emperor has no authority over France, was
showed when as Sigismond the Emperor would have made the Earl of Savoy a Duke
in Lions; for then the Kings Officers withstood him therein, and forced him, to
his great grief, and in a great fury and anger to depart thence, and out of all
the dominion of France, before he could use in that point his Imperial power
and authority: And that the Pope has no manner of Authority, Prerogative, or
Pre-eminence over France, it appears by the confession of all Canonists, who
have written, and do write of the Popes Prerogatives: For albeit they make the
Empire, and almost all the Kingdoms of the world, in some sort subject unto the Sea of Rome; yet they confess the King of France to be so absolute, that he
acknowledges no Superior but God, and that there is no other Prince but he,
unto whom some Pope or other has not either given or confirmed his Estate and
Kingdom. It must needs therefore follow, That there is no Superior out of
France, who either has or could bestow his privilege upon France: And it
appears by their own Histories; Du Haillan
That there has been nothing done within the Realm whereby their Kings have
been forbidden to dispose their Kingdoms by their last Wills and Testaments:
For Dagobert, King of France, in the presence of the principal Lords and
Prelates of his Realm, made his last Will and Testament, and therein gave the
Kingdom of Austrasia unto his Son Sigisbert; Piero Mexias vida de Carlo Magno.
and the Kingdom of France unto his Son Cloius, Likewise Charlemain by Will and
Testament, divided his Kingdom betwixt his three Sons; He gave unto Charles the
best and greatest part of France and Germany; unto Pipin, Italy and Baivera;
and unto Lewis that part of France which confineth and bordereth upon Spain and
Provence; And caused this his Will to be ratified, confirmed and approved by
the Pope; and entitled his Sons with the names of Kings. It is also written by
French Historiographers, That Philip de Valois (who contended with Edward the
Third for the Crown of France) ordained by his last Will and Testament, Du
Haillan lib. 15. p. 214.
that John his eldest Son should succeed him in the Crown; and that his second
Son Philip should enjoy for his part and portion, the Dukedom of Orleans, and
the Earldom of Valois. Now these three Kings being of three Races of the French
Kings, Dagobert of the Merovingians, Charlemain of the Charlemains, and Philip
de Valois, although not directly, yet collaterally of the Capets, which are the
three only Races that ever were in France; and they having disposed of their
Kingdoms in manner as is a foresaid, it may well be presumed that others before
them have or might have done the like, especially since there is no Law to be
showed which forbids Kings to bequeath their Kingdoms by Will and Testament.

The sixth and last Objection which is made against this Contract is, That
Charles the sixth could not lawfully dis-inherit his son, The sixth Objection
with the Answer.
who, by the custom of France was lawful and apparent Heir, and could not for
any cause whatsoever, be deprived by his Father, or by any other, of that right
which belonged unto him by the ancient Privilege of France. John de Terra
Rubea tract. 2. conclus. 9. 10, 11, 12.


In this Objection there are two things intended; The one, That the Kings of
France cannot deprive their Sons or next Heirs, for any occasion whatsoever, of
their Right, Title, and Interest to the Royal Crown and Dignity. Guliel.
Benedictus in c. Ragnat. in verbum and eodem test. number. 148. Guido Papius
quest. 279.
The other, That the next of the blood Royal, according to the Custom before
mentioned, must of necessity succeed and enjoy the Kingdom.

This Ob^ection is (in my simple opinion) of greatest force, because I read not
in all the Histories of France, that ever any King thereof, but Charles the
sixth did dis-inherit his Son: True it is that Charles the seventh was thus
dis-inherited, being plagued by God for his disobedience toward his Father,
with a Son as undutiful and disobedient in all respects, as himself was, sent
unto the Pope to advise him how he might dis-inherit his eldest Son, who had
diverse times rebelled against him, and bestow the Kingdom upon his second son,
in whom he never found any manner of disobedience; but the difficulty is
resolved by this reason following: For if a Kingdom may be given by Will and
Testament (as is to be presumed) that it may also be taken away from one, and
bestowed upon another, when there is just cause given by him who lays claim
thereunto; why he should be dis-inherited, especially when as there is no such
necessity of successive inheritance, as has hitherto been mentioned; And in
case it be doubtful whether a Kingdom may be taken from the right Heir, and be
bequeathed unto another; the custom of the Country in private men's Inheritance
is to be considered: because most commonly, such as the Law is in part, such it
is in the whole; and for that generally the Nobility of every Realm (who regard
the conservation of their Honor and Dignity in their Families, no less then
Princes do the preservation of the Royal Authority in their Posterity) do
follow and imitate the manner, Law, and Order of their Kings, touching the
disposition of their Kingdoms: And even as they usually dispose of their
Principalities, so do the other of their Baronies, and inferior Estates, by
what Name or Title soever they be called: If therefore it can be showed that
any of the chief Nobility of France, have at any time dis-inherited their
lawful Heirs, it may justly be presumed that the Kings of France may do the
like, when the like occasion is offered unto them: The Lords of Bearne have
time out of mind, been of such power and might in France, that the Kings
thereof have in all Ages made great account and reckoning of them; And the
present King of France is Lord thereof; and by his Adversaries the Spaniards
(who will hardly vouchsafe him the name of a King of France or of Navar,
because they take him to be lawful King of neither of these Kingdoms) is
commonly called in their Writings, Lord of Bearne. The Earls also of Foix, have
beyond the memory of man, been of such worth and estimation, that it is written
of them, (when they were also Lords of Bearne) they cared neither for the King
of Aragon, nor for the Kings of Navarra, for they were able upon any urgent
occasion to keep more men at Arms at one time, then both those Kings could make
at two several Levies. Both these Lordships or Seigneuries, are now under the
Kingdom of Navar; and the principal members thereof, and the Lords and lawful
Owners of each of them, Nich. Gyles Froissart.
dis-inherited their next and lawful Heirs, only for ingratitude and unkindness
toward them; for the French Histories report, that Gaston Lord of Bea^ne had
but two Daughters; the eldest of which he married unto the Earl of Armignack,
and the younger unto the Earl of Foix, who was Nephew unto the King of Aragon:
Froissart.
It fortuned that the said Gaston had Wars with the King of Spain, wherein he
desired help of the Earl of Armignack, who refused to succor him; and the Earl
of Foix holp him with such power and force, that he enforced the King to very
reasonable conditions of Peace; in recompense of which service, Gaston made the
Earl of Foix his sole Heir; and caused the Nobles and Gentlemen, together with
all other his Subjects, to confirm and ratify his Grant; whereupon followed
great strife and contention between the two Earls.

It is also written in the Chronicles of France, Nich. Gyle^
that in the year 1391. The Earl of Foix, because his Son, by the consent and
counsel of the King of Navar, went about to have poisoned him, gave his Earldom
from him, to the King of France, who presently bestowed the same upon the Earl
of Candalles. Here you see two Heirs dis-inherited by their Father, whose Act
was generally reputed and held lawful. Now you shall see the like cause in
Charles the seventh; and why should it not be thought lawful for his Father to
inflict upon him the like punishment* The one of them denied his Father in law
such help as he demanded; The other purposed to have poisoned his own Father:
The unkindness of both was not in all degrees equal, yet their punishments were
in all respects alike. The Father of the one incurred no loss by his Son in
laws disobedience, and the Father of the other lived not a minute of an hour
the less, notwithstanding his sons wicked purpose. But Charles the 6ths case
was in many respects lamentable, and his Sons ingratitude for many causes
worthy of greater punishment then the loss of a Kingdom; for the murdered the
Duke of Burgundy, one of the chief Peers of France, and when he was summoned by
Proclamation to show some cause before his Father, Du Haillan. lib. 21.
and the Nobles of France, why he had committed so horrible a murder, did not
only not appear at his Fathers Summons, but also defended his cruelty in
killing the Duke, and his disobedience in not appearing at his Fathers
Commandment, by force of Arms: For which unnatural Rebellion, not his Father
alone, but the whole Council and Nobility of France, gave judgment that he
should be banished the Realm, and reputed unworthy to succeed his Father,
either in the whole Kingdom, or in any part or parcel thereof; which done, and
Judgment being both begun and ended with all such solemnities as in the like
cases are required, must of necessity be held and reputed most just and equal,
since both Law and man's reason neither has not can invent any better means to
chast^se and correct the unnatural disobedience of rebellious children toward
their Parents, then by depriving them of their Patrimony descending from their
Parents. And if Princes should be debarred of this manner of correction, they
should be in far worse condition then their poorest Subjects; for Princes
Children having more occasions to lead them to wickedness, then their Subjects
Children have, if they should not be restrained by dis-inheritance, would
undoubtedly go far beyond all others in lewdness and unhappiness; because
Princes and Noblemen, whether they give themselves unto virtue or unto vice,
most commonly excel the meaner sort in both, as it may evidently appear unto
such by reading the lives of Princes and Peers of all Realms and Kingdoms,
shall find such rare Presidents of virtues and vices in them, as far exceed
man's reason, or will hardly be credited or believed of any man. Was there ever
any private man comparable to Nero for cruelty, or to Vespasian for mercy? to
Solomon for wisdom, or to Childerick of France for folly? to Trajan for
goodness, or to Cambyses for murder? to Tarquin for pride, or to Lewis of
France for meekness? to Caesar for liberality, or to Caligula for avarice? to
Marcus Aurelius for moderation and temperance, or to Commodus for prodigality
and dissoluteness? Briefly, to Antonius and Titus for lenity and clemency, or
to Dionisius and Tiberius for rigor and severity? For undoubtedly, as long as
the provocations to vices, and the allurements to virtues are more and greater
in Princes then in private men, so long will the one far exceed the other in
virtues or in vices; Then since it is behoveful for every Commonwealth to be
ruled by good Princes; it must also behove good Parents to be careful to leave
good children to succeed after them, and not to be so affected to the eldest of
their children because he is the first of their strength, as to make him, and
no other but him, their sole Heir and Successor, although he alone be wicked
and ill given, and the rest wise, discreet, and virtuous; so he unworthy to
Govern, and they most fit to Rule; because he would overthrow, and they uphold
the whole Estate and Kingdom.

The Consideration hereof, moved the good Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who had a
good and a bad Son, when he was visited with a Disease that was mortal, greatly
to lament his own death; not because he was loath and unwilling to dye, knowing
as he did, that death was the end of all miseries, and the beginning of
everlasting felicity; Vita de Marc. Aurelio.
but for that he was bound by the custom, generally, and time out of mind
received and allowed by his Predecessors, contrary to his will and desire, to
leave the Empire of Rome (which had been ruled a long time by his many years
and great experience) to be Governed and Ruled by the indiscreet youth and
youthful indiscretion of his bad Son Commodus.

The Consideration hereof, caused James King of Aragon and Sicily, to persuade
his eldest Son James (who was more fit to live sequestered from the company of
men, Tarapha Illescas lib. 6.
in a Monastry, then to sway a Monarchy) to leave the world, and betake himself
to a Monastical life, suffering his second Brother Alphonsus, (upon whom God
had bestowed sufficient gifts and qualities capable of a Kingdom) to succeed
his Father in both Kingdoms.

The Consideration hereof induced Robert King of France to make his second Son
Henry his Heir and Successor in the Kingdom, Du Haillan lib. 6.
because he knew that God had endowed him with a far better spirit and wit,
more fit to Command and Govern then his eldest Son Robert had, upon whom he
bestowed the Duchy of Burgundy.

The Consideration hereof moved not only Lewis surnamed the Gross, Du Haillan
lib. 8.
King of France, but also all the Peers and States of the same Realm, to make
Lewis his second Son King, because Robert his eldest Son was by him and them,
for want of judgment and understanding, judged unfit and unworthy to bear or
sway the Crown of France; and therefore he and they held it sufficient to
bestow upon him the Earldom of Dreux.

Lastly, the Consideration hereof moved Dagobert King of France to entreat
Sigisbert his eldest Son, Du Haillan lib. 2.
who not being able in his opinion to Rule and Govern so great a Kingdom as
France, and yet desirous to have the name of a King, to be contented with the
small Kingdom of Austrasia, and to resign and give over his Right and Title to
the Kingdom of France unto his younger Brother Clouis.

Considering therefore, That the Gifts which are required in a Prince are many
and very difficult to be attained: That very few have wit and wisdom sufficient
to govern a Kingdom: That of these few some use their wits to attain to their
purpose; and when they have gotten their desire, leave both to be wise and
virtuous, as I could declare by many Examples, if it were not to digress from
my purpose:) And lastly, that the virtues of the Parents are obscured and
blemished by the childrens vices; and the Predecessors Conquests are oftentimes
either lost or diminished by the Successors folly and pusillanimity: It were a
shame for the Father, a detriment to the Commonwealth, a wrong to the Kingdom,
and an injury to the virtuous child, where there is a good Son to succeed a
virtuous Father, to bind the same Father to leave little or nothing to his good
children, and a whole Kingdom to him that is neither worthy nor well able to
rule the thousand part thereof; And if at any time it be lamentatable, yea
scant tolerable, to prefer wicked children before them that are virtuous; and
to lay a heavy charge and burden upon their shoulders, who are not able to
take up (much less to bear) the same, not for a day, but for the whole term of
their natural life; truly it is much more to be lamented, yea, in no respect to
be suffered, that such a Son should be set over others, to rule and govern
them, who could nor would never govern himself well; to exact and require
obedience of his Inferiors, who was always disobedient in the highest degree of
disobedience unto his Superiors; to manage, husband, and increase the Treasure
of a whole Kingdom, who has prodigally wasted and consumed his own private
Patrimony: Lastly, to induce others by his example to live honestly, justly,
orderly, and virtuously (as Princes either do or should do) who never esteemed
honesty, cared for justice, respected order, or embraced virtue.

John Bodin in his Book de Republica, writes that a disobedient child of
France being sued by his Mother for using himself unreverently toward her, and
especially for easing his body in a mess of Broth which she had provided for
her self; was condemned by a competent and wise judge, to make her honorable
amends; from which sentence the wicked Son disdaining to ask his Mother pardon
and forgiveness, appealed unto Paris, where it was found been appellatum, and
male judicatum, not that the Judges there thought that the Appellant had just
cause to appeal, because he was enjoined to submit himself unto his Mother; but
for that they were of opinion that the Judges from whom he had appealed, had
not inflicted such punishment upon him as he deserved; And therefore
considering his former disobedience, and also his unkind and unnatural
perseverance therein, indiscreetly showed, in refusing to make so slender a
submission, they altered the former sentence, and gave judgment that he should
be presently hanged, which was accordingly executed.

This sentence was highly commended by Bodin, and worthily allowed and praised
by as many Frenchmen as did ever read the same in his Book.

And how can they dislike the Judgment given against Charles the seventh, not
by any inferior Judge, but by a King; not by a Parliament of Paris (the Judges
whereof may so hate an offense, that for the very and sole indignity thereof,
they do likewise hate the offender) but by a Father, who had rather conceal
then reveal, and pardon then punish his childrens offenses; neither by a Father
alone, but by the whole Peers and Nobles of a well ruled Kingdom? not lightly
and without advice, but deliberately, and with great discretion and wisdom;
Briefly, not in hatred of the offender, but in regard of the whole
Commonwealth* which might perish under the hands and government of an unwise,
unruly, and unnatural Prince, in whom there could be no hope of love toward
them or their Country, because he had given manifest signs of want of love
toward his Father, whom nature and other respects bound him to love, honor,
and reverence; for Princes as well as private men, and the children of the one,
as well as the offspring of the other, are equally and undoubtedly bound to
obey Gods Laws, and Commandments; And if both in one manner presume to break
the same, both without all doubt and controversy are subject to one and the
same measure of punishment.

But it may be said, Laws are made by Princes, and not for Princes; and to bind
their inferior subjects, and not themselves or their children; who for their
Fathers sake, for the privilege of their birth, for the worthiness of their
place, and in regard of the authority and pre-eminence whereunto they are born,
may and ought to challenge and enjoy far greater immunity, yea, and sometimes
more impunity then other Peers, or private men: certainly reason permits,
and humanity persuades to favor a Prince much more then a subject. But it was
both the Will and the Law of a worthy Prince, That nothing commends the
Majesty of a Prince more, then to submit himself to the observance of his own
Laws: and there can be no better means to induce subjects to show their
obedience unto their Princes Laws, then the example of their own Princes, not
vouchsafing to violate the least branch that is of their own Statutes and
Constitutions. Was not that King highly commended by his own subjects, praised
by his posterity, and worthily extolled even in our age not meaning that the
son who had by breach of the Law deserved to lose both his eyes, should escape
unpunished (which might be offensive unto his subjects) but intending to
moderate and qualify the rigor of the Law, because he was his Heir (which for
some considerations is tolerable in Princes) plucked out one of his own eyes,
and another of his Sons, thereby satisfying, if not the rigor, yet the equity
of the Law; and thereby moving his subjects to compassion in regard of himself,
and to obedience to the same Law in consideration of his justice.

I have stood too long upon the confutation of this last objection, and yet
have touched but one part thereof; and therefore I will run over the other part
lightly, because in refelling the same, I shall need but to make a brief
repetition of that which has been said already: for if you remember that not
Bernard the Nephew, Du Haillan lib. 2, 6, 8.
but Lewis the Meek succeeded his brother Pipin, eldest son to Charlemaigne,
and father to Bernard; That Pipin, and not the right Heir was king after
Childerick; that Hugh Capet, and not Charles Duke of Lorrain enjoyed the Crown
immediately after Lotharius: That Dagoberts second son, and not the eldest
possessed the Royal Scepter after him: That Henry the younger, and not the
elder brother ruled after king Robert their Father; and that Lewis the second,
and not Robert the eldest child of king Lewis the Gross, was called to the
royal Scepter and Crown of France; and also, if it may please you to call to
remembrance that Pharamond, with diverse others beforementioned, were chosen
kings, you shall easily see and perceive, that there has been no such custom,
or at the leastwise the same not so inviolable as it is suggested, for the
next of the Blood to succeed always in his own right, and not as Heir to hid
Predecessor. In like manner if you please to understand that Theodorick the
first king of France of that name, Nic. Gyles.
because he was a man wholly given over to pleasure, of small worth, of less
value, and of no sufficiency capable of so great a Kingdom as France was and
is, was by the States of his Realm deprived of his Royal Crown and Dignity, and
put up in a Monastery. That Lewis surnamed Do nothing, because he had make
France Tributary unto Normandy, Idem.
was also driven by the States to give over his Kingdom, and to lead the
residue of his life in a house of Religion; And that the Peers of France not
regarding the young years of Charles the son of Lewis their King, Idem.
deprived him of his right, and made Eude Earl of Paris king of France; You may
think it as lawful for Charles the 6. to deprive his Son Charles of his
Inheritance, for the horrible murder committed (as it has been said) on the
person of the Duke of Burgundy, a Prince of the blood royal, a Peer of France,
and a Counselor unto the King his Father; and for the great, manifest, and
undutiful disobedience which he showed unto his Father, as it was for the
States of the same Realm to deprive Theodorick for his Insufficiency, Lewis for
his Pusillanimity, and Charles for his youth. So you see the last Objection
refuted by their own Examples. And as you see the cause why it is said that the
Kings of France cannot dis-inherit their children; so I will let you understand
the reason why they have invented a new shift or device, thereby to deprive
those of their due who made claim to such debts as the Kings of France owed
them.

There was a time (and so it is still) when a King of France dyed greatly
indebted to the Switzers, which debt they challenging of his immediate
Successor and Heir, who dyed in their debt; It was answered, that although true
it was that Contracts do bind the Contrahents and their heirs, as well private
men a Princes, yet the Kings of France not succeeding as Heirs, but as
Successors by custom, are not within the meaning and sense of that Law which
speaks of Contracts and their Contrahents, and their Heirs only. Smillerus de
republica Helvetiorum.
By which cavil the poor Switzers were deceived of their due debt, as we
Englishmen have been debarred of our Claims, Titles and Rights, sometimes by
the Law Salique, which was (as I have said) no Law of France, and sometimes by
such exceptions, devices, and subtleties, as I have lately specified.

The fourth point whereat they wonder, is, why the Kings of England having good
right unto the Crown of France, The reasons why England challenges not her
right in France.
and better success when they demanded their Right by Fire and Sword, do not
still prosecute their demand, and did quickly lose whatsoever they or their
Predecessors got in many years.

This point consists of two several points, the one why we forbear to
challenge our right? the other by what occasion we lost all that some of our
Kings had conquered, especially Henry the fifth, who subdued the greatest part
of France; and although he dyed very young, yet he left his Son Henry the
Sixth, being an Infant of few years, so mighty at home so be-friended abroad,
so accompanied with good Soldiers, so well assisted with good Counselors, so
followed by cunning and expert captains, Du Haillan Polid. Virg. Holinshed.
and so directed by wise and discreet Generals, that when he was but ten years
of Age, he was crowned at Paris King of France by the Dukes of Bedford and
Burgundy, and in the presence of the chief Peers and Nobility of France.

This first point is easily answered, because ever since the first time we laid
claim to the Crown of France, those Princes of ours who were Martial men, and
inclined to Wars, demanded their Right by open Wars; as both ours and their
Chronicles do testify. But it pleased God sometimes to send us (as he does
unto other Kingdoms) such Princes as were rather given to pleasure, and unto
peace, rather then unto Wars, and Martial exploits; in whose time the Frenchmen
were wise enough to take advantage of their quiet and peaceable natures; and
when our Kings and Subjects, following (as Subjects commonly do) the humors
and qualities of their Princes, gave themselves unto pleasures and pastimes,
the French followed the Wars; and either by open Invasions, or by subtle
devices, recoverd part of their losses. Besides it has sometimes fortuned,
that when we had valiant Princes, and such as has both good will and
sufficient power to recover their Right, our Realm has either been divided
within it self, and by domestical dissension hindered to prosecute Foreign
Wars: Or that our Kings coming by their kingdoms by force of Arms, have had
more mind and occasion to stable and assure the same unto themselves and their
Heirs, then to make Wars abroad. Again during the contentions betwixt the
houses of Lancaster and of York, sometimes the one part, and sometimes the
other sought favor and friendship, and alliance of the Kings of France; and
they who prevailed in their attempts and purposes, by their aid, furtherance
and sufferance; thought it an especial point of wit and policy to seek and
continue their Amity; yea, and sometimes to buy the same with very hard
conditions; lest that having them for their Enemies, they should either invade
their Realms, or assist their Competitors, who most commonly fled unto them for
help; relief, and succor. For as many of our Kings as have been driven out of
their Royal Seats and Dignities by their domestical Adversaries, have been
either entertained, or restored to their Crowns by the Kings of France and
Scotland, the Dukes of Burgundy, or the Princes of Henault; as were Edward the
fourth, Henry the second, the sixth and the seventh. Besides some of the kings
of France, as namely, Lewis Da Haillan Phil. de Comines. Holinshed Polid. Virg.
Hect. Boet.
the twelfth, and Francis the first, doubting that our Kings would annoy them
at home whilst they were busied in Foreign Wars, corrupted our Kings Council
with bribes, and with yearly rewards and pensions made them so bound and
beholding unto them, that they did not only bewray their Masters secrets, but
also diverted their purposes; and if at any time they were purposed to molest
France, or to join with the Enemies of France, they changed the Kings minds,
and persuaded them not only, not to hinder, but also to help and further the
French Kings in all their Enterprises, and against all their Enemies. And they
were not only contented to ^ee our chief Counselors, Vie da Francois Primier
dece nom.
as Francis the first ^id Cardinal Wolsey, who bare such sway with Henry the
eighth, changed his determination so often, made him friend and enemy to whom
he would, and favored the Emperor Charles the fifth, and sometimes the French
king his common Adversary, in such manner, that it was commonly said, that
Cardinal Wolsey ruled the French King, the King of England, and the Emperor,
but also they purchased our Kings favor and furtherance with yearly Fees and
Pensions. For it is written that Lewis the eleventh to retain and entertain the
King of England for his friend, Phil. de Comines.
paid him yearly in London 50000 Crowns, and bestowed yearly 16000 other
Crowns upon his chief Counselors, the Lord Chancellor and the Master of the
Rolls, and when our King had any occasion to send any Ambassador unto him, he
received them so honorably, entertained them so friendly, rewarded them so
liberally, and dispatched them with so fair words, although their Embassage was
never so unpleasant and displeasing unto him, that they departed always very
well contented. And albeit that some of them knew that whatsoever he did, was
to win time to work his will and purposes, yet because they got much by their
dissimulation, they dissembled their knowledge, and never acquainted our King
with his secret intentions.

The same Lewis, besides this manner of entertaining of our Ambassadors, used
(when there was any great matter in debate and contention betwixt us and him)
to receive all Ambassages that were sent unto him, and never to answer any of
them but always promised to send other Ambassadors after them, who should
bring his answers, and give our king such assurance of all things whereof he
had occasion to doubt, that he should have no longer cause to be discontented;
and when it came to the sending of such Ambassadors, because he would be still
assured to gain time, he sent such personages as never had been in England
before; to the end, that if his former Ambassadors had promised any thing that
was not performed, or begun any Treaty that was not finished, the latter should
not be able to make any answer thereunto, but enforced to desire some time and
respite to acquaint their Master therewith, and to crave and have his
resolution therein.

Further, you may remember that it has been already said, that the Almighty,
to the end that Kingdoms should remain still under their natural Princes, or
being transferred from one Nation to another, should at length return unto
kings of their own Nation, who indeed are more fit to govern them, of his
infinite goodness toward man does usually send a peaceable Successor after a
Warlike Prince, in whose time the conquered recover either all or part of their
losses, which by his heavenly will and pleasure has happened in England as well
as in other places: For we have had such Princes as did as well lose what their
Predecessors had conquered, or recover what some of them lost. Du Haillan.
Polid. Virg. Holinshed. Annals de Aquitain. T. Walsing. in his Neustria.
We won in the time of Richard the first the Kingdom of Cyprus, and sold it
presently. We enjoyed by reason of the marriage with the daughter and heir of
William Duke of Aquitane, and wife unto Henry the 2. that Dukedom better then
300 years, and at the last lost the same by negligence. We possessed the
Dukedom of Normandy 350 years, and lost it in the time of Charles the 7. We
subdued Scotland Hect. Boet.
in Edw. 1. time, and lost it not long after. We conquered Ireland better then
four hundred years since, and yet retain it. We ruled in Flanders for a while,
and were driven out of Flanders after a small while. Briefly, it is written by
some, that Brennus who first took and conquered Rome, was an Englishman, and
that he continued his conquest but a very short time.

And as we have had good fortune against others, so others have not wanted good
success against us: for the Romans conquered us, the Saxons subdued us, the
Danes ruled us, and lastly the Normans had the upper hand of us; of whom our
Kings are lineally descended, and in whose race they have continued better then
500 years.

Again it is usual betwixt Princes, when they are wearied with long, tedious,
chargeable and dangerous wars, to desire peace, and to yield to the same upon
reasonable conditions; and in consideration of their troubles endured in wars,
of their charges sustained thereby, and of their subjects impoverished by the
means thereof, to take long times of Truce, and surcease from wars, within
which time it is not lawful to do any act of hostility. And this occasion has
also restrained some of our Princes for attempting any thing against France,
although they had great desire to recover their right in France: Moreover it
has now and then happened, that when we have been determined to prosecute our
right, we either have been diverted by the entreaty of other Princes, who have
been mediators for peace betwixt France and us; Or hindered by the departure of
such Con^ederates from our part, as promised to aid and assist us in our
enterprises. Or drawn from them to defend our selves at home, by reason of the
sudden invasions which have been made by the Scots upon England, at the
entreaty and persuasion of the French, which has been the usual policy of the
Kings of France, to turn the wars from themselves upon us; always retaining
the Scots for their friends and confederates, for no other purpose, but either
to help them when we came into France or to make war with us when we intended
to have carried our Forces thither.

Again, either by the weakness or by the corruption of our Council, we have (as
has been said) been so overreached by the Frenchmen in all such agreements as
we have made with them, that when we have won the whole, we have been contented
with part, and when as we might have had mountains, we have vouchsafed to
accept mole-hills; yea, we have bound our selves to relinquish our Right, to
renounce our Titles, and give over all our Interests.

So at what time Prince Edward married Isabella daughter of Philip surnamed the
Fair, we resigned the Duchy of Guyenna.

So Edward sir-named Long-hands, acquitted the French King of all the right he
had to the Crown of France, to the Duchy of Normandy, and to the Earldoms of
Anjou, Main, Tourrain, and Poictou.

So Edward 3. having taken King John of France prisoner at Poictiou, and
retained him four years prisoner in England, took certain Towns and Countries
in France for his ransom, and surrendered the residue of France into his hands,
to be held by him and his heirs for ever, and with express condition never to
lay any claim thereunto thereafter.

These agreements have been another cause why we have repressed our desires,
and not prosecuted our rights.

Lastly, when we conquered France, and had continual wars therewith, the Realm
was not then as it has been of late years united, void of dissension, free
from civil wars, in the hands, and under the government of one King, and not
divided, dis-membred, and possessed with diverse petty Princes, who either for
alliance with us, or for some quarrel betwixt them and the French Kings, were
always ready to aid and assist us. So we had help sometimes of the Duke of
Burgundy, of the Earl of Anjou, of the Duke of Britain, of the Earls of Foix,
of Flanders, of Holland, and of Arminack, and sometimes of the kings of Navar,
and of the Emperors of Germany; which helps of late years failing us, and the
reasons already mentioned, have occasioned our weak, slender, and slack pursuit
of the Title and Interest which we pretend unto the Crown of France.

Now to the second Point of this fourth Point, wherein I should spend so much
time, and overweary you with too long and impertinent discourse, The Causes and
means how we lost all France.
i^ I should relate unto you the time and manner, how and when we lost
Normandy, Aquitania, and every other member of France; and therefore it shall
suffice to show you, how and when we had conquered almost all France in a few
years, we lost again all in a very short time.

Both ours and the French Histories agree in this Point, That either in, or
immediately after the happy and prosperous Reign of Henry the fifth, we
flourished, and possessed most in France; and lost all, or most part of all, in
the time of his Son Henry the sixth.

The ways how this came to pass were many, I have reduced them unto four and
twenty; the least of every of which was, and has been enough to lose whole
Estates and Kingdom, not gotten by Conquests, which are easily recovered, but
descending by Inheritance, which are hardly lost.

The first Cause of our loss of whatsoever King Henry the fifth had gotten in
France, Holinshed. Polid. Virg. Du Haillan Ph. de Comines.
was the death of King Charles the sixth; for when he was dead, many of the
French Nobility (which before either for fear of the English puissance, or for
the love which they bore unto King Charles, favored and furthered our part)
revolted from us unto the Dolphin, Paulus Aemilius.
his dis-inherited Son; and it is usual in Factions, the head of one side being
dead or suppressed, the residue be so weakened or feared, that either all or the
most part either fly unto their Adversaries, or else make their peace with
them, with as reasonable conditions as they can possibly; as was seen by the
death of Pompey. whose Adherents fled unto Caesar, or sought his favor, after
their principal Ringleader and Guide was slain.

The second Cause was the sparkles of sedition and strife which began betwixt
us and the Duke of Burgundy, our principal Aider and Abettor, who was highly
discontented with us, because that Humphry, Duke of Gloucester, either blinded
with ambition, or doting with the love of the Lady Iaquet, sole Heir unto the
County of Holland, had married her, notwithstanding that her Husband John, Duke
of Brabant, and Brother to the Duke of Burgundy, was then living.

The third Cause was, the liberty of James King of Scotland, who being Ransomed
with courtesy, and having sworn Loyalty unto the young King Henry the sixth,
was no sooner in his own Country, then he forgot his Oath, and allied himself
with the French King.

The fourth was, the Revolt and departure of the Duke of Britany, and his
Brother, from us unto the French King.

The fifth Cause was, the dissension betwixt the Bishop of Winchester, and the
Duke of Gloucester, who governed the young King; for appeasing whereof the Duke
of Bedford, Regent of France, was called home.

The sixth, the liberty of the Duke of Alancon, who being Ransomed in the
Regents absence, did greatly strengthen the Dolphins power.

The seventh, the death of the Earl of Salisbury, and of the worthiest and most
fortunate Captain that ever England bred at Orleans; After whose decease the
English good and prosperous fortune presently began to decline.

The eighth, was the refusal of the Duke of Bedford to suffer Orleans to yield
to the Duke of Burgundy; Of which refusal there proceeded two great
inconveniences:

The one, That they of Orleans offering to yield themselves unto the said Duke,
because they held it less dishonorable to yield unto a Frenchman, then unto an
English Prince, although it were to the behalf and use of the King of England;
and seeing their offer refused, grew (as many both before and since have done
upon the like occasion) so wilful, obstinate and desperate, that we could never
get their Town, but suffered great losses in laying and continuing our Siege
thereat a very long time, and endured such shame by departing thence without
taking the same, that even until this day (as I saw of late years my self) they
yearly celebrate this day as Festival, to our great dishonor, whereon they
compelled us to withdraw thence our overwearied and bootless Forces.

The other, That the Duke of Burgundy thinking by this refusal that we envyed
his Honor too much, who had rather lose a Town of such strength and importance
as Orleans was, then to suffer it to yield unto him; although it were (as I
have said) to our own use and advantage, began by little and little to remove
his affection, and unfeigned friendship and furtherance from us.

The ninth, The often conveying of Forces out of England into Holland, and in
succor of the Duke of Gloucester against the Duke of Brabant, who as mortal
enemies, warred one upon the other, for the cause above mentioned; and also
into Bohemia, by the Bishop of Winchester, for the Pope Martin, who intended to
make a Conquest of Bohemia.

The tenth, The Dolphins policy who refused diverse times to put trial of his
cause to the hazard of a Battle.

The eleventh, The mistrust and jealousy which the Regent had of the
Parisians; for fear of whose wavering and unconstant minds (a fault whereto
they have always been greatly subject) the said Regent left diverse times very
good and advantageous occasions to fight with the Dolphin, and return to Paris.

The twelfth, The variance and strife betwixt the Duke of Bedford, then Regent,
and the Cardinal of Winchester, proceeding of this cause especially, for that
the Cardinal presumed to command the Regent to leave off that name during the
Kings being in France; affirming, the chief Ruler being present, the Authority
of the substitute to cease, and to be derogate.

The thirteenth, The death of the Duchess of Bedford, Sister unto the Duke of
Burgundy, with whom dyed the true friendship between the two Dukes.

The fourteenth, The foolish pride of the Duke of Bedford, who coming from
Paris of purpose to St Omers, a Town belonging to the Duke of Burgundy, and
appointed and chosen a convenient place for them to meet, and end all
contentions betwixt them both, thought that the Duke of Burgundy should have
come to his Lodging to have visited him first, as Son, Brother, and Uncle unto
Kings; And the Duke of Burgundy being Lord of that place, would not vouchsafe
him that Honor, but offered to meet him half way; which the Duke of Bedford
refusing, they departed the Town discontented, and without seeing one another,
and never after saw and con^erred together.

The fifteenth, The Duke of Burgundy displeased with this occasion* and won,
partly by the outcries of his own people (overwearied with wars) and partly by
the general council held at Arras for the according and agreeing of the two
Kings, joineth with the French King.

The sixteenth, The death of the Duke of Bedfore, who being a man thoroughly
acquainted with the humors and wars of France, by reason of his long
continuance in the one, and conversation with the other, died the fourteenth
year of Henry the 6. his Reign, and presently after many French Noblemen, and
worthy Soldiers who followed the said Duke, withdrew themselves from the
English Faction.

The seventeenth, The Duke of York his Successors so long stay in England,
occasioned by the malice of the Duke of Somerset, that before his coming into
France, Paris, and many other good Towns of France had yielded unto the Dolphin.

The eighteenth, The sending over but of hundreds, yea, of scores, where before
thousands were sent, to keep Holds not comparable to Paris, and other such like
places.

The nineteenth, An unprofitable marriage concluded betwixt our King, and
Margaret daughter unto Rainer king of Sicily and Jerusalem, by the means of the
Earl of Suffolk, corrupted (as it was thought) by money: for the King had
nothing with her, but delivered for her the Duchy of Anjoyne, the City of
Mouns, and the County of Main; which Countries were the very stays of the
Duchy of Normandy.

The twentieth, The Earl of Arminack (with whose Kinswoman the King should have
married) by reason of the aforesaid marriage, became the Kings enemy, and the
chief cause of the loss of the Dukedom of Aquitain.

The one and twentieth, The Queen disdaining that the King her husband should
be ruled by the Duke of Gloucester, never left till she had brought him to his
untimely death.

The two and twentieth, The Dukes death, which diverse French Noblemen hearing
of, revolted from our King; whose Realm was (as he knew) divided within it
self, because Richard Duke of York, allied by his wife unto the chief Peers of
the Realm, began to contemn the King, who was ruled by his wife, and to lay
claim privily unto the Crown, whereby men's minds were not attentive unto
Foreign affairs, but wholly given to prevent and keep off proffered wrongs at
home.

The three and twentieth, The King himself, who being more given to a purchase
of an heavenly, then of an Earthly Kingdom, regarded not the matter, but
suffered the Queen to be governed by ill counsel.

The four and twentieth, The sudden, and as it were in a manner, the miraculous
coming of the Virgin of Orleans unto the Dolphin, who wrought him very
strangely to leave those follies whereunto he was vainly given, and to betake
himself with more courage and diligence unto the violent pursuit and following
of his cause. And because as of a few sparkles sometimes arises a great fire,
so of very light occasions, now and then come wondrous effects; I will briefly
declare unto you the history of this Virgin, and also the means how she being a
base and mean Maiden, was reputed to be sent from heaven, to work such wonders
as I may say in some manner with the Dolphin: This Maiden was a poor Shepherds
daughter, and always brought up to attend and keep her Fathers Sheep, until a
Gentleman of some account and worth, dwelling not far off, thought it
expedient, by reason of a bold spirit which was seen and observed to be in her,
somewhat exceeding the common courage of women, to use her as an instrument to
bring the Dolphin, who lay at Borghes, besotted with the love of a very fair
Damsel, and careless of his own estate, and of the honor of his Realm, from
that wretchless security, unto a better trade of of life, and a more earnest
desire of the recovery of his losses: First he made the Maiden privy to diverse
secret qualities of the Dolphin, which he being an ancient and continual
Courtier, had observed from him in his Infancy: Then by showing her every day
his Picture, as truly and lively drawn as might possibly be done, he acquainted
her so well with the form and shape of his face, that she might easily know
him, although he were never so much disguised amongst a number of other
Courtiers: And thirdly, he learned her many other things far beyond the reach
and capacity of a poor simple Maiden, and taught her both to foretell, and to do
such things as made her to be taken for a very wise woman in the Country. This
done, he resorteth to the Court, acquainteth diverse Courtiers with his purpose
and intention; and how that he, considering that many other policies and
devices had failed, to make the Dolphin to be more careful of the present
lamentable estate of France, had with much labor, travel, and study, invented
a very ready way to stir him up to diligence and care of his Realm and Country,
and to enforce or persuade him to forsake those pleasures which had not only
seduced and misled him, but also the most and better part of his Nobility, by
whose negligence France was already fallen into bondage, servitude, and
thraldom. This matter, says he, must be brought to pass, not by humane
policy, but by persuading the Dolphin (as I have found a means how to do it)
that God has sent a Virgin as it were from heaven, to be his Guide and Leader
against his enemies, whom (as long as he should follow) he should undoubtedly
be accompanied with good and fortunate success. Having won diverse friends of
his to allow of his device, and to consent to the putting of the same in
execution, he and they spread a rumor in the Dolphin's Court, of many strange
things which they said had been already done by this Virgin, which report came
in time to the Dolphin's ears; who being (as Princes, and others commonly are)
very desirous to know the truth of this report, sent for this Gentleman
(because it was told him that he dwelt very nigh unto her) and asked him what
wonders she had wrought: He verified the common report, and added further, That
she must needs have some secret virtues more then other men or women could
commonly have, for that she had told him diverse secrets of his own, which he
never told unto any man: Which seeming somewhat strange unto the Dolphin; he (to
make up the matter) assured him, that if she were called from her Fathers poor
cottage to the Court, he would not think any thing untrue that was reported of
her; for I dare undertake (said he) that she shall tell you your own secrets,
and know you, and reverence you as King, although she never saw you in her
life, and albeit you disguise your self in the habit of the meanest Courtier
within your Court: And further, I have heard say, that she can and will direct
you a course, how you shall (within a very short time) drive the Englishmen
your enemies out of France.

The Dolphin somewhat astonished with the strangeness of this tale, and very
desirous to see the Maiden, caused her presently to be sent for, disguised
himself in a mean apparel, and willed one of his chief Noblemen to be honored,
apparelled, and accompanied as King, upon whom, he amongst the rest attended in
proper person. The Maiden being brought to Court in a strange attire made for
the nonce, and apparelleld like a Soldier, and instructed in some points of
Chivalry by the Gentleman before she came thither, and especially in the
fashions of the Court, and other circumstances of the same, so demeaned her
self, that it may be said of her, Non minuit, sed auget praesentia famam; She
finds out the Dolphin presently in the midst of the thickest th^ong, yeildeth
him reverence due and usually showed unto a King: Who ravished with the
strangeness thereof (for that it was certainly known that she was never in the
Court, nor had at any time seen him) talks with her, finds her wise in her
answers, and able to tell ^im m^st part of his secrets; and to be short, she
being seconded by the Gentleman, and others (whom he, and the pity they had of
the poor estate of the Country, had made willing and ready to join with her in
such petitions and motions as she had made unto the Dolphin) settled such an
opinion of wisdom and holiness in him, that he presently took her for a guide
sent from heaven, to direct him in all his doings; and by her persuasions, left
his Love, and followed this maiden to the wars; who being always accompanied
with good Captains, and counseled by them what directions she should give to
the Dolphin to the end she might win credit with him* at the first sped very
well in many things which she attempted, and especially in raising our siege at
Orleans, where I have seen her picture in brass, mounted upon a very large
brazen horse, and there is yearly (as I have said before) a solemn Feast, and
procession kept, in remembrance of her, that she drove the Englishmen from
thence.

The Dolphin being thus animated by her, and encouraged by the good success
which followed her for a while, proceeded so manfully, that he never left,
until he had recovered all the Kingdom of France: So he by her sped not ill,
but she for him had no good end; for being in the end taken by the Englishmen,
and arraigned at Roan, upon diverse articles of witchcraft, was found guilty,
and there burnt for a witch. A strange metamorphosis, and not so strange as
ridiculo^s. But if you consider how many things Scipo persuaded a few Roman
Soldiers to do, which were almost impossible to be done by a few, only by
telling them that he had often and secret conference with a Goddess, who
counseled him to put those things in execution, and promised him good success
in those enterprises; you may easily think that his policy might work the
effect which it wrought.

It is written of Mahomet the God of the Turks, that he grew to the credit and
reputation of a God, Marco Arrogo sans occino nel suo governo.
by as mean a device as this; for he carried a show of holiness, was better
learned then their Teachers were, had the gift of Eloquence, secretly had
insinuated himself into the favor of the people, and to persuade them that he
had secret conference with God, and that whatsoever he Preached unto them, was
put into his mouth by the Holy Ghost; he had used a tame Dove to come and stand
upon ^is shoulder, ever when he Preached unto them, and to join his Beak and
Head unto his Ear, as though it did whisper something into his Ear; Whereby he
won such credit, that not only his Laws were thought to proceed from the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, but he ever sithence has been honored for a
God.

It is written again of Kemitius King of Scotland, that when he had oftentimes
endeavored by diverse ways to induce his Nobility to think well of his intended
Wars against the Picts, Hect. Boet.
and could not by any manner of persuasions prevail with them, he invented a
policy never used or heard of before; he called his Council and Nobility
together to consult of matters of weight, and held them in consultation until
night, then he provided a great and costly Supper, which of set purpose he
caused to continue until the night was very far spent, insomuch that they being
overcharged with meat and drink, fell all asleep; then he commanded that into
every one of their Chambers there should go a man apparelled in a long Gown,
made of fish skins, with the scales still remaining upon them, who carried in
one hand a staff of rotten wood, because that it (as the scales of the fish do)
in the dark, makes a kind of glittering able to astonish those who never saw
the like; and in the other hand a great Oxes horn, out of which the man
speaking, should give a sound and voice far differing from the voice of a man:
These men so apparel'd, entering into the Counselors chambers, spoke in a great
and grave voice, and said, That they were Messengers sent thither from Heaven,
to tell the Scottish Nobility, that they ought to hearken to the advice and
Counsel that Kemitius their King gave them, and to aid and assist him to
recover his Kingdom out of the hands and possession of the Picts: When they had
thus said, every one of them (as he was taught) hid his staff under his Gown,
and gathering the fishes scales together in such manner, that it seemed unto
the beholders, that as the glittering, so they suddenly vanished away. In the
morning the Nobility met together, and every one of them tells the King what
he had seen and heard that night; he wondered thereat, as though he had not
known thereof, tells them he had the like vision, but thought not good to
acquaint them therewith, lest that they glorying too much in the special favor
which God showed unto them, should by revealing the same, before it was time,
unto over many, greatly offend his heavenly Majesty; but that he meant to show
unto them what he had heard and seen, when the Wars were happily undertaken and
ended. The Nobility confirmed in the opinion of the Miracle by the Kings
report, yielded presently unto his Counsel, and with all possible speed made
great preparation for the Wars against the Picts.

But now from these by-tales again to my purpose, which I might dilate and
beautify with examples, confirming every one of these 24. Causes to be
sufficient to lose a Kingdom; but your own reason and experience is able to
assure you thereof; and therefore I will proceed no further in this Point;
Saving that I have thought good to clear one thing, which perhaps may seem
doubtful unto you; for I think it will seem strange unto you why I call him by
the name of Dolphin, whom the French Chronicles call Charles the seventh; you
know that our Kings eldest Son, during the life of his Father, ever sithence
that Wales, was first conquered by England, was called the Prince of Wales; And
so the eldest Sons of the Kings of France, have bin called Dolphins of France,
since that Imbert and Humbert dyed without Heir, and gave Dolphiny unto Philip
deValois, King of France, Hottoman. Joh. Tilletius.
with condition that the eldest Son of the Kings should be called Dolphins;
which name was given unto Charles the seventh during his Fathers life, Du
Haillan lib. 15.
when he was dutiful, and retained, after that he grew to disobedience and
rebellion; yea continued by our Writers and Chroniclers, after his decease: for
me thought it not convenient to call him King of France, because our King was
then entitled by that name; but we vouchsafed him still the name of Dolphin,
even as the Spaniards having deprived the present and rightful King of Portugal
of his Kingdom, calling him still by the name of Don Antonio, as he was called
before the Kingdom fell unto him by descent; and the Leaguers call the now King
of France, not by the name of King of France, but King of Navarra; yea the
Spaniards (as I have said before) considering that their King enjoys a great
part of that Kingdom, Pedro Corneio de la lyga y Confederation Francesca*
and lays claim to the whole, vouchsafes him not the honor to call him king
of Navarra, but in all their Writings they call him either the Prince of Bearn,
or more plainly, the Bernois.

The first point whereat they wonder is, why the King of Spain (whose
Predecessors not much more then 320 years ago, were but very poor Earls of
Hapsburg in Swizzeland, until that in the year 1273. Rodulph Earl of Hapsburg
was chosen Emperor) is grown to be a King of more might, How the King of Spain
his Predecessors grew from mean Earls to be mighty Kings.
greater wealth, and larger Dominions, the either the Emperor, or any other
Christian Prince possesses at this present; and how he, and some of his
Predecessors have kept and conserved the same, whereas the Emperor has lost
most part of his possessions, and we (as it has been said) and many others
besides us, have in a very few years departed, or rather been driven from all
that we or they got and conquered in many years.

In this point there are these parts to be considered, The increase of the
house of Austria, and how it came; The continuance thereof, and whence it
proceeded; The fall and decay of the Emperor, and what was the cause thereof;
Lastly ours and others losses, and how they happened. The Spaniards increase is
rare, but not marvelous; because few Princes have been blessed with the like
fortune; not marvelous, because the causes thereof are ordinary, and not in any
respect strange or wondrous, for that very many mean men have enjoyed the like
success; for of the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Seigniories which he now
possesses, he came by some justly, as those which came unto him by succession
and inheritance; others valiantly, as those which his Ancestors conquered by
force of Arms; some fortunately, as those which his Predecessors got by
marriages; others most wrongfully, as those which he or they usurped unjustly.

So private men which grow unto excessive wealth, get some thereof with
cunning, as that which they attain by deceit and policy, other-some happily, as
that which comes unto them by marriage, some painfully, as that which they
purchase by great Industry, other some wrongfully, as that which they extort
from their Neighbors by violence, injury, wrong, or oppression. It is and has
been always usual amongst Princes to give their Kingdoms and chief Dominions
unto their eldest Sons, and the Appendancies unto their younger children; and
those Princes who have commonly come by Election unto higher dignity then ever
they expected, have likewife always accustomed for the increase of their
greatness, and the advancement of their house and family, to bestow whatsoever
falls void in the time of their Government belonging unto the same, upon
their children; even as Bishops, Deans, and other Prelates of the Church, in
these days, grant all the Leases, Coppy-holds, Farms and Tenements which
belonging unto their Bishoppricks, Deaneries, and Prebendaries, fall void in
their time, upon their children, or their nearest kinsmen. But betwixt Princes
and Prelates there is this difference, That Princes give with this condition,
that for default of Heirs Males of their bodies unto whom they give, their
gifts should return from whence they came; and Prelates for the most part give
for term of life, or for certain years; and yet those Prelates who besides
their prelacy challenge to be absolute Princes (of which number I read of none
so absolute or liberal in that respect as the Pope of Rome) grant many times,
not Seigniories, but Kingdoms and Principalities with the like conditions, yea
and impose a yearly fee and pension to be paid unto them and their Heirs, unto
whom they give out of the Sea of Rome, from whence they and their posterity
receive the same gifts: Historia Pontifical. de D. Illescas Spanish.
So there was a time when Benedict, the twelfth Pope of Rome, gave unto Suchin
the Viscount and Government of Millan, and of all the towns, and of all castles
belonging to the jurisdiction thereof. So there was a time when the same Pope
bestowed upon diverse Princes the like gifts, as upon Martin of Scala, the
cities of Verona and Vicenza, upon William Gonzega, Mantua and Rezzo, upon
Albertin Corazza, Padua, and the Territories thereof, upon Obizes Estenses,
Ferrara and the Dukedom thereof: Piero M^xi. Vida de Ludovico Sp.
So there was a time when as Lewis the Emperor, either to be as liberal as the
Pope, or to have as many friends as the Pope, gave unto Geleotto Malatesta, the
Regiment of Arminio, Pescar^, and Fano unto Anthony Mountefeltro the Dukedom of
Urbine, and the Country called La Marca unto Geytel de Veronio, the Dukedom of
Chamerino unto Guido de Polenti, the city of Ravenna unto Cinbaldo Ordelafy,
the cities of Furly and of Cesena unto John Manfred Faenza, and unto Lewis
Adolisti the city of Imola: So there was a time when as Pope Urban gave unto
Charles Earl of Argiers and of Provence, the kingdom of Sicily, and the
Dukedomes of Puglia and Calabria, Nich. Giles.
to hold them unto the fourth generation, who promised to pay him yearly
seventy thousand Crowns for the same Kingdom and Dukedomes. So briefly, there
was a time when as Alexander the sixth giving his only Daughter in marriage
unto the Duke of Ferrara, confirmed unto him and his Heirs the same Dukedom,
and reduced the yearly pension thereof from forty thousand Crowns unto a
thousand Ducates, Guicciard.
not in imitation, but in the self same manner as those Popes and those
Emperors used: the forementioned Emperor Rodolph, sometimes Earl of Hapsburg,
having attained the possession of the Empire; contrary to all men's
expectations, and perhaps far beyond his own deserts, meaning to increase his
own ability, and to benefit his heirs and posterity for ever there by, bestowed
the kingdom of Austria, which in his own time for want of Heirs Males reverted
unto the Empire, upon his son Albert, to hold it for ever of the Empire; and
from this Albert came all the house of Austria, Vida de Don Alonso.
until Charles the fi^th, who was Emperor and Father to the present king of
Spain.

There began his house: Now shall you see how it came to further advancement.
His States, some are within his native Country, and some without the same: They
within, are the Kingdoms of Castile, of Aragon, and of Lions, etc. twelve in
number; sometimes belonging unto so many several Princes, and in process of time
united and appropriated unto one. So was France in ancient time divided into
three Kingdoms; Du Hailan. Nic Gyles. Froissart. Munsterus. Functius.
as the Kingdom of Mets, with the Country adjacent; of So^sson, with the
Territory thereunto adjoining; and of Paris, with the Provinces thereunto
belonging. And the Kings of these several Kingdoms bore the names of the place
where they kept their Courts: So was ^hibault king of Mets, Childebert king of
Paris, and Clotarius of Soissons: So in the year 514. was added unto these
three Kingdoms a fourth, namely Orleans; and every one of those Kings was
commonly called King of France; and for the better knowledge of them, and
difference between them, it was added, The King of France holding his Mansion
house or Royal Court at Paris, at Orleans, at Soissons, or at Mets. And the
Sovereignty of Basemain of these four Kingdoms was due only unto the King of
Paris, as unto the chief and principal King, until in the year 618. all these
kingdoms were united and incorporated into one. So was England divided into
many kingdoms, as into the kingdom of Kent, of Northumberland, etc. So the
three sons of Brutus, as Camber, Locrinus, Polid. Virg. Holinshed.
and Albanactus divided the whole kingdom betwixt them after their fathers
death. And this division continued in France, in England, and in the Empire,
until their mortal wars, or friendly marriages, voluntary agreement, or
forceable violence, greedy ambition, or fatal destiny reduced them unto one
Monarchy. The Union of the twelve Kingdoms of Spain fell out in Ferdinando his
time, who being king of Aragon, Terapha Guicciard.
matched with Isabella Queen of Castile, as heir unto her Brother Henry, and in
her right, held himself, and after his decease transferred unto his Daughter
Joan, begotten upon her body, all the Kingdoms of Spain; which Daughter married
with Philip Archduke of Austria, who begat upon her body Charles the fifth,
who was Emperor, and unto him succeeded Philip which now reigns. And thus he
came by the States within his own Country.

The States without the limits of Spain, some of them are Kingdoms, as of
Naples, of Navarra, of both Sicilies, and of Portugal, together with the many
Kingdoms of both the East and the West Indies; some Earldoms and Dukedoms, as
of Milan, Brabant, and Flanders, of Burgundy, and briefly of the seventeen
United Provinces: How he came by all these, it will be more tedious then
wondrous to declare.

The Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily have been the butchery of most Nations of
Europe; For the Popes challenging to be Sovereign Lords thereof, That the
Kingdom of Naples has been fatal to many Nations.
and by virtue of that Title, to have full power and authority to dispose the
same at their pleasure, according to the variety of their humors, their
affections, their quarrels, and their factions, they have sometimes bestowed
them upon Frenchmen, other times upon Italians, sometimes upon Germans, other
times upon Swetians, sometimes upon Spaniards, other times upon Hungarians, and
once upon the Englishmen. So that all these Nations, either for the conq^est,
or for the de^ence thereof, have lost their blood, hazarded their lives, and
spent infinite treasure; which is shortly proved by these examples following.

In the year 1381. Pope Clement crowned in Avignion, Nic. Gyles. Du Haillan
Functius. D. Illescas
Charles Prince of Tarento, King of Sicily, who had married the sister of Joan
Queen of Sicily, and of Jerusalem; the which Joan for default of heirs, adopted
for her son and heir, Lewis Duke of Anjou, and made him king of Naples Sicily,
and Jerusalem, and Duke of Cambria, and Earl of Provence. This gift and
adoption was ratified by the Pope, and furthered by the Frenchmen for these
respects. Clement the pope having a Corrival named Urban, who was favored by
the king of Castile, and of Hungary, thought it convenient and necessary for
him to procure the help and assistance* of the Frenchmen for the better
maintenance of his cause (as diverse of his Predecessors had done before him)
and therefore with his gift and donation so wrought and won unto him the said
Lewis, who was then Regent of France, that although the Kings abovementioned
had sent their Ambassadors unto the French king to entreat his favor and
furtherance for Pope Urban, they could not prevail with him, because the said
Lewis, who governed the king, and all the Realm, was wholly for Clement;
insomuch that through his favor Clement's Cardinals had all the best
Benefices, and Ecclesiastical promotions of France, without any respect being
had to their lives, to their learning, to their qualities, or to their
Religion. The Frenchmen aided the said Lewis in this quarrel, and in his Wars
for the obtaining of these Kingdoms, most willingly; because they were desirous
to send him far from home, who wearied them at home daily with new Taxes, and
unaccustomed grievances.

Pope Urbane, on the contrary side to gratify his friends, and to be assured
of their help, Piero Mexias vida de Wencelao D. Illescas vida de urbano 6.
gave these Kingdoms unto Charles, Nephew of the King of Hungary, who willingly
accepted the same, as well for the benefit thereby likely to arise, as for to
revenge the death of his Brother, cruelly and unjustly murdered by the said
Joan his Wife; Wherein he had so good success, as that he took the said Joan
Prisoner, and caused her to be put to death: Here you see Frenchmen and
Hungarians at mortal Wars for this Kingdom. And before these later Contentions,
you shall understand that the above mentioned Joan being weary of her Husband
Lewis, and having diverse ways so wronged him, that he lived many years
indurance, Adopted for her Heir Alonso King of Aragon, who drove Lewis out of
his Kingdom; Here you see Frenchmen and Spaniards at deadly feud for these
Kingdoms.

Conradin, Functius lib. 10. Caxton. Du Haillan
Duke of Suavia, and Son to Conrade the Emperor, being disposed and purposed
to retire himself, after the death of his Father, into his Kingdom of Naples,
obtained great help of diverse German Princes, and especially of Frederick Duke
of Austria, his very near and dear Kinsman; but being encountered by Charles,
brother of the King of France, and betrayed unto him by Pope Clement the
fourth, both he and the aforesaid Frederick were taken Prisoners, and by the
advice of the Pope, not long after beheaded: So came the Kingdom of Naples from
the Suavian, unto the Frenchman; and the Dukedom of Suavia ended, and was
utterly extinct by the Treason and wickedness of Pope Clement.

What Contentions have been betwixt diverse Families of Italy, and diverse Houses
of Naples it self for those Kingdoms, the Chronicles of Italy report; And I
hasten from this Nation to our own Country, because it may seem somewhat
strange we had ever to do so far from home; and what quarrel, presence, or
title we could lay to a Kingdom so remote and far distant from England.

By that which has been said you may easily perceive that the Popes have used
these Kingdoms, and their pretensive right unto them, for the only means and
instruments to furnish themselves with friends in time of need and necessity:
And when they began to be weary upon any occasion, of the present King of
Naples, they incontinently set upon another; displaced their enemy, and called
such a Prince as best pleased them, or the time or the opportunity made fittest
to hearken to their persuasions, and to persecute their Adversaries, into
Italy; and there continued and cherished him for a time, until they likewise
grew weary of him, or he could no longer stand them in stead.

This is verified by many Armies that have been especially brought out of
France, and by sundry Kings and Princes of that Country, who spent their time,
travel, and treasure, in those Wars: But there is not one Example that
confirms the same more apparently then that which our Histories report of
Henry the third, King of England.

This King by reason he had Reigned many years, saw sundry alterations in
diverse Kingdoms; Math. Paris
and (as Princes who continue long are oftentimes sought unto) he was honored
of all the Kings and Potentates that lived in his time; and many of them were
glad of his am^ty and friendship; for as he was mighty, so was he very wise,
and therefore able to help them with his strength, and counsel them with his
wisdom; yet neither so strong, nor so wise, but that his power was abated, and
his wisdom abused by the Popes subtle policies. There was a time when Conradus
king of Sicily, began to be somewhat grievous and offensive to the Pope, who to
be revenged of his supposed wrongs, had suborned diverse Princes against him;
and when all had either failed him, or faintly proceeded in their quarrel
against Conrade, he fled for his last refuge unto the said Henry the third; and
to induce him to show his readiness and good will to drive Conrade out of his
Royal Seat and Dominion, he used diverse sinister means, and many subtle devices.

First he defamed the said Conrade, accused him of Heresy, laid murder to
his charge, burdened him with the death and poisoning of his own Brother,
thereby making him odious to the world. Then not thinking it sufficient to
disgrace and discredit him (for that the Princes neither then, nor in those
days did easily undertake Wars one against another in hatred of the vices which
possessed them, but in hope of the Kingdoms which they enjoyed) he, to
encourage our King the more, gave him the Kingdoms of Apulia and Sicily, and
entitled his Son by the name of king of both those Countries; And
understanding that he wanted sufficient men to employ in that service, Math.
Paris
he dispensed him to take those Soldiers which had enrolled themselves for the
Wars of the Holy Land, and publishing that his Adversary for grief was dead,
and forsaken by his friends; With these devices, and his Ambassadors
subtleties, he induced our King to bind himself, upon pain of loss of his
Kingdom, to spend and send 140m Marks to those Wars; and this promise was so
readily performed, and men by our King so willingly transferred for that
service, that the whole Realm in very short time felt great want, both of men,
and of money.

Thus you see that Naples and Sicily have been both troublesome and chargeable
to as many Nations as I before named; And yet you see not how they came
directly unto the house of Spain, nor with what Right and Title king Philip
possesses them at this day.

To the end therefore that herein as well as in other Points, you may be fully
satisfied, I will let you understand the late claims and challenges laid and
made to those Kingdoms.

Charles the eighth, Paul Jovius. lib. 2. Guicciardine.
king of France, challenged the Kingdom of Naples, because Renatus, Duke of
Anjou, his very near Kinsman, dying without children, and being made Heir of
the same kingdom by the last Will and Testament of Joan, D. Illescas vida de
Fagenio.
Queen of Naples, had made and declared in his last Will and Testament, Lewis
the eleventh for his Heir unto the same kingdom, which Lewis was Father unto
the said Charles; who followed the Claim with such speed and expedition, that he
got the kingdom by force of Arms, in so short a time, Phil. de Comines.
that a notable Historiographer writing thereof says, That an Ambassador
would almost have spent as much time in going thither from France, as the said
Charles did employ in conquering thereof.

The Frenchmen enjoyed not their Conquest many years; for Ferdinando,
Guicciard. lib. 5.
king of Spain began to lay claim unto the kingdom of Naples, because that
although Alphonsus king of Aragon had bestowed the same kingdom upon Ferdinando
his base Son; yet both John his Brother, and Successor in the kingdom of
Naples; and also Ferdinando himself being Son unto the said John had just cause
of claim and title ther^unto; because that Alphonso having gotten the same both
with the Forces and with the treasure of the Realm of Aragon, it should of
right belong unto that Crown.

This claim of Ferdinandos was furthered by Pope Iulio the second, who either
being wearied of the insolency of the Frenchmen, or desirous to follow the
steps of his inconstant Predecessors, or rather willing to revenge the wrong
offered unto his Predecessor by Charles the eighth, Guicciard. lib. 1.
what time he imprisoned him in the Castle of S. Angelo, and enforced him to
give him for his ransom or deliverance the Castles of Civita Vecchia, of
Forracina, and of Spoleto, to hold them until he had made full conquest of
Naples, and also constrained him to invest himself in the said Kingdom,
besought Ferdinan^o king of Aragon, to undertake the defense of the Church, D.
Illescas vida de Julio 2.
and of the States and Dominions thereof, against all those who persecuted the
same, and especially against Lewis the 11. of France; and to make him the more
willing and ready to accomplish this his desire, he sent him the Investure and
Gift of the same kingdom, with a very small and reasonable yearly Tribute for
the same. Ferdinando thinking his Title the better by the Popes Grant, and his
possibility to prevail the greater, because of his assured help and
furtherance, prosecuted his claim by open Wars upon the Frenchmen; wherein he
had so good success, that he drew the French King to make a friendly division
of the kingdom between them. This composition (as all agreements betwixt
Princes most commonly are) was kept inviolable, until Gonsalvo, General for the
Aragonian king in those parts (who was afterward for his Excellency called the
Great Captain, as Pompey was amongst the Romans) took these occasions following
to dispossess and drive the Frenchmen out of all that they possessed within the
Realm of Naples. First he alleged that the division was not equally made,
because the Dogana of Puglia (which indeed was the best and greatest Revenue of
that Crown) was wholly allotted unto the Frenchmen, and neither any part
thereof, nor any thing else that might countervail the same in worth, value,
and goodness, was assigned unto the Spaniards.

Secondly, there fell such a disease amongst the Frenchmen, by reason of the
abundance of fruit which they eat daily, Guicciard. D. Illescas vida de
Clemente 7.
and because the waters which they drank (as it was thought) were poisoned by
the Spaniards, that most part, as well of the private soldiers, as of the
chief Captains, died thereof and many for fear thereof departed from the French
kings Camp.

Thirdly* that poor and small remainder that was lest, presuming that this
composition should be held inviolable, grew so negligent and careless, that
they suffered the Spaniards to do all that they would, and never distrusted
them, until it was too late.

Lastly, Gonsalvo being required to desist from Wars because there was a peace
concluded betwixt the Spanish and French kings, in regard whereof the French
General had long before surceased all acts of hostility; answered, That he
could not leave off his wars, because he knew not what authority Don Philip
(who was the Mediator of that Peace, and should have had the French Kings
daughter for wife to his son Charles) had from the King and Queen of Spain to
conclude the said Peace: And the said King and Queen hearing of the good
success which their General had daily against the Frenchmen, permitted him to
proceed as he began, and disclaimed all that was agreed, or yeil^ed unto by the
said Don Philippo, saying that he had no power or authority from them to make
any such agreement. But Don Philippo seeing his credit thereby called in
question, published to all the world that he had done nothing more in the
concluding the said peace, How the Spanish King came by Naples.
then the King and Queen had given him full commission to do; and further
before he departed out of Spain, he saw them both swear upon the holy
Evangelists, and upon the Image of Christ crucified, that they would confirm,
ratify* and observe, whatsoever should be concluded by him. Guicciard. lib. 5.
6. and 9. Sleidon lib. 16.
Thus Naples was gotten deceitfully, although Francis the first after that he
was unhappily taken Prisoner at Pavia by Charles the fifth, did voluntarily
renounce all his Right, Title, and Interest unto the same kingdom for the
ransom and deliverance of his two Sons, who were Prisoners a long time in
Spain, as pledges for their Father.

From Naples and Sicily, I hasten to the kingdom of Navarra, gotten by the
Spaniards Predecessors, and held as unlawfully by him, as the two other
kingdoms; How the Spanish King came by the kingdom of Navarra.
for when as Ferdinando, so often before mentioned, had occasion to pass with
an Army through the kingdom of Navarra to succor the Pope, he demanded safe
passage of the King thereof; who being so commanded by Lewis the French king
his Sovereign, denied him passage: Ferdinando certifying the Pope of his
denial, the Pope excommunicated the King, Guicciard.
and depriveth him as a Schismatique of his kingdom; Ferdinando hereupon having
his Army in a readiness, invadeth the kingdom, takes the King unprovided, and
before he could have any help from the French king, depriveth him of his Royal
Seat and Dignity; and his Heirs have held the same ever ^ithence by no better
Title then this. Of which give me leave in a few words to tell you my simple
opinion, and then I will come to the kingdom of Portugal. As it is most certain
that the Kings of Naples and of Scotland hold their kingdoms the one of the
Pope of Rome, the other of the Queen of England as of their Sovereigns; so it
is undoubtedly true, that the Kings of Navarra owe homage, faith, fealty, and
obedience unto the king of France, as unto their Lord and Sovereign, for their
kingdom; in regard whereof they are bound to many conditions of services unto
him as their Sovereign, and especially to aid and assist him in his just
quarrels, wars and contentions against any other Prince whatsoever, and never
to leave him, upon pain of forfeiture of their States and Dominions holden of
him; which is so true, that many Doctors of Law writing upon this case, make
this question, whether a Vassal (such as the king of Navarra was in respect of
the French king) leaving his Lord and Sovereign sorely hurt in the field, and
forsaking him in that case, does forfeit his Estate or no? And they all
generally conclude, that it his wounds be not mortal, and such as they leave no
small hope of life, then the Vassal for forsaking him loses his Estate, be it
never so great. But I will not stand upon the proof of this point, nor upon the
justifying of the king of Navarra his denial made unto the Aragonian king by
Commandment of his said Lord and Sovereign; for I shall have occasion to
enlarge hereof in another place, whereunto when I come, you shall see it
sufficiently and plainly proved, that the king of Navarra could not without
manifest loss and forfeiture of his kingdom unto the French king, deny or
resist his Commandment.

This then being most manifest, it must needs follow, that the king of Aragon
did most wrongfully invade and take from him his kingdom; and so consequently
the king of Spain withholdeth the same from the present king of Navarra, with
no better right or reason then he that detaineth a private man's lands, who
never having any just title thereunto, justifies his Tenure by no other reason
but by a few years wrongful possession; which gives no just title* especially
if the same has been continually claimed and demanded by the lawful owners
thereof, as without all doubt the kingdom of Navar has been; for the present
king and his Predecessors did oftentimes require restitution thereof of them
which did wrongfully detain it; And had not the civil wars of France hindered
the present king from demanding the same by force of Arms, he had long before
this time warred upon the now king of Spain, for the recovery thereof. Now to
the Kingdom of Portugal. This kingdom as Scotland and Navarra are members of
the kingdom of England and France, so it is a member of the kingdom of Spain;
Terapha de Regibus Hisp.
for Alphonsus the sixth, king of Spain, had a base Daughter named Taresia,
whom he married unto Henry Count of Lotharinga, and gave him in Dower with her
the Kingdom of Portugal, The Spaniards title to the Kingdom of Portugal.
because he had done him very great service against the Moors: But his Son
Alphonsus the first, was the first that was named King of Portugal, and the
first that got the City of Lisbone from the said Moors; and having overcome in
one Battle five of their Kings, he left five Shields for Arms unto his
Posterity. This kingdom has had many alterations, and sundry Wars, moved by
such as laid claim thereunto; but none considering the small continuance
thereof, more lamentable then the late Wars betwixt the now king of Spain, and
him whom the Spaniards call Don Antonio, and no lawful king of Portugal; for
besides that the chief of the Nobility of that Realm were either cruelly
murdered in the said War, or unkindly held in extreme thraledom or servitude
by the Spaniard, their natural and professed enemy; the rightful King was most
wrongfully driven from his lawful Inheritance, to live as you know, in a
strange Country with the Princely, and yet slender releif that her Majesty of
her Royal liberality and clemency vouchsafes him and his poor Train. Sleidens
Commentaries.
The Spaniard for the better obtaining of his Kingdom, imitated in some
measure, the policicy of Charles the fifth his Father, who during the competency
betwixt him and Francis the first, king of France for the Empire; brought an
Army of men unto the place where the Electors were assembled to make choice of
the Emperor; pretending the cause of bringing his Army thither, to be his just
and Princely desire to free the Electors from all manner of fear, which they
might justly have of some violence to be offered them by the French king, if
they made not choice of him; Whereas in very deed his Forces tended to no other
purpose then to choose him: But the king of Spains device was not in all
respects so cleanly, as you shall hear by the sequel: But you must first
understand how many Competetors there were for this one Crown, and what right
every one of them had thereunto.

Emanuel king of Portugal married first Isabel, Don Antonio his Apology.
Daughter to Ferdinando, king of Castile, by whom he had but one male child,
which died in his infancy: Then he took to Wife Mary the second, Daughter of
the said Ferdinand, by whom he had nine children; John who had issue John the
third, and he Sebastian which was lately slain, not leaving any issue behind
him, Lodowick, who was lately secretly married, and had issue this Don Antonio,
who now lives in England. The third child was Ferdinando, who married a
daughter of the Earl of Marialva, by whom he had two Sons, who dyed before
their Father. The fourth was Alphonsus, who was made Cardinal, and departed the
world not having any child. The fifth was Henry, who was likewise a Cardinal,
and king after Don Sebastian, and died also without issue. The sixth was
Edward, who married Theodosia Duchess of Burgantia, by whom he had three
children, that is to say, Mary, who married Alexander, Prince of Parma,
Katharine, who took to husband the Duke of Burgantia, and Edward who died
unmarried. The seventh was Anthony, who died in his infancy. The eighth child
was Isabel, who was married to Charles the Emperor, and had issue by him the
present king of Spain. The last was Beatrice, wife to the Duke of Savoy.

These were the issue, now follow the Competitors; they were five. Don Antonio,
lawful son, (as he proved) unto Lodowick the second heir male of Emanuel, The
Prince of Parma as Tutor unto his son, begotten upon the eldest daughter of
Edward, the sixth heir male. The Duke of Bergantia, begotten on the body of
Katharine, the second daughter of the said Edward. King Philip begotten of the
body of Isabel, eldest daughter unto Emanuel. And the Duke of Savoy, the lawful
heir of the youngest daughter of the said Emanuel.

Now of all these competitors, to deliver you first my opinion, I take it
(always salvo meliori judicio) that none of them all could lawfully claim the
Crown of Portugal: For as many as hold the marriage of Henry the eighth king of
England, with the Lady Katharine unlawful, because she was married unto his
eldest brother Arthur, must needs hold the marriage of Emanuel king of Portugal
far more unlawful, because both king Henry and he married unlawfully: For if
two brethren cannot successively marry one woman, truly two sisters cannot be
married unto one man: And the reason which some use to justify king Henry his
marriage, cannot serve for the justification of king Emanuel's matrimony; for
all that was said in the defense of the Lady Katharine, was, that her husband
never knew her carnally; which cannot be truly said for king Emanuel, because
he had a son by his first wife: wherefore if all these nine children being
begotten in unlawful wedlock cannot possibly be reputed legitimate, and
therefore are not lawful heirs to their reputed fathers, much less can any of
they who descend from any of these nine children be esteemed lawful heirs to
the Crown of Portugal. But grant them to be lawful, and then to each of their
Titles in order. Don Antonio has sufficiently justified his Title in his
Apology, by many reasons, which I reduce to these three principally.

First he proves his Fathers marriage, though it were with his far inferior,
to be lawful, notwithstanding the disparagement, in regard of which it was
concealed. Then he fortifieth his Title by the custom of the people of
Portugal, who by ancient privilege challenge a right, in case of controversy
for the Crown, to make choice of such an one of the competitors as they shall
have a special liking and love unto. Lastly, he either shows, or might show,
that Bastards have succeeded in the Kingdom of Portugal; and that therefore
although Bastardy had been fully proved against him, yet being chosen by the
common consent of the people, it was no sufficient bar, or lawful exception, to
say that he was a Bastard, especially being made by such an one as came from a
Bastard himself, and holds his own Kingdom by right derived from a Bastard,
as does the present king of Spain: For the Chronicles of Spain report, that
Henry bastard brother unto Peter king of Spain, Froissart vol. pr. c. 252.
taking advantage of the evil opinion which was conceived of his brother, (by
reason of his loose and dissolute life) by the help of the French King,
notwithstanding that Edward the third aided the said Peter, and once restored
him to his Crown, drove him the second time from the same; Du Haillan. lib. 6.
Froissart vol. 3. c. 25.
and having slain him in the Field, usurped his Royal dignity, and transferred
it unto his heirs, of which king Philip is lineally descended: For there was a
time when as John Prince of Castile, and son to Henry of Castile, challenged
the Kingdom of Portugal, because he had married Beatrice the only daughter and
heir of Ferdinando late king of Portugal; but the people would not accept him
for their king, because they naturally hated the Castilians, and therefore they
chose a bastard for their king, named Denis, saying; That it was as lawful for
them to choose the said bastard for their king, as it was for the Castilians to
admit Henry the bastard for their king, who had (as is above said) deprived
most unlawfully and unnaturally the lawful king of his life and Scepter. Now
from Don Antonio, unto the rest in general, who because they all claim by right
of their mothers, D. Anton. his Apol.
are all excluded by an inviolable law of Portugal, alleged against the
aforesaid John Prince of Castile, in the behalf of the aforementioned bastard
Denis, whereby it is provided, That no woman shall enjoy the Crown of Portugal:
For whereas there is a Law that no woman shall succeed; the same Law (as it
appears by the Law Salique alleged against us in the time of King Edward the
third) excludes also the males descending from the woman. And so these four
Competitors claim is utterly void, and of none effect. And in case where women
may succeed, the Females descending from an heir male, are to be preferred
before such as come only and directly from the female: And so the Prince of
Parma, and the Duke of Bergantia descending from the daughters of Prince Edw.
and they in law succeeding their Father, as the same person and his undoubted
heirs, are not only to be preferred before the King of Spain, and the Duke of
Savoy, who came of the daughters of the before-named Emanuel, but also before
their Aunts, the said King Philips, and Duke of Savoy's mothers, because in
matter of Succession, the elder brothers children are always preferred before
the Uncles or Aunts. Those Titles, and the means how the Kings of Spain
prevailed before the rest of his Competitors, are largely set down in Don
Antonio's Apology, unto which I refer you, Although there be (at the least)
twenty points therein of no small moment, which (in my opinion) are not
sufficiently cleared, nor substantially handled, yet therein you shall easily
perceive how king Philip in getting the same kingdom, The Spanish King's right
to the Indies.
imitated (as I said before) his father. I must likewise refer you to the
history of Hernan Logeres, touching the discovery and conquest of the Indies;
for it were too long for me to tell you what small forces went thither out of
Spain first; and how the Leaders of those slender Armies taking advantage of
the divisions which they found betwixt the kings of those Countries, did easily
overthrow some with the help of the other. There you shall see how a number of
naked men fly like sheep before a few armed soldiers; there you shall read,
that even amongst those barbarous people and princes, there wanted neither
deceit nor policy; there you shall find, that the Spaniards being far from
their Country, and not many, amongst an infinite number of mortal enemies,
strived and contended amongst themselves for superiority, which argues an
unsatiable desire of rule and government, and their natural proneness to
mutiny; although they challenge an especial praise above all other Nations for
their obedience to their Superiors: there you shall see the fruits of
division, the effects of tyranny, the force of terror and fear, and the virtue
of good and expert soldiers fighting against rude and ignorant multitudes:
there you shall observe, in some of these unchristian Princes, more loyalty,
friendship, constancy, and perseverance in their honest and lawful enterprises,
then has lately been found in many Christian Princes: there (briefly) you
shall find enough to satisfy you, how the Spaniards came to the possession of
the Indies; if withal it may please you to understand, that Pope Alexander the
sixth being a Spaniard, and chosen Arbitrator betwixt the Kings of Spain and
Portugal, at what time they were at variance for and touching the division of
the Indies; the said Pope showed himself too too partial unto the Spaniard, and
gave him much more then the Portugal thought that in reason and conscience
should have been allotted unto him.

Now from the Indies, and the aforementioned Kingdoms, unto the Earldoms and
Dukedoms; And first to the Duchy of Millan; a State which has suffered many
alterations, of which I may not speak without digressing too much from my
purpose; and because I hasten unto many other points, whereof I intend by Gods
grace to discourse at large, I may not be overlong in this point.

The Duchy of Milan was anciently a member of the Empire, The Spanish Kings
title to the Dukedom of Millan.
and none was held lawful Lord or Duke thereof, which had not received his
investure and approbation from the Emperor. It would be both long and tedious
to relate unto you the many competencies for this Dukedom, the sundry
Pretendants thereunto, and the mighty Partakers of these competitors; whereof
leaving ancient quarrels aside, and not troubling you with the Titles of the
Viscounts, with the pretentions of the Sforzas, nor with the claims of the
Predecessors of Francis the first king of France, and of Charles the fifth
Emperor; Guicciard. lib. 14.
I will only tell you that the former challenged the same Dukedom in right of
the Lady Valentine, wife unto the Duke of Orleance; and the later pretend right
thereunto, because the contract of Marriage betwixt Valentine and the said Duke
was not confirmed by the Authority of the Emperor, because the Emperor had
never granted unto the before-named Duke the Investure of the said Dukedom:
These reasons indeed are sufficient in Law to deprive a Vassal of his
Seigniory, if by voluntary negligence, or wilful obstinacy, he refuse to do
homage, or to demand the Investure of his hold and Tenure of the Lord and
Sovereign. But there are many occasions which may excuse this demand, upon
which I shall not need to stand, because they are not pertinent to this
purpose, which is only to show you whether the Spanish King came rightly or
unrightly unto the Dukedom of Millan.

The which difficulty may be cleared in this manner: Let the Spaniard show that
his Fathers Allegation was lawful, then shall it follow that his War for the
same, with the French King, was also most lawful; And so consequently his
getting the same by force of Arms likewise lawful: Let him show that it was
gotten with the Forces and Expenses of the Empire; then it shall follow that it
belonged unto the Empire: Let him show that his Father, having purchased his
Dukedom in right of the Empire, and at the costs, and with the help of the
Soldiers and Captains thereof, had full Authority to alienate the same, and to
bestow it upon him his lawful Son, and that he so did; then shall it follow
that he is true owner thereof: But I fear me it will be very hard and difficult
for him to show all these particulars; and therefore I dare not deliver it for
any sound opinion, that he has right thereunto, unless he shall plead the
Renunciation, and Resignation made thereof by the said Francis, Vie de F^ancois
p^ Guicciardin.
at what time the Treaty of Peace was concluded betwixt his Father, and he the
said Francis, at Cambray; At which time the said Francis for himself and his
heirs, renounced, demised, released, and resigned into the hands and possessi^n
of the s^id Charlo^ and of his Heirs, all Rights, Titles, and Interests which
he or they had or might have unto the Dukedom of Millan. From which Dukedom I
will now come to the Duchy of Burgundy, The Spanish Kings Title to the Dukedom
of Burgundy. D^ Com.
and to all the Earldoms, and other members implicatively contained therein,
and lawfully invested in the Duke thereof. For Charles last Duke of Burg^ndy
(who was unfortunately slain by the Switzers) was Earl of Flanders, and of
Holland, Duke of Brabant, and Lord of all the united Provinces; by reason
whereof, and of those laudible qualities which he possessed, he thought himself
inferior to no Prince living in his time, and never had been overthrown as he
was, had he not dwelt too much in his opinion, had he not presumed too much of
his own strength, had he not thought too basely of his enemies, and had he not
made so sl^ght account as he did of the French Kings subtle and secret
practices against him; which indeed were so politic, De Com.
so wise, and so secret, that a French Historiographer writes, That the French
King still sitting in his Chair at home, and suffering the Duke to follow his
own humors, and suborning and procuring him daily new Adversaries, did him far
more much harm, then they who did openly and directly bear Arms against him.

This Duke being slain (as is abovesaid) in an unfortunate time for the house
of Burgundy, and for a very small occasion (for the Wars wherein he was slain
were but for a Cart laden with sheepskins) left issue but one Daughter, whom
Maximilian the Emperor married, and had by her issue Philip Archduke of
Austria, who begat Charles the Emperor, and Charles (as it has often been said)
this present King of Spain. Besides Francis the first (who before that time was
(as all his predecessors before him had been) Soveragin of all those Estates
and Countries) did as well at Madrid in Spain, whilst he was Prisoner there for
his own Ransom; as at Cambray, after he was set at liberty; for the
deliverance of his two Children, renounce all his Rights and Interests to the
Sovereignty of all these Countries. Thus came the Spaniard by all that he has.

Now shall you see how he has hitherto conserved all this his own possession,
How the Spanish King retains all those States which he now possesses.
notwithstanding the reasonable pretenses which many either do or may make to
diverse of his Dominions.

First, as amongst private men, whosoever attaineth unto great wealth, is
reverenced amongst his neighbors, honored by his friends, feared by his
adversaries, and so sought unto by all men, that many endeavor to please him,
few or none dare to contend with him; even so amongst Princes, he that
exceeds the rest in might, in wealth, in reputation, carries such credit
with the rest, bears such sway wheresoever he comes, wins such favor in
all that he attempteth, and strikes such terror in the hearts of them who
have occasion to quarrel with him, that they had rather sit down losers, then
rise up in Arms against him; they suspect his secret attempts, stand in awe of
his exceeding power, doubt the aspiring projects of his ambitious mind, and are
presently terrified when they enter into consideration of his strength, of his
treasure, of his friends and confederates; provoke him think they, and you heap
burning coals upon your own heads; anger him, and you awake a shrewd sleeping
Dog; offend him, and you displease his friends; contend with him, and you
strive against the stream; and therefore they hold it for extreme folly to
incur his displeasure, and for singular wisdom to continue in his favor. When
the Romans were in the highest degree of their prosperity; What Prince was so
mighty that feared not their power? What Commonwealth so rich that stood not in
fear and awe of their huge Armies? What commanded they that was not obeyed? Or
whither went they, where they were not received? Was there any Nation so far
from them which heard not of their might and magnificence? Titus Live* Corn.
Tac. Polibius.
Was there any Region (were it never so remote) that heard not of their
strength and puissance; that trembled not at the very name and mention thereof?
Came not Kings voluntarily to Rome from the furthest confines of the world to
seek their friendship? Sent not the Princes of Asia, the Monarchs of Africa,
and all the Kings of Europe, their Ambassadors, to crave their Favor and
Alliance? What Prince presumed so much of his own force, that if he were wise,
held himself not greatly honored if he were so happy as to be one of the
number of their Alliance? and if he were unwise, or over-hardy and bold, that
found not himself deceived, yea utterly overthrown, if at any time he presumed
to contend with them? Lived not Carthage in wealth and honor until she took
stomach and heart at grass against Rome? Mighty Pyrrhus, wise Mithridates,
deceitful Hannibal, puissant Massinissa, with a number of others of like
renown, ruled they not in peace, and Reigned in security, until they began to
conjure and combine themselves against the Romans? And then failed not their
power? perished not their Authority? decayed not their Reputation? and went not
all they had to wrack and ruin? It is therefore undoubtedly true, that this
prejudicate opinion of the Spanish Kings Might and Power, has been one
especial means to preserve and keep his many Dominions; for although his might
is in many degrees inferior to the Romans Power; yet as they, because they
possessed most part of the world, were redoubted and reverenced of all Nations
in the world; so he possessing more then any Prince of Christendom, must needs
be had in honor and reverence through the greatest part of Christendom.

Besides, as they, in all places of Conquest had their power and forces to hold
them in continual awe and obedience; As in Germany eight Legions, Appianus.
Alexand.
every Legion consisting of 6100. Soldiers, and 726. Horsemen; In Spain three
Legions; In Africa two; In Seruia and Bulgaria two more; and in Salaminia
other two; and about Rome in the Cities of Italy, twelve sundry Bands, whereof
every one of nine of them, consisted of 1105. Footmen, and 66. on Horseback;
So that they had always in continual pay, twenty five Legions, which amounted
in all to 165755. Footmen, and unto 19734. Horsemen at the least, besides the
help and succor of their friends and Confederates; And these Forces they kept
as well in the time of peace as war, for the more safety and security of their
Estates and Dominions: In the like manner the King of Spain has certain men
always in pay in the Duchy of Millan, in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Country
of Burgundy, in the Low Countries, in the Realm of Portugal, and in other
places of his Dominions, for the better secu^i^y of the same; and those Men lie
in continual Garrison, as well when he has Peace as when he is at Wars.
Moreover, as the Romans destroyed the Cities of Alba, of Numantia, and of
Carthage, because as long as they stood, they were always rebelling against
them; So the Catholic King has either forceably subverted, or voluntarily
impoverished many Cities within his several Dominions, only to disable them to
make head against him: And this policy of impoverishing Rebellious Cities, and
their richest Inhabitants, is too too general and usual in Italy; where it is
held a point of wisdom, and a strengthening, or rather a sure way to uphold and
continue their Estate, to hold down and depress their most noble and wealthy
Subjects, for fear that le^t over great riches embolden them to enter into
conspiracy against their Rulers, or to seek some means to set themselves and
their Cities at liberty.

Again, Tit. Liviu^
as the Romans never entered into League or Amity with any Prince or Nation who
did not wholly submit himself, and it self unto their discretion; So the
Spaniard never receives any King or Potentate for his Ally and Confederate,
unless he can and will be content to be wholly at his devotion. Plutarch in his
book of the lives of the noble Romans and Graecians, Plut. in the life of
Eumenes.
writes that Eumenes understanding that diverse Satrapes sought all occasions
and means to kill him, to stop and prevent their malice against him, feigned
that he had great need of a great sum of money, which he borrowed of them which
hated him most, to the end that they might give over the seeking of his death,
whereby they were assured to lose all their money: In like sort, both the King
of Spain, and his Father before him, doubting that Genoa, a very rich, mighty,
and populous city in Italy, might be either induced by the persuasion of other
Princes in Italy (who desire nothing more then to see a King of Naples and a
Duke of Millan born within Italy it self as there was wont to be) or by the
counsel of such Citizens as were wont to favor the French faction, to fall
from him to the French, and especially for the great Traffic which they have
at Lions, Paris, and other places of France (which only respect has moved the
Florentines to be far more friendly and better affected unto the French King
then unto him) did and does borrow as much money as he could or can possibly
get into his hands, of the best and richest Gentlemen and Merchants of that
city; to the end that fear of losing their money may always retain them in love
and friendship toward him.

It is written by the said Author, Plut. in the life of Theseus.
that Theseus, to people and augment the city of Athens, invited as many as
would to come and dwell there, promising and assuring them to enjoy the
self-same Liberties, Privileges, and Immunities, which the very Citizens
themselves had. In like manner the Spaniard to enrich his city of Antwerp, and
other cities of the Low Countries, by the Access and Traffic of our Nation
with them, and to draw us thither for that purpose more willingly, freed us
from diverse Imposts, Idem in the life of Romulus.
which his own natural Subjects usually paid. Again the same Author reports,
that Romulus after he had builded Rome, and subdued the Sabines, and taken
their City, he commanded them to throw down their own houses, and to go to
dwell with him at Rome, where they should have the same Liberties and
Privileges, which his own Citizens had. And there was nothing that more
increased Rome, then this joining and incorporating with her own Inhabitants
those which she conquered: In imitation hereof, the Spaniard when he had
subdued the Indies, transported as many Spaniards as he could possibly thither,
giving them great privileges after they had inhabited there certain years: And
in many men's opinions, there is nothing that does more retain that barbarous
people in obedience unto him, then the fear of those natural Spaniards, nor any
thing that more inricheth his natural Subjects; we go thither very poor, and
return thence infinitely rich: And in my simple conceit, the sending of those
Colonies (as I may call them) into the Indies, is the best and surest means
that the Spaniard does and can use for the peaceable maintenance of those
Estates: For albeit they tyrannize there far beyond the nature of humane
creatures, as well in respect of them that inflict, as of those which endure
afflictions and torments in those countries, yet because (as our Chronicles do
testify) that (as William the Conqueror did after he had conquered our
Nation) he has deprived the Inhabitants of all sorts of Weapons, Holinshed.
Polid. Virg.
whereby they are made unable to undertake any hostile attempt, he lives and
rules in peace amongst them, and his few number of Spaniards are held
invincible, or such as may easily withstand and prevent their secret
conspiracies.

Besides, those whom he places as Governors, or men of any Authority amongst
them, do cunningly get into their hands the chief wealth of the Country,
whereby the inhabitants are greatly impoverished, and they enabled when they
return, to do better service unto their Prince and Country. In consideration
whereof, many desire their places as soon as (or before) they become void; and
some take the wealth purchased there, for a sufficient recompense of their many
and several services done at other times, and in other places. But it may be
said, that the Spaniards cruelty might long before this time have given
occasion to the Indians to rebel: True, if they had weapons and arms wherewith
to defend themselves, and offend their enemies: why necessity enforces the old
wife to trot, and puts diverse inventions into the heads of malicious and
desperate men, to find out fit Instruments for the accomplishment and
performing of their desires. Certainly, and past all doubt, put a few expert
soldiers, and well defended Castles bid a number of uncunning and ignorant
armed men. Multitudes most commonly prevail against a few, and sudden
rebellions are dangerous and terrible: No man can deny this to be a manifest
truth; but multitudes without an head seldom do any thing worthy their labor,
or answerable to their desires, hazards, and perils: and where there is no
order, no guide, no governor, there seldom or never follows good success.
The Romans after they had conquered Capua, Ti^us Live*
willingly yielded that the Town should be still inhabited, haunted, and
frequented by all sorts of people, as it was before accustomed, but they would
not in any wise permit or agree that there should be any Senate, any form of
Government, any Guide, any kind of Magistrates, any common Council, as there
was wont to be; because where these things are wanting, there it is impossible
for any innovation, conspiracy, or rebellion to have good and fortunate success.

The Spaniard therefore ruling in the Indies by his own Nation, they being
stronger then the natural inhabitants; and the people of the Country, either
for ignorance not being able, or for want of authority, not having sufficient
power to govern as they would, it is easy for him to rule as he list, and very
difficult for them to change, alter, or subvert the manner of his Government,
although it be hateful, prejudicial, odious, and hurtful unto them. But albeit
that this kind of administration and government may for a small time work the
like effect which a far milder sort of rule and commandment most commonly
works; yet common experience, and the ready disposition of the Indians to
revolt from the Spaniards, when as Sir Francis Drake was lately amongst them,
declare, that they would willingly, if they could securely, be content to shake
off the yoke of the Spanish Government. In like manner, although Naples and
Milan live obediently under his regiment, and factions are not in this age as
rife there as in ancient times they were wont to be; yet the people of both
places being far more willing to be governed by their own Countrymen then by
mere strangers, the exactions in both States exceeding by very much the old and
ancient tributes, imposts, and contributions, by what name soever it shall
please you to call them; and the Spaniards sparing them no more then they do
the poor and simple Indians: It is to be supposed, that if there were a Brutus
amongst them, who would vouchsafe to undertake the restoring of his Country and
Countrymen unto their former and ancient liberty, he should not fail or quail
in his enterprise, for want of a competent and sufficient number of friends and
followers: For the general hatred conceived against the Spaniards, the general
dislike of their Tyranical Government, the common desire of the inhabitants
uttered in Table-talk, in secret conferences, in open assemblies, in private
houses, and in all places where they may boldly speak without danger, argue
manifestly that they lack ability, and not good will to rebel. But he provideth
such Governors in both places, as are not only true and faithful unto him, but
also so discreet and wise, that they both foresee and prevent all occasions of
rebellion. These Governors have their eyes always open and watching, not only
over the Subjects committed to their charge, in holding them low, and in
continual fear of severe punishment for every small offense, but also over the
Princes which confine with the Governments, in keeping them from all
opportunities of invading their States. These Governors are assisted by grave
and wise Counsel, by whose advice they are directed in matters of great weight.
These Governors are accompanied by many underofficers, who are employed in
gathering such intolerable taxes as are laid upon the common people; upon
which officers the fault is laid, if any offense be taken against the
extremity of the taxes; and sometimes the Governor upon complaint made unto him
(if no excuse can pacify the complainants) mitigateth the rigor of the
exactions, or sends them unto his and their king for relief and remedy; who
if he shall see no other way to content them, or to continue and contain them
within the bounds of their wonted obedience, yeildeth somewhat to their
petition; and so laying the blame either upon the necessity of the time, or the
extremity of his expenses, or the severity of their officers, discharges
himself of the fault which was imputed unto him, and sends the Petitioners
away in some measure well pleased and satisfied. But I shall have occasion to
handle this point more largely in another place, when I shall speak of such
exactions as were levied in particular estates in this our age. And therefore
reserving the residue of that which I have to say for that place, I will
proceed in declaring unto you other means which the Spaniard uses for
preservation of his Estates in peace, in quietness, and in dutiful obedience.

It is written that his Father Charles the fifth, fearing that Ferdinando Duke
of Calabria, and the only remainder of Ferdinando late King of Aragon, might in
time find some friends to help him or his issue (if he should so marry that he
might have any) to the Crown and Kingdom of Aragon, married him unto Germana,
widow unto the said Ferdinando, but barren, and past children; reaping of this
marriage two benefits, and both of great weight and consequence: For whereas
the said Duke, by refusing the Crown when it was offered him by the people,
Guicciard. lib. 15.
and by persuading them to accept and receive the same Charles for their King,
had made the Emperor somewhat beholden unto him, he did not only seem in some
measure to recompense that good turn, by honoring him with the marriage of a
Queen, but also he assured that Kingdom unto himself and his heirs, by
bestowing a barren wife upon him who was rightful heir thereunto, and by that
marriage was utterly disabled to have any lawful Issue.

The Spaniard not by marriage, but by employment of the late Duke of Parma in
such wars as were somewhat pleasing and answerable to his humor, kept him
always so busied, that he could never attend to the conquest of Portugal,
which of right belonged unto his Son, rather then unto the King of Spain; And
as the Emperor rather deprived the abovenamed Ferdinando, by giving him a
barren wife, of all possibility to have any lawful issue, and so consequently
of all earnest desire to recover that Kingdom, which should end in himself for
want of a child to whom it might descend; So the Spanish King deprived the
said Dukes son of all hope to recover his right in Portugal, by procuring and
counselling him to match in such a Family, as never can be able to yield him
any competent aid for the recovery of his said right.

Again it is written of Richard the third, and also of Edward the fourth, Kings
of England, Polid. Virg. Hect. Bo^t. Holinshed.
that they both fearing lest that Henry Earl of Richmond who lived in exile
with the Duke of Britany, by whom he was only sustained and succored, might in
process of time find some Friends at home, or purchase the favor of some
Foreign Prince abroad, to help him to recover the Crown of England, whereunto
he always laid claim, did seek all means possible to have the said Earl
delivered unto them by the Duke, but they could never prevail, and therefore
never lived secure or assured of their Estate: And Richard the third, according
as he doubted, was deprived of his Royal Dignity by the said Earl: In like
manner the Spaniard has sought all ways possible to have Don Antonio delivered
unto him, and has made him diverse great and fair offers of great livings and
dignities if he would return into his Country, and acknowledging him for King,
live under his obedience, but he could never prevail; and God knows to what
end it has pleased the Almighty to preserve and reserve the said Don Antonio
from many great, and almost inevitable dangers and hazards of his life: He is
not now so low, so poor, so bare, so destitute of all friends, so void of all
hope, but that Henry Earl of Richmond was in all degrees and measure of need
and poverty equal unto him. It is an infallible rule in policy, that no Usurper
has any firm hold or strong assurance of his Estate, as long as any pretending
right thereunto lives; but the Spaniard has sufficiently foreseen and
provided for any manner of harm or detriment that may arise unto him, or unto
any of his, by Don Antonio, or by his children: For as the loss of the Battle
at Canna, deferred the Victories, that Hannibal might have had against the
Romans, and his abode at Capua (where his Soldiers learned to be eff^minate,
and forgot to be right Soldiers) took away all hope to subdue the Romans so
the overthrow received by D^n Antonio, within his own Kingdom, when he was
possessed thereof, made it very difficult for him to re-gain or recover the
same; And the late repulse taken at Lisbona, when he was before the Town with
the small and weak Forces of England, has put him out of all hope to attain
his purpose: And yet it is held for a sure and most sound opinion by many
martial men, that not with much great strength then he had then from hence, it
would be an easy enterprise to recover that Kingdom; which opinion I list not
to control (for that men of my profession may not conveniently contend with
Soldiers, especially in matters concerning martial affairs) And yet I fear me,
that if any second enterprise should be attempted against Portugal, with an
English Army of greater strength, of better provision, of sounder bod^es, and
of more convenient furniture then the last was; the Commanders of such an Army
should be subject to no less inconveniences then the other was; and so long as
those incommodities are found in an Army, so long the like success (as happened
unto the first) will follow the latter.

You seldom hear or have read of any Army that went far from home, that has
not been subject unto many casualties, unto many accidents, and unto unexpected
success and fortune; They are to day Conquerors, and to morrow conquered; this
day strong, to morrow weak; sometimes in health and prosperity, upon a very
sudden in sickness and penury: Their Triumphs are Messengers of evil fortune;
their Victories forerunners of overthrows; their abundance, tokens of Penury;
and their conceived hope, an infallible Prognostication of future calamity. Was
there ever a wiser Captain then Hanniball? Was there ever any Army compounded
of so many and diverse Nations? Was there any Soldiers that were better
governed? or any Governor that was more careful of his Company? more politic
to win and purchase unto himself the favor and friendship of such people with
whom he had any manner of commerce or society, or of whom he stood in any kind
of need? And yet what success had his Providence, his Prudence, his Policy?
Decayed not his strength daily? his Soldiers, became they not effeminate? his
fortune, did it not forsake him? his faithful friends, did they not leave him?
the Towns he got, did they not revolt from him? And briefly, lost he not in a
very short space, all that he got in many years? And yet since Hannibal his
time, there was never any Captain, General, Colonel, or Leader of any Army
(call him by what name or Title you list) that in my simple conceit might
compare with Hannibal; either for the governing of his Soldiers, or for
temporizing with his Adversaries, for preventing mischeifs, or for inventing
new Stratagems; for putting in execution, with good success and marvelous
fortune, of all his attempts and enterprises; or briefly for furnishing his
Camp with all things necessary, or keeping his Soldiers in awe and obedience;
But Hannibal contended with the mightiest Adversary of the world: Hannibal had
secret enemies at home, who were content to suffer him and his to live in want
and penury abroad; Hannibal pretermitted many occasions of good fortune, which
being taken in time, might have made him a most happy Conqueror: Hannibal
suffered his Soldiers to dote in love, when it was no time to dally in
Lechery; Briefly, H^nnibal would not win when he might have won; And therefore
it was reason that Hannibal should lose when he would not have lost.

In later times Hannibal's follies have made wise men; Hannibal's evil fortune,
has taught others to beware of the like Fortune; Hannibal's losses have given
his posterity occasion to take heed by his examples, lest following his steps,
they chance to fall into his miseries. Now Princes measure their strength by
their adversaries power; they rate their charges by the distance of places into
which they are to convey their Armies; they furnish their company according to
the time for which they purpose to use the same; they cast their accounts
before they enter into wars; they consider the casualties which are accustomed
to follow wars; they note the dispositions and affections of their neighbors;
they mark and observe the provision of their enemies; they provide for longer
time then they intend to spend in wars; they have their carriage to attend upon
their Armies, their victuallers to follow them, their confederates to supply
their wants, their Messengers to bring them word of their necessities, and
their Officers both at home and abroad to make provision as soon as any thing
is found to be defective or wanting in their Armies: So if they go far from
home, they seem always to be at home; if they want, their wants are presently
supplied; if they chance to decrease, their number is immediately increased;
and although they may happen to languish, yet they are never suffered to
perish: True it is, that other men's harms have made men both in these days,
and in former times, to be wise and wary: And the Prince is reputed to want the
discretion and wisdom requisite in a Prince. who undertaketh wars without due
consideration of all the circumstances above mentioned; and yet neither
Hannibals ill fortune, nor his example, nor common experience, nor fear of
inevitable accidents can make men so wary as it behooves them to be, but in
later times they have been and will be subject unto the self same
Inconveniences which men in former times endured. Have Armies in times past,
going far from home, perished in their journies by reason of the intemperature
of the air, the heat of the weather, and the intemperance of the Soldiers, who
seed too much of noisome and hurtful fruits, or drank too much of hot Wines in
hot seasons, and in hot countries; as did the Army which Marcus Antonius led
from Italy to Parthia, Appianus. Alexand.
whereof better then 20000 Footmen, and 4000 Horsemen perished by such
casualties before he came to his Journies end? And do not, or have not some
miscarried by the same means in our days, or within our memories? Have many
Christian Armies led out of Christendom into Turkey, not lost the grea^est part
of their number before they came unto the place whereunto they were sent? Did
not the first Army that ever the Romans sent by Sea against the Carthiginians
perish in the Sea; Tit. Livius.
and almost so dismayed the Soldiers, that they were utterly discouraged to
commit any more men or ships to the unmerciful Tempests of the raging Seas? And
did not the like befall unto the Navy that Charles the fifth sent in his time
unto Algire, whose lamentable overthrow is pitifully described by a Spanish
Historian in the life of Paulus tertius, Historia Pontifical. de D. Illescas
sometimes Pope of Rome? Did a plague consume so many of the Soldiers of
Radagasius King of the Goths, that (as Saint Augustine reports) one day
deprived better then an hundred thousand of their lives? And did not the like
happen unto Francis the first his Army in his Wars for the Kingdom of Naples?
Did better then 30000 of that Army which John Duke of Lancaster carried out of
England into Portugal perish by the way for lack of victual and necessary
sustenance: Neustra. Tho de Walsingh.
and might not the same misfortune betide the small company which went out of
late from England into Po^tugal? Justinus.
Was the huge Army which Darius had against Alexander, overthrown for want of
water, and other inconveniences occasioned by their long abode in a strange
and unable country to receive so big an host? and can it seem strange or
marvelous, Vida de Paulo 3. de D. Illescas.
that Charles the fifth's Army, brought out of Spain to Marselles, and passing
by the most barren and unfruitful countries of France, felt the like
calamities? Plagues, Pestilence, Famine, Tediousness of the way, Want of water,
Tempests by Sea, and sudden Sickness have always, and will continually lessen
the number, weaken the Forces, and not spare the mighty multitudes that have
been or shall be sent far from home by any Prince whatsoever. There is no
policy can prevent it, no wisdom that can foresee it, no foresight that can
withstand it; they be Scourges which it pleases the Almighty to send, and
therefore it behooves him that has urgent occasion to send an Army into
foreign countries, to think well thereon, to consider all casualties, and to
provide for them long before they happen, lest that want of foresight cause
his utter discredit and destruction. The only means is, to send such a number
as is neither too great to be conveniently maintained, nor too little to effect
and accomplish his purpose; especially if things be so ordered, that as soon as
occasion shall be ministered, fresh supplies may be conveyed over in due time,
and by competent and sufficient numbers. For if the supplies be defective in
number, or not transported in seasonable time, they are sent (as experience
teaches) but as Sheep to the shambles. But from these matters (which are
touched but by the way of digression) back again to the Spanish King, and to
the narration of other reasons, why possessing many Kingdoms, he enjoys them
all peaceably, or with so little distrurbance as he does. For the better
understanding whereof, you are to consider the State and condition of such
Princes who have any Lands or Territories confining or bordering upon his
Dominions; and in them you are to mark and observe what power they have to
annoy him if they would, or what will if they could. The Princes with whom by
reason of such Neighborhood he has any way to deal, are these.

The Turk, the princes of Italy, the princes of Germany, the French King, and
the Queen of England: Of which some could be content to annoy him by all means
possible, but they want ability answerable to their good will; others have
might enough to prejudice him diverse ways, but he carries so watchful an eye
over them, is so jealous of their greatness, so well acquainted with their
counsels, determinations and purposes, that all their intents, endeavors, and
enterprises against him, are most commonly so soon prevented by his careful
providence, as they are intended through their malice and indignation. But it
is not sufficient to declare thus much in general terms; you shall see his
particular proceeding with every one of these Princes.

The Turk he knows to be a Prince greatly to be feared of all Christians, as
well in regard of his great power, The Spanish Kings opinion and proceeding
with the Turk.
as in respect of his subtle policy. His power is terrible, because he armeth
speedily, and that in such multitudes, as both the number and the expedition
terri^ieth all Christendom: For when he armeth, he most commonly bruiteth it
abroad, that he means to carry his Forces to one place, when indeed he
conveyeth them to another; yea, and sometimes he sends Ambassadors to will
them to be assured and out of all doubt, that he will not in any wise molest or
trouble them, whom his full intent, purpose, and resolution is to invade upon a
sudden. Considering therefore his strength, his religion, his natural hatred
against Christians, together with the continual emulation, quarrels, and
contentions that are betwixt Christian Princes, he holds it most convenient
and necessary to have always a vigilant eye over such an adversary. For of
Christian Princes, he considers who they be whom he most envieth, whose
States he most longs for, after whose Dominions he most thirsts, and unto
which he has best access, and easiest possibility to attain them. The House of
Austria are his nearest kinsmen, and on one side the next adjoining neighbors
unto the Turkish Territorirs: With them for kindred sake he entertaineth
perpetuamit amity, and is loath to offer them any occasion of coffeehouse,
because he knows that of late years they have not only possessed the Empire,
but also been greatly favored in Germany; with whose invincible power and
puissance, they are both able and ready, when occasion shall be offered, to
offend and defend the Turk: For it is their Dominion unto which the Turk has
an especial eye, and an unsatiable desire, and by them and their means,
Christian Princes most annoy him; because by the Country of Hungary the way
lies open unto these Regions, which he lately subdued; and a Christian Prince
leading an Army through that Country against the Turk, may undoubtedly have
good success against his Forces, if he shall observe these conditions following.

First, if in conducting his Army he shall avoid and decline the wide plains,
and come not near unto the River Danubius; of the commodity whereof, the Turk
by reason of his great courage, stands always in need.

Secondly, If he shall not come nigh unto such places where the Turk may have
convenient use of his Horsemen, and innumerable Footmen; with the excessive
multitudes of which, he will easily oppress and suppress a Christian Army, if
they should chance to encounter in those Plains.

Thirdly* If the Christian Prince shall arm this year, and proceeding slowly on
his journey, not meet with the Turk, but fortify and strengthen such places as
he shall get and conquer; and the next year, when as the Turk neither is wont,
nor can arm with the like number and quantity, proceed manfully; For the Prince
in thus doing, shall compel him to stand continually upon his Guard, and
always to entertain great and gross Armies, which he should not be able to
endure long; or else enforce him to use such Forces as might be more easily
conquered, and so consequently drive him to change the accustomed course and
custom of his Wars, which would be as much as half a victory gotten against
him.

Fourthly, If the Christian shall endeavor to draw him into some Straight, and
there with some warlike stratagem enforce him to a Battle, and with a Troop of
well ordered Footmen encounter his Janissaries, which he usually reserveth for
some extremity, and with valor, and some unknown and unusual exploit, drive
them to the worst, or put them out of their array and order; there is no doubt
but with the strangeness thereof he might obtain a notable victory against him;
whose horsemen are most easily overthrown, because they are for the most part
unarmed.

Fifthly, If he shall mark and observe when there is mutiny, sedition, or
secret dissension, disturbance, or coffeehouse betwixt the Turk and his
Subjects, and by all cunning and policy entertain the same, maintain the
procurers and heads thereof, and in the very heat of their tumult be ready to
invade them. For indeed, the especial means to weaken the Turk, is to assault
him when he is otherwise busied in wars with the Sophi, or with any other
enemies, or when his successors are at contention for the crown, or his people
divided amongst themselves, or he did lately receive some notable overthrow:
for he tyrannizing his subjects in such manner as he does, the least overthrow
that can be must needs endanger his State greatly, because he fears that his
own people will be ready to give entertertainment, aid, and succor unto any,
by whom they may have certain hope to wind their necks out of the yoke of that
intolerable servitude which they now suffer.

This is so true, that it is credibly affirmed by the best Warriors of our
age; That if the Christians had procceded with their invincible Navy, when Don
John de Austria gave the Turk the famous overthrow (for which all Christendom
greatly rejoiced) they might happily have gotten Constantinople, and have
recovered most part of the Turkish Dominion. Next unto the House of Austria is
the State of Venice; which although it be far inferior unto many Christian
Princes in power and strength by land, yet it yeildeth unto very few or none of
them in force by Sea.

With this State the Spaniard knows also that it is very good and convenient
for him to entertain peace and amity: For albeit they have many Countries
confining and bordering upon the Turk (for the which they pay him yearly
Tribute) and that their Merchants have continual intercourse of Trade and
traffic unto Turkey, and likewise the Turks with them (which brings in
inestimable wealth and benefit unto the State) and that in consideration hereof
the Turk will not easily offend them, nor they willingly displease him; yet the
Venetians knowing him to be a Turk, that is, a common enemy of Christendom, the
devourer of other men's estates, the disturber of the common peace, and a most
notable breaker of all League, Truce and Amity; as often as he stirs they
stand in continual awe of him, and notwithstanding all leagues, contracts, and
confederacies with him, are content to join with the Spaniard at any time
against him, and to use the utmost of their power to annoy and molest him; as
it was seen by the great aid which they gave unto the Spanish King, when as Don
John de Austria gave the Turk the abovementioned overthrow. Thus being assured
of the Venetians friendship, entertaining perfect and perpetual amity with the
House of Austria, and having the rest of the Princes of Italy for his friends,
he has little occasion to fear the Turk: And yet for his better security, he
seeks to live in league and amity with him; and likewise keeps continual
friendship with the Turks greatest enemies, hoping to turn them upon him, if at
any time he should chance to attempt any act of hostility against any of his
States and Dominions.

The French King is the second considerable friend or enemy the Spaniard has,
The Spanish Kings opinion and proceeding with the French King.
of whose friendship or enmity he is to make no small account; For albeit the
one has many more Kingdoms, many more People, and much more Treasure then the
other; yet because France is of it self, and within it self, a very great
Kingdom, well inhabited, full of many great Cities, replenished with all things
necessary, and sufficiently furnished with whatsoever is needful, either for
Peace or for War: The King thereof is (in my opinion) nothing inferior unto the
Spaniard, and much more able to pleasure or annoy him, then any other Prince of
Christendom. It may be said that the Spaniards many Dominions yields him
infinite multitudes of Soldiers; that his Indies furnish and enrich him with
great abundance of Silver and Gold; and that the one and the other make him in
a manner invincible; But if his men by reason they are far off, cannot easily
be brought together; I^ because they are of diverse Nations they will hardly
agree long together; It because they be of contrary natures and conditions,
they are not in like measure fit for the Wars; If their discipline shall be
found contrary, their humors diverse, and their courages in no respects equal
or like; What benefit? What good success may be expected of an Army being
compounded of so many diversities? Again, if the wealth of the Indies may be
(as it has been oftentimes) intercepted; If his Treasures do scant suffice for
his ordinary and extraordinary expenses; If his debts be already more then he
is well able to pay; What booteth his wealth? Or why should France fear his
Treasure? Or what just occasion has he, either in regard of his people, or in
respect of his gold, to contemn or make small reckoning of the united Forces of
France? especially since the Countries of France are able to set forth such a
sufficient Army to encounter with his forces at any time, and the yearly
revenues of the Crown of France, will serve to maintain and furnish the same
Army withal things necessary.

Appianus Alexandrinus, who lived in the time of Adrianus the Emperor, in his
History of the Roman Wars writes, That in his time, the Emperor Adrianus had
in pay 200m. Foot^men, and 500m. men at Arms, 3000. Carts and Wagons for his
Wars, and 300m. Armors to Arm his Soul^iers withal; he had also a Navy of 600.
tall Ships, and of 1500. Galleys, with many other Vessels of diverse sort, and
with an infinite number of all kind of Instruments and Weapons for Sea Fight;
besides 80. Ships with the Prores and the Poups of gold for a show or ornamen^
of his Wars: And lastly, he had in his Treasure-house, 150m. Talents in ready
coin: This force, this preparation, this strength and wealth, seemed unto the
same Author so great, that in the proem of the very same History he says, That
all the Forces of Alexander the Great, of the Assirians, of the Medians, and of
the Persians (which were four mighty Emperors) were never able to attain in
900. years unto half the power, strength and greatness that the Romans had.
Titus Livius had the like opinion of the Roman power; For he says, That
Alexander King of Epirus, was wont to say, That all the Wars which Alexander
the Great ever had, were in comparison of his own Wars, with women rather then
with men; And that all the life of Alexander the Great would not have sufficed
to end and finish one only War with the Carthaginians, with whom the Romans, in
the first Wars against them, fought twenty four years together. And that the
Romans had overthrown above 1000. sundry Armies, the least of all the which was
far greater then the Armies of the Macedonians, or of Alexander the Great; All
which may seem to be true, because Plutarch in his Lives of the Roman and
Greekish Worthies, reports, That Julius Caesar took in his time, one thousand
Cities by assault; overcame more then 300. sundry Nations; took above a Million
of men prisoners, and slew better then another Million of men in diverse
Battles; for if one General of the Romans wrought so many worthy Exploits,
subdued so many Regions, and slew so many Enemies; how infinite, now incredible
were the Armies and the Victories of the Romans, (who had many Captains (As
both the Scipios, Fabius Maximus, Pompeius Magnus, and diverse others) not much
inferior to I^lius Caesar? Notwithstanding all this that is said, I must needs
say that (as John Bodin a French Author says, in his Book de Republica) the
Romans having made trial of four several Estates; Bodin.
As of a Royal, a Tyrannical, an Aristocratical, and a Popular State, never
thrived better, nor ever flourished more, then they did under their Popular
State: And to what end say I thus? Forsooth to this purpose: To show you that
when the Romans were most mighty, when their Authority was greatest, when they
commanded all Italy, they might justly stand in fear of such an Enemy in Italy,
as the King of France may be thereunto; And so consequently, that the present
King of Spain, whose power is by very many degrees inferior and not equal to
the Romans, has very great and just occasion to doubt and fear the French
King; for it is written that Hannibal, who was the greatest enemy that ever the
Romans had, Tit. Livius. lib. 33.
who in my simple conceit, was the most wise, politic, and valiant Captain
that ever lived, who knew the strength of the Romans, and how they might well
and conveniently be annoyed by any Prince that would undertake Wars against
them, better then any General of former Age, or of our time does, or can know,
being driven after the ruin and destruction of Carthage, to fly for succor,
and for his last refuge unto King Antiochus, delivered unto him, for his sound
and settled opinion; that Italy was a Country that was able to yield unto any
foreign Enemy, both Soldiers and Victuals against it self; and yet whosoever
would attempt any enterprise, either secretly or openly, against Italy; must
take the advantage of some Conspiracy, Tumult, or Commotion, to be moved within
the very bowels and entralls of Italy; for that if the Romans might wholly
enjoy and employ the only forces and strength thereof; there was never any
King, or any Nation that might justly and truly compare with the Romans. Then
if Italy be such a Country (as undoubtedly it appears to be by Hannibals
Testimony) If it be able to yield releif to Forrainers; if the next way to win
it be to have a party and partakers in it, who can be thought wise that shall
be of opinion the Spaniard is of so great power and Authority in Italy, that he
should not need to fear the French Kings might or puissance? Shall he not be
feared, because some men perhaps think him not able to set forth an Army
sufficient to encounter with the Spanish Forces? Tit. Livius. lib. 9.
Why, it is written that Alexander the Great (who conquered mightier Princes
then the present King of Spain is) never had in amy Army above 30000. Footmen,
and 4000. Horsemen. It is written that the very Romans (whose power was such as
you have heard it to be) never used greater Forces against any foreign enemy
then an Army of 40. or 50m. at the most. Lastly, it is Recorded that the
Spanish Kings Father held an opinion, for many reasons him thereunto moving;
that an Army of the same number and quality which Alexander used, was (without
all doubt and controversy) sufficient for any Prince whatsoever against any
enemy, was he never so mighty: Again, shall he not be feared because his
Treasure is not equal unto the Spaniards Golden Mines? Why, it is true that
money and Gold are the very sinews of War; it is an infallible Maxim; we hold
it for a most ancient and overruled Rule; but if riches had been the best and
only means to subdue Nations, never had the poor Romans at their first
beginning, nor the needy Swizzers in their Wars against the rich Duke of
Burgundy, nor the beggarly Normans, in the Infantry of their Chivalry, obtained
such Victories and Conquests as they did: But grant that the Spaniard needs
not fear any Enemy in Italy, unless he be as mighty as the Romans, both in
money and in men; If the French King shall be found to be such an enemy, will
the Spaniards favorers confess that he is worthy to be feared? If they should
not, you would hold them to be senceless.

And if in this Point concerning the annoying of the Spaniard in Italy, I prove
him not in some manner equal to the Romans, I can be content that my slender
Reputation shall suffer any manner of indignity. Titus Livius, and many other
Authors of the like Authority and Credit, make true and large mention of the
harms, of the indignities, and of the damages which the Romans sustained by
Hannibal; They report how he passed the Alps with great difficulty, brought in
forces into Italy with great danger, ruled his Soldiers with great dexterity,
provided things necessary for them, with singular wisdom and providence; won
diverse Princes of Italy to join with him and them, with great Wit and Policy;
Lastly, proceeded on his journey with so great courage and magnanimity,
prevailed in his enterprises with so good success and fortune, terrified and
daunted the invincible hearts and stomachs of the Romans, with so many
unexpected and notable Victories; that they had no other way to be rid of him
but to send Scipio to War in Africa, and by besieging Carthage to call him
home to the releif of Carthage. Now for the better proof of my purpose, give me
leave I pray you, to compare the Spaniard and the Romans, the French King and
Hannibal together; a Molehil indeed with a Mountain; an Eagle in truth with a
fly, but such a Molehil, and such a fly, as will declare the greatness of the
Mountain; as will illustrate the might and virtues of the Eagle. The Romans
commanded all Italy; The Spaniard rules most part of Italy; they had no man in
Hannibals time, that durst oppose himself openly against him; he has few or
none in our Age that dares show himself an open enemy against him; they were
generally feared; he is undoubtedly redoubted; they were assisted by their
friends against Hannibal; he would likewise find friends against the French
King; Briefly, they stood upon their guard, and he is not without his
Garrisons. But an Hannibal annoyed them when they were almost in the highest
period of their pride and prosperity; And why may not a French King work him
annoyance when he stands most assuredly upon his defense? Shall he not be
able to hurt him because the Alps divide France and Italy, and makes the
passage hard and difficult? But Hannibal passed them when they were not so
passable as they are now; And how many times have the Frenchmen passed them
since Hannibals time? Shall he not find means to work him dispight and
hindrance because he is not so well experienced in Wars, as Hannibal was? But
may he not find many Captains, who in these days have little less experience
then Hannibal had? Shall he not be sufficient to war against him in Italy,
because the Country is far better fortified then in Hannibals time? but late
experience has taught us, that those Fortifications, Holds, and Citadels,
could not stay the course of Charles the eighth King of France, who passed
through all Italy as a Conqueror, until he came to the Kingdom of Naples,
which he also subdued? Briefly, shall he not prevail against him in Italy,
because the Spaniard is in League with most of the Princes hereof? But
Histories afford us many examples, that the Italian Princes have oftentimes
broken their League with the Emperor and other his Predecessors, whose
greatness they either feared or enveighed as they do the overgrowing power of
the Spaniard at this present.) And why may not these examples move them to do
the like, when as the like occasion of fear or of envy is offered unto them?
Hannibal counseled (as you have heard) Antiochus to war upon the Romans in
Italy, when they were far stronger then the Spaniards is and no man had better
experience of the Romans or of Italy then Hannibal had; The reasons therefore
enforcing Hannibal to give that Counsel to Antiochus, may (as they have many
times) serve to move the French King to follow his counsel; the rather because
experience proved it to be true; and Antiochus failed of his purpose, because
he hearkened to Hannibal's persuasion.

But this difficulty will be better cleared, if I shall let you understand the
opinion of one of the best Warriors of our Age, as well touching the wealth,
Monsieur de la Nove en le, discourse politiques.
as the strength of the French King: Monsieur de la Nove (who dyed but a few
years past, and when he lived was generally reputed and esteemed the best
Captain of our time) in his Book of Military discourses, delivers that the
French King, Henry the second, levied yearly by ordinary means of his Subjects,
fifteen Millions of Francks, part whereof were engaged and pawned for his
debts; and yet (says he) our King levieth no less at this day. Here you see
the French Kings Revenues were in some measure comparable unto the Romans: For
Plutarch in his before mentioned History, Plutarch.
writing of the life of Pompey (who was surnamed the Great) reports, That the
yearly and ordinary Revenues of the Roman Commonwealth, before the Conquest
obtained by Pompey, came but to five Millions of Crowns, which is fifteen
Millions of Francks; the just Revenue of the French King, until that Pompey
increased the same, and brought it to eight Millions, and 500m Crowns, and
brought unto the Treasure-house, ten Millions of Jewels and ready coin: So if
you remember, that (as it has been showed) the Romans never flourished more,
then they did when they were governed by Consuls, and not by Kings or by
Emperors; yea you shall see that the French King coming not much behind them
in yearly Revenues, may be thought in some respect equal unto them.

The same Mounsieur de la Nove, in his twentieth Military Discourse, talking of
the might and puissance of the French King, deliver^th, That he may very
conveniently set forth an Army of 60. Companies of men at Arms, of 20. Cornets
of light Horsemen, and of five Companies of Harquebusiers on Horseback (which
were in all 10000. Horsemen) besides 4000. Royters, and 100. Ensigns of French
Footmen, and 40. Ensigns of Swizzars, and yet he shall leave his Frontier
Towns sufficiently well armed and furnished with men and munition, as well to
defend as offend the enemy.

Du Haillan, Du Haillan
in his 14th Book of the History of France, sets down, That Philip de
Valois, when as he warred with Edward the Third King of England, for the Crown
of France, had an Army of 100m fighting men. The same Author in his sixteenth
Book writes, That Charles King of France, meaning to go into England against
King Richard (as I take it) the second, brought to the Sluice in Flanders, a
Navy of 128^. Ships, all laden with men and munition, which I have thought
good to let you understand, to the end you may see, that if the Alps should be
made unpassable by the Spaniard for the Frenchmen (which was the Emperor
Charles the fifth's purpose and intention to do, if in his life time he could
possibly have brought it to pass) yet the French King is not unable or
unfurnished of ships to convey and carry (as his Predecessors have done) a
sufficient Army by Sea into Italy. Plutarch in the life of Julius Caesar
records, that the Frenchmen came with an Army of three hundred thousand
fighting men, to raise Julius Caesar's Siege before Alexia; a huge number, and
such a number as the Romans never used the like against any Foreign Enemy; as
the same Plutarch testifies in the life of Fabius Maximus, where he affirms,
that the greatest power which the Romans ever had against any enemy whatsoever,
was but eighty eight thousand soldiers: Andreas Friccius de Repub.
and Andreas Ficcius in his book de Repub. reports, that they seldom or
never passed the number of forty or fifty thousand; a less number then which,
Charles the fifth, the present King of Spain's father, held to be sufficient (as
I have said before) to encounter with any Christian Prince; and I have thought
good to repeat, because hearing what you have heard of the French power, you
may think the French King well able to annoy any King of Christendom: For
although I should grant that his power is weakened, and he not able to arm such
multitudes as his Predecessors have done (for which I see no reason, if he were
freed of his Civil wars) yet it must needs be granted, that he could easily
make an army of that number, and therewith greatly prejudice the Spaniard in
Italy, especially since a Captain of valor and experience will adventure to
set upon innumerable multitudes, nothing fearing their number, with a few well
trained and experienced soldiers; as Alexander the great did upon Darius his
innumerable host, and Hannibal did upon the Romans; who (as Polibius
testifies in his second book, with scant twenty thousand, feared not to fight
with the Romans in Italy, Polib. l* 1.
amounting unto seven hundred thousand footmen, and seventy thousand horsemen.

Thus, as in Revenues, so in multitudes of Soldiers, at the leastwise in such
multitudes as they commonly used, you see the French King is in some measure
comparable to the Romans, but especially in no respect inferior unto Hannibal
for men or money; and therefore without all doubt and controversy, as likely
and able to war with the Spanish King within the very bowels of Italy, as he
was to contend with the Romans when they were strongest, as all Princes are
most commonly within their own Realms and Dominions, especially if they have
(as the Romans had) the same wholly and entirely to themselves. But although
this point touching the King of France his possibility and means to molest and
trouble the Spanish King in Italy, be well and sufficiently cleared by that
which is said, yet I cannot so leave it; for I hold it convenient to let you
know the opinion of his Father concerning the same matter. He therefore
considering the variable affections of the Princes of Italy, the hidden and
secret malice which they inwardly bear unto all strangers and foreigners, the
many pretensions which the French King has unto Naples and Milan, together
with sundry prosperous attempts and journeys which of late years they have made
into Italy, counseled the present King of Spain, his son, at the time he
resigned all his Kingdoms unto him (a very rare and commendable act) to carry a
watchful and wary eye over the French King; he wills him to be jealous of his
greatness, and to seek all means possible to weaken him; he advises how to war
against France, and how by his own examples, and by the remembrance of his own
mishaps and evil success, he might fight against the French King with far
better advantage then he did at Marselles; he exhorts him to shut up the
French King's passage, as much as in him shall lie, by the way of Turin; he
admonishes him to take heed lest that at any time the Frenchmen give him some
overthrow in Italy; he assures him, that if at any time they should happily
obtain any victory there against him, his best and most assured friends in
Italy would not run the same and the like danger and fortune with him, but
presently join and associate themselves with his Adversaries; briefly, he
warns him above all other things, to look and foresee, that there be no
league of amity and alliance concluded betwixt the French King and the
Venetians, or any other Prince of Italy; he adds to those counsels, diverse
other wise and considerable advertisements; as, to inform himself thoroughly of
the contentions and strifes that are or may be betwixt the principal Houses and
Officers of France; he counsels him, if there be any, to nourish them; if
none, to procure and set some forward; he considering that the Country of
Piedmont is easy to be subdued by the French, and of great profit and
commodity unto them, either by Wars, or by marriage, to keep them from the
possession of all, or of any part thereof; assuring him, that it will not be so
beneficial for him to take from the French King a third part of his whole Realm
toward Flanders, as it will be to shut him out of Piedmont; because barring
him by that means of an easy access into Italy, he shall live in good
assurance of his Estates there, which are the chiefest parts of his strength,
and the most especial pillars of his greatness. This counsel has been as
wisely followed and executed by the Son, as it was warily given by the Father:
for it is better then thirty years ago since he by his instruments (I mean the
Princes of the House of Guise) has maintained and nourished civil dissension
in France, whereby the Kings thereof in all this time have never been able to
make wars upon him in Italy. It is likewise many years agone since he favored
the late Duke of Savoy (who by the French King was driven out of his Estate)
with men and money for the present recovery of the same: and not many years
since, for the better assurance of the Savoyans friendship, he has given his
second daughter (a match fit for a better man then he) in marriage unto the
Duke of Savoy; and has helped him as much as he could possibly, in all his
wars against the late French King, by whom (if God had spared him longer life)
he had long before this time, been driven out of his Country. I shall not need
to tell you in what terms he stands with the present King of France; you, and
all the world know, that he only maintains his Rebels, not for any love
toward them, but for his own private gain and security. And therefore from the
French King I will now come unto other Princes of whom the Spaniard makes any
reckoning or account.

And first unto the Princes of Germany, The Spanish Kings opinion and
proceeding with the Princes of Germany.
of whom I shall not need to say much, for I shall have occasion to speak of
the Emperor in another place; and the other Princes either depend on him, or
if they be absolute of themselves, set their whole care upon preserving their
own Estates, and care not to augment and increase the same. Hence it comes,
that they live in continual peace, although they differ in Religion, and that
one of them encroacheth not upon another, albeit they have their Estates and
Territories very near adjoining together. Hence it comes, that they live
securely, and are not ready to enter into Wars for light occasions, or to
succor their Allies and Confederates with such celerity, willingness, and
expedition as is required, and thought meet and convenient. Hence again it
comes, that they opposed not themselves against the greatness of the Spaniard,
and are not so forward, as they in reason and policy should be, to yield aid
both of men and money unto those whom he molesteth. Briefly, hence it comes,
that there are so many free Towns and Cities in Germany, which had framed unto
themselves such Governors, and such Rulers as it has best pleased them; and
that these Towns and Cities being of great wealth, are not made subject unto
the next adjoining Princes; for if that the Princes of Germany had been so
desirous and ready to increase their Estates, as the Pope, the Venetians, the
Dukes and other Potentates of Italy have been, who by main force, and the
advantage and benefit of times, have usurped the possession of diverse Cities,
whereunto they had no manner of Right, Germany should have fewer free cities,
and far mightier Princes then it has. The Spaniard therefore knowing that
these Princes are peaceable men, and not easily let to enter into wars, and
yet, because their country is populous, both able and willing to spare many of
their Subjects to be employed in foreign Wars, entertaineth as many of them as
he can possible, for his friends, and has lately sought to draw the Switzers
(who are part of Germany) from the service of the French King; wherein he
labors so earnestly by his Ambassadors, that what by promising to pay the
French Kings debts, what by assuring them to increase their monthly pay, he had
undoubtedly won them, had not the ancient friends of the Crown of France, and
the eldest captains and Senators stuck hardly unto the late French King, who
was compelled for fear of losing their aid and assistance, to borrow as much
money as he could possibly, to pay them some part of his d^bts, and to assure
unto himself those Captains and Senators, without which help, his ancient
friends forsaking him, had entered into league and service with the Spaniards.
Thus much, or rather this little briefly of the Princes of Germany.

Now to the Princes of Italy, which are the Pope, the Dukes of Florence,
Ferrara, Mantua, and Savoy, and the Venetians; all which have some Town or
other, near unto the Kingdom of Naples or Dukedom of Mlian.

He makes special account of the Pope, The Spanish Kings opinion and
proceeding with the Pope of Rome.
not because he is the mightiest (for the Venetians are undoubtedly of far
greater strength and power then he) but because where he inclines, there the
rest most commonly bend their favor, and lend their furtherance; unto him
therefore he carries great respect, feeeth his chief Counselors, respects
his college of Cardinals, gives rewards and yearly pensions unto many of them;
and unto those Courtiers who are in special favor with him, promises and
protests that he will be always ready to defend and protect them, and their
just causes and quar^els against all princes whatsoever. He cares not by what
means he procures his friends to make a Pope, whether it be lawful or
unlawful, whether he be worthy or unworthy of so high a place and dignity, so
that he be well assured of his Friendship. And if it so fall out, that those
cardinals who are not well affected unto him, by plurality of their voices,
make such a Pope as is rather his enemy then friend, he presently seeks all
means possible to purchase his favor, he corrupts his best favorites,
bribeth his nearest servants, wins by yearly fees and pensions his chief
cardinals, and so by direct and indirect courses procures his assured
Friendship. Or if he be past hope to obtain the same, that Pope shall be
assured not to live long in his pontifical feat and Majesty; For, either he, or
some one of his friends or followers for him, will find some way or other to
dispatch him, as it has been very lately seen and verified: So that either
love, procured and continued by his benevolence and liberality toward the
Popes Cardinals, or fear, proceeding from the consideration and remembrance of
the dangers which later Popes have both incurred and endured, because they did
not either like him, or were not well liked by him, contains and continues
the Sea of Rome in peace and amity with him.

Next unto the Pope are the Venetians, with whom the Spaniard knows that he
may very easily entertain Love and Friendship, The Spanish Kings opinion and
proceeding with the Venetians, and the rest of the princes of Italy.
because they do, or have always put great trust and confidence in the change
and alteration of times; attributing so much thereunto, that it is greatly to
be feared their long sufferance will be the cause of their utter ruin and
destruction; for temporizing as they do, they will become in time a prey unto
some warlike Nation, and namely, unto the Turk, with whom, by reason of their
continual Traffic with him, they stand in such terms, that they lie always
open unto him; and it is to be doubted, that he taking the advantage and
benefit of time, will one day when they least suspect him, deprive them of
Corsu, Candia, Zant, and other places, as he did suddenly spoil them of the
Kingdom of Cyprus: notwithstanding because the Venetians are somewhat jealous
of his greatness, and fear to see any man to be of overgreat credit and
authority within the bowels and heart of Italy; the Spaniard has a watchful
and suspicious eye over them, knowing that as nothing can sever or separate
them from the Turk, unless they see him not only ready to decline, but also in
some manner thrown down; so they have always, and will still be most ready to
withstand the aspiring ambition of any Forreigner that should seek to make
himself great and mighty in Italy. Moreover he knows that the Venetians know
not their own power, nor can tell how to use the same; which they showed to be
most true not many years since, when they took not such occasions of enlarging
their Dominions as were offered unto them. Again he considers, that they
having lived a long time in peace, are grown so out of use of wars, that they
have in a manner forgotten all military discipline; and therefore if they
should at any time give him occasion to fall at variance with them, he might
undoubtedly with assaulting them upon a sudden, drive them to some great
inconvenience, especially if he should enter with his forces into the heart and
very center of their Dominion, and there compel them to put strong Garrisons
within all their Forts and Towns of strength, whereby they should not be able
to keep the field* and in so many holds (as they have) it cannot be but that in
some of them there would quickly be found want, either of victuals, or of
munition, or else some means to corrupt the Garrison or the Captain, or the
Inhabitants, or such as are factious; of which quality and humor there are
many, in very many of their cities. Further he knows that if he were but once
Master of the field, all that is not strong within the Seigniory (which in all
States is a great deal more then the strong) would presently yield unto his
discretion; or else he should constrain them to come to the field, and there
leave the Forts and Towns without sufficient defense, or else not to be able to
continue their Garrisons long; and coming once to the field, they will easily
be drawn of necessity unto a Battle, wherein they can hope for no great good
success; or at the least they must suffer some great disadvantage, by reason of
the want of experience, as well in their Soldiers as in their Captains: But
the greatest care or fear the Spaniard has of the Venetians is, lest that the
remembrance of their good usage and demeanor toward the Neapolitans, and of
their mild and gentle Government wheresoever they chance to have the upper
hand, should make the Neapolitans willing and ready to further their Attempts,
if at any time they should set upon the Kingdom of Naples: This care makes him
entertain friendship with them, and also puts him in mind (if he see the
least likelihood that may be of Wars with them) to seek all the means possible,
either by prevention or sudden Invasion to divert them from warring against
Naples. Thus lives he either in peace with them, or warreth against them with
great advantage.

Now from them to the other Princes of Italy, the which are of such strength
that he needs not greatly to fear them; only of them he has this care and
this regard; That he suffers none of them to augment and increase his Estate,
no not him that depends most upon him; carrying always this mind, That it
behooves him as well to contain his best friends within a moderate and
convenient greatness, as to weaken and depress his enemies: For he assures
himself, that those that love him best in Italy, who flatter him now most, who
follow him with all favor and furtherance, would quickly forsake him, if his
Power once began to decline: For the Italian lends his hand to his enemy to
help him up; that is but up to the chin in Water; and puts his foot upon his
head to drown him that is, fallen in above the chin: And because he knows
their weakness to be such, as that they cannot possibly annoy him, unless they
chance to enter into League and Confederacy against him; he entertaineth their
divisions, maintains his credit and reputation amongst them, provideth wise
and discreet Officers to govern his Subjects there, uses his own people as
gently as he can; and lastly, foreseeth that they shall not combine themselves
against him; This is all that I shall need to say of the Princes of Italy.

From whom I must come to the Queen of England, The Queen of England is the
mightiest enemy that the Spanish King has.
who (the times being as they are) is in my simple opinion the mightiest and
most terrible Enemy that the Spaniard has: For albeit France; is far bigger
then England; the Turk mightier then France; and the other Princes of whom I
have spoken, nearer unto him and his States then we are; yet France is divided,
and therefore not able to molest him* The Turk is strong, but either otherways
busied, or not so bold to set upon him, for fear of the other Princes of
Christendom, who would be ready to succor him: And the forenamed Princes be
many, but not equal in Forces to our Queen; for he that is mightiest of them,
is mighty either by Sea only, or by Land only; her Majesty is strong both by
Sea and Land, they therefor not able to trouble him without the help one of
another; and her Highness of her self sufficient to cross his enterprises, to
withstand his endeavors, to prevent his purposes, and to invade his Kingdom.
In so much that he may well reckon it for one of the chiefest blessings that
God has bestowed upon him; that it pleased his divine Majesty to make her a
woman, and not a man, a lover of Peace, and not a friend of War, a Princess
desireous to maintain her own, and not to Conquer other Princes Kingdoms; for
if ever she had affected higher Dominion, if ever she had desired to enlarge
her Territories, or coveted to enrich her self with his, or other Princes
losses; What occasions have been offered unto her? What advantage has time it
self given her? What suit have some of her Neighbors made unto her? not to
receive them only into her protection; but also with her aid, help, and
assistance, to subjugate other Dominions? Scotland may commend her Justice and
Liberality: France has great occasion to extol her Lenity and Temperance:
Flanders is bound to pray for her prosperity: And the Spaniard himself shall be
unthankful, if he praise not her Equity. Time has greatly favored her by
sending divisions amongst her Neighbors; The Almighty has strengthened her, by
impairing the strength of her adversaries; both have set her many degrees above
all the Princes of Christendom, by giving her peace, when they have had wars;
her abundance, when they have suffered many wants; her loving and dutiful
Subjects, when their people have been unkind and rebellious; briefly, her all
the blessings that man's heart can wish, and them most part of the crosses that
humane imbecility can endure. I may not dwell upon her praises, because they
are far beyond my capacity; I cannot set forth her blessings, because they are
innumerable. The one require an higher style, a more eloquent Tongue, a better
Wit, and a greater understanding then the most High has bestowed upon me: The
other are apparent, but not computable; and whosoever shall undertake to
express them, shall faint before he be half entered into them; And yet I may
not thus leave them, lest passing them over in silence, I should seem curious
in other States, and ignorant of our own. Neither may I adventure to write all
that I know: Princes actions are open in outward show, but inwardly obscure;
subject to the view of many men, but exceeding the wisdom and capacity of most
men; soon espied, but never thoroughly seen; seeming quickly to be known, but
hardly well understood; in appearance easy, but in effect very difficult; in
some men's opinions reprehensible, but in others judgments praise worthy: To be
short, they may be talked of, but not controlled; admired but not censured;
lightly enquired after, but not narrowly sif^ed and examined; It suffices to
hear them, it becomes not any man to seek and search the Reasons of them:
Nature enforces us to desire the one; and wisdom warns us not to be curious
of the other.

But I have taken upon me to make a full Discourse of this time; and therefore
may not omit the principal Actions of the only Princess of our time, nor
obscure her Puissance by leaving it untouched, whose power is invincible,
because it was never touched: The Maiden whose honesty was never attempted,
deserves the name of a true Virgin: And the Prince whom no man dares to
molest, may well be termed invincible: The Fort that never parts, is seldom
taken: And the King whose Power never decreaseth, can hardly be subdued.

It is written that the Frenchmen seeing the innumerable Armies that have been
sent out of England into France; Da Hailan
and considering that they murdered our men daily, and in great numbers, and
yet we received daily new supplies from home, as though our men never dyed;
compare us unto wild Geese, which in the coldest Winters come unto the watery
grounds every year by great flocks, and albeit most part of them be killed
before the Winter be fully ended, yet they return the next year in as great
quantities as they did the year before; And so, although they were wearied with
killing and slaying our Countrymen; yet as soon as one Army was defeated,
there came a new supply, which took sharp, revenge of the others deaths, and
never suffered them to live in peace, ease, or quietness, until they redeemed
their vexations and troubles with such conditions as contented our Princes.

I might here take just occasion to trouble you with a long recital of the
Forces and Armies which diverse of our Kings have led and carried, either under
their own, or under their Lievtenants conduct into France or Flanders, into
Italy or Germany, into Spain or Portugal, into Turkey or the Holy Land; but our
Histories and other Chronicles are full of them, and you carry them so well in
mind, that I hold it very superfluous to refresh your memory. I leave the
prowess of Edward the third undeclared; the fortunate Conquests of Richard the
first untouched; the happy Victories of Henry the fifth unrepeated; and the
strange and marvelous fortunes of many other of our Kings, not mentioned: I
list not to boast of the black Princes valor, of the Duke of Glocesters
boldness, of the Bishop of Winchesters pride, who being but Subjects under our
Kings, carried out of our Realm diverse Armies comparable to the Forces of
Kings. Old Histories are reputed for Fables; Things beyond memory are not
thought worthy of memory; And what our Fathers did, redoundeth not, in some
men's opinions, to our praise or commendation, according to the Poets saying.

Et genus and Proav^s and quae non fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra voco. But later
Years have held many Testimonies of our strength, manifold Arguments of our
valor, infallible proofs of our power; The Spaniard is in the opinion of all
men, the terror of Princes, the controller of Kings, the Monarch of the world,
and the most and highest Sovereign of all Sovereigns; It is he that makes
Italy to tremble; that holds Spain in great awe; that terrifieth the proud
and invincible Germans; that molesteth the valiant and variable Frenchmen; that
tyranizeth over the effeminate Flemmings; that mastereth the ancient and
warlike Burgundians; that captivateth the free and manly Switzers; that
miscarrieth the populous and poor Scots; that bridleth the simple and untamed
Indians; that rules the unruly and obstinate people of Portugal; that
overlooketh with an eye of ambition, with a heart of covetousness, with a
desire of superiority, with an unsatiable appetite of Sovereign Authority, the
whole face, and the large precincts of Christendom. It is he that uses his
wit, imployeth his strength, bends his power, armeth his people, directs
his Council, and dedicateth all that he possesses to the lawful or unlawful
enlarging of his Territories. It is he that takes of his Father to be
Ambitious, that has learned of his Ancestors to be troublesome, that thinks
it a work beseeming a Prince, and becoming a King, to vex and molest all Kings.
It is he that dreameth by night, studieth by day, practices at all times how
to let no time pass without a line (as it was anciently said) without a
Stratagem, a late invented policy, an unknown practice, and a rare and
marvelous enterprise. It is he that increases in ambition as well as in years,
in covetousness as well as in pride, in rigor as well as in morosity; Briefly,
it is he, and I would to God that it were not he, that troubles the peaceable
estate of Christendom, that only vexes the Realm of France, that disquieteth
Flanders, and sets friends at jarrs, allies at variance, and confederates at
dissension; insomuch that it may well be said of him, Phi- malus and lippus,
totus malus ergo Philippus.

Now if a woman has presumed to encounter with this man; if a Queen of one
Island has undertaken to bridle a Prince of so many Nations; if her sole
Forces have tamed his invincible power, her only counsel prevented his subtle
practices; her good will, withstood his ill will, his mischievous practices,
and his ambitious desires; if she alone has hindered him to be Lord of France,
Ruler of Italy, and Commander of all the rest of the world; shall he not err
that compares Hercules with her? Or can any man deem him wise, that takes her
in any respect inferior to Julius Caesar, mighty Pompey, or Alexander the
Great? For two of these, with the invincible power of the invincible Romans,
conquered some part of the rude and unwarlike people of the world; and the
third and fourth are famous, not in true Histories, but in old Fables, for
doing such exploits as are more pleasant then credible, more praised then
possible, and much more admired then allowed for true, and not miraculous: But
if any man shall deny her to be wise, her peaceable Government gives him the
lie; if her might and power shall be called in question, her actions in
Flanders and France, testify the fullness of her strength; if her justice be
not worthily commended, her motherly care over the present King of Scotland
while he was an infant, her pitiful charity extended to as many as have had
need of her help, and her upright and just proceedings in as many matters
foreign and domestical as have been referred to her discretion, shall convince
him of falsehood, or of malice, that shall derogate ought from her innumerable
multitudes of her everlasting praises. I wonder when I hear the Romans boast of
their Pompey, the Grecians brag of their Constantine, the French report wonders
of their Charlemaigne, and the Syrians set forth the praises of their Antiochus
(whom every one of these Nations baptized with the surname of Great) because
their actions were somewhat extraordinary, exceeding the common success of other
Princes, and the usual fortune of many and diverse Kings; for if a woman has
gone far beyond them all, and that without the aid of any Allies, without the
help of Foreign powers, and without the strength of such as should have
employed their whole strength to the furtherance of her endeavors; are not
their praises eclipsed, their honors blemished, and their renown obscured?
They lived in an age of ignorance, in a time of simplicity, in a season of
cowardly pusillanimity; she rules in a world full of Machiavelists, pestered
with deceitful Hanibals, plentiful of warlike Captains, and rather
over-burthened, then not thoroughly furnished with sufficient Counselors: and
yet neither the policy of the wisest, nor the deceit of the craftiest; not the
labor of most warlike, nor the wisdom of the best and most sufficient
Counselors, has ever drawn her into any small inconvenience, but hitherto
either wisely or happily, providently or fortunately, warily or worthily she
has not only prevented but escaped, foreseen but overgone, forecast but
overcome the most secret, the most subtle, the most divelish, and the most
unnatural and inevitable practices, devises, attempts, treasons, and trecheries
of her adversaries. For many men and women, learned and unlearned, spiritual
and temporal, noble and ignoble, courtiers and counselors have sought her
death, and committed treasons against her: Witness the late Queen of Scots, Mrs
Arding, and her daughter, witness Dr Storey, Dr. Parrey, and Dr Saunders:
Witness Campion, Sherwin, and their accomplices: Witness the Earls of
Northumberland, Westmerland, and Arundel: Witness Babington, Throgmorton,
Tilney, and their confederates: Witness the late Duke of Norfolk and Perrott,
both Privy Counselors of great account, wealth, credit, and honor, both
greatly loved, trusted, and honored by her Majesty, both bound unto her
Highness for many favors, dignities, and advancements, both (briefly)
counseled, animated, encouraged, and directed in their treasons by the wise
Counselors of the mightiest Prince, and the greatest enemy that her Grace had
in the world: Their treason was plotted abroad, and intended at home; invented
in Spain, and should have been executed in England; there it received a
beginning, here an approbation: here were executioners, and there counselors;
here practisers, and there patrons; here the traitors were blinded with
ambition, there the abettors were transported with envy; here reigned pride,
and there revenge; briefly, here the treasons ended, but their malice
continues, and sends forth daily new Conspirators, new devises, and new
practices: Since therefore her Majesty's death has been so often intended, the
subversion of her State so many times purposed, and the performance of both so
desperately undertaken, her Highness for her self, and we for her Highness, are
greatly bound to pray to the Almighty, who has so many ways, so many times,
and so miraculously preserved her.

Julius Caesar was so fortunate, Plutarch.
that being in great danger of drowning and presuming that it was not his
Creators pleasure that he should perish in the Sea; when the Pilot durst not
adventure to carry him for fear of the apparent and great danger which
threatened his present death, he boldly said to the Master of the ship, Go thy
ways, thou carriest Caesar, and Caesar's Fortune; and yet notwithstanding it was
his fortune to be killed with Bodkins, and that by his dearest friends, yea in
the Senate House, where he thought himself as safe as in his own Palace, as
sure as in a Castle, and as free from danger as a Prince environed with a
strong Guard.

Pompeius had many commendable qualities, great store of friends, infinite
followers, strange fortunes, many signs of Gods blessings, sundry tokens of
more then ordinary and humane felicity; and yet he was poisoned or done to
death by his professed friends.

Alexander, who for his Prowess, was surnamed the Great; for his fortune was
one of the Wonders of the world, and for his rare faithful friends and
Counselors, went far beyond all the Princes that lived either before or after
him; neither by his virtue nor valor, nor by his fortune and good hap, nor by
his friends and Counselors, could escape the fatal poison that ended his days,
before he attained unto those years which be the forerunners of Age: So as in
others, so in this Point her Majesty far exceeds Caesar, Pompey, and
Alexander, the three greatest Princes that ever lived: For their death was so
soon performed as purposed; Her life has been often sought (but God be thanked
therefore) not shortened; they escaped not the malicious Treasons of one or two;
she has been preserved from the wicked treacheries of very many; they could
not prevent the Conspiracies of their friends; she has withstood the open and
secret attempts of their enemies; Briefly, they dyed before they became old,
she has attained unto sixty years of her Age; and the rare fortune which she
has hitherto had to escape so many and marvelous dangers, puts me, and all
her loving Subjects, in good hope, that it will please the Almighty to add many
more years of bliss and haappiness to her days: neither do I think only that
she shall live beyond the ordinary and usual years and age of other Princes;
but I am fully persuaded, that her Grace is preserved and reserved to great
fortune to some marvelous purpose; her qualities exceeding other Princes
conditions; her fortune being more then ordinary, and her dangers escaped, not
prudently, but providently, not by humane policy, but by divine prevention;
give me good occasion to presume, that he that disposes of Kings, and all
Kings Actions, lengthneth her days, and has dedicated her years to some
notable accident: For what he has intended, man cannot prevent: what he
purposes, Man cannot prevent what God intends.
humane wit cannot change or alter, his resolutions are in Heaven, ours on
earth; his eternal, ours changeable; his immutable, ours subject to alteration;
We purpose, he disposes; we intend, he changes; we desire, he rules, yea so
rules, that he directs our thoughts, leads our counsels, inclines our
dispositions to his will and pleasure; he knows our necessities before we ask,
our infirmities when we conceal them, our desires, albeit we keep them most
close and secret; He gives us what is expedient for us, grants us more then
we dare desire, provideth better for us then we can deserve; and to be short,
is so resolute to do us good, that all our wits, capacities, and policies are
not able to prevent the meanest of his determinations, so the same tend to our
benefit: For although his mercy exceeding our merits, and his clemency yiedling
to our contrition, do sometimes divert the evil that we have deserved, and
mitigate the punishments which are due to our many offenses; yet if our
humility be not dissembled, or his pleasure fully bent to work us any good
whatsoever; so good is he, that our good cannot be attended, nor his intention
changed: An Example or two will prove this to be manifest; and therefore I will
afford you these Examples.

Astiages dreamed that his Daughter Mandana made so much water at one time as
filled his whole City, Herodotus lib. 1.
and was likely to drown his whole Country; with which dream being greatly
terrified, he propounds the same to be expounded by his best Interpreters of
Dreams; They report, that of the said Daughter should come such an Issue, as
should drive him from his Kingly Seat: He takes counsel what to do to prevent
this intention of the Almighty. It is resolved, that the best means is to marry
his Daughter to a mean man. The counsel is followed, and she married not to a
Median, worthy of such a Wife and Princess as she was; but unto a mean Persian,
by name called Cambises, born of indifferent good Parentage, but not likely to
carry such a mind as to deprive his Father in Law of his Kingdom. The same year
that his Daughter was married, he dreamed again. That out of her Privities
sprang such a Vine, as overspread all Asia. This Dream he likewise communicated
with the Soothsayers: They delivered, That out of the Womb of Mandana should
proceed such a Child as should be Lord of all Asia; and so desirous thereof,
that he should hardly and very unwillingly attend his Grandfathers death:
According to the Prophecy, the Child is born, his Nativity cast, and the
disposition of his body, and other outward signs foretell, that the
Prognostication made before his birth, was likely to prove true. The
Grandfather minding to prevent a future mischief, gives him unto one of his
faithful Counselors, commanding him to put him to death: The Counselor moved
with pity, commends the child to the custody of his Shepherd, yet charging
him to murder the Infant; The Shepherds Wife having a child of her own dead
the very self same day, not finding in her heart to consent to the death of so
pretty and Princely a Child, beseeched her Husband to expose her own dead Child
instead of Cyrus, for so Astiages his Grandfather was called: The Shepherd
followed his Wives counsel, and yielded his consent that she should bring up
Cyrus as her own: He grows to years, and within a few years is chosen King by
other children of all sorts, poor and rich, Noble and ignoble; and being
elected King, commanded as a King, and inflicteth punishments upon his far
betters, for disobeying his Authority. They disdaining to be commanded, much
less to be punished (as they were) by their far inferior, complain to their
Parents, and they to Astiages, of the injury offered by poor Cyrus. The
Shepherd is enjoined to bring forth Cyrus; he makes appearance at the day
appointed; carries himself not Shepherd like, but Princelike, before the King:
And being demanded by the King how he durst presume to command his betters to
be chastised; answered boldly and with a spirit far exceeding his years, and
not becoming his supposed Estate, That since it had pleased the rest of the
youth to choose him for their King, and to subject themselves in general unto
him, it was not lawful for any particular, were he never so good, to disobey
him; And in case any one did so far forget himself as to contemn his Authority,
that then it was as lawful for him, as for King Astiages, to punish his or
their disobedience. At which Answer the King being astonished, looking upon the
audacity of the Child, considering his wisdom, calling to mind the exposing of
Cyrus, and conferring his Daughters child's Age, and his years together,
suspected him to be Cyrus: Sent presently for Harpagus (for so was the
Counselors name unto whom he had given him to be destroyed) compels him to
tell the truth; The Shepherd is likewise sent for, who declares the means and
manner how Cyrus was saved: The King highly offended with Harpagus, and fully
resolved to depress Cyrus, dissembleth his anger with the one, and takes
present order for the base education of the other. Cyrus is sent from Media
into Persia: and Astiages not long after, carrying a watchful and revengeful
mind; and knowing that Harpagus had but one child, and being once rebuked of
Harpagus, (more boldly then wisely) of drunkenness, sends for the Infant and
the Father, unto whom he says, Thou toldest me (of late) I was drunken; Now to
show thee whether I be, or no, I have here an Arrow in my hand, which if I do
shoot so rightly, that I do hit thy Son at the heart, thou may well think I
am not drunk; and if I miss his heart, then will I not be offended at thee for
so saying of me: He shoots the Arrow, and strikes the child at the heart:
And not content with this severe revenge, commands the Father to sup with
him, and compels him at Supper to feed on the best and chiefest parts of his
only and dearest Son, baked in a Pie. Harpagus endures the wrong for a while,
and makes Astiages to continue his cruelty, consents to his Marriage with
his own Sister, brings him by secret means, and his own lewd demeanor, into
the hatred of his Subjects; And when he saw that it was time to begin to work
his revenge; fearing that if he should send a Letter to Cyrus (whom he meant to
use for the Instrument of his revenge) by ordinary means, the same might be
intercepted, and so both he and Cyrus endangered; takes an Hare, opens his
Belly, within it encloseth a Letter, and gives the Hare to a trusty Messenger
to carry unto Cyrus, willing him to take off the Hares skin; And to the end the
matter might be less suspected, he apparelleth the man like a Hunter, gives
him Nets in his hand, and other instruments belonging unto Hunting: The Letters
contained, That Cyrus should dispose the Persians to revenge the wrongs that
Astiages had done unto him and to Cyrus: The trust that Astiages reposed in
Harpagus, and that being assured to be made chief Lieutenant of the Median
Forces which should be sent against Cyrus, he would presently revolt unto
Cyrus, who by that means might easily overthrow his Grandfather: The Plot was
thus laid; Cyrus rebelled, Astiages put Harpagus in trust with all his
strength; he flies unto Cyrus; Astiages is delivered into the hands of his
enemies, and the Empire of the Medians is by this means translated unto the
Persians.

Amulius to rule alone, killed Numiter, Just. lib. 43. Tit. Livius.
and made his Daughter Rhea one of the Virgins Vestals, that no man-child might
proceed from her to revenge the wrong done unto her Father, or recover the
Kingdom due unto her Father, Rhea living thus sequestered from the company of
men, is gotten with child, it is not known whether by mortal man, or by the God
Mars. She bringing forth two Twins, they are called Romulus and Rhemus, who
being brought up (as some say) by a Wolf, or (as others) by a common Strumpet
called Lupa, as they grew in years, so they increased in virtues, valor, and
credit, and in time wrought the revenge of their Grandfathers death, and drove
Amulius from his Kingdom.

Cambyses, Son to the aforementioned Cyrus dreamed that a Messenger brought him
word that his Brother Smerdis sitting in his royal seat, Herodotus lib. 3.
touched the Heavens with his head; by occasion of which dream, fearing that he
might be deprived of his Kingdom by his Brother, more speedily then wisely, he
commanded Smerdis to be done to death: He is no sooner dead, but one Smerdis
rebelled against Cambyses; with whom Cambyses riding to encounter, as he gat
upon his horse, his Sword fell out of his sheath, and ran him through the
Thigh, of which wound he dyed.

Gargoris Rex Curetum, Just. lib. 44.
begat a Son upon his own Daughter, and being ashamed of so foul a fact,
purposed to cause the child to be murdered. First he willed him to be cast to
wild beasts: The wild beasts contrary to their kind, nourish him. Then he
throws him amongst hungry Dogs, and such as he had caused many days to be
kept of purpose from meat: The Dogs likewise spare him. Next he exposes him
unto certain Hogs, unto which there was no manner of Sustenance given in a long
time: The Hogs likewise do him no kind of harm. Then he wills him to be
thrown into the Ocean Sea, whence he is cast upon the shore, and presently an
Heart gives him suck. Lastly having lived a long time amongst a number of
Hearts, until he could run as fast as they, he was taken in Nets by certain
Huntsmen, who presented him unto the King; by whom being known, as well by the
proportion of his body, as by certain marks given him as soon as he was born,
he is acknowledged and accepted for his Nephew, and in regard of so wondrous
preservation from so many and different perils and dangers, is also declared
only heir of his Kingdom, and called Atis.

These examples although they may seem to be untrue, and incredible, yet
because they are strange and wonderful, and reported by such Authors whose
writings deserve no small credit, they may right well serve to put us in mind,
that whatsoever the eternal God has decreed, it lies not in our power to
prevent or alter his determination.

Astyages could command his daughter to marry with a mean man, he had power to
will the fruit of her womb to be destroyed, he might entreat or enforce
Harpagus to procure the Infants death; But after that he (moved with
compassion) spared the child, and committed the same unto the custody and
discretion of the Shepherd: Astyages authority, and Harpagus commission
expired, the Shepherd pitied the poor Infant, and it pleased the Almighty (who
had resolutely determined his greatness and welfare) to suffer him to live, to
the utter ruin and overthrow of the Grandfather.

Amulius, as a wicked Usurper, intended to deprive Rhea of her right, according
to his purpose slew her father, and dedicated her to such a life, as there was
small hope that from her should succeed any offspring to spoil and deprive him
of his Royal Scepter: But God had fully resolved that out of Rheas womb should
proceed the scourge of her fathers iniquity, and the founder of the Romans
Majesty, and accordingly of her came Romulus and Rhemus, who founded that
worthy and famous City.

Cambyses, dismayed with a dream, and fearing that his Brother would shorten
his days, and usurp his Crown, took the ordinary means that Princes use to take
in such occasions; but he had no sooner killed one Smerdis, but another arose
and rose against him, who did put him besides his royal Diadem.

Briefly, Gargoris thought by adjudging the Son which he begat upon his own
daughter, sometimes to one, and sometimes to another kind of death, to have
hidden his own shame, and to have debarred the poor infant from his right: But
he that righteth all wrongs, and undertaketh the defense of the innocent, would
not have it to be so, would not suffer wickedness to prevail, nor permit the
guiltless blood to be destroyed.

I may therefore infer by these examples, and by the rare fortune which our
gracious Queen Elizabeth has hitherto enjoyed, that it lies not in the
ambitious Spaniard, nor in the proud Prelate of Rome, her mortal enemies, her
sworn and professed adversaries, to shorten her days, but one day, or one
minute: Their wishes are on earth, but cannot ascend to heaven; they may
purpose, but not dispose, they have often desired, but could never prevail;
they have suborned many, but never found, nor shall find any that shall be able
to accomplish their desire; the Axe may be laid to the root of the Tree, but
it shall not have power to fell it; the Lion perhaps may go about to seek his
prey, but he shall never find it; the devil (as a devil) may provoke and
procure his instruments to be ready to further his attempts, but Gods Angels
attending on her person, having a care of her health, and a special charge of
her safety, will not permit divellish ministers to have the least power that
may be over her.

The Rule and Government of Women is rare; and omnia rara sunt chara: Their Sex
is weak, and the Almighty has promised to be the Protector of the infirm and
weak; Their capacity is not answerable to man's policy; and the Lord has said,
that his elect shall not be confounded with humane wisdom; he has said, and we
may swear, That heaven and earth shall sooner perish, then his word shall fail.
Why then do the Princes rage? Why then do the Pope and the King of Spain fret
and fume against the Lords Anointed? Against his chsen Vessel? Against his dear
Virgin? Why the cause is the Lords, and he will try it, he will end and
determine it. Is it because she upholdeth and defends the Spaniards afflicted
and oppressed Subjects? Why, therefore she was ordained, therefore the Lord
preserves her. Is it because she lives in peace, and they in wars? Why, the
Almighty has blessed the Peacemakers, and has vowed to be the Protector and
Patron of as many as love peace. Is it because her subjects rebel not against
her, as theirs do? Why that is an express and manifest sign of their evil, and
her good Government. Is it because she withstandeth their attempts and
purposes? Why she medleth not with their doings, but with such as tend to her
hinderance; and those it is both lawful and honorable for her to cross and
prevent. Briefly, Is it because the wisest Princes and Subjects of the world
favor her more then them? Why, that is because their actions are not in any
respect equal or comparable unto hers; for they pretend one thing, and intend
another; her thoughts and pretensions do always agree together: They would
seem to love Peace, and yet dwell continually in wars; she seeks peace and
embraces it: They combine themselves, and employ their strength and Forces
against Christian Religion, she uses her power to no man's detriment or
destruction: Briefly, they do or would usurp more then belongs unto them, and
she requires no more then is her own. That such is her mind, desire, and
purpose is most apparent to all the world, because when she might have had the
Sovereignty and universal Government of Flanders, she accepted it not; when she
might have excluded the Spaniard out of the possession of his rich and wealthy
Indies, she deprived him not of them; And when as her Forces are sufficient to
disturb his whole Realms of Portugal and Spain, she employeth them not to his
disturbance: But In magnis voluisse sat est: She has assaulted the Indies;
attempted the conquest of Portugal, and assayed what her Forces could do in
Spain: It cannot be denied but that her Majesty has done as much, The
justification of the Queens attempts against Spain and Portugal.
and perhaps more, then is said; but not before she was provoked thereunto,
neither with a mind so much to prejudice the Spaniard, as to provide for her
own safety; For when Sir Francis Drake, with such Forces as he and his friends
with a very slender help from her Highness, had provided, happily spoiled part
of the Indies, and returned thence with no small prey, if he had gone
thitherward somewhat sooner then he did, better furnished then he was, and with
a larger commission then he had, al which lay in her Majesty to have granted
him, undoubtedly either the season of the year, or the number of his ships or
the largenes of his Authority, would both have encouraged and also enabled him
to have done those her Highness enemies much more and greater despite then he
did. But as wise men going about a great piece of work, and finding when they
have begun the same, that their ability will not serve to accomplish it, sit
down and study what ways to take, and how to put those ways in execution, for
the full perfection of their enterprise: So her Highness having so mighty an
enemy as the Spaniard, whose Attempts and purposes it was necessary (for her
own security) to cross and prevent. And finding that her Treasure was not
comparable to his wealth, especially seeing he attempted diverse ways to annoy
her, and purposed to weary her with length of time, and variety of expenses,
resolved with her self, that it could not be amiss to permit her loving
Subjects to adventure some part of their wealth, and a small portion of her own
Treasure, in^hope to bring from the Indies much more then they carried thither:
The which her Resolution being put in practice, found the same event which was
expected, and the sequel thereof sufficiently declared; that a greater Navy
well furnished with sufficient men, and good store of Victuals and Munition,
might then, and may yet, put her Majesty in quiet possession of the richest and
best part of the Indies: But it suffices her Highness to try the Forces of
those Countries; to acquaint her Sea men and Soldiers with the way thither; to
give them a taste of the Indian wealth; and to make her power known as well
unto the Inhabitants of those remote Countries, as of other nearer Regions of
the world, who thought too basely of her strength, and carried too good a
conceit of her Adversaries might and puissance; And finally, to fetch from her
mortal enemies own Dominions some Treasure wherewith to withstand the Rancor
and extremity of his malice. Guicciard. lib. 10.
In which Action her Majesty fully and wisely imitated the example of the
Florentines, who fearing that* Pope Julius the second would war upon them for
consenting unto that Counsel which diverse Cardinals, with the consent and
furtherance of the French King and other Princes, had summoned against him; and
thinking it convenient to defray the charges of Wars, moved in defense of
Churchmen, with Church goods; seized upon so much of the Clergies goods as
they thought would suffice for the maintenance of those Wars: Even so her
Highness hearing that the Spaniard had a long time prepared to invade her
Realm, and being well assured, that as soon as he could be well able he would
send the same preparation toward England; held it expedient and necessary to
seek all means possible whereby she might happily be enabled to maintain either
all, or part of the Expenses of those Wars with his Treasure; And having
learned of men of great experience what Forces would suffice to effect her
desire and purpose, thought it superfluous and needless to send thither greater
strength then they (not unadvisedly) required; And albeit neither her Majesty
nor the Lords of her privy Council were ignorant that the Indians were far
stronger then when they were first conquered; And therefore that such a Navy as
was first sent thither could not work the like effect there; yet both her Grace
and they thought it not meet to employ any more of her own, or of her Merchants
Ships in that service, lest that the Spanish Fleet (which was expected in
England many years before it came) coming upon her Realm in the absence of Sir
Francis Drake, and his Consorts, should not have found the same sufficiently
provided to make such resistance as was needful: For as it shows courage in a
Prince to give the first onset upon his enemies within his own Dominions;
Machiavel in his discourse upon Tit. Livius.
so it argues want of discretion and wisdom to assault his adversaries with
such force and power, as if the enemy in absence thereof invade his Realm,
there should not be found at home, an Army sufficient to withstand his Invasion.

Now as touching her Majesty's Attempt made against Portugal and Spain; The
manner thereof is not unknown unto the world, the cause is notorious, and the
success is not hidden nor secret: For Mr Anthony Wingfields, and Mr Dr Doylies
Books; the one in English, the other in Latin, set down the order, motive, and
the event of that Attempt, so truly, so fully, and so plainly, as I shall not
need to say any thing thereof, especially having already touched his Right at
large, for whose cause, and at whose instance the Voyage was undertaken: But
because the said Books make but a plain and true Narration of the Journey, and
of the cause and success thereof, leaving the Justification of the same cause
unhandled, and you desire to see the same confirmed and strengthened by some
examples declaring the equity thereof: I will in this Point somewhat satisfy
your desire and pleasure.

Presupposing therefore Don Antonion his Title to the Kingdom of Portugal to be
just and right (as his own Apology can, and does testify) I think it will not
be denied, but that what help soever was, or shall be hereafter yielded unto
him for the recovery thereof, was, and will be both warrantable by Law, and
justifiable by many and infinite Histories.

The Law be it of Nature or of Nations, warranteth any man whatsoever, Vim vi
repellere, to repel force by force, which is not tied to this bare sense and
meaning only; That it shall be lawful for him to defend himself only against
him that assaulteth his person, or endangereth his life, but it reaches
further, and gives him leave to use any moderate violence, yea sometimes to
kill him (if he cannot otherwise retain his own) that goes about by main force
to put him out of possession of his lands and inheritance, or to take away his
goods from him. The same proceeds further with us in England, and in France,
and provideth that if a man be assaulted, and others stand by, and help him
not, they are held for partakers of the violence that is offered unto him; and
if a man be robbed upon the highway, and Hue and Cry be not made presently
after the Thieves, the Town, Village, or Hamlet, which presently pursues not
the Malefactor, shall answer whatsoever is taken from the party that is robbed.

The reasons of this Law are many. First it is expedient for the Commonwealth
to conserve the lives and goods of the Subjects thereof; then there should
neither be Meum nor Tuum, if this Law did not take place. Next, the first and
especial cause of assembling Societies together, and of making and fortifying
Villages, Towns, and Cities, was a desire and care which men had to live
together in safety, as well of their Goods, as of their persons. Lastly, nature
detesteth unlawful violence, desires the conservation of her Creatures,
tendreth their welfare, and hates the Procurers of her harm and detriment, and
therefore provided Princes that should minister Justice unto all men
indifferently, defend the innocent valiantly, maintain their Subjects in peace
continually, and duly inflict condign punishment upon the breakers and
perturbers of peace and tranquillity. Now because Justice loses her name and
majesty unless a proportionable Equity be observed in the administration and
exercise thereof, as private men's security is regarded and tendered in Justice,
so the Law must likewise have the indemnity, safety and commodity of
Superiors, Magistrates, and Princes in recommendation, otherwise they should be
in far worse case then their own Subjects are: For, the wrongs that are done
unto them, are righted by their Magistrates; and therefore it stands with
good reason, that some provision be made, and some care had for the reformation
of such injuries as are offered to the Kings and Princes. If a Subject be
thrust out of possession of his proper Inheritance, the Law provideth that he
shall be presently restored thereunto. And if a king be wrongfully driven out
of his kingdom, shall not he be allowed to seek a restitution thereof? He
shall, but how? Forsooth at his hands who has deprived him; but what if the
Usurper will not yield to his petition? he is then to implore the help of other
Princes, and they on his behalf are to pray and admonish the Usurper to make
restitution of all that he detaineth wrongfully; whereunto i^ he shall not
hearken after due admonition given unto him, they may ( junctis viribus) invade
his Realm, and by main force enforce him to restore whatsoever he withholds
unjustly. For this charge lay upon the Emperors, as long as they were of
sufficient force and authority to command and control the Kings of this world:
But now that the Imperial Majesty is somewhat abated, and Kings have freed and
emancipated themselves from the Emperors power and jurisdiction it remains
as part of the charge of Kings, to see that no violence be offered unto their
Colleagues, and especially unto their Confederates. Therefore it is usual
amongst Princes to enter into Alliance together, with express conditions to
take the Enemies each one of the other for their own Enemies, and not only to
defend their own Estates against all men whatsoever, but also to offend him,
whatsoever he be that shall attempt any thing to their prejudice; and there is
nothing more common then to see Princes oppressed to fly for aid unto the
Oppressors Adversaries, and to receive help and succor from them.

They therefore are highly commended which receive and harbor a distressed
Prince, That it is lawful for a prince to receive and succor another Prince
flying unto them for refuge and relief.
and they contrariwise worthy of perpetual shame and infamy, which either
refuse to receive such an one, or after his receipt offer him any manner of
wrong or violence; because as to add affliction unto the afflicted is a point
of great Inhumanity; so to comfort the comfortless is a work of singular
Justice and Lenity. The commendation due to this kind of courtesy has wrought
so strange effects in the hearts of many Princes, that some have received their
professed Enemies, others have fallen out with their dearest friends, rather
then they would restore a poor Prince being fled unto them for succor, when he
was demanded at their hands; some have refused great rewards which have been
offered them for the restitution of such as lived in exile and banishment
within their Territories, others have entertained them with large yearly
Pensions, and presently aided them for the recovery of their Kingdoms; some
have given them whole Cities to dwell in, others have been so forward in
releiving such as implored their help, that they have lost their own Kingdoms
for defending them.

It is written in the Histories of France, that Charles the seventh having upon
just occasion of offense and displeasure conceived against the Dolphin of
France(who was his eldest son) banished him out of his Realm, Du Haillan lib.
24.
and commanded that none of his Subjects or Friends should receive him: The
Duke of Burgundy (who was then Vassal unto the French King, and mortal Enemy
unto the Dolphin) did not only receive him, but also gave him leave to choose
what Castle, Hold, or City of his soever he would to dwell in: and sent
presently Ambassadors to his Father to make his excuse for receiving him.

Piero Mexias, in his Book of the lives of the Roman Emperors, reports, That
the Emperor Henry the third, Vida de H. 3
when as Peter King of Hungary was driven out of his Kingdom by his own
Subjects, who for his evil Government had rebelled against him, did not only
harbor and entertain him, but also restored him unto his Kingdom, although the
same Peter not long before had favored the Duke of Bohemia, who rebelled
against the said Emperor.

The King of Cochin, being required by the King of Calicut not to harbor his
enemies which were fled unto him for succor; Answered, that he could not expel
them out of his Cities, having received them upon his word; with which Answer
the King of Calicut being highly displeased, wrote him a Letter full of great
threats, whereat the King of Cochin laughed, and willed the Messenger to tell
him, that he would not do that for fear of all his threats, which he vouchsafed
not to do at his request; whereupon the King of Calicut suddenly prepared a
great Army invaded the King of Cochins Realm, drove him out of his Kingdom, and
enforced him to fly unto a certain Island of his own which was then in the
hands of certain Portugals, by whom he not long after was again restored unto
his Kingdom.

Our Chronicles report, That both Edward the fourth, and Richard the third,
Holinished. Du Hailan Polid. Virg.
offered great Rewards unto the Duke of Brittan to restore unto them Henry,
Earl of Richmond, who lived as a poor banished man within the Dukedom, but no
money could win him to yield unto their desire.

The same Chronicles testify, Holinshed.
that the poor King of Scots received Henry the sixth, flying from the
persecution of Edward the fourth, and entertained him with a yearly Pension,
and aided him for the recovery of his Kingdom.

David distrusting the protection of God, Bible, in 2 Kings. Chap. 12.
slyeth unto Achich, King of Goth, who gives him Siglag to dwell in; And
Ierob^am flying unto Shishack, King of Egypt, was honorably received of him,
and maintained there like a Prince, until Rehoboam was deprived for his
cruelty, and he sent for out of Egypt, and made King of Israel.

Frederick, King of Naples, being oppressed by his Uncle the King of Spain,
used unto the French King, unto whom he made grievous complaints of the
Catholic King, because without any regard of the kindred and consanguinity
that was betwixt them, he had endeavored by all means possible to deprive him
of the Moity of his Kingdom. Lewis the French King received him with great
honor and courtesy, Illescas vid^ de Alexandro. 6.
made him Duke of Anjou, and gave him 30000. Ducates of yearly Revenue. Our
Chronicles and other Histories are full of a number of the like Examples,
confirming the equity, and commending the clemency and gentleness of such
Princes as have yielded competent relief to their neighbors, to their enemies,
to their Allies, and to mere strangers, being enforced to crave their aid and
assistance. But hoping that these will suffice to satisfy and resolve you, I
will forbear to enlarge this discourse with the supersluous and needless
recital of others.

It is commonly said that troubles come in post, and depart by leisure; And who
so seeks unquietness shall easily find it, and therefore considering the
displeasure that is done to the adversary of him that is received into another
Kings Realm and protection, the danger which the Receiver may incure, and the
manifest wrongs which are sometimes done unto the Receiver by the received,
together with their most unkind and unnatural Ingratitude; this kind of
charity, is sometimes termed cruelty; this pity, peril, this favor extreme
folly, and this compassion a passion not agreeable to reason and Princely
policy. Some Princes therefore weighting the perils that may follow the
receiving of such Guests, or the aiding of Princes who were expelled or
banished from their own Dominions, would neither receive them, nor succor
them, unless they were well rewarded for their labor; to the end that such a
reward might recompense the costs and charges which do necessarily depend upon
the harbor and relief which is given unto them.

Alexis, sometimes Emperor of Greece, being deprived of his Empire, could not
obtain any manner of aid from the Venetians, the Marquess of Montferrat, and
the King of France, until he had faithfully promised to pay the Venetians
debts, Biondo lib. 16.
to recompense with so much ready money the harms which the Frenchmen had
sustained by the Emperor Emanuel, Du Haillan lib. 9.
and to bestow the Earldom of Candia upon the forenamed Marquess.

Macrinus, having slain the Emperor Bassianus, enjoyed the Empire; and his Son
Antoninus Heliogabalus lived a long time in exile, until his Mother Messa,
Piero Mexias vide Macrino.
by great gifts and extraordinary liberality, won the Soulders of Macrinus, and
his best Captains and Colonels, to acknowledge him for the true and indubitate
Heir of the Empire; and in regard thereof, and of the duty of the young child
(whom for his Fathers sake they quickly affected) to deprive Macrinus of his
usurped Diadem, and Imperial Authority.

Other Princes perhaps terrified with the perils that accompany and attend upon
the harboring of such distressed Princes, when they have once received them,
either restore them to their enemies, or detain them as lawful Prisoners, or
cause them to be secretly murdered.

So did Alarick, Du Haillan. lib. 1.
King of the Goths, send King Siagrius, who fled unto him for succor, back
again unto Clovis King of France, his mortal enemy.

So did Toleny cause Pompey to be murdered, Jul. Caesar lib 3.
who fled unto him as unto his ancient and faithful friend, from the wrath and
indignation of Julius Caesar.

So did Peter King of Castile murder Rubaeus King of Granado, Terapha de
Regibus Hispan.
for the greedy desire which he had of the infinite Treasure which Rubaeus
brought into Castile with him.

So did Ptolomy imprison Antiochus, Justin. lib. ^7.
who trusting him rather then his Brother Seleucus (whom he had many ways and
times grievously offended) fled unto him from the heavy displeasure and
persecution of King Eumenes.

So briefly did Henry the fifth King of England, Holi^shed. Polid. Virg.
detain James afterward King of Scotland, prisoner many years, who flying from
the unnatural persecution of his Uncle, who had deposed his Father, and usurped
the Crown, was driven by tempest into England.

These Examples varying much from the former; And these Princes observing a
quite contrary course unto that which the before-named Kings observed, makes
this question very doubtful; Whether it be lawful and commendable in Princes to
receive and harbor another Prince who flies unto him for succor: But if
humanity deserves always more commendations then cruelty; if it be true that
the Poet says.

Turpius ejicitur, quam non admittitur Hospes. If Princes were first ordained
and instituted to yield relief to as many as were distressed; If God most
commonly blessed them who yielded such relief, and contrariwise punished those
who exercised no kind of humanity toward them. Briefly, if wiser Princes have
received them then have rejected them, this doubt is easily dissolved, and this
difficulty quickly removed.

Now that humanity which is incident unto men, is to be preferred before
cruelty, which is proper unto bruit beasts, is a thing so apparent to common
sense, that I hold him for senseless that doubts thereof; and what is he who
blames him not for incivility, who having received his friend into his house,
and being very well able to relieve him, excludes him without any occasion of
coffeehouse offered by him: Or who is so ignorant, that knows not there is
nothing more answerable unto the principal cause and motive of the first
institution of Kings, then it is to succor as many as have need of their help:
And our Chronicles do testify, that God plagued the posterity of Henry the
fifth, for his extremity used unto the poor distressed Prince of Scotland; and
the French Histories do declare, that God never prospered Lewis surnamed
Oultremer, King of France, because he had dealt discourteously and unkindly
with the Infant Richard Duke of Normandy, T. Walsing* in his Neustria.
whom he had received into his safe custody and protection: And to be short,
the wisdom of those Princes who have harbored their Neighbors and Allies, Du
Haillan.
are commended beyond all measure by the Writers who mention them; whereas
their folly is reprehended, and their cruelty blamed, who rejected those of
whom I lately made mention, and all histories shall sooner perish, then their
infamy be forgotten. But to reconcile the contrarieties of the precedent
examples, and to clear the difficulty of this question, I think it not amiss to
descend from the general argument to a particular supposition; for so the
controversy will soon be determined: Suppose therefore (for example sake) that
the Kings of France and Spain being in fast League of friendship together,
there arises a variance betwixt the Kings of France and Navarra; from this
variance they fall to wars, of these wars follow the overthrow of the
Navarrois; after that overthrow he flies unto the King of Spain for refuge:
May the Spanish King in this case receive and harbor him? To this demand it is
not possible to make a good and an absolute answer, unless the cause of the
Wars betwixt France and Navarra, and the kind of Alliance betwixt France and
Spain, be well and sufficiently known; for, the nature and quality of the one
and the other, may make the receipt and entertainment of the Navarrois lawful
or unlawful: If the French King had just occasion to war against the Navarrois,
because he was wronged by him, or by some of his; and the League betwixt Spain
and France bound the Kings of both places not to receive one another enemies,
but that the one should hold him for his foe, which was, or is adversary to the
other. Then doubtless except the King of France of his part had first committed
some Act contrary and repugnant unto the conditions of the Alliance, whereby
the same was broken and violated, the Spaniard could not lawfully receive the
Navarrois: But contrariwise, if the aforenamed Wars were unjust, and the League
not so straight as Alliance, which are both offensive and defensive are, then
might the Spaniard without breach of his duty harbor the Navarrois, especially
if the French King had before the receipt violated the conditions of the
League; for as Bonds and Obligations betwixt private men tie not the Obligee to
other things then are mentioned in the conditions; so Leagues betwixt Princes,
do not prohibit them to do any thing that is not expressly or by implication
forbidden by the Articles of those Leagues.

Besides (as the world is now adays) Leagues are of no longer continuance then
there is some profit or commodity arising or proceeding from them, That leagues
are no longer inviolable then until there is some advantage given to break them.
and as soon as the breach of them may be certainly and assuredly profitable
and advantageous unto the breaker, they are not so religiously observed as they
have been in times past, but some color or other is presently pretended to
justify their unlawful violation. You have heard what a strait League was
concluded betwixt the French King and Ferdinando King of Spain touching the
Kingdom of Naples, and also what occasion was taken to break the same, as soon
as Gonsalvo (surnamed the great Captain) had the French General at an
advantage. But I think I have not as yet acquainted you with the color and
pretense which was used to excuse the breach thereof; the which, because it now
comes fitly to the purpose, I purpose to declare unto you.

Ferdinando and Isabella King and Queen of Spain, being accused by the French
King, that they had unlawfully broken the League of Friendship which was
straightly concluded betwixt Spain and France against all enemies whatsoever,
Guicciard. lib. 5. ^. 2.
that should attempt any thing against the Kingdom of Naples, being equally
divided (as you have heard) betwixt the two Crowns, alleged for their excuse,
that amongst other Articles of their League and Agreement this clause was
inserted: That they should not be bound to any thing that might be prejudicial
unto the Sea of Rome; and that therefore the Pope having required them, as
Sovereign Lord of that Kingdom, to succor the distressed Kingdom of Naples,
they could do no less, but yielded unto his request, and with this Cautele,
contrary to their former promise made unto the French King, the said King and
Queen entered into confederacy and league against France, with the Pope, with
the Venetians, and with the Duke of Milan, and the Duke of Ferara would not
openly enter into this League, but cunningly, and with an Italian devise and
subtilty, he suffered his Son to serve the Duke of Milan as his Lieutenant
General with 150 men at Arms. A few more Examples like unto this will give
some better light unto the obscurity and doubtfulness of this question, and
therefore I will afford you some such examples.

Edward the third King of England espying a time of great advantage to invade
Scotland, because he might be the less blamed if he should take the same
occasion, Polid. Virg. lib. 19.
publicly protested, that he was not in League with the Scot, because the
League betwixt them was fully agreed and concluded upon in his minority, and
while he being under Age, had not the capacity to perceive the disadvantage and
great harm that grew unto him by the same League. The Scots and Picts being in
League with the ancient Britanes, and spying a convenient time to molest them,
Hect. Boet. lib. 7.
whilst Maximinianus the Emperor was absent, invaded the Realm, and pretended
that they were not bound to the League concluded betwixt them and Maximinianus
if he were once out of the Kingdom. The same people notwithstanding their
League, invaded the Brittanes another time, saying that the League was at an
end by the death of Placitus the Roman Lieutenant, who had concluded the same
League.

The Brittans in the time of King Arthur, Idem lib. 9.
entered into League with Lothus King of the Picts, and bound themselves to
receive Aludred a Pict, for heir and successor unto King Arthur, but when
Arthur was dead, (contrary to the Convenants of this League) they made
Constantius, and not Aludred their King, and being accused of the said Picts,
for breach of the said League, Idem.
they answered, that the League betwixt Lothus and Arthur was fastened unto
this condition, that as soon as the one or the other dyed, the Subjects of
neither of them should be tied any longer thereunto, adding further, that it
stood not with policy to admit a Stranger to bear rule and government over
them. The examples are infinite that might be alleged to this purpose, but
these few may suffice to show the proneness and ready good will of Princes to
falsify their Faith, and to color the breach thereof with some reasonable
show and pretense, when they found it not commodious or convenient for them to
hold every Covenant and Article of their Agreements: Now having seen by this
that has been said already, that Leagues are lightly broken, it rests for
the better strengthening of my purpose, that I declare unto you by such
examples as shall presently come unto my memory, what occasions one Allie has
taken to be offended with another, and how upon such occasions offered, of
great friends they have become mortal enemies. For hereby you shall see (that
since Princes are most commonly led and ruled by examples, insomuch that they
hold all things to be well done, which (not being apparently unjust or
dishonest) are done by example) that our Queen notwithstanding the ancient
continuance of the League that has been between the Crown of England, and the
house of Burgundy, of which the King of Spain pretends himself to be lawful
Heir, Princes for lawful occasions may, and have bin offended with their
confederates and leave them.
may most lawfully fall from the same, and by many and infinite Presidents
justify the receipt of the King of Portugal, and the aid given unto him. I
find many causes in such Histories as I have read, which have moved princes who
were conjoined together in a very straight League of Amity and Friendship, to
fall at variance, and either to war one upon another, or to associate
themselves each one with the Foes and Adversaries of the other.

Julius Caesar although the Romans were in League with the people which were
anciently called Lingones, yet he held them, yea and used them as Enemies,
because they aided the Helvetians (which are now called Swizzers) with corn and
other provision. Other Princes have taken occasion of offense against their
Allies and Confederates, because they have fallen to Agreement with their
common Enemies and Adversaries without their consent of privity.

So was Pope Sextus the fourth highly displeased with Ferdinando King of
Naples, Illeseas vida de Sexto 4.
because he not making him privy thereunto, had agreed all matters of variance
and controversy betwixt himself, and Laurence de medicis, and the City of
Florence.

So did Lewis the twelfth of France justly complain of Pope Julius the second,
Idem vida de Julio* 2.
because at what time France stood in most need of him, he compounded the
differences betwixt the Church and their common Enemies; and for this injury
offered unto him, published bills and books of grievous complaints against him,
saying that he was worthy to be deprived of his Popedom.

Illescas in the life of Pope Leo the tenth, Idem vida de Leon. 10
reports, That the Venetians being in League with the King of Spain against
the French King, departed from their Alliance with the Spaniard, and allied
themselves with the French King, for no other occasion but because Prospero
Colona, one of the Captains of the Spanish Army, did not presently give unto
them Bressia, which he had taken from the French King, and should (as it
seemed) have been restored unto the Venetians as soon as it was taken.
Sometimes it falls out that many occasions meet at one time to move a Prince
to relinquish and leave the side and party of his confederate: Idem ibid.
Paulus Jovius. l. 26.
Many causes enforced Pope Leo the tenth to leave the French King, and to join
with Charles the fifth. First his unsatiable desire to recover Parma and
Placentia. The pity he took of Italy, to see what misery it endured under the
French. Thirdly, The good will he had to gratify the Emperor for the great
love which he showed at the Diet holden at Worms, unto the Sea of Rome.
Fourthly, his indignation and displeasure conceived against Monsieur Lotreth,
Governor of Milan, because he did not only molest and trouble the poor
Millanois, with a thousand vexations and grievances, but also gave all the
Benefices, Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Livings, within the Dukedom of
Milan, without the Popes leave and license; And further, because he had had
given commandment that no man should appear upon any Citation sent from Rome,
nor should go thither to follow any Suit or Process begun or moved there. And
lastly the remembrance of those injuries which were done by the King of France
unto his Predecessors, and especially unto Peter and Laurence de Medicis, his
Father and his Brother.

Here you see the Pope (whom the rest of Italy most commonly follows) partly
moved with a just hatred against the Frenchmen; and partly fearing their
overgrowing power in Italy; to prevent the hateful increase of their greatness,
leaves them, and joyneth himself unto their enemies. Now you shall see another
Pope, Idem vida de Clement. 7.
named Clement the seventh, and with him also the Venetians, finding that
Charles the fifth (with whom Leo the tenth allied himself against the French
King) yeildeth not, accordingly as he was bound, the investiture of the Dukedom
of Milan, unto Francis Sforza, who promised to give him for the same six
hundred thousand Ducates, and to marry with whomsoever it should please him;
and also to hold the Dukedom at his devotion; And further, conjecturing by the
onset which he gave upon France, and by the great Power and Authority which he
had even then in Italy, that he went about to make himself Lord of the most
part of the world; And seeing that Francis the first, King of France, had
lately won Milan from the said Emperor, they entered into League with the
French King against Charles the fifth, as secretly as they might possible: You
have heard before how Leo the tenth, taking the kindness showed unto him by the
Emperor, at the Diet of Worms very kindly, was moved thereby to leave the
French party, and to become one of the Emperors Faction.

Now you shall hear how Pope Paulus the third, Idem de Paulo. 3.
having the Cardinal Farnesius for his Ambassador with the said Emperor, and
finding that his Majesty had proclaimed a Diet to be held at Worms, touching
the deciding of certain matters and controversies of Religion, took it in so
evil a part: that the Emperor would intermeddle with the hearing of spiritual
causes, the cognizance whereof belonged unto the Pope; that he commanded the
said Cardinal to depart from the Emperors Court without taking leave of his
Majesty, and to leave the Cardinal Marcello Corvino in his place; which was an
indignity never offered unto any Prince, unto whom either the Ambassador or
his Majesty bear any love or affection. This evil conceit of the said Paulus
Tertius toward the same Emperor was increased by three special Causes.

The first because the Emperor to strengthen himself against the above named
French King, had lately entered into League and Alliance with Henry the eighth,
King of England, who was then fallen from that obedience which the Sea of Rome
looked for at his hands.

The second because Caesar had so quickly forgotten the wrong done unto his
Aunt, lately divorced from the same King.

The third because the Emperor would neither sell unto him the Dukedom of
Milan, nor make his Son Pier Lewis, Duke of Parma and Placentia.

I might proceed in the recital of many other Examples like unto these, but
from these you may sufficiently gather, that the wisest, both Popes, Emperors,
and Kings, that ever lived of late years, have made it a matter of small or no
conscience to break their Leagues for very small occasions, especially if they
found that any King or Emperor, by reason of their League, presuming to find
no resistance able to withstand his intent and purpose, went about to incroach
upon other Princes, and to make himself Lord of the world: You may also
perceive by the mutability and inconstancy of the Princes of Italy, and of
their falling from France to Spain, and again from Spain to France; how greatly
they fear the greatness of the one or the other in Italy, how ready they have
been to supplant him that waxes great amongst them; and how careless,
negligent and secure they are now, since they notwithstanding (not as their
predecessors always did before them) the aspiring Ambition of the Spaniard.
Moreover these Examples may teach you what opinion was conceived of Charles the
fifth; what jealousy and suspicion other Princes had of him, and what an high
and aspiring mind he carried; The which having left as an Inheritance to his
Son, with a number of precepts forged in so dangerous and ambitious a conceit;
no marvel though he do somewhat imitate his Father. But great marvel it is why
the Princes of our Age do not foresee and fear in him the same mind, the same
desire, the same ambition, and the same purposes which were in his Father. But
the more careless other Princes are herein, the more commendations our Gracious
Sovereign deserves, who for better then these thirty five years has (as I
have said often, and cannot say too often) mightily crossed his endeavors
without the help of any other that ever would vouchsafe to join with her
Majesty in so honorable an Action. Neither may it be imputed to her Highness
as a fault, that she has forgotten the ancient league which was betwixt the
house of Burgundy and her Predecessors, but rather, as he amongst private men,
is highly commended, who forsakes his dearest friends in their unjust causes,
and when they go about to oppress and overthrow their Neighbors, so her
gracious Majesty is worthy of everlasting praise and fame, because it has
pleased her Highness to prefer the justice and equity of good causes, before
the iniquity of any League or confederacy, Besides, since that the League
(that was betwixt England and Burgundy) was (as it may be gathered by the
Chronicles of both Nations) rather with the people subject unto the Princes of
Burgundy, then with the Princes themselves, her Majesty continuing in Amity
with the States and People of the United Provinces, and being ready to do the
like (if the like occasion were offered) with the other of the seventeen
Provinces, does not any thing in the prejudice of the Antiquity of that
League, but as her Predecessors have done before her, (as namely Edward the
third, Holinshed. Pol: Virg. Du Haillan.
and Richard the second) her Majesty has thought it meet and convenient to
stand with the poor and afflicted people against the unkind and unnatural
cruelty and oppression of their Sovereign. The which action being most
commendable, and such as might be approved by infinite Examples; they do her
Highness great wrong, who, not considering the indignities, wrongs, and
injuries done unto her by the late house of Spain, and not remembering the
first occasion of displeasure between the Crowns of England and Spain, to have
risen from Spain, blame her Majesty as the first breaker of that ancient
League. These men, besides many other things which are already refuted, or
remain to be fully answered hereafter in their several and fit places, more
maliciously then wisely object unto her Majesty, that about the year 1569. her
Ships intercepted 59 chests full of Ryals of Spain, amounting unto the sum and
value of eight hundred thousand Ducats, Dinothus de bello Belgico.
which were sent unto the Duke of Alva out of Spain to pay his soldiers
withal, the which wrong gave (as they affirm) the first or greatest occasion of
breach of amity and friendship betwixt Spain and England: For by the
intercepting of this money the Soldiers were disappointed of their pay, and
the Kings credit and authority was greatly impaired and weakened in the Low
Countries. But those men neither consider that Spain had long before this time
offered great wrong unto England, nor remember that when the Spaniard
complained unto her Majesty hereof, that it was wisely and sufficiently
answered; That her Majesty understanding that the said money was sent to pay
certain debts of the Spanish Kings, which he owed unto diverse Merchants of
Genova, who being well able to spare the same, and her Highness having urgent
occasion to use so much, thought she might be so bold (as the Spaniard had
been) to borrow the said money for a small time, paying them (as he did) some
yearly consideration for it: Which Answer might well have contented the King of
Spain, since the said Merchants at no time had any cause why they should not
credit her Highness as well as him: Nor did they weigh the violent and
extraordinary dealing of the Duke of Alva; who as soon as he heard the news of
the intercepting of the said money, commanded all our English Merchants that
were then in Antwerp, or elsewhere in Brabant and Flanders, to be detained as
prisoners, seized upon their goods and Merchandises, and willed that the
English house should be kept by a Guard of High-Dutchmen, and presently wrote
unto the King his Master to detain all our Merchants in Spain; and further,
knowing that there were diverse English Ships in Zeland, laden with Cloth and
other Merchandise of great worth and value, he caused them likewise to be
stayed, and neither they, nor our Merchants in Brabant, Flanders, Zeland or
Spain, were dismissed before the king of Spain was fully satisfied, which might
easily be done; the very Cloth it self which was transported out of England
into those Countries, being almost worth the sum that was pretended (God
knows how truly) to be taken away from the Sp^niard: For although we should
grant that this money was wrongfully taken and detained by her Majesty; yet the
order which the Duke of Alva took for the recovery thereof, was not to be
justified: He ought first to have acquainted his Master with the taking
thereof; Then an Ambassador should have been sent from him into England to
demand restitution thereof: And lastly, if her Grace had denied the restoring
of the same, or not sufficiently satisfied the taking of it, the course which
was taken had not been amiss: But here the Cart went before the Horse, and
judgment was given before the Cause was heard. Now because our Merchants lived
quietly in the Low Countries, as well before as after the taking of this money,
because they enjoyed their Privileges as largely as ever they did; because we
had daily Traffic with Spain, and the Kings Ambassadors remained then and
many years after in England; (All which are Arguments and probable Conjectures,
that there was peace betwixt us and Spain) the intercepting of this money will
still seem unlawful, unless it be showed that the Spaniard has given her
Majesty some just occasion of coffeehouse before the time of taking thereof.
Truly it cannot be denied that our Merchants had Traffic (as it is said) in
Spain, and elsewhere under the Spanish Dominions; but not for any love to our
Prince or Nation, but in regard of the great benefit that they brought unto the
King and to his Countries, which could not well stand or at the least wise (as
late experience has showed) flourished as they did without them: Witness the
misery of Antwerp at this present; the poverty of Burges, and the calamity of
many other Towns, both in Brabant, and in Flanders, which as long as they were
haunted and frequented by Englishmen, yielded to few Towns and Cities of
Christendom for wealth and prosperity. Witness again Middleboroug, Vlushing,
Amsterdam and other Towns in Holland and Zeland, which before the departure of
our Englishmen from those Towns which are now under the King of Spain, and
before their Traffic in Holland and Zeland, had not the tenth part of the
wealth or resort of Merchants thither, which they have at this present; in so
much that many Towns in these two Provinces are of late years made larger, yea
twice as big as they were wont to be. Witness lastly, the great wealth, power
and strength which the States of the United Provinces are grown unto since they
have cast off the yoke of Spanish Tyrannical Government, entered into strait
League with our most gracious Queens Majesty, and has had Traffic with her
loving Subjects; for which the small aid which they have had from us (small
indeed in comparison of their great charges) and with the yearly Revenues which
they gather by the resort of Merchants thither; it is seen of late that they
are become so mighty, as that for provision of Wars, for strength by Sea, for
Munition, for all kind of furniture for Wars, both by Sea and Land, and
especially by Sea, they may almost compare with the mightiest Prince in the
world. Have they not of late years boarded the Spaniard? did they not when he
sent his Invincible Army into England, stand us in great stead? Have they not
won many Towns which were lost and betrayed in the time of the late Earl of
Leicesters being there, when they had far greater help and countenance by us
then they have had of late? Briefly, have they not, and do they not carry
themselves so of late years, that it may not only grieve the Spaniard, but also
all the Princes of Christendom, that he has given them so just and good
occasion to know and to use their own strength. For, if the chiefest Towns of
France, which are grown to such an humor and liking of encantonizing
themselves, as it has been thought meet to publish many reasons in print to
show the great inconveniences and difficulties which they should incur and
find in so doing; if I say, these Towns should enter into consideration of the
wealth and prosperity of the said States and their Subjects, and after due
examination of their happiness, follow their examples; and so in time cast off
the yoke, servitude, and obedience, which time out of mind they have owed, and
most dutifully showed unto their Kings; would it not be a very ill president, a
dangerous imitation, and a most pernicious example? Should not other Princes
have just cause to suspect and fear the like change and alteration in their
kingdoms? And were it not greatly to be doubted and feared, that other
Subjects would be as ready, as forward, as desirous as they of liberty, of
alteration, and of a new kind of Government? Nay, was there not a time, when
almost at one time all the Subjects of Europe, not seeing so much as they may
now see, jumped so well in one desire to free themselves from their subjection
unto Kings and Princes, as that all Kings and Princes were enforced to join
together in strength and in good will to suppress them? The danger therefore of
this inconvenience only, being well and wisely considered, all the Princes of
Europe have great occasion to be offended with the Spaniard, who by his unjust
severity has in some manner endangered all their States and royal
Principalities. But hereof more conveniently hereafter in another place.

Now again to my purpose. The Subjects of the United Provinces travel daily
into Spain, they carry thither and fetch thence many commodities, they only
abstain from carrying and bringing of things necessary and profitable for the
maintenance of Wars. May any man, considering the premises, and seeing how they
and the Spaniards fight daily one against another at home, and within their own
Countries, say truly that there is no War betwixt them? No verily, it is not
the intercourse of Merchants, nor the residence of Leaguers and Ambassadors
that always proves peace betwixt Princes: The one is permitted and
entertained for commodities sake, and for the benefit of the Subjects on both
parts, yea, for the better maintenance of the Wars: And the other is used and
practiced for his great advantage, whose Ambassador can carry himself most
wisely and most cunningly. for Ambassadors are (as Phil. de Comines said very
well) but honorable Espies, and therefore it is usual to let them remain and
reside in Princes Courts, not only after the rupture and breach of peace, but
also sometimes when they are at mortal Wars, that they may be Mediators of
peace. Send therefore says de Comines, Ambassadors unto thine Enemies, even
when thou art at most deadly feud with them: For, though thy charges in sending
be great, and thy Adversaries be wary and circumspect in foreseeing they shall
do nothing to their prejudice; yet if those whom thou sendest be wise, they
cannot choose but learn something that may be very beneficial unto them, and
countervail their expenses, The reading of Histories has taught me, that
Ambassadors are sent from one Prince to another even in the hottest times of
their Wars, sometimes to demand a convenient place of parley.

So Caesar sent unto his enemy Ariovistus to require him to appoint some Czsars
Commen^
convenient place where they might meet and confer of matters concerning the
profit of himself, (...)
and of Ariovistus; sometimes to require and offer conditions of peace. So
Divito was sent Ambassador unto Caesar to desire peace at his hands: sometimes
to spy and sound the affections of Subjects. So Hannibal when he was coming
into Italy, sent certain Ambassadors unto the French King, being then subject
unto the Romans, to enquire of their affections, and to see how they might be
disposed and persuaded o suffer him to pass the Alps quietly, and to behold
where he might pass them with least danger. But I shall have occasion to handle
this matter more largely hereafter. And therefore from it again to my purpose.

The taking of the forementioned money is the matter that is most urged, That
the intercepting of the Spaniards money sent many years ago into Flanders gave
him no just cause of quarrel against England.
and therefore must be more sufficiently answered. This is the sore that
gauleth, the wound that grieveth, the corro^ive that grows. To this therefore
I will add another Plaster. It shall not suffice that the money intercepted
was taken and esteemed not to be the King of Spains, but to belong unto certain
Merchants of Genoa; that Allegation shall not go for sufficient and lawful
payment; but it shall be added, yea and proved (for an Ambassador was sent by
her Majesty into Spain of purpose) that her Highness complained unto the King
of Spain of the great wrong that was done by the Duke of Alva unto her Majesty
and unto her Subjects upon an unjust occasion of displeasure taken against her
Grace and them for that money; which if the King (although it was certain it
appertained unto those Merchants) would needs have it, it was offered unto him
by the said Ambassador, that it should be restored, so that her Highness
Subjects might enjoy their ancient Liberties and Privileges within the Spanish
Dominions, and also a restitution might be made by the Duke of Alva for all
that was wrongfully detained from them: And the same Ambassador added further,
that it was never her Majesty's mind to offend the Catholic king, nor to
provoke him to wrath and anger, whose Friendship the knew might be a great help
and honor unto her. What might her Majesty have said more lovingly? or what
better satisfaction could the king of Spain demand? Was he displeased because
her Majesty gave no better audience unto the Duke of Alva his Secretary, who
was sent to admonish her Majesty not to meddle with any matter belonging to his
Master? Why, his cross and rash dealing deserved no favor at her hands, and
made his Masters Subjects fare far worse then otherwise they should have done
in England. For her Highness hearing that the Duke had made stay of her
Merchants, and of their Goods, to be even with him, commanded that all the
Merchants strangers that then lived in England, and were Subjects to the King
of Spain, should likewise be arrested, and their Goods attached; and strait
Commandment was given unto our Merchants, that they should forbear to traffic
into any place subject unto the Spanish Dominion, until the Kings pleasure was
fully known what should become of our Merchants. Here you see that the
unordinary and unkind proceeding of the Duke of Alva, was occasion of greater
unkindness then should have proceeded of so small a matter: For, if he had
forborne to arrest our Merchants, and to attach their Goods, until his Masters
pleasure had been known, his Kings Ambassadors had had better audience, and
his Subjects had been free from inconveniences and harms, as they suffered by
his default. For after he had rashly and unadvisedly laid hands upon our
Merchants and their Merchandises, her Grace could do no less then she did,
especially since the Laws of her Realm have provided, that her Subjects being
restrained, in the like manner shall have recourse unto her Highness, as unto
her chief Justice, and there demand, that the Subjects of a foreign Prince who
has offered wrong or violence unto them and their Goods, be presently attached
in England, until our Merchants and their Goods be released and set at liberty
by that Prince: So the blame in this case must lie upon the Duke of Alva, who
when this occasion of rupture and variance was growing betwixt our Queen and
his King, should have wisely dissembled the same, and quickly have extinguished
the flames of the displeasure and coffeehouse that was likely to burn
betwixt them.

For a Servant and Counselor may offend as well in being too forward, as in
being too ^low in his Masters business, as I shall have occasion to show more
at large hereafter; the which when I shall handle, will give light unto this
matter, and fully and thoroughly clear the same. Now to the proof that the King
of Spain did before the intercepting of this money, give her Majesty just
occasion to ^eize upon the same, and to detain it, although it had been much
more then it was, for her own use and benefit. It is since the taking of this
money some four and twenty years ago, and therefore if it may be proved that
long before that time the Spaniard has dealt more like an enemy then a friend
with her Majesty; I think it will follow that she might justly have done him,
even then, and before then, far greater despite then ever she did.

When the late French King suffered the Duke of Alencon, Dinothus de bello
Belgico.
his Brother to take upon him the Title of the Duke of Brabant, and the defense
of those Countries, he sent an Ambassador into Spain to excuse his Brothers
going thither, and to signify unto the Spanish King that all that was there
done was done without his Counsel and Privity; The Spanish King was highly
displeased with this Message, and answered the Ambassador, that he had rather
have the French King a professed enemy, then a dissembling friend; And not
satisfied with the indignity of this disdainful Answer, he sent presently after
him another Ambassador into France, to tell the King thereof; That the
Spaniards were not so foolish and so unwise, as not to see and perceive, that
whatsoever the Duke of Alencon did, was done by permission, counsel, consent,
and furtherance of the King his Brother. Out of this Answer, and this
Embassage, I gather thus much: That it is better for a Prince to have an open
enemy, then a deceitful friend: And to prove the Spaniard to have been always
such a friend unto the State of England, I use these Demon^trations.

First, It is not unknown (as I have said before) all the Treasons and
Conspiracies which have been attempted, intended and practiced against her
Majesty, ever since her first coming to the Crown, have had their beginning or
their comfort, their counsel or their furtherance, their countenance, or their
invention from Spain; Witness (to omit others of lesser moment, and yet of most
dangerous consequence) the Treasons of the late Duke of Norfolk, since whose
death it is better then twenty years, and more then forty since he first began
to be a Traitor. Is it not more then twenty one years ago that Robert Rudolphy,
a Florentine Merchant (who had lived many years in England) departed out of
England, for fear that the Duke being committed to prison, should reveal the
practices and means which he had used by the solicitation of the King of Spain,
and of the Pope, to draw the Duke unto those Treasons which he afterward
intended, and had executed, had he not been happily discovered? did not the
same Redolphy go from hence to Rome? and there communicated with the Pope how
the Duke was apprehended, and thereby their Plot and device broken and
prevented? Was he not sent from Rome into Spain, there to make the same
relation, and to consult with the Spanish king what means might be used for the
liberty of the said Duke, and if that might not be happily wrought and
effected, for some other kind of of annoyance to be done to England? Was it not
publiquly noised, and certainly believed, that the Duke of Alva should have
joined with the said Duke, and have done us more woe then I may boldly speak of,
and my heart can even without extreme grief to relate or remember? Witness
again the most unnatural practices of the late Queen of Scots; unnatural,
because she was a Queen as her Majesty was, because she was her near kinswoman,
and her Vassal beholding unto her Highness for her life, and for the life of
her own only child, which unto good and loving Parents is always more dear then
their own life. Lived not this unthankful, ungracious, and unfortunate Queen,
more then twenty years prisoner in England? and which of all those years lived
her Majesty free from some Treason or other? But hereof in another place.

Now let it suffice that it is apparent to all the world that she had secret
Messengers, secret help and counsel from Spain, as well before as after her
Imprisonment, to animate, encourage, and set her forward in all her mischievous
endeavors and purposes against our gracious Sovereign, and her Realms. Is not
then the Spaniard a deceitful friend unto England? Is he not then, by his own
confession, more to be feared, and more to be disliked then an open enemy? Or
are not we so wise as the Spaniard, to see and perceive such deceitful
proceedings? and seeing them shall it not not be lawful for us to think of him
as he thought of the king of France? and to deal so with Spain, as he dealt and
deals with France? such justice as a Magistrate uses unto others, such must
he expect himself, says the Emperor Justinian: He that seeks daily to
increase his own power, purchases to himself envy and batred; So Said
Sabellicus, The Prince that desires Cities that are far off, cannot but covet
those which are near at hand; So said Leo Aretinus; and it is hard and
difficult to beware of such friends which secretly play the part of enemies; So
said Dionifius Hallicarnesus. If therefore the king of Spain has nourished
civil dissension in France; if he has been so ready to maintain the Rebels
thereof against their King, that rather then the Realm should be without
troubles, he has relieved and succored the very Protestants of France, and
the heads of their Faction against their Sovereign, and other their professed
enemies: And if he has done all this to the end the French king might not be
able to encroach upon him in Italy, Flanders, or any other of his Dominions:
Why may not our Queen, who as a woman is fearful, and timorous, and, as a
Prince ought to be, careful and provident for the safety of her Realm, and of
her Subjects, relieve the States of the United Provinces, being her ancient
friends and Allies, to the end that he Spaniard being busied in those parts,
Dinothus de bello Belgico
may have no time, leisure, or commodity, to work any manner of open or secret
prejudice unto her Realm, and her Subjects? Dinothus a true Historiographer of
the civil Wars in Flanders, reports, That when the King of Spains Ambassador
said unto the late French King, that it was neither seemly, nor convenient for
his Majesty to receive the States who were Rebels unto his Master; The French
king Answered him, that he neither received nor harbored them as Rebels unto
his Master but as men wrongfully oppressed; and that Christian Princes have
always used to grant and give help and succor unto the oppressed: And further
that the States had assured him, that they had oftentimes sent many
supplications unto their King, therein submiting themselves unto his mercy, and
humbly beseeching his Majesty to remit their offenses, and to receive them into
his favor; yea, and when they might have any commodity, they delivered
themselves such supplication unto the Kings own hands, but could never have any
reasonable Answer from him. And that therefore it was lawful for them to appeal
from him that denied them justice; and to seek aid against him, where they
might hope to find the same. If then the king of France, a Prince of contrary
Religion unto the States; a Prince of as near Alliance, and of later Affinity,
unto the Spanish king, then our Queen is; a Prince that in his own Realm could
never endure Protestants, because he thought it very dangerous to suffer two
Religions in one Kingdom, held it the part of a Christian Prince to succor the
oppressed, and to be their Protector, unto whom justice was openly denied: Why
should it be a fault imputed unto our Queen, that she releeveth her oppressed
neighbors, since she does it not in malice toward the Spaniards, but in mercy
toward the afflicted; not so much to offend him, as to defend them, not to
enlarge her Dominions, but to preserve her Realms and Subjects; for how can she
think that the Spaniard desires not her Kingdoms, who shows many and
manifest signs that he affects the Rule and Empire of all the world? Why
should she not envy and hate him who seeks to increase his power, to the end
he may be the better able to annoy her? And how can she be too wary, too
circumspect, too wathful over such a friend (if he will needs be taken as a
friend) who watches and snatcheth, every little and great, secret, and
coulourable occasion, to play her the part of a deadly and a mortal enemy?
Shall she take him for a friend, that seeks to murder her person, to
estrange her Subjects, to destroy her Realms? The first, confirmed by the
Treasons before mentioned: The second proved by the pernicious and detestable
Book published by Dr Allen, wherein he exhorts, teaches, and licenseth her
Subjects to rebel against her, and had for his labor a Cardinalship, procured
by the Spaniard: The last lately verified, and manifested by the hostile
attempt and violence of his invincible Navy, gathered together in seven years
space, compounded of all Nations, and reported to have conquered before it came
to the place where it meant to conquer; and yet by our Might, and the
Almighties assistance, happily and speedily conquered.

It is truly written, or wisely fained, That Hercules (a man exceeding common
men's stature; a man blessed with more then ordinary good fortune; a man of rare
virtues, and of admirable force and strength) went up and down the world
walking with a mighty Club in his hand, and wandering from place to place, only
to subdue and chastise Tyrants; and this true History, or wise Fiction, tends
to no other purpose, is reported for no other cause, but to signify that
oppression is hateful, and oppressors hated; that affliction craveth
compassion, and afflicted persons are worthy of mercy; and that to subvert the
one is laudable, and to succor the other is lawful: Then if (as Cornelius
Tacitus says) other men direct their counsels to things that they think may
and will be profitable unto them; but Princes are and must be of another
condition, because all their actions must tend to the affectation and
purchasing of Fame and Renown; The Prince that succoureth the oppressed, and
seeks to supplant the oppressor, works a deed of Charity, an action of
Piety, a work of commendation; and in working thereof, bends his counsels,
and directs his actions unto the attaining of true honor and everlasting
fame: Then (if as Polibus says) he that has not compassion of other men's
harms, must not hope that any man shall have pity of his miseries; Princes,
because there is quaedam rerum vic^ssitudo, and fortune was never at all times
favorable, although they be in the highest degree of felicity, must not
presume too much on their own good fortune, nor condemn those that are in
miseries, lest that if they chance to fall, no man will vouchsafe to help them
up again: Then if (as Thucidides says) he is not only a Tyrant that enforces
his Subjects to live in bondage and servitude, but he also that may withstand
another man's violence, and do not withstand the same: Princes which see their
neighbors violently oppressed, and as idle lookers on yield them no manner of
relief and succor when they may conveniently help them, and in danger to be
esteemed and reputed Tyrants; Then if (as Zenophon says) it be not lawful to
break faith with him that falcifieth his word and promise; Princes that
withhold not their helping hands from the oppressed, because they have been and
are in League with the Oppressor, who has violated his faith unto them, and
unto others, are not to be condemned of wrong and iniquity; Then if (as
Josephus says) patience and long suffering of an injury makes the wrong-doer
most commonly ashamed of his actions; the Prince that cannot be entreated to
leave off his wrong doing may well be ashamed thereof; Then if (as Bartholomeus
Facius says) women-kind, the weaker and more fearful it is, the readier it is
to believe any credible report, her Majesty is not to be blamed for crediting
the just complaints of the oppressed States, unto which the late King of France
did (as you have heard) give open ear, and would (as it is credibly reported)
have vouchsafed sufficient relief, had he not been let by domestical
dissentions and wars, nourished and maintained of purpose by the Spaniard
because he should not be able to yield them relief and succor.

Then though it belong unto private men to conserve and retain their own, and
unto Princes to contend and strive for other men's Goods (as ambitious minds do
affirm and desire) yet must they remember, that the desire of Rule passes all
other affections; yet must they not forget that some things resembling virtues
are scant commendable, but rather hateful and odious; as too too great and
obstinate severity, and a mind nothing flexible or relenting, at the sight, at
the remembrance of another man's misery: Then though Princes be of power to
begin Wars, and to oppress their Subjects, yet ought they to consider that it
is not always expedient to do all that a man may or can do, that a wise man
must first try all other means, then use the trial of Arms; that as it is
commendable to be valiant against the enemy, so it is praiseworthy to use
clemency and gentleness toward them that are meek and penitent, that they
which offend by force, and not of purpose, by constraint and not of free will,
and use Arms for their liberty, and not o^ malice, deserve pardon, and not
hard dealing, favor and not cruelty, life, and liberty, and not death and
servitude; Then to be short, if every one of these reasons shall not be
available unto the Queen of England, and the oppressed Flemmings, yet let all
avail her and them; so shall she and they be justified, and the Spainiard
condemned; so shall their and her actions be approved, and his doings be
reprehended; so shall no man have just occasion to envy their and her
prosperity, and all Princes good cause to fear and suspect his over-growing
authority; so briefly shall it appear, that the Spaniards unkind dealing
deserves no kindness of her Majesty, and that although she has hitherto
spared him, yet she has no occasion to favor ^im. And now I will make it
appear, that not withstanding his many Kingdoms and great power, it lay in her
power long sithence to have overthrown him. For if it had pleased her Highness
to have sent greater strength in Flanders then she did, and of late years to
have aided the United Provinces with huger Armies then she ever sent thither,
those Countries which are now partly in h^s possession, and partly freed from
his bondage, had all before this time rejected him for their Lord, and not any
of them ever returned to his Subjection. But the fear which she had of him and
his power at home, the supplies which she sent into France, and the upholding
of her friends in Scotland, together with the repressing of her Rebels in
Ireland, never gave her leave to bend her whole forces against him in the Low
Countries. True, and that is one of the principal reasons why he has by all
means possible labored to sow discord, and to maintain factions in all and
every one of the Countries, thereby disabling them to send out any forces
sufficient to annoy him, and diverting her from using the uttermost of her
power, to his prejudice; and yet, to conclude this point, considering the
weakness of these his Neighbors, by reason of their domestical divisions, and
her Graces whole strength, because her Realm is not divided, it cannot be
denied that she has far better ab^lity then any other Christian Prince to
weaken his power, and to abate his pride; and truly he that shall well look
into his State, such as it is, shall find that it is far different from that
which it is supposed to be: For, although he be Lord and King of many Dominions
and Kingdoms, although the Indies, in some men's opinions, furn^sh him with
abundance of Treasure, yet in truth neither is his power greatly to be feared,
not his wealth far exceeding her Majesty's and other Princes substance.

For first, The Sp^^nia^d is not so strong as men ^^pose him to be.
touching his strength, some of his Countries are not so populous as France and
England; others that have great store of people, have men of such a mould, and
such conditions, that they are unfit and unapt for the Wars; and Spain it self
from whence his best Soldiers come, sends forth so many Garrisons into the
Indies, to Naples, to Milan, to Flanders, and to Burgundy, that he can hardly,
upon an occasion of great and most urgent extremity, bring ten thousand
Spaniards together: And although the benefit of the Camaradoes does greatly
help them, their long and late experience makes them most expert and cunning;
their military discipline contains them in a very good order, and their
extraordinary rewards and stipends makes them both serviceable and very
adventerous; yet neither can so small a number perform any matter o^ great
worth, neither was it ever seen, since the first Wars of the LowCountries until
this day, that being inferior but by a few, nay being equal unto our men in
number, they departed with the honor of the field, neither can it be truly
said, that our men being no choice men, but such as our Country can spare, and
has least need of, having had no long time of experience, nor fighting for the
Liberty of their own Country, or the right of their Prince (which two things
add and put courage even in men scant having any great stomach at all) did
ever refuse to meet the best trained and long experienced Spaniards in the
field, and meeting them in equal places, and in like number, they most commonly
have driven them to the worst, or made their party good enough with them; and
although the Spaniards for these few years (few I term them because they exceed
not the memory of man) have had the name of great Soldiers, yet if we consider
with what people they have encountered, and by what policies they have
prevailed, they have not received the tenth part of that honor and renown
which they seem to challenge of just and due desert; for the people with whom
they have contended in all this time, have been the unexperienced Flemmings,
the careless Germans, the unwarlike Italians, and the fierce and quickly
fainting Frenchmen. The first sort by long practice are grown equal, and
nothing inferior unto them; the second of late have help them to most of their
victories; the third by their own Writers are termed Infamia militiae; and the
fourth was in Julius Caesar's time, and are still, in the beginning of a
conflict more then men, in the end thereof less then women; neither may I so
much derogate from the Italians, or from the Frenchmen, but that I must of
necessity grant, that many of the Captains who have done the Spanish King
greatest service, have been Italians; and the unprofitable Journies which
Charles the fifth made diverse times into France, with full intention and
assured hope to conquer the same; and also the late dishonours received by the
Prince of Parma and other his Lieutenants sent into the same Realm, with a
purpose and resolution to do much more then was effected, do argue that the
Frenchmen yield not greatly unto them in valor or in discipline. Then if he
cannot make an Army of many natural Spaniards, and they when they are
strongest, be it in number or experience, are easily to be matched, and many
times over-matched by men of less experience, practice and exercise then they,
why shall his natural strength be feared, which cannot be great, unless he will
disfurnish his Garrisons, which were to overthrow himself, and to lose his best
and richest Countries? Or why should a Prince fear his mercenary Soldiers, or
hirelings? who fight no longer then they have money, and when they are ready to
go to the Battle, either abandon their Master for want of pay, or fly to the
enemy in hope of reward; or when they are in the conflict, behave themselves
cowardly, faintly, and so indifferently, that if they might be assured of their
lives, they would hardly strike one stroke. This is briefly his power.

Now to his Wealth.

It cannot be denied that his Revenues far exceed the Revenues of any Christian
Prince whatsoever. The Spaniard is not so wealthy as he is taken to be.
It must likewise be granted, that the Indies yield him yearly great store and
abundance of Treasure; And it is supposed that his credit with Merchants is
able at any time to supply his wants, if he should chance to stand in need: But
his States being most of them gotten (as you have heard) by conquest; or
distracted (as you see) by division; they must needs (as all such States do)
put him to so great charges, as the comings in will hardly serve to de^ray his
Expenses.

The Treasure that comes from the Indies, sometimes part of it perishes by
the Sea, part is intercepted by us, and all that is brought home, does not
suffice to maintain his Wars. His credit is not in any measure answerable to
the conceit and opinion that is had of it.

For first, It has been published in French Discourses, Printed many years
since; that he owes more money to the Merchants of Genoa alone, then ever he
shall be able to pay; And I can show, whenever it shall please you to require
the fight thereof, a Letter written better then sixteen years ago unto him by
his Secretary Escovedo, and intercepted by the States, wherein he signifies
unto him, That his credit would not serve, (the which Don John of Austria
affirms by another Letter unto his Catholic Majesty) to take up any more
money upon the Bourse at Antwerp, because the Merchants would first be paid
that which then was owing them, before they would lend any more; And Don John
de Austria, adds in his Letter, That had not Escovedo his credit (by reason
that the Merchants held him for a man of great wealth, and of great care to
maintain his credit) been of greater worth upon the Bourse, then the Kings,
their necessities had not been supplied; and therefore in the end of his
Letter, he beseeches his Majesty to have an especial care of the payment of
those small sums which were then taken up, lest that Escovedo his credit
failing. for want of due payment, they might fail of their purpose when they
should have the like occasion to borrow at another time.

Besides, his Father, by reason of the great Charges which his continual Wars
put him unto, when he dyed, left him greatly in debt; and he himself ever since
his Fathers death, has been at exceeding great charges, either by building
Castles and Citadels, or by making houses of pleasure, and Monastries, or by
maintaining continual Wars, or by keeping many Garrisons, or by buying and
building Ships to withstand our Navy, or by paying part of his Fathers debts,
or by entertaining our Fugitives, or by upholding the Rebels of France: Now as
private men being left in debt by their Parents, and living always at great
charges, cannot not possibly be rich and wealthy: So Princes being not only
charged with their Fathers debts, but also overcharged with ordinary and
extraordinary Expenses, cannot have great store of wealth in their
Treasure-houses; And Alphonsus Duke of Ferrara (as Paulus Iovius reports in
his life) held opinion, Paul Jovius
that the Prince was not worthy the name of a Prince, and was always likely to
be contemned and wronged, who had not in his Treasure great store of ready
money laid up against he should have need thereof.

But, to the end that all which I have said touching this last Point, may carry
the more likelihood of truth and probability, I take it not to be amiss to let
you understand the proportion of some Princes expenses, in their Wars; in their
Buildings, and in other occasions, by which you may conjecture what the Spanish
King has expended of late years voluntarily and necessarily, beyond his usual
and ordinary charges.

The Bishop and Town of Colen, Comines
in their Wars against Charles Duke of Burgundy, spent every Month an hundred
thousand Crowns; as Philip de Comines avoucheth.

The Florentines in their Wars against the King of France, undertaken by the
Commandment of Pope Leo the tenth, spent eight hundred thousand Ducates, in the
taking of the Dukedom of Urbin; In their Wars against Caesar, six hundred
thousand; and in other occasions depending upon the Wars against France, after
the said Pope Leo his death, three hundred thousand Ducates; Guicciard.
And the same Pope spent in the said Wars against the Duke of Urbin, eight
hundred thousand Ducates; as Guiccidine reports. Paul Jovius
Clement the seventh spent in the Wars against Tuscany, for the restoring of
his Family, ten hundred thousands Crowns; as Paul Iovius reports. Paulus
tertius consumed in fifteen years, in needless Wars, above twenty Millions of
gold; Illescas.
as Illescas in his life affirms. The Duke of Alva for the building of the
Castle of Antwerp, exacted of the Citizens thereof, Dinothus
four hundred thousand Florins; as Dinothus testifies. Cosmus de Medicis,
being first a private man, and then Duke of Florence, spent in private and
public buildings, better then forty Millions of Crowns, and ten Millions in
Gifts and Rewards; Paul Jovius
as Paulus Iovius averreth. Edward the Third, King of England, spent in an idle
Journey into France, nine hundred thousand pounds; Tho. Walls.
as Thomas of Walsingham reports. The Frenchmen in the time of Richard the
second, King of England, spent a thousand Marks every day from Easter until
Michlemas, Idem.
in maintaining but thirty seven Galleys, and eight other Ships; as the same
Author affirms. Henry the third spent in a Journey which his Brother Richard
made into Germany, when he was chosen Emperor, above seven hundred thousand
pounds; Math. Paris
as Matthew Paris says in his Chronicles. But to come more near to our purpose:
The King of Spain offered unto Don John Duke of Austria, three hundred thousand
Crowns every Month, to maintain his Wars in the Low Countties, Dinothus.
as Dinothus sets down in his History. The same King above sixteen years
ago, had spent better then fifty Millions of Crowns in his Wars of Flanders; as
Marco Antonio Arrayo M. Ant. Arrayo.
testifies. And the States of the said Countries gave unto the Duke of
Alencon, yearly, four and twenty Tuns of Gold to maintain their Wars both by
Land and Sea, against the King of Spain; David Chyt^aeus.
as David Chaytraeus reports. Now, if mean States in small and short Wars; if
petty Princes in private and public buildings; if the French king in the
maintenance of a few Ships, but for a few Months; if our Kings in idle
Journeys; if the duke of Alva in building one Castle; if the State of the Low
Countries in their Wars; and if the king of Spain himself so many years ago,
spent so much as is before mentioned; What have his Citadels, his Castles, his
Monasteries, his Journeys, his provisions by Sea, his Ships, and his Wars, not
in one place, but in many, not against one Prince, but against diverse, not for
short time, but of long continuance cost him? And as these wonderful Expenses
are Arguments that he had much; so they be witnesses that he now wants: And
as his long and continual Wars in Flanders do show that he is malicious, prone
to revenge, and desireous to recover his own; so they prove that his might, his
puissance, and his power, is not so great as it is taken to be. For, he that
withal his strength cannot master one poor Nation; that in many years cannot
recover his own Patrimony; shall any man take him to be able to bring to pass
all that he attempteth? Shall we deem him sufficient to subdue others
Countries? common sense and reason teaches us, that he which is not able to do
little things, is far unable to bring to pass matters of great weight. Titus
Livius divides men into three sorts; Some are so wise that they counsel
themselves and others; Others be not wise enough to advise themselves, and yet
to conceive and follow such advice as is given them: And the third sort can
neither take nor give good counsel: So some Princes are able to help themselves
and others; Others can defend themselves, but not assist their friends; And
there is a third kind that can neither defend their own States nor others. I
know not in which of these three sorts to place the king of Spain: The last
sort too base for him; the second not high enough; and the first in truth scant
fit for him; for he that cannot help himself, how may we judge him sufficient to
succor others? and yet we see that there are no Wars where he has not
somewhat to do, where he sends not some helps, either of men or money, or of
both; which argues that he loves to be always doing, although he do nothing
worthy his labor, always troublesome, although his troubles avail him little
or nothing; always desirous to embrace many things, although he holds not
safe any thing. But of Princes I had rather deliver unto you other men's
judgments then mine own opinion.

You have heard what the Spanish Kingdoms are, and by that which has been said
you may easily conjecture that his principal force and strength comes from
Spain and Italy, Countries as far different in conditions and qualities, as
they are distant in place and situation: Of the force of these two Countries
you shall therefore hear what a learned Writer, and what I (who am not worthy
to write) has set down for his resolute opinion. I have told you long since,
that Guicciardine terms the Footmen of Italy, Infamia della militia; And now
to the same purpose (because it falls out very fit for my purpose) I may not
forbear to tell you, that the same Author in his ninth Book of the same
History, uses of the Infantry of Italy, these words following; All Princes
that can be served with High Dutchmen, Spaniards or Swizzers, refuse the
service of Italian Footmen, because they are neither acquainted with the
Customs and Orders of other Nations, nor accustomed to continue long in the
field. The same Writer considering that some kingdoms naturally are better able
to defend themselves then offend their enemies; delivers for his opinion,
that the Spanish King is far better able to defend his Kingdom from any
Invasion to be made by the King of France, then to offend or annoy the said
King; By which two judgments I may boldly conjecture, and prove my conjecture
by Nicholaus Machiavelli, (who has written a whole Chapter upon this Argument)
that not only the Spanish King, but also any other Prince whatsoever, being
driven (when he has occasion to offend or invade an enemy) to use foreign
power, and mercenary Soldiers, is not to be esteemed a strong and mighty
Prince: and that such is the state and condition of the king of Spain, is
manifestly proved by the places before alleged out of Guicciardine. For, if
his Italians (the principal forces of an Army always consisting of Footmen) be
not fit for that service; and his Spaniards are better able to maintain his
Realm at home, then to molest his enemies abroad; who can justly esteem him
strong, whose chiefest strength depends wholly upon these two Nations? And now
to leave the Italians, as men in this respect not worthy to be had in any great
reckoning, and to proceed more largely in the discovery and declaration of the
Spanish valor.

True it is that (as I have said before) continual use and daily experience in
Martial affairs, have made them of late years very famous: It is also most
certain and manifest, Munsteri Cosmog.
that they are very patient, and able to endure labor, hunger and thirst;
light of body, sparing in their diet, and therefore satisfied and maintained
with a little; wary and politic, and therefore cunning in using and inventing
new Stratagems; briefly, so desireous of Wars, that unless they have a foreign
enemy, they will easily fall to variance and civil discord at home: But if you
call to remembrance how they come to that fame, which now they have attained;
if you consider that they are (as Titus Livius testifies) of an unquiet and
contentious disposition, and always affecting change and alteration; if you
call to mind that (as Paulus Iovius reports) they have minds evermore
thirsting for Rule and Government; whereunto if they once attain, they bend
their whole force and thoughts unto the purchasing of further and higher
Authority; Lastly, if you weigh and remember, that (as Piero Mexias, a Spanish
Historiographer says) they cannot endure to be governed by a stranger; you
must needs think that the before mentioned virtues may be either obscured or
hindered by these later vices: For let them meet with a Nation not so timorous
as those with whom they had to deal of late; let them follow their natural
disposition, and so fall at variance amongst themselves; let them still cover
and affect Authority, and so when they should jointly help one another against
their enemies, proudly disdain to be ruled by their own leaders, as they have
done of late years: Lastly, let them contemn a stranger, as they did the late
Duke of Parma, or not agree with strangers, as they did in Flanders; what fruit
may be expected of their service? or what profit can proceed of their valor?
It is imputed unto the Germans for a great fault, that when they are ready to
join with their enemies in battle, they oftentimes refuse to strike a stroke
before they have their due and monthly pays; and for this one fault Princes
make no great account of them; and yet the Spaniards, who are subject to this
fault as well as they, are commended for their loyalty and obedience; in so
much that some men write, that they were never discontent for want of their
pay: But if you read either the Indian History, or the Writers of their late
Wars in Flanders, you shall find that they have oftentimes revolted for lack of
their pay; yea they have banded against their Captains, and their best
Soldiers have resisted the commandment of their Generals. This I could prove
by many Examples, but one notable Example shall suffice for those many. At what
time it was agreed betwixt the King of Spain, and the States of the Low
Countries, that all Spaniards shall depart thence; It was thought convenient
and necessary by Don John de Austria, who was the General for the King in
Flanders, to appoint some principal and chief Captains to have the leading and
conducting of them into Italy; Whereupon Don John gave express commandment unto
the Kings Secretary Escovedo, to assemble the Counsel of War in the Town of
Antwerp, and there to consult and deliberate what man was meetest for that
purpose. This Council assembled, made special choice of Don Alonso de Vargas,
who willingly accepted the charge; but Julian Romero, a man of great worth, and
no small experience, openly re^u^ed to be commanded by Don Alonso, alleging
for the only reason of his disobedience, that it would be a great dishonor for
him to go into Italy under such a Leader; because that he being Master of the
Camp, Don Alonso had been his Soldier; and De Vergas as boldly protested, that
since he had been thought worthy by the Counsel to govern, he would not be
governed nor guided by Julian Romero. The Council acquainted Don John with this
contention; he fearing to discontent either Romero or Vergas, and doubting that
if they should be discontented, some great inconvenience might follow thereon;
commanded the Council to choose a third man, which was the County of Mansfield;
Whereat Don Alonso so stormed, that he complained of Don John de Austria, a
Danderas displagad, with Banners displayed, as the same Don John terms it in
his Letters to the king of Spain; yea it seemed that he was so displeased
therewith, and so resolute to signify his grief and coffeehouse unto the
King, that Don John de Austria in his Letter unto the King is fain to entreat
his Majesty that if Don Alons^, moved with the same passion which possessed him
when he chid hand-smooth with him, should so much forget himself as to write,
Alganalibertag, some unbeseeming speech unto his Majesty, Como la ha hecho a
mi, as he has done (^aith he) unto me, it might please his Majesty not only to
dissemble, but also to comfort, favor, and promise him some high reward,
assuring his Majesty, that whatsoever recompense his Grace should bestow upon
him, he would take the same as bestowed upon himself; yea further, beseeching
his Majesty to let Don Alonso understand what he had written in his behalf, and
that his commendations has not a little availed him; to the end (says he)
Salga de la opinion que ya concedido, he may conceive no more so evil an
opinion of me as he has done. Was not this, think you, a point of great
disobedience in a base Soldier, as Don Alonso had been? Was it not a bold part
of a Soldier to rail at his General unto his face? Was it not a fault severely
punishable, to refuse to march under a Leader chosen by consent of an whole
Council at War? Was not that General in an evil case, who was constrained to
flatter so mean a Soldier? Or can that king be thought to have obedient and
loyal Soldiers, who must of necessity be enforced, not only not to punish, but
also to pardon, and not to tolerate alone, but also to recompense a rebellious
and insolent Captain, for fear of some inconvenience that might follow of his
coffeehouse or punishment? But this was not all, And Don Alonso alone showed
not himself discontented; Sancho de Avila, the Colonel Mudragon, the Captain
Monteselega, the Colonel Verdugo, the Castellan Francisco, Hermandes de Avila,
and many other of the most especial Captains of that time, were likewise so
displeased, and uttered their discontentments in such manner, as that Don John
was compelled (as he testifies in the same Letter) to pacify them, not only
by granting them their whole pays out of Wars which they had in Wars, but also
by promising them that they should have the like charges and Offices in the
Dukedom of Milan, as they had in Flanders. Now whereas the wisest, best, and
most serviceable Captains show manifest signs of undutiful carriage, and
intolerable arrogance; may the meaner Soldiers be justly blamed if they fall
into the like offense? Or can that Nation be worthily commended for loyal and
obedient Soldiers, whose chief Officers do so highly forget and neglect their
duty? especially in a matter of such weight and importance as the departure of
the Spaniards out of Flanders was at that time unto the King; but this kind of
disobedience is not usual; and whereas there be good Masters, there most
commonly be likewise good servants; So the Spanish King being better furnished
with notable Captains then any other Prince in Christendom, he must likewise
have sufficient and good Soldiers; And because it has been said, that not the
number and multitude but the goodness and valor of Soldiers makes their
Kings victorious, it must needs follow as a necessary consequent, that the King
of Spain, whose Captains pass the Captains of all other Princes, both in number
and experience, cannot be without good Soldiers, and therefore is strong
enough to encounter with any Adversary whatsoever: To this Argument it is
easily answered; that although the valor of Soldiers is better to be regarded
then the number, yet that Prince who has valiant Soldiers, not being able to
bring into the field a proportionable and equal number unto his enemies,
especially such enemies as rather excel then yield unto his Subjects in valor
and Chivalry may undoubtedly be held and reputed a Prince of no great strength
and pui^sance. If then you remember (as you cannot forget) that the Christian
Adversaries with whom the king of Spain has any great contention; are, the
king of France, and the Queen of England, (the Subjects of either of which
Princes are neither inferior unto the Spaniards in number or in valor) you
cannot choose but perceive and see, that the King is not of might and power
sufficient to contend at once with both these Princes. This was well known unto
his Father, who (as it has been said before) so carried himself in all his
life time, that when he had England for his enemy, France was his friend; and
when he fell at variance with France, he presently procured the friendship and
alliance of England; Besides there is nothing more usual then to make
conjectures of things to come by things that are past, and to measure the
present forces of Princes by their own or their Predecessors strength and power
at other times; for although a Kingdom be at sometimes more populous then at
others; yet because man in reason has a better regard of that which is
commonly and daily seen, then of that which happens very seldom; he cannot
greatly be deceived that measures a new reigning Princes might and power, by
his own and his Predecessors former puissance: But before I enter into the due
consideration hereof, it shall not be amiss to let you understand whence it
comes to pass that the Spaniards are lately become so famous as they are: you
know that in this our corrupt Age, as men are friended, so they are favored,
that they who are highest in Authority, are most commonly as high in praise, as
they are in pre-eminence; that all men covet to win favor with the Mighty;
that no man can so securely, as perhaps boldly, derogate the least jot that may
be, from their credit and reputation, who in common opinion are held praise
worthy. Common same is by Law a certain kind of proof; and our common Proverb
says; That it may be an untruth which two or three report; but that can hardly
be untrue which all or most men affirm to be certain and manifest; yea such is
the force of common same, that whenever it proceeds first from grave and
honest personages, it carries great credit, and he shall hardly be credited
that shall venture to gainsay or control the same. Since therefore diverse
Authors of great Antiquity, of mavelous gravity, of singular learning, and
rare wisdom, have attributed in their speeches, in their conferences, in their
writings, more praises, and far greater commendations unto Spain, then unto any
other Country; many for fear to be reputed unwise, if they should not subscribe
to their opinion; some to follow the new received custom of open and
intolerable flattery; and others for affection (which easily deceives very
wise men) have of late years either thought it a duty, or a degree and step to
preferment, to concur in opinion, both openly and privately, with as many as
have dedicated their Studies, and devoted themselves and their uttermost
endeavors, to the setting forth, maintenance, and augmentation of Spain, and
of the Spanish Kings honor and reputation; Thence it comes to pass, that
diverse learned men in their Writing, striving to yield more praises to Spain
then it deserves; make mention of such commodities to be as yet in Spain,
which many years before our great Grandfathers time were never seen nor found
therein. So does Johannes Vasoeus, Vasoeus.
in his Preface of his History of Spain say, that there was sometimes so great
abundance of gold and silver Mines in one Province of Spain called anciently
Boetica, as that diverse forain Nations, being drawn thither with an unsatiable
desire and covetousness thereof, did not only lade their Ships with Gold and
Silver, but also made Anchors for their Ships of silver. The same Author
adds further, That when the Carthaginians came first into Spain, they found
in many houses great Barrels and Hogsheads made of pure silver; and in some
Stables the Mangers for their Horses of silver: In so much that the
Carthaginians being enriched only with the wealth of Spain, were made able
therewith alone to subdue the Sicilians, Libians, and Romans; for they found
their silver in such great quantity, that one man called Bebelo, gave daily
unto Hannibal, there thousand Crowns: The same Author proceeding in one and
the same manner of commendation, affirms our of Justin, That Spain may
compare for fertility of soil, with France, Africa and Italy, for that these
Countries never help Spain, but Spain oftentimes help them with Corn, and all
other kind of Victuals. The same Author Hyperbolishing still in one manner,
calls Spain the most warlike Nation of the world; the Teacher of Hannibal to
war, the Nurse of Soldiers, and the Province which knew not her self, nor her
strength, before she was overcome; and that she troubled the Romans more then
any other Nation of the whole world. The same Author always continuing one
course, prefers Spain for Antiquity of true Religion, and for faithful
obedience to her Sovereign Kings and Governors, before all other Nations,
attributing the first foundation of their faith and profession of Christ, unto
Paul the Apostle, and James the son of Zebedeus, and extolling their loyalty,
because they have not only been always true unto their own Kings, but also to
foreign Princes and Leaders; As Hannibal, Pompey, Iuba King of Numidia,
Sertorius, a notable Roman Rebel, reposed greater trust and confidence in
Spaniards then in their own Nations: Lastly, the same Author striving to
exceed all others in flattery, equalleth Spain for learned men and women, with
the most learned Nations of Europe. And Sebastianus Foxius in his Book de
Institutione Historiae, with a Spanish brag, speaking by way of a Dialogue,
more arrogantly then wisely of himself; gives such praises unto himself for
eloquence, as T^lly the father and founder of eloquence, would or did ever
challenge; And yet Tullies Verse (O fortunatam natam me Consule Romam, argues
that he was somewhat proud and arrogant. Now to avoid the just reprehension of
hatred or malice, I will forbear to confute their Assertions at large; and
briefly, impugn them, not by mine own, but by other men's Testimonies, who shall
not be inferior but equal to Vasoeus for learning and sidelity: Munster
therefore shall tell you, that Spain now yeildeth no golden or silver Mines,
but that all the Mines it has are of Lead and Tin; which may perhaps in time
turn into Gold and Silver, if we may believe Raymundus Lullius, and other
Alchimists of his opinion, which if it should chance at any time as many
Historiographers as write of England, would tell you that England should not
then go behind Spain for gold and silver. The same Author shall likewise tell
you, how likely it is that Spain should excel Africa, France and Italy, in
fertility of soil, since (as he says) Spain lies barren, waste and desolate
in many places; and late experience shows, that Denmark, Holland and England,
have many times supplied Spains wants of Corn and other Victuals: How warlike a
Nation Spain has been, let not only Terapha, a Spanish Chronocler, and better
witness for Spain then Vasoeus a Flemming; but also reason and daily experience
testify, both which telling us (as you shall hereafter hear) that Spain has
been conquered by more sundry Nations then any other Nation in the world do by
necessary inference conclude, that Spain yeildeth unto all those Nations in
Prowess and Chivalty; And all Historians of former times, and of this present
Age, will undoubtedly control as many as shall presume to affirm, that France
and England troubled not Rome much more then Spain did, before they could be
conquered, for where was Caesar in greater danger then in England? Where was
there a Prince that durst challenge him to a single Combat but in England? And
what hold had he of his Conquest after he had conquered England? No better then
Vasoeus might have of a wet Eel by the tail.

But to proceed to the confutation of the rest; Terapha in some manner agrees
with Vasoeus touching the Antiquity of Religion; for he says, that during the
Reign of Claudius the Emperor, James the Apostle traveled over all Spain, and
not long after Paul came to Narbona: but how many won James to profess the
Gospel, by traveling over all Spain? Forsooth but poor nine Disciples, as
Ter^pha reports; a small number for so great a Travel, or for Vasoeus to
boast and brag of, much less for him to pre^et Spain in this respect before all
other Nations; for I know not why for Antiquity of Religion, England should
yield unto Spain; because the same Josephus which buried the body of Christ,
not alone, as Paul and James came into Spain, but with great company arrived
into England, and not he alone, but diverse of his society, converted not poor
nine, but infinite many, and not to profess Christ Jesus, but to be baptized:
And if a Spaniard may carry equal credit with a Flemming (which a Spaniard will
rather die then not do) our little English Island professed Christ long before
Spain. For Dr. Illescas in his Ponti^ical History reports, that Pope
Elutherius sent Fugacius, Vide de Elutherio.
and Damianus into England to baptize King Lucius and all his Household: And
England was the first Province in all the world, in common opinion of all other
Nations, that received and professed Christian Religion; Functius. lib 1.
and if Spain may brag of their Isidorus Archbishop of Sivil, Nic. Gyes^.
Polid. Virg. lib. 4.
or of Eludius, Archbishop of Toledo, which purged their Country of the Heresy
of the Monopoliss; why may not our Island boast of Augustinus Militus, and that
John which Pope Gregory the first sent into England, Rob. Barns in vita
Ponti^icum page 68.
not to remove errors as their Bishops did, but to confirm our Countrymen in
that Christian Religion and Profession which they had received and entertained
almost five hundred years before their coming. Neither may it be justified that
Spain (as Vasoeus says) after it had once entertained the Doctrine of Christ,
never fell from the same; for Illescas, in the life of Pope Pelagius the
second, affirms, that in the 585. year of Christ's Incarnation, Recaredus,
King of the Goths, and of Spain, was the first King that expelled the Arrian
Heresy out of his kingdom and expressly commanded all his Subjects to receive
and profess Christian Religion: Whereby it appears that Spain lived from the
time of St. James and St. Paul's being there, until Recaredus his Reign, which
is better then four hundred years, in manifest and manifold Heresies; a crime
which cannot be proved to have been in England, or in many other Nations, after
they had once submitted themselves to the Doctrine of Christ and his Disciples.
Lastly, if Spain will still continue to brag and say, that their King Ferdinand
was entitled by Alexander the sixth, by the name of the Catholic King,
Guicciard. lib. 10. 5. 18.
they may leave to boast thereof, when they shall hear that Henry the eighth
our King, not much after the same time, was surnamed by Leo the tenth, Pope of
Rome, Defender of the Catholic faith; and that the Switzers for their service
done unto the same Pope Leo the tenth, Nic. Giles. Munsterius
received of him the Title of Helpers and Protectors of the Ecclesiastical
Liberty; a Title in no respect inferior unto that of Spain: And lastly, that
Clouis King of France, above nine hundred years before their Ferdinando the
fifth was honored with the Title of The most Christian King: A Title as for
Antiquity, so for worthiness better then the other, because the French Kings,
for the worthiness and multitude of their deserts toward the Sea of Rome, are
called Prim^geniti Ecclesiae, the eldest Sons of the Church of Rome: Now from
their faith toward God, to their fidelity toward their Princes, a matter
sufficiently handled, and therefore needless, and not requiring any other
confutation, then the advantage that may be taken of Vasoeus his own words; for
if they have been faithful unto forrainers and strange Princes, and have
submited their necks unto many several Nations, it argues inconstancy,
fellow-mate to levity, which is either a Mother or a guide unto disloyalty;
because light heads are quickly displeased, and discontented minds give easy
entertainment unto rebellious and treasonable cogitations. To conclude then
this Point with their learning, let me oppose a Spaniard unto a Flemming; a man
better acquainted with the virtues and vices of his own Country then a
stranger, a man who gives his Testimony of Vasoeus, and of the cause of his
writing of the Spanish History: John Vasoeus a Elemming, seeing the negligence
of the Spaniards, and how careless they were to commit to perpetual memory the
worthy exploits and actions of their own Nation, began of late years to set
forth a small Chronicle: Why then the Spaniards are negligent, they are
careless of their own commendation; so thought Vasoeus, or else he had not
written their History; so says Sebastianus Foxius, the man whom I bring to
confute Vasoeus; the man who by attributing (as you have heard) more unto
himself then any modest man (unless it were a bragging Spaniard) would do,
gives me occasion to think that he will not derogate or detract any thing from
the praises due unto his own Country: This man therefore in his before
mentioned Book speaks thus of the learning of Spain: Our Country men (says
he) both in old time and in this Age having continually lived in foreign or
domestical Wars, never gave their minds greatly unto study; for the rewards of
learning in our Country are very few, and they proper unto a few paltry
Pettyfoggers; and our wits being high and lofty, could never brook the pains
that learning requires, but either we disdaining all kind of study, give our
selves presently to the purchase of Honors and Riches, or else following our
studies for a small while, quickly give them over, as though we had attained to
the full and absolute perfe^tion of learning, so that very few or none are
found amongst us, who may compare for learning with the Italians, or have
showed the ripeness and sharp maturity of their wits in any kind of any kind of
study. You have heard two contrary opinions touching the Spaniards learning; I
leave it to your discretion to follow and believe which of them you please; and
withal to consider by the way what manner of Ecclesiastical Discipline and
Government we should have, if the Spanish ignorant and unlearned Clergy might,
as they have a long time both desired and endeavored, prescribe Laws and
Orders unto all the Churches of Christendom. The favorable Assertions in the
behalf of Spain being thus briefly refelled, it remains now to make a
conjectural estimate of the Spanish present Forces, by an Historical
Declaration of the power thereof in times past; and because it were over
tedious to trouble you with the recital of such forces as Spain has employed
many hundred years ago, in her own defense, or in disturbance of her foreign
enemies abroad, I will restrain my self unto such a time as is within the
memory of man, and especially unto the Reign of Charles the fifth; For (as I
take it) Spain was never, for this many hundred years, so strong, as when the
said Charles was both King thereof and Emperor. And albeit Piero Mexias, in the
life of Gratianus the Emperor attributes so much unto Spaniards, as that he
more boldly then truly affirms; that the Emperor flourished more under
Spaniards, then under any other Nation whatsoever; and alleges for proof of
his Assertion, the flourishing Estate thereof, under the before named Charles
the fifth. Yet I think that the Empire being added unto Spain, rather
beautified Spain, then that Spain being conjoined with the Empire, did any
thing at all illustrate the majesty of the Empire; because as little Stars give
no light or beauty unto the Moon, but receive both from the Moon; so a lesser
dignity being joined to a greater, adds no reputation thereunto, but is
greatly honored and beautified by the conjunction thereof, neither redoundeth
it much (in my simple opinion) unto the honor of Spain, or of the Empire, that
Charles the fifth was Emperor.

Spain is not greatly honored thereby, because Charles the fifth was a
Flemming, and no Spaniard; and Spain came unto him (as I have said) by marriage
with the heir of the Kingdoms of Arragon and Castile; and the Empire was
rather disgraced then honored by the said Charles, because he being born in
Gaunt, was not only a vassal, and natural-born subject unto the King of
France, but also unto the Sea of Rome, for all the Dominions, Lands and
Seigniories which he had in possession, saving those which he held of France
and the Empire. But Charles the fifth, such an Emperor as he was (and
undoubtedly he was a very mighty, wise and politic Prince) never brought into
the Field against any of his Enemies whatsoever, so great forces, and so mighty
an Army, as might worthily be called invincible (by which name the proud and
bragging Spaniards baptized their late Army against England) This Emperor being
(as you may conjecture and perceive by that which has been already said) both
Ambitious and Warlick, had in his life time many wars with diverse Princes, but
none more notable, famous, and worthy of perpetual memory, th^n his wars in
France, Italy, and Germany: For the wars which he had against the Turk are not
properly to be termed his, because his Forces alone were not employed therein,
but the aid and help of the best and most part of Christendom. His Forces in
Germany were not above 9000 Horsemen, and 50000 Footmen, as Lewis Guicciardine
testifies in his Commentaries: And although he used in these wars all his wit
and policy to increase his own power, and to weaken and diminish the strength
of the Protestants; performing the one by drawing into League with himself, and
unto his aid, the Pope, and other Princes of his own Religion: And effecting
the other (as Sleidan writes) by great cunning, and policy used in distracting
many Princes concurring in opinion touching matters of Religion with the
Protestants, from their side and Faction; yet the Protestants Army, consisting
of 10000 Horsemen, and 90000 Footmen, was far greater then his in number, and
had undoubtedly gotten the day against him when they joined battle together,
had not diverse of their Confederates left and abandoned them before the battle
was fought; Or had not the Duke of Saxony committed a gross error in joining
battle with him. His Armies brought into France were many, but none greater
then at Laundresy and Marcelles: In the first he was aided by our King; And in
the second, by most of the Princes of Italy, and other his confederates,
Insomuch that the King of France, who had been first overthrown by him in
Italy, was constrained to implore the help of the Turk against him: For when he
came to Marselles he had (as Dr. Illescas reports in the life of Paulus
tertius) in his Army about 25000 Almains, 8000 Spaniards, and ten or twelve
thousand Italians; the Almains ga^hered within the Dominion of the Empire, the
Spaniards within his own Realm of Spain, and the Italians not only in the
Kingdom of Naples, and the Dukedom of Milan, but also in the Duchy of Savoy,
and in other parts of Italy, At Laundresey, reckoning therein the Forces which
he had out of England, his whole Army came not to above 50000 (as the said
Guicciardine affirms.) These were the greatest Strengths that ever he
gathered together; and these are not so great, but that our Queen, without the
help of any other Allie or Confederate, has oftentimes brought far greater
Forces into the Field, as both our Histories, and the French and Scottish
Chronicles do witness. And Mr. de la Noue, his opinion before mentioned,
shows, that the French King of himself is very well able to raise a far
greater Army, then any of these were, against any of his Enemies. I shall not
therefore need (as I might conveniently do in this place) confer the Forces of
England or of France with the strength of this Emperor, who had never gotten
the happy victory, which he obtained against Franci^ the first, King of France,
had not the Italian Captains, whom the French King put in trust, deceived him
by taking pay for many more Soldiers then they had in their bands; (a fault
too much used in our Modern Wars) had not the Switzers, when there was most
need of them, departed to their own homes; had not the French King given
himself too carelessly to pleasures, which caused his Forces to decrease and
diminish daily; or had not the said King very unadvisedly attempted in the cold
Winter to besiege Pavia: Vide de Marq. de Pescara
For the Marquess of Pescara, understanding that the King of France, being
counseled thereunto by Captain Bonnevet, was gone to besiege Pavia, said unto
his Soldiers; We that were no better then men already conquered, are now
become Conquerors; for our Enemy, being therein ill advised, leaves us in
Lody, and goes to fight with the Almains at Pavia; where the Frenchmen will
not only lose that Fury, with which many times they work wonders, but also
will spend their chiefest Forces in a long and tedious siege of a Town, not
easy to be taken, and in fighting with a very valiant and most obstinate
Nation; and in the mean while we shall receive fresh supplies out of Germany;
and without all doubt, if the War continue long, as it is likely to do, we
cannot but hope for a most happy and victorious end thereof.

Now if this Emperor, in these Wars, (the worst of which was far more just,
then the best which the King of Spain has lately undertaken) could with the
help and furtherance of all his Allies and Confederates make no greater Forces,
then are before mentioned; nor with his Forces should ever have had so good
success as he had, if his Adversaries had been so wise and wary as they might
have been: Why shall his son King Philip be thought able to bring more men into
the Field, then were in those Armies, or worthy of so good fortune as his
Father had, since his strength is in no respect comparable unto his, and his
Actions and his Enterprises have not the like color and show of Wisdom, or of
Justice, as the Emperor had? That the Father excelled the Son in strength, all
men will confess, saving those which carry a partial and prejudicate opinion of
the present greatness of Spain: for albeit the son has lately added the
kingdom of Portugal unto those Realms and Dominions which his Father possessed
and left unto him; although the Empire has continued for these many years, and
is likely to ^emain still in the House of Austria, and his very near kinsmen;
in regard of whose Affinity and kindred he may boldly rest in as great hope and
assured confidence of the Aid and Assistance of the Empire, as he might if
himself were Emperor: Yet having so governed in Flanders, that by reason of the
long and continual Civil Wars, those Countries cannot yield him such Aid of Men
and ^oney, as they did unto his Father, who in all h^s Wars, (as Lewis
Guicciardin^ in the second Book of his Commentaries affirms) had greater help
both of Men and money from them alone, th^n from all the rest of his Dominions;
he has greatly impaired his strength, and made it far inferior unto his
Fathers, or unto that same which he himself was like to make before, or at the
first beginning of his Civil Wars. For to omit that he can now hardly make such
strength as the Duke of Alva, or Don John de Austria have had in their Armies
in Flanders, whereof the first had at one time 6000 horse, and 30000 foot, and
the other as many footmen, and 4000 horsemen more; The decrease and diminution
of his strength does manifestly appear in this, that the Low Countries are now
reduced unto that poverty, and to such a penury of men, that he cannot possibly
fetch any reasonable great number thence to employ them in foreign services,
but he is fain to bring in Strangers to defend his Towns against the united
Provinces.

Iacobus Meyerus in the sixth book of his Chronicles of Flanders, reports
that Philip King of Flanders in the year 1181 having Wars against the French
King, had 200000 Men in his Army: and Adrianus Barbadus, in the Chronicles of
the Dukes of Brabant, records, that the Bishop of Utritch is able, upon any
urgent occasion, to arm 40000 Men. The first of these reports shows what the
force of Flanders has been; and the second gives me occasion to conjectu^e
and think, that the strength of the United Provinces cannot but be great, since
a Bishop of one Town could readily and conveniently Arm so many Men. It is
written that the chiefest cause of displeasure and contention betwixt Philip,
surnamed The Fair, king of France, and Pope Boniface the eighth, was, because
the said Philip would not, at the request and entreaty of the Pope, restore
Guido Earl of Flanders unto his Liberty, that he might accompany and assist the
Christians in their Wars in the Holy Land, where the said Guido's Predecessors
had done better service then any other Prince of Christendom; and the Pope held
an opinion, that Guido's presence would avail the Christians much more then the
society of all the other Princes. What a loss then has the king of Spain by
the Low Countries poverty, as well of money as of men, since the same Countries
were of late years more populous, far richer, and better inhabited then they
were in times past. It is a worlds wonder to see the Riches, the beauty, the
Pride, and the jolity of those Citi^s before the late C^vil Wars; And it will
make any man's heart bleed (as we say) within his body, to behold the poverty,
desolation, ruin and calamity of them at this present. Neither is the weakness
of Flanders so prejudicial or hurtful unto the Spaniards, as the obstinate
continuance of the United Provinc^s in their disobedience against him. For,
considering the extremity of his malice against England, it must needs be very
grievous unto him, that there is so fast a League of friendship betwixt us and
them; And he cannot but be sorry in heart as often as he remembers what aid
they yielded us against his invincible Navy, wh^reby the same was more easily
subdued and overthrown: But if he should look considerately upon their Strength
by Sea, and the multitude of their Mariners and Sea-fa^ing m^n, whereof he has
more need then of any other people whatsoever, (...) cannot but utterly despair
to attain unto his desires, or to satisfy his revengefull mind, so long as
those P^ovinces shall continue in Amity with us. It will seem inc^edible that I
have heard reported of the multitude of the natural Inhabitants in such a
Country, where most part of their Martial men are employed in foreign
Garrisons, and the people remaining at home are scant fit to make soulders; For
that every man that has an affection and liking to be trained up in Arms,
desires to be sent into some such place where he may have the use of Arms; It
is an ancient custom amongst Princes, if one has an occasion to pass with an
Army through another Country, to take Pledges and Hostages that he shall pass
without any kind of Annoyance: And if caution be thought necessary when a
multitude goes but through a Foreign Dominion, how can a Prince be too
watchful, provident, and circumspect over an infinite number of Foreigners
residing within the limits of his Kingdom, where although they be not armed,
yet they may arm themselves at any time? although they be dispersed, yet they
may congregate and unite themselves together at their pleasure: although they
want Guides and Governors to direct them in any malicious enterprise; yet if
any Army of their own Nation should attempt any manner of Hostility against the
Prince within whose dominion they live* they may watch and wait for some good
opportunity to join with their Countrymen, and so endanger his Estate that
harbors them: And sometimes Strangers of a few, grow to so great a multitude
in other Princes dominions, that they become both terrible and dangerous unto
the Country which they inhabit.

There was a time when certain wicked Rebels cruelly murdered Charles Earl of
Flanders; Holin. shed.
of which some were according to their desert severely punished, and others
were (both they and their Poste^ity) banished out of all parts of the Earldome,
and also out of all the dominions of the king of France; insomuch that all men
and nations hating them for their wickedness, they wandered up and down the
wide world, and could not find any place that would receive and harbor them;
until that Edward King of England vouchsafed them a simple dwelling place in a
little Island of Ireland, called Gherma, where in a few years they so
multiplied and increased, that in the year 1287. they presumed to wage war
against the said King Edward; but being happily subdued by him, the greatest
part of them were slain, and the residue which escaped became Sea-Rovers, and
spared not to pill and poll any Nation whatsoever, that chanced to fall into
their hands. This example may warn all Princes to take heed of strangers, and
especially of such as have been Traitors unto their own Princes; and whosoever
considers well every circumstance thereof, and of many others like unto it,
may boldly presume to say, that the Prince, whose Country is replenished with
strangers, and especially with such as have been Traitors unto their own
Princes, has great occasion to live in great doubt of his own security, and of
his subjects safety. But I speak not this against such strangers as are fled
into England, or any other Country for their conscience sake, to avoid the
tyranny of the Spaniards. I know that God ordained Cities of refuge, whereunto
it was lawful for ^nnocents and men wrongfully oppressed, to fly for safety;
and yet even over such strangers it cannot be amiss to have a watchful Eye, as
well to Cherish t^em, if living well, and under Law, they be wronged by the
natural subjects of his Country where they live, against the course of Law, as
to foresee, that neither all, nor part of them be induced by the natural or
professed Enemies of the State in which they are harbored, to attempt any open
Hostility, or secret Treason against him that vouchsafes to harbor them. You
have heard what may be said against the present strength of the Spanish King;
Now it remains, that you hear what can be objected against his wisdom and
justice in Civ^l Government: For as necessary are Justice and Prudence for a
peaceable regiment, as Force and Policy in time of Wars. To censure his wisdom,
will argue small wisdom in me, who do both know and acknowledge it to be my
duty to think well (as I have said) of all Princes, and not to examine their
actions, nor look into the mysteries of their secret enterprises; And yet
because his favorites and friends spare not to report whatsoever their wicked
hearts can imagine against our Sovereign, I may boldy presume to commit to your
secret view what others have published in prejudice of his wisdom and justice,
especially since I intend not to discover any hidden oversights, but such as
are known to the world for most manifest errors. These unto him that has
leisure to enter into considerations of them all, would fall out to be very
many; but my purpose is at this time but to acquaint you with four, and of
these four I will deliver you my opinion in this manner. Dionthus de Bello
Belgi^o Sil^a (...) aei.
I hold it first for a great oversight, that being bound by oath to rule and
Govern in the Low Countries The first (...) of the Spanish King in governing
the Low^ (...) by Spaniards.
by Deputies, and principal Officers being born within the Limits of Brabant
and Flanders, he contrary to his Oath and all good policy, has ruled the said
Countries by proud and d^sdainfull Spaniards.

For although a Magistrate loves virtue, and hates vice, embraces justice,
and disliketh oppression, possesses all good qualities, and entertaineth scant
any kind of ill disposition; yet if he cannot accommodate himself unto the
nature of those subjects which are committed unto his charge, instead of Peace
and tranquillity, he shall occasion and nourish among them discord and
diss^nsion: For proof whereof I shall need to allege no other examples, but
the troubles and civil wars, which in these few years have (as I have said)
turned the prosperity, wealth and riches of Flanders into Poverty, Ruin, and
desolation. For whosoever will considerately look into the causes of th^se
tro^^les, shall find that they have proceeded principally from the contrari^ty
of the natu^es and dispositions of the Spaniards, and of the Flemings, because
the one never learned to command with a spirit of meekn^ss and lenity, and the
other could never endure to be ruled by proud and arrogant Officers, but have
always been far better governed by the Courtesy and Clemency of Women, then
by the severity and rigor of Men.

And truly, although Nimrod began his reign with cruelty and violence, as the
Scriptures testify; and it has been, and it is a question disputable, Whether
it be better that the Ministers of Kings and Princes should be severe and
cruel, or gentle and courteous; yet the wiser sort are of opinion, that
Humanity and Gentleness is both more commendable and necessary; especially
where the People that is to be governed is mild by Nature, gentle in
condition, and no way inclined to conceive well of cruelty. And certainly
whosoever shall busy himself in reading many Chronicles, shall undoubtedly
find in them, that more Kingdoms, Dominions and Seigniories have been
overthrown and ruinated by the cruelty of Underofficers, then by the severity
of the higher Powers: For in Histories men shall see, that even those people
who lived many years in peace, without knowing what belonged to the besieging
of a Town, to the maintaining of a Camp, or to the entertaining of any
Domestical sedition, have been enforced by the barbarous and Cruel Tyranny of
wicked Officers, to prefer Wars before Peace, and the effusion of blood, before
the conservation of their lives.

The Province of Graecia, after that it had sought and gained many Battles,
subdued sundry Nations, and triumphed over infinite Enemies, was at the last
overthrown and destroyed by the wickedness and cruelty of their Governors. The
iniquity and cruelty of Appius Claudius showed unto Virginius his Daughter,
changed the state of Rome, and was the only cause that their form and manner
of Civil Government was altered. The Ancestors of the same Flemmings, which of
late years have born Arms against King Philip of Spain, not being able to brook
and endure the Indignities and Injuries of those Officers which king Philip of
France (surnamed The Fair) set over them, took out of Prison a poor Weaver, and
made him their Head, rebelled against their king, and killed all the Frenchmen
that were in Flanders. The People of sicilie, moved thereunto by the barbarous
cruelty of such French Governors as Tyrannized over them, slew in one night all
the Frenchmen that were in that kingdom, and opened the bellies of as many
women of their own Nation as were with child by Frenchmen, only to destroy
the fruit of their womb.

How many times have the People of England, the Subjects of France, and the
Inhabitants of Spain rebelled for the same occasion? Yea, in the time of the
Emperor Charles the fifth, whose Predecessors were driven out of all that ever
they had in Switzerland, for the great Tyranny which was used by him whom they
placed for their Lieutenant. And in truth, less grievous and offensive are the
Injuries which Princes themselves do unto their Subjects, then those which
proceed from the enmity and malice of their Officers; and certainly much more
dangerous to a Princes State are the Extortions, Cruelties and Exactions of
inferior Magistrates, then of those unto whom as well the Magistrates as the
Subjects are accomptable. This is first proved by the force and efficacy of
Reason it self, because every particular man can better endure to be wronged by
the Master then by the Servant; for that the Indignity and base Condition of
the wrong-doers many times increases the grief and coffeehouse which is
conceived upon occasion of an Injury sustained. S^condly the Common People
hating always much more the evil and tyrannical Government of an Inferior
Magistrate, then of the Superior Powers, think it far better to have a bad
Prince, who will be Governed and directed by good Counselors, then to live
under wicked Officers authorized to Rule and Govern them by a good and virtuous
Prince. For, say they, a wicked Prince lives at ease in his Kingly Palace,
gives himself unto pleasure, follows his delights, and rejoices in the
Company of his vain and foolish Favorites; and these are most commonly the
worst things that he does; But the wicked Magistrate studie^h continually, how
to commit Violence, to invent new Exactions, to trouble and torment the common
People, to clipp their Wings, to de^^owre their Children, to dishonest their
Wives, and to seize upon their Goods, to withhold their Lands, and to violate
and break their Privileges. These are the harms that proceed from the bad
Magistrate, the remembrance of which is most greiv^us, the pain excessive, the
beginning odious, and the end ex^crable. The consideration whereof makes me
think not only ours, but all other Estates and Kingdoms most happy, which are
governed by such Princes as are borne in the same Kingdoms which they Govern;
And those contrariwise most unfortunate, and subject unto infinite miseries,
which are ruled by Forain Princes: The consideration whereof made many kingdoms
not to accept and acknowledge for their Kings the lawful Children of their
deceased Sovereigns, because they were born in Fo^rain Countries. The which
consideration (as it seems) had sometimes place in England, because am^ngst
other Statutes of this Realm, there is one to enable and make the Child^en of
our Kings which are born in other Countries capable of the Crown of England.
Lastly the consideration whereof moves many grave and wise Politicians to be
of opinion, that the Princes are not overwise and discreet which labor all the
days of their lives to Conquer and subdue Forain Kingdoms; For after that they
have attained the desired Fruits of their desired Labor and Travail, what
have they gotten worthy of their pain^s and charges? They have added somewhat
to their former Reputation, They have increased their yearly Revenues of their
Crown, They have (as it becomes good Husbands) augmented the Talent which God
bestowed upon them; And what is all this, but a thing that glistereth and is no
Gold? a show of Reputation, that is no true Glory? and a Representation of
great profit than can have no long continuance? For if this happy and glorious
Conqueror shall leave his natural Country, and govern in person his new
Conquered Kingdom, what sorrows, what inconveniences, what troubles, dangers
and vexations will follow thereof? His natural Subjects will complain that they
are forsaken, and the ^onquered will not long like of his Government; The
former will find Fault with his Deputies, and the later will desire his room,
rather then his presence; The one will not think him worthy to enjoy his own,
and the other will esteem all that he gets theirs, because they presume that
it is gotten with the goods and wealth of the Country which they call theirs;
So he becomes a stranger unto his own, and being daily amongst his own, his
own will not know him; And that which is most grievous, if his own chance to
rebel, as many have done in their Sovereigns absence, he is fain to employ
strangers to suppress them; And if his Strange^e happen to revolt, he mu^t
either make a Butchery of his own, to subdue them, or lose in a few days that
which was gotten in many years: I shall not need to stand upon the proof
hereof, I have cleared that by many examples, in the beginning of this
discourse; And therefore I will now come unto the second Error not inferior,
but rather greater then the first.

It is an usual Policy amongst Princes, The Spaniards ^ Error in not gra^ting
Liberty of Conscience unto his Subjects in Flanders.
when they have given their loving Subjects just occasion of coffeehouse, to
yield them some manner of satisfaction whereby their alienated minds may be
Changed; and their natural Affections enforced to return. But the King of Spain
being neither mindful of his Policy, nor careful (as it should seem) to
maintain and keep his own, having alienated the hearts and estranged the
Affections of his kind and tender Subjects, by an indiscreet toleration of bad
and lewd Officers, is so far from pacifying their Wrath, as that he provokes
them unto further Anger and coffeehouse, by refusing to condescend unto a
most reasonable Requ^st, which not they alone by their Ambassadors, but also
other Princes for them make unto him: For after that the Low Co^ntries by the
example of the Kingdoms of Poland, Swedland, Denmark, France, Scotland, and
England; together with the Commonwealth, Dukedoms, Principalities, Counties
Palatinates, and other Dominions and free cities of Switzerland, Savoy,
Wittenberge, and other Provinces of Germany, fell from Popery unto the
profession of Gods true Religion, they desired of their King that they have
liberty of conscience; and without danger of a Spanish inqu^si^ion profess that
Religion wherein they were fully resolved to live and die; But the King
thinking it not convenient, or beseeming the Royal Majesty of a Prince, to
yield unto any extraordinary Petition, were it never so humble or reasonable,
of his Subjects, refuses to satisfy this request; For which his refusing, as
many as^favor him, or his cause, allege these reasons, First that Men of two
Religions can hardly live in Peace and quietness together in one Estate.
Secondly, that these suppliants have been and are still the cause of all
troubles and seditions in the Low Countries. Thirdly, that he had faithfully
promised the Popes holiness never to entertain or maintain any other then the
present Roman Religion, within any of his Kingdoms or Dominions. Fou^thly, that
such a toleration as was demanded by his Subjects, cannot be war^anted by the
example of any Kings or Princes of later or former times: Fifthly, that the
King of France, and the Queen of England having had the like motion made unto
them by their natural and most loving Subjects, could never be moved to
condescend to their humble Petitions.

And lastly, that it was not seemly for his Majesty to be directed by other
Princes what to yield or not to yield unto his Subjects, especially since he
both held and knew himself to be very well able to enforce his rebellious and
heretical Subjects to submit themselves unto the profession of that Religion
which his Subjects in Spain and in other his dominions do profess.

These are in brief all the reasons that ever I could hear alleged by any
man for the justification of his refusal; and to the end that his error may not
be colored or maintained by the show and shadow of these simple reasons, I
will briefly confute every one of them in order. True it is that there is no
streighter tie, no surer stay, no stronger hold to co^joyn and knit the hearts
of Subjects together, then is the conformity and unity of religion; and that
the readiest way to sever and separate their Affections is to set them at
strife and variance for Religion; In regard whereof diverse wise men and grave
counselors have advised their Kings to take heed that no kind of heresy
creep into their kingdoms, to resist the first beginni^g of any heresy
whatsoever, and to foresee that no new opinion enter into the hearts of their
Subjects; and if any by chance happen to find never so small entrance, to
labor by all means possible to remove the same. For variety of opinions easily
engendered, finds means to increase without great difficulti^, and having
once penetrated, into the interior cogitations of men's hearts, so ravisheth
their senses, blinds their eyes, and obscur^th their judgments, that they
can neither see, nor discern the truth from falsehood, nor the light from
darkness, but so cleave and hold fast on their opinions, that they will almost
as soon and as willingly depart from their lives as from their heresies. But if
by reason of not opposing and withstanding the beginning and increase of
opinions, the number of Subjects professing a Religion contrary to their Kings,
be once grown to be equal or greater then the multi^ude of those which agree
with him in opinion, there are but two ways to reform and order this
disorder. The one to command (as Dagabert King of France did) that all they
that profess not the same religion which their King does, shall by a certain
time appointed, depart out of his Realm; and that those who remain within the
limits of his kingdom, beyond the day prefixed, shall be held as Enemies unto
the State, and therefore be reputed (...) worthy of present death. The other,
to permit them to continue in their Country, and to enjoy liberty of
conscience: The which way because it draws nighest unto humanity, seems
unto me best to be followed: For since men's consciences ought to be free and
at liberty, since no man may rightfully be deprived of the benefit and
^ommoditie of his Conntry, without some off^nce committed worthy of ban^shment;
since the life and welfare of their Subjects is recommended unto Princes;
since the fault that is committed by their Sufferance cannot be well punished
without great prejudice unto their honor and reputation, and briefly since the
life may be more beneficial then the death of such Subjects unto their Kings,
it should undoubtedly be great Tyranny to deprive them either of their lives or
of their Country. But we are commanded in the Scriptures to r^ject him that is
an Heretic after one or two admonitions: We are told, that he that will not
be obedient unto the Church, must be unto us as an Heathen man, or a Publican.
And we are willed to take heed (...) no man deceive us, and that we keep not
company with such men; how then shall the religious converse with the
Reprobate? How shall the Papist live with the Protestant? And how can a Prince
maintain both in one Kingdom, in one City, in one Town, in one house? This is
all that can be alleged against us out of the word of God, and by these words
the Protestants are not commanded to shun the Papists, nor the Papists to avoid
the Protestan^s; only we are all in general taught to beware of vain
Philosophers, of men delighting in many speeches, of such as with vanity of
words excuse sins, and mock at at the Menaces and judgments of God; we are
forbidden to give any credit to their Philosophy, and humane reasons, to put
any confidence in their Traditions in their Fables, to be moved any thing at
all with their Miracles, to participate with them in their Doctrine and
Ceremonies, and to admit them to conference or communication with us; this
commandment stretches not unto men varying somewhat from us in Religion; these
words forbid not the true worshippers of God to converse with them that worship
God truly, but not in the ^^me manner in all respects as they do; For if this
were a general commandment, then all men not being well instructed or
persuaded in Religion, should not be admitted into the company of Christians.
The Church of God from the beginning has withstood and infringed this
commandment; yea our Savior Jesus Christ should seem to have given contrary
commandments unto his Apostles, unto his Disciples: For, when he willed them
to go and preach his word unto all Nations, as well unto the Jews as unto the
Gentiles, unto the b^leivers as unto the unbeleiving, Is not this Commandment
contrary unto the former? Or could they as they were commanded, teach the
Infidels, or instruct the ignorant without conversing with them? did not he,
whose word is a Lanthon unto our Feet, whose life must be our guide, whose
Actions must be our imitation, daily converse with Publicans, with Pharisees,
with Sadduces, with all sorts of people, never having respect of men, nor
careing of what profession they were, because the end of his coming was to save
the Sinner, and to conver^ the Infidel? And has he not said, that two shall be
in one bed, whereof the one shall be received, and the other rejected? And does
not this saying import that the true Christians shall converse with the
Schism^ticks of the world? Did not Abell live with Cain until he was murdered
by Cain? Did not Seth and Enoch, both beleiving in God, dwell amongst the other
Children of Adam, who lived without Religion, without any knowledge of God?
Abraham was commanded by God to leave his native Country, and to go to seek a
new Habita^ion amongst men not knowing nor worshipping of God; Isaac swore
friendship and Alliance with Abimelech an Infidel, and Jacob dwelt with Laban
an Idolator.

^ut these and the Prophets of God were men so well instructed in Gods word, so
affected thereunto, so willing to observe every Precept thereof, and so
unwilling to give any occasion of offense in what Company soever they came,
that they lived in peace with all men, they exhorted all men unto peace; and
there was no man so ungodly that could receive any loss, detriment, scandal, or
offense by their company: Men are not so in these days; And therefore the like
effects will not follow of their company: And yet in these dai^s the
unbeleiving may not only, but are also commanded to abide with the believers;
and the believers are enjoined to dwell with the unbelieving; for the woman
that has an husband that believes not, if he be content to dwell with her,
let her not (says the Scripture) forsake him; for the unbelieving husband is
sanct^fied by his wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband,
because the Faith of the believer has more power to sanctify Marriage then the
w^ckedness of the other to pollute it: And the Scripture goes further, saying,
what know thou O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband? Or what know
thou O man whether thou shall save thy wife? Why then there comes a benefit by
suffering the Reprobate to converse with the Religious; the Faith of the one
may sanctify the other; and the b^l^ever may chance to save him that believes
not; and were it not th^n impious, wicked and irreligious to deprive the one of
the society, and of the instructions of the other? But they will not live
together in p^ace and quietness. How know you that? or what shall cause
variance betwixt them? forsooth the variety of their Religion.

But may not they be forbidden to argue of matters of Religion? and take away
all kind of dispu^ation and argument; and do you not therewithal remove all
cause of cont^ntion? know you not that knowledge comet^ partly by hearing? and
if they should hear one another with mildness and modesty, would not the
Faith of the believers be able to confound and confute the Infidelity of them
that beli^ve not? the prayer of a righteous man avails much, as it was seen
by Elias, who being a man subject to the like Passions as we are, prayed
earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the Earth for three
years and six months, and he prayed again, and the Heaven gave Rain and the
E^^th brought forth her Fruit. The prayer of Faith shall save the sick, and the
Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed any sin it shall be forgiven
him. If then by prayer rain is stayed, and rain may be procured; if by prayer
he^lth be restored, and sin be forgiven, shall not the prayer of the faithful
avail much? or shall not the Infidel be benefited or saved by their prayer?
faith is the g^ound of things that are hoped for, and ^he evidence of things
that are not seen.

By faith Abell offered unto God a greater Sacrifice the Caine. By faith Enoch
was taken away that he should not see death. By faith Noah, being warned of
Go^, of the things that were as yet not seen, moved with reverence, prepared
the Ark to the saving of his Household. By faith Abraham obeyed God, when he
was called to go into a place which he should afterward receive for an
Inheritance. By faith Sarah received strength to co^ceiv^ Seed, and was
delivered of a Child when she was past Age. By faith Moses forsook Egypt. By
faith he with his people passed through the red Sea as on dry Land. By faith
the Walls of Jericho fell down after they we^e compast about seven days. And
by faith ^he Prophets subdued Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched
the violence of Fire, escaped the Edge of the Sword, of weak were m^de strong,
waxed valiant in Battle, and turned to Flight the Armies of the Aliens. Then
since faith is of this force, and efficacy, shall not the faithful be able to
convert them, by whose conversation they shall reap no small benefit? for if
any man has erred from the truth, says St James, and some men has converted
him, know that he that has called the sinner from going astray out of his way,
shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. And is it not
a thing commendable before men, acceptable unto God, and worth the l^bours of
any good Christian to save a soul, and to hide a great multitude of sins? But
to leave these Divine arguments, and to come unto humane reasons, because they
are more pleasing and acceptable to children of this world, whom (me thinks)
it should suffice for proof that Papists and Protestants may live in peace and
quietness together, because that in Poland where there are many Religions
professed, you seldom hear of any civil contention; and in Switzerland* in
many Towns thereof, the Papists and Protestants eat together, lie in bed one
with another, marry together, and that which is most strange, in one Church you
shall have a Mass and a Sermon, and at one Table upon Fish dai^s, Fish and
Flesh, the one for Papists, the other for Protestants. And whosoever shall look
upon the present State of Spain, or the present Government of Italy in this
Age, in which Countries there is but one Religion professed, shall find no
greater peace, no more assured Friendship, no streighter League of Ami^ie
amongst them then there is amongst the people of Poland, Switzerland, and other
Nations which give Friendly entertainment unto plurality of Religions; neither
can any m^n say with reason, that the Protestants of Flanders have been the
occasion of the unnatural variance and civil dissension which now troubles
their Country: For there is no man that reverenceth the Magistrate, obeys the
Laws of God and man, or fulfilleth the true sense and meaning of both Laws more
willingly then they, as their Supplications, their Le^ters, their Apologies do
testify. It is not they, but their Enemies; not they but their evil
Governors; not the Inhabitants of their Country, but the Strangers sent into
the Country, and del^ghted wi^h the pleasures and the profits thereof, that
have occasioned these Troubles. Neither is it to be thought that so many
Princes, as the King of France* the Queen of England, the Archduke of Austria,
and the late Duke of Anjou, being all strangers unto them, would ever have
undertaken their defense and p^otection, if they had thought or seen that the
principal c^use of Sedition might justly be imputed unto them. It was the
Tyranny of Don John de Austria, the Cruelty of the Duke of Alva, the
intolerable Pri^e of the Spaniards in general, the unreasonable exaction of the
Hundredth, the Twentieth, and the Tenth Penny of ^v^ry man's substance, together
with other Causes mentioned in the b^ginning of this discourse, that caused the
forcible distraction of them from the usual and dutiful Obedience. Devotion,
service, and observance of their Prince. I^ the time of Philip the Fair^ King
of France, as now in the Reign of Philip the second King of Spain (whereby it
may appear that the name of Philip has been fatal unto this Country) there
were the like troubles is Flanders as there are now; and as now, there were
some of the Country it self that favored Spain more then their own
liberty; so then there were many Liliari that tendered the French Kings
Factions more then the safety of their own Conn^ry; and as now, so then those
Liliari together with the King of ^^ance imputed the cause of the Troubles and
Wars unto the peevish will^ullness of the poor Flemings, and not to the
perverse obstinacy and obdurate malice and cruelty of the French King and his
Counselors. Moreover, as now, so then, diverse flourishes and sh^wes of peace
were made unto the Flemings; not because they that offered those conditions of
peace meant to perform them, but to make the world believe that they were
desirous of Peace; whereas indeed their tender of peace was but to save
themselves from the hazard of a Battle; when they saw there was no way but to
take it either with some great disadvantage, or to forsake it with great
dishonor: Such offers of peace were those that have been lately made unto the
United Provinces; and such were they that were tendered many years ago, by
which the Spaniards received always some benefit; sometimes he got a Town, a
Hold, or a Castle; sometimes he distracted some of the Nobility from the Prince
of Oranges faction, and at other times he avoided some eminent danger which
could not otherwise be escaped. This will appear most true and manifest unto as
many as shall read diverse Apologies set out by the Prince of Orange and the
States of the Low Countries. And therefore I know not with what conscience, or
with what show of truth, the cause of this Civil Discord may be ascribed unto
the Subjects of Flanders, and not unto the king of Spain and his evil Officers.

The first and second Reasons are sufficiently refuted; Now to the third.

He has promised the Popes Holiness not to admit any other Religion but his in
any part of his kingdoms or Dominions. How is his promise proved? What ground
has it? Upon what Reasons stands it? He is in some manner subject unto the
Pope; Be it; he holds all or most of his kingdoms and dominions of him: Let
it be so; he bears the title of the Catholic king, as an especial gift from
him or his Predecessors; It shall not be denied. Lastly, it is he whose
friendship and amity ^is father willed him to embrace and entertain; this must
also be granted: But what of all this? He may not break promise with his
Holiness. True, if the promise be possible; for no man is bound to things
impossible. And is this promise impossible? It is; or at leastwise like to a
promise that stands upon ^mpossibilities; ^r whatsoever cannot be done by a
Prince without offense ^o God, without effusion of blood, without ruin of his
Estate, and without manifest and great prejudice unto his honor and dignity,
that may in some respect be esteemed impossible; and whosoever makes any such
vow or promise, first, it had been very good that he had never made it; and
next* it were very convenient never to put the same in execution; because the
sin that hurts but one man alone, is much more tolerable then that which may
endanger many. This promise therefore, if it were never made, but suggested,
requires no performance; and if it were once made, it likewise ought not to be
performed, because it is impossible, and cannot be maintained without great
effusion of blood, without hurt unto many, and prejudice unto a whole estate.
From this promise therefore unto the fourth Reason, a Reason almost as easy to
be refuted as to be repeated. For the Emperor Constans maintained the Corpse and
College of Arrianus, not for any affection that he ba^e unto them, but because
he thought it part of his charge and duty to conserve and preserve the life of
his Subjects. Theodosius surnamed the Great, Memories de France Ca^ion.
Sleidanus
who was always a most mo^tal enemy unto their opinion, did likewise permit
them to live in company with his other Subject. And Valens and Valentian,
whereof the one was an Arrian, and the other a Catholic, suffered men of both
Religions to live under their Government. The Emperor Ferdinand granted leave
and liberty unto his subjects of Silecia and Lituania, which are Provinces of
Bohemia, to change their Religion. And not long after him, Maximilian the
Emperor licensed them to build Churches after the manner and fashion of
Protestants. Besides the Pope himself, the Dukes of Mantua, Ferrara, Florence,
and Baviera, together with the Seigniory of Venice suffer Jews to live in
their Country. And the Kings of Poland and Moscovia vouchsafe to suffer a
number of Tartarians and Mahometists to lead their lives in their Countries,
Imitating therein the example of Constantine the great, who after that he had
established Christian Religion in Rome, excluded not any Pagans and Infidels
out of Rome. In the Kingdom of Poland, the Greek and Roman Religion was at one
time a long while professed; And now there are many Lutherans, Catholics,
Anabaptists and Calvinists.

Lastly it cannot be denied (and this methinketh should move the King of Spain
most of all) that his Father Charles the 5 after that he had fought a long
while with the Princes of Germany which profess^. Lu^herasme, being aided in
the same Wars by the Pope and all the Princes of Italy, granted at the length
that Peace unto the Protestants which is called the Pe^ce of Aubspurge.
Considering therefore, that al these Popes, Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Princes and
Barons, having no less regard then the King of Spain, of their Souls health,
and hoping to have no worse part then he in the kingdom of Heaven did permit
and do yet permit the professed and sworn Enemies of Christ and of his Gospel,
namely the Jews, to live, nay to be born, and to enrich themselves within
their kingdoms, Dominions, and Principalities; What Shame, D^shonor, or
prejudice can it be unto the King of Spains Catholic Majesty, to give leave
unto his loving and trusty Subjects to adore and worship the same Go^, which
he himself honoreth and reverenceth in such form and manner as they desire? I
know not what should be the cause that he, who is so desirous in all other
things to follow his Fathers (...), Examples, and Counsels, does not vouchsafe
to imitate him in this Toleration, which will be acceptable unto his Subjects,
answerable unto their desires, agr^e^ble unto Gods word, and very pro^itable
for the Adv^ncement of his own reputation. It is (to come unto the fifth Reason)
because the Queen of of England and the King of France will not yield unto any
such Toleration in the^r several kingdoms? Ala^* neither the example of the
one, nor the other can serve to strengthen his cause. For he has not the like
Authority in Flanders as they have in France and England: They are free, and he
is bound; They are tied to no conditions, and he is fastened unto many; and
especially unto these, not to break their ancient Privileges, nor to innovate
any thing without the consent of the States of the Country, by whom he is to be
directed in all matters of great counsel and importance. Besides there must
needs follow far greater Inconv^nience unto him then unto her, by denying
Liberty of conscience unto their Subjects: For, his are so many that require
the same, that above 30000 departed at ^ne time out of Flanders because he
refused their humble Request; and the number of Traditioners in England is so
little, that all that were of any note and name amongst them, were heretofore
and are at this present reduced, into one little Island, nay into no great
house of a little Island; But the late King of France, who was esteemed one of
the wis^st Princes of Europe would not in any wise suffer two Religions to be
professed in his kingdom; but because he would plant one only there, he made
wars a great while against his own subjects, destroying their houses, wasting
their Fields, ruinating their Cities, and Massacring their persons. But who
gave him Counsel so to do? Was it not the King of Spain, or his Pensioners? And
what advantage got he therefore? Truly no other but the ruin and desolation of
his Country: And what end had he of his war before he died? Forsooth such an
end as made him to repent that ever he undertook those wars: And what
continuance had these wars? Certainly they lasted above thirty years, and the
Protestants are now stronger then ever they were. And what issue is come of
these French troubles? Undoubtedly the issue was such, that whereas the Realm
was divided but into two Factions, a little before the Kings death there were
three; and of those three the last was most unjust, pernicious, and execrable;
For in the same one Papist killed another, the son bore Arms against the
father, the brother against the seed of his mothers womb, and the subjects
(being in their opinion of a good Religion) against their King, whose Religion
was as good or better then theirs. It is not then the French kings examples
that moves him; It beseems not his Cathol^ck Majesty to be directed by other
Princes what to grant or what to deny to his subjects: This is the last, and in
effect the best of his Reasons. For it is usual amongst Princes, and therefore
no shame to crave counsel, advice and direction one of another, in matters of
great weight and moment; and happy ha^h that Prince been always accounted who
could and would follow such advice as h^s faithful Friends abroad gave him:
Thence it comes that Princes send Ambassadors one unto another, that they
crave conference one with another, that they have oftentimes Interviews and
solemn Meetings; and according to this custom he either dissembleth
egrediously, or meant truly, that the Ambassadors sent by the Emperor, the
Queen of England, and other Princes of late years to Cullen, should have ended
all contentions and controversies betwixt him and his Subjects. Again, this was
no direction but an admonition, no counsel but a request, and such a request as
might rather have honored then disgraced him: For had it not been a great
glory and commendation unto him, not only to have listened, but also to have
submitted himself unto the motion and final judgment of so many Honorable and
Princely Intercessors? Was it, think you, a dishonor unto Alphonsus King of
Castile, and to Garsias King of Navarre, that they referred the contention
betwixt them for the bounds and limits of their Kingdoms unto the judgment and
decision of Henry the second, King of England? Wise Princes rather then they
will enter into wars, or being at wars continue therein, do usually commit
their controversies sometimes to the determination of their equals, and
sometimes to their far inferiors; and although the cause be far greater, and
of more weight then the controversy betwixt the Spanish King and his Subjects
was, yet they have been content to stand to their doom and judgment. The
contention betwixt Artobazenes and Zerzes, was one of the most famous and
intricate questions that has been betwixt Prince and Prince; Artobazenes
challenged the Kingdom of the Medians, Herodotus.
because he was the first begotten son of his father Darius; and Zerzes thought
himself worthy to be preferred, because his Father was but a private man when
his Brother was begotten, and a King whenas he begat him; and therefore his
Fathers private Patrimony belonged in his opinion unto his Brother, but the
Kingdom was his own Inheritance; the rather because Artobazenes came not only
of a private man, but also of a Mother and Grandfather by the Mothers side
which were not Princes, whereas both his Mother and Grandfather had kings to
their Fathers. This contention by mutual consent was referred unto the Uncle
Artipherus, who after due examination of the Cause, gave the Kingdom unto
Zerzes; and this judgment has ever since remained, and been held for a
lawful sentence and notable president to be imitated in the like occasion even
in these days.

There are few or no Historiographers of France, Holinshed Pol. Virgil. Boethius.
England or Scotland, that mention not the notable controversy betwixt John
Ballioll, Robert Bruise, and John Hastings, Husbands unto the three Daughters of
David King of Scotland, and Coheirs of that Kingdom after the death of their
Brother Alexander; and by common consent of all Historians, this rare and
strange contention was referred unto Edward the first, King of England, who
chose forty, or some say eighty, the one half English men, and the other half
Scotish-men, who having thoroughly discussed every man's right, gave sentence for
John Balliol, who descended of the eldest Daughter of the King of Scotland;
which Award was confirmed by the King.

The Chronicles of Flanders, Annals. Flandriae.
and our Histories testify, that Henry the second, and Philip King of France,
and after them Philip surnamed The Fair, and the Flemings his subjects, after
they had been over-wearied with a long continuance of most cruel and sharp
wars, the first two compromitted their difference unto their Archbishops, and
the later unto men of meanner condition; and yet both the first and the last
stood unto their Arbit^ement. I could allege many other Examples to this
purpose; but they would rather dilate th^n discuss my purpose; and therefore
that which has been said shall suffice for the confutation of part of this
last Reason; And the rest shall be confuted more conveni^ntly in another place.

Then to the third Error. Seeing that his purposes failed him in Flanders, The
King of Spains third Error in entering into League with the Guis^rd^.
that the Hollanders were continually secured against him by the Queen of
England, and that the Princes and Cities Protestants increased daily as well in
number as in power and authority, he thinking that it would redound greatly to
his glory, honor and reputation to profess himself to be head and Protector
of the Holy League which was intended to be made against all Princes, or any
other whatsoever professing Lutheranism, entered into League with the Pope, the
Princes of Italy, the Duke of Lorrain, and the House of Guise, with express
condition, that he as head, and they as principal Adherents should labor,
travel, and endeavor to the uttermost of their power to subvert all those
which made profession of a contrary Religion unto theirs. To sound the depth of
this Alliance, and to understand whether the same shall be profitable or
glorious, honest or commendable for him, it shall be very expedient to enter
into a particular consideration of the powers, qualities, conditions and means
of every one of these Allies; For although some, or most of them have been
spoken of before, when we handled their abilities and means to hurt and annoy
him; yet it shall not be now amiss to declare what strength and sufficiency
they have to help and further his intents and purposes: The Pope as Christ's
Vicar, the Holy Father of the Church, the lawful successor of St. Peter, and
the chief Protector of the Roman and the Catholic Faith (for all these are his
Titles that he challenges, as proper and peculiar to himself) will think that
his sacred Holiness is greatly wronged, if I should not vouchsafe him the first
place in this Alliance; For albeit he very seldom enters into League with
Princes that are of less might then himself; yet be his confederates never so
great, let their charges never so much exceed his, and their Armies (be they by
Sea or by Land) far excel his, as well in number as in valor, yet he claims
a Prerogative to be chief Patron of the confederacy, and Umpier and Arbitrator
of all con^entions that may arise thereof; The most famous Enterprise that has
been of late years, was the Attempt made at Lepanto against the Turk, Mar*
Antonio Arrogo.
by Pius Quintus, King Philip that now is, and the Venetians; For the
performance whereof the Spanish King and the Seigniorie of Venice were at far
greater charges, employed more Galleys, and greater Forces then his Holiness;
and yet the Reverend Father by reason of his usurped prerogative, must needs
have the honor of the first place in that League; and whatsoever debates or
difference fell out in any thing concerning the said League, the same was to be
referred unto his Holiness, and to receive no other end then such as he should
decree and determine; For fear therefore of his heavy indignation, I will not
presume to defraud him of his honor. The Princes of Italy shall have the
second place, and the Peers of France the last. It shall be easy for any man
to make conjecture, and give his judgment of the Popes power and puissance,
that will consider that his City of Rome, That the Pope is not able to yield
the Spaniard any great help.
which is the chief seat, and the greatest part of his strength, retains not
so much as the bare shadow of her ancient virtue; that she loses her
Reputation, Prosperity, Peace and Dignity, as soon as she beginnineth to be
troubled or molested with the factions and partialities of the contentious
Ursini and Colonesi, two notable Families of Rome, that a petty Duke of Ferrara
has presumed to withstand the Popes Ordinances and Commandments, De Comines.
Guicciardine.
that the Florentines warred many years against him, that the Venetians make no
account of his Forces; that the nigher any Prince joyneth unto him, the less he
esteems him; and lastly, that a very small Army of Charles the fifth, sacked,
not many years ago, his Pont^fical Seat, and put him to such a ransom as best
liked the victorious and conquering Emperor. But his Excommunications are more
feared then his Forces, and he has much more money then might; I must needs
confess that many Princes have been excommun^cated by him; but because I shall
have occasion to show what sl^nder account both Kings and meaner Potentates
have made of his turbulent and thundering Excommunications, I will leave them,
and come unto his demean, unto his treasure: For the better determination
whereof I think it convenient to declare unto you what kind of men our Popes
are of late days; some of them are poor Inquisitors, of base parentage,
brought up in beggary, advanced by corruption and preferred unto that Dignity
by Bribes, Rewards and Simony; And they who have been of best birth amongst
them, have been but the younger brothers of Dukes of Florence, of Ferrara, of
Mantua, or of some like mean Prince, and all of them have most commonly spent
their poor patrimony, and the small gains of their former life in the attaining
of their Pontifical Dignity. Besides when they come unto the height of that
Authority, either they spend their Revenues prodigally (as did Paulus Tertius,
who in less then fifteen years wasted 25 millions of Gold; or spare the same
thriftily to buy some estate for their children, as did Gregory the 13th; so
that what with prodigal spending, what with extreme covetousness tending to the
advancement of their posterity, the Popes have not much money otherwise to help
their Allies and Confederates. Moreover, who so shall consider that their yearly
Revenues are mightily decreased, by by reason that Bohemia, Hungary, Denmark,
Sweden, Scotland, Holland, England, and most of France, Flanders and Germany,
are fallen from their Obedience, and vouchsafe not to send them yearly such
Tributes, Pensions, Tenths and other Commodities as they were wont to receive
from them, must needs understand and confess, that there can arise no great
profit from their Alliance and Confederacy: The terror of their interdictions,
of which some Princes, more Religious then wise, have in times past made some
small account; The regard of their Authority, of which when their virtues were
more then now they are, greater reckoning was made then is at this present; and
the converting of their Crociados which were wont to be employed in holy Wars,
into profane uses, are the only means and benefits wherewith they are now able
to pleasure their best friends. Leaving them therefore to their passions and
extreme sorrows conceived for the small hope which they have to recover their
losses, which is in no respect answerable to the extremity of their desire, I
will descend unto the ^rinces of Italy as from a mountain unto a Molehill.

These Princes if they were to give aid and succor unto a King of France, unto
an Emperor, or to any other Prince or Potentate pretending some Right. Title,
or Interest un^o some Dukedom of Estate of Italy, may perhaps yield such help
and Assistance as happily may further such a Princes Enterprise: That the
Princes of Italy cannot greatly respect the Sp^niards.
But as for such a League, and such forces as shall be sufficient to hasten the
utter overthrow and subversion of all Protestant Princes, or to revenge the
great injuries and indignities lately endured by the Spanish king, they are far
unfit and unable to gather together any such strength; and he is greatly
deceived that ca^rieth such an opinion of their might and power, The best guard
that they have is the reciprocal fear which one of them has of another, the
continual and great jealousy which is betwixt them, and the small and slender
Love which one of them bears unto another, every one of them not only
enveighing, but also withstanding by all means possible the advancement of the
other, be it in wealth or in credit, in power or pre-eminence: Their Subjects
are not warlike; their best Soldiers are (as you have heard) of no great value
or estimation; their Courage is soon cooled, their Armies are quickly defeated;
there best Captains by reason of their long Peace, are of mean experience, and
their is scant any Town, City or Country that is not a witness of their
Cowardice, Adversity, bondage and servitude; you shall hear hereafter what
discommodities may arise unto those Princes of Italy which have unadvisedly
entered into this League, and therefore from them unto the Peers of France;
These Princes are no other then Traitors, Rebels, and Conspirators against
their Prince and Country; And therefore detestable before God, odious unto the
world, and execrable unto their Post^rity; For although Princes, according to
the Common saying, like such Treason as any wise is beneficial unto them; yet
all men hate and abhor Traitors, especially such as these be, who having
received great honor, pleasure, and prefermen of their King, did by all mean^
possible endeavor to deprive him of his Crown, Scepter and Life: Their taking
of many Towns, their purpose to seize upon the Kings own person, their desire
to bring him to Paris as a Prisoner, their carriage toward him there, and
their preparation, Army and Hostility against him after his departure from
thence, do abundantly testify and declare their Treason; now what honor can
it be unto the King of Spain to join and associate himself with such men as the
world detesteth, all men abhor, That the Spaniards can neither have pr^fit nor
h^nour by the Leaguers.
and his own Spaniards will not only hate, but also be ashamed to receive them
into their Company, or to harbor them in their houses? For I find in the
Histories of France, Italy and Spain, that whenas the Emperor Charles the fifth
intending to honor the Duke of Burbon, who had revolted from his King unto his
service, prayed one of the chief and principal Dukes of Spain to lodge him in
his Palace; the Duke showing himself therein a greater Enemy to Traitors, then
a Friend to Treason, answered the Emperor, that both he and his house were at
his Majesty's commandment; but if that it pleased him to lodge the Duke
therein, he would set fire thereon as soon as the Duke should be out of it, as
on a house infected with the Treason of Burbon. But Francis the first King of
France used the like help of the Turks and Infidels to be revenged upon his
Enemies; and Lewis Sforza Duke of Milan to make himself the better able to
withstand their violence which went about to deprive him of his Estate, brought
an Army of Turks into Italy; and it is commonly said, that the Queen of England
was in the League with the Great Turk; Why then may not the king of Spain
implo^e and use the help of his Friends in France, of whom because they are
Christians and Catholics, he may have far better assurance and confidence then
of Turks and Infidells?

Truly, I have heard the before mentioned French king greatly blamed for
entering into League with the Tu^k, and his honor and reputation has been, and
still is so much blemished thereby, that a very wise and grave Author of our
time, to cover his fault with some honest pretense, has been enforced to
distinguish how and in what manner a Christian Prince may be at league with the
Turk; The causes for which a Christian Prince may (as he says) enter into
League and Amity with this common Enemy of Christians, are either to obtain
Peace or Truce, or to end a conten^io^ and qu^rrel for any Dominion or
Seigniory, to have reparation and amends for wrong done unto him, or to entreat
leave for his Subjects to trade and traffic i^to his Countries, and not to
yield him any aid against his Enemies: And the same Author adds, that the
said Francis being continually assaulted by the Emperor Charles the 5th and by
the king of England within his own Realm, and not being able to make his party
good against them and other enem^es, who at their instigation and request did
put him ofttimes in great and manifest danger to lose his whole estate, was
counseled by his wisest Friends for his better defense to join in amity with
Sultan Solimon, who was better able then he to interrupt and cross the violent
course which Charles the 5th took to make himself Lord and Monarch of all the
world. Necessity therefore enforced Francis the first to enter into this
League, without the which he had been in great p^rill and hazard of losing his
whole Kingdom; For conservation whereof I read in Histories, that a Predecessor
of the Spanish King called Peter, confeder^ted himself with the King of
Bellemarine, Du Hatllan.
a Sarizi^, married his Daughter and renounced his Faith and profession of a
Christian. Considering therefore that necessity has no law, that Commodity
and sweetness of Rule and Governmen^, makes many good Christians to forget
themselves and their Duties; that extreme malice conceived and borne against
an Enemy, has constrained many Princes to seek to be in League with their very
Adversaries; and that a noble and valiant heart deteste^h nothing more then to
yield unto his Enemies, and labors by all means possible to avoid that
dishonor; No man can can justly condemn Francis the first, or the Duke of
Milan. Now touching the Queen of England, her Majesty having alwais the fear
of God before her eyes, and walking in his ways as much as any Prince of
Christendom, has always thought no better of the Turk then he deserves, as
well because she has nothing to do with him, as for that by reason of the
great distance that is betwix^ her and him, she has less occasion to stand in
fear of his forces then any other Prince of Europe; True it is that in regard
of the late Traffic which some few of her Merchants have into Turkey, to their
great benefit and advantage, her Majesti^ has suffered them to have their
Agent there who carries not the n^me of Ambassador, as the Emperors, the
French Kings, the Spanish Kings, the Venetians and other Christian Princes
Ambassadors do, and yet his Credit is such, that either with favors or with
presents (w^ereof the Turk is very desirous and coveteous) he might have
broken the League of peace and Truce which is betwixt Spain and him, to the
Spanish Kings great hurt and detriment. But he^ Majesty had ^ather that the
H^stories of our tim^ should mention her virtues, then declare her policies,
and thinks it far better that as all men of our Age commend her Beauti^, her
bounti^ and her goodness, so her after-Commers should have occasion to p^aise
and ex^oll her constancy and Religious affection toward God and the Common
wealth of Christendom. But to return to the Spanish league with the Peers of
France, I think no good Christian can think b^tter of them then of a Turk; and
I am of opinion that the League and Am^ty of Turkish Infidels is more to be
este^med then the friendship of these Leaguers, more profitable and
advantageous unto him that shall stand in need thereof, and more assured and
firm^ unto any one that have occasion to rely thereupon; For since that these
Rebels have deserved to lose their Lands and possessions, have incurred the
odious and detestable Crime of Tre^son, and have worthily merited the name of
Traitors and Conspirators, there can be no other League or Amity with them
then is with Thieves and Felons, the society and conversation with whom has
been in all Ages, and in all places accounted as most odious and execrable; yea
by how much a Traitor is more odious and wicked then a Thief, by so much his
Infamy, shame, and dishonor is greater who as^ociateth himself with a
Conspirator, be i^ that he conspireth against his Prince, or against his
Country, or against both. Such as a man's Companions are, such shall he be held
to be in all men's opinions; and he that converseth daily with wicked men shall
hardly be reputed an honest man.

The great and large Privileges which belong unto Princes appointed by God to
rule and govern his people, make me forbear to say so much as I might say in
this place; and yet I may not spare to reprehend and condemn the bad
Consciences of those Consciousles Counselors who have persuaded the King of
Spain to forget and forgo his honor, his Reputation, his blood, and his
Parentage, to join himself with those who may increase the number, but not the
Forces of his Allies. I have oftentimes heard say that the end honors all
the rest of a man's life; Finis coronat opus.
that the elder a man is, the wiser he should be; that the Actions of al men
that are placed in high degree and dignity, are subject to the view, the sight,
the censure and judgment of all men; that a man may easily fall from the top
of honor and glory unto the bottom of shame and infami^; and briefly that all
men with open mouth speak boldly and freely that of Princes when they are dead
which they durst not muter whilst they lived. I could with therefore, that
either the virtues of the late French King, or the affinity, conjunction and
parentage that was betwixt these two Crowns, or the conformity of their
religion, or the remembrance of the greatness and power of France might have
been able to have diverted and withdrawn the mighty Monarch of Spain from the
Amity of those Traitors and Felons of France, to live in peace, League and
Amity with his dear and beloved Brother of France: But the detestable vice of
Ambition, which misleadeth the greatest and wisest Princes of the world, with a
vain hope of good success and prosperous fortune in all their enterprises,
has turned his love into hatred, and covered the spots and blemishes of true
dishonor with a Cloak of false honor and repu^ation. And it seem^th that the
custom of Princes is to receive into their protection such Subjects as other
Princes have banished ou^ of their Realms (although in truth this kind of
Clemency ought to be showed and extended unto Princes only which are
constrained by necessity to fly from their kingdoms, and not unto Subjects)
for succouring of whom many Princes of great friends have become mortal
E^emies; it seems (I say) that this custom does somewhat excuse the Spanish
Kings indiscretion in this action: But wise men consider not so much what men
do as what they ought to do; and true Glory consists in virtue, and not in
show or shadow of virtue; and as Caesar would not have her to wife who was more
defamed by suspicion then by action, so it becomes the Princes of our time to
hate those who are vicious, not in deed only, but in common fame also;
especially whenas it is in question whether the friendship of a kinsman be to
be preferred before the Amity of a Stranger; of a king before that of a
Subject; of one that is equal in power to the greatest Prince of the world,
before those who depend wholly upon the power and authority of others.

And undoubtedly the Guisards of France have no other Credit, strength or
reputation then that which has been derived and given unto them by the late
French King and his predecessors, the which in time will decay and return unto
the place and person from whence it came; even as rivers return unto the Sea,
from whence they have their first original and being. I may therefore boldly
say, that the King of Spain has carried himself very indiscreetly in entering
into League with these Guisards for four principal causes.

The first because the shame and dishonor which will arise thereby shall
always continue, Four causes proving the Spaniards indiscretion in entering
into League with the ^^isards.
and never be forgotten through length of tim^, or voluntary silence of the
Authors and writers of our time.

The second, because the profit arising thereby will be of small con^inuance.
The third because the quarrel betwixt him and France proceeding thereof will be
both dangerous and immortal. The fourth, because the hatred engendered by this
quarrel will rekindle the fire of old dissentions, and revive the memory of
ancient rights, titles and Interests which the Crown of France pretends unto
diverse States lately fallen unto the house of Spain. For the dishonor which is
gotten by wicked ways, cannot so be buried in silence but that it will always
be reported by the Father unto the child, Fama crescit eundo.
and by that child unto his posterity, always finding increase and
augmentation by the report which is made thereof.

And it is and always has been the nature of man to remember one only error,
evil deed or oversight of a Prince far better then many of his virtues,
valiant exployts, or wise and discreet Actions; Witness the common consent and
accord of all Historiographers as well of ancient time as of our Age, who
although in other things they be oftentime^ very contrary the one unto the
other, yet they agree very well in this point, that they all as it were with
one mouth and one voice, speak ill in their writings of the wisest
Philosophers; Orators, Emperors, Kings, Princes and Captains that ever were in
the world.

So the Author that greatly busied himself in commending Alcibiades, Plutarch
in his life.
a great Philosopher says, that as he did many notable deeds, spoke many
worthy sayings, and showed many apparent Arguments of his great wit and
Dexterity, so he was too delic^^e in his ordinary Diet, too dissolute in fond
Love of foolish women, too inordinate in his daily banquets and too superfluous
and effeminate in his usual Attire; To maintain himself in which things he
often times took dishonest rewards and was corrupted with unlawful Bribes. So
he that labored to set forth the praises of Marcus Cato, a notable Sen^tor of
Rome would not conceal that he had let out his money at Interest, that he
became so severe in time that he took a very young damsel descended of base
Parantage to Wife, when he was of such years as required not marriage. So
Plutarch recounting the Valor, Magnanimity, and virtues of Titus Quintus
Flaminius and of Philopaemon, two notable Captains, was so bold as to say, that
the one was Ambitious, Turbulent, and easy to be displeased; and the other
conceited, opinionative, and very hard and difficult to be pleas^d.

So Cajus Marius, by the some Author, who for his valor was called the son of
Mars, for his delicacy and effeminate behavior was surnamed the Child of Venus
so Alexander the great who is commended by many Authors for the greatest and
mightiest Conqueror of the World, is reprehended by as many for that he was
somewhat hateful for his vain glory, and imitated therein those vain Soldiers
who are never well but when they are comm^nding themselves; So Cicero who for
his excellency deserved to be called the Orator, was disgraced in this, that he
was fearful and timorous as well in the field as in his Pleadings, and it is
written of him that he never beg^n to speak but with great fe^r and ^^^mbling.
So Pompey surnamed the great, who had these qualities to make him well beloved,
Temperance in his Life, Dexterity in Arms, Eloquence in his Speech, Faith and
loyalty in his Word, good Grace in his behavior, and an Amiable Carriage
toward all men that had to deal with him, was hated, and in the end ruinated,
because he would endure no Superior. So Julius Caesar, who has this
commendation, that he took a thousand Cities by Assault, subdued more then 300
sundry Nations, took above a Million of Men prisoners, and slew better then an
other Million in the Field (the least of which things the best Captain of our
Age never was nor will be able to do) is greatly blamed, not only because he
was indebted above 700000 Crowns before he bore any Office in Rome, but also
for that he could not endure to have any companion in the administration of the
Roman Commonwealth: So to be short, and to come to the Princes of our Age,
diverse men spare not to speak very ill of Charles the fifth (although he was a
most wise, ve^tuous, and valiant Prince) because he took the Pope prisoner at
Rome, and showed himself very hard and severe unto Francis the first of France,
when he was his prisoner at Madrill; Guicciardine.
and whereas some commend his wisdom for resigning his Empire unto his
Brother, and his Kingdoms unto his Son; Others reprehend his folly and pride
therein, because he did it with a hope and full intention, as they say, to be
chosen Pope, A^ unknown Author in Italian
and with a purpose in his Popedom to give unto his Son all or most of those
States which he held in Italy of the Sea of Rome, meaning thereby to leave in
his house and Family the Government, or the means to attain and usurp the
Regiment and Monarchy of all the world; By these Examples it is apparent, that
the Prince who by any oversight has made himself odious and contemptible,
cannot possibly avoid shame and Infamle.

And for so much as it becomes not any Prince to debauch and estrange the
Subjects of another Prince from their obedi^nce unto their King, the Spanish
King shall in his life time, or after his death be reprehended, for that he
has persuaded and induced the French men to rebel against their Prince and
Country, the which Frenchmen were wont (as I showed you long sithence) to be
counted and reputed the most true and loyal Subjects of the world.

Is it likely think you, that any man will spare him when he is dead, since
during his life we read in some histories, that his own Son, his French
wife, the Prince of Orange, the Counts of Edmond and of H^rne, the late Duke of
Alencon, the Admiral of France the Prince of Condy, the Queen of Navarre, and
the last King of France with many other Princes and Po^entates have been
unnaturally Murdered, cruelly Poisoned, wrongfully done to Death, and horribly
Massacred by his consent and Counsel, Commandment or Approbation? It is
common in every man's mouth that he makes no Conscience to rid his hands of his
enemies by any manner of Wickedness, be it never so execrable and impious. His
la^e in^ent to poison our gracious Sovereign (whose life God long preserve)
testifies thus much; and as many as shall hear of his purpose of Dr. Lopes and
his Accomplices, cannot but esteem his worthy of everlasting Ignominy.

But now to declare unto you that this League cannot be of any long
continuance, I will use these few demonstrations.

First, as many as have read either Ancient or Modern Histories, shall easily
perceive by them, that Fortune, or rather the Eternal, never gave unto Rebels
any long Continuance of their prosperity.

Next, the Common People which easily forsake the heads and chief of their
Rebellion, depart from them so soon as they perceive that their strength
decays; then fear, jealousy, suspicion, distrust, and diffidence always
attend upon Rebels to dismay, daunt and terrify them.

And lastly, these great and Archtraytors are beset with so many d^fficulties
that it is impossible for them to attain unto their pu^pose. For if there be
many that are equal in Authority, credit and reputation, the one alwais
distrusteth the other; And if there be but one upon whom the rest do depend, he
must of necessity please him that comes nighest unto him in Authority, least
that he make the way hard and difficult for him to work his desire and
pleasure. He must content the common People, sati^fie the Gentlemen, and
accommodate himself to the Nature, Covetousnes and Avarice of the common
Soldiers, matt^rs of great difficulty, hardness and impossibility, because
the desires of the Nobility, People and Soldiers are most commonly contrary,
and tend to diverse purposes, the first seeking for advancement, the second for
Peace, and Tranquillity, and the third Coveting nothing more then the
continuance of War. Moreover whereas the wisest amongst them begin to consider
that they have violated the Laws, offended their Kings Majesty, born Arms
against their Prince and Country, against their near kinsmen and their own
^amilies, and that instead of one King (which perhaps fleeced them) they are
now subject unto many Princes who fleece them more, instead of ordinary
charges, they are now charged with new expenses and unsupportable Subsidies,
instead of Cl^mency, Justice, and Mercy, they are now exposed unto I^justice,
Cruelty and Briberie; they lose by little and little their Indign^tion and
Fury, and seek by all means possible to reenter, into the good grace and favor
of their Liege Lord and Sovereign. The chief consp^^at^rs therefore fearing to
be forsaken and abandoned by their companions and ^ellowes in Arms, in the end
are constrained to submit themselves unto their Princes discretion.

And the common People which at their instigation was too pron^ and ready to
rebel against their Sovereign, do sometimes after due consideration of the
indignity of their unnatural disobedience, become so desirous to recover the
Kings favor and good likeing, that to the end the way to attain thereunto may
be made the more easy, they kill the first Authors of their Rebellion, or else
deliver them into the hands of their Prince; Du Hailan.
And if ever Rebels have been left and forsaken by their partak^rs, these
Traitors of France may justly st^nd in great fea^e thereof, because the nature
of Frenchmen is such, tha^ if a man do not take present advantage of their
unnatural heat and fury, but suffer the same to wax cold and to relent, it is
very difficult and almost impossible to revive the same with the best art or
counsel that may be used.

If therefore they shall begin to want money, of which they cannon choose but
stand in great need quickly, because they are poor, and cannot at all times and
on all occasions have present supplies from their Allies, or if the Parisians
(whose custom it has been always to be quickly discontented, and ^asily to
repent themselves of their Folly) depart suddenly from their League and Amity;
if the King of Spain who shall have so much to do on every side, that he shall
hardly be able to defend his own Countries, do not continually send them fresh
relief of men and money.

If the King of France chance to be Superior to his Adversaries in number of
Soldiers and of all things necessary for the m^intenance of his Wars; lastly
if the Princes of the blood shall begin jointly to put their hel^ing hands to
the suppressing of those Rebels, I cannot see how they can possibly hold out
long. And although fortune should show herself so favorable unto these
Traitors, as that they might, in process of time, effect and accomplish their
desires; yet considering that the murderers of Princes are most commonly
murdered, that those who have ascended unto the royal dignity of Kings by
Treason or Rebellion, are thrown down again the sam^ way which served them for
a Ladder to mount and clime up thereunto; that when the Usurper shall divide
the prey and spoil betwixt them that have aided and assisted him, they fall
presently unto contentious brawlings and quarrels; and briefly, that of such
Controversies oftentimes follows the ruin and destruction of him that held
himself well assured of his new gotten kingdom; It is much more to be doubted,
then to be hoped, that whosoever shall be declared King amongst them, cannot
continue long in his place which is purchased by force and violence, and must
needs not only be subject unto the inconstancy and variety of fortune, but
also unto the diversite of humors of men that are inconstant, light, and very
ready to change and alter their opinions. I could allege infinite examples to
prove all that I have said, but I forbear for brevities sake, to trouble you
with a superfluous and needless enumeration of such examples, and let you
understand that these Rebels had long since been suppressed and overthrown, had
not the late King committed diverse oversights after his resolute murder of the
Duke of Guise.

For had he not killed the Cardinal of Guise, Pedro Corneiod^ la ligay
Consideration Franc^se^.
the Clergy had not been so highly offended wi^h him, had he not presently
called the now King to help and succor him, made him his General, and
declared him his immediate Successor, he had not so much displeased the
contrary Faction as he did, and yet he received no great benefit by his coming
unto him; for he brought not above two thousand men with him, and the Nobility
which within a few days after came unto him with their people were about
thirty thousand; again the delay and surcease of Arms for fifteen days
together, after the victory had against the Count of Egmont, gave time and
space unto the Parisians to make sufficient provision of all such things as
they wanted. Secondly the King hindered himself greatly by staying to recreate
and solace himself a while at Corbeit, making a sure reckoning that he had
gotten a final and happy end of his wars, because he had won that Town, which
is as it were the Key of all Victuals that pass by that River to Paris: A
French discours^ written by an unknown Author*
Thirty, had he been so provident in executing all other Peers and Noblemen of
the Duke of Guise his mind with the same Duke, as they were which committed the
Massacre of Paris, he had quickly been ridd of his Enemies. Fourthly, had he
presently after the same murder showed himself in the field with those
Companies that came unto him, and had he not done all things by haifs as he
did, ^e had undoubtedly dismayed and terrified all the Towns adhering unto the
L^ague^s, which were greatly discomfi^ed and amazed with the sudden accident of
the Duke of Guise his death; but after that he saw his Enemy dead, he thought
that he had no more Enemies in the World; this confidence made him so careless,
that he suffered Orleanc^ to be lost, which might have been saved by showing
himself only within convenient time in the Field, and he gave the Duke of Maine
leave to return and fortify himself, and made small account to do any of
those things which within a month after he would gladly have done. The
Leaguers likewise committed their oversights, of which if the King had taken
advantage, he might easily have subdued them.

For after that the Duke of Guise had driven the King from Paris, many
prognosticated, that either the Duke would destroy the King, or that the King
would murder the Duke; For there was no hope and less likelihood, that so
foul an Indignity offered unto a King both of great might and notable valor,
would be put up at the Dukes hands without a revenge; And after that day all
that the Duke did, was begun without providence, continued without justice, and
in end, had a bad and; For when he had mounted almost up to the top of his
desi^es, by force and violence, he a thinking that the Nobility of France
would be highly displeased with his audacious Insolency, and insolent Attempt,
seeks means to pacify the King, and to reenter into his good grace and
favor.

This poor Prince blinded with ambition, and b^so^ted with the love of a
kingdom, thought that a Prince being so injuriously dealt with all as the King
was, would by the goodness of his nature be reconcile^, and he believed that he
might easily find the means to persuade the King to resign his Crown, or to
induce the People to enforce him thereunto: But the King was fully resolved to
have his revenge; he assembled ther^^ore the Estates of France thinking to
find sufficient credit and ^u^horitie in that Assembly to bring the Duke to his
death by Sentence and Judgment; And the Duke on the contrary side supposed,
that in that Assembly he should find friends enough to deprive the King of his
Scepter; But the King failed of his purpose, and the Duke missed his mark, and
yet the King within a small while after effected his desire; but committed
other errors besides the above mentioned, of which the Leagu^rs took present
hold and advantage; they thought that the Kings negligence and the hatred of
the People conce^ved against him for the Dukes death, gave them fit opportunity
to deprive him of the Crown; But withal they considered not how unwort^y the
best of them was to wear the same; and how unable to keep it when it was upon
his head. Again, when they saw that the Dukes death had rather fortified then
weakened their party, they supposed that all was gotten, that nothing remained
to be conquered, that they needed to take no more pains, but to give
themselves unto delights, and to make partition amongst themselves of the
kingdoms and when they came to deliberate who should be their King, they could
not agree amongst themselves upon any certain person; whereas if they had
presently resolved to make the Duke De Main, it migh easily have been
effecte^; but the competitors were many, and there began a debate and emulation
betwixt the Duke and the Marquis Du pont; his cosen the Duke of Aumale wo^ld
not give his head for the washing, and the Dutchesses of Montpensieur and of
Nemurs put in for their best friends, the later for her Son of Nemurs, which
began to win credit amongst the people, and the first for her brother who began
to lose his reputation; and the Duke De Main foolishly gave over the name and
hope of being a King, and accep^ed the Title of Lieutenant of the Crown;
besides, whilst this contention was rife amongst the Nobles, and whilst they
busied themselves in framing a Process against the late King, which Process
endured some eight or nine Months, the people perceiving how pleasant a thing
it was to be subject unto no man, and the chief cities being glad that they had
cast off the yoke of a Monarchy, would not endure any speaking of a new King,
but to free and emancipate themselves as well from the Authority of a Prince,
as of an high Count of Parliament; by the imitation of Paris, they establ^shed
in every City a Council of certain persons of mean and base quality, into
whose hands they pu^ all kind of Authority, and they presumed to limit the Duke
of Maynes Authority, and to set certain controllers over them.

T^is breeds a dislike betwixt the Nobility and the People; and especially
the Officers of the Crown, as the Officers of the Privy Seal, of the
Parliament, of the Exchequers, the Judges, the Treasurers, and all the
Servitur^es of the Monarchy were highly displeased therewith, and would not
give place to, nor go after the Magistrates that were c^e^ted by the People.
Lastly the King of Spain, their chief Patron and upholder, deals but faintly
with them, and is not so ready to help them as they supposed he would be. So
they are enforced to threaten him that they would yield to the King before they
could obtain such help as they expected from him. For although he sent the Duke
of Parma and others to relieve them in their Necessities, yet he st^ndeth in
doubt, that if he should send any great supplies, and God should bless them
with any extraordinary Fortune, that the Duke of Main should be chosen King;
he sees that they were too strong to yield unto his motions; he perceives
that he must keep them low and in continual need of his help; and therefore
when he has once succored them, he withdraws his forces and leaves them
sometimes in such distress that the Duke of Main is constrained to forget that
he is Lieutenant General of the Crown of France, and to his great shame and
dishonor is driven to go seek for Aid of the Duke of Parma, which carried the
^itle but of a Lieutenant unto his Master in one Province. And truly it is
reported that the King of Spain took not the loss of his men at the battle of
Jury, where he received a great overthrow, so grievously, but that he was right
glad to see his partakers reduced to so great an extremity, as that they were
enforced to present him a Blank, and to offer to subscribe to any thing that he
should demand. These faint proceeding of the King, of Spain, these apparent
coutentions betwixt the Leagu^res themselves; and this general coffeehouse
of the common people might have shortened the Wars in France, if the now King
had been of sufficient power to take and make his advantage of them: But I
shall have occasion to show why this advantage was omitted and not taken, in
another place; And therefore to proceed according to my purpose. If you
consider that the Etolians and Arcadians warr^d a long time together for a wild
Boar; that the Carthaginians held long Wars with the People of Piraca for a
Sea-Rovers ship; that there were mortal W^rrs betwixt the Scots and Picts for
a few Dogs which the one Nation had taken from the other, And that the wars
betwixt Charles Duke of Burgondy and the Switzers began but for a cart laden
with sheep skins which Mr. de Romont took from a Switzer who passed therewith
through his ground: Du Haillan Carrion De Comines.
you shall easily perceive and see how ready Princes are to take very light
occasions to war one against another; And this ready desire accompanies most
commonly those Princes who have valiant hearts, Du Haillan Carrion.
good occasions, and ready means to be revenged on their Enemies. It is
therefore to be thought that the now king of France, who is endowed with all
the perfections and virtues which the Almighty of his bounteous liberality
uses to bestow upon Princes, will not suffer the king of Spain to offer him
such wrong as he does without revenging the same. He is valiant and wise, and
undoubtedly he will follow the Life and Actions of his Predecessors; of which
Pipin made wars with the Venetians, because they favored the party of
Nicephorus Emperor of Greece against Charles the great his Father; Philip
surnamed The Fair warred against Adolph the Emperor, because he had taken money
of the king of England to make wars against France; Philip Augustus denounced
wars against France unto John king of England, because he killed his Nephew
Arthur: And Clovis, the first of that name, warred with Alurick king of the
Visgots, because he harbored and received the Exiles of France, and had
suborned certain men to come and kill the French king within his own Realm: And
has not the king of Spain deserved much more then all these the hatred and
hostility of the present king of France? since he sends aid not to the
Enemies, but to the Subjects of the king of France; since he has not taken but
given money to others to make wars against him; since he has not killed his
Nephew, but his own Son; since he not only receveth the Exiles of France, but
counsels the good Subjects thereof to become bad, and the most obedient to
rebel against their king, and hireth not strangers, but his own natural
Subjects to come and murder the French king in his own Palace.

But it may be said that the Spanish king has taken a good course to keep the
Frenchmen out of his kingdom, Objection
by sending his Forces into theirs, and by nourishing and continning the Civ^l
Wars in France.

To this I answer, Answer.
That the Leaguers begin now to lose their credit, that their Forces and
Strength declineth, that their Towns and Partners leave them; and that if they
will not vouchsafe to imitate M. Coriolanus, they must expect the success and
fortune that fell unto the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury in England; M.
Coriolanus taking in evil part that the Romans had rejected a very reasonable
demand which he made unto them, joined with their Enemies, and obtained for
them many battles and victories against his own Country; but being entreated by
his Wife and his Mother, he returned into his Country, and recovered whatsoever
he or his Enemies had taken from Rome.

By whose Example, if the Guisards, being now so weakened as they are, H^linshed
Pol. Virg^l.
will not learn to submit themselves unto their Princes mercy, they must fear
and be afraid, when they hear that the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, after
that they had deprived one king of his Royal Seat and Scepter, and placed
another in the same, were both cruelly murdered in the Field, although there
was a time whenas the one could have obtained whatsoever he would of the common
People, and the other by reason of his Offices had all the chief Forces and
strength of England as well by Land as by Sea, at his disposition and
commandment. Now if these two Earls had no better end but to be slain in the
Field, although they were the mightiest and best beloved Rebels that ever were
in the world: What assurance can the Gu^sards of France have of their good
fortune? What hope in the multitude of their partners, and their fellows in
Arms? What confidence in the favor of fortune which never was, nor never will
be constant in any other thing but inconstancy? Their glory therefore cannot
continue long, their Alliance shall not greatly avail the Spanish king, and the
remembrance and memory of this their Rebellion will always remain fresh, as
well in the hearts of our after-comers, as in the minds of our selves and our
children, because men are more prone and ready to remember the wrongs that
others do un^o them, then the benefits they receive from others. How can the
Frenchmen then forget the subtilty and cunning which the Spaniards used in
taking from them the kingdom of Naples? the rigor and cruelty that was showed
unto Francis the first to make him resign the Sovereignity of Flanders? the
injury and injustice used by Ferdinando king of Castile, Gui^ciardine.
when he usurped and took into his hands the moyetie of the kingdom of Navarr?
and the unlawful violence of the Spanish kings father practiced in the
usurpation of the Dukedom of Milan? And remembering all this, can they want good
occasion to exercise all kind of Hostility against the Spaniards, as soon as
it shall please God to send an end of these Civil Wars? The occasions are
great: And if you remember what has been said of the Strength of France, you
will think that the means which the French king may have to be revenged of
these wrongs, are far greater; and so in this respect the Spanish king has
showed his indiscretion in entering into League with the Guisards; Of whose
Friendship I pray you let us now consider what hold and good assurance he may
have. That the Spaniards can have no good assurance of the Leaguers firm
friendship.
There are diverse kinds of assurances to be taken together; some content
themselves with the faithful promise of their Allies; others require Hostages;
many demand to have some Holds and Towns of strength in their custody: and
there be such as never think themselves safe or well assured, unless they unarm
their confederates; But the strongest and best bond is, in the opinion of the
wisest, a firm conjunction and binding of the Allies together by the way of
Wedlock. Now of all these sorts of Alliances, which has the king of Spain
taken? Or which of them can he take without showing himself very indiscreet?
May he content himself with the faithful promise of his Allies? Will they hold
their promise unto him who have violated their faith unto their Liege Lord and
Sovereign? Has he taken Hostages of them? Will they careful of other men's
lives, who have so small care of their own? Will they give him any strong
holds? With what reason can he detain them, since both they that give them have
no authority or sufficient power to deliver them up into his hands, and he is
not strong enough to keep and defend them when the has them? Will he unarm
them? Take their weapons from them, and what good can they do him? Will he make
them assured to be at his devotion by a fast bond and linck of marriage? What
honor, or rather shame shall it be for him to mingle his Blood, his Honor,
and his House with the Infamy, Dishonor, and Ignominy of Rebels and Traitors?
But of Traitors some one of them will become a king: O poor and unadvised
Prince, who shall spend his money to honor him who deserves no honor, and of
whose faithful friendship he can have no fast assurance. But how shall he
become a King? By the Forces of Spain? O simple and indiscreet King, who
thinks to purchase a great and invincible Kingdom from a Stranger, when he is
not able to recover a poor Country taken from him by his own Subjects. But by
what means, and by what color shall he become a King? By the Example and
imitation of Hugh Capet, who (as you have heard) was made King by showing unto
the Pope and the People of France, that in choosing a King, the man that is
present ought to be preferred before him that is absent; he that governs in
Person, before him that rules by a Deputy; he that is both careful and
virtuous, before him that is careless and vicious. But what manner of imitation
is this, unless you call it an imitation when as a man does all things quite
contrary to his Actions whom he proposes to himself to follow and imitate? For
he that was deposed by Hugh Capet governed by his Lieutenant, and the present
King of France rules by his own person; he was hated by reason of his great
negligence, and this King was beloved for his great pains and diligence: He was
insufficient to Govern, and this King has given many Experiments of his great
wit and sufficiency; And to be short, This Hugh Capet, who is proposed as a man
worthy to be imitated by the Arch-Traitor that would make himself king of
France, used as his most principle reason this Argument to show that Charles
Duke of Lorrain, and Uncle unto Lewis the fifth, deserved not to be chosen
king, because that in all controversies that fell out in his time betwixt the
Empire and the Kingdom of France, the said Charles showed himself more
affectionate and friendly unto the Emperor then unto the French King. How
blind then are those Guisards, who cannot see that when they shall desire the
people to make choice of one amongst them to be their King, the greater part
will hardly yield to their motion? they will cry out that their King is yet
alive, that it is not reason to take the crown from his head, and to put it
upon a Strangers, or upon one of his inferior Vassals; that many can witness,
that in all contentions betwixt. France and Spain, they have always showed
themselves more favorable unto Spain, then unto their own Country; And lastly,
that the Duke of Lorrain because he was a Prince of the Empire, had more Reason
to favor the Emperor then the Guisards have to befriend the Spanish king, whom
they should hate and abhor, because he loves not their Country. A Book
written in Latin as it is supposed by the Archbishop of Lions.
You have seen the Spanish kings indiscretion in contracting this League: Now
give me leave to show you the League^s great solly in subscribing thereunto.
The Causes which moved them to enter into this League, were (as you understand
already) very many: But it appears not how true, or rather how false their
pretentions are: This must be discovered, and then their folly cannot be
concealed.

They lay to their late kings charge, that he was an Heretic, a Parricide, a
wicked and impious despiser of God, a Tyrant, and Hypocrite, a perjured Prince,
and a man given over to all kind of vice and wickedness.

They charge him further, that he wasted the Revenues of the Crown, and that he
committed many other follies long since mentioned. To all these, The same
Authors accusations refuted.
that their malice, falsehood and folly may appear, I will answer briefly; A
full denial of all that they say might serve for mine answer, were it not that
I seek by reason and truth to confound them that have neither reason nor truth.
I must therefore run through the kings life, and to purge him of the crime of
Heresy, I think it convenient to declare what he did both before and after he
was king, against those whom the Leaguers term Heretics.

Now to omit other matters, testifying his great zeal and affection unto the
Roman Catholics before he was king of France, I will prove the same by four
principal Arguments. First, it is apparent unto the world, that he was one of
the chief Authors of the Massacre of Paris, which was general through Erance,
and practiced with a great hope utterly to extirpe all the Protestants in
France: Next, it is certain that no Prince living could show greater hatred,
stomach, or courage against men of a contrary Religion unto himself, then he
did at the ^iege of Rochel, before which he lay, until he was fetched thence
into Poland. Thirdly, it is notorious unto as many as know any thing of his
Election unto the Kingdom of Poland, that there was nothing that more estranged
the Affections of the Electors from him, then his great hatred showed against
the Protestants, both in the time of the massacre, and also at the siege to
Rochel; Insomuch that Mr. of Valence, who was his Ambassador unto the Electors,
was fa^n to publish a Book, wherein he more cunningly then truly derived the
fault and crime of that M^ssacre from him unto the Duke of Guise, who took the
same in so evil part, that after the king was est^blished in Poland, the said
Duke published an other book wherein he cleared himself, and laid the chief
blame upon the late French king. Lastly, whenas he had ruled a while in Poland
and saw the diversities of Religions there, he loathed the Country, detested
their opinions, and could hardly be brought to take the Oath which bound him to
permit and tolerate a plurality of Religions in that kingdom.

But it may be thought, that as many Princes have showed themselves honest,
O^jection.
virtuous and religious before they were kings, to the end they might the
better attain unto a kingdom; so he being assured by his Mother, and by a vain
prophecy, that she should live to see all her sons kings, and knowing that he
should hardly come to the kingdom unless he gave some manifest signs of his
zeal in Religion, during the time that he lived as a Subject under his Brother,
repressed his nature, dissembled his manners and disguised his Religion, that
Heresy might not be a bar unto him for the kingdom.

In the refuting of this Objection, I shall have occasion to confound many of
his Actions together, Answer.
which will serve to confute some other crimes laid to his charge. When his
bother Charles the ninth died, he was in Poland, where hearing he news of his
death, he took such a course for his departure from thence, as highly
commends his wisdom, and manifestly declares his great and natural love and
affection unto his native Country, with which course it shall be very requisite
and expedient to acquaint you thoroughly, because his Adversaries draw from
hence their principal Arguments to prove his Infidelity, and the beginning of
his evil Government; for where as he was (say they) bound by faithful promise
and oath to contnue in Poland, and to have an especial care of the Wealth and
welfare of that Country, he left and abandoned them when they had most need of
him, as may appear by the Letter that was sent unto him after his departure, by
the principle Peers, Nobles and Senators of that Realm. It is not unknown unto
any that know the State of France, and are conversant in the writers of the
later Accidents thereof, that he was very unwilling to go into Poland, because
that he saw that his brother was not likely to live long, and that he dying, in
his absence the kingdom, which was always to be preferred before the Crown of
Poland, might be wrongfully tranferred unto his Brother, or unto some other
whom his Brothers young years, or his absence might encourage to affect the
same. This consideration moved him not to give his consent unto that journey,
before that his Mother faithfully promised to revoke him with all possible
diligence, if his Brother should chance to die. And some write, that at his
departure, his mother, whether it were to make him the more willing to go, or
that she was resolved to take such order that Charles the ninth should not live
long, said unto him; Take not his departure (my son) grievously, for it shall
not be long before thou shall return: Let it be spoken either to comfort and
encourage him; or with her foreknowledg and prejudicate opinion; he was scant
settled in Poland when a Messenger came unto him, to signify his brothers
death; This Message being delivered, he wisely and providently called together
the Nobility of Poland, imparted unto them his Brothers death, required their
Counsel in a case of such difficulty as greatly perplexed his Wits, and not
lightly troubled the wisest amongst them.

The first thing that was decreed, was, that the Nobles should mourn for him,
in the same manner, and with the same solemnities that they usually observe in
mourning for their own Kings, whereby they signified their great love which
they bore him.

The next matter that was resolved, was to dispatch a present Messenger into
France, with Letters of Credit unto the Queen his mother, requiring her for him
to take upon her the Regency of France, until his return.

And the third Conclusion of their consultation was, to call a general Assembly
of the States, and therein to deliberate and consult what might be best for the
King to do, whether to return into France, or to continue and remain in
Poland.

In this interim, he calling to mind the trubulent Estate of France, the young
years of his Brother, and the Ambitious and aspiring minds of diverse of the
French Nobility: And li^^wise understanding, that the Peers of Poland fearing
his sudden departure, were about to take some order for preventing the same,
determined with himself to depart thence before his going should be known,
as well because he would not have the same hindered and crossed by the Nobility;
as for that he knew it would be very dangerous for him to pass homeward through
the Countries of diverse Princes that bore him no great good will, if he should
depart thence as that they might have any foreknowledg and intelligence of the
time of his departure, and of the way which he went in returning into France.

This resolution thus taken, he writes a letter with his own hands unto those
in whom he reposed greatest confidence, and signified unto them, that since
the time of their last conference, he had received such Intelligence out of
France, as gave him just occasion to hasten thither in Post, and not to attend
the general Assembly of the States of Poland; he promises to return so soon
as he could conveniently; prays them to excuse his sudden departure unto the
rest of the Nobility; And for such matters as his leisure would not permit
him to committ unto his Letter, he desires them to give credit unto a
faithful Counselor of his, whom he left behind him with further instructions
for them: The Nobility understanding by his own Letter, and these men's
reports (mark the love they bore him, and the care which they have of him)
sent presently a Nobleman in Post after him, to beseech him to return; and
wrote their Letter un^o the Emperor to certify his Majesty, that his hasty
return into France proceeded not of any offense given unto the King by them,
nor of any evil opinion conceived by the King against them, but of some urgent
occasion requiring his presence in France: They rested not here; but when they
saw that he returned not in such time as they looked for him, they wrote a
large Letter unto him wherein they declared how lovingly they consented to
choose him before a number of other P^^nces that were competitors with him; how
honorably they sent for him into France, how royally they received him; how
dutifully they carried themselves toward him; how carefully they provided for
the safety of both his kingdoms, as well of that which came unto him by descent,
as of that which he received from their Election; how greatly he was honored
by their choice, and how dangerously he had forsaken them: they prayed his
return if it might stand with his good liking, if it mig^^ be to his benefit;
if not, they humbly besought him to consider in what danger they stood of
Foreign Enemies, what troubles hung over their heads by reason of the hatred
and quarrels that were betwixt them and the Princes of Walachia, Scythia, and
Muscovia, and how needful and necessary it was for them not ^o be long without
a King, whose presence might comfort them, whose counsel might advise them,
whose experience might direct them, whose Authority might govern them, and
whose Credit might countenance them. They forgot not the Inconveniences that
had happened unto them since his departure, nor the difficulty and impossibility
to provide for their redress, and their own safety without his presence; for
that it is an inviolable Law in Poland, that although the States of the Country
have decreed Wars against an Enemy, yet it can neither be denounced nor
prosecuted without the consent and suffrage of their King.

These necessities being thus expressed, they set him down a peremptory day
within which to return, with a plain intimation, that if he shall not return
by that day, they will proceed unto the Election of an other King; beseeching
him not to think that they will choose another for that they are weary of him,
or desirous to forsake him; there is no such conceit lodged in their hearts, no
such Cogitation entered into their heads; but they and he must consider that
Poland is so situated, that barbarous Enemies do environ it on every side, and
that it is the stay of all Christendom, and that therefore it behooveth them to
be careful when others are negligent, and to watch that others might keep in
quiet without danger. And lastly, that these premises well and duly
considered, such a kingdom cannot be long without an Head, without a Captain,
without a King.

He receives these Letters, and they receiving no such Answer from him as
might assure them of his return unto them by the day appointed, proceeded to a
new Election: And hence his Enemies derive their best Arguments to condemn him
of Infideltie, and Heresy; Of Infidelity, in that he returned not according
to his promise; and of Heresy, in that living there amongst a number of sundry
Sects, and Sectaries, he learned to bear with Heretics.

I find in the Histories of Poland, that when the States had agreed upon his
Election, the Ambassadors which he had sent into Poland about those Affairs,
were sworn in the name and behalf of their Master, by the Archbishop of
Cracovia, to maintain, uphold, conserve, and increase the Ancient Laws,
Rights, Liberties, and Immunities of the kingdom of Poland, and of the great
Dukedom of Lituania. The which Oath being thus taken, the Palatine of
Cracovia, being high Marshall of the Kingdom of Poland, and the great Captain
of Samogitia, being Marshal of the great Dukedom of Lituania, presently
proclaim him King of Poland, and Duke of Lituania: Here is no promise to abide
with them for ever; Here is no Oath not to return again into France; Here is
no Bond to tie him to continual Residence: And though he promised to return at
his departure, yet you shall understand, that although he could (...) would
have returned, yet he had small occasion to return unto them: For first the
kingdom of France is far better then that of Poland; Next few Princes have
ever left their native Countries unto the Government and administration of a
Lieutenant, to rule themselves in a Foreign Dominion: Then he found his own
kingdom at his return, in such broils and contentions, that he c^uld not
possi^ly appease them to return into Poland at his day prefixed: And lastly,
they not admitting his lawful excuses, chose another king before h^e refused
to come back unto them.

This last cause is sufficient to excuse his not returning into that kingdom:
And this is so true, that when I was in Italy, I remember that it was a fresh
news that the Polacks had sent an Ambassador unto the Pope to excuse their
sudden choice of their new King, and to do such ceremonies unto the Pope as in
such cases is required. This Ambassador p^ssed by Padua, where I saw him, and
he stayed there so long, that he spent all the money that was allowed for his
Journey to Rome and home again, before he went thence. The cause of his long
stay, was the Protestation that was made by the French Ambassador residing then
at Rome, and requiring the Pope not to accept of the said Ambassador, as an
Ambassador sent unto him by the lawful King of Poland, because the French King
his Master had not resigned his Right and Title unto that Crown: And the
validity of this exception was so long in debating, that intimation being given
to the Poland Ambassador not to proceed any further on his Journey toward Rome,
until the same question was fully decided, he was enforced to continue so long
as I have said in Padua, to the great hinderance of himself, and of all his
company. Besides, as our Kings still carry the Title of Kings of France, in
remembrance of their Right unto that kingdom; so the late King of France ca^sed
himself to be called King of Poland until his dying day, in token that he
never had resigned his Interest and claim thereunto.

This Argument brought against his fidelity is sufficiently refelled. It
rests to refute the exception made against his carriage and Government in
Poland. This shall need no great Confutation, because it appears by the
aforementioned letters of the Senato^s unto him, and the Emperor after his
departure, that there was no d^sl^ke conceived against him; and the earnest
entr^aty which was made unto him to return, testifies the good opinion, hope,
and confidence which they had to be well and wisely ruled by him.

Now whereas it is said, that he learned to be favorable unto Heretics in
Poland: It may be that he conversed with some of them whilst he was there,
because he could not otherwise do (their general Assemblies and meetings
requiring his presence, and consisting of such Peers and Nobles as were of
diverse Religions) But it appeare^h by his letters written unto his especial
Friends of that kingdom when he departed thence, that he had no great
confidence or trust in them that were contrary unto him in Religion. For,
besides the letter that ^e wrote to the General States of all the Country, he
wrote unto certain choice men, as unto the Bishop of Cinavia, unto the Palatine
of Cracovia, unto the Marshall of Eboronius, unto the Vice Chancellor Wotkins,
unto the Castellan of Meymcimer his Vice-Chamberlain, and unto the Marsh^l of
the Court of Lituania, all which were very zealous and earnest Catholics, and
the only men of whom ^e made any ^eckoning, during his short abode in Poland.

Thus I have freed him from suspicion either of Heresy, or of any favor showed
unto H^reticks whilst he was abroad: Now let me examine his li^e at home, and
see whether until his dying day he might be justly ^axed or touched with the
crime of Heresy.

He came to Lions about the 9 of September, in the year 1574 where the Que^n
his Mother, the Duke of Alencon, his Brother, the King of Navarre, Charles
Cardinal of Guise, and others met with him: The 10 of September, (a short space
of recr^a^ion and solace after so long a Journey) he falls to consult with
all those before nam^d, what means were best to be used to renew Wa^rs against
those whom they termed Hugonetts; he beseig^th Pusania upon the Roane, and
takes the same the 5 of October, assaulteth Mombrim, lays seige to Lioron,
and never left in the dead of Winter to War against the Protestants, until he
took a little Truce during the solemnity of his Coron^tion: Not long after his
Coronation, there came Amb^ssadors unto him from the Switzers to entreat
liberty of Conscience for the Protestants of France; They are heard with small
favor, and their Petition rejected with so great indignation, that the Quee^
Mother was fain to pac^fie her son in h^s great rage and fury: The Protestants
require aid out of Germany: Duke Casimer comes into France: The Prince of
Conde grows strong; the king of Navarre flies from the French Court unto
him: the Catholics want money, the P^pe sends them 400000 Florins. The Duke
of Guise is sent to meet with Casimir, either to repel him with force, or to
deceive him with policy; and because they feared the king of Navarre, diverse
ways and means are practiced ^o make him suspected unto the Prince of Conde;
immediately after the Duke of Guise, follows Mounsieur the kings Brother with
greater troup^s; but both he and the Duke finding themselves not able to
encounter with the Prince of Conde and the Duke of Casimir, Mounsieur receives
the Duke with great Fri^ndship in Burgony and talks very familiarly with him.

To be short, the king and Queen, and Casimir meet; a Peace is concluded; all
offenses are forgiven, and liberty of conscience is granted to be used in all
places saving Paris. The Duke Casimir dep^rteth; and he is no sooner gone, but
the Catholics cry out against this peace; the Citizens of Paris tread the
Articles thereof under their feet. A general Assembly is called at Bl^ys. The
king of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and the Mashal Damule come not to this
Assembly. The Articles of the beforenamed Peace are abrogated, and a full
resolution is taken to subvert the Prot^stants, or to enfo^ce them to receive
the Counsel of Trent. The Decrees of this Assembly are sent to the Prince of
Conde, Declaration del Estate de France en temps les Roys Henry 2 Francis 2 and
Charles 9.
and they are required to subscribe unto them; which they refuse to do. The
king is disco^tented, and swears not to leave until he has u^terly
overthrown the Protestants. He writes unto Duke Casimir, and unto the
Lansgrave of Hesse, requiring them not to give any more succor unto the Prince
of Conde. The one answers the king gently, and prays him to keep the late
concluded Peace; and the other threateneth that if the same be not observed, to
return into France with far greater strength then he brought thither the year
before. New troubles begin, but are quickly ended by reason of Mounsi^urs going
into Flanders, and taking upon him the defense and Patronage of that Country.

This is the kings behavior and carriage before the holy League, the which
begins in the year, 1585.

Of this League three especial causes are pretended; The Troubles of France,
the kings sterility, and the right of succession, which belongs unto the king
of Navarr. By the confederates in this League these things are required; That
the Catholic Religion, and the Nobility that professed the same, may be
restored unto their ancient dignity; That a Parliament might be called, that
Tributes may be gathered for the king and the kingdom; that extraordinary
exactions may be mitigated; that ev^ry third year a Parliament may be held. And
lastly, that an Army of 16000. footmen, and 3000 horse may be gathered and
maintained with the kings treasure against the Hugonets, and the same Army to
be lead by the kings own person, or by the Duke of Guise, as his Lieutenant
General. They set fo^th an Apology containing their Griefs and these Petitions,
and end the same with a promise to lay down their weapons, if the king will be
content to subscribe to these Articles, and to overthrow the Protestants.

The king of Navarr finding himself to be the mark whereat these Leaguers shot,
published his Apology, proves himself to be no Heretic, Apostate, Persecutor,
or Rebel; shows that the Duke of Guise is the only Perturber of the peace
and quiet of France, and that he cannot feel the wound thereof because he is a
stranger; and lastly, for the ending of all troubles without more effusion of
blood, challenges the combat.

The late King published likewise his Answer to every Article, and promises
that all these things shall be done answerable to Gods Word and the prescript
rule of Justice; praying the Leaguers, that since both he and the Queen are yet
young enough to have children, and that children are the Gift of God, they will
not rashly think him to be without all hope of children.

Here I might trouble you with the rehearsal of many examples of many Rebels
like unto these, who when their demands have been so reasonably answered as
these were, desisted from wars, or had but an evil issue. But I must restrain
my self, and labor to be short, otherwise I shall be both too long and
tedious. What could a king, nay the most absolute king of the world, the
mightiest king of Europe, do more then this king did? Or what would they
require more at this kings hands then he performed? He entered not into this
League; would not be one of their confederates; Hinc nostri fundi Calamitas;
But he seems to allow the proscription and disinheritance of Navarr; he
banisheth all Protestants out of the Realm; he answers the king of Denmark,
who becomes a suitor for them, that he neither can nor will have Peace with
them; he writes to the Prince of Germany, who likewise entreated his favor
for the Protestants, That he knows well enough what to do without their
counsel, and marvelleth that they have so great leisure as to meddle with other
men's matters, and especially with such things wherewith they have nothing to do.

This is not enough; He provideth an Army against the Protestants, he sends
to encounter with the Forces of Germany that were coming into France to succor
them; The Duke of Guise overthrows them; and the kings Brother-in-Law, the
Duke of Ioyesa is overthrown by the king of Navarr, with the loss of his own
life, and of 12000. of his Soldiers. The Duke of Guise made proud and insolent
with this victory, and having gotten above 120000 Crowns by the spoils of the
Enemies returns to Paris, boasts of his conquest, prefers himself before
his idle and loytering king, (as he terms him discovers his secret
intentions more openly then he did before, and seeks how he either might make
away the king, or thrust him to a Monastery. And when he heard that his secret
practices were revealed unto the king by the Duke of Espernon, he is sore
troubled, and labors to free himself from all manner of suspicion; What way
takes he to bring this to pass? Submits he himself unto the king? Clears
he himself of the Accusations laid to his charge? Craveth he pardon of his
insolency? He does; But how? Forsooth, in such manner, that even a man with one
eye might easily see that he dissembleth. He comes to Paris with a small
Troop, but so disposes his Army that his intention to carry away the king by
force could not be hidden. He craveth conference with the king, is admitted to
his presence; They spend three whole days together in conference; he so
plays his part, that the king leaves to suspect him, removes the Duke of
Espernon from the Court and his company, who had revealed his secrets, and is
angry with the said Duke for accusing him wrongfully. What follows? God who
knows the inward thoughts of all men, and has an especial care of Princes
^afety, by a sudden and unexpected accident, lays open his dissimulation, and
bewrays the Dukes Treachery.

The king seeing that armed men came into Paris in great Troops by night and
day, sets his Switzers to watch and ward in every street of Paris. It
^ortuned that a Switzer by chance was stricken by a Parisian, with whom he had
some private quarrel; hereof follows a great slaughter. The Duke of Guise
commits the Switzers to prison, besetteth the Lover with a Garrison of
Soldiers: The king begins to be afraid, he flees from Paris secretly,
takes his mother thence with him, commende^h the Duke of Espernon his Faith
and Loyalty, and escapes the danger of the Lion that lay in wait for his life,
for that time, but is to die the death within a short time after, not by the
sharp and merciless sword of the proud and ambitious Duke (which had been more
Princelike) but by a short and poisoned knife of a Jacobin Friar, which was too
base a death for the greatest Monarch of the World.

But again to the Duke; who hearing that the king began to sound the depth of
his Treasons, and to suspect all his proceedings, to remove his many doubts,
and to recover his good opinion, sends certain Ambassadors unto him, (if they
may be termed Ambassadors that go from a Rebel unto a king) of his own, and of
diverse Cities and Provinces which he had drawn to his own Faction, and had
always ready at hand. By the mouth of these Ministers (sufficiently instructed
what to say) he protested that nothing was further from his thoughts then to
seize upon the kings person; For if he had had any such mind, any such
intention, he might have wrought his pleasure upon him when he had him in Paris.

First therefore he desires, that the Duke of Espernons malice and untrue
Accusations might carry no credit, at the leastwise not breed any disgrace and
discredit.

Next, that whatsoever has been heretofore done, or said, might be buried in
oblivion.

Thirdly, that the Duke of Espernon, and his brother Mr. de Valetta might be
banished the Court disturbers of the Common Peace.

Fourthly, that the Government of Normandy might be given unto the holy League.

Fifthly, that his Brother the Duke of Main might be created great Master of
the kings Palace, and the Cardinal of Bourbon made Governor of all France.

Sixthly, that two Armies might belevied, and maintained at the kings charges
against the Hugonets, and one of them to be sent into Picardy, under the kings
or the Duke of Guise his conduct, and the other into Dolphine, of which the
Duke of Main must be General.

Lastly, that the king of Navarr, with all his Adherents, and all other
Heretics, might be thrust out of the Court and utte^ly destroyed, and a
Parliament presently called, wherein they might consult of matters of greater
weight and consequence.

The king perceived by these unreasonable demands that their pleasure and
purpose was to make him a king of Poland in France, that is, such a king as
should carry the bare (...) and Name of a king, and others should rule,
thinking it high time to call his wits together, to be in no longer subjection,
and to begin to dissemble with them who go about to deceive and subvert him by
cunning and dissimulation; he therefore yields to all that was demanded,
commands an Assembly of the three Estates to be held the next September at
Bloys, exhortethall his Subjects unto a general Peace, and devise^h all means
possible to supplant the Duke of Guise. To this Parliament came the most and
best Peers of the Realm. The Duke of Guise absenteth himself, either for fear,
because his guilty conscience accuses him, or of set purpose and cunning,
because he seeks to be entreated. In his absence they began to consult of
great matters, in all which the king rule^h not, but is ^uled; he signifies
unto the Nobility th^re assembled, that he takes himself greatly bound unto
them for their good and wholesome counsel, professes himself to be unable to
Govern so turbulen^ a kingdom any longer, desires to be eased of s^ great a
charge, and thinks it expedient, both for the Commonwealth, and for himself,
to imitate the example of Charles the fifth, and to shut himself; up as a
Penitentiary in some Monastery; and therefore he praye^h them to consider to
whom he might best surrender his Crown. But if his judgment might be of any
fo^ce and weight with them, no man should contend for it. For no man was equal,
much less to be preferred before the Duke of Guise; He is valiant in Arms, wise
in Counsel, zealous in Religion, faithful to h^s Country, and wants nothing
requisite in a king but the name of a king; He is heard with great attention,
believed without any contradiction, and the Duke is sent for with all speed
possible. It is no need to bid him come, he flies, he seems to be in Heaven;
but falls as suddenly as Lucifer did down to hell. The king calls him into
his private Chamber, pretending to have some great occasion to confer with him;
before the rest of the Nobility he gives him into his hands certain Letters of
his own handwriting s^nt unto the king of Spain, but intercepted, by which he
is convinced to have ^ought the kings untimely death, and the unlawful
possession of his Crown: He ^alleth down upon his knees, humbly bes^echeth the
kings pardon; And whiles with frivolous Protestations, and false Oaths he
labors to clear himself, he is not so cruelly as justly murdered in the
king presence.

The Arch-Traytor being thus executed, the Queen Mother allowed the execution,
praises her Sons wisdom, thanketh God that it has pleased him to put that
counsel into the Kings head, and to give him grace to execute the same; and now
(says she) my Son plays the king indeed.

The Parisians are presently certified of the Dukes death; there is weeping and
gnashing of Teeth; the Crochilers have lost their Countenance, the Fac^ious
their Father, the Seditious People their ambitious Patron, and the Malicious
Sorbonists their Religious Protector. What follows? Sudden accidents must
have sudden consultations; new devises, hasty resolutions, hasty executions,
and the new year must begin wi^h new Treasons: They choose the Duke of Aumale
for their Head; they draw the kings picture in the dirt through the streets;
they rob and ransack his Exchequer, his Palace, his Storehouses; and for their
last resolution, they conclude that he must be no longer their king.

According to this conclusion, after that their City was hardly beset, and they
had almost endured as hard a siege as the Citizens of Jerusalem, they send out
a desperate Jacobin Friar, as their Judith to behead Holofernes, to execute
their doom and devilish sentence upon the Lords anointed, and their lawful
king. The Friar goes to the kings Camp, which was at St. Clovis, feigneth to
have Letters of great weight to deliver unto the king; he is brought to his
presence, kindly received, (for the king always loved those Friars too well)
and lovingly willed to declare the cause of his coming; he delivers his
Letters; the king reads them seriously, and the Jaobin, more like a Judas
then a follower of St. James, seeing the kings doublet loose about him, aiming
at a place where he might be sure to dispatch him, whilst he was busied in
reading the Letters, thrusts a poisoned knife into his Bowels of which wound
he died within a few hours after.

You have heard his Tragedy, his Reign, and his End, and what can you find
that savoureth of Heresy? Was it Heretical to persecute those whom they call
Heretics before he Reigned, and as long as he reigned? Was it Schismatical to
proscribe, banish, and massacre them? Was it Apostatical to proclaim and make
Wars against them, whenever and wheresoever the Guisards required him? Was it
irreligious and hypocritical for him in a Lent time, when men use to be
penitent for their Sins, to whip themselves while the blood follows, by his
own Example to induce the Cardinal of Lorrain, and others his chiefest
Counselors and Courtiers to do the like? Was he a despiser of God, who with
consent of the Popes Holiness, to show his zeal, and to leave an Eternal
Monument thereof, did erect a new order of Knighthood of the Holy Ghost, and
took an Oath to live and die in defense of the Catholic Faith? Was it impious,
and an Act not beseeming a Christian Prince, to go in person, and accompanied
with most of the Peers of his Realm in Procession bare-headed and barefooted?
If none of these things be Heresy, Apostasy, and contempt of God, and
Religion; then undoubted^y the late French King, having done all these things,
was no Heretic, no Apostate, no Schismitick, no despiser of God, but a
Zealous, a Religious, a Catholic, and a most Christian Prince.

But the Duke of Guise his death is the matter that is most urged, Objection.
is the sore that most grieveth, is the objection that needs a present and
large confutation: He was murdered without any desert, without any rightful
administration of Justice, without any manner of proof, that he had committed a
Crime worthy of death. God said unto Cain where is thy brother Abel; He said
unto the woman accused or Adultery, Where are thy Accusers? He said unto his
Disciples, In the mouth of two or three consists a Truth; He said unto the
Judges of the Earth, Be ye wise and discreet in your judgments. And why said
he all these? Forsooth, to show that in every Capital Cause there ought to be
an Accuser, diverse witnesses, and a Judge to give Sentence according unto Law,
and unto his Conscience.

Truly the Laws of France, Answer.
and the Laws of all Nations require, That the French King had just cause to
kill the Duke of Guise.
that a man being held guilty of any Crime, be it never so odious, never so
horrible, be called unto Judgment, and be convinced by his own confession, or
some other pregnant and forcible proof, before he can be condemned. But if the
crime whereof he is accused be so manifest that all the world knows it, that
he cannot deny it, and has nothing to say for his defense; it is lawful to
condemn him, yea, to execute him without hearing his Cause; especially, if by
giving him notice of his Arreignment, you give him time and opportunity to
escape without punishment: The Word of God says, Thou shall do no murder; But
the Laws of Nature, the Laws of Nations, yea, the Laws of Princes say, That it
is better to kill then to be killed: The Apostles have taught, that the
testimony of two or three witnesses is sufficient in any Cause; but the Civil
Laws require sometimes seven, other times five, and commonly they are contented
with two; and by Canonical constitutions according to the degrees of dignities
of Ecclesiastical persons, the testimony of seventy two, of sixty four, of
twenty seven, and of seven is oftentimes requisite and necessary. God has
commanded every man to do according to his conscience; but the Laws of Princes
command all Judges to give judgment according to the proofs and allegations
that are made before them. I may therefore boldly say, that not only the Pope,
(unto whom the Canonists only attribute this power and authority) but also
every lawful secular Prince (unto whom God has commanded that every soul
should be obedient) may, upon good occasion, and consideration of some
circumstances, qualify, and interpret the Laws of God. He that strikes with
the sword, shall perish with the sword, says the holy Scripture; and there is
no express commandment given not to suffer Malefactors to live. But Humane
Policy has thought it convenient and equitable, that children because they
know not what they do, that mad men because they are deprived of the use of
Reason and Understanding, that any man kills one another by mischance,
because he offends through ignorance, and not of malice: And lastly, that an
honest man, if he chance to kill a Thief by night or by day, in defending his
own person or goods, because it is lawful to repel force by force, shall not
be condemned to death, although his crime in it self, in strictness of Law be
Capital.

There is nothing more certain then the commandment of God, not to swear, and
yet it is lawful to swear, yea, it is an offense not to swear, if a man be
commanded by a Magistrate to swear; and if a truth cannot be known but by an
Oath, and the oath that a man has taken must be inviolable, It cannot be
broken; and there is no man's more odious, no crime more detestable then the sin
of perjury; and yet a Judge that has taken an oath to keep the Statutes of his
Country without breaking the same, or without departing from the true sense and
literal meaning of them, may violate them, if the iniquity of the time will not
give him leave and leisure to confer with his superior, or to ask his opinion,
or if there be manifest dangers like to follow of the delay which he shall use.
Besides if a Judge be commanded, yea sworn not to do any thing against the
L^wes of God, or nature, or of his Country, yet if he be urged by some great
occ^sion, or if necessity enforce him thereunto; or if some notable danger,
scandal, or inconvenience is like to follow of the strict observance of those
Lawe^, he may lawfully violate them. And shall a Judge have Authority to break
Laws, and shall not an absolute Prince have the like liberty? A Provost Marshal
taking a Theif in the fact of committing a robbery, may hang him up presently
with out any form of Judgment; and shall not a King cause a notorious Traitor
to be murdered without a solemn Sentence? The Governor of a City taking an
Homicide, an Adulterer, a rav^sh^r of Women upon the Fact* may chastise and
punish them according to the Rigor of the Law without any form of Law; and a
King taking a Traitor being about to deprive him of his life, of his Crown apd
Scepter, shall he not do him to death without asking the opinion of his Judges
without imploring the help of his Magistrates, and without imparting his
Treason unto his Counselors, or unto the Friends and Allies of the Traitors,
especially when as he may escape whilst these things shall be doing, when be
is so strong, so backed with friends, so guarded with Soldiers, that if he be
not executed upon a sudden, the respi^e and leisure which shall be given him,
shall g^ve him time and means not only to escape the punishment which he has
deserved, but also to put in great hazard the life of his Prince, and the weal
of his Country; to be short, when either the Prince or the Traitor must die
presently?

It is written of Iehu the Judge and King of Israel, that he fearing the great
multitude of Baals Priests, and doubting that if he should put them to death by
the way of Justice, there would follow some great Inconvenience or scandal to
himself; he feigned that he himself wou^d do sacrifice unto God Baal, and by
that pretense and color he caused them all to come together, and when they
were all assembled, he willed them all to be murdered.

Who has heard the History of Ladislaus king of Bohemia, commends him not
for his wisdom and discretion in dissembling the grief which he took to see
the Earl of Cilia, his faithful and assured Friend and Uncle, killed almost
in his presence, so ^uningly that he not only seemed not to be grieved with his
death, but also to think that he was lawfully killed, because he presumed to
come Armed into the Court where all others were unarmed? The Bohemians seeing
how lovingly he entertained Ladislaus Humiades the Author of this Murder, how
kindly he used his Mother, how wisely he suffered Ladislaus and his Brother
Matthias to bring him into Beuda, and how resolutely when he had him where he
was stronger then he, he commanded him to be done to death for the murder
committed on his Uncles person, took it for a manifest Argument that he would
prove (as ind^ed he did) a very wise, just, and valiant Prince, si^ce in his
youth he was so subtle, and so resolute, and gave them so notable an Example
and President of his Justice.

Who has read the policy which Darius king of Persia used in revenging the
injury of Oretes, who was grown to be so mighty, so proud, and so well backed
with friends, that he neither could nor durst do him to death by the ordinary
Course of Justice, and prayseth him not for inventing a way to induce 30 of his
Gentlemen to undertake his death? And who commends not the Mag^animitie and
resolution of Bageus, who when it fell out to his lot to be the first of the
30 that had vowed to haza^d their live; foe their king, went no less hastily
then cuningly about his enterprise, and within a very short while murdered
Oretes, who had bea^ded and braved his King many years?

Briefly, who reads and allows not the History of David, who when a man
come to him from Saul his Camp, and told him that he had kil^ed Saul, commanded
his S^rvant to kill him presently, and said unto him, Thy blood be upon thine
ow^ head, for thine own mouth has spoken against thee? And yet every man
knows that Saul killed himself, and that this poor simple man thought to have
had a reward of David for bringing him the first news of Saul's death.

These premiss^s therefore being duly considered, it must follow that the late
king had great reason and just cause to command the Duke of Guise to be killed.
But his friends say nay; They have caused it to be imprinted that he was one of
the Peers of France; one of the greatest of that Realm, one of the best
beloved Subjects of Europe, and one that was allied unto great Kings and
Princes: And that therefore the King causing him to be murdered, as he was
mig^t well think, and justly fear, that in doing him to death, he should
highly offend his best friends, and give just occasion unto as many as suffered
any loss or detriment by his death, to revenge the same.

As therefore Julius Caesar winked at the Treason committed by Dunorix, Caesar
Comment.
and called him not into question for the same, for fear to offend his Brother
Divitiacus, who was an assured and faithful Friend unto the people of Rome, and
a man of great credit and Authority in his Country; even so the King should
have spared the Duke of Guise, and not have used such c^ueltie toward him as
he did for fear to displease and discontent his dearest and best friends; and
as Henry the 4 King of England deprived the Dukes of Anmarle, of Exceter and
Surrey, of the Lands and possessions which Richard the second gave them, and
yet spared their lives; so the king had done well if he had taken away the
lands and livings, and not the life of the Duke of Guise.

Truly if h^s kingdom should have received no greater loss or damage by the
Duke of Guise his life, then the commonwealth of Rome received by Dunorix, the
king should not have greatly done amiss to have suffered him to live: But since
that the Duke did always aspire unto the Crown, and since he desired, sought
and labored by all means possible to usurp the same, the King played (as his
Mother said) the right part of a King, wh^^^ as he resolved and ex^cuted his
death with all convenient speed. For* the same Caesar which had pit^y and
compassion on Dunorix, because his life could not greatly hinder or cross his
d^signes and purposes, first banished, and afterward secretly caused his near
kinsman Lucius Caesar to be murdered because he had both the mind and the
means to withstand and prevent his intentions: and Henry the 4 should have had
good occasion to repent him of the clemency and mercy which he showed unto the
before named Dukes, if the E^rle of Rutland had not been constrained by his own
folly to reveal unto the King their Treason and Conspiracy against him, for
which afterward they were worthily executed: Pity therefore is commendable
and best beseeming the Majesty of a Prince, when as the same may be used
without any danger unto his person, or his State, or his kingdom; but when as
he sees manifestly, that never a Province, never a City, never an house of his
kingdom, can or will long continue in good estate, in dutiful obedience, in
natural affection toward him, and his Crown, unles he do som^^imes use to
play the King, to revenge wrongs, and to punish Treasons; he must needs change
his nature, make a ver^ue o^ neces^i^ie, and accommodate himself unto their
manners and their merits with whom he has occasion to deal.

France n^v^r had any King that was more gentle, kind, and courteous then that
Lewis who for his Courtesy and Clemency was ^irnamed The Meek; And yet the same
Lewis (as you have already heard) forgot that name, and the qualities and
conditions incident thereunto, when it was in question whether he or his Nephew
Bernard should rule and Reign. For then knowing that a Prince cannot live in
any good assurance of his Estate and kingdom so long as another pretends
Right and Title thereunto; and having wrongfully been kept from the possession
thereof he plucked out his Eyes, kept him in perpetual prison, and in the end
caused his head to be cut from his shoulders.

Who can then blame the late King of France, if he chose rather to rule, then
to be ruled; to kill, then to be killed; to murder the Duke of Guise, then to
endanger his whole Estate and Kingdom? The Prince that (...) not an Injury that
is done unto his Commonaltie, or to a private person, is in danger sometimes to
lose his life, or his kingdom ^as were the Romans, and Philip King of
Macedania; he because he punished not A^tilas at the request of Pau sanias; and
they, because they sent not the French men those which in the battle betwixt
them and the Citizens of Chynsie, forgeting the duty of Ambassadors, were
found in the forem^st rank of their Enemies fighting against the French men:
And is it necessary that a King shall punish or revenge a wrong done unto his
Country, or unto ^ private man; and shall it not be lawful for him to take
vengeance of the wrongs and Indignities which are done unto himself? May he
command a Ju^g to proceed Defacto, without taking full knowledge of the cause,
and every circumstance of the Subjects cause; and shall it not be lawful for
him, to use the like power and authority in his own case? The least and
meanest Judge, may he not sometimes give judgment hearing no other proof but
very violent presumptions; and shall it not be lawful for the King, from whom*
he same Judge receives such power and authority, to do the like? We say and
confess that The^e is manifest, when the Theif is taken in the Fact; and shall
it not be lawful for a Prince to take that Treason for notorious which the
Trayt^r has Committed* If a man find a stolle ^ thing about a Thief, he is in
danger of death; and if a man find a Traitor armed and all things else in a
readiness to perform and execute his treacherous Attempts shall he not be
reputed a Traitor? The Law says, that whatsoever a King does, it seems to
be done with great reason: If he comme^deth any thing, every one is bound to
believe that he has good occasion to commend the same. His Actions are
manifest, but his thoughts are hidden and secret; it is our duty to tolerate
the one, and not to murmur against the other, nor to enquire or demand the
Causes, Motives, and Reasons of his Commandments; his pleasure must be unto us
as a Law, and his Will has the full force and strength of reason; and when the
cause of that punishment which it pleases him to inflict is notorious and
manifest, his Commandment, although it be done in have, and without great
advisement, yet it carries no less force and moment then does a sentence that
was duly examined, wisely perused, diligently considered, and solemnly
pronounced.

Why then shall the death of the Duke of Guise be thought unlawful, since the
King commanded the same, not for hatred to the Duke, but for security of
himself, for love of the weal public; not without (...) Justice, but
according to Law and Equity, (because a Princes pleasure is held for Law) not
without example* but with approbation and imitation of many, who having had the
like occasion have used the like punishment; briefly, not to revenge his
particular quarrels and Jnjuryes, but to preserve his Right and his Crown,
upon which the wealth, the life, and the welfare of all his good and loyal
Subjects do depend.

He was Allied unto many great Princes which are displeased with his death, and
will not leave it unrevenged; But if these Princes were the Kings friends
before the Dukes death, they will not take the same in evil part; and if they
were his Enemies, he needs not to care for them, or to fear their displeasure
more then the universal ruin and destruction of his Subjects. He was one of
the Peers of France: But honor may not be a Privilege un^o any man to embolde^
him to offend the Laws; but the more honor a Subject receives from his King,
the more he is bound to love and f^are him.

But grant that the King did evil in causing him to be murther^d; shall the
Subjects be grieved therewith? shall they seek Revenge thereof? shall they bear
Arms therefore against their Prince and their Country? May the son arm himself
to kill and murder his Mother? And is he not held for an ungracious and wicked
child which will be revenged of his Father although he have done him great
wrong? And is not a King the Father of his Subjects? and is not every Country
the Mother of the natural Inhabitants thereof? Or may they war against their
Prince wihout seeking the lamentable overthrow, Ruin and destruction of their
Country? Are all alterations dangerous in every well governed State, and can
that alteration be without danger which transferreth the Crown from the right
heir unto an Usurper, from the lawful King to an ambitious Subject?

But it is only said, and no way proved, that the Duke of Guise had any such
int^n^ion as to deprive his Sovereigne, and to crown himself; it may be
suspected, but it is not notorious. This must appear more manifestly then it
does, or else all that is said will be to no purpose.

To manifest this therefore I will briefly examine that which has been already
said, and by his own Acts and Demands convince and prove his intention. It is
said that the foot shall not presume to rule the head, no more should a Subject
take upon him to control the King, or to prescribe unto him what he shall do:
And yet the Duke of Guise, not once, but many times rebukes his Kings
proceedings against she Protestants, blames him of Negligence, and tells him
more boldly, then wisely, that he must not spare them but subvert them. And
what was that but to spoil his kingdom? The Counselor is commended which
rather refuses as Office and charge with modesty, that is laid upon him, then
affects the same before he be thought worthy thereof; and yet the Duke of
Guise staieth not until he was moved by the King, but n^med himself for his
Lieutenant: And what was that but to appoint the Kings Officers? We read of
Saul, that it grieved him greatly when it was said that David had killed Twenty
thousand Enemies, and Saul but ten Thousand; and yet the Duke of Guise, after
that he had overthrown the Germans, is termed an other Gideon, and he terms
his King a loiterer; and what was that but to disgrace his Sovereign? It is
commonly said, that where there is no offense committed, there needs no
pardon; and yet the Duke of Guise would seem not to have offended, although he
desires to have all that was said or done to be pardoned, and buried in
Oblivion: And what was that bu^ to betra^ a guilry conscience, and an unwilling
mind to acknowledge and confess his offense? The Subject that armeth
multitudes without his kings commandment, when there is no fear of a Foreign
Enemy, or any other in arms within a Realm, gives many presumptions and
arguments of a Rebellious mind; And yet the Duke of Guise does not only arm
Multitudes, but also prote^teth, that he and they will lay down his and their
arms until the king yields unto his demands; and what was that but to
threaten and menace his king? The Count of St. Paul, High Constable of France,
was held a Traitor by Lewis the eleventh, and so executed, because he betrayed
his counsel* and kept certain Holds and Towns of strength from the king; and
yet the Duke of Guise must be no Traitor, who revealed the kings secrets, and
withheld many Towns and Cities from him, and drove him out of the principal
City of his Realm. Francis the first proclaimed the Duke of Bourbon to be a
Rebel and a Traitor because he fled to Charles the fifth, and bore arms in his
quarrel against him; and yet the Duke of Guise is no Traitor who favors the
Spanish king more then his own Prince, and brings Spaniards into France to
murder and massacre the kings loving Subjects.

He saw that his conspiracies and secrets were discovered by the Duke of
Espernon, and therefore he must be banished the Court; He saw that the king of
Spain prevailed not against England, because he had no Towns in France, to
harbor his wearied and Sea-beaten Soldiers; and therefore at his next coming
he must have Normandy at his devotion; for that was his purpose when he
demanded that Normandy should be given to the holy League. What meant he when
he required that his brother should be made great Master of the Kings Palace,
and the Cardinal of Lorrain Governor of all France? Why demanded he no office
for himself? Forsoo^h, because it was not yet time for him to say he must be
king. France could not brook two kings. The late king must be first deposed;
and was it not his meaning to procure him to be depo^ed and deprived of his
Crown at the Parliament which he required to be presently called and assembled?
That was the matter of great wait, the cause of such consequence whereof they
must consult; an to bring the matter to pass there must be two great Armies in
readiness (the one in Picardy, and the other in Dolphine) to bridle those who
were most likely to withstand h^s Coronation, and not to admit and receive him
for their king. The Hugonets also must be all subverted. They were the Orato^s
that preserved Athens; they were the Ge^se that saved the Roman Capitol; they
therefore must be taken away, or else he must fail of his purpose. That Nation
whose king has the honor to be called the most Ch^istian king, may not brook
an Heretic for their king; and therefore the king of Navarr must be taken
away, he must not live any longer; the Prince of Conde next heir to the Crown
after him, was already dispatched by poison, and his young infant was not fit
to rule.

But if the king of Navarr's death might have contented him, if his overthrow
might have set France at Liberty, and utterly have subverted the Protestants,
why was not this king of Navarr's offer accepted? Why refused he the combat,
whereunto he was challenged? Such a Champion as the Duke was, should not have
refused such a challenge; such a Gideon, that flew so many Germans, should not
have been afraid to encounter with one Man, especially with such a man as
forgot the name and state of a King to fight with a Rebel, as debased himself
to contend with a Traitor, as if he won the battle, could not but lose some of
his honor, because he had encountered with an infamous person, and if he lost
the field, lost both his life and Scepter. Such a Father and Protector of his
Country should not have denied to hazard his life in such a quarrel as might
have saved the lives of many of his best friends, who have been killed since
the time of that challenge. But he thought it best to sleep in a whole skin,
and he knew how to be king without such a hazard: he had preferred many, and
therefore they would and should prefer him.

But of him enough. And from him to the rest wherewith the late king was more
vainly then truly charged. It follows in the Accusation, that he prodigally
wasted the Revenues of the Crown, and gave himself to all kind of vice and
wickedness.

This wastfull spending of the Revenues of the Crown, is a fault that exceeds
all other faults; a fault that offends a kings Subjects much more then any
other vice, because when Princes Treasures are wasted, they fly to their
subjects Coffers, and empty their Chests to fill their own Exchequers. Subjects
therefore for their ease require that their king should be a good husband. It
was a commendation that Tully gave to king Demetri^s; It is a quality that is
required in a good Steward; it is a property by so much more requisite in a
Prince, by how much his charge is greater then other men's; but a though they
desire that their Prince should be thrifty, yet they would not have them
covetous; and as they can be contented that they should be liberal, so they
like not that they shall be prodigal: Thrift makes them able to live with
their own, Covetousness enforces them to prey upon their Subjects. Liberality
procures them the good will and love of all men, and Prodigality brings them
to Poverty, and Poverty teaches them to invent and practice extraordinary
ways to supply their ordinary wants.

But I must not stand upon such a king as Subjects desire to have: I hasten to
the Accusation, and in handling thereof I mean not to free the king from all
blame, but to lay the greatest blame upon them who are most to blame.

True it is, that the Revenues of France are now far greater then ever they
were, and that they have received their great increase of late years; yea, that
the ancient kings never did nor could impose such subsidies and charges upon
their Subjects as have been lately levied in France. For Charles the seventh
was the first king that got and begun this point of imposing charges upon his
Subjects at his own pleasure, and without the consent of the States of his
Realm; and yet this Charles never levied more of his Subjects then eight
hundred thousand Franks by the year, a small sum in regard of that which is now
levied.

After him succeeded Lewis the eleventh his son, who raised the Revenues from
ten hundred thousand, to forty and seven thousand, and yet he laid up nothing
at the years end into his Treasure-house; For he builded more Houses, and
fortified more Cities then all his Predecessors did before him; It is written
of Charles the eighth that he purposed to have reduced his subsidies unto
twelve thousand Franks, and to have the same sum by way of Ben^volence from his
Subjects, or for the d^fence of his Realm, meaning to defray his ordinary
charges which the Revenues of his Demesnes, which together with all Customs and
Impositions came to a Million of Francks. But says my Author Philip de
comines, the people pay now but two Millions and one half, a great increase in
so small a time; and yet no increase in respect of that which follows For you
have heard out of Mr. de la Nove, that Henry the second, the la^e kings father,
levied by ordinary means on his Subjects fifteen millions o^ Franck^ by the
year, which are five millions of Crowns: And another of (...) time testifies,
that the Revenues of the late French King came unto ten or eleven millions of
Crowns.

The Book called The Treasure of Treasures of France, sets down at large how
the Revenues are gathered, Tresor deTreso^s.
how they increased* and how they have been, and are either Prodigally or
unthriftily, superfluo^sly, or extraordinarily wasted. The same Book
testifies, that diverse complaints have bin exhibited unto the king against the
wastfull spenders of his Treasures, and that his Majesty was often^imes minded
to take some present order for the redress of those abuses. But* when he began
to think thereon, and purposed to call into question those which were noted to
have wasted his Treasure, he was presently drawn from that intention by sudden
wars, procured (as it was thought) by those who were guilty of mispending of
his Revenues, to the end that he might not have leisure to examine their abuses.

It was showed unto his Majesty, that in thirty one years after his Grandfather
Francis the first his death, the receipt of such money as came in those years
unto the Treasure amounted unto more then 400 millions of Crowns, and the
expenses came but to 260 millions. It was showed that besides the same sums
which entered into the kings Coffers in that time, the People had paid to the
king use fifteen millions of millions, and 246 millions of Crowns, which i^ as
much money as 423 thousand Mules are able to carry. It was showed that the Pope
in those few years had out of France better then thirty millions of Crowns. It
was showed that this infinite Treasure was not wasted by the Kings of France,
but by their Officers; That there were above two hundred seventy four Families,
whereof some might dispend an hundred thousand Francks by the year, others
eighty thousand, some sixty thousand, others forty, thirty, twenty* and fifteen
thousand, of which the best could not dispend above nine or ten thousand
Francks, and some not above two or three hundred before they had the collection
of the kings Rents and Revenues. It was showed that there were three hundred
thirty eight Treasurers, of which some were worth ten thousand, others twenty
thousand, some thirty thousand, some forty thousand, others sixty and eighty
thousand Crowns. It was showed that some began but with three hundred Francks a
year, whose yearly Revenues came now to sixty thousand, or eighty thousand
Francks, and they were worth besides thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, and eighty
thousand Crowns in ready Money, Pla^e, and Jewels. Lastly, it was showed, that
whereas the king might well have had two hundred millions of Crowns in the
Treasury, he was indebted above thirty millions. And that there might be found
six and thirty Ladies in France, whose heirs, rather then they would be called
to an account, would willingly pay the twentieth part of the debts of the
Crown; and the above mentioned Officers might think that they escaped very well
if they might be freed from all danger by paying the Residue.

Now considering that the house of Guise, Declaration del Estate, etc.
or such as depend upon them, ruled not only the Realm, but also managed the
Treasure of France of late years, during the minority of their Kings,
considering that the late King would and could not redress the abuses of such
Officers as received, and were countable for his Revenues; considering that he
was charged with greater burdens then his Predecessors, as the maintenance of
his Brother, the Dower of his Mother, and of the late Queen of Scots, the
marriage of his Sisters, and other debts in which he was left by his
Predecessors, considering that his Revenues were increased before his time, or
by such as ruled more then he in his time, and that Princes do rather augment
and increase, then diminish their yearly Rents and Demeasns; And lastly,
considering that of Thirty three Chambers of Account which are in France, not
above six of them were for the King toward his end, and those of the poorest,
and such as scant yielded him Three hundred thousand Crowns, his Receipts being,
as it has been said, almost eleven Millions; no man may justly accuse him of
consuming the wealth of his Crown and Kingdom.

It is likewise to be noted, that Wars are much more chargeable then they have
been, and that he seldom lived out of Wars; not through his own folly, but by
their fault who can blame him most; And it cannot be denied but that he gave
away much unto his Favorites, and to his Minions; and yet his Gifts were
nothing comparable to the excessive liberality of his later Pred^cessors. For
it is written that Lewis the 11. gave to his physician in five months Fifty
four thonsand Crowns, besides the Bishopric of Amiens for his Nephew, and
diverse Offices and Lands for himself and his friends. Bodin in his Book De
Republica reports, that Charles the Ninth King of France his Brother, gave
away in the year 1572. Two millons and seven hundred thousand Francks, and the
next year two millions and forty four thousand Francks, and in the last year of
his reign One million five hundred and two thousand Francks, besides certain
years Pentions, which amounted unto One hundred thousaud Francks.

But grant that he gave much more then he did; Is it not lawful for a Prince to
reward his Servants? Is it not in his liberty to cast his especial favor upon
whom it pleases him? And is there any thing that shows a Kings greatness,
procures him faithful Friends, and eternizeth his Name, more then his bounty
and liberality? I know that Nero was reprehended, because that in Fifteen years
he gave away above Fifty five millions. I confess that Caligula is blamed for
that he spent in one year Sixty seven millions. And I acknowledge that Dion
reports it for no praise and commendation unto Claudius that he wasted in
three years five Miriades of Miriades and Seventh usand seven hundred and eight
drams, or as some report, One thousand seven hundred and eight miriades. I
allow no such prodigality, and yet I think it not lawful for Subjects to rebel
against their Princes if they be over-prodigal; I know that there be other ways
to be used to restrain their excessive liberality.

I read that the Parliament House, in the tenth year of Richard the Second of
England, considering that through the covetousness of the Officers by them
displaced, the Kings Treasure had been imbezelled and lewdly spent, chose
Thirteen Lords to have the oversight (under the King) of the whole Government
of the Realm. And I find that diverse Subjects have revolted from their
obedience to their Princes, because they having wasted their Revenues, they
overcharged them with Subsidies and Impositions. But I see that their
rebellion wrought their own confusion.

Now from the late Kings Prodigality, briefly in a few words to his other
vices; he is noted to have been somewhat more given to Venery then it became a
married Prince, but I find not that his wantonness was outrageous; and sure I
am, that he never had so many Concubines as Solomon; nor caused any man to be
killed that he might enjoy his Wife, as David did to Urias; nor made away with
his own Wife to have another, as it is said the Spanish King did: And yet
Solomon was the wisest Prince that ever lived; and no King ever pleased God
more then David did; And the Leaguers held King Philip to be the mirror of the
Kings in our age. Neither did the late King of France delight so greatly in the
company of wanton women, but that he could and would have used the same with
much more moderation then he did, had not the Queen Mother, the Duke of Guise,
and others who ruled all things under him, nourished that humor in him, to the
end that he following of his delights, they might the more freely govern the
whole Kingdom at their own will and pleasure; a policy borrowed of Cardinal
Wolsey. This Wolsey being Henry the Eighth his Chaplain, and brought into
credit and favor by the Bishop of Winchester, made his House a Paradise of all
kind of pleasure, and oftentimes invited the King thither, and so fed him with
vain delights, that his Majesty during the greatest time of his younger years,
committed the Government of the whole Kingdom into his hands.

It is written of Lewis King of Bohemia, that if he had had a good Governor in
his youth, who would not only have had a care of his health, but also have
given him good instructions, he would undoubtedly have made a notable Prince;
for he had a very good Wit, and a natural disposition to Virtue and Goodness:
But the Marquess of Brandenburg, who by his Father was left to be the Teacher
and Informer of his Youth and Manners being a very good Prince, but more
delighting in Banquets, Dancings, and other such Sports and Pastimes, then in
serious and grave studies befitting a Prince, brought the King up in those
Vanities, wherein he took such pleasure and delight, that he cared not how
little he meddled with matters of State. Good Education is a great Jewel for all
men, but especially for Princes, because that such doctrine and disposition as
Children and Young Men receive in their youth, such they retain in their elder
years. Quosemel est imbui^ recens, etc.
And the Prince is not so much to blame who is given unto vanities in his riper
years, as they are to be reprehended who trained him up in vain Delights in the
days of his indiscretion.

The blame therefore of Henry the Third his wantonness, must light upon them
who were the Authors of his folly, and abused those good Gifts and Graces which
the Almighty had bestowed upon him, which were Valor, Wisdom, Eloquence, and
the use of diverse Languages, Qualities not so common as commendable in a
Prince: His Valor is proved by the siege of Rechel, where (as it is written by
Historiographers of good credit) it was impossible for a Prince (for such was
he at that time) to show himself more truly valiant then he did; and the
commendation which Sir Henry Cobham (a discreet and wise Gentleman, and of
great Judgment and Experience) when he was Ambassador for her Majesty in
France gave him, upon occasion of talk at his Table (coming from such and so
able a man as was) may serve for a sufficient proof of the rest of his good
qualities: For I well remember that the said Sir Henry, talking with his Nephew
Mr. Maximilian Cobham (who was then lately come out of England into France) of
the late King said, that he had been employed as Ambassador for her Majesty
unto the Emperor, the King of Spain, and diverse other Princes, but among them
all, he never heard any foreign Prince that delivered his mind more eloquently,
readily, and wisely then the said King; and that as often as he had Audience of
him, he would sometimes speak in French, and sometimes in Italian; and although
he Answered him fully to every point whereof they conferred, before he departed
from him, yet (like a wise and discreet Prince) he would always require him not
to take it for his full and resolute Answer, until he had talked with his
Council; and at their next meeting, his later Answer seldom or never varied
from the former; a manifest Argument of his great Wisdom, who was able to
answer an Ambassador upon the sudden, and that not at one Conference only, bnt
upon as many and as great occasions as he the said Sir Henry had to confer with
his Majesty, in the space of three or four years, so well and so wisely, that
his greatest and gravest Counselors could not upon deliberation amend his
sudden and extemporal Answers.

This commendation given him by Sir Henry Cobham is confirmed by the Siegneur
Darrennes, Negotiation de la pax del an. 1575.
one of the Ambassadors sent from the Prince of Condey unto his Majesty in the
year 1575. to negotiate a general peace betwixt the King and his discontented
Subjects, as well Papists as Protestants. This Ambassador in the preamble of
his Speech to the King used these words.

We thank God that it has pleased him so highly to favor us, as to send us a
King that both will and can hear himself the wants and complaints of his
Subjects, and order and redress the same according to his good pleasure, and
the laudable course of Justice: For if our Writers have employed their Labors
in writing to blame and reprehend those Kings which hear not but by the Ears of
others, which see not but by the Eyes of others, and speak not but by the
Mouths of others; We have most great occasion to think our selves very happy
and blessed, unto whom God has sent a King so gentle, and so loving unto his
Subjects, as that he will hear all our causes and controversies himself; and a
King of so rare and excellent Wisdom, as that he is able to decide and
determine our Contentions.

This commendation given him by Seigneur Darennes far exceeds Sir Henry
Cobhams, because he was the Ambassador of a Prince that was in League with the
late King, and the Siegneur Darennes of a Prince that not long before had born
arms against this King; And Sir Henry might speak for favor, but the other
spoke as he thought; because it appears by the rest of the speeches which he
used in the same negotiation, that he neither would or could dissemble: And
because this praise and commendation was given by an Enemy rather then by a
friend, it cannot but be void of all partiality, assertion, or flattery.

Thus you have heard the French Kings Virtues and his Imperfections; the
Leaguers folly, and the Spanish Kings indiscretion.

Now it rests to declare unto you his further error, which although it be the
last, yet it is not the least; and I fear me I shall have occasion to enlarge
my self more of it then I did of the other three.

It is not unknown unto all or most part of the World, that the King of Spain
too much crediting the light and false reports of certain English Fugitives,
did once attempt, and does still intend to invade and subdue England. This
attempt and this intention, although it seems to be grounded upon good
reasons, and to be allowed by the wisest Counselors; yet I will show that it
was neither begun with wisdom, nor is continued with any great discretion.

To show this, it shall be needful to examine all and every of the causes which
moved him to undertake this attempt and purpose. The causes are many, and some
of them are already sufficiently declared; others rest, first to be discovered,
and then then to be confuted: It has already been showed, that for succouring
of France, for aiding of Flanders, for intercepting his money, and for
favoring and furthering of Don Antonio his resolution to recover the Kingdom
of Portugal, the Spanish King had no just occasion to be offended with the
Queens Majesty. It remains to prove that the Popes Excommunication, That the
false and sinister reports of the English Fugitives, the death of the late
Queen of Scots, OF the sending away of his Ambassador with some small disgrace
out of England, gives him no just occasion to trouble her Majesty's quiet and
peaceable Government.

All this being proved, his indiscretion shall be made appear by three
principal Reasons. The first, because he took no good course for the
accomplishment of his enterprise. The second, Because that although his course
had been good, yet he neither was, nor is able to subdue England. And the
third, Because albeit he should chance to conquer our Realm, yet he could not
hold the same long.

The order whereunto I have tied my self, requires that I begin with the Popes
Excommunication. And for the better clearing of this point, it were necessary
to show what Authority he has to excommunicate. But this is a matter that
requires a whole and large Volume; and therefore I have thought good not to
meddle therewith, but to refer you for your better instruction unto the large
Apology which Marsilius Paturius wrote above 266 years ago in the defense of
the Emperor Lewis of Baviera against the Pope, that would not admit or allow
him for Emperor: There you shall see that the Pope, although he were Christ's
lawful and indubitate Vicar, (a point which never was nor will be proved) yet
he has no more Authority then Christ himself had. There you shall read, That
the Popes excommunications are not to be feared, nor a lawful cause to invade
England.
that Christ came not into the world to Rule, that he took not upon him to
Command Princes, but that both he himself obeyed, and taught his Apostles to
obey Princes. There you shall understand that Saint Paul the Apostle, Saint
Peter, and other of Christ's Disciples obeyed the Civil Magistrate, and
submitted themselves unto Temporal Government. There briefly, you shall learn
that not Clergy man ought to meddle with Temporal matters; And that the Pope
has no more Authority to pardon sins, or excommunicate any man, then other
Inferior Priests and Ministers have.

All this being true, as in that Apology you shall find it learnedly,
substantially and sufficiently proved, not by humane Reasons, which may be
erroneous, but by sacred Scriptures, which cannot be controlled; your own
discretion may sufficiently warrant you, that this Excommunication can be of no
great force; And yet because many of our Countrymen attribute too much unto the
Popes Authority, and cannot be persuaded but that he came unto the same
directly, and holds it immediately from Christ. I will show you as briefly as
I can, how the Pope of Rome attained unto that great Authority which he now
enjoys.

It appears by Du Haillan in the French Chronicle, that in the time of
Charles the Great, the Popes of Rome had no power or authority in Rome it self;
they meddled but only with matters of Religion, with Ecclesiastical Discipline,
and with points of Divinity. It appears also by Platina, Dr. Illescas, and
Robert Barnes, three notable Writers of the Popes lives; the first being an
Italian, the second a Spaniard, and the third an Englishman, that many years
after Christ's passion, and after St. Peter's death, they were cruelly massacred
and martyred by the Emperors of Rome. It is also notorious and apparent, by the
testimony the same Writers, and of many more, that they were wont to be chosen,
approved, and confirmed by the Roman Emperors, insomuch that he was not held
for a lawful Pope which had not the Emperors approbation; Briefly you shall
find in the Histories and Chronicles of France, that three Popes being chosen
at one time, they came into France (the Kings whereof were then also Emperors)
to excuse themselves and their election, because it was made without the
consent or privity of the Emperor, and to stand to his opinion that then was
Emperor, which of the three should be Pope; but now there is a great
alteration, and a mavelous change. For the Servant commands the Master, the
Subject his Sovereign, the Inferior his Superior, the Vassal his Lord, and the
elegible the Elector; Whereat so many marvel, that it was never more necessary
or expedient then it is now, to declare how this came to pass; you shall
therefore understand that there was a time when as the Emperor had power and
pre-eminence over all the Princes of Christendom, as well spiritual as
temporal; and as long as this power and prerogative continued, so long the name
of the Emperor was honored of all men, his Empire was large and ample, his
Dominions great and excessive, and his credit and authority was mavelous and
incredible.

About, or not long after this time, not God, but the Devil raised up a man,
The Popes means to grow up to authority.
who seeking the preferment of this world, and the advancement of his See,
endeavored by all means possible to attain his purpose. What does he? What
course takes he? What means uses he? What habit putshe on? He thinks it not
good to use any violence; his Forces are too weak, his Treasury too small, his
Arms are not great, and he wants a Lions skin, he therefore plays the Fox;
accommodateth himself unto the humors of Princes, counterfeiteth an
extraordinary kind of Holiness, and more then a common and usual kind of Zeal,
Sancti^y and Devotion, and entreats the Emperor to make him Head of all the
Churches of the World; because as Rome was his Seat that commands the World
in Secular causes; so the Bishop that had his Sea at Rome, was worthy to govern
and rule all other Bishops in spiritual Affairs.

The Emperor that then was, had killed his Predecessor, had usurped his Empire,
and had need of one to tolerate and excuse his murder, and to countenance and
allow his Usurpation; and therefore taking the Pope to be the fittest man that
then lived to further his purpose, yields to his demand; But the other
Bishops, which before that time never acknowledged any Superior, refused to
receive and acknowledge him for their Head, who was wont to be their Equal and
Companion. The Bishops contradiction could not make him give over his Suit; he
prays, entreats, beseeches, and never leaves to be importunate until
Phocas the Emperor grants his Request. He might have contented himself with
this, Grant, with this favor; But as covetous men, the more they have, the
more they desire; so this ambitious and proud Prelate studieth presently how to
get new Dignities, how to purchase new Honors; wherein he finds not only
Fortune, but the time favorable and friendly unto him. For whenas the Empire
began to decay, having lost France, England, and Germany, the Huns conquered
Italy, the Vandals became Lords of the greatest part of Africa, and the
dissolution and loss of the Empire began to be so great, that the Emperors were
fain to give over all the West Countries, and to sea^ themselves in the East.

It happened not long after, that there fell out a great contention betwixt the
Pope and the Emperor touching Images; the one commanded them to be pulled down,
and the other to be raised up, and he excommunicated the Emperor for
withstanding his commandment.

And about this time, or not very long after, the Lumbards began to make great
Wars in Italy, whose Forces the Pope (who was then very weak) not being able to
resist, was forced to fly for Aid to the King of France, by whom being
defended from the force and violence of his Enemies; were it to be revenged of
the Emperor of the East, or to recompense the good turn and pleasure which the
Frenchmen had done him in debasing the pride of the Lumbards, or to make the
way to increase his own power and magnificence more ready and easy,
considering the weakness of the Eastern Emperor, whose power began daily to
decrease and diminish, through the continual and cruel Wars which were between
him and the Turk, he presumed to declare the King of France, which was then
Charles the Great, for rightful Emperor. And so he, which at the beginning was
poor and needy, feared not to deprive him of the Emperial Diadem, unto whom God
commanded all humane creatures should be obedient, and to choose the Roman
Emperor, whose election belonged in former times to the people or the Soldiers
of Rome.

But what were the fruits, what the effects of this choice? Forsooth, a
division of the Empire, the which of one was made two; a dangerous contention,
and long Wars, the beginning and end whereof was most lamentable; For the
Empire having continued a long time in the Race of Charles the Great, the
Princes and Pe^rs of Italy began to grieve and grudg thereat; Insomuch, that
entering into League and Confederacy together, they chose Berengarius Emperor,
and aided and animated him to make Wars against the lawful Emperor who was then
Lewis the Third. This Lewis being hated of his own Subjects for his great Pride
and Tyranny, Othon Duke of Saxony went into Italy with a great Army, and there
subdued Berengarius, and received of the Pope the Emperial Crown for his
guerdon and recompense, Lewis the right and lawful Emperor being then alive:
The Pope that then was being Gregory the Fifth, and this Othon, whom he had
made Emperor, were both Germans, and naturally hated all French men; And
therefore began to devise with themselves, how they might take away all
possibility for ever from the Frenchmen to recover the Empire.

The Pope showing himself herein wiser then the Emperor, inventeth these means.
He thought it convenient for the better countenance of the Emperor, that he
should be assisted and always accompanied with certain grave and wise
Personages, as well for learning as for honor: and therefore he ordained that
seven Princes of Germany should have full power and authority to choose the
Emperor, whereunto the Emperor consented most willingly, as well in regard of
the hatred which he bore unto France, as for that there were like to rise
quarrels and debates betwixt the Germans themselves touching the Election.

What does the Pope when he has gained this high point? Seeks he not for
something more? Thought he that it was sufficient honor for his Pontifical
Seat, that three of the seven Electors of the Emperor were Bishops, and all of
them sworn to be obedient unto him in all things? Approved he always their
Election? Bears he any respect or honor unto them that were chosen by the
same Elector? He means no such thing: For he sets them at naught, seeks
to discredit them, and is not ashamed to command them to swear that they shall
always defend, keep and maintain the goods of the Church, and the Popes, and
also their Dignities, their Privileges, their Laws, and their Decrees; by
virtue of which Oath he restrains their Wills, abridgeth their Power, and
enforces them to be at his devotion.

True it is, that the Emperors Frederick the third and second, and Henry the
fourth, not vouchsafing to brook their Bravadoes, their Threats, and their
Outrages, opposed themselves against all their audacious Enterprises; but they
care not for the first, set as little by the second, contemned the third, and
excommunicated them all.

They rest not satisfied with these honors; they proceed further, and desire
more; commanding that no secular Prince shall take upon him to give any
Spiritual Living, any Ecclesiastical Dignity; they excommunicate as well those
that give such Livings, as those which receive them at their hands; having
obtained this advantage, they covet still more; and think it not sufficient to
be Privileged themselves, but all the Clergy must participate and taste of
their honors. All Priests and Ecclesiastical persons must be exempt from all
charges, subsidies, and impositions; no man must be so bold as to meddle with
their Rents, with their Revenues; The Bishops and all the Clergy are bound to
them for their Liberality: In requital therefore of these great Privileges and
Immunities, it behooveth them to purchase and get the favor, and good liking
of all secular Princes; of some, to get as much by them as they can possibly;
of others, to have their help against their enemies, and against those that
will not yield and condescend to all their demands and desires. They deal
herein so cunningly that they find some so ready, willing, and desirous to
help and succor them, that they vouchsafe to employ their Goods, their
Subjects, yea, their own lives to do them service.

All Histories are full of Wars, of Battles, of Victories, begun, fought and
obtained at the instance, at the request, and in the behalf of the Popes. I
shall not need to name the Princes, to record the Battles, or to mention the
victories. Our Histories, and the Histories of all other Nations remember them
sufficiently. Our forefathers declared them unto their Posterity, and we may
have heard of them of our Fathers, of our Grandfathers.

But to give the more credit unto my speech, and occasion unto the incredulous
to believe me the better, I will briefly discover unto you the means; the
cunning, and the subtilty which they have used to attain unto their greatness,
and height, and to the continuance and perpetuity of their Rule and Government.

There is nothing more profitable or expedient for him that will advance
himself in credit, reputation and authority, then to know the deliberations and
purposes of his Enemies: And because it is very difficult and hard to attain
unto this knowledge, he deserves great praise and commendation, that can behave
himself so cunningly, so politickly, as to learn all his secret adversaries
intents, and practices; and it is not only necessary to understand his
determinations, but also it is convenient and fitting sometimes to foresee and
prevent them; yea, it is needful to be acquainted with his Actions, and not
only with those which he intends to do presently, and at home, but also with
them which he purposes to do hereafter, and far from home; for by
understanding and knowing these things, a man may quickly either get all that
he desires, or else so temporize and prolong matters until the time fall out
fit and favorable for his purpose.

All Princes therefore, to have a certain and sure knowledge of these things,
are accustomed to have their Ambassadors in the Courts of their Friends and
Confederates, who do not only send them certain news of the intents and
purposes of their Friends, but also whatsoever else is done or said in their
Courts or in their Councils. But the Pope as he challenges unto himself a
Pre-eminence above all other Princes, so he far excels them all in this
kind of providence.

For besides that he has his Ambassadors in the Courts of diverse Princes, he
has also his Espies, his Favorites and his sworn men. There are many Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, and Cardinals which are Counselors unto Kings, although they
have sworn to do nothing in prejudice of the Holy Church, to condescend unto
nothing that shall weaken or diminish the Popes authority; to learn, espy,
understand, prove, attempt, foresee, and practice all things that may any ways
befit or advance his Pontifical Dignity.

Moreover, to make his way more ready and easy for his Ambassadors to
understand all that may stand him in steed, he purchases the favor and good
opinion of Princes Favorites, and such as are nearest about them, by rewards,
promises, bribes, and corruptions: Unto some he gives a Cardinalship, unto
others his daughters or kinswomen in marriage; and not to leave the Princes
themselves uncorrupted, he sufferth them sometimes to take the tenths of their
Kingdoms, to make their profit of his Croicadoes; and to procure them to be the
more ready to do him pleasure, he feeds them with fair words, with sweet and
sugered speeches, he adorneth them with new titles, with new honors and
dignities, that are more gorgeous in show then in deed; calling some of them
Catholic Kings, others most Christian Kings, some Protectors of the Sea of
Rome, and others Defenders of the Faith: and when he has occasion to change or
innovate any thing, then he helps himself with a specious show of a zeal of
Religion, with the report and remembrance of that authority which he
challenges to have received from God, and with a vain flourish of that honor
and reverence, which some Princes being more zealous and devout then wise, have
showed unto him, endeavoring to persuade others by their examples to do the
like. But if it chance, either by the iniquity of time, or by their incredulity
whom he seeks to make his Friends, that they will not give ear unto his
persuasions, he has presently recourse unto the decrees and constitutions of
his Predecessors, he wresteth the Text of the holy Scripture to serve his
purpose, and forgets nothing that has been either done or devised, and
decreed for his advantage. He puts them therefore in mind, that Boniface the
eighth made a Decree, That as many as would be saved, and have a part in the
Kingdom of Heaven, must of necessity be obedient in all cases and in all places
unto the Pope: Wherein he does not only resemble, but make himself equal to,
and better then his Master Christ, because he, while he was upon the earth, did
not only show obedience, but also taught his Apostles (as I have formerly
said) to be obedient unto Inferior Magistrates, and such as were in Authority;
And the Pope will be both honored and obeyed of the greatest Princes and
Monarchs of the World; Yea, if all the Princes of Europe, if the sacred and
general Councils of all the Nations of the World should make a Law or
Ordinance, the same shall be of no force, strength, or validity, if he do not
approve, ratify, and confirm the same; and if any Prince being more bold then
the rest, presumes to say there have been many bad and evil Popes, it shall be
answered him presently that he ought not therefore to contemn or reject their
pontifical Authority, and that no man upon earth may be so bold as to examine
or reprehend, or censure the Popes actions.

I have acquainted you with many Devices, great Subtilties, and fine policies,
but the finest deceits are yet behind; For is it possible to have a better
means to overthrow and ruinate a Princes Enemies, then to make them perish
without laying hands upon them, without effusion of blood, without spending of
money, without employing his own Force and Authority? There is no Victory but
is honorable, and yet of all Victories that is most commendable which is
purchased with least effusion of blood or spending of money. The Pope therefore
aiding himself with this kind of policy, whenas some Prince or other being
mightier then he, will not bow under his yoke, against whom he dares not make
open Wars, he seeks by all means possible to bring him into hatred with some
other Prince; he slandereth him, spreads evil rumors and reports of him,
takes away his good name, scandalizeth his person, and imploreth the Aid and
Assistance of all Christian Princes against him; he gives his Kingdom to him
that can or will invade the same, he declares him to be an Heretic, he
depriveth him of his Scepter, he takes all his Titles from him, he commands
his Subjects not to obey him, he suborneth his own Children to rise up in Arms
against him, he procures his Subjects to seek his overthrow, he causes
another to be crowned in his place, and he excommunicateth both him and his
Kingdom.

And if neither the Forces of his Enemies, nor the rebellion of his Subjects,
the confederacy of many Princes against him, nor the policies whereof we have
spoken be able to supplant and suppress him, then he procures some one or
other to kill him, or to deliver him by some Treason into the hands of his
Enemies.

Truly these are strange policies, cruel devices, and such kind of revenge as a
man shall hardly find to have been practiced by secular Princes; and therefore
that my words may carry the more credit, since they tend to the discredit of
the holy Father of Rome, I will prove by the Testimony of authentical Histories
all that I have said.

Boniface the eighth, solicited the King of England to w^rr against Philip the
fair King of France; And Pope Benedict, who cared not wh^t it cost King
Philip, so that his Popedom might be honored by the Holy Wars, which the
said King had promised to make against the Turk, defamed him through all the
world, calling him disloyal, false and forsworn Prince. Pope Hildibr and sowed
great dissentions and immortal wars betwixt the Princes of Germany and the
Emperor Henry the 4. and commanded the Electors to choose another Emperor in his
place; and when that would not prevail, he suborned the Son to bear arms
against the Father, and to deprive him of the Empire. Alexander the third
procured the Millanois and other Cities of Italy to rebel against Frederick
the Emperor; and Alexander the sixth took the name and Title of most Christian
King from Charles the eighth of France, and gave it unto the King of Castile.
It is written that Innocent the fourth held a Council at Lions in France, and
with the help of the Frenchmen thrust Frederick the second from the Empire,
and caused Henry Landsgrave of Thuring to be chosen in his place. And we find
in diverse true Histories, that Pope Pascall, Gregory the 7. Victor the 3. and
Urban the 2. had great variance and contention with the Emperor Conrad and
Henry his son for the Collations and Installations of Bishops; And when they
could not otherwise hu^t them, they excommunicated both the Father and the Son.

But I have to tell you a more strange History, a more wicked Action, and such
a one as beseemed not a Christian, much less the Pope, who calls himself the
Father of all Christians; And that is an History of Alexander the 3. who was so
furious, indiscreet, and frantic in prosecuting the hat^ed which he bore unto
the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, that besides other malicious and wicked
means by which he sought to have him killed, whiles the good Emperor was
busied in warring against the Turk for the good and benefit of all Christendom,
he sent word unto the Turk, that he should look for no peace at the Christians
hands so long as the Emperor lived, and that therefore it behooved him to look
for some means to surprise and kill him; and to the end the Emperor should not
escape the Turks hands, unto whom he was not known, he sent him his picture,
whereby the Turk found a way within a small time after, to t^ke him Prisoner.
And although the Emperor feigned himself to be the Emperors Chamberlain, yet
that could not help him. For the Sultan conferred him with the Picture which
the Pope had sent him, and thereby knew him. And when the Emperor was set at
Liberty, not without great charges to himself, and greater detriment to the
whole State of Christendom, he assembled the Princes of Germany together, and
there showed them the Pop^s letters, and likewise the Picture which he had sent
to the Sultan.

There wanted no good will in Gregory the 7. that the Emperor Henry the 4. was
not killed in hearing Mass, by a great Stone which he had caused to be ^ung
so cuningly and artificially right over the place where the Emperor should
hear Mass, that while he was upon his knees, and at his devotion, it should
have fallen down upon his head; but it pleased God to preserve the Innocent
Emperor, and to suffer the Store to fall upon the chief Workemans head whiles
he was making trial of his skill and cunning.

What shall I speak of his unsatiable desire of Revenge, who so much forgot God
and the reverence which his best Predecessors bore unto the Sacrament of the
Altar, that he caused the same to be poisoned and a good Emperor to be poisoned
therewith.

But what do I trouble you with Foreign examples, with old and ancient
Histories, since we have some of later time, some ^igher unto us, some
domestical Testimonies which do sufficiently witness the Fury, Enmity, Hatred,
Cruelty and Tyranny of Popes? Can any man desire a better proof of the Popes
Avarice then the History of King John? This King (as our Chronicles testify)
was somewhat too severe to his Clergy, and over-hard to the Nobility of his
Realm, insomuch that both rebelled against him, and had their recourse for
their better Aid unto the Popes Holiness, who presently excommunicated him, and
commanded all Christian Princes, and especially the King of France, to invade
his Country. The French King obeys this commandment, and sends his Son
Lewis with a great Army into England, where he is received with great honor,
and aided by the rebellious Barons with all the help and power that they could
make for him.

The King perceiving that he was too weak to encouunter with his own Subjects,
and with the Foreign supplies that were sent ^h^m, and thinking that it was
best for him to seek for help at his hands by whom he was hurt, sent presently
Ambassadors unto Rome to pacify the Pope, by making his kingdom Tributary unto
him, and by promising to hold the same of him, to take him for his Superior,
and to be obedient unto all his commandments. The good old man presently
changes his mind, pacifieth his own wrath; and of a deadly foe, becomes the
Kings great friend, insomuch that he revoketh whatsoever was before decreed;
excommunicateth the King of France for robbing the Patrimony of the holy
Church, and commands the English Subjects to return presently unto the
dutiful obedience which they owe unto their King.

Is there any Man so ignorant within this Realm, that has not oftentimes
heard how many times the later Popes of Rome have sent not only secular Men,
but Seminary Priests into England to murder our gracious Sovereign? There are
some Widows and Orphans within this Kingdom, who lament even at this day the
death of their husbands, and of their Parents which have lost their lives
because they would have deprived our merciful Queen of her life at the Popes
instance and instigation.

It were to be wished that poor France had not lately felt the great miseries
which follow after the Popes heavy indignation; It should not have lost within
the space of 15 years 14 hundred thous^nd men, not Strangers but natural
French men; it should not have lost in so small a time above 142950. French
Gentlemen; it should not have lost in so unhapy a time their late King, the
first King that ever was murdered by his own Subjects in France; it should
not complain that the Father had killed the son, the child h^s parent, the
brother the seed of his mothers Womb, and the kinsman the next of his own
kin; briefly, it should not be pestred and plagued with such unnatural Subjects
as delight in the slaughter of their own Country men, as comment and approve
of the wicked, horrible, and most odious and detestable Murder of their own
Liege Lord and Soverraigne.

Now seeing that either the Approbation of murder, as in the Emperor Phocas,
or the Allowance of unlawful usurpations as in Charles the great, or the
Toleration of wicked Rebellions, as in Henry the son against the Emperor Henry
the Father; or the maintenance of wrong Titles, as in King Pipin of France; or
the practice of subtle and devilish devices, as in the before mentioned Popes
has caused the Advancement of Popes: It must needs follow, that they have not
lawfully attained unto the Authority which they now challenge.

But to omit all that might here be conveniently spoken against the Succession
of Popes, against their Authority, their Pride, their abuses, and the Injuries
offered unto all Nations that either voluntarily or forcibly have lived under
their obedience:

To leave to tell you how many Catholic Princes they have excommunicated as
Heretics, how many Seditions, Tumults and Wars have been raised in the world
by them, and in the defense of their causes: To leave to declare unro you, The
great wrongs losses and Ind^gnities which England sustained by Acknowleding the
Popes Authority.
how ^thany religious Princes and Kings have nothing esteemed their
excommunications, and how many had good occasion to commend and bless them;
briefly to avoid that prolixitie which could not be avoided if I should enter
into this discourse; I will only signify unto you, the great Wrongs, losses,
and Indignities which our Realm alone has received by receiving the Pope and
his Authority; for, of a brief declaration hereof will follow this great
benefit, that when it shall appear (as it may appear unto as many as will
vouchsafe to read the before named Marsilius Pativius) that their Authority
is usurped, and that by receiving and acknowledging the same, our Realm feel
many inconveniences, and many Miseries, from which it is now freed, no man
should think her Majesty to be Lawfully excommunicated, whom the Pope has
anathematized for not reverening him, and his Authority, whom her Prede^effors
long since rejected.

There was a time when as our Kings, blinded with the same zeal and affection
which now possess^th the hearts of those Princes which are wholly devoted unto
the Popes holiness, honored him as those Princes now do; then there was no
Realm comparable to ours, neither for number, nor for beauty of religious
houses; There was no Country that yielded greater Obedience unto the Sea of
Rome, no people that was more ready to receive and entertain the Popes
Legates, to honor and reverence them, and to fulfill and accomplish whatsoever
they required at our hands.

This great zeal and obedience of ours, whereas it should have purchased us
especial favors (for he that loves most, ought to be required with most love)
procured us in time great hatred; for no Nation had the like injuries offered
unto them, as were proffered unto us. Whence this hatred proceeded I shall not
need to relate, our H^stori^s ease me of that labor and pain, and the
manifold Abuses which are suffered will manifestly prove the same.

There is nothing that derogateth more from the Majesty of a King then to be
ruled by Foreign Laws, nor any thing that grieveth or offends Subjects so
much as to be drawn from home into remote and far distint places to prosecute
their Right and Suits in Law; The first is odious, because it disgraceth the
Country whose Prince endures that Jndignitie; and the last is grievous,
because it is both troublesome and chargeable.

In the time of our Superstitions and foolish zeal unto the Sea of Rome,
Thomas Archbishop of Cant. was slain in his Cathedral Church by William
Tracey, Reynold Ursin, Hugh Marvel, and Richard Britton; who thinking it no^
convenient that a proud Prelate should prefer the Popes Commandment before our
Kings Authority, and being grievously offended with the great Indignities that
were offered unto our King and his kingdom, for his superstitious and
contentious Bishops sake, came out of Normandy of purpose to end by his death
those troubles and vexations, from which they thought that our Realm could not
be freed so long as he lived.

The King when^this Murder was committed in England, was in Normandy, where
hearing the News thereof, he greatly lamented his death. Clothed himself in
Sackcloth, confessed himself unto Almighty God, and protested before his
divine Majesty, that he neither was guil^ie or privy to the Archbishops
death, (unless he might be held for guil^ie which had just occasion not to love
him over well) besides Henry the second (for he was then King) having for this
Bishops sake, tasted somewhat of the bitter fruits of the Popes Indignation,
and fearing that when his death should be known at Rome, he should incurr his
further displeasure, sent presently certain Ambassadors unto Rome to excuse
him, and to signify his Innocence unto the Pope; but his Holiness would not
admit them unto his sight, until that certain of his Cardinals told him, that
they had express commission from their King, to signify unto his Holiness,
that he would stand to the Popes and his Cardinals Judgment, and undergo what
Penance soever it should please him and them to lay and inflict upon him.

The Pope sends two Cardinals into England, before whom the King swears,
that the Murder of the Archbishop was undertaken and performed without his
consent and privitie; And yet because he confessed that in his wrath and anger
he had spoken some words that might perhaps embolden the Malefactors to committ
the same, he could not be Absolved before he promised to give the Cardinals so
much ready money as would maintain 200. soldiers for a year in the Holy land,
and also that all his Subjects should have liberty to appeal from his Courts
unto Rome; a great punishment for a small offense: For what a trouble and grief
was it think you unto the Subjects of this Realm, to have all causes carried
unto Rome, where they spent their travel and their money many years before they
could be ended, and received no indifferent Judgment, because their Contentions
were for the most part (as you shall hear) with Italians, who found better
favor, either for money or for love, then our Countrymen, which were mere
Strangers unto the Judges.

But these griefs are nothing in respect of those which we endured in the time
of Henry the third, the which were so grievous, that the King together with the
Clergy and Nobility complained thereof unto the general Council which was
held in Pope Innocent the third his time at Lions.

They complained, first that the Pope not being contented with his Peter Pence,
did newly exact new contributions of the English Clergy, and still intended to
extort more and more from them, contrary to the ancient Customs and Liberties
of England.

Next, that the Patrons of Churches, when they fell void, could not present fit
Clerks unto them, as by grant from the Pope they might do, but their Churches
were collated unto Italians, who understood not our Mother tongue, and
therefore could not instruct their People, whose Souls for lack of discipline
and good instructions perished.

Thirdly, they complained that the Pope imposed upon their Churches more
Pensions then he had formerly promised to take of them, and leavied diverse
taxes within this Realm, without the Kings knowledge or consent.

Fourthly and lastly, that Italians succeeded unto Italians in the best
Benefices and Ecclesiastical livings of England.

Of which followed these Inconveniences; First, there was no Hospitality kept
for the releif of the Poor. Next the word of God was not preached to the
edifying of men's Souls, their divine Service was not celebrated to the comfort
of men's consciences; and lastly church^s were not repaired to the benefit of
their next Incumbents.

It was further showed, that the Clergy of England was enforced to maintain and
arm, some Ten Soldiers, others five, and others fifteen, to be sent with
sufficient Armor and horses to serve the Pope, in what place soever it pleased
him.

Again it was declared, that although there was an Ancient privilege in
England, that no Legate should come into the Realm unless the King required
and allowed him; yet they came continually one after another, and the later
still exceeded the former in troubling and overcharging the Realm.

Moreover it was proved, that besides the Popes Tributes and Subsidies,
Italians held Benefices in England to the yearly value of 60 Thousand marks;
and transported out of the kingdom the most part of that money, to the great
impoverishment of our Country.

Neither were these griefs so lamentable, but that it grieved all estates in
our Country much more, that our best wits for lack of such preferment as was
due unto Learning, were fain to leave the Universities, and to betake
themselves unto Mechanical Trades, and such Occupations as were not fit for men
of their Gifts and capacities, whereby our Realm was almost induced unto a
very Barbarism.

The Ambassadors that made this complaint, were men of great dignity, mature
Judgment, and of exceeding great learning: But what could they prevail in a
Council where the Popes^ Faction was so strong, that at the very self same
time he deposed the Emperor Frederick, and sent away our Ambassadors greatly
discontented: For he gave them a charg^ straightly to command all Bishops in
England to set their hands and seals to that detestable Charter which King
John made to the Pope for a ye^rly pension to be paid unto the Sea of Rome;
unto which commandment all the Bishops (more indiscreetly then wisely) showed
themselves most obedient: But the King protested that although the Bishops had
bowed their knees unto Baal, yet he would stand stoutly in the defense of the
Liberty of his Realm, and would never pay any yearly pension unto Rome under
the name of a Tribute.

I might here take occasion to tell you how this Tribute grew, but you must
remember that I have already touched the same somewhat, in all that may be said
in the behalf of the Pope; and for the maintenance of that Pension, it has
been lately confuted in a leamed Treatise called Anti-Sanderus; I might also
proceed in declaring other inconveniences which our Realm has endured by our
voluntary subjection unto the Pope: But these may suffice to commend those our
Kings for their wisdom, and magnanimity which cast off that yoke, amongst
whom there are none that deserve greater commendation then the Queens Majesty
that now reigns, and her Noble Father and godly Brother: For some of their
predecessors (indeed) permitted not the Pope to overcharge their Subjects; but
they have discharged them of all kind of Grievances which he was wont to put
them unto, and have both wisely and boldly excluded him and his Authority,
which he wrongfully usurped. Whereat both his Fatherly reverence and our Romish
S^ctaries so much repine, that they cry out with open mouth, that it is against
all Reason, all Divinity and Scriptures that secular Princes should have and
arrogate unto themselves any manner of Authority in Ecclesiastical causes.

This, and the Substraction of such Taxes and Impositions, as the Sea of Rome
was wont to impose upon the English Clergy, are the true and only Causes why
the Pope thundereth his Interdictions and Menaces against our Gracious
Sovereigne and her kingdom; although he pretends that her dissent* and
diversity from his Religion only moves him to excommunicate her Majesty: You
have heard sufficient Reasons to just^fie the taking away of those duties and
services; And the same might be warranted by the Examples of many Foreign
Examples, who upon the like occasion have done the like: But I may not handle
every matter that is worth the handling, in this discourse, which already is
grown to be far large then I thought it should have been; And yet considering
the Impudency of our Adversaries in denying all kind of Authority unto
Temporal Princes in spiritual Causes, and for satisfying you somewhat in that
point, who especially Charged me to yield you some satisf^ction therein, I will
in few words, and by a few Examples fetched from the holy Scriptures, prove unto
you that this her Majesty's proceeding in Ecclesiastical Causes is waranted by
holy Scriptures. Temporal Princes intermedling with speritual matters warranted
by the Scriptures


Joshua King of Judah commanded Heikias the high Priest of the second Order, and
the Keepers of the Doors to bring out of the Temple of the Lord, all the
Vessels that were made for Baal, and to do any manner of things mentioned in
the 23. Chapter of the second Book of Kings.

David assembled the Sons of Aaron and the Levites to bring the Ark of the Lord
into the House prepared for it, Commanding them to sanctify themselves; And
David had a Linen Garment, as all the Levites had that bear the Ark, And upon
David was a Linen Ephod: David also blessed the People in the Name of the
Lord, and appointed Certain of the Levites to be Ministers before the Ark of
the Lord: He Likewise divided Offices to the Levites, to their Priests, and to
their Sons.

Solomon set the Courses of the P^iests to their Offices, according to the
order of David his Father, and the Levites in their Watches, for to praise and
Minister before the Priests every day, and the Portersby their Course at every
Gate, For so was the Commandment of David the Man of God.

Iehosaphat, in the third year of his Reign sent his Princes to teach in the
Cities of Judah, and with them the Levites and Priests. And after he had
appointed Judges in Civil Causes over all Judah, the set in Jerusalem certain
of the Levits and of the Priests, and of the Chiefest of the Fam^l^^s of Israel
for the Judgment and Cause of the Lord; and made Amoriath the Priest the chief
over them in all matters of the Lord.

Ioash Commanded the Levites, the Priests and Iehoiada the Chief Priest to
gather Money of all Israel to repair the House of the Lord.

Briefly, Hezekias goes furthen then all these; for he repaireth the Temple of
the Lord, and commands the Levites to cleanse themselves, and to sanctify
the House of the Lord. He commands the Priests the Sons of Aaron to offer his
Sin Offerings upon the Altar of the Lord. He appoints the Levites in the
House of the Lord with Cymbals, with Viols, and with Harps; He willed the
Levites to praise the Lord with the words of David, and of Asaph the Seer. He
set posts through all Israel and Judah to command them to come to keep the
Passover with him, and to turn unto the Lord; He appointed the Courses of the
Priests, and of the Levites by their turns, every Man according to his Office.
Bri^fly he commanded the People of Jerusalem to give a great part to the
Priests and Levites that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord.

Since therefore the Queens Majesty intermedleth not in Ecclesiastical Causes
so much as these Princes did, or any thing more then other Kings and some of her
Predecessors have done; Since, when her Majesty called a Parliament to Consult
of temporal matters, the Bishops and Prelates of this Re^lme have a meeting
also in their Congregation House, where whatsoever they decree and order, is
ratified by her Highness Royal Assent and Approbation; since not her Majesty
but her Graces Father was the first that assumed unto himself (not without just
occasion) the Title of Supreme head and Governor in all Causes Ecclesiastical
within his Majesty's Realms and Dominions; And Briefly, since what power soever
the Pope had over England, was long since taken from him, This sentence of
Excommunication against her Majesty is neither warrantable by Law, nor any
sufficient cause for the King of Spain to invade our Realm.

Now to the false Reports of our English Fugitives who (as all other Fugitives
have accustomed to do) fill the King of Spains ears with many vain Fables,
seeking thereby to exasperate him against our Realm and to extenuate the Forces
thereof, to the end he may think the Conquest of England to be a matter of no
great difficulty; They calumniate her Majesty's Justice, ^ccuse her
Government, and blame her Proceedings against Seminaries and Romish Priests
sent into this Realm from Rome as out of the Trojan Horse, to se^uce her
Majesty's loving Subjects, and to withdraw t^em from their Obedience. These
grievous Accusations be sufficiently answered in a little and very learned
Treatise Called the Execution of Justice.

But the Chiefest Point which they reprehend in Her Highness Government, is
there unanswered, and therefore I have thought good to re^ell it in this place.
They signify unto the Spaniard, That her Majesty had, before the Coming of his
Invincible Navy, so overcharged her Subjects with new Subsidies and
unaccustomed Taxes and Impositions, that they neither would be willing nor able
not to defray so great charges as should be requisite and necessary to maintain
an Army by Sea, and an other by land; This Accusation is auggravated, because
her Majesty has called a Parliement almost every fourth years since she came
to the Crown; and in some of them h^th not been cont^nted with a single
Susidie, but has charged her Subjects with a double Subsidy; A matter (as they
say) never heard of in any of her Predecessors times, nor then needful when it
was required.

For the better answering of this obj^ction, I must run over the whole Reigns
of some of her Maj^sties Predecessors, thereby to make it appear that they
called Parliaments and levied Subsidies as often as her Highness has done; And
because it would be tedious to trouble you with many, I have restrained my self
unto two only, namely unto Ed. 1. and Ed. the 3.

The Commons granted a Subsidy unto Edward the First in the third year of his
Reign, and another within two years after; then having no extraordinary
expenses until the eleventh year of his Reign (which was six years after) he
obtained another Subsidy; And when he had reigned two and twenty years, the
Clergy gave him the half of their goods, the Inhabitants of the Cities the
sixth part, and the rest of the common people the tenth of all that they
possessed. And yet within two years after, he levied of all Townsmen and
Citizens the Eighth part, and of the Country people the Twelfth part of their
goods; and because the Clergy refused to grant him a Subsidy at that time, they
were all excluded from his favor and protection; for the recovery whereof, some
by themselves, and others by their friends gave him the Fifth part of all that
they possessed. Neither did the Liberality of the Laity, nor the bounty of the
Clergy so free them from further Contribution, but that the very next year
after, the King having occasion to War against Scotland, the common people gave
him very willingly the Ninth part of their Goods; the Clergy subject unto the
Archbishop of Canterbury the Tenth, and the Clergy of York Diocese the Fifth
part, because they were nearer to the danger and invasion of the Enemy.

Edward the Third had a Subsidy of his people the sixth year of his Reign, and
another the next year after, and within four years after the Commons granted
him a Fifteenth, the Burgesses of Towns and Inhabitants of Cities a Tenth, and
the Clergy as much for three years together; And yet the same year, the City of
London was charged with Two hundred armed men, Canterbury with Forty, St.
Albans with ten, and other Towns and Cities according to their wealth and
ability. Two years were not fully ended, but the people were charged again, and
so almost every third year during his reign,, until that in the Forty fifth
year thereof he levied a certain sum of Fifty thousand Marks of his Subjects;
and within six years after, he charged all persons of his Realm, as well men as
women that were fourteen years of age, to pay him Four pence a piece, except
only such as went a begging from door to door. The like Subsidies were levied
by Richard the Second, by Henry the Fourth, and Henry the Fifth, and almost by
all the rest of our Kings; the which for brevitie sake, I pass over with
silence.

But to clear her Majesty the better of this accusation, and to make it known
unto her Subjects how greatly they are bound unto her Highness, for sparing to
use such means for money, as many of her Predecessors used in time of their
necessity; it will not be a miss to acquaint you and them with many ways that
our Princes have practiced to relieve their wants, of which her Majesty,
although her occasions to use money were greater, or as great as theirs, never
did put any one in practice. In the recital of these practices, I will not name
our Kings in order as they reigned, but relate their means to make money as
they shall come to my memory.

Edward the First called (by a Writ called Quo Warranto) all together that held
any Lands of him, to show by what Title they held their Lands, who recovered
much money of the meaner sort, who having no evidences to show, durst not
withstand his demand, until the Earl of Surrey, called before the Justices to
the same effect, answered, That he and his Ancestors entering into this Realm
with William the Conqueror won their Lands by the Sword, and that he would hold
his by the Sword; which stout answer made the king surcease his demand.

Henry the seventh wanting money, caused all penal Statutes to be examined, and
all forfeitures laid upon his Subjects by them, to be strictly and severely
exacted. Which exaction cost Richard Empson and Edmond Dudly their lives.

Henry the first, in a Parliament held in the one and thirtieth year of his
Reign, put Priests to their fines who lived with their wives still in house
with them.

Henry the second, Anno 1166. ordained a Collect^on on to be made through all
his Countries and Dominions of two pence in the pound of every man's Lands and
Goods (Jewels and Apparel only excepted) to be paid the same year; and for the
space of four years next ensuing one penny of every pound to be paid yearly;
and those that had not the worth in goods and lands to the value of twenty
shillings, and were house-holders, and had any offices, they should pay a penny
to this Contribution. And those that departed this life within the term that
that this Collection was current, their debts being paid, were appointed by the
same Ordinance to pay the tenth part of all the residue of their goods unto
this Contribution.

Richard the first, to make money for his voyage against the Turks, levied a
Tax, engaged, sold, and let to Farm his Lands, his Tolls, his Customs, and
other his Revenues, with certain Countries and Offices; and understanding that
Hugh Pudley Bishop of Durham had great store of ready money, he sold to him the
Manor of Seggesfield, with the Wapentake belonging unto the same, and also
found means to persuade him to buy his own Province, which he did, and was
thereupon created an Earl by the King for the same, and was Entitled both
Bishop and Earl of Durham: He had likewise great sums of money of the Citizens
of London for Privileges granted unto them. Besides he had license of Pope
Innocent to dispense with such as pleased him for their vows, and to go into
the Holy Land, although they had taken the cross on them for that purpose, and
of those he took abundantly; and diverse others he compelled to fine. Also he
feigned that he had lost his Seal, wherefore he commanded a new to be made, and
willed it to be proclaimed and published in every Country, that those to whom
he had granted any thing by his Deed or Charter, meaning to enjoy the same in
surety, should not think it much to come and have it confirmed by his new Seal,
least afterward the other being lost, their lawful Titles might be called in
question. Lastly, he levied the tenth part of all the moveable goods throughout
the Realm of England to the aid of the Wars; and this Collection passing under
the name of an Alms, was extended upon the goods of Spiritual men as well as
Temporal. This King was (as you shall hear hereafter) taken Prisoner in
returning from those Wars* and for his Ransom order was taken that all manner
of persons as well Spiritual as Temporal, should give the fourth part of their
whole Revenues due to them, for that year toward the Kings Ransom. The same
king after his retu^n sold the Offices of Sheriffs and diverse other Offices,
and procured a Subsidy to be given unto him of two shillings of every ^
lough-land, and commanded that every man should make for him the third part of
Knights service accordingly* as every Fee might bear, to furnish him forth into
Normandy. The same King by virtue of a Parliament, called back, and resumed
into his hands all Patents, Annueties, Fees, and other Grants, before his
voyage into the Holy Land, by him made, or otherwise granted or alienated. And
because it should not seem he used a mere extort violence herein* he treated
with every one of them in most courteous wise, bearing them in hand that he well
knew they meant not to let forth their money unto him upon usury, but would be
contented with such reasonable gains and profit as had been raised to their use
in the time of his absence, of those things which they held of him by
Assignation in way of loan, so that now the same might be restored unto him
again, since he meant not to sell them, but to let them forth as it were to
Farm for a time, as all men might well understand, considering that he could
not maintain the port of a King without receipt of those profits which he had
so set forth; And hereunto every man yielded, although no man had received a
third part of the principal which they had laid forth. The same King having
borrowed a great sum of money of the Merchants of the Staple, called the Monks
of Osteaux, gat them to pay the same, telling them that he borrowed it of
certain Merchants beyond the Sea, upon confidence of their good benevolence.
The same King caused all Offices in Aurmen, Poictou, and Main to fine with him
for their Offices. The same King seemed in appearance to be offended with his
Lord Chancellor for concluding the Truce with the French King, and therefore
took the Seal from him, and caused a new to be made, proclaiming through all
his Dominions, that not any thing sealed with the old Seal should stand in
force, both for that his Counselors had wrought more indiscreetly then was
conven^ent, and because the same Seal was lost when his Vice Chancellor was
drowned; wherefore all men were commanded to come to the new Seal that would
have their Charters and Writings confirmed. The same King having levied two
shillings once before of every Hide of land, levied 5 s. of every Hide of Land
for a Subsidy, rating every Hide to certain hundred acres. Lastly, the same
King caused Turneys to be exercised in diverse places for the better trayning of
men at Arms in F^ats of Arms, whereby he raised no small sums of money for
granting license to his Subjects so to Tu^ney; every Earl paid for his license
twenty Marks, every Baron ten Marks, and every landed Knight four Marks, and
those that had no land two Marks.

Now from this King unto others; King John in the year 1204 levied a Subsidy
of two Marks and an half of every Knights Fee, belonging as well unto Spiritual
as unto Temporal men; the which exaction must needs be very great, considering
that there were better then forty thousand Knights Fees in England, and that
every shilling then was worth three shillings in these days, according to the
rate which Sir Thomas Smith makes in his Book de Republica Anglorum.

Henry the third revoked all lands granted in his Minority unto his Servants,
and called to an account all his Officers, displaced some, fined others, sold
his Plate, and borrowed so much money as he could get of the Londoners, of
Priors, Abbots, and of the Jews, of one of which named Aaron, it is written
that he had at one time above 30000 Marks.

Henry the third again obtained certain Authentic Seals of the Prelates of
England, and sealed therewith certain writings and instruments* wherein it was
expressed that he had received certain sums of money for dispatch of business
pertaining to them and to their Churches, of these and the Merchants of
Florence and of Sienna, whereby they stood bound for repaiment by the same
Instruments, made by him their Agent in their names. The Pope yielded his
consent unto this shift, because it should go unto the discharging of the kings
debts into which he was run by bearing of the charges of the Wars, whereof I
have made mention in another place against the king of Sicilie.

The same Henry caused a Proclamation to be made, that all such as might
dispend 15 l. in land should receive the honor of Knighthood, and those that
would not, should pay their Fines; and five Marks were set on every Sheriffs
head for a Fine, because they had not distrained every person that might
dispend 15 l. land, to receive the order of Knighthood, as was to the same
Sheriffs commanded. The same Henry in the Forty fourth year of his Reign, had
granted him a Scutagium or Escuage, that is fourteen shillings of every Knights
Fee. The same Henry, in the second commotion of the Earl of Gloucester, engaged
the Shrines of Saints, and other Jewels and Relics of the Church of
Westminster for great sums of money, wherewith he got Aid out of France and
Scotland. Briefly, the same Henry caused all the weights and measures
throughout all England to be perused and examined, and laid great Fines on
their heads that were found with false Weights and with false Measures.

Edward the second, for his defense against the Scots had the sixth penny of
temporal men's goods in England, Ireland, and Wales: And Edward the Third for
the recovery of France, besides other Subsidies, took the ninth Lamb, Fleece,
and Sheaf of Corn through England.

Ri^hard the Second had a Mark of the Merchants for every Sack of their Woolls
for one year; and six pence of the buyers for every pound of Wares brought in
from beyond the Seas and here sold. He had likewise toward his charges for the
Wars of France a Noble of every Priest, Secular or Regular, and as much of
every Nun; and of every married or not married man or woman being sixteen years
old four pence, and forty shillings of every Sack of Wool; of which ten
shillings to be employed at the ^ings pleasure, and thirty shillings to be
reserved for his necessity.

In the 24. year of Henry the Eighth his Reign, when his Majesty married with
her Highness Mother, the Lady Ann Bullein, Writs were directed to all Sheriffs
to certify the names of all m^n of 40 l. lands to receive the honor and order
of Knighthood, or else to make a Fine.

It is written by Philip de Comines, that our Kings when they wanted money,
were wont to feign that they would go into Scotland or into France with an
Army; and that to make great sums of money, they would levy men, and pay them
for a matter of two or three months, within which space they would again
dismiss their Armies, although they had taken money of their Subjects enough to
maintain them for a whole year or more; and many times they had money of the
King of Scotland or of France toward the charges of their Wars.

It is written by du Haillan in the Tenth Book of his French History, that John
King of England being in great want of money, enjoyed for six years together
all the B^nefices of his Realm, and all his Bishoprics, Abbeys, and
Monasteries, wherewith he defraied the expenses of his House and of his Armies;
which he might do very well, because the Revenues of such Benefices as Italian
Priests enjoyed sometimes in England, came by just computation to above seventy
thousand Marks by the year. And it was declared in a Parliament held in the 11.
year of King Henry the Fourth his Reign, that the King might have of the
temporal possessions, Lands and Revenues which were lewdly consumed by the
Bishops, Abbots and Priors of England, so much as would suffice plentifully to
find and maintain 150 Earls, 1500 Knights, 6209 Esquires, and an hundred
Hospitals more then were at that time. The same King John accused sometimes
one, sometimes another Nobleman of England, that they lost his Towns and Cities
beyohd the Seas by their negligence, and fined them at great sums of money.

Thus I have with as much brevity as might be, waded through the several reigns
of most of the longest-lived Kings of our Realm, and have set you down about
thirty sundry and diverse kinds of ways which they have used to make money in
time of their want and necessities; of all which, her Majesty's greatest
enemies cannot truly show or prove that her Highness in thirty six years that
her Grace has now reigned, ever used as much as one; and if it may please
those that being Fugitives abroad, and most envy and malign her peaceable and
quiet Government at home, to confer the necessities of her Predecessors with
the urgent occasions that her Grace has had to use much ready money, they
shall find that her Ancestors never had so just occasions of necessary
expenses as her Majesty had of late years, yea almost for the whole time of her
reign.

For albeit her Majesty has not had continual open Wars, as some of them had,
yet her charge has been nothing inferior unto theirs. For first, Wars are now
adays (as I have said) far more chargeable then they were wont to be. Then her
Grace has had no other Princes to contribute toward her expenses as her
Predecessors had. Next her Loans to foreign Princes, as to the Kings of France,
of Navar, of Scotland, to the late Duke of Alencon, and to the States of the
Low Countries have been very great. And lastly, her charges both by land and
Sea could not choose but amount yearly to infinite sums, considering how many
times her Highness has been constrained to send her Navy to the Seas, and her
Land Soldiers forth of the Realm. Besides, her Predecessors charges were for
the most part voluntary, being undertaken to conquer, and not to defend their
Realms, to get other Princes Dominions, and not to conserve their own; to
revenge foreign injuries, and not to repulse domestical invasions; briefly,
their Wars were for their own profit, and hers for her Subjects benefit;
considering therefore, that whatsoever her Grace has levied, not granted unto
her by her Parliament, without any contradiction, without any accusing her of
Prodigal^ty, without any such exception taken against her demands, as has been
taken against other her Predecessors, without any suspicion of her evil
Government, therefore without any consigning the managing and government of the
same unto others, then unto them who by her Majesty's appointment have the
custody thereof; it is a manifest argument, that her Subjects were always most
willing to yield to all manner of contributions that her Highness in her
Princely Wisdom and Discretion did take to be necessary for the defense of her
Realm. And if these malicious Accusers would look upon the governments, upon
the Exactions, upon the extortions of such Princes in whose Realms they either
live by Alms, or wander up and down as Vagabonds, their own consciences (if at
least they have any) would condemn them of malice, of untruth, or of gross
ignorance; for the wisest amongst them may and are well able to make large
volumes of such Subsidies, Taxes, Impositions and Grievances as are levied in
France, Italy, and Spain, of which the hundredth parts are unknown, much less
practiced in England, and this must needs appear to be most true and manifest,
since it cannot be denied that in some Dukedoms of Italy, the Circuit of which
is not comparable unto one Shire of England, the yearly Revenues of the Duke
far exceed the Revenues and Rents of the Crown of England.

Moreover, if it may please this Viperous generation of Fugitives to call to
mind the Interest that Princes have in their Subjects Goods, and the great
power that is given unto kings in the Old Testament over the Lands and
Possessions of as many as live under their Obedience; and also to remember,
that Princes, the longer they live, the more absolute, Imperious, and
self-conceited they are in the Execution of their Government, and the more
Experienced in their proof, they must rather commend then condemn her Majesty,
whom neither continuance of time, nor fullness of Authority, nor presumption
upon the good Wills of her people, nor confidence upon the Equity of her Cause,
nor the consideration of her Subjects weal, wholly depending upon her welfare;
nor briefly, the remembrance of her gentle and sweet-Government, has ever
imboldened to be over-chargable unto the Realm, or over-burthensome unto her
Subjects. This grievous accusation is more truly then briefly refelled.

Now leaving the rest of these Fugitives suggestions unto another place,
wherein I shall have occasion to handle them more fitly; I will end this point
with condemning the King of Spain for being too light in crediting these Rebels
in two principal points.

For first he ought to have considered, The Spaniards indiscretion in crediting
our English Fugitives.
that neither the vain Pamphlets disspersed by his lying Ambassador Mendoza,
nor the malicious book written by Cardinal Allen, was able to alter, remove, or
shake the natural and dutiful affections of our English Subjects; they were
too well acquainted with the Ambassadors old and inveterate malice, with his
hostile practices, and his desperate intents. They knew the Cardinal to be a
Religious Fugitive, to sell his tongue and the use thereof for money, to be
like unto Richard Shaw, that was hired to preach at Pauls-Cross, and there
publicly to justify the wrongful usurpation of Richard the third; to
resemble the Duke of Buckingham, who neither feared nor blushed to commend the
same cause for just and most lawful in the Guildhall London; to imitate John
Petit a Preacher of France, who for a far less bribe then a Cardinalship,
allowed, approved, and commended, in Pulpit and in writing, the most horrible
murder committed by the Duke of Burgoigne on the person of the Duke of
Orleans: And lastly to follow his example, who (without all example) was not
ashamed to write a large volumn against the late king of France, and therein to
deduce many reasons, many causes, for and by which he maintained that the said
King might be lawfully deposed, and another set up and established in his place.

Secondly, he might have considered that those Fugitives are (for the most
part) peevish and discontented Scholars, fitter to manage a Pen then a Lance,
to dispute of Philosophy, then to discourse of War, to be partial in their own
conceits, then to be prodigal in their assurance; briefly, to be ready to say
more then they know, especially when they are either assured, or in good hope,
by saying much to obtain much: he might have remembered that Johannes Viennensis
sent into Scotland by Charles the sixth of France, although he was a man of
great experience, a Captain of long continuance, and one that by his long abode
in Scotland knew England and her Forces far better then our Fugitives do,
deceived his King at his return out of Scotland, in reporting unto him the
strength of our Nation; he had fought with many of our Armies, had seen 60000
Footmen, 8000 and Horsemen of ours in the Field, was of opinion that our Country
was easy to be conquered within the Realm, howsoever it prevailed and
conquered abroad; And lastly, he both knew and signified unto the king, that
the Duke of Lancaster was absent in Portugal with the Flower and chief Youth of
England.

These reason* moved the French king to determine to invade England presently,
to carry an huge Army to Sluice in Flanders, to assemble all the Nobility and
Peers of his Realm for that voyage, and to pro^^se unto himself an assured
victory against England. But what event had this Journey? What effect followed
of this persuasion? The king hearing that the Duke of Lancaster was returned
out of Portugal, and that in England f^r greater Forces were prepared to resist
his invasion then John of Vienna had mentioned, withdrew his Forces from Sluice
unto the places from whence they came; and as the Spaniards would cover their
dishonor received in their attempt against England by the Duke of Parma his
not joining with them in convenient time, as it was decreed in Spain before
they departed out of Spain; so they laid the fault of not proceeding in the
journey upon the Duke of Berry, who knowing the Forces of England (as
undoubtedly the Duke of Parma did far better then those that took upon them to
make report thereof) came not unto the French king at Sluice until the dead of
Winter, when it it was too late to depart thence to invade England.

And as the Frenchmen falsely charged the Duke of Berry that he had received
Bribes of the king of England to divert his king from his intended enterprise
against England; So the Spaniards more indirectly then justly, blame the Duke
of Parma, that in consideration of some reward either received or promised from
us, he held not his promise to join his power with the Spanish strength against
us.

And lastly, as of the French vain enterprises and all the preparations
thereof, there came nothing else into England but certain great Tents and
lodgings of Wood, capable, (as their Authors report) of all their kings huge
Army; So of the Span^sh invincible Navy, and of their mighty Army, nothing was
seen in England but the spoil of their strong Armado, and the flags of their
tallest ships, which were brought to Pauls^Cross and there showed unto the
People as notable monuments of their wondrous overthrow.

Now follows the death of the Queen of Scots, a Queen in whom God had joined
some virtues with many vices; The late Scottish Queens death gave the Spaniard
no just occasion to invade England.
a happy Queen, if she had not been too much affected unto the Pope of Rome,
too much lead and counseled by the Spanish King; a Pope and a King that have
overthrown more noble Families in England, France, Flanders, and Scotland, then
they have true and good Noblemen within their Realms and Dominions.

Of this Queen because she was nobly descended, and the mother of a most noble
King, I forbear to set down what Buchanan has written: And yet because her
Majesty is charged to have done her to death wrongfully, I cannot but relate
what another reports of her; Another, that was neither an Englishman, nor a
Scot, but a German: Another that writes of her as Cornelius Tacitus does of
his Emperors, Sine ira and studio, without hatred or affection; for she was
unto him as those Emperors were to Tacitus, neither known for any good turn
that ever he received of her, nor hated for any wrong that ever she did unto
him. This Queen says my Author) being weary of her second husband, whose life
was often sought, and at length unhappily shortened, not long after his death
married James Hepborn Earl of Bothwel, whom during her Husbands life she had
used most fumiliurly. Certain Noblemon of Scotland, being greatly moved with
the indignity of so wicked a deed, and desirous to revenge so horrible a
Parricide, raised an Army against the Queen, and forced her to resign her
Kingdom unto her young Son; But they confined her unto a certain Island, whence
escaping the next year by corrupting her Keepers, and the Hamiltons Forces
which fought in her defense, but overthrown by the Lord Protector of Scotland,
she meaning to go unto her Mothers friends into France, took her journey by
England, where she was detained; and when as certain Treasons, intended by the
instigation of the Pope against the Queen of England her State for the delivery
of the Scottish Queen, and establishing her in both Kingdoms, were revealed and
discovered, she was more straightly kept and looked unto, until at length
because she had used many means to deprive the Queen of her life, she was
cond^mned to death in the year 1586. by the Lords and Commons of the Parliament
House, and executed the same year accordingly.

Against this Sentence, Six Arguments in the b^half of the Scottish Q. used by
her friends to prov^ that she could not lawfully be condemned by our Queen.
and his execution there are made these exceptions. First, it is said, That the
late Queen of Scotland, being an absolute Prince as well as the Queen of
England, could not be condemned to death by her, because Par in parem non habet
potestatem. Next it is alleged, that if a Prince should so much forget
himself, as not only to pronounce, but also to execute a sentence of death
upon his Equal, over whom he has no manner of Jurisdiction or Authority, other
Princes will be greatly offended with this Sentence, and never endure that it
should be put in execution. To these Reasons there is added a Third, That since
there is no Law as yet written to punish a Prince with death, they think it
unlawful to make new Laws, new Statutes for the punishment of a Prince; and in
case it were lawful, it is not known who should make these Laws, who should
adminster them, who should execute them; and therefore sithence there is no law
against Princes, there can be no great punishment inflicted upon Princes; and
because there was never any custom known or practiced to proceed so severely
against Princes Lives, it must needs be against all good Cust^m to call their
Behavior in question, or their Lives into danger.

The favorers of this cause proceed further, and look upon the malice and
wickedness of Subjects, who as soon as they begin to hate their Prince,
unjustly and for no occasion, would quickly by themselves or by other Princes,
by open violence, or by secret conspiracies, be rid of their Princes; So (say
they) would it come to pass, that by whom Princes ought to be preserved, by
them they should perish; and by whose help they mould be delivered against all
others, through their hatred they should be destroyed by themselves.

The Patrons and Advocates of this Queen bring another reason to confirm their
opinion. For (say they) if a Prince fall willingly into another Princes hands,
or if it happen that flying from his malicious Subjects, or from his foreign
Enemies, or being driven by Tempest, or other casualty into one Kingdom, when
he meant to go into another, or that being in the field, one Prince is detained
by another, the detainer that shall not ransom but execute such a Prince, shall
break and violate the Laws of Arms, of Humanity, or of Hospitality.

Lastly, the Laws of Nations require, that Princes Ambassadors, even in the
hottest broils, and most bloody contentions that are betwixt Princes, shall
have free ingress and egress into and out of the Kingdoms into which they are
sent: But if the Laws permit, or rather command Ambassadors, who do but
represent the persons of Princes, to be free from all dangers; what honest or
just pretext can there be to violate or wrong their Lords and Masters? For, it
is against all reason, against common pract^ce and experience to spare the
Servant, and to spoil the Master; not to hurt the Subject, and to murder the
Prince; to dismiss the Messenger, and to detain the Sender; briefly, to honor
him who represents another man's person, and to disgrace the party whose
person is represented.

These are the most substantial Reasons that are made against this Sentence;
And to every one of these I will frame a brief Answer. Par in parem non habet
potestatem. And therefore Princes who are most commonly equals, The Answer to
the first Argument.
cannot exercise any power or authority one against another. True it is, that
this is an ancient principle or maxim in Law; but as other Rules or Maxims
have their exceptions, so this position is not without a limitation, without an
exception or interpretation. Two Magistrates (I grant) being made and
constitu^ed by their Superior with equal power and authority, have no power or
jurisdiction one over another; but they are created as it were with this
condition, that they shall use the authority which is given them by their
Princes against their Inferiors, and to those that are subject to their several
jurisdictions. But sithence this Law was made in their behalf only who do
acknowledge a Superior, and that in such a time, and in such a State in which
there were many Magistrates but one King; many Judges but one Emperor; many
that were equa^s among themselves, but one that excelled them all in power and
and authority; I take it that the same concerns absolute Princes no more then
a privilege granted to Ticius alone belongs unto Marius; For sithence that
the charge and alteration of time has brought forth so many Kings instead of
one Emperor, that almost every Country has now his several King: Since the
consent and general agreement of people has given full power and authority
unto their Kings to make what Laws they pleased; since need and necessity
requires that new Laws be made and published almost every day; and that they
being once made, shall not be of force out of those Realms within which they
are established, it cannot be but both absurd and ridiculous to believe and
affirm that a Law made many hund^ed years ago, by a Roman Emperor, and that in
Italy, shall in these days bind those Princes over whom the Emperor has no
manner of power, and that when a^tient Emperors had it long sithence abrogated
and abolished. For as many Shires and Provinces of England, France and other
Countries, which had their several Kings, are now reduced under the obedience
of one King; so contrariwise the Emperor, which was wont to command many
Nations, is now brought to such allow ebb, to so small and slender an Estate,
that he can hardly challenge the absolute Rule and Government over the
twentieth part of one Nation;

Since therefore Laws made by our Ancestors are so derived to our aftercommers,
that it may be well said, that they a^e as well Successors unto them in their
Laws, as they are their Heirs in their goods; it is certain that many Laws
remain still which were made many years ago; but no Prince will admit or allow
them any longer then they shall be found to be profitable and expedient for the
Commonwealth, or then they shall not diminish their royal Authority; hence it
comes that some men hold opinion, that a King cannot make a Law which shall
prejudice his Successors: hence it comes that former Laws may Lawfully be
abrogated; and others, although they be quite contrary, made in their stead, so
that they be found profitable for the S^ate. Hence lastly it comes that the
latter Statute repealeth the former, and that which came last to light obtained
most force. Neither although there be but very few or no Princes, (especially
in Christendom) which even in these days of Weakness and infirmity of the
Empire, do not greatly respect and reverence the Emperor; And albeit there be
very few Lawyers which do not both read and admire the large volumes of the
Civil Laws, Compiled, or rather digested into order by Justinian the Emperor;
yet is there any King that uses the same Laws as Justinian his Laws? Or any
Civilian that joyneth not the knowledge of the Statutes and Constitutions of
his Country with the Study of the Imperial decrees and Ordinance? In England
the Civil Law has small force, and less use: In France it is in great Credit;
but there is a Capital punishment laid upon them who in pleading a Cause
presume to allege a Civil Text as a Law made by the Emperor, but they
alleged them as Laws approved by the French King. For, when as the King of
France perceived that his Majesty should be greatly blemished and prejudiced,
if he should Govern his kingdom by Foreign Laws, and yet he saw that it was
impossible to have or invent better Laws then the Civil Laws are, he
entertained the best of them, being very loath that so good Laws should utterly
perish, and be forgotten; But he commanded them to be Called his and his
Successors Laws, least that it might turn to his discredit to Govern by other
Princes Laws. What account other Nations make of the Civil Laws, it is easy to
Conjecture by this; That in Germany it self, in which only Country the Emperor
has Imperial authority, there are many Provinces which have banished the Civil
Law.

Considering therefore that Laws made in Spain bind not us in England; and
that the Frenchmen are not tied to ours; who shall be esteemed wise that will
affirm, that these Kings are Subject unto Justinians Laws, which are nothing
inferior unto Justinian his Successor in power and Authority? But grant that
the Emperors Laws have now as great Force and Strength as ever they had, and
that this Maxim, Principle, or Rule in Law ( Par in parem non habet
potestatem) do bind all the Kings of the World; yet it shall appear that it
cannot any thing at all avail the late Scottish Queen.

For First, as it oftentimes happens that men of great Authority, lose the
same by their own default, or Negligence; So princes going our of their own
Countries into other kingdoms and Dominions, make themselves inferior unto them
in whose kingdom they remain.

This is proved by Common experience. For, what Householder (be he never so
poor will suffer a rich man to rule, or be his better in his own House? What
Master of a Ship will permit a Passenger, b^ he of never so great Wealth, to
Guide or Govern his ship? Or what Captain can or will endure that a young
Nobleman, be he of never so great birth and Parentage shall lead and direct his
Soldiers? The sweetness which is in Commanders admits no Companion; The
Pope, the Emperor, or if there were any greater then they, has no share, no
part or Portion therein; but all, were it never so much, belongs wholly unto
him that rules; And there is such a feeling, such pleasure in this sweetness,
that to extenuate the same by words is dangerous, to diminish it by deeds
perilous, and to make others partakers of it, foolish in a King, and Capital in
a Subject. Eumenes was King but of a poor Castle, and yet he would not
accknowledge mighty Antigonus for his Superior* Pompey was a Subject, and yet
he could not endure any one man to be above him. Caesar a Citizen of Rome, and
yet he could not brook an equal: And the late Prince of Orange a Prince of no
great Power or Wealth, and yet he held himself for as absolute a Prince as the
mighty Monarch of Spain.

This again is proved by a notable example of the Emperor Charles the 4. who
coming into France in the time of Charles the 5. King of France, to end all
debates and quarrels betwixt him and our King, was met upon the way by the
French King; which is a ceremony observed by them who acknowledge themselves to
be inferior unto him whom they meet, but the Emperor as soon as they were
met, would have yielded the highest place unto the King, and accepted it not
without great ceremony; and it was written that it was given him but of
Courtesy, a Courtesy usual among Princes as well as amongst private men; for as
private men in their own houses, and at their own Tables, will of Curte^ie set
meaner men then they are before themselves; so Princes when strange Kings come
into their country, will prefer them before themselves. It is ce^tain that the
Emperor precedeth of right, all the Princes of Christendom. And yet when
Francis the first King of France, was brought from Pavia, where he was taken
Prisoner, into Spain, at their first meeting, the Emprror and he embraced one
another on horseback, with their Capps in their hands, and in covering their
heads there pass^d great ceremony betwixt them, each of them striving to be
the last that should be covered, and after that they had talked a while, they
both covered their heads at one very selfsame time. And after that there was a
new strife betwixt them for the right hand.

This again is proved by the Emperor Sigismond, who when he would have made
the Earl of Savoy (as you have heard upon an other occasion) Duke at Lions,
he was commanded by the Kings Attorney not to attempt any such thing in
France, as well because it was thought, that being in an other Kings Country, he
lost his Authority and Power to create a Duke, as for that it seemed unto the
French King that he was not to suffer him to use any Royal Authority within
his dominions.

The Queen of Scotts therefore when she was in England, The Queen of Scots is
in^erior to the Queens Majesty.
was inferior unto the Queens Majesty, and this inferioritie is proved by three
other principal Reasons. The one because there is an inequality betwixt Kings;
one of them being better then an other. The other because she was her Majesty's
Vassal; and the third because she was deposed, and so no longer a Queen; First
for the inequality, it is certain that the Kings of Spain and of France be both
resolute Princes, and yet France challenges precedence before Spain for five
principal causes.

The first, because the consent and opinion of the learned is for France, and
not for Spain.

The second, because the French Kings have a long time had the honor to be
Emperors, and not the Kings of Spain.

The third, because the French Kings have been called most Christian Kings
these many hundred years, and Ferdinando the fifth was the first (and that but
lately) that was called the Catholic King of Spain.

The fourth, because at the Feast of St. George in England, France even in
Queen Mary's time, was preferred before Spain.

The fifth, because the house of France is more ancient then that of Spain,
which reigned long before the Castle of Hapsburg was builded.

The sixth and last, because the book of ceremonies (which is kept at Rome)
prefers France before Spain.

Next to France is England, as appears by the same book, which puts
England in the second place, and Spain in the third. Again, those Kings are
best which are Crowned; and by the same book it is evident, that France,
England and Spain only have Crowned Kings. Next it seems that the meaner sort
of Kings also strive for Precedence, and one of them will be accounted better
then another; For it is written that Matthew King of Hungary, thinking himself
better then Ladislaus King of Bohemia, when they met once together, Matthew
went bare-headed, and tied about the head with a green Garland, because he
would not put off his Capp unto the Bohemian, but have him put off his unto
him; which the King of Bohemia perceiving, deceived his expectation, by tying
his own Capp so fast unto his head, that when they met he could not put it
off; and so the Hungarian being bare-headed, saluted the Bohemian, that was
covered.

But to leave these Inequalities, That the Kings of Scotland owe homage unto
the Crown of England for Scotland.
and to come unto the second point, which being proved, it must needs follow,
that the Scottish Queen was far inferior unto our Queen, u^^o whom she owed
honor, homage, and obedience:

Many of our Kings have challenged the Soveraignity over Scotland, but none
prosecuted the same more eagerly then Edward the first; who because he would
be sure that his right thereunto was good, caused all the Monasteri^s of
England and Wales to be searched, to see what evidences or books he could
find in them to prove his Title. The King found in the Chronicles of Mariamis
Scotus, of William of Malmesburg, of Roger of Hoveden, of Henry of Huntingd^n,
and of Radolph of ^ucet, that King Edward his Predecessor in the year of our
Lord nine hundred and ten subdued the Kings of Scotland and C^mberland, and
that the Subjects of both these kingdoms, in the nine hundred and eleventh
year, chose the said Edward for their Sovereign Lord. He found further that
Adeslaus King of England subdued in the year nine hundred twenty six Scotland
and Northumberland, and that the People of both Countries submitting themselves
unto him, swore unto him both fidelity and homage. He found again that King
Edgar overcame Rinad the son of Alphinus King of Scots, and that by that
victory, he became King of Four kingdoms, namely of England, Scotland,
Denmark, and Norway. He found also that St. Edward gave the kingdom of
Scotland, to be held under him, unto Malcolm, son unto the King of Cumberland;
and that William the Conqueror in the sixth year of his reign conquered the
said Malcolm, and took an oath of homage and fidelity of him. The like did
William Rufus unto the same Malcolm, and unto his two Sons, who reigned one
after another. Besides it appears unto the said Edward, that Alexander King
of Scotland succ^eded his brother Edgar in his kingdom, with the consent of
Henry the first King of England; that David King of Scots did homage unto King
Stephen; and William unto King Henry the second, unto Henry the third, unto
King Richard, and unto King John.

It appeared again by the Chronicles of St. Albans, that Alexander King of
Scots in the thirty year of King Henry's Reign, married Margaret his Daughter
at York, and then and there did him homage for his Kingdom; Lastly it appeared
by the Popes Bulls written into Scotland, that the Kings of Scotland were
excommunicated by diverse Popes because they would not obey the Kings of England
their Lords and Sovereigns.

Bu^ against all this and whatsoever else may be said by us to fortify and
defend our Title, the Scots make three principal Objections.

The first that their King never did homage unto us but for the Countries of
Northumberland; Cumberland, Westmerland and Huntingdon; the which they confess
they held of our Kings, and by their grant and gift.

The second, that Edward the third being chosen Arbitrator of the great and
notable contention that was betwixt John Bali^l and Robert Bruce for the
Kingdom, took the two Competitors aside, and sounded which of them would take
the kingdom to hold it of him, which when Robert (whose Title was, as they
thought best) refused to do, and John was content to perform, he wrongfully
pronounced Judgment for John Baliol; and so extorted this Homage by Fraud and
Corruption.

The third, that the Estates of the Realm never acknowledged this Homage, but
were so far from yiedling thereunto, that the Nobility of Scotland deprived
John Baliol of the Crown, and gave the same unto Robert the first, because he
submitted himself and his Kingdom unto King Ed.

The three Obj^ctions may not be unanswered; and therefore unto ^very one of
them in Order. True it is that a King may hold his Kingdom of no Superior, and
yet owe Homage for some Member thereof unto another, or some Principality that
he holds of an other, and he shall still nevertheless remain a most
absolute King: For who will deny King Edward the third of England to be either
absolute or Sovereign King of England, although he swore Homage and Fidelity
unto King John of France for Gascoigne and other Dominions which he held of him
in France? Or who will take the Emperor Chales the fifth not to be an absolute
and Sovereign King in Spain or other his Dominions and Kingdoms, because he
sometimes owed Fidelity and Homage unto the French King for the Dukedom of
Burgondy? B^t the case is altered in the King of Scots, because he did Homage
both for these Countries and for his Kingdom: And this is no good Argument. The
King of Scots did Homage unto England for certain English Provinces held of
England, therefore they did not Homage for Scotland.

But the second Objection is of better weight, and yet may be thus answered; I
might here oppose the Credit of an English man against a Scots credit, and
desire to have Holinshed, and The. Walsingham speaking for us, to be as well
believed as Hector Boethius and George Buchanan would be credited when they
speak for Scotland. But you shall hear this Objection confuted by an Italian,
namely by Pelidore Virgil, a man of more indifferency, of less partiality, and
perhaps of better Judgment: against whom if it be be said, that he was either
hired to write our History favorably, or that he could write nothing of us but
what he had from us; I ^nswer that there was never any man justly condemned
upon a bare and light suspicion; and I eftsoons say as I once said before,
that where a matter cannot be proved but by domestical witnesses, there such a
proof is both allowable and lawful.

Then to refell this Objection, I say out of Polid. Virgil, that King Edward
pronounced not Judgment for John Balioll because he promised to hold Scotland
in homage of him, but because he came of the eldest Daughter of King David, and
Robert Bruce of the Second. I strengthen my saying by these Arguments; First,
it is said, that King Edward very wisely, when as this great con^ention was
referred unto his Audience and determination, he called together (as Hector
Boeti^s himself writes) the learned men of England and of Scotland; he sent
the State of the Question into France, whence he received Answer, that John
Baliolls Title was the better; And because he might be su^pected if he should
examine the matter alone, and give sentence himself, he chose 12. English men
(as Boethius says) or 20. (as Holinshed reporte^h) and as many Scots as English
men, whom he made Judges of the controversy; and they when they had thoroughly
discussed both conpetitors Rights, gave Judgment for John Balioll, which Award
was confirmed by the King. Then whenas the King had seen so many Evidences and
proofs confirming his Right and Title unto the Soveraignity of Scotland, as are
before mentioned, is it likely that he who had Right to that which he demanded,
would condition with the Competitors in such manner as is objected? Lastly
although he had made John Bali^ll to enter into such a condition, and to bind
himself thereunto, this cannot help the Scots, for that it is lawful for any
Man to Claim his Right at any time, and to tell him that is likely to detain
and withstand his Right, that he shall not have his lawful Favor unless he
will be content. And this is most lawful in a cause of Contention betwixt the
Sovereign and his Vassal, because the Sovereign must require Homage at his
hands, and the Vassal is not (in some Men's opinion) bound to do him homage
unless it be required.

The third Objection is Answered with as little difficulty as the rest: For
the chief Peers of Scotland acknowledged Obedience and homage unto King Edward:
They consented unto the delivery which John Balioll made unto our king of his
kingdom; they required our king to be bound (as he was) in an hundred thousand
Marks to deliver the kingdom to their king again within two months; and they
appointed certain principal Noblemen to receive and keep the Revenues and
Profits of the Crown to his use, whom King Edward should declare to have best
Right thereunto.

Again, John Balioll was not deprived of his Crown by the States and Nobility
of Scotland (as Bucanan reports) but was enforced (as Hector Boethius
restifieth) to resign all his right in the Crown unto King Edward, and to
relinquish and give over his kingdom and at; the same time all the Nobility of
Scotland did swear homage and Obed^ence unto our King: and Boethius has nothing
to say (...) their defense, but that our King enforced them thereunto; As
though it were not lawful for the Superior to constrain his Vassals and
Subjects (in case fair means cannot prevail with them) by violence to
acknowledge their duty and service unto him. But it pleased the Almighty to
punish the Scottish disloyalty, Inconstancy and Rebellion: they revolted often;
They broke their promise many times; They thought it lawful to delude us with
fair words, and to deceive us with vain promises; But the eternal who hates
deceivers, and deceitful dealings, so prospered all our Attemps against them,
that our King for a while left them destitute of a King, caused them to swear
and submit themselves unto some of his own laws; made the Earl of Pembroke
(whose name was Odomar Valentinian) Governor of Scotland; and to the end they
should have no Memory, no Monument nor Testimony of a Royal Majesty, he
transferred a Seat of Stone (whereupon their Kings were wont to sit at their
Coronation) out of Scotland into England, and the same remainth at th^s day at
Westminster.

Now to leave these and the like Testimonies, because they carry the less
credit, for that they are reported by our own Historiographers, I will come to
the violent presumptions which may be gathered out of their own Histories.

First, it cannot be denied that God has blessed us with many famous and
notable Victories against the Scots. Then it must be granted that we had
always wit enough to make our best advantage of those victories. Next, it is
not likely but that we took the benefit of such advantage^: And who will think
that when we were so often provoked, so many times deceived, so thoroughly
informed of our Right, that we would not claim our Right? Again, at the very
time of this notable competency betwixt John Balioll and Robert Bruce, it is
written that Ericus King of Norway, sent certain Ambassadors wi^h Letters of
Commissi^n from him to demand the Kingdom of Scotland in the Right of his
Daughter Margaret, sometimes Wife unto the King of Scots; in which Letter he
acknowledges our King to be Lord and Sovereign of Scotland. And why should
there be found Bulls of Excommunication against the Kings of Scotland for not
obeying our Kings? Or why should it be recorded, that two Kings of Scotland
Carried, at several times, the Sword before King Arthur and king Richard at
their Coronations? Or why is it not probable that Scotland should be as well
Subject unto us, as Bohemia and Hungaria were unto the Empire, Naples and
Sicilie unto Rome, Burgondy and Navarr unto France; the Du^edom of Moscovia and
the Marquisate of Brandiburge unto Pol^n^a, Portugal unto Spain, and Austria
unto Bohemia? Or l^stly, why may it not be thought, that as these Kingdoms and
Dominions remain still in their old Subjection and acknowledge their Ancient
Sovereign, so Scotland ought to do the like? Our Fortune seldom failed us
against them; They never used us so kindly, nor our kings at any time behaved
themselves so unwisely, that they Resigned their Right and Title unto Scotland,
as other Princes have done.

But now to the like advantage of this kind of inferiority, as a Frenchman
contracting or bargaining with one of our Nation in England, makes himself by
this contract and Bargain a Subject unto our Laws; so any man whatsoever
offending within our Realm subjecteth himself, by reason of his offense, unto
our Jurisdiction: And this is so true, that a very mean man being a Judge, if a
great personage remaining under his Jurisdiction (who by reason of his
greatness may seem to be freed from his Authority) shall commit an offense
worthy of Punishment during his abode there, the same mean and Inferior Judge
may lawfully punish his Offense. Example will make this matter more clear. For
Example sake then, grant that a Bishop abides a while within an Archdeacons
Jurisdiction, and there offends in some Crime that deserves Punishment; the
question may be, whether the Archdacon may punish this delinquent?

For the Negative, it may be said, that Par in parem non habet protestatem,
much less an Inferior against his Superior; and that an Archdeacon is Oculus
Episcopi, and Major post Episcopum; and therefore can have no Authority over a
Bishop; yet it is resolved, that if the Bishop be a stranger, and not a Bishop
of the Diocese, the Archdeacon has sufficient Authority and the power to
Chastise and Correct his offense; but he cannot meddle with him if he be his
own Bishop; and the reason of the diversity is, because his own Bishop is as it
were the Archdeacons spiritual Father, and it is not Convenient that the Son
should have any manner of Authority over the Father. Now since it is certain,
that where there is the like reason, there the like Law shall be, I may boldly
infer by this Law; that the Scottish Que^n offending within her Majesty's
Dominion, may be punished by her Grace, although she were her far better.

I might here, before I come unto her voluntary and forcible Resignation of the
Crown, tell you, that she committed many things, both before and after her
Imprisonment, that made a plain forfeture of her Kingdom; But although when I
t^uched the duties of Vassals in some part, I promised to touch the same in
this pl^ce more largely; yet for brevitie sake, I must omit this large
discourse, and only tell you, that as the French King called our King John in
question for the murder committed by him (at his Instigation) on the person of
his Nephew Arthur, and forfeited his States in France for his not Apperance, or
insufficient Answer unto that Crime; so if the Scottish Subjects had not
deprived their Queen for the Par^icide la^d to her charge, our Queens most
excellent Majesty might not only have taken notice thereof, but also have
punished the same. For, albeit the Fact was committed without her Highness
Realm and Dominion, yet the person who was murdered being her Subject and
Kinsman, her grace might ex eo capite, in my simple opinion, lawfully have
proceeded against the Malefactor. And I remember that I saw a man executed at
Venice because he killed his own Wife in Turkey; and the reason why they
proceeded against him, was the hainousness of the Fact, and for that his Wife
(although she were not so) was their natural Subject. And yet I confess that
our Common Laws regard not offenses committed without our Realm; wherein me
thinks they have small reason; For, sithence that for a Bargain made beyond
the Seas I may have my re^edy here; why shall not have the benefit of Law for
my Child and Kinsman, or any other that is near and dear unto me murdered
beyond the Seas, since the life of a Subject ought to be of far greater value
and worth then his goods? And if in a Civil action, of which the Cause and
original is given beyond the Seas, they can (...) the Bond and Obligation to
be made at Lions, within some Shire in England, when indeed the same Lions
which they mean, and where the Bond was made, is in France, why may they not
lawfully use the like Fiction in a Criminal Cause?

But now the third point that Argues the late Scottish Queens Inferiority unto
our Queen; She was deposed, and therefore no longer a Queen.

This point has in it two very strange points. It is strange to hear that a
Man or a woman being borne a Prince should be deprived; and that he which
receives a Kingdom by his birth, should lose the same before his death. But
because this point has great affinity which the third objection that is made
against the unfortunate Queens Execution, I will forbear to speak thereof
until I come to that Objection.

Considering therefore all the premises, I may boldly conclude, that
notwithstanding our often repeated Maxim, Par in Parem non habet potestatem;
Her Majesty's proceeding against the Scottish Lady was most lawful. For,
although as there is but one Sun and one Moon in the Firmament, so there should
be but one king in a kingdom, yet this king may receive another coming into
his Dominion (if he will) gently, for that is humanity; but let him neither
admit him to be his Companion, although he earnestly entreat him; for that were
folly; nor to be afraid to punish him if he offend; for that would argue
foolish Pusillanimitie.

It is written of Lewis the Emperor, that he having taken Frederick his
Competitor Prisoner in the Wars, took his Oath that he should never affect the
Empire any more, nor bear arms against him, and so did set him at Liberty;
And he returned into Austria, where he lived af^erwards quietly; and never
molested or troub^ed the Emperor more. Again, it is reported of Cyrus, that he
having taken King Astiages Prisoner, Caused him to be kept as a king, and never
did him more harm^: And that he likewise showed the like Clemency unto Croesus
king of part of Asia; Now as these kings were Commended as well by those who
lived in their days, as by their Posterity, for their courtesy showed unto
these Cap^ives; So it had greatly rebounded (say the Scottish Queens favorers)
unto her Majesty's Commendation, if it had pleased her to have preserved the
unfortunate Queen; The Spanish king would have thanked her, France would have
p^^^sed her, the Guisards would have liked it, and the Orphan her Son would
have taken very it kindly; Whereas now all these are or justly may be highly
offended and displeased with her severily

Truly, Compassion and Mercy in a Queen toward a Queen is commendable, and it
becomes the Feminine Sex (whose hearts are more tender then Men's) to be kind
unto their own kind; But if this kindness cannot be showed without manifest
danger unto him that shall show it, I hold it for cruelty rather then clemency
to use it; For there is quaedam credulis misericordia; and sometimes to spare a
sinner, is as much as to kill a sinner; and poor pity many times (says the
Proverb) overthrows a whole city.

Cle^menes flying from king Antigonus his wrath and violence, had recourse and
refuge unto Ptolomy king of Egypt, by whom he was courteously entertained, and
promised Ayd^ to help him unto his kingdoms. This Aid was deferred from day
to day; and the longer it was delayed, the greater was Cleomenes desire to
return into his country; And therefore finding that his courteous host was so
given unto Wine and Drunkenness that there was small hope to have present
help from him, he entered into conspiracy with some of his Nobles against him,
and thought to have extorted by force, what he could not obtain by entreaty,
but he failed of his purpose; And he that meant to have killed, was killed.

But what if Ptolomy had understood his Treason before it was put in practice,
and he punished him according to his deserts, who would or could have justly
blamed him for repelling Force by Force? who would have been grieved at so
unthankful a Guests death? who would have sought revenge for so ungrateful a
person? who, to be short, would have reproved in an other that which he would
have done himself, if the like wrong had been offered unto himself? I know that
many Prince cannot abide him that gives such counsel as likes them not,
although it be never so good.

Some cannot endure that any man should presume to tell them of their faults,
and very few can find in their hearts to pardon him that would take away their
lives: In which opinion the more stiffly they dwell, the more reason I give
them, because such Lenity would encourage wicked and evilminded men to intend
and procure their final destruction. For if Cle^menes had killed Ptolomy with
impunity, who would not have been animated by his Example to have made the like
Attempt, especially against him whose death might yield him any manner of
benefit* In regard whereof Ptolemy examined Cleomenes his Treason after his
death, and finding him guilty, condemned his memory, and caused his dead
carcass to be hanged up to his great dishonor and perpetual infamy. There
lived many good and courteous Princes in that age; but none of them reprehended
Ptolomy his action, because they saw that if they tolerated or allowed
Cleomenes his Ingratitude and Treason, being such as no man but a most wicked
man ever adventured to attempt none except he had been a very simple fool would
have made any conscience or difficulty to have done the like.

Since therefore the Scottish Queen, not only resembled, but exc^lled and
exceeded Cleomenes (for she conspired many times, but he but once against his
Host) since she was so near unto her as Astiages was to Cyrus, nor could not
serve her for so faithful a Councellor as was Craesus; nor in sparing her, she
was to regard any man's favor or friendship, as Lewis the Emperor did the Love
and Amity of Leopald the duke of Austria, when he showed mercy unto his
Competitor Frederick; why should her Majesty have spared so unthankful a
Guest, so merciless a Queen? Should she have feared the King of Spains
displeasure? It was he that set her on* and animated her in her enterprises;
And therefore it had been as much to fear him, as to be afraid to execute a
Thief, for fear of his Companion. Should she have born respect unto the
Guisards? Why she knew their hatred was so great toward her, that she needed
not to fear to increase the same, and she had so provided that they should not
be able to annoy her. Should she have been afraid of the French Kings
displeasure? Why she sent her Process, her Examination, her Arraignment unto
him, and found that he rested well and thoroughly satisfied therewith, and he
was to reap a great benefit by her death; for he was discharged of the Dower
which she had yearly out of France. Lastly, should she have stood in fear of
her sons displeasure? Why she saw that so long as she lived he could not live
in peace, in quiet, in security; and as for his Subjects, they when they
deposed her, or rather when they caused her to resign her Diadem, showed their
mind and affection toward her. The rest of the princes of Christendom, some
might perhaps marvail for a while at her death, because it was a strange
President; others might pity her, because she was a woman, and a Queen, but
none will fight for her, because that they which were allied unto her were not
able; and they that had no alliance unto her, had no cause to Revenge her death.

The second Objection is fully answered; now follows the third; a dangerous
Question to be handled by a Subject, The answer to the third Objection.
and yet too boldly discussed by some learned Subjects; for considering we
find many Texts in the Holy Scripture, whereby we are commanded to obey
Princes, to be subject unto them, to honor them, to pray for them; since they
are called Fathers, and we Children; they Shepherds, and we their Flocks; they
Heads, and we their Feet; it is an hard Resolution, and (in my opinion) an
heavy sentence that Children should disobey their Parents, a Flock to Rebel
against their Shepherd, or the Feet to presume to command and direct the Head.

This question, notwithstanding that it is dangerous and difficult, is largly
discussed by George Buchanan in his Book de Iure Regni apud Scotes, and also by
him who was ashamed to put his name unto the Book that was lately written
against the French king. In these two authors you shall find every point of
this third Objection sufficiently debated: You shall find the Text alleged
out of St. Paul in the behalf of Princes, and other places of the Scripture
learnedly answered: You shall find many examples of profane and Ecclesiastical
Histories, of Princes that have been done to death. Briefly, you shall find
more to move others perhaps then there is to move me to subscribe to their
opinion. For Buchanan argues in such manner, as I may rather commend his
subtilty, then his conscience. And he that writes against the French king,
shows himself too partial, too malicious, too injurious to Princes: And
Buchanan gives too great Authority unto Subjects, and the other too much power
unto the Pope. It cannot be denied that Princes received their first Authority
from the consent of the people; It is likewise certain, that this Authority was
given them to be used to the benefit of the people. And no man will deny that
Countries can subsist and stand without kings: But shall every man that
receives a benefit of another be always subject unto him that once pleasured
him? Shall either a rude multitude, or a few contentious Rebels judge when a
King uses his Authority to the benefit of the people? And because Countries
have flourished, and may still flourish without a king, shall therefore every
Country reject their king, when they dislike their king? It ^eemeth that
Buchanan is of this opinion, because he approves the death of king James the
third, and allows the approbation that was made thereof by some of the people
and Nobility of Scotland, who were the principal Actors in the Rebellion
against the same king, and the chief Authors of his death.

The causes which moved those Rebels to bear Arms against their King, were but
two; The one, that he had made certain base money, and called it not in again
at their pleasure. The other that he had advanced certain base Personages unto
high places of great credit and dignity; if these two faults might be amended,
the Rebels offered to submit themselves to their King. The King yielded not
unto these motions; Why? The History gives a good reason for the King. They
made these demands being in Arms. It seems that they would not entreat, but
enforce their King; and the King thought it convenient to chastise their
insolency and boldness, who presumed to War against him at home, when he and
his Kingdom stood in manifest danger of foreign Enemies. There was amongst
them, namely the Duke of Albania, who affected the kingdom, who to further his
Traitorous purposes, had joined with the King of England, against his native
Country, and animated his lewd confederates to continue in their obstinate and
unlawful demands. They considered not that extreme necessity and want compelled
their King to use that money; and when they had taken these base persons from
the King for which they seemed to rebel, and had hanged them, contrary to all
Law and Equity, they laid not down their Weapons, but followed the poor King,
and so followed him that at length they flew him. And why? My Author gives
this reason, Because they knew that they had so highly offended him, that they
feared, that if they should have spared him (as some better minded then the
rest purposed to have done) he would have been revenged of them. This murder,
the States of Scotland (says Buchanan) allowed, and ordained that no man
should be called in question or troubled for the same. But what States are
these? Those (says my Author) that had born Arms against him, and for whose
sake he was murdered: And they had good cause to decree that no man should be
accused of his death.

But what will some man of Buchanans opinion say unto me? Shall Princes do what
they list, and no man censure them? Are they not subject unto the Laws? May
they not be called to an account? Shall the people, from whence they derive
their Authority, have no manner of authority over them? And has it not been
always held very dangerous in a State to have any man so mighty that no man may
or dare control him? Truly I allow not that liberty unto Princes, that their
pleasure shall stand always for a Law: I limit their Wills unto Reason, I tie
their commandments unto the Word of God; I fasten their Decrees unto the Laws
of Nature, unto Equity, and unto the Weal of the people. And if these things be
not regarded, I take their Laws to be unlawful, their Commandmen^s unjust,
their Decrees ^^ique. I know that good Princes are so far from nor subjecting
themselves unto their Laws, that they suffer themselves and their causes to be
tried daily by their Laws. And if any of them, by negligence or wilfulness by
folly or ignorance, by malice or forgetfulness, begin to contemn their Laws. I
think it convenient that they should be modestly rebuked, but not utterly
rejected; be in a mannerly sort checked, but not violently condemned; be gently
admonished, but not straight ways furiously and turbulently punished. Is there
no way but down with them, depose them, kill them? Must we cry against the
Lords anointed with the Jews* as they did against Christ, Crucifige,
Crucifige; and not rather learn by the Jews, that the common people is no
competent Judge to determine matters of great weight and consequence.

I am not such a stranger in the course of Histories, but that I know that some
Princes have been deposed for their insufficiency, as in France, Theodorick,
and Chilperick; others for their negligence, as again in France, Lewis surnamed
Do nothing; some for poisoning the next Heir of the Crown, as Martina Empress
of Constantinople; others for perjury, and not keeping promise with their
Enemies, as Justinian the Son of Constantine the Fourth; some for not tendering
the Weal, and public Welfare of their Subjects, as Richard King of England;
others for murdering them which reprehended their vices, as Boleslaus King of
Polonia; some for usurping things not belonging unto their Crown, as
Sumberlanus King of Bohemia; others for their extreme rigor and cruelty, as
Sigismond King of Hungary; some for their childrens Adultery, as Tarquine King
of Rome; others for Tyranny, as Archilaus, Son to Herod; some for unreasonable
exactions, as Slaomire King of Abredites; and others for corruption, as Adolph
the Emperor.

But if all these Depositions were examined and tried by the Touchstone of Law,
I think the most part of them will be found scant lawful. For all these crimes
in private men, are not capital, and therefore why should they be so severely
punished in Princes? How many judges take Bribes, and are not deposed? How many
Magistrates are negligent, and are not punished? How many Officers execute not
their Offices and are not removed? How many rich men offend in Adultery, and
are not censured? briefly, How many Noble men commit Adultery and Murder, and
are not condemned? In Poland the Gentleman that kills a Yeoman pays but a
certain Fine in money; in France he that kills another manfully and in the
field, is seldom executed. In Italy many are vilely murdered, and the
Murderers are not always punished. And in all Countries grievous Crimes are
either tolerated or pardoned, sometimes because the Malefactors are descended
of notable parents, whom Princes are loath to offend and discontent.

You have heard how Dunorix was spared, although he were a Traitor, for
Diviaticus his Brothers sake; and our Chronicles report, that Henry the Third,
having taken in the Barons Wars many Scholars of Oxford in Northampton, who
did him more harm then all the rest of his Enemies, would have hanged them all,
had not his Council persuaded him to save them, because in executing them he
might displease their friends, who were Gentlemen and Noblemen of great Houses.
Shall mean personages, vile murderers, private men escape unpunished, and must
the Law be executed with all severity upon Princes? They are in higher places,
their actions are beheld of all men, and most men are lead by their example.
True, but David was not punished as soon as he had killed Uriah; Solomon was
not deposed although he kept many Concubines; Herod was not streightways
deprived for murdering of John Baptist; and it was long before Saul was
removed by David.

But how then? May Princes offend as often as they will, and never be punished?
No; Must their Subjects endure all their Cruelties and Tyrannies? No; May they
be troublesome unto their Neighbors, untrue unto their Confederates, Enemies
unto the common peace, and never to be reprehended? No; What course is then to
be taken to bridle their Appetites, and restrain their Insolency? Truly I find
two notable Laws for the punishment of such Princes, the one made by Conrad the
Emperor, and the other by Otho the Third.

Conrad his Law commanded all Princes to embrace Peace, to maintain Law and
Equity, and not to disturb the quiet and peaceable Estate of the Empire; and
that whosoever transgressed in any of these three points, should suffer death.

Othon his Law was much to the same effect; but he added, That the Prince
offending in any of these three points, should besides the loss of life, lose
all his States and Dominions, and be held for a common enemy; and that all the
Princes of Christendom should rise in arms against him, as a perturber of
Christian peace and tranquillity.

But in these days Princes neither are, nor will be, nor can be ready to help
every one that complains; and why should Subjects seek for releif abroad,
that may be releived and succored at home? The course is ordinary, the remedy
easy, if men will not deceive themselves in taking their course. Every Country
has its Parliament, every Kingdom the Assembly of their Estates; there may
their Griefs be heard, their Wrongs red ressed, and their Princes repressed:
And in this course the common people loses not a jot of their Authority; for
they which attribute most unto the people, take not every confused, rude, and
tumultuous multitude for the people, but a choice company of the wisest
Nobility, and of the most grave, honest, discreet and wise men amongst the
Commonalty. It must not be such base and busy companions, as was Jack Straw in
England, Nicholas Rency in Rome, Jacques Artevilla in Flanders, George Zechius
in Bohemia, Anthony Bavadella in Spain, and William Siler in Switzerland, that
must presume to control mighty Kings, or to alter well governed States: For
such petty Companions are better able to mislead a number of simple people with
their venomous tongues, then to consider with discretion, that many things are
done in every Kingdom which Princes know not of, and that diverse abuses are
committed, which the Officers that commit them keep, as long as they can
possible, from their Princes knowledge; which abuses should be quickly
redressed if the king might be made acquainted with them.

These Companions consider not, that there is an High Court of Parliament, unto
which Princes either can be contented, or be constrained to submit themselves,
and wherein Subjects may speak unto their King freely, so they speak
reverently, any thing that may benefit their Country; I said, reverently,
because methinks it is not tolerable, that any Subject be he never so great and
mighty, should use unreverent speeches unto his King secretly, much less in an
open Parliament, as did Richard Earl Marshal of England unto King Henry the
third, who when the King called him in choler (and perhaps not without
occasion) Traitor, gave him the lie in the Parliament House, and told him to
his face he cared not for him because he was well assured, that as long as he
lived in obedience unto the Laws of the the Realm, he could not hurt him; And
when the king answered, he could intercept his victuals, and suffer no man to
bring him any manner of Provision, he replied, that if he sent any to intercept
his victuals, he would send them home shorter by the heads then they came. Such
an audacious and unreverent speech coming to the ears of such busy Companions
as Jack Straw and Jack Cade were in England, would make them take the Speaker
for a Demi God, for a Patron of his Country, for a Protector of their Liberty,
and being carried from them unto others, may draw them like a company of
madmen, to adventure life and limbs for such a desperate Cataline, and without
ever considering whereabout they go, to undertake for his sake the utter
subversion of Town and Country.

But it may be said, that I am like the Physician that prescribes a remedy
unto his Patient, but tells him not how he shall come by it; so I talk much
of a Parliament, but I conceal how difficult it will be to have a Parliament,
especially when a Prince, without whose consent and commandment the same cannot
be called, knows, or mistrusteth that any thing shall be debated and
determined therein to his prejudice. I cannot but acknowledge this difficulty,
and therefore if the wrongs that are offered be not too great, it is better to
suffer them with patience, th^n to seek to reform them by violence. But if the
outrages grow once to be so extreme that they are no longer to be endured, I
hold the same for a most unfortunate, unhappy, and servile State, wherein the
Nobility is either too timorous, or so besotted with the love unto a bad King,
that they will not be moved upon the just complaints of the poor and distressed
Commonalty, to enforce him to call a Parliament: and in this kind of violence,
I require discretion and judgment in the Confederates, lest they mar a good
Cause with evil handling thereof, as did Julius Caesar, who when he had
deserved a triumph, took so violent a course in demanding the same, that his
sure was rejected, to his endless dishonor, and his Countries great detriment.
Let the Subjects be therefore humble Petitioners unto the Princes to reform
such abuses as are notoriously known to be abuses. Let them yield such measure
unto their kings as they would desire for themselves; let them when neither
their humble suits may prevail, nor their gentle connivence or toleration
mitigate the wrath, or moderate the affections of their Sovereigns, humbly
beseech the Peers of the Realm to be their Patrons and Protectors of their
Innocence. Then will he that rules Princes, and has their hearts in his hand,
that can prevent their imaginations, and cross their intentions, raise up some
better disposed then others, better minded then the common sort of men are,
better able then the Commonalty is to judge of wrongs, to redress injuries, and
to repress evil-disposed Princes.

All Authority is divided into Ecclesiastical and Temporal; of the one the
Pope, of the other the Emperor challenges superiority; and yet both these
Heads, notwithstanding their pre-eminence, their power and prerogatives, have
been reduced to Reason, when they have swerved from all Reason, by those who by
Reason were led to challenge Power and Authority over them. For both the
College of Cardinals and the States of the Empire have claimed, and according
to their claims have used a certain Right both over the Pope and over the
Emperor, when the one or the other of them has been found negligent in their
duties; and therefore have presumed that the power of the one and the other
has been devolved unto them. Even when an inferior Prelate is negligent, the
Bishop may assume into his hands all his Jurisdiction and Authority; or when
the Bishop is careless in performance of his duty, either the Dean and Chapter
or the Archbishop may lawfully rebuke his negligence, and reform whatsoever he
vouchsafed not to amend; so although the Pope challenges to be by many degrees
higher then all the Princes of Christendom, yet diverse Cardinals in the time of
Pope Julius the second, considering that the Church had need of Reformation, as
well in the Head, as others Member thereof, implored the aid of the Emperor,
and of the King of France, and with assurance of their help and assistance
caused certain peremptory citations to be set up in Modena, Bolognia, and other
Cities of Italy, by which they cited the said Pope to appear at a general
Council to be he^d at Pisa, and to answer to such Articles as should be laid
in against him, touching his Simony, negligence, and other abuses not specified
in the said Citations; In regard of which faults, and of his Negligence, they
affirmed that the Pope was not sufficient and fit to govern the Universal
Church of Christendom, and that the Power and Authority to call and summon a
general Council was lawfully devolved unto them. So although our Kings (as I
have said) are the greatest and most absolute Kings of the world, next unto the
Kings of France; yet the Barons, after the battle of Lewis, in the time of
Henry the third, ordained that two Earls and a Bishop elected by the Commonalty
should chose to them nine other persons, whereof three should always remain
about the King, and by the whole twelve both the Court and the Realm should be
governed. So in the fourth year of the Reign of Edward the second, the
Prelates, Earls and Barons made Ordinances for the State and Government of the
Realm, which because the King would neither confirm, not allow, were confirmed
by sentence of Excommunication against all them that should go to break the
same. So the Scotchmen in the time of John their King, being moved thereunto by
his negligence, chose twelve Peers, and four Bishops, four Earls, and four
Barons, by whose advice and counsel the King should Govern the Realm. So to be
short, although (as Bodin reports) when a certain Advocate pleading a cause
in France said, that the Kings of France had received their Power and Authority
from the Common People, the Kings Attorney stepped up and requested the Court,
that those things might be razed out of his Plea; showing that the Kings
thereof never received any Power or Authority from the common people and
required, that both that Advocate and all others might be commanded (as he and
they were) never to use the like words in their pleas: yet before and since
that time diverse Kings of France have been censured by the three Estates of
their Realm, as it may appear by the examples of those Kings which were (as I
have said) deposed in France.

Thus it appears, that if Princes offend, they may be chastened according to
the nature and quality of their offenses; and it cannot justly or truly be
said, that that is against a Law or without Law which is done by an high Court
of Parliament, from whence all or most Laws have their beginning, their
foundation, their strength. Neither can this manner of correction embolden
Subjects to conspire against the life of their Sovereign. For either the
Majesty of their Prince, or the remembrance of their du^y toward him, or the
fear of punishment, or the danger that follows Rebellions, or the hope of
Reformation by employing the aid of the Peers and Nobility will always
restrain their insolency, and keep them within the bounds and limits of true
obedience.

But when Subjects are disposed to be rid of their Kings, they may (say the
Favorers of the Scottish Queen) implore the aid of Foreign Princes to suppress
them.

Whereunto I answer, that if their cause be just and good* I grant it to be
lawful so to do; But if it shall proceed of Malice, and not of Justice, of
their desire, and not of their Princes desert; of a rash and foolish dislike,
and not of manifest Tyranny or evil Government, there will be no Prince so ill
advised as to hear them, much less to succor them; for he that should hear^en
to such light complaints, and in regard of them molest another King, would
undoubtedly by Gods good and just punishment, in time be troubled with the like
Subjects himself.

Now whereas it is said, that a Prince coming upon what occasion soever into
another Princes Country cannot be put to death without the breach of Humanity
and Hospitality. Hereunto I answer briefly, that if such a Prince shall so much
forget himself, as, although he be detained for never so unjust a cause, to
attempt and conspire by himself or others his death that detaineth him; truly,
neither the Laws of Humanity or Hospitality are or can justly be said to be
broken, if such a Prince be severely punished; for since he first violateth
these Laws himself, he gives thereby just occasion unto him whose death he
seeks by unlawful means to use the benefit of Law, for the shortning of so
unthankful a Guests life; especially if before his attempt and conspiracy his
detainor always used him gently and courteously.

But it was never seen (say the Scottish Queens friends) that a Prince flying
from the violence of her Subjects, or passing by another Princes Realm (as the
Scottish Queen did) to go into another Country, was detained prisoner; It is a
thing never heard of, never practiced in any Age, or by any Prince, were he
never so barbarous, never so void of Humanity.

This is a vehement Objection; but not so vehement as ridiculous: For as a
private man cannot come upon his neighbors ground without his leave, so
Princes may not set their feet on their neighbors Territories without asking
them leave and license; and the Prince that shall presume to come into another
Princes Country without his leave, is thought too indiscreet and unwise,
although the occasion of his coming be never so just and lawful. It is written
of Baldwine the Emperor of Constantinople, that when he being driven from his
Imperial Seat, came into England to demand aid of our King, the cause of his
coming was very just and equitable; but when landed at Dover, word was sent him
by our King, that he had done unadvisedly and otherwise then it became a king
of his Magnificence and Majesty, to adventure to come into our Realm without
making them privy before hand to his coming; and because he vouchsafed not to
ask leave, it was held for a manifest sign of great pride and contempt.

Was there ever Prince that took a more just and necessary and commendable
voyage then Richard the first king of England did unto the Holy land? Was there
ever any journey of which followed better success then of that his voyage? Had
ever Prince more just occasion to hope to pass by another Princes Country
without danger or detriment then he had? And yet as he returned, although he
was disguised in apparel, to the end he might not be known, and pass safely, he
was intercepted by Leopald Duke of Austria and held a long time in prison by
him, and afterward dilivered unto the Emperor. And albeit that the Pope and
other Princes, considering that he was unlawfully detained, became Mediators
and Intercessors for his liberty, yet he could not be delivered before he had
endured twenty two months imprisonment, and had paid better then one hundred
and fifty thousand pounds for his Ransom.

Both our Chronicles and the Scottish Histories report, that James son unto
Robert King of Scotland, (when his Uncle being Governor of the Kingdom, had
murdered his Elder brother, and purposed to have made him away also) was sent
by his father into France or into England, with letters of recomenmdation unto
both Kings, wherein the poor and distressed Father besought both Kings to have
compassion of his woeful and unhappy estate, and to receive and entertain his
Son with all kindeness. The young Prince, after that he had been but a small
while upon the Seas, not brooking them very well, commanded the Master of the
ship to land him in England; He is presently brought unto the presence of King
Henry the first, to whom he showed his Fathers letters; The King having perused
them, called his Council together; they deliberate what were best to do with
the Prince; some think it good to send him into France; others (whose opinion
was followed) persuade the king to detain him as prisoner. I might allege a
number of Examples like unto these two, but they may suffice to refute this
frivolous Objection: And the late Queen of Scots might have learned of either
these Princes how to have carried her self in the time of her Captivity.

King Richard was a valiant, a mighty, and a notable wise Prince. His case was
lamented of all the Princes of Christendom: His Subjects were both willing and
able to have constrained his Detainers to deliver him: His journey was
undertaken for the benefit of all Christendom; and therefore it behoved all
Princes to be offended with his imprisonment. Briefly, neither the Duke nor the
Emperor had just occasion to detain him; and yet during the long and tedious
time of his durance, he neither sought any unlawful means to escape out of
prison, nor practiced any treacherous ways to be revenged of his Detainers.
The Scottish Prince doubtless was to be pitied: The cause of his flight was
just and honest, and the detaining of him prisoner wa^ rather hateful then
honorable; and yet this poor Prince carried himself not only honestly and
faithfully as long as he was prisoner in England, but also when our king caused
him to attend upon him into France, where he might have easily escaped from his
keepers, or quickly have procured some violent means to purchase his liberty,
he continued st^ll a faithful prisoner; And was so far (at all times) from
seeking revenge for his hard and long imprisonment, that he always thought
that he was well and courteously used; and in requital of that courtesy, when
as Henry the sixth, Son unto the same Henry who kept him Prisoner, was driven
out his kingdom, he not only ha^boured him, but also helped to restore him to
his kingdom.

The good carriages of these two Princes condemns the Scottish Queen; and the
general custom of Princes as not only to crave leave when they come into other
Princes Dominions, but also to provide for their safety and security as long as
they shall be there, confuteth this foolish, this fond, this ridiculous and
childish Objection.

It is written of a King of Navarre, that when he had occasion to come into
England, in the four and fortieth year of Edward the Third his reign, not to
conspire against us but to entreat a League with us, and to fight for us, he
not only demanded leave, but also durst not adventure to come, before that the
King had sent unto his Realm certain Bishops, Earls and Barons to remain as
Hostages and Sureties that he should be well used so long as he continued in
England. And surely Princes have great reason to require such Assurance, since
many Kings and Princes have been in great danger to be killed, yea and some
have been killed when they met of purpose to talk of Common Affairs: So was
Julius Caesar in danger to have been in conference with Ariovis^us; so was
William Duke of Normandy killed in conference with Arnold Earl of Flanders; so
was the Duke of Burgundy mu^thered at a meeting with the Dolphin of France. And
these examples have made Princes more provident and wise then they were wont to
be, for that they will hardly be persuaded or entreated to any such Enterviews;
or if they must needs meet, they cause places to be made of purpose before the
meeting, in such manner that they may see and hear one another, but not come so
near together that the one may hurt the other.

But Ambassadors are safe in their enemies Countries; why then should Princes
be in danger in their Neighbors Dominions? The Answer is very easy, because
Ambassadors are not spared either for their own sak^s, or for their Masters,
but because that without them there would never be an end of Hostility, nor any
^eace after Wars. Neither is the name or person of an Ambassador so inviolable
either in peace or in the time of War, but that there may be both a convenient
time, and a good occasion to pun^sh an Ambassador. For to omit that Olaus and
Euetus killed the Ambassador of Illalcolnius King of Scots, as Hector Boethius
records; that Teaca Queen of Selavonia slew a Roman Ambassador, as Polybius
reports; that the Athenians caused King Darius his Ambassador to be thrown
and drowned in a deep Well, as Herodotus testifies; and that William King of
Sicily plucked out the eyes of Henry Dandelo, Ambassador unto him from the
Venetians, as Illescas writes; because these and the like examples are
manifest Presidents of barbarous cruelty, rather then of Justice and Equity; I
will show you by a few examples, that an Ambassador has been, and may as often
as the like occasion happens, be lawfully punished or sent out of the Realm
wherein he remains as an Ambassador.

Titus Livius writes, that when Brennus had found Quintus Fabius Ambustus
fighting in the Camp of the Clusians against him, he sent presently as Herald
of Arms unto Rome, to demand him to be delivered into his hands, as a Breaker
of the Laws of Arms, because that being sent from the Romans as Ambassador unto
him, he returned not home as soon as he had done his Embassage, but remained
still in the Clusians Camp; and because the Romans did not deliver unto his
Messenger the said Ambustus, he left the siege of Clusius, and conveyed his
invincible Army unto Rome, and therewith spoiled and sacked the City.

Adrian the fourth Pope of Rome, sent his Chancellor Rowland, and Cardinal
Bernard unto Fredrick the Fourth, who used such unreverend speeches unto the
Emperor, that the County Palatine of Vitilispatch, not brooking the indignity
that was offered unto his Master, drew his sword, and had not the Emperor staid
his hand, he had slain the Ambassador in his presence; and the Emperor was so
moved with indignation to see his insolent carriage and behavior, that he
presently commanded him to avoid out of his Court, and not to stay so long as
to dispatch his necessary business.

The Romans when Marcus Aemilius Lepidus and Ca^us Flaminius were Consuls,
delivered Lucius Martinus and Lucius Manlius into the hands of the
Carthaginians to be used at their pleasure and discretion, because they had
beaten their Ambassadors.

Edward the Second, King of England, amongst others sent a French Gentleman
Ambassador into France, whom the French King (had not the Queen purchased his
pardon) had excommunicated as a Traitor, because he presumed to serve his enemy
for an Ambassador unto him.

Francis the First, King of France, sent Caesar Fregosus and Antony Rincone
Ambassadors unto the Great Turk; Charles the Fifth his Soldiers took them upon
the River of Poe in Italy, and presently slew them both: The French King
complains that they were wrongfully murdered; the Emperor justifies their
death because the one being a Genouis, and the other a Milanois, and both in
some manner his Subjects, they feared not to serve the French King his enemy.

Henry the Eighth, King of England, commanded a French Ambassador to depart
presently out of his Realm, for no other occasion but for that h^ was the
professed enemy of the Sea of Rome.

The Seigniory of Venice understanding that certain Traitors who had revealed
their secrets to the Turk, were fled to hide themselves to the French
Ambassadors house at Venice, sent certain Offices to search the Ambassadors
house for them, and when the Ambassador forbad and refused to suffer those
Officers to enter into his house, the Senate made no more ado, but sent for
certain pieces of great Ordnance out of their Arsenal, whereby they would have
beaten down the house, had not the said Ambassador as soon as he saw the same
Ordnance, yielded the Traitors to their mercy and discretion.

I might allege many more Histories to this purpose, but I should be over long
and tedious; And yet I may not omit these two following, because they are
worthy observation, and make more for my purpose then all the rest.

In the year 1544 the French King sent certain Ambassadors unto Charles the
Fifth to Spires, sending an Herald of Arms before with Letters unto the
Emperor, and unto the Princes Electors, in which he required a safe Conduct for
his Ambassadors. The Herald is staid by the Cardinal Gavilla and made to
deliver him his Letters, and to show the cause of his coming; further he is
commanded to keep his lodging, and that no man should be suffered to speak with
him, and within four days he is willed to depart, and take heed that he presume
not to come within the Emperors Dominions another time without his leave; he
was now pardoned rather of lenity then of desert, because he had broken the
Laws of Arms: And as concerning his Letters, it was told him that the King his
Master had so deserved of the Emperor, and all the whole state of Christendom,
that the Emperor neither could nor would receive them. This answer was given
unto him written in French, and certain Soldiers appointed to bring him to the
Borders of France.

The second example is of a Bishop, who in the year 1302 being sent Ambassador
unto the French King from the Pope, practiced certain Treasons in France
against the King, whereof he is accused, arraigned in the Court of Parliament
at Paris, and being found guilty is committed unto prison. But he is delivered
out of prison at the Popes request, and both he and the Popes Nuntio are
commanded to avoid the Realm. The Pope excommunicateth the King for proceeding
thus against his Ambassador; and the King to requite him with the like
courtesy, commanded that no more money should be carried out of his Realm to
Rome.

By these examples I may boldly infer two necessary Consequents; the one, that
if Ambassadors fail in their duty, or fall into these follies which I have
mentioned, they are either punishable, or may be sent away in disgrace. The
other that the Spanish King has no just cause to be offended with our Queens
Majesty for the sending away of D^n Bernardine Mendoza his last Ambassador in
England. For although he fought not in any Camp against her Majesty, as did
Ambustus against Brennus, yet he persuaded diverse of her Subjects to bear Arms
against her; although he used no uncivil and unreverent speeches against her
Majesty as the Cardinal Bernard did unto the Emperor Fredrick, yet he did both
backbite and slander her unto her Subjects and unto other Princes; although he
did not beat her Ambassadors, as Martinus and Manlius did the Carthaginian
Ambassadors, yet he did both vilify and discredit her Ambassadors abroad;
spared not to speak evil of her best and wisest Counselors at home; although
he was not an Ambassador of a professed enemy to the Sea of Rome, as was the
French Ambassador residing in England in Henry ^he Eighth his time, yet he was
an Ambassador of a professed enemy unto her Highness, because he was his
Ambassador who was in league with the Sea of Rome; Briefly, although he denied
not to deliver Traitors unto her Majesty, as the French Ambassador did at
Venice; yet he not only received but procured her many Traitors, and both
counseled and encouraged them to commit sundry Treasons against her Majesty.

The premises being therefore duly considered, why might not her Majesty
imitate Charles the Fifth, who hardly admitted the French King Lerold to his
presence, because his Master was his professed Enemy? Why might not her Grace
command the Spanish Ambassador to depart out of her Realm, since he had lived
many years in England, not as a Mediator, but as a Perturber of a peace; not as
a friend to her Estate, but as a debaucher and corrupter of her loyal Subjects;
not as one that desired her welfare, but endeavored to procure her overthrow?
Why might not her Highness send him away in peace, who as long as he lived in
her Realms, would continually have interrupted her peace? Might the King of
France arreign and condemn a Bishop for practicing Treason against his person?
might he commit him to prison, and after his deliverance profess open enmity
against the Pope his Master, against the Pope that had, or at lestwise
challenges some authority over him? and might not her Majesty do the like unto
a Spanish Gentleman, a mere Layman, not so privileged as a Prelate, not so
favored in Law as a Bishop; briefly, not so worthy of favor or compassion as
was a Popes Legate, a Legate either equal, or as the days were then, and are in
some places yet, not inferior to a Prince? It was Mendoza that misled the
Scottish Queen; it was he that drew Francis Throgmorton into dangerous
Treasons; it was he that had secret Intelligence with Babington and his
Accomplices; it was he that encouraged Morgan and Paget abroad; it was he that
studied night and day to procure us Enemies at home; Briefly it was he that
spared no labor, no money, no expenses, whereby he might either openly or
secretly endanger our State.

He lived not many months but years in England without bringing so much as a
Letter from his Majesty unto her Majesty, without performing any Function
belonging to an Ambassador: And how lived he? Not in Court, but in the City;
not in open view of the World, but in secret corners; not as an Ambassador, but
as a Spy. And when was he dismissed? Not so soon as he was found to have
committed one action of hostility, but after that he was admonished, not once,
but many times, to leave off his Treachery; not when he was suspected, but
after that many Traitors had confessed that he was not only privy but principal
unto their Treasons. Briefly, how was he dismissed? Not with a crimination and
threatening, as was the French Herald, but with fa^r words and a kindly farewell;
not with a Troop of Soldiers to conduct him to Sea side, but with a company of
Gentlemen to associate him to the place where he took shipping; not to pass
with danger through the Country that hated him for his Treasons, but to be
conveyed without danger unto the Country that loved him for his Treachery
intended against her Majesty: To be short, not slightly sent away in disgrace,
but then commanded to depart, when as his Master would not vouchsafe audience
unto a wise and discreet Gentleman sent by her Majesty unto him, to signify
his demeanor and his carriage.

Well, he is gone out of England, and whether? Into France; And to what place
in France? To Paris: And what to do there? To persevere in his malice against
England, to confer with the English Traitors personally, with whom he talked
before by Letters; to confirm the Guisards in their Treasons, to dispose the
French Leaguers to favor and further his Majesty against us and our friends:
Briefly, so to behave himself, that without him, neither whole France, nor
rebellious and obstinate Paris had held out so long as it did against the late
and present French king; for the people of Paris are (as a Spanish writer
reports of them) proud, rich, and rebellious, which humor this Ambassador
nourishes in them; and when they were most hardly besieged, there were five
things (as the same Author writes) that made them hold out; First, The valor
and courage of the Duke of Nemours Governor of the Town; Secondly, the
presence of the Popes Legate; Thirdly, the Alms and Liberality of this
Ambassador; Fourthly, the persuasions of the Preachers; Fifthly, the news that
were daily sent to the Town by the Duke of Main, and published by Mendoza and
other Princes.

Thus it appears that he was a notable Instrument of Rebellion, and a fit man
to be employed in factious services: For, as God has deprived him of his
sight, and made him blind; so he intended to deprive others of their senses,
and to blind their fight and judgment, to the end they might not be abe to
see and discern the hidden projects of his conspiracies. But of him enough. Now
again unto the Queen of Scots.

It appears that being culpable, she might be arraigned; and being found
guilty, she might be condemned. But the manner of her arraignment and of her
condemnation seems very strange unto as many as hear of it; and ^is repugnant
unto the Laws and Customs of England, observed in the Trial of meaner Subjects.
It seems strange that her Majesty should be a judge in her own cause, in a
matter of Treason; and especially against a Princess: And of this strangeness
many of the Scottish Queens Favorites take such hold, as they hold it for a
matter without Example, without any former Presidents.

But if it might please these her Favorers to consider, that although it be a
certain rule in Law, that no man shall be a Judge in his own cause, yet the
Pre-eminence, Excellency and Prerogative of Kings and Princes, is, and has
always been such, that they may Judge and determine in any causes that concern
themselves. For Tiberi^s Caesar sat Judge in his own cause, in dividing
certain Inheritances: with him was substituted one Parthenius, Caesar's servant.
Marcus Antonius the Emperor judged that the goods of Valerius Nepos were
lawfully devolved, and as it were confiscated unto the Exchequer. And
Quiltilian testifies, that he pleaded a cause for Queen Berenne, whereon she
her self sat as principal Judge.

What Scholar has not read the Orations of M. Tullius Cicero made in defense
of Quintus Ligarius, of Deiotarius, of Marcus Marcellus before Julius Caesar,
he being the only Judge and Arbitrator of his own cause? And it was the custom
of the first kings of Rome to hear all causes themselves, as well concerning
their subjects as themselves, until that Servius Tullius, the sixth king,
reserved all public causes for his own audience, and referred his own private
matters unto the Senate; There was nothing so great or so small (says
Suetonius Tranquillus) but Tiberius, when he began to be weary of managing of
public affairs, referred the same unto his Senators: And so did Marcus
Antonius, as Capitolinus testifies. But after that Princes began to grow
absolute, after that their States became hereditary, and they had established a
certain order in Judgment, then began they to have their Judges, who sat as
their substitutues, as well in other men's as in their own causes, as Choppianus
reports. And although they appoint such Judges, yet they wrong not their
Subjects therein, because both they themselves vouchsafe to swear to see their
Laws maintained, and their Judges are sworn to Judge according unto their Laws.
But our Queens Majesty was not Judge in the Scottish Queens cause; It pleased
her to make the high Court of Parliament judge thereof. What wrong then was
there offered unto her, since she had the same Trial which many Kings of
England have had? As namely, Richard the second and third, and Henry the fourth
and sixth.

She had not the favor which was showed unto Subjects or Strangers. She should
have had a Jury of Twelve Peers to pass on her, whereof the one half should
have been Englishmen, and the other Scots, or other strangers?

This in truth is the usual and ordinary manner of Trial for strangers
offending within the Queen Dominions: But where should such strangers have been
had, but that they would have been partial on the one side, or on the other?
what course might have been taken for their coming into England? And when they
were come, if she had made, as she might have done, any manner of exception
against them, had it not been dangerous to stay the coming of others? Had it
not been costly to have defrayed their Charges? And who should have born their
charges? The strangers themselves would not have been at the cost. The Scottish
Queen was not able to maintain them: And there was no reason to put her Majesty
to such charges. It may be that the Spanish King would have been content to
have paid their charges. Let it be granted; yea, and those whom he would have
sent, would have saved her life, because they durst not displease him, and he
must needs have gratified her, because she had (as she confessed) sold unto him
her pretensive Right unto the Crown of England. Is it likely, that six Peers of
our Realm would have spared her, when six and thirty of the chiefest of our
Nobility, and of the most discreet Judges and Lawyers of our Realm found her
guilty, and the whole Parliament condemned her? In which Parliament, by reason
of the Privileges and Liberties thereof, any man might have spoken more
freely, in her defense, then in any other place? And was it not seen, that
before she had endeavored by so many ways and means as she did, to take away
our most gracious Sovereigns life and Scepter, that very mean men presumed to
speak for her in the Parliament House, and were heard with all favor and
indifferency? And if she had been saved by the Spaniards benefit, would he not
have used her to our destruction? And should not we have lived in continual
servitude, then which nothing is more grievous unto a good mind, nothing more
contrary and repugnant unto the nature and quality of a Prince? May it be
thought that that King, who objected unto our Queen, in a most disdainful and
dispightfull manner, that he had saved her life, and that her Majesty was bound
unto him for the same, when as indeed there was no cause why she should have
ever have been in danger to lose her life? May it be thought (I say) that he
wou^d not have done the like unto the Scottish Queen, if she had not been
always at his disposition?

But it was strange that a Prince should be put to death. It was not strange in
Scotland, where more Kings have been slain and murdered then have died a
natural death; where Alphinus, not only King of Scots, but also Heir unto the
Kingdom of the Picts, was openly beheaded. It was not strange in Hungary, where
Queen Joan was executed for the murder committed on the person of her Husband.

It was not strange in France, where Bernard King of Italy, and lawful King of
France, was adjudged and done to death. It was not strange in Asia, where
Hercules slew Laomedon for his tyranny and cruelty. It was not strange in
Spain, where Henry the Bastard executed Peter the lawful King. It was not
strange in the kingdom of Naples, where Conrad rightful King thereof was
beheaded. Briefly, it was not strange in the holy Scrip^ures, where we read
that Ioshuah discomfited five Kings, and hung them all upon trees; that Saul
was reprehended by Samuel for not kiling Agag King of the Amalakites, whom
Samuel took and hewed in pieces; that Gideon slew the Kings of Midian, and that
Iehu slew Iehoram King of Israel, and Ahaziah King of Judah.

There is nothing then strange or without example in the execution of the
Scottish Queen, unless it be strange that our Queens Majesty was careless of her
life, when her Subject were careful of the same; that she would not hear of her
death, when they desired nothing more then her death: That when the Parliament
had condemned her, she could not be in treated to subscribe to their Judgment.

Briefly, That when with great labor and many persuasions she was won by her
privy Council and others, who were of opinion that Vita Mariae would be Mors
Elizabethae, as Vita Conradini was thought by the Pope to be Mors Caroli, to
deliver her Warrant to one of her Secretaries for her death, she imprisoned,
and grievously fined that Secretaryfor sending that Warrant with such speed as
he did, whereby it seemed, that had not the Warrant been obtained when it was,
she would hardly have yeeled to her execution; and by punishing him that was so
willing and ready to have her executed, it appears that her Majesty not only
loved her whilst she lived, but also after she was dead; and her Highness grave
and wise speeches delivered unto her loving Subjects in the Parliament House,
do testify how sorrowful and unwilling her Majesty was to consent unto her
death, although it was there made most apparent unto her Grace, that as long as
that Queen lived, she could not be without continual danger of losing her life.

This opinion being therefore confirmed to be most true since her death,
because there have no such Treasons been either intended or practiced against
her Majesty since, as before that time; It follows, that her execution gave
the King of Spain not just occasion to invade her Highness Realms. The causes
then of this invasion are unjust; now follows the course, a course not
beseeming a Prince of his might, of his years, of his long continuance and
experience in the exercise and administration of a kingdom.

For first, his years are fitter for peace then for war; for rest and
quietness, then for troubles and unquietness; and many wise and mighty Princes,
either before or as soon as they came to his years, have given over the World,
resigned their kingdom, and spent the residue of their time in Monastical
idleness. I read that Sigisbert, Etheldred, Elured, Constantine, and Inas King
of England; that Charles the Fifth, and Uladislaus kings of Bohemia, Constantine
king of Scotland, and Amadeus Duke of Savoy, before they came to the Spanish
kings age, renounced the world to live unto God in houses of Religion. I record
oftentimes the notable exploits, the mavelous victories, and the rare and
admirable virtues of Pompey, of Alexander, of Antiochus of Theodosius, and of
Charles king of France (who were all, as you have heard surnamed the Great) and
I find that they were all so far off at his age from seeking new occasions of
Wars, of new Conquests, that either all, or the most part of them commended
their souls unto God, and committed their bodies unto the earth before they
attained his years. I remember all this, and in remembering it, I think that it
pleased the Almighty to take them out of this world so soon as they were no
more fit and able to conquer in the World; thereby giving to understand unto
their after-commers, that in their youth they may lawfully attend upon
Conquests, upon Arms, upon Wars as occasion shall be presented unto them, but
that in their elder age, they ought to have their thoughts, their cogitations,
and their eyes fixed upon no other things then upon the conservation of their
kingdoms, the wealth of their Subjects, and the health of their own souls: For
when private men, much more Princes, attain unto threescore and odd years, it
is high time for them to amend their lives, and to reconcile themselves unto
God, because their strength fails them, their vital spirits decay, and the
hour of death approaches.

Here you see one great oversight in his course; now follows another. Wise
and discreet Princes most commonly before they enter into dangerous and long
Wars, appoint and compose the Quarrels and contentions which they have with
their Neighbors, or with any other Princes that are able to cross their
Enterprises. It is written of Julius Caesar, of whose commendations all
Histories are plentiful, that when he was fully resolved to war with the
Veyans, he sent a Gentleman accustomed and acquainted with the natural
disposition of those people, to contain the Inhabitants of the River of Rhine
in their duty and obedien^e, and to take order that the Gascoines should not in
any wise help or assist his enemies. The Romans being entreated by the
Spaniardw, with whom they were in league, to succor them against the
Carthaginians, denied them such aid as they demanded, because that the
Frenchmen at the sametime warred in Italy. Richard the first, king of England,
being determined to make a voyage into the Holy Land for relief thereof; and
fearing that either the King of Scots or his Brother John might at the
instigation of the French king, trouble and disquiet his Realm in his absence,
would not undertake that journey before he assured unto himself the king of
Scots and his Brother by many gifts and rewards; and also bound the French king
by vow and oath to attempt nothing against his kingdom, before that fifty days
should be expired after his return out of Syria. And that victorious king of
France ^who passed triumphantly from the beginning of Italy unto the end
thereof without striking a stroke) would not adventure to enter into Italy
before he had made a very fast ane strong League of Amity and Friendship with
Fardinando and Isabella King and Queen of Spain, and before he had purchased
through Bribes and Corruption, the assured friendship of the king of England,
and had also accommodated and appeased all causes and occasions of contentions
and variance betwixt France and the Emperor Maximilian.

It seems the Spanish king either regarded not, or remembered not these
examples, because that intending and fully resolving to invade England, he made
the French king his enemy rather than his friend; from whom he might receive
far greater annoyance and disturbance in his intended purpose and enterprise,
then from any other Prince in Christendom. But the Catholic kings Counselors
persuade him that he and his Confederates are well enough able of themselves,
not only to withstand, but also to subdue and subjugate all those Princes
which are not in league with him; and that the next way to recover his own
patrimony in the Low Countries, was to distress and destroy England first;
which being once happily effected, he should find it very easy and nothing at
all difficult to master his Subjects, and enforce them by open violence to
receive both him and his Religion; he must therefore bend his whole ^orces
against England; against England that has highly offended him, and that may
easily be subdued, because he shall find many there, who being weary and
discontented with the present Government, will be ready to entertain his
Armies, and immediately will join their strength with his Forces.

But not to stand long upon the confutation hereof, let these grave
Counselors, or these discontented Fugitives, unto whose persuasions both the
Spanish King, and his wisest Counselors give too much credit, tell me whether
ever any Prince had, or may desire to have a better opportunity, or an easier
means to invade and conqu^r England, then Lewis Son unto the King of France
had, who was not only called into the Realm by the Barons, with a faithful
assurance of all the best help and furtherance that they could yield him
against King John, but also was comforted and accompanied with all the good
wishes and blessings that the holy Father of Rome could bestow upon him; and
wanted not the many Forces, and continual Supplies which the mighty Kingdom of
France was able to afford him: And yet how speeded this valiant Lewis? What
success had his ambitious Enterprise? Forsooth he prevailed for a time; won to
day, and lost to morrow, and in the end was glad to return from whence he come
with far greater shame then honor.

But what need I speak of matters beyond man's memory, worn out of remembrance,
and reported by ancient Historiographers, when as the success of the late
Spanish Fleet may serve to admo^ish a wise Prince, how to trust the vain
reports of lying Fugitives, and how to make great preparations against a mighty
Kingdom in hope of assistance within the Realm? Was there any man that gave
them succor either of Men or Victuals? Was there ever an Haven that was either
able or willing to harbor their Ships their Ships that needed both harbor and
reparations? Was there any friend either within the Country, or nigh unto the
Country would bestow a little fresh water upon them, for lack whereof many of
their people died? Was there ever a Prince or Potentate, that would suffer them
to repair either broken, wind-shaken, or Sea beaten Ships within his Dominion?
Briefl^, was there any man that would furn^sh them with Masts, Sa^ls, Cables*
and other things n^cessary, for want whereof most of their Navy perished?

I will tell you a thing which may be strange to others, but no news to you,
and yet worthy to be told, because it is meet that it should be known unto all
men. When the report was certain in England that the Spanish Fleet and Forces
were at hand, instead of lamentat^ons, weepings, outcries (which things in
time of sudden accidents are common, and even used amongst valiant people) the
Queens Majesty's ears were filled with Prayers, Petitions, and Motions,
sometimes of one Shire, sometimes of another, most humbly beseeching her
Highness to give the Spaniards liberty to land with their Forces, and them
leave to encounter with them alone. I my self do marvel, and I think as many as
shall hear it will marvel thereat, that in men of one and the same Religion,
there should be diverse opinions, and different Judgments in matters concerning
the advancement of their Religion; Yet I know, and you shall understand, that
the English Catholics which are out of England, and those that live within the
same Realm, were not all of one opinion, of one mind, when the Spaniards were
coming for England; for the one sort wished them all manner of happiness and
prosperity; and the other prayed to God not to prosper their journey, much less
their Attempt, and besought the Queens Majesty to place them in the foremost
Range and Rank against the Spaniards, and where they might endanger themselves
most, and do her Highness most service; not because they were weary of their
lives, but for that they thought it most honorable to die in the defense of
their Country, and that God would never forsake them in so just a cause.

This may serve to show that the Spaniards had, and may have very small hope to
find any manner of aid within England. And yet to clear this point the better,
may it please you to remember, that when the report of the Spaniards coming
began to be certain, all those which we call Papists, and our Adversaries term
Catholics, at least the better sort of them, were conveyed to several houses
far distant the one from the other, and there kept, not like Prisoners, but
like Gentlemen of their calling, and all the Nobility was commanded to repair
to the Court; of which commandment their followed two commodities: The one,
That the Catholics being under safe custody, there was no man of account to
solicit the Subjects to Rebellion; the other, that if any small or great
number had been disposed to rebel, there was not any man of worth to be their
Head; And it has seldom been seen that Rebels ever durst adventure to show
their evil inclination; or adventuring, had at any time good success, without
having some man of special account and authority for their head.

But Ireland and Scotland may be thought to favor the Spanish King, and
undoubtedly he has been made believe, that in either of those Realms he shall
find faithful friends, and such as will adventure their lives to do him
service. Truly Ireland has been a long time subject to the Crown of England,
but always divided into two Factions; the one of civil and discreet people, the
other of wild and savage men; the first sort, true and faithful Subjects unto
their Sovereign, and the other prone and ready to spurn against their
Superiors, but not able to do any great hurt, no more then the Banditti of
Italy, which may rob a house, spoil a little Village, and set fire on a Castle,
and run away by the light when they have done; and yet to be sure that no great
annoyance should come from Ireland to England, the best part of the Nobility of
the Country was likewise called to the Court; the strongest Holds were
committed to the custody of faithful keepers; and to hold them in better
obedience, there was sent over such a Lord Deputy as was well acquainted with
their Customs practiced in the Country, and very well beloved of the people.

As for Scotland, although the Kings thereof have always been for these many
hundred years in firm league and amity with the Kings of France, and of late
years have had some occasion of extraordinary great love and friendship with
the house of Guise (the House that has been, as you have heard, the only
upholder and mainta^ner of the Spanish Fact on in France) yet because the
present King of Scotland has been nourished up from his infancy in the same
Religion which the Queen of England professes; and for that he is bound unto
her Highness for diverse favors and courtesies showed unto him in the time of
his distress and necessity, he is very well affected unto the State of England,
and desires nothing more then the welfare of that Country, the health and
safety of the Queens Majesty, and the reign and overthrow of all her Enemies;
which desire he signified unto her Majesty at such time as she thought she
stood in need of his help, offering to come in person to aid her Grace against
the Spainards wi^h the greatest power he was able to make.

The Venetians brag of the strength of their City, because it is distant five
miles from any land, and defended by a little natural Bank from the violence of
the Sea: How may England therefore boast of her strength, since she is severed
above thirty miles at the least from any other Nation, not by a little Bank,
but by a great Sea; especially if ^reland and Scotland be under her subjection,
and in League with her; and also if the Maritine forces of the United Provinces
be always ready to join with her against all her enemies? It is not the happy
success of one Battle, nor the mighty or innum^rable forces of one A^my that
must or (...) subdue England; but he that will undertake to conquer our Realm,
must first overthrow our invincible Navy, and then encounter with our strengths
by Land, and not obtain one only, but many Victories against them; a matter in
my simple conceit almost impossible, especially for the King of Spain. For
besides that Fortune is seldom or never so constant or prodigal of her favors,
that she vouchsafes unto any man any long continuance of desired happiness;
this impossibility will easily appear unto him that shall call to remembrance
what has been already said touching the Forces of England and Spain.

But the Romans first, then the Danes, next William the Conqueror; Lastly,
Diverse English Princes pretending right unto the Crown of England, have with
very small difficulty, and with no great Armies subdued the same; and why may
not the like fortune happen to the Spainard? Truly, if it might be inferred as
a necessary consequent, that the Country that has been conquered many times,
and by many Nations, should always be very easily conquered; This inference
might be far better made and used against Spain, then against England. For
Spain was first governed by Tuball the Son of Iapheth, the Son of Noe, and by
his posterity, who were deprived of the Possession and Government thereof by
the Sidonians, and they by the Thracians, and they by the Rhodians, and they by
the Phrygians, and they by the Phenicians, and they by the Cypriots, and they
by the Egyptians, and they by the Miletians, and they by the Phocentians, and
they by the Chaldeans, and they by the Carthaginians, and they by the Romans,
and they by the Goths, and they by the Vice-Gothes, and they lastly by the
Spainards, whom the Sa^azens had driven out of their Country, had not the
Frenchmen helped them to repel and expel the Sar^zens.

England was undoubtedly subdued by the Romans, but not before they had
conquered all the rest of the World, because they reserved (as it may be well
supposed) the conquest thereof (as Conquerors most commonly do in great
Enterprises) for the last and greatest Exploit which they had to do, or for the
best reward that they could attain or expect of their long and tedious Wars.
And it is written that they boasted more of the Conquest thereof, then of all
the Victories which they had obtained in their days, because they supposed
that England which was divided from the rest of the World by the Sea, was no
part of the World; and therefore they made two Triumphs thereof; the one of the
main Land, and the other of the huge and merciless Sea.

The Danes and Saxons likewise subdued England, but they enjoyed their Conquest
but a very few years; And how subdued they England? Not by main force (as Spain
was always conquered) but by cunning and deceit; for Vortiger King of England,
being continually molested by Pirates, and by the Scots, was constrained to
require Aid of the Saxons, who sent him a great Army under the Conduct of two
Brethren, Engistus and Orsus; of which, Engistus having cunningly obtained of
the King a convenient place for his people to dwell in, fortified the same
secretly, got more thereunto covertly, politickly persuaded the King to send
for more forces out of Saxony; and lastly, Married his Daughter unto the King,
by whose means he brought his Countrymen in great credit with his Majesty, made
him banish the chief Nobility from the Court, caused the King by this means to
incur the hatred of his Subjects; and when he perceived that our Countrymen
began to suspect and fear his over-growing Greatness, he suddenly entered into
league with the Picts, the Ancient Enemies of England, and with their helps
made an easy conquest thereof.

William the Conqueror became Master of England in this manner; Edward King of
England dying in the year 1065. made by his last Will and Testament, William
Duke of Normandy his sole and lawful Heir, with the consent and counsel of the
chief Peers and Barons of his Realm; But afterward, being wone thereunto by
the flattery and sweet words of his Wife, he changed his maid, and adopted
Harrold his Brother for his Heir; whereupon there grew a great variance and
contention betwixt the said William and Harrold; who having some occasion to
go into Flanders, was by contrary winds driven into Normandy, where he was
presently intercepted and carried unto the Duke as a Prisoner; before whom,
when he came, fearing that he should not be set at liberty in a long time, nor
without a great Ransom, unless he used some cunning device for his present
delivery; He said unto the Duke; Other Princes (Noble Duke) when they have
occasion to require Helps or any thing else of their Neighbors or
Confederates, use to demand the same by their Ambassadors; But I, contrary to
this Custom, knowing that there is no better way to end this contention and
competency which is betwixt you and me, then for me to marry your Daughter, am
come in person to pray your good Will, that I may have her for my Wife.

The Duke yields to his desire; Harrold with his new Spouse returns
speedily into England, commands all Normans upon pain of death to depart out
off his Realm within three days, prostituteth his wife unto his meanest
servants, cutteth of her nose and her ears, and sends her back unto her
Father in a Fisher-mens Boat. This Injury and Indignity may seem grievous unto
you that hear it; No marvel then if it so grieved her poor Father, that to be
revenged thereof he presently implored the help of his Friends; who what for
pity of the distrested Princess, what in hope of high rewards, what in regard
of the love and duty that some bare unto the Duke, were so many, that the
greatest part of the Nobility of France, with all the power that they could
possibly make, accompanied him in his journey.

But from him unto those kings of England, who being driven from their
Kingdoms, recovered the same with small difficulty. And not to be over tedious,
it shall suffice to mention unto you but two Princes of that kind, namely
Edward the fourth, and Henry the seventh.

And first to Edward, who being deprived by his own Subjects of his Royal
Diadem, fled unto the Duke of Bugundy, of whom obtaining an Army but of two
thousand men only, he returned into England, and finding that very few
favored him, so long as he demanded the Crown, he caused it to be proclaimed
and published, that he required nothing but the Dukedom of York, whereunto
every man knowing that he had Right, many began to favor him, and no man at
his first landing in Yorkshire would resist him; and yet he was not received
into the City of York, before that he had sworn faith and obedience unto the
King.

This Oath being solemnly taken, he goes forward toward London; Some few of
his Friends came unto him upon the way. The Earl of Warwick his Brother, who
was encamped near about York to intercept him on the way, either for fear, or
through ignorance, suffers him to proceed on his journey, and so without so
much as one stroke he came to London, where he was received by the Citizens
with great joy and gladness, because diverse of the richest sort, doubting that
they should never have again such sums of money, as they had lent him whiles he
was their king, unless he recovered the Kingdom, had purchased him the favor
and friendship of the greatest part of the City; of which being once Master, he
increased daily in power and strength; and his Brother the Duke of Clarence,
and others, leaving the Earl of Warwick and his Faction, made him so strong
that he daily subdued the rest of his Enemies. Thus prevailed he.

Now from him unto Henry the seventh, who living a long time as a banished man
in Brittany with the Duke thereof, could never be sent into his Country unto
Edward the fourth, or Richard the third although both of them, knowing that
that they could not Reign in security so long as he lived, had requested him
very earnestly of the Duke; And the last of them ruled still in great fear, but
in Peace and Quietness, until that Isabella, wife of Edward the fourth, and
Margaret the said Henry's Mother, by the help of a Physician came to confer
together, and in the end they concluded of this agreement, that they would
cause her Son, the said Henry to return into England, and to possess the Crown
thereof, with the help of his aid and their friends, if he would take to wife
the daughter of Edward the fourth. Henry being certified hereof, and also given
to undeastand, that Richard Thomas, a man trained up in arms all the days of
his life, and Sir John Savage would adventure their lives for him, and that the
Lord Bray had provided great sums of money to pay his Soldiers withal, easily
obtained of the king of France a small Army of 2000 men, with which arriving in
Wales, and joining with the Forces of the said Thomas, he went toward London;
and upon his way daily received greater strength, even of the Soldiers of king
Richard, his Enemy, who by reason of the great cruelty and ^yranny which he
used, was forsaken of his own Friends; and his Soldiers detesting his proud
and cruel Government, fought so in his behalf, that they seemed more desirous
he should lose then win the Field; which fell out according to their desire.

By these Examples and others like unto these, you may perceive that never any
man had any good success against England, who had not both a just cause to
invade the same, and a strong faction within the Realm. And by that which has
been spoken you may understand that the Spaniard wants both the one and the
other.

Here might I conveniently (if I had not sufficiently declared the strength of
England, to make the difficulty and impossibility of the Spaniards purpose more
apparent) enter into a large discourse of the Forces thereof; but let that
suffice that has been spoken. And yet I may not forget to let you, and as many
as doubt of our strength, understand that we have been (and I know not why we
should not still be) so strong and fortunate, that when the French were so many
in the Field against us, that they thought the very Boys and Lacques in their
Camp were able to subdue our Army; and when the Scots, thinking that because
our king was in France with fourscore thousand English, we had none but Priests
and women left at home to encounter with them, entered with main force into our
Country, and with assured hope and confidence to conquer the same, we neither
fearing the multitudes of the French, nor being danted or terrified with the
Scots sudden and advantageous Invasion, subdued both Nations, and took both
their kings prisoners in the Field.

But our Englishmen cannot live with a little Bread and a Cup of Wine, as the
Spaniards can do; they are not accustomed to endure cold, to lie abroad in the
Field, to stand up to the knees in dirt and water, to watch nights and days,
and briefly to take other such pains and travels as are incident unto wars.

To pleasure our Adversaries, let us grant this to be so (although the the
contrary indeed is most true) who amongst the bravest Spaniards, or the
greatest Soldiers in the World would willingly go to the wars, if he should
always be subject unto these or the like incommodities? And yet who would not
rather endure, and suffer them patiently. then live in servitude or th^aldom,
or yield unto his mortal Enemies? All Histories are full of examples of base
and faint-hearted people, the which having been compelled to fight for their
lives, because there was no other way to save or redeem the same, have behaved
themselves most manfully, and have enforced their Enemies to yield unto
reasonable Conditions of Peace, which sometimes would not hearken unto any
agreement, and have constrained them to become humble Suitors, who would not
once vouchfa^e to hear their humble Petitions; and truly extreme perils and
irresistible necessities have such force and virtue, that oftentimes they put
both heart and Courage into them which by nature are neither hearty nor
courageous. Considering therefore that our men shall fight at home, and the
Spaniard abroad; that we will be as valiant to defend our selves, as they can
be courageous to offend us; that when they have soiled us by Sea, they must
fight afresh with us by Land; they being weary*, and we fresh; they weak, and
we strong; they lame and diseased, and we whole and in perfect health; Briefly,
they far from home, and we at home, for our wives, for our houses, for our
children, and for our goods; Is it not likely that we should fight with greater
courage, with better success then they? Considering again the England is
fertile, and replenished with all things necessary for man's sustentation; That
her Majesty's Counselors are wise and provident; her people rich and full of
money, her Subjects loving and well affected to her Highness and their Country;
Can there be any thing wanting that shall be needful for the maintenance of a
convenient Army? Considering thirdly, that if any want shall fall out, their
cause being general, as the maintenance of the Spaniards Religion is universal
and common to all his Confederates; is it not to be thought that the Princes
Protestants will supply those wants, and fight for England, as well and as
willingly, as the Papists will for Spain? Considering fourthly, that when
Charles the fifth, a Prince (as I have said) of greater power and of better
experience then the Spanish king, warred with the Protestants of Germany, not
only the Princes of the Reformed Religion, but also the French (which hated
their Religion) aided and assisted them; Can it be supposed that England should
not find the like aid and assistance?

Briefly, Considering that the Spaniard cannot land his Army in any place in
England, where he shall not find at the least ten thousand men, to find him
work until a greater power come; what hope can he then have to Land without
Resistance, to proceed without a Battle, to fight without loss, and to lose
without extreme confusion?

Our Armies therefore being equal to his, and our hope more assured then his,
no wise or Politic man will doubt, but that our success is likely to be far
better then his, and therefore his hope and expectation vain, his purpose and
intention ridiculous, as well in regard of his course taken therein, as of his
possibility to attain thereunto. But it behooveth a king to bridle and correct
his Rebellious subjects; and it is the part of a Protector of the Catholics,
not to permit his own subjects, or any other aiding or assisting them in the
maintenance of their Errors and Heresies, to profess a contrary Religion unto
his, especially when he is able to suppress them and their Patrons. This
supposed Ability emboldeneth the Spaniard, and his confidence must be shown to
be as foolish, as other of his vain hopes, of his rash conceits.

First therefore I will make it appear, that he is not able to enforce any
general alteration in Religion; Then, that though he could, yet he should not
compel his Subjects by force and violence to change and alter their opinions.

There is nothing (as I have said) more common then to judge of things to come
by things that are past, and to conjecture what a Prince can do, by that which
his Predecessors did, and were able to do before him: And therefore to clear
this question, it shall not be amiss to consider what the Span^sh kings Father
did, and was able to do, during the long time of his Reign, against Luther and
his followers; and if it shall appear that he with all his might, his Friends,
his Allies, could not suppress the Princes Protestants at their first
beginning, and when neither the number, nor the power was so great as it is
now, It must needs follow, as a necessary consequent, that the Spaniard with
all his Adherents shall never be able to enforce a general alteration and
change in Religion.

At what time Martin Luther began first to discover the Abuses, Errors, and
Heresies of Papistry, Pope Leo the tenth of that name, thinking it convenient
to withstand an Evil at the beginning thereof, and knowing that if Luther were
suffered, great danger and many inconveniences would follow thereof, he
Excommunicated his person, condemned his opinions, and entreated the Emperor
Charles the fifth to ratify his condemnation in a general Assembly, held in
Germany, and to command all his Subjects to take him prisoner wheresoever they
should find him: But what was the end and issue of this rigorous Sentence? Did
the Almighty suffer it to be put it in execution? No, but he so crossed the
Pope, and the Emperor therein, that neither their Counsel not their
condemnation took effect. About twenty three years after, this sentence was
published; and although that the Advancement of Luthers Doctrine depended only
upon his life, and that it was a matter of no great diffi^ulty to supplant him,
and to suppress his discipline; yet it pleased God (meaning to show thereby,
that it lies not in man's power to Prevent, much less to Cross his resolute
intent and purpose not to permit any manner of prejudice to grow unto the
Reformed Religion by the same Excommunication: For he presently troubled the
Emperor, and busied him with a sudden and unexpected occasion of wars; which
gave unto the Protestants sufficient time and opportunity to strengthen
themselves against their Enemies. Not long after the Emperor, to subvert Luther
and all that followed him, entered into League with Francis the first King of
France; and they agreed not only to employ all their own Forces, but also to
implore the aid and assistance of the Pope, and of all others of his
profession, against the Princes Protestants.

This undoubtedly was a great conspiracy, not only intended, but also very
like to be executed, by two mighty Princes, had not the Almighty hindered the
accomplishment of their designs and purposes, by breaking the bond of their
League and Amity, and by sending a sudden occasion of Wars betwixt them. But
as after Rain there follows fair weather, so after those Wars succeeded a
friendly Peace, in the Articles whereof the Emperor and the said Francis
covenanted, that they should jointly, and with all the Forces they could
possibly make War against the Protestants, and use the Popes Cruciadoes in
these Wars, even as Christian Princes were and are wont to do, when they wage
War against the Turk. Besides, the Emperor made a Proclamation, that all
Lutherans should either convince and prove their Doctrine to be answerable unto
the Word of God, or else leave and forsake the same within the space of five
months; And the Pope at the Emperors Coronation, gave him great charge to see
the same Proclamamation duly executed. The Protestants had never greater
occasion to be afraid then they had at that time, when the Emperor was so bent,
and so many Princes joined with him against them. But whether it were because
the Protestants, during the time of the War betwixt the Emperor and the King of
France, grew so strong that their Enemies feared them; or because the Lord of
Hosts* who never f^ileth his people, had undertaken to protect them; or because
that the true and holy Religion of the immortal God increases daily,
notwithstanding the Threats and Menaces of mortal men; this alliance and
confederacy availed Caesar nothing at all; but it pleased God so to abate his
pride and humble him, that when he purposed most of all to hurt and annoy the
Protestant^, he was constrained to crave their Aid against the Turk, who with a
mighty and terrible Army invaded Austria, and had undoubtedly endangered the
Emperor, had not the Princes of our Religion assisted him, and God so disposed
his heart, that to make the Protestants more willing to help, he most will^ngly
and of himself, without any manner of intercession and entreaty, so mitigated
the rigor and extremity of his former Proclamation that through his lenity and
sufferance our Religion began to receive great increase.

For, as Dogs, although they bark and bite one another; yet as soon as they see
and discover the Wolf, they agree presently: And as when fire takes hold of an
house, of which the Master and Family are at variance, they forget their
private contentions, their hatred, and their quarrels, and run with one consent
and mind together to extinguish the fire: And as in a great Tempest, the Master
and Mariners of a Ship, who before the Tempest were at mortal feud amongst
themselves, become friends, and endeavor by all means possible to save their
Ship, least they all perish together with their Ship:

So the Protestants, seeing there was no Wolf more cruel, no fire more
terrible, no Tempest more dangerous then the Turk, submitted themselves with
all humility unto the Emperor, and aided him with all their power against the
Turk.

In regard of which, his Majesty used them most courteously, and yielded much
more unto them then they hoped to obtain of him: And because his Highness found
a rare Loyalty, a strange constancy, and a mavelous affection in them, he
vouchsafed to afford them all kind of courtesy, until that after that he
returned from Tunis, where he had got a notable Victory, the Catholic Princes
bearing themselves bold in regard of that fortunate, and happy Success, began
to brave, contemn, and despise the Protestants, and to threaten them that the
Emperor should not keep the Peace of Norimberge, nor of Ratisbone: Of which
insolency the Princes Protestants complained unto his Majesty, who answered
them most lovingly, and assured them that he desired to end and compose all
contentions and Controversies that were in Germany for Religion, not by force
and violence, but by fair means and gentleness, praying them to have such an
opinion of him, and not to be moved with the threats and menaces of their
Adversaries: This Answer was given unto them, when the Emperor was leading his
Forces unto Marcelles in France, against the King thereof; with whom, as soon
as he was reconciled, the Catholics thinking that he had but dissembled with
the Protestants but for a time, hoping that he would bend his whole Forces
against the Lutherans* But he deceived them all, and went into Spain; from
whence he sent an Honorable Embassage into Germany, to let the Protestants and
all others understand, that he would be very glad that all Contentions,
Debates, and Controversies touching Religion, should receive a final end and
agreement by a General Assembly and Disputation of learned Divines, to the end
that the right and true Doctrine of Jesus Christ being by that means laid open
and discovered, he might establish and confirm the same with his Imperial power
and authority.

It happened not long after, that the Emperor had an occasion to pass through
France into Flanders; then the Enemies of the Reformed Religion began to
promise to themselves great wonders, and to conceive an ass^red hope of an
invincible power to be levied by the Emperor and the King of France against the
Protestants, for, that then the two chief Protectors of their Catholic Faith,
were thoroughly reconciled, and were equally bent against Luther and his
Followers; and their conceits proved to be most vain; and of that Journey
followed no good success for them: For the Emperor, either because he would be
still mindful of his promise; or for that he knew that the Protestants strength
increased daily, caused a General Diet to be Assembled; wherein, although he
was daily entreated by the Catholics to declare open Wars against the
Protestants, yet he would never take that violent course, but ordered, that
shortly after there should be a general Assembly, in which the cause of
Religion might be freely and lovingly decided by learned Divines; who having
lightly discussed some Points of Controversy, were commanded by his Majesty to
come to Ratis^one; Where when as all Contentions could not be fully ended, his
Majesty was contented to refer the final Conclusion unto another General
Assembly; of which the success and event was so well known, that I shall not
need to acquaint you with the particulars thereof.

Now considering the Reasons, Varieties and Circumstances of all that has been
said, what may a man judge thereof, but that the Almighty prevented, crossed
and hindered the determinations, purposes, and Enterprises of the Emperor, and
so guided and directed them, that it lay not in their power to confo^nd the
Protestants by force of Arms; For, if we shall consider the great strength of
the Catholic Princes, as well in Foot as in Horse, the number of their
Soldiers, the multitude of their Provisions, the greatness of their Treasure,
the vehemence of their hatred, the wilfulness of their perseverance therein,
their courage, their animating and provoking the Emperor against the
Protestants, and how to win him thereunto, they spared no kind of policy,
cunning and deceit that humane wit could invent; and that notwithstanding all
their utmost endeavors, they were then so far from attaining their purpose,
that in the very last Diet that was held, certain points of Doctine were
yielded unto, which before that Assemby both the Emperor, and his best Divines,
held to be most erroneous. It must needs be confessed that it was Gods pleasure
so to dispose and govern the hearts of those Princes; for in that Diet many
opinions were received and allowed for good and godly, for the maintenance
whereof many Protestants had lost their goods, their Countries, and their lives.

The Catholics therefore, seeing that they prevailed not greatly by force and
violence, they cast off the Lions skin, and put on the Foxes, whom they
counterfeited so well, that they brought the Protestants into disgrace, by
sowing false Rumors and Accusations against them* And because they had rather
lost much, then gotten any thing by disputing with them, they caused it to be
bruited abroad that the Protestants durst no longer dispute with them, and they
gave liberty unto all sorts of people, without any regard of learning or
modesty, to rail upon Luther, and to write malicious and false Invectives
against him:

A strange course, and too much used in these days! but in my simple opinion,
a course not now like to have better success then that course then had: For, as
Luther, when he saw that it was law (...) for every man to exercise the
bitterness of his pen against him, conceived such malice against the Pope, that
he discovered many of his follies, which might have lien hidden unto this day:
Even so it is greatly to be feared, if men having more Zeal then Learning, of
greater Malice then Judgment, shall be suffered to preach and write against
the foolish impugners of our Ecclesiastical Discipline, that either their
Malice or their Ignorance will utterly disgrace the same, because preaching by
preaching may unhapply be disgraced, and a few turbulent and unqu^et spit^ts
may with a small Pamphlet, or with a simple Sermon do more harm then a number
of learned men shall be able to amend or reform with great pains and travel.

Had not the Pope given too great encouragement to such as wrote against
Luther, Had not rude and ignorant men been suffered bitterly to inveigh against
his Doctrine, Had not certain malicious persons labored to disgrace him with
the Pope and the Emperor, Had he not been condemned before he was heard:
Briefly, had not his Books been unjustly adjudged to the fire, he had never
appealed from the Pope unto a General Council; he had never labored so much as
he did in searching out, and laying open the Popes Errors; He had never made so
bitter Invectives as he wrote against the Pope and his Bishops; He had never
impugned the Pope and his General Councils Au^hority; He had never implored the
Duke of Saxony and other Princes help and countenance; He had never procured
the Popes Canons to be burned; Briefly, he had never written a Book against the
Catholics Reformation; so many things might and should still have remained, as
it were buried in obscurity, which are now brought to light, and made known and
palpable to very Babes and Infants.

They therefore (in my simple cenceir) did not a little hurt and prejudice unto
the Papists and their Cause, who pe^swaded the Pope and Emperor to make wars
against Luther and his Adherents. For since that time many other Nations
besides Germany are fallen from their obedience to the Pope, and from their
good liking of his Religion, and so many and diverse opinions are now crept into
men's hearts, that I take it a thing almost impossible to reconcile those
diversities. For such is the nature of man that we hardly change our opinons;
and yet when we have changed, we stand stiff and obstinate in our new and late
received conceits, and are very hardly removed from them; Quo semel est imbu^a
recens, etc.
Insomuch that whatsoever the Child receives from his Father, or whatsoever
the Grandfather teaches the Grandchildren, that seems to be irremoveable,
and subject to no kind of alteration.

A man may therefore boldly say, yea swear, that the Spaniard (let him try all
the means he can possible) shall never enforce a general change in Religion.
For since his Father (whose power although he should surpass, yet he shall
never match him in good fortune) could not constrain the Protestants (in the
very infancy of Religion) to return unto his profession; is it credible that
the Son should ever be able to compel far and remote Nations, mighty and great
Princes, manly and warlike people, which of late years have forsaken Popery, to
reassume their old opinions?

But if any man think him great, sufficient, and mighty enough to effect his
disire; let that man consider, how many, how noble, and how learned men the
cruel War of Charles the Fifth against the Protestants in Germany, the most
barbarous cruelty of Francis the First against them in France, the bloody five
years persecution of Queen Mary in England, the Spanish Kings terrible and
horrible Inquisition in Spain, Italy, and Flanders; lastly, the most execrable
and hateful Massacre of Paris, has sent headlong, and before their times unto
another World: And when he has considered all these, let him likewise
remember, that the more these Tyrants murdered, the more the Protestants (as
though others sprang out of their blood) increased daily.

If all these shall not content and satisfy him, Sanguis Martyrum semen
Ecclesiae.
let him call to mind how many years the Wars continued in France and Flanders
for Religion, with far greater obstinacy then with good success and happiness.

Lastly, Let that man weigh with himself how unlikely a thing it is for the
Spaniard to prevail against so many Nations, who in almost Thirty years
continuance, has not been able to replant his own Religion in a few Provinces
of one Nation: Besides the rare success, and the wondrous events that have
always followed the Pro^estants, make me believe that their Cause is a good
Cause; and whosoever so believes, must likewise believe, that were their
number smaller, their Forces weaker^, their exprience far more slender then it
is; yet God that can win with a few as well as with many, with the weak as well
as with the strong, will not only protect them, but also confound their
Adversaries. How many examples find we in profane Histories, which record that
small sroops have oftentimes subdued great Armies, and that mighty Kings have
been put to flight by weak Princes? How can we then but think, that the
Protestants who are Gods Soldiers, who fight in his Cause, and are defended by
his Forces, are able to beard the proud Spainard; yea, to brave and foil all
his Confederates? It is no small comfort to have God on our ^ide. It is a geat
Consolation to sight in a good cause. And who can desire better advantage then
to contend with and Adversary, that begins to decline, that is ready of
himself to fall? And is not the Pope and his Kingdom in this case? Have not
many Nations (as I said said) long since shaken off the intolerable burden of
his grievous yoke and bondage? And do not all States, when they begin once to
decline, sooner fall from the half way toward the end, and to their utter
destruction, then from the beginning of their first declination unto the
midst of their downfull? Shall not those then that seek to defend Popery, do
even as a Physician does, when he labors to preserve a very weak and old man
from the danger of death? Has not St. Paul said, that Antichrist shall perish
as soon as he begins to be known? And if God by the mouth of St. Paul, has
pronounced this Judgment, this Sentence against him; who either can or will be
able to prevent or hinder the execution thereof? He is now no more able to
encounter with Henry's, Othons and Fredericks, great and mighty Emperors: He
has no more Kings of France to fight in his quarrels; No more Kings of England
to be Defenders of his Faith; No more Switzers to be Protectors of his Church;
all these have forsaken him, and by Example of these, many other Princes have
learned not to set a Fig by him.

Thus the First point is cleared; now it remains to clear the second, and to
make it appear that the Span^ard, although he could, yet he should not
constrain his Subjects by force of Arms to change their Religion. This point,
although it has been already touched in some manner, yet it was not so
sufficiently handled, but that it needs a more ample Declaration.

For the better understanding therefore of this Question, you shall understand
that the Common people (which are Princes Subjects) never did; and particular
men, although they change their lives, yet they leave most commonly behind
them their posterity and their Children, which succeed them not only in their
Lands and Inheritances, but also in their quarrels and affections; Insomuch
that there dies scant any man so bad, so wicked, so unbeloved, but that he
leaves behind him, either children, kinsmen, or friends, who will not only
be sorry for his death, but also revenge the same, if he chance to be violently
or wrongfully put to death.

This appears by the Wars of France and Flanders; This appeared most
evidently, by the Bloody and long Civil contentions that were betwixt Lewis the
last Earl of Flanders (for after his death the Earldom fell to the House of
Burgondy, as it did after the death of the County Charles unto the house of
Austria) and the Citizens of Gaunt; who after that they had unadvisedly born
arms against their said Earl, and began to repent themselves of their folly,
most humbly entreated the Duchess of Brabant, the Bishop of Liege, and other
Noble men to be Mediators of a friendly peace betwixt them and their Earl. The
Duchess and the rest became humble Suitors for the poor Gantois; the Earl was
obstinate, and would not yield to their Request, unless the Inhabitants of
Gaunt would be content to meet him at a place appointed, bare-headed, and
barefooted, with halters about their necks, and there ask him pardon and
forgiveness, which being done, he would then pardon them if he thought good.
The rich Citizens hearing these hard conditions, and considering that when they
had made this humble submission, it was doubtful and uncertain whether they
should be pardoned or no; of humble Suitors, became most desperate Rebels; and
(as Men careless of their lives) resolved rather to die then to yield to so
unreasonable conditions; and with this resolution, before they were constrained
to leave their Town, not above Five Thousand of them issued out of the City,
and (as roaving Wolves seeking for their prey) went in a great rage and fury to
Bruges, where the Earl lay with his Forces, who with an Army of Forty Thousand
at the least, set presently upon them, with a full resolution to kill every
Mothers Son of them; But God who saved the Children of Israel from the
persecution of Pharaoh, unto whom they had humbled themselves, and drowned the
Persecutors in the Red Sea, vouchsafed to be their Protector, and gave them
such Courage, such Fortune and good success, that they overthrew the Earl, and
made him hide himself in a poor Cottage under an old woman's bed, ransacked his
Houses, took Bruge^, and most of the Cities and Towns of Flanders, and sent
their unfortunate and unmercifull Earl to beg and into France, from whence he
returns with great help, and finds them more insolent, rebellious, and
obst^nate then ever they were.

To be short, the Earl is driven to offer conditions of peace* A mean and base
Citizen, named Leo, fearing that if a Peace were concluded, he should be
severly punished, changed their minds that were inclined to Peace. This Le^
died not of a natural death, but of po^^on, given him (as it was thought) by
the Earls means.

Then was there great hope to mitigate the rage of the common people; and yet
the war ceased not: The cause of the continuance was, that the Nobility
favored the Earl, and began to malice and menace the Common People; and the
Magistrates of Bruges, in a Tumult that was betwixt the Gentlemen and the
Weavers of the Town, showed themselves more favorable unto the Gentlemen then
unto the Weavers; of this small Cause followed so great a War, as continued
above seven years, and consumed above two hundred thousand Flemings.

In those Wars, sometimes James Artevild, other times Philip Artevild;
sometimes Basconius, other times Francis Agricola, all base men, and of no
account before they began to be Rebels, so ruled the people, that they led them
whither they would, and how they would. Artevild imposed upon them what
Tributes soever it pleased him. Basconius hung up so many of them as but once
spoke of Peace. Artevild was served in Plate of Silver and Gold like an Earl;
Feasted the Dames and Ladies as an E^rl; Swore his Subjects; and was sworn unto
them as an Earl; Contracted Amity and Alliance with the King of England, and
used his help as an Earl: Briefly, lived with far greater Magnificence then an
Earl. Agricola wanted not his commendation. He was adored like a god; preferred
before the Duke of Burgondy (who for his val^ur was called Philip the
audacious) both for Valor and Wisdom promised to be made Duke, and in all
respects more honored then the Duke. Artevild had one named Carpenty, to extol
his Virtues, to recommend him to the people. And Agricola used Besconius for
his Instrument, who so delighted the peoples ears, that they would willingly
hear no s^und, no voice but his. It was he that when Artevild was slain brought
Agricola into favor and credit. It was he that when the people was dismayed and
out of courage because of Artevilds death, put them in heart, and made them
more courageous then ever they were. It was he that persuaded the relenting
Commons that Artevild lost the field and his Army by indiscretion and rashness,
and that Agricola would easily overcome their enemies by valor and wisdom.

The like instruments unto these had the Duke of Mayn at Paris, where he had
never obtained so much as he did of the people, nor contained them so much in
their devotion, had he not used the malici^us help and furtherance of Marteau,
Campan, Nally, Rowland and Bassy the Clerk, the Ministers of his fury, and
misl^aders of the ignorant, rude and seditious Commonalty.

By this you may see how one mutinous Subject begets another. By this you may
observe and note, that if Princes could be content to yield somewhat unto such
mutinous Subjects, and now and then wink at their follies, pardon their
boldness, and pacify their rage and anger, they might live in quiet, and save
the lives of many of their loving Subjects: And by this you may perceive, that
Princes by Civil Wars incur the hatred and malice of their loving Subjects;
which sometimes takes such deep roo: in their hearts, that it is hard, yea
almost impossible to root it out. And lastly, By that which follows you may
understand, that when a multitude of Subjects are discontented, it is far
better to pacify and reconcile them with courtesy and gentleness, then to
provoke and punish them with rigor and cruelty. For the Prince that either
openly or secretly practices the death of his Subjects, and delights to see
them massacred and murdered, very seldom or never escapes himself
unmassacred.

The Emperor Caligula caused many of his Subjects to be done to death; some for
his pleasure, and others without any just occasion, especially those that
reprehended his actions, or disliked his Government. He thought by these
murders to dispatch all those that hated him, and supposed that when they were
dead, he might reign and rule at his pleasure; but he was greatly deceived, for
the more he caused to be killed, the more he displeased; and if he slew one
Enemy, that one begat him ten far worse Adversaries; insomuch that seeing
himself hated of all the people, he wished (as you have heard) that all the
Subjects of Rome had but one head, that he might have cut it off at a blow; and
in the end, when it was too late he perceived that the people multiplied daily,
and had infinite heads, and he himself but one, of which he was deprived sooner
then he thought he should have been.

Maximinus the Emperor, who was so strong of body that with the blow of his
fist he could strike out the tooth of an Horse, and with his hands break in
sunder an horse-shoo, presuming on his strength and the multitude of his
Soldiers, cared not whom he put to death wrongfully, but after that he had
murdered above Four thousand Gentlemen without any due observance of Justice
and Equity, he himself was murdered by his own Soldiers, who hated his
barbarous cruelty more then they honored his Imperial Majesty. I might trouble
you with many examples like unto these, as with the Emperors Nero, Vitellius
and Gallienus. But I must proceed.

Briefly to my purpose: As the people therefore live still, and live to revenge
the wrongs and injuries done into them; so contrariwise, Princes die, and their
Quarrels, their Designs, and their Purposes many times die with them; for their
Successors are not always of their minds, nor of their Humors, but oftentimes
govern themselves otherwise then they did, and taking a quite contrary course
unto theirs, most commonly break the Laws they have made, distress the persons
whom they advance, and exalt them whom they depress; In regard whereof it is
usual amongst wise Courtiers not only to pleasure him that rules, but also
him that shall succeed the Ruler; and as Pompey said unto Sylla, More do adore
the Sun rising then the Sun setting,

It is wondrous that is reported of Alexander the Great, how with an Army of
Thirty thousand Macedonians only, he overthrew Darius in Three sundry Battles;
in the first of which Darius had Three hundred thousand Soldiers, which was
Ten to One; in the second, Six hundred thousand, which was Twenty to One; in
the third, a Million, which was better then Thirty to One. He conquered all
Darius Empire, Persia, Media, Parthia, Armenia, Babylonia, Egypt, Palestina,
Syria, and all the rest of Asia and Europe that was then inhabited.

But these Conquests quickly vanished away; For he died very young, and left
not any valiant Successor like unto himself behind him; Whereupon Titus Livius
moves this Question, Whether if Alexander the Great had warred in his time
with the Romans, he might easily have subdued them as he did Darius?

He Answers Negatively, and gives a Reason for his Negative: Alexander was a
valiant King, and a very brave and very notable good Soldier; but he was but
one man, and when he dealt with Darius he meddled but with one Captain; Whereas
if he had encountered with the Romans, he should have made trial, not of one,
but of many Generals the one after the other, as of Valerius Cervinus, Martius
Rutilius, Caius Sulpitius, Manlius Torquatus, Publius Philo, Papirius Cursor,
Fabius Maximus, Lucius Volunius, Marius Curious, and many others who were most
valiant Captains, and would have made Alexander know that they understood the
manner and Stratagems of War as well as he did. Besides, Alexander was young,
and could not have so good counsel given him as those men had who were directed
in their Actions by a grave and wise Senate.

Tit. Livius concluded his speech in this manner. The Macedonians had but one
Alexander, and the Romans had many Captains which were nothing Inferior unto
him, every one of which lived and died without any great loss or danger to the
Commonwealth of Rome; but whenas Alexander died, the State and Honor of his
Monarchy perished. The reason of this speech is verified, and the experience
thereof seen in the wars Hanibal had against the Romans. For Hanibal was such a
Captain as you have heard me describe him long since, and he overthrew many
Captains of Rome, as Flaminius, Paulus Emilius, Terentius, Varro, Marcellus and
many others; But in the end he was defeated by Claudius Nero and Fabius
Maximus, and utterly overthrown by that great Scipio who was surnamed the
Affrican. By which as he might, so you may perceive that it is no small matter
to meddle with a multitude of people, because the death of a few, b^getteth
daily a number more; and he that has subdued them, has not presently
conquered all; Nay the longer he warreth with them, the harder it shall be to
prevail against them: For continuance of them will make them more hearty and
valiant, and their Captains more expert and cunning, as Experience has
verified both in France and Flanders, where the People, bearing Arms against
their right or pretended Sovereigns, have more and better Captains then they.
But how then, will some men say to me, Shall Subjects Rebel, and shall nor
Princes punish them themselves? Yes, but not by open wars, if they may pacify
them by other means. For, few offend at the first, and those few instead of a
great Multitude who offend not so gri^vously as their Counselors and
Cor^uptors do, and therefore it is neither reason nor humanity, nor equity to
punish them all alike; And yet in Civil wars the Innocent suffer together
with the malicious, the good with the bad, the ignorant with the wilful, and
those that would easily relent, and might quickly be reclaymed, with such are
F^rebrands to heat them, Schoolemasters to instruct them, Captains to guide
them, and evil Counselors to corrupt them. Princes may learn in the dangerous
times of popular Seditions, how to carry themselves by the An^ient Romans who
knowing that their Subjects were the Members, and they the head of one body,
and that they were Invincible against Strangers, but not against their
Subjects, as often as they chanced to raise any Tumults or Seditions, presently
sought means to pacify them by Curte^ie and Gentleness. The People of Rome
being once greatly discontented with the rigor and cruelty which was showed
unto them by great usurp^rs, unto whom they were indebted, rose up in Arms,
and were like to have made a great Tumul^. The Consuls called the Senater
together, to know how they might best pacifi^ that popular Commotion. The
Senators in order delivered their opinions.

Appius Claudius in a rigorous and cruel Senator, was of opinion that the
usurpers should be paid all that was due unto them, and that it was not
convenient to suffer the Common people to break such Contracts, Bonds and
Obligations, which they had made with good advise, and when they had great
occasion to borrow. And that if they punished those severely which were most
mutinous, and had been the chiefest Authors of the mutiny, the rest would be
quickly terrified, and taught by their examples never to enter into the like
Follies again. The Consul Servilius was of a contrary mind, and thought it best
to content the Seditious by some Gentle means, saying, that it was far more
easy to bend then to break the hearts of the Common people; and that
gentleness and lenity is a far better means then rigor and severity to
conserve and preserve any State whatsoever, because if a rigorous course take
not good success, presently the People wax insolent, hard to be reconciled, and
so peremptory and obstinate, that it will be impossible to reduce them to good
order. The Senate allowed Servilius his opinion; and order was taken that the
Usurpers should forbear their money and Interest for the same, until their
debtors were more willing and better able to pay them. The same Romans can also
reach Princes, that if they commit any extraordinary kind of violence, and the
Subjects for a time forbear to show their dislike thereof, yet they must not
presume upon that forbearance to offend and displease again in the like manner;
because he that winketh at a fault once, will not bear with offenses of the
like nature always. It happened that not long after the Tumult before mentioned,
some few of the greatest Senators of Rome had secretly caused a Trbiunes of the
people to be murdered, because under the color and pretense of his Office, he
had (as they were informed) done his best endeavor to make a commotion amongst
the common people. The Tribune thus mu^thered, the people showed no outward
sign of coffeehouse, because they knew not unto whom they might impute his
death, or whom to blame or accuse for the same. The Senators were glad to see
that his death was so well taken, thinking that they had used a very good
course to prevent and withstand the like seditions, and that the other Tribunes
would be warned by their Fellow and Colleagues punishment never hereafter to
move the common people to rebel. They supposed that by one man's death they had
removed all occ^sions of Tumultuous disorders; But experience taught them not
long after, that they were greatly deceived. For when they were to levy an Army
of men to use in their wars, and thinking that the Tribunes death was
forgotten; they commanded one Volero, one of the common people who had been
Captain of certain footmen, to have his company in a readiness, he answered
them plainly, that he would not obey their commandment Whereupon the Consuls
Emilius and Virginius, sent certain Sergeants unto him to carry him to prison;
He escapes out of their hands, gets himself into a press of common people,
there he cries out with open mouth, My masters, let us defend our selves; we
must not think to be any more supported by our Tribunes who dare not speak for
us, for fear lest they be ki^led, as one has been already that favored us in
our honest causes. He had no sooner said this, but that the people, although
the Consuls endeavored to appease the Tumult, ran upon the Sergeants, who
after that they had been well beaten, and their Maces broken about their heads,
saved themselves in the Palace where the S^n^te was assembled. The Senators
deliberate presently how they might pacify this sedition; many thought it meet
to repress force by ^orce; but the graver sort was of opinion, that it were not
good to tame the members of a body by violence, and that they had already too
much offended who were Authors of the Tribunes death, and much more they who
entreated Volero hardly, for that in Popular diseases, the gentler a Medicine
is, the better it is; and the more that a Magistrate spa^e^h, the better he
fares. The same Romans will likewise teach Princes, that the eldest
Counselors are not always the wisest, and that the most voices are not
oftentimes the soundest voices. It chanced another time in Rome, that the
Commonalty was so greatly discontented, that the greater part of the people
were purposed to forsake their City, and to inhabit in some place where the
Nobility should not carry so heavy an hand over them as the Senators did; and
with this resolution they left their houses, and were ready to betake
themselves to their journey. The Senators understanding of this determination,
cast their heads together, and advised among themselves what it were best to do
to remove this settled opinion, and to hold them still in the City, which was
almost past all hope. Appius Claudius, according to his rigorous nature and old
custom, persuaded them to bridle the mutinous by rigor, and severity; For
says he, the common people, if they be not held in continual awe, wax proud,
disdainful and insolent, not caring what they do, or how often they offend;
And therefore to suffer them in one Folly, were to encourage them to commit
another. This opinion was presently approved by all the younger Senators, whose
hands tickled and hearts burned with a desire of revenge for some small
indignities offered unto them by the Commonalty. Menenius Agrippa, a Senator of
few years, but greater clemency then Appius Claudius, contradicted this
opinion; because the Commonwealth represents, says he, the body of a man;
and a good Physician will not presently cut off a member or joint that is
grieved, but will seek some gentle means to affwage the grief; and
experience has taught us, that as a wild beast being gently used waxes tame,
and contrariwise a tame one being rudely handled becom^th wild; so the most
rude and common people relent if you use them gently, and they that are most
civil and modest, quickly forget all modesty and civility if you once provoke
them too much, if you continue to displease and discontent them too long and
too often. Menenius his opinion was followed. Spurius Manlius entreated them to
excu^e the younger Senators Folli^; They were commended that departed quickly
from Claudius his opinion; and Agrippa was enjoin ed to pacify the people: He
therefore follows this commandment; calls the Commonalty together,
declares unto them the Senators good will toward them; speaks so gently
unto them that he makes them all change their resolution and uses this
principal reason to enforce this persuasion. The Senators (says he) resemble
the Belly, and you the rest of the members of man's body; must the other parts
of man's body complain that all they can gather and scrape together is little
enough for the Belly? Is it not the Belly that nourishes all the rest or the
Body, that maintains and sust^ineth every part thereof? does the Belly when
it receives any kind of victuals be it never so delicate, never so rare, and
exquisite, res^rve all for it self? Does it not distribute and disperse the
same even to the parts that are furthest off from the Belly? even so the
Senators, do they challenge that for their own use and benefit which they exact
of you? Do they not employ the Tributes and Subsidies which they levy to the
behoof and commodity of the whole State? Do they not all that they do for your
good and safety? Are they not rather Nurces to nourish you, then Lords to
command you? Are they not Shepherds to defend you, and not Wolves to devour
you? And do they not show themselves to be your Fathers, rather then your Foes?
Why then do you complain of them? Why th^eaten you to leave them, who will
forget themselves to remember you, and rather die to content you, then live to
confou^d you? Thus ended Menenius his speech, somewhat abruptly and yet so
mildly, that the grave Senators most highly commended it, and the common people
most willingly followed it. Now to apply these examples to the King of Spain,
and to tell you how he, and any other Prince in the wide world, governing as he
does, might have made some use and profit of them, it will be no lost labor,
because it will make his oversights more manifest then they are unto the view
and Judgment of the whole world: Had he therefore, at the beginning of the
Alienation of his Subjects hearts and Affections from him, harkened unto such
Counselors as Servillus and not Appius Claudius; had he when some one Subject
like unto Volero was displeased, satisfied him, and not provoked him; had he
when his Subjects were departing out of their Country, not sent a Claudius to
repress them, bu^ a Menenius to reconcile them, he had never found so many
Agricolas, so many Artevills, so many Carpentaries, so many Basconii, so many
Leones as he did amongst them. H^d he not disturbed, disgraced, discredited his
faithful Subjects, servants, his best Officers, as Nero did Rufus, Su^rius,
Flavius, Sulpitius, After, Corbulo, and Galba, they never would have harbored
a thought to deprive him (as the others did Nero) of the possession of the Low
Countries; Briefly had he considered that when Nero began to be a Tyrant, First
France, then Spain, and at the last other Provinces fell from their obedience
toward him, he might easily have perceived, that when Brabant failed him,
Flanders, Holland and all the rest of his seventeen Provinces would likewise
fall from him. But it pleased him having two notable Examples before his eyes,
the one of Antien^time, the other of latter years, the first bad, and the other
good, to reject the one, and to follow the other.

The Examples were these; Reh^boam the son of wise Solomon would impose
greater Taxes and Subsidies upon his Subjects then his Father had done before
him. The People hereupon complained unto him, as the Lowcountry Subjects did
unto the Spanish King, desired him rather to mitigate then to increase his
Impositions, showed that they were not able to bear and support so great
charges. He called his Counselors together (as undoubtedly the Spaniard did)
and craved their advice: The elder Counselors were of opinion that it was good
and expedient to yield unto his Subjects demands (as perhaps the better sort of
the Council were) and by easing their charges to assure unto himself their
hearts and their affections; But the younger sort (and such undoubtedly were
the Spanish Senators, either in Wit or years) advised him to reject their
Petition, and not to suffer them to prescribe Laws unto him (who were to
receive laws from him) but to let them know that he was their King, and they
his Subjects, and that it belonged unto them to obey. This Counsel what
followed: But what followed in following this Counsel? The greatest part of his
People Rebelled against him: Jeroboam was chosen King, and Rehoboam raised an
Army of 80 Thousand men to constrain his Subjects to return to their former
obedience; but he lost him time and Ten parts of his Kingdom.

Lewis the Eleventh King of France, a wise and subtle Prince, if ever there
were any in France, at his first coming to the Crown, played his part as
Rehoboam did, until that the chief of his Nobility rebelled against him.

This wise King acknowledged his fault, sought all means possible to pacify and
reconcile those Rebels; He yielded to their demands, and was so far from
punishing their disobedience, as that he received them for his chief
Counselors, and was always more directed by them, then by any other of his
Counsel. And when he had escaped the danger, whereinto he was fallen by his
Folly, he gave great thanks to Almighty God, that it had pleased him to give
him the Grace not to hazard the loss of so great and mighty a Kingdom as
France was, and is, upon the uncertainty of a Battle and especially of a
B^ttaile to be fought against his own Subjects; Subjects that love their Prince
as the head of the Politic body, their children as the stay and hope of their
everlasting Families, and their Liberty as the most precious Jewel of their
worldly wealth: And therefore when they see their Liberty restrained or
impeached, they forget their duty to their Prince, remember not their love to
their children, and cut off their love and affection to their goods; Nay they
are no longer Masters of themselves, being void of (...), of reason, of
Judgment, apprehending no thing else but that which is before their eyes, and
following those only who delude their senses, abuse their reason, and deceive
their Judgment; so that to strive with them in these Passions, is to contend
with mad men in their fury; and it is almost as impossible for a Prince to rule
them in this rage, as it is impossible for one man to take and tame a number of
wild Beasts in a wide and great Forest. It is doubtless that the Spanish King
knew thus much; but it pleased him to believe Appius Claudius better then
Servilius; to persecute and not to pacify Volera; to reject and not to receive
Menenius his Counsel, and to imitate Rehoboam of Israel, rather then Lewis of
France; no marvel then if Rehoboams hard and ill Fortu^e, and not Lewis his
rare and strange Felicity be^ideth him. You have seen his bad course; heard his
impossibility to subjugate and subdue England; It remains to show you, that
although he should conquer England, yet he could not continue long in quiet and
peaceable possession thereof. It is hard to say what course he would take, and
how he would govern if he should chance to prevail against England; but I
think he would imitate the example of, others who have made conquest of strange
and foreign Countries before him; and he will therefore make all things new,
as he himself shall be new; He will appoint a new government and new Governors;
He will establish new Laws, new Orders, new Customs; build up new Citadels,
and pluck down old Castles; kill our Nobility and place Spaniards in their
rooms; Change all our Officers, and make Castles and For^s to keep his
Subjects in awe and in fear; destroy the Coun^y and take away all ancient
Privileges; impoverish the rich, and enrich the poor; unarme the vanquished,
and arms the vanquishers; plant his religion, and banishours; impose new
tribute^ and charge the Subjects with strange impositions; Briefly set spies in
every City, in every village, in every town, in every Hamlett, and in every
House, to mark what is done or said, what what is Counseled or practiced,
Behold this is all that he can do: This is as much as the Danes did: This is
the course that William the Conqueror took; Briefly this is the manner of
Government, which the Romans practiced; and it is likely that he will do all
this in his own Kingdom: But our Country men knowing by certain report, that
he will do all this, will rather die then endure all this; or if they endure
it for a time, will undoubtedly both seek and find means to free themselves
from such servitude in shorttime. The examples of other Nations and other
People which have killed themselves with their own hands because they would not
fall into their Enemies hands, will both move and encourage them to imitate and
follow their Magnanimity; The rebellions of many Princes will animate them to
Revolt from their obedience; Necessity will put some way or other into their
heads how to find weapons, how to choose Captains, how to persuade a general
Revolt, and how to procure an alteration and change of his Tyrannical
Government. For albeit that the Spaniards will perhaps for a time Govern with
all mildness, ^^^anity and Justice; yet as soon as they think themselves well
settled and assured to hold and continue their conquests; as soon as they taste
those sweet Commodities and pleasant fruit which follow after the great
increase of wealth and riches, then will they begin to change their customs
and their conditions; then should you see (which God forbid you ever see) the
Magistrates rob the commonwealth; base and unworthy persons advanced to places
of Dignity; Superiors wrong their Inferiors; ^^supportable tributes imposed
upon the People; abominable Vices left unpunished; Offices of Justice sold for
money; Laws little or nothing regarded; Strangers more honored and respected
then our own countrymen; and good manners changed into evil conditions: And
when you see this, then you may boldly say, that things are at the worst; that
violent courses cannot long endure; that a time of a change and alteration is
not far off; and lastly, since those things which Philosophers and wise men
have noted to be the Forerunners of the Subversion of States, are happened, and
fallen upon our State, that it will quickly change and perish.

All things therefore being well considered, and that especially remembered
which was said, when I handled the first oversight of the Spanish King; I may
boldly infer, that Conquests are chargeable before they be gotten, easy to
be lost after they be attained, and wholly depending upon the Government of
such Officers as are placed over them; who if they be good Servants, many times
make themselves Masters; and if they be bad, put in great hazard all that is
committed to their charge; And since there are not many that endeavor to be
such as they should be, there can be no great good looked for at their hands,
so long as they continue such as they appear to be.

Besides, the great ingratitude of Justinian the Emperor to Marcelles, of
Ferdinando of Spain to Gonsalvo, breeds a Jealousy and fear in the hearts
and heads of as many as are employed in the like services, that their Kings and
Princes will reward them with the like recompenses; And this Jealousy makes
them to seek means how to be able to match or rather overcharge their
Sovereign in Power and Authority.

Was not this Jealousy the sole and only cause, that Tiberius had like to
have been deprived of his State by Sejanus, Commodus by Pervicius, Theodosius
the second by Eutropius, Justinian by Bellizarie, Xerxes by Artaban, and the
Merovingians and Carolovingians by the great Masters of their Palaces?

Is not the fear of the like danger the cause that Princes change their
Liuetenants and Deputies often, least that growing in too great Credit and love
with the people, their Credit may breed in them Ambition, their Ambition a
disloyalty, and their disloyalty a plain Rebellion, and their Rebellion a
lamentable overthrow of their Kingdoms?

Is not this yearly or continual changing of Officers the cause that they
knowing that their Authority is of no long continuance, study more to enrich
themselves then to benefit the people, to oppress and overcharge the Subjects,
then to comfort and relieve them? And is not their study the cause that the
people are discontented, and of^entimes enforced to Rebel? Moreover how can it
be but all or most part of those Inconveniences of which I have spoken, must
needs fall upon the King of Spain, whether he live long or die shortly, since
many motives and causes of Rebellion in Subjects and coffeehouse in Noblemen
concur together in him? For he is old and will leave a very young Infant or no
old Prince to succeed him in all his States, who perhaps will Govern by
Deputies and Liuetenants, as his Father did before him in those Dominions which
are far distant from Spain, and will participate some small portion of
Government with his Sister, that has been a long time nourished and nousled up
in the sweetness of commanding.

Of his Governors some will be ambitious, and desire to rule; Others of baser
minds, but yet greedy of Recompenc^es and Rewards, for services done to him and
his Father; He will be jealous of some, and give too much credit unto othe^s;
His Courtiers will engage and indebt themselves in setting themselves fo^th in
Triumphs and p^stiumes that they will devise to show him: His Captains will
^rave to be always employed in wars, and to levy those Soldiers in those
Countries which will not be well con^ented with those Le^ies: B^iefly then will
some Potentates and Frinces, considering the years and weakness of this young
Prince, lay claim unto some of his States, and every man will snatch what so
ever shall be fitt^^t for his purpose, nighest to his State, and most open to
his Invasion.

The Soldiers of Rome rebelled against Oth^, because h^ was old: Certain Cities
of France against the Romans, because they were greatly in debt: The People of
Thraci^ against Rome, because there were Soldiers l^vied in their Country
against their wills: Orgatorix Prince of the Switzers: because he was desirous
to be a King, Morgovias and Cavedagins against Cordi^a their Aunt, because she
was a woman: The Englis^man against Edward the Fourth, because he dishonored
the Earl of Warwick; against Henry the Third, because he would have made new
Laws; The Duke of Buckingham against Richard the Th^rd because he brake promise
with him for the Earldom of Hertford; the Scots against James the Third,
because he gave greater credit unto some of the Courtieers then they deserved;
and the Spaniards against Charles the Fifth, because he lived more in Flanders
then in Spain, and governed Spain by Flemings.

Lastly, when as Alexander the Great died, Seleucus seized upon the Kingdom of
Syria; Ptolomy usu^ped upon Egypt, Antigonus made himself King of Asia, and
Cassander reigned in Greece and Macedonia. So whenever the King of Spain
shall die, his Son will enjoy most of his Dominions, the Duke of Savoy will
look for part of them; His other Daughters Husband will look for a
proportionable share, and the Princes of Italy will perhaps lay in for their
part and for their portion. For every Kingdom has a certain Period, an end and
declination; And it is seldom seen that any State flourishes many hundred
years: And as those bodies die soonest, that are subject to most diseases; so
those Kingdoms perish soonest, whose Princes are most inclined to many vices.
Saul reigned but Forty years; and he and his posterity perished for his
Infidelity. David ruled other Forty, and his Kingdom was divided for his
Adultery. Achan was King no longer time, and his Kingdom was destroyed for his
Idolatry. And Cyrus enjoyed his Crown and Scepter not many years, and his race
failed in his Son Cambyses for his Cruelty.

And how can the Spanish Kings declining glory last long, since many probable
and very learned Authors do greatly belie him, if he be not infected with all
or most part of those vices which possessed incredulous and unbelieving Saul,
adulterous and leacherous, David Idolatrous and Superstitious Achan, Cruel and
incestuous Cambyses. I favor and reverence his Person because he is a King,
hate and detest his vices, because they become not a Prince; have declared and
discovered his indiscretion, because he may be no more thought so wise as
common Fame report^th him to be.

And now, because of a dissembling friend, he is become our professed Enemy, I
may not conceal the means how his courage may be cooled, his Pride abated, his
purposes prevented, his courses crossed, his Ambition restrained, his hopes
frustrated, his strength weakened, his Alliances dissolved, and Briefly, all or
part of his Kingdom rent and dismembered.

To know how all this may be done, you shall need but to look back upon the
means that he uses to conserve his States, and to cross his Counsels and
Intentions in the use of those means. For, does he continue in credit by the
General reputation and conceit that is had of his wealth? Let it be showed that
he is poor and needy. Holds he his Subjects and Towns of Conquest in awe, by
keeping Garrisons in them? Seek either to corrupt those Garrisons, or to
persuade those Towns to expel them. Borrows he money in his need and necessity
of the Genowaies and other Merchants of Italy? Counsel them to call for their
old Debts and to lend him no more money before they be paid. Does our Nation
and others enrich his Country by resorting thither? Let them repair no more
then they needs must to those Countries. Fetches he yearly great wealth from
the Indies? Let that be intercepted more then it has been. Places he wise
Governors and Magistrates in his Dominions to Contain his Subjects in
obedience, and his Neighbors in fear? Send Firebrarnds and Authors of Sedition
amongst his Subjects as he does amongst ours, and think it as lawful and easy
to estrange the affection of his wisest and most trusty Deputies and
Lieutenants, as it was and is for him to allienate the hearts of some of the
Nobility of France from their King.

Has he married the now Duke of Parma so meanly that he can not be able to
recover his right to Portugal? Or has he so weakened Don Antonio that he shall
never be able to return into his Country? Provoke the one to be his Enemy in
putting him in mind of his Fathers untimely death, and by remembering the great
wrongs that he suffers, and let many Princes join in heart and in help to
set up the other against him, and to strengthen and succor both, rather then
the one or the other should not annoy him. Is France unable to hurt him because
France is divided? Reconcile them that are dissevered, and revive the quarrels
and pretentions that France has against him? Presumes he that the Germans
will rather help then hurt him, because he is allied to some in Conjunction of
blood, and to others in league of amity? dissolve his alliances and debase the
mightiest of his kindred.

To be short, are the Pope, the Venetians, and the other Princes of Italy
either for fear or affection his friends? encourage the Timorous and fearful,
and alter and remove the love and affection of them that bear him best good
will.

But some man will say, This is sooner said then done, and therefore I have
said nothing unless I show you how all this may be well and conveniently done.
There is a general means, and there are diverse special ways to effect all
this. I will acquaint you with both, because you shall be ignorant of neither,
and I will be as brief as I may, because I take it high time not to trouble you
any longer. It is grown unto a general use of late years, and undoubtedly it
was usual in times past, when Princes undertake any great actions or
enterprises that may perhaps seem strange and somewhat unreasonable unto other
Princes whose favor and friendship they desire, to publish the causes and
reasons which induce them to enter into those actions; and in those
Declarations to omit nothing that either may grace and credit them, or
discredit and disgrace their Adversaries.

The States of the Low Countries when necessity enforced them to renew Wars
against the Spaniards, published certain Books containing the causes which
moved them thereunto; and caused those Books to be imprinted in seven several
Languages, in Latin, in French, in their own Tongue, in High Dutch, in
Italian, in Spanish and in English, to the end that all the Nations of the
World, hearing the Justice and Equity of their quarrel, might either as Friends
help and assist them, or as Neutrals, neither aid nor hinder them as their
Adversaries. The late Duke of Alenson, because it might seem strange unto some,
that he being a Catholic Pr^nce, would aid men of a contrary Religion; and
reprehensible unto others, that being in some manner allied and a supposed
friend unto the Spanish King, he would accept the Title of the Duke of Brabant,
and undertake the defense of the Low Countries against the Spaniards, made it
appa^ent unto the world, by the like means, that it was not any ambitious mind,
or greedy desire of advancement, but a Princely clemency, and commiseration of
the distressed state of that Country, too much oppressed by the Spanish
Tyranny, that moved him to receive them into his Protection and Patronage.

The like did the County Palatine Cassimer when as he came into Flanders with
his Forces. And the like have many other Princes done, not in just causes only,
but in matters that had far greater affinity with injustice and dishonesty,
then with justice and integrity. That Duke of Burgondy which more wickedly then
justly murdered the Duke of Orleance, fearing that his murder might justly
purchase him the Kings heavy displeasure, and the general hearted of all France,
suborned a learned and famous Divine named John Petie, not only to excuse, but
also to commend and allow the execution thereof in many public, Sermons, and
writ diverse Letters unto the best Towns of France, to declare and justify the
cause that moved him thereunto. Henry the Fourth of England, whom many
H^storiographers hold rather for a wrongful Usurper then a lawful King, to make
it known by what Title he took upon him to be King of England, sent diverse
Ambassadors into Spain, Germany, and Italy, with such instructions, and so
forceable reasons, that he made a bad cause seem just and equitable. That Pope
of Rome, which (as you have heard^ betrayed Frederick the Emperor most leudly
unto the Great Turk, and was the only cause of his long and chargeable
imptisonment, finding that his unchristian treachery, being happily disclosed,
did greatly blemish his name and reputation, to give some show and color of
Justice to a bad cause, caused to be published, that two notable Murderers had
been taken at Rome, who voluntarily confessed that the Emperor Frederick had
hired and sent them thither of purpose to kill the Pope.

How the Duke of Bnckingham, and the more learned, the conscionable Dean
Richard Shaw, justified in the Guild Hall of London, and at Paul's Cross, the
unlawful and tyrannical Usurpation of Richard the Third, our Histories make it
so manifest, that I need not to trouble you with the recital thereof. Since
therefore not mean and Laymen only, but Noblemen and great Divines have both
defended and furthered wrongful causes; and with their de^ence and furtherance,
have brought to pass their lend and wicked purpose; why should not men
sufficiently seen in matters of State, and thoroughly furnished with all good
qualities, requisite in a good and worthy Writer (of which sort this Realm had
rather some want then any great store) depinct the Spainard and his tyranny so
lively and so truly, that their reasons, their persuasions, and their
admonitions may may shake the affections, and penetrate even to the hearts of
his best friends and his most assured Allies? But he is a faint friend that
will be won with a word, and he not worthy the name of an Ally, whom the dash
of a pen may make forsake and abandon his Confederate. How then? what other
general way is to be practiced. Where a pen cannot prevail, let a purse be
walking. Quis nisi mentis snops oblatum respuit aurum? Let greater advancement
be proffered to the Spanish Governors; greater preferment to his best friends;
notable rewards unto those that will leave him. Julius coesar, to win the
hearts and affections of Scipios Soldiers, promised them peaceable and quiet
possession of their own goods, and to reward them with the self same Honor,
Offices, and Dignities which he vouchsafed upon his own own followers; and by
this means he won from Scipio many of his dearst friends.

Francis Forza a Captain of great worth, and of better credit, served the
Venetians and the Florentines together many years, against Philip Maria Duke of
Millan; and they to retain him to their only service, made him great offers,
promised him great preferment; but the Duke hearing hearing thereof, with a
faithful promise to give him his only Daughter in marriage, and to make him
his sole and only Heir, made him forsake his old friends, and to become his
vowed friend and servant. But Francis Forza was a mean Captain, and a man of no
great Lineage, and therefore easy to be changed with an assured hope of better
advancement; whereas men of good account, of honorable Parentage and of
fufficient Lands and possessions (such as the Spaniards chiefest Governors
commonly are) will not falsify their faith, or forsake their King for any
reward whatsoever. Truly men of great honor, prefer their credit before their
gain; and yet honorable men are men as others be, and suffer themselves to be
won as others are.

There was a time when the Marquess of Mantoua (whose Successors are now Dukes,
and equal to great Princes, and he not inferior unto any of his Predecessors)
having vouchsafed to serve the Venetians as their General against Lewis Duke of
Millan, stood not so much upon his honor, but that the said Lewis with greater
offers, and a larger Pention then he had of the Venetians, was able to withdraw
him from their service and devotion.

There was a time when the mighty Emperor Charles the Fifth, being desirous to
alienate the affection of Pope Leo the Tenth, from Francis the First, King of
France, obtained his request and purpose, by promising the Cardinal Iulio de
Medicis a yearly Pension of ten thousand Ducats to be paid him out of the
Archbishopric of Toledo, and by giving to Alexander de Medicis a Pension of
the like value in the Kingdom of Naples.

There was a time when the said Emperor Charles, being jealous of the great
friendship that was betwixt Pope Clement the Seventh, and the Duke of Urbin,
and likewise desirous to distract Andrew Dorea from the service of the said
Pope, who then was in League with the French King, prevailed with the one by
giving him the City of Lova in the Kingdom of Naples, and gained the assured
friendship of the other, by making him Duke of Malfie, and by increasing the
pay and Pension which the Pope gave him. To be short, there was time when as
Philip surnamed the Fair, King of France, did not only entreat Adolph the
Emperor^ by the only means of great Rewards to forsake the Amity and Alliance
of Edward King of England, and of Guido Earl of Flanders, but also procured
Albert Duke of Austria, by warring upon the Emperor at home, to detain him in
Germany, so that he could not, as he had promised, trouble and molest France.

But some men will say, These men had no regard of their honor, whereunto a
man carrying any reasonable respect, will hardly be entreated to commit any
thing that may never so little blemish or prejudice his reputation. It cannot
be denied that virtuous men had rather have their names eternized by their
virtuous action, then their Families enriched by unlawful corruption: Yet it is
written, and written by an Author worthy to be remembered amongst the best
Authors of our time, That the Marquess of Pescara, a Prince whose Virtues,
Fame, Reputation, Credit and Honor were nothing inferior unto the most
honorable and virtuous Princes that ever lived on earth, had been won by his
friend Jeremy Morony to forsake the Emperor Charles the Fifth, if the Cardinal
Acoltera and the Marquess of Angel^, together with those learned Civilians
which were sent by the Pope and the Venetians to persuade him that the Emperor
was not lawful King of Naples, and that the Pope had power to dispose thereof
unto whom it pleased him, had used pregnant and sufficient Reasons to enforce
their persuasions, and to assure him of the Kingdom^

And undoubtedly the brotherly love of Don John de Austria, and the loyal
affection of the late Duke of Parma, might easily have been shaken by a more
sweet then tempestuous wind of the like nature: For since Marquesses, Dukes,
Emperors and Popes, have been content to be caught with a golden hook; let no
man be afraid to try and sound, or despair to win and change the affections of
meaner personages, especially such as are either greedy or needy of rewards,
and against such Princes as have given many occasions of coffeehouse unto
such Personages.

But now to descend from the general means unto those particular ways which I
promised to declare unto you, let me, I pray you, with good leave and patience
run over the short Catalogue of his best friends, and show you how even they
may be entreated or councelled either to forsake him utterly, or to stand as
Neutrals and idle lookers on, whilst others shall annoy him. And because of
late years, and since his late dishonor received in England, he has used all
means possible to induce the Princes of Italy to aid him in a second Enterp^ise
which he intends against England; I will as briefly as I can set down diverse
Reasons which may be used to dissuade them from yielding him any manner of
assistance. It may therefore be said unto the Italians in general, that they
live now in peace and quietness under the wings and protection of diverse
Princes; but who knows whether the Spaniard desires this aid of them to
disturb their quiet, and to disquiet their general peace? who knows whether
he that now favors them, will hereafter take occasion to hate them? who
knows, since it is the custom of Princes to seek help of others, not for any
great need they have thereof, but either to weaken them, or to bring them into
the ha^red of others, whether the King of Spain desires their succor and
furtherance to diminish their strength, or the number of their friends?
Briefly, who knows when their friends are diminished, and their forces
impared, whether he will not suddenly denounce open Wars against them? Great is
the force of ambition, and unsatiab^e are the desires of covetous Princes, who
having subdued one Country, seek presently after another, and when they have
conquered that, labor to attain unto new Conquests, and never leave to enlarge
their over large Territories until a small piece of ground incloseth their dead
and rotten bodies.

But it may be said, the King of Spain is old; but covetousness dies not, but
increases in old age. He is already Master and Lord of many Kingdoms and so
many Countries: But as I have said, the more a man has, the more a man
wants; he being nigh unto deaths door, thinks nothing of his death. But every
Prince before his death, would be glad to make his name immortal, his Dominions
infinite. He is a Catholic Prince, and therefore will hold his words and
promises with Catholics as he has done hitherto: But deceitful men keep touch
in small matters, to deceive the better in causes of great weight and
consequence: They may therefore justly fear, that he who coveteth Kingdoms that
are far from him, is not without a great desire of States that join and border
upon his Dominions; and they may well think since he is descended (as you shall
hear anon) of such Predecessors, as were ready to take any occasion whatsoever,
just or unjust, honest or dishonest, commendable or reprehensible, to enlarge
their Dominions, that he has learned of them to have the like desires, and use
the like practices.

But grant they have no just occasion to distrust him? what shall they gain by
his friendship? what profit shall they reap by aiding and assisting him? He
called them to help him: But when forsooth? when his ships were su^k, bruised
and broken; some lost and never heard of, and those which returned into Spain,
were so shaken and beaten with weather and Gunshot, that either they will be
altogether unprofitable, or hardly repaired without great and infinite charges;
and when his people were either drowned, or so terrified, that they will have a
small desire, and less courage to return in England. But why implored he not
their helps when he went for England with an assured hope and confidence, of an
happy Conquest, of an honorable Victory? He was loath to use their help,
because he thought himself able to a^tain his purpose, without making them
partakers of his glory; and now that he has failed of his purpose, he calls
them unto a second voyage, intended for a revenge of the dishonor received in
his first journey; and they must go to recover his credit, and to revenge his
quarrel, who have not as yet righted many wrongs done unto themselves, nor
wiped away diverse foul spots and stains which blemish their own credit. And how
must they revenge his quarrel? Forsooth, by sending their best Soldiers into a
strange Country, by dis-furnishing themselves of Ships and Artillery, and by
lending him Munition and Mariners, who might do well to spare his own people,
and to reserve theirs to encounter with the common enemy of Christendom. Their
Ancestors bought peace with unreasonable conditions, and at a great price; and
they shall go to Wars where they have no cause of War. Their Predecessors when
any Nation dwelling beyond the Alps intended to pass the Alps, endeavored by
all means possible to hinder their passage, and to keep them at home, and they
having not felt the forces of such Nations these many years, shall for his sake
now go about to provoke them. Their Forefathers lived quietly at home with
their own; and they shall disquiet themselves and other men, and endanger their
own for his cause and his advantage. Their Parents never suffered their ships
or their Soldiers to depart out of Italy, for fear left the great Turk in
their absence should invade their Country and they must send their provision
and their people to fight against the Heavens, against the Winds, against the
Weather and the Sea, for so they sight that fight against England. Their hearts
may tremble to think of it; and that which has happened once may happen again.
If whilst their Forces shall be employed in the Spanish kings service, the
Turk shall assail them at home, shall they stay for their strengths until they
come out of England? Or shall they yield themselves unto his mercy and
discretion? For there is no other way to relieve them, or to repel them. But it
may be said that the Spaniards credit and reputation will be their Buckler; his
greatness will restrain and repress their Adve^iaries. Tell me, you that think
so; Is he stronger then h^s Father was? Has he ever had better success in the
Wars then he? And yet in the prime and flower of his years, and even when he
thought himself free from all danger, from all trouble and vexation of the
Turks, the Turks came to besiege Vienna, which is the Emperors chief Seat, and
a City of as great strength as any other City of Europe. They may consider that
Armies that go far from home have (as I have said) seldom good success; that
enterprises which are unadvisedly and hastily taken in hand, seldom fall out
well; that men being once deceived of their expe^ation in any thing that they
undertake, proceed faintly and fearfully in all that belongs to that action;
that to hang good Soldiers, and to employ them in a bad cause and evil
quarrel, is but to tempt God; and lastly, that is more grievous that which a
man has already in possession, then not to attain unto that which he would
fain obtain.

All these being duly considered, they may justly be afraid when they call to
mind, that their Navy which they shall send into England to help the king of
Spain, shall pass through many Seas, Rocks, with many contrary Winds, in great
Tempests, and through manifest and dangerous parils; and that their Soldiers
shall be sometimes subject to hunger and thirst, sometimes be Sea sick, and in
great danger of other diseases; for where many be shut up close together, there
few can be in health long.

All this being duly considered, they may well be dismayed when they shall
remember that the Spanish Fleet, which went out of Spain with an assured hope
of victory, returned with great loss and ignommy: And they may be discomforted,
when they enter into cogitation that the Spanish Navy returning to that place
where they were once well beaten, and remembering what small relief they had
when they were in distress, will not only lose the^r courage themselves, but
also discourage their Italian Soldiers, not being accustomed to sight so far
from home, or on so dangerous and troublesome Seas, and with so valiant a
Nation as the English Sea and Subjects are.

They may again be dismayed, when they consider, that although they should
conquer England, yet they cannot keep it long, because they have no just cause
to fight against England.

And lastly, they may be dismayed when it shall come to their minds and
remembrance, that the small hope and confidence which they have to prevail in
England, cannot countervail the great distrust and fear which they have to lose
their own possessions and Country, whilst they busy themselves in seeking
after strange and difficult conquests; And if to leave nothing unsaid that may
be said to encourage them, some men will use unto them all the same persuasions
which our Fugitives used to induce the Spanish King to undertake the Conquest
of our Land, that man whatsoever he be, may well and sufficiently be answered
with the same Arguments which I used long since to confute their Reasons: With
these and the like Reasons uttered by grave men unto the Common people (who
hearken willingly unto any thing for their own quiet and security) and used in
convenient time and place, of which wise men in their wisdom and gravity can
take their best advantage, the most discreet and wisest Subjects of Italy may
quickly be persuaded not to further the Spaniard in his unlawful and ambitious
attempts and purposes, and the Princes themselves who willingly enter into no
action, whereof some great commodity is not likely to follow, will easily
hearken unto any man of credit and experience, that shall review their
memories, and reduce unto their mind the means that their Predecessors have
used to free themselves from Foreign Servitude and bondage; a commodity, far
exceeding all the commodities that heart can imagine or tongue express. It may
therefore be showed unto them in general, that Maximilian the Emperor, and the
Spanish Kings great Grandfather (for it were tedious to talk of his former
Predecessors, and of the wrongs that they did unto Italy) entered oftentimes
into League and Amity with barbarous Nations against the Princes of Italy,
brought them into their Country, besieged their Cities, cast down their Walls,
ransacked their Houses, changed their mirth into sorrow, and never lest to
trouble and molest them, until that his strength, and not his good will to
annoy them failed him. Charles the fifth his Father (for his Grandfather
Philip died in the prime of his years, and therefore could not greatly trouble
them, because he wanted the means) does the like; and many of the Italian
Princes most loving Subjects die, some by the sword, others by famine, some
through grief, and others by infinite labor and travel, neither permitting
them that resisted him to live one hour in rest and quietness, nor suffering
those that yielded unto him to enjoy any long peace and tranquillity; but
reduced both the one and the other sort unto extreme beggary, by grievous
impositions and long and tedious wars. He himself wheresoever he rules in
Italy (and he rules there too much) impose^h new Tributes, unaccustomed
Subsidies, and extraordinary impositions; and where he has no Authority to
rule, there he borrows money, and pays his Debts with fair words, and sweet
promises; and when he uses them best, with Bonds and Obligations, which shall
be paid when every brother pays another. When this is said, and they moved
with the grievous remembrance and lamentable rehearsal hereof, it may be they
would be glad to remedy and revenge these wrongs; but they dare not adventure
to contend with him; they will fear him, because he is wealthy; stand in aw of
him, because he is mighty; and strive amongst themselves, who shall first begin
to trouble him, because they distrust one another. His might and his wealth
have already been shown sufficiently, and proved to be far inferior unto the
general conceit and opinion that is had of them, and their distrust may be
removed by a general League, and perfect imitation of their Predecessors.

It must therefore first be remembered, that Nicholas the third Pope of Rome,
fearing the great wealth of France, under Philip the son of Lewis surnamed The
Godly, used all means possible to abate and diminish the French Kings power and
reputation. And the state of this present time must be conferred with the
condition of that Age, to the end that if the like causes of fear be now
apparent, the like remedies may be applied. Then was France to be feared,
because there was no Civil War in France; Now Spain must be suspected, because
Spain is quiet and at peace within it self; all the Lords and Peers of France
were then obedient unto their king, and are they not so in Spain? The French
king was then in League with England and Germany; and is not the Spaniard
allied unto many For eign Princes? The king of Navar a Vassal of France, ruled
all things then in Spain, because he was Tutor unto the young king; and does
not Spain now sway and rule a great part of France, by reason of the League
betwixt him and the unnatural Reb^s thereof? Siciy was then subject unto
Charles the French kings Uncle; and now both Sicily and Naples are under the
Spaniard. The same Charles was of great authority in Rome; he was Lieutenant
General unto the Empire, and under that Title either commanded by force, or
prevailed by authority through all Italy. And has not the Spaniard as great
authority there at this present as he had then? The face and countenance of
both times are alike; the Remedies therefore should be such now as they were
then. Then the Pope weakened the credit and authority that Charles had in Rome;
the Pope must do like to the Spaniard now. Then was the Title of Lieutenant
General taken from Charles; Now should all helping Titles be likewise taken
from Spain. Then was the Pope determined to make two kings in Italy; the one in
Lombardy, and the other in Tuskany, and both of the House of Ursim, of which he
was the chief and principal branch; And if the like device were now practiced,
undoubtedly the Great Duke of Florence, and some other Potentates of Italy,
upon whom the most should agree, would accept the Title of kings, and be able
both for their wealth and their might, to maintain the same with credit and
reputation. Then was Phaleologo Emperor of Constantinople incensed and
encouraged to war upon the Sicilian king; now there would want no sufficient
reasons to move the French king to do the like against the Spaniard. Then upon
sudden were all the Frenchmen either slain in Sicily or driven thence; and now
might all the Spaniards be either murdered (which were somewhat too bloody and
cruel an action) or removed by main force from Naples and Sicily, which would
be a general benefit and comfort unto all Italy. But Italy of it self is not
able to do all this, what then shall it avail to intend and purpose this? Italy
must then be strengthened and helped, lest it fa^l in doing this. But how shall
Italy be assisted? Forsooth by an imitation of the Princes which lived in
Charles the fifth his time, and envied his greatness. Forsooth, when they saw
that he had by subtilty and corruption obtained the Empire, and that what with
the vigor of his youth, what with the reputation of his might and strength, he
was so puffed up with pride, that he intended to make himself Monarch of all
the world; all the Princes of Christendom fearing his over growing greatness,
began to consult and take advice how they might bridle his ambition, and hinder
the proud and insolent projects of his aspiring and imperious mind. But the
Princes of Germany, who had greatest occasion to fear him most, were the first
that bended all their thoughts, and all their cogitations to move the rest of
the Princes and Potentates of Europe to join with them in League and Amity
against him: Then were there sent Ambassadors unto the King of England, France
and Denmark: Then were there Letters written unto the Swi^zers: Then were
Letters dispatched to the Duke and Seigniory of Venice to desire help against
the Emperor, and to distract the Venetians from the League of Amity which they
had with him, and to entreat both the Venetians and the Switzers, not to suffer
any Forces to pass by their Dominions which should be sent out of Italy unto
Caesar. Then did as many Princes as were not in League with the Emperor, show
themselves forward in this honorable Action; and those who for their Leagues
sake could not openly assist the Confederates against Caesar, exhorted others
to join with them against him; and to make them more able and willing to enter
into the action, they lent or paid them great sums of money which they owed unto
them. Then, since it behooves Princes in wisdom and policy to keep their next
neighbors as weak as they may; since the Spaniard before the king of France
changed his Religion, pretended to war against him for no other cause^ but to
enforce him thereunto; and now continues his Wars and ai^ing his Rebels,
although the French king is of himself become a Catholic, which proves
manifestly, that it was not Religion, but ambition that moved him to aid and
assist those Rebels; since it is apparent to the World, that he only
disturbeth (as I have said) the peace and quietness of all the world, and
causes the Turk to insult as he does upon Christian Princes; since both Othon
the Third, and Conrad the Emperors Laws enjoin all Princes (as it has been
showed upon other occasion) to bend their Forces, and to bandy themselves with
main might against such a Prince, and such a disturber of common peace as the
Spaniard is, I see no reason why the Princes of Christendom, as well Friends as
Foes unto him, should not all jointly, and with one consent, enforce him to
contain himself within his bounds and limits, and to succor and assist him
against the common Adversary of Christian Religion, who of late has given the
Christians no small overthrow. The Popes of Rome were wont, when Christendom
stood in no greater danger of the Turk, then it does at this present, to send
their Ambassadors from Prince to Prince, to reconcile them if they were at
variance, and to exhort them to employ the uttermost of their powers against
the professed Enemy of Christendom. It is written that Paulus Tertius, a Po^e
that was ninety years old when he departed this world, not long before he di^d,
considering the great danger and peril that was likely to fall upon
Christendom, by reason of the pride and ambition of the great Turk, and the
unnatural discord and dissension that was betwixt ^rancis the first and Charles
the fifth, sent his own Nephew the Cardinal Fernese unto them to make a
friendly composition and agreement betwixt them. The like Atonement might the
present Pope make betwixt the French king and the Spaniard; who has now no
other pretense to fight against France, but that the king thereof, although he
is become a Catholic, yet he remains Excommunicate; a pretense both vain and
frivolous, because the kings of France and the Peer; thereof, and also all his
Officers, cannot be lawfully excommunicated by the Pope, as it may appear by
the privileges granted unto diverse kings of France by many Popes: as namely,
by Martin the third and fourth, Gregory the eighth, ninth, ten^h and eleventh,
Alexander the fourth, Clement the fourth and fifth, Nicholas the third, Urban
the fifth, and Boniface the twelfth; The which Privileges are to be seen in
the Treasury where the kings Charters are usually kept: And when the Pope shall
interpose his Authority, many other Princes shall likewise labor to make them
friends, as of late years the King of Denmark, was a Mediator of peace betwixt
him and our gracious Sovereign. And if when this motion shall be made unto him,
he will neither regard the Authority of the Intercessors, nor respect the
manifest eminent danger of Christendom, but still continue and follow his
ambitious nature and unchristian course; then will it be a sit and convenient
time to implore and employ the aid and assistance of his near and dearest
friends against him; then because ^insmen forsake even the next of their own
blood, when they will not yield unto reason, and friends many times fall unto
variance when they are put in mind of old quarrels, and ancient injuries; it
will not be amiss to revive the memory of old and new wrongs and indignities,
offered by the house of Austria unto their Neighbors, their Allies, their
Kinsmen, their Friends, and other Princes that now either fear or favor them;
Then would it be showed, that all the Emperors and Princes of that Family have
neither regarded consanguinity of blood, or alliance of Friendship, nor the
wealth of their Subjects, nor the bonds of Equity and Reason; but have always
preferred their private gain before the Commonweal, their own interest before
their ^^insmens and Friends commodity and advantage, their own will and
pleasure before all Law and Justice; briefly, their subtle devices and deceits
before plain dealing and sincerity.

Then, to begin with the infancy of their Family, it would be made known, that
when they were but poor Counts of Hapsparge, they encro^ched upon their
Neighbors, they wronged and oppressed the simple and well-meaning Switzers,
over whom they tyrannized so long, that at length by common consent, and by a
general Revolt against them, both they and their Officers were violently driven
out of the Country.

Then would it be declared that Rodulph the first Emperor of their House,
obtained the Empire by plain deceit and cunning; and so carried himself
therein, that he sought his own commodity more then the wealth of the Empire,
and showed many evident signs and arguments of loathsome and detestable
ingratitude. For, whenas the Empire had been void almost Twenty years, and
diverse Compeitors affected the same, as Henry of Thyringia, and William Earl
of Holland, Alphons King of Castile, and Richard, Brother unto the King of
England; and all those Corrivals had almost wasted themselves and their friends
in seeking for the place, and in maintaining themselves therein: The Electors
being over-wearied with the length and troubles of this tedio^s Competency,
sent Conrade Archbishop of Coruge unto Othagarius King of B^hemia, to pray him
to accept the Empire; but he thinking himself not sufficient enough to rule his
own Kingdom, re^u^^d their offer; and they in disdam of him, presently made
choice of this Rodulph, who had been the Master of his Palace, and had learned
diverse Feats of Chivalry under him; in regard of which experience, the Electors
as some men write, yielded him their consent: But others report, that after
that, for his ingratitude and evil demeanor, he was put out of Othagarius his
service, he followed the Archbishop of Ments, and attended so diligently upon
him in the Journey which he made unto Rome, that when he returned thence he
made him Emperor, although he was then of a very mean living, as Albertus
Argentinensis, Johannes Vitudaranus, Rotridano Molespini, Giovani Villani, and
Aeneas Sylvius (who was afterward Pope Pius the Second) with many others do
testify. And it is written that the same Arch bishop, bragging many times with
his friends in secret conference, what a great deed he had done to make so mean
a man Emperor, would say unto them merrily, that he carried an Emperor behind
him in his riding Hood when he traveled by the way.

You have heard how he came to the Empire; now let me tell you how he demeaned
himself therein. The first thing he did wisely; considering his own weakness,
he insinuated himself into the favor of the German Princes; and whether it
were to please them, who were somewhat offended with Othagar King of Bohemia,
because they thought he disdained to be Emperor, or to show himself grateful
where he had received great favor and courtesy, he presently summoned his
Master Othagar to come to do him homage for his Kingdom. Othagar contemning
both the Message and the Messenger, and taking him for a proud servant, who
b^ing unworthily advanced, would begin to show his pride against his Master,
refused to appear at his summons; Rodulph presently in regard of this contempt,
invaded the Dukedom of Austria, and forfeited the same unto the Empire. Othagar
being highly offended with the confiscation, denounces Wars against the
Emperor. By the intercession of friends they met at a place appointed; And
there Rodol^ph, dissembling cunningly his pride and insolency, goes first to
salute Othagar, calls him his Lord and Master, thanking him for vouchsafing
to end their contention by a friendly composition, rather then by bloody Wars;
makes a marriage between his Daughter and Venceslaus the Son and Heir of
Othagar; and then with a fair show of assured and faithful friendship, prays
him to vouchsafe, if not openly, because perhaps he would be ashamed to do it,
yet secretly and within his Royal Tent, to do him Homage for his Kingdom and
Principalities. The King won with fair words, yields to his demands, offers
up unto him five several Banners, whereof the Emperor restores unto him on^^y
two, and detaineth the other three, one for Austria, another for Corinthia, and
the third for Syria; and pacifieth the King who was greatly offended therewith,
by promising faithfully to restore them unto his Son Venceslaus, as soon as the
Marriage betwixt him and his Daughter shall be solemnized.

To this deceit and cunning he adds a worse despite and contumely; For
having entreated to do him Homage secretly, and within a Tent, he caused a
deceitful Tent to be made, the which should fall open as soon as the cords
thereof were unloosed. In this Tent Othagar falls down on his knees, and
suddenly whilst he is doing Homage, the Tent falls open; the Germans laugh at
his humility; the Bohemians are grieved with his submission; and he himself is
highly displeased with the Emperors deceit: And his grief is increased because
his Wife scorned and mocked him at his return. To be short, he prepares all
the Forces that he could possibly make, and renews War against the Emperor:
The Emperor that whilst he had been his servant remembered that Othagar had
given great occasion of coffeehouse unto the great Captain of Moizona,
called Milota, him he puts in mind of an old injury; and so prevailed, what
with bribes, and what with persuasions, that in the very conflict, he forsakes
his Master, and leaves him to be murdered of two Brethren, whose third
Brother Othogar had caused to be executed, for some offense worthy of death.

The king being thus slain, he rewards both the Traitor and the murderers,
and following his victory, burns a number of Monasteries and Religious houses
that Othogar had builded: A rare and strange Pesident; For it is abominable in
a servant to betray his Master; more abominable to cause him to be murdered;
and of all abominable things the most abominable to reward the Traitors, and
recompense the murderers: But to burn Religious houses in despite of the
Founder, and to spoil Gods Temple in hatred of a man, is an act the like
whereof has never been found but in such as neither care for God nor regard
his service.

Neither did Rodolphs wickedness end in these heinous Actions, but he
wrongfully warred upon Bemera, unjustly invaded Bohemia, unlawfully seized upon
Austria, and most cruelly burnt above threescore very fair and beaut full
Castles in Turingia.

Rodolph having reigned as Emperor nineteen years, and in all this time never
vouchsafed to set one foot toward Italy, to be crowned there of the Pope
(which negligence in those days was held for a most heinous offense) departed
the World, and leaves his son Albert Duke of Austria, who in disdain of the
French king, within 6 years after is made Emperor, and imitateth his Father in
his bloody cruelty: For he begins his Empire with killing Adolph his
Predecessor, continues the same with the wrongful molestation and usurpation
of Mayeme, dishonors his Reign with a violent and forcible seizure into his
hands, and to his sons use, of the kingdom of Bohemia, and ends the same, not
by a natural, but by a violent and unnatural death: For it pleased God, that
his own Nephew, and other Earls of the House of Austria should by taking him,
revenge the wicked and detestable murder which he committed on the sacred
person of Adolph the Emperor.

Frederick Duke of Austria was the third Emperor of this House; if he may be
called an Emperor, who being unlawfully chosen, wrongfully usurped the Empire.
For the Bishop of Trevers and Ments, and the Marquess of Brandenburgh, together
with John king of Bohemia, chose Lewis of Bamera Emperor, and Frederick had the
voices and suffrages of the Bishop of Colen, of the County Palatine, and of the
Duke of Saxony; whose Elect on was of no force, because when the six principal
Electors cannot agree, but three of them are for one, and three of them are for
another, the king of Bohemia as Umpier, determines the matter, and he casts
his voice upon the said Lewis, and made him lawful Emperor. But Frederick
according to the ambitious and violent nature of his proud Family, pursued his
pretensive right by bloody wars, and drew the Pope, the kings of France, and of
Hungary, the County Palatine, Stratsbourgh, and other Imperial Cities, to stand
stout and obstinate in the defense of his quarrel, wherein many thousands were
slain, and many more had been murdered, had not the Almighty (who always
favors just causes) vouchsafed to give the Emperor Lewis grace to take him
prisoner in the Field; After which disgrace, he and his Family had been for
ever been undone, had not the good Emperor been so gracious unto him, as after
three years imprisonment to set him at Liberty, and to restore unto him the
Dukedom of Austria, the which he might have returned with more reason unto the
Empire, then Rodolph had to distract it from the Empire.

The fourth Emperor of this Family was Albert the second, who married the
daughter and heir of the Emperor Sigismond, and had with her in Dower, the
kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary: This Emperor ruled scant Two years, and
therefore did not any good or bad exploit worthy of memory.

The fifth Emperor of this Family was Frederick the third, whose Government was
such, that his own Subjects with the help of his own Brother Albert, besieged
him a long time in the Castle of Vienna; where they had taken him prisoner, had
not George king of Bohemia delivered him by deceit and cunning, rather then by
strength and fortitude; For although he came to Vienna with an Army of eight
thousand good Soldiers, yet was not this Force able to succor him, but he was
fain to play the Umpier betwixt him and his Citizens, and so under a color of
conference called him, his wife and his son forth of the Town, and when he had
cunningly set them at Liberty, he conveyed them secretly unto a place of
security.

This Emperor to prosecute a Bishop which was deposed by the Pope, raised such
troubles in Germany, that the Princes thereof were not able to succor the
Emperor Constantine of Constantinolpe, whom the great Turk Mahomet drove from
his Imperial City, caused him to be slain before the gates thereof, set his
head upon a Lance, and commanded it to be carried about the City; his wife,
daughters, and many other Ladies and Gentlewomen, were invited to a banquet,
after which they were all deflowred, and then cut into small pieces, as flesh
to the pot. And lastly, in despite of Christ and all Christians, he caused the
Picture of our Savior to be set up in the Town, with this Inscription, Behold
the Savior of the Christians that could not save them! Immediately after
Frederick succeeded Maximilian, and after him Charles the fifth, his
grandchild; of which two I have already said enough, and might say much more
to make them more hateful, but I should be too long and over-tedious; And yet
I may not forget three notable Arguments of of Charles the fi^hs dissembling,
and of his turbulent nature and conditions.

The First shows that he pretended to be a zealous Catholic, and was indeed
no better then a dissembling Hypocrite.

The second proves, that although he showed an outward desire of peace, yet he
cared not what occasions he took to make war.

The third declares, that albeit he would seem to love Germany, as the Nation
from whence all his greatness proceeded, yet he sought the advancement of Spain
more then of Germany, or of his own Family or House of Austria.

The first point is proved, because that having obtained of Leo the tenth great
sums of money, and ten thousand well appointed Soldiers, in regard of his
faithful promise to subvert and utterly overthrow the Lutherans of Germany, as
soon as he had with those men and that money fully revenged himself upon
certain Princes of Germany, with whom he was highly offended, and whom he had
never subdued, had he not had the Popes help, he gave over his wars, and
granted both unto them and all others liberty of conscience; wherewith not only
the Pope had just occasion to be displeased, but his own Confessor took it so
grievously, that the next time he came to Confession, he denied him Absolution.

This zealous Christian, when he had troubled Italy, with long and tedious
wars, not meaning (as it seemed) to end the same wars without doing some
notable action, worthy of eternal memory, took the Pope prisoner at Rome, and
kept him a long time in the Castle of St. Angelo. And although he would not
suffer him to be set at Liberty before he had paid a great Ransom, yet he
dissembled and handled the matter so cunningly, that he caused public Praises
and Supplications to be made unto God generally throughout all Spain for the
delivery of this Holy Father, and protested openly unto the World, that his
unruly Soldiers, full sore against his will and pleasure, being in great
distress of money and other necessary provision, had sacked Rome, and
imprisoned the Popes Holiness.

The second point shall need no other proof but his great malice, and continual
spite, notwithstanding that the Princes of France were in some manner the
only and special cause of his greatness: For had not Lewis the eleventh with
great cunning and policy weakened the last Duke of Burgondy; had he not most
wisely and providently nourished the wars betwixt him and the Switzers; had he
not covetously and carelessly set him at variance with the Duke of Lorrain; and
lastly, had he not secretly and privily won Nicholas Campobasso to leave the
said Duke in the midst of the battle, which he fought with the Prince of Lorain
(a practice not to be forgotten against the Spaniard) valiant Charles of
Burgundy had never been slain in the Field, nor the troublesome Maximilian
should ever have inherited his Dukedom by matching with his daughter. How
sought he continually to perturb and disquiet the peace thereof? Which side
left he unassaulted? Which way to enter into France untried? And what cause had
he to disquiet France, especially after that he had taken the king thereof
prisoner, and made him yield unto all unreasonable demands? It is written that
many times entering into a serious cogitation of the great slaughters that had
been committed in France by him and his Soldiers, of the great wrong that he
had done to the good and virtuous Kings thereof; and of the simple and weak
causes that moved him thereunto, he was often and greatly troubled in his
Conscience, and sometimes sought peace of himself; and yet the wicked spirit
overcoming the good inclination that sometimes guided him, he returned
presently and without any just occasion unto wars.

The last point is proved by a Diet and a general Assembly of the States of
Germany, which he held at Auspurge, under a color to reform and order diverse
abuses in Religion; unto which Diet many great Princes of Germany would not
vouchsafe to come, because they knew certainly, that the reformation of
Religion was but the pretense and color of keeping that Diet; but the very end
and p^rpose thereof was to reverse the order of the Election of the Emperors,
and to tranfer the Empire from Germany unto Spain: The which his intention was
afterward so apparent, that although in regard of his brotherly love, and
during the minority of his son, he had caused Ferdinando his brother to be
elected King of the Romans, yet he used all the cunning he could possibly, to
persuade him to relinquish and resign that Title unto his Son Philip, now and
then King of Spain; and also he sent for Maximilian his Son in Law, and Nephew,
King of Bohemia, to pray him to be content to condescend and yield unto his
Fathers resignation; and the Queen of H^ngary, and Gravilla the Emperors
Chancellor made many Voyages into Hungary, to entreat Ferdinando to yield unto
this motion, unto which neither the King of Hungary nor Maximilian his Son
would vouchsafe their consents.

These three points being thus cleared, it rests to speak somewhat of Charles
the Fifths Successors, as Ferdinando, Maximilion and Rodolph; but their actions
are fresh in memory. And if the Law of the Emperors Creation (called the Golden
Bull) which expressly forbids to choose above four in one house, to succeed
one after another in the Empire, were (as it should be) in full force and
strength, none of them should be accounted or held lawful Emperors. Now if the
breach of this sacred and inviolable decree (I mean the golden Bull) which has
been infringed by making not four, but seven or eight at the least of the House
of Austria Emperors together, shall nothing at all incense and instigate the
Princes of Christendom against this ambitious and aspiring generation;

It shall be needful to revive the loathsome memory of many great and grievous
indignities and ingratitudes unkindly and unjustly shown by the late Emperors
of the house of Austria, unto diverse great and mighty Princes of Germany, and
unto the Empire it self. It must therefore be showed unto them, that Rodolph
the first Emperor of this Race, to assure unto himself and his Heirs the
Dukedom of Austria, and the States of Stiria and Suevia (which were united unto
the Empire for fault of Heirs Males) resigned the Exerchat of Italy unto the
Pope, and freed as many Cities of Italy from the homage and obedience which
they owed unto the Emperors, as would buy their freedom and liberty of him for
ready money. Albeit his Son when he was Emperor, fought many Battles and got
many Towns with the Forces and Expenses of the Empire, but reserved all the
profit arising by those Battles to his proper use; and to have better and more
easy entrance into Bilencia, he usurped the State of the Marquess of Menia.
And Albert the Second enriched himself greatly, although he ruled not long by
troubles and divisions. Is it not the House of Austria that has wrongfully
deprived many Princes, and diverse Electors of the Empire of their States and
Dignities? Is it not this house that has unjustly compelled the greatest
Princes of Germany to fly for succor, and to seek the protection of the
French King? Is it not this House that has unlawfully confiscated the States
and Digninities of John Fredrick, Duke of Sexony? Is it not this House that
has most cruelly razed the Walls and destroyed the Forts of the most noble and
virtuous Prince the Lantsgrave of Hess? Is it not this House that has
violently sacked, destroyed and utterly overthrown the great and goodly Dukedom
of Wittenberge? Is it not this House, that contrary to all humanity has
confiscated the greatest part of the Duke of Cleur his goods, and made him too
deer for a Wise that brought him Dowry? Is it not this House that, to make the
Princes of Germany their Servants and Slaves, have contrary to the Laws of the
Empire, erected a new Council in the City of Spires? Briefly, Is it not this
House that uses them most unkindly of whom they have received most Courtesy?
Have they ever had greater aid, greater helps of any Princes of the Empire then
of the Duke of Saxony? Who sought for Frederick Duke of Austria, against Lewis
Duke of Bavaria more willingly and valiantly then Rodolph Duke of Saxony?
Ernest Duke of Saxony was the only cause and means that Maximilian was chos^n
Emperor. And John Duke of Saxony went unto the Assault of Aba in Hungary, and
never departed thence until he made Maximilian Lord and Master of the whole
Count^y. Frederick of Saxony refused the Empire when it was offered unto him,
and procured it to be given unto Charles the Fifth; And yet the same Charles
omitted no Art, no cuning, no way, nor means, that he could possibly devise to
^subvert and ^vinate the House of Saxony. He set up Maurice and Agust his
Brother against John Frederick; And Maximiliam stirred up the Sons of John
Frederick one against another. Rodolph Count Palatine bore arms in the behalf
of Frederick of Austria against his own brother Lewis Duke of Bamera, and
Frederick Count Palatine, who was Recompensed for this pleasure by Frederick
the Third, who procured all the States and Princes of the Empire to be his
mortal Enemies. Briefly, who favored and furthered the Election of the last
Maximilian so much as Frederick Count Palatine? And yet not long after he gave
so hard a sentence against him at Auspurghe, that all the Princes of the Empire
reversed the same in his Presence. Now to speak of the Spanish Kings abuses
toward the Princes of Germany and others, were infinite labor, and either
that which I have already said is sufficient to cause him to be generally
hated, or the late Apologies of the Prince of Aurange, of the State of the Low
Countries, of the now King of France, of Don Antonio and of others, will supply
whatsoever I, either for modesty or for br^vitiesake forbear to discover.

Then to conclude this point, If France might be moved to set on Foot for the
Kingdom of Navarre, the Dukedom of Burgondy, and all or part of the
Lowcountries: If the Pope might be intrea^ed to bestow the Kingdom of Naples
and Sicily upon some: Prince of worth and estimation; If the Venetians and other
Princes of Italy would be content to divide and share the Dukedom of Milan
betwixt them; If the States and Princes of the Empire would be pleased to
reconcile the Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary, with the Dukedom of Austria,
unto the Empire* If the Duke of Parma or Don Antonio might be seated in
Portugal: And lastly England, Holland, and other States and P^in^es, that are
mighty upon the Seas, would either stop the Spaniards passage into the Indies,
or intercept his Treasure when it comes from thence, the proud and insolent
House of Austria should quickly be reduced unto their old and pristine Estate;
and the Princes of Christendom, when they should have no Adversary to fear,
but the common Enemy of Christians, should undoubtedly live in great security,
peace and Amity: For, then are Kingdoms most safe, when their Neighbors
Forces and their own strength are not greatly unequal; And then should our
English Island be the strongest and happiest Kingdom in Christendom.

But in taking this course it behooveth to be somewhat Circumspect, least that
the overthrow and downfall of one terrible and mighty Adversary raise up
another, who may be in all respects as dangerous and as well to be feared as
he. For, because France lies nearer unto us then Spain (and Vis unita is
always held to be Fortior) if France should recover Burgondy and the Low
Countries, should we not have great and just occasion to fear France? For
neither may our happy victories against France encourage us not to esteem
France, since it is no point of wisdom, not to fear the least Enemy that may
be; nor the late benefits pleasures, and Offices of kindness showed by us unto
the late Kings thereof, can assure as that France will never endammage us.

I have already showed the causes of our fortunate success against France; and
if those causes should once begin to fail us, the good fortune which proceeded
of them, would soon leave to follow us; and as well Princes as private men
receive favors and courtesies readily, look upon their Benefactors
unwillingly, remember good turns slowly, and requite received benefits faintly.
Then because the fresh memory of new courtesies cannot extinguish the grievous
and unpleasant remembrance of ancient quarr^ls, we must (as we have said) still
have a very careful and watchful eye over France, and entreat France to be
content to join with us in placing and preferring some such Prince unto the
quiet and assured p^ssession of the Low Countries, as may be well able with the
help of us and France to retain the same, and yet unable to hurt us or France.
Neither must the cross dealings of the late Duke of Alencon discourage us to
attempt any such matter; for we saw that they whom he had handled somewhat
unkindly, might easily have been persuaded to have received him again for their
Duke. And there may a Prince be found that shall be less suspected, and more
acceptable unto the Flemings then any Frenchman can be.

The Duke Ernestus who was lately sent to be their Governor, in my simple
opinion se^meth to be a fit man for that purpose. For whereas the Spanish King
of late would have bestowed the Infanta his Daughter upon him, it may easily be
thought now that that hope fails him, because he knows now where to find a
fitter Husband for her then to match her with him, and to give him the Low
Countries for her Dowry. But common same reports, that there is an intent and
purpose to marry her unto the French King, as well because he is now become a
Catholic, as for that France and Spain have often matched together; and the
Pope may easily be entreated to dispe^se with the French King to take her for
his Wife. Truly it were hard to permit him to marry so near a Kinswoman as is
his now living wives own Niece. But grant that the Popes dispe^sation may salve
this sore, that the French King may forget the wrongs and indignities offered
unto him by Spain; that this were a good and ready way to reconcile these
Princes that have lived too long together in contention and variance, and that
of this reconciliation there is likely to follow a great and general benefit
unto all Christendom: Yet I can hardly think that the Spanish King would ever
yield his consent unto such a Match; And though he would ever yield his consent
thereunto, yet it behooves all the Princes of Christendom to hinder such a
marriage. For if his Son should die (whose life is in Gods hands) should not
all the Kingdoms and Dominions of the Spaniard, because there is no Law Salick
in Spain, descend unto his Daughter? And would not the desired addition of all
those unto the Kingdom of France, make the warlike and mighty Prince thereof,
not only to think upon, but also to attempt the Conquest of all Europe? Should
he not grow too mighty? Should he not be able to Tyrannize over all the world,
more then the Spaniard does now? And then does it not greatly import all
Christian Princes to withstand this Marriage? Besides, grant that his son does
live to have many children, were it not a very unwis^ and indiscrect part of
the Spanish King to give h^s Daughter in marriage unto such a one, as what for
his old grudge unto Spain, what in regard of the Title and Interest that this
wife may give him unto the Crown of Spain, will undoubtedly be content to take
her for wife, were it for no other occasion but to have so good, just, and
colorable a cause as her right would give him, to challenge, invade and
conquer Spain? For the Prince of Orange, by noting the Spanish Kings son of
Bastardy in his Apology, and by animating the French King to defend his Niece,
right, whenever God should call her Father to his mercy, has set open such a
gap as will give a very easy entrance into the Kingdom of Spain unto the
Spanish Daughters ambitious nature, or unto his valiant mind (if there be any
valor in him) who shall have her to wife.

The surest and safest way then for the Spaniard, is either to match her lowly,
as Austiages did his Daughter, with some mean Prince, who shall not be able to
hurt or prejudice his Son; or else to bestow her upon the said Duke Ernestus,
who although he be her near kinsman, and a Prince of no great living; yet
because it is a matter very usual in the House of Austria to match in their own
blood, and for that the Spaniard has Kingdoms and Dominions enough to bestow
upon her in marriage, neither the propinquity in blood, nor the want of living
can be an obstacle unto the match; But it may be said, what shall it avail if
she be married to the Duke Ernestus, and Flanders be her Dowry? Shall it not be
all one? Will he not be at the devotion of his Father inlaw? And will it not be
a means to make the Emperor more fast and assured unto Spain, and to carry the
less love and affection unto us and our Friends? But I suppose the Empire shall
be transferred unto some other Prince: and although it shall remain still in
the House of Austria, yet I know he that shall be, or is Emperor, can have no
great means to annoy us. Besides, we may find many ways to set a variance and
separa^ion betwixt the Father and the Son, and (when God shall have wrought his
will and pleasure upon the Father) betwixt the Brother and the Sister. Were
there ever more hot and bloody wars betwixt us and France, then when the French
Kings Sister was married unto our King? Or when our Kings Daughters have
matched with France? Did not these marriages breed and bring forth the chiefest
causes of our most deadly contentions? And did not our and their profit and
gain make us forget blood, affinity and Alliance? But if it shall seem
dangerous to hazard our safety upon so weak an hope, it shall not be amiss to
use all policy to procure such a match* and to cause her Dowry to be either the
Kingdom of Naples or of Portugal. For so shall his Sons power be weakened; his
Daughter further off from us, and from France, and her ambition better
satisfied with a kingdom then with a Title of Duchess; too base a name for so
proud a woman, and such an one as has lived a long time in equal credit with
a Queen. And we find that the desire of that Char^es his wife (who of a Duke
of Anio^ was made and crowned King of Naples) to be a Queen was the chief and
special cause her Husband entered into that quarrel; for his wife (who was
descended of a King; and still lived among Queens) would never suffer him to be
at quiet until he had made her Queen. There is no doubt but that the Princes of
Italy could be very well content, that the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily were in
some such poor Princes possession, rather under the subjection of the sole heir
of Spain, because he being a young Prince, and King of so many Dominions, will
not perhaps be keep within his bounds as his old Father is; and they would
easily find means to hold such a Prince long enough, and to keep him from all
kind of ability to hurt and damnifie them. For experience has taught them,
that when Naples and Sicily were governed by a proper King, and he always
Resident amongst them, they lived not then in such danger, or in such fear as
they have been since the French or the Spaniards were Masters of those
Kingdoms. Duke Ernestus being placed thus far from us, the question would be,
what Government would best content us in Flanders; whether it were best to have
a Prince there; and if a Prince, what he should be; or else such a Government
as is now amongst the United Provinces; and if such a Government, whether it
were best to unite the rest of Flanders unto them that are already united. The
questions are full of difficulty; and a man of far greater experience and
wisdom then my self can hardly resolve them: And yet because this is my last
task, I will* as I have done in the rest, adventure to commit my follies to
your secrecy.

The pleasant and sweet Government under the States of the United Provinces,
The consideration of their Subjects quiet and wel^are, The regard of their
wealth, The credit whereunto they are grown, The account that their Neighbors
make of them, The free Traffic which they have with Foreign nations, The
recourse of Strangers unto them, The beauty and increase of their Cities,
lately enlarged and beautified, and their strength being (as I have once said
already) almost comparable unto the power of mighty Princes, might easily
induce them to consent to make one Commonwealth of all the seventeen
Provinces. But if they should all join in one Form of Government, it were
greatly to be doubted that they would grow so mighty in time, that their might
would make them ambitious, and their ambition desirous to encroach upon their
Neighbors; who with the same and good of their great ease and prosperity,
would happily be content to shake off their Kings, and live under their wings
and protection. Was it not the common report of the Romans good Government that
made Foreign Nations desirous to be subject unto them? Was it not the
incorporating of those Nations into their own Cities, and their permitting of
them to enjoy the like Privileges and Liberties as the Romans enjoyed, that
drew other people to follow the example of those Nations? Was it not then seen,
and may it not be seen again, th^^ the less Cities iimitated the greater, and
whether the first inclined, thither the last repaired? Is it not generally
said, that two eyes see more then one? And do not many Counselors consult and
resolve upon any thing better then a few? and is it not true that it is not the
Clymate or the Region that only makes men wise? The Spaniard is wiser then
the Frenchman, the Florentines of a quicker wit and judgment then the
Venetian; and yet when the lightheaded Frenchman begins once to be staid,
he is nothing inferior to the wise Spaniard; and the Venetians when they
consult upon matters of weight, resolve them not so soon, but better then the
Flo^entines. The reason whereof is given by Bodin; because the first trusting
too much to the dexterity of their wits, dwell obstinate in their first
conceived opinions and sometimes will not yield unto the soundest judgments,
because they proceed from them who are either their enemies, or in their
opinions not worthy to be reputed wiser then they; whereas the later,
distrusting every man his own judgment, and examining soundly and with great
deliberation all the reasons that may be alleged pro and con in any matter
whatsoever, after long con^erence and consultation, conclude upon the best and
wisest resolution. Is it not this proved in the States of the United Provinces;
especially in the Hollanders, who until of late years were commonly called by
the Flemings The Blockish and hard-headed Hollanders, and now they are grown
equal to the wisest Flemings, Italians, French, or Spaniards? Court they not
Princes that were wont only to live by the transporting of commodities of
their Island into England and other places? Have they not their Agents in
Princes Courts, who in many years would not presume to look upon a Court, and
knew not how to behave themselves when they came thither? Have they not learned
the means and ways to insinuate themselves into Princes favors, and continue
themselves therein, who not long ago cared for no Princes favor, but ^or one
Kings good will and countenance? Sent they not their Ambassadors unto the
Christening of the Scottish Prince? Gave they not their Present as well as
others, and within it a yearly Pension unto the young Prince, to be paid unto
him yearly out of the rents of one of their Towns? Have they not discovered a
shorter way to the Indies? and will they not take and make a benefit by the
discovery? Do they not daily increase their Revenews? Do not their Subjects
that were wont to guide a Boat, and govern an Oar, now manage a Lance, and
handle a weapon as well as other Nations? Do not the better sort amongst them,
who heretofore never meddled with matters of State, match the wisest Politicians
in Counsel, and the best Statesmen of the world in their writings? And to be
brief, is it not likely, that if they proceed as they have begun, they will in
time grow too strong, and exceed the Seigniory of Venice, the which if it be
not assisted by other Princes of Christendom, stands in great danger to
become a prey unto the Turk? I have once already said it, and cannot say it too
often; God grant that all the Princes of Christendom, yea the Child that is
unborn, have not just occasion one day to curse the King of Spain for enforcing
the States to know and use their strength.

Let us remember the weakness of the Switzers, and call to mind upon what
occasion they began to encanton themselves; how base men they were that were
the first Authors thereof; how Stansfather Gualter first, and Arnold Melthdiall
detesting the unsupportable Tyranny of the Governor Greisleir, drew first
diverse Gentlemen, and then the inhabitants of a few Towns to conspire the death
of their Governor, and the banishment of all the Officers set over them by the
house of Austria; how they beat down to the ground all their Castles; how they
persuaded the Towns of Sinty, Ury, and Underwald to free and emancipate
themselves from the Thraldom and Bondage wherein they lived under the house of
Austria; How after this association others entered into League with them, and
briefly, how after their general confederacy, they lived many years contented
with their own, and scant knew what wealth meant: Was it not wondrous that
after the notable victory which they had at Grason against Charles Duke of
Burgondy, they knew not the worth or value of the goods that came to their
hands? Will any man believe that they should tear into a Thousand pieces the
fairest pavilion that ever was seen in the world? May it be credited that they
sold great dishes and platters of clean Silver, thinking that they had been of
Tin, for six pence a piece? Will it not seem incredible that the fairest
Diamond that was in those days in the world, and had a very great and rich
pearl hanging thereat, was sold unto a Priest for a Florin, and that he sent it
unto their chief Governor, who gave him but three Franks, which is a French
Crown, for the same? And to what reputation are these people now grown? Are
they not held the best Pikemen of the world? Do not the greatest Princes of
Europe seek their Amity and alliance? Strive they not who shall first entertain
them, and continue longest in league with them? Have they not more liberty in
Italy then any nation whatsoever? Are not the Grisons their Confederates, free
from the Inquisition, a freedom not granted unto any Nation but unto them? Was
there not a time when a King of France, for calling them base people, was
forsaken by them, and made a prey unto his Enemies? Did they not in revenge of
that disdainful word, make a Road into his Country? and had they not come unto
the walls of Paris, if they had not been entreated and hired for great Rewards
to return into their Country? Who can desire a more notable and worthy example
of valor and fortitude, then they showed in Navar in Italy, where they being
in a strong City, and not needing to make any sally out, they came forth upon
the French that lay before the Town, went proudly and without fear, upon the
fearful and terrible mouths of their greatest Artillery, took the same and
bended it upon their Enemies, whom with the only help thereof, they put to a
most shameful flight, and to the edges of their unmercifull swords? When we
remember these men, and enter into cogitation of the premises, we must justly
fear that the Hollanders and their Adherents may one day have the like minds
and the like fortune; And if they should chance to grow to the like greatness,
be it of mind or of fortune, let us consider what advantage they shall have of
Princes; Even the same advantage which Titus Livius mentions in the
comparison which he makes betwixt Alexander the Great and the Romans. For they
have many Alexanders, whereas a Kingdom should have but one; and with this ones
death his whole State should be endangered; whereas the loss of some of their
Alexanders shall not endanger their State; and Kingdoms Enterprises shall
perish with their King, and their Attempts shall be performed by their
surviving Alexanders; Briefly, the Kings posterity shall not resemble him, and
their Successors shall rather excel then not imitate them.

Thus to have all the Low Countries governed by a few States, or by one Prince,
wholly depending upon the King of Spain, were in one and the same measure
dangerous; and therefore it were convenient for us in wisdom and policy, to
erect and establish such a Prince as should neither a^together depend upon
France, nor be wholly devoted unto Spain; or else to divide the seventeen
Provinces into diverse several Cantons, and to nourish continually a diversity
of opinions and Religions amongst them; whereby some of them being led to
affect us, and others to favor Princes of their Religion, they shall be
neither helped nor hurt by them more then we, nor we more then they.

Besides, Experience yields us this comfort, that as long as we shall
entertain a free and loving (...) intercourse of Trade and Traffic with them,
whereby their people may be enriched, their Cities frequented, and their
several Artificers maintained and nourished, so long may we be assured of their
fast Friendship and Amity. For if, when as that notable contention and
competency for the Crown of France was between Edward the third, and Philip de
Val^ys, although Lewis the Earl of Flanders favored the French King, because
he was his Vassal, yet the Common people affected and furthered our Kings claim
and quarrel, and would not be drawn from us by any manner of whatsoever
persuasion; why may we not hope to fined the like affection in them even
against their Sovereign, if we should have the like occasion to use their
furtherance? For as then many of their Towns standing wholly upon the Trade of
wool, with which their Diers, Fullers, and other such Artificers were
maintained, they would not leave us to lean to their Prince, because if our
King should not have sent thither our woolls, they knew not how to live, and
for that France was not able to hurt them so much as England could do both by
Sea and by Land; so now if they should want such Commodities any long time, as
we send over unto them; although they be now far stronger by Sea then they were
then; yet either the regard of profit, or the fear of discommodity and hurt
that might arise unto them by the discord betwixt us and them, would cause them
to stand fast and ass^^ed unto us, rather then unto our Enemies; especially if
we shall entertain some such faithful friends unto us amongst the common
people, as were the before mentioned Artevild, Boscanus, Agricola, and others.

Thus Spain being weakened, and the Low Countries, either all, or the most part
thereof well-affected unto us, we shall stand in less danger and fear of
France, whose troubles and divisions, although they begin now somewhat to
cease; yet I fear me, that when they are once utterly extinguished, they will
be quickly revived again: For as fire being but covered over with ashes, and
not thoroughly put out, is soon kindled again; so reconciled friends, the causes
of their former contentions not being wholly removed, upon very light occasions
fall again to strife and variance. The experience thereof was seen in the Reign
of Henry the third of England, and in the time of Lewis Menervensis Earl of
Flanders, whose Nobility and Subjects were often reconciled unto them, and yet
returned to their former disobedience and coffeehouse.

And France in my simple opinion, although the King that now raignneth, and his
discontented Subjects were never so well reconciled, would quickly return again
into Civil Dissentions. For the King being most honest, frank, open-hearted,
free-minded, sometimes somewhat hasty, so earnest of that which is laid before
him, that he has less regard of that which is passed, and also unto that which
he must follow; and lastly, so much presuming upon his good hap and fortune,
that he can neither conceive, nor cares to prevent far fetched practices;
these his conditions will easily renew some occasions of coffeehouse, even
perhaps in his best and his most loving Subjects; Every man that has deserved
little, will demand much, when his Kingdom is frank and free; And will it not
be impossible to content all that shall and will beg of him? An open-hearted
man cannot dissemble his grief, nor conceal an injury; and is it not likely
that he shall have many griefs, many injuries offered him? An hasty man never
wants woe; and doubtless he shall have many occasions to show himself hasty:
And then if he shall either neglect that which he ought to follow, or not be
careful to prevent such practices as may be devised against him, he that has
but one Eye may see that he cannot long continue in Peace and Amity with such
Subjects as shall be still encouraged by other Foreign Potentates to rebel
against him; And that which has been said already makes it most manifest,
that his Subjects shall not want this encouragement.

Thus have I satisfied your Request in every point that it pleased you to give
me in Charge. In some things I have been somewhat briefer then I would, and in
other perhaps longer then I should. The length may be excused, because all
things being done for your pleasure, I hope you will give me leave to please my
self in some things wherein I was carried away with the great delight that I
took in handling the same; And the brevity is excusable, because when I saw
that my Treatise was grown to be somewhat long, I thought it convenient to
hasten to an end.

Excuse both, and tender my credit; and accuse me of unkindness if I be not
ready to yield you better contentment in the like Task hereafter, when years
shall have increased my sl^nder Experience, and Experience shall have perfected
my simple Knowledge.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
A Libel whose substance cannot be changed after it is once given into a Civil
or Ecclesiastical Court, may in some sort be declared or amended before a
replication be made thereunto.

A witness which after Publication is once granted cannot justly be received,
may be lawfully examined upon new Articles depending upon the former; and a
Judge after the Deposition of Witnesses are communicated to both parties, may
by virtue of his office, and to inform his own Conscience, re-examine a witness.

If Additions and Declarations may be allowed in matters of Judgment, and
Judicial Courts, and especially in the examinations of witnesses, which may
easily be corrupted, I hope it shall not be offensible in me, to make a
Declaration of some things not sufficiently declared and expressed in any
precedent Treatise; especially since this addition serves rather to
illustrate, then any way to enlarge my Discourse; and all or the most part of
that which I have thought good to add in this place, came to my mind or my
knowledge since my task was finished. Farewell, and judge so of my labors, that
you discourage me not to labor for you again, in any thing wherein my pen and
my pain may yield you pleasure and contentment.

A SVPPLEMENT TO THE HISTORY OF THE State of Christendom.
AFter that I had thoroughly (as I thought) finished my task, and had discoursed
upon every point thereof in such manner as you see; of some briefly, and of
diverse more at large: I happened upon a Book called Podaces de Historia; Pidaces.
that is to say, The Fragments of an History: The which was lately Imprinted
and Written (as it is supposed) by Antonio Peers, sometimes Secretary unto the
King of Spain, and now residing in London; not as a rebellious Fugitive (as
many of our Countrymen live in Spain) but as a Gentleman, that thought it
better to forsake his lands and livings, then to live under the tyranny and
injustice of a cruel and ungrateful King.

This Book containing much matter fit to clear and declare some points lightly
handled in my Treatise, in regard whereof, and for that diverse men both speak
and think diversely, as well of the maker, as of the matter thereof, I have
thought it meet and convenient with the substance of this book.

May it therefore please you to understand, that whereas Don John was sent by
the Spanish King to Govern the Low Countries, he had a Secretary appointed him
by the King, called John de Soto, a man that endeavored himself by all means
possible (as wise and worldly servants most commonly do) first to know, and
then to feed his Masters humor, and by feeding thereof, to seek his own profit
and preferment: In which his endeavors he proceeded so far, that the Spaniard
fearing lest that his Brothers ambitious nature receiving both nourishment and
encouragement from his wise and politic Secretary, might in time adventure to
attempt something to the prejudice of his Kingdoms and Dominions, thought it
convenient not to suffer so dangerous a servant to attend any longer upon so
ambitious a master: But because he doubted, that if John de Soto were removed
from Don John de Austria's service, and not preferred to some place better then
the Secretaryship was, it would not only discontent the servant, but also
displease the Master: for the better contentment and satisfaction of both, he
advanced him to an office of greater countenance and commodity; and with advice
of his Council, placed in his room John Escovedo, a man of a milder nature, and
in the Kings opinion, not so fit at that time as the other was, to favor and
further his brothers aspiring and audacious enterprises.

This man advertised the King his master of all Don John de Austria his doings,
and sought rather to please the King, then the young Duke his Master. But at
length he followed the footsteps of his Predecessor, and yielded nothing unto
him in feeding his Masters humors; he found quickly that his Master loathed
the name of Duke, and longed to be a King; that the Pope and Princes of Italy
were as desirous as he to make him King; that the best way to induce the
Spanish King to yield his consent thereunto, was to entreat the Pope to write
unto his Brother in his behalf; and that England was a Kingdom for his purpose,
and worthy the conquering.

A plot is laid how to invade England, and conquer it; and the Pope is
entreated to recommend the enterprise to the Spanish King, and Don John for the
execution before, and the possession after the conquest.

The Pope writes unto the King in the behalf of his Brother; he fearing that
when his brother had obtained England, he would not rest satisfied therewith,
but coveted greater matters, and that he should find many Christian Princes
ready to assist him in his endeavors, thanketh the Pope for his loving and
kindly care of his Brothers advancement; and denies not his suit, for fear he
should offend his Brother; but requires time to consult and deliberate of the
matter; for the enterprise (said he) is honorable, but hard and difficult; and
my Brother a fit man to be employed therein, but his credit must be regarded;
and his aiders and abettors cannot choose but participate of his dishonor, if
the enterprise should not succeed according to his and their desires.

This answer runs for current, until the plot laid for England was
prevented, and broken by the wisdom and policy of the Queen, and Council of
England.

Then Don John and his Secretary, together with the Pope and other Italian
Princes, think upon another Kingdom for him, and altogether practice how to
make him King of Tunis, a place that required a man of his worth, as well to
keep it, as to contain the Turk within his limits.

The Pope therefore writes again unto the Spanish King, praying him to bestow
the Kingdom upon his Brother: He entertaineth both the Pope and his Brother as
he did for England; always forbearing to make Don John greater and might^er
then he was himself.

All these practices with the Pope were done secretly, and Escovedo was the man
that was still employed in them: The King was never made privy unto them,
until that the Popes Nuntio talking by chance with Antonio Peers, revealed all
their secret intelligences with the Pope, and he presently made report thereof
unto the King.

The Spanish Ambassador also advised the said Peers, that Don John de Austria
by means of Escovedo, had great recourse unto the King, with whom his Messenger
had several privy conferences, and never acquainted him with any; and after
they had been with the King, they went unto the Duke of Guise, who concluded a
great league of amity and friendship between Don John and the said Duke, upon
pretense, that the defense of both Kingdoms, France and Spain, was the cause of
this League*

Antonio Peers imparteth the news unto the King, who dissembleth his knowledge
thereof, and entertaineth both his Brother, and his Brothers Secretary, with
all outward shows of kindness and brotherly affection.

Don John wearied with continual crosses, and untoward proceedings in Flanders,
resorted on the sudden into Spain, without giving the King any notice of his
coming: The King gives him outwardly a very kind entertainment, confer
together about his preferment, and dispatcheth him in all haste for Flanders,
pretending the troubles there to be such, as his long absence from thence might
greatly endanger his State. Don John departing, leaves Escovedo behind him, to
solicit and follow his business in his absence.

Here ends Escovedo's prosperity, and begins Antonio Peers his downfall
from that favor and good fortune which followed him before that time: For when
the Duke Don John was gone, the King consulteth with him how to proceed against
Escovedo: Then they call to mind all their former intelligences; they think it
dangerous to send him back again into Flanders, because he would still nourish
him in his ambitious humor: Then they hold it likewise to be a matter of no
small danger to proceed against him by Order of Law, because that was to call
his Brother in question, and so to offend his Brother, thereby to give him an
occasion to fall from him unto his most mortal enemies: Then they resolve that
the best and safest course was, to give Escovedo a Baccado, that is, a morsel
to shorten his days; because that being done secretly, his Brother would happily
think that some of his enemies had secretly poisoned him.

This resolution being thus taken, Antonio Peers is commanded by the King to
put the same in execution; and he performs the charge so cunningly, that no
man but he and the King knew by whom Escovedo was poisoned.

He being dead, his son Pedr^ Escovedo uses all means possible to come to the
knowledge of them that murdered him; and seeking, finds some light occasion
of slender presumption against Antonio Peers, which is nourished by Peers his
enemies.

Escovedo counseled by Peers adversaries, and his Fathers best friends,
presents an humble supplication to the King, wherein he accuses Antonio
Peers of his Fathers death, and beseeches his Majesty to vouchsafe him the
benefit of Law and Justice against the Murderer.

His Petition is received and read by the King, that he shall have Justice with
all favor and expedition: Peers is committed as a prisoner unto his house, and
order is given for his examination: The King wavereth betwixt hope and fear, as
men usually do whose consciences are charged and burdened with guilt; sometimes
he hops well, because no man to his knowledge knowing the matter but he and
Peers, he thinks that the accuser shall never be able to make sufficient
proof of the matter: and sometimes he doubts that Peers may in hope of pardon
from him (by whom he was set on work) confess the murder, and the cause
thereof.

These perplexities thus troubling the King, Peers is likewise perplexed with
the same passions; sometimes he lives in hope, because the King comfort him,
and his accuser proceeds faintly in his accusation; within a while after he
begins to fear, because he is committed to harder durance, commanded to
confess the fact, and conceal the cause; willed to compound with his accuser,
and so eagerly prosecuted, that he flies to Aragon; The people there (being
grieved with the manner of proceeding against him, and with the manifest breach
of their ancient privilege) rise up in Arms, make Ghilmesa their Head, and by
main force deliver him out of prison; he being at liberty, flies into France,
and thence comes into England.

Thus you have briefly heard the fact, now it remains to clear such questions
as may arise from this fact.

The Questions are these, 1. First, Whether the King commanding Escovedo to be
murdered in this manner, may not worthily be accounted and called a Murderer?
2. Next, Whether Antonio Peers obeying this Commandment, has not committed as
great an offense as the King? 3. Then, Whether the King being found a
Murderer, deserves not to be Deposed or Excommunicated for this Murder,
better then the King of France did deserve to be deprived of his Life and
Crown, for murdering the Duke of Guise? 4. Lastly, Whether this
Excommunication and Deposition may be warranted by the example of other
Princes, who having committed the like offenses, have endured and undergone the
like punishment?


To clear the first question, it shall be needful to know whether the King had
just occasion offered him by Escovedo, to cause him to be murdered? For though
Princes have life and death over their subjects, yet he is to be accounted a
Tyrant that causes any of his Subjects to be done to death, without having
deserved to lose his life; and this authority given them by Law, and common
consent of their subjects, tends to no other purpose, nor respects any
other end, then that sin may be punished, and malefactors not permitted to
live, both to the scandal and detriment of well doers.

If therefore Escovedo committed no offense worthy of death, the King had no
power, no warrant, no authority to take away his life; his offense therefore
must be known, the nature, quality, and circumstances thereof well examined,
and duly considered, and according as his crime shall fall out, and prove to be
great or small, pardonable or capital, so shall the Kings actions seem
punishable or excusable.

All that Antonio Peers his Book charge him withal, is, that he had secret
intelligence with the Pope, the King of France, and the Duke of Guise, wherein
he was set on by his master Don John de Austria, who was the King's Lieutenant
General, and by virtue of this office, represented the Kings own person, and
was armed with his authority, if not in all things, yet in as much as concerned
the execution of his charge and commission.

The question then must be, whether the Secretary unto such a Lieutenant
performing that which is commanded by his master, may be taken and condemned
for a Traitor?

Treason has many branches, and is of diverse kinds, and it would be tedious
and troublesome to make a recital of them all: And it shall suffice to declare,
whether any of the actions specified in this accusation, be within the compass
of Treason: He wrote Letters; to whom? To the Pope: Why? He was no enemy, but a
friend to the King of Spain: What was the tenor and contents of this Letter?
Nothing else, but that it might please his Holiness to recommend one Brother
unto another: Why? That was an office of kindness, and not of treason: And for
what purpose desires he to have him recommended? Forsooth for the employment
in the service and enterprise that was to be made against England; Why, that
service liked the King, and proceeded first from him, it tended to his benefit,
it was to be undertaken in revenge of his supposed wrongs, against his enemy;
and all this is no treason: And for whom wrote he? For Don John de Austria, his
Kings Brother, the Pope's Darling, and Turks scourge, the Princes of Italies
Favorite, the Queen of Englands terror, and the whole Worlds wonder. But he
wrote without the King's privity; How shall he know that? Had he not good cause
to think, that all that he did was done with the King's counsel and consent?
Had he not eyes to see, and ears to hear, and discretion to consider, that
whatsoever was done against England, should be both grateful and acceptable
unto the King? I, but he might think that the King would not be content to have
his Brother made a King; Why? He was his Lieutenant already, and so next to a
King; He had done him great service, and was to do him more, and so deserved no
small recompense; he had the Title of a Duke, but no Living fit for a Duke; the
virtues and valor of a King, but no possibility to be a King but by his
Brothers favor and furtherance; briefly, he desired that honor, and Escovedo
perhaps thought the King meant to prefer him to that honor; the rather,
because the King might be led to advance him to a Kingdom in his life time, by
his fathers example, who prefers his Brother Ferdinando to the Empire, before
he died himself; why then, be it that he was either deceived in his cogitation,
or beguiled with the love of his Master, or went further then he had warrant to
go, why, lawful ignorance extenuateth the gravity of; and as to annoy a Princes
enemy, so to pleasure his friend was never punishable, or at any time accounted
treason.

But when the enterprise against England failed, he solicited the Pope for the
Kingdom of Tunis; but how? Not to have it without the Kings good leave and
liking: And when made he that motion? Even then, when the Princes of Italy, and
the wisest Counselors of Europe stood in fear of the common enemy, doubted
that Tunis might be recovered by the Turk, and therefore thought it meet to
have so valorous and victorious a Prince there, as was Don John de Austria; who
having the Kingdom in his own right, would be the more willing and ready to
defend it: and was this desire an offense? Or, could this motion be counted
treason? He might have remembered that Don John de Soto was removed from serving
Don John de Austria, because he furthered him in the like enterprises: But he
saw him preferred to a place of greater honor and commodity; which gave him
just occasion to think, that the King rather liked then disallowed his actions.

Thus you see there is no desert of death in practicing with the Pope. Now it
remains to consider, how this dealing in France with the King, or the Duke of
Guise, may be justly esteemed a crime capital.

It appears that the French King was then in League with the Spaniard, whose
Ambassador was then residing in his Court; and Ambassadors are not permitted to
remain, but where there is a League of Amity betwixt Princes.

The Guisards affection has been declared to have been always greater toward
Spain then toward France: And the enterprise of England might seem unto Don
John de Austria very difficult, yea impossible, without some favor, without
some help from France; if then to favor this enterprise, he had some secret
intelligence with France, is he therefore blameworthy? Or has it ever been
counted a fault in a servant or Lieutenant to seek all lawful and honorable
ways to bring to pass his Masters desire and purpose? Do Princes prescribe unto
their Lieutenants or Ministers all that they can do to compass and effect their
designs? Do they not rather give them a few short Instructions, and leave it to
their discretion and wisdom to foresee and use other means to further their
intentions? Is not this the reason why they make choice of wise and discreet
men for such employments? Is not this the cause that when they send young
Noblemen either to Wars, or Ambassadors, or to foreign Governments, they are
ever accompanied with grave and wise Counselors? Briefly, Is it not this that
moves them to command that their young Lieutenants, Ambassadors, or
Governors, shall do nothing without their Counselors?

I know that it is very dangerous to be employed in Princes affairs; Danger in
conceiving a message, and Danger in delivering the same, and danger in
reporting an answer thereunto: And yet be it that a messenger conceives not a
business rightly; that he delivers not his will and pleasure as he should do;
and that he fails in report of his answer to whom he is sent; yet he
commits not a crime worthy of death, unless his Princes State be greatly
endangered by his fault and folly.

Let all the ancient and new Histories be perused that handle matters of State;
All the large Volumns of Civilians be read that ever writ of points of Treason;
and all the Negotiations that have passed betwixt Prince and Prince be well and
duly considered; and it will appear, that never any Princes servant or minister
has lost life for practicing with his Masters Friends and Allies, unless it
were proved, that through his fault, of Friends they were made enemies: For the
Laws take not any man to be a traitor, by whom his Princes State is not weakened
or endangered; or his Countries adversaries strengthened or assisted, in deed,
or in counsel, by advice, or by action.

Then since it was not proved that Escovedo his practices with the King of
France, or with the House of Guise, tended to the disadvantage of his Prince,
to the loss of his Realms, the diminution of his Friends, but rather to the
advantage of the Kings Brother, the benefit of the Low Countries, and the
continuance of the League and Amity betwixt France and Spain. For Don John de
Austria his League with the Duke of Guise, was concluded for the benefit and
defense of both Kingdoms; I see no reason why Escovedo should lose his life for
contracting with France openly or secretly, with the Kings pleasure, or without
his commission; especially if it were not showed that he had some express
commandment not to deal in any matter of what nature soever with France without
his privity.

For although it be a fault in a servant to be over-busie in his masters
affairs, into which diverse servants fall, many times either because they are
desirous to be always doing something; or for that they think they cannot be too
careful and vigilant in any thing that concerns their masters; yet it is an
offense pardonable: And the fault that proceeds from temerity and rashness,
deserves rather commiseration then cruelty; pardon then punishment: especially
unless it be such a fault that has no certain kind of chastisement appointed
out by the Law.

But Escovedo was once well affected unto the Kings service, and afterward
changed that affection. But how will this be proved? Bartell in his Book de
Guelphis and Gibellinis, sets down four causes, or changes, or signs of a
changed affection, and of a man's mind estranged and departed from that faction
which he once liked and followed.

The first, If he have any sudden occasion of quarrel and contention with a man
that is mightier then himself amongst his own faction.

The second, If any inheritance or great commodity be fallen unto him, which he
cannot enjoy unless he leave his old friends, and lean unto their enemies.

The third, If he be lately joined in affinity with the contrary faction.

And the fourth and last, if moved with any of these causes, he departs from
one side unto another.

Of these four signs, which was found in Escovedo? Had he any quarrel with any
one about his King that was greater then himself? It appears not; and Don
John de Austria testifies unto the King, that he was generally well liked and
loved of all men. Had he any league of kindred or affinity in Rome or France? It
was never urged against him, and he never sought any occasion of any such
alliance. Left he his Masters service to serve the Pope or the French King?
There was nothing further from his heart. Had he any pension of the Pope, any
fee of the French King, any yearly reward of the House of Guise? The
intelligence that was given against him mentions no such matter; and although
he had some benefit by all these, yet it makes him no traitor. For servants
and Kings Counselors may and do usually receive rewards of their Princes
enemies, much more of their friends, which are given to the end they should do
some good offices about their King; and what Counselor can be greatly blamed,
if he take a reward of an enemy to effect that which he knows his master
would have effected? Or who can justly think evil of that Counselor, who when
an enemy seeks a peace that will be both honorable and profitable to his
Prince, receives some notable reward to be a mediator of such a peace? Is it
not good to ease an indiscreet enemy of his money? And have you not heard of
Philip de Commines, that diverse great Officers of England had yearly Fees of
the French King, and yet were held and taken (and that not wrongfully) for good
and faithful Counselors unto their own King and Country?

It is noted for indiscretion, and a great oversight in the Seignory of
Venice, that when they send their Generals into the Field against their
enemies, they give them express charge and commandment, not to fight a Battle
without leave of the Senate; because while they are sending for that leave,
they many times lose very good opportunities to overthrow their adversaries:
For that often times it falls out, that the time, the place, and other
circumstances, give him opportunity to do better service then he should be able
to do, if he were precisely fastened unto his Instructions. And undoubtedly the
late Duke of Parma might have benefitted the Spaniard much more then he did in
the Low Countries, had he not been constrained to let slip many good occasions
whilst he attended for advice and resolution out of Spain. And it is certain
that Don John de Austria after his Victory at Lepant^, might have done great
service unto all Christendom, had he not refused, when he was requested by the
Venetians to follow the victory, because he had no warrant out of Spain to go
further then he did. And the Duke of Medina might (as common fame reports) in
the late Spanish enterprise against England, have annoyed our Realm much more
then he did, had he not stood so nicely to his Commission.

If therefore Flanders, which in those days was very tumultuous, and subject to
diverse accidents; if France, which favored not England at that time, so much
as it does at this present; if the Pope who wanted not a number of fugitives to
incense him against England; if the House of Guise which had their secret
friends, and their privy practices in England; if England it self, which was
the mark whereat the Pope, the Spaniard, and Don John de Austria did shoot;
Briefly, if all these together might minister many sudden occasions, speedy
resolutions, and better furtherance from France, from Rome, then from Spain;
Escovedo's practices were tolerable, and his secret dealings gave the Spanish
King no just occasion to put him to death.

It remains to see, whether the cause of his death being unjust, the King had
any reasonable excuse to extenuate the murder; He that cannot escape death but
by killing another, shall not be punished by death if he kill another; because
it is lawful to repel force by force. The husband or father that kills an
adulterer in committing the fact with his wife or daughter, is not punished
with death by Law, because the greatness of his sorrow excuses the
grievousness of his offense; and a man that being provoked by another by word
or deed, kills the provoker, is not subject to extreme rigor of justice;
because whatsoever is done in heat of choler, is rather excusable in mercy,
then punishable with extremity.

The King of Spain's life stood in no danger as long as Escovedo lived, he had
offered no violence to his wife or daughter, and if he gave him any occasion to
be angry or displeased with him, there was time enough betwixt the occasion
given, and the hour of his death, to allay the heat, and to assuage his wrath.
There is not therefore any one just cause to excuse this murder, but many to
aggravate the same.

For first, A King commanded it to be committed; and Kings ought to preserve,
not murder their subjects.

Next, an innocent man was murdered; and it is better to save many offenders,
then to condemn one innocent.

Then the murderer was as it were a father to the murdered; Kings are called
fathers of their subjects.

Again, Escovedo was no stranger, but the Kings servant; and it is much more
grievous to kill an household servan^, then a stranger.

Again, Escovedo was no base person, but of good worth, and of diverse good
qualities; and he offends more that kills an adulterer of good sort, then
he that murthereth one of vile and base condition.

Again, Escovedo had deserved well of the King, and had done him many good
services; and ingratitude is a detestable, vice, a fault punishable by Law.

Again Escovedo was done to death against Law; and to murder a man without
Law, is a double breach of Law: a breach in the murder, and a breach in not
observance of Law.

Again Escovedo was poisoned; and the murder that is done with poison (because
it is traitorously done) is much more grievous then that which is performed.
Therefore

Lastly, When poison took no effect, he was killed with a sword; and the
murder that is iterated, is more heinous, it argues perseverance in
wickedness, it shows that the offender is obdurate in malice, it betrayeth
his cruelty, and declares that nothing but death will satisfy him; so it is
sin in a Prince to think on such a murder, wickedness to command it to be
done, cruelty to thirst after innocent blood, ingratitude to render evil for
good, treason to take away a man's life by poison, and of all treasons the
greatest, when poison fails, to use the sword, and when God has miraculously
preserved an innocent man, to attempt his death again, and never to desist
until he was massacred.

For Princes are armed with authority, but they are to use the sword only
against the wicked; they may be cruel, but with a kind of mercy and compassion;
they may censure all men's actions, but with remembrance of man's imbecility,
with grief for their fall, with sorrow for their temptation, with hope of their
amendment, and with a desire of their conversion.

They must think that ignorance may mislead them, Satan seduce them, sin get
the upper hand of them, Gods good grace abandon them, and that being destitute
of his favor, they are no more able to make any resistance against the divel's
temptations; and when they have thought upon all this, they must look upon
themselves, and in themselves consider, that they be angry, but without fin;
they may be moved, but not so much as to forget to do justice; punish offenders
without hatred to their persons, and not before that reason has mastered their
own affections, mercy has mitigated their rigor, and wisdom has nullified
all the extremity of their inordinate passions.

This murder being then in thought, in action, in continuance, and in iteration
impious and detestable, it rests therefore to show whether Antonio Peers
yiedling his consent, and putting his helping hand thereunto, be not guilty of
Escovedo his death as well as the King.

For the affirmative it may be said, that in cases of felony, murder, and
treason, the principals and accessaries are held to offend in one and the same
measure; because they are most commonly subject to one and the same manner of
punishment: That servants to private men, and Counselors to Princes, must obey
God rather then their Masters, the almighty in heaven, rather then the mighty
on earth: That Peers knew in conscience that Escovedo had not deserved death:
That no man should do any thing against his Conscience; and that Counselors
attend upon Princes to be disswaders of their follies, and not executioners of
their furies.

It had therefore been the part of Antonio Peers, when he saw his King resolute
to have Escovedo murdered, not to have reprehended his wicked intention
presently, but to have attended some convenient time when the Kings fury and
anger had been past, when he would have hearkened unto reason, and given an
attentive ear unto good counsel, and then not to have spared his tongue or his
pen, his counsel or his cunning, his wits, or his credit with his master, until
he had changed his mind.

For wise and discreet officers unto Princes, will not presently obey their
hasty, furious, and unadvised commandments, but give them time to allay, and
pacify, and to consider with themselves what they have commanded, and what
mischiefs and inconveniences may follow of their commandments: And the Prince
that has such, may think himself happy; and when of a servant to his passions
he returns happily to himself, that is to be a right Prince, then will he
thank them heartily for their good counsel.

It is written of a Duke of Britany, that when he had taken Clission an high
Constable of France, who had made the French his mortal enemy and caused him to
work his Countries great harm and annoyance, he delivered him into the hands of
John Bavilion his trusty and faithful servant, and commanded him to be caused
to be drowned secretly: Bavilion considering what danger might follow of his
rash and hasty commandment, preserved the Constable; and within a few days
after, when he saw the Duke his master very pensive and sorrowful, he presumed
to demand the cause of his grief: The Duke not being able to conceal any thing
from him, although he thought not to have found such comfort as he did by him,
acquainteth Bavilion with the ^^use of his heavines, which was, that he had
caused the Constable so unadvisedly to be made away; Bavilion seeing the time
fit to declare what he had done, let the Duke understand that Clisson lived;
and by way of advice told him, that by restoring his prisoner in safety without
a ransom unto the French King, he should bind the Constable to do him all
manner of good offices about the king of France, purchase the Kings assured
friendship, and procure his own Countries safety and quiet: For which good
counsel the Duke thanked him as much as for saving the Constable, and found
that by following the same, he and his subjects lived afterward in great peace
and tranquillity.

Had Antonio Peers imitated this Bavilion, the Spanish Kings honor had not
been blemished as now it is, Escovedo's children had not troubled him as they
did, Peers himself and his posterity had not endured the calamities which he
and they suffer, and Aragon had not tasted the miseries and inconveniences
which fell upon Aragon.

In handling of the negative, I may not altogether excuse Antonio Peers; for I
know, and so must he, that his reputation should have suffered less indignity,
his conscience less troubled, and he should undoubtedly have less to answer for
hereafter, if he had imitated Bavilion; but because it is hard in these days to
find any Prince like unto the Duke of Britany, few Counselors or Ministers
dare adventure to follow the footsteps of Bavilion.

For they remember that Hydaspes or Harpagus, Herodotus.
as before, being commanded by Astyages to kill Cyrus, saved the harmless
innocent, but his son smarted for his fathers offense, and the father could not
choose but smart and sorrow in his sons death.

They remember, that Cambyses his servant spared Croesus, when they were
commanded to kill him, but he lived, and his wife was the cause of their death;
and this remembrance makes them fear the Princes displeasure, and this
displeasure puts them in fear of their lives, and this fear causes them
willing to obey and execute their hasty and furious commandments, the rather,
because they see that although Princes sometimes chance to return to favor
those persons whom they willed to be destroyed, yet they always hate those
ministers that would not destroy them at their commandment.

And Peers knew, or might learn that a Princes Judges may command an ordinary
or an inferior Judge to execute his sentence, and he upon whom he lays this
command, is bound to execute the same, although he knows that his sentence be
unjust; and if the ordinary or inferior Judge shall refuse to obey his
commandment, Pastoralis
the Delegate may enforce him thereunto by excommunication and ecclesiastical
censure.

And this is so true, that the Popes Legate, who is an ordinary, and one of the
highest dignities that may be, cannot impeach or hinder a sentence given by the
Popes Delegate; and the Delegate may, if it please him, both command and compel
the Popes Legate to execute his sentence, De officio Delegati.
because that in the cause that is so committed unto him, he is greater then
the Popes Legate.

And if a Popes Legate may be constrained to obey a Judge Delegate, how much
more may an inferior Judge, or a common or a mean Ordinary be enforced to
yield him dutiful obedience.

The reason why this obedience is required, because he unto whom the execution
of sentence is only committed, has no authority to examine the equity or
injustice thereof; he must think that all is just that such a judge does, Gloss
and Pastoralis
he must look upon the commission and commandment given unto him, without
making any further enquiry into the matter, and he must presume that whatsoever
might be said against that sentence, has been already said, and duly
considered.

Now if this obedience must be showed unto a Judge delegate, and for no other
reason but for that he represents the Princes person, how much more ought a
Kings commandment not to be disobeyed, although he should will and command any
man to hang one of his Subjects, without acquainting him with the cause,
Felinus in Eccl. n. 6.
or examining the same cause before his commandment; for the pleasure of a
Prince is held for a sufficient cause, and he has no superior who may presume
to examine his will or his actions. And this is so true, that no manner of
proof may be admitted against this general and infallible conclusion.

Again, a Judges authority makes that just which was otherwise unjust; for
although whatsoever is done by a false Guardian be not lawful, especially if it
be done to his prejudice that is under years; L. 1. idem Pompon.
yet if the Civil Magistrate shall ratify such a Guardians action, it shall be
of full force. Shall not a King from whom such authority is derived have the
like power, the like prerogative?

Again every superiors authority and commandment must be obeyed, C. 2
and he that obeys not must dye the death, and may be lawfully called and
chastised as a Rebel.

Now to apply all that has been said unto Ant. Peers his case; the resolution
of the second question may be briefly this; if he knew, either because the King
had acquainted him therewithal, Felinus in Eccl. n. 6^.
or that in conscience he was assured that the King would not command any
unjust thing, that Escovedo had deserved death, he might boldly see him
executed. Or, if it were doubtful unto him whether Escovedo had given the King
just occasion to command his death, he needed not fear to perform his
commandment. But if his secret conscience could tell him that the King had not
just cause of death against Escovedo, then undoubtedly it had been Peers his
part not to have obeyed.

For as the Judge who is bound to judge secundum allegata and probata, if any
thing be falsely proved before him, and he not know that it is so, shall do
better to give over his office, then to pronounce sentence against his own
Conscience. So Antonio Peers, although it had been dangerous for him to refuse
to obey, and execute his Princes command, yet if he knew that the same was
repugnant to the Word of God, which permits no man to be slain without just
desert, he should have done better to obey God then his King.

For although a King be called God's Minister, and his judgments seem to
proceed from God's own mouth, yet when he does wrong, and breaks God's
commandments, Qui resistit 11 quest. 3. Bald.
he is not then God's minister, but the divel's and then he is no Judge, no
King, because he leaves God, and fulfilleth not that charge which the Almighty
has laid upon him; and he that obeys not his King in such commandments,
obeys God; yea the subject against whom the King takes such unlawful course,
may defend himself against his violence and oppression.

Betwixt God therefore and Antonio Peers his Conscience be it, whether he
proceeded against Escovedo in malice or in justice; and if his conscience shall
accuse him, undoubtedly he shall one day find, that the fear of the Princes
displeasure will be no sufficient warrant, or lawful excuse, and that it had
been better for him to have said unto his King, God commands me one thing,
and you another; he bids me not to kill, and you command me to murder; he
threatens me if I obey not him, and you menace me if I disobey you; but you
threaten me with imprisonment, he with hell; you with short pain, and he with
everlasting torment; you with death, and he with damnation: and therefore good
King give me leave to lean to him, and leave you.

Now follows the third question, a matter the proof whereof must rest upon
the Spanish King's Conscience, and Antonio Peers his voluntary confession,
which is a slender kind of proof, and especially against a King, for exceptions
may be made and taken against it: As that Antonio Peers bewrays his own
filthiness, and therefore is not to be heard; That he is but one witness; That
he is as Socius Criminis, and therefore his accusation of little force; and
many other like, which for brevity I omit, and will dispute tanquam ex
concessis, and have two principal reasons to induce me thereunto.

The first, because I presume that no man will be so impudent as to accuse a
King, and his own Sovereign to his face, and to the view of all the world, of a
horrible murder, unless his accusation were true, and tended rather to purge
himself, then to defame and discredit his Prince.

The second cause, I find that the Spanish Kings friends and favorers have not
made any conscience or difficulty to calumniate our Princess, her life and
actions, upon far more slender presumptions then we have of this murder.

The Author of that seditious Book which was written against the late King of
France, delivers it for his resolute opinion, That the said King deserved to
lose his Crown, because he not only consented, but also commanded the Duke of
Guise, and the Cardinal his Brother to be murdered.

He aggravateth his murder by three principal reasons and instances. The
first, Because they were innocent. The second, Because they were allied unto
the King, And the third, Because they were massacred by common murderers.
These reasons have already been sufficiently reproved.

Their innocence has been showed to be horrible treasons, their alliance unto
their King not worthy of pardon or commiseration, and their death to be
warrantable by Law and equity.

It rests to make a brief comparison betwixt them and Escovedo; and the
comparison may be this: Escovedo practiced with friends, they with foes. He for
the King's Brother, they against the King, his Brother, and all his blood. He
to the benefit of his Prince and Country, they to the hurt and ruin of the
King and his realm. He with the consent and command of the King's Lieutenant,
they against the will and pleasure of all the King's loving and faithful
Officers. He to reduce the King's subjects to their obedience, they to alienate
their Princes subjects from their allegiance. He to submit strangers unto his
Princes Dominions, and they to subject their Prince and Country unto strangers.
He to ^oyn other Countries with the Spanish Kings, they to dismember and
distract many provinces from the French Crown. He was never admonished to
desist, they were oft-times required to depart from their unlawful League and
Confederacy. He was cut off before he came to any open action, they lived after
they had committed many notable and notorious treasons. He was accused but of
presumption, they were convicted by diverse and evident proofs. He perished
because it was thought he would or might have done evil, they were not executed
before it appeared that they had done too much evil. He living could not
endanger his Kings life, and they (if they had not been slain when they were)
would have shortened their King's days, and utterly have subverted his Realm and
their Country. Briefly, his death did the Spanish King no good, their
punishment had freed the French King and his Country of many troubles and
dangers, had not a factious and wicked Friar ended his life before he could see
an end of those troubles. If ergo the King of France deserved to be
excommunicated and deposed for murdering them, much more deserves the King of
Spain the like punishment for massacring him, although they far excelled him in
honor and dignity: And if great crimes are to be punished with great
penalties, small offenses with small correction, and such as the fault is, such
is the chastisement, I shall not need to prove my opinion with more arguments.
And if the common and Ecclesiastical Laws have no greater punishment then
degradation and excommunication, and both of them are equal unto deposition,
unto death in the Civil Law; and if for what faults they may be afflicted by an
Ecclesiastical Judge, deposition and death may be imposed for the same crimes
by a Civil Magistrate: Murder being punished with degradation and
excommunication in an Ecclesiastical Court, Murder must needs be capital
before a Temporal Judge.

But what need I stand any longer upon the proof of my opinion? The Author of
the before-named seditious Book, eases me of that pain.

Ergo, since the Law says, Such Judgment as a man gives against another,
such must he expect and look for himself; and he that approves a witnesses
honesty and integrity, when he is produced to testify in a matter for him,
cannot refuse to take exceptions against his person, if he chance to be brought
forth afterward for a witness in another cause against him.

The Leaguers were the Spanish King's friends, who by the mouth of this author
have condemned the French King for a murderer, and have thought him worthy to
be deprived for those murders, must needs allow the same reasons, the same
Law, the same judgment against the Spaniard. Thus the third question is
cleared.

Now follows the fourth, in the handling whereof I shall likewise be eased by
the same author; for the same examples which fortify his opinion, may serve to
confirm my assertion.

He mentions many Princes who were deposed, or excommunicated, or censured by
the Pope for murder.

The Princes deposed were Ptolomeus Phisco King of Egypt, Tarquinus superbus
King of Rome, Philip King of Macedonia, Herdanus King of Castile, and Edward
and Richard both the second, Kings of England.

The Kings excommunicated by the Pope, were Peter King of Castile, whom Pope
Urban excommunicated, because he killed Blanch the daughter of the Duke of
Barbon, and diverse Peers of his Realm. Maganus Nicholas King of Denmark, who
was likewise excommunicated for the murder committed by his sons procurement
on the person of Canutus his Nephew. And lastly King John of England, who
incurred the like punishment for causing his Nephew Arthur to be murdered,
without any desert, without any due observance of Law or Equity.

The same author aggravateth again the French King's murder, because the
Cardinal was an Ecclesiastical man, and a man of great Calling and Dignity; and
proves again his opinion by the example of Henry the eighth King of England,
whom the Pope excommunicated, and absolved his subjects from the oath and duty
of obedience which they owed unto him, because he cause Fisher Bishop of
Rochester to be done to death: And by the example of Bolislaus King of Poland,
whom Gregory the seventh not only excommunicated, but also deprived him of his
Crown and Dignity, because he had killed holy Stomlaus.

But it may be said that the French King killed two, and the Spaniard but one;
that Escovedo was a man of no such quality as the Duke and the Cardinal; that
their death alone was not the only crime that was proved against the French
King, but many other matters as heinous as their murder; Briefly, that in
Kings, one fault, be it never so grievous, may be pardonable, a few somewhat
tolerable, but many must needs be punishable in the highest degree, and with
the greatest extremity.

To this I may answer, that I have already sufficiently cleared the French King
of all that was (more wrongfully then truly) laid to his charge; and that the
Spanish King may be charged with many crimes, as many as the late King of
France; but in particular.

Escovedo his death was an horrible murder, but the proceeding of Antonio
Peers and his friends, made it much more horrible; for wherein did Peers offend
the King? Was it an offense against his Majesty that he fulfilled his
commandment, in causing him to be murdered whose death he desired? Was it a
treason not to confess this murder, which could not be revealed without the
King's prejudice? Was it a fault to confess the murder, as he was commanded,
and to conceal the cause, as he was willed? Was it not a crime punishable to
compound with the accuser, and to buy his quiet, as Peers did with twenty
thousand ducats? Briefly, Was it a sin unpardonable to blemish his own
reputation, and to impoverish himself, and all to please and content the King?
If all these be no faults, then had the King no just cause to be displeased
with Peers as he was, sometimes friendly, other times hardly pleased, to day
favoring him, to morrow persecuting him; one while promising him great
rewards, another while taking from him his own goods, and his own substance;
and if all these be faults, whose faults be these? Are they not the King's as
well as Peers his faults? Nay, came they not from the King, and not from Peers,
who did nothing but what the King commanded him what he thought fit and
convenient to be done, which he not only required him, but also promised him
great rewards to do? But grant that Peers offended the King highly, what
offense had Peers his wife and children committed, that they should be
imprisoned, and his Son lose his ecclesiastical living? Offended they because
they became suitors for his enlargement, for his speedy and just trial? Had he
been a manifest Traitor, it was lawful for his wife to sue for his pardon. Had
she been guilty, and consenting to his treason, she could have endured no more
then he did, unless he had been first condemned; and the Law favors women,
even in cases of treason; because it presumes that by reason of the infirmity
of their Sex, they dare not attempt so much as men: and had his son joined with
his mother for his fathers liberty, that was no sufficient cause to take away
his Living.

For the Law which enjoyneth a child to prosecute and revenge his fathers
death, if he chance to be killed, upon pain of loss of his childs part and
portion, cannot but permit him, yea either expressly or secretly charge him to
do his best and uttermost endeavor to preserve and keep his father from a
wrongful and undeserved death.

And the Cannons which permit not the Pope, who is a competent and the highest
Judge in any Ecclesiastical cause, to take away a Benefice from any man at his
pleasure, suffer not a Lay Prince, who is no competent Judge in Ecclesiastical
causes, according to those Cannons, to make his pleasure a just and sufficient
reason to deprive any man of a spiritual Living.

It is ergo manifest, that there was and is great wrong done unto Antonio
Peers, to his wife and children; and this wrong cease not in them, but
reaches unto others; and not unto mean men only, nor in the least kind of
injury: For John Don de la Nuca, a man of no mean authority, a Magistrate, the
chief Justice of all Aragon, must not be lightly punished (which had been
somewhat tolerable but unjustly beheaded, which was extreme tyranny; and for
what cause? If I may not tell you, the King's own letter shall tell you.

This Letter written by the King unto Don John Alonso, contained these short
but sharp words.

As Soon as you receive this Letter, you shall apprehend Don John de la Nuca,
chief Justice of Aragon, and let me as soon be certified of his death, as of his
Imprisonment; you shall cause his head straightway to be cut off, and let the
Crier say thus: This is the Justice which the King our Lord commands to be
done unto this Knight, because he is a gatherer together of the Kingdom, and
for that he raised a Banner against his King, who commands his head to be cut
off, his goods to be confiscated, and his House and Castle to be plucked down to
the ground: Whosoever shall presume so to do, let him be assured so to die.

You see the cause, he is a Traitor: How is that proved? The King said so. He
gathered together the Commons: How does that appear? By the King's Letter. He
raised a Banner against the King: who is his Accuser? The King; Who the Judge?
The King; What Trial had he? As Soon as he was taken he was executed; a
Judgment goes before an Arraignment; and Execution before a Judgment; Who
was the Executioner? Don Alonso de Vargas; With what solemnity is the execution
done? Whosoever is a Traitor shall die; so whosoever rai^eth the Country shall die; so
whosoever raises a standard in the field against the King shall die so; all is
treason, and all is death, all upon a sudden, and all without due and lawful
proof.

For such a Justice as Don John de la Nuca was, could have no other Judge, no
man else to condemn him, but a certain Court called Contes Lateras, the King,
and the States of the Kingdom; such a crime as was laid to his charge, cannot
be heard and determined in Aragon by the King, such a sentence as passed
against him, has no more power or force against a man's person, his goods, or
his honor, then a sentence given by the complainant against the defendant;
such a King as the King of Spain should be in Aragon, is no longer a King if he
break the Laws of the Union, and of those Laws there are two especial branches,
the one, That whenever the King breaks those Laws, the Subjects may
presently choose another King: The other, That all the States, and rich men of
the Country may assemble together, and forbid any rents to be paid unto the
King, until the Vassal whom the King does wrong be restored unto his right; and
the Law which he does presume to violate, be likewise re-established in full
force and strength.

Moreover, because there is no other Law and Obligation wherewith to bind a
King, then with an Oath, an Oath is taken of the King at his Coronation to keep
those Laws, and the Oath is given him with these words: We who are able to do
as much as you, do make you our Lord and King, with this condition, that you
shall keep our Laws and Liberties, and if you will not keep them, you are not
our King.

Here you see Laws broken, a King forsworn, and subjects authorized to depose
such a King, or rather, a King de facto deposed, and not only deprivable if he
shall break those Laws. And in Antonio Peers his Book, you shall see how often
and how violently those Laws were broken.

Now it follows to show you briefly, whether voluntary perjury, and wilful
breaking of Laws, be punishable with deprivation in a prince, and whether
subjects may lawfully resist such a Prince.

These questions, if you look upon the rebellion of the Flemmings, and the
deposition of the Scottish Queen, are in some measure lightly resolved, but not
so fully discussed but that they need a more ample and large declaration.

Perjury is a most grievous offense, but much more grievous when it is
voluntarily committed; and then a man commits perjury willingly, when he
does any thing willingly against an Oath taken, not by force, but by free will;
not unadvisedly, but with great consideration; not to his hurt, but to his
advantage; not to perform a thing impossible or dishonest, but to bind and tie
himself to a condition that is both possible and honest. For when a man (not
being forced thereunto by just fear or irresistible necessity) breaks such an
Oath, there can be no color or pretense to excuse his perjury; it argues, it
convinces him of fraud and deceit, and gives an occasion to think that he
regards not an oath.

The seditious Author thought the late French King worthy to be deprived for
his offense, and yet he has no such proof of his perjury as may be had against
the Spanish King.

The Civil Laws hold perjured men for infamous persons, Barroll. Lucias F.
and the Cannons receive no infamous person fit to execute an office of honor
and dignity. A perjured man is always repelled from bearing witness in any
cause whatsoever, because that being convicted to have forsworn himself in one
cause, Bald. de fid. mis.
it is not only a presumption, but a sufficient proof that he will depose
falsely in another. And this is so true, that although he has amended his life,
Abb. and Fe. ex part de test.
yet he cannot be admitted for a witness, be it either in a civil or criminal
cause.

Again a Priest that has forsworn himself for a Benefice, Abb. and Fe.
is not only deprived of the Benefice for which he committed perjury, but also
of all other Benefices that he had before; Fell.
and the Bishop that has deprived him, cannot bestow another Benefice upon
him; for the collation that the Bishop makes unto such a man of such a
Benefice, is void by Law.

And although a man may say that such a collation made by the Pope is good and
valuable in Law, yet it may be answered, that the Pope making the like
collation, seems to dispense with the inability of the person, and so the
collation is not of force of it self, but by reason of the Popes dispensation,
Glossa.
who has full power to dispense with men in such cases.

Since ergo perjury is a sin so detestable and odious, that it not only
excludes men from preferment and honor, but also removes them from their
offices and dignities which are advanced; it must needs be granted that the
Spanish King who has violated his Oath made unto his subjects at the time of
his Coronation, and broken the Laws which he then swore to observe and keep
inviolable, may with more reason and justice be deprived of his Crown and
Dignity then the French King, who neither was nor could be justly convicted of
the like perjury.

But many things may be said for the Spaniards purgation, and especially these.

First, That subjects cannot receive an oath of their Prince, without the
authority of some Judge, and that a promise made before no competent, binds
not any man.

Next, That Princes which are above Law, are not bound to the observation of
their contracts, which have their full force and strength from Law; that
Princes may change and alter their own Laws at their pleasure.

Then, That although they should be strictly bound to stand to their Contracts,
yet if they were induced to make a contract touching any thing wherein they
were well informed, or if the contract do contain things too much derogating or
diminishing their jurisdiction or authority Royal, or if they have made a
promise that may be very prejudicial unto them, then in these three cases they
may lawfully break and violate their contract.

And lastly, That an oath containing a promise not being grounded upon some
other good cause, gives no good action, no good bond and obligation; and
notwithstanding that the bond were good, and the oath of force, yet Princes who
may dispense with others, may give a sufficient dispensation to themselves, and
so revoke their contracts; that if their own dispensations shall not be
available, the Pope may absolve them of their oath, and from the due observance
thereof; or that if the Pope will not absolve them, they need not care or seek
for his absolution, because considering their might, their power, and their
authority, there is no Law, no Judge that can compel them to keep their oath,
or to observe their contract.

To all these observations I answer briefly; because I mean but to give light
unto others, or to my self, to answer them more fully hereafter.

The Law that requires the authority of a Judge for the validity of a promise,
speaks of a transaction, and for victuals and sustenance, without the
Magistrates consent and authority, and holds the transaction made for
victuals for unlawful, because the composition was too little, and the Law in
these cases is favorable, and the Magistrate charged to interpose his
authority, when favorable persons are overmuch prejudiced, especially in
favorable cases; and although Princes be numb^ed among favorable persons, yet
this Law stretches not unto Princes who do usually at their Coronation swear
to observe the ancient Laws and Liberties of their Kingdoms.

And this oath is held lawful, and lawfully taken, as well because general
custom has the full force and strength of a Law, for that the States and
Commons of the Country being then present, do stand, and are taken by general
custom, for sufficient Judges to give and receive that oath.

And although it may be said that neither all the States, nor all the Commons,
are or can be present at the taking of such an oath, yet the oath shall avail
them that are absent, as much as though they were present.

But Princes being above Law, Jason n. 32
are not so bound to the Laws, but they change and alter them at their
pleasure. True, unless they be grounded upon the Laws of God, and the Laws of
Nature. The first, They may interpret, the second they cannot alter or
abrogate; the first bind them as well as their subjects, and so does the
latter. The breach of the first makes them odious unto God; and the breach of
the latter makes them hateful unto men. In breaking the first they offend
their Creator in heaven; in violating the latter, they remember not their maker
on earth; for the people and Peers of the Realm are their makers next unto God.

Contracts ergo of subjects having their ground, their foundation, and their
strength, not from Princes Laws, but from the Laws of Nature, bind King and
Emperor, Prince and Prelate, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, be it that they are
made between a Prince and a private man, or the Prince and a City, or the
Prince and any other.

The reasons why they are of such force are these.

First, It is not lawful to falsify a man's faith.

Then, The Laws of Nature bind men, and persuade them to keep their contracts,
and to hold their promise, even unto their enemies.

Next, The Laws of honesty charge their Princes to perform their contracts;
there is nothing becomes them better, nothing that commends them more,
nothing that men require so much at their hands.

Lastly, Princes Contracts are as good as Laws, and have the same force as
Laws, in the same strength and virtue against their Successors which they have
against themselves; nay, they are of greater strength then Princes Laws; for
Laws may be repealed, but contracts cannot be revoked: The reason of the
diversity, Laws may alter according unto the times and the occasions, unto
which Laws must be accomodated, by which Laws are occasioned, from which Laws
received their beginning; but contracts are irrevocable, they admit no change,
no alteration; and if they be once perfected, they can neither receive addition
or substraction, diminution nor enlargement; they may not be wrested, but taken
according to the true and plain meaning of the contrahents.

But why they may they not be changed? Why may not a Prince alter them?

The reasons are these.

Before they are made, they are of Free will, and when they are once perfected,
they are of necessity; that the Emperor of the world cannot add or detract any
thing from his contract without his consent to whom it is made, although he
were the meanest man in the world, who may be benefited, but not deceived by a
contract; that is, not defrauded of that which is agreed upon in the contract,
although it be lawful in bargaining, before the bargain be concluded, to
deceive one another.

Secondly, If Princes might revoke their contracts at their pleasure, there
should be no good dealing with them, which would be ridiculous; no trust to
their words, which would be dishonest; no benefit would be gotten by them,
which would be illiberal and unbeseeming the Majesty of a Prince.

Thirdly, Princes actions must be free from scandal, far from deceit, and not
subject unto malice.

Fourthly, Autent de Monarchis in principalibus.
Princes are reasonable creatures, and must submit themselves unto reason, lest
they be reputed as B. Celestine was, not a man, but a beast, because he revoked
in the evening the grants which he made in the morning.

Lastly, Other men may attend to profit, but Princes must look to honor, and
have an especial regard thereof; and what can be more dishonorable then to
break their word, to falsify their faith, to violate their contract,
especially if their word, faith, and contract be fortified and strengthened with
a solemn oath, with an oath that being added to a contract, has these virtues,
these qualities, these operations.

It makes their contracts lawful, and of full strength and force, which
without an oath are not of weight before God and man.

For a young man under years, who by reason of his minority cannot contract
without authority, consent, and counsel of his Guardian, shall be bound to
stand to his contract, if he has sworn to observe and keep the same, his oath
strengthens his contract, and depriveth him of the benefit of restitution to
his former and pristine estate, it makes the person infamous which breaks
such a contract, it debarreth him of any action against the other contrahent,
it enforces him to restore that he has received, it disableth him to take the
forfeiture that is made unto him, it freeth the observer of the Contract from
any penalty whereinto he is fallen, it benefiteth the absent as the present, it
forfeiteth the contract whether it be interposed, either before or after the
contract, or at the instant of the making of her, or at any other time, it
urges and binds the contrahents to a strict and due observance, unless it
may endanger their souls health, and keep and observe their contracts; Briefly,
it has many other operations, which shall be more fitly mentioned hereafter.

But what avails it to have said all this, if all may be refelled in a few
words; The King of Spain was not well informed when he made this contract, when
he took this oath, he prejudiced himself greatly in yiedling thereunto, Fell. in
Ep. 1. de prob. n. 6, 7,
and he weakened his authority too much in submitting himself to the observance
of the Laws: and all these being proved, or any one of these three
inconveniences falling out to be true, he is not bound to the performance of
this contract, or of this oath.

But how are all or any of these three inconveniences proved? How can it be
that he should not be well informed when he yielded to this contract? Could he
be ignorant of that which all the world knew, which his Predecessors did before
him, which strangers unto his Laws and Country knew many years ago? For
Guicciardine (who wrote his book before he was crowned) writes in the sixth
book of his History, That the Aragonian Kings have no absolute and Kingly
authority in all things, but are subject unto the subjects and constitutions of
their Country, which derogate much from the power and authority of a King. And
Bodin (who wrote not many years) being a Frenchman, and having no other
knowledge of the Laws of Aragon but such as he received from others, used in
his Book the same words of the Kings authority, which are used by the King at
his Coronation.

We that are able to do as much as you, make you our Lord and King, upon
condition that you shall keep our Laws and Liberties, and if you will not, you
shall not be our King.

Laws bind the present as soon as they are published in their presence and
hearing, and the absent shortly after that they come to their notice and
knowledge; those Laws therefore being (as by all likelihood it seems) made
and established at the Institution of the Aragonian King, could not be hidden
from his knowledge, nor prejudicial to his Majesty and Authority Royal.

For what blemish is it to a King to submit himself unto those Laws which his
Predecessors were contented to acknowledge and observe. The Emperor that made
and authorized almost all the Civil Laws that are now extant, could set it down
as a Law, that it should be well and worthily done of a Prince, be he never so
great and mighty, to be pleased to subject himself to his own Laws; it
delights a good Prince, it likes his subjects, it honors Kings, and it
greatly rejoices their Vassals.

The ancient Kings of France (who are now grown the most absolute Kings of the
world) were wont to do nothing that was of any weight or consequence, without
the consent of their best and wisest subjects. The Kings of Poland, Denmark,
and Sweden, Bodin de Repub.
cannot make war against their enemies, which is one of the principal marks of
Sovereignty, without the consent and leave of the States of their Country.
Crommus in the year 1559. withstood the coronation of their King Frederick,
until that he had sworn solemnly that he would not condemn any Nobleman to
death, or confiscate his lands or goods, but suffer him to have his trial by
the Senate.

That all Gentlemen should have power of life and death over their subjects,
without appeal, or without giving the King any part or portion of the penalties
or forfeitures that shall be raised and levied of Gentlemen's subjects.

And lastly, That the King should not give any office whatsoever, without the
counsel and consent of the Senate.

These are hard conditions, and presumptive arguments that the King of Denmark
may hardly be called a Sovereign, and yet Frederick yielded to these
conditions, and his Successors have ever since observed them; he, because he
could not otherwise do, and they, because they thought it not convenient to
deny that which he had granted; knowing that if they had refused his
conditions, they should not be received and admitted unto his succession; and
yet sithence the Nobility encroached herein upon their King, I take it to be
lawful for his Successors to free themselves as soon as they shall be able,
from that bondage, and scant princely servitude, if they be not sworn (as the
Spaniard is at his Coronation) to see these conditions inviolably kept and
observed; for if they be sworn, Specul. l. 2. de action seu pet. 93. n. 3.
I hold it not lawful for him to break his oath; for men may not voluntarily
commit perjury for any temporal commodity; and it is far better to endure
temporal inconveniences and discommodities, then to offend a man's conscience,
and endanger his soul.

All Histories new and old are full of the like indignities offered unto
Princes by their subjects, as often as the rebellious people have had any good
fortune against their Sovereigns; and all law and reason permits such
Princes to redeem their liberty by any means possible, so it be not done
contrary to their oath, or done within a convenient time: For though it be
true, that nullum tempus occurrit Regi; yet that is most commonly understood in
matters of lands, but jurisdiction may be prescribed, Fell. in cap. Pastoralis.
and there is nothing more common and ordinary, then for inferior officers to
prescribe their superiors, when they be negligent and careless of their
jurisdiction; and when an inferior has fully prescribed, he has as good
right and interest in his prescribed jurisdiction, as any prince has in the
authority which his Predecessors have had time out of mind, or from the
institution of their Kingdoms.

Be it therefore for that the Nobility of Aragon have had the before-named
privilege from the first beginning of that Royal Monarchy, or that they have
used the same so long a time as serves to induce a prescription, or that a
general custom has put them in full and lawful possession thereof, it is not
now lawful for the Kings of Spain, unto whom the Kingdom of Aragon descended,
with all charges and burdens thereunto belonging, to revoke and disanul the
same privileges; and since that he is bound to observe them, because his
Predecessors did so, and custom binds him so to do, it is not greatly
material whether his oath were well and lawfully taken yea or no; and because
he has sworn to keep them, he cannot dispense with his Oath, or of himself
remit the conditions whereunto he yielded at his Coronation.

For they that swear to do any thing which they are bound to do, Speculum l. 5.
de Legibus S. 6. n. 29,
although they were not sworn thereunto, bind themselves in double bonds to do
the same: the first of honesty, the other of necessity. As if a merchant should
swear not to falsify any merchandises that he utters, he is bound to observe
his promise in honesty, and of necessity; in honesty, because no conscionable
man will falsify his word; and of necessity, because his oath made that
necessary which was before but voluntary, and so forfeited and strengthened the
former bond.

But to come more fitly and properly to our matter, what was the point for
which John de la Nuca suffered, Antonio Peers suffered, part of Aragon
revolted, and many (as well good as bad subjects of the Spanish King) were
slain in Caragoca? Was it not the just grief, and lawful coffeehouse
conceived for the new course, and extraordinary trial that Inquisitors would
and should have used against Antonio Peers? Did not this Inquisition breed a
tumult in Naples, and in Flanders, where it brought more to their untimely
deaths, then there are living creatures in all Aragon? Did you not know that
this Inquisition was first invented for heretics, and now it is used, or
rather abused, against all sort of offenders; all kinds of offenses being
unjustly and maliciously drawn to the notice and cognizance of the unmerciful
and rigorous Inquisitors, that serve the Pope for his executioners, and the
Spaniards for their tormentors? Did not Don John de la Nuca, and many others
know, that Ecclesiastical Judges are not to deal in temporal causes, be they
merely civil or criminal, against private men, or for the Prince? Did not all
the people know, or at least might they not have heard, that Clergy men cannot
be present at a sentence of death, much less give such a sentence? And briefly,
Do not all the world know, that it belongs to him to judge who examineth a
cause, and hears the merits, proofs, and circumstances thereof? Why then
should Inquisitors judge, and others examine; especially when the Law
prescribes both the Examiners and the Judges, and where the party accused
desires the benefit of Law, and the supreme Judge is bound by solemn oath to
vouchsafe and yield him the benefit and fruition of his desire? But it was the
King's pleasure that Antonio Peers should die; and when Temporal Magistrates
would not, Ecclesiastical Judges should condemn him.

If Antonio Peers his death might have contented and satisfied him, why sought
he not some friend to make an end of him, in the same manner that he dispatched
Escovedo for him? Had it not been less known to the world, less danger to the
State? less prejudice to his Laws? He might have been secre^ly murdered with
far less trouble then openly condemned, and his injustice in poisoning him
should have been known but to the murderers; whereas his iniquity in
condemning him could not be but apparent unto the fight and view of all the
world; but his ingratitude unto Antonio Peers for the pleasure done him, by
taking away Escovedo his life, made others unwilling and fearful to pleasure
and gratify him with the like vilany.

Alas poor King, that could not find one in the whole Realm to poison a
private man, and yet of late is waxen so rich and plentiful a Kingdom of
murderers as procurers, as Ma^uel Aridrada, Xpofero de Moco, Rodorigo Marquess
Stephano Ibacco, and the Count Fuentes, as many executioners, as Dr Lopas,
Ferrara, Truoca, Williams, and York, and more perswaders, as Stanley, Holt,
Frogmorton, Ower, Gefford, Northington, Paget, Tipping, Garret, and Naddel; all
of one mind, but of sundry Nations; of one desire, but of diverse conditions; of
one conspiracy, but of contrary vocations; to poison a stranger, a woman, a
Virgin, a Princess; one person having in one body four sundry qualities worthy
of justice, of pity, favor, and honor: for who does not justice to a
stranger, as God's word commands, pitieth not a woman, as man's Law wills,
favors not a virgin, as humanity requires, honors not a Princess, as
God's word, man's law, and humanity prescribe?

This only action of barbarous inhumanity requires a whole and large volumn,
but I must strive to be short; and if you call to mind what has been said
already, you shall find matter enough to enlarge and aggravate this inhumanity;
and therefore briefly to the rest of the objections.

An oath promissory not being grounded upon a just and good cause, binds not
a man to any performance; but can there be a better consideration then the gift
of a Kingdom? Or a greater forfeiture then the loss of a Crown and Royal
Diadem? The gift is contained in these words, [ We make you our King] and the
forfeiture is expressed in these words [ You shall not be our King unless you
keep our Laws] The condition is usual and ordinary, for the Emperor as soon as
he is chosen, takes the like oath, when he swears to conserve and maintain
the liberties, jurisdictions, rights, honors, dignities and privileges of the
Electors of the sacred Empire, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal; and it
seems, that as the seven Electors in recompense of their good will and
courtesy showed to the Emperor of the world, received this bounty of him, so
the Nobility of Aragon, in regard of the favor which they showed unto their
King, in making choice of him for their King, received the like benefit at his
hands, and therefore have good occasion to be no less grieved if he chance to
break this oath, then the Nobility of England should have cause to be sorry, if
after a number of good and gracious Princes, who have always duly kept and
observed the ancient Laws and Liberties of our Realm, and especially in the
trial and arraignment of Noblemen, the Almighty should plague them with such a
Prince as would not suffer them to be tried and arraigned according to the old
and laudable custom of this noble Kingdom, by an honorable Jury of twelve
Peers, but by a beggarly crew of so many base companions.

The promise then is good and better for the oath, but the oath may be broken,
and a dispensation will salve the sore of the breach. He that offends in hope
of a pardon, is not thought worthy to be pardoned, and although it be a greater
commendation in a Prince to be prone to show mercy, ready to forgive, and
willing to pardon offenses committed against himself or his Laws, yet it is
scant tolerable to forgive notorious sins and trespasses against God.

I find that Princes may dispense with Bastardy, restore infamous persons to
their good name and fame, make their own children legitimate, not as their
Fathers, but as their Princes; not as their children, but as their subjects;
free and emancipate bondmen; briefly, pardon and forgive all crimes committed
against their Temporal Laws.

But the Cannons (of which the Spanish King will seem to have more regard then
any other Prince of that Religion) permit not his Catholic Majesty to
dispense with an oath; that is a privilege and prerogative which the Pope has
reserved to the fullness and plenitude of his own part, and would not take it in
good part, that his white son should challenge or assume unto himself any such
authority; and he as a dutiful and loving child, will be loath to offend so
good and loving a father. But the father in regard of his long and loyal
obedience, will absolve him of his oath. If his Fatherly love should make him
forget himself so much, as to dispense at one time, not with one, but many
crimes; the son and the father should without all doubt highly offend their
heavenly father, and voluntarily break the sacred constitutions of their
reverend predecessors.

For the Pope cannot dispense with wilful murder, such as was the violent
death of Escovedo; nor with any thing done against the Laws of Nature, such as
the breach of this contract should be; nor with an oath, such as this oath is,
without calling and citing all the parties that should be interssed and
damnified by the violation and breach of this oath.

But grant that the Pope will dispense with this Oath, what would or could all
avail, when the contract should still remain in full strength and virtue, and
the Aragonian Nobility might notwithstanding this dispensation urge their King
to the performance thereof? Truly this absolution should benefit him no more,
then it should avail a creditor to sue his debtor for one hundred pounds, unto
whom he owed so much upon account; for such a creditor, when he has with long
suit and great charge recovered his debt, is presently to restore the same back
again upon his account: So the Spanish King, when he has with great
difficulty, and perhaps with some expenses, made himself beholding to the Pope
for his dispensation, must notwithstanding the benefit thereof perform the
conditions that was of sufficient strength without the oath, and was confirmed
with an oath for no other purpose, but that it should be the great burden unto
his Conscience, if he should violate his contract.

But how may the Aragonian Noblemen enforce him to perform and keep his
contract? By forfeiting his Kingdom, by taking away his rents, and by putting
the Laws whereunto he was sworn into execution. But he is too mighty, Jason in
leg. mil. n. 7.
and they too weak to compel him thereunto by main force. What remedy shall you
then find against him? The course is ordinary; Bald: in anth. sacr, puber. in
3. coll.
For every Bishop has power to compel any man that is sworn, to keep and
observe his oath, which has always paratum executionem, and is so true, that
the trial of a contract confirmed with an oath depending before a Temporal
Magistrate, a Bishop, or Ecclesiastical Judge, may be reason of that oath
avocate the same cause unto his hearing and determination: And this is the
reason why many Doctors are of opinion, and especially Baldus, that an oath
has the virtue and operation to draw a matter from one Court to another.

But what Prelate in Spain dares be so bold as to call his King into his
Ecclesiastical Court? If the Prelate will not presume to stand in defense of
the Laws, there is another ordinary way. A subject of the Emperor may without
going to any other Judge, convent the Emperor himself before the Pope, if he
will not maintain his bargain or contract; and if the Emperor may be
immediately convented by his own subjects before the Pope, with much more
reason may the Spanish King be called in this case to Rome, to answer the
contempt of his oath, as well because he is inferior to the Emperor, by many
degrees, as for that the peers of his Realm, and the whole Nobility of Aragon,
are of better consideration, and more regard then any private subject.

I find that the Laws and common consent of all Doctors, allow subjects, when
their princes will not do them right and justice, there principal remedies
against such Princes.

The first, That subjects may compel their Prince by his Superior, if he have
a Superior to whom he owes homage and duty, to try the equity of his cause
before that Superior.

The second, That a Subject may convent his adversary before the common
Ordinary of the Diocese, if his Lord and Prince chance to be negligent in the
administration of Justice.

The third, That the Prince denying to do justice to his subjects, may lawfully
be deprived of his power and royal authority over them.

The first and second perhaps will not seem fit to be practiced against the
Spanish King; for that although he be a subject unto the Pope for many of his
Kingdoms, yet he will hardly acknowledge that subjection.

The third is more proper, and therein the question may be, whether subjects
can lawfully expel their Prince out of his Country, and from his Crown and
Dignity, if he do oppress them too much? Some men hold hardly for the
affirmative; and St. Thomas holds an opinion, that they may lawfully kill
such a Prince, and that it were a work somewhat meritorious; And this opinion is
condemned by others; and the Council of Constance determined the contrary
against Saint Thomas; and yet all agree in this, That subjects need not obey
such a prince.

In this contrariety I think ( salvo meliori judicio) that the best course is,
to admonish such a prince of his duty, and to pray him to reform, and reform
all that is amiss. But who shall admonish him? His best subjects, and other
princes; and if after such admonition he shall still remain incorrigible, then
may his actions, his cruelties, his tyrannies be made known unto the world; and
after this Declaration duly justified, and truly certified to all Christian
princes, it may be lawful to implore, and employ their help and assistance for
the speedy suppressing such a manifest and incorrigible oppressor and tyrant.

But the Emperor is too weak, and the Pope will not be willing to join against
the Spanish King.

The Emperor will be strong enough, if other princes may be entreated to join
with him in this honorable action; and the means to persuade him, and entreat
them, has been declared already.

It rests therefore to show, that the pope may be brought to enter into this
action; it may be doubted that the pope will be hardly induced to displease and
offend so mighty a prince, and so faithful a friend as the Spaniard.

You have heard that Leo the tenth, and Clement the seventh crossed his father,
who was always mightier then he; and when they saw him to grow to strength,
they sought means to weaken him, by joining in league against him with diverse
French Kings: But to leave his late predecessor, and to come to himself; Was
there not a pope who in the flower of the Spanish King's youth, when he had not
one foot in the grave, as he has now, did openly oppose himself against him?
Did he not imprison his Ambassador Garcilase de la Vega, when he was sent unto
him about matters of great weight, and of greater benefit to all Christendom?
Did he not cast John Antonio his postmaster at Rome into prison? Did he not
command that there should be no more any such officer in Rome, which had
continued there for a number of years together? How many times did he stay his
Ambassador sent out of Spain to other princes, took away their packets, opened
their letters, and read them? Did he not oftentimes, when he meant to deceive
the Spaniard, send him Ambassadors, to entertain him with vain hopes; and when
they were half way toward Spain, revoke them, and command them to go with the
said Letters, and the same conditions, unto other princes? Did he not in the
Decree against Asconio Caciaco, declare his Catholic Majesty to be an open
and professed enemy unto the Sea of Rome? What could he do more then all this
unto the Turk, the common enemy of Christendom? What have the later popes done
more then all this against the late French King William, for the Spaniards sake
they made their professed enemy? And why may not this pope be induced with the
report of all that has been already said, to as much as all this against the
Spaniard, now that he declineth, that he is going to the grave; or against his
son that shall be coming into the world, and may be of more terror unto Italy,
and the rest of Christendom, then his grandfather or his Father, because he is
heir to as many Kingdoms as they were, and is likely to succeed his father,
when he shall be very young and youthful.

I have said enough to make the Spaniard hateful and odious to all the world,
but I may not end without adding somewhat more to all that I have said.

The seditious Author inveigheth most bitterly against the French King for his
two murders; but I have showed, that the Spaniard has committed many more
then two; and I must add to these murders, the unlawful execution of Diego de
Meneses, sometimes Viceroy of the Indies, and the Governor of Guscabs, of
Henry Perera, Captain of the same Town, of Emanuel Seradas, of the Count de
Terras Vedras, of Peter Alpeene, and Sforza Ursino, whom he caused to be
poisoned.

The same Author aggravateth (as I have said) the French Kings murder,
Advertisement de Seignior Vasc. Fign.
because he killed an Ecclesiastical person; and I promised to show you that
the Spaniard has killed many more then one; witness Friar John, who because he
stood for the liberty of his Country, was hanged in the Isles of Madera;
witness Friar Hector Pinto, who was poisoned by the Soldiers of Castile;
witness James de Moronake, who was beaten to death with Soldiers, although he
was brother to the Earl of Myra; witness many others, who were either thrown
into the Seas, or hanged, or poisoned.

The same Author burdened the late French King to be an author of heretics,
because he did not utterly subvert the protestants in his Realm; but I have
cleared him of that accusation at large, and yet forgot to tell you, that he
did more against the protestants in his Realm, then the Spaniard did in his
Dominions; and he had done much more then he did, had the Spaniard not favored
the protestants against him, and had he not known that it was not Religion, but
private quarrels, that caused a division in his Kingdom; and this division was,
as you have heard, and shall hear, maintained and nourished by the Spaniard.

For when the troubles began first in France, the princes of Vendosme and Conde
being displeased with the greatness of the House of Guise, drew into their
faction and side, the Houses of Montmorency and Chastilian, that they might be
the better able, with their help, to prevent and withstand the increase and
advancement of the late Duke of Guise, his Father, and Uncle, who had usurped
and gotten into their hands, all the authority, credit, and power of the
Kingdom, during the minority of Francis the second their Nephew; afterward the
same Duke of Guise and the Constable fall into variance, for no other cause,
but for that the first was jealour of the other, both of them being in great
favor and credit with Henry the third.

Four principal causes increased and nourished the contention between these two
princes.

The first was the office of great Master of France, which the King gave unto
the Duke of Guise, when he made the Duke of Montmorency Constable of France,
who was great Master before, and had a promise of the King that the office
should have been reserved for his son.

The second occasion of their coffeehouse was, the Earldom of Dampmartin,
which both of them had bought of sundry persons, pretending right thereunto;
and when they had sued for the same a long time in Law, the Constable obtained
the suit.

The third cause of their coffeehouse was, because the one of them seeking
by all means possible to discredit and disgrace the other, the Constable
procured the Duke of Guise to be sent into Italy, that he might in his absence
possess the King wholly and alone, and when he was there, he could not do any
thing worth his labor, or worthy of commendation; because the Constable either
fore-slowed or hindered his business: But the Duke of Guise being returned out
of Italy, and finding that the Constable was taken prisoner at St Laurence, to
be revenged of the indignities offered whilst he was in Italy, procured that
the Constable was held a long time in prison, and used all the policies that he
could devise, to delay and defer his deliverance, the which delays occasioned
his Nephews of Chastilian to crave aid and assistance of the late King of
Navarra, and the Prince of Conde his brother, who had married his Niece.

The fourth and last cause of their strife and difference was, the competency
between the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Iamvile, for the office and charge
of Colonel of the light Horsemen of France. This debate and emulation being
begun, and having continued a long time debate and emulation being begun, and
having continued a long time in this manner, it happened that the first Author
thereof being dead, the Duke of Guise prevailed too much in the French Court,
the which the Lords of Chastilian perceiving, to their great sorrow and
coffeehouse, left the Court, and in returning from thence (were it in
earnest or in policy) began to favor the Lutherans of France, who at that time
began to preach in cellars, and in houses secretly, and became their friends,
more to defend themselves from the House of Guise, then to seek and procure any
alteration or change of Religion, until that the King himself at the
instigation and instance of the Duke of Iamvile, took Monsieur de Andeles at
Cressy, and sent him prisoner to Molin, and imprisoned the Videan of Chatres,
and many others.

These imprisonments and years of further mischiefs, caused the friends and
followers of the Constables, to prepare with great silence and secrecy, a
mighty Army in Germany, with which he purposed to make an horrible execution of
the House of Guise, under a color to free the King from that bondage, wherein
the late Dukes of Guise and Aumale held him, of which followed the great
execution of Amboise, the rigorous commandment that was given to the King of
Navarra, and the imprisonment of the Prince of Conde, at the assembly of States
held at Orleans, and many other accidents, which had continued with far greater
cruelty, then was used against the Houses of the Constable, and of Chastilian,
had not the sudden death of the young King prevented the bloody intentions of
the House of Guise.

The unexpected death of the young King, perplexed and dejected the House of
Guise much, and surely they had been reduced unto extreme desperation, had not
the Spanish King revived their hope, and put them in great comfort; who until
he saw them in great extremity, stood in doubt which part to favor most; and
kindled the fire of dissension on both sides, to the end it might at the length
burn and consume France, in such manner as it did of late years.

It was the Spanish King that (when the King of Navarra was made Governor of
Charles the ninth, and the Constable restored to his ancient Honor and Dignity)
supported the Duke of Guise, and gave him such counsel, that he both won the
King of Navarra, and the Constable to favor him and his enterprises, against
their own Brothers and Nephews, and took the young King and his Mother at
Fountain-bleau, and carried them to Melind.

The Queen Mother grieved with this captivity of the King and her self, was
sain to entreat the Prince of Conde, and the Lords of Chastilian, to help to
set him and her at liberty: And then the said Prince and Lords not being able
to resist of themselves so mighty enemies as the Guisards were, especially
being aided with the power and authority Royal, became protestants in good
earnest, and declaring themselves Protectors and Heads of the Huguenots, craved
their assistance, wherewith they seized upon many Cities of France, not making
any mention of their Religion, but pretending to free the King and his Mother
from that captivity wherein the House of Guise held them.

It was the King of Spain, who when the Duke of Guise was slain at Orleans by
Poltrot, practiced with the Cardinal his Brother to entertain and maintain the
divisions in France, not to subvert the Lutherans, but to weaken the Kingdom;
wherein the Cardinal proceeded so cunningly, that he drew the Queen Mother from
the Prince of Conde, and the Chastilians, by whom she was set at liberty, by
persuading that the Prince of Burbone, the Constable, and the Chastilians
sought her utter ruin and subversion, and would never leave until they had
sent her into Italy, unto her friends there; for which she conceived so great
displeasure and indignation against them, that she caused the one brother to be
killed at the Battle of Iarvack, and the other at the Massacre of Paris; it is
thought that if the Montmorencies had been there at the same time, they had
drunk of the same cup.

Thus you see that the troubles of France grew not for Religion, but for
competency and emulation that was betwixt the House of Guise and the
Chastilians and Montmorency, then those competencies were nourished by the
Spaniard for his benefit, and not to subvert the protestants, and that the King
might and would easily have reduced all his subjects to one Religion, had not
the Spaniard hindered his course; for even toward his latter days, perceiving
that wars were not the right and ready means to subvert the protestants, he
took another way, which was, to forbid them to resort to the Court, or to enjoy
any Offices, Dignities, Governments or Benefices, whereby he m^de the old
Hugonots cold in their Religion, and to suffer their children to become
Catholics, that they might be admitted as well as others unto Honors, and
that very few or none that were not protestants before; fell to the open
profession of their Religion; which course if it were taken with both kind of
Recusants in England, would sooner call them home, then other courses that are
taken against them.

Again, The same Author thought the French King worthy of deprivation, because
he was in his opinion disloyal, and not trusty unto his old and ancient
friends, and favored not the House of Guise so much as they deserved; the
which crime may very well be returned upon the Spanish King; who when he might
have pleased one of his best friends, and one of the mightiest Kinsmen that he
had, refused to pleasure the one or the other; when the pleasure done unto
them, should greatly have benefitted all Christendom.

For when as Pope Gregory the thirteenth, purposing with the aid and assistance
of certain Christian Princes, to have undertaken a sudden enterprise against
the Turk, to the benefit and augmentation of Christendom, prayed the Spaniard
to have some help and succor, he not only refused to send him any manner of
help, but also would not lend him any of his Galleys, which the Pope offered to
have entertained, and sent to that enterprise at his own charges.

But this unkindness was nothing in respect of the discurtesie and disloyalty
which he showed unto Don Sebastian late King of Portugal, the which unnatural
and unkind practice all Christendom has occasion to lament; for when as
Sebastian intending to aid Muly Mahomet King of Fez and Morocco, against Muly
Malucco his brother, who had driven him out of his Kingdom; which intention, by
reason of the profitable composition which Sebastian had made with the said
Mahomet, had greatly advanced all Christendom, required the Spaniard (his Uncle
to give him help toward this honorable action; he promised to furnish him
with fifty Galleys well appointed, and with four thousand fighting Soldiers:
The which when Malucco heard, he offered him presently certain Maritime Cities
if he would not assist his Nephew; the which condition the covetous Spaniard
accepted, and was not ashamed to forsake his own Kinsman, and a Christian King,
and entered into League with a barbarous Infidel: But he was rewarded
accordingly; for when he sent Vernegas his Ambassador to take possession of
the City Zaracha, and of other Towns that were promised unto him: The
Barbarians mocking him for his covetousness and disloyalty, made his Ambassador
to dislodge with cannon shot.

But he forsook his Nephew (as some say) of purpose; knowing, that for his
honor, and the maintenance of his promise, Don Sebastian would adventure
himself in that enterprise, although he had not help from the Spaniard, and so
losing his life in defense of so honorable a quarrel, leave him a great
possibility to attain unto the Kingdom of Portugal; which fell out (as you have
heard) according to his expectation.

Lastly, The same Author concludes the French King to deserve to be deprived
of his Crown, because he was in his opinion a Tyrant.

But you shall hear the marks whereby a Tyrant is known, and then judge whether
he or the Spaniard may best be called and reputed a Tyrant.

Bartol in his short Treatise of Tyranny, sets ten principal observations
to know and discern a Tyrant from a good and just King, which he took out of
Plutarch his book de Regimine Principum.

First, Such Princes kill the mightiest men in their country, that they may not
rebel against them.

Secondly, They keep their doings hidden and secret from wise men, that they
may not reprehend their actions, and provoke the common people to rebellion.

Thirdly, They suppress Learning, and the Students and Professors thereof, left
they should wax wise, and dislike their unlawful proceedings.

Fourthly, They suffer no great meetings, or general assemblies of their
Subjects, lest that they should enter into some conspiracy against them.

Fifthly, They have their spies in every corner and place, to hearken and
observe what men say of them; for knowing that they do not well, they always
fear to be ill spoken of, and therefore they entertain those spies very
willingly.

Sixthly, They maintain their Subjects in Divisions, that the one part standing
in continual fear of the other, both may be afraid to rebel.

Seventhly, They keep their subjects as low and poor as they can possible, that
being continually occupied and busied in getting their livings, they may have
no time or leisure to conspire against them.

Eighthly, They nourish wars, and send their soldiers afar off from home,
because that by wars their subjects are impoverished, and they provided of
sufficient soldiers to defend them in their unjust quarrels.

Ninthly, They have their guards of strangers, and not of their own subjects,
because they stand in great fear of their own.

Lastly, When their subjects are divided, they favor the one part, that the
other may the more easily be destroyed by their help.

These be the properties which Bartol examineth in this manner; to kill
Noblemen, and not to spare his own brethren, is the action of a tyrant, unless
the murder be grounded upon a just occasion; to suppress wise men is likewise
tyrannical, except they commit some offense worthy of death; to hinder Learning
is not a work beseeming a just Prince, unless he does forbid the study of such
Sciences as are not lawful and fit to be entertained in a Christian
Commonwealth; to permit no assemblies of subjects, argues tyrannical
inhumanity, if their assemblies tend not to evil purposes: to entertain spies
may be lawful, if it be for the punishment of sin, and not for the suppressing
or false accusation, of good and loyal subjects; to nourish divisions can in no
wise be commendable, because a good Prince should procure his subjects peace,
quiet, and tranquillity; to impoverish subjects is simply most unlawful; for
that the wealth of their subjects is the riches of good Princes; and good Kings
will rather labor to enrich them, then to impoverish them; to comfort, then to
afflict them; to succor, then to leave them succourless; to procure foreign
wars for any other cause but to avoid wars at home, is a manifest argument of a
notable Tyrant; and especially if his wars be unjust: to have a guard of
strangers may be lawful, if a Princes subjects may not be trusted, if they have
been such as have been lately subdued, if prone and ready to rebel, and if they
showed themselves mutinous and disobedient unto good Princes: lastly, to
destroy one faction by another, is of all actions the most inhumane of all
inhumanity; because it behooves a Prince to preserve his subjects at home and
abroad, in time of peace, and in time of wars, against open adversaries, and
secret enemies.

Now if you look back upon all that has been said, you shall easily perceive,
that all these marks may be found in the Spanish King, who has not spared his
son, his brother, his kinsman, his nobility and peers, whose Country has (by
the testimony of their own writers) no great store of learned men, whose
natural subjects are employed in foreign services, whose foreign Dominions
are maintained by domestical divisions, whose guard consists of Flemmings,
although his Spaniards be the most trusty and loyal subjects that he has,
whose spies are infinite, or else his intelligences could not be so great as
they are, whose subjects cannot be rich, because he fleeceth so much, whose
wars are unlawful, because they are begun without just occasion, continued with
iniquity, and performed with barbarous cruelty; briefly, whose studies,
endeavors, and purposes, tend to no other end, but to weaken all Christian
Princes, that he may tyrannize without comptrolment, and make himself or
successors monarchs of the whole world without resistance.

Then to conclude this Treatise, which is added only to give some light to the
precedent matter. If it be perjury to break an oath willingly, sacrilege to
murder, not only one, but many Ecclesiastical persons unjustly, hypocrisy to
dissemble with friends cunningly, tyranny to affl^ct subjects wrongfully,
impiety to betray Christians unto Infidels wilfully, and to murder, kill, and
massacre subjects unlawfully, I may more justly conclude then the French
seditious author did against the late French King, that the Spanish monarch may
be lawfully excommunicated and deposed, because all these crimes concur in him
together, and that no wars of what nature soever, can be held unjust and
unlawful, that shall be enterprised and exercised against him, so long as he
shall continue to be as he is, the common and only perturber of Christian peace
and tranquillity.

FINIS.

