Country Conversations: Being an ACCOUNT Of some DISCOURSES THAT Happened in a
VISIT to the Country last Summer, on diverse Subjects;

CHIEFLY
Of the Modern Comedies, Of Drinking, Of Translated Verse, Of Painting and
Painters, Of Poets and Poetry.
-- Recubans sub tegmine fagi
Sylvestrem tenui Musam meditaris avena.


LONDON, Printed for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1694.

TO THE WITS.
FOR a plain Country Gentleman, who is none of your Fraternity, to meddle in
these Matters seems a bold Intrusion; and to do this without any Apology, is
still less excusable. I think it therefore, not improper to make a short
Address to you, and therein to acquaint you, that what follows, was neither
Writ nor Printed out of any Malicious intent to invade your Prerogative of
Writing and Censuring. It must be acknowledged that you are the True
Proprietors and Sovereign Lords of the English Parnassus; there is not a Shrub,
or Twig of Bays that puts forth on that Mountain of the Muses, but is within
your Dominion. All that I pretend to, is only the Birthright of a Freeborn
Subject, and to enjoy my Liberty of thinking. Should you deny me this, you
would certainly be more Arbitrary, and show a greater Tyranny over the Mind,
than the Grand Seignior does over the Bodies and Purses of his Mussulmen. I
made bold to borrow one of your Pens last Summer, and employed it merely for a
Pass-time during the Intervals of Angling, and such like Diversions of a
Country Retreat, La Maniere de bien penser fell in my way I know not how, and I
had a mind to try how something of that Nature would look in our Language. I
endeavored to imitate (tho faintly, and afar off) the Original Draught of Le
Pere Bouhours: If this Copy may be allowed by you to pass as a thing well
meant, tho not like, it is the most that I desire, and more than I expect; if
not, I shall not be much concerned, since I have known some of your own Tribe
to be as unsuccessfull. Farewell.

Country Conversations, etc.
SECT. 1. Of the Modern Comedies.
ABOUT the middle of last Spring, Lisander a Commoner of the first Rank, and
one whose Virtues and Accomplishments had rendered him as Eminent as his Birth
and Estate, being to return to his Country Seat (from which he had been absent
the whole Winter) resolved notwithstanding to lose as little as might be of the
Advantages of the Town, the Chief of which is its Conversation. To this End he
engaged Mitis and Julio, two of his most inward Friends, and persons much of
his Humor and Character, to bear him Company, and Spend, at least, part of the
Summer with him. Nor would Lisander suffer them to go otherwise than in his own
Coach, that so he might enjoy the most of their Discourse, and make a kind of
Accademy on the Road, during this little Voyage; for the Remove was short, and
but a Winter days Journey from London: They were no sooner come into the Free
and Un-citty'd Air, when Lisander told his Friends they must now resolve to
wean themselves, for some time, from the Fountain of News, and exchange the
Diversions of the Coffee-House, and the Theater, for a Cool Shade and Rural
Sports. Mitis Replied, the Change cannot but be very grateful to me, since I am
quite sick of the Common Buz at Coffee-Houses, News frequently false, mostly
uncertain, and sometimes absurdly Ridiculous. You cannot be more Sick, added
Julio, of the News, than I am of the New Plays, the Comedies especially, which
in my Esteem are nothing comparable to those Writ before the Civil War, and
some in the Reign of King Charles the Second. I am absolutely of your mind,
said Lisander; and I think one may say, that the Plain Dealer, and Sir Foplin,
were the last of our English Comedies, as properly and as truly, as Cremutius
Cordus could say, that Brutus and Cassius were the last of the Romans. I
perceive, said Mitis, that you two are Confederate against the Modern Comedies,
and I shall have much ado to defend them against so Potent an Alliance. But I
beseech you Gentlemen, how comes this unmodish Opinion in you, against the
Plays in Fashion? I Will tell you, continued Lisander, methinks they have neither
the Wit, Conduct, Honor, nor Design of those Writ by Johnson, Shakspear, and
Fletcher. They are (generally speaking) Flashy and Light; like your Whipped Cream
they have little or nothing of Substance in them, they seem only suited to
humor some present Maggot or Caprice of the Town, without any further Design;
and that may be the Reason, that for the most part, when they have once had
their Run, they are laid by; and rarely either Acted or Read again in Cool
Blood. The Applause that is given them proves, as the Common Phrase is, but a
Nine Days Wonder. Whereas there is hardly a Scene in Shakspeare (though he Writ
near 100 years since) but we have it still in Admiration, for the Vivacity of
the Wit, the Justness of the Character, and the True, Natural, and Proper
Expression. Plays should be (and have always been in the best Reformed and most
Civilized times) Moral Representations, but now most of our New Comedies are
become the very Pictures of Immorality. This is a general Charge, said Mitis,
and fixes nothing. With Lisanders leave, said Julio, I will give you some
particulars. First I must observe, that the Common Parts and Characters in our
Modern Comedies, are two young Debauchees whom the Author calls Men of Wit and
Pleasure, and sometimes Men of Wit and Sense (but that is when they admire the
Name of Lucretius, and seem to have a Judgment above the Common Doctrines of
Religion) these two Sparks are mightily addicted to Whoring and Drinking. The
Bottle and the Miss (as they Phrase it) twisted together make their Summum
Bonum; all their Songs and Discourse is on that Subject. But at last, partly
for Variety of Faces, and partly in Consideration of improving their Estate
(shattered with Keeping) they Marry two young Ladies, one of which is as wild
as possibly can be, so as to escape the Main Chance, the other more reserved,
but really as forward to be Married as her Sister. Another necessary Ingredient
of a Comedy, is a foolish Knight. (sometimes a Rich Country Squire, but most
commonly the Poet Dubs him) and his Fortune is always in the 5th Act to Marry a
Cast Whore of one of those fine Gentlemen before mentioned, who like a Man of
Honor (such as the Poet makes him) pretends that she is a Person of Quality,
and his near Kinswoman. Add to these a Wife somewhat Elderly; but insatiably
Liquorish after a fresh Gallant; with a Husband continually exclaiming against
the intolerable Labor of a Married Life, and the restless importunities of his
Spouse (and yet this unconscio able Cuckold keeps a Whore, incognita). These
are the Fundamentals of a Modern Comedy: These you have continually over and
over again, the Names only varied, and some little Alteration in the Writing
(most commonly for the worse) till the Humors are become Naucious. For
instance, a Lewd Wife pretending Honor (like my Lady Corkwood, in she would if
she could) but Lasciviously coveting the two Sparks that are Suitors to her
Nieces, and all that Run; was New, well contrived, and very diverting at first;
and to have it a second time under other Names, in Epsom Wells, was tolerable;
but to have the very same again in the Virtuoso, and ten years after that in
the Scourers.

-- Occidit Miseros Crambe rep tita. You are somewhat pleasant, said Mitis
interrupting, in your Rehearsal of our Comic Materials, but withal, Julio, you
are partial; for there is hardly any New Comedy that appears on the Stage, but
has some New Part different from what has been before. It Is true, Replied
Julio, there is indeed often added a New Quelque chose, or (as commonly called)
a Kikshaw, or two, to set off the Entertainment, but these are the standing
Dishes, and so often have they been served up, that they are now become Fusty,
and will hardly go down with the Waiters. It puts me in mind, said Lisander, of
a Frugal Tobacconist, who having a small Twist of Excellent Tobacco given him,
was Resolved to manage it to the utmost Advantage; the first Day therefore, he
chaw'd it, and then put it in his Pocket to dry again, the next day he cut it
and Smoakt it in his Pipe, and after all saved the Ashes to serve him in a
Third Capacity, for Snush. But this Tedious Repetition of the same Notions and
Images, continued Lisander, might be endured, if they were directed to the
improvement of Virtue, or the discountenance of Vice. On the Contrary, we
seldom or never see a Character of True Worth, Integrity, and Honor, in any of
these Comedies, unless it be brought in merely to be abused, and Laughed out of
Countenance. The Debauchee is always the fine Gentleman: It Is he that is set up
for an Example fit for Imitation and Esteem. And to say the Truth the young
Gentry of the Nation have been in this particular Wonderful apt and pregnant
Scholars. Whereas in the Comedies of the last Age, though you have sometimes
People of an ill Character represented, yet they had always some Mark of
Disgrace set upon them before the End of the Play; and the contrary Virtue to
that Vice was always Triumphant, and made the more Amiable and desirous when
compared and set off with the Blemishes of the other. With your permission,
said Mitis, I doubt you are under a great mistake in this; for our Wits and
Criti^ks have more than once informed us, that Instruction is not the business
of Comedy, but Diversion and Laughter. Moral Precepts, say they, are only
proper to Tragedy and Grave Subjects: While the Right Object of Comedy is the
True and Lively Representation of the Manners and Behavior of Mankind in the
times we Live in, so as to make a pleasant Entertainment, and that is all. Our
Poets, continued he, represent the Modern little Actions of Debauchees, as Ben
Johnson presented the Humors of his Tankard Bearer, his Paul's Walkers, and his
Collegiate Ladies, etc. things then known and familiar to every Bodies Notice;
and so are these now, and consequently delightful to the times, as Pictures of
Faces well known and remarkable. These, Answered Julio, were Ben Johnsons
Weaknesses, and have been as such sufficiently exploded by our New fashioned
Wits, and therefore methinks they should not be imitated by them of all Men
Living. Such Representations are like a Painters taking a Picture after the
Life in the Apparel then Worn, which becomes Ungraceful or Ridiculous in the
next Age, when the Fashion is out. Mitis thought me under a mistake, said
Lisander, but I wish he be not Guilty of a greater in thinking a pleasant
Entertainment to be the only Design of a Comedy. Let your Wits and your
Critics say what they please, they can never convince me, but that the True
End of Comedy as well as Tragedy, ought to be the Reformation of Manners, tho
they differ in the Operation. The Subject of Tragedy being high, the Precepts,
Sententious and Grave, and the Moral carries something of Terror against those
who are Great and Wicked, and Raises Compassion for the Sufferings of Good Men.
On the other Hand, Comedy relates to the Inferior sort of Mankind, but should
be directed to the same End, it should render the Ill Habits of the Vulgar
Odious as well as Ridiculous, it should make Folly Blush, and Men ashamed of
their Vices; and Encourage Virtue. On the contrary some of our Late Comedies
have given the greatest Countenance to Libertinism that can be. by setting
forth the extravagant Debauches of the Age as the True Character of a
Gentleman, and only Fools and half Witted Creatures to be Considerate and
Sober. Though they have not dared openly to oppose the Precepts of Religion, yet
they have continually Railed against Marriage, as a Curse and Imposition upon
Nature; and at the same time set off Whoring with all the Delicacy of
Expression, and most obliging Character they could invent. They have not been
so Bold as yet (what it may come to in time, I know not) to Represent Obscene
Actions on the Stage, nor to Use the Plain downright Expressions of Immodesty,
but certainly there is such a continued Thread of Lascivious Meaning (commonly
called Baudry in Clean Linen) that Runs through a whole Play, and such
apparent and obvious Phrases, that most of them must of necessity be taken in a
Lewd Signification, or else they are Nonsense and Absurd. On this Account I
think it almost impossible, for the Youth of either Sex to return from one of
these Comedies with their Fancy as Innocent, as they went. Poetry, the
Dramatique especially, has been properly called a speaking Picture, as
Painting, Dumb Poesy. Which Charles Alphonse du Fresnoy, in the beginning of
his Poem De Art Graphica, has thus curiously expressed,

Ut Pictura Poesis erit; similisque Poesi
Sit Pictura, refert par aemula quaeque Sororem,
Alternantque Vices and Nomina; muta Poesis
Dicitur haec, Pictura loquens solet illa vocari.
Now do but imagine, if the Ideas which these Modern Comedies are full of, were
represented by the Pensil to the Eye, in as lively manner as some of our Poets
set them forth to the Intellect, would not this be a fitting Object to be
exposed to the Public, think you? I will pass over the disrespect that has
been shown to the Clergy of all Opinions (thereby insinuating Religion to be
but a mere Trade at best) though some Scenes have been so gross, that they have
been refused to be Acted, and cut out as Undecent for a Public Representation
(and yet the Poet has been so fond of them, as to Print 'em with the Rest, in a
different Character) However I cannot but observe, that a Statute was made in
the Third Year of King James 1. whereby it was Enacted, That if at any time or
times, any Person or Persons, do or shall in any Stage Play, Jestingly or
Profanely speak, or Use the Holy Name of God, or of Christ Jesus, which are
not to be spoken but with Fear and Reverence, he shall Forfeit for every such
Offense Ten Pounds; the one Moity thereof to the King, the other to him or them
that shall sue for the same. How often this Penalty has been incurred, I will
not determine. It Is well we know you, Lisander, said Mitis Smiling; a Stranger
would think you nearly Related to William Prin, and that you are about to
Compose a Supplement to his H^striomastix. So far from that, Answered Lisander,
that I profess my self a Lover of the Stage; I Esteem Plays (if duly Regulated)
to be of Excellent Use, for Instruction by Examples, for the Improvement of
Wit, and for Innocent diversion of that vacant time, which otherwise might be
worse employed. What I have said is in Order to their Continuance, by a timely
Reformation of those Scandals which are but too visible and noted. It Is well
known, that their Suppression has been endeavored once or twice; and the
Actors are not the first sort of Men here in England, whose Institution, though
it was at first Good and Laudable, yet being afterward abused, their Enemies
have taken occasion from the Abuse, wholly to forbid the Use. The Athenians and
Romans, when their Comedies became Licentious, thought it not below the Dignity
and Care of their Magistrates to Regulate their Faults. And of later times, we
have a fresher and nearer Instance of the Reformation of the Stage. That Great
Man, the Cardinal Duke of Richelieu, to whose Wise Councils France does at this
day, perhaps, owe all her present Grandeur, among all his other Noble Cares for
the Advantage of that Kingdom, made it none of the least to Reform the French
Stage, that from a scandalous Load of Nautious Farce, which few of Quality
would Grace with their Presence, the Objects of the Theater are now become so
Regular and Modest, that Ladies of the Nicest Honor, and the Gravest Church
Men see 'em without Offense. Or to Use the Words of my French Author -- Par les
soins du Grand Cardinal ae Richelieu, la Comedy a tellement change de face,
qu'il n'y rest plus rien de ce qui la faisoit autrefois condamner. Now really
I would not have a Nation of the Roman Catholic Communion boast of any sort of
Reformation, in which we of the Reformed Religion are wanting.

Here this Discourse was broke off for some time. After which Interruption the
Company being again settled, Mitis put Julio in mind of his Promise to give
particular instances of the Defects and Blemishes of our late Comedies, and of
the contrary Beauties of those before the Wars. Whereupon Julio, in a long
Discourse, produced out of Ben. Johnson, Shakspear, Beaumont and Fletcher,
Messenger, Shirley, and Sir William Davenant, before the Wars, and some
Comedies of Mr. Drydens, since the Restoration, many Characters of Gentlemen,
of a quite different Strain from those in the Modern Plays. Whose Conversation
was truly Witty, but not Lewd, Brave and not Abusive; Ladies full of Spirit and
yet Nicely Virtuous; with abundance of Passages discovering an admirable
Invention, and quickness of thought, and yet decently facetious. On the
contrary he gave infinite Examples out of Modern Comedies of another Stamp,
mistaken Images of Bravery, Virtue despised, and the very Genius of Immodesty,
not dropped here and there, but so diffused, that it seems the Soul of the Play.
He took occasion to speak of the Comic Scenes in Tragedies, or Tragic
Stories, (much used by the Poets of the last Age) which they called
Tragy-Comedies; he showed how useful they were in many Respects, but that they
were always subservient to the main Design, and were used chiefly to
Illustrate, Highthen, and set off, the Moral of the Play. He showed also how
those Poets had always in their thoughts that Old Verse,

Omne tulit Punctum qui miscuit Utile dulci. And that those who Writ most
Correct and considerately squared their Designs by that Rule. But now said he,
the Vtile seems wholly lost and forgotten, and the Dulce is become Palled,
Corrupted, and Sour; as Honey it self, and the best sort of Sweet Meats will be
with keeping. Julio was going on in this manner, but the Coach was now Arrived
at Lisanders Village, and the Noise of the Bells that were Ringing to welcome
his Coming, would not suffer any further Discourse at that time.

SECT. II. Of Drinking.
LYsander being thus possessed of the Society of those two Persons whom he Wrote
in the first List of his Friends, was Resolved to give them all the Diversions
his Country could afford, which was certainly Inferior to no Part of England
for all sorts of Game, and good Humored Conversation. To Visit and be Visited,
are the usual Ways by which those of the better sort pass off their vacant time
in the Country. Two or three days after Lisander's Arrival, several of the
Neighboring Gentry came to Welcome his Return. Among whom was Belamy a
Gentleman of Handsome Parts, and Wit enough, but he had Learnt at Oxford (where
he had spent some years) among other Arts, the Science of good Drinking. Which,
with his Country Practice since, had rendered him most expert, in that Noble
Science. He knew the Nature and Force of all sorts of Wines, and had made an
Engine (of which he was the Inventer) whereby to Essay, or Prove 'em, as they
do Gunpowder, and know how far they would carry, and at what distance of time
do Execution. The Learning of Wines being somewhat Foreign, required more of
Reading and Study, and a kind of Mathematical Head to make his Conclusions; but
as for Our Manufacture, all the abstruse Questions relating to Ale, were so
easy and obvious to his understanding, that (as I may say) it was his proper
Element. He knew how by its own natural ferment (without the least Adultery of
Art) to Raise, Refine, Highten, and even inebriate the Liquor it self. To this
end only he had Studied the Principles of Astronomy, and could tell you the
Critical Minute when most successfully to brew, when to Tun, when to Bottle,
and when to Drink; and how many hours Sleep is requisite after a full Dose, a
half Dose, and a quarter Dose. All this Curious Learning and forty times as
much more on the same Subject, Belamy was a Complete Master of. After Dinner
the Bottles began to Muster according to Modern Discipline. Mitis and Julio,
foresaw an Assault, and began to cast up all the Arguments they could, to
fortify their Camp against the Enemy: Mitis especially, who was one of those
Stanch and Abstemious Humourists that Drink more Tea than Claret; understand
me, between Meals; for at Dinner he always took his Glass in Course, and
thought it then as absurd to forbear Wine as to drink Coffee. Belamy who
happened to fit next him, and having observed him at Dinner to drink freely
enough, and never balk a Health, he concluded he would do the like at all
times; perceiving therefore now, that he trifled with his Glass, and (as he
Phrased it) did not Drink fairly, he began to press upon him, and urge him to
be sociable, alleging for a main Argument, that after this Rate we shall be
Drunk before you. Mitis a little moved to find the Conscience less free in
Drinking than Religion, Replied, Do you Esteem that an Advantage, or
disadvantage? a Happiness, or Misfortune? Let me perish if I can imagine which
you think it. For if you think it a misfortune, who constrains you to drink a
stronger Liquor, or in a greater quantity, than I do? But if you think it a
Happiness or Advantage, what Reason have you to complain of that? This was a
Dilemma which Bellamy was not at that time prepared to Answer, he therefore
Balkt the Question, as Mitis had done the Glass, and in a more Complaisant
manner, entreated him to begin a Health, such as he pleased. Will you then
pledge me in Tea, said Mitis. Not while there is Wine in the County, Replied
the other. And what, continued Mitis, should oblige me to Drink your Liquor,
more than you mine? Suppose a Water Drinker here (you know there are many such)
whose long continued Custom has made it natural to drink nothing but pure
Element. Would you think it Civility to press him to pledge you a Bumper in
Claret, or on the other hand, would you not think him Mad to urge you to Pledge
a Pint Glass from the Cistern? A Water Drinker, says Bellamy, is Company for my
Horse, and unfit for Society. Hereupon M^tis demanded, what do you call
Society? The other replied readily, Wit, Mirth, and good Humor; which none can
be Master of without a generous Bottle. And yet, said Mitis, Voiture drunk
Water. That very Name has the force of a thousand Arguments against you.
Besides, Water is the natural Drink of the whole Creation; the only Drink, in
probability, before the Flood, when Mankind lived to the extravagancy of Old
Age; and certainly could we reduce our selves to that which was Adam's Liquor,
and leave that of Noah, whose first appearance in the World was unluckly and
ominous, we should avoid a thousand Distractions, and (which is the constant
effect of Drinking in me) as many painful Surfeits and Fevers. That Is only for
want of Practice, said Belamy; if you did but use it more, you would not be
disturbed; no more than I, who am as Brisk and well next day after my three
Bottles over Night, as if it were Mothers Milk. Are you sure it agrees so well
with you, said Mstis slily, I should be apt to think it does not. Do you think
me, answered Belamy somewhat hastily, a Fool or a Madman? Why sure you will give
me leave to understand my own Constitution better than you; and Judge of my own
Temper from Experience truer than you can. You have Reason, answered Mitis; and
why must I be supposed such an Idiot that I cannot do the same of my Temper
from my Experience? You Advise me to Drink Wine more frequently, that it may
by constant practice, be familiar to my Stomach, and that I may have my Health
after it. Is not this Ridiculous, when I have my Health already without it? I
know there is a sort of People who think it conducing to their Health (or at
least their Pleasure) once or twice a Week to be very Merry, as they call it,
that is in English, down Drunk: and this in their Phrase is to give Nature a
Fillip. How you approve of this I know not, for my part I think such a Course
of Life as far from pleasure as it is from Health. An other thing I have
observed among your Good Fellows, which in my Opinion is extremely obsurd; if
one Man drinks his Glass less full than his who drank to him, the other cries
out in a very Pathetical manner,; Nay Sir, Do me Justice -- mine was higher. As
if the Contents of one Man's Stomach were the Standard for all Men. They call
this Justice, which in reality is the greatest Injustice that belongs to
Society. Suppose it were the Custom to Eat Healths and not drink'em (as I see
no Reason for one more than the other.) There are some of such Voracious
Appetites, that one Man can Eat a whole Shoulder of Mutton at a Bout, or
perhaps a Leg of Pork and Turnips. Would you think it reasonable for one of
these Eaters to desire his Friends to pledge him, and take off a whole
Shoulder? Perhaps his next Neighbor at Table is one of those who have an
Aversion for Hogs Flesh, would you think it Civil for one of these Devourers
aforesaid to Eat a Health, and press the other to do him Justice, and Pledge
him in five or six pound of Pork? Away with your naucious Similes, interrupted
Belamy, who ever heard of Eating Healths? The Debate, said Mitis, is not of
Eating or Drinking, but measuring the Contents of one Man's Appetite by that of
an other. -- But what is a Health? Belamy readily gave him this Definition; A
Health is only a hearty Wish between two, for the Good and Prosperity of a
third Person; and as an Evidence to demonstrate the Reality of our Intention,
we take off a Bumper, tho perhaps against ones Stomach: Nay, the bigger the
Glass is, and the more against nature, the stronger our Affection. A most
excellent Demonstration of well wishing! cried Mitis; something like this,
continued he, I have read, of a sort of Bigoted Turks, who in the hight and
transport of their Zeal, to show their Love and Devotion to Mahomet, cut and
gash their own Flesh, and Stab themselves in the Hand. But here is the
difference, some Men among us, when they demonstrate on such occasions as you
mention, instead of Wounding themselves they Stab others. Come, come, said
Belamy, all your Argumentation signifies not a rush, the Practice of all Europe
in this Age, is against you; and Custom must prevail. In my mind, replied
Mitis, our Ancestors the Old Britans had a much better Custom, for which they
were proposed as an Example of Temperance: Witness the Poet,

Ecce Britannorum Mos est laudabilis iste
Vt bibat arbitrio pocula quisque suo.
Which with your permission may be Englished thus,

Among the Britans we this Custom find,
That no Man drinks but as he is inclined.
Methinks' said Belamy, arbitrio suo may as well be taken in an other quite
different sense, and with the same Liberty that you have used, I may render it
thus

Among the Britans this good Custom was,
That each Man willingly took off his Glass.
The rest of the Company who had been hitherto very Attentive to the pleasant
Dialogue, could no longer forbear to interpose. Julio, either out of
Complaisance to Belamy, being a stranger, or minded to Rally Mitis, highly
applauded B^lamy's Version; saying, it showed the very Spirit of Ben. Johnson,
when indulging his Genius in the Apollo. Lisander smiled and said he liked the
Witty Evasion of the Authors Sense. Others, who were Brothers of the Bottle,
were Lavish in their Commendation, and that they might never forget so useful a
piece of Poetry, they Writ it down in their Table Books. One of the Company, an
Old Cavalier of Gray Age, but of a Wit and Judgment as Vigorous as ever, said,
Belamy's Shift puts me in mind of an Evasion that was made (somewhat to better
purpose) many years ago, in the time of Oliver's Rebellion. The Parlimentarian
Party were very apt to Argue the Righteousness of their Cause from the Success;
saying, that God owned his People, and manifested the Justice of their
Undertakings by the many Victories which he gave them, and a great deal of Cant
to that purpose. One of that side who pretended to Learning, said, the Notion
was acknowledged in all Ages, which made Lucan Write,

Victrix Causa Diis placuit -- A Royalist then present of a Wit as far
Superior to his, as his Principles were better, Replied, Consider the whole
Verse together, and it makes against you.

Victrix Causa Diis placuit, sed Victa Catoni. Now all History tells us of what
Eminent Virtues, and how excellent a Man That Cato was; and we are still better
informed, from the Holy Scripture, that the Heathen Gods were Devils, Omnes Dii
gentium Daemonia. (Psalm. 95. v. 5.) The plain English therefore of that Verse
in Lucan is no more than this;

Devils the Conquering Cause like best,
But Divine Cato the Oppressed.
This Translation, says Julio, would certainly have pleased Father Bouhours,
who in all probability would have preferred it to the Latin, since in the very
beginning of his Man ere de bien penser, he falls foul on Lucan for
representing, in that place, a Mortal Man to be of a better Character for
Justice and Compassion, than the Gods, contrary to the Universally received
Notions of a Deity. Hereupon they fell into a long Discourse of Translated
Verse. Lisander affirmed that none can be properly said to Translate well,
unless he improves the Author's Thought, or at least meliorates the Expression
in English beyond what it is in Latin, which rarely happens, unless it be from
one who has great Judgment in both Languages. And for this reason the
Translation of Latin Poetry, Verbally, into English Prose, (or bad Verse,
which is worse) is Dull and Flat, though never so good in the Original, because
it wants the Delicacy of Expression, and the Harmony of Measure and Cadence,
which belongs to true Poesy. Julio acknowledged what Lisander said, to be
undoubted Truth, and observed further, that the Poets of this Age, however
short they may be of some of their Predecessors in other matters; yet they much
excel them in the Art of Versifying; I mean for easy and Genuine Expression,
and smooth composure of their Lines, placing their Words so as may most agree
with the usual way of speaking, and not beginning a Period in the middle of one
Verse, and ending it in the middle of the next. In which particulars most, if
not all the Poets of the last Age were very Faulty and Ungraceful in their
Writings. And yet, said Mitis, I remember a Latin Couplet, Witty enough, which
I think better expressed in English, above 100 years ago, (as seems by the
Measure.) It is a piece of an Epigram relating to a Clock: The Words are these,

Quis teneat lento fugientia tempora nodo,
Cum dent and celeres plumhea vincla pedes?
The rest I have forgot, both of the Latin and English, except only this
Conclusion,

Then who with gentle tie can cause the fleeting time to stay;
When feet which fettered are with Lead, do post so fast away?
Here the thought is as full as in the Original, but much more intelligibly
expressed to an English Ear, than if he had said, That Leaden Chains give swift
Feet, the harshness of the Metaphor being mollified in the Translation. Which
is the more observable, added Lisander, in regard the Writers of those times do
so very much superabound in uneasy Figures, and hardly any thing was then
admitted to be well and Scholar-like penned, unless it were almost all Metaphor,
and Catachresis. In the mean time, says Belamy, we forget our Business; the
Wine dies, the Glass sleeps, and the Butler grows Pursey for want of Exercise:
Away with your Poetry and Poets, the best use we can make of them at present
is, in my opinion, to Drink all their Healths from Homer down to Ben. The
Extravagancy of such a Proposal made Mitis start, who replied, that to do so
would take up more time than he designed to spend in the Country, and he
questioned whether Lisander's Celler could supply them all. Besides, says he, I
must be first satisfied by a Divine, whether Drinking a Health to the Deceased
be not as Superstitious and Unlawful as to pray for them. Well then, said
Belamy, since we must not remember them this way, let us even take a friendly
Round or two, and forget 'em. Lisander proposed, as a means to gratify both
Parties, the Drinkers, and the Wits, that Mitis and Julio should at this time
comply in some reasonable degree with Belamy, and in return, he and all the
Rest of the Company should at the next Meeting produce a Specimen of Translated
Verse of their own performance, all which should be impartially Examined by the
Rest; thereby to discover, if not an Example of good Translation, yet at least
how it should be such. What Lisander mentioned was not unpleasing to any; each
Man in the Company undertook to perform his part, according to his Talent, both
for Drinking and VVriting. The Rest of the Evening they Sacrificed to Bacchus,
till the Company Parted, all having enough, and some too much.

SECT. III. Of Translated Verse.
IT was about a fortnight or three Weeks after, before all those who had
undertaken this Exercise of the Muses could meet. At last they happened
together at Lisanders: Who after a Noble Treat at Dinner, led his Friends to
his favorite Walk in the Bottom of his Park. It was cut out and contrived on
the Bank of a most delightsome River, as well stored with all sorts of Fish, as
the Swans would permit; the Walk was as Broad, and even as the Mall, and above
half as long, but not so strait, it humouring the Meanders of the Stream. The
whole length of the Walk was skirted on the one Hand with a Wood continually
full of Nightingales, Throstles, Stockdoves, and such Silvan Music; the
outward Branches of which were so Luxuriant, that they spread themselves with
little or no intermission, as a Natural Canopy from one end of the Walk to the
other. On the other side, opposite to the Wood, ran along a most sweet and
clear River, and beyond that lay such a Beauteous Prospect of Meadows, so decked
at that time with Primroses, Daisies, and other such like wild Gayities of the
forward Spring, as if Nature had defied the most skilful Jeweller to show a
pleasanter Enamel. Lisander had contrived on the Wood side of this Walk several
Seats and Resting places, but one more especial about the Middle. It was a kind
of small Summer House Placed opposite to a Visto that for Eight or Ten Miles
forward, cut through all the delightful Objects that fancy can desire in the
most pleasing Landscape. Here it was that Lisander having seated the Company,
remembered them of the Translated Essays they had all promised; and because he
was the Promoter of the Undertaking, himself first began with Repeating these
Lines out of the Sixth Book of Virgils Aeneads.

Excudent alii spirantia mollius era;
Credo equidem, vivos ducant e marmore Vultus.
Orabunt Causas melius, caelique meatus
Describent radio, and surgentia sidera dicent.
Tu regere imperio populos, Roman, memento,
(Hae tibi erunt arts) pacisque imponere morem
Parcere Subjectis, and debellare superbos.
Which, said he, I have ventured to render thus, in English.

Some may in Sculpture sweeter Touches give,
And by their Skill make the Cold Marble live:
Some better may defend their Clyent's Cause;
Some in Astronomy gain more Applause:
To Rule, O Roman, shall thy Science be;
These are the Proper Arts of Majesty:
How in soft Peace their Subjects to dispose,
And how with Steel to manage Rebel Foes.
Mitis began to Applaud the Translation, when Lisander cut him short, saying,
that he did not propose these Essays for Applause, either to himself or others;
but on the contrary to occasion handsome Exceptions, and discoveries not of
Beauties, but Defects and Blemishes (which he knows the Company can make) in
Order thereby to teach one how to write Correctly. And I am of Opinion,
continued he, that no Man can be said truly to write well, unless he can find
Fault well. For Faults, like Diseases, when perfectly discovered are half
Cured. Hereupon Julio said, I tell you frankly then Lisander, I should not like
your Expression in the second Line -- Make the cold Marble live -- as too bold
and extravagant, were it not Justified in the Original by spirantia era, and
Vivos Vultus: But there is a real Fault, or rather Defect in your Translation,
for which I can Frame no manner of excuse. You have omitted Parcere Subjectis,
which seems to me to be the most material Part of the Character which Virgil
here gives of an excellent Prince, or Governor; Mercy and Forbearance are
Attributes of the Deity, and nothing can be more Great and Godlike in a Ruler.
Therefore Debellare Superbos, and not parcere Subjectis at the same time, as it
is but half the Advice of Anchises to Aeneas, (or under that Fiction, of Virgil
to Augustus) so it is but half the sense of your Author. Lisander acknowledged
the Truth of what Julio said, and thanked him, for expressing his free Thought.
Belamy happened to sit next to Lisander, and was therefore as next in Order,
requested to produce something or other that he had fancied since the last
Meeting. I profess, replied he briskly, I have not of late met any thing more
agreeable to my Humor, than an Old Chanson a boire in one of Molier's Comedies.

Buuons, chers Amiss, buvons,
Le temps qui fuit nous y convie:
Profitons de la vie
Autant que nous pouvons:
Quand on a pass l'onde noire,
Adieu le bon Vin, nos amors;
Depeschons-nous de Boire,
On ne boit pas toujours.
Laisons Raisonner les Sots
Sur le vray bon heur de la vie;
Nostre Philosophy
Le met parmy les Pots:
Les biens, le Scavoir, and la Gloire,
N'ostent point les soucis fascheux;
Et ce n'est qu'a bien boire
Que l'on peut estre heureux.
Which I thus English,

Drink, my Friends, and use your time,
While easy Life is in its Prime,
E're our Drinking days are past.
Sullen Age comes on apace,
And Death will all our Joys deface:
Drinking cannot always last.
Drink, my Friends, while Fools dispute
Of what is Life's most Happy Fruit;
All their Arguments are Cheat.
Fair Estates, and Fame more fair,
Could never yet extinguish Care;
Drinking only does the Feat.
A Chanson a Boire, said Mitis, is of so slight a Nature, that it can hardly
afford either matter or words substantial enough to bear an exception; things
of this kind are supposed to be writ as it were extempore over a Glass of Wine,
with little or no Consideration, and therefore have all the Grains of allowance
that can possibly be given. And for that reason I cannot in this, tho in an
other sort of Poem I should disapprove the last Words, does the Feat, as a low
and abject Phrase. Yet, said Julio, if a Word be used improperly, or in a sense
that it will not bear, it may be justly condemned; for example, in the first
Stanza, -- Death will all our Joys Deface. Deface is a word that relates
properly to Objects of the Sight, as to Deface a Writing, a Monument, a
Picture, etc. Now Joys are Notional and may be said to be Defeated, Destroyed,
or Determined, but, as I conceive, not properly to be Defaced; no more than to
deface ones pleasure, or deface a Jest or fit of Laughter. After all added
Lisander, I think his English to be better than the French Original, as
including the Authors sense in less Compass, and fewer Idle Words. Here
Charleson (for that was the Name of the Old Cavalier former^y mentioned)
recited the beginning of that Famous Ode in the 3 d Book of Horace, which, said
he, we that suffered in the times of Rebellion and Anarchy, did sometimes use
to apply to our selves, by way of Encouragement.

Justum and tenacem propositi Virum,
Non civium ardor prava jubentium,
Non vultus instantis Tyranni
Mente quatit solida: neque Auster,
Dux inquieti turbidus Adriae,
Nec fulminantis magna Jovis manus.
Si fractus illabatur Orbis
Impavidum ferient Ruinae.
I shall give ye occasion enough of Exception, continued he, when I tell you my
English.

The Just and constant Man is never cast down
By the Mob's Fury, or a Tyrants Frown.
Nor Winds, nor Waves, nor Thunder, can
Or Shake, or Startle, such a Man;
Nay should the very Heavens Fall
And a New Chaos swallow all,
Well settled in his Mind, he would stand upright;
Nor could the Universal Ruin Fright.
This Translation, said Lisander, has fully and handsomely expressed the Sense of
the Latin; but not after the Poetical Phrase of the Author. And though Nor
Winds, nor Waves, nor Thunder -- gives us the true signification and meaning,
of Neque Auster Dux turbidus Adriae, nec Jovis Manus -- Yet in my Opinion a
Translator must not neglect those Figurative ways of speaking; for if so, we
should loose the Intelligence of the Old received Fictions, without which we
can never perfectly understand all the Beauties of the Latin Poets. I cannot
approve, said Julio, of the word Mob, in these Verses, which tho significant
enough, yet it is a word but of Late Use, and not sufficiently Naturalized to
appear in a serious Poem: Besides, I esteem it a kind of Burlesque word, and
unsuitable to the Dignity of Horace. There is an other word, said Mitis, which I
cannot pass without a Remark; and that is the Particle, Nay, which I know is of
Common use in Prose to highten and aggravate the Subject of Discourse, but I
cannot think it graceful in Verse, as a too familiar and slight way of
speaking. It Is without all question, there are some words which are allowable
in Prose, but not in a Poem; such as the word Lad, which the Great Cowley tells
in the Notes on his Davideis, is not proper to be Read in an Heroic Poem, and
therefore uses the Word Boy instead of it; and yet the word Lad is preferred in
the English Translation of the Scriptures, from whence he takes the Argument
and Foundation of his Work. After this it came in Course to a Gentleman whose
Name I have forgot, to produce his Specimen; he told the Company, that he had
lately happened upon a French Epigram of a New and surprising Turn, the manner
of the Poets expressing his Design, in the Close, pleased me so well, said he,
that I could not forbear trying, how the Thought would show in English. It is
an Address to Cardinal Richelieu, formed in such an Air, that in my mind, it is
the neatest (or if you will) the gentilest way of begging a great Man's favor,
not without something like Reproach for neglect, that ever I met with. The
French is this,

Armand, l'aage afioiblit mes yeux,
Et tout ma chaleur me quitte:
Je verray bien tossed mes ayeux
Sur le rivage du Cocyte:
Je seray bientost des suivans
De ce bon Monarque de France
Qui fut le Pere des scavans
En un seicle pleine d'ignorance.
Lors que j'approcheray de luy,
Il voudra que Je lui raconte
Tout ce que tu fais aujourduy
Pour combler l'Espagne de honte.
Je contenteray son desir,
Et par le recit de ta vie
Je charmeray le deplaisir
Qu'il receut au Champ de Pavie.
Mais s'il demand en quel employ
Tu m'as tenu dedans le monde,
Et quel bien j'ay receu de toy,
Que veux-tu que je luy reponde?
And my English this,

Old Age begins to call; I soon must go
To my last home, in the Dark World below,
Where busy Souls will Crowd some News to know.
There I shall tell, Armand, of your Renown,
The Voice of every Country, every Town;
What Wonders you have done to serve the Crown.
How Wise, how Great, in every god like Deed,
How bountiful you are to all that need,
But most where Learning speaks, or Merits plead.
When they shall ask, as ten to one some may,
What you have done for me, tell me I pray,
Illustrious Sir, what would you have me say?
Believe me Sir, said Lisander, you have hansomly and well expressed the Authors
Turn of Thought in the Conclusion, but I must needs say, you have so little
observed the Authors Expressions in all that goes before, that in my Opinion,
this cannot properly be called a Translation, but rather some Verses writ in
imitation of the French. You have well Paraphrased the Author's meaning in the
main; but certainly as a good Translation ought not on the one hand, to be
Literal or Verbal without a due Liberty to the property of Expression in our
Language; so on the the other, it must not be a mere Paraphrase on the Author's
General Design, without any respect to his form of expression. Julio added,
that he could wish the word what had not been twice used so close together in
the two last Lines, What you have, and what would you, for besides that correct
Writers forbear to repeat the same words near the place where they have been
used already, (unless the Enargy of the sense does absolutely require it) the
word what is harsh and unpleasant in the English Tongue, as the word Car in the
French; which Monsieur de Gomberville one of those Select Wits who composed the
French Academy, rejected as offensive, and fitter for a Disputation than a
Romance or Poem; and bragged that he had not at all made use of that word in
composing the five Volumes of Polexander. After this Mitis produced Mr. Cowleys
Epitaph in Westminster Abbey, rendered by him into English.

Aurea dum uolitant late tua scripta per orbem
Et fama aeternum vivis, divine Poeta,
Hic placida jaceas requie: Custodiant urnam
Cana fides; vigilcntque perenni lampade Musae:
Sit sacer iste locus, nec quis temerarius ausit
Sacrilega turbare man^ venerabile Bustum.
Intacti maneant, maneant per secula dulcis
Couleii ^ineres, serventque immobile Saxum.
Immortal in his Fame, which daily Flies
About the Globe, here Divine Cowley lies.
His Urne inviolate all Ages keep:
Here let the Muses ever Watch, and Weep.
For ever Holy let this place remain,
Untrod by Sacrilegious and Profane
Eternal Peace Sweet Cowley guard; and may
His Name preserve this Marble from decay.
Belamy who had been silent a long while, this dry Discourse being insipid to
him; could not now forbear observing to Mitis (his Old Antagonist) that in his
Opinion he has taken too great a Liberty in the beginning of his Version, the
Latin mentioning Cowley in the second Person, which he has varied in the
English to the third, contrary (as he thinks) to the Rules of a True and Just
Translation. Julio said, that his addition of the Word weep, though i^ does
really improve the sense, yet being placed unluckily at the end of the Line,
looks as if it was taken in, only for the Rhyme sake. Lisander observed, that
the Conclusion of this Epitaph (especially as Mitis has expressed it in English)
has much the like thought with that composed for Michael Drayton whose Monument
is very little distant from Mr. Cowley's, and that the sense of their Epitaphs
in this particular, is almost as near as their Graves; for thus the Composer of
Mr. Drayton's Epitaph is supposed to speak to the Marble that covers him.

And when thy Ruins shall disclaim
To be the Treasury of his Name,
His Name that cannot dye shall be
An Everlasting Monument to thee.
Here Julio was called upon to produce his Essay of Translation. He said he had
lately chopped upon some Latin Verses which he found written before a Burtons
Melancholy, the Author of which Book assumed the Name of Democritus Junior.

Heraclite fleas, misero sic convenit Aevo,
Nil nisi triste vides, nil nisi Turpe vides.
Tu ride quantumque lubet, Democrite, ride,
Non nisi vana vides, non nisi stulta vides.
Is fletu, hic risu modo gaudeant, unus utrique
Sit licet usque Labor, sit licet usque Dolor.
Nunc opus est (nam totus eheu! jam desipit Orbis)
Mill Heraclitis, milleque Democritis.
Nunc opus est (tanta est insania) transeat omnis
Orbis in Anticyras, gramen in Helleborum
The Latin pleased me so well, continued Julio, that I tried to turn 'em into
English; but so unsuccessfully, that I am ashamed of the Attempt.

Now Heraclitus, let thy Salt Showers fall;
Since all you see is sad, and wretched all.
Now Laugh, Democritus, and burst thy Spleen;
Nothing but vain, and Ridicule, is seen.
To both your Passions give their full Careers;
More than sufficient cause for both appears.
The Unhappy Age wants thousands such as you
To Weep, to Laugh, yet all would be too few
The Unhappy Age wants no Provision more
Than Towns of Bedlams, Fields of Hellebore.
As Julio had before played the Critic on the several Translations of all the
Company, so now every Man thought himself obliged to make some Remark on his.
Mitis said, that he had used more figurative Expressions in his English, than
the Author had in the Latin, such as let thy Salt Showers fall, instead of
Fleas. And that in his Opinion, Figures are less allowable in our Language than
in the Roman. Charleson said his Addition, yet all would be too few, admits of
the same exception, which himself made but just before to Mitis about the word
Weep, and one need only repeat his own Words, [tho' it does somewhat improve
the Authors thought, yet being placed unluckily at the end of the Line, it
looks as if it were taken in, only for the Rhime's sake] so common a thing is
it for a man to trip in the very place where he observed another to stumble. A
third said, if those words were not added for the Rhime's sake, yet he fears
the word Careers in the Plural was, for I fancy, continued he, had it Rhimed,
Career in the singular had been better English: Yet it seems to me to be but an
untoward and ill chosen Word, at best. Others made other Observations of less
Note, which I have forgot. Julio thankt the Company for the Honor they did him
in examining his Verses more closely than the others; but, added he, after all
you have not discovered half the Faults. In such like Discourses the time slipped
away insensibly; when Lisander having observed the Sun near setting, rise up
from his Seat, and ended the Friendly Debate with this Verse of Virgil,

Claudite jam Rivos, Pueri, sat prata biberunt. I cannot imagine, said Belamy,
how you apply that; for if you design it to us, nothing can be more improper;
since we are so far from having drunk enough, that Drink is the only thing that
has been wanting. If you love me therefore, let us make all convenient have
back to your house, Lisandey, and redeem the time, for really I have lost an
Afternoon strangely. They all smiled, and returned. As they walked Julio
acknowledged he began to be tired with the Afternoons Work; whick looked so like
Schoolboys producing their Exercise, that he could not choose but remember
with a kind of Terror, the Rod and Ferula. True, said Mitis, we were all like
Schoolboys in one respect, but we were all Masters in another, since we all
judged, Censured, and Corrected. Or as Ovid says of Baucis and Philemon,

-- Iidem jubentque parentque SECT. IV. Of Painting and Painters.
AMong other Visits which Lisander and his two Friends were obliged to repay,
one was to Eugenius, a Gentleman whose Seat was about Seven or Eight Miles
distant from that of Lisander, Eugenius had Traveled in his younger years, and
performed the Grand Toure; after his return into England, he had lived at Court
in a very handsome Station, but some years since he had quitted his Office
there, and given himself wholly to a Country Retirement. Since when he employed
himself much after the Italian Fashion in Building, and imbelishing his House
and Gardens. Out of the Ruins of an Old Priory he had erected one of the
Neatest Houses in that County for true and Regular Architecture, and Curious
Contrivance. It was choicely furnished within, but in no particular more
singular and observable than for a Select and valuable Collection of Original
Paintings, which he had purchased, at a very considerable expense, in Italy and
France. He had always a Great fancy for the Art of Designing, and had been
taught something of it when young, which he had extremely improved by the
Instructions of the best Masters at Rome. In his later times of Leisure he used
the Pensil often, which he called his most pleasing Diversion, and his Idle
Hours more Honestly employed than in that which some call business. His Genius
inclined him most to Landskip-Painting in which he had a very pretty manner,
and almost all that he performed appeared with a free and Noble Gust. Mitis and
Julio no sooner approached the House, but they took Notice of some of the Old
Ruins, which Eugenius had purposely left standing at a little Distance,
esteeming such Marks of Venerable Antiquity, no blemish, but rather Beauty,
like the Ruins of Old Rome among the Modern Palaces. One might easily perceive
where the Church and Cloister had been, by the Remains of an Old Wall, which
looked as if it had Wrestled with an Earthquake; and though the Legs, and Arms,
and even its very Neck were broken, yet the heart remained still firm and
unshaken. Julio who omited no occasion to Magnify the Wit of the Dramatick
Poets of the last Age, said, this Object has the Beauty of an old Medal; the
Sight is like that of a Good Picture, where all the while a Man views it, his
Fancy is still working, and the more he looks, the more he discovers to
please him. Nothing can possibly better suit with my Thoughts on this Occasion,
than what Antonio says in the Duchess of Malfy, a Tragedy Writ by Webster.

I do love these Ancient Ruins. We never
Tread on them, but we set our Foot upon
Some Reverend History. And questionless
Here in this open Court, which now lies Naked
To the Injuries of Stormy VVeather,
Some lie interred who loved the Church so well,
And gave so largely to it, they thought it would
Have Canopy'd their Bones till Domesday:
But all things have their End. Churches and Cities
Which have Diseases like to Men, must have
Like Death as we have.
Eugenius who had discovered their coming, received them in his outward Court
with great Civility. After the usual Complements were over, Mitis could not
forbear to extol the Delicacy of the Situation, protesting that he never
beheld a Circle of Prospects, or as the French call it les Environs more
agreeable than what Eugenius enjoys from this Seat, which to me (said he) seems
the very Center of Delights. But you will perhaps, said Lisander, be more
surprised with Admiration when you enter the House, and see how Artificially
Eugenius has contracted the whole Circle into the Center. Mitis expressed a kind
of impatiency to behold so great a Rarity. Eugenius therefore readily conducted
the Company into a very fair withdrawing Room, Curiously Wainscoted with Cedar;
some Parts of the Cornish and Frames were Gilded; the Pannels, which were Large
and High, contained so many Landskips; they were all the several Views about
the Lordship, not the least thing omited that was any way Remarkable, and so
Artificially placed, that they were posited exactly as the Real places lay,
according to the Compass, for the Room was not square, but contrived orbicular,
or rather cast into sixteen Angles, the Pannels not being Concave, but Flat.
Julio admired the Contrivance, and thought he could never sufficiently Applaud
both the Design and performance. Mitis, who was himself a Lover, and had some
Competent Judgment in the Art, after he had viewed 'em very intently sometime,
said, here is one Beauty and Excellent Decorum in these Landskips, which I
believe is not observed by every one that sees them. Though they are several
Pieces, yet the Shadows of all are so placed, as if they were all seen at the
same time of the Day, which makes every Panel, show like a several Window, and
the Picture no more than a view in Perspective. You observe Right Sir, said
Eugenius, 'twas so intended; for if the shadows had in the several Pictures,
been placed more ways than one, and that not answering and agreeing in all, it
would have looked as if there had been several Suns shining in one Hemisphere.
You may suppose therefore, that you see all these Objects two or three hours
after Sun Rise about Midsummer, which I esteem the pleasantest part of the Day,
and of the year. But these are Trifles, the next Room will show you something
more worth your Sight, hereupon he led them into a Large Gallery Richly Adorned
with choice Italian Paintings: There was hardly a Great Name in Italy, but he
had there some of his Work, with some of the best of the Flemings, and Plenty
of Vandikes Portraits. He had also some Excellent Sculptures of Cavalier
Bernini, and our own Mr. Gibbon. Julio protested that the Sight only of this
Gallery was richly worth a Journey from London, or from any other, though it be
the furthest, part of England. Mitis said he was confounded with so many
admirable Objects, each having its particular Excellency tho in a different
Manner of Expression. Lisander begged that Eugenius would favor him with some
Rules whereby to judge of the Great Masters, and their several and peculiar
Manners. Eugenius's Modestly excused himself, saying, he was but an ill
Instructor in an Art which he did not well understand himself; but having been
lately reading in a French Author, something which relates to this Question, he
will repeat it in Engliish as well as he can. They are, said he,

The Sentiments of Charles Alphonse Du Fresnoy, on the Works of the Principal
and best Painters of the last Ages.
PAinting was in its Perfection among the Ancient Greeks. The Principal Schools
were at Sicyon, and after at Rhodes, Athens, Corinth, and lastly at Rome. War
and Luxury having dissipated the Roman Empire, all Curious Arts, all polite
Learning, and other Sciences, became extinct. But this began to appear again in
the year 1450, among the Florentines, one of whom was Dominico Ghirlandi,
Master of Michael Angelo, a Painter of some Considerable Name, though his manner
was Gothic, and very dry.

Michael Angelo, his Disciple, appeared in the time of Julius II, Leo X, Paul
III, and eight succeeding Popes. He was not only a Painter, but a Sculptor, and
Architect Civil and Military. The choice which he made of his The Posture and
Action that any Figure is represented in.
Attitudes was not always excellent, nor pleasing. His The Relish or Delight
Resulting from the whole, also the manner.
Gust in designing cannot be said to be the finest, nor his The Outward Lines.
Contour the most Elegant. His folds of Garments, and Habits, were not very
Beautiful nor Gracious.

He is somewhat Fantastic and extravagant in his Compositions, Rash and Hardy
in taking to himself License against the Rules of Perspective. His Coloring is
not very True nor pleasant. He knew not the Art of The Art of disposing the
Lights and Shadows skilfully.
Clair-obscur. He designed, and understood the Connection of the Bones, the
Function, and Situation of the Muscles better than any of the Painters among
the Moderns. He expressed a certain Grandeur and Security in his Figures, which
took well in many places. But above all he was the greatest Architect that ever
we knew of, having excelled even the Ancients themselves. Witness St. Peter's
at Rome, St. John's at Florence, the Capitol, the Palace Farnese, and his own
House. His Disciples were Marcel Venuste, Andrew de Vattere, le Rosse, George
Vasare, Fra Bastian who usually Painted for him, with several other Florentines.

Peter Perugin, designed with sufficient Intelligence of Nature, but it was Dry
and Withered, and after a little Manner. He had for Disciple.

Raphiel Santio, who was born on Good Friday in the year 1483, and died on
Good Friday in the year 1520, having lived but 37 years. He has surpast all the
Modern Painters, in having more excellent parts in him all at once, and some
think he equaled the Ancients, except in this that he did not design Naked
Figures so skilfully as Michael Angelo. But his Gust in designing is much more
pure, and finer. His Painting was not so good, so full, and of so Gracious a
manner, as that of Corregio; nor had he the Contraste or Opposition of
Clair-obscur, and the fierce and clean Coloring of Titian. But without
Comparison, he had a better disposition in his Pieces than Titian, Corregio,
Michael Angelo, and all other Painters that have ever been since that time. His
choice of Attitudes, of Heads, of Ornaments, of his manner of Drapery, his
manner of designing, his Varieties, his Contrastes, his Expressions were all
perfectly good; but above all the Graces of his Pictures were such as no Man
ever came near. His Heads Painted after the Life.
Portraits are very well esteemed. He was an excellent Architect. He was
handsome, Tall, Civil and Obliging, never refusing to inform any one in what he
knew. He had many Disciples, among others Julio Romano, Polidore, Gaudens, John
d'Vdine, and Michael Coxis. His Graver was Marck Antoine, whose Prints are
admirable for the Correction of the Contours.

Julio Romano was the most excellent of all Raphiels Disciples, and had some
Conceptions more extraordinary, more profound, and more Majestic than his
Master. He was also a great Architect; of a Gust Pure and Neat; a great
imitator of the Ancients, discovering in all his Works his desire to restore
the Old Fotms and Fabrics of past Ages, to the Modern Practice. He had the
good fortune to have persons of great Quality who relied wholly upon him for
Buildings, Terms in Architecture, relating to several forms of Building.
Vestibules, Tetrastile Portico's, Xistes, Theaters, and such other Places, not
now in use. He had a Wonderful Judgment in the Election of Attitudes. His
manner was the Hardest and dryest of all the School of Raphael; he did not very
well understand the Clairobscur, and way of Coloring. He is stiff and
ungraceful in many places. The folds of his Draperies are neither Beautiful,
nor Great, nor Easy, not Natural, but all Fantastic and which resemble
something the Habits of ill Comedians. He was very intelligent in all polite
Learning. His Disciples were Pirro Ligorio, admirable for antique Buildings,
Towns, Temples, Tombs, Trophies, and the Situation of all Old Structures,
Eneas Vico, Bonasone, George Mantuan and others.

Polidore, a Disciple of Raphaels, was Wonderful excellent at designing
Pratique, having a peculiar Genius for Frises, as appears by those he Painted
at Rome in Black and White. He imitated the the Ancient Paintings and Sculpture.
Antique, in a greater manner than Julio Romano, but Julio seems to be truest.
One may see in his Works, some admirable A Knot or amasement of Figures
standing together.
Groupes such as are not to be seen elsewhere. His Coloring was extremely
Rare, and he has done some Landskips of a good Gust.

At Venice, John Bellin was one of the first that was taken Notice of, his
Painting was extreme dry after the manner of that Age. He very well understood
Architecture and Perspective. He was Titians first Master, as one may perceive
by the first Works of that Illustrious Disciple of his, in which is seen a
property of Colors such as his Master used.

About the same time Georgion, cotemporary with Titian, became excellent for
Portraits and Great Pieces. This was he who first took up the Election of
Colors fierce and agreeable, which was after brought to perfection and the
entire Harmony which appears in Titians Pictures. He set off his Figures
extremely well; and one may say, that had it not been for him, Titian had never
rise to the degree of Excellency, for it was caused chiefly by the Emulation
and Jealousy that was betwixt these two.

Titian was one of the greatest Colourists that ever was in the World. He
designed with much more facility and experience than Georgion. The Women and
Children of his hand are admirable for design and Color, the Gust being
Delicate, Neat and Noble, with a kind of pleasing Negligence in the Dress, in
the Draperies, and Furniture, peculiar to him. His Figures of Men are such as
nothing can be better designed; however there are some of his Draperies that
are somewhat sad, and of little Gust. His Painting is extreme fierce, sweet,
and precious. His Portraits were Wonderfully Beautiful, his Attitudes extreme
handsome, grave, varied, and adorned after a most advantageous manner. Never Man
wrought Landskips of so great a manner, of so good a Coloring, and expressing
so much Truth. For the space of eight or ten years together, he copied with
great exactness all that he did, to gain to himself a more easy Road, and to
establish himself in the general Maxims. Besides that excellent Gust in
Coloring, which he had above others, he perfectly understood how to give every
thing its proper touches, whereby they are distinguished from one another, and
which gives 'em more Spirit and Life. The Pictures which he made at his
beginning, and toward his latter end, are of a dry and lean manner. He lived
101 years; and had for his Disciples Paul Veronese, James Tintoret, James
Dupout, Bassan and his Brothers.

Paul Veronese expressed an extreme Grace in the Airs of Women, with great
diversity of changeable Drapeperies, and incredible vivacity and facility,
notwithstanding his Composition was Barbarous, and his design not correct; but
the Coloring and all that depends thereon, was so admirable in his Pictures,
that it surprised at first sight, and caused all other Faults to be forgot.

Tintoret, a Disciple of Titian; he was a great Designer and An Artist of a
ready and expert Practice.
Praticien, and sometimes a great One whose drawings are strained, and
extravagant.
Strapasson; he had an admirable Genius for Painting, but his Affection and
Patience was not equal to his Fire and vivacity. He has made some Pictures of
no less Beauty than those of Titian. His Composition and his Dress are
Barbarous for the most part, and his Contours are not very Correct; but his
Coloring and all that depends on that is admirable.

The Bassans had a poorer and more miserable Gust in Painting than Tintoret,
and designed worse than he. But they had an excellent Gust in Colors, and
touched up, or expressed Animals after a very good Manner, yet their Composition
and design was very Barbarous.

At Parma, Corregio Painted two Great Cupulo's in A sort of Painting upon
outward Walls.
Fresquo, and several Altar Pieces. He had certain natural Graces, peculiar to
himself, for all his Pictures of the Blessed Virgin, the Saints, and young
Children. His manner is extreme great, as well for design, as for Workmanship,
tho without Correction. His Pensil is one of the most agreeable and easy, and
one may say of him, that he Painted with such a force, such a relief, and such
a sweetness and vivacity of Colors, that he could do nothing better. He
distributed his Lights after a particular manner, such as gave a great force
and roundness to his Figures. It consisted in extending his Lights to be large,
and then losing them insensibly in the dark Colors without the The Masses are
the strongest Lights, and Shadows.
Masses, which gave them a great Roundness, without our perceiving from whence
such force and such satisfaction to the Eye, should proceed; and in this
particular he seems to be followed by other Lombards. He had not the Election
of handsome Attitudes, nor the distribution of comely Groups. His design often
appears Lame, and his positions are not much observed. The Aspects of his
Figures are not unpleasant in many places: But his manner of designing the
Heads, the Hands, the Feet, and other parts, is very great and good to imitate.
In the Conduct and finishing a Picture, he did Miracles; for he Painted with
such Union, that his greatest Works, seemed to be the Product but of one day,
and appeared as if seen in a Looking glass. His Landskips were handsome, and
correspondent to his Figures.

At the same time lived Parmigano, who besides his great Manner in good
Coloring, was excellent for Invention and Design; he had a Genius full of
Gentileness and Spirit, having nothing of Barbarous in his Choice of Attitudes,
and in the Dress of his Figures, which cannot be said of Corregio. There are
very handsome things and very correct of his.

These two Painters had very good Disciples, but none but those of that Country
know who they were; however we are not well assured of what they say, for
Painting is there utterly extinct.

I say nothing of Leonard de Vinci, because I have seen but very few things of
his doing; though he revived these Arts at Millain, and made many Disciples.

Lewis Carache Uncle of Hanibal, and Brother of Antonio, studied at Parma after
Corregio, and became excellent in design and coloring, which he performed with
such Grace and Candor, that Guido a Disciple of Hannibal, did afterward
imitate him with much success. There are of his Pictures very Beautiful and
well managed. His ordinary residence was at Bologna; and it was he that first
taught his Nephew Hannibal to use the Crayon.

Annibal quickly out went his Master in all particulars. He counterfeited
Corregio, Titian, and Raphaels manner in different Pictures, excepting that
they want the Nobleness, the Grace, and the Delicacy of Raphael, and that his
Cantours are not so Pure and so Elegant. For the rest he was very accomplished,
and very Universal. His manner of designing is great and excellent. Expressing
what he knew with an admirable Genius.

Augustine, Brother of Annibal was also a good Painter, and a most excellent
Graver. He had a Bastard Son Named Antonio, who died at the Age of 23 or 24
years, who as it is thought, would certainly have surpast his Uncle, Annibal,
for it seemed, from what we see of his, that he would have taken a greater
Flight.

Guido imitated chiefly Lewis Carache, and always retained the same fashion of
Painting with Lawrence the Fleming, his Master, who dwelt at Bologna, and was
Contemporary and an Emulatour of the said Lewis. Guido made use of Albert Durer
as Virgil did of the Poet Ennius, and this he turned into his own manner with
such Grace and Beauty, that he alone got more Money, and obtained more
Reputation in his time, than his Masters, and than all the Disciples of the
School of the Caraches, though more capable han the. His Heads are no ways
inferior to those of Raphiel.

Sisto Badalocchi designed better than the other Disciples; but he died young.

Albano was excellent in all the parts of Painting, and was skilled in the
Belles Lettres, or polite Learning.

Dominicano was a very skilful Painter, and very painful, being not otherwise
advantaged by Nature. He was very profound in all that depends on Painting;
however he seems to have less Majesty than all the other Disciples of the
Caraches.

John Lanfranc was of great Spirit and Vivacity, and continued long in an
excellent Gust of Design and Color, but having no Foundation but the
Practique, he quickly became liable to Correction, in such sort that we see
many of his things very Strained and extravagant.
Strapassees where there was no occasion for it. For the rest of those
Disciples, after the Death of their Master, they all grew worse and worse in
every particular of Painting.

Viola begun to make Landskips when he was very Old. Hannibal took a delight to
instruct him, and we may see several Pieces of his Work wonderfully handsome,
and well colored.

In Germany and the Low Countries Albert Durer, Lucas, Aldegrave, Isbin, and
Holbin, were all of the same time. Among whom Albert, and Holbin, were very
skilful, and had been of the first Rank had they seen Italy, for we can blame
them for nothing but their Gothic Gust, and chiefly Albert. As for Holbin, he
carried the Execution beyond Raphael, and I have seen a Portrait of his that
put down one of Titians.

Among the Flemings, we have had Rubens, a Man to whom his Birth gave a Lively
Wit, Free, Sweet, and Universal; he had a Genius capable to raise him not only
to the Rank of the Ancient Painters, but also to the greatest Employments, and
accordingly he was made choice of to go on one of the most famous Embassies
that has been in our Age. His Gust for design did Taste more of the natural
Fleming than of the Beauty of the Antique, for he had been but a little time at
Rome. Though we may observe in all his Works, a Grandeur, and Majesty, yet one
may say truly, that generally speaking, he did not design well, but for the
other parts of Painting he understood and possessed as much as ever Painter did.
His principal Study was made in Lombardy, and particularly after the Works of
Titian, Paul Veronese, and Tintoret from all which, (as one may say) he skim'd
away the Cream, to gether for his own use certain general Maxims and infallible
Rules, which he always observed, and by which he performed his Works with more
facility than Titian, more Purity, Truth and Science, than Paul Veronese, and
more Majesty, Repose, and Moderation than Tintoret. In fine, his manner was so
firm, so skillful, and so prompt, that it seemed as if his Rare Genius was sent
on purpose from Heaven, to teach Mankind the Art of Painting.

His School was filled with many good Disciples, among whom Vandike best
understood the Rules and Ge^eral Maxims of his Master, and did even surpass him
in the Delicacy of his Carnations (or Flesh Colors) and in his Cabinet Pieces;
but he had as ill a Gust as him, in that Part which relates to Design.

SECT. V. Of Poets and Poetry.
AFter Eugenius had thus finished his (or rather Monsieur Fresnoy's) Discourse
of the Famous Italian Painters, the Company fell into familiar Chat, such as
produced nothing Remarkable; till the approach of Night caused the Visitants to
think of home. Mitis made Eugenius a very gentile Complement at parting, and
Julio professed, that though his Entertainment was in all particulars extreme Noble
and Obliging, yet nothing had more surprised him with Delight, than the Sight
of his Excellent Collection of Pictures. As they returned, Mitis began a
Discourse which lasted all the way, near two hours. He said it may be a
Question which is the most Delightsom Painting or Poetry? Understand me, where
both are good and in perfection; for the little common Dawbings are no more to
be valued in one, than the Street Ballads and dispicable Rhimes of the other.
Whichsoever occasions the greatest Pleasures (said Julio) I will not determine;
for that may arise chiefly from the apprehension, or different Genius of the
Party who views the Picture, or reads the Poem: But I am apt to believe that
Poetry is more useful to humane Life, by Reason of its Moral Precepts and
Instructions, such as cannot arise from a Dumb Painting. As Dumb as the
Painting is, said Lisander. Pictures are thought to be of great use, even by
the way of Direction and Information, beyond Sea; and therefore they are so
frequently placed in Churches there, to highten the Affections and advance
Devotion. It Is true, this has been thought Superstitious here in our Country,
and therefore Pictures have been with us Excommunicated or Expelled the Church,
and certain Texts of Scripture Writ up and down on the Walls, instead of them;
and yet some People think this to be of as little use, and less Ornament than
the other; for say they, in Country Churches, where it is most Practiced, many
(if not most) of the Parish cannot Read, whereas every Body understands the
meaning of a Picture, which indeed speaks all Languages: And for that Reason
they have been, not improperly, called, The Laymens Books. But to wave this
Comparison of Painting and Poetry, which has been allowed in all Ages since Old
Horace said,

-- Pictoribus atque Poetis
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas.
There is one Point of Disparity between 'em, in the true Cause of which I
would gladly be satisfied. And that is, why Poetry and Poverty are counted
inseparable Companions, and that for a Man to have a Poetical Genius is thought
fatal, that he is thereby half Ruined, and in the ready way to Beggary? Whereas
for a Painter to have an apt and ready Genius in his Science, is counted a good
Omen, and assures us that in time he will be a great Master, and raise an
Estate. Julio after a little pause, answered to this purpose. It Is very true,
that those who addict themselves to Poetry, especially such who make it their
whole business, have been generally observed to be little beholding to Fortune,
or in plain English, poor and indigent; one Reason may be, that they are Men of
Generous Souls, above their Fortunes, and live according to the Ideas and
Notions they Read and Write of; which though commendable in Poems and Romances,
yet are not practicable here, without a plentiful Revenue, and almost
Inexhaustible Fund. Besides, they Love quiet, as most agreeable to their
Studies, while those who Raise Estates are your Intreaguers, Men of Business,
and such as live in a continual Hurry. Add to this, that being Men of Witty and
Delightsom Conversation, their Company is desired by almost all, and those of
Fortunes and Expenses greater than they in Prudence can Cope with; which
insensibly decays that little Estate which they have. An other Reason may be
that they aspire no higher than a handsome subsistence for the present, and
leave the future to Providence that disposes all things; in which particular
they are better Christians and Philosophers, than Husbands and Parents. After
all, perhaps this Character of Poverty is not only applyable to Poets, but in
some (if not equal) Degree, to all other Scholars, who being Masters of Little
or nothing besides their Learning, they are compelled (after the Example of all
Ages) to apply themselves to Great Men; some of whom, whose Estates have
overgrown their Wit and Humanity, think themselves importuned with their
Addresses, and therefore speak more disgracefully of them than they deserve.
These are the Reverse of a M^cenas; they have have his Riches, but Souls below
a Plebeian. They look upon a Poet, or Poor Scholar, with a Present or
Dedication, as a kind of Robber, for though He does not take their Purse like
your Highwayman, yet he forces their Will, and they part with what Custom
obliges them to return, (if they make any) merely to avoid the Dishonor, as
unwillingly and with as ill a Face, as if they heard Stand and Deliver. For
this Reason, said Mitis, I would have (if possible) no Poets but such only who
have Estates of Inheritance Large and sufficient to guard them both from the
Insults of the World, and Cares of subsisting. It Is true, there have been
several among the Romans, and in our Age, who have been as Eminent for their
Excellent Genius this way, as for their Quality. But for the most part, the
Great Men and the Poets are not to be United; for they are Born Rich, and these
are born Poets. But where some of those to raise their Estates (which are
already made to their hands) they might, perhaps, live as poor as these. There
is certainly more required to getting Riches, than Learning and Science: There
is much of Luck, and something of Trick (the Citizens call it Mystery) that are
necessary Concomitants. What else makes the Hypocrite more plausible than the
Good Christian, an Empirick Richer than a Learned Doctor? And I have heard of a
Fellow in the Country, who could not Write, nor (hardly) read, and yet got a
great Estate by pretending to the Law. In these Lucky pretenses, these Tricks
and Mysteries, or what ever you call 'em, it seems the Poets are Ignorant:
There is still one other Reason for a Poets Poverty; those who addict
themselves to other Studies, find great encouragement from public Provisions.
The Divine has his Livings, Promotions, and Dignities. Those of the Law have
abundance of Offices of mighty profit; and the Physicians, settled Salaries
from Hospitals and other endowments. But the Poet (as such) has no Office or
Place of Preferment belonging to his Profession, that I know of, except one;
and that too, consist^ chiefly in Reputation, and a Pipe o^ Canary. This starts
an other occasion of their impoverishment; they have been generally devoted to
the Bottle; they fancy inspiration from Wine; and I never heard of any who
raised an Estate, but thousands who consumed it, by Drinking. You have given
Reasons more than enough, said Lisander, to justify the common Notion of
Poets. I perceive that Verses and Poems are pretty Toys to play with, but the
worst Tools for a Trade that ever were invented. It Is well some of our Poets
have other ways of subsisting, else I know not how they would do to live in
this World, unless they could Restore the Golden Age (their beloved Theme) in
which bountiful Nature supplied all things to every one, and none wanted any
thing. And among other Arts, which have interfered with Poesy, I have observed
in a more especial manner, that of Painting to be one; as if the two Sister
Sciences delighted to live together in the same Person. You seldom knew a Poet
but he was a Lover of Pictures, nor a Painter who had not the like Affection
for Poems and Music (which is really an inarticulate Poesy). Some persons
have attained to a great perfection in both these Arts; such was Leonardo da
Vinci; I could Name other Italians, and several of our own Nation; But it is
sufficient to instance only in one. A young Lady of Eminent Virtue and Beauty,
was when she lived (which was not many years since) incomparable for her
performances both with the Pen and Pensil. I mean Mrs. Ann Killegrew, whose
Picture drawn by her self, is Printed before her Book of Poems, published soon
after her Death. A Gentleman of our Acquaintance, though he had never seen her
when living, fell really in love with her Memory, and on the first view of her
Picture and Poems, composed some Verses which I think I can still remember.

Often have I Conquered been
With the Beauties I have seen;
Often have uncommon Faces
Pleased and Wounded with their Graces:
But till this Hour I never found
That the Fair Sex unseen can Wound:
Till now I never was a Slave
To Charms and Beauties in a Grave:
Nor time can cure, nor Hope can ease my Care,
At once I see, Love, and despair.
Ah sweet Remains of that Lamented Maid!
Ah Lovely Shadow of a Shade!
Where Is now the Hand which this fair Image drew?
Where Is that we miss even when we view?
Where is that Noble Fancy could design
A Face, and Verse, both so Divine?
Where is that Face that did all Art defy,
That Art that Nature did outvy?
Where in the Sex shall we her Virtue find?
And where her Wit in all Mankind?
Absurd Inquiries! Can such Beauty dye,
Such Wit be subject to Mortality?
Can such Accomplishments as hers create
Less than a Miracle, and Conquer Fate?
See profane Infidel, see here, and find
In this Eternal Monument inshrined,
Her very self; her Wit, her Face, and Mind.
This seems, indeed, to be Writ with as great Affection as Encomium, and more
Love than Art. But you know Philaster, he is the Author. I did imagine, said
Mitis, it must be he; He is himself a pretender to both these Arts: And that
with as much Success as he desires, since he never made either of them his
Business, but Diversion.

With this and such like Discourse, the Way and the Time past off, when they
found themselves arrived at their Journeys End, and that the Daylight had
determined, and the Sun Resigned his Office to his Sister almost an hour
before, which they never minded.

FINIS.

