A DECLARATION FROM YORK,

BY Sir Francis Wortley, Knight and Baronet.

In vindication of himself from diverse aspersions and rumors concerning the
drawing of his sword, and other actions, wherein he desires to give the World
satisfaction.

LONDON, Printed by A. N. for Thomas Warren, 1642.

Rationi satisfacere possibile, voluntati vero malignitatis satisfacere nec
spero, nec curo.
I Stand accused of to errors, the first an error of my judgment poisoned
with disaffection to the honorable Houses of Parliament, the other a perverse
error of will, and a malignant disposition to disturb the business we had
in hand, and to make a Schism and Division amongst the Gentry. Crimes
unbeseeming an honest or a wise man (unworthy of a Gentleman) I have therefore
offered to the satisfaction of those, whom reason will satisfy, this
Declaration strengthened with reason and protestation, backed with an innocent
and clear conscience from that false, and scandalous information given to the
honorable Houses of Parliament, (which I will avow to be so sub poena capitis,
and which is more sub poena disreputationis, and which is most sub poena laesae
conscientiae) if you ask me our reasons:

First, why we petitioned that the magazine at Hull might be staid, or why we
preferred it to his Majesty, not to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, and as
is pretrended in opposition to their obedience, or why we petitioned in the
name of the Gentry and Commons of the County, and not in our own only, and why
I presented it to his Majesty and not another, there being others of my rank
and quality, as able and willing as my self to do his Majesty or the Country
service.

For the first, though the words were that the magazin at Hull, might be staid,
when the return was delivered, I explained our sense and meaning, and
petitioned that so much only might be staid as might concern his Majesty, the
safety of his Princely issue, and the security of this Country, though I might
well have added these six other Counties, which all depend upon the safety of
the Magazin at Hull. Our apprehensions of dangers were grounded upon our own
great charges for watching and warding, and our Countries charge to buy powder,
match and bullets, for the Foot appointed to be in readiness by the Sheriffs and
other Gentlemen upon their first assembly at York, and we measured our danger
by the proportion of our charge, which was to raise and arm 3000 Foot, and
300 Horse, and to mayntayn them three months at the Countries charge, which
after was made by the Sheriff and others, whereof Sir William Constable, Sir
Matthew Baynton and Sir John Bourchier were chief, though I dare say as
considerable men for Birth and Fortunes in the County disavow it; And as many I
verily believe, as subscribed, yet we will not brand them with the character
of arrogance as they do us, Et turpe est doctri cui culpa redarguit ipsum.
Besides the book directed to be printed and published by the honorable Houses
of Parliament, called the Danes plot, subscribed by the Clerk of the
Parliament, dated Vicessimo die Martij 1641. and another to his Majesty of some
intelligence from Holland, concerning the Danish intentions, his Majesty
protesting against the knowledge of these, we cannot but give credit both to
his Majesty, and to the intelligence, and consequently be sensible both of his
Majesty's, and our dangers: these I say, were just grounds, of and for our
fears as well of Foreign, as domestique dangers; if they were true, how are
thy lessened? if not why are they pretended and put upon us with such charge?
besides, admit it be public stock, are we not sharers in the public? and for
placing of it at Hull, the honorable Houses of Parliament conceived it the
fittest place to settle the Magazin in, both in respect of the place, and that
the adjacent Counties might with most ease, least charge, and best
accommodation be supplied with Arms, and Ammunition upon all occasions.

For the second we made our humble addresses to our dear and gracious
Sovereign, and not to the honorable Houses, for these reasons following;

We being assembled about a Petition to the Parliament concerning other
businesses, we were credibly advertised, that the whole Magazine was to be
carried away within two or three days, in which time we could not hope to
address our selves to the Parliament, and to reap the benefit of an answer at
such a distance from them, and that we were assured his Majesty's interest in
the danger would stir him up, both to secure himself, and us, we did not
prescribe the way to his Majesty, but left it to his Princely wisdom, we
advised him not to go to Hull, nor was this Petition so much as (causa) but
per accidens of his Majestys going to Hull, as his Majesty knows and has
declared.

If you ask me why we petitioned in the name of the whole County, and not in
our own names? I answer, we considering our good intentions thought it would
not have been disavowed, and being most of us men (how ever branded with the
name of inconsiderable and disaffected men) of as good quality and
consideration, and as well affected to religion, our Prince, and Country; as
most of those who have protested against it, we presumed that the cause merited
the general assistance, I do protest for my self, and in christian charity
for the rest, our intentions were good, and had no spirit of contradiction in
them, much less of opposition to the honorable Houses of Parliament.

If you ask me why I delivered it, I must protest against all arrogancy in
it. I was willing to do my Prince and Country that good service (as I
conceived it) and being amongst others of my quality, the first in order of
rank, and his Majesty's servant, I must acknowledge that I was well pleased
with the service, my heart and conscience, excusing me from all malignant
thoughts of contradiction or opposition. And for this last charge which as I
conceive consists of three parts, viz. That I came up into the Deanery, where
the Sheriff and Committee (as they call it) were, and there questioned the
Sheriff and Committee, I appeal to the Sheriff and the Gentry, whether I was
ever with them, or had any discourse with them or no, at that time I was going,
and hearing blows above stayres, I would not embroyle my self in the
business so much as to go up.

For the other that I should come down and draw my Sword and flourish it, and
cried for the King, I do protest against it, and believe it was grounded upon
some calling for the Sheriff, upon which occasion others called for the King,
insomuch as I desired the Gentlemen for the honor of God to put up their
Swords, and not to spoil the Kings good cause and chid; some I knew better,
for it, as diverse now of good quality will, and have attested. For my calling
to the Hall I mentioned it not, but seconded the motion in a civil way,
neither did I contenance, or move the schism and division, but consented to
our address of unity, as all there present can testify. I am only sorry the
Honorable houses of Parliament should be abused with such malicious and
frivolous informations, and for my self, I am only sensible of the
mis-apprehensions of my good intentions, and protest my heart is loyal to God,
my King, and Country, as any, and dare avow it as far, as who dare avow the
contrary.

If this Declaration justify me amongst the rational and impartial men, I
shall think my self happy in their good opinion, if not, I shall stick to
the Motto of my house, which is, Amicitias volo, inimicitias sperno.
FINIS.

