THE GENTLEMAN Dancing Master.

A COMEDY, As it is Acted By Their MAJESTY'S SERVANTS.

By Mr Wycherley.

Horat. Non satis est risu diducere rictum
Auditoris: and est quaedam tamen hic quoque virtus.
LONDON, Printed for H. Herringman, and Sold by T. Dring, R. Bentley, J.
Tonson, F. Saunders, and T. Bennet, 1693.

PROLOGUE To the CITY, Newly after the Removal of the Duke's Company from
Lincoln's-Inn-fields to their new Theater, near Salisbury-Court.
OUR Author (like us) finding 'twould scarce do,
At the other end of the Town, is come to you:
And since it is his last Trial, has that Wit
To throw himself on a substantial Pit.
Where needy Wit, or Critic dare not come,
Lest Neighbor in the Cloak, with looks so grum,
Should prove a Dunne;
Where Punk in vizor dare not rant and tear
To put us out, since Bridewel is so near;
In short, we shall be heard, be understood,
If not, shall be admired and that is as good;
For you to senseless Plays have still been kind,
Nay, where no sense was, you a Jest would find:
And never was it heard of, that the City
Did ever take occasion to be witty
Upon dull Poet, or stiff Players Action,
But still with claps opposed the hissing Faction.
But if you hissed, 'twas at the Pit, not Stage,
So, with the Poet, damned the damning Age,
And still we know are ready to engage
Against the flouting, ticking Gentry who
Citizen, Player, Poet, would undo,
The Poet, no; unless by commendation;
For on the Change, Wits have no reputation;
And rather than be branded for a Wit,
He with you, able men, would credit get.
Dramatis Personae.
Mr. Gerard, Mr. Martin,
Young Gentlemen of the Town, and Friends. Mr. Parris or Monsieur De Parris. A
vain Coxcomb, and rich City-Heir, newly returned from France, and mightily
affected with the French Language and Fashions. Mr. James Formal or Don Diego.
An old rich Spanish Merchant newly returned home, as much affected with the
Habit and Customs of Spain, and Uncle to De Parris. Mrs. Hippolita. Formal's
Daughter. Mrs. Caution. Formal's Sister, an impertinent precise Old Woman.
Prue. Hippolita's Maid. Mrs. Flirt. Mrs. Flounce.
Two Common Women of the Town. A little Black-a-More, Lacquey to Formal. A
Parson. A French Scullion. Servants, Waiter, and Attendants.
SCENE London.

THE GENTLEMAN Dancing Master.
ACT I.
SCENE I. Don Diego's House in the Evening.
Enter Hippolita and Prue her Maid. Hipp. TO confine a Woman just in her
rambling Age! take away her liberty at the very time she should use it! O
barbarous Aunt! O unnatural Father! to shut up a poor Girl at fourteen, and
hinder her budding; all things are ripened by the Sun; to shut up a poor Girl
at fourteen! --


Pru. It Is true, Miss, two poor young Creatures as we are!


Hipp. Not suffered to see a play in a twelve month! --


Pru. Nor to go to Ponchinello nor Paradise! --


Hipp. Nor to take a Ramble to the Park nor Mulberry-garden! --


Pru. Nor to Tatnam-Court nor Islington! --


Hipp. Nor to eat a Sillybub in new Spring-garden with a Cousin! --


Pru. Nor to drink a Pint of Wine with a Friend at the Prince in the Sun! --


Hipp. Nor to hear a Fiddle in good Company!


Pru. Nor to hear the Organs and Tongs at the Gun in Moorfields! --


Hipp. Nay, not suffered to go to Church, because the men are sometimes there!
little did I think I should ever have longed to go to Church!


Pru. Or I either, but between two Maids! --


Hipp. Not see a man! --


Pru. Nor come near a man! --


Hipp. Nor hear of a man! --


Pru. No, Miss, but to be denied a man! and to have no use at all of a man! --


Hipp. Hold, hold -- your resentment is as much greater than mine, as your
experience has been greater; but all this while, what do we make of my Cousin,
my Husband elect (as my Aunt says) we have had his Company these three days. Is
he no man?


Pru. No, faith, he is but a Monsieur, but you will resolve your self that
question within these three days: for by that time, he will be your Husband, if
your Father come to night? --


Hipp. Or if I provide not my self with another in the mean time! For Fathers
seldom choose well, and I will no more take my Father's choice in a Husband,
than I would in a Gown or a Suit of Knots: so that if that Cousin of mine were
not an ill contrived ugly Freekish-fool, in being my Father's choice, I should
hate him; besides he has almost made me out of love with mirth and good humor,
for he debases it as much as a Jack-pudding; and Civility and good Breeding
more than a City Dancing Master. --


Pru. What, will not you marry him then, Madam?


Hipp. Would thou have me marry a Fool! an Idiot?


Pru. Lord! it is a sign you have been kept up indeed! and know little of the
World, to refuse a man for a Husband, only because he is a Fool. Methinks he is a
pretty apish kind of a Gentleman, like other Gentlemen, and handsome enough to
lie with in the dark, when Husbands take their privileges, and for the
day-times you may take the privilege of a Wife.


Hipp. Excellent Governess, you do understand the World, I see.


Pru. Then you should be guided by me.


Hipp. Art thou in earnest then, damned Jade? would thou have me marry him?
well -- there are more poor young Women undone and married to filthy Fellows,
by the treachery and evil Counsel of Chamber-maids, than by the obstinacy and
covetousness of Parents.


Pru. Does not your Father come on purpose out of Spain to marry you to him?
Can you release your self from your Aunt or Father any other way? Have you a
mind to be shut up as long as you live? For my part (though you can hold out
upon the Lime from the Walls here, Salt, old Shoes, and Oat-meal) I cannot live
so, I must confess my patience is worn out --


Hipp. Alas! alas! poor Prue! your stomach lies another way, I will take pity
of you, and get me a Husband very suddenly, who may have a Servant at your
Service; but rather than marry my Cousin, I will be a Nun in the new Protestant
Nunnery they talk of, (where they say) there will be no hopes of coming near a
man.


Pru. But you can marry no body but your Cousin, Miss, your Father you expect
to night, and be certain his Spanish policy and wariness, which has kept you up
so close ever since you came from Hackney-School, will make sure of you within
a day or two at farthest --


Hipp. Then it is time to think how to prevent him -- stay --


Pru. In vain, vain Miss!


Hipp. If we knew but any man, any man, though he were but a little handsomer
than the Devil, so that he were a Gentleman.


Pru. What if you did know any man, if you had an opportunity; could you have
confidence to speak to a man first? But if you could, how could you come to
him, or he to you? nay how could you send to him? for though you could write,
which your Father in his Spanish prudence would never permit you to learn, who
should carry the Letter? but we need not be concerned for that, since we know
not to whom to send it.


Hipp. Stay! -- it must be so -- I Will try however --


Enter Monsieur de Paris. Mons. Serviteur, Serviteur, la Cousine, I come to
give the bon Soir, as the French say.


Hipp. O Cousin, you know him, the fine Gentleman they talk of so much in Town.


Pru. What! will you talk to him of any man else?


Mons. I know all the beaux monde Cousine.


Hipp. Mister --


Mons. Monsieur Taileur! Monsieur Esmit, Monsieur --


Hipp. These are Frenchmen --


Mons. Non, non, vou'd you have me say Mr. Tailor, Mr. Smith, fie, fie, test
non --


Hipp. But don't you know the brave Gentleman they talk of so much in Town?


Mons. Who, Monsieur Gerrard?


Hipp. What kind of man is that Mr. Gerrard? and then I Will tell you.


Mons. Why -- he is truly a pretty man, a pretty man -- a pretty so so -- kind
of man, for an Englishman.


Hipp. How! a pretty man?


Mons. Why, he is conveniently tall -- but --


Hipp. But, what?


Mons. And not ill-shap'd -- but --


Hipp. But what?


Mons. And handsome, as it is thought -- but --


Hipp. But, what are your Exceptions to him?


Mons. I cannot tell you, because they are innumerable, innumerable mon foy.


Hip. Has he Wit?


Mons. Ay, ay, they say he is witty, brave and de bell humeur and well-bred with
all that -- but --


Hipp. But what? does he want Judgment?


Mons. Non, non, they say he has good sense and judgment, but it is according
to the account Englis' -- for --


Hip. For what?


Mons. For Jarnie -- if I think it --


Hipp. Why?


Mons Why -- why his Tailor lives within Ludgate -- his Valet de Chamber is no
Frenchman -- and he has been seen at noonday to go into an English
Eating-house --


Hipp. Say you so, Cousin?


Mons. Then for being well-bred you shall judge -- first he cannot dance a step,
nor sing a French Song, nor swear a French Oate, nor use the polite French word
in his Conversation; and in fine, cannot play at Hombre -- but speaks base good
Englis' with the commune homebred pronunciation, and in fine, to say no more,
he never carries a Snuff Box about with him.


Hipp. Indeed --


Mons. And yet this man has been abroad as much as any man, and does not make
the least show of it, but a little in his Mien, not at all in his discour
Jernie; he never talks so much as of St. Peter's Church, and Rome, the
Escurial, or Madrid, nay not so much as of Henry IV. of Pont-Neuf, Paris, and
the new Louvre, nor of the Grand Roy.


Hipp. It Is for his commendation, if he does not talk of his Travels.


Mons. Auh, auh -- Cousine -- he is conscious himself of his wants, because he
is very envious, for he cannot endure me --


Hipp. He shall be my man then for that.

Aside. Ay, ay, it is the same,


Prue. No I know he cannot endure you, Cousin --


Mons. How do you know it -- who never stir out. Test non --


Hipp. Well -- dear Cousin -- if you will promise me never to tell my Aunt,
I Will tell you --


Mons. I will not, I will not, Jarnie --


Hipp. Nor to be concerned your self so as to make a quarrel of it.


Mons. Non, non --


Hipp. Upon the word of a Gentleman.


Mons. Foy de Chevalier, I will not quarrel.


Pru. Lord, Miss! I wonder you will not believe him without more ado?


Hipp. Then he has the hatred of a Rival for you.


Mons. Mal a peste


Hipp. You know my Chamber is backward, and has a door into the Gallery, which
looks into the back-yard of a Tavern, whence Mr. Gerrard once spying me at the
Window, has often since attempted to come in at that Window by the help of the
Leads of a low Building adjoining, and indeed 'twas as much as my Maid and I
could do to keep him out --


Mons. Aule-Coquin! --


Hipp. But nothing is stronger than aversion; for I hate him perfectly, even as
much as I love you --


Pru. I believe so faith -- but what design have we now on foot?


Aside. Hipp. This discovery is an Argument sure of my love to you --


Mons. Ay, ay; say no more, Cousin, I doubt not your amoure for me, because I
doubt not your judgment. But what is to be done with this Fanfaron -- I know
where he eats to night -- I Will go find him out ventre bleu --


Hipp. Oh my dear Cousin, you will not make a quarrel of it? I thought what
your promise would come to!


Mons. Would you have a man of Honor --


Hipp. Keep his promise?


Mons. And lose his Mistress, that were not for my honor, may foy --


Hipp. Cousin, though you do me the injury to think I could be false -- do not
do your self the injury to think any one could be false to you -- will you be
afraid of losing your Mistress; to show such a fear to your Rival, were for his
honor, and not for yours sure.


Mons. Nay, Cousin, I Would have you know I was never afraid of losing my Mistress
in earnest -- Let me see, the man can get my Mistress from me, Jarnie -- but he
that loves must seem a little jealous.


Hipp. Not to his Rival, those that have Jealousy, hide it from their Rivals.


Mons. But there are some who say Jealousy is no more to be hid than a Cough;
but it should never be discovered in me, if I had it, because it is not French,
it is not French at all -- ventre -- bleu --


Hipp. No, you should railly your Rival, and rather make a Jest of your Quarrel
to him, and that I suppose is French too --


Mons. It Is so, it is so, Cousin, it is the veritable French Method; for your
Englis, for want of Wit, drive every thing to a serious grum quarrel, and then
would make a Jest on it, when it is too late, when they cannot laugh, Jarnie! --


Hipp. Yes, yes, I would have you railly him soundly, do not spare him a jot --
but shall you see him to night?


Mons. Ay, ay --


Hipp. Yes! pray be sure to see him for the Jest's sake --


Mons. I will -- for I love a Jeste as well as any bell Esprit of 'em all -- da.


Hipp. Ay, and railly him soundly; be sure you railly him soundly, and tell
him, just thus -- that the Lady he has so long courted, from the great Window
of the Ship-Tavern, is to be your Wife tomorrow, unless he come at his wonted
hour of six in the morning to her Window to forbid the Banes; for it is the
first and last time of asking: and if he come not, let him for ever hereafter
stay away and hold his Tongue.


Mons. Hah, ha ha, a ver good Jeste, test bleu.


Hipp. And if the Fool should come again, I would tell him his own, I warrant
you, Cousin; my Gentleman should be satisfied for good and all, I Would secure him.


Mons. Bon, Bon.


Pru. Well, well! young Mistress, you were not at Hackney-School for nothing I
see; nor taken away for nothing: a Woman may soon be too old, but is never too
young to shift for her self?


Aside. Mons. Hah, ah, ah, Cousin, dou art a merry Grigg -- ma foy -- I long to
be with Gerrard, and I am the best at improving a Jeste -- I shall have such
divertisement to night test bleu.


Hipp. He Will deny, 'may be at first, that he ever courted any such Lady.


Mons. Nay, I am sure he will be ashamed of it: I shall make him look so sillily,
test non -- I long to find him out, adieu, adieu, la Cousine.


Hipp. Shall you be sure to find him?


Mons. Indubitablement I Will search the Town over, but I Will find him, hah, ha,
ha --

Exit Mons. and returns. But I Am afraid, Cousine, if I should tell him you are
to be my Wife to morrow, he would not come, now I am for having him come for
the Jest's sake -- ventre --


Hipp. So am I, Cousin, for having him come too for the Jest's sake.


Mons. Well, well! leave it to me! ha, ha, ha.


Enter Mrs. Caution. Mrs. Caut. What Is all this gigling here?


Mons. Hay, do you tinke we'll tell you, no fait, I warrant you test non, ha,
ha, ha --


Hipp. My Cousin is over joy'd, I suppose, that my Father is to come to night.


Mrs. Caut. I am afraid he will not come to night -- but you will stay and see,
Nephew.


Mons. Non, non: I am to sup at the other end of the Town to night -- la, la, la
-- ra, ra, ra --


Ex. Mons. singing. Mrs Caut. I wish the French Levity of this Young Man may
agree with your Father's Spanish Gravity.


Hipp. Just as your crabbed old age and my youth agree.


Mrs. Caut. Well, Malapert! I know you hate me, because I have been the
Guardian of your Reputation. But your Husband may thank me one day.


Hipp If he be not a Fool, he would rather be obliged to me for my virtue, than
to you, since, at long run he must whether he will or no.


Mrs. Caut. So, so! --


Hipp. Nay, now I think on it; I Would have you to know the poor man, whosoe'er he
is, will have little cause to thank you.


Mrs. Caut. No --


Hipp. No; for I never lived so wicked a life, as I have done this twelve
month, since I have not seen a man.


Mrs. Caut. How! how! If you have not seen a man, how could you be wicked? how
could you do any ill?


Hipp. No, I have done no ill, but I have paid it with thinking.


Mrs. Caut. O that is no hurt; to think is no hurt; the ancient, grave, and
godly cannot help thoughts.


Hipp. I warrant, you have had 'em your self, Aunt.


Mrs. Caut. Yes, yes! when I cannot sleep.


Hipp. Ha, ha -- I believe it, but know I have had those thoughs sleeping and
waking: for I have dreamed of a man.


Mrs. Caut. No matter, no matter, so that it was but a dream, I have dreamed my
self; for you must know Widows are mightily given to dream, insomuch that a
dream is waggishly called the Widows Comfort.


Hipp. But I did not only dream in --


Sighs. Mrs. Caut. How, how! did you more than dream! speak, young Harlotry;
confess, did you more than dream? how could you do more than dream in this
house? speak! confess.


Hipp. Well! I will then. Indeed, Aunt, I did not only dream, but I was pleased
with my dream when I awaked.


Mrs. Caut. Oh, is that all? nay, if a dream only will please you, you are a
modest young Woman still, but have a care of a Vision.


Hipp. I; but to be delighted when we wake with a naughty dream, is a sin,
Aunt; and I am so very scrupulous, that I would as soon consent to a naughty
man, as to a naughty dream.


Mrs. Caut. I do believe you.


Hipp. I am for going into the Throng of Temptations.


Mrs. Caut. There I believe you again.


Hipp. And making my self so familiar with them, that I would not be concerned
for 'em a whit.


Mrs. Caut. There I do not believe you.


Hipp. And would take all the innocent liberty of the Town, to tattle to your
men under a Vizard in the Play Houses, and meet 'em at night in Masquerade.


Mrs. Caut. There I do believe you again, I know you would be masquerading; but
worse would come on it, as it has done to others, who have been in a Masquerade,
and are now Virgins but in Masquerade, and will not be their own Women again as
long as they live. The Children of this Age must be wise Children indeed, if
they know their Fathers, since their Mothers themselves cannot inform 'em! O
the fatal Liberty of this masquerading Age when I was a young Woman.


Hipp. Come, come, do not blaspheme this masquerading Age, like an illbred
City-Dame, whose Husband is half broke by living in Covent Garden, or who has
been turned out of the Temple or Lincoln's Inn upon a masquerading Night: by
what I Have heard it is a pleasant-well-bred-complacent-free-frolick
good-natur'd-pretty-Age; and if you do not like it, leave it to us that do.


Mrs. Caut. Lord! how impudently you talk, Niece, I Am sure I remember when I
was a Maid.


Hipp. Can you remember it, reverent Aunt?


Mrs. Caut. Yes, modest Niece, that a raw young thing though almost at Woman's
estate, that was then at 30 or 35 years of age, would not so much as have
looked upon a Man.


Hipp. Above her Fathers Butler or Coachman.


Mrs. Caut. Still taking me up! well thou art a mad Girl, and so good night. We
may go to Bed, for I suppose now your Father will not come to night.


Exit Mrs. Caution. Hip. I am sorry for it, for I long to see him. But I lie; I
had rather see Gerrard here, and yet I know not how I shall like him: if he has
wit he will come, and if he has none he would not be welcome.


Aside. Ex. Hip. and Pru. SCENE changes to the French-House, a Table, Bottles,
and Candles. Enter Mr. Gerrard, Martin, and Monsieur de Parris. Mons. It Is ver
veritable, Jarnie, what the French say of you English, you use the debauch so
much, it cannot have with you the French operation, you are never enjoyee; but
come, let us for once be enfinement galliard, and sing a French Sonnet, sings
la boutelle, la boutelle, glou, glou.


Mart. to Gerrard. What a melodious Fop it is?


Mons. Auh -- you have no Complaisance.


Ger. No, we cannot sing, but we'll drink to you the Ladies health, whom (you
say) I have so long courted at her Window.


Mons. Ay, there is your Complaisance; all your English Complaisance is
pledging Complaisance, ventre -- but if I do you reason here, will you do me
reason to a little French Chanson aboire -- I shall begin to you -- La
boutelle, la boutelle -- sings.


Takes the Glass. Mart. to Gerrard. I had rather keep Company with a Set of
wide-mouthed drunken Cathedral Choristers.


Ger. Come, Sir, drink, and he shall do you reason to your French Song since
you stand upon it sing him Arthur of Bradely, or, I am the Duke of Norfolk.


Mons. Auh, Test bleu, an English Catch, fie, fie, ventre --


Ger. He can sing no damned French Song.


Mons. Nor can I drink the damned Englis' Wine.


Sets down the Glass. Ger. Yes, to that Ladies health, who has commanded me to
wait upon her to morrow at her Window, which looks (you say) into the inward
Yard of the Ship-Tavern, near the end of what dee called street.


Mons. Ay, ay, do you not know her, not you (vert and bleu.)


Ger. But 'pray repeat again what she said.


Mons. Why, she said, she is to be married to morrow to a person of Honor, a
brave Gentleman, that shall be nameless, and so, and so forth (little does he
think who it is.)


Aside. Ger. And what else?


Mons. That if you make not your appearance before her Window to morrow at your
wonted hour of six in the morning to forbid the Banes, you must for ever
hereafter stay away and hold your tongue, for it is the first and last time of
asking, ha, ha, ha!


Ger. It Is all a Riddle to me; I should be unwilling to be fooled by this
Coxcomb.


Aside. Mons. I will not tell him all she said, lest he should not go, I would
fain have him go for the Jest's sake -- ha, ha, ha.


Ger. Her name is, you say, Hippolita Daughter to a rich Spanish Merchant.


Mons. Ay, ay, you don't know her, not you a d'autre a d'autre ma foy -- ha,
ha, ha.


Ger. Well! I will be an easy Fool for once.


Mart. By all means go.


Mons. Ay, ay, by all means go -- hah, ha, ha,


Ger. To be caught in a Fools Trap -- I Will venture it. Come, it is her health.


Aside. Drinks to him. Mons. And to your good reception -- test bleu -- ha,
ha, ha.


Ger. Well, Monsieur! I Will say this for thee, thou have made the best use of
three months at Paris as ever English Squire did.


Mons. Considering I was in a dam' Englis' Pension too.


Mart. (...) you have conversed with some French, I see; Footmen I suppose at
the Fencing-School, I judge it by your Oaths.


Mons. French Footmen I well, well, I had rather have the conversation of a
French Footman than of an English Esquire, there is for you da --


Mart. I beg your pardon, Monsieur: I did not think the French Footmen had
been so much your Friends.


Ger. Yes, yes, I warrant they have obliged him at Paris much more than any of
their Masters did. Well, there shall be no more said against the French
Footmen.


Mons. Non de Grace -- you are always turning the Nation Francez into redicule,
dat Nation so accomplie, dat Nation which you imitate, so, dat in the
conclusion you butte turn your self into redicule ma foy: if you are for de
raillery, abuse the Duch, why not abuse the Duch? les gross Villains,
Pandars, Insolents; but here in your England may foy, you have more honeur,
respect, and estimation for the Dushe Swabber, who come to cheat your Nation,
den for de Franch-Foot-man, who come to oblige your Nation.


Mart. Our Nation! then you disown it for yours, it seems.


Mons. Well! wat of dat; are you the disobligee by date?


Ger. No, Monsieur, far from it; you could not oblige us, nor your Country any
other way than by disowning it.


Mons. It is de Brutale Country, which abuse de France, an' reverence de Dushe:
I will maintain, sustain, and justify dat one little Franch-Foot-man have more
honeur, courage, and generosity, more good blood in his vainee, an mush more
good manners an' civility den all de State General togeder, Jarnie -- dey are
only wise and valiant wen dey are drunkee.


Ger. That is always.


Mons. But dey are never honest wen dey are drunkee; dey are de only Rogue in
de Varlde, who are not honest wen dey are drunk -- ma foy.


Ger. I find you are well acquainted with them, Monsieur.


Mons. Ay, ay, I have made the toure of Holland, but it was en post, dear was
no staying for me, test non -- for de Gentleman can no more live dear den de
Toad in Ir'land, ma foy; for I did not see on' Chevalier in de whole Cuntree:
always, you know de Rebel hate de gens de quality; besides, I had make
sufficient observation of the Canaile barbare de first nightee of my arrival at
Amsterdamme. I did visit you must know one of de Principal of de Stat General,
to whom I had recommendation from England, and did find his Excellence weighing
Soap, Jarnie -- ha, ha, ha.


Ger. Weighing Soap!


Mons. Weighing Soap, ma foy, for he was a whole Sale Chandeleer, and his Lady
was taking the Tale of Chandels wid her own witer hands, ma foy, and de young
Lady, his Excellence Daughters stringing Harring, stringing Harring, Jarnie --


Ger. So -- h -- and what were his Sons doing?


Mons. Auh -- his Son (for he had but one) was making de Toure of France,
Espaigne, Italy, an' Germany in a Coach and six, or rader now I think on it,
gone of an Embassy hider to dear Master Cromwell, whom they did love and fear,
because he was some-tinge de greater Rebel, bute now I talk of de Rebelle, none
but de Rebel can love de Rebelle, and so mush for you and your Friend the
Dushe, I Will say no more, and pray do you say no more of my Friend de Franch,
not so much as of my Friend the Franch-Footman- da *


Ger. No, no; but, Monsieur, now give me leave to admire thee, that in three
mouths at Paris you could renounce your Language, Drinking and your Country
(for which we are not angry with you) as I said, and come home so perfect a
Frenchman, that the Drey-men of your Fathers own Brew House would be ready to
knock thee in the head.


Mons. Vel, vel, my Father was a Merchant of his own Beer, as the Noblesse of
France of their own Wine: but I can forgive you that Raillery, that Bob, since
you say I have the Air Francez. But have I the Air Francez?


Ger. As much as any French-Footman of 'em all.


Mons. And do I speak agreeable ill Englis' enough?


Ger. Very ill.


Mons. Veritablement!


Ger. Veritablement.


Mons. For you must know, it is as ill breeding now to speak good Englis', as to
write good Englis', good sense, or a good hand.


Ger. But indeed, methinks, you are not slovenly enough for a Frenchman.


Mons. Slovenly! you mean negligent?


Ger. No, I mean slovenly.


Mons. Then I will be more slovenly.


Ger. You know, to be a perfect Frenchman, you must never be silent, never sit
still, and never be clean.


Mart. But you have forgot one main qualification of a true Frenchman, he*
should never be sound, that is, be very pockie too.


Mons. Oh! if dat be all, I am very pockie; pockie enough Jarnie, that is the
only French qualification may be had without going to Paris, mon foy.


Enter a Waiter. Wait. Here are a couple of Ladies coming up to you, Sir.


Ger. To us! did you appoint any to come hither, Martin?


Mart. Not I.


Ger. Nor you, Monsieur!


Mons. Nor I.


Ger. Sirrah, tell your Master, if he cannot protect us from the Constable, and
these midnight-Coursers, it is not a House for us.


Mart. Tell 'em you have no body in the house, and shut the doors.


Wait. They Will not be satisfied with that, they will break open the door, they
searched last night all over the House for my Lord Fisk, and Sir Jeffery
Jantee, who were fain to hide themselves in the Bar under my Mistresses Chair
and Petticoats


Mons. Wat do the Women hunt out the men so now?


Mart. Ay, ay, things are altered since you went to Paris, there is hardly a
young Man in Town dares be known of his Lodging for 'em.


Ger. Bailiffs, Pursevants, or a City-Constable are modest people in comparison
of them.


Mart. And we are not so much afraid to be taken up by the Watch, as by the
taring midnight Ramblers, or Houza-Women.


Mons. Jarnie -- ha, ha, ha.


Ger. Where are they? I hope they are gone again?


Wait. No, Sir, they are below at the Stair-foot, only swearing at their
Coachman.


Ger. Come, you Rogue! they are in Fee with you Waiters, and no Gentleman can
come hither, but they have the intelligence straight.


Wait. Intelligence from us, Sir, they should never come here if we could help
it. I am sure we wish 'em choked when we see them come in; for they bring such
good stomachs from St. James's Park, or rambling about in the streets, that we
poor Waiters have not a bit left; it is well if we can keep our money in our
Pockets for 'em; I am sure I have paid seventeen and six pence in half Crowns
for Coach hire at several times for a little damned taring Lady, and when I
ask't her for it again one morning in her Chamber, she bid me pay my self, for
she had no money: but I wanted the Courage of a Gentleman; besides the Lord
that kept her, was a good Customer to our House, and my Friend, and I made a
Conscience of wronging him.


Ger. A man of Honor!


Mons. Vert and bleu, pleasent, pleasent, mon foy.


Ger. Go, go, Sirrah, shut the door, I hear 'em coming up.


Wait. Indeed, I dare not; they will kick me down stairs, if I should.


Ger. Go you, Rascal, I say.


The Waiter shuts the door, it is thrust open again, enter Flounce and Flirte in
Vizards, striking the Waiter, and come up to the Table. Ger. Flounce and Flirte
upon my life.

Aside. Ladies, I am sorry you have no Volunteers in your Service; this is mere
pressing, and argues a great necessity you have for men.


Floun. You need not be afraid, Sir, we will use no violence to you, you are
not fit for our Service; we know you --


Flirt. The hot Service you have been in formerly, makes you unfit for ours
now; besides, you begin to be something too old for us, we are for the brisk
Hoaza's of seventeen or eighteen.


Ger. Nay, 'faith, I am not too old yet, but an old acquaintance will make any
man old; besides, to tell you the truth, you are come a little too early for
me, for I am not drunk yet; but there are your brisk young men who are always
drunk, and perhaps have the happiness not to know you.


Floun. The happiness not to know us!


Flirt. The happiness not to know us!


Ger. Be not angry, Ladies; it is rather happiness to have pleasure to come,
than to have it past, and therefore these Gentlemen are happy in not knowing
you.


Mart. I Would have you to know, I do know the Ladies too, and I will not lose the
honor of the Ladies acquaintance for any thing.


Floun. Not for the pleasure of beginning an acquaintance with us, as Mr.
Gerrard says: but it is the general vanity of you Town-Fops to lay claim to all
good acquaintance and persons of Honor; you cannot let a Woman pass in the
Mall at midnight, but dam you, you know her strait, you know her; but you would
be damned before you would say so much for one in a Mercers Shop.


Ger. He has spoken it in a French-house, where he has very good credit, and I
dare swear you may make him eat his words.


Mons. She does want a Gown indeet: she is in her dishabiliee, this
dishabiliee is a great Mode in England; the Women love the dishabiliee as well
as the men, ma foy.


Flirt. Well: if we should stay and sup with you, I warrant you would be
bragging of it to morrow amongst your Comrades that you had the Company of two
Women of Quality at the French-house, and name us.


Mart. Pleasant Jilts.


Aside. Ger. No upon our Honors, we should not brag of your Company.


Floun. Upon your Honors?


Mart. No faith.


Floun. Come, we will venture to sit down then: yet I know the vanity of you
men; you could not contain your selves from bragging.


Ger. No, no! you Women now adays have found out the pleasure of bragging, and
will allow it the men no longer.


Mart. Therefore indeed we dare not stay to sup with you; for you would be sure
to tell on it.


Ger. And we are young men who stand upon our Reputations.


Floun. You are very pleasant, Gentlemen.


Ger. And for my part I am to be married shortly, and know 'twould quickly come
to my mistresses's ear.


Ger. And for my part I must go visit to morrow morning be-times a new
City-Mistress, and you know they are as inquisitive as precise in the City.


Flirt. Come, come! pray leave this fooling; sit down again, and let us bespeak
Supper.


Ger. No 'faith, I dare not.


Mart. Besides, we have supped.


Floun. No matter, we only desire you should look on, while we eat, and put the
glass about, or so.


Ger. and Mar. offer to go out. Flirt. Pray, stay.


Ger. Upon my life I dare not.


Floun. Upon our Honors we will not tell, if you are in earnest.


Ger. P'shaw, p'shaw -- I know the vanity* of you Women, you could not contain
your selves from bragging.


Mons. Ma foy! is it certain! ha, ha, ha! hark you, Madam! cannot you fare well,
but you must cry Roast-meat?

You Will spoil your Trade by bragging of your gains,

The silent Sow (Madam) does eat most Grains.

-- da --


Flirt. Your Servant, Monsieur Fop.


Floun. Nay, faith, do not go, we will no more tell --


Mons. Then you would of a Clape, if you had it, dat's the only secret you can
keep* Jarnie.


Mart. I am glad we are rid of these Jilts.


Ger. And we have taken a very ridiculous occasion.


Mons. Wat! must we leave the Lady then, dis is dam Civility Englis' mon foy.


Flirt. Nay, Sir, you have too much of the French Air to have so little honor
and good breeding.


Pulling him back. Mons. Dee you tinke so then, sweet Madam, I have mush of de
French Air?


Flirt. More than any Frenchman breathing.


Mons. Auh, you are the curtoise Dame, mort-bleu, I shall stay then, if you
think so. Monsieur Gerrard, you will be certain to see the Lady to morrow, pray
not forget, ha, ha, ha.


Ger. No, no, Sir.


Mart. You will go then?


Ger. I will go on a Fools Errand for once.


Exeunt Gerrard and Martin. Floun What will you eat, Sir?


Mons. Wat you please, Madame.


Floun. De hear, Waiter, then some young Partridge.


Wait. What else, Madam?


Flirt. Some Russes.


Wait. What else, Madam?


Floun. Some young Pheasants.


Wait. What else, Madam?


Flirt. Some young Rabits, I love Rabits.


Wait. What else, Madam?


Floun. Stay --


Mons. Dis Englis' Waiter wit his wat else, Madam, will ruin me, test non.


Aside. Wait. What else, Madam?


Mons. Wat else, Madam, again! call up the French Waiter.


Wait. What else, Madam?


Mons. Again, call up the French Waiter or Quesinier, mortteste-ventre, vite,
vite -- Auh, Madam, the stupidity of the Englis' Waiter, I hate the Englis'
Waiter, mon foy.


Ex. Waiter. Flirt. Be not in passion, dear Monsieur.


Mons. I kiss your hand obligeant, Madam.

Enter a French Scullion. Chere Pierot, Serviteur, Serviteur, or ca a manger.


Kisses the Scullion. Scull. En voulez vous de Cram Schiquin.


Floun. Yes.


Scull. De Partrish, de Faysan, de Quailles.


Mons. This Bougre vil ruin me too, but he speak wit dat bell Air and grace. I
cannot bid him hold his tongue, ventre, c'est assey, Pierot, vat-en.


Ex. Scull. and returns. Scull. And de litel plate de --


Mons. Jarnie, vat-en.


Exit Scull. and returns. Scull. And de litel plate de --


Mons. De grace go die way.


Exit. Scull. and returns. Scull. And de litel de --


Mons. De Fourmage, de Brie, vat-en, go, go.


Floun. What Is that Cheese that stinks?


Mons. Ay, ay, be sure it stink extremente, Pierot vat-en; but stay till I
drink die health, here is to dat pretty Fellow's health, Madam.


Flirt. Must we drink the Scullion's health?


Mons. Auh, you will not be disobligeant, Madam, he is the Quisinier for a
Cardinal or French* Abbot.


Drinks. Floun. But how shall we divertise our selves till Supper be ready?


Flirt. Can we have better Divertisement than this Gentleman?


Floun. But I think we had better carry the Gentleman home with us and because
it is already late, sup at home, and divertise the Gentleman at Cards, till it
be ready, de hear, Waiter, let it be brought when it is ready to my Lodging hard
by, in Mustard-Alley, at the Sign of the Crooked-Billet!


Mons. At the Crooked-Billet!


Flirt. Come, Sir, come.


Mons. Mort-bleu, I have take the Vow (since my last Clap) never to go again to
the Bourdel.


Floun What is the Bourdel?


Mons. How call you the name of your House?


Flirt. The Crooked-Billet.


Mons. No, no, the -- Bawdy House, vert and bleu.


Floun. How, our Lodging! we'd have you know --


Mons. Auh, mort-bleu, I would not know it, de Crooke-Billet, hah, ha.


Flirt. Come, Sir.


Mons. Besides, if I go wit you to the Bourdel, you will tell, mort-bleu.


Floun. Fie, fie, come along.


Mons. Beside, I am to be married within these two days, if you should tell now.


Flirt. Come, come along, we will not tell.


Mons. But will you promise then to have the care of my honor, pray, good
Madam, have de care of my honeur, pray have de care of my honeur. Will you have
care of my honeur? pray have de care of my honeur, and do not tell, if you can
help it; pray, dear Madam, do not tell.


Kneels to 'em. Flirt. I would not tell for fear of losing you, my Love for you
will make me secret.


Mons. Why, do you love me?


Flirt. Indeed I cannot help telling you now what my modesty ought to conceal,
but my eyes would disclose it too. I have a passion for you, Sir.


Mons. A passion for me!


Flirt. An extreme passion, dear Sir, you are so French, so mightily French, so
agreeable French; but I Will tell you more of my heart at home: come along.


Mons. But is your pation sincere?


Flirt. The truest in the World.


Mons. Well then, I Will venture my body wit thee for one night.


Flirt. For one night, don't you believe that, and so you would leave me to
morrow; but I love you so, I cannot part with you, you must keep me for good
and all, if you will have me. I cannot leave you for my heart.


Mons. How, keep, Jarnie, de Whore Englis' have notinge but keep, keep in
dear mouths now a* days, test non: formerly 'twas enough to keep de shild, ma
foy.


Flirt. Nay, I will be kept else -- but come we'll talk on it at home.


Mons. Umh -- so, so, ver vel de Amoure of de Whore does always end in keep, ha,
keep, ma foy, keep, ha --

The Punck that entertains you wit'her passion,
Is like kind Host who makes the Invitation,
At your own cost, to his fort bon Collation.

Ex. ACT II.
SCENE I. Don Diego's House in the Morning.
Enter Don Diego in the Spanish Habit, Mrs. Caution his Sister. Don Dieg. HAve
you had a Spanish care of the Honor of my Family, that is to say, have you
kept up my Daughter close in my absence, as I directed.


Caut. I have, Sir; but it was as much as I could do.


Don. I knew that; for 'twas as much as I could do to keep up her Mother. I
that have been in Spain, look you.


Caut. Nay, it is a hard task to keep up an English Woman.


Don. As hard as it is for those who are not kept up to be honest, look you con
Licentia Sister.


Caut. How now, Brother! I am sure my Husband never kept me up.


Don. I knew that, therefore I cried con Licentia Sister, as the Spaniards have
it.


Caut. But you Spaniards are too censorious, Brother.


Don. You English Women, Sister, give us too much cause (look you) but you are
sure my Daughter has not seen a man since my departure.


Caut. No, not so much as a Churchman.


Don. As a Churchman ( Voto) I thank you for that, not a Churchman! not a
Churchman!


Caut. No, not so much as a Churchman; but of any, one would think one might
trust a Churchman.


Don. No, we are bold enough in trusting them with our Souls, I Will never trust
'em with the body of my Daughter, look you, Guarda, you see what comes of
trusting Churchmen here in England; and it is because the Women govern the
Families, that Chaplains are so much in fashion. Trust a Churchman -- trust a
Coward with your honor, a Fool with your secret, a Gamster with your purse, as
soon as a Priest with your Wife or Daughter, look you, Guarda, I am no Fool,
look you.


Caut. Nay, I know you are a wise man, Brother.


Don. Why, Sister, I have been fifteen years in Spain for it, at several times,
lo^k you: Now, in Spain, he is wise enough that is grave; politic enough, that
^ays little; and honorable enough that is jealous; and though I say it, that
should not say it, I as as grave, grum, and jealous, as any Spaniard breathing.


Caut. I know you are, Brother.


Don. And I will be a Spaniard in every thing still, and will not conform, not
I, to their ill-favored English Customs, for I will wear my Spanish Habit
still, I will stroke my Spanish Whiskers still, and I will eat my Spanish Olio
still; and my Daughter shall go a Maid to her Husbands Bed, let the English
Custom be what 'twill: I would fain see any finical cunning, insinuating
Monsieur, of the age, debauch, or steal away my Daughter; but well, has she
seen my Cousin? How long has he been in England?


Caut. These three days.


Don. And she has seen him, has she? I was contented he should see her,
intending him for her Husband: but she has seen no body else upon your certain
knowledge?


Caut. No, no, alas! how should she? it is impossible she should.


Don. Where is her Chamber? pray let me see her.


Caut. You Will find her, poor Creature, asleep, I warrant you; or if awake,
thinking no hurt, nor of your coming this morning.


Don. Let us go to her, I long to see her, poor innocent Wretch.


Exeunt. Enter Hippolita, Gerrard, and Prue at a distance. Ger. Am I not come
upon your own Summons, Madam? and yet receive me so?


Hipp. My Summons, Sir, no I assure you; and if you do not like your reception,
I cannot help it; for I am not used to receive men, I Would have you to know.


Ger. She is beautiful beyond all things I ever saw.


Aside. Hipp. I like him extremely.


Aside. Ger. Come, fairest, why do you frown?


Hipp. Because I am angry.


Ger. I am come on purpose to please you then, do not receive me so unkindly.


Hipp. I tell you, I do not use to receive men; there has not been a man in the
House before, but my Cousin, this twelve month, I Would have you to know.


Ger. Then you ought to bid me the more welcome, I Would have you to know.


Hipp. What do you mock me too? I know I am but a home-bred-simple Girl; but I
thought you Gallants of the Town had been better bred, than to mock a poor Girl
in her Fathers own House. I have heard indeed it is a part of good breeding to
mock people behind their backs, but not to their faces.


Ger. Pretty Creature! she has not only the Beauty but the Innocence of an
Angel. Mock you, dear Miss! no, I only repeated the words, because they were
yours, sweet Miss, what we like we imitate.


Aside. Hipp. Dear Miss! sweet Miss! how came you and I so well acquainted?
This is one of your confident Tricks too, as I have been told, you will be
acquainted with a Woman in the time you can help her over a Bench in the
Playhouse, or to her Coach: but I need not wonder at your confidence, since
you could come in at the great Gallery-window just now. But pray who shall pay
for the glass you have broken?


Ger. Pretty Creature! your Father might have made the Window bigger then,
since he has so fine a Daughter, and will not allow people to come in at the
door to her.


Hipp. A pleasant Man! well, it is harder playing the Hypocrite with him, I see,
than with my Aunt or Father; and if dissimulation were not very natural to a
Woman, I Am sure I could not use it at this time; but the mask of simplicity and
innocence is as useful to an intriguing Woman, as the mask of Religion to a
Statesman, they say.


Aside. Ger. Why do you look away, dearest Miss?


Hipp. Because you quarreled with me just now for frowning* upon you, and I
cannot help it, if I look upon you.


Ger. O let me see that Face at any rate.


Hipp. Would you have me frown upon you? for I shall be sure to do it.


Ger. Come, I Will stand fair: you have done your worst to my heart already.


Hipp. Now I dare not look upon him, lest I should not be able to keep my word.


Aside. Ger. Come, I am ready, and yet I am afraid of her frowns:

Aside. Come, look, Ih -- am ready, Ih -- am ready.


Hipp. But I am not ready.


Aside. Ger. Turn, dear Miss, Come, Ih -- am ready.


Hipp. Are you ready then, I Will look?

Turns upon him. No faith, I cannot frown upon him, if I should be hanged.


Aside. Ger. Dear Miss, I thank you, that look has no terror in it.


Hipp. No, I cannot frown for my heart; for blushing, I don't use to look upon
men, you must know.


Ger. If it were possible any thing could, those blushes would add to her
Beauty: well, bashfulness is the only out-of-fashion-thing that is agreeable.


Aside. Hipp. Ih -- h -- like this man strangely, I was going to say loved him.
Courage then, Hippolita, make use of the only opportunity thou can have to
enfranchize thy self: Women formerly (they say) never knew how to make use of
their time till it was past, but let it not be said so of a young Woman of this
Age; my damned Aunt will be stirring presently: well then, courage, I say,
Hippolita, thou art full fourteen years old, shift for thy self.


Aside. Ger. So, I have looked upon her so long, till I am grown bashful too;
Love and Modesty come together like Money and Covetousness, and the more we
have, the less we can show it. I dare not look her in the face now, nor speak a
word.


Aside. Hipp. What, Sir, methinks you look away now.


Ger. Because you would not look upon me, Miss.


Hipp. Nay, I hope you cannot look me in the face, since you have done so rude a
thing as to come in at the Window upon me; come, come, when once we Women find
the men bashful, then we take heart; now I can look upon you as long as you
will; let us see if you can frown upon me now!


Ger. Lovely Innocence! No, you may swear I cannot frown upon you, Miss.


Hipp. So I knew you were ashamed of what you have done; well, since you are
ashamed, and because you did not come of your own head, but were sent by my
Cousin, you say.


Ger. Which I wonder at.


Aside. Hipp. For all these reasons I do forgive you.


Ger. In token of your forgiveness then (dearest Miss) let me have the honor
to kiss your hand.


Hipp. Nay, there it is you men are like our little Shock-dogs, if we don't keep
you off from us, but use you a little kindly, you grow so fidling, and so
troublesome, there is no enduring you.


Ger. O dear Miss, if I am like your Shock-dog, let it be in his Privileges.


Hipp. Why, I Would have you know he does not lie with me.


Ger. It Is was well guessed, Miss, for one so innocent.


Hipp. No, I always kick him off from the Bed, and never will let him come near
it; for of late indeed (I do not know what is the reason) I don't much care for
my Shock-dog nor my Babies.


Ger. O then, Miss, I may have hopes; for after the Shock-dog and the Babies,
it is the man's turn to be beloved.


Hipp. Why could you be so good-natured as to come after my Shock-dog in my
Love? it may be indeed, rather than after one of your Brother-men.


Ger. Hah, ha, ha -- poor Creature, a Wonder of Innocence.


Hipp. But I see you are humble, because you would kiss my hand.


Ger. No, I am ambitious therefore.


Hip. Well, all this fooling but loses time, I must make better use of it. I
could let you kiss my hand, but then I Am afraid you would take hold of me and
carry me away.


Aside. Ger. Indeed I would not.


Hipp. Come! I know you would.


Ger. Truly I would not.


Hipp. You would, you would, I know you would.


Ger. I Will swear I wo' not -- by --


Hipp. Nay, don't swear, for you will be the apter to do it then, I would not
have him forswear it neither; he does not like me sure well enough to carry me
away.


Aside. Ger. Dear Miss, let me kiss your hand.


Hipp. I am sure you would carry me away, if I should.


Ger. Be not afraid of it.


Hipp. Nay! I am afraid of the contrary; either he dislikes me, and therefore
will not be troubled with me, or what is as bad, he loves me, and is dull, or
fearful to displease me.


Aside. Ger. Trust me, sweetest; I can use no violence to you.


Hipp. Nay, I am sure you would carry me away, what should you come in at the
Window for, if you did not mean to steal me?


Ger. If I should endeavor it, you might cry out, and I should be prevented.


Hip. Dull, dull man of the Town, are all like thee. He is as dull as a Country
Squire at Questions and Commands. No, if I should cry out never so loud; this
is quite at the further end of the House, and there no body could hear me.


Aside. Ger. I will not give you the occasion, Dearest.


Hipp. Well! I will quicken thy sense, if it be possible. Nay, I know you come
to steal me away; because I am an Heiress, and have twelve hundred pound a
year, lately left me by my Mothers Brother, which my Father cannot meddle with,
and which is the chiefest reason (I suppose) why he keeps me up so close.


Aside. Ger. Ha!


Aside. Hipp. So -- this has made him consider, O money, powerful money! how
the ugly, old, crooked, straight, handsome young Women are beholding to thee?


Ger. Twelve hundred pound a year --


Hipp. Besides, I have been told my Fortune, and the Woman said I should be
stolen away, because she says it is the Fate of Heiresses to be stolen away.


Ger. Twelve hundred pound a year --


Aside. Hip. Nay more, she described the man to me, that was to do it, and he
was as like you as could be! have you any Brothers?


Ger. Not any! 'twas I, I warrant you, Sweetest.


Hipp. So he understands himself now.


Ger. Well, Madam, since 'twas foretold you, what do you think on it? it is in
vain, you know, to resist Fate.


Hipp. I do know indeed they say, it is to no purpose: besides, the Woman that
told me my Fortune, or you have bewitched me. Ih -- think.


Sighs. Ger. My Soul, my Life, it is you have Charms powerful as numberless,
especially those of your innocence irresistible, and do surprise the wary'st
Heart; such mine was, while I could call it mine, but now it is yours for ever.


Hip. Well, well, get you gone then, I Will keep it safe for your sake.


Ger. Nay, you must go with me, sweetest.


Hipp. Well, I see you will part with the Jewel; but you will have the keeping of
the Cabinet to which you commit it.


Ger. Come, come, my Dearest, let us be gone: Fortune as well as Women must be
taken in the humor.


Enter Prue running hastily to stop 'em, Don Diego and Mrs. Caution*
immediately after. Pru. O Miss, Miss! your Father, it seems, is just now
arrived, and here is coming in upon you.


Hipp. My Father!


Don. My Daughter! and a Man!


Caut. A Man! a Man in the House!


Ger. Ha! -- what mean these! a Spaniard.


Hipp. What shall I do? stay -- nay, pray stir not from me; but lead me about,
as if you lead me about, as if you lead me a Corant.


Leads her about. Don. Is this your Government, Sister, and this your innocent
Charge, that has not seen the face of a man this twelvemonth, En hora mala.


Caut. O sure it is not a man, it cannot be a Man!


Puts on her Spectacles. Don. It cannot be a Man! if he be not a Man he is a
Devil; he has her lovingly by the hand too, Valga me el Cielo.


Hipp. Do not seem to mind them, but dance on, or lead me about still.


Ger. What de'e mean by it?


apart to* Hipp. Don. Hey! they are frolic, a dancing.


Caut. Indeed they are dancing, I think, why Niece.


Don. Nay, hold a little: I Will make 'em dance in the Devils name, but it shall
not be la Gailliarda!


Draws his Sword, Caution holds him. Caut. O Niece! why Niece!


Ger. Do you hear her? what do you mean?


apart to Hipp. Hipp. Take no notice of them; but walk about still, and sing a
little, sing a Corant.


Ger. I cannot sing; but I Will hum, if you will.


Don. Are you so merry? Well, I Will be with you, En hora mala.


Caut. Oh Niece, Niece, why Niece, Oh --


Don. Why, Daughter, my dainty Daughter, my shame, my ruin, my plague.


Struggling gets from Caution, goes toward 'em with his Sword drawn. Hipp. Mind
him not, but dance and sing on.


Ger. A pretty time to dance and sing indeed, when I have a Spaniard with naked
Toledo at my tail: no, pray excuse me, Miss, from fooling any longer.


Hipp. O my Father! my Father! poor Father! you are welcome, pray give me your
blessing.


Turning about. Don. My blessing, En hora mala.


Hipp. What, am I not your Daughter, Sir?


Don. My Daughter, mi mal, mi muerte.


Hipp. My name's Hippolita, Sir, I don't own your Spanish names; but pray,
Father, why do you frighten one so! you know I don't love to see a Sword: what
do you mean to do with that ugly thing out?


Don. I Will show you, Trayidor Ladron, demi houra, thou dy'st.


Runs at Ger. Ger. Not if I can help it, good Don; but by the names you give
me, I find you mistake your man, I suppose some Spaniard has affronted you.


Draws. Don. None but thee, Ladron, and thou dy'st for it.


Fight. Caut. Oh, oh, oh -- help, help, help.


Hipp. Oh -- what will you kill my poor Dancing Master?


Kneels. Don. A Dancing Master, he is a Fencing-master rather, I think. But is
he your Dancing Master? Umph --


Ger. So much Wit and Innocence were never together before.


Aside. Don. Is he a Dancing Master?


Pausing. Caut. Is he a Dancing Master? He does not look like a Dancing Master.


Hipp. Pish -- you don't know a Dancing Master, you have not seen one these
threescore years, I warrant.


Caut. No matter; but he does not look like a Dancing Master.


Don. Nay, nay, Dancing-masters look like Gentlemen, enough, Sister; but he is
no Dancing Master by drawing his Sword so briskly: those tripping outsides of
Gentlemen are like Gentlemen enough in every thing but in drawing a Sword, and
since he is a Gentleman, he shall dye by mine.


Hipp. Oh, hold, hold.


Fight again. Caut. Hold, hold! pray, Brother, let us talk with him a little
first, I warrant you I shall trap him, and if he confesses, you may kill him;
for those that confess, they say, ought to be hanged -- let us see --


Ger. Poor Hippolita, I wish I had not had this occasion of admiring thy Wit; I
have increased my Love, whilst I have lost my hopes, the common Fate of poor
Lovers.


Aside. Caut. Come, you are guilty by that hanging down o^ your head. Speak,
are you a Dancing Master? Speak, speak, a Dancing Master?


Ger. Yes, forsooth, I am a Dancing Master, ay, ay --


Don. How does it appear?


Hipp. Why there is his Fiddle, there upon the Table, Father.


Caut. No busie-body, but it is not -- that is my Nephews Fiddle.


Hipp. Why, he lent it to my Cousin; I tell you it is his.


Caut. Nay, it may be indeed, he might lend it him, for ought I know.


Don. I, I, but ask him, Sister, if he be a Dancing Master, where?


Caut. Pray, Brother, let me alone with him, I know what to ask him, sure!


Don. What will you be wiser than I? nay, then stand away. Come, if you are a
Dancing Master; where is your School? adonde, adonde.


Caut. Why, he will say, may be he has never a one.


Don. Who asked you, nimble Chaps? So you have put an Excuse in his head.


Ger. Indeed, Sir, it is no Excuse, I have no School.


Caut. Well! but who sent you, how came you hither?


Ger. There I am puzl'd indeed.


Aside. Caut. How came you hither, I say? how --


Ger. Why, how, how, how should I come hither?


Don. Ay, how should he come hither? upon his Legs.


Caut. So, so, now you have put an Excuse in his head too, that you have, so
you have, but stay --


Don. Nay, with your favor, Mistress, I Will ask him now.


Caut. I'facks; but you shall not, I Will ask him, and ask you no favor that I will.


Don. I'fackins; but you shall not ask him, if you go there to, look you, you
Prattle-box you, I Will ask him.


Caut. I will ask him, I say, come.


Don. Where.


Caut. What.


Don. Mine Is a shrewd question.


Caut. Mine Is as shrewd as yours.


Don. Nay then we shall have it, come, answer me, where is your Lodging? come,
come, Sir.


Caut. A shrewd question indeed, at the Surgeons Arms I warrant in -- for it is
Springtime, you know.


Don. Must you make lies for him?


Caut. But come, Sir, what is your Name? answer me to that, come.


Don. His Name, why it is an easy matter to tell you a false Name, I hope.


Caut. So, must you teach him to cheat us?


Don. Why did you say my questions were not shrewd questions then?


Caut. And why would you not let me ask him the question then? Brother,
Brother, ever while you live for all your Spanish wisdom, let an old Woman make
discoveries, the young Fellows cannot cheat us in any thing, I Would have you to
know; set your old Woman still to grope out an Intrigue, because you know the
Mother found her Daughter in the Oven: a word to the wise, Brother.


Don. Come, come, leave this tattling; he has dishonored my Family, debauched
my Daughter, and what if he could excuse himself? the Spanish Proverb says,
Excuses neither satisfy Creditors nor the injured; the wounds of Honor must
have blood and wounds, St. Jago para mi.


Kisses the Cross of his Sword, and runs at Gerrard. Hipp. Oh hold! dear
Father, and I Will confess all.


Ger. She will not, sure, after all.


Aside. Hipp. My Cousin sent him, because, as he said, he would have me recover
my Dancing a little before our Wedding, having made a Vow he would never marry
a Wife who could not dance a Corant. I am sure I was unwilling, but he would
have him come, saying, I was to be his Wife, as soon as you came, and therefore
expected obedience from me.


Don. Indeed the venture is most his, and the shame would be most his; for I
know here in England it is not the custom for the Father to be much concerned
what the Daughter does, but I will be a Spaniard still.


Hipp. Did not you hear him say last night he would send me one this morning?


Caut. No not I sure. If I had, he had never come here.


Hipp. Indeed, Aunt, you grow old, I see, your memory fails you very much. Did
not you hear him, Prue, say he would send him to me?


Prue. Yes I Will be sworn did I.


Hipp. Look you there, Aunt.


Caut. I wonder I should not remember it.


Don. Come, come, you are a doting old Fool.


Caut. So, so, the fault will be mine now. But pray, Mistress, how did he come
in: I am sure I had the Keys of the Doors, which till your Father came in, were
not opened to day.


Hipp. He came in just after my Father, I suppose.


Caut. It might be indeed while the Porters brought in the things, and I was
talking with you.


Don. O might he so, forsooth; you are a brave Governante, look you, you a
Duenna voto -- and not know who comes in and out.


Caut. So, 'twas my fault, I know.


Don. Your Maid was in the Room with you! was she not, Child?


Hipp. Yes indeed, and indeed, Father, all the while.


Don. Well, Child, I am satisfied then; but I hope he does not use the
Dancing-masters tricks of squeezing your hands, setting your Legs and Feet, by
handling your Thighs, and seeing your Legs.


Hipp. No indeed, Father; I Would give him a Box on the Ear, if he should.


Don. Poor Innocent! Well I am contented you should learn to dance; since, for
ought I know, you shall be married to morrow, or the next day at farthest, by
that time you may recover a Corant, a Sarabrand I would say; and since your
Cousin too will have a dancing Wife, it shall be so, and I Will see you dance my
self, you shall be my Charge these two days, and then I dare venture you in the
hand of any Dancing Master, even a saucy French Dancing Master, look you.


Caut. Well, have a care though; for this man is not dressed like a
Dancing Master.


Don. Go, go, you dote, are they not (for the most part) better dressed and
prouder than many a good Gentleman? you would be wiser than I, would you?
Querno --


Caut. Well, I say only look to it, look to it.


Don. Hey, hey! come, Friend, to your business, teach her her Lesson over
again, let us see.


Hipp. Come, Master.


Don. Come, come, let us see your English Method, I understand something of
Dancing my self -- come.


Hipp. Come, Master.


Ger. I shall betray you yet, dearest Miss, for I know not a step, I could
never dance.


apart to Hipp. Hipp. No!


Don. Come, come, Child.


Hipp. Indeed I Am ashamed, Father.


Don. You must not be ashamed, Child, you will never dance well, if you are
ashamed.


Hipp. Indeed I cannot help it, Father.


Don. Come, come, I say, go to it.


Hipp. Indeed I cannot, Father, before you; it is my first Lesson, and I shall do
it so ill: pray, good Father, go into the next Room for this once, and the next
time my Master comes, you shall see I shall be confident enough.


Don. Poor-foolish-innocent Creature; well, well, I will, Child, who but a
Spanish kind of a Father could have so innocent a Daughter, in England? well I
would fain see any one steal or debauch my Daughter from me.


Hipp. Nay, will not you go, Father!


Don. Yes, yes, I go, Child, we will all go but your Maid; you can dance before
your Maid.


Hipp. Yes, yes, Father, a Maid at most times with her Mistress is no body.


Ex. Diego and Mrs. Caution. Ger. He peeps yet at the door.


Hipp. Nay, Father, you peep, indeed you must not see me, when we have done you
shall come in.


She pulls the door to. Pru. Indeed, little Mistress, like the young Kitten,
you see, you played with our prey, till you had almost lost it!


Hipp. It Is true, a good old Mouser like you, had taken it up, and run away
with it presently.


Ger. Let me adore you, dearest Miss, and give you --


Going to embrace her. Hipp. No, no embracing good Master, that ought to be the
last Lesson you are to teach me, I have heard.


Ger. Though an after-Game be the more tedious and dangerous, it is won, Miss,
with the more honor and pleasure; for all that I repent we were put to it; the
coming in of your Father as he did, was the most unlucky thing that ever befell
me.


Hipp. What, then you think I would have gone with you.


Ger. Yes, and will go with me yet, I hope, courage, Miss, we have yet an
opportunity, and the Gallery-window is yet open.


Hipp. No, no, if I went, I would go for good and all; but now my Father will
soon come in again, and may quickly overtake us; besides, now I think on it, you
are a Stranger to me. I know not where you live, nor whither you might carry
me; for ought I know, you might be a Spirit, and carry me to Barbados.


Ger. No, dear Miss, I would carry you to Court, the Play Houses, and Hide-Park
--


Hipp. Nay, I know it is the trick of all you that spirit Women away to speak
'em mighty fair at first; but when you have got 'em in your Clutches, you carry
'em into Yorkshire, Wales, or Cornwall, which is as bad as to Barbados, and
rather than be served so, I would be a Prisoner in London still as I am.


Ger. I see the Air of this Town without the pleasures of it, is enough to
infect Women with an aversion for the Country. Well, Miss, since it seems you
have some diffidence in me, give me leave to visit you as your Dancing Master,
now you have honored me with the Character, and under that, I may have your
Fathers permission to see you, till you may better know me and my heart, and
have a better opportunity to reward it.


Hipp. I am afraid, to know your heart, would require a great deal of time, and
my Father intends to marry me very suddenly to my Cousin who sent you hither.


Ger. Pray, sweet Miss, then let us make the better use of our time, if it be
short: but how shall we do with that Cousin of yours in the mean time, we must
needs charm him?


Hipp. Leave that to me!


Ger. But what is worse! how shall I be able to act a Dancing Master? who ever
wanted inclination and patience to learn my self.


Hipp. A Dancing-School in half an hour will furnish you with terms of the Art
Besides, Love (as I have heard say) supplies his Scholars with all sorts of
Capacities they have need of in spite of Nature, but what has Love to do with
you?


Ger. Love indeed has made a grave Gouty Statesman fight Duels; the Soldier
fly from his Colors, a Pedant asine Gentleman; nay, and the very Lawyer a
Poet, and therefore may make me a Dancing Master.


Hipp. If he were your Master.


Ger. I Am sure, dearest Miss, there is nothing else which I cannot do for you
already, and therefore may hope to succeed in that.


Enter Don Diego. Don. Come, have you done?


Hipp. O! my Father again.


Don. Come, now let us see you dance.


Hipp. Indeed I am not perfect yet, pray excuse me till the next time my Master
comes: but when must he come again Father?


Don. Let me see, Friend, you must needs come after Dinner again, and then at
night again, and so three times to morrow too. If she be not married to morrow
(which I am to consider of) she will dance a Corant in twice or thrice teaching
more, will she not? for it is but a twelvemonth since she came from
Hackney-School.


Ger. We will lose no time I warrant you, Sir, if she be to be married to
morrow.


Don. Truly, I think she may be married to morrow, therefore I would not have
you lose any time, look you.


Ger. You need not caution me I warrant you, Sir, sweet Scholar, your humble
Servant, I will not fail you immediately after Dinner.


Don. No, no, pray do not, and I will not fail to satisfy you very well, look
you.


Hipp. He does not doubt his reward, Father, for his pains. If you should not,
I would make that good to him.


Don. Come, let us go in to your Aunt, I must talk with you both together,
Child.


Ex. Ger. Don. Hipp. I follow you, Sir.


Pru. Here Is the Gentlewoman o'th'next House come to see you, Mistress.


Hipp. She Is come, as if she came expressly to sing the new Song the sung last
night, I must hear it, for it is to my purpose now.

Aside. Madam, your Servant, I dreamed all night of the Song you sung last; the
new Song against delays in Love: pray let us hear it again.

SINGS. 1.
Since we poor slavish Women know
Our men we cannot pick and choose,
To him we like, why say we no?
And both our time and Lover lose.
With feigned repulses and delays
A Lover's appetite we pall;
And if too long the Gallant stays,
His stomach's gone for good and all.
2.
Or our impatient amorous Guest,
Unknown to us, away may steal,
And rather than stay for a Feast,
Take up with some coarse, ready meal.
When opportunity is kind,
Let prudent Woman be so too;
And if the man be to your mind,
Till needs you must, never let him go*
3.
The Match soon made is happy still,
^or only Love has there to do;
Let no one marry against her will,
But stand off, when her Parents woo.
And only to their Suits be coy,
For she whom Jointure can obtain
To let a Fop her Bed enjoy,
Is but a lawful Wench for gain.

Pru. Your Father calls for you, Miss.


steps to the door. Hipp. I come, I come. I must be obedient as long as I am
with him.

pausing. Our Parents who restrain our liberty,
But take the course to make us sooner free,
Though all we gain be but new slavery;
We leave our Fathers, and to Husbands fly.

Exeunt. ACT III.
SCENE I. Don Diego's House.
Enter Monsieur, Hippolita, and Prue. Mons. SErviteur, Serviteur, la Cousin,
your Maid told me she watched at the stair-foot for my coming, because you had
a mind to speak wit me before I saw your Fader, it seem.


Hipp. I would so indeed, Cousin.


Mons. Or ca, Or ca, I know your affair, it is to tell me wat recreation you
ade with Monsieur Gerrard; but did he come, I was afrait he would not come.


Hipp. Yes, yes, he did come.


Mons. Ha, ha, ha -- and were you not infiniment divertisee and please, confess.


Hipp. I was indeed, Cousin, I was very well pleased.


Mons. I do tinke so. I did tinke to come and be divertisee my self this
morning with the sight of his reception; but I did ran'counter last night wit
dam Company dat keep me up so late I could not rise in de morning. Mala-peste
de Puteins --


Hipp. Indeed we wanted you here mightily, Cousin.


Mons. To elpe you to laugh; for if I add been here, I had made such
recreation wid dat Coxcomb Gerrard.


Hipp. Indeed, Cousin! you need not have any subject or property to make one
laugh, you are so pleasant your self, and when you are but alone, you would
make one burst.


Mons. Am I so happy, Cousin? then in the bon quality of making people laugh.


Hipp. Mighty happy, Cousin.


Mons. De grace.


Hipp. Indeed!


Mons. Nay, sans vanity I observe wheresoe'er I come I make every body merry,
sans vanity -- da --


Hipp. I do believe you do.


Mons. Nay, as I march in de street I can make de dull Apprenty laugh and
sneer.


Hipp. This Fool, I see, is as apt as an ill Poet to mistake the contempt and
scorn of people for applause and admiration.


Aside. Mons* Ah, Cousin, you see wat it is to have been in France; before I
went into France I could get no body to laugh at me, ma foy.


Hipp No! truly Cousin, I think you deserved it before, but you are improved
indeed by going into France.


Mons. Ay, as, the Franch Education make us propre a tout; beside, Cousin, you
must know to play the Fool is the Science in France, and I did go to the
Italian Academy at Paris thrice a week to learn to play de Fool of Signior
Scaramouche who is the most excellent Personage in the World for dat Noble
Science. Angel is a dam English Fool to him.


Hipp. Methinks now Angel is a very good Fool.


Mons. Nauh, nauh, Nokes is a better Fool, but indeed the Englis' are not fit
to be Fools; here are ver few good Fools. It Is true, you have many a young
Cavalier, who go over into France to learn to be the Buffoon; but for all dat,
dey return but mauvais Buffoon. Jarnie.


Hipp. I Am sure, Cousin, you have lost no time there.


Mons. Auh le brave Scaramouche.


Hipp. But is it a Science in France, Cousin? and is there an Academy for
Fooling: sure none go to it but Players.


Mons. Dey are Comedians dat are de Matres, but all the beaux monde go to
learn, as they do here of Angel and Nokes; for if you did go abroad into
Company, you would find the best almost of de Nation conning in all places the
Lessons which dey have learnt of the Fools, dear Matres, Nokes and Angel.


Hipp. Indeed!


Mons. Yes, yes, dey are the Gens de quality that practice dat Science most,
and the most ambitieux; for Fools and Buffoons have been always most welcome to
Courts, and desired in all Companies. Auh to be de Fool, de Buffoon, is to be
de great Personage.


Hipp. Fools have Fortune, they say indeed.


Mons. So say old Seneque.


Hipp. Well, Cousin (not to make you proud) you are the greatest Fool in
England, I am sure.


Mons. Non, non, de grace, non, Nokes de Comedian is a pretty man, a pretty man
for a Comedian, da --


Hipp. You are modest, Cousin; but least my Father should come in presently
(which he will do as soon as he knows you are here) I must give you a Caution,
which it is fit you should have before you see him.


Mons. Vel, vel, Cousin, vat is dat?


Hipp. You must know then (as commonly the conclusion of all mirth is sad)
after I had a good while pleased my self in jesting and leading the poor
Gentleman you sent into a Fools Paradise, and almost made him believe I would
go away with him, my Father coming home this morning, came in upon us, and
caught him with me.


Mons. Mala-pes^e.


Hipp. And drew his Sword upon him, and would have killed him; for you know my
Father's Spanish fierceness and jealousy.


Mons* But, how did he come off then? test non.


Hipp. In short, I was fain to bring him off by saying he was my Dancingmaster.


Mons. Hah, ha, ha, ver good Jeste.


Hipp. I was unwilling to have the poor man killed you know for our foolish
Frolic with him; but then upon my Aunts and Fathers inquiry, how he came in,
and who sent him; I was forced to say you did, desiring I should be able to
dance a Corant before our Wedding.


Mons. A ver good Jest -- da -- still bettre as bettre.


Hipp. Now all that I am to desire of you, is to own you sent him, that I may
not be caught in a lie.


Mons. Yes, yes, a ver good Jest, Gerrard, a Mastre de Dance, hah, ha, ha.


Hipp. Nay, the Jest is like to be better yet; for my Father himself has
obliged him now to come and teach me: So that now he must take the
Dancingmaster upon him, and come three or four times come before our Wedding,
lest my Father, if he should come no more, should be suspicious I had told him
a lie: and (for ought I know) if he should know o^ but guess he were not a
Dancingmaster, in his Spanish strictness and Punctillioes of Honor he might
kill me as the shame and stain of his Honor and Family* which he talks of so
much. Now you know the jealous cruel Fathers in Spain serve their poor innocent
Daughters often so, and he is more than a Spaniard.


Mons. Non, non, fear noting, I warrant you he shall come as often as you will
to the House, and your Father shall never know who he is till we are married;
but then I Will tell him all for the Jests sake.


Hipp. But will you keep my Counsel, dear Cousin, till we are married?


Mons. Poor* dear Fool, I warrant thee, mon soy.


Hipp. Nay, what a Fool am I indeed, for you would not have me killed: you love
me too well sure, to be an Instrument of my death;

Enter Don Diego walking gravely, a little Black behind him. Mrs. Caution.] But
here comes my Father, remember.


Mons. I would no more tell him of it, than I would tell you if I had been with
a Weach, Jarnie -- she is afraid to be killed, poor Wretch, and he is a
capricious jealous Fop enough to do it, but here he comes.

Aside. I Will keep thy Counsel I warrant thee, my dear Soul, mon petit Coeur.


Hipp. Peace, peace, my Father's coming this way.


Mons. I, but by his march he will not be near enough to hear us this half hour,
hah, ha, ha.


Don Diego walks leisurely round the Monsieur, surveying him, and shrugging up
his shoulders whilst Monsieur makes Legs and Faces. Aside. Don. Is that thing
my* Cousin, Sister?


Caut. It Is he, Sir.


Don. Cousin, I am sorry to see you.


Mons. Is that a Spanish Complement?


Don. So much disguised, Cousin.


Aside. Mons. Oh! is it out at last, ventre?

Serviteur, Serviteur, a Monseur mon Oncle, and I am glad to see you here
within doors, most Spanish Oncle, ha, ha, ha. But I should be sorry to see you
in the streets, test non.


Don. Why soh -- would you be ashamed of me, hah -- (voto a St. Jago) would
you? hauh --


Mons. I it may be you would be ashamed your self, Monseur mon Oncle, of the
great Train you would get to wait upon your Spanish Hose, puh -- the Boys would
follow you, and hoot at you (vert and bleu) pardone my Franch Franchise,
Monsieur mon Oncle.


Hipp. We shall have sport anon, betwixt these two Contraries.


apart to Prue. Don. Do thou call me Monseur (voto a St. Jago*)


Mons. No, I did not call you Monseur voto a St. Jago, Sir, I know you are my
Uncle Mr. James Formal -- da --


Don. But I can hardly know you are my Cousin, Mr. Nathaniel Paris; but call me
Sir Don Diego henceforward, look you, and no Monsieur, call me Monsieur Guarda.


Mons. I confess my error, Sir; for none but a blind man would call you
Monsieur, ha, ha, ha - But pray do not call me neder Paris, but de Paris, de
Paris (si vou plai'st) Monseur de Paris! Call me Monseur and welcome, da --


Don. Monsieur de Pantaloons then voto --


Mons. Monsieur de Pantalloons! a pretty name, a pretty name, ma foy, da --
bein trove de Pantalloons; how much betre den your de la Fountains, de la
Rivieres, de la Roches, and all the De's in France -- da -- well; but have you
not the admiration for my Pantalloon, Don Diego mon Oncle?


Don. I am astonished at them verde deramente, they are wonderfully ridiculous.


Mons. Redicule, redicule! ah -- it is well you are my Uncle, da -- Redicule, ah
-- is dear any ting in de Universe so jenti as de Pantalloons? any ting so
ravisaunt as de Pantalloons? Auh -- I could kneel down and varship a pair of
jenti Pantalloons? vat, vat, you would have me have de admiration for dis
outward skin of your Thigh, which you call Spanish Hose, fie, fie, fie -- ha,
ha, ha*


Don. Do thou deride my Spanish Hose? young Man, hauh.


Mons. In comparison of Pantalloon I do undervalue 'em indeet, Don Diegue mon
Oncle, ha, ha, ha.


Don. Thou art then a gavanho de malo gusto, look you.


Mons. You may call me vat you vill, Oncle Don Diegue; but I must needs say,
your Spanish Hose are scurvy Hose, ugly Hose, lousie Hose, and stinking Hose.


Don. Do not provoke me, Boracho.


Puts his hand to his Sword. Mons. Indeet for lousie I recant dat Epithete, for
dear is scarce room in 'em for dat little Animal, ha, ha, ha. But for stinking
Hose, dat Epithete may stand; for how can dey choose but stink, since dey are so
furieusmente close to your Spanish Tail, da*


Hipp. Ha, ha, ridiculous.


Aside. Don. Do not provoke me, I say, En hora mala.


Seems to draw. Mons. Nay, Oncle, I am sorry you are in de pation; but I must
live and dye for de Pantalloon against de Spanish Hose, da.


Don. You are a rash young Man, and while you wear Pantalloons, you are beneath
my passion, voto -- Auh -- they make thee look and waddle (with all those
gew-gaw Ribbons) like a great old Fat, slovenly Water-dog.


Mons. And your Spanish Hose, and your Nose in the Air, make you look like a
great grisled-long- Irish-Grey-hound, reaching a Crust off from a high Shelf,
ha, ha, ha.


Don. Bueno, Bueno.


Mrs. Caut. What have you a mind to ruin your self, and break off the Match?


Mons. Pshaw -- wat do you tell me of the Match? dee tinke I will not
vindicate Pantalloons, Morbleu?


Don. Well! he is a lost young Man, I see, and desperately far gone in the
Epidemick Malady of our Nation, the affectation of the worst of French
Vanities: but I must be wiser than him, as I am a Spaniard look you Don Diego,
and endeavor to reclaim him by Art and fair means (look you, Don Diego) if
not, he shall never marry my Daughter look you, Don Diego, though he be my own
Sister's Son, and has two thousand five hundred seventy three pound Starling
twelve shillings and two pence a year Penny-rent, Segouaramente.

Aside. Come, Young Man, since you are so obstinate, we will refer our
difference to Arbitration, your Mistress my Daughter shall be Umpire betwixt
us, concerning Spanish Hose and Pantalloons.


Mons. Pantalloons and Spanish Hose (si vous plaist.)


Don. Your Mistress is the fittest Judge of your Dress, sure?


Mons. I know ver vel, dat most of the Jeunesse of England will not change the
Ribband upon de Crevat widout the consultation of dear Matress, but I am no
Anglois da -- nor shall I make de reference of my Dress to any in the Universe,
da -- I judged by any in England, test non* I would not be judged by an
English Looking-glass, Jarnie.


Don. Be not positivo, Young Man.


Mrs. Caut. Nay, pray refer it, Cousin, pray do.


Mons. Non, non, your Servant, your Servant, Aunt.


Don. But pray be not so positive, come hither, Daughter, tell me which is best.


Hipp. Indeed, Father, you have kept me in universal ignorance, I know nothing.


Mons. And do you tink I shall refer an Affair of dat consequence to a poor
young ting who have not see the Varld, da, I am wiser than so voto?


Don. Well, in short, if you will not be wiser, and leave off your French
Dress, Stammering, and Tricks, look you, you shall be a Fool and go without my
Daughter, voto.


Mons. How, must I leave off my Janti Franch Accoustrements, and speak base
Englis too, or not marry my Cousin! mon Oncle Don Diego* Do not break off the
Match, do not; for know I will not leave off my Pantalloon and Franch
Pronuntiation for never a Cousin in England't, da.


Don. I tell you again, he that marry's my Daughter shall at least look like a
wise Man, for he shall wear the Spanish Habit, I am a Spanish Positivo.


Mons. Ver vel, ver vel! and I am a Franch Positivo.


Don. Then I am Definitivo; and if you do not go immediately into your Chamber,
and put on a Spanish Habit, I have brought over on purpose for your Wedding
Clothes, and put off all these French Fopperies and Vanidades, with all your
Grimaces, Agreeables, Adorables, ma Foys, and Jernies. I swear you shall never
marry my Daughter (and by an Oath by Spaniard never broken) by my Whiskers and
Snuff Box.


Mons. O hold, do not swear, Uncle, for I love your Daughter furieusment.


Don. If you love her, you will obey me.


Mons. Auh, wat vil become of me! but have the consideration, must I leave off
all the Franch Beautes, Graces, and Embellisements, bote of my Person and
Language.


Exeunt Hipp. Mrs. Caution, and Prue laughing. Don. I will have it so.


Mons. I am ruinne den undonne, have some consideration for me, for dear is not
the least Ribbon of my Garniture, but is as dear to me as your Daughter, Jernie
--


Don. Then you do not deserve her, and for that reason I will be satisfied you
love her better, or you shall not have her, for I am positivo.


Mons. Vil you break mine Art! pray have de consideration for me.


Don. I say again, you shall be dressed before night from Top to Toe in the
Spanish Habit, or you shall never marry my Daughter, look you.


Mons. If you will not have de consideration for me, have de consideration for
your Daughter; for she have de passionate Amor for me, and like me in dis
Habit betre den in yours, da --


Don. What I have said I have said, and I am uno Positivo.


Mons. Will you not so mush as allow me one little Franch Oate?


Don. No, you shall look like a Spaniard, but speak and swear like an English
man, look you.


Mons. Helas, helas, den I shall take my leave, mort, test, ventre, Jernie,
teste-bleu, ventre-bleu, ma foy, certes.


Don. Pedro, Sanchez, wait upon this Cavaliero into his Chamber with those
things I ordered you to take out of the Trunks, I would have you a little
accustomed to your Clothes before your Wedding; for if you comply with me, you
shall marry my Daughter to morrow, look you.


Calls at the door. Mons. Adieu then, dear Pantalloon! dear Belte! dear Sword!
dear Perruque! and dear Chappeaux, Retrousee, and dear Shoe, Jernie; adieu,
adieu, adieu, helas, helas, helas, will you have yet no pity.


Don. I am a Spanish Positivo, look you.


Mons. And more cruel than de Spanish Inquisitiono, to compel a Man to a Habit
against his Conscience, helas, helas, helas.


Exit Monsieur. Enter Prue and Gerrard. Pru. Here is the Dancing Master, shall
I call my Mistress, Sir?


Exit Prue. Don. Yes. O you are as punctual as a Spaniard: I love your punctual
Men, nay, I think it is before your time something.


Ger. Nay, I am resolved your Daughter, Sir, shall lose no time by my fault.


Don. So, so, it is well.


Ger. I were a very unworthy Man, if I should not be punctual with her, Sir.


Don. You speak honestly, very honestly, Friend; and I believe a very honest
man, though a Dancing Master.


Ger. I am very glad you think me so, Sir.


Don. What you are but a Young Man, are you married yet?


Ger. No, Sir, but I hope I shall, Sir, very suddenly, if things hit right.


Don. What the old Folks her Friends are wary, and cannot agree with you so
soon as the Daughter can?


Ger. Yes, Sir, the Father hinders it a little at present; but the Daughter I
hope is resolved, and then we shall do well enough.


Don. What! you do not steal her, according to the laudable Custom of some of
your Brother Dancing-masters?


Ger. No, no, Sir, steal her, Sir, steal her, you are pleased to be merry, Sir,
ha, ha, ha. I cannot but laugh at that question.


Aside. Don. No, Sir, methinks you are pleased to be merry; but you say the
Father does not consent.


Ger. Not yet, Sir; but 'twill be no matter whether he does or no.


Don. Was she one of your Scholars? if she were, it is a hundred to ten but you
steal her.


Ger. I shall not be able to hold laughing.


Aside, laughs. Don. Nay, nay, I find by your laughing you steal her, she was
your Scholar, was she not?


Ger Yes, Sir, she was the first I ever had, and may be the last too; for she
has a Fortune (if I can get her) will keep me from teaching to dance any more.


Don. So, so, then she is your Scholar still it seems, and she has a good
Portion, I am glad on it, nay, I knew you stole her.


Ger. My laughing may give him suspicions, yet I cannot hold.


Aside. Don. What, you laugh I warrant to think how the young Baggage and you
will mump the poor old Father; but if all her dependence for a Fortune be upon
the Father, he may chance to mump you both, and spoil the Jest.


Ger. I hope it will not be in his power, Sir, ha, ha, ha.

I shall laugh too much anon.

Aside. Pray, Sir, be pleased to call for your Daughter, I am impatient till
she comes; for time was never more precious with me and with her too, it ought
to be so, sure, since you say she is to be married to morrow.


Don. She ought to bestir her, as you say indeed, wuh, Daughter, Daughter,
Prue, Hippolita: Come away, Child, why do you stay so long?


Calls at the door. Enter Hippolita, Prue, and Caution. Hipp. Your Servant,
Master! indeed I am ashamed you have stayed for me.


Ger O good Madam, it is my Duty, I know you came as soon as you could.


Hipp. I knew my Father was with you, therefore I did not make altogether so
much haste as I might; but if you had been alone, nothing should have kept me
from you, I would not have been so rude as to have made you stay a minute for
me, I warrant you.


Don. Come, fidle, faddle, what a deal of Ceremony there is betwixt your
Dancing Master and you, Querno --


Hipp. Lord, Sir, I hope you will allow me to show my respect to my Master, for I
have a great respect for my Master.


Ger. And I am very proud of my Scholar, and am a very great Honourer of my
Scholar.


Don. Come, come, Friend, about your business, and honor the King. Your
Dancing-masters and Barbers are such finical smooth-tongu'd, tatling Fellows,
and if you set 'em once a talking, they will never a done, no more than when you
set 'em a fidling: indeed all that deal with Fiddles are given to impertinency.


To Mrs. Caution. Caut. Well! well! this is an impertinent Fellow, without
being a Dancingmaster: he is no more a Dancing Master than I am a Maid.


Don. What! will you still be wiser than I? voto.

Come, come about with my Daughter, Man.


Prue. So he would, I warrant you, if your Worship would let him alone.


Don. How now Mrs. Nimble-Chaps?


Ger. Well, though I have got a little Canting at the Dancing-School since I
was here, yet I do all so bunglingly, he will discover me.


Aside to Hipp. Hipp. Try, come take my hand, Master.


Caut. Look you, Brother, the impudent Harletry gives him her hand.


Don. Can he dance with her without holding her by the hand?


Hipp. Here, take my hand, Master.


Ger. I wish it were for good and all.


Aside to her. Hipp. You Dancing-masters are always so hasty, so nimble.


Don. Voto a St. Jago, not that I can see, about, about with her, Man.


Ger. Indeed, Sir, I cannot about with her as I would do, unless you will
please to go out a little, Sir; for I see she is bashful still before you, Sir.


Don. Hey, hey, more fooling yet, come, come, about with her.


Hipp. Nay, indeed, Father, I am ashamed and cannot help it.


Don. But you shall help it, for I will not stir: move her, I say begin Hussie,
move when he will have you.


Pru. I cannot but laugh at that, ha, ha, ha,


Aside. Ger. Come then, Madam, since it must be so let us try, but I shall
discover all, One, two, and Coupee.


apart to Hipp. Caut. Nay de' see how he squeezes her hand, Brother, O the lewd
Villain!


Don. Come, move, I say, and mind her not.


Ger. One, two, three, four, and turn round.


Caut. De' see again he took her by the bare Arm.


Don. Come, move on, she is mad.


Ger. One, two, and a Coupee.


Don. Come, one, two, turn out your Toes.


Caut. There, there, he pinched her by the Thigh, will you suffer it?


Ger. One, two, three, and fall back.


Don. Fall back, fall back, back, some of you are forward enough to fall back.


Ger. Back, Madam.


Don. Fall back when he bids you, Hussie.


Caut. How! how! fall back, fall back, marry, but she shall not fall back when
he bids her.


Don. I say she shall, Huswife, come.


Ger. She will, she will, I warrant you, Sir, if you won' be angry with her.


Caut. Do you know what he means by that now, you a Spaniard?


Don. How Is that, I not a Spaniard? say such a word again.


Ger. Come forward, Madam, three steps again.


Caut. See, see, she squeezes his hand now, O the debauched Harletry!


Don. So, so, mind her not, she moves forward pretty well; but you must move as
well backward as forward, or you will never do any thing to purpose.


Caut. Do you know what you say, Brother, your self now? are you at your
beastliness before your young Daughter?


Pru. Ha, ha, ha.


Don. How now, Mistress, are you so merry? is this your staid Maid as you call
her, Sister impertinent?


Ger. I have not much to say to you, Miss; but I shall not have an opportunity
to do it, unless we can get your Father out.


Aside to Hip. Don. Come about again with her.


Caut. Look you, there she squeezes his hand hard again.


Hipp. Indeed and indeed, Father, my Aunt puts me quite out, I cannot dance
while she looks on for my heart, she makes me ashamed and afraid together.


Ger. Indeed if you would please to take her out, Sir, I am sure I should make
my Scholar do better, than when you are present, Sir, pray, Sir, be pleased for
this time to take her away; for the next time I hope I shall order it so, we
shall trouble neither of you.


Caut. No, no, Brother, stir not, they have a mind to be left alone. Come,
there is a beastly Trick in it: he is no Dancing Master I tell you.


Ger. Damned Jade, she will discover us.


Aside to Hipp. Don. What will you teach me? nay then I will go out, and you
shall go out too, look you.


Caut. I will not go out, look you.


Don. Come, come, thou art a censorious wicked Woman, and you shall disturb
them no longer.


Caut. What will you bawd for your Daughter?


Don. Ay, ay, come go out, out, out.


Caut. I will not go out, I will not go out, my Conscience will not suffer me;
for I know by experience what will follow.


Ger. I warrant you, Sir, we'll make good use of our time when you are gone.


Caut. Do you hear him again, don't you know what he means?


Ex. Don thrusting Caution out. Hipp. It Is very well, you are a fine Gentleman
to abuse my poor Father so.


Ger. It Is but by your Example, Miss.


Hipp. Well I am his Daughter, and may m^^^ the bolder with him, I hope.


Ger. And I am his Son-in-law, that shall (...)nd therefore may claim my
Privilege too of making bold with him, I hope.


Hipp. Methinks you should be contented in making bold with his Daughter; for
you have made very bold with her, sure.


Ger. I hope I shall make bolder with her yet.


Hipp. I do not doubt your confidence, for you are a Dancing Master.


Ger. Why, Miss? I hope you would not have me a fine senseless Whining, modest
Lover; for modesty in a Man is as ill as the want of it in a Woman.


Hipp. I thank you for that, Sir, how you have made bold with me indeed; but if
I am such a confident Piece, I am sure you made me so; if you had not had the
confidence to come in at the Window, I had not had the confidence to look upon
a Man: I am sure I could not look upon a Man before.


Ger. But that I humbly conceive, sweet Miss, was your Fathers fault, because
you had not a Man to look upon. But, dearest Miss, I do not think you
confident, you are only innocent; for that which would be called confidence,
nay impudence in a Woman of years, is called innocence in one of your age; and
the more impudent you appear, the more innocent you are thought.


Hipp. Say you so! has Youth such Privileges? I do not wonder then most Women
seem impudent, since it is to be thought younger than they are it seems; but
indeed, Master you are as great an Encourager of impudence I see, as if you
were a Dancing master in good earnest.


Ger. Yes, yes, a young thing may do anything, may leap out of the Window, and
go away with her Dancing Master, if she please.


Hipp. So, so, the use follows the Doctrine very suddenly.


Ger. Well, Dearest, pray let us make the use we should of it, lest your Father
should make too bold with us, and come in before we would have him.


Hipp. Indeed old Relations are apt to take that ill bred freedom of pressing
into young Company at unseasonable hours.


Ger. Come, dear Miss, let me tell you how I have designed matters; for in
talking of anything else we lose time and opportunity: people abroad indeed say
the English Women are the worst in the World in using an opportunity, they love
tittle tattle and Ceremony.


Hipp. It Is because I warrant opportunities are not so scarce here as abroad,
they have more here than they can use; but let people abroad say what they will
of English Women, because they do not know 'em, but what say people at home?


Ger. Pretty Innocent, ha, ha, ha. Well I say you will not make use of your
opportunity.


Hipp. I say you have no reason to say so yet.


Ger. Well, then anon at nine of the Clock at night I Will try you; for I have
already bespoke a Parson, and have taken up the three back Rooms of the Tavern,
which front upon the Gallery-window, that nobody may see us escape, and I have
appointed (precisely betwixt eight and nine of the Clock when it is dark) a
Coach and Six to wait at the Tavern-door for us.


Hipp. A Coach and Six, a Coach and Six, do you say? nay then I see you are
resolved to carry me away* for a Coach and Six, though there were not a Man but
the Coachman with it, would carry*away any young Girl of my Age in England, a
Coach and Six!


Ger. Then you will be sure to be ready to go with me.


Hipp. What young Woman of the Town could ever say no to a Coach and Six,
unless it were going into the Country: a Coach and Six, it is not in the power
of fourteen years old to resist it.


Ger. You will be sure to be ready?


Hipp. You are sure it is a Coach and Six?


Ger. I warrant you, Miss.


Hipp. I warrant you then they will carry us merrily away* a Coach and Six?


Ger. But have you charmed your Cousin the Monsieur (as you said you would)
that he in the mean time say nothing to prevent us?


Hipp. I warrant you.


Enter to 'em Don Diego and Mrs. Caution pressing in. Caut. I will come in.


Don. Well, I hope by this time you have given her full instructions, you have
told her what and how to do, you have done all.


Ger. We have just done indeed, Sir.


Hipp. Ay, Sir, we have just done, Sir.


Caut. And I fear just undone, Sir.


Ger. De' hear that damned Witch.


Aside to Hipp. Don. Come leave your censorious prating, thou have been a false
right Woman thy self in thy Youth, I warrant you.


Caut. I right! I right! I scorn your words, I Would have you to know, and it is
well known. I right! no it is your dainty Minx, that Jillflirt your Daughter
here that is right, do you see how her Handkerchief is ruffled, and what a heat
she is in?


Don. She has been dancing.


Caut. Ay, ay, Adam and Eve's Dance, or the beginning of the World, de' see how
she pants?


Don. She has not been used to motion.


Caut. Motion, motion, motion de' call it? no indeed, I kept her from motion
till now, motion with a vengeance.


Don. You put the poor bashful Girl to the blush, you see, hold your peace.


Caut. It Is her guilt, not her modesty, marry.


Don. Come, come, mind her not, Child, come, Master, let me see her dance now
the whole Dance roundly together, come sing to her.


Ger. Faith, we shall be discovered after all, you know I cannot sing a Note,
Miss.


Aside to Hipp. Don. Come, come, Man.


Hipp. Indeed, Father, my Master's In haste now, pray let it alone till anon at
night, when you say he is to come again, and then you shall se me dance it to
the Violin, pray stay till then, Father.


Don. I will not be put off so, come begin.


Hipp. Pray* Father.


Don. Come, sing to her, come begin.


Ger. Pray, Sir, excuse me till anon, I am in some haste.


Don. I say begin, I will not excuse you, come take her by the hand, and about
with her.


Caut. I say he shall not take her by the hand* he shall touch her no more;
while I am here there shall be no more squeesing and tickling her palm, good
Mr. Dancing Master, stand off.


Thrusts Ger. away Don. Get you out, Mrs. Impertinence, take her by the hand, I
say.


Caut. Stand off, I say, he shall not touch her, he has touched her too much
already.


Don. If patience were not a Spanish Virtue, I would lay it aside now. I say
let 'em dance.


Caut. I say they shall not dance.


Hipp. Pray, Father, since you see my Aunts obstinacy, let us alone till anon,
when you may keep her out.


Don. Well then, Friend, do not fail to come.


Hipp. Nay, if he fail me at last.


Don. Be sure you come, for she is to be married to morrow, do you know it?


Ger. Yes, yes, Sir, sweet Scholar, your humble Servant, till night, and think
in the mean time of the instructions I have given you, that you may be the
readier when I come.


Don. I, Girl, be sure you do, and do you be sure to come.


Caut. You need not be so concerned, he will be sure to come, I warrant you; but
if I could help it, he should never set foot again in the House.


Don. You would frighten the poor Dancing Master from the House; but be sure
you come for all her.


Ger. Yes, Sir.

But this Jade will pay me when I am gone.


Aside. Caut. Hold, hold, Sir, I must let you out, and I wish I could keep you
out. He a Dancing Master, he is a Chouce, a Cheat, a mere Cheat, and that you will
find.


Don. I find any Man a Cheat! I cheated by any Man! I scorn your words, I that
have so much Spanish Care, Circumspection, and Prudence, cheated by a Man: do
you think I who have been in Spain, look you, and have kept up my Daughter a
twelvemonth, for fear of being cheated of her, look you? I cheated of her!


Caut. Well, say no more.


Exeunt Don, Hipp. Caut. and Prue. Ger. Well, old Formality, if you had not
kept up your Daughter, I am sure I had never cheated you of her.

Aside. The wary Fool is by his care betrayed,
As Cuckolds by their Jealousy are made.

Exeunt. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Monsieur de Paris without a Perruque, with a Spanish Hat, a Spanish
Doublet, Stockins, and Shoes, but in Pantalloons, a Waste-Belt, and a Spanish
Dagger in it, and a Crevat about his Neck. Enter Hippolita and Prue behind
laughing. Mons. TO see wat a Fool Love do make of one, Jernie. It do
metamorphose de brave Man into de Beast, de Sotte, de Animal.


Hipp. Ha, ha, ha.


Mons. Nay, you may laugh, it is ver vel, I am become as redicule for you as can
be, mort-blue. I have deform my self into an ugly Spaniard.


Hipp. Why, do you call this disguising your self like a Spaniard while you
wear Pantalloons still and the Crevat.


Mons. But is here not the double Doublet and the Spanish Dagger aussy.


Hipp. But it is as long as the French Sword, and worn like it. But where is your
Spanish Beard, the thing of most consequence?


Mons. Jernie, do you tink Beards are as easy to be had as in de Play Houses,
non; but if here be no the ugly-long- Spanish Beard, here are, I am certain,
the ugly* long- Spanish Ear.


Hipp. That Is very true, ha, ha, ha.


Mons. Auh de ingrate! dat de Woman is, when we poor men are your Gallants you
laugh at us your selves, and wen we are your Husbands, you make all the World
laugh at us, Jernie. Love, dam Love, it make the man more redicule than
Poverty, Poetry, or a new Title of Honeur, Jernie.


Enter Don Diego and Caution. Don. What at your Jernies still? voto.


Mons. Why, Oncle, you are at your voto's still.


Don. Nay, I Will allow you to be at your voto's too, but not to make the
incongruous Match of Spanish Doublet and French Pantalloons.


Holding his Hat before his Pantalloons. Mons. Nay, pray dear Oncle, let me
unite France and Spain, it is the Mode of France now, Jarnie, voto.


Don. Well, I see I must pronounce, I told you, if you were not dressed in the
Spanish Habit to night, you should not marry my Daughter to morrow, look you.


Mons. Well, am I not habiliee in de Spanish Habit, my Doublet, Ear, and Hat,
Leg and Feet are Spanish, that dey are.


Don. I told you I was a Spanish Positivo, voto.


Mons. Vil you not spare my Pantalloon (begar) I will give you one little
finger to excuse my Pantalloon, da --


Don. I have said, look you.


Mons. Auch chere Pantalloons, speak for my Pantalloons, Cousin, my poor
Pantalloons are as dear to me as de Scarff to de Country Captain, or de new
made Officer; therefore have de compassion for my Pantalloons, Don Diego, mon
Oncle, helas, helas, helas.


Kneels to Don. Don. I have said, look you, your Dress must be Spanish, and
your Language English, I am uno Positivo.


Mons. And must speak base good English too, ah la pitiee, helas.


Don. It must be done, and I will see this great change ever it be dark, voto
-- your time is not long, look to it, look you.


Mons. Helas, helas, helas, dat Espaigne should conquer la France in England,
helas, helas, helas.


Exit Monsieur. Don. You see what pains I take to make him the more agreeable
to you, Daughter.


Hipp. But indeed and indeed, Father, you wash the Black-a-more white, in
endeavoring to make a Spaniard of a Monsieur, nay an English Monsieur too,
consider that, Father; for when once they have taken the French plie (as they
call it) they are never to be made so much as English men again, I have heard
say.


Don. What, I warrant, you are like the rest of the young silly Baggages of
England, that like nothing but what is French. You would not have him reformed,
you would have a Monsieur to your Husband, would you, Querno?


Hipp. No indeed, Father, I would not have a Monsieur to my Husband, not I
indeed, and I am sure you will never make my Cousin otherwise.


Don. I warrant you.


Hipp. You cannot, you cannot, indeed, Father: and you have sworn, you know, he
shall never have me, if he does not leave off his Monsieurship. Now as I told
you, it is as hard for him to cease being a Monsieur, as it is for you to break a
Spanish Oath, so that I am not in any great danger of having a Monsieur to my
Husband.


Don. Well; but you shall have him for your Husband, look you.


Hipp. Then you will break your Spanish Oath.


Don. No, I will break him of his French Tricks, and you shall have him for
your Husband, Querno.


Hipp. Indeed and indeed, Father, I shall not have him.


Don. Indeed you shall, Daughter.


Hipp. Well, you shall see, Father.


Caut. No I warrant you, she will not have him, she will have her Dancingmaster
rather: I know her meaning, I understand her.


Don. Thou malicious foolish Woman, you understand her! but I do understand
her, she says I will not break my Oath, nor he his French Customs, so through
our difference she thinks she shall not have him, but she shall.


Hipp. But I shall not.


Caut. I know she will not have him, because she hates him.


Don. I tell you, if she does hate him, it is a sign she will have him for her
Husband; for it is not one of a thousand that marries the man she loves, look
you. Besides, it is all one whether she loves him now or not; for as soon as
she is married, she would be sure to hate him: that is the reason we wise Spaniards
are jealous and only expecte, nay will be sure our Wives shall fear us, look
you.


Hipp. Pray, good Father and Aunt, do not dispute about nothing, for I am sure
he will never be my Husband to hate.


Caut. I am of your opinion indeed, I understand you, I can see as far as
another.


Don. You, you cannot see so much as through your Spectacles, but I understand
her, it is her mere desire to Marriage makes her say she shall not have him; for
your poor young things, when they are once in the teens, think they shall never
be married.


Hipp. Well, Father, think you what you will, but I know what I think.


Enter Monsieur in the Spanish Habit entire only with a Crevat, and followed by
the little Black-a-more with a Golilia in his hand. Don. Come, did not I tell
you, you should have him, look you there, he has complied with me, and is a
perfect Spaniard.


Mons. Ay, ay, I am ugly Rogue enough, now sure, for my Cousin; but it is your
Father's fault, Cousin, that you have not the handsomest best dressed man in the
Nation, a man be in mise.


Don. Yet again at your French? and a Crevat on still (voto a St. Jago) off, off
with*


Mons. Nay I will ever hereafter speak clownish good English, do but spare me
my Crevat*


Don. I am uno Positivo, look you.


Mons. Let me not put on that Spanish Yoke, but spare me my Crevat; for I love
Crevat furiesment.


Don. Again at your Furiesments!


Mons. Indeed I have forgot my self, but have some mercy.


Kneels. Don. Off, off, off with it I say, come refuse the Ornamento principal
of the Spanish Habit.


Takes him by the Crevat, pulls it off, and the Black puts on the Golilia.
Mons. Will you have no mercy, no pity, alas, alas, alas, Oh I had rather put on
the English Pillory than this Spanish Golilia, for 'twill be all a case I Am
sure; for when I go abroad, I shall soon have a Crowd of Boys about me,
peppering me with rotten Eggs and Turnips, helas, helas.


Don puts on the Golilia. Don. Helas again?


Mons. Alas, alas, alas.


Hipp. I shall dye; ha, ha, ha.


Pru. I shall burst, ha, ha, ha.


Mons. Ay, ay, you see what I am come to for your sake; Cousin and Uncle, pray
take notice how ridiculous I am grown to my Cousin that loves me above all the
World? she can no more forbear laughing at me, I vow and swear, than if I were
as arrant a Spaniard as your self.


Don. Be a Spaniard like me, and never think people laugh at you: there was
never a Spaniard that thought any one laughed at him; but what do you laugh at
a Golilia, Baggage? Come, Sirrah-Black, now do you teach him to walk with the
verdadero gesto, gracia, and Gravidad of a true Castilian.


Mons. Must I have my Dancing Master too? come little Master then, lead on.


Black struts about the Stage, the Monsieur follows him, imitating awkerdly all
he does. Don. Malo, malo, with your Hat on your Pole, as if it hung upon a Pin;
the French and English wear their Hats, as if their Horns would not suffer 'em
to come over their Foreheads, voto --


Mons. It Is true, there are some well-bred Gentlemen have so much Reverence for
their Perruque, that they would refuse to be Grandees of your Spain, for fear
of putting on their Hats, I vow and swear.


Don. Come, Black, teach him now to make a Spanish Leg.


Mons. Ha, ha, ha, your Spanish Leg is an English Courtsie, I vow and swear,
hah, hah, ha.


Don. Well, the Hood does not make the Monk, the Ass was an Ass still, though
he had the Lions Skin on; this will be a light French Fool, in spite of the
grave Spanis. Habit, look you. But, Black, do what you can, make the most of
him, walk him about.


Pru. Here are the people, Sir, you sent to speak with about Provisions for the
Wedding, and here are your Clothes brought home too, Mistress.


Prue goes to the door, and returns. Don. Well, I come: Black, do what you can
with him, walk him about.


Mons. Indeed, Uncle, if I were as you, I would not have the grave Spanish
Habit so travesty'd, I shall disgrace it and my little Black Master too, I vow
and swear.


Don. Learn, learn of him, improve your self by him, and do you walk him, walk
him about soundly. Come, Sister and Daughter, I must have your Judgments,
though I shall not need 'em, look you, walk him, see you walk him.


Ex. Don, Hipp. and Caution. Mons. Jernie, he does not only make a Spaniard of
me, but a Spanish Jennit, in giving me to his Lacquey to walk; but come a long,
little Master.


The Black instructs the Monsieur on one side of the Stage, Prue standing on
the other. Pru. O the unfortunate condition of us poor Chamber-maids, who have
all the carking and caring, the watching and sitting up, the trouble and danger
of our Mistresses Intrigues! whilst they go away with all the pleasure; and if
they can get their Man in a corner, it is well enough, they never think of the
poor watchful Chambermaid, who sits knocking her heels in the cold, for want
of better exercise in some melancholy Lobby or Entry, when she could employ her
time every whit as well as her Mistress for all her Quality, if she were but
put to it.


Aside. Black. Hold up your head, hold up your head, Sir, a stooping Spaniard,
Malo.


Mons. True, a Spaniard scorns to look upon the ground.


Pru. We can shift for our Mistresses, and not for our selves, mine has got a
handsome proper Young Man, and is just going to make the most of him, whilst I
must be left in the Lurch here with a Couple of ugly little Black-a-more Boys
in Bonnets, and an old withered Spanish Eunuch, not a Servant else in the
House, nor have I hopes of any comfortable Society at all.


Aside. Black. Now let me see you make your Visit-Leg thus.


Mons. Auh, test non, ha, ha, ha.


Black What, a Spaniard, and laugh aloud! no; if you laugh thus only so -- now
your Salutation in the street as you pass by your Acquaintance, look you, thus
-- if to a Woman, thus, putting your Hat upon your heart; if to a man, thus
with a nod, so -- but frown a little more, frown. But if to a Woman you would
be very ceremonious too, thus -- so -- your Neck nearer your shoulder, so --
Now if you wou'd-speak contemptibly of any man or thing, do thus with your hand
-- so -- and shrug up your shoulders, till they hide your Ears. Now walk again.


Mons. imitating the Black. The Black and the Monsieur walk off the Stage. Pru.
All my hopes are in that Coxcomb there; I must take up with my Mistresses
leavings, though we Chamber-maids are wont to be beforehand with them: but he
is the dullest, modestest Fool, for a Frenchisi'd Fool, as ever I saw; for no
body could be more coming to him than I have been (though I say it) and yet I
am never the nearer. I have stolen away his Hankerchief, and told him of it,
and yet he would never so much as struggle with me to get it again. I have
pulled off his Perruque, untied his Ribbons, and have been very bold with him,
yet he would never be so with me; nay, I have pinched him, punch'd him, and
tickled him, and yet he would never do the like for me.


The Black and Monsieur return. Black. Nay, thus, thus, Sir.


Pru. And to make my person more acceptable to him, I have used Art, as they
say; for every night since he came, I have worn the Forehead-piece of Bees wax
and Hog's Grease, and every morning washed with Butter-milk and wild Tansie, and
have put on every day for his only sake my Sunday's Bow-dy-Stockins, and have
new chalked my Shoes, and's constantly as the morning came; nay, I have taken
an occasion to garter my Stockings before him, as if unawares of him; for a
good Leg and Foot, with good Shoes and Stockings, are very provoking, as they
say, but the Devil a bit would he be provoked; but I must think of a way.


Black. Thus, thus.


Mons. What so -- well, well, I have Lessons enough for this time. Little Master,
I will have no more, lest the multiplicity of them make me forget'em, da -- Prue,
art thou there, and so pensive? what art thou thinking of?


Pru. Indeed I am ashamed to tell your Worship.


Mons. What ashamed! were thou thinking then of my beastliness? ha, ha, ha.


Pru. Nay, then I am forced to tell your Worship in my own vindication.


Mons. Come then.


Pru. But indeed your Worship -- I Am ashamed that I am, though it was nothing
but a dream I had of your sweet Worship last night.


Mons. Of my sweet Worship! I warrant it was a sweet dream then, what was it?
ha, ha, ha.


Pru. Nay, indeed I have told your Worship enough already, you may guess the
rest.


Mons. I cannot guess, ha, ha, ha, what should it be? prithee let us know the
rest.


Pru. Would you have me so impudent?


Mons. Impudent! ha, ha, ha, nay prithee tell me, for I cannot guess, da --


Pru. Nay, it is always so; for want of the men's guessing, the poor Women are
forced to be impudent, but I am still ashamed.


Mons. I will know it, speak.


Pru. Why then methoughts last night you came up into my Chamber in your Shirt,
when I was in Bed, and that you might easily do; for I have never a Lock to my
door: now I warrant I am red as my Petticoat.


Mons. No, you are as yellow as ever thou were.


Pru. Yellow, Sir!


Mons. Ay, ay; but let us hear the Dream out.


Pru. Why, cannot you guess the rest now?


Mons. No not I, I vow and swear, come let us hear.


Pru. But cannot you guess in earnest?


Mons. Not I, the Devil eat me.


Pru. Not guess yet! why then methoughts you came to bed to me? Now am I as red
as my Petticoat again.


Mons. Ha, ha, ha, well, and what then? ha, ha, ha.


Pru. Nay, now I know by your Worship's laughing, you guess what you did: I Am
sure I cried out, and waked all in tears, with these words in my mouth, You
have undone me, you have undone me! your Worship has undone me.


Mons. Hah, ha, ha; but you waked and found it was but a Dream.


Pru. Indeed it was so lively, I know not whether 'twas a Dream or no: but if
you were not there, I Will undertake you may come when you will, and do any thing
to me you will, I sleep so fast.


Mons. No, no, I don't believe that.


Pru. Indeed you may, your Worship --


Mons. It cannot be.


Pru. Insensible Beast! he will not understand me yet, and one would think I
speak plain enough.


Aside. Mons. Well, but Prue, what art thou thinking of?


Pru. Of the Dream, whether it were a Dream or no.


Mons. 'Twas a Dream I warrant thee.


Pru. Was it? I am hugeous glad it was a Dream.


Mons. Ay, ay, it was a Dream; and I am hugeous glad it was a Dream too.


Pru. But now I have told your Worship, my door has neither Lock nor Latch to
it: if you should be so naughty as to come one night, and prove the dream true
-- I am so afraid on it.


Mons. Never fear it, dreams go by the contraries.


Pru. Then by that I should come into your Worship's Chamber, and come to bed
to your Worship. Now am I as red as my Petticoat again, I warrant.


Mons. No, thou art no redder than a Brick unburnt, Prue.


Pru. But if I should do such a trick in my sleep, your Worship would not
censure a poor harmless Maid, I hope; for I am apt to walk in my sleep.


Mons. Well then, Prue, because thou shall not shame thy self (poor Wench) I Will
be sure to lock my door every night fast.


Pru. So, so, this way I find will not do, I must come roundly and downright
to the business, like other Women, or --


Enter Gerrard. Mons. O the Dancing Master!


Pru. Dear Sir, I have something to say to you in your Ear, which I am ashamed
to speak aloud.


Mons. Another time, another time, Prue, but now go call your Mistress to her
Dancing Master, go, go.


Pru. Nay, pray hear me, Sir, first.


Mons. Another time, another time, Prue, prithee be gone.


Pru. Nay, I beseech your Worship hear me.


Mons. No, prithee be gone.


Pru. Nay, I am even well enough served for not speaking my mind when I had an
opportunity. Well, I must be playing the modest Woman, forsooth; a Woman's
hypocrisy in this case does only deceive her self.


Exit Prue. Mons. O the brave Dancing Master, the fine Dancing Master, your
Servant, your Servant.


Ger. Your Servant, Sir, I protest I did not know you at first. I am afraid
this Fool should spoil all, notwithstanding Hippolita's care and management,
yet I ought to trust her; but a Secret is more safe with a treacherous Knave
than a talkative Fool.


Aside. Mons. Come, Sir, you must know a little Brother Dancing Master of
yours, Walking-master I should have said; for he teaches me to walk and make
Legs by the bye: Pray know him, Sir, salute him, Sir; you Christian
Dancing-masters are so proud.


Ger. But, Monsieur, what strange Metamorphosis is this? you look like a
Spaniard, and talk like an Englishman again, which I thought had been
impossible.


Mons. Nothing impossible to Love, I must do it, or lose my Mistress your pretty
Scholar, for it is I am to have her; you may remember I told you she was to be
married to a great man, a man of Honor and Quality.


Ger. But does she enjoin you to this severe penance, such I am sure it is to
you.


Mons. No, no, it is by the compulsion of the starched Fop her Father, who is so
arrant a Spaniard, he would kill you and his Daughter, if he knew who you were;
therefore have a special care to dissemble well.


Draws him aside. Ger. I warrant you.


Mons. Dear Gerrard, go little Master and call my Cousin, tell her, her
Dancing Master is here.

Exit Black. I say, Dear Gerrard, Faith I Am obliged to you for the trouble you
have had: when I sent you, I intended a Jest indeed, but did not think it would
have been so dangerous a Jest; therefore pray forgive me.


Ger. I do, do heartily forgive you


Mons. But can you forgive me, for sending you at first, like a Fool as I was,
'twas ill done of me; can you forgive me?


Ger. Yes, yes, I do forgive you.


Mons. Well, thou art a generous man, I vow and swear, to come and take upon
you this trouble, danger, and shame, to be thought a paltry Dancingmaster, and
all this to preserve a Ladies honor and life, who intended to abuse you; but I
take the obligation upon me.


Ger. Pish, pish, you are not obliged to me at all.


Mons. Faith but I am strangely obliged to you.


Ger. Faith but you are not.


Mons. I vow and swear but I am.


Ger. I swear you are not.


Mons. Nay, thou art so generous a Dancing Master -- ha, ha, ha.


Enter Don Diego, Hippolita, Caution, and Prue. Don. You shall not come in,
Sister.


Caut. I will come in.


Don. You will not be civil.


Caut. I Am sure they will not be civil, if I do not come in, I must, I will.


Don. Well, honest Friend, you are very punctual, which is a rare Virtue in a
Dancing Master, I take notice of it, and will remember it, I will, look you.


Mons. So silly-damn'd-politick Spanish Uncle, ha, ha, ha.


Aside. Ger. My fine Scholar, Sir, there, shall never have reason (as I told
you) Sir, to say I am not a punctual man, for I am more her Servant than to any
Scholar I ever had.


Mons. Well said, ^'faith, thou do make a pretty Fool of him, I vow and
swear; but I wonder people can be made such Fools of, ha, ha, ha.


Aside. Hipp. Well, Master, I thank you, and I hope I shall be a grateful kind
Scholar to you.


Mons. Ha, ha, ha, cunning little Jilt, what a Fool she makes of him too: I
wonder people can be made such Fools of, I vow and swear, ha, ha, ha.


Aside. Hipp. Indeed it shall go hard but I Will be a grateful kind Scholar to
you.


Caut. As kind as ever your Mother was to your Father, I warrant.


Don. How; again with your senseless suspicions.


Mons* Pish, pish, Aunt, ha, ha, ha, she is a Fool another way; she thinks she
loves him, ha, ha, ha. Lord, that people should be such Fools!


Aside. Caut. Come, come, I cannot but speak, I tell you beware in time; for he
is no Dancing Master, but some debauched person who will mump you of your
Daughter.


Don. Will you be wiser than I still? Mump me of my Daughter! I would I could
see any one mump me of my Daughter.


Caut. And mump you of your Mistress too, young Spaniard.


Mons. Ha, ha, ha, will you be wiser than I too, voto. Mump me of my Mistress!
I would I could see any one mump me of my Mistress.

To Caution. I am afraid this damned old Aunt should discover us, I vow and
swear; be careful therefore and resolute.


Aside to Ger. and Hipp. Caut. He, he does not go about his business like a
Dancing Master, he will never teach her to dance, but he will teach her no goodness
soon enough I warrant: he a Dancing Master!


Mons. I, the Devil eat me, if he be not the best Dancing Master in England
now. Was not that well said, Cousin? was it not? for he is a Gentleman
Dancing Master, you know.


Aside to Ger. and Hipp. Don. You know him, Cousin, very well, Cousin, you sent
him to my Daughter?


Mons. Yes, yes, Uncle, know him!

We'll never be discovered, I warrant, ha, ha, ha.


Aside. Caut. But will you be made a Fool of too?


Mons. Ay, ay, Aunt, never trouble your self.


Don. Come, Friend, about your business, about with my Daughter.


Hipp. Nay, pray, Father, be pleased to go out a little, and let us but
practice a while, and then you shall see me dance the whole Dance to the Violin.


Don. Tittle, tattle, more fooling still! did not you say when your Master was
here last, I should see you dance to the Violin when he came again.


Hipp. So I did, Father; but let me practice a little first before, that I may
be perfect. Besides, my Aunt is here, and she will put me out, you know I
cannot dance before her.


Don. Fiddle, faddle.


Mons. They Are afraid to be discovered by Gerard's bungling, I see. Come, come,
Uncle, turn out, let 'em practice.


Aside. Don. I will not (voto a St. Jago) what a fooling's here?


Mons. Come, come, let 'em practice, turn out, turn out, Uncle.


Don. Why, cannot she practice it before me?


Mons. Come, Dancers and Singers are sometimes humorsom; besides, 'twill be
more grateful to you, to see it danced all at once to the Violin. Come, turn
out, turn out, I say.


Don. What a fooling's here still amongst you, voto?


Mons. So there he is with you, voto, turn out, turn out, I vow and swear you
shall turn out.


Takes him by the shoulder. Don. Well, shall I see her dance it to the Violin
at last?


Ger. Yes, yes, Sir, what do you think I teach her for?


Exit Don. Mons. Go, go, turn out, and you too, Aunt.


Caut. Seriously, Nephew, I shall not budge, royally I shall not.


Mons* Royally you must, Aunt, come.


Caut. Pray hear me, Nephew.


Mons. I will not hear you.


Caut It Is for your sake I stay, I must not suffer you to be wronged.


Mons. Come, no wheedling, Aunt, come away.


Caut. That slippery Fellow will do it.


Mons. Let him do it.


Caut. Indeed he will do it, royally he will.


Mons. Well let him do it, royally.


Caut. He will wrong you.


Mons. Well, let him, I say, I have a mind to be wronged, what is that to you, I
will be wronged, if you go thereto, I vow and swear.


Caut. You shall not be wronged.


Mons. I will.


Caut. You shall not.


Don returns. Don. What Is the matter? will not she be ruled? come, come away, you
shall not disturb 'em.


Don and Monsieur thrust Caution out. Caut. De' see how they laugh at you both,
well go to, the Troth telling Trojan Gentlewoman of old was never believed,
till the Town was taken, rumag'd, and ransak'd, even even so --


Exit Caution. Mons. Hah, hah, ha, turn out. Lord, that people should be such
arrant Cuddens, ha, ha, ha; But I may stay, may I not?


Hipp. No, no, I Would have you go out and hold the door, Cousin, or else my Father
will come in again before his time.


Mons. I will, I will then, sweet Cousin, 'twas well thought on, that was well
thought on indeed for me to hold the door.


Hipp. But be sure you keep him out, Cousin, till we knock.


Mons. I warrant you, Cousin, Lord, that people should be made such Fools of,
ha, ha, ha.


Exit Monsieur. Ger. So, so, to make him hold the door, while I steal his
Mistress is not unpleasant.


Hipp. Ay, but would you do so ill a thing, so treacherous a thing? Faith it is
not well.


Ger. Faith I cannot help it. Since it is for your sake, come, Sweetest, is not
this our way into the Gallery?


Hipp. Yes, but it goes against my Conscience to be accessory to so ill a
thing; you say you do it for my sake?


Ger. Alas, poor Miss! it is not against your Conscience, but against your
modesty, you think to do it franckly.


Hipp. Nay, if it be against my modesty too, I cannot do it indeed.


Ger. Come, come, Miss, let us make haste, all is ready.


Hipp. Nay, Faith, I cannot satisfy my scruple.


Ger. Come, Dearest, this is not a time for scruples nor modesty; modesty
between Lovers is as impertinent as Ceremony between Friends, and modesty is
now as unseasonable as on the Wedding night: come away, my Dearest.


Hipp. Whither?


Ger. Nay sure, we have lost too much time already: Is that a proper Question
now? if you would know, come along, for I have all ready.


Hipp. But I am not ready.


Ger. Truly, Miss, we shall have your Father come in upon us, and prevent us
again, as he did in the morning.


Hipp. 'Twas well for me he did; for on my Conscience if he had not come in, I
had gone clear away with you when I was in the humor.


Ger. Come, Dearest, you would frighten me as if you were not yet in the same
humor. Come, come away, the Coach and Six is ready.


Hipp. It Is too late to take the Air, and I am not ready.


Ger. You were ready in the morning.


Hipp. I, so I was.


Ger. Come, come, Miss, indeed the Jest begins to be none.


Hipp. What, I warrant you think me in jest then?


Ger. In jest, certainly, but it begins to be troublesome


Hipp. But, Sir, you could believe I was in earnest in the morning, when I but
seemed to be ready to go with you; and why will not you believe me now, when I
declare to the contrary? I take it unkindly, that the longer I am acquainted
with you, you should have the less confidence in me.


Ger. For Heaven's sake, Miss, lose no more time thus, your Father will come in
upon us, as he did --


Hipp. Let him, if he will.


Ger. He Will hinder our design.


Hipp. No, he will not, for mine is to stay here now.


Ger. Are you in earnest?


Hipp. You Will find it so.


Ger. How! why you confessed but now you would have gone with me in the morning.


Hipp. I was in the humor then.


Ger. And I hope you are in the same still, you cannot change so soon.


Hipp. Why, is it not a whole day ago?


Ger. What, are you not a day in the same humor?


Hipp. Lord! that you who know the Town (they say) should think any Woman could
be a whole day together in an humor, ha, ha, ha.


Ger. Hey! this begins to be pleasant: What, will not you go with me then after
all?


Hipp. No indeed, Sir, I desire to be excused.


Ger. Then you have abused me all this while?


Hipp. It may be so.


Ger. Could all that so natural Innocence be dissembled? Faith it could not,
dearest Miss.


Hipp. Faith it was, dear Master.


Ger. Was it, faith?


Hipp. Methinks you might believe me without an Oath: you saw I could dissemble
with my Father, why should you think I could not with you?


Ger. So young a Wheedle?


Hipp. Ay, a mere damned Jade I am.


Ger. And I have been abused, you say?


Hipp* It Is well you can believe it at last.


Ger. And I must never hope for you?


Hipp. Would you have me abuse you again?


Ger. Then you will not go with me?


Hipp. No; but for your comfort your loss will not be great, and that you may
not resent it, for once I Will be ingenuous and disabuse you; I am no Heiress, as
I told you to twelve hundred pound a year. I was only a lying Jade then, now
you will part with me willingly I doubt not.


Ger. I wish I could.


Sighs. Hipp. Come, now I find it is your turn to dissemble; but men use to
dissemble for money, will you dissemble for nothing?


Ger. It Is too late for me to dissemble.


Hipp. Don't you dissemble, faith?


Ger. Nay, this is too cruel.


Hipp. What, would you take me without the twelve hundred pound a year? would
you be such a Fool as to steal a Woman with nothing?


Ger. I Will convince you, for you shall go with me; and since you are twelve
hundred pound a year the lighter, you will be the easier carried away.


He takes her in his Arms, she struggles. Pru. What, he takes her away against
her will, I find I must knock for my Master then.


She knocks. Enter Don Diego and Mrs. Caution. Hipp. My Father, my Father is
here.


Ger. Prevented again!


Ger. sets her down again. Don. What, you have done I hope now, Friend, for
good and all?


Ger. Yes, yes, we have done for good and all indeed.


Don. How now! you seem to be out of humor, Friend.


Ger. Yes, so I am, I cannot help it.


Caut. He Is a Dissembler in his very Throat, Brother.


Hipp. Pray do not carry things so as to discover your self, if it be but for
my sake, good Master.


Aside to Ger. Ger. She is grown impudent.


Aside. Caut. See, see, they whisper, Brother, to steal a Kiss under a Whisper,
O the Harletry!


Don. What Is the matter, Friend?


Hipp. I say for my sake be in humor, and do not discover your self, but be as
patient as a Dancing Master still.


To Ger. Don. What, she is whispering to him indeed! what is the matter? I will
know it, Friend, look you.


Ger. Will you know it?


Don. Yes, I will know it.


Ger. Why, if you will know it, then she would not do as I would have her, and
whispered me to desire me not to discover it to you.


Don. What, Hussy, would you not do as he would have you! I Will make you do as he would
have you.


Ger. I wish you would.


Caut. It Is a lie, she will do all he will have her do, and more too, to my
knowledge.


Don. Come, tell me what 'twas then she would not do, come do it, Hussy, or --
Come, take her by the hand, Friend, come, begin, let us see if she will not do
any thing now I am here.


Hipp. Come, pray be in humor, Master.


Ger. I cannot dissemble like you.


Don. What, she cannot dissemble already, can she?


Caut. Yes but she can, but it is with you she dissembles; for they are not
fallen out, as we think, for I Will be sworn I saw her just now give him the
languishing Eye, as they call it, that is, the Whitings Eye, of old called the
Sheeps Eye. I Will be sworn I saw it with these two Eyes, that I did.


Hipp. You Will betray us, have a care, good Master.


Aside to Ger. Ger. Hold your peace, I say, silly Woman.


Don. But does she dissemble already? how do you mean?


Ger. She pretends she cannot do what she should do, and that she is not in
humor, the common Excuse of Women for not doing what they should do.


Don. Come, I Will put her in humor; dance; I say, come, about with her, Master.


Ger. I am in a pretty humor to dance.

I cannot fool any longer, since you have fooled me.


Aside. To Hip. Hipp. You would not be so ungenerous, as to betray the Woman
that hated you, I do not do that yet; for Heaven's sake for this once be more
obedient to my desires than your passion.


Don. What is she humoursom still? But methinks you look your self as if you
were in an ill humor; but about with her.


Ger. I am in no good Dancing humor indeed.


Enter Monsieur. Mons. Well, how goes the Dancing forward? what my Aunt here to
disturb 'em again?


Don. Come, come.


Ger. leads her about. Caut. I say stand off, thou shall not come near, avoid,
Satan, as they say.


Don. Nay then we shall have it, Nephew, hold her a little, that she may not
disturb 'em, come, now away with her.


Ger. One, two, and a Coupee.

Fooled and abused.


Aside. Caut. Will thou lay violent hands upon thy own natural Aunt, Wretch?


The Monsieur holding Caution. Don. Come, about with her.


Ger. One, two, three, four, and turn round.

By such a piece of Innocence.


Aside. Caut. Do thou see, Fool, how he squeezes her hand?


Mons. That will not do, Aunt.


Hipp. Pray, Master, have patience, and let us mind our business.


Don. Why did you anger him then, Hussy, look you?


Caut. Do you see how she smiles in his face, and squeezes his hand now?


Mons. Your Servant, Aunt, that will not do, I say.


Hipp. Have patience, Master.


Ger. I am become her sport, one, two, three, Death, Hell, and the Devil.


Aside. Don. Ay, they are three indeed; but pray have patience.


Caut. Do you see how she leers upon him and clings to him, can you suffer it?


Mons. Ay, ay.


Ger. One, two, and a slur; can you be so unconcerned after all?


Don. What, is she unconcerned! Hussy, mind your business.


Ger. One, two, three, and turn round, one, two, fall back, Hell and Damnation.


Don. Ay, people fall back indeed into Hell and Damnation, Heaven knows.


Ger. One, two, three, and your Honor: I can fool no longer.


Caut. Nor will I be withheld any longer like a poor Hen in her Pen, while the
Kite is carrying away her Chicken before her face.


Don. What have you done? Well then let us see her dance it now to the Violin.


Mons. Ay, ay, let us see her dance it to the Violin.


Ger. Another time, another time.


Don. Don't you believe that, Friend; these Dancing-masters make no bones of
breaking their words. Did not you promise just now I should see her dance it to
the Violin, and that I will too, before I stir.


Ger. Let Monsieur play then while I dance with her, she cannot dance alone.


Mons. I cannot play at all, I Am but a Learner; but if you will play, I Will dance
with her.


Ger. I cannot play neither.


Don. What a Dancing Master, and not play!


Caut. Ay, you see what a Dancing Master he is. It Is as I told you, I warrant:
A Dancing Master, and not play upon the Fiddle!


Don. How!


Hipp. O you have betrayed us all! if you confess that, you undo us for ever.


Apart to Ger. Ger. I cannot play, what would you have me say?


Mons. I vow and swear we are all undone, if you cannot play.


Don. What, are you a Dancing Master, and cannot play! umph --


Hipp. He is only out of humor, Sir; here, Master, I know you will play for me
yet, for he has an excellent hand.


She offers Gerard the Violin. Mons. Ay, that he has.

At giving a box on the Ear.


Aside. Don. Why does he not play then?


Hipp. Here, Master, pray play for my sake.


Gives Ger. the Violin. Ger. What would you have me do with it? I cannot play a
stroke.


Hipp. No, stay then, seem to tune it, and break the strings.


Apart to Ger. Ger. Come then.

Next to the Devil's the Invention of Women, they will no more want an excuse to
cheat a Father with, than an opportunity to abuse a Husband.

But what do you give me such a damned Fiddle with rotten strings for?


Aside. Winds up the strings till they break, and throws the Violin on the
ground. Don. Hey-day, the Dancing Master is frantic.


Mons. Ha, ha, ha, that people should be made such Fools of.


Caut. He broke the strings on purpose, because he could not play, you are
blind, Brother.


Don. What, will you see further than I? look you.


Hipp. But pray, Master, why in such haste?


Ger. Because you have done with me.


Don. But don't you intend to come to morrow again?


Ger. Your Daughter does not desire it.


Don. No matter, I do, I must be your pay Master I Am sure, I would have you
come betimes too, not only to make her perfect; but since you have so good a
hand upon the Violin to play your part with half a dozen of Musicians more,
whom I would have you bring with you; for we will have a very merry Wedding,
though a very private one; you will be sure to come?


Ger. Your Daughter does not desire it.


Don. Come, come, Baggage, you shall desire it of him, he is your Master.


Hipp. My Father will have me desire it of you, it seems.


Ger. But you will make a Fool of me again: if I should come, would you not?


Hipp. If I should tell you so, you would be sure not to come.


Don. Come, come, she shall not make a Fool of you, upon my word: I Will secure
you, she shall do what you will have her.


Mons. Ha, ha, ha, so, so, silly Don.


Aside. Ger. But, Madam, will you have me come?


Hipp. I Would have you to know for my part, I care not whether you come or no;
there are other Dancing-masters to be had, it is my Fathers request to you: all
that I have to say to you, is a little good advice, which (because I will not
shame you) I Will give you in private.


Whispers Gerard. Caut. What, will you let her whisper with him too?


Don. Nay, if you find fault with it, they shall whisper; though I did not like
it before, I Will have no body wiser than my self; but do you think if 'twere any
hurt, she would whisper it to him before us?


Caut. If it be no hurt, why does she not speak aloud?


Don. Because she says she will not put the man out of Countenance.


Caut. Hey-day, put a Dancing Master out of countenance!


Don. You say he is no Dancing Master.


Caut. Yes, for his impudence, he may be a Dancing Master.


Don. Well, well, let her whisper before me as much as she will to night, since
she is to be married to morrow, especially since her Husband that shall be
stands by consenting too.


Mons. Ay, ay, let 'em whisper (as you say) as much as they will before we
marry. She Is making more sport with him, I warrant; but I wonder how people can
be fooled so, ha, ha, ha.


Aside. Don. Well, a Penny for the secret, Daughter.


Hipp. Indeed, Father, you shall have it for nothing to morrow.


Don. Well, Friend, you will not fail to come.


Ger. No, no, Sir.

Yet I am a Fool, if I do.


Aside. Don. And be sure you bring the Fiddlers with you, as I bid you.


Hipp. Yes, be sure you bring the Fiddlers with you, as I bid you.


Caut. So, so, He Will fiddle your Daughter out of the House, must you have
Fiddles, with a fiddle, faddle.


Mons. Lord! that people should be made such Fools of, hah, hah.


Ex. Don, Hipp. Mons. Caut. and Prue. Ger. Fortune we sooner may than Woman
trust
To her considing Gallant she is just;
But falser Woman only him deceives,
Who to her Tongue and Eyes most credit gives.

Exit. ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Monsieur and Black stalking over the Stage, to them Mr. Gerard. Mons.
GOod morrow to thee, noble Dancing Master, ha, ha, ha, your little black
Brother here, my Master, I see, is the more diligent man of the two; but why do
you come so late? what you begin to neglect your Scholar, do you? Little black
Master ( con Licentia) pray get you out of the Room.

Exit Black. What, out of humor, Man! a Dancing Master should be like his
Fiddle, always in Tune. Come, my Cousin has made an Ass of thee, what then, I
know it.


Ger. Does he know it?


Aside. Mons. But prithee don't be angry, 'twas agreed upon betwixt us, before
I sent you, to make a Fool of thee, ha, ha, ha.


Ger. Was it so?


Mons. I knew you would be apt to entertain vain hopes from the Summons of a
Lady; but faith the design was but to make a Fool of thee, as you find.


Ger. It Is very well.


Mons. But indeed I did not think the Jest would have lasted so long, and that
my Cousin would have made a Dancing Master of you, ha, ha, ha.


Ger. The Fool has reason, I find, and I am the Coxcomb while I thought him so.


Aside. Mons. Come, I see you are uneasy, and the Jest of being a
Dancing Master grows tedious to you; but have a little patience, the Parson is
sent for, and when once my Cousin and I are married, my Uncle may know who you
are.


Ger. I am certainly abused.


Mons. What do you say?


Mons. listens. Ger. Merely fooled.


Aside. Mons. Why do you doubt it? ha, ha, ha.


Ger. Can it be?


Aside. Mons. Pish, pish, she told me yesterday as soon as you were gone, that
she had led you into a Fools Paradise, and made you believe she would go away
with you, ha, ha, ha.


Ger. Did she so? I am no longer to doubt it then?


Aside. Mons. Ay, ay, she makes a mere Fool of thee, I vow and swear; but don't
be concerned, there is hardly a man of a thousand but has been made a Fool of by
some Woman or other: I have been made a Fool of my self, man, by the Women, I
have, I vow and swear, I have.


Ger. Well, you have, I believe it, for you are a Coxcomb.


Mons. Lord! you need not be so touchy with one, I tell you but the truth for
your good, for though she does, I would not fool you any longer; but prithee
don't be troubled at what cannot be helped. Women are made on purpose to fool
men; when they are Children, they fool their Fathers; and when they have taken
their leaves of their Hanging-sleeves, they fool their Gallants or
Dancing-masters, ha, ha, ha.


Ger. Hark you, Sir, to be fooled by a Woman you say is not to be helped; but I
will not be fooled by a Fool.


Mons. You show your English breeding now, an English Rival is so dull and
brutish as not to understand raillery, but what is spoken in your passion, I Will
take no notice of, for I am your Friend, and would not have you my Rival to
make your self ridiculous. Come, prithee, prithee, don't be so concerned; for
as I was saying, Women first fool their Fathers, then their Gallants, and then
their Husbands; so that it will be my turn to be fooled too; (for your comfort)
and when they come to be Widows, they would fool the Devil I vow and swear.
Come, come, dear Gerard, prithee don't be out of humor and look so sillily.


Ger. Prithee do not talk so sillily.


Mons. Nay, faith I am resolved to beat you out of this ill humor.


Ger. Faith, I am afraid I shall first beat you into an ill humor.


Mons. Ha, ha, ha, that thou should be gulled so by a little Gipsey, who
left off her Bib but yesterday; faith I cannot but laugh at thee.


Ger. Faith then I shall make your mirth (as being too violent) conclude in
some little misfortune to you. The Fool begins to be tyrannical.


Mons. Ha, ha, ha, poor angry Dancing Master; prithee match my Spanish pumps
and legs with one of your best and newest Sarabands; ha, ha, ha, come --


Ger. I will match your Spanish Ear, thus, Sir, and make you Dance thus.


Strikes and kicks him. Mons. How! sa, sa, sa, then I Will make you Dance thus.

Mon. draws his Sword and runs at him, but Ger. drawing her retires. Hold, hold
a little: A desperate disappointed Lover will cut his own throat, then sure he
will make nothing of cutting his Rivals throat.


Aside. Ger. Consideration is an Enemy to fighting; if you have a mind to
revenge your self, your Sword's in your hand.


Mons. Pray, Sir, hold your peace; I Will never take my Rivals counsel be it what
'twill, I know what you would be at; you are disappointed of your Mistress, and
could hang yourself, and therefore will not fear hanging; but I am a successful
Lover, and need neither hang for you nor my Mistress; nay, if I should kill
you, I know I should do you a kindness; therefore even live to die daily with
envy of my happiness; but if you will needs die, kill your self and be damned
for me I vow and swear.


Ger. But will not you sight for your Mistress?


Mons. I tell you, you shall not have the honor to be killed for her; besides,
I will not be hit in the teeth by her as long as I live with the great love you
had for her. Women speak well of their dead Husbands, what will they do of
their dead Gallants?


Ger. But if you will not fight for her, you shall Dance for her, since you
desired me to teach you to Dance too; I Will teach you to Dance thus --


Strikes his Sword at his legs, Monsieur leaps. Mons. Nay, if it be for the
sake of my Mistress, there is nothing I will refuse to do.


Ger. Nay, you must Dance on.


Mons. Ay, ay, for my Mistress and Sing too, la, la, la, ra, la.


Enter Hippolita and Prue. Hipp. What Swords drawn betwixt you two? what is the
matter?


Mons. Is she here?

Aside. Come put up your Sword; you see this is no place for us; but the Devil
eat me, if you shall not eat my Sword, but --


Hipp. What Is the matter, Cousin?


Mons. Nothing, nothing, Cousin; but your presence is a Sanctuary for my
greatest Enemy, or else, test non.


Hipp. What, you have not hurt my Cousin, Sir, I hope?


To Ger. Ger. How she is concerned for him; nay, then I need not doubt, my fears
are true.


Aside. Mons. What was that you said, Cousin! hurt me, ha, ha, ha, hurt me! if
any man hurt me, he must do it basely; he shall never do it when my Sword's
drawn, sa, sa, sa.


Hipp. Because you will never draw your Sword perhaps.


Mons. Scurvily guessed.

Aside. You Ladies may say any thing; but, Cousin, pray do not you talk of
Swords and fighting, meddle with your Guitar, and talk of dancing with your
Dancingmaster there, ha, ha, ha.


Hipp. But I am afraid you have hurt my Master, Cousin, he says nothing; can he
draw his breath?


Mons. No, it is you have hurt your Master, Cousin, in the very heart, Cousin,
and therefore he would hurt me; for Love is a disease makes people as malicious
as the Plague does.


Hipp. Indeed, poor Master, something does all you.


Mons. Nay, nay, Cousin, faith don't abuse him any longer, he is an honest
Gentleman, and has been long of my acquaintance, and a man of tolerable sense
to take him out of his Love; but prithee, Cousin, don't drive the Jest too far
for my sake.


Ger. He counsels you well, pleasant-cunning-jilting-Miss for his sake; for if
I am your divertisement, it shall be at his cost, since he is your Galiant in
favor.


Hipp. I don't understand you.


Mons. But I do, a pox take him, and the Custom that so orders it, forsooth;
that if a Lady abuse or affront a man, presently the Gallant must be beaten,
nay, what is more unreasonable, if a Woman abuse her Husband, the poor Cuckold
must bear the shame as well as the injury.


Aside. Hipp. But what is the matter, Master? what was it you said?


Ger. I say pleasant, cunning, jilting Lady, though you make him a Cuckold, it
will not be revenge enough for me upon him for marrying you.


Hipp. How, my surly, hussing, jealous, senseless saucy Master?


Mons. Nay, nay, faith give losers leave to speak, losers of Mistresses
especially, ha, ha, ha. Besides, your anger is too great a favor for him, I
scorn to honor him with mine, you see.


Hipp. I tell you, my sawey Master, my Cousin shall never be made that
monstrous thing (you mention) by me.


Mons. Thank you, I vow and swear, Cousin, no, no, I never thought I should.


Ger. Sure you marry him by the sage Maxim of your Sex, which is, Wittals make
the best Husbands, that is, Cuckolds.


Hipp. Indeed, Master, whatsoever you think, I would sooner choose you for that
purpose than him.


Mons. Ha, ha, ha, there she was with him, in faith, I thank you for that,
Cousin, I vow and swear.


Hipp. Nay, he shall thank me for that too; but how came you two to quarrel? I
thought, Cousin, you had had more wit than to quarrel, or more kindness for me
than to quarrel here: what if my Father hearing the Bustle should have come in,
he would soon have discovered our false Dancing Master (for passion un-masks
every man) and then the result of your quarrel had been my ruin.


Mons. Nay, you had both felt his desperate, deadly, daunting Dagger; there are
your des for you.


Hipp. Go, go, presently therefore, and hinder my Father from coming in, whilst
I put my Master into a better humor, that we may not be discovered, to the
prevention of our Wedding, or worse, when he comes, go, go.


Mons. Well, well, I will, Cousin.


Hipp. Be sure you let him not come in this good while.


Mons. No, no, I warrant you.

Mons. goes out and returns. But if he should come before I would have him,
I Will come before him and cough and hawk soundly, that you may not be susprised.
Will Not that do well, Cousin?


Hipp. Very well, pray be gone.

Exit Monsieur. Well, Master, since I find you are quarrelsom and melancholy,
and would have taken me away without a Portion, three infallible signs of a
true Lover, Faith here is my hand now in earnest, to lead me a Dance as long as
I live.


Ger. How Is this? you surprise me as much as when first I found so much Beauty
and Wit in Company with so much Innocence. But, Dearest, I would be assured of
what you say, and yet dare not ask the question. You h -- do not abuse me
again, you h -- will fool me no more sure.


Hipp. Yes but I will sure.


Ger. How! nay, I was afraid on it.


Hipp. For I say you are to be my Husband, and you say Husbands must be
Wittals, and some strange things to boot.


Ger. Well, I will take my Fortune.


Hipp. But have a care, rash man.


Ger I will venture.


Hipp. At your peril, remember I wished you to have a care, fore-warned,
forearm'd.


Pru. Indeed now that is fair; for most men are fore-arm'd before they are
warned.


Hipp. Plain dealing is some kind of honesty however, and few Women would have
said so much.


Ger. None but those who would delight in a Husbands jealousy, as the proof of
his love and her honor.


Hipp. Hold, Sir, let us have a good understanding betwixt one another at
first, that we may be long Friends; I differ from you in the point, for a
Husbands jealousy, which cunning men would pass upon their Wives for a
Complement, is the worst can be made 'em, for indeed it is a Complement to
their Beauty, but an affront to their Honor.


Ger. But, Madam --


Hipp. So that upon the whole matter I conclude, jealousy in a Gallant is
humble true Love, and the height of respect, and only an undervaluing of
himself to overvalue her; but in a Husband it is arrant sawciness, cowardice,
and ill breeding, and not to be suffered.


Ger. I stand corrected, gracious Miss.


Hipp. Well! but have you brought the Gentlemen Fiddlers with you as I desired?


Ger. They are below.


Hipp. Are they armed well?


Ger. Yes, they have Instruments too that are not of wood; but what will you do
with them?


Hipp. What did you think I intended to do with them? when I whispered you to
bring Gentlemen of your acquaintance instead of Fiddlers, as my Father desired
you to bring pray what did you think I intended?


Ger. Faith, even to make fools of the Gentlemen-Fidlers, as you had done of
your Gentleman Dancing Master.


Hipp. I intended 'em for our guard and defense against my Fathers Spanish and
Guiney force, when we were to make our retreat from hence, and to help us to
take the Keys from my Aunt, who has been the watchful Porter of this House this
twelvemonth; and this design (if your heart do not fail you) we will put in
execution, as soon as you have given your friends below instructions.


Ger. Are you sure your heart will stand right still? you flinch'd last night,
when I little expected it, I am sure.


Hipp. The time last night was not so proper for us as now, for reasons I
willgive you; but besides that, I confess, I had a mind to try whether your
interest did not sway you more than your love; whether the twelve hundred
pounds a year I told you of, had not made a greater impression in your heart
than Hippolita; but finding it otherwise -- yet hold, perhaps upon
consideration you are grown wiser; can you yet, as I said, be so desperate, so
out of fashion, as to steal a Woman with nothing?


Ger. With you I can want nothing, nor can be made by any thing more rich or
happy.


Hipp. Think well again; can you take me without the twelve hundred pounds a
year; the twelve hundred pounds a year?


Ger. Indeed, Miss, now you begin to be unkind again, and use me worse than
ever you did.


Hipp. Well, though you are so modest a Gentleman as to suffer a Wife to be put
upon you with nothing, I have more Conscience than to do it: I have the twelve
hundred pounds a year out of my Father's power, which is yours, and I am sorry
it is not the Indies to mend your bargain.


Ger. Dear Miss, you but increase my fears, and not my wealth: pray let us make
haste away, I desire but to be secure of you; come, what are you thinking of?


Hipp. I am thinking if some little filching inquisitive Poet should get my
story, and represent it on the Stage; what those Ladies, who are never precise
but at a Play, would say of me now; that I were a confident coming piece, I
warrant, and they would damn the poor Poet for libelling the Sex; but sure
though I give my self and fortune away frankly, without the consent of my
Friends, my confidence is less than theirs, who stand off only for separate
maintenance.


Ger. They would be Widows before their time, have a Husband and no Husband:
but let us be gone, lest fortune should recant my happiness. Now you are fixed,
my dearest Miss.


He kisses her hand. Enter Monsieur coughing, and Don Diego. Hipp. Oh here is my
Father!


Don. How now, Sir! what kissing her hand? what means that, Friend, ha!
Daughter, ha! do you permit this insolence, ha! ( voto a mi honra.)


Ger. We are prevented again.


Hipp. Ha, ha, ha, you are so full of your Spanish Jealousy, Father, why you
must know he is a City Dancing Master, and they, forsooth, think it fine to kiss
the hand at the Honor before the Corant.


Mons. Ay, ay, ay, Uncle, don't you know that?


Don. Go to, go to, you are an easy French Fool, there is more in it than so,
look you.


Mons. I vow and swear there is nothing more in it, if you will believe one. Did
not I cough and hawk? a jealous prudent Husband could not cough and hawk louder
at the approach of his Wifes Chamber in visiting-time, and yet you would not
hear me, he will make now ado about nothing, and you will be discovered both.


Aside to Hipp. and Ger. Don. Umph, umph, no, no, I see it plain, he is no
Dancing Master, now I have found it out, and I think I can see as far into
matters as another: I have found it now, look you.


Ger. My fear was prophetical.


Hipp. What shall we do? nay, pray, Sir, do not stir yet.


Ger offers to go out with her. Enter Mrs. Caution. Caut. What Is the matter,
Brother? what is the matter?


Don. I have found it out, Sister, I have found it out, Sister, this Villain
here is no Dancing Master, but a dishonourer of my House and Daughter, I caught
him kissing her hand.


Mons. Pish, pish, you are a strange Spanish kind of an Uncle, that you are, a
dishonourer of your Daughter, because he kissed her hand; pray how could he
honor her more? he kiss't her hand, you see, while he was making his Honor to
her.


Don. You are an unthinking, shallow, French Fop, voto -- But I tell you,
Sister, I have thought of it, and have found it out, he is no Dancing Master,
Sister. Do you remember the whispering last night? I have found out the meaning
of that too, and I tell you, Sister, he is no Dancing Master, I have found it
out.


Caut. You found it out, marry come up, did not I tell you always he was no
Dancing Master?


Don. You tell me, you silly Woman, what then? what of that? you tell me, de'
think I heeded what you told me? but I tell you now I have found it out.


Caut. I say I found it out.


Don. I say it is false, Gossip, I found him out.


Caut. I say I found him out first, say you what you will.


Don. Sister Mum, not such a word again, guarda -- you found him out.


Caut. Nay, I must submit, or dissemble like other prudent Women, or --


Don. Come, come, Sister, take it from me, he is no Dancing Master.


Caut. O yes, he is a Dancing Master.


Don. What will you be wiser than I every way? remember the whispering, I say.


Caut. So, he thinks I speak in earnest, then I Will fit him still.

Aside. But what do you talk of their whispering, they would not whisper any
ill before us sure.


Don. Will you still be an Idoit, a Dolt, and see nothing.


Mons. Lord! you will be wiser than all the World, will you? are we not all
against you? pshaw, pshaw, I never saw such a Donissimo as you are, I vow and
swear.


Don. No, Sister, he is no Dancing Master; for now I think on it too, he could
not play upon the Fiddle.


Caut. Pish, pish, what Dancing Master can play upon a Fiddle without strings?


Don. Again, I tell you he broke 'em on purpose, because he could not play; I
have found it out now, Sister.


Caut. Nay, you see farther than I, Brother.


Ger. offers to lead her out. Hipp. For Heaven's sake stir not yet.


Don. Besides, if you remember they were perpetually putting me out of the
Room, that was, Sister, because they had a mind to be alone, I have found that
out too: Now, Sister, look you, he is no Dancing Master.


Caut. But has he not given her a Lesson often before you.


Don. I but, Sister, he did not go about his business like a Dancing Master;
but go, go down to the door, some body rings.


Exit Caution. Mons. I vow and swear Uncle he is a Dancing Master; pray be
appeased, Lord do you think I Would tell you a lie?


Don. If it prove to be a lie, and you do not confess it, though you are my
next Heir after my Daughter, I will disown thee as much as I do her, for thy
folly and treachery to thy self, as well as me; you may have her, but never my
estate look you


Mons. How! I must look to my hits then.


Aside. Don. Look to it.


Mons. Then I had best confess all, before he discover all, which he will soon
do.

Enter Parson. O here is the Parson too! he will not be in choler nor brandish
Toledo before the Parson sure?

Aside. Well, Uncle, I must confess, rather than lose your favor, he is no
Dancingmaster.


Don. No.


Ger. What has the Fool betrayed us then at last? nay, then it is time to be
gone; come away, Miss.


Going out. Don. Nay, Sir, if you pass this way, my Toledo will pass that way,
look you.


Thrusts at him with his Sword. Hipp. O hold, Mr. Gerrard, hold, Father!


Mons. I tell you Uncle he is an honest Gentleman, means no hurt, and came
hither but upon a frolic of mine and your Daughters.


Stops his Uncle. Don. Ladron, Traidor.


Mons. I tell you all is but a jest, a mere jest I vow and swear.


Don. A jest, jest with my honor voto, ha! no Family to dishonor but the
Grave, Wise, Noble, Honorable, Illustrious, Puissant, and right Worshipful
Family of the Formals; nay, I am contented to reprieve you, till you know who
you have dishonored, and convict you of the greatness of your crime before you
die, we are descended, look you --


Mons. Nay, pray Uncle hear me.


Don. I say, we are descended.


Mons. It Is no matter for that.


Don. And my great, great, Grandfather was.


Mons. Well, well, I have something to say more to the purpose.


Don. My great, great, great Grandfather, I say, was --


Mons. Well, a Pin-maker in --


Don. But he was a Gentleman for all that, Fop, for he was a Sergeant to a
Company of the Train-bands, and my great, great, great Grandfather was.


Mons. Was his Son, what then? will not you let me clear this Gentleman?


Don. He was, he was --


Mons. He was a Felt-maker, his Son a Wine cooper, your Father a Vintner, and
so you came to be a Canary-Merchant.


Don. But we were still Gentlemen, for our Coat was as the Heralds say -- was
--


Mons. Was, your sign was the Three Tuns, and the Field Canary; now let me tell
you this honest Gentleman --


Don. Now that you should dare to dishonor this Family; by the Graves of my
Ancestors in Great Saint Ellen's Church --


Mons. Yard.


Don. Thou shall dye for it, ladron.


Runs at Gerard. Mons. Hold, hold, Uncle, are you mad?


Hipp. Oh, oh.


Mons. Nay then, by your own Spanish rules of honor (though he be my Rival) I
must help him, since I brought him into danger.

Draws his Sword. Sure he will not show his valor upon his Nephew and
Son-in-Law, otherwise I should be afraid of showing mine.

Aside. Here Mr. Gerrard, go in here, nay, you shall go in, Mr. Gerrard, I Will
secure you all; and Parson do you go in too with 'em; for I see you are afraid
of a Sword and the other World, though you talk of it so familiarly, and make
it so fine a place.


Opens a door, and thrusts Gerrard, Hippolita and Parson in, then shuts it, and
guards it with his Sword. Don. Tu quoque, Brute.


Mons. Nay, now Uncle you must understand reason; what, you are not only a Don,
but you are a Don Quixot too, I vow and swear.


Don. Thou spot, sploach of my Family and blood; I will have his blood, look
you.


Mons. Pray good Spanish Uncle, have but patience to hear me; suppose -- I say,
suppose he had done, done, done the feat to your Daughter.


Don. How, done the feat, done the feat, done the feat, En hora mala.


Mons. I say, suppose, suppose --


Don. Suppose --


Mons. I say, suppose he had, for I do but suppose it; well, I am ready to
marry her however; now Marriage is as good a Solder for cracked Female-honour,
as blood, and cannot you suffer the shame but for a quarter of an-hour, till the
Parson has married us, and then if there be any shame, it becomes mine; for
here in England, the Father has nothing to do with the Daughters business,
honor, what de'e called, when once she is married, de'e see.


Don. England! what do you tell me of England? I Will be a Spaniard still, voto a mi
hora, and I will be revenged, Pedro, Juan, Sanches.


Calls at the door. Enter Mrs. Caution followed by Flirt and Flounce in Vizard
Masks. Caut. What Is the matter, Brother?


Don. Pedro, Sanchez, Juan, but who are these, Sister? are they not men in
Women's Clothes? what make they here?


Caut. They are relations, they say, of my Cousins, who pressed in when I let
in the Parson, they say my Cousin invited 'em to his Wedding.


Mons. Two of my relations, ha -- they are my Cousins indeed of the other
night; a Pox take 'em, but that is no Curse for 'em; a Plague take 'em then, but
how came they here?


Don. Now must I have witnesses too of the dishonor of my Family; it were
Spanish Prudence to dispatch 'em away out of the House, before I begin my
revenge.

Aside. What are you? what make you here? who would you speak with?


Flirt. With Monsieur.


Don. Here he is.


Mons. Now will these Jades discredit me, and spoil my match just in the
coupling minute.


Don. Do you know 'em?


Mons. Yes, Sir, sure, I know 'em. Pray, Ladies, say as I say, or you will
spoil my Wedding, for I am just going to be married, and if my Uncle, or
Mistress should know who you are, it might break off the match.


Aside to 'em. Floun. We come on purpose to break the match.


Mons. How!


Flirt. Why, de'e think to marry and leave us so in the lurch?


Mons. What do the Jades mean?


Aside. Don. Come, who are they? what would they have? if they come to the
Wedding, Ladies, I assure you there will be none to day here.


Mons. They will not trouble you, Sir, they are going again. Ladies, you hear what
my Uncle says; I know you will not trouble him. I wish I were well rid of 'em.


Aside. Floun. You shall not think to put us off so.


Aside. Don. Who are they? what are their names?


Flirt. We are, Sir --


Mons. Nay, for Heaven's sake don't tell who you are, for you will undo me, and
spoil my match infallibly.


Aside to 'em. Floun. We care not, it is our business to spoil matches.


Mons. You need not, for, I believe, married men are your best customers, for
greedy Batchellors take up with their Wives.


Don. Come, pray Ladies, if you have no business here, be pleased to retire,
for few of us are in humor to be so civil to you, as you may deserve.


Mons. Ay, prithee dear Jades get you gone.


Flirt. We will not stir.


Don. Who are they, I say, Fool, and why don't they go?


Floun. We are, Sir --


Mons. Hold, hold.

They are persons of honor and quality, and --


Flirt. We are no persons of honor and quality, Sir, we are --


Mons. They are modest Ladies, and being in a kind of disguise, will not own
their quality.


Floun. We modest Ladies!


Mons. Why? sometimes you are in the humor to pass for Women of honor and
quality; prithee, dear Jades, let your modesty and greatness come upon you now.


Aside to 'em. Flirt. Come, Sir, not to delude you, as he would have us, we are
--


Mons. Hold, hold --


Flirt. The other night at the French House --


Mons. Hold, I say, it is even true as Gerrard says, the Women will tell, I see.


Floun. If you would have her silent, stop her mouth with that ring.


Takes off his ring and gives it her. Mons. Will that do it, here, here --

It Is worth one hundred and fifty pounds;

But I must not lose my match, I must not lose a Trout for a Fly.

That Men should live to hire Women to silence.


Enter Gerrard, Hippolita, Parson and Prue. Don. Oh, are you come again!


Draws his Sword and runs at 'em, Monsieur holds him. Mons. Oh, hold, hold,
Uncle!

What are you mad, Gerrard, to expose your self to a new danger? why would you
come out yet?


Ger. Because our danger now is over, I thank the Parson there. And now we must
beg --


Ger. and Hipp. kneel. Mons. Nay, Faith, Uncle, forgive him now, since he asks
you forgiveness upon his knees, and my poor Cousin too.


Hipp. You are mistaken, Cousin; we ask him blessing, and you forgiveness.


Mons. How, how, how! what do you talk of blessing? what do you ask your Father
blessing, and he asks me forgiveness? But why should he ask me forgiveness?


Hipp. Because he asks my Father blessing.


Mons. Pish, pish, I don't understand you, I vow and swear.


Hipp. The Parson will expound to you, Cousin.


Mons. Hey! what say you to it, Parson?


Pars. They are married, Sir.


Mons. Married!


Caut. Married! so, I told you what 'twou'd come to.


Don. You told us --


Mons. Nay, she is setting up for the reputation of a Witch.


Don. Married, Juan, Sanchez, Petro, arm, arm, arm.


Caut. A Witch, a Witch!


Hipp. Nay, indeed Father, now we are married, you had better call the Fiddles:
Call 'em Prue quickly.


Ex. Prue. Mons. Who do you say married, Man?


Pars. Was I not sent for on purpose to marry 'em? why should you wonder at it?


Mons. No, no, you were to marry me, Man, to her; I knew there was a mistake
in it some how; you were merely mistaken, therefore you must do your business
over again for me now: The Parson was mistaken, Uncle, it seems, ha, ha, ha.


Caut. I suppose five or six Guinies made him make the mistake, which will not
be rectified now, Nephew; they will marry all that come near 'em, and for a
Guiney or two, care not what mischief they do, Nephew.


Don. Married, Pedro, Sanchez?


Mons. How, and must she be his Wife then for ever and ever? have I held the
door then for this, like a Fool as I was?


Caut. Yes, indeed.


Mons. Have I worn Golillia here for this? little Breeches for this?


Caut. Yes, truly.


Mons. And put on the Spanish honor with the habit, in defending my Rival;
nay, then I Will have another turn of honor in revenge. Come, Uncle, I Am of your
side now, sa, sa, sa, but let us stay for our force, Sanchez, Juan, Petro, arm,
arm, arm.


Enter two Blacks, and the Spaniard followed by Prue, Martin, and five other
Gentlemen like Fiddlers. Don. Murder the Villain, kill him.


Running all upon Ger. Mart. Hold, hold, Sir.


Don. How now, who sent for you, Friends?


Mart. We Fiddlers, Sir, often come unsent for.


Don. And you are often kicked down stairs for it too.


Mart. No, Sir, our Company was never kicked I think.


Don. Fiddlers, and not kicked? then to preserve your Virgin-honour, get you
down stairs quickly; for we are not at present disposed much for mirth, voto.


Mons. peeping. A pox, is it you, Martyn? nay, Uncle, then it is in vain; for
they will not be kicked down stairs, to my knowledge. They are Gentlemen Fiddlers,
forsooth, a pox on all Gentlemen Fiddlers and Gentlemen Dancingmasters say I.


Don. How! ha.


Pausing. Mons. Well, Flirt, now I am a Match for thee, now I may keep you, and
there is little difference betwixt keeping a Wench and Marriage, only Marriage
is a little the cheaper; but the other is the more honorable now, vert and
bleu, nay now I may swear a French Oath too. Come, come, I am thine, let us
strike up the Bargain, thine according to the honorable Institution of
Keeping, come.


Flirt. Nay hold, Sir, two words to the Bargain, first I have never a Lawyer
here to draw Articles and Settlements.


Mons. How! is the World come to that? a Man cannot keep a Wench without
Articles and Settlements, nay then it is even as bad as Marriage indeed, and
there is no difference betwixt a Wife and a Wench.


Flirt. Only in Cohabitation, for the first Article shall be against
Cohabitation; we Mistresses suffer no Cohabitation.


Mons. Nor Wives neither now.


Flirt. Then separate Maintenance, in case you should take a Wife, or I a new
Friend.


Mons. How! that too? then you are every whit as bad as a Wife.


Flirt. Then my House in Town, and yours in the Country, if you will.


Mons. A mere Wife.


Flirt. Then my Coach apart, as well as my Bed apart.


Mons. As bad as a Wife still.


Flirt. But take notice I will have no little, dirty, second-hand Chariot new
forbish'd, but a large, sociable, well painted Coach, nor will I keep it till
it be as well known as my self, and it come to be called Flirt-Coach; nor will
I have such pitiful Horses as cannot carry me every night to the Park; for I
will not miss a night in the Park, I Would have you to know.


Mons. It Is very well, you must have your great, gilt, fine, painted Coaches,
I Am sure they are grown so common already amongst you, that Ladies of Quality
begin to take up with Hackneys again, Jarnie; but what else?


Flirt. Then, that you do not think I will be served by a little dirty Boy in a
Bonnet, but a couple of handsome, lusty, cleanly Footmen, sit to serve Ladies of
Quality, and do their business as they should do.


Mons. What then?


Flirt. Then, that you never grow jealous of them.


Mons. Why will you make so much of them?


Flirt. I delight to be kind to my Servants.


Mons. Well, is this all?


Flirt. No then, that when you come to my House, you never presume to touch a
Key, lift up a Latch, or thrust a Door, without knocking before hand; and that
you ask no questions, if you see a stray Piece of Plate, Cabinet, or
Looking-glass in my House.


Mons. Just a Wife in every thing; but what else?


Flirt. Then, that you take no acquaintance with me abroad, nor bring me home
any when you are drunk, whom you will not be willing to see there, when you are
sober.


Mons. But what allowance? let us come to the main business, the money.


Flirt. Stay, let me think, first for advance-money five hundred pounds for
Pins.


Mons. A very Wife.


Flirt. Then you must take the Lease of my House, and furnish it as becomes one
of my Quality; for don't you think we'll take up with your old Queen Elizabeth
Furniture, as your Wives do.


Mons. Indeed there she is least like a Wife, as she says.


Flirt. Then, for Housekeeping, Servant-wages, Clothes, and the rest, I Will be
contented with a thousand pound a year present maintenance, and but three
hundred pound a year separate maintenance for my life, when our Love grows
cold; but I am contented with a thousand pound a year, because for Pendants,
Neck-laces, and all sorts of Jewels, and such Trifles, nay and some Plate, I
will shift my self as I can, make shifts, which you shall not take any notice
of.


Mons. A thousand pound a year! what will Wenching come to? Time was, a Man
might have fared as well at a much cheaper rate; and a Lady of ones affections,
instead of a House would have been contented with a little Chamber three pair
of Stairs backward, with a little Closet or Larder to it; and instead of variety
of new Gowns and rich Petticoats, with her Dishabiliee or Flamecolour Gown
called Indian, and Slippers of the same, would have been contented for a
twelvemonth; and instead of Visits and gadding to Plays, would have
entertained her self at home with St. George for England, the Knight of the
Sun, or the Practice of Piety; and instead of sending her Wine and Meat from
the French-houses, would have been contented, if you had given her (poor
Wretch) but credit at the next Chandlers and Checkered Cellar; and then instead
of a Coach, would have been well satisfied to have gone out and taken the Air
for three or four hours in the Evening in the Balcony, poor Soul. Well, Flirt,
however we'll agree; it is but three hundred pound a year separate maintenance,
you say, when I am weary of thee and the Charge.


Don. Robbed of my Honor, my Daughter, and my Revenge too! Oh my dear Honor!
nothing vexes me but that the World should say, I had not Spanish Policy enough
to keep my Daughter from being debauched from me; but methinks my Spanish
Policy might help me yet: I have it so -- I will cheat 'em all; for I will
declare I understood the whole Plot and Contrivance, and connived at it,
finding my Cousin a Fool, and not answering my expectation. Well; but then if I
approve of the Match, I must give this Mock-Dancingmaster my Estate, especially
since half he would have in right of my Daughter, and in spite of me. Well, I
am resolved to turn the Cheat upon themselves, and give them my Consent and
Estate.


Mons. Come, come, never be troubled, Uncle, 'twas a Combination, you see, of
all these Heads and your Daughters; you know what I mean, Uncle, not to be
thwarted or governed by all the Spanish Policy in Christendom. I Am sure my
French Policy would not have governed her; so, since I have escaped her, I am
glad I have escaped her, Jernie.


Caut. Come, Brother, you are wiser than I, you see, ay, ay.


Don. No, you think you are wiser than I now, in earnest; but know, while I was
thought a Gull, I gulled you all, and made them and you think I knew nothing of
the Contrivance. Confess, did not you think verily, that I knew nothing of it,
and that I was a Gull?


Caut. Yes indeed, Brother, I did think verily you were a Gull.


Hipp. How Is this?


Listening. Don. Alas, alas, all the sputter I made was but to make this Young
man, my Cousin, believe, when the thing should be effected, that it was not
with my connivence or consent; but since he is so well satisfied, I own it. For
do you think I would ever have suffered her to marry a Monsieur, a Monsieur
Guarda. Besides, it had been but a beastly incestuous kind of a Match, voto --


Caut. Nay, then I see, Brother, you were wiser than I indeed.


Ger. So, so.


Aside. Caut. Nay, Young Man, you have danced a fair Dance for your self
royally, and now you may go jig it together till you are both weary; and though
you were so eager to have him, Mrs. Minx, you will soon have your belly-full of
him, let me tell you, Mistress.


Pru. Hah, ha.


Mons. How, Uncle! what was it you said? Nay if I had your Spanish Policy
against me, it was no wonder I missed of my aim, mon foy.


Don. I was resolved too, my Daughter should not marry a Coward, therefore made
the more ado to try you, Sir, but I find you are a brisk Man of Honor, firm,
stiff, Spanish Honor; and that you may see I deceived you all a long, and you
not me; ay, and am able to deceive you still; for, I know, now you think that I
will give you little or nothing with my Daughter (like other Fathers) since you
have married her without my consent; but, I say, I Will deceive you now, for you
shall have the most part of my Estate in present, and the rest at my death;
there is for you, I think I have deceived you now, look you.


Ger. No, indeed, Sir, you have not deceived me, for I never suspected your
love to your Daughter, nor your Generosity.


Don. How, Sir! have a care of saying I have not deceived you, lest I deceive
you another way; guarda -- pray, Gentlemen, do not think any Man could deceive
me, look you; that any Man could steal my Daughter, look you, without my
connivence.

The less we speak, the more we think,
And he sees most, that seems to wink.

Hipp. So, so, now I could give you my blessing, Father, now you are a good
complaisant Father, indeed.

When Children marry, Parents should obey,
Since Love claims more Obedience far than they.

Exeunt Omnes. EPILOGUE
Spoken by Flirt.
THE Ladies first I am to Compliment,
Whom (if he could) the Poet would content,
But to their pleasure then they must consent.
Most spoil their sport still by their modesty,
And when they should be pleased, cry out, O fie,
And the least smooty jest will never pass by.
But City damsel never had confidence,
At smooty Play to take the least offense,
But Mercy shows, to show her innocence.
Yet lest the Merchants Daughters should to day
Be scandalized, not at our harmless Play;
But our Hippolita, since she is like one
Of us bold Flirts, of the other end of the Town;
Our Poet sending to you (though unknown)
His best respects by me, does frankly own
The character to be unnatural;
Hippolita is not like you at all;
You, while your Lovers court you, still look grum,
And far from wooing, when they woo, cry mum;
And if some of you ever were stoll'n away,
Your Portion's fault 'twas only I dare say:
Thus much for him the Poet bid me speak,
Now to the men, I my own mind will break;
You good men of the Exchange, on whom alone
We must depend, when Sparks to Sea are gone;
Into the Pit already you are come,
It Is but a step more to our Tyring room;
Where none of us but will be wondrous sweet
Upon an able Love of Lumber-street:
You we had rather see between our Scenes,
Than spend-thrift Fops with better Clothes and meens;
Instead of Lac'd-coats, Belts, and Pantalloons,
Your Velvet Jumps, Gold Chains, and grave Fur Gowns,
Instead of Perriwigs, and broad cocked Hats,
Your Satin Caps, smalls Cuffs, and vast Crevats;
For you are fair and square in all your dealings,
You never cheat your Doxies with gilt Shillings;
You never will break our Windows, then you are
Fit to make love, while our Houzaas make War;
And since all Gentlemen must pack to Sea,
Our Gallants, and our Judges you must be;
We therefore, and our Poet, do submit
To all the Chamlet Cloaks now in the Pit.
FINIS.

