SOCINIANISME in the Fundamental point of Justification discovered, and
confuted.

Or, an Answer to a written Pamphlet maintaining that faith is in a proper
sense without a trope imputed to Believers in justification.

Wherein The Socinian fallacies are discovered and confuted, and the true
Christian Doctrine maintained, viz. That the righteousness by which true
believers are justified before God is the perfect righteousness and obedience
which the Lord Jesus Christ God and man did perform to the Law of God, both in
his life and death.

By George Walker B* of Divinity, and Pastor of S. John the Evangelists Church
in Watling-street London.

A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition reject,
knowing that he that is such is subverted and sins being condemned of
himself.

Tit. 3.10, 11. LONDON, Printed by R. O. for John Bartlet, at the Sign of the
gilt Cup in Paul's Churchyard, near S. Augustins Gate. 1641.

To his Reverend Brethren, the Godly, Orthodox Pastors and Preachers of Gods
Word, in and about the City of London: the Author of this brief discovery and
confutation, wishes all increase of Grace, peace and happiness; with the
abundance of blessings from God on their faithful labors.
MY Reverend, and dearly beloved Brethren, it is not unknown to diverse of you,
what great conflicts I have had with the adversaries of this Socinian Faction
about this main fundamental point of Justification, what pains I have taken to
vindicate the truth above six and twenty years ago, from the opposition and
subtle Sophistry of a cunning adversary, who by the fame and opinion which men
had of his great Learning, and no less Piety, had drawn many zealous
Professors of Religion into some liking of his Errors. His written Pamphlets
went currently through the City and were to be found in the hands of many men,
in which he First utterly renounced the Law, in whole and part performed by our
selves, or any other in our stead, for the justifying of us in the sight of
God. Secondly, rejected as a mere device of our late Divines, the imputation
of Christ's righteousness and satisfaction, not only his habitual
righteousness, but also his whole obedience, both active and passive; and
affirmed it to be a thing whereof there was no testimony or proof in Scripture,
nor any necessary end or use thereof. Thirdly, he professed and undertook to
prove, thot Faith, even the act of believing and trusting in Christ for
salvation after a general and confused manner, as a favorite of God, and not
as a perfect satisfyer of his justice and just Law; is that which God accounts
and accepts for righteousness to justification, in stead of righteousness and
perfect obedience performed to the will and Law of God, either by Christ or our
selves. These and diverse other errors which were here and there interlaced, I
did at the first discover in some sermons, to be no Doctrines of sacred Truth
by him dug out of the deep mines of holy Scripture* and newly brought to
light (as his seduced Disciples proclaimed them to be) for the inlightning of
the blind world in these last days of darkness and perilous times: but the
old errors and Heresies of Servetus and Socinus, newly revived and raked out of
hell by Arminius, Bertius, and others of their Faction. Diverse of his Friends
who had begun to embrace his opinion, were not a little terrified at the
hearing of these things; and earnestly besought me to give him a meeting, who
at that time was to me unknown by face; I condescended to their desire: but
whereas I came with an heart full of tender compassion, and with Prayers in my
mouth, and tears in mine eyes, laid open before him the danger of his errors,
and the evil and mischief which by means of his obstinate persisting in
them, might accrue to himself and those who were by him seduced and misled; he
on the contrary hardened his heart to maintain per fas, et nefas, and dolo malo
his foresaid erroneous opinions; showing out of Luther on the Galatians, some
words which seemed to favor his error, and to exclude the righteousness of
the Law from justification (which words he applied to the righteousness of the
Law performed by Christ for us, and did most stiffly so urge them:) but the
words which immediately followed, to wit, that God justifies us by the
righteousness of his Son Jesus Christ, and by his fulfilling of the Law for
us, he covered with his fingers, till I plucked the Book out of his hands, and
read them to those that were present, whereby he was much confounded. Now the
issue of my fair and Christian dealing with him and of my modest and mild
opposing of him, without such sharpness as the cause and his carriage did
require, was the same, which the gentle behavior of Orthodox Divines toward
perverse Heretics, has commonly had in all former ages: For his Factious
disciples did impute it to the weakness of my Cause, and to his arguments
convincing my Conscience, that his opinions were not so dangerous as I had
censured them to be: but rather unreprovable, yea and laudable. And upon my
departure out of the City, immediately after to Cambridge, whither my occasions
called me; in my absence they reported, that at our meeting he did so convince
and confound me with strong arguments, that I humbled my self, to him
confessed my ignorance, embraced his opinions, and promised to hold and
maintain them till death. This wicked and Jesuiticall policy which they used
to retain diverse of his disciples, who were ready to fall off from him; and to
recall those who were fallen off already, did produce a quite contrary effect:
For when I returned again to the City, and was saluted as a Socinian onvert,
and informed of their false reports and lying forgeries; I was inflamed with a
double desire to vindicate both the truth of God, and mine own reputation from
their slanderous aspersions; and hereupon I betook my self to handle and
expound that place of Scripture, Romans 5.17, 18, 19. which does most pithily and
plainly set forth the Doctrine of Justification by the communion of Christ's
righteousness and obedience. And because I discerned in mine Adversaries a
perverse Heretical spirit, and that they had made lies their refuge, and did
sin being condemned of themselves; I did with all zeal confute their
errors, lay open the deadly poison and malignity of them, and cloth them with
such reproachful titles as diverse grave and learned Divines of the best
reformed Churches had before shaped and fitted to them. I proved them to be
profane and abominable Doctrine, Epistolica Collatio cum Bertio, page 1. and 2.
even the damned Heresy of Servetus and Socinus, as Sibrandus Lubertus had
before styled them. And that their denying of the reciprocal imputation of
Christ's righteousness and satisfaction to the faithful, and of their sins
to Christ, was impiety and blasphemy, as learned Beza calls it. Though by this
means my adversaries were enraged, Lib. con. Anonymum.
and did suggest into the ears and minds of many godly people in the City, to
whom as yet I was unknown, that I was a green headed novice carried away with
anger and passion, rather then zeal: yet diverse of you, my learned Brethren,
did judge otherwise of me, and my labors; and God blessed them, and made them
and your assistance of me therein, powerful and effectual to the quelling of
those errors, and to the suppressing of them at that time, by putting the
Author of them to silence. And now for 20. years, and more, they have been
buried in oblivion, until this new Adversary has raked them up, as coals out
of ashes, and out of a surreptitious Book (which the First Adversary had
composed, Wotton de Reconciliatione.
Printed beyond the Seas, and procured to be brought in by stealth, and sold
underhand) did bring them into the pulpit, and from thence with a tumultuous
noise proclaimed them most confidently. Now because I have sufficiently acted
my part heretofore in opposing these errors; and also diverse of you have
entered into the lists, and with zeal and courage have begun to fight against
the reviver of them, I should have refrayned my self from further meddling: but
because this common adversary has singled me out, and provoked me by a proud
challenge, to answer his writings. I have once more undertaken to answer his
challenge, which Answer being sent to him privately, might there have rest^d,
if his most reproachful and railing reply, full of lies, absurdities,
contradictions, blasphemies, and intolerable scoffs and reproaches, had not
forced me to send it abroad into the world to justify it self from the
railing and slanderous clamours which he and his disciples, and factious
followers have raised against it, I here commend it to your grave censure, in
hope that the goodness of the cause which herein I maintain, will cover mine
infirmities, and will stir you up to perfect and finish what I have begun.
The Truth for which you shall fight is strong, and will prevail; all power,
might, glory and victory is Gods, for whose cause you stand; and our Lord Jesus
Christ, on whose perfect rigteousnesse you strive to keep the Crown, has all
power given him in heaven and in earth. To this God eternal and omnipotent,
and to his eternal Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and to the most
holy and blessed Spirit, three persons in one God, I commend you and your holy
and faithful labors in my daily Prayers, humbly supplicating to his Majesty
for this Grace, that I may continue till death

Your fellow Soldier and labourer in his Vineyard GEORGE WALKER.

THE ANSWERERS PREFACE To the first Chapter.
THE question which is propounded and the state and drift thereof laid down in
this first Chapter, is (in the Authors own words) this, whether the faith of
him that truly believes, or the righteousness of CHRIST be imputed for
righteousness in the act of justification. In this question the imputing of
Faith is opposed to the imputing of Christ's righteousness, for righteousness
to justification, which no Orthodox Christian durst atten^^ to do at any time:
for the godly learned in the Scriptures, and acquainted with the writings of
Orthodox divines both ancient and Modern from the time of the Apostles to this
day, do always join Faith with Christ's righteousness in the act of
justification, and do never account them such opposites as do the one exclude
the other, and cannot both stand together, and be reputed for righteousness to
believers in justification. Though the Apostle does oppose justification by
faith, to justification by works of the Law performed by every man in his own
person, as two opposites which cannot stand together in GODS justification of
sinners; And this all true Christians receive, embrace, and hold for a solid
truth, and a fundamental article of Christian Religion: Yet they abhor and
detest the opposing of Faith, and Christ's righteousness in GODS imputing of
righteousness to believers; and do with an unanimous consent teach, that in
this justifying act of GOD, Christ's righteousness of which all true believers
have communion, is that which GOD in a proper sense is said to accept, and
repute for righteousness; and Faith as it receives and applies Christ's
righteousness, is said to be imputed, but in an improper speech; the name of
the act being used to signify the object, which we see frequently in
Scripture, as for example, Gal. 3.2.25. where the name ( Faith) is used to
signify the thing believed, that is, the doctrine of the Gospel, and Coloss.
1.5. where the name [ Hope] is used, to signify the thing hoped for; that is,
the inheritance and reward laid up for us in Heaven, of which kind many more
instances may be produced. But as for them who have called into controversy
the imputation of Christ's righteousness; and having propounded this question,
whether Faith or the righteousness of Christ is imputed in the act of
justification, have set up Faith and thrust out Christ's righteousness, they
have ever been branded by all true Churches of Christ for pestilent Heretics,
and enemies of GODS saving truth. The first mover of this question was one
Petrus Abilardus, a pestilent and blasphemous Heretic, who being full of the
spirit of pride and error, did in disputing and writing, deny the communion of
Christ's perfect satisfaction, obedience and righteousness; and the imputation
of them for righteousness in the justification of true believers. This filthy
wretch was gelded for corrupting and defiling of a Maid, and for his
blasphemous heresies, Saint Bernard, and the Bishops of France caused him to be
excommunicated and condemned for an Heretic, and his blasphemous books to be
burned publicly.

The next instrument of the Devil after him mentioned in former Histories was
Servetus that blasphemous Heretic, who for heresies and blasphemies which he
dispersed as a vagabond in several Countries, in diverse books, was by Master
Calvin discovered and apprehended at Geneva, condemned and burned, and dyed
blaspheming Christ most horribly, as Beza testifies, in vita Calvini.

The third notorious Heretic who in writing and books published, did
maintain this wicked error, and by his Disciples dispersed it in
Transylvania, Polonia, and other adjoining Countries, was Faustus Socinus,
whose blasphemous faction and sect still continues, and infesteth those
Countries at this day.

The fourth Grand Master and propagatour of this heresy, who brought it into
Holland nearer unto us was Arminius; He did first secretly teach and instill it
into the ears and hearts of many disciples; and afterward did openly profess
it, as we read in his Epistle ad Hyppolytum de collibus, wherein he confesses
that he held, Faith to be imputed for righteousness to justification, not in a
Metonymicall, but in a proper sense: And although this and other errors held
by him are condemned in the late Synod of Dort: yet his disciples the
Remonstrants do obstinately persist in this error, though some of that sect,
would seem to decline and disclaim it.

The fifth perverse publisher of this heresy, who first openly professed it in
England, and in manuscript Pamphlets and Printed Books, dispersed it in
London, and from thence into several places of the Country about 28. years
ago, was Anthony Wotton, who being discovered and hotly opposed by the Author
of this answer was by his zeal, and the industry of some other Preachers in
London quickly quelled, and his opinion suppressed: but yet because he would
uphold a secret faction, he wrote a book in Latin, wherein he seemed to
retract, or rather to run from some desperate opinions and speeches, which are
to be seen in his private manuscripts given by him from hand to hand, and
formerly dispersed. For whereas in diverse of them he professes in plain
words, his dissent from all our Orthodox Divines, which had been before
written of Justification, saying, I am enforced to dissent from them all; He in
that book labored to make a show of consent with them, and did wrest some of
their doubtful speeches to countenance his Socinianisme. This book entitled
De Reconciliatione some of his fiery factious, and zealous disciples with much
difficulty, after it was rejected at Leiden and Amsterdam, procured it to be
printed at their own cost, brought over the Copies and sold them under hand in
London. And out of it (we may justly suspect, that this Scribler and babbler
has stolen the most part of his conclusions, arguments and distinctions, for
I am informed that he is a great admirer of that book, and of the Author also.
So that if this Socinian John will and must needs have, and usurp that high
Title which our Savior gave to John the Baptist, and will be called (as his
disciples stick not to style him) the shining light of the Church in these last
days: Surely he is but a borrowed light or rather a wandering light, like that
ignis fatuus which in dark nights leads the followers into ditches, loggs,
praecipces, and breakneck downfalls, as the Philosophers write of it.

For the recalling of the ignorant who are by him seduced, for the confounding
of them who are by him perverted, and for the stopping of the foul lying, and
slanderous mouths of those factious sectaries his followers, of a scarred
conscience, who as they have his person in high admiration, so also are bold to
revise and defame all godly and learned Preachers, who oppose his errors and
preach against them. I will spend a few spare hours to sift his written
discourse, at least so much of it as is come to my hands; hoping by evidence of
truth, plain Scriptures, solid reasons, and testimonies of the best writers,
to make it manifest to GODS people, that he is a mere Socinian Sophister, and
dangerous seducer, and that his discourse is an hotch potch of pestilent
errors, and full of ^e^giversations, contradictions, and perverse wrestlings
of Scriptures, and of the words and writings both of Ancient and modern
Divines. And that neither he himself* nor his clamarous disciples may have the
least color, or occasion to complain, that I have not dealt fairly with him.
I will first set down his Socinianisme, word for word out of his own
writings, without concealing any word or sentence. And to every part thereof I
will oppose the contrary doctrine of Christ under the name of Christianisme.
And first I begin with his preface, with which he begins his first Chapter.

The Preface to Socinianisme.
FOr the clear understanding of the state and drift of the question, something
would be premised, which for the evidence sake might be privileddg and
exempted, from passing under much dispute and contradiction: yet if any thing
be not sufficiently prepared for assent in the brief proposal of it, the
ensuing discourse will labor to reconcile the disproportion; And in the
progress make satisfaction for what it shall receive upon courtesy in the
beginning.

The Answer to the Preface.
THis short Preface does by the affected style, and phrase of it discover the
Author to be one, who has studied to preach himself more then Christ, and to
set forth his own absurd conceits in the entising words of carnal wisdom,
not to declare the Testimony of GOD in Apostolical plainness, nor in
demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.12.
and of power as Saint Paul did. The lofty words, and short cut speech which
he uses here, and in this ensuing discourse, are so far beyond the capacity
of his rude unlearned followers, that his wooden pulpit shall as soon as they
understand them, unless he first teach them his Grammatical skill, before he
admit them into his Theological auditorie. But belike he knows the ready way
to catch the wavering, unstable, and giddie multitude, those wandering Stars
of these last times, who are like clouds without water* carried about with
winds of every new and strange Doctrine, and of all people are the fittest to
be his disciples. For the mouth which speaks great swelling words, is
admired of them who have men's persons in admiration; and far fetched phrases
are fine fooleries to tickle the itching ears, and win the hearts of such as
desire to seem and be counted something, when indeed they are nothing but
bubbles, and empty bladders, who as they admire every bewitching Simon Magus,
as the great power of GOD, and extol to the Skies his most cursed errors: So
they abhor and revile all sincere and godly Preachers, rebukers of their
madness, blaspheme GODS word in their mouths, and speak evil of the good
things, which they understand not, until in the gainsaying of Core they
utterly perish.

Moreover, to give him his due, he appears to me in his style and phrase, a
very skillful Artist in his own way, as cunning as the subtle Serpent, in
clothing and trimming his strange Doctrines, with strange conceited words
fited to them, by which they who affect strange novelties, may easily be
allured and ensnared. But when the children of truth hunt him by the smell, and
strong savours of his rankling errors (which stink as well as fret like an
eating Cancer) and are ready to catch him; he does by his inkhorne terms so
obscure and darken his meaning, that only they who have a sharp, quick and
strong sight, can lay fast and sure hold on him. We may well resemble him to
the crafty fish Sepia of which we read, that when she is pursued and ready to
be taken, she spueth forth a black ink wherewith she darkneth the waters round
about, and so escapes away in thick darkness, through which she cannot be
seen and discerned.

But to omit his style, and to come to the matter of his preface, it is a
promise and pretense of somewhat by him premised, which shall serve for the
clear understanding of the state of the question, and for evidence sake might
be privileged, from passing under much dispute and contradiction; but hoc
aliquid nihil est, this something is nothing, we find no performance of promise
nor truth, in what he pretends; neither his brief proposal, nor his
ensuing discourse gives us any satisfaction; neither can his beginning,
progress, or ending receive from us any thing upon courtesy. For if any come
to us and bring not the true Doctrine of Christ, but damnable Socinianisme,
error, and heresy, we must not show so much courtesy, as to bid him God
speed. 2 John 10.

The Analysis of his first Chapter in general.
and justifying, and to determine in what sense the words are used in those
Scriptures, which speak of the justification of a sinner before GOD.

In the second he lays down

In the third he comes to speak of imputation of righteousness, for somewhat
imputed.

In the fourth part he shows first negatively, how Faith is not quaeres.
Secondly affirmatively, that Faith (as he holds it to be imputed) is opposed to
the righteousness of Christ, as to a competitor which receives the repulse.

In the fifth part (to cover the Christ's righteousness into part of the honor
for peace, and fashion sake, as Esau was admitted unto some vanishing
participation* of some temporary blessings with Jacob. For he forgeth a strange
and false kind of imaginary imputation of Christ's righteousness, unto which he
labors to wrest the words of Luther, Calvin, and the Homilies and Articles
of our English Church.



Socinianisme.
THat the terms of Justifying, 1 Part.
Justification, etc. are not to be taken in this question, (nor in any other
that are usually moved about the Justification of a sinner) either 1. Physico
sensu, in a Physical sense; as if Justification signified to make just with
any habitual, actual, or any positive, or inhaerent righteousness. 2. Sensu
forensi proprie dicto, in a juridicall, or judiciary sense, properly so called,
when the Judge has only a subordinate or derived power of judging, and is
bound by oath, or otherwise, to give sentence according to the rule of the Law;
as to justify were to pronounce a man just* or to absolve him from punishment,
according to the strict terms or rules of that Law whereof he was accused, as a
transgressor, though this sense be received, and admitted by many. But 3. and
lastly, Sensu forensi improprie dicto, in a Judiciary sense less properly, and
usually so called. viz. Where he that sits Judge, being supreme Magistrate,
has an Independency, and Soveraignety of power, to moderate, and dispense with
the Law, as reason and equity shall require: So that justifying in this
question, imports the discharging or absolving of a man from the guilt, blame,
and punishment of those things, whereof he is or might justly be accused; not
because he is clear of such things, or justifiable according to the letter and
strictness of the Law, (for then he could not be justly accused) But because
the Judge having a sufficient, and lawful Soveraignety of power, is willing
upon sufficient, and weighty consideration, known unto himself, to remit the
penalty of the Law, and to deliver and discharge him, as if he were an
Innocent, and righteous man. As for that Physical sense of making just by
inhaerent righteousness, though Bellarmine and his Angels, earnestly contend
for it, yet till the Scriptures be brought low, and Etymology exalted above
them; til use and custom of speaking, deliver up their Kingdom into the
Cardinals hand; that sense must no way be acknowledged, or received, in this
dispute: yet, (to give reason and right, even unto those that demand that which
is unreasonable) Its true, that GOD, in, and upon a man's Justification begins
to justify him Physically, that is to infuse habitual, and inhaerent
righteousness into him. But here the Scriptures, and the Cardinal, are as far
out in terms, as in 1000. other things they are in substance and matter: That
which he will needs call Justification, the Scripture will as peremptorily call
Sanctification. Concerning that other sense of judiciary Justification, usually
so called; wherein the Judge, or justifier, proceeds upon legal grounds, to
acquit, and absolve the party guilty, and accused, neither can this be taken in
the question propounded, except the Scripture be forsaken, because the
Scripture constantly speaks of this act of GOD, Justifying a sinner, not as of
such an act whereby he will either make him, or pronounce him legally Just, or
declare him not to have offended the Law, and hereupon justify him, but as of
such an act whereby he freely forgives him all that he has done against the
Law, and acquits him from all blame, and punishment due by the Law, for such
offenses: So that in that very act of GOD, by which he justifies a sinner, as
there is a discharge from all punishment due unto sin, so there is a
profession withal, or plain intimation of the guiltiness of the person, now
to be justified, according to the Law, and that he is not acquitted, or
discharged, upon any consideration that can be pleaded for him according to the
Law: but that consideration upon which GOD proceeds to justify him is of
another order: the consideration of somewhat done for him in this case, to
relieve him out of the course or order and appointment of the Law. He whose
Justification stands (whether in whole or in part, it is not material here) in
the forgiveness of sin, can in no construction be said to be Justified
according to the Law, because the Law knows no forgiveness of sin, neither
is there any rule for any such thing, nor the least intimation of so much as
any possibility of any such thing there. The Law speaks of the curse, death,
and condemnation of a sinner; but for the Justification of a sinner, it neither
takes knowledge nor gives any hope thereof.

Christianisme.
IN this first part here are only three significations of the word
Justification, and Justifying, rehearsed. The first is Natural, or Physical;
that is, making a man just with habitual inhaerent righteousness.

The second is a Judiciary sense, properly so called, when a subordinate Judge
does according to the strict terms, and rules of the Law, acquit, and absolve
a man from punishment (which is due by the Law to him being a transgressor) and
does pronounce him just.

The third is a Judiciary sense, less properly so called, when a supreme
Judge, by soveraignety of power, does acquit and absolve a man, and remit the
penalty of the Law, which he deserves, upon weighty consideration, known to
himself, and does deliver him, and discharge him, as if he were an innocent,
and righteous man.

The first Physical sense, he rejects, and plays upon Bellarmine, for
reteining, and using the word Justify, in that sense: And yet he himself
immediately acknowledges, that GOD upon a man's Justification, begins to
Justify him Physically, by infusing into him habitual, and inhaerent
righteousness: But this (he says) is in Scripture called Sanctification.

The second sense he also disclaimes, and in this dispute embraces the third
sense, to wit, that Justification signifies GODS forgiving a man freely all
that he has done against the Law; and his acquiting, and discharging of a man
from the guilt, and punishment, due by the Law, for such offenses; not for any
consideration which can be pleaded for him, according to the Law, but for
somewhat done for him in this case, to relieve him out of the course, order, and
appointment of the Law: His reason why he embraces this sense, is because he
conceives Justification to stand in forgiveness of sin, which belongs to the
Law in no respect at all.

In all this part, and passage, I find not one particle of solid truth, but
many gross errors, and falsehoods; for of all the three significations, of the
word Justify, by him here named, only the first may pass in some tolerable
construction, but not in his sense: for though GOD in the creation made our
first Parents after his own Image and similitude, in perfect righteousness,
endued with a natural, and habitual uprightness, conformable to his revealed
will, and Law; and in this respect may be said to have Justified, that is, made
them upright, as the wise Preacher says, Eccles. 7.29. GOD made man upright:
Yet whether this act of creation was a Physical act of GOD, or rather a
voluntary act of his will and of his wisdom, and counsel, and so may be
called Artificial, is something disputable. As for the framing and making of
the man Christ, the blessed seed, by the power of the holy Ghost, pure, holy,
upright, and just from his first conception; this was a spiritual and
supernatural act, and the holiness and righteousness was a supernatural
gift given from above, not introduced by natural generation, nor raised from
natural principles. That making of men righteous in their sanctification,
which Bellarmine speaks of, is not justification in a natural, but in a
spiritual sense* For the spirit of GOD works those habits, and graces of
holiness in men, whom GOD has begotten of his own will in the word of truth.
And therefore when Bellarmine or Goodwin, or any other call this a Physical
justifying, they err grossly. For if it be any justification at all, it is
spiritual and moral. But for my part, I find not that by the Spirit of GOD
in Scripture, any habitual holiness of men begun in this life, is called
righteousness simply in it self. But as the Saints regenerate, and faithful
are called righteous in respect of their communion with Christ, and
participation of his righteousness: So their sanctity or habitual holiness, is
called righteousness, not simply in it self, but by conjunction with the
righteousness of Christ, the head of the body: which as it iustifies them by
constituting and making them righteous: so also it iustifies their rectified
holy actions, which they perform by the mo^ions of the spirit, and by Faith in
Christ, (as learned Beza well observed, and truth affirms. Lib. contra
Anonymum,) and their sanctification cannot be called justification, but by
reason of conjunction with justification in the same person. For if it were
possible for a sinful man to be made perfectly holy, and conformable to GODS
Law, in his own person: yet having formerly transgressed the Law, and failed
in many things; ^his n^w conformity to the Law, by reason of those sins, and
failings will prove a lame righteousness, not fit to satisfy the Law, and to
be accepted for perfect righteousness to justification, because if a man keep
the whole Law, and fail in one point, he is guilty of all. Iam. 2, 10. No
righteousness can justify, which is not a perfect obedience, and conformity
of the whole man, to the whole, law in his whole life, from the beginning to the
end. Secondly, that signification of the word Justification, which he calls a
judiciary sense, properly so called, is, (as he describes it) a foolish fiction
of his own brain: for never did any but a madman dream of Justifying
sinners by a subordinate Judge, absolving them from punishment, according to
the strict terms, and rules of the Law; for that were to give a false
sentence, and to pronounce a man free from all transgression of the Law, and a
perfect fulfiller of it in his own person. All our learned, and Judicious
Divines, do hold that the full satisfaction and obedience of CHRIST being
communicated, and imputed to true believers, they are absolved, and have their
sins pardoned, and are counted, and judged righteous by GOD: as men who have
satisfied the Justice, and just Law of GOD, by CHRIST their head, and surety,
not in their own persons, which the Law in strict terms requires, and this is
justification in the Judiciary sense, which is approved by the learned.

Thirdly, that Judiciary sense, improperly so called, which he approves, and
allows in this dispute, is an Heretical, and Socinian conceit; for so long as
GOD the supreme Judge of all the world, is immutable, and infinite in Justice,
he neither can, nor will dispense with his eternal just Law, in any jot, or
tittle, but will have it perfectly fulfilled either by our selves or some
sufficient surety in our behalf, and will forgive no sinner, without a full
suffering, and satisfaction, made to the Law in the same kind which the law
requires, though not in every man's person; and this full satisfaction must be
communicated to every one, and made his own by union, with CHRIST his head;
before that GOD will judge or account him righteous, and pardon al his sins.
To imagine a somewhat, in consideration whereof GOD forgives sinners, and
accepts them as if they were righteous; besides, the full satisfaction of GODS
Justice, and just law, is to conceive GOD to be mutable, and not the same in
his infinite justice at all times; and to affirm it, is Samosatenian, and
Socinian Blasphemy.

Fourthly, in arguing against the second sense by him propounded, he wrestles
with his own shadow, and fights against a fiction of his own brain, and
discovers his blindness, and ignorance of the dictinction, and difference
between Legal, and Evangelicall justification, and righteousness: Legal
righteousness is the condition of the first covenant of works, and consists in
perfect conformity, and obedience to the law, performed by every man in his
own person, and no man can be legally justified but by his own personal
righteousness. Evangelicall righteousness, is CHRIST'S perfect righteousness,
and fulfilling of the Law in the behalf of all the elect and faithful: It was
not the Law, nor our works of the Law, which moved GOD to give CHRIST to be our
surety and redeemer; but he of his own free love and bounty gave Christ, and
Christ the Son of GOD out of his love, humbled himself to become man, and to
fulfill the law for us. Neither do we obtain Communion of Christ's
satisfaction and righteousness, by the works of the Law; but by the Gospel
preached and believed as the Apostle teaches, Gal. 3.2. And therefore though
Christ his righteousness be a perfect fulfilling of all obedience, which the law
requires of man; and GOD did exact of him every farthing, of our debt, both in
active, and passive obedience, and in respect of the matter and substance, his
satisfaction may be called after a sort legal, and is so called by Luther: yet
as it was for us, not for himself, and performed by him our head, not by every
one of us in our own persons, and is received and applied by Faith, not by our
works of the Law, and is brought unto us by the Gospel, not by the Law, and
is given to us freely by GODS grace, not merited or procured by any thing in
our selves; so it is not legal but Evangelicall, and GODS justifying of us,
and counting us righteous by it, is not a proceeding upon legal grounds, nor
pronouncing us legally just, as this calumniator does, either foolishly
imagine, or falsely slander and misreport our Doctrine.

Fifthly in arguing for his own false, and forged sense of the word
Justification, he has three reasons all which are for us, and prove our
Doctrine not his opinion. For if this make a sense of the word Justification,
good, because it does intimate the former guiltiness of him that is justified,
as well as it does discharge him from all punishment, (which is his first
reason) then is our Doctrine of justification by imputation of Christ's
satisfaction for all our sins, very good and sound, for it intimates a
guiltiness in him who is to be justified, as well as a discharge from
punishment. Secondly we do not plead for our justification, any consideration
according to the Law, that is, we do not plead our own innocence, nor
satisfaction and righteousness performed in our own persons; but we plead more
then somewhat done for us, even all Christ's obedience active and passive, by
GODS free grace communicated to us, not obtained, or merited by our works of
the law. Thirdly though the law iustifies no sinner, but threatens the curse,
death* and condemnation as the due reward of the transgressors of it: Yet it
iustifies all who are free from all sins committed against it, and are made
righteous by the perfect fulfilling of it to the utmost. And therefore when the
Gospel has brought us to the Communion of Christ's full satisfaction, by which
we are made free from all sin, and perfect fulfillers of the law in him our
head; as GOD does forgive us our sins, and counts us righteous: so the law is
no more against us, 1 Timothy 1.9. but is witness for us, that in Christ we are
worthy of remission and justification. By this are manifest the gross errors,
and absurdities which he utters in this first part of his preparative Chapter.

But that his ignorance in the Doctrine of justification, may more fully
appear, I will lay down the several significations of the words,
justification, and justifying, wherein the Spirit of God does use them in the
holy Scriptures.

First the word justify, and justification Romans 5.19. Where many are said to
be made, or constituted righteous by the obedience of Christ, even as by Adams
disobedience many were made sinners, and 1 Cor. 1.30. and 2 Cor. 5.21. Where
Christ is said to be made unto us righteousness, and we are said to be made
the righteousness of God in him. And Romans 3.24. and 4, 5. Where we are said to
be justified freely by his grace, through the redemption which is in Christ.
And God is said to justify the ungodly, which cannot be meant of counting
judging, and pronouncing, but of making them righteous by the Communion of
Christ's righteousness. For to justify the wicked by judging and pronouncing
them righteous, without making them such, is ao^mination to the LORD, Prove.
17.15. And in this sense Preachers of GODS Word are, as instruments under GOD,
said to justify many by bringing them unto righteousness, and are called
(...) iustifiers, Dan. 12.3. This justifying we may very fitly call radical,
or fundamental justification. This Luther and other learned Divines call
actionem individuam, because it is GODS action of communicating Christ's
righteousness in a moment, and not by degrees successively, and in it men are
mere patients, and do not work with GOD, no more then Adam did in GODS first
creating of him upright, in his Image: Even regenerate Infants may thus be
justified, and are justified before they actually believe.

Secondly the word justify, signifies GODS justifying of men by Christ, and
to enjoy it by Faith, in this sense the word is used, Romans 4. Where GOD is said
to justify us by imputing righteousness, and counting Faith for
righteousness, that is, counting a true believer a righteous person. And thus
the word is to be taken, where we are said to be justified by Faith, without
the works of the Law. The Apostle does much urge, and press this
justification, Rom* 4 and Gal. 3. because though in this taken actively, GOD
only acts: yet taken passively as it is received of us, and we by Faith
feel and discern in what account we are with GOD, and by believing enjoy
Christ's satisfaction for remission of sins, and for righteousness, we may be
said to work with GOD, by way of receiving, as a begging hand does in
receiving gifts freely given, and put into it. This justifying does necessarily
presuppose the former, and does assure us of it. For the just GOD, whose
judgment is according to truth, cannot r^pute us righteous, till we have
communion of Christ's righteousness, and be thereby truly righteous. And this
Justification Divines call imputative. It springs from the former as from the
root, and is builded on it as on the foundation.

Thirdly, this word justify, signifies a manifesting and declaring of men to
be righteous and justified, and that three ways. First in foro conscientiae,
in the court, or judgment of our own conscience, when a man being troubled in
his conscience with the sight of his sins, and his want of righteousness,
after humble prayer, and poenitent seeking, receives either the inward
testimony of the Spirit, and is enlightened by GOD, to see that he is in the
state of righteousness absolved and justified; or by inward sense of his
sanctification, Faith, and other graces proper to the righteous justified; is
declared and made manifest to his own conscience, that he is justified and
righteous, and has all his sins pardoned, and is accepted of GOD for a
righteous man. This is that which we are taught by Christ to pray for in that
petition, forgive us our debts or trespasses, that is, pacify and clear our
consciences, by manifesting to us that we are justified, and have remission of
all our sins by thy free grace, and by communion of Christ's full
satisfaction; and thus we are to understand the word, wheresoever it is
opposed to the accusations of Satan, and the horrors and troubles of
conscience, as a remedy against them, as Rom* 8.33.

Secondly it signifies declaring, and proving men righteous in foro humano, in
the judgment and sight of men openly, and that by outward fruits of Faith,
and external works of righteousness, and holiness. When GOD enableing us, and
moving us to do such works, and bring forth such fruits as are by his word
continually pronounced, and proclaimed to be righteous, and holy works and
evidences of justification, does thus declare, and prove us to be faithful and
righteous, he is said to justify us before men. In this sense the word is
used, Job 13.18. where Job says that if he may plead before GOD the integrity
of his life, he knows he shall be justified: as afterward he did cap. 31.
and was thereby declared to be righteous, and so justified. And Iam. 2.21.
where it is (...) that Abraham was justified by works, that is, declared to be
a righteous man.

Thirdly it signifies judging, and declaring men to be persons justified, and
righteous in the universal judgment at the last day, when the LORD Christ
shall by the evidence of their works of love and charity, done to him in his
members, declare them to be his faithful servants, and children of his
Father, justified by the communion of his righteousness, and in him worthy of
eternal life; and also adjudge them unto the inheritance of the kingdom of
Glory. In this sense the word is used, Romans 5.16.18. where it is called (...)
Justification of life, and is opposed to the sentence of everlasting
condemnation. These are all the significations of the word (justify) recorded
in the Scriptures; And this great promiser here shows himself ignorant of
them all: and therefore how little satisfaction he has given to any, but such
fools as delight to fill themselves with husks, let the learned judge.

Socinianisme.
2 Part.
THat Jesus Christ the natural son of GOD, and supernatural son of the
Virgin Marie, ran a race of obedience with the Law, (as well Ceremonial as
Moral) and held out with every letter, jot and title of it, as far as it any
ways concerned him, dureing the whole continuance of his life in the flesh; no
man's thoughts ever rose up to deny; but those that denied him the best of his
being, (I mean his Godhead) which of you can convince me of sin? was his
challenge to the nation of the Jews, whilst he was yet on earth, John 8.46. And
remains through all ages, as a challenge to the whole World. He that can cast
the least aspersion of sin upon Christ, shall shake the foundation of the
peace and safety of the Church.

That this Christ offered himself Socinus formerly, and still works in those
that are baptized into the same spirit of error with him.

I conceive it to be a truth of greater authority amongst us, then Jesus
Christ is the sole entire meritorious cause of every man's justification, that
is justified by GOD; or that that righteousness or absolution from sin, and
condemnation which is given to every man in his justification, is somewhat, yea
a principal part of that great purchase, which Christ has made for the world:
even as GOD for Christ's sake freely forgave you. Forgiveness of sins, or
justification is from GOD for Christ's sake, he is worthy to be gratified or
honored by GOD, with the justification of those that believe in him.

Christ has purchased for the children of men, and that without believing no
man can have part, or fellowship in that great and blessed business.

Christianisme.
IN this second part he does promise four several propositions, which he
conceives to be out of question, and undeniable. By the first proposition he
makes a fair show in words, but his heart is far removed, and his meaning is
wicked, and so will appear, if we observe how he in another place afterward
explaines himself. First though he seems to acknowledge Christ to be GOD,
yet he takes away the use of his being, GOD as well as man in the work of our
redemption. For if GOD by his supreme sovereigne power can dispense with the
law of his justice, and instead of Christ's full satisfaction made for us to the
law, and imputed to us, and made ours, can and does accept our weak Faith for
the perfect righteousness of the Law; what use is there of Christ's being GOD
in our nature? For all Orthodox Divines do give this reason, why it was
necessary that Christ should be GOD in our nature. viz. That his suffering and
righteousness performed in our nature, might be of value to justify all the
sons of men, who have communion of them, and to whom they are imputed. This
communion and imputation while he denies, he takes away the use of Christ's
being GOD in our nature.

Secondly, in affirming that Christ obeyed the whole Law in every letter, jot,
and title, he does mock, and delude his hearers, and readers; for he does not
hold, that he fulfilled the Law only for us, but primarily for himself; his
words imply so much, for he says, he obeyed the Law, as far as concerned
himself, while he continued in the flesh: and he dorh hereafter roundly
affirm, that Christ was bound to fulfill the Law for himself, which is in
effect, a denying of his eternal Godhead: for if he be GOD, infinite in
glory, and excellency, his Godhead must needs exempt the Manhood personally
united to it from all bondage of the Law, and make it worthy of glory at GODS
right hand, from the first assumption of it. He continued in the flesh, and
obeyed the Law, only for us without all doubt, as the Prophet foretold, Esa.
9.6. saying, To us a Child is borne, and to us a Son is given.

Thirdly, as he denies the satisfaction of Christ to be imputed to us, so he
denies the imputation of our sins to Christ; and that very closely, and
cunningly, under color of that challenge which Christ made to the Jews, which
of you can convince me of sin? For our Savior speaks of sin committed by
himself, and such aspersion none can say upon him; But all our iniquities GOD
laid upon him, and he bare all our sins, Esa. 53. And was made sin for us,
2 Cor. 5, 21. and to cast this aspersion of all our sins on him, is a sure
foundation of the peace, and safety of the Church.

In the second proposition, he does most notoriously aequivocate, and play the
Hypocrite; First in that he seems to acknowledge the sacrifice of Christ to be
an atonement, and satisfaction for the world, and a propitiatory sacrifice for
the sin of it. Secondly, in that he denies his Lord, and Master Socinus, and
calls the Spirit which wrought in him a Spirit of error; whereas indeed he
himself is lead by the same Spirit, and does deny Christ to be the
propitiatory sacrifice for our sins, as far as Socinus ever did: For in a
propitiatory sacrifice, offered to purge sin, and to make atonement, there
were three necessary requisits: First, the thing offered, must be of his own
proper goods, for whom it was offered, so the Law required, and therefore David
durst not offer for his sin, that which was not his own, Purchased with his
money, 2. Sam. 24, 24. Secondly, the owner, whose expiatory sacrifice it was,
did lay his hand upon the head of the Beast which was to be offered, and
thereby in a type imposed all his sin, and guilt upon it, so that it became
(...) his sin, and (...) his guilt, Levit 5, 6. and Exodus 30.10. and did bear
upon it all his sins, Lev. 16.22. Thirdly, this sacrifice offered up by the
Priest in that manner which GOD praescribed in the Law, GOD accepted as a
propitiation for him, it was set on his skore, and covered his sin, as the
Hebrew words signify, Levit. 1.4. He who denies any one of these, overthrowes
the sacrifice of atonement. Now this dissembler does with Socinus deny all
these things in Christ's offering of himself a sacrifice of atonement to purge
sin. First he denies the true real Spiritual union between Christ, and the
persons pardoned, and justified; by which Christ, and they are made one body,
and he is their head, and they his members; For if he, and the faithful be
one, then all his goods are theirs, and their debts are his, and his
satisfaction, and righteousness is theirs, and is set on their skore, which he
denies, and altogether opposes, and so denies their interest, and propriety
in Christ, and their union with him, as his Master Wotton did, in express
word: In his Essays of Justification. Secondly, he also denies that the
sins of the faithful, were laid on Christ, and imputed to him; and in this
he charge GOD, with notorious injustice, who laid the punishments of all our
sins on Christ, without the sins: For he says, that Christ bare the
punishments, though he had no share in our sins by any imputation. Thirdly,
he denies that the sacrifice of Christ's suffering, and obedience offered up by
him, is imputed to us, set on our skore, and accepted for us. And thus in the
doctrine of Christ's sanitisfaction, and atonement, he declares himself a true
disciple of Socinus, lead by the same spirit of error, and of the same opinion,
though in words he denies it. And what he here seems to grant, is no more but
what all Socinians yield unto.

In the third proposition, viz. that Christ is the sole, and entire miraculous
cause, of every man's justification, etc. He does aequivocate, and delude the
simple, and while he deceives them, he is deceived himself, as the Apostle
says of wicked seducers, 2 Timothy 3, 13. For if he does understand his own
words, that Christ is the sole meritorious cause of every man's justification,
that is justified by GOD, he must needs grant that Christ's satisfaction, made
to GODS justice, and his perfect righteousness, as it is meritorious, and of
great value in it self; so it is appropriated, communicated, and imputed to
him; that is, it is made actually meritorious for him, and makes him worthy to
be counted righteous, and to be justified; for his words signify so much,
though he is in his purpose and meaning, as contrary, as darkness is to
light: for he means no more, but that Christ meritted for himself, that GOD
should gratify, and honor him with the justification of those that believe in
him, so he explaines himself in the last words. It is certain that a thing
may be merritorious in it self, for the worth of it, but it cannot be
meritorious to any particular person, till it be appropriated to him* and set
on his skore. Wotton his Master, (this point being proved to his face with
undeniable arguments) was driven to disclaim the word (merit) denied Christ's
meritting, for the faithful, and rejected it as a thing not named in
Scripture, in his Essays of Justification. Besides this deceiving of himself,
and misconceiving of his own words, I find here much absurdity: First, in that
he is wavering, and not settled in his Judgment, for in many places he holds
faith to be the righteousness of a man justified; and here he calls
absolvtion from sin, and condemnation, the righteousness which is given to
every man in his justification: I grant that in a man justified, there is no
righteousness inhaerent, but his cleanenesse from guilt of all sins, both of
commission, and omission, and in this sense, Calvin, Luther, and others say
that all the righteousness, in a man justified, is the remission of his
sins, that is, his cleanenesse from the guilt of them, but this is not the
righteousness which justifies him, and which is communicated to him, to make
him clean, and to work this cleanness from the guilt of his sin, that is,
the righteousness inhaerent in Christ, which makes him clean, and puts him in
a stare of righteousness before GOD: but this profound Doctor, with that
stamp, and superscription of rational authority, which he conceives to be
set on him, has not yet searched into the deep things o^ GOD.

Secondly, he is most absurd in imagining that Christ has purchased favor,
and honor, wit^ GOD, that he might justify the^ that believe in him by
Procuring, that faith in a proper sense should be accepted for righteousness:
For Christ as he was GOD, and man, was infinitely of himself in favor and
honor with GOD, and humbled himself only for us* and in our behalf
fulfilled the Law; not to purchase honor, and favor, to himself, nor to make
himself worthy to be gratified, and honored by GOD, as he affirms. Thus we
see his absurdities, and his deceiving of himself.

Christ has purchased etc. In which I find delusion, and falsehood: First he
does not mean a gift, grace, or Spiritual qualification, appointed by GOD, by
which as by the hand of the soul stretched out, we must lay hold on Christ's
satisfaction, and righteousness* for justification, and redemption, (though
his words pretend so much) but he means that faith is the condition of the
new covenant, which man must on his part perform, in stead of all
righteousness, which the Law requires; and so it is in the new covenant, the
condition of life; as works of the Law, and of righteousness, were the
condition of the old covenant: This is the very haeresie, and damned error of
Socinus. Secondly, he does here make the covenant of grace, a covenant of life,
not freely, but upon a condition* performed on man's part, and so a covenant of
works, contrary to Scripture, Romans 11.6. Thirdly, he erres grossly, in
imagining faith not to be a free gift of grace, but a work performed on man's
part, as works were required in the old covenant. Fourthly, he falsely
charge all honest, and godly men, to be of his judgment. I know that all
Orthodox Divines, abhor and detest this opinion. Fifthly, he affirms a
manifest untruth, in saying, that without believing, none can have part in
justification, and redemption; for no regenerate Infants, which die in their
Infancy, do actually believe* and yet being by the Spirit of regeneration
engraffed into Christ, they have communion of his ransom and righteousness,
are justified before GOD, and saved.

Socinianisme.
3. Part.
It Is evident from the Scriptures, that GOD in the act of every man's
justification does impute, or account righteousness to him, or rather somewhat
for, or in stead of righteousness, by means of which imputed, the person
justified passes in account as a righteous man (though he be not properly, or
perfectly such) and is invested accordingly with those great privileges of a
man perfectly righteous, deliverance from death and condemnation, and
acceptance into favor with GOD. The reason of which imputation, or why GOD is
pleased to use an expression of righteousness imputed, in or about the
justification of a sinner, seems to be this, the better to satisfy the
natural scruple of the weak, and feeble conscience of men, who can hardly
conceive, or think of a justification or of being justified, especially by
GOD, without a perfect legal righteousness. Now the purpose and counsel of
GOD in the Gospel, being to justify men without any such righteousness: the
better to salve the fears of the conscience touching such a defect, and to
prevent and stay all troublesome thoughts, or quaeres which might arise in the
minds of men, who when they hear of being justified, are still ready to ask
within themselves, but where is the righteousness* conceiving a legal
righteousness to be as necessary to justification, as Isaac conceived of a Lamb
for a burnt offering, Genesis 22. He (GOD I mean) is graciously pleased so far to
condescend to men in Scripture treaty, with them about the weighty business
of justification, as in effect to grant and say to them, that though he finds
no proper or perfect righteousness in them, no such righteousness as passes
under the name of righteousness with them: yet if they truly believe in him as
Abraham did; this believing shall be as good as a perfect complete righteousness
unto them, or that he will impute rihteousnes to them upon their believing.

Christianisme.
THe first thing in this passage, to wit, GOD imputing righteousness to every
man in his justification, is a thing evident by the Scriptures, and I willingly
grant it. But I abhor and detest as heresy, that which he adds out of his
own conceit, to wit, that GOD does rather impute somewhat in stead of
righteousness, which cannot make a man properly or perfectly righteous. This is
a blasphemous imagination, that GOD can judge falsely, and account a thing for
righteousness which is not, and esteem a man righteous who is not properly
righteous. Secondly that which immediately follows is no less blasphemous, to
wit, that a man may be invested by GOD, with the great privileges of a man
perfectly righteous, namely deliv^rance from sin and condemnation, and
acceptance, into favor with GOD, though he be no such man. For hereby GOD is
charged either with injustice and iniquity, or with error in his judgment.
Thirdly his taking upon him to give a reason of GODS purpose, and counsel, is
Luciferian pride and presumption. For who knows the mind of GOD, or has
been of his counsel, Romans 11.34. Saint Paul who was taken up into the third
heaven, could never find out any such counsel of GOD, neither durst give a
reason of GODS purpose and counsel, but only the good pleasure of his own
will. Fourthly in the declaration of his reason I find many errors, and
untruths, as first, that a man's conscience can hardly think of being justified
by GOD, without a perfect legal righteousness. Every regenerate man and true
believer can upon his own knowledge, and experience give him the lie, and tell
him that the weakest conscience of any, who has true Faith, being taught by
the Gospel, can very easily think and believe, that GOD justifies him by an
Evangelicall righteousness, even Christ's perfect fulfilling of the Law, which
is far more perfect then that legal righteousness, which the Law requires
of every man in his own person. This Abraham believed, and was fully persuaded
of it, this David professes, and Saint Paul preached, and I know no true
Christian, who does not both think and believe it. If any man be found
doubting of this, it is because the spirit of Antichrist and Socinus does work
strongly in him. Secondly the thing which he imagines, being so notoriously
false there can be no reason given of it, but a reason as false as the thing it
self. And indeed so it is here. For first he assure, most falsely that GODS
purpose in the Gospel, is to justify men without any such righteousness, as
the Law requires in every man, that is the perfect fulfilling of the Law. For
though GOD does not purpose to justify men by their own fulfilling of the
Law, every one in his own person: yet by Christ's righteousness and his
fulfilling of the Law in their stead, and by communicating and imputing that
righteousness to them, he purposes in the Gospel, and professes that men
shall be and are by him justified, and this is in Christ such a righteousness
as the Law requires, for proof of this see Romans 8.4. and 10.4. Secondly the
fathers upon GOD his own false and wicked conceits, to wit First, that GOD
goes about to cure an infirmity in his people, which is not to be found in any
of them, after they are called to believe in Christ, and to be his people; for
then they bid their own works of the Law adieu, and do no more dream of
justification by them. Secondly, that GOD for the cure of their weak
consciences tells them in the Gospel, that if they believe in Christ, this
believing shall be as good as a perfect complete righteousness: by this he
would make GOD a pure Socinian, one who takes the Crown from Christ, and the
righteousness from GOD and man, and sets it on the head of man's Faith, which in
the best believers, and even in Abraham himself was mingled with much
doubting, and many infirmities. In a word, though all Orthodox Divines do
according to the Scriptures, acknowledge that upon a man's believing truly in
Christ, GOD does impute to him the perfect, and complete righteousness of
Christ, which is made his before he can truly apply it by Faith. Yet it can
never enter into the heart of a true Christian, but his soul will abhor to
think, that any man's believing should be to him as good, as perfect complete
righteousness, or that GOD should accept it in stead of perfect righteousness,
and rather then the righteousness of Christ GOD and man, who is made unto us of
GOD righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. and in whom we are found to have the
righteousness of GOD by faith, Philip. 3.9. To conclude this passage, let me
add this as a foul absurdity. For if he speak by experience, that
conscience leads men naturally to think that there can be no justification
without righteousness, which is a perfect fulfilling of the Law. Which I
confess my conscience and my reason tell me, and GODS word teaches* me
plainly: Then what is become of his conscience, who contrary to all truth and
reason, and the common conscience of all men, will teach justification, without
any true righteousness at all either of Christ, or our own, and will crown
man's weak Faith with the Crown of righteousness, which only belongs to Christ
and his perfect obedience.

4. Part.
Socinianisme.
SO that now the state and drift of the question is, not either First whether
Faith without an object or as separated from Christ, be imputed for
righteousness; for such a Faith (doubtless) in the point of justification was
never dreamt of by any man, that kept his (...) company; men may as well fancy
a living man without a soul^, or a wise man without his wits, as a Faith
without an object; much less was such a Faith conceived by any man, to be
imputed for righteousness.

Christianisme.
IN the fourth part, or passage, he first propounds five foolish quaeres, which
he denies to concern the state of the question. Secondly, he propounds a sixth
quaere, and that in plain, and precise terms he affirms. I will first
particularly answer the 5. quaeres: and after lay down the ^i^t at large, and
address my self to the confutation of his discourse upon it.

And first, whereas he pronounces him a mad man, who dreams of faith without
Christ the object, or thinks that faith which believes not in Christ, should be
imputed for righteousness: Here I must be bold to put him in mind; that thus
he dreams in the next Chapter, where he boldly affirms and by diverse
arguments labors, to prove that the Faith of Abraham which was imputed to
him for righteousness, was not a believing in Christ, neither was Christ and his
righteousness the object of it. And therefore by his own confession and his
own words; he does there play the mad man, and keeps not his wits company,
but his fancy runs wild, while he strives to prove that Abraham's Faith imputed
to him for righteousness was not a believing in Christ.

The second Quaere.
NEither is it any part of the intent of the question, to enquire, whether
Faith be the meritorious cause of a man's justification. For both they that
affirm, and they that deny the imputation of Faith for righteousness; deny the
meritoriousnes of Faith every way* how ever it is true, that they tha^ would
seem most to disclaim it, and cast it further from them, do yet in some of
their most beloved tenets draw very near unto it (as will afterward appear.)

Answer.
HEre behold either gross ignorance or wilful lying against knowledge, and
conscience. For all the learned know that Faith and believing are held by the
Church of Rome, to be a principal part of man's righteousness, and works
which GOD imputes and accounts meritorious, of justification, and of eternal
life ex condigno. Yea he himself in the passage next before has plainly
affirmed, that Faith to him that believes as Abraham did, is as good as
perfect and complete righteousness; which if it be true, then Faith must needs
be, (as perfect and complete righteousness is) the meritorious cause of
justification. And therefore that which he here says is verified in himself,
though he would seem most to disclaim the merit of Faith, and to cast it
furthest from him, yet in some of his most beloved tenets, he draws very
near to it, yea he embraces it with his heart in his whole discourse, the
maine drift whereof is to exalt Faith into the place of Christ's most
meritorious righteousness, and to put the Crown upon it. For what can be
imagined more meritorious of justification, then that which GOD in a proper
sense judges and counts for righteousness, and for which he does justify
men, and counts them righteous.

The third Quaere.
NEither is it the question, whether faith be the formal cause of
justification, that is, whether GOD does justify a man with his faith, as a
Painter makes a wall white with whitenes, or as a Master makes his Scholar
learned with knowledge, or learning conveyed into him; for both parties make
the form of justification to be somewhat really different from Faith (which is
the genuine tenet of Arminius*)

Answer.
THis quere is very ridiculous, for to imagine a quality or act in man, to be
the formal cause of justification which is GODS act, is the fancy of a
distempered brain, and the conceit of a mad man. His exposition of his quaere
shows his want of Logical skill. For the whiteness wherewith the Painter
makes a wall white, is a form introduced into the wall, it is not the formal
cause of his action of painting; and so learning produced in a scholar, is
forma docti, the form of a Scholar as he is made learned, not the formal
cause, of his masters teaching, surely his expounding of his quaere, by such
dissonant similitudes, shows that he had need of a Master to teach him some
better knowledge, and learning, and to set on him some better stamp, and
superscription, of rational authority. His phrase (of learning conveyed) is
somewhat improper, for learning is not conveyed, into a Scholar, but produced,
and begotten, in him. Let him not therefore condemn tropes of speech, seeing
he himself can, and does often speak tropically, and improperly.

But to come home to his quaere. If by justification he means imputative
justification, in which GOD justifies a man, by imputing righteousness to him;
and man is justified by believing that GOD counts him righteous in Christ; then
we deny not that faith in some respect, is the formal cause of justification:
For in this justification taken passively, as it is man's receiving by faith,
that which GOD imputes to him; that is, as it is a man's believing, that God
reckons him among the righteous, and counts him to be in the state of a
justified person; so his actual faith, and believing, is the form of his
justification: But take Justification, according to his own opinion, for GODS
imputeing faith in a proper sense, for righteousness; Then is faith that
somewhat, by which a man stands in the state of a person Justified before GOD,
even his formal righteousness, or that at least, which is in stead of formal
righteousness. Thus he is every way taken, and entangled in his own words.
Lastly, what that is, which he says is the genuine tenet of Arminius; he
does not express whether it be, that faith is really different, or not
different, from the form of Justification; for his words are included in a
parenthesis, which might very well be left out: only this I know, that
Arminius professes this to be his genuine tenet; That faith is imputed to the
believer, for righteousness. sensu proprio, non m^tonymico, in a proper sense,
without a trope, In Epist. ad Hippolitum de Collibus, If elsewhere he alters
his tenet, and writes otherwise; It is but the common disease, the vertigo, and
giddiness of the Socinian faction, to do as here their fellow disciple does
in this his hovering, and wavering discourse; that is, to say, and gainesay,
affirm, and deny, the same things, through the inconstancy of their windy
brains, and minds unsettled.

The 4 Quaere.
NOr yet does the question make any quaere at all, whether Christ be the sole
meritorious cause of justification of a sinner, for both they that go on the
right hand of the question, and they that go on the left hand, are knit
together in the same mind, and judgment concerning this.

Answer.
WHosoever denies such a Spiritual union, and communion between Christ, and
the penitent, and believing sinner justified, as does make Christ's
righteousness, and satisfaction to become his ransom, and righteousness, and
to be imputed by GOD to him, and to make him accepted by GOD, as one clean
from the guilt of sin, and righteous in his sight, This man denies Christ to
be the meritorious cause, of the Justification of a sinner: For till Christ
with his satisfaction, be communicated, and appropriated to the faithful, yea,
till his righteousness be so made theirs, and set on their skore, that they have
a right, and interest in it: Christ is no more meritorious of Justification to
them, then he is to Infidels, and reprobates: for it is as impossible for
Christ to be actually meritorious of Justification to any man who has not an
interest in him, as for one man's money to ransom another, who is a captive,
upon whose skore it was never set, no^ so much interest therein given to him,
that it is paid for him and accounted for his ransom.

5 Quaere.
NEither does the question as it is here propounded, int^nd any dispute at all,
whether the active obedience of Christ, falling in with the passive, and
considered in conjunction with it, be that whereby Christ merited the
Justification of sinners, or that which GOD has a principal respect, and
recourse unto, in the Justification of sinners, for this also is acknowledged
on both sides (at least by the greater party of both)

Answer.
But while he denies GODS communicating, and imputeing Christ's whole obedience*
he denies the merit of them in our Justification; and when he affirms, that
faith, and not Christ's righteousness, is the thing imputed for righteousness,
to justification, he denies Christ's obedience active, and passive, to be that
which GOD has a principal respect, and recourse unto in the justification of
sinners, and therefore here he contradicts himself, and says untruely* that
all sides hold the merit of Christ's whole obedience, when in his Doctrine he
utterly overthrowes it.

The 6 Quaere, which he allows, and affirms.
BUt lastly the question in plain terms is this, whether the faith of him
that truly believes in Christ, or whether the righteousness of Christ
himself, that is that obedience that Christ performed to the moral Law
(consisting of all those several and particular acts of righteousness,
wherein he obeyed in the letter and propriety of it) be that which GOD imputes
to a believer, for righteousness in his justification, so that he that
believes is not righteous only by account, or by GODS gracious reputing and
accepting of him for such: but is rigidly, literally, and peremptorily
righteous, constituted and made as perfectly and completely, and legally
righteous as Christ himself, no difference at all between them, quoad
veritatem, but only quoad modum, the justified every whit as righteous as the
iustifier, both righteous with the selfsame individual righteousness, only
this difference between one and the other; the justified wears i^ as put upon
him by another by imputation; the iustifier wears it as put upon him by
himself, or by inherency. That the Scriptures no where countenance any such
imputation of the righteousness of Christ, I trust (the spirit of truth
directing and assisting) to make manifest in the sequel of this discourse, and
to give good measure of truth to the Reader, heaped up by testimonies from the
Scripture, pressed down by the weight of many arguments, and demonstrations
running over, with the clear approbation of many Authors learned and sound,
and every way greater then exception.

Multa fidem promissa levant.
Answer.
TO this question laid down in plain, and precise terms, I answer. First
that to move this question, except with purpose to discover and oppose Socinus,
and his followers who affirm it, and stand for imputation of faith in a proper
sense; for righteousness is not to be tolerated among true Christians: but to
dispute for that damned error, which takes the Crown from the all-sufficient
righteousness of Christ, and sets on the head of man's weak faith, is most
heretical impudency (as in my whole answer I shall prove abundantly.
Secondly his absurd expounding of Justification by Christ's righteousness
imputed; and how in this question the righteousness of Christ, and the
justifying of men by it, are to be understood; is a notable point either of
calumny in slandering our doctrine, and reporting it corruptly, or of subtilty,
that when his opinion is proved to be blasphemous, he may have some starting
holes, through which he may shift away, and make an escape, pleading that he
mistook our Doctrine of being righteous by Christ's righteousness imputed, and
ignorantly did oppose it.

First no man standing for the imputation of Christ's righteousness, does affirm
that every particular act of Christ which he performed, was necessary to make
up a perfect and sufficient righteousness: but that his righteousness contains
in it all his acts of obedience, none denies. For suppose our Savior by
reason of imprisonment, or some other restraint and impediment, had been
hindered from doing diverse of those works of mercy, charity and piety, which
he did perform being at liberty, this had not diminished his righteousness, so
long as he had a ready will to do good upon all occasions, and did good works
when liberty and opportunity served. Secondly none of our Divines do think or
write, that Christ's righteousness imputed, and communicated to believers, does
make them rigidly, literally, and peremptorily righteous, constituted and made
us perfectly completely and legally righteous, as Christ himself, for though
they are iustifi^d by the Communion of Christ's satisfaction, and have so much
interest in it, as to make them truly righteous, yet they have it not as
Christ has it performed legally by himself in his own person; neither have
they power to give the Spirit, whereby they may communicate it to others to
justify them, and to make them righteous. The Wife is endowed with her
Husbands honors and riches, and made honorable and rich, but she is not
endowed with her Husbands Lordship and dominion over them, so far that she may
give them away at her pleasure: but only posseseth them in him and with him,
for her own use. And so it is between Christ and the faithful, he is
righteous rigidly and legally, according to the letter of the Law; They are
righteous Evangelically by the Communion of his righteousness, that is,
originally righteous, as the head in a natural body is sensitive, and has
sense and motion in it as the root and fountain: They are righteous by
Communion from him, and possess his righteousness as all the rest of the
members, in a living body possess life by derivation from the heart, not in
the same degree as the heart does, to communicate it to others; but every one
so far as to be a living member. Therefore all that he here says is but
subtilty, calumny, and falsehood, neither Scriptures nor any sound and learned
Authors will minister arguments, or demonstrations to him to prove any thing
contrary to our Doctrine, concerning the imputation of Christ's righteousness for
justification. The more he strives to wrest and abuse testimonies of Scripture,
and learned Authors, the more evident demonstrations will he give of his
wickedness, and wilful contending against GODS sacred truth.

Socinianisme.
GIve me leave here to mention that by the way, which prevents many mistakes
(yea and offenses too) in reading the writings of many later Divines
(especially of other Churches) touching this point of Justification. If we take
the phrase of imputing Christ's righteousness unproperly, and out of the usual
and formal signification of it (as Luther and Calvin, and other Divines of the
reformed Churches sometimes do in their writings) viz For the giving out and
bestowing (as it were) the righteousness of Christ in the return of it, that
is, in the privileges, blessings and benefits, that are procured and purchased
by it for men: So a believer may be said to be justified by the righteousness of
Christ imputed. But then the meaning can be no more but this. A believer is
justified by the imputation of Christ's righteousness. That is, GOD justifies a
believer for Christ's righteousness sake, and not for any righteousness of his
own. Such an imputation of the righteousness of Christ as this is, is no ways
denied or once questioned. And thus such passages as those in Calvin, GOD
freely justifies us by imputing the obedience of Christ unto us, Instit. 1. c.
3.11, and again a man is not righteous in himself, but because the
righteousness of Christ is communicated, or imparted to him by imputation, these
and such like expressions in this Author, are to be interpreted by such
passages as these (which are frequent in the same Author) Christ by his
obedience, procured and merited for us, grace and favor with GOD the Father,
and again Instit. 1.2.17. and again, 1.3. c. 11.12. Christ by his obedience
procured, or purchased righteousness for us. And again, in Gal. 3.6. All such
expressions as these import the same thing, that we are justified by the grace
of GOD, that Christ is our righteousness; and that righteousness was procured
for us by the death, and resurrection of Christ. By all which passages and many
more of like importment, that might be produced out of the same Author, its
fully evident, that where he mentions any imputation of the righteousness of
Christ's in justification, the meaning is only this, that the righteousness of
Christ is only the meritorious cause of our justification, and he has
procured and purchased this for us at GODS hand; that upon our believing we
should be accounted righteous by him; or (which is but the same) that our
faith should be imputed for righteousness to us. To which purpose he speaks
more significantly, and expressly in the place last mentioned, Gal. 3.6. men
not having righteousness lodged in them, they obtain it by imputation, which
imputation he thus explicates and interprets. Because GOD does impute or
account their faith unto them, for righteousness. Diverse like passages might be
drawn together out of other Authors, which must be seasoned with the same salt
of interpretation, to be made savorie and meet for spiritual nourishment. In
the Homilies of our Church, there are several passages that mention the
imputation of Christ's righteousness in justification, for the genuine sense
whereof if we consult with the 11. article of Religion (which is concerning
justification) and is framed with all possible exactnes this way (that so few
words are capable of) that will lead us directly to the same interpretation of
them. We are accounted righteous before GOD, (says our Article) only for the
merit of our LORD, and Savior Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own
works or deservings. Where its to be observed, that we are not said to be
constituted, or made righteous before GOD in justification, but only that we
are accounted or reputed such. 2. Its not said that we are accounted righteous
with the righteousness, nor yet with the merit of Christ, but only we are
accounted righteous before GOD, only for the merit of our LORD Christ by
faith. The merit of Christ or of his righteousness, has so far prevailed with
GOD on our behalf, that by our faith we shall be accounted righteous before
him; which is in effect the same truth we maintain. viz. that GOD for Christ's
sake, or for Christ's merits sake does impute our faith for righteousness unto
us. And thus Musculus expresses himself roundly. Faith is accounted for
righteousness for Christ's sake; And again Loc. com. de justifica. This faith
ought to be esteemed of us, as that which GOD purposes for Christ's sake, to
impute for righteousness to those that believe in him. So Luther also ad Gal.
3.6. GOD for Christ's sake accounts this imperfect faith for perfect
righteousness. And Chamier calls remission of sins, the righteousness which is
imputed to us. Therefore wheresoever, whether in the Homilies of our Church* or
in other Authors we meet with any such expressions of the righteousness of
Christ imputed in justification; we must not understand this righteousness of
Christ in the letter, propriety, and formality of it, but in the Spirit, or
merit of it to be imputed. And this manner of speech to put the name of a thing
in the propriety of it, instead of the value, worth, benefit, and return of
it, is both usual, and familiar in ordinary passage, of discourse amongst us,
and very frequent in the Scriptures; when we say, a Merchant grew rich by such,
or such a commodity, our meaning is, that he grew rich by the gain, or
return of it, he may be made rich by the commodity, and yet have never a whit
of it with him; so when we say, such a man grew rich by his place or office,
our meaning is, that he grew rich by such gain, or profit, as his office
afforded him; we do not mean that the place it self, or office, were his
riches; so it may be said, that we are justified by the righteousness of
Christ, and yet not have the righteousness it self upon us by imputation, or
otherwise, but only a righteousness procured, and purchased by it, really,
and essentially, differing from it, viz. remission of sins, as will appear
in due time: Thus in the Scriptures themselves there is no figure, or form of
speech more frequent, then to name the thing it self in the propriety of it in
the stead of the fruit of it, good or bad, benefit, or loss, vantage or
disadvantage, merit, or demerit of it. Thus Job 33.26. GOD is said to render
unto man his righteousness, the fruit and benefit of his righteousness in the
favor of GOD, and manifestation of it in his deliverance, and restoration;
the righteousness it self in the propriety of it, cannot be rendered unto
him: So Ephesians. 6.8. Whatsoever good thing, any man does, the same he shall
receive of the LORD: he shall receive benefit, and consideration from GOD for
it* so Reve. 14.12. and 13.10. here is the patience and faith of the Saints,
that is, the benefit, and unspeakable reward of the faith, and patience of the
Saints to be seen; when the Beast, and all that worship him shall be
tormented in fire, and brimstone for evermore, and those that have constantly
suffered for not worshipping him, shall be delivered from drinking of that
bitter cup: so Psalm. 128.2. Thou shall eat the labor of thy hands, that is,
the fruit of thy labor. So on the other hand Heb. 9.28. To those that look
for him, he shall appear the second time without sin; without the guilt or
punishment of sin charged upon him. Genesis 19.15. Least thou be destroyed in
the iniquity of the city: that is, in that judgment which fell upon them by
means of their iniquity: In such a construction of speech, as the holy Ghost
himself uses in these, and such passages in Scripture, the righteousness of
Christ may be said to be the righteousness by which we are justified, or which
is imputed unto us in justification.

Christianisme.
THis fifth part, or passage, is nothing else, but first the propounding of a
new, and strange imputation of Christ's righteousness contrary to sense and
reason, and to the common signification of the phrase of imputing
righteousness, or counting a thing for righteousness. Secondly, a wresting,
and abusing, of some speeches of Scripture, and learned writers, that he may
father on them, an opinion, which they abhorred, and in express words,
disclaimed, and confuted.

First, he says, that the phrase of imputing Christ's righteousness, is by
Luther, Calvin, and other Divines, taken unproperly, and out of the usual, and
formal signification, for the giving, and bestowing of the return, that is,
the privileges, blessings, and benefits, which are purchased by Christ's
righteousness, for men; and the meaning can be no more but this; that GOD
justifies a believer, for Christ's righteousness sake, and not for any
righteousness of his own. To this I answer, First, that this signification of
the phrase, is so unproper, unusual, and deformed, that it is never found in
all the Scriptures, nor any approved Author (as hereafter I shall make
manifest) only Socinus, and they of his faction are coiners, and forgers, of
such strange barbarismes. Secondly, it is so contrary to common sense, and
reason, that if any man should say, the Sun, the air, or other Elements are
imputed to us by GOD, because GOD has given us the benefit of them; every man
would laugh at such a barbarism, even the most simple would discern it to be
ridiculous. If Master Goodwin, or any of his disciples, comeing into some
country house for shelter from some cruel tempest, which overtooke him as he
traveled on his journey, should for the benefit which he received under the
man's roof, presently chaleng, that the house is imputed to him, and is to be
counted his, and set on his skore, it is a thousand to one, that the owner of
the house, would take him for a mad man, and put a fools feather in his cap,
or cast him out of the doors, by the head and shoulders, for a saucy
companion: he had not best therefore use such speeches, nor write such phrases
with his pen, for if they once proceed out of his mouth, and come to other men's
ears, he will thereby purchase to himself much scorn and derision. But let
us proceed to examine the instances, by which he goes about to prove this
strange signification, of the word imputing righteousness, wherein
righteousness is put for the fruit of it by a metonymie of the cause for the
effect; imputing is put for bestowing by a new Socinian trope, and GODS
bestowing, for man's receiving, by a monstrous metonymie, of one opposite for
another: I wonder here by the way, how this man (who disclaimes in the next
Chapter, the Apostles using of tropes and figures in the weighty Doctrine of
justification, and calls it a monster of speech to use two tropes in one
phrase) dares here make in this one phrase, so many tropes, and monstrous
figures.

The first instance, which he brings to prove that Calvin did use the phrase
in this signification is this; GOD freely justifies us, by imputing Christ's
obedience to us: and again, a man is not righteous in himself; but because
the righteousness of Christ is communicated, and imparted to him by
imputation. I might here blame his false quotations, to wit, Instit. 1. c
3.1.11. and 1.2.17. and 1.3.14.17. In which places no such words are to be
found; but I willingly embrace these words as Calvin's, for they are most
clear, and manifest to prove that GOD not only give us the return or
benefits of Christ's righteousness, but also does by imputation communicate,
and impart to us the righteousness it self: so that if this man had studied
all his days, to contradict his own opinion, and to confute his forged
signification, he could not have found more full, plain, and p^rspicuous words
then these of Calvin; for if a man be not righteous in himself, then is he
not righteous by faith in a proper sense, for his faith in a proper sense, is
in himself. But let us not be too hasty to insult over his folly; it may be
his impudency will catch at some other words of Calvin, which do not so
expressly contradict him, but are more obscure, and them he will wrest, and
abuse to expound Calvin's plain words in a contradictory sense. It is even so
indeed, for he cites in the next place, some more general and obscure
speeches of Calvin, to expound his plain words, and to make them contradictory
to themselves. I have heard absurd fellows derided for going about to show
obscurum perobscurius, that is, to make men see dark things through greater
darkness, and for running (as the proverb is) out of GODS blessing, into the
warm sun: But that any should go about, to make others see the sun, when it
shines in full strength, by the dim light of a candle, and to persuade them
that the sun is the moon; this is madness, and deserves that the Lunatike, and
Melancholic person so doing should be sent to the Island of Hellebore, there to
inhabit till he recover his wits. And does not he so who seeks to make
Calvin's plain words, to contradict themselves by citing words, wherein he
speaks neither so plainly, nor so fully as in them. But let us see those
other speeches of Calvin, which he brings for this purpose: one is, that
Christ by his obedience has merited, and procured for us favor with GOD his
Father. These words do not prove that the imputing of Christ's obedience, and
righteousness signifies the bestowing of the benefit of it on us, that is GODS
favor: but show clearly the contrary to that which he intends, namely that
Christ's obedience is made ours, and imputed to us, because it procures to us
the favor of GOD, which we cannot enjoy, nor appear gracious in his sight,
unless we be clothed, with Christ's rich robe of righteousness, and washed
clean from the guilt of sin, by his satisfaction imputed to us. Another is,
Christ by his obedience has purchased righteousness for us; the true and plain
sense of which words, is no more but this, that Christ by his obedience has
fulfilled the Law of GOD for us, and we by that obedience are constituted and
made righteous, as the Apostle expressly affirms, Romans 5.19. Another is that,
when we are said to be justified by the grace of GOD, and that righteousness was
procured by the death, and resurrection of Christ: these expressions import the
same thing with those, that Christ is our righteousness, that is by union with
him and communion of his righteousness, which he purchased by his death and
resurrection, and which GOD graciously gives to us, we are justified. Another
is, men having not any righteousness in themselves, they obtain it by
imputation, that is, neither a man's own works, nor faith taken in a proper
sense, for a gift grace or work in him, can be his righteousness, but only
that which is obtained by imputation, to wit, Christ's righteousness apprehended
by faith, which when true believers have laid hold on, then GOD does account
them righteous, and in this improper sense GOD is said to impute faith for
righteousness. Thus every speech of Calvin which he brings against Calvin
himself, is like a stone cast against a brazen wall, and rebounds against the
caster, and dasheth out the brains of his heretical opinion. And therefore it
was his safest course, only to tell us of more such passages, but not to
recite any more out of Calvin, or other Authors. For being seasoned with the
salt of their own interpretation, they will prove gravel in his mouth, choke
him, (and if it be possible) put him to shame and silence.

From Calvin he comes home to the Homilies allowed in our Church, and they by
his own confession teach, that we are justified by the imputation of Christ's
righteousness. But to prove that by the righteousness of Christ, they mean faith
taken in a proper sense, that is, as it is the gift of faith in us, and the
operation of it in us, even our believing: he brings the words of the 11.
Article of Religion allowed in our Church by Law. viz. we are ac, counted
righteous before GOD only for the merit of our LORD and Savior Jesus Christ
by faith, not for our own works or deserts; where note, that whereas the
Articles send us to the Homilies, as being very profitable, and plain
expositions of them; he on the contrary sets the cart before the horses to
draw them after it. He brings the text to expound the commentary or plain
exposition of it. But he gets no advantage by doing so, for the words of the
Article are very exact indeed, and make much for us against his opinion, they
show that the merit of Christ apprehended by faith, is that for which we are
accounted righteous before GOD, and that faith is not our righteousness, for
then we should be accounted righteous for a grace in our selves, and for a
work of our own, performed by us, even our own believing. Oh but the Article
does not say that we are constituted, and made, but only accounted righteous:
True indeed, the Article does not speak of fundamental justification
mentioned, Romans 5.19. but of imputative justification, of which the Apostle
speaks, Romans 4, 3. which necessarily presupposes the other: For GOD whose
judgment is according to truth, cannot judge, and count us righteous, till he
has communicated Christ's righteousness to us, and by it, constituted, and
made us righteous; which when we by faith, receive, and apply by the assistance
of his Spirit, which dwells in us, and makes us one Spiritual, and mystical
body, with Christ; then GOD accounts us righteous, and by our faith, and
believing, we obtene, as Abraham did, this testimony from GOD, that we are
righteous, as Iustine Martyr says in the words cited in the next Chapter.

From the Article, and Homilies, he proceeds to Musculus, Luther, and
Chamier, who, though in their Doctrine they are opposite to his opinion, as
heaven is to earth, yet he snatcheth here, and there, some improper speeches
out of their writings, which he wresteth to his purpose; though they do most
plainly expound their own meaneing to be contrary to his mind. The words of
Musculus are these, Faith is accounted, for righteousness for Christ's sake:
That is, faith is accounted for righteousness, and the true believer is
counted a righteous man: not sensu proprio, nec per se, sed propter Christum.
That is, by reason of Christ, and his righteousness, whom the believer
apprehends, and by faith possesses his righteousness; and again, this
faith ought to be esteemed of us, as that which GOD purposes for Christ's sake
to impute for righteousness, to those that believe in him, in which words
Musculus following the phrase of the Apostle, intends no more but this, that we
are not to seek righteousness by our own works, but by faith in Christ for if
we can obtain grace to believe in him, and to lay hold on his righteousness;
we are for Christ and his righteousness sake, upon our believing counted
righteous before GOD, because by our communion which we have with Christ by
the Spirit dwelling in us, and enabling us to believe, The righteousness of
the Law is fulfilled in us imputatively, by the righteousness of another, even
of Christ, which is also ours, for we are flesh of his flesh, that is* one with
him; these are Musculus his own words, in which, he roundly expresses
himself in Romans 8.4. and 10.3.4* Luthers words, at which he catches in
vain, are to the same purpose, in Gal. 3.6. GOD for Christ's sake, accounts
this imperfect faith, for perfect righteousness. Here Luther does not charge
GOD with error, or iniquity in judgment, by judgeing, and accounting, that for
perfect righteousness, which is imperfect; for his speech is tropicall
imitating the phrase of the Apostle; by imperfect faith he means a true
believer, by a weak faith, laying, hold on Christ's righteousness, and by
perfect righteousness a man set in a state of perfect righteousness by
communion with Christ; and this is the sense of the words, that if a true
believer does lay hold on Christ by faith, which in the best of us, is but
weak, and imperfect; yet GOD accounts him perfectly righteous, with the
righteousness of Christ, which is most perfect, and complete. Thus Luther
expounds himself, 1 Tom. page 32. Editionis Ienensis: Christ (says he) is in
us by faith, yea, one with us, but Christ is righteousness, and a fulfiller of
all GODS commandments, therefore we also do by him fulfill all GODS
commandments, when he is by faith made ours: And 2 Tom. page 515. Faith puts
us upon Christ's works of righteousness, without our own works, and
translates us out of the exile of our sins into the Kingdom of his
righteousness* And Tom. 1. page 106. By faith, our sins are made no more our
own, but Christ's, upon whom GOD has laid the iniquities of us all? and
again, all Christ's righteousness is made ours, for he lays his hand on us:
If a man had the tongue of men and Angels, he could not speak more fully for
the communion, and imputation of Christ's righteousness to believers, for
justification, and of their sins to Christ for remission: then Luther does in
these, and diverse other places, as I shall more fully show in the second
Chapter. As for Chamiers words, who calls remission of sins, the
righteousness which is imputed to us; they show that faith is not that imputed
righteousness, for faith, or believing, is our act; remission is GODS act* who
can forgive sins but* GOD* But indeed* the meaning of Chamier is the same
with Calvin, to wit* that our cleanness from the guilt of sin, which is
Passive, remission, or justification, is that which GOD looks upon in us, when
he counts us righteous in Christ, as I have before showed: wherefore I
conclude with the contradictory of his conclusion (which he inferres upon the
speeches of our Homilies, and of other learned Authors) to weet thus; That
wheresoever we find in the Scriptures, or any Authors of sound learning; this
phrase of faith, or believing, imputed for righteousness, we must not
understand faith in a proper sense, but the righteousness of Christ, even his
fulfilling of the Law for us, which together with the power, and merit of it,
so far as every believer has need, is communicated to him, and imputed to him
for justification: For as a Merchant cannot be, said to be enriched by the
gain of a commodity, which never was his own, and in which he never had any
interest, or propriety, nor any man by an office which was never his own, nor
by him executed: So none can have the merit, and benefit of Christ's
righteousness, nor be said to be thereby justified, neither can any such
thing be imputed to them, except they have a propriety in it, and communion of
it. Thus his instances, and similitudes, are turned against himself, to the
confusion of his haereticall opinion. But that his sin may appear out of
measure sinful, he does not content himself, with his abusing, wresting, and
perverting of the godly sayings of other Authors, and using similitudes which
are most contrary to his purpose; but he also lays profane hands, on the
holy Scriptures. That excellent saying, Job 33, 26. which Master Perkins
learnedly expounds to be meant of Christ's righteousness, which when men humbly
seek to GOD, by repentance, and faithful prayers, GOD renders unto them by
renewing their sense and assurance of their communion with Christ in his whole
satisfaction. This Doctor novice most Popishly applies to a man's own
righteousness, and says, that GODS rendering to a man his righteousness is
giving him the benefit of it, not the righteousness it self: And yet if we
should grant what he perversely seeks, it will avail him nothing; for as the
fruit, and benefit, which GOD renders to a man, is not the fruit of a
righteousness, in which he has no propriety, or interest, but is his
righteousness, so the fruit, and benefit, which we receive of Christ's
righteousness, GOD renders to us when that righteousness is become ours in
the propriety of it: That place Ephesians. 6.8. whatsoever good a man does the same
he shall receive of the LORD: it is for us, and against himself, for as the
good which a man receives from GOD for well doing, is the good fruit of his
own well doing, so is the fruit, and benefit which we receive in our
justification* the fruit of Christ's righteousness made ours, and imputed to us:
Those speeches Revel. 13.10. and 15.10. here is the faith and patience of the
Saints, etc. are not to be understood of the fruit, and reward of their
patience (as the circumstances show, which are killing, and slaying, and
leading into captivity) but of the patience, and faith themselves, that in
such times they are seen, tried, and proved, and GOD at such times gives them
patience, and faith, by threatening, and foretelling the final destruction of
their enemies; as learned Brightman truly expounds the words. Besides if
patience and faith were here used to signify the fruit, and benefit of
patience and faith: yet he cannot say it is the fruit of any patience, or
faith, but of the Saints themselves who receive the benefit. Likewise if we
grant, that in the other places Psalm. 128.2. Labor signifies the fruit of
labor, and Heb. 9.28. Sin signifies the punishment of sin, and Genesis 19.15.
iniquity signifies the judgment of GOD on Sodom for iniquity, by a trope or
Metonymie of the cause for the effect. This proves that faith which is the
hand, or instrument of the soul, receiving Christ with his righteousness, may
by the same trope be used to signify that state of righteousness, which we
receive by it as by an hand or instrument. Thus while he runs against the
invincible rock of the holy Scriptures, and seeks to turn them like a
rolling stone against a bark, they roll and rebound back, and tumbling upon
him grind him to powder^ For if he had ten thousand instances of Scripture,
wherein the fruit and benefit which men receive, are signified by the names of
the things which are the causes, and means of them* yet still it will appear
that the fruit is not received except men have first an interest, and
propriety in the causes and means of it. And thus you see his fifth part, or
passage proved to be a rotten heap of stinking lies, absurdities and gross
errors.

Socinianisme.
WHerefore to draw toward the close of this first Chapter, and withal to give
a little more light, that it may be seen to the bottom clearly, both what
we affirm, and what we deny in the question propounded: First when we affirm
the faith of him that believes to be imputed for righteousness; The meaning is
not either, 1o. That it it be true, it requires the lighting down of the
mighty arm of GOD, upon the soul to raise it. Neither 3o is it imputed for
righteousness in respect of the object, or as, or because it lays hold upon
Christ, or his righteousness (though it be also true that that faith that is
imputed for righteousness must of necessity lay hold upon Christ; and no other
faith is cable of this imputation besides) because if faith should justify or
be imputed as it lays hold upon Christ, it should justify out of the
inhaerent dignity and worth of it and by virtue of that which is natural and
intrinsecall to it, there being nothing that can be conceived more natural,
and essential to faith, then to lay hold upon Christ: this is the very life,
and soul of it, and that which gives it its specificall being, and subsistence.
Therefore to make the object of faith, (as such) the precise, and formal
ground of its imputation, is to make have into the midst of Samaria, whilst
men are confident, they are travailing toward Dotha^. Its the giving of the
right hand of fellowship, to the Romish justification, which makes faith the
meritorious cause of it (in part.)

But lastly, when with the Scriptures we affirm that faith is imputed for
righteousness: our meaning is simply, and plainly this, that as GOD in the
first covenant of works required an absolute, and through obedience to the
whole Law, with continuance in all things, for every man's justification, which
perfect obedience had it been performed had been a perfect righteousness to
the performer, and so would have justified him:

So now in the new covenant of grace, GOD requires nothing of any man for his
justification, but only faith in his Son, which faith, shall be as
availeable, and effectual to him for his justification, as a perfect
righteousness should have been under the first covenant: this is that which is
meant when faith is said to be imputed for righteousness, which is nothing but
that which is taught generally by Divines, both ancient and modern. Sic
decretum dicit a Deo, ut cessante lege solam fidem gratia Dei posceret ad
salutem. Ambrosius. In Romans 4. that is, that the Apostle saying, that to him
that believes his faith is imputed for righteousness, affirms that GOD has
decreed that the Law ceasing, the grace of GOD will require of men only faith
for salvation: and again upon Chap. 9. of the same Epistle, Sola fides posita
est ad salutem, only Faith is appointed to salvation. Calvin writing upon Romans
10.8. has words of the same importance, and somewhat more clear, and full,
ex hac distinctionis nota colligimus, sicut lex opera exigit, Evangelium nihil
aliud postulas, nisi ut fidem afferrent homines ad recipiendam Dei gratiam:
that is, from this distinction we gather, that as the Law exacted works; so
the Gospel requires nothing else, but that men bring faith to receive the
grace of GOD. If GOD requires faith in the Gospel, for that same end for which
he requires works, or perfect righteousness in the law; it necessarily
follows that he shall impute this faith for that righteousness, that is accept
from men upon the same terms, and be countable unto them the same favors,
rewards, and privileges upon it, that should have been given unto men, in
regard of that righteousness, had it been performed or fulfilled: otherwise he
should require it for such an end, or upon such terms as he would refuse to
make good unto it, when the creature has exhibited and tendered it unto him.
To require it for righteousness, or in stead of righteousness, and not to accept
it for righteousness, when it is brought to him, should be as apparent a
breach of Covenant with GOD, as it would be in a rich creditour, that should
compound and agree with his poor debtors for 1. in the pound, or the like, but
when they brought the money to him, should refuse to take it upon any such
terms, or to discharge them of their debt, and give them out their bonds.

Christianisme.
IN this last part or passage which is a mere confusion, and distraction of
words, he gives more then a little light, that his Socinian heresy in this
point of justification maintained with much non sense, may be seen to the
bottom clearly. First, he takes upon him to show that faith is imputed, and
how it is imputed. Secondly he strives to show that Christ's righteousness is
not imputed. The first is in the words before recited. The second follows
hereafter. First I will sift his words already rehearsed, And after proceed to
the second. The sum of his speech last recited, may be reduced into a
Syllogism of non sense, without form mood or figure. The proposition and
assumption whereof are contradictory. And the conclusion damned Socinian
heresy, so that here I may say with the Poet. Spectatum admissi risum teneatis
amici?

His proposition runs thus. Faith is neither imputed for righteousness, in
respect of any thing which it receives from man, the proper subject of it, nor
as it is man's act who uses it, and performs the acts of believing, nor in
respect of any thing which it has from GOD, or his spirit in the production of
it, nor in respect of the object Christ and his righteousness, nor in respect of
the life and soul of it, which gives to it the specificall being, and
subsistence, to wit, the application of Christ, and laying hold on him.

The Assumption.
But faith is imputed to men, and is counted, and accepted as sufficiently for
justification, and upon the same terms under the Gospel, as perfect
righteousness of works and of obedience to the whole Law, was in the first
covenant and under the Law: So all Divines hold both ancient and modern.

The Conclusion.
THerefore upon men's believing, GOD shall be as countable to them, to give
them the same favor, rewards and privileges, that should have been given unto
them in regard of the perfect righteousness of works, and of the Law, if they
had fulfilled it.

First for his negatives heaped up in the proposition, wherein we have a
narration of what he holds not: if we lay them altogether, they will conclude,
that faith is no way at all imputed for righteousness, for neither in respect of
the subject in which the habit of it rests, nor in respect of the acts which
man performs by it, nor in respect of any thing, which GOD by his spirit gives
it in the production of it, that is, for no quantity quality, or virtue in it,
nor in respect of the object Christ, nor in respect of the life, soul, or
form which gives it the specificall being, and subsistence, so he plainly
professes, and besides these there is no other respect in which it may be
imputed, as al reasonable men do know. Therefore the conclusion is, that it is
not imputed at all.

But yet in affirming nothing, but denying all respects, which reason can
conceive in faith, and in roming from himself and us, he kicks at us, and by
the way snarls and bytes at the truth. For it is most certain, that faith is
said to be imputed in respect of GODS production of it by his spirit, and in
respect of the object Christ, and his righteousness which it does lay hold on
and apply. For the spirit of regenerarion being shed on us through Christ,
dwelling in us, and making us one body with Christ, and partakers of his whole
satisfaction, does work justifying faith in us, and this union and
conjunction, which in order of nature, goes before faith and concurres to the
production of it, is the ground, and reason, of the imputation of it. If Christ
were not made ours, and his satisfaction communicated to us, faith could not
truly believe in Christ, nor truly apply his righteousness, therefore the
two last of his negatives are false, and haereticall. Besides, it is not to be
passed over in silence, that here again he contradicts himself, and grants
that Christ, with his righteousness, is the object of faith, and laying hold
on him, is the life, and soul of faith; which he utterly denies, and
disputes to the contrary in the next Chapter, as I have touched before.

As for his assumption, the sum whereof is, that faith is imputed, and accepted
of GOD, for righteousness, upon the same terms, that perfect righteousness of
works should have been in the first Covenant; This is Socinian haeresie, in
the highest degree; so gross, and palpable, and so openly, and expressly
affirmed by him, that no salt of interpretation can keep it from stinking in
the nostrills of any true Christian. Here also we may note his ignorance,
absurdity, and nonsense; for instead of showing in what respect faith is
imputed, he affirms, that he holds it to be imputed instead of perfect
righteousness of our own works, and that it is in the new Covenant a
condition answerable and every way as sufficient and availeable to procure all
favors, rewards, and privileges, to us from GOD, as the righteousness of
works, was in the Covenant of works: and both here, and in the conclusion,
he makes faith as meritorious, and as strong a bond to tie GOD, and make him
countable for all favors, rewards, and privileges, under pain of being
counted a covenant breaker; as the perfect fulfilling of the Law, by every man
in his own person, was in the covenant of works, and here does more then give
the right hand of fellowship, to Popish justification, for he transcends them,
and makes GOD more obliged to men for them, and more countable then any Papists
ever did. As for the testimonies which he brings, out of Ambrose, and Calvin,
they are nothing to his purpose; they only affirm, that as the Law was man's
only guide to salvation, and the rule of righteousness in the old covenant;
So faith in the Gospel, is the only way to salvation in the new covenant, and
the means by which we receive the grace of GOD* and the righteousness of
Christ offered to us for justification, and salvation.

Socinianisme.
SEcondly, when we deny the imputation of Christ's righteousness in
justification, we neither deny the righteousness of Christ in it self, we
rather suppose and establish it, neither 2o do we deny the absolute necessity
of it, both to the justification, and salvation of a sinner: neither 3o do we
deny a meritorious efficiencie, and causalitie in that righteousness in respect
of the justification of a sinner, but verily believe and conceive, that GOD
justifies all that are justified, not simply or barely, for Christ's sake, or
for his righteousness sake (for a man may do a thing for his sake whom he much
loves, and respects, though he has not otherwise deserved it at his hands) but
for the righteousness of Christ, his death being taken into the consideration
with it, why GOD should justify those that believe in him. But 4o and lastly,
that which we deny in denying the imputation of Christ's righteousness, is
this, that GOD should look upon a believing sinner, and account of him, as one
that has done in his own person, all that Christ did in obedience to the
moral Law, and hereupon pronounce him righteous: or: (which is the same) that
GOD should impute unto him those particular acts of obedience which Christ
performed in that nature, and property of them, so that he should stand as
righteous before GOD, as Christ himself, or (which is the same) righteous with
the self same righteousness wherewith Christ was righteous, and so GOD make
himself countable to him for such obedience imputed in as great matters of
rewards as he would have been for the like obedience personally performed by
himself; in a word, this is that which we deny, and this is that which we
affirm, concerning the righteousness of Christ, in the justification of a
sinner, that GOD clothes none with the letter of it, but every man that
believes with the spirit of it. 1. that this righteousness of Christ, is not
that, that is imputed unto any man for his righteousness; but is that for
which righteousness is imputed to every man that believes: a justified person
may in such a sense be said to be clothed with Christ's righteousness, as
Paul's necessities were relieved, and supplied by his hands. Act. 20.24. these
hands (says he) have ministered to my necessities. Paul neither eat his
fingers, nor spun out the flesh of his hands, into clothing, and yet was both
fed, and clothed with them: So may a believer be said to be clothed with the
righteousness of Christ, and yet the righteousness of Christ it self, not to
be his clothing, but only that which procures his clothing unto him, and so
Calvin calls that clothing of righteousness wherewith the believer is clothed
in his justification, Justitiam morte and resurrectione Christi acquisitam, a
righteousness procured by the death, and resurrection of Christ. This
righteousness of Christ may be said to be the righteousness of a believer, in
such construction of speech, as the knowledge of GOD and of Christ, is said to
be eternal life. John 17.3. viz. in way of causality, not in that formality of
it, and again the righteousness of a believer in his justification, may be
termed the righteousness of Christ in such sense, as the favor of GOD in
deliverance of a man out of trouble, is called a man's righteousness. Job. 33.
verse 26. or as the nation and people of the Jews are often in the Scriptures
called Jacob, they were not Jacob in the propriety of his person, but in his
descent and propagation; so may the righteousness of a believer be called the
righteousness of Christ, because it is a righteousness descended from it, and
issuing as it were out of the loins of it. What has been affirmed, and what
has been denied in the question, we come now to prove and demonstrate the
truth of both. 1o From the authority of Scriptures. 2o From the grounds of
reason; as for the third way of proof and confirmation by consent of Authors,
we shall not assign a peculiar place for that by it self, but interlace our
other proofs occasionally with such testimonies as we have received from
learned, and judicious men for confirmation of our point to be discussed.

Christianisme.
THe second thing in this last part or passage is a profession of his meaning
in denying Christ's righteousness to be imputed in justification.

First because he would have an adversary for him to triumph over, and least
his admired sophistry should be idle, for want of an opposite against which it
might magnify it self in the eyes of senseless sectaries; he suffers
Christ's righteousness to have a being, and does not deny it in it self, but does
approve and establish it, and so by good hap he escapes one base absurdity in
his disputing, to wit, denying of the subject of the question.

Secondly, because he would have his competitor, or corrivall to be of some
great note, the more to glorify his victory over him, he does not deny an
absolute necessity of Christ's righteousness, both to the justification and
salvation of sinners; we thank him, that for saving of himself from the
hatred and skorne of the world, he would grant so much of truth openly
testified in Scripture. Thirdly he does not deny a meritorious efficiency, or
causality of Christ's righteousness in respect of the justification of a
sinner. In this he comes somewhat near to us, but I doubt it is not in
sincerity and truth, but rather in show, to make the ignorant to conceive
better, or at least, not to judge so hardly of his opinion, for mark his
slubbering, and dawbing, with untempered mortar, I verily believe (says he)
that GOD justifies them that are justified, not simply, or barely, for Christ's
sake, or for his righteousness sake, but for the righteousness of Christ, his
death being taken into consideration with it: here you see a plain
contradiction, for Christ's righteousness, his death, being taken into
consideration with it, is no more but his perfect righteousness, because his
active obedience, without his passive obedience to death, is no perfect
fulfilling of the Law; so that here is a contradiction, even an affirmation,
and negation of one, and the same thing, in one continued sentence. The
parenthesis also, which he inserts to trouble the reader, is false, and
frivolous, to wit, (for a man may do a thing for his sake, whom he much
loves, and respects, though he has not otherwise deserved it at his hands.)
First let me ask him what is his drift in these words? It seems to me,
either to be wholly superfluous, or to intimate that Christ's righteousness did
not deserve our justification at GODS hands, but that GOD out of love and
respect to Christ's person, without the merit of his righteousness, does accept
us, and count us righteous. Secondly, let me tell him, that when a man does
any thing for another out of love, without desert, he does it for his own
loves sake, and for the magnifying of his kindness, and free bounty* and thus
GOD did in giving his Son for us, undeserving sinners: But when justice does
stand up in strength and pleades for right, as in the justification of sinners,
then a full satisfaction must come between, and love can no otherwise be
rightly, and lawfully showed, but by making a satisfaction, or by apposing one
who is sufficient to make satisfaction, that no evil but good may be done to
the party loved, and respected: and thus the case stands in justification of
sinners. Thirdly, though a man out of his corrupt, and carnal love, may do a
thing for his favorite, without desert, or just consideration, yea contrary to
justice, yet it is not so with GOD, who is no respecter of persons, in matter
of justice, and justification: He does never out of his free love decree to
do any thing, but withal, he decrees, and ordeines a just consideration, why
he should do it; so that this is a frivolous parenthesis, both false and from
the matter.

In the fourth place he shows what he denies in denying the imputation of
Christ's righteousness, viz. That GOD looks upon a believing sinner, and
accounts him as one that has done in his own person, all that Christ did in
obedience to the moral Law, and hereupon pronounces him righteous, so that he
does stand as righteous before GOD, as Christ himself, because righteous with
the same righteousness; and so GOD makes himself countable to him for such
obedience imputed in as great matters of reward, as he would have been for
the like obedience, particularly performed by himself. In this expression of
himself, here is much calumny, error, and untruth. First he does calumniate,
and slander the true Doctrine of Christ professed by us concerning the
imputation of Christ's righteousness; for no man in his right wits did ever
hold that imputation of Christ's righteousness to believers, is GODS accounting
them to have performed in their own persons, every act of obedience, which
Christ performed to the Law* This is a manifest contradiction, fitter for a
giddy fancy to imagine, then for any true Christian to profess. The truth
which we profess is this, that true believers being by that one spirit which
works faith in them, united to Christ, and made partakers of his
righteousness, and believing, and applying by faith to themselves, his
satisfaction particularly are accounted truly righteous before GOD by
communion, and imputation, not by legal performance in their own persons: And
though the righteousness by which they are justified, is the very same which
is in Christ, and which he performed, yet it does not follow, that they
thereby are as fully righteous as Christ himself, for he is originally
righteous, by his own personal righteousness, as the justifier; they are
righteous by communion, and imputation, as justified: And as the hands and
feet, and other inferior members, live by the same life, and are sensitive by
the same sense which is originally in the heart, and head of the same body; yet
they are not so lively, and sensitive, as the heart and head, but in a
competent measure, and proportion, fit for every one of them. So it is in the
mystical body of Christ, between him the head, and them his believing, and
justified members, as I have before touched. So that here we have an
intolerable calumny, and slander, laid upon GODS sacred truth, and the true
professors of the same. Secondly, he utters a notorious untruth when he says,
that to be righteous by the same righteousness which Christ performed, is
nothing else, but to be performers of every act of his obedience in our
persons. Thirdly, it is a wicked error to think (as he does) that obedience
and righteousness, either performed by ourselves or communicated to us, should
make GOD countable to us* that is, bound to give us the greatest rewards. For
the righteousness of justification and the holiness, and obedience of
sanctification, are only free gifts which GOD gives to make us capable of
eternal life, and fit to stand in his presence, and to see and enjoy his
glory; not bands to tie himself, and to make him countable to us; for if we be
righteous what give we to him, or what receives he at our hands? Job 35.7.
eternal life, though by Christ purchased for us; yet is the free gift of GOD
in Christ. Romans 6.23. Here therefore this sublimate Doctor does bewray his own
ignorance in the maine mysteries of salvation, and is as David says, Psalm. 14.
become filthy, stinking, and abominable in his thoughts, and imaginations,
concerning GOD himself, while he doateth after Socinian subtilties, and sets
himself to be singular, by preaching his fond errors, and heresies. Lastly,
after all this, in conclusion, he takes upon him to elude, and evacuate those
most plain testimonies of holy Scripture, wherein Christ is said to cloth,
and cover us with the garments of salvation, and the robe of his righteousness
Isa 61.10. that our sins and stains, being thereby covered, Psalm. 32.1.
sin might no more be imputed to us; but we in the robes of his righteousness
may stand clothed as with long white linen robes, Revel. 19.8. And like Jacob
in the garments of the first borne, yielding a sweet smelling savor, may be
accepted of GOD our heavenly father. First he says, that GOD in the
justification of sinners, clothes none with the letter of Christ's
righteousness, but every man that believes with the Spirit of it: that is, not
with the righteousness it self, but with the fruit and benefit of it: that
is, with faith counted for righteousness, where note, that (in his conceit,)
the righteousness of a justified man, is a thing inhaerent in himself, and a
work performed in his own person, not communicated to him from another, ab
extra, as garments are, and so no clothing: here is one gross absurdity, like
as if one should say, a man's clothes are not on him, but in him. That speech
of Paul, these hands have ministered to my necessity, Act 20.34. are nothing to
the purpose, for he does not say his hands were his necessary meat, and
clothes, but by working did get him necessaries; and so Christ by his
obedience procured righteousness for us, which he does communicate to us, and
clothes us with, and by GOD it is imputed to us: and this Calvin calls
righteousness gotten by Christ's death and resurrection: and all this is for
us, and against himself.

The other instances which he brings from Scripture to prove that Christ's
righteousness is by a metonymie of the cause for the effect, used to signify
the fruit and effect of it in us, prove no such thing at all. The first of
them John 17.3. (this is eternal life, to know thee the only true GOD, etc.
It is mistaken, for to know GOD, and Christ (that is, to have experimental
knowledge of GOD, and Christ, and to enjoy GOD in Christ, as the word (know) by
an Hebraisme signifies) is not there mentioned, as the efficient cause of
eternal life, but as the thing wherein it does formally consist: So also that
speech, Job 33, 26. (as Master Perkins truly expounds it) does not speak of
the fruit of a man's righteousness, which GOD renders to him; but of the
righteousness of Christ, which GOD renders to a man a fresh, and after
temptation, doubting, and distress, makes him feel and enjoy it in himself,
when by repentance, and humble and faithful prayer he seeks it.

And although the nation of the Israelites are often (as he alleges) called
by the name of Jacob in Scripture, because he was their Father, and they his
natural progeny: yet this proves only, that the Scripture uses tropes of
speech many times, which we acknowledge willingly, and in the next Chapter will
prove fully. Where he forgetting, and contradicting himself, utterly
disclaimes tropes and figures, and exclaimes against all the learned, who hold
that Saint Paul uses a trope in saying that faith is imputed for
righteousness: Well, for the present we will grant him, that our cleanness
from the guilt of sin, and the state of righteous, and justified persons,
wherein we stand before GOD, being the issue and fruit of Christ's satisfaction
communicated to us, may very well be called by a trope the righteousness of
Christ; but this does not overthrow, but rather strongly prove the communion,
and imputation of Christ's righteousness to us. Thus we see how he labors in
the fire, and in vain beats his brains, and out of the confusion, and
distemper of them, does say, and gainsay, affirm and deny the same things
oftentimes; being like a clowd without water, carried about with winds,
sometimes one way, and again the contrary way, and never settling upon solid
truth, nor building upon a sure foundation. Now what he promises in the
conclusion of this Chapter* you shall see how he performs by my answer, to
his second Chapter, wherein as he begins here, so he goes on entangling and
beating himself, forging and falsifying, and in every passage discovering his
ignorance and folly, mingled with much impudency and heretical perverseness
and pravity, which that it may better appear, and that we may see his Socinian
heresy to the bottom clearly, I will lay down the chief heads of the
Doctrine of Justification, as it is taught in the Scriptures, and maintained by
all Orthodox Divines, both ancient and modern.

Justification taken in a full sense is that act of GOD, by which he justifies
his elect, and faithful in his son Jesus Christ by the communion of his
spirit; that is, does make them righteous by Christ's perfect righteousness, and
full satisfaction spiritually made theirs, and does count them righteous by
imputing the same unto them, and does declare them to be righteous inwardly to
their own consciences by the inward testimony of his spirit, and the inward
sense and experience of inward grace; and outwardly in this life before men,
and publicly in the last judgments by their good works, which are evidences
of their faith, and of their union and communion with Jesus Christ, and of
their regeneration by his spirit, and adoption unto GOD in him.

First GOD the father is the primary efficient cause of our justification. Romans
3.26.30. and 4.5. and 8.33. Secondly the inward moving cause is GODS own free
grace favor and love Romans 3.24. Tit. 3.7. The outward moving or impulsive
cause is Christ's mediation Isa 53.11. John 1^.21. 1 John 2.2.

The isntrumental cause is Christ the mediator communicating his whole
obedience to us, when by the spirit which GOD sheds on us through him, we are
made one body with him, 1 Cor. 12.13. Tit. 3.6. The means by which we come to
be justified are, either principal; viz. the lively operation of the spirit,
spiritual union with Christ, the pure and holy humanity of Christ, or less
principal* the word and ministry thereof, the Sacraments, faith and the like,
as appears, Romans 3.25.28. and 10.14. Gal. 3.8. Heb. 9.14. 1 John 1.^. Dan.
12.3.

The material cause, that is, the righteousness it self by which they are
justified, that is, made, counted, and declared to be righteous, is Christ's
perfect righteousness obedience and satisfaction, which he, GOD and man
performed in our nature, in the state of humiliation, Romans 3.24.25. Romans 5.19.
and 8.4. The formal cause of justification is that communion between Christ
and us, and that reciprocal imputation of our sins to Christ, and of his
righteousness, and full satisfaction to us, which communion arises, and flows
from the spirit which GOD sheds on us through Christ, which spirit dwelling in
us (in some measure, so as he dwells in the man Christ, from whom he is
derived to us) does make us one spiritual body with Christ, and works in us
faith and all holy graces, and affections by which we adhere and cleave to
Christ, and apply and enjoy his righteousness, so that it is our formal
righteousness not inherently, but imputatively, and by spiritual communion, for
it is that which does constitute, and make us righteous, Romans 5.17, 18, 19. and
8.4. and ^0.4. and 2 Cor. 5.21.

The immediate fruit and benefit of our justification, is the state of
righteousness and of cleanenesse from the guilt of sin, and acceptance with
GOD, Romans 3.25. and 4.2. also peace with GOD, Romans 5.1.

The end and use of our justification is the satisfaction and declaration
Christ, and not otherwise, neither by it till he communicates it to us and
makes it ours; Also the manifestation of his mercy, free grace and bounty, in
that he would give his son to become man, and to make satisfaction to the
full, when no other could be found able to satisfy for us, neither could his
justice by any other means be satisfied, also in that he would give us his
spirit to unite us to his son, and to bring us to a true communion of his
righteousness, and to work faith in us by which we receive and enjoy Christ
with all his benefits, Romans 3.24.26. Tit. 3.4. Ephesians. 1.6.12.

The contrary Doctrine of Socinus* and his faction.
THough they grant that GOD is the chief efficient cause, and his free grace,
mercy, and love, the inward moving cause; yet they err in the impulsive and
isntrumental cause, and make Christ and his righteousness no otherwise
meritorious, but by procuring that GOD should count faith in a proper sense,
for righteousness to them that believe, neither any other way an instrument of
justification, but by bringing faith to this honor, to be accepted for, or in
stead of righteousness.

Secondly they deny all causality of Christ's righteousness in justification,
except only by way of efficiency: whereas indeed and in truth it is the matter
about which justification is exercised, for what is justification but the
communicating of that righteousness to men, and the imputing of it, and
declaring of them to be thereby righteous? the very name of justification
signifies so much: and what is the form of a justified man as he is righteous,
but righteousness? to imagine a righteous, and justified man without
righteousness, is as if one should dream of a living man without life or soul.

Thirdly they deny the principal ground of justification, to wit, spiritual
union and communion with Christ, which cannot stand without imputation of
Christ's righteousness; for communion and union do necessarily bring with them
imputation. If we have communion of Christ's satisfaction and righteousness,
GOD must needs judge and count them to be ours, for his judgment is according
to truth. And faith which is an inferior and subordinate means, they set up
in the place of Christ's righteousness.

Fourthly as they deny the material cause of justification, by rejecting
Christ's righteousness from being the proper matter about which it is exercised;
so also the form or formal cause, even the mutual communion, and reciprocal
imputation of our sins to Christ, and Christ's satisfaction and righteousness
to us, whereby it is made our formal righteousness not inherently, but
spiritually and imputatively, for they acknowledge no formality, but inherency.

Fifthly they deny the immediate fruit and benefit of justification, to wit that
state of righteousness, cleanness from the guilt of sin, and acceptance with
GOD, wherein the justified are firmly established before GOD, and stand in his
sight, which is the chief honor and prerogative of GODS Saints, and their
greatest comfort in all their afflictions, and temptations.

Lastly, they take away the true end, and use of justification, to wit, the
revelation of GODS infinite justice, mercy, bounty, and free grace; for they
overthrow his infinite justice, while they teach that GOD by his sovereign
power puts his justice to silence; and without Christ's full satisfaction, made
to it, for us, and made ours by communion, and imputation, does accept our
weak faith in stead of it, and makes himself as countable for it in all
rewards, as he would do for the perfect fulfilling of the Law by our selves,
or by Christ in our stead. They extenuate and vilify GODS mercy, bounty, and
free grace; by setting up faith in stead of Christ's perfect righteousness, and
making it the condition of the new covenant. For whatsoever is given or
promised to us, upon a condition to be on our part performed, is not a gift of
free grace and bounty. And when justice may be turned out of doors, without a
complete satisfaction; there is nothing left for mercy wherein to show the
power of it. The infinite mercy of GOD does appear in this, that, when his
infinite justice required that we should all be damned without a full
satisfaction (which none could make but the son of GOD in our nature) and
that performed for us, and made ours; He would give his only son for us to
satisfy in our stead, and his holy spirit to unite us to his Son, and to
bring us to communion of his satisfaction.

Thus we see that they shut up the door of Heaven, and stop that only way to
eternal life, by overthrowing justification, which is the making and
accounting of men righteous, by that only righteousness of Christ, besides
which there is not any other to be found sufficient, and able to bear us out
before GODS tribunal of justice. Now let all true Christians well weigh and
consider the difference, between truth and error, life and death, true
Christianity and Antichristian infidelity; for such is the damned Socinianisme
before discovered. And if any man in the midst of the light of the Gospel
shining so clearly, and discovering so plainly cursed heresy, will be blind;
let him be more blind still; and if any will be filthy, let them be more
filthy still. And if any love not the LORD Jesus, but hate and blaspheme his
truth, let him be Anathema Maranatha. Amen.

THE SECOND CHAPTER, OF Socinianisme.
Wherein the imputation of faith for righteousness (in a proper sense) is
undertaken to be proved from the Scriptures, and the interpretation of those
Scriptures confirmed both by reason, and authority, as well of ancient, as
modern Divines.

THE PREFACE.
WHat it is that should be imputed for righteousness in justification; all the
wisdom, and learning under heaven, is not so fit or able to determine, as the
holy Ghost speaking in the Scriptures, being the great Secretary of heaven, and
privy to all the ways, and counsels of GOD: and therefore there is none to
him, to take up any difference, or to comprimise between the controverters,
about any subject in Religion.

All the difficulty, and question is, because though he speaks upon the house
top, yet he interprets in the ear: all the Christian world either knows (or
readily may know) what he speaks in the Scripture: But what his meaning and
intent is in any thing, he leaves unto men to debate, and make out amongst
them. To some indeed he reveals the secret of his counsel, the Spirit of his
letter, in some particulars; but because these are not marked in the forehead,
therefore their apprehensions and thoughts (though the true begotten of the
truth) are yet in common esteem, but like other men's, till some stamp or
superscription of rational authority be set upon them to make the difference,
yea many times, the nearer the truth, the further off from the approbation of
many, and sometimes, even of those, that are greatest pretenders to the truth.

The Answer.
THe first part or speech, is a solid truth, to wit, that no wisdom, and
learning under heaven, is so fit or able to determine what is imputed, for
righteousness in justification, as the holy Ghost speaking in the Scriptures.
But this truth he contradicts in the next words which follow immediately, where
he says, that the holy Ghost leaves his meaning, and intent to men to debate,
which if it be true, then men are to determine, and to take up every difference
about any subject in Religion. This beginning with contradiction is very
ominous, and prodigious: and from hence we may gather, what we are likely to
find in his ensuing discourse.

The rule by which men are to judge of, the Spirits meaning is the stamp, and
superscription of rational authority, set upon them: so he here expressly
affirms, and in this he openly professes himself, to be of the faction of
the Socinian, and Arminian remonstrants, who do teach that the best judge of
the meaning, of the Scriptures is, recta ratio, that is, their own carnal
reason, rectified by the art of Sophistry. Again, he affirms, that all the
Christian world knows, or readily may know, what the holy Ghost speaks in the
Scripture. If this be true, then they are all taught of GOD, and the Spirit
leaves not his meaning to men to debate, and to promise between controverters.
Here is another contradiction.

He proceeds yet further in his absurdities, and tells us that the holy Ghost
reveals not to all the Christian world, but to some, the secret of his
counsel, the Spirit of his letter: this is a contradiction to that which went
next before. And whereas before he says, that all the Christian world knows
what the holy Ghost speaks in Scripture, that is all saving truth: here he
says, that he reveals the secret of his counsel, but in some particulars:
thus in every thing he contradicts himself, and like a lunatic broken out of
Bedlam, he raves, first saying, and affirming, and immediately denying, and
gainesaying, in the same things. But yet a lunatic persons have high conceits
of themselves, that they are of noble, and royal blood, right heirs to
Crowns, Kingdoms, and Empires: or if not the holy Ghost himself, yet persons
wonderfully illuminated, and inspired by him. And many times they will not
utter their conceits in express words, but tell you of such great persons, and
complain of your blockish dullness, and stupidity, if you do not presently
discern that they speak of themselves, and they are the men. So here does
this illuminated Doctor deal with us: He tells us of some special ones, to
whom the Spirit interprets in the ear, and reveals the secret of his
council, the Spirit of his letter, who are the true begotten of the truth: and
that he takes himself to be a chief among these, it appears, first by his
undertaking to give a reason of the counsel and purpose of GOD in his former
Chapter, (as I have there noted.) Secondly, by his taking upon him, here to
determine this question, which none but such illuminated ones can be able to
do. And he breaks off his prologue with a kind of complaint, and exprobration
full of disdain, namely this, that because they, (meaning himself, and his
fellows) are not marked in the forehead, by the Spirit of illumination;
therefore their thoughts, and apprehensions, are yet in common esteem like
other men (you see, non sapit humanum, nec est mortale quod optat) till some
stamp, and superscription, of rational authority, be set upon them to make the
difference. Here he seems in this last clause, to take courage, and to
conceive some hope, that by the rational authority, of his new coined Logic,
(of which he lately gave us a taste, when he told us, that causes are opposite,
ex diametro and therefore the efficient, impulsive isntrumental material,
formal, and final causes, of man's justification, and salvation, cannot all,
or the most of them concur in one person Christ, though GOD and man) he will
make the difference known between his excellency, and other men's ignobility,
and obscurity.

The last clause of his complaint, wherewith he concludes his Preface, is an
overthwart blow to some, where speaking of those first begotten of the truth,
he says, yea many times the nearer the truth, the further off from the
approbation of many; and sometimes even of those, that are the greatest
pretenders to the truth. A shrewd nip (if you mark it) to you learned Doctors,
and Preachers of the City of London, who are great pretenders to the truth:
and yet the nearer that he is come to the truth, and makes his unlearned
followers able to see it to the bottom (as he has often told us) the further
off he is from your approbation. If he be thus bold, and ready to nip you who
do not approve his opinion, it is no marvel that his rude followers, do lay
all slanders, reproach, and aspersions on us, who oppose him, and charge him
with Socinian haeresie, and blasphemy, whom they admire, and proclaim to be
the great light of GODS Church in these last days.

Socinianisme.
Four things there are especially, which much commend an Interpretation, when
they are found in conjunction, and establish, it like that King upon his Throne
Prove. 36.31. against whom there is no rising up. First if the Letter, or
Grammar of the Scripture will fairly and strongly bear it. 2o If the scope of
the place will close directly and entirely with it. 3o When the interpretation
which is set up against it, cannot stand before the circumstances of the text.
4o And lastly, when the judgment of able, learned, and unpartiall men are
found in concurrence with it. If these four be sufficient to furnish out an
interpretation with authority, and power, then shall we need no more
Scriptures, to prove the innocence of our affirmative. viz. the imputation of
faith for righteousness (the truth of the negative inseparably accompanying it)
but that one Chapter only, Romans 4.

Christianisme.
IN these words he makes his entrance, into the disputing of the point
before propounded, to wit, faith in a proper sense is imputed for righteousness
in justification; which speech excludes the righteousness of Christ from being
the only righteousness by, which being communicated, and imputed to true
believers, they are justified and stand righteous before GOD.

First he propounds four things, which when they are found in conjunction,
with an interpretation of any Scripture, they commend and establish it (as he
says) like that King upon his Throne against whom there is no rising up, Prove.
30.31. These four things. First the literal sense strongly bearing it.
Secondly the scope of the place concurring. Thirdly the inconsistence of the
circumstances of the place, with the interpretation which is contrary. Fourthly
the Judgment of able learned men agreeing with it, these I say may pass for
current. But whether that one place of Scripture, in the interpretation whereof
these concur, be alone without more Scriptures, sufficient to prove the
innocence of an assertion which is agreeable to that interpretation, is a
question, many interpretations seem to have all these, and yet are
contradicted by other Scriptures, as that place Hosea 11.1. When Israel was a
child, out of Egypt have I called my Son, being interpreted of the Nation of
the Israelites, was borne up by the letter, concurred with the scope, and
circumstances more then many contrary expositors, and all the learned and able
Jews so understood it: and yet the Gospel expounds it another way, Mat. 2.15.
The place of Scripture upon the interpretation whereof established by these
four things, he intends to build his whole dispute in this Chapter, is the
fourth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans; so that his proofs by which he
goes about to set the royal Crown, which is due to Christ and his
righteousness, on the head of man's imperfect faith, are according to these four
things, divided into four ranks. First he undertakes to prove, that the
Letter of that Scripture, Romans 4. does bear up his interpretation, to wit,
that faith in it self, and in a proper sense is said to be imputed for
righteousness in justification. Secondly by the scope of the place. Thirdly by
showing that the circumstances of that Scripture, cannot bear the Doctrine of
Christ's righteousness imputed. Fourthly by the judgment, and testimonies of
able learned and unpartiall men. But how poorly he performs his undertakings,
and how pitifully he fails in them, we shall in the progress show. That
his disputation is like to be very Illogicall, we may gather from the foul
flaw which appears in his Logic, in this his first entrance, where he
says we need no more Scriptures, to prove the innocence of our affirmative,
viz. the imputation of faith for righteousness (the truth of the negative
inseparably accompanying it) but that Chapter only, Romans 4.

First it is against all true reason and Logic, that the affirmative should
be innocent from untruth, and that the negative which is opposed to it, should
have truth accompanying it. If his affirmative (faith is imputed for
righteousness, in a proper sense) be true, then the negative must needs be
false, to wit, faith in a proper sense is not imputed: But perhaps by the
negative, he does not mean the negative of his affirmative, but some other
negative proposition, the subject whereof, is different from the subject of his
affirmative. His hatred and envy, against Christ's righteousness, least it
should get the Crown from faith, is so great, that we may well conceive, that
by the negative he in heart means, this ( Christ's righteousness is not imputed
in justification) which if he does, we cannot but blame him for speaking
ambiguously, which Logic in a disputation abhors. But I leave his trifling,
and come to the ground and foundation of his discourse, even that fourth
Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, on which he labors to build his
heretical opinion. The words of that Chapter which seem most to favor him
are these. Verse 3. Abraham believed GOD, and it was counted to him for
righteousness, and verse 5. To him that believes, his faith is counted for
righteousness, and verse 9. For we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for
righteousness.

That the truth may more plainly appear, and the contrary falshoode, and
error be made more fully manifest, I will first lay down the true orthodoxe
exposition of the words, which is according to the common judgment of the most
godly, learned, and judicious Divines, of the best reformed Churches.

Secondly I will truly rehearse the corrupt exposition of the Apostles words,
made by the heretic Socinus, and his followers the Arminians, and other
fanaticall Sectaries, unto which this adversary adheres, and grounds his whole
disputation upon it. The orthodox exposition I will illustrate and confirm by
the scope, and circumstances of the rext, and by arguments drawn from other
Scriptures. The corrupt exposition also I will prove to be false, and
heretical. And afterward I will proceed to answer this adversaries discourse
in every particular.

The true Exposition explained.
FIrst these words, that Abraham believed GOD, and it was counted to him for
righteousness, are generally held to be improper, and tropicall, and that the
meaning of them is not, that Abraham's faith, or act of believing by it self in
a proper sense, was counted to him for righteousness: but that the object of his
faith even that which he believed, to wit, Christ promised for righteousness and
salvation, was that which by GOD was (upon Abraham's believing) counted to him
for righteousness. It was not his faith simply considered in it self, but his
faith embracing Christ promised, and possessing him with his righteousness, and
satisfaction which was reckned to him for righteousness, and as to him, so to
every one that believes his faith is counted to him for righteousness. For all
true believers who by faith lay hold on Christ, the promised seed of Abraham,
and believe GOD to be their shield, and exceeding great reward in him, they are
by one spirit baptized into one spiritual body with Christ, united to him
their spiritual head, and made his lively members, and sensible partakers of
his perfect obedience, righteousness and full satisfaction, for redemption,
remission of sins, justification, and perfect salvation; and need not any
more to seek the reward of blessedness, by the righteousness of their own
works* performed according to the tenor of the Law, by every man in his own
person; but in the LORD Jesus Christ (who is Jehovah Zid-kenu the LORD our
righteousness, Ier. 23.6. and the end and fulfilling of the Law for righteousness
to every one that believes, Romans 10.4.) they have perfect righteousness. And in
him GOD is become their reward, and the lot and portion of their inheritance,
Psalm. 16.5. And that gracious and free favor which GOD showed to Abraham, when
he believed in Christ promised, and firmly without staggering applied to
himself, the blessing promised, being fully persuaded that GOD who of his free
grace promised, was by his power able to perform, though by the course of
nature, and by reason of the deadness of Sara's womb he himself seemed to
be, and indeed was incapable of that blessing; The same he will show to all
true believers, who are Abraham's faithful seed, and children of promise, that
is, as he reckoned Abraham's faith for righteousness; so he will count their
faith to them for righteousness; that is, he will accept and account them for
righteous persons (as indeed they are) not for any works of their own, nor by
any righteousness performed according to the letter of the law in their own
persons, but by the righteousness, which is through the faith of Christ, and is
called the righteousness of faith, because it is the righteousness of Christ GOD
and man, given to them of GOD, and of them apprehended, and applied by faith.
For being thus justified by faith, and having communion with Christ of his full
satisfaction and righteousness, GOD whose judgment is according to truth does
certainly judge and count them (as truly they are) righteous in his sight, and
becomes in Christ their shield, and exceeding great reward. This is the
Orthodox exposition of the Apostles words in this Chapter, generally received
by all, both ancient and modern Divines, famous for learning and godliness.

The corrupt and heretical exposition of the Apostles words, made by Socinus,
and maintained by his followers the Arminians, and other fanaticall Sectaries.
THey of the Socinian faction, do generally hold and obstinately affirm, that
Abraham's believing and his faith, taken in a proper literal sense without any
trope, is here said by the Apostle to be counted to Abraham for righteousness,
in stead of all righteousness which either Abraham himself, was by the Law
bound to perform in his own person, or any surety could perform for him. And
in like manner to every one that believes, his faith is in a proper sense said
to be counted for righteousness, even his faith by it self, and not the
righteousness of Christ with it. This is their exposition. And upon these words
of the Apostle thus falsely, and corruptly interpreted, they build all their
heretical opinions, and doctrines concerning justification of the faithful
before GOD, namely these following. First that faith, as it is in every
believer, even as it is inherent in him, and is his own faith and believing;
is the only thing which GOD of his grace and mercy, and out of his absolute
sovereign power and dominion, is pleased to ordain, appoint, and account for
all the righteousness, which a man shall have for his justification; though in
truth, and according to Law and the rule of justice, it is not righteousness,
being weak oftentimes and full of imperfections.

Secondly that the Spirit of GOD Apostle, did not intend or mean any communion
of the righteousness, and perfect obedience performed by Christ to the Law, as
our surety, and in our stead, nor imputation of that righteousness to every true
believer for justification, nor GODS accepting of the faithful for righteous
by that righteousness communicated to them, and of them applied possessed and
enjoyed by faith.

By faith, and believing, they do Christ, and Christ is their head, and they as
lively members of his mystical body* have communion of all his benefits, even
of his full satisfaction and perfect righteousness, for justification, and full
remission of all their sins. But by faith, and believing, they understand
only a confidence in GOD, that he will perform his promises made in Christ,
and an assent unto his word that it is true. The tenor of which word, and
promises, they conceive to be this; That Christ in his pure unspotted humane
nature, has by his righteousness, suffering and obedience, unto death,
meritted, such high favor with GOD; that GOD in honor to him is pleased to
accept and account the faith of them that believe in him, and rest on him for
their Savior, for perfect righteousness, and requires no other righteousness
to constitute, and make them in any sort formally righteous in their
justification.

When they acknowledge that the perfect righteousness, and satisfaction
Christ, is the meritorious cause of our justification: they do not mean that
they are communicated to us, and so apprehended, and possessed of us by faith,
that we are thereby indeed, and in GODS account righteous before GOD, and
justified; or that they deserve and are worthy, that GOD should so account us
for them. But their mind, and meaning is, that Christ by his righteousness
has merited, that GOD for his sake, and in favor to him should account faith
to us for righteousness, without either our own works, of the Law, or
Christ's righteousness imputed to us and made ours by communion. And when they
say that faith is imputed for righteousness as an instrument, they do not mean
as the instrument or spiritual hand, applying Christ his righteousness to be
after a sort, the formal righteousness of the believer, but that faith, as it
is the instrument by which the believer does believe that Christ has purchased
this favor, that his believing should be the only thing, accounted to him for
righteousness; so only and no other way, GOD reckons to him for righteousness.

The orthodox exposition I will in the first place prove, and confirm, from
the words of the Apostle himself, and by other strong reasons* and afterward
confute and overthrow the Socinian, heretical exposition.

The true Exposition proved and confirmed.
FOr the right understanding of the Apostles words, three things come first to
be considered, and explained. 1. What is here meant by faith, and believing. 2.
What righteousness is here meant. 3. What is meant by imputation.

First, by faith in this text, we must not understand, that natural habit and
power, which is common to all reasonable men; who upon their apprehension, and
knowledge of things spoken, and promised, do give willing assent unto them that
they are true, either for the authority of the speaker whom they do respect
and judge to be faithful, or because they see good reason in the things
spoken and promised: And if the things spoken and promised be such as tend to
their own good; they rest upon them confidently, and persuade themselves, that
they are sure and certain of them already, or shall receive and enjoy them in
due time without fail. But here by faith we are to understand that
supernatural gift, and grace of believing wrought in the elect, regenerate by
the spirit shed on them abundantly through Jesus Christ, Tit. 3.6. which is
therefore called most holy faith, Iud. 20. verse. This faith agrees with the
other in four points. First as that is an habit and power of believing, so is
this. Secondly as that contains in it, notitia^ in intellectu, and assensum in
voluntate, that is, both a notice and knowledge of the things spoken and
believed, and an assent of the will, so does this also. Thirdly as that faith
when it goes no further then knowledge and assent is called hlstoricall; so
this also. Fourthly as that faith when it reaches to good things promised to
our selves particularly, to apply them, and to rest on them, has also fiduciam
in cord et affectionibus, a trust and confidence of the heart and affections
in it; so has this also, and is called a firm persuasion, trust and
confidence. But they differ in diverse things. First that is a natural power or
habit, this is a spiritual wrought in men by the spirit of GOD dweling in them,
and uniting them to Christ in one mystical body. Secondly, that has in it no
knowledge, but natural, arising from light of natural reason, nor any assent
of the will, or confidence in the heart and affections, but such as are drawn,
stirred up and wrought by means of natural light, and common causes. This
has in it a spiritual knowledge arising from the spirit of GOD, inlightning
the understanding; the spirit also inclines and moves the will to give assent,
and confirms the heart with confidence, and firm persuasion. Thirdly that is
common to all reasonable men; This is proper to the elect regenerate and
sanctified by the holy Ghost, shed on them through Christ, and is the first and
as it were the radical grace and virtue of renovation. Fourthly that has for
the object or things believed, either natural and worldly things only; or
things heavenly and supernatural, seen, and discerned through the dim mist
of natural reason, and assented to and rested on with a carnal and
unsanctified will and heart. This has for the object things supernatural,
heavenly and spiritual, discerned by supernatural light, assented to with an
holy and sanctified will, confirmed to the heart by a spiritual sense, and
sweet taste of the things promised, wrought by the holy spirit in the true
believer apprehending and applying them.

But to come nearer to the text, the believing which the Apostle speaks of in
3.9. and 22. verses, is the faith and believing of Abraham, who diverse years
before this act of believing, which it here said to be counted to him for
righteousness, was called out of his own country, and by faith obeyed GOD
calling, and went and soiourned in the land, promised to him, and his seed, as
appears, Heb. 11.8, 9. He had overcome and slaughtered four mighty Kings, and
their victorious armies, by faith and confidence in GODS promises. And
Melchizedek, King of Salem, the Priest of the most high GOD, had blessed him,
as we read, Genesis 14. And after these things, the LORD appeared to him, and
said, fear not Abraham* I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward; and
withal he renewed the promise of the blessed seed, by means of which seed,
all the families of the earth should be blessed in Abraham, and should become
his faithful Children; besides, his natural seed, and posterity, which should
come of the Son, and heir of his own bowels, as appears, Genesis 15. verse 1.4.
These were the promises which GOD made to Abraham, and which Abraham believed
to be true, and resting upon the LORD by firm faith, and belief, for the
performance of them, the LORD counted it to him for righteousness. Genesis 15.6.
or as the Apostle expresses the same sentence, in the same sense, though in
words somewhat different, it was counted to him for righteousness. verse 3.
even faith was reckoned to him for righteousness, verse 9. Now this faith was
first an holy and spiritual belief, and the faith of a man, long before called
of GOD, sanctified by his Spirit, and made obedient to GOD and his word.
Secondly, it was a belief not only of the promise of Christ the blessed seed
in general, but more specially, that Christ the blessed seed, should according
to the flesh come out of his own bowels, and that by Christ the Son of GOD,
made man of his seed, the redemption both of him, and of his faithful seed,
all true believers should be wrought, and performed, GODS wrath appeased, the
Law fulfilled, and justice satisfied, and perfect righteousness brought in for
their justification; and by his, and their union with Christ by one spirit, and
communion of all his benefits, they should have GOD for their portion, and
reward, and for their shield and defense, and should not need to seek the
blessing and reward from their own works, or their righteousness, and
fulfilling of the Law in their own persons, but merely from the free grace of
GOD, and of his free gift in Christ as a reward of Christ's righteousness,
freely given to them, and of them apprehended by faith, and believing. Thirdly,
this faith of Abraham was not a weak, but strong faith and belief, without
staggering, even a full persuasion that GOD who quickens the dead, and
calls those things which be not, as if they were, was able to make good, and
to perform what he had promised, yea, it was a believing in hope, against
hope, that GOD could out of a dead body, and womb raise up a lively seed, and
make them spiriritually righteous, which are by nature, and according to the
Law wicked sinners. All these things are manif^st by the place before cited.
Gen 15. and by the express words of the Apostle in this Chapter, from the
tenth verse, to the end of the Chapter. And thus it is plain what is meant by
faith, which is here said to be imputed for righteousness.

Secondly, the righteousness here meant, is not the righteousness which is
according to the strict terms, and tenor of the Law, that is, righteousness of
a man's own works, performed by every man in his own person to the whole Law
of GOD, for the Apostle does dispute altogether against that righteousness, and
proves that neither Abraham was justified, or counted of GOD righteous for it,
as appears in the 2.5.6. and 13. verses; nor any other at any time, as he
shows in the Chapter next before, and in the Chap. 8.3. and 9.32. and 10.3.
But here is meant an Evangelical righteousness which does not consist in any
work, or works performed by man himself in his own person, nor in any grace
or virtue, inhaerent in himself, but is a righteousness which GOD of his own
free grace, does impute to the true believer, who by one spirit is united to
Christ, and has communion with him, and which is called the righteousness of
faith, (because by faith men lay hold on it) and does exclude legal
justification by righteousness of a man's own works* as appears by the
Apostles whole discourse in this and the former Chapter, and in diverse other
places of this Epistle, especially verse 13, of this Chapter, and in Chap.
3.27.28.

Thirdly the phrase of imputing or counting a thing to one, signifies both in
the old and new Testament, an act of judgment and estimation, by which a thing
is judged, esteemed, reckoned, and accounted to be as it is indeed, and then it
is just according to truth; or else judged thought, and esteemed to be as it
is not, and then it is unjust and not according to truth. GODS thoughts are
always right and just, and his judgment is according to truth. Romans 2.2. And
therefore a just counting and imputing is here meant, for GOD does account, and
judge of persons, and things so as they are.

Of unjust counting, and imputing falsely, we have some instances in Scripture,
as 1 King 1.21. where Bethsheba says to David, I and my son Solomon shall
be counted offenders, that is usurping Adoniah, and his wicked company will
esteem and judge us, and use us accordingly,

Of reputing and counting truly as the thing is, we have examples also, as
Nehem. 13.13. where it is said of the chosen Levites that they were counted
faithful, viz. upon former experience of their faithfulness, and therefore
the office of distributing to their brethren was committed to them. And Levit.
17.4. where it is said, blood shall be imputed to that man, he has shed blood,
and shall be cut off from among his people, and Psalm. 22.30. a seed shall serve
him, it shall be counted to the LORD for a generation.

Moreover this word impute, or count, signifies sometimes in the most proper
sense, a bare act of judgment and thought. Prove. 17.28. where a fool is said
to be counted wise, when he holds his peace, that is, men for the present
so think, and judge him to be at least in that point of silence. Sometimes it
signifies in a more full sense not only thinking, counting and judging persons
to be good, or bad, just or unjust, innocent or guilty; but also dealing with
them, and using them accordingly, as in the place before named, I King 2.21.
Neh. 13.13. Psalm. 22.30. and 1 Samuel 22.15. where Ahimilech purging himself
before Saul, from the offense of conspiracy with David against him, as Doeg had
falsely accused him, says, let not the King impute any thing to his servant,
that is, let him not count his servant guilty, nor use him as a conspiratour.
Sometimes it signifies by a Metonymie of the cause, for the effect condemning,
and punishing an offense in a guilty person as he has deserved, and to deal
with him as he is justly thought and judged to have deserved, as Shimei said,
2 Samuel 19.19. Let not my LORD impute iniquity to me, he does not desire that
David would not think, nor count his iniquity to be no iniquity, that had
been against all reason: but that for the satisfaction which he had made in
coming, first before all the house of Joseph to meet David, and to bring him
again to his Kingdom, David would graciously pardon his offense, and not
proceed against him and punish him according to his fauit, though guilty and
worthy of punishment. Sometimes it signifies by a Metaphore to count one thing,
as if it were another, or no better then another, or of the same value, as
Prove. 27.4. where a flattering salutation, or blessing given with a loud voice
is said to be counted a curse, that is, esteemed no better then a curse.
Sometimes to use one as if he counted him of another condition, as Genesis 31.15.
where it is said that Laban counted his daughters strangers, that is, used them
as he had counted them strangers, and Job 31.10. where Job says that GOD
counted him for his enemy, that is, afflicted and plagued him as if he had
counted him his enemy. Sometimes the word signifies to skore up, or put upon a
man's account, either the offense or debt which he runs into himself, as Romans
5.13. where it is said, that sin is not imputed where there is no Law, that
is, it is not so skored up, that they are punished for it, it is not judged and
punished in them; Or the debt which he takes upon him for another, as Philemon
verse 18. If he has wronged thee or is indebted to thee, put that on mine
account, that is, impute and count it to me, set it on my skore. Now the
several significations of the several words being thus laid open, I proceed
more particularly to every word to show the true sense, and meaning of it in
these speeches of the Apostle, and to show how far the speeches may be
extended. And first by faith and believing which is counted to every true
believer, and was counted to Abraham for righteousness; I here understand
(according to the judgment of the most Orthodox Divines) the true holy,
spiritual faith and belief, which is before showed to have been in Abraham,
and which is proper to the elect regenerate, and is said to be imputed for
righteousness. By righteousness is here meant Evangelicall righteousness (which is
opposed to the legal righteousness of works, which is inherent in every man,
and is every man's fulfilling of the Law in his own person) even the
righteousness and perfect satisfaction of Christ, GOD and man, our mediator and
surety, which he the son of GOD in man's nature performed to the Law, and
which is apprehended by every true believer, and applied to himself by a
lively faith, whereof also he has true communion, and is truly made partaker
by his spirtual union, with Christ, of whose mystical body, he is a member,
being thereinto engraffed and baptized by one spirit. By the imputing, and
counting of that faith for righteousness to Abraham, and to every one of his
faithful seed, is here meant GODS setting of Christ's righteousness on every
true believers skore, and putting it on his account, and judging, counting, and
esteeming him no more guilty of sin, but perfectly righteous by that
Evangelicall righteousness, which is called the righteousness of GOD, 2 Cor.
5.21. because GOD performed it in man's nature; and the righteousness of faith,
Romans 4.13. and not of works, because it is applied and enjoyed by faith,
Philip 3.9.

For the confirmation of this exposition and justifying of this truth, we need
seek no other arguments, but such as may be gathered from the Apostles own
words as in other of his Epistles, so especially in this to the Romans.

from the 2. Chapter of this Epistle; v. 26. where this word (...) as it
signifies to be imputed or counted, is first used by the Apostle in the very
same phrase, as here in this Chapter 4.3.5*9. If (says he) the uncircumcision
keep the righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for
circumcision? By uncircumcision, in the first clause, we must necessarily
understand a Gentile uncircumcised (as learned Beza in his notes observes) and
that by a trope of speech which is called Metonymia adjuncti, for with some
reason it may be supposed that an uncircumcised man, may observe the precepts
of righteousness contained in the law; but it is against common sense, to
suppose that the foreskin of any man's flesh not cut off, should perform the
righteousness of the Law, no man in his right wits will father such a senseles
meaning upon the learned Apostle. The same word in the second clause (as Beza
also well observes) cannot with any reason be thought to signify the foreskin
of man's flesh not cut off, that is uncircumcision in a proper sense, for that
cannot but most falsely be reputed, and counted for circumcision, because they
are contradictories one to another. But here by a trope or Metonymie (called
Metonymia signipro re signata) the word uncircumcision signifies the state of
Ge^tilisme. Neither does it signify that state barely considered by it self,
but as comprehending in it the righteousness of the Law, which the uncircumcised
man has kept and performed in that state, as the words necessarily imply, for
the Apostle does not say that uncircumcision simply, but uncircu^cision which
has kept the righteousness of the Law, shall be counted for circumcision. So
that here is a Metalepsis or double trope, to wit, first uncircumcision put for
Gentilisme, of which it is a sign or adjunct, and secondly put not only for
that state of a Gentile, but also for the righteousness of the Law, kept by
the man in that outward state of a Gentile, uncircumcised which is a Metonymie
of the subject containing for the thing contained. Yea if we look thoroughly
into the phrase, we shall see that the state of the man uncircumcised, or the
man in that estate, put for that which he has done, and performed even the
righteousness of the Law.

By circumcision we cannot with reason understand, the outward cutting away of
the foreskin of man's flesh, neither taken literally and carnally as the corrupt
and blind Jews did take it, for a work of righteousness and obedience to the
Law for justification. The Apostle affirms, Galatians 5.3. that so taken it
was an obligation, by which the circumcised was bound, under pain of cutting
off for ever, to perform the whole Law. And for a righteous Gentile to be
brought under this bondage was no benefit, but a miserable condition an ill
reward of his keeping the Law.

Neither can circumcision be here taken sacramentally as it was an outward
sign and seal of the righteousness of faith, and of mortification, and all
virtues of holiness by which men are sanctified to GOD, and become his
peculiar people. For Ishmael, Esau, and all the Sons of Belial in Israel,
even Elies wicked Sons, and the rest were partakers of the outward sign and
sacrament of circumcsion, and yet being destitute of the inward grace,
signified, their circumcision was no reward to them, but was a witness to
condemn them. But the circumcision here mentioned by the Apostle is an honor,
benefit, and a good condition, and therefore undoubtedly signifies, the inward
circumcision of the heart in the Spirit, and not in the letter, so the Apostle
does expound himself, verse 29. that is true mortification, and sanctification.

The word ((...)) shall be counted, signifies here in a full sense, judging,
counting, approving, accepting, and using accordingly. Now all laid together,
the meaning of the Apostle must necessarily be this, without any contradiction.
That if a man uncercumcised, do keep and observe with all holy endeavor the
commandments of GODS Law, and the righteousness thereof, his state of
Gentilisme, and of outward uncircumcision comprehending in it a conscionable
observing of GODS holy commandment, shall be accounted, and judged by GOD and
by all who judge aright, (as it is indeed) the state of mortification, and
sanctification, which by the Prophets is called circumcising of our selves to
the LORD, and putting away the foreskin of our hearts Ier. 4.4. And this man
though uncircumcised in the flesh and a Gentile in outward estate, shall be
counted of GOD for a true Israelite, without guile, circumcised with
circumcision of the heart in the Spirit, whose praise is not of men, but of GOD.

This sense and meaning of the words of this phrase is so clear, and manifest,
and so perfectly agreeable to all true reason, that no man can deny it, unless
he will set himself to rebel against the light And this phrase being the
same with that which is made the ground of this dispute, Romans 4. where the same
Apostle says, that faith, and believing, were counted to Abraham, and so are
to every true believer, for righteousness: yea, being the only place in all
this Epistle wherein the Apostle uses the phrase of imputing, or counting,
except only in this 4. Chap. and once in the 5. Chapter, where he says,
sin is not imputed, it must needs give light to these speeches, and words, in
controversy, and as it has the first place in this Epistle, so it deserves to
go before as a guide to lead us to the understanding of the rest. Wherefore if
we will follow the Apostle himself, and tread in the same steps after him,
being the surest guide, and best expounder of his own meaning: we must by
Abraham's believing, by a Metalepsis, or double trope (with our learned Divines)
understand Abraham settled in the state of a true believer, united by one Spirit
unto GOD in Christ, and having communion of his satisfaction, and righteousness,
which were of force and efficacy from the beginning, to save and justify all
the faithful, and to make GOD their reward. And by faith imputed we must not
understand faith by it self in a proper sense, but the state and condition of
a faithful man, and also that which faith comprehends, and includes in it,
even the perfect righteousness, and full satisfaction of Christ, GOD and man
(for there is a metalepsis or double trope, as in the place before expounded)
By righteousness we must understand the state of a man justified, and made
righteous by the communion of Evangelicall righteousness, and by counting, and
imputing, we must understand, the accepting, approving, esteeming, and judging
of Abraham and every true believer, to be in the state of a man justified, and
GODS setting on his skore, and imputing to him being faithful, the
righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, which no man can truly by faith
lay hold on until by one spirit he be united to Christ, and have communion
with him. Hear then the true sense and meaning of the speeches in question,
parallelled with the sentence and speech before expounded Chap. 2.26. which I
thus lay down paraphrastically.

Abraham upon a true inward spiritual sense of his union, and communion with
Christ did believe and was surely persuaded that GOD was his reward, and this
belief, and faith apprehending Christ, and after a sort containning in it, as
by a fast holding and possessing hand of the soul, Christ's righteousness, GOD
counted it to him for righteousness, that is, set it on his skore, and reckoned
to him for justification, and judged, esteemed, and accepted him for a man
truly righteous, as indeed he was by Evangelicall righteousness. And so,
whosoever does not rest on his own works for justification, nor seeks
thereby to be justified, but by faith feeling himself by nature ungodly,
flees to Christ's righteousness, and by faith feels himself to have
communion of it, and holds it fast, and applies, and enioyes it. His faith is
to him an evidence of his righteousness, and GOD* who judges according to truth
knowing him to have share in Christ's righteousness, does accept it for him, and
counts him righteous, and uses him as a man truly justified. Thus you see how
the Apostles former using of this phrase in the second Chapter, does show the
true meaning of it here where it seems to be more doubtful. The sum of the
argument reduced into a short syllogism is this.

That exposition of a doubtful phrase, which is most agreeable to the manifest
sense and meaning of the same phrase used by the same Author, in the same
discourse, is the best: Our exposition of the phrase in question, to wit, faith
and believing is imputed for righteousness, is most agreeable to the manifest
sense of the same phrase of speech used by this same Apostle Cap. 2.26 in this
same Epistle. Therefore undoubtedly, our exposition is best.

Apostle uses the phrase (...) that is, of imputing one thing for another,
there the thing imputed differs from that, for which it is imputed, and
cannot in any proper sense be called the same, as in the place before cited,
Romans 2.26 Romans 9.8. and so it is, Psalm 106.31. where Phineas his executing of
judgment, is said to be counted to him for righteousness. And wheresoever a
thing is said in a proper sense to be counted, or imputed, or set on ones
skore, it is said simply to be counted, imputed, set upon a man's account, as
Rom 4.4. where the reward is said to be counted of debt to him that works,
and verse 6. and 8. where GOD is said to impute righteousness, and not to impute
sin* and verse 11. that righteousness might be imputed unto them. and Romans
5.13. sin is not imputed when there is no Law. and 2 Cor. 5.19. not imputing
their trespasses to them, and 2. Tim. 4.16. I pray GOD it may not be laid to
their charge, or counted to them ((...) and Philem. 18. put that on my account.
Now here in the speeches controverted faith and believing are not said simply
to be imputed to believers, but to be imputed for righteousness, and therefore
faith is not said to be imputed in a proper sense, neither can it truly be
counted or called righteousness by it self, and in a proper sense; but the
speech is tropicall, and improper.

A third argument is drawn Apostles words in the 4. verse where he says to
him that works the reward is not reckoned of grace, but of debt; these words
imply, that the righteousness here said to be imputed brings the reward of
blessedness to the believer, which reward is of grace, and not of debt. Now
there is nothing which can bring the reward of blessedness in eternal life to
him unto whom it is counted and set on his skore, but the perfect
righteousness, and satisfaction of Jesus Christ. That all do grant to be
meritorious of eternal life to all that are partakers of it, and because the
communion, and imputation of it is of GODS free grace, and the faith by which
we receive and apply it is GODS free gift, therefore the reward of it, to wit,
eternal life is of free grace, and not of debt, as the Apostle here says,
whereupon the conclusion follows, that the righteousness which GOD accepts, and
imputes, is properly the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith.

Fourthly, the Apostle teaches, Christ's perfect righteousness, and
satisfaction, and that is a perfect propitiation for all sins, and an
expiation of all iniquity to them, who by faith have put on Christ, therefore
it is the righteousness which is imputed to every believer for justification.

Fifthly, that which is said to be imputed to Abraham, and to every true
believer, is righteousness, of the Apostle both here, and in the Chapters next
going before, and that which next follows is altogether of justifying, as
appears, Chap. 3.24 25.26, 28, 30. and Chap. 5.1, 16, 17, 18, 19. in all which
places, he names expressly justification, and justifying: and here in this 4.
Cap. he brings Abraham's example, and David's testimony, to show how we are
justified. Now there is nothing which does serve to us for justification, but
that which is found in Christ our mediator, even his righteousness and perfect
fulfilling of the Law, so he plainly affirms and teaches Chap. 5, 19. and 8,
3, 4. and 10.3, 4. and therefore his righteousness upon the true believing of
Abraham, and the faithful, is counted, and imputed to them, and set on their
skore, and they by it are justified.

Scripture, wheresoever it is mentioned, so undoubtedly, it is here to be
taken. For the Scripture is the best expounder of it self; and the spirit of
God therein speaking does best understand and show his own meaning. Now the
only place in all the Scripture where any thing besides faith, and believing
is said to be counted to man for righteousness, is that place of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 106. and 31. where the godly zealous act of Phinees, in executing just
judgment on Zamri, and Cosbi is said to be counted to him for righteousness.
Now the meaning of the words there cannot be, that this act of Phinees was
accepted of GOD, and counted to him for righteousness to justification. For then
it will follow that a man may be justified before GOD by one act, or work of
his own. Which the Apostle here utterly condemns as a gross error, and
bends his whole discourse against it. The true sense and meaning of the phrase
is no more but this, that Phinees performing such an act of godly zeal, as is
proper only to a faithful righteous man, who by the spirit of regeneration,
dwelling in him is so united unto Christ, that by faith he was a true partaker
of his righteousness. GOD upon this act gave him the testimony of righteousness,
and declared and judged him to be a righteous man truly justified. Therefore
the Apostles phrase of counting faith to the believer for righteousness, which
he often uses in this Chapter, signifies after the same manner, GODS counting
a true believer for a righteous man, and giving him the testimony of
righteousness, because he is righteous indeed by communion of Christ's
righteousness which he has apprehended, applied, and enjoys by faith.

The confutation of the false heretical exposition of the Apostles words
maintained by the Socinian faction.
FIrst whereas they hold that faith considered by it self in a proper literal
sense, without consideration of the object, or laying hold on Christ, and his
righteousness, is counted to the believer for righteousness to justification, and
GOD requires in and of us, no other thing for righteousness, neither our own
works performed in our own persons according to the Law, nor Christ's perfect
righteousness and fulfilling of the Law made ours by spiritual union and
communion with Christ, and accepted of GOD for us. This I prove to be false
heretical and blasphemous, by these arguments following.

First faith taken in a proper sense is a part of our conformity, and do teach
that we are justified by a work of obedience, to the Law performed in our
own persons, and GOD requires on our behalf, no other righteousness for
justification, which Doctrine the Apostle utterly condemns. Therefore their
opinion and exposition is heretical, and more impious then the Pelagian and
Popish heresies concerning justification.

Secondly that which was properly Abraham, and is so imputed to true believers
is righteousness, so the Apostle in plain words expresses, verse 6. and 11.
but faith in a proper sense is not righteousness. For righteousness is perfect
conformity to the Law, as sin is transgression of the Law, yea humane
righteousness is a man's keeping of the whole Law, and his observing to do all
GODS commandments with his whole heart all the days of his life, as we read
Deuteronomie 8.

Thirdly that which charge without perfect fulfilling of his Law, nor allow
any man to be justified without righteousness, nor will his truth suffer him to
count any just who is not just. Therefore by this base shift, and wicked
pretense devised to hide, and cover their blasphemy, they do run further into
blasphemy, and make his sovereign power, a tyrant and oppressor of his
justice and truth.

Christ, and his perfect fulfilling the Law, a vain and needless thing, is
most heretical, impious, and blasphemous. This opinion, that GOD by his
sovereigne power can, and does accept and count imperfect faith for perfect
righteousness, takes away the means by which GODS justice, mercy, and wisdom
are revealed to be infinite, yea it extenuates and vilifies GODS justice, mercy,
bounty, and wisdom, and makes Christ's full satisfaction, a vain, superfluous
and needless thing. Therefore it is an impious and blasphemous opinion.

First that which reveals GOD to be infinitely just is, that he cannot be
reconciled to men that have sinned without execution of justice to the full,
and a full satisfaction made according to his just Law, if not by men in their
own persons, which is impossible, yet by their mediator and surety, in their
behalf, and by him communicated to them, and made theirs, as truly as if they
had fulfilled the Law in their own persons. And though this satisfaction be of
infinite value, yet it cannot profit them, nor actually merit for them till they
be partakers of it truly, and really by spiritual communion. This is that
means by which GOD is known to be infinitely just.

Secondly, when GODS infinite justice was so strict, that nothing could
satisfy it, nor redeem mankind, but a satisfaction of infinite value made for
them. And when all the world was not able to find such a satisfaction; that his
wisdom should find one out, and have it ready before hand in her eternal
treasures, even a full satisfaction performed in man's nature, by GOD the
eternal son, and also the means to make it truly and really the satisfaction
of every man truly believing, that is, by the Holy Ghost shed on them through
the Son Christ, and making them one spiritual body with him. This reveals
GOD to be infinite in wisdom.

Thirdly in that GOD the Father would in this case give his only begotten
son, to be humbled in our nature, and to obey, suffer, and make such a
satisfaction for poor miserable men, in that the son would willingly take
all this upon him* to do and suffer whatsoever justice could require, and in
that the holy Ghost, when this satisfaction could not otherwise profit men nor
be made theirs, does not disdain to take up for his constant dwelling, the
earthly tabernacles of men's bodies, and to work in them all graces needful,
to conform them to Christ, and to make them sensibly to enjoy him with all his
benefits. This most wonderfully shows GODS infinite mercy, bounty and free
goodness. And all these means which are manifested and maintained by our
Doctrine of justification, this wicked opinion of the Socinians does utterly
take away. First it denies GODS justice to require man's communion of such an
infinite satisfaction made by Christ for him: it treads GODS justice under
foot by his sovereignty of power, and maugre justice, it makes man's imperfect
faith to go current for righteousness, and to be accepted for perfect
righteouses, to justification. Secondly if GOD by sovereignty of power can
bear down justice, and make any weak and imperfect thing such as man's faith
is; serve in stead of Christ's full satisfaction and perfect righteousness: Then
he might by the same power have appointed the sacrifice of a Lamb, or any
clean beast, or the satisfaction of any mere man, and so it will follow that
the giving of his son to be made man, was no point of wisdom, but a going
far about, and spending much, even Christ's blood, when less might have
served the turn. As for GODS goodness mercy and bounty, they are hereby made
painted shows and shadows, yea needless prodigality, and Christ's
satisfaction is made vain and superfluous. Therefore this opinion which brings
in such impious consequences, is blasphemous and heretical.

Fifthly, that opinion which overthrowes the sacraments of the Gospel, and takes
away the true use of them, is heriticall, profane, and impious. This opinion
that Christ's righteousness is not imputed to the faithful, does so. For the
sacraments are seals of our union, and communion with Christ: Baptism seals
our engraffing into Christ in our new birth, by which we become one with him.
The LORDS Supper is such a lively seal of our communion with Christ, in the
benefits of his death, passion, and full satisfaction, expressed under the
terms of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, that it is commonly called,
the communion of the faithful, when it is rightly received. But these
Heretics while by imputing faith in a proper sense, they exclude the
imputation of Christ's righteousness to the faithful, they deny their communion,
and union with Christ, they take away the truth and the use of the Sacraments,
for if the faithful are regenerate, and by one spirit ingraffed into Christ,
and united unto him, as Baptism signifies, and seals: and if they have
spiritual communion with Christ of his righteousness, and all other benefits
which the LORDS Supper signifies, and is thereof a seal to them: Then GOD
whose judgment is according to truth, cannot but impute Christ's righteousness to
them, and accept it for them, and account it theirs. They who deny GODS
imputing of it do either charge GOD with injustice, and error of judgment in
not counting, and judging that to be theirs in which they have communion, and
interest, or else they deny the union and communion of the faithful with
Christ, and make the sacraments lying signs, and seals of false things, and
things which are not. Therefore their opinion is most abominable, profane,
impious, and blasphemous.

Christ, and tends mainely to persuade that there is no use of Christ's being
GOD, and man, in one person, is Heretical and blasphemous. Such is this
opinion of the Socinians, it is an invention of Haretiks, and tends to take
away the use of Christ's being GOD, and to persuade men that there is no
necessary use of his being GOD, and man in one person. For all Orthodox Divines
give this reason, why it was necessary that Christ the mediator should be GOD
in our nature, even that the obedience and suffering which he did under go in
man's nature, might be the obedience and suffering of GOD, and so of infinite
value, and though of him alone, and but for a time, yet of more worth, then if
all men in their own persons had obeyed as much as he did and suffered for
ever in Hell. They teach also, that first for the removing of so great evils,
as the infinite wrath of GOD, eternal death, and torment in Hell: and
secondly, for purchase of so great a good, as is the state of righteousness,
and of grace, and also of eternal glory in Heaven. GODS justice could require
no less satisfaction, and righteousness, nor be satisfied with any other, but
that which is performed by him, who is GOD and man, in one person, that is the
perfect righteousness and satisfaction of Christ which alone by the infinite
value which it receives from his Godhead, is fit to remove so infinite an
evil, and to procure so infinite a good to men* But the maintainers of this
Socinian opinion by denying that GODS infinite justice stands in strength to
exact such a satisfaction being overruled, and oppressed, by absolute
sovereignty of power; and by teaching that mercy, and bounty run beyond reason,
freeing men from all need of such an infinite satisfaction to be communicated
and imputed to them, and justifying them freely without righteousness, they do
take away the use of Christ's Godhead in his mediation, and the causes, and
reasons, for which it was necessary that he should be GOD as well as man: And
in conclusion, in places where they dare be bold to disclose the secret
thoughts of their hearts, they roundly deny Christ to be the Son of GOD, of
the same substance with GOD the Father. Therefore this their opinion is most
impious, blasphemous, and Heretical: And indeed it is never found in
Histories, to have been maintained by any but Samosatenian Heretics, deadly
enemies to Christ's deity.

Lastly, that opinion which is builded upon an Heretical, and blasphemous
ground, and is upheld, and maintained by blasphemous arguments, which do shake,
and even raze the maine foundations of true Religion, must needs be most wicked
and blasphemous: and such is this opinion; for it is builded upon this
blasphemous ground, that GOD by his sovereign power may do and will, things
contrary to his justice, that is, count and accept that for righteousness, which
is no righteousness, nor worthy to be accounted an act of perfect righteousness,
for such is the faith of frail man taken in a proper sense.

The arguments by which it is commonly maintained are also blasphemous, and
wicked; to wit* First they argue, that Christ's righteousness is not imputed to
true believers, neither can be made or counted theirs by GOD. Because Christ's
righteousness is the righteousness of another far different from them: and GOD
cannot justify one, by another righteousness, and therefore we are not
justified by Christ's righteousness, neither is it imputed in justification.
Now what is this but a denying of the union, of the faithful with Christ, for
if he be one with us, and we one with him, then are our sins made his by
communion, and in him satisfied, and his righteousness and satisfaction is made
ours, and we thereby are pardoned, and justified, by it as it, is made ours,
and is not the righteousness of a stranger, nor of one who is another so
different from us, but that he and we are one spiritual body, and all his
benefits are ours, and we have an interest in them, and possess them, and
enjoy them; so far as every one has need of them. As this argument tends to
overthrow our union with Christ, so A. Wotton in a manuscript of essays, does
profess that our union with Christ is only metaphorical. Secondly, they
argue that the righteousness of Christ cannot be sufficient for the elect, nor
counted to them for all righteousness which is in effect a denying of Christ
to be GOD and man in one person, for if they acknowledge him to be GOD, they
must needs hold that his righteousness and fulfilling of the Law, is of more
worth and value, then if all men in the world had fulfilled the Law, in their
own persons without failing in one point.

Thirdly, they argue that if Christ his righteousness, and satisfaction be so
made ours, and imputed to us that the Law may be said to be fulfilled in us,
and we may said to have satisfied GODS justice, in him our head, and by him our
surety, then is there no place left for pardon, and free forgiveness of our
sins, for pardon and satisfaction are contrary. By which they overthrow the
Doctrine of redemption, and of Christ's satisfaction for us, and deny Christ to
be our redeemer, and to have paid our ransom, and made a full satisfaction to
the justice of GOD for our sins, contrary to the Scriptures, and the
judgment and belief of all Christian Divines, who teach that Christ has paid
our ransom, is our (...) and (...), and properly called (...) our redeemer.
And though GODS justice exacted of Christ our surety a full ransom, and did
not abate him the least farthing of our debt, yet we are freely pardoned, and
have free forgiveness, and are freely justified by GODS grace, because he did
freely give his own son to satisfy and fulfill the Law for us, and does freely
by his grace, and the free gift of his spirit unite us to Christ, and make us
partakers of his satisfaction, and imputing his satisfaction freely to us does
for it freely forgive our sins, and justify us. Fourthly while they argue
that faith in a proper sense is all the righteousness which the faithful have
for justification; and yet faith is not any formal righteousness, by their own
confession, yea they deny that any formal righteousness is required in
justification; hereby they deny the Saints justified to be righteous contrary
to the Scriptures which call them the righteous, and the generation of the
righteous, Psalm. 1.6. and 14.5. and the righteous nation, Isa. 26.2. and in
many other places, which title GODS spirit would never give to them, if they
were not formally righteous, by righteousness, communicated to them after a
spiritual and heavenly manner. For to hold as they do, that men are justified
and counted righteous without any formal righteousness, which does constitute
and give being to a righteous and justified man, as he is righteous and
justified, is a monstrous opinion contrary to reason.

Fifthly while they deny that the faithful are constituted and made formally
righteous by the obedience of Christ communicated, and imputed to them, which
the Apostle in express words does affirm, Romans 5.19. and 8.4. and Romans 10.4.
they in heat of argument fall into the Pelagian heresy, and are forced to
deny, that Adams sin and disobedience is communicated and imputed to his
posterity, so as that they are formally sinners by it. And rather then they
will yield that infants which dye before they commit actual transgression in
their own persons, are punished with death, because they are guilty of Adams
sin; they do blasphemously affirm, that GOD being offended and moved to
wrath, by the sins of parents, will out of the magnificence of his judgment,
and rage of his justice, destroy innocent babes with their sinful parents, for
terror to others; which is contrary to GODS word, and Law which teach that
children shall not dye for the sins of their parents, unless they be
partakers with them, either by communion and imputation, or by imitation and
approbation. Whereas they bring for instance, that the children of Korah were
destroyed with their father, though they were innocent, and not partakers in
the sin; herein they contradict the Scriptures, which expressly affirm that
the children of Korah dyed not. numb. 26.11. For they undoubtedly upon Moses
his threatening of sudden destruction, fled from their fathers tents and
escaped, and only they perished who would not be admonished by Moses, to
separate themselves from the congregation of Korah, but adhering to him were
partakers of his conspiracy, and sin of rebellion.

Sixthly when they to color their heresy, proclayme Christ's righteousness to
be the meritorious cause of justification, and yet deny communion and
imputation of it to true believers; what is this but to hold that Christ's
righteousness is meritorious to them, who have no interest in it? which being
granted it, will follow, That Christ's righteousness does merit for infidels and
damned reprobates, and does as much for the justifying of them, as it does to
justify the Elect and faithful. For true reason can conceive no cause, why
Christ does merit more, or confer more to the justification of the elect and
faithful by his righteousness, then he does to Infidels and reprobates; but
only this, that he communicates it to the elect, gives them a proper interest
in it, and makes them truly partakers of it, so that it is imputed to them,
and made their meritorious ransom: this while these men deny, they deny
Christ's righteousness to merit any more for the faithful, then for damned
reprobates. And thus their bent is to set up Pelagian and Arminian free will,
and to make this the only difference between them that are justified and them
that are damned, that whereas both alike have equal share in Christ's merits,
and Christ has merited as much for the one, as the other, and given as much
grace for justification: the one having power of free will does use it, and
will believe, and so is justified by his faith imputed for righteousness; the
other will not use the universal grace given to him, nor believe, which he
might do if he would; and therefore is damned: which is a most horrible and
abominable Doctrine, and heretical opinion.

Lastly they argue, that as in the first Covenant, GOD required works of the
Law performed by every man in his own person, and this was the condition which
man was to perform for justification, and eternal life, and so that Covenant
was not free, but conditional. So in the new Covenant GOD requires faith and
believing, which we on our part must perform for justification, life and
salvation. And hereby they abolish the freedom of the new Covenant, and make
it a Covenant conditional, and not of free grace. For what soever is
covenanted-and promised, upon a condition to be performed, is not absolutely
free nor freely given; and so according to their Doctrine, they that are
justified by faith are not freely justified by grace, whereas they plead
Scripture for their error, and allege that justification and life is promised
upon condition of believing. If you believe, you shall be saved. I answer that,
this is a gross and absurd mistake. For every conditional proposition does
not propound the conditition of a Covenant, which the party to whom a thing is
promised, must perform, that the promise may be made good to him; for such a
condition whenever it is performed, makes the thing covenanted a due debt
which the promiser is bound to give.) But oftentimes a conditional proposition
propounds the means, by which a free gift is received; or the qualification by
which one is made capable, and fit to receive, and enjoy a free gift, as for
example, it is often said in Scripture. if ye will hear and hearken, ye
shall eat the good of the land, and shall live, and not be destroyed. Isay
1.19, Ier. 26.3. and many other places. If we love one another, GOD dwells in
us. 1 John 4. If we walk in the light, we have fellowship one with another. 1
John 1.2. If we confess our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive. 1
John ^.9. If a man be just, and do that which is right he shall surely live.
Ezech 18.5.21 In all which, and the like places, there is no condition of the
Covenant propounded, but only the way and means to receive blessing, or the
quality and condition, by which men are made capable and fit to enjoy the
blessing, and sometimes the signs, tokens, and effects of them, that are in a
blessed estate. And even so when GODS word says, If you believe, ye shall be
saved, There is no condition of the Covenant, propounded to be performed on our
part, for justification, and salvation, but only the qualification; by which
GOD of his free grace does qualify, and fit us to be justified, and saved, and
the means by which he enables us to receive righteousness, and to lay hold on
salvation, which is freely given to us in Christ. Upon these particulars
severally observed out of their own words, and writings, I strongly conclude,
that this opinion being builded upon such a blasphemous, and Heretical ground,
and upheld, and maintained by such blasphemous arguments, must needs be most
impious, Heretical, and blasphemous.

Having already proved the Socinian and Arminian opinion, to be most false, and
abominable, I proceed to answer the particular arguments, contained in this 2.
Chapter, which was by the Authors own hand delivered unto me to be answered:
And because he and his followers shall not complain, of misrelating any of his
words* I will (as I have done in the former Chapter.) first lay down his own
words.

Socinianisme.
THe first argument brought to prove that faith and believing are in a proper
sense, Romans 4. said to be imputed to the believer for righteousness in
justification, and not the righteousness of Christ.

First, the letter of this Scripture speaks what we affirm plainly, and
speaks no parable about it: yea, it speaks it once, and twice, yea, it
speaks it the third, and fourth time, and is not ashamed of it. Abraham
believed GOD, and it was imputed to him for righteousness verse 3. Again to him
that works not, but believes in him that justifies, the ungodly his Faith
is counted to him for righteousness, verse 5. And yet again verse 22. And
therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness. The same phrase and
expression is used also verse 23.24. Certainly there is not any truth in
religion, not any article of our belief, that can boast of the letter of the
Scripture more full, express and pregnant for it; what is maintained
concerning the imputation of faith, has all the authority, and countenance
from the Scriptures, that words can lightly give, whereas the imputation of
Christ's righteousness (in that sense which many magnify) has not the least
relief either from any sound of words, or sight of letter in the Scripture.

Christianisme.
HIs first argument reduced into the form of a syllogism, runs thus. That
opinion which has the Letter of the Scripture, more full express and pregnant
for it, then any truth in religion, or article of our belief, and has all the
authority and countenance from the Scripture, that words can lightly give, is
certainly true.

This opinion concerning the imputation of faith in a proper sense is such.
Therefore it is a true and sound opinion.

That this imputation of faith, may boast of the letter of Scripture, and of
all the authority and countenance that words can give, he proves, because the
letter of the Scripture speaks it once, twice, yea thrice and four times, to
wit, in this Chapter, Romans verse 3.5. 22, 23, 24. to which I will add a fifth
time verse. 9. Ans.


The more true that the proposition is, the more false is the assumption,
wherein he assumes most falsely to his opinion, that which in no wise belongs
to it, and thereupon inferres a most false conclusion. I answer therefore that
his assumption is an heap of impudent lies. First the killing letter of the
Scripture may give some countenance to it, that is, speeches of Scripture
understood, and urged literally, which are spoken by GODS spirit tropically and
in a figure. This Saint Austin calls the killing letter, because they who take
the words properly, and so urge them obstinately, they slay their own souls.
But the true literal sense of the words, which are improperly literal, will
never give any countenance to this heretical opinion, as I have showed before
most fully.

2 I cannot but accuse him here of most intolerable impudency in that he
affirms, that this most Heretical opinion has more full express, and
pregnant testimony from the letter of the Scripture, then any truth in
Religion, or any article of Religion, and has all the authority and
countenance from the Scripture, that words can give, when as in all the
Scripture, faith is not once said to be imputed for righteousness, in a proper
sense, in all the word of GOD, and is only seven times said to be counted, or
imputed for righteousness, and that tropically; while the Apostle uses the
phrase borrowed from that improper speech which is spoken of Abraham, Genesis
15.6. That when Abraham believed GOD, he counted it to him for righteousness.
For it is manifest that in this. Chapter, he altogether insists upon that
speech, and does but repeat it six times: and so likewise Gal. 3.6, Saint James
also once uses it, speaking of declarative justification, to prove that
Abraham was justified by works, Iam. 2.23. that is, declared before men to be
righteous, because the Scripture says, Abraham believed GOD, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness. So that of Saint James may be believed, faith
is not the righteousness for which man is accepted with GOD, (as the Socinians
teach) but that by which man obteines the testimony of righteousness, as Iustine
Martyr understands this phrase. Now that Christ, and his fulfilling of the law
is truly, and properly, the righteousness by which all believers are justified,
constituted, and made righteous before GOD: the Scriptures do in proper
literal speech, as well as improperly more often affirm, as Isa. 61.10. Romans
3.24. Romans 4*6. Romans 5.17, 18, 19^ Romans 8.4. and 10.3.4. and Phil. 3.9. and 1
Cor. 1.30. and 2 Cor. 5.24. these twelve places do plainly teach and affirm,
that the righteousness by which men are made and constituted righteous in
justification, is Christ's obedience and satisfaction, made to the Law, for our
redemption, and nine of them are proper speeches; so that here we see the
communion of Christ's righteousness which he opposes, has more authority,
and countenance from the Scripture, and more full express, and pregnant
testimony from the letter of it. If I should instance in other truths of
Religion, as that there is one true GOD, even Jehovah, and none beside him; or
that he created all things, or concerning the deity of Christ, and of the holy
Ghost, or concerning redemption by Christ, or the last Judgment, resurrection
and life eternal: ten express, and pregnant testimonies of Scripture might be
brought to prove any one of them; for every one wherein imputation of faith is
named. So that here we see what he cannot prove by argument, he goes about by
impudent outfaceing to impose upon his hearers, and readers.

But let us examine the proof of this bold assertion even his assumption,
which certainly is as poor weak, and begerly, as his forehead is strong,
like brass, in impudent affirming it. The letter of the Scripture, (says he)
affirms it plainly once and twice, yea a third and fourth time. Therefore it
is most certainly true. To this I answer, that the letter of the Scripture
affirms that faith and believing was counted to Abraham, and is to other
believers, but not in a proper sense, but tropically; and so many things are
often affirmed by the letter of the Scripture, which if we understand them in a
proper sense, are most false, as for example. GOD is said to repent Gen* 6. two
several times, to wit* ver. 6.7. and Ier. 26. three several times, viz. ver.
3, 13.19. and Amos* 7.3, 6. and Iud 2.18. and 1 Samuel 15.11. Psalm. 135.14. Ier.
18.10. with many more. So likewise an hand, and arms, and eyes, and mouth, are
often attributed by the letter, of the Scripture to GOD, which speeches if we
should understand in a proper sense they would prove a killing letter to us;
therefore this is a most absurd and ridiculous proof well beseeming the thing
which it is brought to prove. And as he falters in his Logic and his reasons,
so he shows ignorance of rhethorik, for he takes it for a certain truth, that
one phrase four times used must needs be taken in a proper literal sense. But
rhetorik would have taught him that to use diverse tropicall speeches together,
is an Allegory, and elegancy of speech often used in Scripture, as the places
last cited show. To which let me add one most pregnant instance, Gal. 3. where
the word faith in a discourse of justification is used ten times in an improper
sense, for the Gospel which is the word of faith, and teaches justification by
Christ, and by believing in him, and not by our own works, which the Law
requires, to wit, verses 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12, 14, 22, 23, 25.

Now it may be he perceived little strength in his argument brought for his
imputation of faith, notwithstanding, his great braggs, and therefore he
shootes one fools bolt against the imputation of Christ's righteousness, which
is an argument or syllogism, consisting of an assumption without a
proposition, or a conclusion expressed: but I can conjecture what he meant to
conclude, namely, that the imputation of Christ's righteousness in justification,
is a mere faction, and ought not to be believed.

The imputation of Christ's righteousness, (in that sense which many magnify)
has not the least relief, either from sound of words, or light of letter in
the Scripture.

To which I answer, first that if this were granted (which is most false) yet
it does not follow that faith alone in a proper sense is imputed. Ridiculum
caput (says he in the Comedy) quasi necesse sit, si justitia Christi non
dicitur imputari, fidem reputari pro justitia. It is a ridiculous conceit, to
think that if Christ's righteousness be not imputed, therefore faith alone in a
proper sense must be said to be imputed. David tells us that Phinees his
executing of judgment, was imputed to him for righteousness, and Saint James
says that Abraham was justified by works, and not by faith alone: why then are
not works as well as faith imputed?

But secondly I answer that his assertion is most false, and I prove it from
the very words of the Apostle in the 4. Chapter, verse 6. where he says that
to the blessed man righteousness is imputed without works, and verse 11. where
he gathers that to the believing Gentiles, though uncircumcised, righteousness
shall be imputed. Now faith is not righteousness (as he himself confesses) for
righteousness is perfect conformity to GODS law; and this is not to be found in
all the world, but only in Christ, he alone has in man's nature fulfilled the
law. As for faith, eve^ in Abraham himself it was stained with many doubtings,
and fears at some times as when he called his wife his sister for better
safety: and so it is in the best believers. Believing also is but a duty and a
work of obedience to the Law; but this which is here said to be imputed, is a
righteousness without works, or any thing performed in our own persons;
therefore faith is not the righteousness which is here said to be imputed; but
the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, and couched under the name of
faith and believing.

Socinianisme.
SEcondly the scope of the place rejoices also in this interpretation, that
faith should be taken properly in all those passages cited, and from tropes and
metonymies it turns it self away. It is apparent to the circumspect Reader,
that the Apostles maine intent and drift in this whole discourse of
justification, was to hedge up with thorns (as it were) that false way of
justification which lay through works, and to put men from attempting any
going that way, and to open and discover the true way of justification, wherein
men shall not fail to attain that Law of righteousness before GOD: that is, in
plain speech, to make known unto them what they must do, and what GOD
requires of them to their justification, and what he will accept at their
hands this way, and what not? Now that which GOD precisely requires of men to
their justification, in stead of the works of the Law, is their faith, or to
believe (in the proper and formal signification.) He does not require of us
the righteousness of Christ, for our justification, this he required of Christ
himself; that which he requires of us for this purpose is our faith in
Christ. Therefore to certify or say unto them, that the righteousness of Christ
should be imputed to them for righteousness, would fall short of his scope and
intent this way, which was plainly and directly this, to make known unto them
the counsel and good pleasure of GOD, concerning that which was to be done
and performed by them to their justification, which he affirms from place to
place, to be nothing else but their faith in Christ or believing, whereas to
have said thus unto them that, they must be justified by Christ, or by Christ's
righteousness, and withal not to have plainly signified, what GOD requires of
them and will accept at their hand to give them fellowship in that
righteousness. For justification which is by Christ, and without which they
could not be justified, had been rather to cast a snare upon them then to have
opened a door of life, and salvation unto them.

Christianisme.
His second way of arguing to prove his opinions from the scope of the place,
and the intent of the Apostle in this discourse of justification. His maine
argument reduced into form runs thus.

The scope of the place, and intent of the Apostle is to hedge up with thorns,
the false way of justification which lay through works, and to turn men from
it; as also to discover the true way to them, to wit, what they must do, and
what GOD requires of them, to their justification, and what he will accept at
their hands, instead of the works of the Law: and that is it which he here
says is imputed for righteousness.

But faith, and believing (in a proper and formal signification) is that which
they must do, and perform to their justification, which also GOD requires of
them, instead of works of the Law, and will accept at their hands instead of
them. Therefore faith in a proper sense, is here said to be imputed

To this argument I answer, First, that in the first proposition there is some
truth affirmed, but immediately contradicted, and many falsehoodes
intermingled. That the Apostles scope and intent is to hedge up the false way
of, justification, which lay through works, and to discover the ture way, we
grant for truth. But like a mad, or drunken man, he immediately contradicts the
truth which he had affirmed, and tells us that the right way is doing, and
performing, something which GOD requires at our hands to our justification. And
what is this, but the way which lies through works? For to do and perform
something required of us, that it may be accepted of GOD at our hands to our
justification, is to seek justification by the way of working in the judgment
of men, that are sober and in their wits.

Besides this manifest contradiction, I find also much falsehood and evil
meaning. 1. In saying the truth, that the false way lies through works, that
is, works performed in obedience to the Law by every man in his own person
(which is the true intent and meaning of the Apostle) he has a further wicked
meaning, namely, that our seeking after the righteousness of Christ, which
consists in his works of obedience to the Law, is the way which lies through
works to justification, and therefore the false way. And this he declares to be
his meaning in that he immediately after labors to beat men off from Christ's
righteousness. Wherefore, I justly tax him here, not only of blasphemy, in
calling the righteousness Christ (who is the way, the truth, and the life) and
seeking justification through it, a false way: but also of stupidity and
blindness, in that he cannot see the difference between our seeking
justification by the righteousness offered to us in the Gospel to be
apprehended by faith, even Christ's righteousness; and our doing works of the
Law for our justification; or Christ's performing works of the Law in his own
person. For Christ's righteousness as it was performed by himself, was legal
and according to the strict terms of the Law: but as it comes to us by
communion, and is applied by faith, it is Evangelical. 2. In that he says God
requires something to be done of men for their Justification, which God imputes
to them, and accepts at their hands instead of the works or righteousness of
the Law. Hereby he sets up justification by some thing which a man does, and
performs, which the Apostle altogether opposes in this discourse and his
whole scope is bent against it; and his whole intent and drift is to show, that
we are justified, not by giving or doing, but by receiving that which is freely
given of GOD, and reputed for righteousness, even the righteousness of him, who
is GOD, and is called therefore the righteousness of God, Chap. 3.21. and 10.3.
Hereby also he brings in a doing and performing of something by men, which is
accepted of God, over and above that which the Law requires, which is a mere
Popish fiction, tending to dishonor the Law, and to make it an imperfect rule
of man's well doing. And withal he makes the new Covenant a condicionall
Covenant, and not of free Grace, promising justification and salvation upon
condition of men's doing.

In the second place, his assumption, wherein he affirms that faith and
believing in the proper and formal signification, is that which men must do
and perform, and which God requires and will accept at their hands instead of
works of the Law for justification: it contains in it most gross Socinian
error, and much absurdity and untruth. First, in that he calls faith and
believing a thing done and performed by men, this is directly contrary to the
Apostle, who teaches, that faith is not of our selves, but is the gift of God,
Ephesians. 2.8. and that we of our selves are not sufficient to think much less to
do that which God can accept: but our sufficiencies of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. and it
is God which works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil.
2.13. so that faith and believing are not a condition performed by us to oblige
God; but a part of the Grace freely promised in the Covenant, and given to us,
even the work and motion of his Spirit in us.

Secondly, in that he sets up faith instead of all righteousness and perfect
fullfilling of the Law: hereby he does profess himself a Socinian Heretic
in plain terms, and conspires with those Heretics to overthrow the justice of
God in our justification, and to make Christ's satisfaction vain and needless,
as I have before showed.

After his arguing for the imputation of faith, he proceeds here in his second
way of arguing, as he did in the former, to dispute against Gods imputing of
Christ's righteousness in justification. His reasons are 3. First, because God
required Christ's righteousness of Christ himself, and therefore it is not
required of GOD for our righteousness, to justification. Secondly, because the
scope of the Apostle is to show what must be done, and performed by us, and
what GOD requires at our hands, to justification, and Christ's righteousness is
not any thing performed by us, and therefore is not here said to be imputed.
Thirdly, if the Apostle had said that we must be justified by Christ and his
righteousness, without any other thing performed by us, this had been to cast
a snare upon us, rather then to open to us a door of life, and salvation.

To which I answer, that as his denying of Christ's righteousness to be imputed,
is Heretical, so also are his reasons brought to confirm his opinion. First
in that he says GOD does not require of us the righteousness of Christ, for our
justification; this phrase is not only harsh, and unsavory, but also full of
calumny, and close slander. It is harsh and absurd, like as if one should say,
that GOD requires the same particular, and individual act, done by another, to
be not done by him, but by us, which implies a gross contradiction. It is also
full of close calumny, for hereby he goes about to make men believe, that the
orthodox doctrine of justification by the communion, and imputation of Christ's
righteousness, is a teaching, and supposing, that GOD requires of us for
justification, that we be performers of the same individual works of the law,
in the propriety, and formality of them, which Christ performed, and so he
openly expresses his mind in another place, which is a base slander, as I have
before showed.

Secondly, in that he says, God required Christ's righteousness of Christ
himself, and not for our justification; This implies, that Christ had need of
justification, and was bound to fulfill the righteousness of the Law, as a
thing requisite for himself, and it savours very rank of the Samosatenian, and
Socinian heresy, which denies Christ's eternal deity, for if Christ his
humane nature, being from the first conception most pure, upright, and holy,
was personally united to the eternal Son God, equal with the father, and so
was the Son of God, and heir of all things: who can doubt but that he in
himself was worthy of glory at Gods right hand from his birth; as his taking
of our nature upon him was altogether for us, so his infirmities, sufferings,
death, and continuance on earth for the performance of all righteousness and
obedience to the Law was for us, and for all the elect, both them who of old
before his coming believed in him promised and to come; and also for them who
now do believe in him already come exhibited and exalted to glory in his
humanity. To say or think that he had need to justify, and make righteous
himself by his works, and to merit glory in heaven by his righteousness; is in
effect to deny that he is GOD infinitely worthy of all glory, as he was the
only begotten son of GOD, and heir of all things.

His second reason is a manifest falshod, to wit, that the scope of the Apostle
is to show what is to be done, and performed by us, which GOD may accept at our
hands to our justification. For the Apostles scope is to show that we are
justified freely by GODS grace, by the things which Christ did for our
redemption, cap. 3.24* and that obedience, righteousness, and satisfaction of
Christ, we must not obtain by any works of our own according to the Law, it
is freely given us of GOD, and faith is the hand by which we receive it, and
our evidence, that we are justified by it.

His third reason is blasphemy, and contradiction of Christ's own words. For
our Savior professes and affirms that he alone is the door, John 10.7. and
the way, John 14.6. and he who makes him the way and door, and seeks
justification life and salvation by the way of his righteousness, he is a true
disciple of Christ, and his Apostles. But to call the teaching of men in this
way, the casting of a snare upon them is blasphemy. Far be it from me, and from
all true Christians not to detest and* abhor such impiety, and not to think
him worthy of the curse of Anathema Maranatha, who with his mouth proclaims,
and with an obstinate heart maintains, that teaching of justification by
Christ and his righteousness is casting of a snare on men, and not of the door
of life and salvation to them.

Socinianisme.
THirdly that interpretation which is set up against it, and contendeth for the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, is clearly overthrown by several
circumstances, and passages in the context;

First it has no appearance of a likelihood in it, that the Apostle in the
great and weighty point of justification, wherein (doubtless) he desired, if
in any subject besides, to speak with his understanding, as his own phrase is,
that is, that what he himself conceives and understands may be clearly
understood by others, should time after time and in one place after another
without ever explaining himself, or changing his speech throughout the whole
disputation, use so strange and harsh and uncouth an expression, or figure of
speech, as is not to be found in all his writings besides, to say that faith
and believing is imputed for righteousness, but to mean that indeed it is the
righteousness of Christ that is imputed; were to speak rather that he might
conceal his mind then reveal it.

Christianisme.
IN this third way of arguing he lays down his arguments against the true
Orthodox interpretation of Saint Paul's speeches, concerning imputation of faith
for righteousness; which interpretation he goes about to overthrow by several
circumstances, or passages in the context. I will first sift his first argument
here laid down, and then propound and answer the rest.

Answer to the first argument.
IN this argument there are more impudent lies then full pauses, or sentences.
The first impudent lie is, that the Apostle expressing the state of
righteousness, or of a man justified by Christ's righteousness; by the name of
faith, and believing imputed for righteousness to him, should use an harsh
strange and uncouth speech, and expression: what is the man so ignorant of the
first grounds of Rhetoric, that a trope or figure of speech, is harsh strange
and uncouth with him? It is but a Metonymie to expres by the name of Faith, and
believing, the state of a believer or a faithful man, or the object of faith,
which faith has laid hold on so fast, that they cannot be separated, but he
who has the one has the other also, and by righteousness to express the state
of a righteous man justified. And when we say faith is imputed for
righteousness, to mean that the state of a believer is counted the state of
righteousness, or of a man justified; or that faith as it comprehends Christ's
righteousness, is counted to him that has it righteousness: and Christ's
righteousness which the believer by faith possesses, is set on his skore for
justification.

A second notorious untruth is, that such a figure of speech as this, is not to
be found in all the Apostles writings besides. For the same expression and
figure of speeches used by this Apostle, Cap. 2.26. as I have before plainly
showed. Yea four times in the four last verses is the same trope used,
uncircumcision first for a man uncircumcised, and secondly for the state of an
uncircumcised Gentile, and circumcision for a circumcised Jew, and again for
inward sanctification whereof circumcision was the sign and Sacrament, and ten
several times does he tropically by faith mean the Gospel, and Doctrine
thereof, which is the object of faith, Gal. 3 (as I have before noted, where he
discourses about this weighty point of justification.

A third impudent lie, and manifest falsehood is that the Apostle time after
time, and in one place after another uses the word faith or believing imputed,
without ever explaining himself, or changing his speech. For that which he
calls faith and believing, and faith it is imputed for righteousness, verse. 3.
and 5. he explaining himself, and changing his speech, v. 6.11. calls it
righteousness, and says GOD imputes righteousness, and righteousness is
imputed. In a word I do challenge him to show one place in all the writings of
this Apostle, wherein he uses this phrase of faith, or believing, imputed for
righteousness, except only here in this Chapter, and in Gal, 3. In both which
places he cites that testimony of Moses, concerning Abraham, that GOD counted
faith to him for righteousness, and urges it in the phrase of Moses, but in all
other places, where he writes of justification, he uses his own expressions,
and says that we are justified by Christ's satisfaction made for our
redemption, as Romans 3.24. and by his obedience and fulfilling of the Law Romans
5.19. and 8.4. and 10.3.4. and that Christ is made to us righteousness, 1 Cor.
1.30. and we are made the righteousness of GOD in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. If he cannot
show any place besides these, then let him be ashamed of his doings, in that
he has bent his tongue and pen like a bow for lies, and shootes out in every
passage so many notorious untruthes, that he may be suspected to have full
furnished his quiver, from the armorie of the father of lies, the Prince of
darkness.

The second Argument.
SEcondly verse 5. it is said, that to him that believes his faith is imputed
to him for righteousness. From which clause it is evident, that that faith
(whatsoever we understand by it) which is imputed is his, somewhat that ways
truly, and properly called, his, before such imputation of it be made unto
him. Now it cannot be said of the righteousness of Christ, that it is any man's
before the imputation of it to him, but faith properly taken is the believers
before it be imputed (at least in order of nature, though not in time.)
Therefore by faith which is here said to be imputed, cannot be meant the
righteousness of Christ.

Answer.
THe righteousness of Christ by spiritual union, and communion, which every
true believer has with Christ, is as truly his, as his faith. For Christ is
made unto him righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. and he is made the righteousness of
GOD in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.22. and that in order of nature before it is counted
his righteousness. For GOD whose judgment is according to truth, does not
count that to the believer, which he has not before communicated, or at the
same time does communicate to him. Secondly I answer, that if faith which is
here called his faith, be faith in a proper sense, and be imputed for
righteousness to justification, then is man justified by his own inherent
righteousness, and by a work done and performed in his own person, which
every Orthodox Divine will tell him is flat popery or worse.

The third Argument.
THirdly granting a trope, or Metonymie in this place, and that by faith is
meant the object of it, or the thing believed; yet it will not follow from
hence, that the righteousness of Christ should be said to be imputed here,
but either GOD himself, or the promise of GOD made to Abraham For it is said
verse 3. that Abraham believed GOD, not that he believed Christ's righteousness,
except we set up another trope to maintain the former, and by GOD will say is
meant the righteousness of Christ, which would be not a trope or figure, but
rather a monster of speech. Therefore the righteousness of Christ is not here
said to be imputed for righteousness, but faith properly taken. Yea whereas
the object of faith as justifying, is expressed with great variety of words,
and terms in Scripture, in all this variety there is not once to be found the
least mention, of the righteousness of Christ: as if the holy Ghost foreseeing
the kindling of this false fire, had purposely withdrawn, or withheld all
fuel that might feed it. Sometimes Christ in person is made the object of this
faith, John 3.16. besides many such expressions. Sometimes Christ in his
Doctrine, or the Doctrine and word of Christ, John 5.46. had ye believed
Moses, ye would have believed me. Sometimes Christ in the relation of his
person, and that either as he stands related unto GOD as his father, John
20.31. or else as he stands related to those ancient promises of GOD made unto
the Jews concerning a Messiah, to be given and sent unto them, John 8.24.
except ye believe that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins. Sometimes the
raising up of Christ from the dead, as Romans 10.9. Sometimes GOD himself is
made the object of faith. 1. Pet. 1.21. Sometimes the record or testimony of
GOD concerning his son, is made the object of faith, 1. Ioh. 5.10. In all
this variety or diversity of expressing the object of faith, as justifying,
there is no sound or intimation of the righteousness or active obedience of
Christ. Not but that the righteousness of Christ is, and ought to be believed
as well as other things revealed, and affirmed in the Scriptures: yea it is of
nearer concernment to the maine to believe it, then the believing of many
things besides comprehended in the Scriptures as well as it, but the reason I
conceive) why it is not numbered or reckoned up among the objects of faith, as
justifying is, because though it ought, and cannot but be believed by that
faith which iustifyeth, yet it may be believed also by such a faith, which is
so far from justifying, that it denies this Christ (whose righteousness
notwithstanding it believes) to be the son of GOD. Thus some of his own
nation (the Jews) have given testimony to his righteousness and innocence,
who yet received him not for their Messiah, nor believed him to be GOD. And
this is the frame and constitution of the Turkish faith (for the most part) at
this day.

Answer.
IN this third argument he undertakes to prove, that if faith were said to be
imputed by a trope or metonymie, and that by faith were meant the object of it,
yet Christ's righteousness cannot be meant, because the object of that faith
which is said to be imputed, is GOD himself, or the promise of GOD: But to
understand, that by GOD is meant Christ's righteousness, would be not a trope or
figure of speech, but a monster of speech. To which I answer, that Abraham's
faith which was imputed, was a believing that GOD in Christ was his shield, and
his exceeding great reward. Genesis 15.1. Now no man can in believing by a true
faith separate the righteousness, and full satisfaction of Christ GOD and man,
from Christ himself. To believe GOD to be our reward is to believe that GOD is
become our righteousness, and so our reward; for the reward of blessedness is the
reward of righteousness, and is called the Crown of righteousness. 2. Tim. 4. So
that the argument may be turned thus against himself. Whosoever truly
believes GOD to be his reward, he believes that GOD is righteousness, and so
Christ as he is JEHOVAH, his righteousness. Abraham when his faith was counted
to him for righteousness, believed that God was his reward: Therefore he
believed that God was his righteousness, and so Christ as he is JEHOVAH our
righteousness, was the object of his justifying faith. Secondly, he has here
one most gross and absurd speech, which shows either his palpable ignorance
in Rhetoric, or desperate impudency. That is, that if one should speak of
believing God, and mean believing Christ's righteousness; this were not a trope
or figure, but a monster of speech. Here I will entreat him to tell me
ingenuously whether he does hold the Lord Christ (who appeared, and spoke to
Abraham, and the Fathers, and whom they believed) to be the true God. If he
denies him to be the true God, then we shall take him to be in all points of
heresy a complete Socinian: if he grants that Christ is God, and his
righteousness performed in our nature, is the righteousness of God and
inseparable from his person; then he who truly believes in Christ, and
enjoyes him, must needs believe his righteousness, and enjoy it, and to speak of
believing in Christ God our shield, and reward, and to mean not his Godhead
barely or his naked person, but his righteousness also, and that he is JEHOVAH
our righteousness; this is but a metonymie of the subject, which non cane call a
monster of speech, but he who is ignorant in the grounds of Rhetoric.

Thirdly, in his denying, that Christ's righteousness is the object of justifying
faith, he does most openly contradict that which he has writ in the former
Chapter, in the 6 part, where he professes that Christ and his righteousness,
is the object of that faith which is imputed; and if it does not lay hold on
Christ, it is not capable of imputation. His rehearsing of the variety of the
objects of faith, mentioned in the Scripture, and denying Christ's righteousness
to be any object, or thing believed: he does notoriously delude and gull his
readers, and shows great impudency; for what more often required in the
Scripture to be believed, then that Christ is our true sacrifice for sin, and
our sacrifice of righteousness, and that he is the end and fulfilling of the
Law, for righteousness to every one that believes? yea, he gives himself the
ly, and by his own argument overthrowes his conclusion: For among the things
which the Scriptures require that we should believe, he reckons Christ
himself, and the doctrine of Christ, and the promise of Christ, the testimony
which GOD has given of his Son, and the resurrection of Christ, every one of
which includes in it Christ's righteousness; for if we believe in Christ aright,
we believe him to be the righteous servant of GOD, in whom his soul
delights, who has fulfilled all righteousness, is the end of the Law, for
righteousness to every believer, and is Jehovah, our righteousness; such a one
he was promised to be. The Gospel which is his doctrine, teaches him to be
such a one. The testimony which GOD has given of him, is that in him we have
eternal life, which is the crown of righteousness. His resurrection is the
evidence of his righteousness, and that the Law was fulfilled by him, and death
therefore could not hold him captive: so that by rehearsing these as the
objects of faith, he confuts himself, and confirms our doctrine. And lastly,
he professes vain tergiversation, openly, by granting that Christ's
righteousness is to be believed. But whereas he says that Turks, and Jews,
believe not Christ, and yet believe his righteousness; this is a monster in
speech, sense, and reason; For how can a man believe that a person which is not
is righteous, and that righteousness may subsist without a subject. None can
believe Christ's righteousness to be, as the Scripture calls it, the
righteousness of GOD, unless he believe Christ to be GOD. Some Turks acknowledge
Christ to have been a Prophet, but his perfect righteousness performed to the
whole Law for us, they do not believe. And the Jews to this day blaspheme
Christ and call him a liar, an Impostor, a deceiver, and malefactor, justly
crucified for his wickedness. And therefore in this argument he shows that his
tongue and pen are applied to ly, and forge, to contradict himself, and to be
constant in nothing but in holding obstinately his heretical conclusions.

4 Argument.
FOurthly, that faith which is said to be imputed to Abraham for righteousness
ver. 3. is that faith by which he believed in God, that quickens the dead,
and calls the things which are not as if they were. ver. 17. But the
righteousness of Christ can in no tolerable construction or congruity of
speech be called that faith by which Abraham believed in God, that quickens
the dead. Therefore the righteousness of Christ is not that faith which is here
said to be imputed for righteousness.

Answer.
I Answer, first that a true believer may truly say, my righteousness which I
have in Christ is this, that I believe in God, who quickneth the dead, and
graciously calls and counts me (who am not righteous in my self nor by my
own righteousness) a righteous and justified person.

Secondly, that God did not quicken and raise up Christ, till he had perfectly
fulfilled all righteousness, and satisfied the law for us as our surety.
Neither does he quicken any dead but through his righteousness and by his
spirit communicating it to them, the debtor or his surety, laid up in prison,
cannot be released, til the debt be fully discharged. And therefore Christ's
righteousness is comprehended by that faith which believes in God who
quickens the dead, because quickening the dead, necessarily presupposes their
communion of the righteousness of Christ, and under the name of that faith may
by a metonimie be truly said to be imputed to justification.

5 Argument.
Fifthly, the faith imputed to Abraham, ver. 3. is that faith wherein he is said
not to be weak, ver. 19. and is opposed to doubting of the promise of God
through unbelief ver. 20. But the righteousness of Christ cannot be conceived
to be that. wherein Abraham was not weak, neither does the righteousness of
Christ carry in it any opposition to doubting of the promise, through
unbelief, being a thing of a differing kind and nature from it* But between
faith properly taken, or a firm believing, and doubting through unbelief,
there is a direct and perfect opposition. And therefore it is faith in this
sense, and not the righteousness of Christ which is said to be imputed for
righteousness.

Answer.
I Answer, that though Christ's righteousness be a thing different from the
believers faith: yet when the believer by a strong faith, and without doubting
possesses Christ, and his faith does spiritually comprehend in it Christ's
righteousness; then GOD counts it to him for righteousness, that is, judges
him a righteous man by communion of Christ's righteousness, but does not judge
his faith and Christ's righteousness to be one the same very thing. This argument
is not to the matter. It may be turned against himself thus. The more strong
a man is in faith, and far from doubting of the promise through unbelief,
the more firmly he is united to Christ, and the more full communion he has
of Christ's righteousness, and with more reason may he being so faithful be
counted righteous, and Christ's righteousness under the name of faith be imputed
to him: This was Abraham's case he was strong in faith and doubted not, and
therefore having firm union with Christ, and communion of all his benefits,
GOD justly imputed faith to him for righteousness, and counted him so
believing justified, and righteous by Christ's righteousness, and so in like
case GOD will deal with other believers.

The sixth Argument.
Sixthly, that faith which was imputed to Abraham was that by which he was
assured, that he who had promised, was able also to do it, verse 21. and 22.
But the righteousness of Christ is not capable of any such description as
this, that by it Abraham was fully assured, etc. Therefore it is not that,
which was imputed to Abraham.

Answer.
I Answer to this, as to the former. It is not to the matter, until he first
prove that the name of one thing, may not be used by a Metonymie to express
another, except these two things be both one, and the same thing; we will deride
such foolish arguments. Though Christ's righteousness be not one and the same
thing with faith: yet the more it does assure us of the performance of GODS
promise in Christ, the more closely it comprehends Christ's righteousness, and
the more just cause there is* that under the name of faith, Christ's
righteousness should be imputed by a Metonymie.

The seventh Argument.
SEventhly that which shall be imputed unto us, for righteousness is said to
be our believing in him, that raised up Christ from the dead. verse 24. But the
righteousness of Christ is not our believing on him that raised Christ from
the dead, therefore it cannot be that, that is said to be imputed for
righteousness unto us.

Answer.
THere is no faith under the name whereof Christ's righteousness may so fitly
be expressed, as that which is a believing on him who raised up Christ from
the dead, for we cannot truly believe GODS raising of Christ from death, but
withal we must believe that GODS justice is by him our surety fully
satisfied, and his Law fulfilled in our behalf, and we being partakers thereof
and enjoying it by faith, GOD may justly impute this faith to us for
righteousness. Thus his arguments being all from his matter; are easily turned
upon himself.

8 Argument.
Eighthly whereas the question, or point of imputation in justification, is
handled only in this passage of Scripture (for those other places Gal. 3. and
James 2. only mention it, but insist not at all upon any declaration, or
explication thereof) it is no ways probable but that the Apostle should speak
somewhat distinctly, and plainly of the nature of it, otherwise he might
seem rather to lay a stumbling block in our way, then to have written any
thing for our learning and comfort. If we take the word faith or believing so
often used in this Chapter in the proper and plain signification of it, for
that faith whereby a man believes in Christ then the tenor of the discourse,
is as clear and full as may be, the stream of the whole Chapter runs limpid
and untroubled; but if we bring in a tropicall, and metonymicall
signification, and by faith will compel Paul to mean the righteousness of
Christ, we cloth the Sun with sackcloath, and turn Paul's perspicuity into a
greater obscurity, then any light in the Scripture knows how to comfort or to
relieve. The word faith being a term frequently used in Scripture, is yet
never found to signify the righteousness of Christ, the holy Ghost never
putting this sword into that sheath, neither is there any rule of Grammar or
figure in Rethorick, that knows how to salve up the inconsistence of such an
interpretation.

Answer.
THis argument is no more but his own bare affirmation, that it is probable
the Apostle in this place where he handles the point of imputation, would speak
plainly, and it is more plain to speak of faith, imputed in a proper sense:
the tropicall and metonymicall sense or interpretation brought in, is a
compelling of Paul to mean by faith the righteousness of Christ, and thereby
we cloth the sun with sackcloath, in which multiplicity of words, we find
much vanity. As for imputation in justification, it is not the maine and
principal point which the Apostle insists upon, the maine and principal
points of justification are in the 3. and 5. Chapter handled plainly, and in
the 8, 9, and 10. Chapters, where he plainly teaches that the righteousness by
which we are constituted, and made righteous before GOD, is Christ's obedience
and fulfilling of the Law. The imputation of faith comes in only by the way,
being occasioned by that testimony of Moses concerning Abraham, which the
Apostle brings to prove that justification is not by our own performance, or
works of the Law, but by a righteousness which GOD gives, even the fulfilling
of the Law by Christ for our redemption, which we receive and enjoy by faith
so certainly, that if we be faithful believers in Christ, then are we
righteous even in GODS account; for true faith cannot be nor subsist in any who
has not communion of Christ's righteousness. This to all judicious men is more
plain, and limpid and clear, then to take faith in a proper sense, and to set
on it the Crown of Christ's righteousness, especially seeing the Apostle in
the 6. and 11. verses shows that the thing properly imputed is
righteousness, and therefore not faith, which cannot properly be called or
counted righteousness: yea he tells us, it is a propitiation to cover our sins,
which in no case can be properly said of faith. As for his words wherein he
affirms, that there is more comfort in faith imputed, then in the
righteousness of Christ imputed; they are most wicked and more hateful then
any popery, yea blasphemous in exalting man's faith into the royal Throne of
Christ's righteousness, and calling the teaching of the imputation thereof, the
laying of a stumbling block in our way. It is to be feared that he who thus
speaks and writes has stumbled at Christ the precious stone, which GOD has
laid in his Zion, as the Apostle intimates, speaking of them who make the
righteousness of Christ a stumbling block, and stone of offense. Romans 9.33. In
the next place after these frivolous arguments, he takes upon him to answer
some places of the Apostle which are produced by us and objected against him,
wherein faith and hope are used to signify their objects, that is, the things
believed and hoped for, as Gal. 1.22^ and 3.23. and Colos. 1.5. And here he
does use notable trifling, and most absurd tergiversation. First he grants the
Apostle does use in his writings such tropes of speech, which is a thing so
manifest, that impudency it self is ashamed to deny it. And by granting this,
he contradicts what he has before affirmed, to wit, that in all the Apostles
writings such a trope is not to be found.

Secondly he opposes what before he granted, by a forged and false
distinction, affirming that the habit of faith may be used to signify the
object, but not the act, Cujus contrarium est verissimum. For in the places
objected, the act as well as the habit, and especially the act of faith and
hope are to be understood, for the habit is ordained to be exercised about the
proper object, but it never is exercised about it, nor reaches to it but by
the act, faith by believing comprehends Christ and his righteousness, and so
does hope by the acts of it, reach that within the veil. And indeed, if we
observe it, we shall see in this discourse, that faith which signifies the
habit, as well as believing which is the act, is here said to be imputed for
righteousness, as ver. 5. and 9. and therefore this distinction helps him
nothing at all.

Thirdly, he contradicts himself again, and grants that the act may be used
to express the object, but then he flees to his old shift saying that Christ's
righteousness is not the object of justifying faith, or of faith as
justifying, which error I have before confuted, and indeed it is contrary to
all reason; for the proper object of faith, as it is an instrument of
justification is nothing else but righteousness.

Fourthly, he utters a notable untruth, when he says, that the Scripture where
it speaks of faith as justifying, makes not the least mention of Christ's
righteousness, and fulfilling of the Law. Let him read Romans 3.24. and 10.4. and
tell me whether the believing of the man, to whom Christ is the end or
fulfilling of the Law, for righteousness be not justifying faith, and when we
are said to be justified by the redemption which is in Jesus Christ, whether
our believing of that our redemption be not a true justifying faith.

Lastly, he argues without reason, that though Christ's righteousness be a thing
which is to be belived, and so is a partial object of faith, yet it is not the
object of justifying faith, because creation of the world, and Christ's being
born of a virgin, and his ascension are partial objects, and yet not of faith
as it is justifying; but either Christ himself, or the promies of God,
concerning the redemption and salvation of the world by him. To which I
answer, 1 that his sylogism is without mood or figure: it is as if I should
thus reason, That Master Goodwin, though he be a living creature, yet because
some living creatures, as Asses, and Apes, are not reasonable creatures,
therefore he is not a reasonable creature. 2. I must tell him there is but one
true saving faith, and that is justifying faith: and he who can by true holy
faith believe aright the creation, or the nativity of Christ borne of a virgin,
or his ascension, he has justifying faith, though when faith is acting about
justification, the proper object is righteousness, even Christ's full
satisfaction for our redemption, and salvation, and the justifying act, is
believing that Christ is made unto us of God righteousness, and we are made the
righteousness of God in him. And faith imputed for righteousness, ver. 3. is
righteousness imputed. ver. 6. and 11. Thus you see all circumstances in the
context stand up in contestation with his exposition, which by faith here said
to be imputed, understands faith in a proper sense, and per se, not faith in
respect to Christ's righteousness.

But that I may not seem to conceal any thing, nor give any thing for his
upon trust, I will set down these tergiversations in his own words.

Socinianisme.
IF it be objected, that faith is sometimes put for the object of faith, as
Gal. 3.23 before faith came, and Gal. 1.22. he preaches the faith, etc. And
may be so used with a good propriety of speech, (mark this bull, that faith
put for the object of it, is a proper speech) as hope is put for the thing
hoped for, which is an expression usual in Scripture. To this I answer, first
by concession, it is true, the name of the faculty is sometimes put for the
object appropriated to it, neither is there any hardness or cause of offense* or
mistake in such an expression, but it rather adds a grace and countenance to
the sentence wherein it is used seasonably, and with judgment, as might be
exemplified by several Scripture instances, if it were pertinent. But 2. by
way of opposition, I answer (Here observe how he plays Jack a both sides.)
First though the faculty be sometimes put for the object, yet the act is
seldom or never (to my remembrance) the act or exercise of hope, is never put
for the things hoped for; but hope it self is sometimes found in that
signification, as Col. 1.5. for the hope which is laid up in heaven, so Tit.
2.13. looking for the blessed hope. Now that which is here said to be imputed
to Abraham for righteousness was not the habit of his faith, but Abraham
believed GOD, that is exercised or put forth, an act of faith, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness.

Secondly though it should be granted, that as well the act, as the habit or
faculty may be sometimes put for the object, yet when the act and object have
been named together, and the act expressed and specified by an object proper
to it, and somewhat immediately ascribed to the act under that consideration,
all which is plainly seen in this clause ( Abraham believed GOD, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness) in this case to conceive or to affirm, that
what is so ascribed is neither ascribed unto the act it self, there mentioned
(which is here Abraham's believing) nor to the object mentioned likewise with it
(which is here GOD, Abraham believed GOD) but to something really differing
from them both, and not so much as once mentioned in all the discourse (as
namely to the righteousness of Christ, what is this but to turn a man's back
upon the text, to look out an interpretation and to exchange that which is
plainly affirmed, with what is not so much as is obscurely intimated, or
employed, and to make the Apostle to speak as never man spoke besides, not for
the wisdom and excellency of his speech, but for the uncouth abstrusenes of
his meaning. Doubtless no instance is to be found of any Author whatsoever
sacred, or profane, who so far abhorred to be understood in what he spoke,
as to put his mind into words of such a construction.

Thirdly and lastly, neither is the righteousness of Christ the object of
faith, as justifying (as has bin said) nor does the Scripture where it speaks
of faith, as justifying, which are places not a few, make the least mention, or
give the least intimation of such a thing. It is true the Scriptures often
propound the righteousness of Christ, or his obedience to the law, as that which
is to be believed, and so it may be termed a partial object of faith, somewhat
that is and ought to be believed: but so the creation of the world is
propounded to be believed, and that Cain was Adams son, is somewhat to be
believed. And generally whatsoever the Scriptures affirm, may be called a
partial object of faith. But the object of faith properly as it justifies, is
either Christ himself, or the promise of GOD concerning the Redemption and
salvation of the world by him. The righteousness of Christ is no more the object
of faith as justifying, then either his being borne of a Virgin, or his
ascending into heaven, or the like, and either the one or the other might as
well be here said, to be imputed to Abraham for righteousness, in that respect
as his righteousness. Thus you see at large how many passages and
circumstances in the context, stand up in contestation with that exposition
which by Paul's faith in this Chapter, will needs understand Christ's
righteousness.

Answer.
THat which I have noted before gives light to see many tergiversations, and
much trifling in this passage. Let me only here desire him to repeat the
words which he chiefly stands upon, to wit, Abraham believed GOD, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness, and tell me whether righteousness be not
named, which was imputed to Abraham* and all who truly believe, as appears,
verse 6. and 11. and what righteousness can be found fit to justify a man
before GOD, besides Christ's righteousness?

Socinianisme.
FOurthly and lastly, this interpretation we contend for, according to which
the word faith, or believing is to be taken properly in all the passages
mentioned, and not tropically or metonymically) was the common interpretation
anciently received, and followed by the Church of GOD from the primitive times,
and for 1500. years was never questioned or contradicted, neither did the
contrary opinion ever look out into the world, till the yesterday of the last
age, I speak this somewhat above the analogy, and proportion of mine own
reading in matters of antiquity, (which I confess will not amount to any such
confidence) but I am confident in this behalf upon the undertaking of another,
who searched diligently what interpretation of this Scripture ruled amongst the
learned and Orthodox writers from time to time, so that it is but a calumny of
evil report brought upon the opinion and interpretation of this Scripture
which we maintain, unworthy the tongue or pen of any learned or sober man, to
make either Arminius or Socinus the Authors, or first founders of either. And
for the last hundred years and upward, from Luther and Calvin's times, the
fairest stream of interpreters so runs, as to water and refresh the same
interpretation: you will easily incline (I presume) to believe both the one and
the other, that both former and latter times have been friends and favorers
to the interpretation given; if you will please with diligence, and without
partiality, to examine these few testimonies, and passages following, as they
stand in their several Authors respectively.

Christianisme.
HEre he enters into his fourth and last way of confirmation, that is, to
confirm his opinion, and interpretation, by testimony of learned Divines, both
ancient and modern writers, even from the Primitive times, to the year 150.
after Christ. His beginning is with great swelling words, and with wonderful
confidence, though builded not upon any reading, or knowledge, of his own, but
upon the testimony of another, doubtless of some Socinian braggadogo, or
impudent Arminian, whom he is ashamed to name, who are all of this spirit,
that when they build upon weakest ground, and are most strongly convinced by
testimonies of Scripture, and unanswerable arguments, then they affirm and
outface most impudently, and brag and ly, as if they contended to win the
whetstone: Nay, we think that this confession of his small reading, is out of
modesty, or out of Satanicall subtilty? that as the Devil in the person of the
Serpent vented his lies to our first Parents, so he may belch out desperate
lies and forgeries under the person of another concealed Author, verily I fear
the latter. because on another word, he does so boldly, and impudently,
charge all the learned of the best note in this age with calumny, and false
report, raised upon his opinion, (unworthy the tongue and pen, of sober and
learned men) in that they make Arminius or Socinus, chief and first Authors of
it, and with out blushing affirms that the fairest stream of interpreters
from the time of Luther, and Calvin runs as water to refresh his
interpretation. In both which I find such manifest falsehood, that no man of
any reading can so speak and affirm, without a brazen face, maintaining
wilful and manifest lies against his own conscience. First to the bold charge
of our learned Divines with calumny, for taxing Socinus, and Arminius, as
chief and first Authors of his opinion, I answer, That although that infamous
heretic, Petrus Abailardus, who was gelded for his incontinence, by a man
whose daughter he had abused) laid the first ground of this opinion, that
Christ's satisfaction is not imputed to justification: (as Saint Bernard shows,
Epist. 190.) Yet the first Authors who expressly affirmed that fides per se,
that is, faith by it self in a proper sense, without a trope, is by the
Apostle said to be imputed, for righteousness, were Servetus, as Calvin shows,
in opusculis, Socinus, part 4. cap. 4 and 11. de Christo Servatore. And
Arminius in Epist. ad Hippolitum de collibus. these. 5. Secondly to his false
pretense of the maine stream of writers, since Luther, and Calvin: so running
as water to refresh his interpretation, I do answer and confidently affirm,
that there is not one Orthodox writer to be found since that time, which ever
held, that faith in a proper sense is imputed for righteousness, and denied the
imputation of Christ's righteousness. Servetus, Socinus, Arminius and the rest of
their sect, branded for heretics, are the only maintainers of that opinion.

To his testimonies and his impudent boasting of the general consent of
interpreters, I answer, First jointly and in general, That of all the
testimonies which he has cited, there is not one which either affirms that
faith taken in a proper sense is imputed for righteousness, or denies the
imputation of Christ's righteousness. Moreover, that all Divines who are the most
zealous opposers of his interpretation, may say the same words which he cites
out of Authors: and yet hold justification by Christ's righteousness imputed, yea
and in proving that truth may with good reason press and urge the same words
rightly understood. So that a more odious example of folly and impudency
cannot be showed then he here shows himself by, making his folly strive for
Mastery with his impudency.

Secondly, for the particular testimonies which he brings both out of ancient
and modern writers. They say no more but what Saint Paul says, and we all
acknowledge and embrace for truth, viz. That Abraham believing that in Christ,
and through his satisfaction, GOD was become his reward, was thereupon counted
righteous, and GOD counted faith to him for righteousness, and so are we all
justified, not by our own righteousness of works performed to the Law in our
own persons, but by faith laying hold on the righteousness of Christ, which is
counted for righteousness, not in a proper sense, but relatively, as it
comprehends Christ and his righteousness, which Calvin calls apprehending the
goodness of GOD, and trusting in it. First for Tertullians words, I take them,
as he does render and rehearse them, and so the rest in order, and will take a
light view of them, that we may see his vanity, in citing testimonies which
make nothing for him, but some directly against his opinion.

Tertulian Lib. 5. c. 3 against Marcion.
But how the children of faith? and of whose faith, if not of Abraham's? for if
Abraham believed GOD, and it was deputed to him for righteousness, and he
thereby obtained the name of the father of many nations; we by believing GOD
are therefore much rather justified, as Abraham was. And lib. de patientia cap.
6. Abraham believed and was deputed by him to righteousness; but he tried his
faith by patience, when he was commanded to sacrifice his son.

All this we grant, Answer
for here is not a word of imputing faith in a proper sense, only an
affirmation that Abraham by believing, obtained this at GODS hands, that he was
accounted and reputed to be in the state of a righteous man, which we all
profess.

Origin in Epist. ad Romanos, Cap. 4. verse 5.
IT seems in this present place, that whereas many beleevings of Abraham werk
before, now in this believing his whole faith was gathered together, and so was
reputed to him for righteousness, and again in the same place Abraham was not
by GOD testified to be righteous, for his circumcision, but for his faith, for
before his circumcision, he believed GODS and it was counted to him for
righteousness.

If Origens meaning be, as Beza gathered from these, Answer
and other words in that place, that Abraham's faith and all his acts of
believing made up a perfect righteousness, and conformity to GOD, will and
law; then is he in as great an error, as the Papists who set up justification
by a man's own inherent righteousness, and his testimony is to be abhorred.
But if his meaning be that by his believing, and not by his circumcision, he
obtained from GOD this testimony, that he was righteous by a righteousness
believed, then he is full for us, and against his interpretation.

Justine Martyr Dialog. with Trypho.
ABraham not for his circumcision, but for his faith obtained the testimony of
righteousness: for before he was circumcised, it is said of him, Abraham
believed GOD, and it was counted to him for righteousness.

We grant that Abraham believing GOD to be his reward in Christ; Answer
this faith was the evidence of his being righteous by apprehension of Christ,
and his righteousness, and therefore by it he obtained a testimony from GOD,
that he was in the state of righteousness. And Justine Martyrs words say the
same, and so he is clear for us against them, who make faith the righteousness
imputed in a proper sense, and not the evidence of righteousness.

Chrysostom on Romans 4.23. says that the Apostle
HAving spoken many and great things concerning Abraham and his faith, says,
wherefore is it written but that we might learn, that we also are justified
as he was, because we have believed the same GOD? and on Gal. 3.6. For what
was he the worse for not being under the Law? nothing at all, for his faith was
sufficient to him for righteousness. All this we grant. For as Abraham's faith
laying hold on GOD, as his reward in Christ by communion of his righteousness,
was sufficient to him for righteousness, so is our faith also sufficient for
us to justification, because by it we possess Christ's righteousness.

Augustine on the 148 Psalm. says,
FOr by believing we have found what the Jews lost by not by unbeleeving, for
Abraham believed GOD, and it was imputed to him for righteousness, and on
Psalm. 140. for I believe in him who justifies the ungodly, that my faith may
be imputed to me for righteousness, and in his book de natura and gratia. For
if Christ dyed not in vain, the ungodly is justified in him alone, to whom
believing in him that justifies the ungodly, faith is accounted to him for
righteousness, and in his 68. sermon de tempore, Abraham believed GOD, and it
was imputed to him for righteousness. See that without any work he is
justified by faith, and whatsoever was possible to be conferred on him by his
observation of the Law, his believing alone gave it all unto him, where note
that believing gives righteousness, and is not the righteousness given in
justification.

Primasius on Romans 43. says.
Abraham's faith by the gift of GOD was so great, that both his former sins
were forgiven, and this faith alone is said to be accepted before all
righteousness: that is, before all righteousness of his own, not instead of
Christ's righteousness. For if it had not laid hold and possessed the full
satisfaction of Christ, it could not have gotten pardon of his sins.

Beda's words which he cites concerning the faith which is imputed, are only
these, not every faith, but that only, which works by love. This is a
certain truth, for no faith can bring to us a true sense and assurance of our
communion with Christ, but that which works by love.

Haymo on Romans 43, says, Quia credidit Deo, etc. Because he believed GOD, it
was imputed to him for righteousness, that is, for remission of sins,
because by that very faith by which he believed, he was made righteous: These
words show that faith by way of efficiency, and as an instrument makes men
righteous, even as it brings remission of sins by applying Christ's
satisfaction to them.

Anselmes words are, that he believed so firmly, this was by GOD counted to
him for righteousness, that is, by this belief he was reputed righteous. And
I say there was good reason, that he who by firm faith is partaker of Christ's
righteousness, should be reputed righteous before God.

These are his testimonies which he cites out of the Ancients whose maine
stream, as he boasted, did so run as to water his opinion. But we see they
so run as to overwhelme and wash away his muddie, and slimie opinion and
interpretation. Not one syllable of faith in a proper sense counted for
righteousness: Thus the mountains have traveled of a child, and have roared
out, and have made a terrible sound, and bustling, and when it comes forth in
the birth, it is ridiculus mus, nay not so much as a poor drowned Mouse, in
the eyes of judicious readers.

I proceed to his testimonies of modern Divines.
LVther on Gal. 3.6* Christian righteousness is an affiance or confident resting
on the Son of GOD, which confidence is imputed for righteousness, for Christ's
sake, and a little after, GOD counts that imperfect faith for perfect
righteousness for Christ's sake, in whom I have begun to believe. We cannot
desire plainer words to prove that faith is not the righteousness by which we
are justified, nor so in a proper sense counted, but propter Christum, that is,
by reason, of him which it possesses with all his benefits and full
satisfaction.

Bucers words are, Abraham believed God, and he accounted this faith to him
for righteousness: and therefore (says he) by believing he obtained this, that
God esteemed him for a righteous man. These words show, that his faith was not
his righteousness, but the thing by which he obtained the estimation of a
righteous man. Peter Martyrs words are, To be imputed for righteousness in
another sense, signifies that by which we our selves are reckoned in the
number of the righteous, and this Paul atributs to faith only, mark the
words, he does not say, that faith properly is our righteousness, but the only
thing by means of which we com to be reckoned in the number of the righteous
Calvin on Rom 4.3. Abraham by believing, does embrace the grace offered to him,
that it might not be frustrate: If this be imputed to him for righteousness, it
follows, that he is no other way righteous, but because trusting in Gods
goodness he has boldness to hope for all other things from him. And again* on
verse 4. Faith is counted for righteousness, not because it brings from us any
merit unto GOD, but because it apprehends the goodness of GOD. These and such
speeches of Calvin affirm no more, but that faith is imputed for righteousness,
not properly in it self, nor for any merit or worth of it, but merely for
that which it apprehends and embraces when it is tendered. That is, GODS
goodness in giving Christ with all his benefits, and righteousness.

Musculus in his common places. ss. 5. This faith ought to be commended, not in
respect of any proper quality, but in respect of Gods purpose, by which he has
appointed, that it, to believers in Christ, should for his sake be imputed in
the place of righteousness. These words cut the throat of his interpretation;
for they tell us, that faith is imputed for righteousness, not for it self, or
any proper quality in it, but for Christ's sake, which is his righteousness sake.
Also on Gal. 3.6. What did Abraham that should be imputed to him for
righteousness, but only this, that he believed GOD? Indeed, believing is the
only means to receive Christ's righteousness, and therefore by believing only
we come to be counted righteous. Also on Genesis 15. He so speaks of Abraham's
faith, that it is plain he disputes of that faith by which men do not simply
believe GOD, but believe in him. That is, trust only in GOD, and rely on the
righteousness of Christ, God and man.

Again afterward: But when he firmly believed GOD, promising, that faith was
imputed to him in the place of righteousness, that is, he was reputed of God
righteous for that faith, and absolved from all his sins. It is true, it must
be an holy faith, and a firm belief which must so receive Christ and his
righteousness, that it may be reputed to us for righteousness, and we may be
reputed righteous, and absolved from our sins.

Bullinger on Rom 4.
Abraham committed himself to God, and that very thing was imputed to him for
righteousness. These words show, that faith in a proper sense, is not imputed,
but our committing of our selves wholly to GOD, by faith, and relying on his
righteousness, is that which is counted for righteousness. He adds also on Gal.
3.6. That same faith of Abraham by which he believed on GOD was imputed for
righteousness: And very well it might, for by that he laid hold on GOD, as his
reward, and his righteousness, and shield.

Gualthers words on Romans 4.4. are no more but the bare words of Moses Genesis
15.6. Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness. You see
he is put hard to it, when he cites the bare words themselves to prove his
interpretation of them.

Aretius his words prove, that faith is so acceptable to GOD, that he counted
Abraham righteous upon his believing, by the righteousness of Christ, imputed
and set on his skore, not inherent in him: For thus his words run, (as he here
cites them) Romans 4 He imputed righteousness, that is, he so far accepted his
faith, as thereupon to account him righteous, by a righteousness which is
imputative. That is, not by any righteousness of faith, or other works or
graces inherent in him, but by Christ's righteousness, which is imputative, such
as may be communicated spiritually, and set on the believers account. Also on
verse 22. A faith so firm and pious, was imputed to Abraham for righteous.
Hereby he notes that it must be a firm and godly faith which is accepted of
GOD, for no other but a firm and pious faith can possess Christ's
righteousness, by reason of which it may be imputed to the believer for
righteousness.

Illyricus on Romans 4.3.
That same believing was imputed to him for righteousness, yea, for true
righteousness. These words show that the righteousness for which faith is said to
be counted is true righteousness, that is, only the righteousness of Christ
only, for faith of it self is no true righteousness.

The words cited afterward are directly against himself. That begging faith
laying hold on Christ's righteousness, was imputed to him in the place of his own
inherent righteousness: It is not therefore faith per se proprio sensu, but
faith holding fast Christ's righteousness, which is counted for righteousness.

Pelican in Genesis 15.6.
He simply believed GODS word, and asked no sign of the LORD, and he did
impute that very faith unto Abraham himself for righteousness, by which GOD is
believed to be propense or ready for our good.

Hunius also says, The faith by which Abraham believed GOD promising was
imputed to him for righteousness.

Beza says, Here the business is concerning that which was imputed to him,
namely, his faith* Inius, and Tremellius on Genesis 15.6. GOD esteemed or counted
him for righteous, though wanting righteousness, and reckoned him to be in the
state of righteousness, because by firm faith he embraced the promises.

Paraus Romans 4.3.
We understand by the word faith, which is said to be imputed for
righteousness, Abraham's resting, not in himself, or his own merits, but in the
promise and good will of GOD. These testimonies are brought to beg the
question, for they only affirm, that faith is imputed: and by believing, men
come to be counted righteous: but there is not in any one the least intimation,
that faith is imputed in a proper sense, but their own words in the same
places show, That faith by reason of that which it believes, and apprehends,
that is, Christ with all his merits, and benefits, is counted for righteousness,
which is our true, genuine and Orthodox exposition of the Apostles words.

And thus I have answered all whatsoever he has said for his interpretation,
only his several falsehoods, and manifest untruthes in several phrases, and
boasting words prefixed before the testimonies, of every Author whom he
names. I leave to the Reader to observe; For indeed they are most palpable,
that every man of understanding may run and read them.

But because I will not have such a forger, and false suborner of witnesses
escape away without the just brands of forgery, and notorious impudency. I will
bring in the best learned of the Ancients and also of late Orthodox Divines,
even those whom he calls to witness for him; and will make them speak in
their own words, and testify to all the world, that by faith imputed for
righteousness, they understand not faith by it self in a proper sense; but
the satisfaction and righteousness of Jesus Christ GOD and man, performed
according to the Law, in our nature and in our behalf, that through him the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who believe in him, and are
lead by his spirit.

First Justin Martyr testifies that we being in our selves transgressors, and
ungodly, cannot possibly be justified but in the only son of GOD: now if
only by being in him, and by that union and communion which all have with him
who are in him, then only by his righteousness. For as the same Author says
in the same place, It is his righteousness and nothing else, which can cover our
sin. Justin Martyr in Epist. ad Diognetum. and in exposit^ fidei, he says
that Christ as well by his exact conversation of life (that is, his perfect
righteousness) as by his undeserved death has abolished and covered our falls
and failing which came in by Adam.

Irenaeus is so strict for our communion with Christ in his obedience unto
death, and for our reconciliation and justification thereby, that he imputes
Christ's obedience to us, and says. Jn secundo Adamo reconciliati sumus,
obedientes usque ad mortem facti. In the second Adam we are reconciled, being
made obedient even unto death. lib. 4. c. 14. adversus haereses.

Athanasius in his 2 Tom. page 270. of Cornelius edition, says that it is most
necessary for us to believe the Scriptures, that Christ who has freed us from
the curse, is the first fruits of the mass of mankind who are by him
redeemed, and that the perfect fulfilling of the law by him the first fruits,
is imputed to the whole mass, his words in greek are (...). And in his book
de incarnat. verbi, he affirms that we shall live, and be saved, because we
are partakers of the righteousness without spot, which Christ GOD in the flesh
brought into the world.

Gregory Nyssen Orat. 2. in Cantica says, Christ having the filth or guilt of
my sins transferred upon himself, has communicated his perfect purity to me,
and made me partaker of that beauty which is in himself.

Ambrose says, as Adam is the pattern of death because of sin, so Christ is
the pattern of life, because of his righteousness, in cap. 7. Lucae lib. 5.
And our justification by faith, and not by works, he says was prefigured by
Jacobs getting of the blessing in sweet smelling garments. Jacob was a type of
every true believer under the Gospel, Rebecca of the Church. The garments of
the first borne Christ's righteousness. The Jews of the elder testament, like
Esau, sought righteousness by their own works, and true believers put on the
righteousness of Christ by faith, being so taught by the Church their mother,
and obtain by the merit of it the blessing.

Ambrose lib. 2. c. 2 de Jacob and vita beata.
Chrysostom says, If a Jew ask thee how can all the world be saved by the
righteous doings of one Christ? thou may answer him, even as all the world
is condemned by one Adams disobedience, on Romans 5. homil. 10.

And in his book de recta fide, It is absurd (says he) to think that we
should be made heirs of the punishment of the first Adam, by his
disobedience, and should not be partakers of the righteousness of the second
Adam, who does bring us to life by his most perfect obedience, Theodoret. Sermon.
10. de curand. Graec. affect. says, It is very convenient that he who highly
praised righteousness, should in his coming in the flesh fulfill
righteousness for men.

Augustine Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 41. says, he was made sin, that we might
be made righteousness, not our own, but GODS righteousness; not in our selves
but in him: even as he was sin, not his own sin, but ours; not in
himself, but in us. And sermon. 6. de verb. Apost. he says, GOD the father made
him sin, that we might be made the righteousness of GOD in him. Behold
here two things: the righteousness of GOD not our own^ (...) not in our selves.

Leo the (...), Epist. 70* says* that, by the innocence of one we are all made
innocent, and that by righteousness from him, derived unto men, who has taken
man's nature upon him.

Bernard. Epist. 190. as one has borne the sins of all, so the satisfaction
of one is imputed to all. It was not one which forfeited, and another which
satisfied: for the head, and the body is one Christ. Also in sermon. ad Milites
templi he says, Death is made to flee away in the death* of Christ, and
Christ's righteousness is imputed to us: and a little after, He who has
willingly been incarnat, willingly suffered, and willingly crucified, will he
keep back his righteousness from us? and again one man sinned, and all are
made guilty, and shall the innocence of one (Christ) be imputed only to one?

Anselme on Rom 5. says, that by the righteousness of one, coming upon all the
elect, they come unto justification, that they may be justified by
participation of Christ's righteousness. These with many other testimonies
which might easily be gathered out of the Ancients from the primitive times,
until Luther, do abundantly show the impudency of this man, who so
peremptorily affirms, that the communion and imputation of Christ's
righteousness for justification, was never dreamed of among ancient writers,
but only faith imputed for righteousness in a proper sense, all these
Ancients before named testify the contrary. But to descend to Orthodox
writers, of this last age since Luther: It is well known that they generally
hold imputation of our sins to Christ, and of Christ's satisfaction and
righteousness to us for justification, to be the form of justification, by
which believers are justified.

Luther acknowledged, that it was the doctrine of Saint Bernard, concerning
justification by Christ's righteousness imputed, and not by our own works;
which moved him to suspect the popish doctrine, and to grow into dislike, and
loathing of their religion.

And in his commentary on Galat. where he does debase the righteousness of
works, and does most highly extol the righteousness of faith, he tells us,
that faith being weak in many of GODS children, cannot be accepted for
righteousness of it self, that is, in a proper sense, and therefore there is
necessarily required imputation of righteousness for justification, on
Galatians 3.6.

In editione Jenensi. Tom. 1. page 32. he says, faith obtaines what the Law
commands, and what is that but obedience and righteousness? and again, by
faith Christ is in us, yea one body with us* but Christ is righteous and a
fulfiller of the Law; wherefore we all do fulfill it, while Christ is made
ours by faith.

Also Tom. 3. p. 539. when Paul ascribes justification to faith, we must of
necessity understand, that he speaks of faith laying hold on Christ, which
makes Christ of efficacy against sin and the Law.

Also Tom. 2. page 515. Faith settles us upon the works of Christ without our
own works, and translates us out of the exile of our sins, into the
kingdom of his righteousness.

And Tom. 1. page 410. Sin is not destroyed unless the Law be fulfilled, but
the Law is not fulfilled, but by the righteousness of faith, and page 437. To
keep the Law is to have and possess Christ the fulfiller of the Law. And Tom.
4. page 44. Faith justifies because it comprehends and possesses that
treasure, to wit, Christ and page 45. we say that Christ does form faith, or
is the form of faith. And Tom. 2. upon Genesis The laying hold on the promises
is called sure and firm faith, and does justify, not as it is our work. These
speeches show plainly, that Luther conceived Christ's righteousness to be after
a sort the formal righteousness of the believer, though not formally inherent,
yet formally possessed, and enjoyed by faith.

Concerning this justifying righteousness Luther also teaches, that it is not
in our selves, but in Christ, even his fulfilling of the Law, for us, made
ours* and imputed to us. Tom. 1. page 106. By faith (says he) are our sins
made no more ours, but Christ's, upon whom GOD has laid the iniquities of us
all, and he has borne our sins: And on the other side, all his righteousness
is made ours, for he lays his hand upon us. And page 178. The righteousness of a
Christian is the righteousness of another, and comes to him from without. It is
even Christ, who is made unto us of God righteousness; so that a man may with
confidence glory in Christ, and say, Christ his living, doing, and suffering,
is mine, no otherwise then if I had lived, done, and suffered, as he did: as
the married man possesses all that is his wives, and the wife all the goods
which are her husbands, for they have all things common, because they are
become one flesh: and so Christ and the Church are one spirit; by faith Christ's
righteousness is made ours, and all his are ours, yea, himself is ours.

And Tom. 2. page 86. The righteousness by which we are justified before GOD, is
not in our own persons, but without our selves in GOD, because man shall have
no cause to boast of his own proper righteousness before GOD.

And Tom. 2. page 385. A Christian is not formally righteous, by reason of any
substance or quality in him, but relatively in relation to Christ, in whom he
has true righteousness.

Melancthon in Epist. ad Romans 8.4. says, wherefore Paul's meaning is thus to be
taken; that Christ is given for us, that we may be counted to have satisfied
the Law, by him, and that for him we may be reputed righteous; Although we our
selves do not satisfy the Law, another fulfilling of it is freely given to
us, and is imputed to us, and so the Law is imputatively fulfilled in us. And
so when the Apostle says that Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness,
that is, he who has Christ is righteous, he is reputed to have satisfied the
Law, and he imputatively has that which the Law requires. And on chap. 10.4.
upon these words ( Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, etc) he
says, this is the simple meaning, Christ is the fulfilling of the Law to the
believer, and he who has Christ, that is, believes in him, is righteous, and
has imputatively, what the Law requires.

The Book of concord subscribed by so many hundreds of Evangelicall Ministers,
of the reformed Churches in Germany, in the Articles of justification says,
that when we speak of justifying, it is to be known that these three objects
concur, which are to be believed. 1. The promise of the benefit, that is,
mercy for remission of sins, and justification, 2. That the promise is most
free, which excludes our merits. 3. The merits of Christ, which are the price
and propitiation, and a little after, faith does not justify, because it is a
work worthy by it self, (that is, in a proper sense) but only because it
receives the mercy promised. And again, How shall Christ be our mediator, if
in justification we do not use him for our mediator: that is, if we do not
feel that for him we are reputed righteous.

The Divines of the Augustane confession, condemned Osiander, who held that the
righteousness of faith, was the essential righteousness of GOD, and also them
who taught that Christ is our righteousness, only according to his humane
nature. And in the Epitome of the Articles, controverted by some, they with one
consent affirmed* that the righteousness of faith, is remission of sins,
reconciliation, and adoption to be Sons of God, for the obedience of Christ
only which by faith alone of mere grace is imputed to all believers. Artic 3.
de fidei justitia.

And this obedience of Christ which is imputed for righteousness, they affirm
to be the obedience which he performed both in his death and passion, and also
in his fulfilling of the Law, for our sakes. Ibid. Artic 3. And concerning
faith, they teach that in justification before God, it trusts neither in
contrition nor love, nor any other virtues but in Christ alone, it is the only
mean and instrument which receives the free grace of GOD, the merit of Christ,
and remission of sins, and rests on Christ's most perfect obedience, by
which he fulfilled the Law for us, which obedience is imputed to believers for
righteousness. Ibid Artic. 3.

Calvin is so zealous, and so plain and perspicuous in teaching and
maintaining the doctrine of justification, by the communion and imputation of
Christ's perfect obedience to the Law, even his full satisfaction, and
righteousness, that among Christians who read Calvin's institutions, one would
think the very Father of liars, the Devil himself should, if not blush and be
ashamed, yet in policy and subtilty be afraid, to call Calvin for a witness on
his side, in this point, least the most simple should see and discern him for
an open liar, and forger, and abhor and hiss him out with derision. The
Doctrine of Calvin concerning justification, I will lay down in certain
Articles, gathered from his own writings, especially his Institutions. Lib. 3.
cap. 11. and 12.

First he affirms in plain words* that justification consists in remission
of sins, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness. cap 11. ss 2.

As for the word remission of sins, he uses it two ways; sometimes in a
large sense, for that act of GOD, by which he does communicate, and impute the
full satisfaction of Christ unto his elect, and faithful, so that the whole
guilt of all sins, both of commission, and omission, is thereby taken away,
and they are no more accounted, nor appear in his sight as sinners. In this
sense he calls remission of sins in his comment on Romans totum
justificationis, and in his Instit. 3. cap. 11. sect 4 totam justificationem.
For indeed when the guilt of all sins of omission, and commission are taken
away by that part of Christ's satisfaction imputed, which is called his passive
obedience, or voluntary suffering of the penalties of the Law, and the defects
which come in by the sins of omission, supplied by his active obedience, in
fulfilling the righteousness which the Law requires, which is the other part of
Christ's satisfaction imputed; so that now the elect are reputed, and esteemed
as righteous men, who have the defects which came by omission supplied, and,
have no more the sins of commission or omission imputed, the guilt being
taken away: this is perfect and whole justification, and is very fitly called
by the name of remission, to distinguish it from justification by our own
works, and by our own inherent righteousness.

But sometimes he uses this word remission, in a more strict sense, for that
part of GODS act of communicating, and imputing Christ's satisfaction, which
respects the passive obedience of Christ, which takes away the guilt of sins
committed, but does not supply the omission of righteousness, and in this
sense he makes remission of sins, but a part of justification. And GODS
imputing of the active part of Christ's satisfaction, and counting the faithful
righteous by it imputed; he makes the other part of justification in the
words before cited, Lib. 3. cap. 11. ss. 2.

Secondly he constantly teaches, and affirms that there is no
righteousness, by which a man can stand before GODS tribunal, and be
accepted for righteous in his sight: but only the full satisfaction of Jesus
Christ, and his perfect righteousness, which he GOD and man performed in our
nature. For that which is not entire and absolute, and without all stain, and
spot of sin, such as never has been nor shall be found in any mere man,
can never be accepted of GOD, but is with him slighted and vilified beyond all
measure. And whosoever prate of any righteousness in men's own works, or
doings, they have no true thought, nor least sense of the justice of GOD, but
make a mock of it. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 12. ss. 1.3. and 11.16.

Thirdly he affirms that man is justified by faith, when he is excluded from
the righteousness of works, and by faith lays hold on the righteousness of
Christ, with which he being clothed does appear in the sight of GOD, not as
a sinner but as a righteous man, Instit. 3. cap. 11. ss. 1.

And the same chap. ss.. 11. This is that admirable way of justifying, that
being covered with Christ's righteousness, men do not fear the judgment of
which they are worthy, and while they deservedly condemn themselves, they are
reputed righteous without themselves.

Fourthly concerning the office of faith in justification, he teaches, that
faith being in it self weak, imperfect, and of no dignity, worth, price or
value, is never able to justify us by it self, but by bringing Christ unto
us, who is given to us of GOD for righteousness, it is not our righteousness,
but it makes us come with the mouth of the soul wide opened, that we may be
capable of Christ. And it is as a vessel or pot; for as the pot full of money
enricheth a man, so faith filled with Christ and his righteousness, is said to
justify us, and to be counted for righteousness. It is a foolish thing to
mingle our faith, which is only the instrument of receiving righteousness,
with Christ who is the material cause, and both the Author and minister of
this great benefit, cap 11. ss. 7. And again, ss. 17. Faith is hereupon said
to justify, because it receives and embraces righteousness offered in the
Gospel.

Fifthly he affirms that the righteousness by which believers are justified,
and stand righteous before GOD, is not in themselves, but in Christ, even his
perfect obedience, and righteousness communicated to them by imputation. ss.
23.

Lastly he shows how this righteousness comes to be the righteousness of
believers, and to be so communicated to them, that GOD does justly impute it
to them for justification, and accepts it as if it were their own, to wit,
by means of their spiritual union, and conjunction with Christ, by which they
are made partakers of Christ, and with him and in him, possess al his riches,
Sect. 10.20.23. This is the sum of Calvin's Doctrine, concerning justification
briefly comprised, and collected out of his words in the places before cited,
where the Reader may be fully satisfied.

Beza in the doctrine of justification, by faith does fully agree with Luther,
and Calvin, in all the former articles. First he says, that faith is not any
such virtue as does justify us in our selves before GOD, for that is to set
faith in the place of Christ, who alone is our whole and perfect
righteousness. But faith justifies, as it is the instrument which receives
Christ, and with him his righteousness, that is most full perfection, and we
say, that we are justified by faith only; because it embraces Christ, who
does justify us, with whom it does unite and couple us, that we may be
partakers of him and all his goods, which being imputed to us, are sufficient
that we may be absolved before GOD, and deemed righteous. Confess. cap. 4.
ss. 7. in notes on Romans 3.22.24.

Secondly, that faith sends to Christ for perfect righteousness, to
justification, and that it assures us of salvation through his righteousness
alone, because whatsoever is in Christ is imputed to us, as if it were our
own, if so be we embrace him by faith: The righteousness of Christ which is
imputed, he describes to be the greatest, and most absolute perfection of
righteousness, consisting in these two things. First that he has no sin in
him. Secondly that he has fulfilled all the righteousness of the Law.
confess. cap. 4 ss. 8. in his notes on Rom 3.22.26. and Romans 4.5. and 5.12. and
Phil. 3.9.

Thirdly he shows that we come to have communion of Christ's righteousness,
by spiritual union, and marriage with Christ. If (says he) we be united, and
joined together into fellowship with Christ by faith, nothing is more properly
ours then Christ, and whatsoever is Christ's, confess. 4. ss. 9.

Fourthly he pronounces that it is no less then wicked blasphemy to deny
the mutual and reciprocal imputation of the sins of believers to Christ,
and of Christ's perfect satisfaction to believers, Lib. contra Anonymum de
justificatione.

Fifthly he affirms, that righteousness which justifies men before GOD, must
be both a full satisfaction for sin, and also a perfect fulfilling of GODS
commandments in every part, on Rom* 3.20. Our learned Whitakers in his answer
to Campions 8th. reason, page ^8. and in the 8 Book against Duraeus page 177.182
183. does pithily dispute, and stoutly maintain the Doctrine of the
righteousness of Christ imputed, which he proves to be the only perfect
righteousness, able to justify us before GOD.

Master Perkins also in his Golden Chain. Chap. 37. makes the translation of
the believers sins, to Christ, and Christ's righteousness to the believer, by a
mutual and reciprocal imputation, the very form of justification.

Polanus in Syntagmate Theolog l. 6 c. 36. does maintain the same doctrine with
Luther, Calvin, Mela^cthon, Beza, and Whitakers, and proves every point fully
by plain testimonies, and invincible arguments out of the holy Scriptures. And
in his Symphonia catholica, he brings testimonies of the ancients affirming
every article of our doctrine, and in his Theses de iustifi. he shows the
consent of the most famous Orthodox Divines of the reformed religion since
Luther.

As for Musculus and Junius, whom he brings as favorers of his error, with
other later D^vines, let their own writings speak, and declare how wickedly
he does abuse them in bringing their words to overthrow the imputation of
Christ's righteousness. Musculus on Romans 8.4. expounds the Apostles words, (that
the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us) to be meant, first of
all imputatively by the righteousness of another, even of Christ, which is
also ours, for we are members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones, and
Romans 10.3.4. and by the righteousness which justifies believers, he
understands Christ's perfect righteousness imputed to us. Also Iunius, these.
35. and 36. does affirm that the righteousness of faith imputed to believers,
is the righteousness which the Law requires, performed by Christ, differing
only in this, that legal righteousness is every man's fulfilling of the Law,
in his own person; but this Evangelicall is the fulfilling of the Law by
Christ, GOD and man, our surety and mediator. And for this Socinian heretical
opinion of faith, imputed in a proper sense, for righteousness in
justification, No man can show greater enmity against it, nor with greater
detestation oppose and condemn it, then Paraeus in his commentary on the
Romans, and in other his works. Thus much for the vindicating of the best
learned both Ancient writers, and modern Divines from the foul slanders, most
falsely belched out against them by this most impudent forger of false witnesses
without any fear of GOD, or shame of men. And by their own testimonies, and
plain words rehearsed out of their own writings, I have made manifest their
unanimous consent in the true Doctrine of justification, by the righteousness
of Christ imputed to true believers, and of them apprehended, and applied by
faith. Now I leave it to all indifferent readers, and zealous Christians to
consider whether it be not their duty, both to take heed to themselves, and
also to admonish others, that they have no fellowship with so openly professed
Socinian sectaries, as this man and his followers are: you see the Doctrine
which they maintain is wicked, and blasphemous heresy. And after many
admonitions given by grave, and learned Divines and diverse public
co^fuatations, and censures often passed in public, against this error, they
still persist in their pestilent heresy, and are more mad to disperse it then
before. And when truth cannot help them, they flee for aid to the father of
liars, and make lies their refuge, and in forging lies they sin being
condemned of themselves, even against their knowledge, and conscience, as the
Apostle foretold of heretics, Tit. 3.11.

How wilfully against the known truth, and his own conscience, this desperate
man has proclaimed Luther, Calvin, Beza, Musculus, Iunius, and others to be
of his opinion, I have sufficiently proved; and if ever he has looked into the
writings of any of them, his own eyes have taught him how opposite they are to
his heresy.

But it is no new and strange thing for heretics to sin being condemned of
themselves, when they are once subverted. The Apostle has foretold us that we
must expect no better from such, in that place before named. Tit. 3 11. Now in
conclusion, I appeal to all Christian readers, and desire their opinion and
judgment, in the particulars following.

First whether I have not in all this answer declared, and expressed what I
mean by the righteousness of Christ, which I have proved to be imputed to
believers for justification. If I have made manifest by plain profession, that
by the righteousness of Christ, I understand his perfect fulfilling of the whole
Law of God, and performing whatsoever the Law requires of man for
righteousness, even a full satisfaction made in man's behalf, to the Law of
justice; Then I appeal to the judgment of all reasonable men, whether my
adversary has not most wickedly belyed me in word and writing: for he has
both ways charged me, that I neither hold Christ's habitual holiness, and
uprightnes, of his humane nature, nor his active obedience to the whole Law, or
any righteousness of works by him performed, nor both these together, to be the
righteousness of Christ imputed, and thereupon he clamours against me, that I
hold and teach a righteousness of Christ, which never was in Christ: I confess
I have ever taught and held, That neither the habitual nor actual
righteousness of Christ, alone nor both together, without his satisfaction of
justice, by bearing our sins, and suffering the punishments due to them, are
a sufficient ransom to redeem us, nor a complete and perfect obedience and
fulfilling of the whole, able to justify us, in the sight of GOD, and to
reconcile us to him. Now to affirm that all three together are imputed, is not
to deny the imputation of the two first, though they that are (...)
Calumniators may so wrest the words.

Secondly, whether he who Socinian learning, and Sophistry has so confounded,
and convinced him, that he is wholly turned to be of the same opinion, and
has vowed to maintain his Socinianisme, both publicly, and privately, to the
utmost of his power. So this man's followers have reported, and have withal
added, that so many as have come within his breath, are all illuminated by him,
and being converted to his opinion, do rejoice in the light, by which he has
shined into their hearts.

Thirdly, whether this Answer to his Socinianisme be such, that both it, and
the Author of it have nothing in them but words and passion, and that herein
he is strangely, and monstrously metamorphosed from a Minister of Christ, into
an Angel of darkness, besmearing the brightness of his face, with the foot and
grease of Hell, that the words and phrases of this answer, are the black
Princes coin, and there is little in it besides cursing, and railing. For many
such fiery darts has this Adversary thrown against the Answerer in a
scurrilous Libel fraught with lies, forgeries, absurdities, contradictions, and
blasphemies, and sent forth under the name of a reply; which is also confuted
by the Answerer, and the filthynesse thereof so plainly discovered, that all
true Christians, and modest men, will say of it, that the reciting of it, is a
full confutation. From all such wicked spirits, the GOD of truth defend his
Church and People, and grant a free passage to his Gospel, and to his faithful
Ministers, a door of utterance, that they may preach among all men every
where, the unsearchable riches of Christ. To this GOD of truth, let us
consecrate our tongues, and pens, and resolve with both to maintain his truth,
by his grace, and the assistance of his Spirit, so long as strength, breath,
and life shall last. And to him let us give all glory, now and ever, Amen.

FJNJS.
December. 8. 1640.

Jmprimatur THOMAS VVYKES.


