CVLCOR ET CLAVDI
W^Dolle^F



Reliquiae Wottonianae: OR, A COLLECTION Of LIVES, LETTERS, POEMS; WITH
CHARACTERS OF Sundry. PERSONAGES: And other Incomparable PIECES of LANGUAGE and
ART.

Also Additional Letters to several Persons, not before Printed.

BY THE Curious Pencil of the Ever Memorable Sir HENRY WOTTON Knight.

Late Provost of Eaton College.

The Third Edition, with large Additions.

LONDON, Printed by T. Roycroft, for R. Marriott, F. Tyton, T. Collins, and I.
Ford, 1672.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP EARL of Chesterfield, Lord Stanhop of Shelford.
My Lord,

I HAVE conceived many Reasons, why I ought in Justice to Dedicate these
Relics of Your Great Uncle, Sir Henry Wotton, to Your Lordship; some of which
are, that both Your Grandmother and Mother had a double Right to them by a
Dedication when first made Public; as also, for their assisting me then, and
since, with many Material Informations for the Writing his Life; and for giving
me many of the Letters that have fallen from his curious Pen: so that they
being now dead; these Relics descend to You^ as Heir to them, and the
Inheritor of the m^orable Bocton Palace, the Place of his Birth, where so many
of the Ancient, and Prudent, and Valiant Family of the Wottons lie now-Bar^ed,
whose remarkable Monuments You have lately Beautified, and to them added so
many of so great Worth, as has made it appear, that at the Erecting and
Ad^ging them, You were above the thought of Charge that they might, if
possible, (for 'twas no casie undertaking) boldsome propor^ ^mith the Merits of
Your Ancestors.

My Lord, These are a part of many more Penso^ that have inclined me to this
Dedication; and these, with the Example of a Liberty that is not given, but now
too usually taken by many Scriblers, to make trifling Dedications, might have
begot a boldness in some Men of as mean as my mean Abilities to have undertaken
this. But indeed, my Lord, though I was ambitious enough of undertaking it;
yet, as Sir Henry Wotton has said in a Piece of his own Character, That he was
condemned by Nature to a bashfulness in making Requests: so I find my self
(pardon the Parallel) so like him in this, that if I had not had more Reasons
then I have yet expressed, these alone had not been powerful enough to have
created a Confidence in me to have attempted it. Two of my unexprest Reasons
are, (give me leave to tell them to Your Lordship and the World) that Sir Henry
Wotton, whose many Merits made him an Ornament even to Your Family, was yet so
humble, as to acknowledge me to be his Friend; and died in a belief that I was
so: since which time, I have made him the best return of my Gratitude for his
Condescension, that I have been able to express, or he capable of receiving:
and, am pleased with my self for so doing.

My other Reason of this boldness, is, an encouragement (very like a command)
from Your worthy Cousin, and my Friend, Mr. Charles Cotton, who has assared
me, that You are such a Lover of the Memory of Your Generous Uncle, Sir Henry
Wotton, that if there were no other Reason then my endeavors to preserve it,
yet, that that alone would secure this Dedication from being unacceptable.

I wish, that nor he, nor I be mistaken; and that I were able to make You a
more Worthy Present.

My Lord, I am and will be

Your Humble and most Affectionate Servant,

Iziak Walton.

Feb. 27. 1672.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
YOu may be pleased to take notice, that in this last Relation of Sir Henry
Wotton's Life, it is both enlarged, and some small errors rectified; so that I
may now be confident, there is no material mistakes in it.

There is in this Impression an Addition of many Letters; in which, the spirit
with which they were writ, will assure them to be Sir Henry Wotton's.

For his Merits, they are above my expressions; and, for that reason, the
Reader is requested to take to what I have said of him in his Life, these
following Testimonies:

I. That his Work of Architecture is Translated into Latin, Printed with the
Great Vitruvius, and this Elogy prefixed,

HENRICUS WOTTONIUS Anglo Cantianus, Thomae Optimi Viri Filius natu minimus, a
Serenissimo Jacobo Io, MAGNAE BRITTANIAE, etc. Rege, in Equestre^ Titulum
ascitus; ejusdemque ter ad Remp. VENETAM Legatus Ordinarius; semel ad
Confoederatarum Provinciarum Ordines in Juliacensi negotio; bis ad Carolum
Emmanuelem Sabaudiae Ducem; semel ad unitos Superioris Germaniae Principes in
Conventu Heilbrunnensi; postremo ad Archiducem Leopoldum, Ducem
Wirtenbergensem, civitates Imperiales Argentinam Ulmamque, and ipsum Romanorum
Imperatorem Ferdinandum II. Legatus extraordinarius; Tandem hoc didicit,

ANIMAS SAPIENTIORES FIERI QUIESCENDO.

II. The second testimony is that of the great Secretary of Nature, the Lord
Chancellor Bacon, who thought it not beneath Him to collect some of the
Apothegms and sayings of this Author.

III. Sir Richard Baker in his Chronicle of England sets to his Seal also in a
passage, thus; (speaking of men of Note in King James his time). -- Sir Henry
Wotton was sent Ambassador into Italy -- and indeed the Kingdom yielded not a
fitter man to match the Capriciousness of the Italian wits. A man of so able
dexterity with his Pen, that he has done himself much wrong, and the Kingdom a
great deal more, in leaving no more of his Writings behind him.

AN ACCOUNT Of the WORK.
NOw of the Work it self, Thou shall find in it many curious things about
Architecture. Fountains. Picture. Groves. Sculpture. Aviaries. Landscape.
Conservatories of rare beasts. Magnetical experiments. Gardens. Fish Ponds.

And also many Observations of the Mysteries and Labyrinths in Courts and
States, delivered in Lives, Letters to, and Characters of sundry Personages: As,

Observations and Characters (which He took in his Employments abroad) of these
Dukes of Venice: Giovanni Bembo. Nani. Priuli. Donato. Giustiniano. Ferdin. Gr.
Duke of Tuscany.

An Account of Foscarini.

Of the Archduke Leopold Of Count Tampire.

Artists and Famous men mentioned.
Tyco-brahe. Count Bevilacqua. Kepler. Leon Alberti. Aldrovandus. Philip
D'Orme. Albert Durer. Anto. Labaca censured Palladio. Michael Angelo B. Sir
Henry Fanshaw.

Observations (at home) of the Courts of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King
Charles, with Lives and Characters of Earl of Essex. Duke of Buckingham. Of K.
Charles I.

Characters and Observations of
Queen Elizabeth. Q. of Bohemia. E. of Essex Father. Duke of Buckingham. E. of
Leicester. Spanish Journey. E. of Essex Employments. L. Bacon. Arch. B.
Whitgift. L. Treasurer Weston. M. Anthony Bacon. L. Treasurer Iuxton. Sir
Robert Cecil. Bp. Bedel. The Cecillians. Isle of Rheez. Walter Devereux. Of the
Dukes Ominous presages. Sir Philip Sidney. Sir Walter Raleigh. Countess of
Denbigh. Secretary Cuff. Arch. Bishop. Of K. James. B. of Ely. K. Charles. Part
of the Authors own Character. Q Mary.

Censures of
Felton. Stamford. D. Egglesham. Scioppius.

THE LIFE OF Sir HENRY WOTTON.
SIR Henry Wotton (whose Life I now intend to write) was born in the Year of
our Redemption 1568. in Bocton-hall, (commonly called Bocton, or Bougton -
place, or Palace) in the Parish of Bocton Malherb, in the fruitful Country of
Kent: Bocton-hall being an ancient and goodly Structure, beautifying, and being
beautified by the Parish Church of Bocton Malherb adjoining unto it; and both
seated within a fair Park of the Wottons, on the Brovv of such a Hill, as
gives the advantage of a large Prospect, and of equal pleasure to all Beholders.

But this House and Church are not remarkable for any thing so much, as for
that the memorable Family of the Wottons have so long inhabited the one, and
now lie buried in the other, as appears by their many Monuments in that
Church: the Wottons being a Family that has brought forth diverse Persons
eminent for Wisdom and Valor; whose Heroic Acts, and Noble Employments, both
in England and in Foreign parts, have adorned themselves and this Nation; which
they have served abroad faithfully, in the discharge of their great trust, and
prudently in their Negotiations with several Princes; and also served at home
with much Honor and Justice, in their wise managing a great part of the
Public Affairs thereof, in the various times both of War and Peace.

But, lest I should be thought by any that may incline either to deny or doubt
this Truth, not to have observed moderation in the commendation of this Family:
and also, for that I believe the merits and memory of such Persons ought to be
thankfully recorded, I shall offer to the consideration of every Reader, out of
the testimony of their Pedigree, and our Chronicles, a part (and but a part) of
that just Commendation which might be from thence enlarged, and shall then
leave the indifferent Reader to judge, whether my error be an excess or defect
of Commendations.

Sir Robert Wotton of Bocton Malherb Knight, was born about the Year of Christ
1460: he living in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, was by him trusted to
be Lieutenant of Guisnes, to be Knight Porter, and Comptroller of Callais,
where he died, and lies honorably buried.

Sir Edward Wotton of Bocton Malherb Knight, (Son and Heir of the said Sir
Robert) was born in the Year of Christ 1489, in the Reign of King Henry the
Seventh: he was made Treasurer of Callais, and of the Privy Council to King
Henry the Eight, who offered him to be Lord Chancellor of England; but (says
In his Chronicle.
Hollinshed) out of a virtuous modesty he refused it.

Thomas Wotton of Bocton Malherb Esquire, Son and Heir of the said Sir Edward,
(and the Father of our Sir Henry, that occasions this Relation) was born in the
Year of Christ 1521: he was a Gentleman excellently educated, and studious in
all the Liberal Arts, in the knowledge whereof, he attained unto a great
perfection; who, though he had (besides those abilities, a very Noble and
plentiful Estate, and the ancient Interest of his Predecessors) many
invitations from Queen Elizabeth to change his Country Recreations and
Retirement for a Courtoffering him a Knighthood, (she was then with him at
his Boctonhall) and that to be but as an earnest of some more honorable and
more profitable employment under Her; yet he humbly refused both, being a man
of great modesty, of a most plain and single heart, of an ancient freedom, and
integrity of mind. A commendation which Sir Henry Wotton took occasion often to
remember with great gladness, and thankfully to boast himself the Son of such a
Father: From whom indeed he derived that noble ingenuity that was always
practiced by himself, and which he ever both commended and cherished in others.
This Thomas was also remarkable for Hospitality, a great Lover, and much
beloved of his Country; to which may justly be added, that he was a Cherisher
of Learning, as appears by that excellent Antiquary Mr. William Lambert, in his
Perambulation of Kent.

This Thomas had four Sons, Sir Edward, Sir James, Sir John, and Sir Henry.

Sir Edward was Knighted by Queen Elizabeth, and made Comptroller of Her
Majesty's Household. He was (says Cambden) a man remarkable for many and great
Employments in the State, during Her Reign, and sent several times Ambassador
into Foreign Nations. After Her death, he was by King James made Comptroller of
his Household, and called to be of His Privy Council, and by him advanced to be
Lord Wotton, Baron of Merley in Kent, and made Lord Lieutenant of that County.

Sir James (the second Son) may be numbered among the Martial Men of his Age,
who was in the 38 of Queen Elizabeth's Reign (with Robert Earl of Sussex, Count
Lodowick of Nassaw, Don Christophoro, Son of Antonio King of Portugal, and
diverse other Gentlemen of Nobleness and Valor) Knighted in the Field near
Cadiz in Spain, after they had gotten great Honor and Riches, besides a
notable retaliation of Injuries by taking that Town.

Sir John, being a Gentleman excellently accomplished, both by Learning and
Travel, was Knighted by Queen Elizabeth, and by Her looked upon with more then
ordinary favor, and with intentions of preferment; but Death in his younger
years put a period to his growing hopes.

Of Sir Henry, my following discourse shall give an account.

The descent of these forenamed Wottons were all in a direct Line; and most of
them and their actions, in the memory of those with whom we have conversed: But
if I had looked so far back as to Sir Nicholas Wotton, (who lived in the Reign
of King Richard the Second) or before him, upon diverse others of great note in
their several Ages, I might by some be thought tedious; and yet others may more
justly think me negligent, if I omit to mention Nicholas Wotton, the fourth Son
of Sir Robert, whom I first named.

This Nicholas Wotton was Doctor of Law, and sometime Dean both of York and
Canterbury: a man whom God did not only bless with a long life, but with
great abilities of mind, and an inclination to employ them in the service of
his Country, as is testified by his several Employments; Cambden in his
Britannia.
having been sent nine times Ambassador unto foreign Princes; and by his being
a Privy- Councellor to King Henry the eighth, to Edward the sixth, to Queen
Mary and Queen Elizabeth; who also, after he had been during the Wars between
England, Scotland and France, three several times (and not unsuccessfully)
employed in Committies for settling of peace betwixt this and those Kingdoms,
died (says learned Cambden) full of Commendations for Wisdom and Piety. -- He
was also by the Will of King Henry the eighth, made one of his Executors, and
chief Secretary of State to his Son, that plous Prince Edward the sixth. --
Concerning which Nicholas Wotton, I shall say but this little more; That he
refused (being offered it by Queen Elizabeth) to be Hollinshed.
Arch bishop of Canterbury, and that he died not rich, though he lived in that
time of the dissolution of Abbeys.

More might be added: but by this it may appear, that Sir Henry Wotton, was a
Branch of such a kindred as left a Stock of Reputation to their Posterity; such
Reputation, as might kindle a generous emulation in strangers, and preserve a
noble ambition in those of his Name and Family, to perform Actions worthy of
their Ancestors.

And, that Sir Henry Wotton did so, might appear more perfectly then my Pen can
express it, if of his many surviving friends, some one of higher parts and
employment, had been pleased to have commended his to Posterity; But, since
some years are now past, and they have all (I know not why) forborne to do it;
my gratitude to the memory of my dead friend, and the renewed request of some
Sir Edward Bish Clarentieux King of Arms, M. Charles Cotton, and, Mr. Nick
Oudert sometime Sir Hen. Wotton's Servant.
that still live solicitous to see this duty performed; these, have had a power
to persuade me to undertake it; which, truly, I have not done, but with some
distrust of mine own Abilities, and yet so far from despair, that I am modestly
confident my humble language shall be accepted, because I shall present all
Readers with a Commixture of truth, and Sir Henry Wotton' s merits.

This being premised, I proceed to tell the Reader, that the Father of Sir
Henry Wotton was twice married, first to Elizabeth, the Daughter of Sir John
Rudstone Knight; after whose death, though his inclination was averse to all
Contentions; yet, necessitated he was to several Suits in Law: in the
prosecution whereof, (which took up much of his time, and were the occasion
of many Discontents) he was by diverse of his friends earnestly persuaded to a
re-marriage; to whom he as often answered, That if ever he did put on a
resolution to marry, he was seriously resolved to avoid three sorts of persons:

namely, those that had Children. that had Lawsuits. that were of his
Kindred.

And yet, following his own Lawsuits, he met in Westminster Hall with Mrs.
Elionora Morton, Widow to Robert Morton of Kent Esquire who was also engaged in
several Suits in Law: and, he observing her Comportment at the time of hearing
one of her Causes before the Judges, could not but at the same time, both
compassionate her Condition, and affect her Person: (for, the tears of Lovers,
or Beauty dressed in sadness, are observed to have in them a Charming Eloquence;
and, to become very often too strong to be resisted) which I mention, because
it proved so with this Thomas Wotton, for although there were in her a
concurrence of all those accidents, against which he had so seriously
resolved; yet, his affection to her grew then so strong, that he resolved to
solicit her for a Wife; and did, and obtained her.

By her (who was the Daughter of Sir William Finch of Eastwell in Kent) he
had only Henry his youngest Son. -- His Mother undertook to be Tutoress unto
him during much of his Childhood; for whose care and pains, he paid her each
day with such visible signs of future perfection in Learning, as turned her
employment into a pleasing-trouble: which she was content to continue, till
his Father took him into his own particular care, and disposed of him to a
Tutor in his own House at Bocton.

And, when time and diligent instruction, had made him fit for a removal to an
higher Form, (which was very early) he was sent to Winchester-School: a
place of strict Discipline and Order: that so, he might in his youth be molded
into a Method of living by Rule, which his wise Father knew to be the most
necessary way, to make the future part of his life, both happy to himself, and
useful for the discharge of all business, whether public or private.

And, that he might be confirmed in this regularity, he was at a fit age
removed from that School, to be a Commoner of New-Colledge in Oxford; both
being founded by William Wickham Bishop of Winchester.

There he continued, till about the eighteenth year of his Age: and was then
transplanted into Queens-Colledge; where within that year, he was by the chief
of that College, perswasively enjoined to write a Play for their private use:
(it was the Tragedy of Tancredo) which was so interwoven with Sentences, and
for the Method and exact personating those humors, passions, and dispositions,
which he proposed to represent, so performed, that the gravest of that society
declared, he had in a slight employment, given an early, and a solid testimony
of his future abilities. And, though there may be some sour dispositions, which
may think this not worth a memorial; yet, that wise Knight Baptista G^arini
(whom learned Italy accounts one of her ornaments) thought it neither an
uncomely, nor an unprofitable employment for his Age.

But I pass to what will be thought more serious.

About the twentieth year of his Age, he proceeded Master of Arts; and at that
time read in Latin three Lectures de Oculo: wherein, he having described the
Form, the Motion, the curious composure of the Eye: and, demonstrated, how of
those very many, every humor and nerve performs its distinct Office, so as the
God of Order has appointed, without mixture or confusion; and all this, to the
advantage of man, to whom the Eye is given, not only as the Bodies guide, but,
whereas all other of his senses require time to inform the Soul, this, in an
instant apprehends and warns him of danger: teaching him in the very eyes of
others to discover wit, folly, love, and hatred: After he had made these
Observations he fell to dispute this Optique Question, Whether we see by the
Emission of the Beams from within, or Reception of the Species from without?
and, after that, and many other like learned disquisitions, he in the
Conclusion of his Lectures, took a fair occasion to beautify his Discourse
with a Commendation of the blessing and benefit of Seeing: By which, we do not
only discover Natures Secrets: but, with a continued content (for the eye is
never weary of seeing) behold the great Light of the World, and by it, discover
the Fabric of the Heavens, and both the Order and Motion of the Celestial
Orbs; nay, that if the eye look but downward, it may rejoice to behold the
bosom of the Earth, our common Mother, embroidered and adorned with numberless
and various Flowers, which man sees daily grow up to perfection, and then,
silently moralize his own condition, who in a short time (like those very
Flowers) decays, withers, and quickly returns again to that Earth, from which
both had their first being.

These were so exactly debated, and so Rhetorically heightened, as, among other
admirers, caused that learned Italian, Albericus Gentilis (then Professor of
the Civil Law in Oxford) to call him Henrice mi^celle; which dear expression of
his, was also used by diverse of Sir Henry's dearest Friends, and by many other
persons of Note, during his stay in the University.

But his stay there was not long; at least, not so long as his Friends once
intended: for, the year after Sir Henry proceeded Master of Arts, his Father
(whom Sir Henry did never mention without this, or some like reverential
expression; as, That good man my Father; or, My Father the best of men:) about
that time, this good man changed this for a better life; leaving to Sir Henry,
as to his other younger Sons, a Rent charge of an hundred Mark a year, to be
paid for ever, out of some one of his Manors of a much greater value.

And here, though this good man be dead, yet I wish a Circumstance or two that
concern him, may not be buried without a Relation; which I shall undertake to
do, for that I suppose, they may so much concern the Reader to know, that I may
promise my self a pardon for a short Digression.

IN the year of our Redemption, 1553. Nicholas Wotton Dean of Canterbury (whom
I formerly mentioned) being then Ambassador in France, dreamed, that his
Nephew, this Thomas Wotton, was inclined to be a party in such a project, as,
if he were not suddenly prevented, would turn both to the loss of his life, and
ruin of his Family.

Doubtless, the good Dean did well know, that common Dreams are but a senseless
paraphrase on our waking thoughts; or, of the business of the day past; or, are
the result of our over engaged affections, when we betake our selves to rest;
and knew that the observation of them, may turn to silly Superstitions; as they
too often do: But, though he might know all this, and, might also believe that
Prophesies are ceased; yet, doubtless he could not but consider, that all
Dreams are not to be neglected or cast away without all consideration: and did
therefore rather lay this Dream aside, then intend totally to lose it; and
dreaming the same again the Night following, when it became a double Dream,
like that of Pharaoh (of which double dreams, the learned have made many
observations) and considering that it had no dependence on his waking
thoughts, much less on the desires of his heart, then, he did more seriously
consider it; and, remembered that Almighty God was pleased in a Dream to reveal
and to assure St. Austin's Confession.
Monica the Mother of St. Austin, that he, her Son for whom she wept so
bitterly, and prayed so much should at last become a Christian: This I believe,
the good Dean considered; and, considering also, that Almighty God (though the
causes of Dreams be often unknown) has even in these latter times also, by a
certain illumination of the Soul in sleep, discovered many things that humane
vvisdome could not foresee: Upon these considerations, he resolved to use so
prudent a remedy by way of prevention, as might introduce no great
inconvenience either to himself or to his Nephew. And to that end, he vvrote to
the Queen ('it was Queen Mary) and besought her, That she would cause his Nephew
Thomas Wotton, to be sent for out of Kent: and, that the Lords of her Council
might interrogate him in some such feigned Questions, as might give a color
for his Commitment into a favorable Prison; declaring, that he would acquaint
her Majesty with the true reason of his request, when he should ^xt become s^
happy as to see, and speak to her Majesty.

'Twas done as the Dean desired: and in Prison I must leave Mr. Wotton, till I
have told the Reader what followed.

At this time a Marriage was concluded betwixt our Queen Mary, and Philip King
of Spain: And though this was concluded with the advice, if not by the
persuasion of her Privy Council, as having many probabilities of advantage to
this Nation: yet, diverse persons of a contrary persuasion, did not only declare
against it, but also raised Forces to oppose it; believing (as they said) it
would be a means to bring England to be under a subjection to Spain, and make
those of this Nation slaves to Strangers.

And of this number Sir Thomas Wyat of Boxley-Abbey in Kent* (betwixt whose
Family, and the Family of the Wottons, there had been an ancient and entire
friendship) was the principal Actor; who having persuaded many of the Nobility
and Gentry (especially of Kent) to side with him, and he being defeated, and
taken Prisoner, was legally arraigned and condemned, and lost his life: So did
the Duke of Suffolk, and diverse others, especially many of the Gentry of Kent,
who were there in several places executed as Wyat's assistants.

And of this number, in all probability, had Mr. Wotton been if he had not been
confined: for, though he could not be ignorant that another man's Treason, makes
it mine by concealing it; yet, he durst confess to his Uncle, when he returned
into England, and then came to visit him in Prison, that he ^ad more then an
intimation of Wyat's intentions; and, thought he had not continued actually
innocent, if his Uncle had not so happily dreamed him into a Prison; out of
which place, when he was delivered by the same hand that caused his Commitment,
they both considered the Dream more seriously; and then, both joined in
praising God for it; That God, who ties himself to no Rules, either in
preventing of evil, or in showing of mercy to those, whom of good pleasure he
has chosen to love.

And this Dream was the more considerable, because that God who in the days of
old did use to speak to his people in visions, did seem to speak to many of
this Family in dreams: of which I will also give the Reader one short
particular of this Thomas Wotton, whose dreams did usually prove true, both in
foretelling things to come, and discovering things past: And, the particular is
this; This Thomas, a little before his death, dreamed that the University
Treasury was robbed by Townsmen, and poor Scholars; and, that the number was
five: And being that day to write to his Son Henry at Oxford, he thought it
worth so much pains, as by a Postscript in his Letter, to make a slight enquiry
of it; the Letter (which was writ out of Kent, and dated three days before)
came to his Sons hands the very morning after the night in which the Robbery
was committed; and when the City and University were both in a perplexed Enquest
of the Thieves, then did Sir Henry Wotton show his Fathers Letter, and by it
such light was given of this work of darkness, that the five guilty persons
were presently discovered, and apprehended, without putting the University to
so much trouble, as the casting of a Figure.

And it may yet be more considerable, that this Nicholas and Thomas Wotton
should both (being men of holy lives, of even tempers, and much given to
fasting and prayer) foresee and foretell the very days of their own death:
Nicholas did so, being then Seventy years of age, and in perfect health. Thomas
did the like in the sixty fifth year of his age; who being then in London
(where he dyed.) and foreseeing his death there, gave direction in what manner
his Body should be carried to Bocton; and, though he thought his Uncle Nicholas
worthy of that noble Monument which he built for him in the Cathedral Church of
Canterbury; yet this humble man gave direction concerning himself, to be buried
privately, and especially without any pomp at his Funeral. This is some account
of this Family, which seemed to be beloved of God.

BUt it may now seem more then time that I return to Sir Henry Wotton at
Oxford; where, after his optic Lecture, he was taken into such a bosom
friendship with the Learned Albericus Gentilis (whom I formerly named) that
if it had been possible, Gentilis would have breathed all his excellent
knowledge, both of the Mathematics and Law, into the breast of his dear Harry
(for so Gentilis used to call him:) and though he was not able to do that, yet
there was in Sir Henry such a propensity and connaturalness to the Italian
Language, and those Studies whereof Gentilis was a great Master, that this
friendship between them did daily increase, and proved daily advantageous to
Sir Henry, for the improvement of him in several Sciences, during his stay in
the University.

From which place, before I shall invite the Reader to follovv him into a
foreign Nation, though I must omit to mention diverse Persons that were then in
Oxford, of memorable note for Learning, and Friends to Sir Henry Wotton; yet I
must not omit the mention of a love that was there begun betwixt him and Dr.
Done (sometimes Dean of St. Paul's) a man of whose abilities I shall forbear
to say any thing, because he who is of this Nation, and pretends to Learning
or Ingenuity, and is ignorant of Dr. Done, deserves not to know him. The
friendship of these two I must not omit to mention, being such a friendship as
was generously elemented: And as it was begun in their Youth, and in an
University, and there maintained by correspondent Inclinations and Studies, so
it lasted till Age and Death forced a Separation.

In Oxford he stayed till about two years after his Fathers death; at which
time, he was about the two and twentieth year of his Age: and having to his
great Wit added the ballast of Learning, and knowledge of the Arts, he then
laid aside his Books, and betook himself to the useful Library of Travel, and a
more general Conversation with Mankind; employing the remaining part of his
Youth, his industry and fortune to adorn his mind, and to purchase the rich
Treasure of Foreign knowledge; of which, both for the secrets of Nature, the
dispositions of many Nations, their several Laws and Languages, he was the
possessor in a very large measure; as I shall faithfully make to appear, before
I take my Pen from the following Narration of his Life.

In his Travels, which was almost nine years before his return into England,
he stayed but one year in France, and most of that in Geneva; where he became
acquainted with Theodor Beza (then very aged) and with Isaac Causabon, in
whose house (if I be rightly informed) Sir Henry Wotton was lodged, and there
contracted a most worthy friendship with that man of rare Learning and
Ingenuity.

Three of the remaining eight years were spent in Germany, the other five in
Italy, (the Stage on which God appointed he should act a great part of his
life) where both in Rome, Venice and Florence, he became acquainted with the
most eminent men for Learning, and all manner of Arts; as Picture, Sculpture,
Chemistry, Architecture, and other manual Arts, even Arts of inferior nature;
of all which, he was a most dear Lover, and a most excellent Judge.

He returned out of Italy into England about the thirtieth year of his age,
being then noted by many, both for his person and comportment; for indeed he
was of a choice shape, tall of stature, and of a most persuasive behavior;
which was so mixed with sweet Discourse, and Civilities, as gained him much
love from all Persons with whom he entered into an acquaintance.

And whereas he was noted in his Youth to have a sharp Wit, and apt to jest;
that, by Time, Travel, and Conversation, was so polished, and made so useful,
that his company seemed to be one of the delights of mankind; insomuch as
Robert Earl of Essex (then one of the Darlings of Fortune, and in greatest
favor with Queen Elizabeth) invited him first into a friendship, and after a
knowledge of his great abilities, to be one of his Secretaries; the other being
Mr. Henry Cuffe, sometimes of Merton College in Oxford (and there also the
Acquaintance of Sir Henry Wotton in his Youth) Mr. Cuffe being then a man of no
common note in the University for his Learning; nor after his removal from that
place, for the great abilities of his mind; nor indeed, for the fatalness of
his end.

Sir Henry Wotton being now taken into a serviceable friendship with the Earl
of Essex, did personally attend his Counsels and Employments in two Voyages at
Sea against the Spaniard, and also in that (which was the Earls last) into
Ireland; that Voyage wherein he then did so much provoke the Queen to anger,
and worse at his return into England; upon whose immovable favor the Earl had
built such sandy hopes, as encouraged him to those undertakings, which with the
help of a contrary Faction suddenly caused his Commitment to the Tower.

Sir Henry Wotton observing this, though he was not of that Faction (for the
Earls Followers were also divided into their several interests) which
encouraged the Earl to those undertakings which proved so fatal to him, and
diverse of his Confederation: yet, knowing Treason to be so comprehensive, as to
take in even Circumstances, and out of them to make such positive Conclusions
as subtle Statesmen shall project, either for their revenge or safety;
considering this, he thought prevention by absence out of England, a better
security then to stay in it, and there plead his innocence in a Prison.
Therefore did he, so soon as the Earl was apprehended, very quickly, and as
privately glide through Kent to Dover, without so much as looking toward his
native and beloved Bocton; and was by the help of favorable winds, and liberal
payment of the Mariners, within sixteen hours after his departure from London,
set upon the French shore; where he heard shortly after, that the Earl was
Arraigned, Condemned, and Beheaded; and that his Friend Mr. Cuffe was hanged,
and diverse other Persons of Eminent Quality executed.

The Times did not look so favorably upon Sir Henry Wotton, as to invite his
return into England; having therefore procured of Sir Edward Wotton, his elder
Brother, an assurance that his Annuity should be paid him in Italy, thither he
went, happily renewing his intermitted friendship and interest, and indeed, his
great content in a new conversation with his old Acquaintance in that Nation;
and more particularly in Florence, (which City is not more eminent for the
Great Dukes Court, then for the great recourse of men of choicest note for
Learning and Arts;) in which number he there met with his old Friend Signior
Vietta, a Gentleman of Venice, and then taken to be Secretary to the Great Duke
of Tuscany.

After some stay in Florence, he went the fourth time to visit Rome, where in
the English College he had very many Friends (their humanity made them really
so, though they knew him to be a dissenter from many of their Principles of
Religion;) and having enjoyed their company, and satisfied himself concerning
some Curiosities that did partly occasion his Journey thither, he returned back
to Florence, where a most notable accident befell him; an accident that did not
only find new employment for his choice Abilities, but introduce him a knowledge
and an interest with our King James, then King of Scotland; which I shall
proceed to relate.

But first, I am to tell the Reader, That though Queen Elizabeth (or she and
her Council) were never willing to declare her Successor; yet James then King
of the Scots, was confidently believed by most to be the man upon whom the
sweet trouble of Kingly Government would be imposed; and the Queen declining
very fast, both by age and visible infirmities, those that were of the Romish
persuasion in point of Religion (even Rome it self, and those of this Nation)
knowing that the death of the Queen, and the establishing of her Successor,
were taken to be critical days for destroying or establishing the Protestant
Religion in this Nation, did therefore improve all opportunities for preveting
a Protestant Prince to succeed Her. And as the Pope's Excommunication of Queen
Elizabeth, had both by the judgment and practice of the Jesuited Papist,
exposed her to be warrantably destroyed; so (if we may believe an angry
Adversary, a Watson in his Quodlibets.
secular Priest against a Jesuit) you may believe, that about that time there
were many endeavors, first to excommunicate, and then to shorten the life of
King James.

Immediately after Sir Henry Wotton's return from Rome to Florence, (which was
about a year before the death of Queen Elizabeth) Ferdinand the Great Duke of
Florence had intercepted certain Letters that discovered a design to take away
the life of James the then King of Scots. The Duke abhorring the Fact, and
resolving to endeavor a prevention of it, advised with his Secretary Vietta, by
what means a caution might be best given to that King; and after consideration,
it was resolved to be done by Sir Henry Wotton, whom Vietta first commended to
the Duke; and the Duke had noted and approved of above all the English that
frequented his Court.

Sir Henry was gladly called by his Friend Vietta to the Duke, who after much
profession of trust and friendship, acquainted him with the secret; and being
well instructed, dispatched him into Scotland with Letters to the King, and
with those Letters, such Italian Antidotes against poison, as the Scots till
then had been strangers to.

Having parted from the Duke, he took up the Name and Language of an Italian;
and thinking it best to avoid the line of English intelligence and danger, he
posted into Norway, and through that Country toward Scotland, where he found
the King at Sterling; being there, he used means by Be^ard Lindsey, one of the
Kings Bed Chamber, to procure him a speedy and private conference with his
Majesty, assuring him, That the business which he was to negotiate, was of such
consequence, as had caused the Great Duke of Tuscany to enjoin him suddenly to
leave his Native Country of Italy, to impart it to his King.

This being by Bernard Lindsey made known to the King, the King after a little
wonder, (mixed with jealousy) to hear of an Italian Ambassador, or Messenger,
required his Name, (which was said to be Octavio Baldi) and appointed him to be
heard privately at a fixed hour that Evening.

When Octavio Baldi came to the Presence-Chamber-door, he was requested to lay
aside his long Rapier (which Italian-like he then wore) and being entered the
Chamber, he found there with the King three or four Scotch Lords standing
distant in several corners of the Chamber: at the sight of whom he made a
stand; which the King observing, bade him be bold, and deliver his Message; for
he would undertake for the secrecy of all that were present. Then did Octavio
Baldi deliver his Letters and his Message to the King in Italian; which, when
the King had graciously received, after a little pause, Octavio Baldi steps to
the Table, and whispers to the King in his own Language, that he was an English
man, beseeching Hini for a more private conference with His Majesty, and that
he might be concealed during his stay in that Nation; which was promised, and
really performed by the King during all his abode there, (which was about three
Months) all which time was spent with much pleasantness to the King, and with
as much to Octavio Baldi himself, as that Country could afford; from which he
departed as true an Italian as he came thither.

To the Duke at Florence he returned with a fair and grateful account of his
employment, and within some few Months after his return, there came certain
News to Florence, that Queen Elizabeth was dead; and, James King of the Scots
proclaimed King of England. The Duke knowing travel and business to be the best
Schools of wisdom, and that Sir Henry Wotton had been tutored in both, advised
him to return presently to England, and there joy the King with his new and
better Title, and vvait there upon Fortune for a better employment.

When King James came into England, he found, amongst other of the late Queens
Officers, Sir Edward, who was after Lord Wotton, Comptroller of the House, of
whom he demanded, If he knew one Henry Wotton, that had spent much time in
foreign Travel? The Lord replied, he knew him well, and that he was his
Brother; then the King asking where he then was, was answered, at Venice, or
Florence; but by late Letters from thence, he understood, he would suddenly be
at Paris. Send for him, said the King, and when he shall come into England, bid
him repair privately to me. The Lord Wotton after a little vvonder, asked the
King, If he knew him? to which the King answered, You must rest unsatisfied of
that, till you bring the Gentleman to me.

Not many Months after this Discourse, the Lord Wotton brought his Brother to
attend the King, who took him in His Arms, and bade him welcome by the Name of
Octavio Baldi, saying, he was the most honest, and therefore the best
Dissembler that ever he met with: And said, Seeing I know you neither want
Learning, Travel, nor Experience, and that I have had so real a Testimony of
your faithfulness and abilities to manage an Embassage, I have sent for you to
declare my purpose; which is, to make use of you in that kind hereafter: And
indeed the King did so most of those two and twenty years of his Reign; but
before he dismissed Octavio Baldi from his present attendance upon him, he
restored him to his old Name of Henry Wotton, by which he then Knighted him.

Not long after this, the King having resolved, according to his Motto (Beati
pacifici) to have a friendship with his Neighbour-Kingdoms of France and
Spain, and also for diverse weighty reasons, to enter into an Alliance with
the State of Venice, and to that end to send Ambassadors to those several
places, did propose the choice of these Employments to Sir Henry Wotton; who
considering the smallness of his own Estate (which he never took care to
augment) and knowing the Courts of great Princes to be sumptuous, and
necessarily expensive, inclined most to that of Venice, as being a place of
more retirement, and best suiting with his Genius, who did ever love to join
with Business, Study, and a trial of natural Experiments; for both which
fruitful Italy, that Darling of Nature, and Cherisher of all Arts, is so
justly famed in all parts of the Christian World.

Sir Henry having after some short time and consideration, resolved upon
Venice, and a large allowance being appointed by the King for his voyage
thither, and a settled maintenance during his stay there, he left England, nobly
accompanied through France to Venice, by Gentlemen of the best Families and
breeding that this Nation afforded; they were too many to name, but these two,
for following reasons may not be omitted; Sir Albertus Morton his Nephew, who
went his Secretary; and William Bedel, a man of choice Learning, and sanctified
Wisdom, who went his Chaplain. And, though his dear friend Dr. Done (then a
private Gentleman) was not one of that number that did personally accompany him
in this Voyage, yet the reading of this following Letter sent by him to Sir
Henry Wotton, the morning before he left England, may testify he wanted not
his friends best wishes to attend him.

SIR,
AFter those reverend Papers, whose soul is (name:
Our good, and great Kings loved hand, and feared
By which to you he derives much of his,
And, how he may, makes you almost the same;
A Taper of his Torch: a Copy writ
From his Original, and a fair Beam
Of the same warm and dazzling Sun, though it
Must in another Sphere his virtue stream;
After those Learned Papers which your hand
Has stored with notes of use and pleasure too:
From which rich treasury you may command
Fit matter whether you will write or do:
After those loving Papers which Friends send
With glad grief to your Sea-ward-steps faerewel,
And thicken on you now as prayers ascend
To Heaven on troops at a good man's Passing Bell:
Admit this honest Paper; and, allow
It such an audience as your self would ask;
What you would say at Venice, this says now,
And has for nature what you have for task.
To swear much love; nor to be changed before
Honor alone will to your fortune fit;
Nor, shall I then honor your fortune more,
Then I have done your honour-wanting-wit.
But it is an easier load (though both oppress)
To want, then govern greatness; for we are
In that, our own, and only business;
In this, we must for others vices care.
It Is therefore well, your spirits now are placed
In their last furnace, in activity; (ore-p^
Which fits them: Schools, and Courts, and Wars
To touch and taste in any best degree.
For me! (if there be such a thing as I)
Fortune (if there be such a thing as she)
Finds that I bear so well her tyranny,
That she thinks nothing else so fit for me.
But, though she part us, to hear my often prayers
For your increase, God is as near me here:
And, to send you what I shall beg, his stairs
In length, and ease, are alike every where.
J. Done.


SIR Henry Wotton was received by the State o^ Venice, with much honor and
gladness, bot^ for that he delivered his Embassage most elegantly in the
Italian Language, and came also in such a Juncture of time, as his Masters
friendship seemed useful for that Republic: the time of his coming thither
was about the year 1604. Leonardo Donato being then Duke; a wise and resolved
man, and to all purposes such (Sir Henry Wotton would often say it) as the
State of Venice could not then have wanted; there having been formerly in the
time of Pope Clement the eighth, some contests about the privileges of
Churchmen, and the power of the Civil Magistrate; of which, for the
information of common Readers, I shall say a little, because it may give light
to some passages that follow.

About the year 1603. the Republic of Venice made several Injunctions against
Lay-persons giving Lands or Goods to the Church, without License from the Civil
Magistrate; and in that inhibition, they expressed their reasons to be, For that
when any Goods or Land once came into the hands of the Ecclesiastics, it was
not subject to alienation; by reason whereof, (the Lay People being at their
death charitable even to excess) the Clergy grew every day more numerous, and,
pretended an exemption from all public service, and Taxes, and from all
secular Judgment: so that the burden grew thereby too heavy to be born by the
Laity.

Another occasion of difference was, That about this time complaints were
justly made by the Venetians against two Clergymen, the Abbot of Nervesa, and
a Canon of Vicenza, for committing such sins, as I think not fit to name; nor
are these mentioned with an intent to fix a Scandal upon any Calling; (for
holiness is not tied to Ecclesiastical Orders, and Italy is observed to breed
the most virtuous, and most vicious men of any Nation) these two having been
long complained of at Rome in the Name of the State of Venice, and no
satisfaction being given to the Venetians, they seized the persons of this
Abbot and Canon, and committed them to prison.

The justice, or injustice of such or the like power, then used by the
Venetians, had formerly had some calm debates betwixt the former Pope Clement
the Eighth, and that Republic: I say, calm, for he did not excommunicate them;
considering (as I conceive) that in the late Council of Trent it was at last
(after many Politic disturbances, and delays, and endeavors to preserve the
Popes present power) in order to a general reformation of those many Errors,
which were in time crept into the Church, declared by that Counsel, That though
Discipline, and especial Excommunication be one of the chief sinews of Church
Government, and intended to keep men in obedience to it: for which end, it was
declared to be very profitable; yet, it was also declared, and advised to be
used with great sobriety and care: because experience had informed them, that
when it was pronounced unadvisedly, or rashly, it became more contemned then
feared. And, though this was the advice of that Council at the Conclusion of
it, which was not many years before this quarrel with the Venetians: yet this
prudent, patient Pope Clement dying, Pope Paul the fifth, who succeeded him,
(though not immediately, yet in the same year) being a man of a much hotter
temper, brought this difference with the Venetians to a much higher Contention:
objecting those late acts of that State, to be a diminution of his just power,
and limited a time of twenty four days for their revocation; threatening, if he
were not obeyed, to proceed to Excommunication of the Republic; who still
offered to show both reason and ancient custom to warrant their Actions. But
this Pope, contrary to his Predecessors moderation, required absolute obedience
without disputes.

Thus it continued for about a year; the Pope still threatening Excommunication,
and the Venetians still answering him with fair speeches, and no compliance,
till at last, the Popes zeal to the Apostolic Sea, did make him to
excommunicate the Duke, the whole Senate, and all their Dominions; and that
done to shut up all their Churches; charging the whole Clergy to forbear all
sacred Offices to the Venetians, till their Obedience should render them
capable of Absolution.

But this act of the Popes did but the more confirm the Venetians in their
resolution not to obey him; And to that end, upon the hearing of the Popes
Interdict, they presently published by sound of Trumpet, a Proclamation to this
effect:

That whosoever has received from Rome any Copy of a Papal Interdict,
published there, as well against the Law of God, as against the Honor of this
Nation, shall presently render it to the Council of Ten, upon pain of death.

Then was Duado their Ambassador called home from Rome, and the Inquisition
presently suspended by Order of the State; and, the Floodgates being thus set
open, any man that had a pleasant or scoffing wit might safely vent it against
the Pope, either by free speaking, or by Libels in Print; and, both became very
pleasant to the people.

Matters thus heightened, the State advised with Father* Paul, a Holy and
Learned Friar (the Author of the History of the Council of Trent) whose advice
was, Neither to provoke the Pope, nor lose their own Right: he declaring
publicly in Print, in the name of the State, That the Pope was trusted to keep
two Keys; one of Prudence, and the other of Power: And that if they were not
both used together, Power alone is not effectual in an Excommunication.

And thus these discontents and oppositions continued, till a report was blown
abroad, that the Venetians were all turned Protestants: which was believed by
many, for that it was observed, the English Ambassador was so often in
conference with the Senate, and his Chaplain Mr. Bedel more often with Father
Paul, whom the People did not take to be his Friend: And also, for that the
Republic of Venice was known to give Commission to Gregory Justiniano, then
their Ambassador in England, to make all these Proceedings known to the King
of England, and to crave a Promise of his assistance, if need should require,:
and in the mean time they required the King's advice and judgment; which was
the same that he gave to Pope Clement, at his first coming to the Crown of
England; (that Pope then moving him to an Union with the Roman Church) namely,
To endeavor the calling of a free Council, for the settlement of Peace in
Christendom: and, that he doubted not, but that the French King, and diverse
other Princes would join to assist in so good a work; and, in the mean time,
the sin of this Breach, both with His, and the Venetians Dominions, must of
necessity lie at the Pope' s door.

In this contention (which lasted almost two years) the Pope grew still
higher, and the Venetians more and more resolved and careless: still
acquainting King James with their proceedings, which was done by the help of
Sir Henry Wotton, Mr. Bedel, and Padre Paulo, whom the Venetians did then call
to be one of their Consulters of State, and with his Pen to defend their just
Cause: which was by him so performed, that the Pope saw plainly, he had weakened
his Power by exceeding it, and offered the Venetians Absolution upon very easy
terms; which the Venetians still slighting, did at last obtain, by that which
was scarce so much as a show of acknowledging it: For, they made an order, that
in that day in which they were Absolved, there should be no Public Rejoicing,
nor any Bonfires that night; lest the Common People might judge, that they
desired an Absolution, or were Absolved for committing a Fault.

These Contests were the occasion of Padre Paulo's knowledge and interest with
King James, for whose sake principally Padre Paulo compiled that eminent
History of the remarkable Council of Trent; which History was, as fast as it
was written, sent in several sheets in Letters by Sir Henry Wotton, Mr. Bedel,
and others, unto King James, and the then Bishop of Canterbury, into England,
and there first made public, both in English and in the universal Language.

For eight years after Sir Henry Wotton's going into Italy, he stood fair and
highly valued in the Kings opinion, but at last became much clouded by an
accident, which I shall proceed to relate.

At his first going Ambassador into Italy, as he passed through Germany, he
stayed some days at Augusta; where having been in his former Travels, well
known by many of the best note for Learning and Ingeniousness, (those that are
esteemed the Virtuosi of that Nation) with whom he passing an evening in
merriments, was requested by Christopher Flecamore to write some Sentence in
his Albo; (a Book of white Paper, which for that purpose many of the German
Gentry usually carry about them) and Sir Henry Wotton consenting to the motion,
took an occasion from some accidental discourse of the present Company, to
write a pleasant definition of an Ambassador, in these very words: Legatus est
vir bonus peregre missus ad mentiendum Reipublicae causa.

Which Sir Henry Wotton could have been content should have been thus
Englished: An Ambassador is an honest man, sent to lie abroad for the good of
his Country.

But the word for lie (being the hinge upon which the Conceit was to turn) was
not so expressed in Latin, as would admit (in the hands of an Enemy especially)
so fair a construction as Sir Henry thought in English. Yet as it was, it slept
quietly among other Sentences in this Albo, almost eight years, till by
accident it fell into the hands of Jasper Scioppius, a Romanist, a man of a
restless spirit, and a malicious Pen: who with Books against King James, Prints
this as a Principle of that Religion professed by the King, and his Ambassador
Sir Henry Wotton, then at Venice: and in Venice it was presently after written
in several Glass-windows, and spitefully declared to be Sir Henry Wottons.

This coming to the knowledge of King James, he apprehended it to be such an
oversight, such a weakness, or worse, in Sir Henry Wotton, as caused the King
to express much wrath against him: and this caused Sir Henry Wotton to write
two Apologies, one to Velserus (one of the Chiefs of Augusta) in the universal
Language, which he caused to be Printed, and given, and scattered in the most
remarkable places both of Germany and Italy, as an Antidote against the
venomous Books of Scioppius; and another Apology to King James: which were
both so ingenious, so clear, and so choicely Eloquent, that his Majesty (who
was a pure Judge of it) could not forbear, at the receipt thereof, to declare
publicly, That Sir Henry Wotton had commuted sufficiently for a greater
offense.

And now, as broken bones well set become stronger; so Sir Henry Wotton did
not only recover, but was much more confirmed in his Majesty's estimation and
favor then formerly he had been.

And as that Man of great Wit and useful Fancy (his Friend Dr. Done) gave in a
Will of his (a Will of Conceits) his Reputation to his Friends, and his
Industry to his Foes, because from thence he received both: so those Friends,
that in this time of trial labored to excuse this facetious freedom of Sir
Henry Wottons, were to him more dear, and by him more highly valued; and those
Acquaintance that urged this as an advantage against him, caused him by this
error to grow both more wise, and (which is the best fruit error can bring
forth) for the future to become more industriously vvatchful over his Tongue
and Pen.

I have told you a part of his Employment in Italy, where notwithstanding the
death of his Favorer, the Duke Leonardo Donato, who had an undissembled
affection for him, and the malicious Accusation of Scioppius; yet his interest
(as though it had been an entailed love) was still found to live and increase
in all the succeeding Dukes, during his Employment to that State, which was
almost twenty years; all which time he studied the dispositions of those
Dukes, and the other Consulters of State; well knowing, that he who
negotiates a continued business, and neglects the study of dispositions,
usually fails in his proposed ends: But in this Sir Henry Wotton did not fail;
for by a fine sorting of fit Presents, curious and not costly Entertainments,
always sweetened by various and pleasant Discourse; with which, and his choice
application of Stories, and his elegant Delivery of all these, even in their
Italian Language, he first got, and still preserved such interest in the State
of Venice, that it was observed (such was either his (merit, or his modesty)
they never denied him any request.

But, all this shows but his abilities, and his fitness for that Employment:
'Twill therefore be needful to tell the Reader, what use he made of the
Interest which these procured him; and that indeed was, rather to oblige
others then to enrich himself; he still endeavoring that the Reputation of the
English might be maintained, both in the German Empire, and in Italy; where
many Gentlemen whom Travel had invited into that Nation, received from him
cheerful Entertainments, advice for their behavior, and by his interest
shelter, or deliverance from those accidental storms of adversity which
usually attend upon Travel.

And because these things may appear to the Reader to be but Generals, I shall
acquaint him with two particular Examples; one of his Merciful Disposition,
and one of the Nobleness of his Mind; which shall follow.

There had been many English Soldiers brought by Commanders of their own
Country, to serve the Venetians for pay against the Turk: and those English,
having by Irregularities, or Improvidence, brought themselves into several
Galleys and Prisons, Sir Henry Wotton became a Petitioner to that State for
their Lives and Enlargement; and his Request was granted: so that those
(which were many hundreds, and there made the sad Examples of Humane Misery,
by hard Imprisonment, and unpitied Poverty in a strange Nation) were by his
means released, relieved, and in a comfortable Condition sent to thank God and
him for their Lives and Liberty in their own Country.

And this I have observed as one testimony of the compassionate Nature of him,
who was (during his stay in those parts) as a City of Refuge for the
Distressed of this and other Nations.

And for that which I offer as a Testimony of the Nobleness of his Mind; I
shall make way to the Readers clearer understanding of it, by telling him,
that beside several other Foreign Employments, Sir Henry Wotton was sent
thrice Ambassador to the Republic of Venice; and at his last going thither,
he was employed Ambassador to several of the German Princes, and more
particularly to the Emperor Ferdinando the second; and that his Employment to
him, and those Princes, was to incline them to equitable Conditions, for the
Restoration of the Queen of Bohemia, and her Descendents, to their Patrimonial
Inheritance of the Palatinate.

This was by his eight Months constant endeavors and attendance upon the
Emperor, his Court and Council, brought to a probability of a successful
Conclusion without bloodshed: but there was at that time two opposite Armies
in the Field; and as they were Treating, there was a Battle fought; in the
managery whereof, there was so many miserable Errors on the one side, (so Sir
Henry Wotton expresses it in a Dispatch to the King) and so advantageous Events
to the Emperor, as put an end to all present Hopes of a successful Treaty: so
that Sir Henry seeing the face of Peace altered by that Victory, prepared for a
Removal from that Court; and at his departure from the Emperor, was so bold as
to remember him, That the Events of every Battle move on the unseen Wheels of
Fortune, which are this moment up, and down the next: and therefore humbly
advised him to use his Victory so soberly, as still to put on thoughts of
Peace. Which Advice, though it seemed to be spoke with some Passion, (his dear
Mistress the Queen of Bohemia being concerned in it) was yet taken in good
part by the Emperor; who replied, That he would consider his Advice: And
though he looked on the King his Master as an Abettor of his Enemy the
Paulsgrave; yet for Sir Henry himself, his behavior had been such during the
manage of the Treaty, that he took him to be a Person of much Honor and Merit,
and did therefore desire him to accept of that Jewel, as a testimony of his
good opinion of him; which was a Jewel of Diamonds of more value then a
Thousand Pounds.

This Jewel was received with all outward Circumstances and Terms of Honor
by Sir Henry Wotton: but the next morning, at his departing from Vienna, he at
his taking leave of the Countess of Sabrina (an Italian Lady, in whose House
the Emperor had appointed him to be lodged, and honorably entertained:) he
acknowledged her Merits, and besought her to accept of that Jewel, as a
testimony of his gratitude for her Civilities: presenting her with the same
that was given him by the Emperor: which being suddenly discovered, and told to
the Emperor, was by him taken for a high affront, and Sir Henry Wotton told so
by a Messenger. To which he replied, That though he received it with
thankefulness, yet he found in himself an indisposition to be the better for
any gift that came from an Enemy to his Royal Mistress the Queen of Bohemia;
for so she was pleased he should always call her.

Many other of his Services to his Prince, and this Nation, might be insisted
upon: as namely, his procurations of Privileges and Courtesies with the German
Princes, and the Republic of Venice, for the English Merchants; and what he
did by direction of King James with the Venetian State, concerning the Bishop
of Spalato's return to the Church of Rome. But for the particulars of these,
and many more that I meant to make known, I want a view of some Papers that
might inform me, (his late Majesty's Letter Office having now suffered a
strange alienation) and indeed I want time too; for the Printers Press stays
for what is written: so that I must haste to bring Sir Henry Wotton in an
instant from Venice to London, leaving the Reader to make up what is defective
in this place, by the small supplement of the Inscription under his Arms, which
he left at all those Houses where he rested, or lodged, when he returned from
his last Embassy into England.

Henricus Wottonius Anglo-Cantianus, Thomae optimi viri (...) minimus, a
serenissimo Jacobo I^ Mag. Brit^ R^ge; in equestrem titulum adscitus, ejusdemq^
(...) ^ublicam Venetam Legatus Ordinarius, ^mel ad confoeder at (...)
Provinciarum Ordines in Juliacensi ^tio. Bis ad Carolum Emanuel, Sab^diae D^;
semel ad unitos superioris. Germaniae Principes in Co^ventu. Heilbrunensi,
postremo ad Archiducem Leopoldum, Ducem Wittembergensem, Civitates imperial^s,
Argentinam, Ulmamque^, and ipsum Romanorum Imperatorem Ferdinandum secundum,
Legatus Extraordinarius, tandem hoc didicit, Animas fieri sapientiores
quiescendo.

To London he came the year before King James died; who having for the reward
of his foreign service, promised him the reversion of an Office which was fit
to be turned into present money, which he wanted, for a supply of his present
necessities, and also granted him the reversion of the Master of the Rolls
place, if he outlived charitable Sir Julius Caesar, who then possessed it: and
then, grown so old, that he was said to be kept alive beyond Natures Course, by
the prayers of those many poor which he daily relieved.

But, these were but in hope; and his condition required a present support: For
in the beginning of these employments he sold to his elder Brother the Lord
Wotton, the Rentcharge left by his good Father, and (which is worse) was now
at his return indebted to several persons, whom he was not able to satisfy,
but by the Kings payment of his Arrears due for his foreign Employments: He
had brought into England many servants, of which some were German and Italian
Artists; this was part of his condition, who had many times hardly sufficient
to supply the occasions of the day: (For it may by no means be said of his
providence, as himself said of Sir Philip Sidney's wit, That it was the very
measure of congruity) He being always so careless of money, as though our
Saviors words, Care not for to morrow, were to be literally understood.

But it pleased the God of providence, that in this jucture of time, the
Provosthip of His Mayesties College of Eaton became void by the death of Mr.
Thomas Murray, for which there were (as the place deserved) many earnest and
powerful Suitors to the King. And Sir Henry who had for many years (like
Siciphas) rolled the restless stone of a State-imployment; knowing
experimentally, that the great blessing of sweet content was not to be found in
multitudes of men or business: and, that a College was the fittest place to
nourish holy thoughts, and to afford rest both to his body and mind, which his
age (being now almost threescore years) seemed to require, did therefore use
his own, and the interest of all his friends to procure that place. By which
means, and quitting the King of his promised reversionary Offices, and a piece
of honest policy (which I have not time to relate) he got a Grant of it from
His Majesty.

And this was a fair satisfaction to his mind: but money was wanting to furnish
him with those necessaries which attend removes, and a settlement in such a
place; and, to procure that, he wrote to his old friend Mr. Nicholas Pey, for
his assistance; of which Nicholas Pey, I shall here say a little, for the
clearing of some passages that I shall mention hereafter.

He was in his youth a Clerk, or in some such way, a Servant to the Lord
Wotton, Sir Henry's Brother, and by him, when he was Comptroller of the Kings
Household, was made a great Officer in His Majesty's House. This, and other
favors being conferred upon Mr. Pey (in whom there was a radieal honesty) were
always thankfully acknowledged by him, and his gratitude expressed by a willing
and unwearied serviceableness to that Family even till his death. To him Sir
Henry Wott^ wrote, to use all his interest at Court, to procure Five hundred
pounds of his Arrears (for le^ would not settle him in the College) and the
want of such a sum, wrinckled his face with care; ('it was his own expression)
and, that money being procured, he should the next day after find him in his
College, and Invidiae remedium writ over his Study door.

This money, being part of his Arrears, was by his own, and the help of honest
Nicholas Pey's interest in Court, quickly procured him; and he (...) quickly in
the College; the place where indeed his happiness then seemed to have its
beginning: the College being to his mind, as a quiet Harbor to a Seafaring
man after a tempestuous voyage; where, by the bounty of the pious Founder, his
very Food and Raiment were plentifully provided for him in kind, and more money
then enough, where he was freed from all corroding cares, and seated on such a
Rock, as the waves of want could not probably shake; where he might sit in a
Caelm, and looking down, behold the busy multitude turmoyl'd and tossed in a
tempestuous Sea of trouble and dangers! And (as Sir William Davenant has
happily expressed the like of another person) Laugh at the graver business of the
State,
Which speaks wen rather wise then fortunate.


Being thus settled according to the desires of his heart, his first study was
the Statutes of the College: by which, he conceived himself bound to enter
into Holy Orders, which he did; being made Deacon with all convenient speed;
shortly after which time, as he came in his Surplice from the Church service,
an old Friend, a person of Quality, met him so attired, and joyed him of his
new habit; to whom Sir Henry Wotton replied, I thank God and the King, by whose
goodness I now am in this condition; a condition, which that Emperor Charles
the Fifth, seemed to approve: who, after so many remarkable Victories, when his
glory was great in the eyes of all men, freely gave up his Crown, and the many
cares that attended it, to Philip his Son, making a holy retreat to a
Cloysteral life, where he might by devout meditations consult with God, (which
the rich or busy men seldom do) and have leisure both to examine the errors
of his life past, and prepare for that great day, wherein all flesh must make
an account of their actions: And after a kind of tempestuous life, I now have
the like advantage from him, that makes the out goings of the morning to praise
him; even from my God, whom I daily magnify for this particular mercy, of an
exemption from business, a quiet mind, and a liberal maintenance, even in this
part of my life, when my age and infirmities seem to found me a ret^eat from
the pleasures of this world, and invite me to contemplation, in which I have
ever taken the greatest felicity.

And now to speak a little of the employment of his time in the College. After
his customary public Devotions, his use was to retire into his Study, and
there to spend some hours in reading the Bible, and Authors in Divinity,
closing up his meditations with private prayer; this was, for the most part his
employment in the Forenoon: But, when he was once sat to Dinner, then nothing
but cheerful thoughts possessed his mind; and, those still increased by
constant company at his Table, of such persons as brought thither additions
both of Learning and Pleasure; but some part of most days was usually spent in
Philosophical Conclusions, Nor did he forget his innate pleasure of Angling,
which he would usually call, his idle time, not idly spent; saying often, he
would rather live five May months, then forty Decembers.

He was a great lover of his Neighbors, and a bountiful entertainer of them
very often at his Table, where his meat was choice, and his discourse better.

He was a constant Cherisher of all those youths in that School, in whom he
found either a constant diligence, or a Genius that prompted them to Learning;
for whose encouragement, he was (beside many other things of necessity and
beauty) at the charge of setting up in it two rows of Pillars, on which he
caused to be choicely drawn, the pictures of diverse of the most famous Greek
and Latin Historians, Poets, and Orators; persuading them not to neglect
Rhetoric, because Almighty God has left Mankind affections to be wrought upon:
And he would often say. That none despised Eloquence, but such dull souls as
were not capable of it. He would also often make choice of some Observations
out of those Historians and Poets: and would never leave the School, without
dropping some choice Greek or Latin Apothegm or sentence, that might be worthy
of a room in the memory of a growing Scholar.

He was pleased constantly to breed up one or more hopeful Youths, which he
picked out of the School, and took into his own Domestic care, and to attend
him at his Meals; out of whose Discourse and Behavior, he gathered
observations for the better completing of his intended work of Education: of
which, by his still striving to make the whole better, he lived to leave but
part to Posterity.

He was a great Enemy to wrangling Disputes of Religion, concerning which, I
shall say a little, both to testify that, and to show the readiness of his Wit.

Having at his being in Rome made acquaintance with a pleasant Priest, who
invited him one Evening to hear their Vesper Music at Church; the Priest
seeing Sir Henry stand obscurely in a corner, sends to him by a Boy of the
Quire this Question, writ in a small piece of Paper, Where was your Religion to
be found before Luther? To which Question Sir Henry presently under-writ, My
Religion was to be found then, where yours is not to be found now, in the
written Word of God.

The next Vesper, Sir Henry went purposely to the same Church, and sent one of
the Quire-boyes with this Question, to his honest, pleasant friend, the Priest;
Do you believe all those many Thousands of poor Christians were damned, that
were Excommunicated, because the Pope, and the Duke of Venice, could not agree
about their temporal power? Speak your Conscience. To which he under-writ in
French, Monsieur, excusay moy.

To one that asked him, Whether a Papist may (...) saved? he replied, You may
be saved without knowing that. Look to your self.

To another, whose earnestness exceeded his knowledge, and was still railing
against the Papists, he gave this advice, Pray Sir forbear, till you ha^
studied the Points better; for the wise Italians have the Proverb; He that
understands amiss, concludes worse* And take heed of thinking, The farther you
go from the Church of Rome, the nearer you are to God.

And to another that spoke indiscreet, and bitter words against Arminius, I
heard him reply to this purpose:

In my travel toward Venice, as I past through Germany, I rested almost a year
at Leyden, where I entered into an acquaintance with Arminius (then the
Professor of Divinity in that University) a man much talked of in this Age,
which is made up of opposition and Controversy: Andindeed, if I mistake not
Arminius in his expressions (as so weak a brain as mine is may easily do) then
I know I differ from him in some points; yet, I profess my judgment of him to
be, that he was a ^an of most rare Learning, and I knew him to be of a most
strict ^fe, and of a most meek spirit. And that he was so mild, appears by his
Proposals to our Master Perkins of Cambridge, from whose Book, of the Order and
Causes of Salvation (which was first writ in Latin) Arminius took the occasion
of writing some Queries to him concerning the consequents of his Doctrine;
intending them ('it is said) to come privately to Mr. Perkins own hands, and to
receive from him, a like private, and a like loving Answer: But, Mr. Perkins
died before those Queries came to him; and it is thought Arminius meant them to
die with him; for though he lived long after, I have heard he forbore to
publish them, (but ^nce his death, his Sons did not:) And (...) pity, if God
had been so pleased, that Mr. Perkins did not live to see, consider, and answer
those proposals himself; for he was also of a most meek spirit, and of great
and sanctified Learning: And though since their deaths, many of ^igh parts and
pi^ty have undertaken to clear the Controversy, yet, for the most part, they
have rather satisfied themselves, then convinced the dissenting party. And
doubtless, many middle-witted men (which yet may mean well) many Scholars that
are not in the bigbest Form for Learning (which yet may preach we^) men that
are but Preachers, and shall never know, till they come to Heaven, where the
Que^tions stick betwixt Arminius and the Church of England, (if there be any)
will yet in this world be tampering with, and thereby perplexing the
Controversy, and do therefore justly fall under the reproof of St. Jude, for
being Busiebodies, and for meddling with things they understand not.

And here it offers it self (I think not unfitly) to tell the Reader, that a
friend of Sir Henry Wottons, being designed for the employment of an
Ambassador, came to Eaton, and requested from him some experimental Rules for
his prudent and safe carriage in his Negotiations; to whom he smilingly gave
this for an infallible Aphoris^; That, to be in safety himself, and serviceable
to his Country, he should always, and upon all occasions speak the truth (it
seems a State-Paradox) for, says Sir Henry Wotton, you shall never be
believed; and by this means, your truth will secure your self, if you shall
ever ^e called to any account; and 'twill also put your Adversaries (who will
still hunt counter) to a loss in all their disquisitions, and undertakings.

Many more of this nature might be observed, but they must be laid aside; for I
shall here make a little ^op, and invite the Reader to look back (...) shall
say (...) little of Sir Alber^ (...) and Mr. William Bedel, whom I formerly
mentioned.

I have t^ld you that are ^y Reader; that (...) Sir H^y Wo^s (...) going
Ambassador into Italy, his Cousin, Sir Albert Morto^, went his Secretary: and
am next to tell you, that Sir Albertus died, Secretary of State to our late
King; but, cannot, am not able to express the sorrow that possessed Sir Henry
W^tton at his first hearing the news that Sir Albertus was by death lost to him
and this world; and yet, the Reader may partly guess by these following
expressions: The first in a Letter to his Nicholas Pey, of which this that
follows is a part. -- And My dear Nick, When I had been here almost a
fortnight, in the midst of my great content^nt, I received notice of Sir
Albertus Morton (...) out of this World, who was dearer to me, then mine own
being in it* what a wound it is to my heart* you that know him, and know me,
will easily believe^ but, ^our Creators Will must be done, and unrepini^gly
r^ived by his own Creatures, who is the Lord of all Nature, and of all Fortune,
when he takes to himself now one, and then ^ther, till that expected day,
wherein it shall please him to dissolve the whole, and wrap up even the Heaven
it self (...) Scr^le of Parchment: This is the last Philosophy that we must
study upon Earth; let us therefore that yet remain here, as our days and
friends waste, reinforce our love to each other; which of all virtues, both
spiritual and moral, has the highest privilege, because death it self cannot
end it. And my good Nick, etc.

This is a part of his sorrow thus expressed to his Nick P^y, the other part is
in this following Elogy, of which the Reader may safely conclude, 'twas to^
hearty to be dissembled.

Tears wept at the Grave of Sir Albertus Morton,
by Henry Wotton.
SIlence in truth would speak my sorrow best,
For deepest wounds can least their feelings tell;
Yet let me borrow from mine own unrest,
A time to bid him whom I loved, farewell.
Oh, my unhappy lines! you that before
Have served my youth to vent some wanton cries,
And now congealed with grief, can scarce implore
Strength to accent, Here my Albetus lies.
This is that Sable Stone, this is the Cave
And womb of Earth, that does his Corpse embrace;
While others sing his praise, let me ingrave
Th^se bl^ding numbers to adorn the place.
Here will I paint the Characters of Woe;
Here will I pay my Tribute to the Dead;
And here my faithful Tears in showers shall flow
To humanize the Flints on which I tread.
Wh^re though I mourn my matchless loss alone,
And none between my weakness judge and me;
Yet even these pensive Walls allow my moan,
Whose d^leful Echoes to my plaints agree.
But is he gone? and live I rhyming here,
As if some Muse would listen to my lay?
When all dis-tun'd sit waiting for their dear,
And bathe the Banks where he was wont to play.
(...) in (...) l^ss Bliss with happy Souls.
Discharged from Natures and from Fortunes Trust;
Whilst on the fluid Globe my Hour glass rowls,
And runs the ^est of my remaining dust.
H. W.

This concerning his Sir Albertus Morton.

And for what I shall say concerning Mr. William Bedel, I must prepare the
Reader, by telling him, That when King James sent Sir Henry Wotton Ambassador
to the State of Veni^, he sent also an Ambassador to the King of France, and
another to the King of Spain: with the Ambassador of France went Joseph Hall,
(late Bishop of Norwich) whose many and useful Works speak his great Merit:
with the Ambassador of Spain went Ia. Wadsworth; and with Sir Henry Wotton went
William Bod^l.

These three Chaplains to these three Ambassadors, were all bred in one
University, all of one Emanuel College in Cambridge.
College, all Beneficed in one Diocese, and all most dear and entire Friends:
But in Spain Mr. Wadsworth met with temptations, or reasons, such as were so
powerful, as to persuade him (who of the three, was formerly observed to be the
most averse to that Religion that calls it self Catholic) to disclaim himself
a Member of the Church of England, and declare himself for the Church of Rome;
discharging himself of his attendance on the Ambassador, and betaking himself
to a Monasterial life; in which he lived very regularly, and so died.

When Dr. Hall (the late Bishop of Norwich) came into England, he wrote to Mr.
Wadsworth, ('it is the first Epistle in his Printed Decads) to persuade his
return, or to show the reason of his Apostasy: the Letter seemed to have in it
many sweet expressions of love; and yet there was in it some expression that
was so unpleasant to Mr. Wadsworth, that he chose rather to acquaint his old
Friend Mr. Bedel with his motives; by which means there past betwixt Mr. Bedil
and Mr. Wadsworth diverse Letters, which be extant in Print, and did well
deserve it; for in them there seems to be a controversy, not of Religion only,
but who should answer each other with most love and meekness: which I mention
the rather, because it too seldom falls out to be so in a Book-War.

There is yet a little more to be said of Mr. Bedel, for the greatest part of
which, the Reader is referred to this following Letter of Sir Henry Wottons,
writ to our late King Charles the first.

May it please Your most Gracious Majesty,
HAving been informed that certain persons have, by the good wishes of the
Archbishop of Armagh, been directed hither, with a most humble Petition unto
Your Majesty, that You will be pleased to make Mr. William Bedel (now resident
upon a small Benefice in Suffolk) Governor of Your College at Dublin, for the
good of that Society; and my self being required to render unto Your Majesty
some testimony of the said William Bedel, who was long my Chaplain at Venice,
in the time of my first employment there; I am bound in all Conscience and
Truth (so far as Your Majesty will vouchsafe to accept my poor judgment) to
affirm of him, That I think hardly a fitter man for that Charge, could have
been propounded unto Your Majesty in Your whole Kingdom, for singular Erudition
and Piety, Conformity to the Rites of the Church, and Zeal to advance the Cause
of God; wherein his Travels abroad were not obscure, in the time of the
Excommunication of the Venetians.

For it may please Your Majesty to know, that this is the man whom Padre Paulo
took I may say, into his very soul, with whom he did communicate the inwardest
thoughts of his heart, from whom he professed to have received more knowledge
in all Divinity, both Scholastical and Positive, than from any that he had ever
practiced in his days; of which, all the passages were well known to the King
Your Father, of most blessed memory. And so with Your Majesty's good favor, I
will end this needless Office; for the general Fame of his Learning, his Life,
and Christian temper, and those Religious Labors which himself has dedicated
to Your Majesty, do better describe him then I am able.

Your MAJESTY'S Most humble and faithful Servant, H. WOTTON.


TO this Letter, I shall add this; That he was (to the great joy of Sir Henry
Wotton) made Governor of the said College; and that August, 1627.
after a fair discharge of his duty and trust there, he was thence removed to
be Bishop of Kilmore. Sept. 3. 1629.
In both which places, his life was so holy, as seemed to equal the primitive
Christians; for as they, so he kept all the Ember-weeks, observed (besides his
private devotions) the Canonical hours of Prayer very strictly, and so he did
all the Feasts, and Fast days of his Mother, the Church of England; to which I
may add, that his Patience and Charity were both such, as showed his affections
were set upon things that are above; for indeed his whole life brought forth
the fruits of the Spirit; there being in him such a remarkable meekness, that
as St. Paul advised his Timothy in the Election of a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3. 7.
That he have a good report of those that be without; so had he, for those that
were without, even those that in point of Religion, whereof the Roman
persuasion (of which there were very many in his Diocese) did yet (such is the
power of visible Piety) ever look upon him with respect and reverence; and,
testified it, by a concealing, and safe protecting him from death in the late
horrid Rebellion in Ireland, when the fury of the wild Irish knew no
distinction of persons; and yet, there, and then, he was protected and
cherished by those of a contrary persuasion; and there, and then he dyed, not
by violence or misusage, but by grief in a quiet Prison^ (1629.) And, with him
was lost many of his learned Writings, which were thought worthy of
preservation; and amongst the rest (...) was lost the Bible, which by many
years labor, and conference, and study, he had translated into the Irish
Tongue, with an intent to have printed it for public use.

More might be said of Mr. Bedel, who (I told the Reader) was Sir Henry Wottons
first Chaplain; and much of his second Chaplain, Isaac Bargrave, Doctor in
Divinity, and the late learned and hospitable Dean of Canterbury; as also of
the Meri^ of many others* that had the happiness to attend Sir Henry in his
foreign employments: But, the Reader may think that in this digression, I have
already carried him too far from Eaton College, and therefore I shall lead him
back as gently, and as orderly as I may to that place, for a further conference
concerning Sir Henry Wotton.

Sir Henry Wotton had proposed to himself; before he entered into his Collegiate
life, to write the life of Martin Luther; and in it, the History of the
Reformation, as it was carried on in Germany: For the doing of which, he had
many advantages by his several Embassies into those pa^ts, and his interest in
the several Princes of the Empire; by whose means he had access to the Records
of all the Ha^ To^s, and the knowledge of many secret passages that ^ll not
under common view^ and in these he had made a happy progress, as it well known
to his worthy friend Dr. D^a, the ^te Reverend Bishop of Sali^bury, but in the
midst of this design, His late Majesty King Charles the first; that knew the
value of Sir Henry Wottons (...) did by a persuasive loving violence (to which
may be added a promise of 500 l. a year) force him to lay Luther aside, and
betake himself to write the History of England; in which he proceeded to write
some short Characters of a few Kings, as a foundation upon which he meant to
build; but, for the present meant to be more large in the story of Henry the
sixth, the Founder of that College, in which he then enjoyed all the worldly
happiness of his present being; but Sir Henry dyed in the midst of this
undertaking, and the footsteps of his labors are not recoverable by a more
than common diligence.

This is some account both of his inclination, and the employment both of his
time in the College, where he seemed to have his Youth renewed by a continual
conversation with that Learned Society, and a daily recourse of other Friend of
choicest breeding and parts, by which, that great blessing of a cheerful heart
was still maintained; he being always free, even to the last of his day, from
that peevishness which usually attends Age.

And yet his mirth was sometimes damped by the remembrance of diverse old Debts,
p^ly contracted in his foreign Employments, for which his ju^ Arrears due from
the King, would have made satisfaction; but, being still delayed with
Co^t-promises, and finding some decays of health, he did about two years
before his death, out of a Christian desire, that none should be a lose by it,
make his last Will; concerning which, a doubt till remains, whether it
discovered more h^y wit, or conscionable policy: But there is no doubt, but
that his chief design was a Christian endeavor that his Debts might be
satisfied.

And that it may remain as such a Testimony, and a Legacy to those that loved
him, I shall here impart it to the Reader, as it was found writ with his own
hand.

IN the name of God Almighty and All-meroif^l, I Henry Wotton, Provost of his
Majesty's College by Eaton, being mindful of mine own mortality, which the sin
of our first Parents did bring upon all flesh, Do by this last Will and
Testament, thus dispose of my self, and the poor things I shall leave in this
World. My Soul, I bequeath to the Immortal God my Maker, Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, my blessed Redeemer, and Mediator, through his all-sole
sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the whole World, and efficient for his
Elect, in the number of whom, I am one by his mere grace, and thereof in often
unremoveably aff^d by his holy Spirit, the true (...) Comforter. My body I
bequeath to the Earth, if I shall end my transitory days at, or near Eaton, to
be ^ed in the Chapel of the said College, as the Fellows shall dispose
thereof, with whom I have lived (my God knows) in all loving affection; or If I
shall dye near Bocton Malherb, in the County of Kent, then I wish to be laid in
that Parish Church, as near as may be to the Sepulcher of my good Father,
expecting a joyful Resurrection with him in the day of Christ.

After this account of his Faith, and this Surrender of his Soul to that God
that inspired it, and this direction for the disposal of his body, he proceeded
to appoint that his Executors should lay over his grave a Marble stone, plain,
and not costly^ And considering that time moulders even (...) to dust; (for
Juven.
Monuments themselves must die.) Therefore did he (waving the common way) think
fit rather to preserve his name (to which the Son of (...) advises all men) by
an useful Apothegm, then by a large enumeration of his descent or merits, (of
boath which he might justly have boasted:) but, he was content to forget them,
and did choose only this prudent, pious, Sentence, to discover his Disposition,
and preserve his Memory.

'Twas directed by him, to be thus inscribed: Hic jacet hujus Sententia primus
Author. DISPUTANDI PRURITUS, ECCLESIARUM SCABIES. Nomen alias quaere.

Which may be Englished thus,

Here lies the first Author of this Sentence. THE ITCH OF DISPUTATION, WILL
PROVE THE SCAB OF THE CHURCH. Inquire his name elsewhere.

And if any shall object, as I think some have, That Sir Henry Wotton was not
the first Author of this Sentence; but, that this, or a Sentence like it, was
long before his time; To him I answer, that Solomon says, Nothing can be
spoken; that has not been spoken; for there is no new thing under the Sun. But
grant, that in his various reading, he had met with this, or a like Sentence;
yet reason mixed with Charity should persuade all Readers to believe, That Sir
Henry Wotton's mind was then so fixed on that part of the Communion of Saints
which is above, that an holy Lethorgy did surprise his Memory. For doubtless,
if he had not believed himself to be the first Author of what he said, he was
too prudent first to own, and then expose it to the public view, and censure
of every Critic. And questionless, 'twill be charity in all Readers, to think
his mind was then so fixed on Heaven, that a holy zeal did transport him: and
that in this Sacred Ecstasy, his thoughts were then only of the Church
Triumphant, (into which he daily expected his admission). And that Almighty God
was then pleased to make him a Prophet, to tell the Church Militant, and
particularly that part of it in this Nation where the weeds of controversy
grow to be daily both more numerous, and more destructive to humble Piety: and
where men have Consciences that boggle at Ceremonies, and yet scruple not to
speak and act such sins as the ancient humble Christians believed to be a sin
to think: and whereas our Reverend Hooker says, former Simplicity, and
softness of Spirit, is not now to be found, because Zeal ha^ drowned Charity,
and Skill Meekness: It will be good to think that these sad changes have proved
this Epitaph to be a useful Caution unto us of thi^ Nation; and the sad effects
thereof in Germa^ have proved it to be a mournful Truth.

This by way of Observation concerning h^ Epitaph: The rest of his Will
follows in his ow^ words.

Further, I the said Henry Wotton, do constitut^ and ordain to be joint
Executors of this my last Will (...) Testament, my two Grand-Nephews, Albert
Morton second son to Sir Robert Morton Knight, late deceased. and Thomas
Bargrave, eldest son to Dr. Bargrave, Dean of Canterbury, Husband to my Rig^
Virtuous and only Niece. And I do pray the foresaid Dr. Bargrave, and Mr.
Nicholas Pey, my most faith^ and chosen friends, together with Mr. John
Harriso^ one of the Fellows of Eaton College, best acquaint^ with my Books and
Pictures, and other Utenfils, to (...) Supervisors of this my last Will and
Testament. A^ I do pray the foresaid Dr. Bargrave, and Mr. Nichol^ Pey, to be
Solicitors for such Arrearages as shall app^ due unto me from his Majesty's
Exchequer at the ti^ of mydeath; and to assist my forenamed Executors (...)
some reasonable and conscientious satisfaction of my Cr^ ditors, and discharge
of my Legacies now specified; (...) that shall be hereafter added unto this my
Testament, (...) any Codicil or Schedule, or left in the hands, or in (...)
Memorial with the aforesaid Mr. John Harrison. A^ first, To my most dear
Sovereign and Master of inco^ parable Goodness, (in whose gracious opinion, I
h^ ever had some portion, as far as the interest of a p^ honest man) I leave
four Pictures at large of those Dukes of Venice, in whose time I was there
employed, with their Names written on the backside, which hang in my great
ordinary Dining Room, done after the Life by Edoardo Fialetto. Likewise a Table
of the Venetian College, where Ambassadors had their Audience, hanging over
the Mantle of the Chimney in the said Room, done by the same hand, which
contains a draught in little, well resembling the famous D. Leonardo Donato,
in a time which needed a wise and constant man. It' The Picture of a Duke of
Venice hanging over against the door, done either by Titiano, or some other
principal hand long before my time. Most humbly beseeching his Majesty, that
the said Pieces may remain in some corner of any of his Houses, for a poor
Memorial of his most humble vassal.

It' I leave his said Majesty all the Papers and Negotiations of Sir Nich.
Throgmorton Knight, during his famous employment under Queen Elizabeth, in
Scotland and in France, which contain diverse secrets of State, that perchance
his Majesty will think fit to be pre^rved in his Paper-Office, after they have
been perused ^d sorted by Mr. Secretary Windebanck, with whom I ^ive
heretofore, as I remember, conferred about them. They were committed to my
disposal by Sir Arthur ^hrogmorton his Son, to whose worthy memory I can^t
better discharge my faith, then by assigning them to ^e highest place of trust.
It' I leave to our most Gracious (...) Virtuous Queen Mary, Dioscorides, with
the ^nts naturally colored, and the Text translated by ^tthiolo, in the best
Language of Tuscany, whence (...) said Majesty is lineally desconded, for a
poor token of (...) thankful devotion, for the honor she was once pleas^ do
my private study with her presence. I leave to the ^t hopeful Prince, the
Picture of the elected and crowned Queen of Bohemia, his Aunt, of clear and
resplen*dent virtues through the clouds of her Fortune. To (...) Lords Grace of
Canterbury now being, I leave my Picture of Divine Love, rarely copied from one
in the King^ Galleries, of my presentation to his Majesty: beseechi^ him to
receive it as a pledge of my humble reverence to (...) great Wisdom. And to
the most worthy Lord Bishop of London, Lord High Treasurer of England, (...)
true admiration of his Christian simplicity, and conte^ of earthly pomp; I
leave a Picture of Heraclitus bewai^ing, and Democritus laughing at the world:
M^ humbly beseeching the said Lord Archbishop his Grace and the Lord Bishop of
London, of both whose favors have tasted in my life time, to intercede with
our most gr^ cious Sovereign after my death, in the bowels of Jes^ Christ, That
out of compassionate memory of my lo^ Services (wherein I more studied the
public Honor then mine own Utility) some Order may be taken out (...) my
Arrears due in the Exchequer, for such satisfaction (...) my Creditors, as
those whom I have Ordained Supervis^ of this my last Will and Testament shall
present unto the Lordships, without their farther trouble: Hoping lik^ wise in
his Majesty's most indubitable Goodness, that will keep me from all prejudice,
which I may other^ suffer by any defect of formality in the Demand of my s^
Arrears. To -- for a poor addition to his Cabi^ I leave as Emblems of his
attractive Virtues, and O^ ging Nobleness, my great Loadstone; and a piece
Amber of both kinds naturally united, and only differi^ in degree of
Concoction, which is thought somewhat ra^ Item, A piece of Crystal Sexangular,
(as they gr^ all) grasping diverse several things within it, which bought among
the Rhaetian Alps, in the very place where grew: recommending most humbly unto
his Lordship, (...) reputation of my poor Name in the point of my debts, (...)
have done to the forenamed Spiritual Lords; and am heartily sorry, that I have
no better token of my humble thankefulness to his honored Person. It' I leave
to Sir Francis Windebank, one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries of State,
(whom I found my great friend in ^oint of Necessity) the four Seasons of old
Bassano, to ^ang near the Eye in his Parlour, (being in little form) which I
bought at Venice, where I first entered into his most worthy Acquaintance.

To the abovenamed Dr. Bargrave Dean of Canterbury, I leave all my Italian
Books not disposed in this Will. I leave to him likewise my Viol de Gamba,
which has been twice with me in Italy, in which Country I first contracted
with him an unremovable Affection. To my other Supervisor Mr. Nicholas Pey, I
leave ^y Chest, or Cabinet of Instruments and Engines of all kinds of uses: in
In it were Italian locks, picklocks, screws to force open doors, and many
things of worth and rarity, that he had gathered in his foreign Travel.
the lower-box whereof, are some sit to be bequeathed to none but so entire an
honest man as he is. I leave him ^ikewise forty pound for his pains in te
solicitation of my Arrears, and am sorry that my ragged Estate can reach no
further to one that has taken such care for me in ^he same kind, during all my
for^eign Employments. To the Li^rary at Eaton College I leave all my
Manuscripts not before disposed, and to each of the Fellows a plain Ring of
Gold, enameled black; all save the verge, with this Motto within, Amor unit
omnia.

This is my last Will and Testament, save what ^all be added by a Schedule
thereunto annexed. Written (...) the first of October, in the present year of
our Redemption 1637. And subscribed by my self, with the Testimony of these
Witnesses.

HENRY WOTTON. Nich. Oudert. Geo. Lash:



ANd now, because the mind of man is best satisfied by the knowledge of Events,
I think (...) to declare, that every one that was named in his Will, did
gladly receive their Legacies; by which, and his most just and passionate
desires for the payment of his debts, they joined in assisting the Overseers of
his Will; and by their joint endeavors to the King (then whom none was more
willing) conscionable satisfaction was given for his just debts.

The next thing wherewith I shall acquaint the Reader, is, That he went usually
once a year, i^ not oftener, to the beloved Bocton-hall, where he would say, he
found a cure for all cares, by the cheerful company, which he called the
living furniture (...) that place: and, a restoration of his strength, by (...)
Connaturalness of that, which he called his genial air.

He yearly went also to Oxford. But the Summer before his death he changed that
for a journey to Winchester-Colledge; to which School he (...) first removed
from Bocton. And as he return^ from Winchester, toward Eaton College, said
(...) a friend, his Companion in that Journey; H^ useful was that advice of a
Holy Monk, who persw^ his friend to perform his Customary devotions in (...)
constant place; because in that place, we usually meet with those very thoughts
which possessed ^s a^ our last being there; And I find it thus far
experimentally true; that, at my now being in that School, and seeing that very
place where I sat when I was a Boy, occasioned me to remember those very
thoughts of my youth which then possessed me; sweet thoughts indeed, that
promised my growing years numerous pleasures, without mixtures of cares; and
those to be enjoyed, when time (which I therefore thought slow paced) had
changed my youth into manhood: But, age and experience have taught me, that
those were but empty hopes: For I have always found it true, as my Savior did
foretell, Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof. Nevertheless, I saw there
a succession of Boys using the same recreations, and, questionless possessed
with the same thoughts that then possessed me. Thus, one generation succeeds
another, both in their lives, recreations, hopes, fears, and deaths.

After his return from Winchester to Eaton (which was about five Months
before his death) he became much more retired, and contemplative; in which
time he was often visited by Mr. John Hales, (learned Mr. John Hales) then a
Fellow of that College, to whom upon an occasion he spoke to this purpose --
I have in my passage to my grave met with most of those Joys of which a
discoursive soul is capable: and, being entertained with more inferior
pleasures then the sons of men are usually made partakers of: nevertheless, in
this voyage I have not always floated on the calm Sea of Content; but, have
often met with cross winds and storms, and, with many troubles of mind and
temptations to evil. And yet, though I have been and am a man compassed about
with humane frailties, Almighty God has by his grace prevented me from making
shipwreck of faith and a good Conscience; the thought of which is now the joy
of my heart, and, I most humbly praise him for it; And, I humbly acknowledge
that it was not my self but he that has kept me to this great age, and, let
him take the glory of his great mercy. -- And, my dear Friend, I now see that I
draw near my harbor of death: that harbor, that will secure me from all the
future storms and waves of this restless world; and, I praise God I am willing
to leave it, and expect a better; that world, wherein dwells Righteousness.
-- These, and the like expressions were then uttered by him at the beginning
of a Feavourish distemper, at which time he was also troubled with an
Asthma, or short spitting; but after less then twenty fits, by the help of
familiar Physic and a spare Diet, this Fever abated, yet so as to leave him
much weaker then it found him: and, his Asthma seemed also to be overcome in a
good degree by his forbearing Tobacco, which, as many thoughtfull men do, he
also had taken somewhat immoderately. -- This was his then present condition;
and, thus he continued till about the end of October 1639. which was about a
month before his death, at which time, he again fell into a Fever, which,
though he seemed to recover, yet these still left him so vveak, that they and
those other common infirmities that accompany age, and were wont to visit him
like civil friends, and, after some short time to leave him; came now, both
oftener and with more violence, and at last took up their constant habitation
with him, still vveakning his Body and abating his cheerfulness: of both
which he grew more sensible, and did the oftener retire into his Study, and
there made many Papers that had passed his Pen both in the days of his youth,
and in the busy part of his life, useless, by a fire made there to that
purpose. -- These and several unusual expressions to his Servants and Friends,
seemed to foretell that the day of his death drew near: for which, he seemed
to those many friends that observed him, to be well prepared, and to be both
patient, and free from all fear, as several of his Letters writ on this his
last sick bed may testify: and thus he continued till about the beginning of
December following, at which time he was seized more violently with a
Quotidian Fever, in the tenth fit of which Fever, his better part, that part
of Sir Henry Wotton which could not die, put off mortality with as much
content and cheerfulness as humane frailty is capable of; being then in great
tranquillity of mind, and in perfect peace with God and man.

And thus the Circle of Sir Henry Wotton's Life -- (that Circle which began at
Bocton, and in the Circumference thereof, did first touch at Winchester-School,
then at Oxford, and after upon so many remarkable parts and passages in
Christendom;) That Circle of his Life, was by Death thus closed up and
completed, in the seventy and second year of his Age, at Eaton College,
where, according to his Will, he now lies buried, with his Motto on a plain
Gravestone over him; dying, worthy of his Name and Family, worthy of the
love and favor of so many Princes, and Persons of eminent Wisdom and
Learning, worthy of the trust committed unto him, for the Service of his
Prince and Country.

And all Readers are requested to believe, that he was worthy of a more worthy
Pen, to have preserved his Memory, and commended his Merits to the imitation of
Posterity.

Iz. VVa.

AN ELEGY ON Sir HENRY WOTTON,
WRIT By Mr. ABRAM COWLEY.
WHat shall we say, since silent now is he,
Who when he spoke all things would silent be.
Who had so many Languages in store,
That only fame shall speak of him in more.
Whom England now no more returned must see:
He Is gone to Heaven, on his fourth Embassy.
On Earth he traveled often, not to say
H'ad been abroad to pass loose time away:
For, in what ever Land he chanced to come,
He read the men and manners: bringing home
Their VVisdome, Learning, and their Piety,
As if he went to Conquer, not to see.
So well he understood the most and best
Of Tongues, that Babel sent into the West:
Spoke them so truly, that he had (you would swear)
Not only lived, but, been born every where.
Justly each Nations speech to him was known:
Who, for the World was made, not us alone.
Nor, ought the Language of that man be less
Who in his breast had all things to express:
We say that Learning's endless, and blame Fate
For not allowing life a longer date:
He did the utmost bounds of Knowledge find;
And found them not so large as was his mind:
But, like the brave Pellean youth did moan:
Because that Art had no more Worlds then one.
And, when he saw that he through all had past,
He died, lest he should Idle grow at last.
A. Cowley.

MARCO VELSERO Duumviro Augustae Vindelicae. HENRICUS WOTTONIUS S. O.
PRivatim antehac ad te aliquoties scripsi; Nunc causae est ut public quoque
id faciam: Haec, qualis sit, quaeso audias. Prostabat Francofurti superioribus
Nundinis opus quoddam, si molem spectes (quod fere fit) non sane de infimis,
cum hac inscriptione; Gasparis Scioppii Ecclesiasticus, authoritati Serenissimi
Domini Jacobi Regis oppositus. In quo cum argumento magnam partem novo, tum
exemplo nemini adhuc usitato, and caetera quae eandem modestiam sapiunt.

Hujus operis consutor cum farraginem rerum undecunque emendicaret, videtur
nescio quo modo incidere in jocosam Legati definitionem, quam jam ante
octennium ^stac transiens apud amicum virum Christophorum Fleckamerum forte
posueram in Albo Amicorum more Teutonico, his ipsis verbis; Legatus est vir
bonus, peregre missus ad mentiendum Reipublicae caussa. Definitio adeo fortasse
catholica, ut complecti possit etiam Legatos a latere. Quid hic, obsecro, facit
Scioppius? Reserat familiaritatis scrinia, resuscitat, post tot annos,
obsoletos sales, jam ipsa vetustate ab inquietudine redemptos; ornat me, pro
humanitate sua, clementissima interpretatione, tanquam id non solum serio, sed
and jactanter scripsissem; Neque hoc contentus, conatur quoque intemeratum
Optimi Regis nomen per jocos meos in invidiam trahere, quasi Domini praestare
tenerentur etiam servorum lusus: Postremo ad honestandam petulantiam suam locum
unum atque alterum ex Esaia and Solomone lepide intermiscet, ut nihil est tutum
a profanis ingeniis. Haec in me fateor cecidisse miro seculo. Quis enim put
arat nasciturum hominem impatientem brevis joci super Legatorum licentia qui
tantum politica agitant, ubi indies videmus ipsam Sacrosanctae Theologiae
severitatem a quibusdam Aequivocationum, mentalium reservationum, and piarum
fraudum Magistris tam foede constupratam? neque hoc obiter, aut jocose, aut in
Albis Amicorum, ubi vana veraque pari securitate tam scribi quam depingi
solent: sed exprofesso, and de suggestu, and cum privilegio and authoritate
Superiorum. Verum Scioppius est qui surrexit. Et quid expectet me responsurum?
Sane memini familiam meam cum Venetiis essem Anathemate percussam in Paraenesi
Baroniana. Memini tum etiam a Gomitulo Jesuit a Perusino, and ab Antonio
Possevino ejusdem farinae quaedam in me jacta: Quae quanquam ab exulceratis
animis effluerent utcunque tacitus ferebam: Quippe hi erant viri non indignae
existimationis saltem apud suos; and ipsorum authorum qualiscunque claritudo
leniebat injuriam: Sed cum famelicus transfuga and Romanae curiae lutulentus
circulator scriptitat solum ut prandere possit; Cum semicoctus Grammaticaster,
and nulla ante hac solidiore disciplina tinctus, Ecclesiastica tractat; Cum
vespillonis, and castrensis Scorti Lege vulgata de vita and parentibus
Scioppii. p. 127.
spuma irreverenter in Regem debacchatur, cujus eximia in divinis humanisque
sapientia and constans justi tenor cuicunque vel privato venerationem
conciliare: Cum homo Germanus exuta patria probitate and modestia, nihil aliud
per totum opus quam eversionem Regum Regnorumque spirat; Cum denique idem as
quod Jesuiticam societatem Ibidem p. 132.
Parricidalem Cohortem vocaverat, nunc postquam culinas Romae olere coepit,
candem Praetoriam Ecclesiasticus Scioppii p. 371.
Castrorum Dei cohortem vocat, Quis iniquae Tam patiens urbis (quae istud
animal pabulatur) tam ferreus, ut teneat se? Igitur, semota omni festivitate,
te serio, te ex animo (Ornatissime Velsere) in hac Epistola convenio: orans,
obtest ansque per commune humanitatis vinculum, per ejusdem Baptismi, ejusdem
symboli conscientiam, ipse velis (pro authoritate qua te scio valere apud tuos)
istos Scioppios compescere; ut ejectis e coetu Christiano similibus hominum
propadiis, Caussarumque sane vel optimarum dehonestamentis, sua bonis viris
existimatio, sua Principibus dignitas maneat: Non vexentur Nundinae prostitutis
Parasitorum calamis; Non typi (nobile Germanorum inventum) adeo misere
torqueantur; sequatur denique quantum infirmit as nostra ferat, illa Regnorum
Ecclesiarumque requies quam nobis commendavit supremus pacis praeceptor simul
and exemplum. Quod si impudentem illam dicacitatem (quam ab infami ortu (...)
traxit) non deponere poterit sine magno ventriculi incommodo; saltem dignus est
certe cui curtetur esca ob execrandam argutiam qua sibi videtur vel ipsis
Tridentinis Patribus oculatior. Illi 8. April. Sess. 4.
Traditiones and Scripturam Sacram paritaniumpietatis affectu and reverentia
suscipiendas, primi omnium (quod ego sciam) decrevere. At iste novus
Ecclesiasticus non in Albo Amicorum, sed pulcherrimi syntagmatis sui, p. 485,
majorem traditi quam scripti verbi Divini authoritatem blasphemo and pudendo
ore pronunciat. Possem sexcent as id genus Scioppietates proferre, sed hoc
esset ruspari sterquilinium. Vale igitur (Vir nobilissime) atque iterum Salve.
Londino Nonis Decembribus Julianis. Anno unici Mediatoris nostri 1612.

TO MARCUS VELSERUS, One of the two Governors of AUSBURG. HENRY WOTTON wishing
health.
SIR,
I Have written to you heretofore sometimes in private, but have a concern
upon me now to do it also in public, of which (with your permission) I
desire thus to inform you.

At the last Frankefurt Mart there was set to sale a certain Book of Bulk
(which often gives the value) not inconsiderable. And it bore this
Inscription: Jaspar Scioppius his Ecclesiasticus: opposed to the Authority of
the most Serene Lord King James -- wherein as with Arguments for the most
part new, and in a way hitherto by no man traced -- And so on with the like
modesty.

The Composer of this Work, in his begging Scraps all about, I know not by
what means, seems to have lighted on a merry definition of an Ambassador,
which above eight years before passing by that way, I had chanced to set down
at my Friend's Mr. Christopher Fleckamor, in his Album of Friends, after the
German custom, (a white Paper-Book used by the Dutch for such kind of Mottos)
which was worded thus: Legatus est vir bonus peregre missus ad mentiendum
Reipub. causa. In English, being only this Jest; An Ambassador is an honest man
sent to lie abroad for the Commonwealth.

A Definition perhaps so Catholic, that it may comprehend even the Popes
Legates; Now, what, I pray, think you does this Scioppius hereupon? Throws open
the Cabinet of familiarity, after so many years, revives an obsolete conceit,
priviledg'd from disturbance even by its Antiquity, and according to his
civility adorns me with a most gentle construction, as if I had written it not
only in good earnest, but even with ostentation. Nor satisfied with this, he
endeavors to draw a blemish from my merriment, upon the untainted reputation
of the best of Kings; as if Masters were obliged to answer for their Servants
triflings. Lastly, To varnish over his perverseness, he puts in a passage or two
out of Esaias and Solomon pleasantly, as nothing is secure from a profane wit.

This I confess befell me in a wondrous age; for, who could have imagined so
ill humored a creature likely to be born, whom such a little fancy upon the
License of Ambassadors, (who act only in Politics) should so grievously
offend; whereas we daily see the severity it self of holy Writ, so foully
adulterated by some that are Masters of equivocations, pious frauds, and mental
reservations? And this not by the by, nor in jest, or in the Album of Friends,
where idle things and truths used to be set down with equal security, but on
set purpose, and from the Pulpit, with privilege and Authority of Superiors?
Yea but it is Scioppius that has rose up, and what answer from me does he
expect? I remember indeed that being at Venice, my Family was struck with an
Anathema in Baronius his Paraenesis; I remember that then also some things of
the like sort were cast at me by Gomitulus, a Jesuit of Perugia, and by
Authony Possevin, which, although they flowed from galled spirits, yet however
I bore in silence, for, these were men of no mean repute, at least at home,
and, such eminency as they had, qualified the injury. But when a hungry
Renegado, a dirty Sharker about the Romish Court, only scribbles that he may
dine, and a raw Pedant, not at all versed in more solid Learning, falls to
treating of Church Matters; when the spawn of a Sexton, and an Ammunition
Trull, See what is published of the Life and Parents of Scioppius, page 127.
rages with that irreverence against a King, whose eminent knowledge in
things divine and humane, and constant evenness of Justice, would beget a
veneration to any private person; when a German quitting the modesty and
honesty of his Country, breathes nothing throughout his whole Book but the
subversion of Kings and Kingdoms; when, finally, the same mouth which had
called the Society of the Jesuits, a company of Parricides; and now having
begun to smell the Roman Kitchins, styles them the Praetorian Band of Gods
Militia: Quis iniquae tam patiens Urbis, quae istud Animal pabulatur, tam
ferreus and teneat se? Who can endure so base a City (that seeds the Beast) or
is so insensible as to contain himself?

Wherefore (setting aside all lightness) I commune with you by this Letter
seriously, and from my heart (most accomplished, Velserus) desiring and
beseeching you by our common bon^ of Humanity, by our conscience in the sam^
Faith and Baptism, that (according to t^ power I know you have amidst your
people you would quell these Scioppians, that such scandals of mankind, and
shames even to the best Causes, being banished from Christian Society, good men
may retain their esteem, and Princes their Dignity; that your Marts may not be
pestered with the prostituted Pens of Parasites, nor the Press (the brave
Invention of the Germans) be so miserably tormented; and lastly, that (as much
as in our weakness lies,) the happy quiet of Kingdoms and Churches may ensue,
which the highest Teacher, and example of peace has commended to us. But if he
cannot leave off that impudent scurrility (which from his base extraction he
has very suitably contracted (...) without great inconvenience to his Belly,
surely he deserves at least to have his Commons shortened, for that execrable
subtilty, whereby he seems to himself quicker-sighted then the Council of
Trent; for they, first of any (that I know of) decreed, that April 8. Ses. 4.
Traditions and holy Scripture were with equal affection, only, of piety and
reverence to be received: But this new Ecclesiastic, not in the Album of
Friends, but in the 485th, Page of his fine Syntagma, pronounces with a
blasphemous and shameless mouth, that the Authority of Tradition is above the
written. Word of God* I could produce six hundred such Scioppieties, but that
were to rake a Dunghill. Wherefore farewell most Noble Sir, and again farewell.

From London, December. 2. after the Julian Account, in the Year of our only
Mediator, 1612.
TO THE Right Worthy Provost AND PROFESSOR REGIUS OF DIVINITY IN CAMBRIDGE.
SIR,
THough my feet cannot perform that Counsel which I remember from some
Translation in Syracides, Teras limen sensati viri, yet I should at least have
often visited you with my poor lines: But on the other side, while I durst not
trust mine own conceit in the power of my present infirmity, and therefore have
seldom written to any, I find my self in the mean time overcharged with
d^vers* Letters from you of singular kindness, and one of them accompanied with
a dainty Peaceful Piece, which truly I had not seen before, so as besides the
weight of the Subject, it was welcome even for the grace of Newne^: Yet let me
tell you, I could not but somewhat wonder to find our spiritual Seneca (you
know whom I mean) among these Reconcilers, having read a former Treatise of his
(if my memory fail me not) of a contrary complexion. Howsoever, now let him
have his due praise with the rest for showing his Christian VVisdome and
Charity; But I fear, as it was anciently said by a Roman General, that Bellum
sese alit; so it will prove, though in somewhat a different fense, likewise as
true of this Church-warfare, That the very pleasure of Contending will foment
Contention till the end of all Flesh.

But let me leave that Sacred business to our wellmeaning Fathers.

And now, Sir, having a fit Messenger, and not long after the time when
Love Tokens use to pass between Friends, let me be bold to send you for a New
years gift a certain Memorial, not altogether unworthy of some entertainment
under your roof; namely, a true Picture of Padre Paolo the Servita, which was
first taken by a Painter whom I sent unto him from my House then neighboring
his Monastery. I have newly added thereunto a Title of mine own Conception,
Conci^ Tridentini Eviscerator; and had sent the Frame vvithal, if it were
portable, which is but of plain Deal, colored Black like the Habit of his
Order. You have a luminous Parlour, which I have good cause to remember, not
only by delicate Fare and Freedom (the Prince of Dishes;) but above all, by
your own Learned Discourse; for to dine with you, is to dine with many good
Authors: In that Room I beseech you to allow it a favorable place for my
sake. And that you may have somewhat to tell of him more then a bare Image, if
any shall ask, as in the Table of Cebes, (...); I am desirous to characterize a
little unto you such part of his Nature, Customs, and Abilities as I had
occasion to know by sight or by enquiry. He was one of the humblest things
that could be seen within the bounds of Humanity; the very Pattern of that
Precept, Quanto doctior Tanto submissior. And enough alone to demonstrate, That
Knowledge well digested non instat. Excellent in Positive, excellent in
Scholastical and Polemical Divinity. A rare Mathematician, even in the most
abstruse parts thereof, as in Algebra and the Theoriques; and yet vvithall so
expert in the History of Plants, as if he had never perused any Book but
Nature. Lastly, a great Canonist, which was the title of his ordinary service
with the State: And certainly in the time of the Popes Interdict, they had
their principal light from him. When he was either reading or vvriting alone,
his manner was to sit fensed with a Castle of Paper about his Chair, and over
head: for he was of our Lord of St. Albons opinion, That all Air is
praedatory; and especially hurtful when the spirits are most employed. You
will find a Scar in his Face, that was from a Roman Assassinate, that would
have killed him as he was turned to a wall near to his Covent: And if there
were not a greater Providence about us, it might often have been easily done,
especially upon such a weak and wearyish Body. He was of a quiet and settled
Temper, which made him prompt in his Counsels and Answers; and the same in
Consultation, which Themistocles was in Action, (...), as will appear unto
you in a passage between him and the Prince of Conde^ The said Prince in a
voluntary journey to Rome came by Venice, where to give some vent to his own
humors, he would often divest himself of his Greatness, and after other less
laudable Curiosities, not long before his departure, a desire too^ him to visit
the Famous obscure Servita: To whose Cloister coming twice, he was the first
time denied to be within; at the second it was intimated, that by reason of
his daily admission to their deliberation in the Palace, he could not receive
the Visit of so illustrious a Personage without leave from the Senate, which
he would seek to procure. This set a greater edge on the Prince, when he savv
he should confer with one participant of more then Monkish Speculations: so
after leave gotten, he came the third time; and then beside^ other voluntary
Discourse (which it were a Tyranny over you to repeat) he assailed him with
a Question enough to have troubled any man but himself, and him too, if a
precedent Accident had not cased him: The Question was (...) this; He desired
to be told by him before his going, Who was the true unmasked Author of the
late Tridentine History?

You must know this* that but newly Advertisement was come from Rome, that
the Archbishop of Spalato being then re arrived from England, in an interview
between him and the Cardinal Ludovisio, Nephew to Gregory the XV. the said
Cardinal after a complemental welcoming him into the Memorandum, That this
Recantation was to my knowledge never Printed at Rome, or elsewhere, through
more haste belike to his death, or otherwise upon further consideration, that
things extorted with fear carry no credit, even by the Praetors Edict.
Lap of the Church, told him by order from the Pope, that his Holiness would
expect from him some Recantation in Print, as an Antidote against certain Books
and Pamphlets which he had published whilst he stood in Revolt, Namely, his
first Manifesto; Item, Two Sermons preached at the Italian Church in London:
Again, a little Tract, entitled his Scogli. And lastly, his greater Volumes
about Church Regiment, and Controversies. These were all named. For as
touching the Tridentine History, His Holiness (says the Cardinal) will not
press you to any Quod metus causa.
disavowment thereof, though you have an Epistle before the Original Edition,
because we know well enough that Friar Paolo is the Father of that Brat.
Upon this last Piece of the aforesaid Advertisement, the good Father came
fairly off; for on a sudden laying all together, that to disavovv the Work was
an untruth, to assume it a danger, and to say nothing an incivility; he took a
middle evasion, telling the Prince, That he understood he was going to Rome,
where he might learn at ease who was the Author of that Book, as they were
freshly intelligenced from thence.

Thus without any mercy of your Time, I have been led along from one thing to
another, while I have taken pleasure to remember that Man whom God appointed
and furnished for a proper Instrument to Anatomize that Pack of Reverend
Cheaters, among whom (I speak of the greater part, exceptis sanioribus)
Religion was shuffled like a pair of Cards, and the Dice so many years were
set upon us. And so wishing you very heartily many good years, I will let you
breathe till you have opened the enclosed, remaining

From the Arms of your good Nurse, who fed you with her best Milk, Jan. 17.
1637 Your poor Friend to serve you,HENRY WOTTON.

THE ELEMENTS OF ARCHITECTURE, Collected by HENRY WOTTON Knight, From the Best
AUTHORS AND EXAMPLES.

THE PREFACE.
I Shall not need (like the most part of Writers) to celebrate the Subject
which I deliver; In that point I am at ease. For Architecture can want no
commendation, where there are Noblemen, or Noble Minds; I will therefore spend
this Preface, rather about those from whom I have gathered my knowledge: For I
am but a gatherer and disposer of other men's stuff, at my best value.

Our principal Master is Vitruvius, and so I shall often call him; who had this
felicity, that he wrote when the Roman Empire was near the pitch: Or at least,
when Augustus (who favored his endeavors) had some meaning (if he were not
mistaken) to bound the Monarchy: This, I Tacit. lib. 1. Annal.
say, was his good hap; For in growing and enlarging times, Arts are commonly
drowned in Action: But on the other side, it was in truth an unhappiness, to
express himself so ill, especially writing (as he did) in a season of the
ablest Pens; And his obscurity had this strange fortune, That though he were
best practiced, and best followed by his own Countrymen; yet after the
receiving and repolishing of good Literature (which the combustions and tumults
of the middle-age had uncivilized) he was best, or at least, first understood
by Strangers: For of all the Italians that took him in hand, those that were
Grammarians seem to have wanted Mathematical knowledge; and the Mathematicians
perhaps wanted Grammar: till both were sufficiently conjoined, in Leon-Batisti
Alberti the Florentine, whom I repute the first learned Architect beyond the
Alps: But he studied more indeed to make himself an Author, then to illustrate
his Master: Therefore amongst his Commenters, I must (for my private conceit)
yield the chief praise unto the French, in Philander; and to the high Germans
in Gualterius Rivius: who, besides his Notes, has likewise published the most
elaborate Translation, that I think is extant in any Vulgar Speech of the
World: though not without bewailing, now and then, some defect of Artificial
terms in his own; as I must likewise: For if the Saxon (our Mother Tongue) did
complain; as justly, I doubt, in this point may the Daughter: Languages, for
the most part, in terms of Art and Erudition, retaining their Original poverty,
and rather growing rich and abundant in complemental Phrases and such froth.
Touching diverse Modern men that have written out of mere practice, I shall give
them their due upon occasion.

And now, after this short Censure of others, I would fain satisfy an
Objection or two, which seem to lie somewhat heavily upon my self: It will be
said, That I handle an Art, no way suitable either to my Employments, or to my
Fortune. And so I shall stand charged, both with Intrusion, and with
Impertinency.

To the first I answer, That though by the ever-acknowledged goodness of my
most dear and gracious Sovereign, and by his long indulgent tolerations of my
defects, I have born abroad some part of his civil service; yet when I came
home, and was again resolved into mine own simplicity, I found it fitter for my
Pen (at least in this first Public adventure) to deal with these plain
Compilements, and tractable Materials, then with the Laberynths and Mysteries
of Courts and States: And less presumption for me, who have long contemplated a
famous Republic, to write now of Architecture, then it was anciently for
Aristot. 2. l. Polit. c. 6.
Hippodamus the Melesian, to write of Republiques, who was himself but an
Architect.

To the Second, I must shrink up my shoulders, as I have learned abroad, and
confess indeed, that my fortune is very unable to exemplify and actuate my
Speculations in this Art, which yet in truth, made me the rather even from my
very disability, take encouragement to hope, that my present Labor would find
the more favor in others, since it was undertaken for no man's sake less then
mine own. And with that confidence, I fell into these thoughts; Of which, there
were two ways to be delivered; The one Historical, by description of the
principal Works, performed already in good part by Goirgio Vassari in the Lives
of Architects. The other Logical, by casting the rules and cautions of this Art
into some comportable Method, whereof I have made choice, not only as the
shortest and most Elemental, but indeed as the soundest. For though in
practical knowledges, every complete Example may bear the credit of a Rule; yet
per adventure Rules should precede, that we may by them be made fit to judge of
Examples: Therefore to the purpose; for I will preface no longer.

OF THE ELEMENTS OF ARCHITECTURE. The First Part.
IN Architecture, as in all other Operative Arts. the End must direct the
Operation.

The End is to build well.

Well-building has three Conditions, Commodity, Firmness, and Delight.

A common Division among the Deliverers of this Art, though I know not how,
somewhat misplaced by Vitruvius himself, lib. 1. cap. 3. whom I shall be
willinger to follow as a Master of Proportion, then of Method.

Now, For the attaining of these Intentions, we may consider the whole Subject
under two general Heads:

The Seat, and the Work.

Therefore first touching Situation.

The Precepts thereunto belonging, do either concern the Total Posture (as I
may term it) or the Placing of the Parts; whereof the first sort, howsoever
usually set down by Architects as a piece of their Profession, yet are in truth
borrowed from other Learnings: there being between Arts and Sciences, as well
as between Men, a kind of good fellowship, and communication of their
Principles.

For you shall find some of them to be merely Physical, touching the quality
and temper of the Air: which being a perpetual ambient and ingredient, and the
defects thereof incorrigible in single Habitations (which I most intend) does
in those respects require the more exquisite caution: That it be not too gross,
nor too penetrative; Not subject to any foggy noisomness, from Pens or Marshes
near adjoining; nor to Mineral Exhalations from the Soil it self. Not
indigested, for want of Sun: Not unexercised, for want of Wind: which were to
live, as it were, in a Lake, or standing Pool of Air, as Alberti the
Florentine Architect does ingeniously compare it.

Some do rather seem a little Astrological, as when they warn us from places of
malign Influence, where Earthquakes, Contagions, Prodigious births, or the
like, are frequent without any evident cause, whereof the Consideration is
peredventure not altogether vain: Some are plainly Oeconomical, as that the
Seat be well watered, and well fuelled; that it be not of too steep and
incommodious Access, to the trouble both of Friends and Family; that it lie not
too far from some Navigable River, or Arm of the Sea, for more ease of
provision, and such other Domestic notes.

Some again may be said to be Optical: Such I mean as concern the Properties of
a well chosen Prospect, which I will call the Royalty of Sight. For as there is
a Lordship, as it were, of the Fee, wherein the Master does much joy when he
walks about the Line of his own Possessions: So there is a Lordship likewise
of the Eye, which being a Ranging, and Imperious, and (I might say) an Usurping
Sense, can endure no narrow Circumscription; but must be fed both with extent
and variety. Yet on the other side, I find vast and indifinite views which
drown all apprehension of the uttermost Objects, condemned by good Authors, as
if thereby some part of the pleasure, whereof we speak, did perish. Lastly, I
remember a private Caution; which I know not well how to sort, unless I should
call it Political: By no means, to build too near a great Neighbor; which
were, in truth, to be as unfortunately seated on the Earth, as Mercury is in
the Heavens, for the most part, ever in combustion or obscurity under brighter
beams then his own.

From these several Knowledges, as I have said, and perhaps from some other, do
Architects derive their Doctrine about Election of Seats: wherein I have not
been so severe as a Ioannes Heurnius Instit. Medicin. lib. 7. cap. 2.
great Scholar of our time, who precisely restrains a perfect Situation, at
least for the maine point of health, Ad locum contra quem Sol radios suos
fundit cum sub Ariete oritur: That is, in a word, he would have the first
Salutation of the Spring. But such Notes as these, wheresoever we find them in
grave or slight Authors, are to my conceit rather Wishes then Precepts, and in
that quality I will pass them over. Yet I must withal say, That in the seating
of our selves (which is a kind of Marriage to a Place.) Builders should be as
circumspect as Wooers, lest when all is done, that Doom befall us, which our
Master does lay upon Mytelene: A Town, in truth (says he) finely built, but
Opidum quidem aedificatum eleganter, sed imprudenter positum.
foolishly planted. And so much touching that which I termed the Total Posture.

The next in Order is the placing of the Parts; About which (to leave as little
as I may in my present labor, unto Fancy, which is wild and irregular) I will
propound a Rule of mine own Collection, upon which I fell in this manner. I had
noted, that all Art was then in truest perfection, when it might be reduced to
some natural Principle. For what are the most judicious Artisans, but the
Mimiques of Nature? This led me to contemplate the Fabric of our own bodies,
wherein the High Architect of the World had displayed such skill, as did
stupifie all humane Reason. There I found the Heart, as the Fountain of Life,
placed about the Middle, for the more equal communication of the vital spirits.
The Eyes seated aloft, that they might describe the greater Circle within their
view. The Arms projected on each side, for ease of reaching. Briefly (not to
lose our selves in this speculation) it plainly appears, as a Maxim drawn
from the Divine Light, That the Place of every part is to be determined by the
Use.

So then from Natural Structure, to proceed to Artificial; and in the rudest
things, to preserve some Image of the excellentest, Let all the principal
Chambers of Delight, all Studies and Libraries, be toward the East: For the
Morning is a Friend to the Muses. All Offices that require heat, as Kitchins,
Stillatories, Stoves, rooms for baking, brewing, washing, or the like; would be
Meridional. All that need a cool and fresh temper, as Cellers, Pantries,
Butteries, Granaries, to the North. To the same side likewise all that are
appointed for gentle Motion, as Galleries, especially in warm Climes; or that
otherwise require a steady and unvariable light, as Pinacothecia (says
Vitruvius) by which he intends (if I might guess at his Greek, as we must do
often even at his Latin) certain Repositories for works of Rarity in Picture or
other Arts, by the Italians called Studioli; which at any other Quarter where
the course of the Sun does diversifie the Shadows, would lose much of their
grace. And by this Rule, having always regard to the Use, any other Part may
be fitly accommodated.

I must here not omit to note, That the Ancient Grecians, and the Romans by
their example; in their Buildings abroad, where the Seat was free, did almost
Religiously situate the Front of their Houses toward the South: perhaps that
the Masters Eye, when he came home, might not be dazzled, or that being
illustrated by the Sun, it might yield the more graceful Aspect, or some such
reason. But from this the Modern Italians do vary. whereof I shall speak more
in another place. Let thus much suffice at the present for the Position of the
several Members, wherein must be had, as our Author does often insinuate, and
especially lib. 6. cap. 10. a singular regard to the nature of the Region:
Every Nation being tied above all Rules whatsoever, to a discretion of
providing against their own Inconveniences: And therefore a good Parlour in
Egypt, would perchance make a good Cellar in England.

There now follows the second Branch of the general Section touching the Work.

In the Work, I will first consider the principal parts, and afterward the
Accessory, or Ornaments; And in the Principal, first the Preparation of the
Materials; and then the Disposition, which is the Form.

Now, concerning the Material Part; Although surely it cannot disgrace an
Architect, which does so well become a Philosopher, to look into the Properties
of Stone and Wood: as that Firtrees, Cypresses, Cedars, and such other Aereal
aspiring Plants, being by a kind of natural rigor (which in a Man I would call
Pride) inflexible downwards, are thereby fittest for Posts or Pillars, or such
upright use: that on the other side, Oak, and the like true hearty Timber,
being strong in all Positions, may be better trusted in cross and traverse
Work; for Summers, or girding or binding Beams, as they term them. And so
likewise to observe of Stone, that some are better within, and other to bear
Weather: Nay, to descend lower, even to examine Sand, and Lyme and Clay (of all
which things Vitruvius has discoursed, without any daintiness; and the most of
new Writers) I say, though the Speculative Part of such knowledge be liberal:
yet to redeem this Profession, and my present pains from indignity; I must here
remember, That to choose and sort the Materials for every part of the Fabric,
is a Duty more proper to a second Superintendent over all the Under-Artisans,
called (as I take it) by our Author, Officinator lib. 6. cap. 11. and in that
place expressly distinguished from the Architect, whose glory does more consist
in the Designment, and Idea of the whole Work; and his truest ambition should
be to make the Form, which is the nobler Part, as it were, triumph over the
Matter: whereof I cannot but mention by the way, a foreign Patron; namely, the
Church of Santa Giustana in Padoua: In truth, a sound piece of good Art, where
the Materials being but ordinary Stone, without any garnishment of Sculpture.
do yet ravish the beholder (and be knows not how) by a secret Harmony in the
Proportions. And this indeed is that end, at which in some degree we should aim
even in the privatest works: whereunto though I make have, yet let me first
collect a few of the least trivial Cautions belonging to the Material
Provisions.

Leon Batista Alberti is so curious, as to wish all the Timber cut out of the
same Forest, and all the Stone out of the same Quarry.

Philibert de 'l Orme the French Architect goes yet somewhat further, and would
have the Lyme made of the very same Stone, which we intend to employ in the
Work; as, belike, imagining, that they will sympathize and join the better by a
king of Original kindred. But such conceits as these, seem somewhat too fine
among this Rubbage, though I do not produce them in sport. For surely, the like
agreements of nature may have oftentimes a discreet application to Art. Always
it must be confessed, that to make Lyme without any great choice, of refuse
stuff, as we commonly do, is an English error of no small moment in our
Buildings. Whereas the Italians at this day, and much more the Ancients, did
burn their firmest Stone, and even fragments of Marble, where it was copious,
which in time became almost Marble again, or at least of indissoluble durity,
as appears in the standing Theaters. I must here not omit, while I am
speaking of this part, a certain form of Brick described by D. Barbaro,
Patriarch of Aquileia, in the largest Edition of his Commentary upon Vitruvius.
The Figure triangular, every side a foot long, and some inch and a thick, which
he does commend unto us for many good conditions: As that they are more
commodious in the management, of less expense, of fairer show, adding much
beauty and strength to the Mural Angles, where they fall gracefully into an
indented Work: so as I should wonder that we have not taken them into use,
being prpounded by a man of good authority in this knowledge; but that all
Nations do start at Novelties, and are indeed married to their own Moulds. Into
this place might aptly fall a doubt, which some have well moved; whether the
ancient Italians did burn their Brick or no; which a passage or two in
Vitruvius has left Ambiguous. Surely, where the Natural heat is strong enough
to supply the Artificial, it were but a curious folly to multiply both Labor
and Expense. And it is besides, very probable, that those Materials with a
kindly and temperate heat wauld prove fairer, smoother, and less distorted,
then with a violent: Only they suffer two exceptions. First, that by such a
gentle drying much time will be lost, which might otherwise be employed in
compiling. Next, That they will want a certain sucking and soaking Thirstiness,
or a fiery appetite to drink in the Lime, which must knit the Fabric. But this
question may be confined to the South, where there is more Sun and patience. I
will therefore not hinder my course, with this incident scruple, but close that
part which I have now in hand, about the Materials, with a principal caution:
That sufficient Stuff and Money be ever ready before we begin: For when we
build now a piece, and then another by fits, the Work dries and sinks
unequally, whereby the Walls grow full of Chinks and Crevices; therefore such
pawsings are well reproved by Palladio, lib. 1. cap. 1. and by all other. And
so having gleaned these few remembrances touching the preparation of the
Matter, I may now proceed to the Disposition thereof, which must form the Work.
In the Form, as I did in the Seat, I will first consider the general
Figuration, and then the several Members.

Figures are either simple or mixed. The simple be either Circular or Angular.
And of circular either Complete or Deficient, as Ovals; with which kinds I will
be contented, though the Distribution might be more curious.

Now the exact Circle is in truth a Figure, which for our purpose has many fit
and eminent properties; as fitness for Commodity and Receipt, being the most
capable, fitness for strength and duration, being the most united in his parts;
fitness for beauty and delight, as imitating the Celestial Orbs, and the
universal Form. And it seems besides, to have the approbation of nature, when
she works by Instinct, which is her secret School: For Birds do build their
Nests Spherically: But notwithstanding these Attributes, it is in truth a very
unprofitable Figure in private Fabrics, as being of all other the most
chargable, and much room lost in the bending of the Walls, when it comes to be
divided, besides an ill distribution of light, except from the Center of the
Roof. So as anciently it was not usual, save in their Temples and
Amphi-Theaters, which needed no Compartitions. The Ovals and other imperfect
secular Forms, have the same exceptions, and less benefit of capacity: So as
there remains to be considered in this general survey of Figures, the Angular
and the Mixed of both, Touching the Angular, it may perchance sound somewhat
strangely, but it is a true observation, that this Art does neither love many
Angles, nor few. For first, the Triangle, which has the fewest sides and
corners, is of all other the most condemned, as being indeed both incapable and
infirm (whereof the reason shall be afterward rendered) and likewise
unresolvable into any other regular Form then it self in the inward Partitions.

As for Figures of five, six, seven, or more Angles: They are surely fitter for
Militar Architecture (where the Bulworks may be laid out at the Corners, and
the sides serve for Curtains) then for civil use; though I am not ignorant of
that famous Piece at Capralora, belonging to the House of Farnese, cast by
Baroccio into the form of a Pentagone, with a Circle inscribed, where the
Architect did ingeniously wrestle with diverse inconveniences in disposing of
the Lights, and in saving the vacuities. But as designs of such nature do more
aim at Rarity then Commodity; so, for my part, I had rather admire them then
commend them.

These things considered, we are both by the Precepts, and by the Practice of
the best Builders; to resolve upon Rectangular Squares, as a mean between too
few and too many Angles; and through the equal inclination of the sides (which
make the right Angle) stronger then the Rhombe, or Losenge, or any other
irregular Square. But whether the exact Quadrat, or the long Square be the
better, I find not well determined, though in mine own conceit, I must prefer
the latter; provided that the Length do not exceed the Latitude above one third
part, which would diminish the beauty of the Aspect, as shall appear when I
come to speak of Symmetry and Proportion.

Of mixed Figures, partly Circular, and partly Angular, I shall need to say
nothing; because having handled the simple already, the mixed according to
their composition, do participate of the same respects. Only against these,
there is a proper Objection, that they offend Uniformity: Whereof I am
therefore oppertunely induced to say somewhat, as far as shall concern the
outward Aspect, which is now in Discourse.

In Architecture, there may seem to be two opposite affectations, Uniformity
and Variety, which yet will very well suffer a good reconcilement, as we may
see in the great Pattern of Nature, to which I must often resort: For surely,
there can be no Structure more uniform then our Bodies in the whole Figuration:
Each side agreeing with the other, both in the number, in the quality, and in
the measure of the Parts: And yet some are round, as the Arms; some flat, as
the Hands; some prominent, and some more retired: So as upon the matter we see
that Diversity does not destroy Uniformity, and that the Limbs of a noble
Fabric may be correspondent enough, though they be various; Provided always,
that we do not run into certain extravagant Inventions, whereof I shall speak
more largely when I come to the parting and casting of the whole Work. We ought
likewise to avoid Enormous heights of six or seven Stories, as well as
irregular Forms; and the contrary fault of low distended Fronts, is as
unseemly: Or again, when the Face of the Building is narrow, and the Flank
deep: To all which extremes some particular Nations or Towns are subject,
whose Names may be civilly spared: And so much for the general Figuration, or
Aspect of the Work.

Now concerning the Parts in Severalty. All the parts of every Fabric may be
comprised under five Heads, which Division I receive from Batista Alberti, to
do him right. And they be these:

The Foundation. The Walls. The Appertions, or Overtures. The Compartition. And
the Cover.
About all which I purpose to gather the principal Cautions, and as I pass
along, I will touch also the natural Reasons of Art, that my Discourse may be
the less Mechanical.

First then concerning the Foundation, which requires the exactest care; For
if that happen to dance, it will mar all the mirth in the House: Therefore that
we may found our Habitation firmly, we must first examine the Bed of Earth (as
I may term it,) upon which we will Build; and then the underfillings, or
substruction, as the Ancients did call it: For the former, we have a general
Precept in Vitruvius, twice precisely repeated by him, as a Point indeed of
main consequence; first, l. 1. c. 5. And again more fitly, l. 3. c. 3. in these
words, as Philander does well correct the vulgar Copies: Substructionis
Fundationes fodiantur (says he) si que^nt inveniri ad solidum, and in solido.
By which words (...) conceive him to commend unto us, not only a diligent, but
even a jealous examination what the Soil will bear: advising us, not to rest
upon any appearing solidity, unless the whole Mould through which we cut, has
likewise been solid; but how deep we should go in this search, he has no where
to my remembrance determined, as perhaps depending more upon Discretion, then
Regularity, according to the weight of the Work; yet Andrea Palladio has
fairly adventured to reduce it into Rule: Allowing for that Cavazione (as he
calls it): sixth part of the height of the whole Fabric, unless the Cellers
be under Under-digging, or Hollowing of the Earth.
ground, in which case he would have us (as it should seem) to sound somewhat
lower.

Some Italians do prescribe, that when they have chosen the Floor, or Plot, and
laid out the Limits of the Work, we should first of all Dig Wells and Cisterns,
and other Under-conducts and Conveyances, for the Suillage of the House, whence
may arise a double benefit: for both the nature of the Mould or Soil; would
thereby be safely searched, and moreover those open vents will serve to
discharge such Vapors, as having otherwise no issue, might peradventure shake
the Building. This is enough for the natural Grounding; which though it be not
a Part of the solid Fabric, yet here was the fittest place to handle it.

There follows the Substruction, or Groundwork of the whole Edifice, which
must sustain the Walls; and this is a kind of Artificial Foundation as the
other was Natural. About which these ar^ the chief Remembrances: First, that
the bottom be precisely level, where the Italians therefore commonly lay a
platform of good Board; Then the the lowest Ledge or Row be merely of Stone,
^^d the broader the better, closely laid, without Mort^ which is a general
Caution for all parts in building, that are contiguous to Board or Timber,
because Lime and Wood are insociable; and if any where unfit Confiners, then
most especially in the Foundation. Thirdly, that the breadth of the
Substruction be at least double to the insistent Wall, and more or less, as the
weight of the Fabric shall require; for as I must again repeat, Discretion may
be freer then Art. Lastly, I find in some a curious precept, that the Materials
below, be laid as they grew in the Quarry, supposing them belike to have most
strength in their Natural and Habitual Posture. For as Philippe de l'Orme
observes, the breaking or yielding of a stone in this part, but the breadth of
the back of a knife, will make a Cleft of more then half a foot in the Fabric
aloft: So important are fundamental Errors. Among which notes I have said
nothing of Pallification, or Pyling of the Ground-plot, commanded by Vitruvius,
when we build upon a moist or marshy Soil, because that were an error in the
first choice. And therefore all Seats that must use such provision below (as
Venice for an eminent example) would perhaps upon good enquiry, be found to
have been at first chosen by the Counsel of Necessity.

Now the Foundation being searched, and the Substruction laid, we must next
speak of the Walls.

Walls are either entire and continual, or intermitted; and the Intermissions
be either Pillars or Pylasters; for here I had rather handle them, then, as
some others do, among Ornaments.

The entire Muring, is by Writers diversely distinguished: By some, according to
the quality of the Materials, as either Stone or Brick, etc. Where, by the way,
let me note, that to build Walls and greater works of Flint, whereof we want
not example in our Island, and particularly in the Province of Kent, was (as I
conceive) merely unknown to the Ancients, who observing in that Material, a
kind of Metalical Nature, or at least a Fusibility, seem to have resolved it
into nobler use; an Art now utterly lost, or perchance kept up by a few
Chymicks. Some again do not so much consider the quality, as the Position of
the said Materials: As when Brick or squared Stones are laid in their lengths
with sides and heads together, or their Points conjoined like a Network (for
so Vitruvius does call it reticulatum opus) of familiar use (as it should seem)
in his Age, though afterward grown out of request, even perhaps for that
subtle speculation which he himself touches; because so laid, they are more
apt in swagging down, to pierce with their points, then in the jacent Posture,
and so to crevice the Wall: But to leave such cares to the meaner Artificers,
the more essential are these.

That the Walls be most exactly perpendicular to the Groundwork, for the right
Angle (thereon depending) is the true cause of all stability, both it
Artificial and Natural Positions: A man likewise standing firmest, when he
stands uprightest. That the Massiest and heaviest Materials be the lowest, as
fitter to bear, then to be born. That the Work, a^ it rises, diminish in
thickness proportionally, for ease both of weight, and of expense. That certai^
Courses or Ledges of more strength then the rest, b^ interlayed like Bones, to
sustain the Fabric from total ruin, if the under parts should decay. Lastly,
that the Angles be firmly bound, which are the Nerves of the whole Edifice, and
therefore are commonly fortified by the Italians, even in their Brick
buildings, on each side of the corners, with well squared Stone, yielding both
strength and grace. And so much touching the entire or solid Wall.

The Intermissions (as has been said) are either by Pillars, or Pyliasters.

Pillars, which we may likewise call Columns (for the word among Artificers is
almost naturalized) I could distinguish into Simple and Compounded. But (to
tread the beaten and plainest way) there are five Orders of Pillars, according
to their dignity and perfection, thus marshalled.

The Tuscan. The Dorique. The Ionique. The Corinthian.
And the Compound Order, or as some call it, the Roman, others more generally
the Italian.

In which five Orders; I will first consider their Communities, and then their
Proprieties.

Their Communities (as far as I observe) are Principally three. First, they are
all Round; for though some conceive Columna Atticurges, mentioned by Vitruvius,
lib. 3. cap. 3. to have been a squared Pillar, yet we must pass it over at
irregular, never received among these Orders, no more then certain other
licentious inventions; of Wreathed, and Vined, and Figured Columns, which our
Author himself condemns, being in his whole Book a professed enemy to Fancies.

Secondly, they are all Diminished or Contracted insensibly, more or less,
according to the proportion of their heights, from one third part of the whose
Shaft upwards, which Philander does prescribe by his own precise measuring of
the Ancient remainders, as the most graceful Diminution. And here I must take
leave to blame a practice grown (I know not how) in certain places too
familiar, of making Pillars swell in the middle, as if they were sick of some
Tympany, or Dropsy, without any Authentic Pattern or Rule, to my knowledge,
and unseemely to the very judgment of sight. True it is, that in Vitruvius,
lib. 3. cap. 2. we find these words, De adjectione, quae adjicitur in mediis
Columnis, quae apud Grecos (...) appellatur, in extremo libro erit formatio
ejus; which passage seems to have given some countenance to this error. But
of the promise there made, as of diverse other elsewhere, our Master has failed
us, either by slip of memory, or injury of time, and so we are left in the
dark. Always sure I am, that besides the authority of example which it
wants; it is likewise contrary to the Original and Natural Type, in Trees,
which at first was imitated in Pillars, as Vitruvius himself observes, lib. 5.
cap. 1. For who ever saw any Cypress, or Pine (which are there alleged) small
below and above, and tumerous in the middle; unless it were some diseased
Plant, as Nature (though otherwise the comeliest Mistress) has now and then
her deformities and Irregularities?

Thirdly, they have all their Under-settings, or Pedistals, in height a third
part of the whole Column, comprehending the Base and Capital; and their upper
Adjuncts, as Architrave, Frize, and Cornice, a fourth part of the said Pillar;
which rule, of singular use and facility, I find settled by Jacobo Baroccio; and
hold him a more credible Author, as a man that most intended this piece, then
any that vary from him in those Dimensions.

These are their most considerable Communities and agreements.

Their Proprieties or Distinctions will best appear by some reasonable
description of them altogether, with their Architraves, Frizes, and Cornices,
as they are usually handled.

First therefore, the Tuscan is a plain, massy, rural Pillar, resembling some
sturdy well-limb'd Labourer, homely clad, in which kind of comparisons
Vitruvius himself seems to take pleasure, lib. 4. cap. 1. The length thereof
shall be six Diameters, of the grossest of the Pillar below. Of all
proportions, in truth, the most natural; For our Author tells us, lib. 3. cap.
1. that the foot of a man is the sixth part of his body in ordinary measure,
and Man himself according to the saying of Protagoras (which Aristotle does
somewhere vouchsafe to celebrate) is (...), as it were, the Prototype of all
exact Symmetrie, which we have had other occasions to touch before: This
Column I have by good warrant called Rural, Vitruv. cap. 2. lib. 3. And
therefore we need not consider his rank among the rest. The distance or
Intercolumniation (which word Artificers do usually borrow) may be near four of
his own Diameters, because the Materials commonly laid over this Pillar, were
rather of wood then stone; through the lightness whereof the Architrave could
not suffer, though thinly supported, nor the Column it self, being so
substantial. The Contraction alost shall be (according to the most received
practice) one fourth part of his thickness below. To conclude, for I intend
only as much as shall serve for a due Distinguishment, and not to delineate
every petty member) the Tuscan is of all the rudest Pillar, and his Principal
Character Simplicity.

The Dorique Order is the gravest that has been received into civil use,
preserving, in comparison of those that follow, a more Masculine Aspect, and
little trimmer then the Tuscan that went before, save a sober garnishment now
and then of Lions heads in the Cornice, and of Tryglyphs and Metopes always in
the Frize. Sometimes likewise, but rarely, channeled, and a little slight
Sculpture about the Hypotrachelion or Neck, under the Capital. The length,
seven Diameters. His rank or degree, is the lowest by all Congruity, as being
more massy then the other three, and consequently abler to support. The
Intercolumniation, thrice as much as his thickness below. The Contraction
aloft, one fifth of the same measure. To discern him, will be a piece rather of
good Heraldry, then of Architecture: For he is best known by his place when he
is in company, and by the peculiar ornament of his Frize (before mentioned)
when he is alone.

The Ionique Order does represent a kind of Feminine slenderness, yet says
Vitruvius, not like a light House-wife, but in a decent dressing, has much of
the Matron. The length eight Diameters. In degree as in substantialness, next
above the Dorique, sustaining the third, and adorning the second Story. The
Intercolumniation two of his own Diameters. The Contraction one sixth part. B^
known by his trimmings, for the body of this Column is perpetually channelled,
like a thick pleighted Gown. The Capital dressed on each side, not much unlike
Women's Wires, in a spiral wreathing, which they call the Ionian Voluta. The
Cornice indented. The Frize swelling like a pillow: And therefore by Vitruvius,
not unelegantly termed Pulvinata. These are his best Characters.

The Corinthian, is a Column lasciviously decked like a Curtezan, and therein
much participating (as all Inventions do) of the place where they were first
born: Corinth having been (without controversy) one of the wantonest Towns in
the world. This Order is of nine Diameters. His degree, one Stage above the
Ionique, and always the highest of the simple Orders. The Intercolumniation
two of his Dia^eters, and a fourth part more, which is of all other the
comeliest distance. The Contraction one seventh part. In the Cornice both
Dentelli and Modiglioni. The Frize, adorned with all kinds of Figures Our
Artizans call them Teeth and Cartouzes.
and various Compartments at Pleasure. The Capitals, cut into the beautifullest
leaf, that Nature does yield; which surely, next the Aconitum Pardalianches
(rejected perchance as an ominous Plant) is the Acanthus, or Brancha U^sina;
though Vitruvius does impute the choice thereof unto Chance, and we must be
contented to believe him: In short, As Plainness did Charactarize the Tuscan,
so must Delicacy and Variety the Corinthian Pillar; besides the height of his
Rank.

The last is the Compounded Order: His name being a brief of his nature. For
this Pillar is nothing in effect, but a medly, or an amasse of all the
precedent Ornaments, making a new kind, by stealth; and though the most richly
tricked, yet the poorest in this, that he is a borrower of all his Beauty. His
length, (that he may have somewhat of his own) shall be of ten Diameters. His
degree should, no doubt, be the highest, by reasons before yielded. But few
Palaces, Ancient or Modern, exceed the third of the Civil Orders. The
Intercolumniation but a Diameter and an half, or always somewhat less then
two. The Contraction of this Pillar must be one eighth Part less above then
below. To know him will be easy by the very mixture of his Ornaments, and
Clothing.

And so much touching the five Orders of Columns, which I will conclude with
two or three not impertinent Cautions:

First, that where more of these Orders then one, shall be set in several
Stories or Contignations, there must be an exquisite care to place the Columns
precisely one over another, that so the solid may answer to the solid, and the
vacuities to the vacuities, as well for Beauty, as strength of the Fabric: And
by this Caution the Consequence is plain, that when we speak of the
Intercolumniation or Distance which is due to each Order, we mean in a Dorique,
Ionical, Corinthian Porch, or Cloister, or the like of one Contignation, and
not in Storied buildings.

Secondly, Let the Columns above be a fourth part less then those below, says
Vitruvius, lib. 5. cap. 1. A strange Precept in my opinion; and to strange,
that peradventure it were more suitable, even to his own Principles, to make
them rather a fourth part greater. For lib. 3. cap. 2. where our Master
handles the Contractions of Pillars, we have an Optique Rule, that the higher
they are, the less should be always their diminution aloft, because the Eye it
self does naturally contract all Objects more or less, according to the
Distance; which Consideration may, at first sight, seem to have been forgotten
in the Caution we have now given; but Vitruvius (the best Interpreter of
himself) has in the same place of his fifth Book well acquitted his Memory by
these words: Columna superiores quarta part minores, quam inferiores, sunt
constituendae; propterea quod, operi ferendo quae sunt inferiora, firmi^ra esse
debent; preferring like a wise Mechanic, the natural Reason before the
Mathematical, and sensible conceits before abstracted. And yet lib. 4. cap. 4.
he seems again to affect Subtilty, allowing Pillars the more they are
chaneled, to be the more slender; because while our Eye (says he) does as it
were distinctly measure the eniment and the hollowed parts, the Total Object
appears the bigger, and so as much as those excavations do subtract, is
supplied by a Fallacy of the Sight: But here me thinks, our Master should
likewise have rather considered the natural inconvenience; for though Pillars
by cha^neling, be seemingly engrossed to our Sight, yet they are truly weakened
in themselves; and therefore ought perchance in sound reason not to be the more
slender, but the more corpulent, unless apparences preponder truths; but Contra
Magistrum non est disputandum.

A third Caution shall be, that all the projected or jutting parts (as they are
termed) be very moderate, especially, the Cornices of the lower Orders; for
whilst some think to give them a beautiful and royal Aspect by their
largeness, they sometimes hinder both the Light within, (whereof I shall speak
more in due place) and likewise detract much from the view of the Front
without, as well appears in one of the principal Fabrics at Venice, namely,
the Palace of the Duke Grimani on the Canal Grande, which by this magnificent
error, is somewhat disgraced: I need now say no more concerning Columns and
their Adjuncts, about which Architects make such a noise in their Books, as if
the very terms of Architraves, and Frizes, and Cornices, and the like, were
enough to graduate a Master of this Art: yet let me before I pass to other
matter, prevent a familiar Objection; It will perchance be said, that all this
Doctrine touching the five Orders, were fitter for the Quarries of Asia, which
yielded 127 Columns of 60 Foot high to the Ephesian Temple; or for Numidia,
where Marbles abound; then for the Spirits of England, who must be contented
with more ignoble Materials: To which I answer, That this need not discourage
us: For I have often at Venice viewed with much pleasure, an Atrium Graecum (we
may translate it an Anti porch, after the Greek manner) raised by Andraea
Palladio, upon eight Columns of the compounded Order: The Bases of Stone,
without Pedistals: The Shafts or Bodies of mere Brick, three Foot and an half
thick in the Diameter below, and consequently thirty five Foot high, as himself
has described them in his second Book: Then which, mine Eye has never yet
beheld any Columns more stately of Stone or Marble; For the Bricks having
first been formed in a circular Moula, and then cut before their burning into
four Quarters or more, the sides afterward join so closely, and the points
concenter so exactly, that the Pillars appear one entire Piece; which short
description^ could not omit, that thereby may appear, how in truth we want
rather Art then Stuff, to satisfy our greatest Fancies.

After Pillars, the next in my distribution are Pilasters, mentioned by
Vitruvius, lib. 5. cap. 1. and scant any where else under the name of
Parastates, as Philander conceives, which Grammatical point (though perchance
not very clear) I am contented to examine no further. Always, what we mean by
the thing it self is plain enough in our own vulgar; Touching which, I will
briefly collect the most considerable Notes.

Pylasters must not be too tall and slender, lest they resemble Pillars; nor
too Dwarfish and gross, lest they imitate the Piles or Peers of Bridges;
Smoothness does not so naturally become them, as a Rustic Superficies; for
they aim more at State and Strength, then Elegancy. In private Buildings they
ought not to be narrower then one Third, nor broader then two parts of the
whole Vacuity between Pylaster and Pylaster; but to those that stand at the
Corners, may be allowed a little more Latitude by discretion, for strength of
the Angles: In Theaters and Amphi theaters, and such weighty Works, Palladio
observes them, to have been as broad as the half, and now and then as the
whole Vacuity: He notes likewise (and others consent with him) that their true
Proportion should be an exact Square; But for lestening of expense, and
enlarging of room, they are commonly narrower in Flank, then in Front: Their
principal Grace does consist in half or whole Pillars' applied unto them; in
which case it is well noted by Authors, that the Columns may be allowed
somewhat above their ordinary length, because they lean unto so good
Supporters. And thus much shall suffice touching Pylasters, which is a cheap,
and a strong, and a noble kind of Structure.

Now because they are oftener, both for Beauty, and Majesty, found arched, then
otherwise; I am here orderly led to speak of Arches, and under the same head of
Vaults: for an Arch is nothing indeed but a contracted Vault, and a Vault is
but a dilated Arch: Therefore to handle this Piece both compendiously, and
fundamentally, I will resolve the whole business into a few Theorems.

Theorem 1.
All solid Materials free from impediment, do descend perpendicularly
downwards, because Ponderosity is a natural inclination to the Center of the
World, and Nature performs her Motions by the shortest lines.

Theorem 2.
Bricks molded in their ordinary Rectangular form, if they shall be laid one
by another in a level row, between any Supporters sustaining the two ends, then
all the pieces between will necessarily sink, even by their own natural
Gravity; and much more, if they suffer any depression by other weight above
them, because their sides being parallel, they have room to descend
perpendicularly, without impeachment, according to the former Theorem;
Therefore to make them stand, we must either change their Posture, or their
Figure, or both.

Theorem 3.
If Bricks molded, or Stones squared Cuneatim, (that is, Wedge-wise, broader
above then below) shall be laid in a Row-level, with their ends supported, as
in the precedent Theorem, pointing all to one Center; then none of the pieces
between can sink till the Supporters give way, because they want room in that
Figuration, to descend perpendicularly. But this is yet a weak piece of
Structure, because the Supporters are subject to much impulsion, especially if
the Line be long; for which reason this Form is seldom used, but over
Windows, or narrow Doors. Therefore to fortify the Work, as in this third
Theorem, we have supposed the Figure of all the Materials different from those
in the second: So likewise we must now change the Posture, as will appear in
the Theorem following.

Theorem 4.
If the Materials figured as before Wedge-wise, shall not be disposed levelly,
but in form of some Arch, or portion of a Circle, pointing all to the same
Center, In this case neither the pieces of the said Arch can sink downwards,
through want of room to descend By the first Theor.
perpendicularly; Nor the Supporters or Butments (as they are termed) of the
said Arch can suffer so much violence, as in the precedent flat posture; for
the roundness will always make the incumbent weight rather to rest upon the
Supporters, then to shove them; whence may be drawn an evident Corolary: that
the safest of all Arches is the Semi-circular, and of all Vaults the
Hemisphere, though not absolutely exempted from some natural weakness, as
Bernardino Baldi Abbot of * Which is the sole Prerogative of perpendicular
Lines, and right Angles.
Guastalla, in his Commentary upon Aristotle's Mechanics, does very well prove:
where let me note by the way, that when any thing is Mathematically
demonstrated weak, it is much more Mechanically weak: Errors ever occurring
more easily in the management of Gross Materials, then Lineal Designs.

Theorem 5.
As Semi-circular Arches, or Hemispherical Vaults, being raised upon the total
Diameter, be of all other the roundest, and consequently the securest, by the
precedent Theoreme: So those are the gracefullest, which keeping precisely the
same height, shall yet be distended one fourteenth part longer then the said
entire Diameter; which addition of distent will confer much to their Beauty,
and detract but little from their Strength.

This Observation I find in Leon-Batista Alberti; But the practice how to
preserve the same height, and yet distend the Arms or Ends of the Arch, is in
Albert Durers Geometry, who taught the Italians many an excellent Line, of
great use in this Art.

Upon these five Theoremes, all the skill of Arching and Vaulting is grounded:
As for those Arches, which our Artizans call of the third and fourth point, And
the Tuscan Writers di terzo, and d^ quarto accuto, because they always
concur in an acute Angle, and do spring from division of the Diameter into
three, four, or more parts, at pleasure; I say, such as these, both for the
natural imbecility of the sharp Angle it self, and likewise for their very
Uncomeliness, ought to be exiled from judicious eyes, and left to their first
Inventors, the Goths or Lumbards; amongst other Relics of that barbarous Age.

Thus of my first Partition of the parts of every Fabric, into five Heads,
having gone through the two former, and been incidently carried into this ^ast
Doctrine touching Arches and Vaults. The next now in order are the Apertions;
under which ^erm I do comprehend Doors, Windows, Stair-cases, Chimnies, or
other Conducts: In short, all In-lets, ^r Out-lets; To which belong two general
Cautions.

First, That they be as few in number, and as moderate in Dimension, as may
possibly consist with other due respects: for in a word, all Openings are
Weaknings.

Secondly, That they do not approach too near the Angles of the Walls; for it
were indeed a most ^ssential Solecisme, to weaken that part which must
strengthen all the rest: A precept well recorded, ^ut ill practiced by the
Italians themselves, particu^arly at Venice, where I have observed diverse
Per^oli, or Meniana (as Vitruvius seems to call them, which are certain
ballised out-standings to ^tisfie curiosity of sight) very dangerously set
^rth, upon the very point it self of the Mural ^ngle.

Now, Albeit I make haste to the casting and ^omparting of the whole Work,
(being indeed the ^ery Definitive Sum of this Art, to distribute sefully and
gracefully a well chosen Plot) yet I ^ill first under their several Heads,
collect briefly ^me of the choicest notes belonging to these parti^lar
Overtures.

Of Doors and Windows.
THese In-lets of Men and of Light, I couple together, because I find their
Dimensions ^ought under one Rule by Leon Alberti (a learned Searcher) who from
the School of Pythagor^ (where it was a fundamental Maxim, that the Images of
all things are latent in Numbers) dot^ determine the comeliest Proportion
betwee^ breadths and heigths; Reducing Symmetry to Sym^phony, and the Harmony
of Sound, to a kind of Harmony in Sight, after this manner: The two principal
Consonances, that most ravish the Ear, are by consent of all Nature, the fifth,
and the octa^ whereof the first rises radically from the proportion between
two and three; The other from the double Interval, between one and two, or
betwee^ two and four, etc. Now if we shall transport the^ proportions from
Audible to Visible Objects; a^ apply them as they shall fall fittest (the
nature (...) the Place considered) namely, in some Windo^ and Doors, the
Symmetry of two to three in their Breadth and Length; In others, the double as
a foresaid; There will indubitably result from either a graceful and
harmonious contentment to the Eye: Which speculation, though it may appe^ unto
vulgar Artizans, perhaps too subtle, and t^ sublime, yet we must remember, that
Vitruvi^ himself does determine many things in his profess^on, by Musical
Grounds, and much commende^ in an Architect a Philosophical Spirit; that is,
(...) would have him (as I conceive it) to be no s^perficial, and floating
Artificer; but a Diver i^ Causes, and into the Mysteries of Proportion. (...)
the Ornaments belonging both to Doors and Wi^dows, I shall speak in other
place; But let me he^ add one Observation; That our Master (as ^peareth by
diverse passages, and particularly lib. (...) cap. 9.) seems to have been an
extreme Lover (...) Luminous Rooms; And indeed, I must confes^ that a Frank
Light can mis-become no Aedifice whatsoever, Temples only excepted; which were
anciently dark, as they are likewise at this day in some Proportion. Devotion
more requiring collected ^hen diffused Spirits. Yet on the other side, we must
take heed to make a House Lumen est diffusivum sui and alieni.
though but for civil use) all Eyes, ^ Argus, which in Northern Climes would be
too cold, In Southern too hot: And therefore the matter indeed imports more
then a merry comparison. Besides, There is no part of Structure either more
expencefull then Windows, or more ruinous; not only for that vulgar reason, as
being exposed ^o all violence of weather; but because consisting of so
different and unsociable pieces, as Wood, Iron, Lead, and Glass, and those
small and weak, they ^re easily shaken; I must likewise remember one thing,
(though it be but a Grammatical Note) ^ouching Doors. Some were Fores and some
were ^alvae. Those (as the very word may seem to im^ort) did open outward,
These inwards, and were ^ommonly of two Leaves or Panes, (as we call them)
thereby requiring indeed a lesser Circuit in their unfoldings; And therefore
much in use among ^talians at this day: But I must charge them with ^n
Imperfection, for though they let in as well as ^he former, yet they keep out
worse.

Of Stair-cases.
To make a Complete Staircase, is a curious piece of Architecture: The vulgar
Cautions ^re these:

That it have a very liberal Light against all Ca^uality of Slips, and Falls.

That the space above the Head, be large and Aerie, which the Italians use to
call Un bels-fogol^, as it were good Ventilation, because a man does spend much
breath in mounting.

That the Half-paces be well distributed at competent distances, for reposing
on the way.

That to avoid Encounters, and besides to gratifi^ the beholder, the whole
Staircase have no nigar^ Latitude, that is, for the principal Ascent, at
lea^ten foot in Royal Buildings.

That the breadth of every single Step or Stair b^ never less then one foot,
nor more then eighteen inches.

That they exceed by no means half a foot in their height or thickness, for our
Legs do labor mo^ in Elevation, then in Distention: These I say are familiar
remembrances; to which let me add,

That the steps be laid where they join Co^ ^tantino di scarpa; we may
translate it somewha^ sloaping, that so the foot may in a sort both asce^ and
descend together, which though observed b^ few, is a secret and delicate
deception of the pai^ in mounting.

Lastly, to reduce this Doctrine to some Nature or at least Mathematical
ground, (our Master, (...) we see, lib. 9. cap. 2.) borrows those proport^ons
that make the sides of a Rectangular Triang^ which the Ancient School did
express in low^ terms, by the numbers of Three, Four, and F^ That is Three for
the Perpendicular, from the St^ head to the ground; Four for the Ground-line it
se^ or Recession from the wall; And Five for the wh^ Inclination or sloapness
in the ascent; which pr^portion, says he, will make Temperatas gradu^
brationes. Hitherto of Stair-cases which are dire^ There are likewise Spiral,
or Cockle Stairs, either Circular, or Oval, and sometimes running about a
Pillar, sometimes vacant, wherein Palladio, (A man in this point of singular
felicity) was wont ^o divide the Diameter of the first sort into three parts,
yielding one to the Pillar, and two to the Steps; Of the second into four,
whereof he gave two to the Stairs, and two to the Vacuity, which had all their
light from above. And this in exact Ovals is a Masterpiece.

Of Chimnies.
IN the present business, Italians (who make very frugal fires, are perchance
not the best Counselors.) Therefore from them we may better ^earn, both how to
raise fair Mantels within the rooms, and how to disguise gracefully the shafts
of Chimnies abroad (as they use) in sundry forms, (which I shall handle in the
latter part of my Labor) and the rest I will extract from Philippe de l'Orme;
in this part of his Work more diligent, then in any other; or, to do him right,
then any man else.

First, he observes very soberly, that who in the disposition of any Building
will consider the nature of the Region, and the Winds that ordinarily blow from
this, or that Quarter; might so cast the rooms which shall most need fire, that
he should little fear the incommodity of Smoke: and therefore he thinks that
inconvenience, for the most part, to proceed from some inconsiderate beginning.
Or if the error lay not in the Disposition, but in the Structure it self; then
he makes a Logical enquiry, That either the Wind is too much let in above, at
the mouth of the Shaft, or the Smoke stifled below: If none of these, Then
there is a repulsion of the Fume, by some higher Hill or Fabric, that shall
overtop the Chimney, and wor^ the former effect: If likewise not this, Then
(...) concludes, that the Room which is infested, mu^ be necessarily both
little and close, so as the smo^ cannot issue by a natural Principle, wanting a
su^cession and supply of new Air.

Now, in these cases he suggesteth diverse Artificial Remedies, of which I will
allow one a litt^ Description, because it savoureth of Philosophy, and was
touched by Vitruvius himself, lib. 1. cap. 6. b^ by this man ingeniously
applied to the present use. He will have us provide two hollow brass Balls o^
reasonable capacity, with little holes open i^ both, for reception of Water,
when the Air sha^ be first sucked out; One of these we must pla^ with the hole
upwards, upon an iron Wire, the shall traverse the Chimney, a little above the
M^tel, at the ordinary height of the sharpest heat (...) flames, whereof the
Water within being rarefied and by rarifaction resolved into Wind, will bre^
out, and so force up the smoke, which otherwi^ might linger in the Tunnel, by
the way, and oftentimes revert; With the other, (says he) (...) may supply the
place of the former, when it is exhausted; or for a need blow the Fire in the
me^ while: Which Invention I have interposed for some little entertainment of
the Reader; I wi^ conclude with a note from Palladio, who observe^ that the
Ancients did warm their Rooms with certain secret Pipes that came through the
Walls transporting heat (as I conceive it) to sundry parts of the House from
one common Furnace; I am ready to baptize them Cali ducts, as well as they are
termed Venti-ducts, and Aquae-ducts, that convey Wind and Water; which whether
it were a custom or a delicacy, was surely both for thrift, and for use, far
beyond the German Stoves; And I should prefer it likewise before our own
fashion, if the very sight of a fire did not add to the Room a kind of
Reputation, A(...), Hom. Epig.
as old Homer does teach us in a verse, sufficient to prove that himself was
not blind, as some would lay to his charge.

Touching Conducts for the Suillage, and other necessities of the House, (which
how base soever in use, yet for health of the inhabitants, are as considerable,
and perhaps more then the rest) I find in our Authors, this Counsel; That Art
should imitate Nature, in those ignoble conveyances; and separate them from
Sight, (where there wants a running Water) into the most remote, and lowest,
and thickest part of the Foundation; with secret vents passing up through the
Walls like a Tunnel, to the wild Air aloft: which all Italian Artizans commend
for the discharge of noisome vapors, though elsewhere, to my knowledge,
little practiced.

Thus having considered the precedent Apertions, or Overtures in severalty,
according to their particular Requisites, I am now come to the casting and
Contexture of the whole Work, comprehended under the term of Compartition: Into
which (being the mainest piece) I cannot enter without a few general
Precautions, as I have done in other Parts.

First therefore, Let no man that intends to build, settle his Fancy upon a
draught of the Work in paper, how exactly soever measured, or neatly set off in
perspective; And much less upon a bare Plant thereof, as they call the
Sciographia or Ground lines; without a Model or Type of the whole Structure,
and of every parcel and Partition in Pastboard or Wood.

Next, that the said Model be as plain as may be, without colors, or other
beautifying, lest the pleasure of the Eye preoccupate the Judgment; which
advice, omitted by the Italian Architects, I find in Philippe de l'Orme; and
therefore (though France be not the Theater of best buildings) it did merit
some mention of his name.

Lastly, the bigger that this Type be, it is still the better, not that I will
persuade a man to such an enormity, as that Model made by Antonio Labaco, of
St. Peter's Church in Rome, containing 22 foot in length, 16 in breadth, and 13
in height, and costing 4184 Crowns: The price, in truth, of a reasonable
Chapel: Yet in a Fabric of some 40 or 50 thousand pounds charge, I wish 30
pounds at least laid out before hand in an exact Model; for a little misery in
the Premises, may easily breed some absurdity of greater charge, in the
Conclusion.

Now, after these premonishments I will come to the Compartition it self, By
which, the Authors of this Art (as has been touched before) do understand, a
graceful, and useful distribution, of the whole Ground-plot, both for rooms
of Office, and of Reception or Entertainment, as far as the Capacity thereof,
and the nature of the Country will comport. Which circumstances in the present
subject, are all of main consideration, and might yield more discourse then an
Elemental Rapsodie will permit. Therefore (to anatomize briefly this
Definition) the Gracefulness (whereof we speak) will consist in double Analogy,
or correspondency. First between the Parts and the whole, whereby a great
Fabric should have great Partitions, great Lights, great Entrances, great
Pillars or Pylasters: In sum, all the Members great. The next between the
Parts themselves, not only, considering their breadths, and lengths, as before
when we spoke of Doors and Windows; but here likewise enters a third respect of
Height, a point (I must confess) hardly reduceable to any general precept.

True it is, that the Ancients did determine the Longitude of all Rooms, which
were longer then broad, by the double of their Latitude, Vitruvius lib. 6. cap.
5. And the Height by the half of the breadth and length summed together. But
when the Room was precisely square, they made the Height half as much more as
the Latitude; which Dimensions the Modern Architects have taken leave to vary,
upon discretion: Sometimes squaring the Latitude, and then making the Diagonial
or overthwart Line, from Angle to Angle, of the said Square; the measure of the
Height sometimes more, but seldom lower then the full breadth it self; which
boldness of quitting the old Proportions, some attribute first to Michael
Angele da Buonaroti, perchance upon the credit he had before gotten in two
other Arts.

The second Point is Usefulness, which will consist in a sufficient Number of
Rooms, of all sorts, and in their apt Coherence, without distraction, without
confusion; so as the beholder may not only call it Una Fabrica ben raccolta, as
Italians use to speak of well united Works; but likewise, that it may appear
airy and spiritous, and fit for the welcome of cheerful Guests; about which
the principal Difficulty will be in contriving the Lights, and Stair-cases,
whereof I will touch a note or two: For the first, I observe that the ancient
Architects were at much ease. For both the Greeks and Romans (of whose private
dwellings Vitruvius has left us some description) had commonly two cloistered
open Courts, one serving for the Women's side, and the other for the Men; who
yet perchance now adays would take so much separation unkindly. Howsoever by
this means, the reception of Light into the Body of the building, was very
prompt, both from without and from within: which we must now supply either by
some open Form of the Fabric, or among graceful refuges, by Tarrasing any
Story which is in danger of darkness; or lastly, by perpendicular Lights from
the Roof, of all other the most natural, as shall be showed anon. For the
second Difficulty, which is casting of the Stair-cases; That being in it self
no hard point, but only as they are encumbrances of room for other use, (which
lights were not) I am therefore aptly moved here to speak of them. And first of
Offices.

I have marked a willingness in the Italian Artizans, to distribute the
Kitchen, Pantry, Bakehouse, washing Rooms: and even the Buttery likewise, under
ground, next above the Foundation, and sometimes level with the plain, or Floor
of the Cellar: raising the first Ascent into the house Fifteen Foot, or more,
for that End; which besides the benefit of removing such annoies out of sight,
and the gaining of so much more room above, does also by elevation of the Front
add Majesty to the whole Aspect. And with such a disposition of the principal
Staircase, which commonly does deliver us into the Plain of the second Story,
there may be wonders done with a little room, whereof I could allege brave
Examples abroad; and none more Artificial and Delicious, then a House built by
Daniele Barbaro Patriarch of Aquileia, before mentioned among the memorable
Commenters upon Vitruvius. But the Definition (above determined) does call us
to some consideration of our own Country; where though all the other petty
Offices (before rehearsed) may well enough be so remote, yet by the natural
Hospitality of England, the Buttery must be more visible, and we need perchance
for our Raunges, a more spacious and luminous Kitchen then the foresaid
Compartition will bear; with a more competent nearness likewise to the
Dining Room, or else besides other Inconveniences, perhaps some of the Dishes
may straggle by the way. Here let me note a common defect, that we have of a
very useful Room, called by the Italians, Il Tinello; and familiar, nay almost
essential, in all their great Families. It is a place properly appointed to
conserve the meat that is taken from the Table, till the Waiters eat, which
with us by an old fashion, is more unseemly set by in the mean while.

Now touching the distribution of Lodging-Chambers; I must here take leave to
reprove a fashion, which I know not how, has prevailed through Italy, though
without ancient examples, as far as I can perceive by Vitruvius. The thing I
mean, is, that they so cast their partitions, as when all Doors are open, a man
may see through the whole House, which does necessarily put an intolerable
servitude upon all the Chambers save the Inmost, where none can arrive but
through the rest; or else the Walls must be extreme thick for secret passages.
And yet this also will not serve the turn, without at least Three doors to
every Room: A thing most insufferable in cold and vvindy Regions, and every
where no small vveakening to the whole Work: Therefore with us that want no
cooling, I cannot commend the direct opposition of such Overtures, being indeed
merely grounded upon the fond ambition of displaying to a Stranger all our
Furniture at one Sight, which therefore is most maintained by them that mean
to harbor but a few; whereby they make only advantage of the vanity, and
seldom prove the Inconvenience. There is likewise another defect (as
absurdities are seldom solitary) which will necessarily follow upon such a
servile disposing of inward Chambers; That they must be forced to make as many
common great Rooms, as there shall be several Stories; which (besides that
they are usually dark, a point hardly avoided, running as they do, through the
middle of the whole House) do likewise devour so much Place, that thereby they
want other Galleries, and Rooms of Retreat, which I have often considered
among them (I must confess) with no small vvonder; for I observe no Nation in
the World, by nature more private and reserved, then the Italian; and on the
other side, in no Habitations less privacy; so there is a kind of Conflict
between their Dwelling and their Being: It might here perchance be expected,
that I should at least describe (which others have done in draughts and
designs) diverse Forms of Plants and Partitions, and varieties of Inventions;
But speculative Writers (as I am) are not bound to comprise all particular
Cases within the Latitude of the Subject which they handle; General Lights,
and Directions, and pointings at some faults, is sufficient. The rest must be
committed to the sagacity of the Architect, who will be often put to diverse
ingenious shifts, when he is to wrestle with scarcity of Ground. The
Italians call it una stanza dannata, as when a Buttery is cast under a
Staircase, or the like.
As sometimes * to damm one Room (though of special use) for the benefit and
beauty of all the rest; Another while, to make those fairest, which are most
in Sight, and to leave the other (like a cunning Painter) in shadow, cum multis
aliis, which it were infinite to pursue. I will therefore close this part
touching Compartition, as cheerfully as I can, with a short description of a
Feasting or entertaining Room, after the Egyptian manner, who seem (at least
till the time of Vitruvius) from the ancient Hebrews and Phoenicians (whence
all knowledge did flow) to have retained with other Sciences, in a high
degree, also the Principles, and practice of this magnificent Art. For as far
as I may conjecture by our Masters Text, lib. 6. cap. 5. (where as in many
other places he has tortured his Interpreters) there could no Form for such a
Royal use be comparably imagined like that of the foresaid Nation, which I
shall adventure to explain.

Let us conceive a Floor or Area of goodly length, (for example, at least of
120 Foot, with the breadth somewhat more then the half of the Longitude,
whereof the reason shall be afterward rendered. About the two longest Sides
and Head of the said Room shall run an Order of Pillars, which Palladio does
suppose Corinthian, (as I see by his design) supplying that point out of
Greece, because we know no Order proper to Egypt. The Fourth Side I will
leave free for the Entrance: On the foresaid Pillars was laid an Architrave,
which Vitruvius mentions alone: Palladio adds thereunto (and with reason)
both Freez and Cornice, over which went up a continued Wall, and therein half
or three quarter Pillars answering directly to the Order below, but a fourth
Part less; and between these half Columns above, the whole Room was
vvindowed round about.

Now, from the lowest Pillars there was laid over a Contignation or Floor born
upon the outward Wall, and the Head of the Columns with Tarrace and Pavement,
Sub dio (says our Master;) and so indeed he might safely determine the matter
in Egypt, where they fear no Clouds: Therefore Palladio, (who leaves this
Tarrace uncovered in the middle, and ballised about) did perchance construe him
rightly, though therein discording from others: Always we must understand a
sufficient breadth of Pavement left between the open part and the Windows, for
some delight of Spectatours, that might look down into the Room: The Latitude I
have supposed, contrary to some former Positions, a little more then the half
of the length; because the Pillars standing at a competent distance from the
outmost Wall, will, by interception of the Sight, somewhat in appearance
diminish the breadth; In which cases, (as I have touched once or twice before)
Discretion may be more licentious then Art. This is the description of an
Egyptian Room for Feasts and other Iollities. About the Walls whereof we
must imagine entire Statues placed below, and illuminated by the descending
Light from the Tarrace, as likewise from the Windows between the half Pillars
above: So as this Room had abundant and advantageous Light; and besides other
garnishing, must needs receive much State by the very height of the Roof, that
lay over two Orders of Columns. And so having run through the four parts of my
first general Division, namely, Foundations, VValls, Apertions, and
Compartition, the House may now have leave to put on his Hat; having hitherto
been uncovered it self, and consequently unfit to cover others. Which point,
though it be the last of this Art in execution, yet it is always in Intention
the first: For who would build but for Shelter? Therefore obtaining both the
Place, and the dignity of a Final Cause, it has been diligently handled by
diverse, but by none more learnedly then Bernardino Baldi Abbot of Guastalla
(before cited upon other occasion) who does fundamentally, and Mathematically
demonstrate the firmest Knittings of the upper Timbers, which make the Roof.
But it has been rather my Scope, in these Elements, to fetch the ground of all
from Nature her self, which indeed is the simplest mother of Art. Therefore I
will now only deliver a few of the properest, and (as I may say) of the
naturallest considerations that belong to this remaining Piece.

There are two Extremities to be avoided in the Cover, or Roof: That it be not
too heavy, nor too light. The first, will suffer a vulgar objection of
pressing too much the under work. The other contains a more secret
inconvenience; for the Cover is not only a bare defense, but likewise a kind of
Band or Ligature to the whole Fabric, and therefore would require some
reasonable weight. But of the two extremes, a House Topheavy is the vvorst.
Next, there must be a care of Equality, that the Edifice be not pressed on the
one side more then on the other; and here Palladio does vvish (like a cautelous
Artizan) that the inward Walls might bear some good share in the burden, and
the outward be the less charged.

Thirdly, the Italians are very precise in giving the Cover a graceful
pendence of sloapness, dividing the whole breadth into nine Parts; whereof
two shall serve for the elevation of the highest Top or Ridge from the lowest.
But in this Point the quality of the Region is considerable: For (as our
Vitruvius insinuates) those Climes that fear the falling and lying of much
Snow, ought to provide more inclining Pentices: and Comeliness must yield to
Necessity.

These are the usefullest Cautions which I find in Authors, touching the last
Head of our Division, wherewith I will conclude the first Part of my present
Travel. The second remains, concerning Ornaments within, or without the
Fabric: A Piece not so dry as the mere Contemplation of Proportions. And
therefore I hope therein somewhat to refresh both the Reader, and my self.

OF THE ELEMENTS OF ARCHITECTURE. The Second Part.
EVery Man's proper Mansion House and Home, being the Theater of his
Hospitality, the Seat of Self-fruition, the Comfortablest part of his own Life,
the noblest of his Sons Inheritance, a kind of private Princedome; Nay, to the
Possessors thereof, an Epitomie of the whole World; may well deserve by these
Attributes, according to the degree of the Master, to be decently and
delightfully adorned. For which end, there are two Arts attending on
Architecture, like two of her principal Gentlewomen, to dress and trim their
Mistress; PICTURE and SCULPTURE: Between whom, before I proceed any further, I
will venture to determine an ancient quarrel about their Precedence, with this
Distinction; that in the garnishing of Fabrics, Sculpture no doubt must have
the pre-eminence, as being indeed of nearer affinity to Architecture it self,
and consequently the more natural, and more suitable Ornament. But on the other
side, (to consider these two Arts as I shall do Philosophically, and not
Mechanically) An excellent Piece of Painting, is, to my judgment, the more
admirable Object, because it comes near an Artificial Miracle, to make diverse
distinct Emineces appear upon a Flat by force of Shadows, and yet the Shadows
themselves not to appear: which I conceive to be the uttermost value and virtue
of a Painter; and to which very few have arrived in all Ages.

In these two Arts (as they are appliable to the Subject which I handle) it
shall be fit first to consider how to choose them; and next how to disp^ them.
To guide us in the choice, we have a R^ somewhere (I well remember) in Pliny,
and it i^ a pretty observation; That they do mutually help to censure one
another. For Picture is best when (...) stands off, as if it were carved; and
Sculpture is (...) when it appears so tender, as if it were painted: (...)
mean when there is such a seeming softness in the Limbs, as if not a Chisel had
hewed them out of Sto^ or other Material, ut a Pensil had drawn and stroak^
them in Oil; which the judicious Poet took well (...) his Fancy. Excudent alii
spirantia mollius era.

But this generality is not sufficient to make (...) good chooser, without a
more particular contraction of his Judgment. Therefore when a Piece (...) Art
is set before us, let the first Caution be, not (...) ask who made it, lest the
Fame of the Author d^ Captivate the Fancy of the Buyer. For, that excellent men
do always excellently, is a false Conclusion; whereupon I observe among
Italian Artizans, three notable Phrases, which well decipher the degrees of
their Works.

They will tell you, that a thing was done Con diligenza, Con studio, and Con
Amore; The first is but a bare and ordinary diligence, The second is a learned
diligence; The third is much more, even a loving diligence: They mean not with
love to the Bespeaker of the Work, but with a love and delight in the Work it
self, upon some special Fancy to this, or that Story; And when all these
concur (particularly the last) in an eminent Author, Then perchance Tatianus
fecit, or (...) will serve the turn, without farther Inquisition; Otherwise
Artizans have not only their Growths and Perfections, but likewise their Vains
and Times.

The next Caution must be (to proceed Logically) that in judging of the Work it
self, we be not distracted with too many things at once; Therefore (first to
begin with Picture:) we are to observe whether it be well drawn, (or as more
elegant Artizans term it) well Designed; Then, whether it be well Colored,
which be the two general Heads; And each of them has two principal Requisites;
For in well Designing, there must be Truth and Grace; In well Coloring. Force
and Affection; All other Praises are but Consequences of these.

Truth (as we Metaphorically take it in this Art) is a Just and Natural
Proportion in every Part of the determined Figure: Grace is a certain free
Disposition in the whole Draught, answerable to that unaffected Frankness of
Fashion in a living Body, Man or Woman, which does animate Beauty where it is,
and supply it, where it is not.

Force consists in the Roundings and Raisings of the Work, according as the
Limbs do more or less require it; So as the Beholder shall spy no sharpness in
the bordering Lines; As when Tailors cut out a Suit, which Italians do aptly
term according to that comparison, Contorni taglienti; Not any flatness within
the Body of the Figure, which how it is done, we must fetch from a higher
Discipline; For the Optics teach us, That a plain will appear prominent, and
(as it were) embossed, if the Parts farthest from the Axel-tree, or middle Beam
of the Eye, shall be the most shadowed; because in all Darkness, there is a
kind of Deepness. But as in the Art of persuasion, one of the most Fundamental
Precepts is the Concealment of Art; So here likewise, the Sight must be
sweetly deceived by an insensible passage, from brighter colors to dimmer,
which Italian Artizans call the middle Tinctures; That is, Not as the whites
and yolks of Eggs lie in the Shell, with visible distinction; But as when they
are beaten, and blended in a Dish, which is the nearest comparison that I can
suddenly conceive.

Lastly, Affection is the Lively Representment of any passion whatsoever, as if
the Figures stood not upon a Cloth or Board, but as if they were acting upon
(...) Stage; And here I must remember, in truth wi^ much marvel, a note which I
have received from excellent Artizans, that though Gladness a^ Grief be
opposites in Nature; yet they are su^ Neighbors and Confiners in Art, that the
least touch of a Pensil will translate a crying into a laughing Face as it is
represented by Homer in the person of Hectors wife; as Painters and Poets have
always had a kind of congeniality, (...).
(...),
(...),
(...). -- -- That is,
She took her Son into her Arms, weepingly laughing.


Which Instance, besides diverse other, does often reduce unto my memory that
ingenuous Speculation of the Cardinal Cusanus, extant in his Works, touching
the coincidence of Extremes. And thus much of the four Requisites, and
Perfections in Picture.

In Sculpture likewise, the two first are absolutely necessary; The third
impertinent; For Solid Figures need no elevation, by force of Lights, or
shadows; Therefore in the Room of this we may put (as has been before touched)
a kind of Tenderness, by the Italians termed Morbidezza, wherein the Chizel, I
must confess, has more glory then the Pensil; that being so hard an
Instrument, and working upon so unpliant stuff, can yet leave Strokes of so
gentle appearance.

The Fourth, which is the expressing of Affection (as far as it does depend
upon the Activity and Gesture of the Figure) is as proper to the Carver, as to
the Painter; though Colors, no doubt, have therein the greatest power;
whereupon, perchance, did first grow with us the Fashion of coloring, even
Regal Statues, which I must take leave to call an English Barbarism.

Now in these four Requisites already rehearsed, it is strange to note, that no
Artizan, having ever been blamed for excess in any of the three last; only
Truth (which should seem the most Innocent) has suffered some Objection; and
all Ages have yielded, some one or two Artificers so prodigiously exquisite,
that they have been reputed too Natural in their Draughts; which will well
appear by a famous passage in Quintillian, touching the Characters of the
ancient Artizans, falling now so aptly into my memory, that I must needs
translate it, as in truth it may well deserve.

The place which I intend, is extant in the last Chapter* save one of his whole
Work, beginning thus in Latin;

Primi, quorum quidem opera non vetustatis modo gratia visenda sunt clari
Pictores, fuisse dicuntur Polygnotus atque Aglaophon, etc.

The whole Passage in English stands thus.

THE first Painters of Name, whose Works be considerable for any thing more
then only Antiquity, are said to have been Polygnotus and Aglaophon; whose bare
Coloring, he means I think in white and black, has even yet so many
followers, that those rude and first Elements, as it were of that, which within
a while, became an Art, are preferred before the greatest Painters that have
been extant after them, out of a certain Competition, as I conceive it, in
point of Judgment. After these, Zeuxes and Parasius, not far distant in age,
both about the time of the Peloponnesian War, for in Xenophon we have a
Dialogue between Parasius and Socrates, did add much to this Art. Of which the
first is said to have invented the due disposition of Lights and Shadows; The
second, to have more subtly examined the Truth of Lines in the Draught; for
Zeuxes did make Limbs bigger then the life; deeming his Figures, thereby the
more stately and Majestical; and therein, as some think, imitating Homer, whom
the stoutest Form does please, even in Women. On the other side, Parasius did
exactly limit all the Proportions so, as they call him the Lawgiver, because in
the Images of the Gods, and of Heroical Personages, others have followed his
Patterns like a Decree; But Picture did most flourish about the days of
Philip, and even to the Successors of Alexander; yet by sundry Habilities: for
Protogenes did excel in Diligence; Pamphilus and Melanthius in due Proportion;
Antiphilus in a frank Facility; Theon of Samos, in strength of Fantasy and
conceiving of Passions; Apelles, in Invention and Grace, whereof he does
himself most vaunt; Euphranor deserves admiration, that being in other
excellent Studies a principal Man, he was likewise a wondrous Artizan, both in
Painting and Sculpture. The like difference we may observe among the
Statuaries; for the works of Calon and Egesias were somewhat stiff, like the
Tuscan Manner; Those of Calamis not done with so cold strokes; And Myron more
tender then the former; a diligent Decency in Polycletus above others; to whom
though the highest praise be attributed by the most, yet lest he should go free
from exception, some think he wanted solemness; for as he may perchance he said
to have added a comely Dimension to humane shape, somewhat above the truth; so
on the other side, he seemed not to have fully expressed the Majesty of the
Gods; Moreover, he is said not to have meddled willingly with the graver age, as
not adventuring beyond smooth cheeks: But these virtues that were wanting in
Polycletus, were supplied by Phidias and Alcmenes; yet Phidias was a better
Artizan in the representing of Gods, then of Men; and in his works of Ivory,
beyond all emulation, even though he had left nothing behind him but his
Minerva at Athens, or the Olympian Jupiter in Elis, whose Beauty seems to have
added somewhat, even to the received Religion; the Majesty of the Work; as it
were, equalling the Deity. To Truth, they affirm Lysippus and Praxiteles, to
have made the nearest approach: for Demetrius is therein reprehended, as rather
exceeding then deficient; having been a greater aimer at Likeness, then at
Loveliness.

This is that witty Censure of the ancient Artizans which Quintillian has left
us, where the la^ Character of Demetrius does require a little Philosophical
Examination; How an Artificer, whose end is the Imitation of Nature, can be too
natural; which likewise in our days was either the fault, or (to speak more
gently) the too much perfection of Albert Durer, and perhaps also of Micha^
Angelo da Buonaroti, between whom I have heard noted by an ingenuous Artizan a
pretty nice difference, that the German did too much express the which was; and
the Italian, that which should be: Which severe Observation of Nature, by the
one in her commonest, and by the other in her absolute^ Forms, must needs
produce in both a kind of Rigidity, and consequently more Naturalness then
Gracefulness: This is the clearest reason, why some exact Symmetrists have been
blamed for being too true, as near as I can deliver my conceit. And so much
touching the choice of Picture, and Sculpture: The next is, the application of
both to the beautifying of Fabrics.

First therefore, touching Picture, there does occur a very pertinent doubt,
which has been passed over too slightly, not only by some Men, but by some
Nations; namely, whether this Ornament can well become the Outside of houses,
wherein the Germans have made so little scruple, that their best Towns are the
most painted, as Augusta and Norembergh. To determine this question in a word:
It is true, that a Story well set out with a good Hand, will every where take a
Judicious eye: But yet withal it is as true, that various colors on the
Out-walls of Buildings have always in them more Delight then Dignity:
Therefore I would there admit no Paintings but in Black and White, nor even in
that kind any Figures (if the Room be capable) under Nine or Ten foot high,
which will require no ordinary Artizan; because the faults are more visible
then in small Designs. In unfigured paintings the noblest is the imitation of
Marbles, and of Architecture it self, as Arches, Treezes, Columns, and the like.

Now for the Inside, here grows another doubt, wherein Grotesca (as the
Italians) or Antique work (as we call it) should be received; against the
express authority of Vitruvius himself, lib. 7. cap. 5. where Pictura (says
he) fit ejus, quod est, seu potest esse; excluding by this severe definition,
all Figures composed of different Natures or Sexes; so as a Syrene or a
Centaure had been intolerable in his eye: But in this we must take leave to
depart from our Master; and the rather, because he spoke out of his own
Profession, allowing Painters (who have ever been as little limited as Poets) a
less scope in their imaginations, even then the gravest Philosophers, who
sometimes do serve themselves of Instances that have no Existence in Nature; as
we see in Plato's Amphisboena, and Aristotle's Hirco-Cervus. And (to settle
this point) what was indeed more common and familiar among the Romans
themselves, then the Picture and Statue of Terminus, even one of their Deities?
which yet if we well consider, is but a piece of Grotesca; I am for these
reasons unwilling to impoverish that Art, though I could wish such medly and
motly Designs confined only to the Ornament of Freezes, and Borders, their
properest place. As for other Storied Works upon VValls, I doubt our Clime be
too yielding and moist for such Garnishment; therefore leaving it to the
Dwellers discretion according to the quality of his Seat, I will only add a
Caution or two about the disposing of Pictures within.

First, That no Room be furnished with too many; which, in truth, were a Surfeit
of Ornament, unless they be Galleries, or some peculiar Repository for Rarities
of Art.

Next, that the best Pieces be placed not where there are the least, but where
there are the fewest lights: therefore not only Rooms windowed on both ends,
which we call through-lighted; but with two or more windows on the same side,
are enemies to this Art: and sure it is, that no Painting can be seen in full
perfection, but (as all Nature is illuminated) by a single Light.

Thirdly, That in the placing there be some care also taken how the Painter did
stand in the working, which an intelligent Eye will easily discover; and that
posture is the most natural: so as Italian Pieces will appear best in a Room
where the Windows are high, because they are commonly made to a descending
Light, which of all other does set off men's Faces in their truest spirit.

Lastly, that they be as properly bestowed for their quality, as fitly for
their grace: that is, cheerful Paintings in Feasting and Banqueting Rooms;
Graver Stories in Galleries; Land-skips and Boscage, and such wild works, in
open Tarraces, or in Summer-houses (as we call them) and the like.

And thus much of Picture; which let me close with this Note; that though my
former Discourse may serve perchance for some reasonable leading in the choice
of such delights; yet let no man hope by such a speculative erudition, to
discern the Masterly and mysterious touches of Art, but an Artizan himself; to
whom therefore we must leave the prerogative to censure the manner and
handling, as he himself must likewise leave some points, perchance of no less
value to others; as for example, whether the Story be rightly represented, the
Figures in true action, the persons suited to their several qualities, the
affections proper and strong, and such like Observations.

Now for Sculpture, I must likewise begin with a Controversy, as before
(falling into this Place;) or let me rather call it a very mere Fancy,
strangely taken by Palladio, who having noted in an old Arch or two at Verona,
some part of the Materials already cut in fine Forms, and some unpolished, does
conclude (according to his Logic) upon this particular, that the Ancients did
leave the outward Face of their Marbles or Freestone without any Sculpture,
till they were laid and cemented in the Body of the Building; For which
likewise he finds a reason, as many do now and then very wittily, even before
the thing it self be true, that the Materials being left rough, were more
manageable in the Masons hand, then if they had been smooth; And that so the
sides might be laid together the more exactly; Which Conceit, once taken, he
seems to have further imprinted, by marking in certain Storied Sculptures of
old time, how precisely the Parts and Lines of the Figures that pass from one
Stone to another, do meet; which he thinks could hardly fall out so right,
forgetting while he speaks of ancient things, the ancient Diligence, unless
they had been cut after the joining of the Materials. But all these Inducements
cannot countervail the sole Inconvenience of shaking and Disjoynting the
Commissures with so many Strokes of the Chizel, besides an Incommodious Working
on Scaffolds; especially having no testimony to confirm it, that I have yet
seen, among the records of Art: Nay, it is indeed rather true, that they did
square, and carve, and polish their Stone and Marble Works, even in the very
Cave of the Quarry before it was hardened by open Air: But, to leave
disputation, I will set down a few Positive notes for the placing of Sculpture;
because the choosing has been handled before.

That first of all, it be not too general and abundant, which would make a
House look like a Cabinet: and in this point, moral Philosophy, which tempereth
Fancies, is the Superintendent of Art.

That especially, there be a due moderation of this Ornament in the first
approach; where our Authors do more commend, I mean about the Principal
Entrance, a Dorique, then a Corinthian garnishment; So as if the great Door be
Arched with some brave Head, cut in fine Stone or Marble for the Key of the
Arch, and two Incumbent Figures gracefully leaning upon it toward one another,
as if they meant to confer, I should think this a sufficient Entertainment for
the first Reception of any judicious Sight, which I could wish seconded with
two great standing Statues on each side of a paved way that shall lead up into
the Fabric, so as the Beholder at the first entrance may pass his eye between
them.

That the Nices, if they contain Figures of white Stone or Marble, be not
colored in their Concavity too black, For though Contraria juxta so posita
magis illucescunt (by an old Rule;) yet it has been subtly, and indeed truly
noted, that our Sight is not well contented with those sudden departments from
one extreme to another: Therefore let them have rather a Duskish Tincture, then
an absolute black.

That fine and delicate Sculptures be helped with Nearness, and Gross with
distance; which was well seen in the old controversy between Phidias and
Alcmenes about the Statue of Venus: wherein the first did show discretion, and
save labor, because the Work was to be viewed at good Height, which did drown
the sweet and diligent strokes of his Adversary: A famous emulation of two
principal Artizans, celebrated even by the Greek Poets.

That in the placing of standing Figures aloft, we must set them in a Posture
somewhat bowing forward; because (says our Master, lib. 3. cap. 3. out of a
better Art then his own) the visual beam of our Eye, extended to the Head of
the said Figures, being longer then to the Foot, must necessarily make that
part appear farther; so as to reduce it to an erect or upright position, there
must be allowed a due advantage of stooping toward us; which Albert Durer has
exactly taught in his forementioned Geometry. Our Vitruvius calls this
affection in the Eye, a resupination of the Figure: For which word (being in
truth his own, for ought I know) we are almost as much beholding to him, as for
the Observation it self: And let thus much summarily suffice touching the
choice and use of these adorning Arts. For to speak of garnishing the Fabric
with a Row of erected Statues about the Cornice of every Contignation or Story,
were discourse more proper for Athens or Rome, in the time of their true
greatness, when (as Pliny records of his own Age) there were near as many
carved Images, as living Men; like a noble contention, even in point of
Fertility, between Art and Nature; which passage does not only argue an
infinite abundance, both of Artizans and Materials; but likewise of Magnificent
and Majestical Desires in every common person of those times, more or less,
according to their Fortunes. And true it is indeed, that the Marble Monuments
and Memories of well-deserving Men, wherewith the very Highways were strewed
on each side, was not a bare and transitory Entertainment of the Eye, or only a
gentle deception of Time to the Traveller: But had also a secret and strong
Influence, even into the advancement of the Monarchy, by continual
representation of virtuous Examples; so as in that points, ART became a piece
of State.

Now, as I have before subordinated Picture and Sculpture to Architecture, as
their Mistress; so there are certain inferior ARTS likewise subordinate to
them; As under Picture, Mosaique; under Sculpture, Plastique: which two I only
nominate, as the fittest to garnish Fabrics.

Mosaique; is a kind of Painting in small Pebbles, Cockles and Shells of sundry
colors; and of late days likewise with pieces of Glass figured at pleasure;
an Ornament, in truth, of much beauty, and long life; but of most use in
pavements and floorings.

Plastique; is not only under Sculpture, but indeed very Sculpture it self: but
with this difference; that the Plasterer does make his Figures by Addition, and
the Carver by Substraction; whereupon Michael Angelo was wont to say somewhat
pleasantly, That Sculpture was nothing but a purgation of superfluities. For
take away from a piece of wood or stone all that is superfluous, and the
remainder is the intended Figure. Of this plastic Art, the chief use with us
is in the graceful fretting of Rooss: But the Italians apply it to the mantling
of Chimneys with great Figures. A cheap piece of Magnificence, and as durable
almost within doors, as harder Forms in the weather. And here, though it be a
little excursion, I cannot pass unremembred again, their manner of disguising
the shafts of Chimneys in various fashions, whereof the noblest is the
Pyramidal: being in truth a piece of Polite and Civil discretion, to convert
even the conduits of foot and smoke into Ornaments; whereof I have hitherto
spoken as far as may concern the Body of the Building.

Now these are Ornaments also without, as Gardens, Fountains, Groves,
Conservatories of rare Beasts, Birds, and Fishes. Of which ignoble^ kind of
Creatures, We ought not, says our greatest Arist. lib. 1. cap. 5. de part.
Anim. (...).
Master among the Sons of Nature, childishly to despise the Contemplation; for
in all things that are natural, there is ever something that is admirable. Of
these external delights a word or two.

First, I must note a certain contrariety betvveen building and gardening: For
as Fabrics should be regular, so Gardens should be irregular, or at least cast
into a very vvilde Regularity. To exemplify my conceit, I have seen a Garden,
for the manner perchance incomparable, into which the first Access was a high
walk like a Tarrace, from whence might be taken a general view of the whole
Plot below, but rather in a delightful confusion, then with any plain
distinction of the pieces. From this the Beholder descending many steps, was
afterward conveyed again by several mountings and valings, to various
entertainments of his sent and sight: which I shall not need to describe, for
that were poetical, let me only note this, that every one of these
diversities, was as if he had been magically transported into a new Garden.

But though other Countries have more benefit of Sun then we, and thereby more
properly tied to contemplate this delight; yet have I seen in our own, a
delicate and diligent curiosity, surely without parallel among foreign
Nations: Namely, in the Garden of Sir Henry Fanshaw, at his Seat in Ware-Park;
where I well remember, he did so precisely examine the tinctures and seasons
of his flowers, that in their settings, the inwardest of which that were to
come up at the same time, should be always a little darker then the outmost,
and so serve them for a kind of gentle shadow, like a piece, not of Nature, but
of Art: which mention (incident to this place) I have willingly made of his
Name, for the dear friendship that was long between us: though I must confess,
with much wrong to his other virtues; which deserve a more solid Memorial, then
among these vacant Observations. So much of Gardens.

Fountains are figured, or only plain Water'dworks: Of either of which, I will
describe a matchless pattern.

The first, done by the famous hand of Michael Angelo da Buonaroti, in the
figure of a sturdy woman, washing and winding of linen clothes; in which Act,
she wrings out the water that made the Fountain; which was a graceful and
natural conceit in the Artificer, implying this rule; That all designs of this
kind, should be proper.

The other does merit some larger expression; There went a long, straight,
mossie walk of competent breadth, green, and soft under foot, listed on both
sides with an Aquaeduct of white stone, brest-high, which had a hollow Channel
on the top, where ran a pretty trickling stream; on the edge whereof, were
couched very thick all along, certain small pipes of lead, in little holes; so
neatly, that they could not be well perceived, till by the turning of a cock,
they did sprout over interchangeably from side to side, above man's height, in
forms of Arches, without any interfection or meeting aloft, because the pipes
were not exactly opposite; so as the Beholder, besides that which was fluent in
the Aquaeducts on both hands in his view, did walk, as it were, under a
continual Bower and Hemisphere of water, without any drop falling on him. An
Invention for refreshment, surely far excelling all the Alexandrian Delicacies,
and Pneumaticks of Hero.

Groves, and artificial Devices under ground, are of great expense, and little
dignity; which for my part, I could wish converted here into those Crypteria,
whereof mention is made among the curious provisions of Ticho Brahe the Danish
Ptolomy, as I may well call him: which were deep concaves in Gardens, where the
Stars might be observed even at noon. For (by the way) to think that the
brightness of the Suns body above, does drown our discerning of the lesser
lights, is a popular error; the sole impediment being that luster, which by
reflection, does spread about us from the face of the Earth; so as the caves
before touched, may well conduce, not to a delicious, but to a learned pleasure.

In Aviaries of Wire, to keep Birds of all sorts, the Italians (though no
wasteful Nation) do in some places bestow vast expense; including great scope
of ground, variety of bushes, trees of good height, running waters, and
sometime a Stove annexed, to contemper the Air in Winter. So as those
Chanteresses, unless they be such as perhaps delight as much in their wing, as
in their voice, may live long among so good provisions, and room, before they
know that they are prisoners; reducing often to my memory that conceit of the
Roman Stoic, who in comparison of his own free contemplations, did think
diverse great and splendent fortunes of his time, little more then commodious
captivities.

Concerning Ponds of pleasure near the habitation; I will refer my self to a
grave Author of our own (though more illustrious by his other work) namely,
Sarisburiensis De nugis Curial, etc.
de Piscina.

And here I will end the second part touching Ornaments, both within, and
without the Fabric.

Now, as almost all those which have delivered the Elements of Logic, do
usually conclude with a Chapter touching Method: so I am here seized with a
kind of critical spirit, and desirous to shut up these building Elements with
some Methodical direction how to censure Fabrics already raised: for indeed,
without some way to contract our Judgment, which among so many particulars,
would be lost by diffusion. I should think it almost harder to be a good
Censurer, then a good Architect: Because the working part may be helped with
Deliberation, but the Judging must flow from an extemporal habit. Therefore
(not to leave this last Piece without some Light) I could with him that comes
to examine any nobler Work, first of all to examine himself, whether perchance
the sight of many brave things before (which remain like impressed forms) have
not made him apt to think nothing good but that which is the best; for this
humor were too sour. Next, before he come to settle any imaginable opinion,
let him by all means seek to inform himself precisely, of the Age of the Work
upon which he must pass his Doom, And if he shall find the apparent Decays to
exceed the proportion of Time; then let him conclude vvichout father
inquisition, as an absolute Decree, that either the Materials were too slight,
or the Seat is naught. Now, after these premises, if the House be found to
beat his years well, (which is always a token of sound constitution) Then
let him suddenly run backwards, (for the Method of censuring is contrary to the
Method of composing) from the Ornaments (which first allure the Eye) to the
more essential Members, till at last he be able to form this Conclusion, that
the Work is Commodious, Firm, and Delightful; which (as I said in the
beginning) are the three capital Conditions required in good Buildings, by all
Authors, both Ancient and Modern. And this is, as I may term it, the most
Scientifical way of Censuring. There are two other which I must not forget:
The first in Georgio Vassari, before his laborious Work of the lives of
Architects, which is to pass a running examination over the whole Edifice,
according to the properties of a well shapen Man. As whether the Walls stand
upright upon clean footing and Foundation; whether the Fabric be of a
beautiful Stature; whether for the breadth it appear well burnished; whether
the principal Entrance be on the middle Line of the Front or Face, like our
Mouths; whether the Windows, as our Eyes, be set in equal number and distance
on both sides; whether the Offices, like the Veins in our Bodies, be usefully
distributed, and so forth. For this Allegorical review may be driven as far as
any Wit will, that is at leisure.

The second way is in Vitruvius himself, lib. 1. cap. 2. where he summarily
determines six Considerations, which accomplish this whole Art.

Ordinatio. Dispositio. Eurythmia. Symmetria. Decor, and Distributio.
Whereof (in my conceit) we may spare him the first two; for as far as I can
perceive, either by his Interpreters, or by his own Text (which in that very
place, where perchance he should be clearest, is of all other the cloudiest) he
means nothing by Ordination, but a well settling of the Model or Scale of the
whole Work. Nor by Disposition, more then a neat and full expression of the
first Idea or Designment thereof; which perchance do more belong to the
Artificer, then to the Censurer. The other four are enough to condemn, or
absolve any Fabric whatsoever. Whereof Eurythmia is that agreeable Harmony
between the breadth, length, and height of all the Rooms of the Fabric, which
suddenly, where it is, takes every Beholder by the secret power of Proportion:
wherein let me only note this, That though the least error or offense that can
be committed against sight, is excess of height; yet that fault is no where of
small importance, because it is the greatest offense against the Purse.

Symmetria is the convenience that runs between the Parts and the Whole,
whereof I have formerly spoken.

Decor is the keeping of a due Respect between the Inhabitant and the
Habitation. Whence Palladius did conclude, that the principal Entrance was
never to be regulated by any certain Dimensions, but by the dignity of the
Master; yet to exceed rather in the more, then in the less, is a mark of
Generosity, and may always be excused with some noble Emblem, or Inscription,
as that of the Conte di Bavillacqua, over his large Gate at Verona, where
perchance had Leen committed a little Disproportion. Patet Ianua, Cor magis.

And here likewise I must remember our ever memorable Sir Philip Sidney, (whose
Wit was in truth the very rule of Congruity) who well knowing that Basilius (as
he had painted the State of his Mind) did rather want some extraordinary Forms
to entertain his Fancy, then room for Courtiers; was contented to place him in
a Star-like Lodge; which otherwise in severe Judgment of Art, had been an
incommodious Figure.

Distributio is that useful Casting of all Rooms for Office, Entertainment, or
Pleasure; which I have h^ndled before at more length then any other Piece.

These are the Four Heads which every man should run over, before he pass any
determinate Censure upon the Works that he shall view, wherewith I will close
this last part, touching Ornaments. Against which (me thinks) I hear an
Objection, even from some well-meaning man; That these delightful Crafts, may
be diverse ways ill applied in a Land. I must confess indeed, there may be a
Lascivious, and there may be likewise a superstitious use, both of Pi^ure and
Sculpture: To which possibility of mis-application, not only these Semi-liberal
Arts are subject but even the highest perfections and endowments of Nature. As
Beauty in a light woman; Eloquence in a mutinous man; Resolution in an
Assassinate; Prudent Observation of hours and humors, in a corrupt Courtier;
Sharpness of wit and argument in a seducing Scholar, and the like. Nay,
finally, let me ask what ART can be more pernicious, then even RELIGION it
self, if it self be converted into an Instrument of ART: Therefore, Ab abuti ad
non uti, negatur consequentia.

Thus having stitched (in some sort) together these Animadversions touching
Architecture, and the Ornaments thereof; I now feel that contemplative spirits
are as restless as active, for doubting with my self, (as all weakness is
jealous) that I may be thought to have spent my poor observation abroad about
nothing but Stone and Timber, and such Rubbage; I am thereby led into an
immodesty of proclaiming another Work, which I have long devoted to the service
of my Country: Namely, A Philosophical Survey of Education, which is indeed a
second Building, or repairing of Nature, and as I may term it, a kind of Moral
Architecture; whereof such Notes as I have taken in my foreign transcursions
or abodes, I hope to utter without public offense, though still with the
freedom of a plain Kentish-man. In the mean while, I have let these other
gleanings fly abroad, like the Bird out of the Ark, to discover what footing
may be for that which shall follow.

FINIS.
A Philosophical SURVEY OF EDUCATION, OR Moral Architecture.

BY HENRY WOTTON Knight. PROVOST OF ETON COLLEGE.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO THE KING.
May it please your Majesty,

I Need no other Motive to dedicate this Discourse, which follows, unto your
Majesty, then the very Subject it self, so properly pertaining to your
Sovereign Goodness: For thereby you are Pater Patriae. And it is none of the
least Attributes wherewith God has blessed both Your Royal Person, and Your
People, that You are so. On the other side: for mine own undertaking thereof, I
had need say more. I am old and childless; and though I were a Father of many,
I could leave them nothing, either in Fortune, or in Example. But having long
since put forth a slight Pamphlet about the Elements of ARCHITECTURE, which yet
has been entertained with some pardon among my Friends, I was encouraged even
at this age, to assay how I could build a Man: For there is a Moral, as well as
a Naturaler Artificial Compilement, and of be^er Materials: Which truly I have
cemented together rather in t^ plain Tuscan (as our VITRUVIUS terms (...)
then in the Corinthian form. Howsoever, if Yo^ Majesty be graciously pleased to
approve any part of it, who are so excellent a Judge in all kind of Structure,
I shall much glory in mine own Endeavor. If otherwise, I will be one of the
first my self, that shall pull it in pieces, and condemn it to Rubbage and
Ruin. And so wishing Your Majesty (as to the Best of Kings) a longer Life then
any of the soundest Works of Nature or Art, I ov^ rest

Your Majesty's

Most devoted poor Subject, and Servant,

H. WOTTON.

A SURVEY OF EDUCATION.
THis Treatise (well may it now proceed) having since the first Conception
thereof been often traversed with other thoughts, yea and sometimes utterly
forsaken, I have of late resumed again, out of hope (the common flatterer) to
find at least some indulgent interpretation of my pains; especially in an
honest Endeavor of such public consequence as this is above all other. For if
any shall think Education (because it is conversant about Children) to be but a
private and domestic duty; He will run some danger, in my opinion, to have
been ignorantly bred himself. Certain it is, that anciently the best composed
Estates did commit this care more to the Magistrate then to the Parent. And
certain likewise, That the best Authors have chosen rather to handle it in
their Politics, then in their Oeconomicks. As both Writers and Rulers well
knowing what a stream and influence i^ has into Government. So great indeed,
and so diffusive, that albeit good Laws have been reputed always the Nerves or
Ligaments of humane Society; Yet are they (be it spoken with the peace of
those grave Professors) no way comparable in their effects to the rules of
good Nurture: For it is in civil, as it is in natural Plantations, where young
tender trees (though subject to the injuries of Air, and in danger even of
their own Flexibility) would yet little want any after-underproppings and
shoarings, if they were at first well fastened in the root.

Now my present labor will (as I foresee) consist of these pieces.

First, there must proceed a way how to discern the Natural Capacities and
inclinations of children.

Secondly, Next must ensue the culture and furnishment of the Mind.

Thirdly, the moulding of behavior, and decent forms.

Fourthly, the tempering of affections.

Fifthly, the quickening and exciting of Observations and practical Judgment.

Sixthly, And the last in Order, but the principal in Value, being that which
must knit and consolidate all the rest, is the timely instilling of
conscientious Principles and seeds of Religion.

These six branches will, as I conceive, embrace the whole business: through
which I shall run in as many several Chapters or Sections: But before I lanch
from the shoars, let me resolve a main question which may be cast in my way;
Whether there be indeed such an infallible efficacy, as I suppose, in the care
of Nurture and first Production; For if that supposal should fail us, all our
Anchorage were loose, and we should but wander in a vvilde Sea.

Plutarch, I remember to the same purpose, in the first of his Tractates,
which place this subject well deserved, endeavors by sundry similitudes,
where in that man had a prompt and luxurious fancy, to show us the force of
Education; All which, in sooth, might have been well forborne, had he but
known what our own Contrymen have of late time disclosed among their
Magnetical Experiments. There they tell us, that a rod or bar of iron having
stood long in a window, or elsewhere, being thence taken, and by the help of a
cork or the like thing, being balanced in water, or in any other liquid
substance where it may have a free mobility, will bewray a kind of unquietude
and coffeehouse till it attain the former position. Now it is pretty to
note, how in this Natural Theorem is involved a Moral conclusion of direct
moment to the point we have in hand.

For if such an unpliant and stubborn mineral as Iron is above any other, will
acquire by mere continuance a secret appetite, and (as I may term it) an
habitual inclination to the site it held before. Then how much more may we
hope, through the very same means, (Education being nothing else but a constant
plight and Inurement) to induce by custom good habits into a reasonable
creature? And so having a little smoothed my passage, I may now go on to the
Chapters.

THE FIRST CHAPTER OR SECTION; Touching the Search of Natural Capacities and
Inclinations.
OF the two things propounded in this Chapter, I must begin with Capacities;
For the manurement of Wits is like that of Soyls, where before either the pains
of Tilling, or the charge of Sowing, Men use to consider what the mould will
bear, Heath or Grain. Now this peradventure at the first view, may seem in
Children a very slight and obvious enquiry; That age being so open and so free,
and yet void of all Art to disguise or dissemble either their appetites, or
their defects: Notwithstanding, we see it every day, and every where subject to
much error; Partly by a very pardonable facility in the Parents themselves, to
over-prize their own Children, while they behold them through the vapors of
affection which alter the appearance; as all things seem bigger in misty
mornings. Nay, even strangers, and the most dis^nteressed persons, are yet, I
know not how, commonly inclined to a favorable conceit of little ones: so
cheap a thing it is to bestow nothing but Hope. There is likewise on the other
side, as often failing by an Undervaluation; for in diverse Children their
ingenerate and seminal powers (as I may term them) lie deep, and are of slow
disclosure; no otherwise then in certain Vegetables, which are long before they
shoot up and appear, and yet afterward both of good and great increase; which
may serve to excite care, and to prevent despair in Parents: for if their Child
be not such a speedy spreader and brancher, like the Vine, yet perchance he may
prove proles tarde crescentis Olivae; and yield, though with a little longer
expectation, as useful, and more sober fruit then the other. And, I must
confess, I take some delight in these kind of comparisons; remembering well what
I have often heard my truly Noble, and most dear Nephew, Sir Edmund Bacon, say,
out of his exquisite Contemplations, and Philosophical Practice: That Nature
surely (if she be well studied) is the best Moralist, and has much good
Counsel hidden in her bosom.

Now here then will lie the whole business, to set down beforehand certain
Signatures of Hopefulness, or Characters, (as I will rather call them, because
that Word has gotten already some entertainment among us) whereby may be
timely descried what the Child will prove in probability. These Characters must
necessarily be either impressed in the outward person, like stamps of Nature,
or must otherwise be taken from some emergent act of his mind; wherein of the
former sort.

The first is that which first incurreth into sight; namely, the Child's color
or complexion, (as we vulgarily term it) and thence perchance some judgment of
the predominant humor.

The next is the structure, and conformation of the limbs.

And the third is a certain spirituous resultance from the other two, which
makes the countenance.

The second kind of these Characters (which are rather mental then personal) be
of such variety (because minds are more active then bodies) that I purpose, for
the plainest delivery, to resolve all my gatherings touching both kinds, iuto a
Rapsody of several Observations: For I dare not give them the Authoritative
Title of Aphorisms; which yet, when I shall have mustered them, if their own
strength be considered rather in troop then singly, as they say, by Pole, may
perchance make a reasonable More Prognostic.

The Observations.
THere are in the course of humane life, from our Cradles upward, certain
Periods, or Degrees of change, commonly (as the Ancients have noted) every
seven years, whereof the two first Septynaries, and half of the third, or
thereabouts, I will call the Obsequious age, apt to imbibe all manner of
impressions: which time of the suppleness of Obedience is to be plied by
Parents, before the stiffness of Will come on too fast.

There is no Complexion, or Composition in Children, either privileged from
bad proof, or prejudiced from good. Always I except prodigious Forms, and mere
natural Impotencies, which are unmanageable In toto Genere, and no more to be
cultivated then the sands of Arabia.

More ordinary Imperfections and Distortions of the Body in Figure, are so far
from excluding all hope, that we usually see them attended with some notable
Compensation one way or other, whereof our own time has produced with us no
slight Example in a great Minister of State, and many other.

I am yet willing to grant, that generally in Nature, the best outward shapes
are also the likeliest to be consociated with good inward faculties: for this
Conclusion has somewhat from the Divine Light: since God himself made this
great World (whereof Man is the little Model) of such Harmonious Beauty in all
the parts, to be the Receptacle of his perfectest Creature.

Touching such Conjectures as depend on the Complexions of Children: Albeit I
make no question but all kind of Wits and Capacities may be found under all
Tinctures and Integuments; yet I will particularly describe one or two with
some preference, though without prejudice of the rest.

The first shall be a Palish Clearness, evenly and ^moothly spread, not
overthin and washy, but of a ^retty solid consistence; from which equal
distri^ution of the Phlegmatic Humor, which is the pro^er allay of fervent
Blood, I am wont to hope where I see it) will flow a future quietude and
^erenitude in the Affections, and a discreet svveet^ess and moderation in the
Manners; not so quick perchance of conceit, as slow to passion; and commonly
less inventive, then judicious: Howsoever, for the most part, proving very
plausible, insinuan^ and fortunate men.

The other is, the pure sanguine Melancholic Tincture, wherein I would vvish
five parts of the first to three of the second; that so there may be the
greater portion of that which must illuminate and enrich the Fancy, and yet no
scant of the other, to fix and determine the Judgment: for surely the right
natural definition of a wise Habit, is nothing else but a plentifulness and
promptness in the Store house of the Mind of clear Imaginations well fixed.

Marcilius Ficinus (the deep Florentine Platonic) increases these
proportions, requiring eight to two in the foresaid Humors; and vvithal,
adding two more of pure Choler: But of that I shall spea^ more among the
inward Motions, purposely her^ forbearing it, where I only contemplate the
superficial Appearance.

In the outvvard frame and fabric of the Body, which is the next object after
Complexion. An erect and forvvard stature, a large breast, neat and pliant
joints, and the like, may be good significants of health, of strength, or
agility, but are very foreign Arguments of Wit: I will therefore only say
somevvhat of the Head and Eye, as far as may conduce to my present scope.

The Head in a Child I vvish great and round, which is the capablest Figure,
and the freest from all restraint and compreshon of the parts: For since in the
Section of Bodies, we find Man, of all sensible Creatures, to have the fullest
Brain to his proportion, and that it was so provided by the Supreme Wisdom,
for the lodging of the intellective Faculties: It must needs be a silent
Character of Hope, when, in the Oeconomical Providence of Nature, (as I may
term it) there is good store of roomage and receipt where those powers are
stovved: As commonly we may think Husbanding men to foresee their own Plenty,
who prepare beforehand large Barns and Garnaries. Yet Thucidides (anciently
one of the excellentest Wits in the learned part of the World) seems (if
Marcellinus in his life have well described him) to have been somevvhat
Taper-headed, as many of the Genouesers are at this day in common Observation,
who yet be a People of singular Sagacity: yea, I call not impertinently to
mind, that one of my time in Venice, had Wit enough to become the Civil Head of
that grave Republic, who yet for the littleness of his own natural Head, was
surnamed Il Donato Testolina. But the Obtrusion of such particular Instances as
these, are unsufficient to disauthorize a Note grounded upon the final
intention of Nature.

The Eye in Children (which commonly let them rovvl at pleasure) is of curious
observation, especially in point of discovery: For it loves, or hates, before
we can discern the heart; it consents, or denies, before the tongue; it
resolves, or runeth away before the feet: nay, we shall often mark in it a
dullness, or apprehensiveness, even before the understanding. In short, it
betrayeth in a manner the whole state of the Mind, and ^etteth out all our
fancies and passions as it were by a vvindovv. I shall therefore require in
that Organ, without Poetical Conceits, (as far as may concern my purpose, be
the color what it will) only a settled vivacity, nor vvandring, nor stupid;
yet, I must confess, I have known a number of dulsighted, very sharp-vvitted
men.

The truth is, that if in these external marks, o^ signatures, there be any
certainty, it must be taken from that which I have formerly called, The tot^
Resultance. By which, what I mean, I shall more properly explain in the third
Section, when I come to handle the general air of the person and carriage. I
will now hasten to those more solid and conclusive Characters, which, as I
have said, are emergent from the Mind; and which often times do start out of
Children when themselves lea^ think of it: for, let me tell you, Nature is
Prod^ torious.

And first I must begin with a strange Note: That a Child will have Tantum
ingenij quantum irae; That is, in my construction, as much wit as he has
waywardness. This Rule we have cited by a very Cap^
Learned man, somewhere out of Seneca, and exemplified by Angelus Politianus
(none of the meanest Critics) who writing the life of Pietro de Medici,
concludes, That he was likely to prove a Wise man, because he was a froward
Boy. Truly, I have been many times tempted to wonder, notwithstanding the value
of these Authors, How so disordinate a Passion seated in the Heart, and boiling
in the Blood, could betoken (...) good constitution of the Brain, which, above
any other, is, or should be, the coldest part: But because all sudden motions
must necessarily imply (...) quick apprehension of the first stirring cause,
and that the dullest of other creatures are the latest offended, I am content
for the present to yield i^ some credit

We have another, somewhat of the same mould from Quintilian, (whom I have ever
thought, since any use of my poor judgment, both the elegantest and soundest
of all the Roman Pens) That a Child will have Tantum ingenii, quantum memoriae:
This, I must confess, will bear a stronger Consequence of Hope; for Memory is
not only considerable as it is in it self a good Retention, but likewise as it
is an infallible Argument of good Attention; a point of no small value in that
Age, which a fair Orange, or a red Apple will divert.

There is yet another in the same Writer, and in the same place, where he
handles this very Theme. How to descry Capacities: That Parents should mark,
whether their Children be naturally apt to imitate; wherewith certainly all
fine fancies are caught, and some little less then ravished. And we have a
Tradition of Quintilian himself, that when he saw any well-expressed Image of
grief, either in Picture, or Sculpture, he would usually weep: For, being a
Teacher of Oratory in School, he was perhaps affected with a passionate Piece
of Art, as with a kind of mute Eloquence. True it is indeed, which a great
Master has long before taught Aristotle in Rhetoricis.
us, That Man is of all Creatures the most Mimical, as a kind of near adjunct
to Reason: Arguing necessarily in those that can do it well, whether it be in
Gestures, in Styles, in Speech, in Fashion, in Accents, or howsoever, no
shallovv Impression of Similitudes and Differences; about which, in effect, is
conversant the whole Wisdom of the World.

Besides these, I would vvish Parents to mark heedfully the vvitty Excuses of
their Children, especially at Suddains and Surprizals; but rather to mark then
pamper them, for that were otherwise to cherish untruth: whereof I shall
speak more in the Final Section.

Again are to be observed not only his own crafty and pertinent Evasions, but
likewise with what kind of Jests, or pleasant Accidents he is most taken in
others; which will discover the very degree of his apprehension, and even
reach as far as to the censuring of the whole Nations, whether they be flat
and dull, or of quick capacity: For surely, we have argument enough at this
day to conclude, the Ancient Grecians an Ingenious People; of whom the Vulgar
sort, such as were haunters of Theaters, took pleasure in the Conceits of
Aristophanes; reserving my judgment to other place upon the filthy Obscenities
of that and other Authors, well arguing among Christians, when all is said,
that the Devil is one of the vvittiest.

Again, it shall be sit to note, how prettily the Child himself does manage
his pretty pastimes: This may well become an ordinary Parent, to which so
great an Emperor as Augustus descended in the highest of his State, and gravest
of his Age, who collected (as Suetonius tells us) out of all the known World,
especially from the Syrians and Moors, (where, by the way, we may note, who
were then reputed the sharpest Nations) little Boys of the rarest Festivity, to
play before him at their ordinary Sports. And indeed there is much to be noted,
worthy of a sadder judgment in the Wiliness of that Age.

Again, I would have noted in Children, not only their Articulate Answers, but
likewise certain smiles and frowns upon incident Occasions; which though they
be dumb and light passions, will discover much of that inward power which
moves them; especially when withal they lighten or cloud the whole face in a
moment.

Lastly, let not his very Dreams be neglected; for, without question, there is
a great Analogy between those Apprehensions which he has taken by day into his
Fancy, and his nocturnal Impressions; particularly in that Age, which is not
yet troubled with the fumes and cares of the World; so as the Soul has a freer
and more defecated Operation: And this is enough for the disclosing of a good
Capacity in the popular way which I have followed, because the Subject is
general.

Now for the second Part of this Chapter, touching Inclinations: for after we
know how far a Child is capable, the next will be to know unto what course he
is naturally most inclined. There must go before a main research, whether the
Child that I am to manage, be of a good nature or no; as the same term is
vulgarly taken, for an ingenious and tractable disposition: which being a
fundamental Point, and the first root of all virtuous Actions, and though round
about in every Mothers mouth, yet a thing which will need very nice and narrow
Observation: I have spent some diligence in collecting certain private Notes,
which may direct this Inquiry.

First, therefore, when I mark in Children much solitude and silence, I like it
not, nor any thing born before his time, as this must needs be in that sociable
and exposed Age, as they are for the most part. When either alone, or in
company, they sit still without doing of any thing, I like it worse; for surely
all dispositions to Idleness, or Vacancy, even before they grow habits, are
dangerous: and there is commonly but a little distance in time between doing of
nothing, and doing of ill.

THE APHORISMS OF EDUCATION.
Time is the plainest Legend, and every day a leaf is turned.
IF we look abroad, we shall see many proceed yearly out of the Schools of
Experience, whereas few, in comparison, are commended unto Degrees by us:
indeed the multitude of those Schools infinitely exceeding our numbers; but
especially because the means which they follow are far more obvious and easy.
Libraries and Lectures profiting none, but such as bring some measure of
understanding with them; but the Occurrents of the World being easily
entertained by the weakest capacities, assisted only with common sense: neither
therefore is this Legend of time to be contemned by those whose Wits are more
pregnant, or Studies furnished with greatest choice. The Students of Common Law
manifest the benefit arising from the use thereof; who as by reading their Year
Books they recover the Experience by former Ages: so by daily repair to the
Courts of Justice, they suffer nothing of the present to pass unobserved. And I
note, That whereas foreign Universities (in conferring Degrees) regard merely
the performance of some solemn exercise: ours further require a certain expense
of time, supposing (as I conceive) that howsoever exercise of form may be
deceitfully dispatched of course: yet that he who lives some space among the
assiduous advantages and helps of Knowledge, (except he be of the Society of the
Antipodes, who turn night into day, and take no notice of what is done) cannot
choose but receive so much upon ordinary observation, as may make him Master of
some Art; which frequent opportunities, as they happily add something to those
who are but idle lookers on, so, no doubt, they must advance perfection in
those who are more studiously observant; every day presenting their Judgments
with matters examinable by the precepts they read, and most producing to their
inventions, occurrents fit for further inquiry.

Every Nature is not a fit Stock to graft a Scholar on.
THe Spaniard (that wrote the Trial of Wits) undertakes to show what Complexion
is fit for every Profession. I will not disable any for proving a Scholar; nor
yet dissemble that I have seen many happily forced upon that course, to which
by nature they seemed much indisposed. Sometimes the possibility of preferment
prevailing with the credulous, expectation of less expense with the covetous,
opinion of ease with the fond, and assurance of remoteness with the unkind
parents, have moved them, without discretion, to engage their children in
adventures of Learning, by whose return they have received but small
contentment: But they who are deceived in their first designs, deserve less to
be condemned, as such who (after sufficient trial) persist in their wilfulness
are no way to be pitied. I have known some who have been acquainted (by the
complaints of Governors, clamors of Creditors, and confessions of their Sons)
what might be expected from them, yet have held them in with strong hand, till
they have desperately quit, or disgracefully forfeited the places where they
lived. Deprived of which, they might hope to avoid some misery, if their
Friends, who were so careful to bestow them in a College when they were young,
would be so good as to provide a room for them in some Hospital when they are
old.

He seldom speeds well in his course, that stumbles at his setting forth.
I Have ever been unwilling to hear, and careful not to utter predictions of
ill success; Oracles proceeding as well from Superstitious ignorance, as
curious Learning: and what I deliver in these words, occasioned by examples
past, I desire may be applied for prevention rather then prejudice to any
hereafter. To the same eff^t I heard a discreet Censor lesson a young Scholar,
negligent at his first entrance to the Elements of Logic and Philosophy,
telling him, That a Child starved at nurse, would hardly prove an able man. And
I have known some who attended with much expectation at their first appearing,
have stained the Maidenhead of their Credit with some negligent performance,
fall into irrecoverable dislike with others, and hardly escape despair of
themselves. They may make a better excuse, but not hope for more favor, who
can impute the fault of their inauspicious attempts some where else; a
circumstance necessarily to be considered where punishment is (...): but where
reward is proposed for worth, it is as usually detained from those who could
not, as from those who cared not to deserve it.

The way to Knowledge by Epitomies is too straight, by Commentaries too much
about.
IT is sufferable in any to use what liberty they list in their own manner of
Writing, but the contracting and extending the lines and sense of others, if
the first Authors might speak for themselves, would appear a thankless office;
and if the Readers did confer with the Originals, they would confess they were
not thoroughly or rightly informed. Epitomies are helpful to the memory, and of
good private use, but set forth for public Monuments, accuse the industrious
Writers of delivering much impertinency, and divert many to close and shallow
cisterns, whose leisure might well be acquainted with more deep and open
springs. In brief, what I heard sometimes spoken of Ramus, I believe of those
thrifty Compendiums; They show a short c^urse to those who are contented to
know a little, and a sure way to such whose care is not to understand much.
Commentaries are guilty of the contrary extreme, stifling the Text with
infinite additions, and scruing those conceits from the words, which, if the
Authors were set on the Rack, they would never acknowledge. He who is discreet
in bestowing his pains, will suspect those places to be desert and barren,
where the way cannot be found without a guide; and leave curiosity in enquest
of obscurities, which, before it receive content, does lose or tire it self
with digressions.

Discretion is the most universal Art, and has more Professors then Students.
DIscretion, as I understand it, consists in the useful knowledge of what is fit
and comely; of necessary direction in the practice of moral duties, but most
esteemed in the composing and framing civil behavior: men ordinarily being
better content to be dishonest, then to be conscious to themselves that they
are unmannerly. Few study it, because it is attained rather by a natural
felicity, then by any endeavor or pains; and many profess it, presuming on
sufficiency to censure others: and as unable to discern themselves, concerning
their own defects, as unaccustomed to be rightly informed. It little concerns
men indifferent what we do in that kind; and our friends are either nothing
offended therewith, or unwilling to offend us with their relation: our enemies
seldom speak of it in our hearing; and when we hear, we as hardly believe them.

They who travel far, easily miss their way.
TRavel is reputed a proper means to create men wise, and a possible to make
them honest, because it forces circumspectness on those abroad, who at home are
nursed in security; and persuades good behavior and temperance to such, who
(far from friends and means) are willing to have little to do with the Lawyer
or Physician. Men coming into other Countries, as if born into a strange world,
with some discretion above them, which teaches both to distrust others, and
keep themselves sober; and to s^ift off those homely fashions which Nature and
Custom in their years of simplicity had put on them. But these effects are not
general, many receiving more good in their Bodies by the tossing of the Ship,
whilst they are at Sea, then benefit in their Minds by breathing in a foreign
Air, when they come to Land. Yet they are as desirous men should observe they
have traveled, as careful in their travels to observe nothing; and therefore
if they be not able to make it known by their relation and discourse, it shall
appear by their clothes and gesture: Some attain to greater perfection, being
able to show at what charge they have seen other places, by their excellency in
some other rare vices, or irregularity in strange opinions. As the times are,
he is commended that makes a saving Voyage, and least discredits his Travels,
who returns the same man he went.

Somewhat of the Gentleman gives a tincture to a Scholar, too much stains him.
HE who advised the Philosopher (altogether devoted to the Muses) sometimes to
offer Sacrifice at the Altars of the Graces, thought Knowledge to be imperfect
without Behavior, which experience confirms, able to show, that the want
thereof breeds as much disrespect to many Scholars with the Observers of
Ceremonies, as improper affectation moves distaste in some substantial
judgments. Indeed slovenliness is the worst sign of a hard Student, and
civility the best exercise of the remiss: yet not to be exact in the phrase of
Complement, or gestures of Courtesy, the indifferent do pardon to those who
have been otherwise busied; and rather deride, then applaud such, who think it
perfection enough to have a good outside, and happiness to be seen amongst
those who have better; pleasing themselves more in opinion of some proficiency,
in terms of hunting or horsemanship, which few that are studious understand,
then they blush to be known ignorant in that which every man ought to know: To
which vanity I have known none more inclined, then those whose birth did
neither require, nor fortunes encourage them to such costly idleness; who at
length made sensible by necessity, happily have the grace to repent, but seldom
times the gift to recover.

Books and Friends are better received by weight then number.
THe necessities of Life do warrant multitude of employments, and the variety
of Nature's excuse the diversity of delights: but to my discretion that course
seems most desirable, whose business occasions no further trouble, nor leisure
requires other Recreations then may indifferently be entertained with Books and
Friends. They are indeed happy who meet with such whom they may trust in both
kinds; and undoubtedly wise, that can well apply them: the imperfect
apprehension and misuse never producing any good effect: For so we see
capacious understandings (by continual inquiry and perusal of all sorts of
Authors) thrive no better in their knowledge then some men of good disposition
(addicted generally to acquaintance) are gainers by the reckoning, when they
cast up their expense of time; the hunger of the one breeds a Consumption,
and the others thirst not determining but by some humorous Disease: nay, they
who seem to respect choice, sometimes err perniciously: Which the French man
observed, who maintained his Country was much the worse by old men's studying
the venom of Policy, and young men's reading the dregs of Fancy. And it is
manifest that in our little Commonwealth of Learning, much disparagement is
occasioned, when able Spirits (attracted by familiarity) are inflamed with
Faction, and good Natures (carried away with the stream of more pleasant
company) are drowned in good Fellowship.

Love that observes Formality is seated rather in the brain, then in the heart.
BY formality, I mean something more then ceremony and Complement (which are
the gesture and phrase of dissemblers,) even a solemn reservedness, which may
well consist with honesty: not but that I admire a constant gravity, which upon
no assurance will bewray the least imperfection to any: but confess, I am far
from suspecting simplicity, which (careful to observe more real duties toward
all) is bold to trespass in points of Decorum amongst some, which without
blushing could not be confessed to others. A sign, from whence the greatest
Reasoner draws an Argument of good affection, which (as divine Charity covers
many offenses) in the experience of common humanity is content to dispense
with. And although Policy shows it to be the safest course to give advantage to
none, yet an ingenuous nature thinks that he is scarce able to distinguish
betwixt an enemy and a friend, that stands wholly upon his own guard.

An enemy is better recovered by great kindness, then a friend assured.
THere are some relics of goodness found even in the worst natures, and out of
question seeds of evil in those who are esteemed best; whence it may appear
less strange, that hearts possessed with rancour and malice, are overcome with
beneficence, and minds otherwise well qualified, prove sometimes ungrateful;
the one fore't to confess satisfaction received far more then was due; the
other to acknowledge a debt of greater value then they are able to pay;
howsoever, smaller courtesies seem not visible, great ones inducing an
obligation upon Public Record.

The sincerest Liberality consists in refusing, and the most innocent Thrift in
saving.
THe bestowing of gifts is more glorious then the refusing of bribes; because
gifts are commonly delivered in public, whereas men use not to confess what
they owe, or offer what they ought not, before witnesses. Bu^ in true
estimation, it is as honorable a virtue not to receive, as to disperse
benefits; it being of greater merit wholly to abstain from things desirable,
then after fruiti^ to be content to leave them; as they who magnify single
life, prefer Virginity much before Widowhood. Yet some (in whom this kind of
bounty is little observed) are unworthily censured for keeping their own, whom
tenderness how to get honestly teaches to spend discreetly; where^ such need
no great thriftiness in preserving their own, w^ assume more liberty in
exacting from others.

Commendations proceeding from Subtilty, captive the Object; from Simplicity,
the Author.
THere is a skill to purchase, and pay debts only with fair words, drawing on
good offices, and requiti^ them with Commendations; the felicity whereof has
made Flattery the most familiar Rhetoric, a leaving the old method of
Persuasion, by insinuating the worth of him who desires to receive; and with
more ease raising a self conceit in the man who is apt to swallow such light
Bribery, and not often indisposed to digest unthankefulness so curiously
seasoned. But it is no great inconvenience that kindness should be bestowed
gratis, or upon cheap conditions; the loss is, when men of plain meaning
adventure on the exchange and use of this coin, who, forward to profess their
belief, engage the credit of their wisdom on the behavior of such, whose
actions are not within their power, and become bound in Suretiship, without the
help of a Scrivener: which inconsiderate affection makes many earnest Speakers
in defense of injuries done to others, and silent Patients of wrongs
unexpectedly befalling themselves; desire to make good their error, pressing
their tongues to so unjust service; or care to dissemble it, debarring them
from the general liberty of poor complaint.

Expectation prepares applause with the weak, and prejudice with the stronger
Judgments.
THe fashion of commending our friends abilities before they come to trial,
sometimes takes good effect with ^he common sort, who, building their belief on
Authority, ^rive to follow the conceit of their betters; but usually amongst
men of independent judgments, this bespeaking of ^pinion, breeds a purpose of
stricter examination; and if ^he report be answered, procures only a bare
acknowledge^ent; whereas if nothing be proclaimed or promised, they ^re perhaps
content to signify their own skill in testifying ^others desert: otherwise
great wits, jealous of their ^redit, are ready to suppress worth in others, to
the ad^ancing of their own, and (if more ingenuous) no far^er just, then to
forbear detraction; at the best rather ^sposed to give praise upon their own
accord, then to make ^ayment upon demand or challenge.

The testimony of sufficiency is better entertained then the report of
Excellency.
THe nature of some places necessarily requires (...) competently endowed, but
where there is choice none think the appointment to be a duty of Justice bound
respect the best desert: nay, the best conceive it a work free bounty, which
men of mean qualities are likely to ^knowledge, and the worldly make it a
business of pro^ unto which the most deserving are least apt to subscrib^. But
besides these unlucky influences from above, this (...) success may be
occasioned either by the too great confide^ of those who hope to rise, or the
jealous distrust of s^ are already raised, whilst they too much presuming
(...) their own desert, neglect all auxiliary strength, these s^pecting some
diminution to their own, stop the passage another worth; that being most
certain, Alterius vi^tuti invidet, qui diffidit suae.

He that appears often in the same place, gets li^ ground in the way to credit.
FAmiliar and frequent use, which makes things (first ungrateful) by
continuance pleasing or tole^ble, takes away the luster from more excellent
obje^ and reduces them from the height of admiration, u^ low degrees of
neglect, dislike, and contempt; (...) were not strange, if it wrought only
among the Vul^ whose opin on (like their stomachs) is overcome wit^ ^tiety, or
men of something a higher stage, the edge (...) whose sight is abated and
dulled by long gazing; but (...) same entertainment is given by the Judicious
and Learn^ either because they observe some defects, which at (...) sight are
less visible; or the Actors in this kind betray weakness in their latter
attempts, usually straining so high at first, that they are not able to reach
again in the rest; or by this often obtrusion not required, discover a good
conceit of their own Graces; and men so well affected to themselves are
generally so happy, as to have little cause to complain of Corrivals.

The Active man rises not so well by his strength, as the expert by his
stirrup.
THey that climb toward preferment or greatness by their own virtue, get up
with much ado and very slowly; whereas such as are raised by other means,
usually ascend lightly and appear more happy in their sudden advancements,
sometimes by the only strength of those who stand above, exercising their power
in their dependants commonly by subordinate helps and assistance, which young
men happily obtain from the commendations of friends, old men often compass by
the credit of their wealth, who have a great advantage in that they are best
able to purchase, and likely soonest to leave the room.

Few men thrive by one only Art, fewer by many.
AMongst Tradesmen of meaner sort, they are not poorest, whose Shop windows
open over a red Lettice; and the wealthiest Merchants employ Scriveners for
security at home, as much as Factors for their advantage abroad, both finding
not more warrantable gains by negotiating with the industrious, then profitable
returns by dealing with unthrifts. The disposition of the time, has taught
this wisdom to more ingenuous professions, which are best entertained when
they come accompanied with some other respects, whence preciseness is become a
good habit to plead in, and Papistry a privy commendation to the practice of
Physic, contentious Zeal making most Clyents, and sensual Superstition
yielding the best Patients. They who are intent by diverse means to make
progress in their estate, cannot succeed well, as he that would run upon his
hands and feet makes less speed then one who goes as nature taught him; the
untoward moving of some unskilful parts, hindering the going forward of those
which are better disposed.

It is good to profess betimes, and practice at leisure.
THere is a saying, That the best choice is of an old Physician and a young
Lawyer: The reason supposed, because where errors are fatal, ability of
judgment and moderation are required; but where advantages may be wrought
upon, diligence and quickness of wit are of more special use. But if it be
considered who are generally most esteemed, it will appear, that opinion of the
multitude sets up the one, and the favor of Authority upholds the other; yet
in truth, a man's age and time are of necessary regard, such of themselves
succeeding best, who in these or any other professions, neither defer their
resolution too long, nor begin their practice too soon; whereas ordinarily,
they who are immaturely adventurous, by their iusufficiency hurt others; they
who are tedious in deliberation, by some improvidence hinder themselves.

Felicity shows the ground where Industry builds a Fortune.
ARchimedes the great Engineer (who in defending Syracusa against Marcellus,
showed wonderful Experiments of his extraordinary skill,) was bold to say, That
he would remove the world out of his place, if he had elsewhere to set his
foot. And truly I believe so far, that otherwise he could not do it: I am sure,
so much is evident in the Architecture of Fortunes; in the raising of which the
best Art or endeavor is able to do nothing, if it have not where to lay the
first stone; for it is possible with the like Skill to raise a frame when we
have matter; but not to create something out of nothing: the first being the
ordinary effect of industry, this only of Divine Power. Indeed, many from very
mean beginnings have aspired to very eminent place, and we usually ascribe it
to their own worth, which no doubt in some is great; yet as in Religion we are
bound to believe, so in truth the best of them will confess, that the first
advantage was reached out merely by a Divine hand, which also no doubt, did
always assist their after endeavors. Some have the felicity to be born heirs
to good Estates, others to be made so beyond their hopes. Marriage (besides the
good which oftentimes it confers directly) collaterally sometimes helps to
Offices, sometimes to Benefices, sometimes to Dignities. Many rise by relation
and dependence, it being a happy step to some, to have fallen on a fortunate
Master, to some on a foolish, to some (few) on a good. There are diverse other
means, of which, as of these, I am not so fit to speak, but truly considered,
they are all out of our own power, which he that presumes most, cannot promise
himself; and he that expects least, sometimes attains.

A CONCEIT Of some OBSERVATIONS INTENDED Upon Things most Remarkable in the
Civil History of this Kingdom; and likewise in the State of the Church.
From the NORMAN Invasion, till the Twelfth Year of our virtuous SOVEREIGN,
CHARLES The FIRST, Whom God have in his precious Custody.
Of WILLIAM the First.
WILLIAM the First was a Child of Fortune from his Cradle. We do commonly and
justly style Him, The Conqueror: For he made a general Conquest of the whole
Kingdom and People either by Composition or Arms. And he suppressed in great
part the former Customs and Laws, and introduced new Behaviors and Habits;
which under show of Civility, were in effect but Rudiments of Subjection.
Lastly, he was near the Imposing, and (as I may term it) the Naturallizing here
of his own Language: At least, he both made it and left it Current in all
Courts of Plea; whereof is yet remaining no small Impression.

Besides his Achievements by Force, I note a great Secret of State silently
wrapped in his high Tenures of Knight Service. For, those drawing as well
Marriage as Wardship, gave him both power and occasion to Conjugate at pleasure
the Norman and the Saxon Houses, which by degrees might prove a second Conquest
of Affections, harder then the first.

Rarely had been seen for such a Prize, an evener Trial by Battle then that at
Hastings: Both Commanders well acquainted before with Adventures and Peril:
Both animated and edged with Victories. In their Numbers (through confused
Report) I can collect no enormous disparity. In their Persons equally valiant.
And for any Right or merit in the Cause, no difference but this: That either
the One must keep a Kingdom ill gotten, or the Other get it as ill.

What were the main Errors, and what principally gave the Day, so long after,
is hard to affirm. Well we may conclude, that on either side the Fight was
constant and fierce: and surely undeterminable without the death, at least, of
one of the Chiefs. For the English would not run away, and the Normans could
not.

After this Success, His not Marching immediately to the Head-City; when Terror
would have swept the ground before him: but Casting about (for so the most have
delivered) more like a Progress then a pursuit, as if one single Battle had
given him leave to play with his Fortune, may seem strange, according to the
Maxims of War at this Day: But, let all Discourse cease. States have their
Conversions and Periods as well as Natural Bodies, and we were come to our
Tropique.

In his farther Proceedings I note him sometimes most helped, and another while
most hindered by the Clergy, then of mighty persuasion with the Temporal Lords
and People: which taught him afterward a Lesson when he was fast in the
Throne, how to Rivet his own Greatness, by Changing the Natives into Normans,
or other Aliens of his proper choice, in the Highest Ecclesiastical Dignities.

Then was Stigand the Metropolitan, in a Synod formally and fairly Deposed,
being too stiff for the times: Which was indeed the wringing Point, though
other Objections made more noise.

He was Crowned on Christmas Day, in the year of our Savior 1066. At which
Time he would fain have Compounded a Civil Title of, I know not what, Alliance
or Adoption, or rather Donation from Edward the Confessor: As if Hereditary
Kingdoms did pass like New Years gifts: The truth is, He was the Heir of his
Sword. Yet from those Pretenses howsoever, there sprang this good, That he was
thereby in a sort engaged to cast his Government into a middle or mixed nature,
as it were between a lawful Successor, and an invader; though generally, (as
all new Empires do savor much of their beginnings) it had more of the Violent
then of the Legal.

One of the first Things in his Intent, but in effect one of the last, was the
perfecting of that which we call the Winchester Book: being a more particular
inquisition then had been before, of every Hide of Land within the precincts of
his Conquest, and how they were holden: whenceforth we may account a full
Re-settlement of Lordship and propriety through the Realm. Quere (for I find it
obscure) whether Possessions for the most part, had not remained all the while
before, in a kind of Martial Disposure, or perchance little better.

We have at this day more knowledge of whom he doubted, then of whom he
trusted, (which I believe were very few) Certainly, his Reign must needs be
full of strong apprehensions, and his nature was prone enough to entertain
them, as may well appear by the event, in two Personages of all other the
likeliest to sit fast about him; namely, Fitz Aubert, alias Fitz Osbern, (for
he is diversely termed) and Odo, one of his own brothers by the same womb. These
two had each of them contributed toward his Enterprise about forty ships a
piece, and were the first foundation of his Fortunes, both in Strength, and in
Example. But what became of them? Marry, after they had been dignified here
with Earldomes, the one of Hereford, the other of Kent; Fitz Osbern (as some
report) was executed under him: Or (as the most) was discarded into a Foreign
Service, for a pretty shadow of Exilement. And Odo his Brother was a Prisoner
even at the time of his own death: So heavy with some high minds is an
overweight of Obligation: Or otherwise, great Deservers do perchance grow
intolerable Presumers Or lastly, Those that help to Raise, stand ever in some
hazard to be thought likewise the fittest to Depress. I have been sometimes
tempted to wonder, how among these Jealousies of State and Court, Edgar
Atheling could subsist, being then the Apparent and Indubitate Heir of the
Saxon Line. But he had tried and found him a Prince of limber virtues: So as
though he might per adventure have some Place in his Caution, yet he reckoned
Him beneath his Fear.

He was contemporal with three Popes, Victor, and Alexander the second of that
Name, and Hildebrand, alias, Gregory the Seventh. Victor took the first hold of
him, by Ratifying his Nuptial Contract within the Degrees forbidden (which is
none of the least Arts in the Roman Hierarchy, for the Chaining of Princes and
their Issue to a perpetual Dependence.) Alexander drove it somewhat further, by
lending his Banner to this Invasion: As they have been always frank of their
Blessings to Countenance any Great action: and then (according as it should
prosper) to Tissue upon it some Pretense or other. As, here first of all came
in a Challenge of Homage, forsooth, by Promise: which though the Conqueror ever
eagerly disavowed; Yet, I know not how, by the cunning Encroachments of
Hildebrand (that famous Intruder) who succeeded, He did abase and avale the
Sovereignty into more Servitude toward that See, (as our Authors charge his
Time) then had been since the name of a State or a Church among us.

Now for the Constitution and Character of his Person and Mind: He was not of
any delicate Contexture: His Limbs rather sturdy then dainty: Sublime and
almost Tumorous in His Looks and Gestures: yea, even in His Oaths; for they
say, He used to swear By the Resurrection of the Son of God. By nature far from
Profusion, and yet a greater Sparer then a Saver; For though he had such means
to accumulate, yet His Forts, Castles, and Towers which he built, and his
Garrisons which he maintained, and his Feastings (wherein he was only
Sumptuous) could not but soak His Exchequer. Besides, the multiplicity of
Rewards which hang upon such Acquests; And likewise certain secret waste Pipes
of Espials through the Realm, no less chargeable, then Necessary for new
Beginners. But above all, I must note the Popes Legates and Dreyners, which
began here to be frequent in His Time; and are no where cheap.

One strange and excellent Fame does follow Him: That the Land had never been
before so free from Robberies and Depredations, as through His Reign; scarce
Credible in such a Broken and Ruffling Time, if it were not so constanly
delivered. But, it should seem, That to ingratiate himself with the vulgar
(with whom there is nothing more popular then Security) He made it a
Masterpiece of his Regiment. And perchance Action had pretty well evacuated
the idle people; which are the stock of Rapine.

His Wife, the Lady Magdalena, brought him four Sons, and six Daughters; And
(besides her natural Fertility) we may almost account her pregnant of a
Conquest: For, her Father Earl Baldwin of Flanders had then the French King in
Tutelage: So as (no doubt) by her Mediation he drew a great Concurrence from
that Kingdom, and the adjacent Provinces. For these Reasons He loved Her well:
And I find his life little tainted with extravagant Lust; for, his pleasures
were more of the Field, then of the Chamber. Yet, he had one Illegitimate Child
(to keep it in fashion) namely, Pruerel, Lord of Nottingham and Derby.

He left the Succession to his second Son, not because he bare his Name (though
that perhaps might have been some Motive:) nor because he thought him the best
timbred to support it: But Robert his eldest, having openly Rebelled against
him; and having (as they write) at a casual Encounter given him his Life (which
was too great a Gift to be either forgotten or acknowledged) he had reason to
prefer the more obsequious Child. And I think, we shall need to seek no further.

As for Henry his third Son, albeit he was born after his Father was a King;
and the two former were but the Issue of a Duke of Normandy; so as by some
ancient Examples (if Examples could carry Diadems) he might, and perchance did
expect the Crown; yet, He left Him (by our best Relations) but a bare Legacy of
five thousand pounds. Note the sober measure of that Age, when it was a Kings
younger Sons Portion, which is now scant an Aldermans: So much is either Wealth
increased, or Moderation decayed.

But let me Conclude my Notes upon the Heroical Champion. He died not in his
Acquisitive, but in his Native Soil: Nature her self as it were claiming a
final Interest in his body, when Fortune had done with Him. But one thing
fell out to disquiet his Obsequies, That the Place where he should be laid,
was put in Suit, as having formerly in the Time of his Power been wrested
from the true Owner; which a while suspended his Interment, and became a
Declamatory Theme among the Religious Men of that Age; That so Great A
Conqueror of Foreign Lands should at length want Earth at Home to cover Him.

But it was the last of his vvorldly Felicities, that for the better
Establishment of His Heir, he survived his own Victory twenty Years, eight
Months, and sixteen days. For, Tempus concoquit omnia.

HENRICI VI^ Angliae and Galliarum Regis, Hiberniae Domini, Etonensis ad
Tamesin Collegii Conditoris, Vita and Excessus.
Scriptore HENRICO WOTTONIO Anglo-Cantiano Ejusdem Collegii Praefecto.
INter honestam requiem quam Etonense Collegium Vergentibus jam Annis nostris
indulget, Subinde me invafit haec Cogitatio: Hand multum distare silentes a
Defunctis. Quippe, quid interest nos terminet fatalis Dies, an praestinguat
Inertia? Unde reputanti mecum quid aggrederer, non ingratum omnino videbatur
praesentis otii praetium fore, si Regis HENCICI VI. Vitam (cujus benifica
Pietate fovemur) e sanctioribus memoriis expromerem a primo fere vagitu ad
extremum usque Diem; quo innocentius quidem quam felicius, Imperium clausit.
Quod si obscuriora jampridem amplexus Studia Magnorum Nominum Gloriae quae sub
Calamum cadent minus satisfecerim. At interea quodcunque futurum sit, pro
diverticulo saltem valeat ad fallendam Canitiem quae indies obrepit.

Age ergo, revolvamus varios humanorum Casuum Fluctus and Procellas. En mirum
sub Rege maxim omnium quiet is avido, turbulentissime Scenae Spectaculum:
Eoque tristiori exitu, quo blandioribus i^itiis, ut nulla Optimo Principi
defuisse videatur, aut ludent is Fortunae ^ut saevientis, Calamitas. Sed in
ipso limine parcendum publico Moerori. Paulisper indefleti jaceant tot fortium
virorum, tot illustrium Familiarum Cineres. Ne, ut ^lerique Scribentium,
pomposo nimis genitu, conceptum opus praegravarem. Teq^e potius (Serenissime
CAROLE Rex and Domine) Iusti tenax, verique patiens, and cujus mores non minus
quam leges cuncta temperant: Te; inquam, veterum ritu ante Exorsum compellare
liceat, ut his conatibus benigna front adesse velis, Dum priorum jam long
temporum Aerumnas (quas divinum Numen sopivit) liberius quam facunde peragam.

Lancastrii Stemmatis MAJESTAS (quoquo modo parta) per duorum Dominantium
virtutes pariter and successus occoeper at paulatim valescere. De Henrici
Quarti primordiis jam circumquaque Silentium: Aut obtecta murmura comprimente
(ut solet) Vulgi voces laeto hactenus domi forisque Fortunae afflatu. At neque
Nobilium videbantur inquieta Consilia, quorum ferocior Pars aperto Mart aut
conjurationibus exhausti, Molliores Tempori serviebant. Quin and quaedam
subfulsit futura securitatis Fiducia. Quippe viginti jam trium Annorum dilapsu
(tot enim a primi Lancastrii Imperio ad insequentis Obitum interfluxerant)
Wallia post Oweni Glendori mis^rrimos Impetus, sub Henrico Quarto composita,
Scotiaeque Confinio per Henrici Quinti Solertiam contra subitos incursus satis
provide munito; Si quid hic forsan adhuc Turbidi, si quid Infidi detegeretur,
promptum erat aliorsum transfundere, and interna Suspicionum in Galliam velut
exantlare, Quo tum Tempestas incubuit.

In hoc statu Rerum Henricus Quintus post Victoriam in Gallos ad Age^riam
(omnis Aevi Memoria illustrem) ingravescente Morbo, quem forte inter bellandi
Sudores contraxerat, sit Saeculi Fulmen, and bre^ (prob nimium!) Aetate,
Gloriae Satur, concessit Fatis, relicto vix quadrimestri Filiolo.

Hic est ille HENRICUS Sextus, cujus Tempora in praesens meditamur, tot sortis
Humanae Documentis inclyta, quot ulla usquam Aetas in unum congessit.

Sed antequam ulterius processerim, non incongru^ reor paucis aperire, Qualis
tum esset Christiani Orbis Facies, Quaenam apud nos Externorum Motuum, Qua
Civilium Origo, Quantum Anglorum Arma tum for (...) obtinuerint, Quid intro
sperandum, Quidve timendu^ fuerit.

Desunt caetera.

King Charles the: I


AD REGEM E SCOTIA REDUCEM HENRICI WOTTONII PLAUSUS ET VOTA.

M. DC. XXXIII.

CAROLINO CORNUBIAE DUCI, CESTRIAE COMITI, etc.
HENRICUS WOTTONIUS Seros Dies.
CELSITUDINI Tuae, tenellae adhuc Aetatis, insequentes PLAUSUS ET VOTA, Quae
PARENTEM Tuum, Optimum Regum e SCOTIA Reducem exceperunt, non inconsulte
Dedico. Ut postquam Literis (Avito jam Decore) imbutus fueris, ex hac
quantulacunque Commentatiuncula Gazam haurias, Triplici DIADEMATE
Splendidiorem: Nempo HEREDITARIAM VIRTUTIS IMAGINEM.

AD REGEM E SCOTIA REDUCEM Henrici Wottonii PLAUSUS ET VOTA.
Augustissime CAROLE REX ET DOMINE.
ANtiquitus mos erat apud humaniores Gentium, quoties Justo Bonoque Principe
fruebantur, Ne muta faelicitas in pectoribus torperet, affectus and gaudia
Praeconiis, Votis, Plausibus effundere; Praesertim si quae Nobilior occasio
acclamantium Voces eliceret. Cujus Ego tam sancti moris aemulatione quadam
raptus, discusso circa praecordia frigore quod gravior jam aetas invexerat, ad
celebrandum hanc Diem qua Te nobis, Nosqque nobismetipsis restituis, flagranti
fiducia accedo. Adeo enim propria dicendi Imbecillitate non deterreor, ut parum
absit quin eo me magis idoneum aestimem: Quippe, quid opus est Rhetorico
apparatu? Cur anxie nimis Verborum pondera expenderem? Sufficient hodie
simpliciter gaudere. Sinceritas rudis ac impolita res est, quo incomptior eo
alacrior: Et Faundia dum ornat, corrumpit laetitiam. At neque id metuo, ne hoc
officium blandientis videatur, and quasi ad Fortunae Genua ambitiosae projecti;
quod sane indignum foret ingenuo pudore quem a Parentibus, Indignum beata
Mentis requie quam ex honestis studiis hausi. Unica tamen, fateor, in ipso
limine Me circumcingit sollicitudo: Nimirum, ne Verecundiam illam qua Majestas
Tua caeteras Virtutes suavissime condire solet etiam veris laudibus offendam.
Nam cum ad alia omnia Fortissimus sis quae aut Corporis Robur, aut Constantiam
Animi postulent; solum vereor, ne hodiernos applausus and Elogia, quo justius
debentur, eo mollius feras.

Legimus Germanicum (At quantum Virum!) paulo ante Praelium in Chattos, ferina
opertum pelle ne nosceretur, appropinquasse noctu militum Tabernaculis, ut
conceptam de se Opinionem in tenebris subriperet: Adco proprias plerumque
Lauds tenerrime excipiunt qui maxim merentur. Unde satis praevideo quam
necessarium sit, ut ad sacras tuas Aures Argumentis non ex levi Oratorum
officina, s^d paulo severioribus, aditum praemuniam. Dico igitur aequissimum
esse ut neque pulchrae Principum, nec deformes Vitae, ignobili silentio
premantur: Sed Boni Pravique eadem scribendi qua vivendi Liberate, Nec minore
Veritatis quam Majestatis Reverentia, ad posterorum notitiam juxta transeant:
Illi quidem, Ne subductis Virtutum Exemplis, Virtutes ipsae paulatim
deficerent: Hi vero, ut soluti Legum vinculis, aliquo saltem Annalium metu
temperentur. Hoc ausim Tibi dicere, Praestantissime Domine, Et hoc ipsum quod
ausim Tibimet-ipsi debeo; Qui Triginta-tres jam Annos Ita vixisti, Ita novem
fere regnasti, ut Verum non timeas. Clarissima erat olim, and aeternum Vivet
Virginii Rufi ad Cluvium responsio; Scis, (inquit) Virgini, Quae Historiae
Fides debeatur: Proinde, si quid in Historiis meis legis aliter ac velles,
Ignoscas rogo. Cui Virginius. Cluvi, ne tu ignoras ideo me fecisse Quod feci,
ut esset vobis liberum Scribere quae libuisset. At haec suit Inclyti quidem sed
privati Hominis securitas. Quanto magis exultet haec dies ob receptum Regem, de
cujus Vita Moribusque apertissime simul ac tutissime loquamur. Quin and
confidenter hoc adjiciam; Si prima Architectrix NATURA ipsa Pectus Tuum (ut
Verbo Vitruviano utar) fenestrasset; Si omnium oculos non solum intra
Secretiores Cubiculi parietes, sed ad intimos Cordis recessus admitteres, Nihil
omnino aliud appareret quam Splendour Boni, and Imperturbata Virtutum Serenitas.
Quid dixi? Si admitteres? Ac si possent, Quos hic Supremum NUMEN in Sublimi and
Lucido posuit, ex Oculis eripi, Et Vitae vel Imperii rationem quasi praetensis
Nubibus occulere. In hoc quidem Obscuritas and Ipsa solitudo est Majestate
tectior. Putatne ille Abissinorum Imperator, quem ferunt quotannis semel palam
conspici, eo minus notescere quid clanculum fiat? Annon etiam hodie scimus
Domitianum olim in secreto Horario, quo se indies seclusit, nihil aliud quam
praeacuto stilo Muscas confixisse? Number Tiberius in Capreensi secessu delituit?
Cum inter tot Vulnera and Laniatus Conscientiae (queis tanquam Furiis
agitabatur) multa quotidie divulsae Mentis Indicia erumperent? Non certe.
Majestas Tua and sui Temporis, and venturi Principes unicam solum and
saluberrimam se celandi Artem docuit, quod nihil celandum moliris. Sunt quaedam
Animalcula ingrato aspectu velut Noctuae ac Vespertiliones quae Natura ad Lucis
Odium damnavit: Nonnullos etiam Potentium fuisse scio, Qui inter Imperii Arcana
and pro magno Versutiae Mysterio habuere, e longinquo coli; Ac si Reverentia in
Speluncis tantum and Crypteriis, non in aprico habitaret. Unde haec Regendi
Sophismata? Paucis dicam ac libere. Per obliquos tramites incedebant quia
nesciverunt (brevissimam Viam) esse Bonos. Tu autem non Subditorum lumina and
accessus fugis: Non abdito gaudes: Non Te tuis subtrahis: Non rigido and
obducto Vultu falsam Venerationem captas. Immo interdum etiam ad Comitatem
quandam descendere non gravaris dignitate illaesa. Sic enim in limpidissimo
sinu tecum reputas, Si non esset supra potestatem Nostram latere posse, At
esset infra Bonitatem latere velle. Qua certe nihil demum est popularius:
Quippe Bonos Reges Boni omnes aperte, sed and improbissimi tacit venerantur,
Dum Virtutis pulchritudo non secus ac insolitum aliquod Jubar vel nolentium
oculos perstringit. Quare cum nuper in manus TRANQUILLUM SUETONIUM sumpsissem
(qui ipsa Caesarum Viscera denudavit) ad fallendam dum aberas, litterato aliquo
diverticulo, ingratam dierum longitudinem: and in illum forte locum incidissem,
quo tam graphice describitur Augusti ejulatus, in Variana Clade crebro
vociferantis, READ MIHI, QUINTILI VARE, LEGIONES MEAS; Illico exardebat Tui
Desiderium, and vota pro reditu incaluere. Multo enim tum justius visum est,
Angliam debuisse SOROREM suam anhelantibus suspiriis lacessere, quam Augustum
QUINTILII Manes: Read mihi, Scotia Soror, Regem nostrum: Read Optimum
Virorum: Quem nemo nisi malus non amat, nemo nisi ignarus non laudat. Read
Morum Rectorem, simul and Normam: Quo non solum laetiorcs, sed and Meliores
simus, dum propius contemplabimur (quod rarissimum est) in summo Fastigio
minimae Licentiae Exemplar. Cum itaque Talis sis, (optime REX) supplex,
permittas, rogo, si precibus quam Argumentis flecti malis, ut novem (Tot enim
computo) discreti Sermonis Populi, quorum habenas moderaris, TE Talem esse
glorientur. Idque praedicent non vernaculo solum cujusque Idiomate (quod
gaudiis quidem nostris angustius foret) sed communiori hac qualitercunque
Lingua, ut and Exteri sciant, BRITANNIAM Tuam, quae olim primum Orbi Christiano
and maximi nominis Imperatorem dedit, non adeo exaruisse quin and hodie etiam
laudatissimi REGISTYPUM exhibeat.

Jam aliquantulum praemollita, uti spero, ad audiendi patientiam via, dehinc
juvabit quaedam ex toto hactenus Vitae tuae Morumque habitu quasi carptim
delibare, eorum more qui Flores legunt. Etenim delectu magis rerum quam
ubertate gestio: quanquam non ignarus, adeo profusam fuisse Veterum in hoc
Dicendi Genere aut Diligentiam aut Ambitionem, ut non inscite forsan TIMAEUS
dixerit, ALEXANDRUM Macedonem citius omnem ASIAM subegisse, quam ISOCRATES
Panegyricum scripsisset, Enimvero, Arti tunc nimis indultum videtur, dum in
seraci Eloquentiae saeculo lasciviebant Rhetorum Ingenia. At Me decet,
Simplicitatis simul nostrae ac Senectutis memorem, Summa potius ex Encomiis
Tuis attingere, quam singula persequi; ut ipsa Orationis Brevitas velut
elabentium Annorum fugam imitetur. Caeterum Ante alia sese offert Eximia Ortus
Tui Nobilitas: Qua in longa Antecedentium REGUM serie cunctis, ne ipso quidem
PARENTE excepto, praeluces. Id paucis clarius deducam. Atavus Tuus HENRICUS
Septimus (Faelicior an Fortior nescio) Rubellam Albamque ROSAS, duarum
praepotentium Familiarum Insignia, per ELIZABETHAE EBORACENSIS Connnbium, Exul
fere simul and Victor univit: quae divulsae Patriam tot annos infestis Odiis
and Cruore polluerant.

Beatius Regnorum quam Rosarum vinculum Parentis Tui Auspiciis debemus, vel ob
id solum non sine summa Veneratione memorandi. At in Te unico (Augustissime
CAROLE) omnium post Romanos, omnis Aevi Nationum, quae Britanniam per Jus aut
Arma possederunt, confluxit gloria. In Te, inquam, Unico; quem primum CAMBRICI,
ANGLO-SAXONICI, SCOTICI, NORMANNICI, ac DANICI demum, Germinis SURCULUM ex
hactenus Coronatis agnos^imus. In hoc fortasse, (si Comparationis Vilitas non
spernatur) Celeberrimo Europae ^STRO non absimilem, quem per immenssa spatia
devolutum tot illustrium Alveorum Undae nobilitant.

Scripsit inter nostrates haud obscurus Author, non prius Majores nostros
legitimum in Angli^ Normannorum Imperium agnovisse, (quod tam aegro initio
laboraverat) Quam MATTHILDIS HENRICO Primo enupta, Sobolem ex Antiquo
Saxonicorum Regum Sanguine, in hanc lucem protulisset. Erat autem illa DAVIDIS,
ETHELREDI Regis Abnepotis, ex progenitoribus Tuis, SOROR. Quanto nunc
splendidior Causa Majestatem Tuam omnibus Ulnis ambiendi, qui ex tam multiplici
Imperantium prosapia, ad Nos defluxisti? Postquam and Cimbrici Sanguinis
Vetustissimi, Additamentum caeteris Decoribus accessit, ex ANNA Matre Virilis
Animi HEROINA. Et quanto nunc verius repetamus, quod superiori Aevo Buchananus
faelicissimi post Antiquos Ingenii Vates, Aviae Tuae (utinam feliciore Fato!)
cecinit Misssa per innumeros Sceptra tueris Avos.

Sed haec quidem hactenus vix Tua reputas: Ad propria transeo, quae non minus
illustrant quam illustrantur.

Tria animadvertimus, Optime REX (qua appellatione iterum libenter and saepius
utar) in Primordiis Tuis ad insequentes progressus haud levis momenti, ut fere
semper incrementis inhaeret Principiorum sapor.

Primum, Quod non in supremam Imperii Spem natus es. Unde Adulatio (quanquam
velox and Vigil Malum) quae ipsa Summorum Haeredum Incunabula circumstat,
mollioribus Annis Tuis segnius incubuit: Et propria interim Indoles,
simpliciore haustu, generosum Honesti Succum imbibebat. Nam certe in formandis
and quasi (ut sic dicam) instillandis privati cujusque, nedum Principum, primae
vis propensionibus, Reipublicae multum interest: Cujus non solum Fulcimina, sed
and simulachra sunt futuri.

Alterum, quod Fratri successisti non modicis quidem Naturae Dotibus. Unde
Parentum exhinc solertior and contractior Sedulitas (curam enim excedebat)
circa Unici Filii Ornatum. Quin and Tui ipsius erectiores indies Spiritus, Cum
Tantae jam Expectationis Onus in Te solum recidisset. Tum admoti qui Aetatem
illam nondum Negotiis aptam, Litteris fideliter imbuerent: Tum acciti qui Te,
paulatim crescente robore, Equestribus Exercitiis polirent. Quae Memini quam
decora dexteritate in primo Juventae agitabas: Donec postea in frequenti
Hastarum decursione, nescio plus spectantibus Gaudii, an Pavoris injiceres.

Tertio in Mentem venit quod aliquandiu, quasi luctante Natura, Corporis
Artubus paulo invalidior eras, and Vigori long Impar quem nunc laetantes
stupemus. Quod equidem secretioris Providentiae Consilio contigisse autumem,
quo intentior tum esset Ingenii excolendi Cura; ut Haeredem Regis clam futurum
decuit; Quem omnium post multa Saecula, Principum Sapientissimum, ne Maligni
quidem negant.

A primitiis Tuis ad robustiora propero, promissae Brevitatis non oblitus.

Post Peregrinationem, variis Casibus obnoxiam, ad Coronam pervenisti: Unde
constat quantum ipsemet tum auderes, cum Omnes Interim Domi, Tui causa
trepidarent. Sed Coelestis Favor Te nobis Incolumem reduxit, and ne tinctum
quidem Exoticis Coloribus: velut alterum ULYSSEM, cui satis erat (vel HOMERO
Test) cognovisse Mores Hominum and Urbes.

Adsumpto Diademate, emicuit ante alia Religiosus Animus, Regnorum Columen,
Bonorum Gaudium. Sacellum Regium nunquam ordinatius. Auctior indies Insignium
Theologorum numerus. Conciones nullo unquam Aevo frequentiores, nullo
Doctiores: Et Exemplum Principis, Concionibus Validius. Nulla ex Ore execratio
temere prodiit. Ab omni paulo lasciviori, nedum sordido sermon, Aures
abhorrebant; qui sub EDOARDO Quarto fortasse, cum Vagi Amores regnarent, pro
Aulica Elegantia habebatur. Nec intra Palatii parietes Pietas stetit; sed per
Regnum diffusa. Intacti Ecclesiae reditus. Templorum hinc inde jacta
Fundamenta: Collapsus passim restituti. Et quod praecipue posteri loquentur,
Pientissimo Tuo Monitu excitatae Regni Opes, ad restaurandam Aedem Apostolo
Gentium Sacram, quae passa erat Temporis injurias; Omnium Orbis Christiani
(Quis dubitet?) pari vetustate Amplissimam. Ubi effulsit Majestatis Tuae cura,
in demoliendis Privatorum Aedificiis, quae tam visendi operis faciem
dehonestabant: Nec minus in administratione totius Negotii imposita,
Vigilantissimo Praesuli, qui ob spectatissimam Fidem and Judicium, nuperrime
altiora meruit.

Jam post Deum, Quam tenero erga Subditos affectu? Cum Contagio grassaretur, Ad
publica Jejunia, Jussu Tuo recursum. Cum Inediae majori Metu quam Malo
premeremur, Annonae flagellatores aperire Horrea coacti, lenitis Frugum pretiis.

Inter has sanctiores Curas non omiserim, Providentiae Tuae peculiare
Praeconium; cujus Origo paulo altius repetenda.

Enatae sunt for as ante aliquot Annos, aut forte ex antiquo recruduerunt,
Controversiae quaedam, circa sublimes Fidei Articulos, quae cum ad nos quoque
transvolassent, (ut facile se diffundunt Ingeniorum Flammae,) ne hic etiam
Pulpita and Calami, cum Inquietudine publica incalescerent, Majestas Tua per
Edictum, laudatissima temperie, omnem utrimque Disceptationem compressit.
Sentiant Alii quid velint; Meo Arbitratu (si Verbo sit venia) Disputandi
Pruritus, est Ecclesiarum Scabies. Referam quod mihi contigit observasse non
semel. Duos nempe de Re quapiam acerrime disceptantes, donec utroque ex alio in
aliud Contentionis aestu abrepto, Ambo tandem primo Charitatem, deinde etiam
Veritatem amiserant. Quo procederet irrequietum Acumen, nisi premeretur? Nullus
est finis Argutiarum. Sed mature Obviam itum est.

His Pietatis Laudibus subjiciam Ingens Gratitudinis, Ingentius fere
Constantiae documentum, erga GEORGIUM VILLIERIUM BUCKINGHAMIAE DUCEM. Quem, cum
inter Hispanici Itineris Discrimina, lateri Tuo praecipuus comes adhaesisset,
Domi postea per omnes utriusque Fortunae Scopulos, quasi repensa vice, tuto
circumtulisti; donec improvisum Diem clausit. Vidimus etiam non leves Favoris
Tui Radios in Alterum ex Fidis comitibus, and solertis Judicii Virum conjectos.

At haec non solum inter Argumenta Animi Fidelium Officiorum memoris (quod vere
Regium est) recenseo; sed and singularis erga Parentem etiam defunctum
Obsequii, cui Buckinghamius tot Annos in delitiis fuerat: Ac si Majestas Tua
sese tam Affectuum ejus, quam Regnorum Haeredem reput^ ss^t: Raro inter Omnium
Saeculorum memorias Exemplo. Erat sane Dux ille ob multa Amabilis, eademque
rarissime conjuncta. Singulis Corporis Artubus quasi affabre compositus: Forma
tamen, an Venustas superaret, incertum. Animo autem haud dubie intrepido.
Impositis, adsumptisve Curis aeque intentus. Aderat, tot negotiis districto,
incredibilis Temperies and Aequabilitas. Appetitum Gloriae haud negaverim, quem
generosi Spiritus tardissime deponunt. At quod super omnia suavissimum; nulla
Morum austeritas. Nihil in externo tumidi. Sed Obvius, Affabilis, and cuique
fere Expositus: Ac si in tanta Faelicitate, vix Faelicitatem suam sensisset.
Quo vel uno meritus videatur, ut mollius decumberet.

Pollere post haec incepit Principibus Majestatis Tuae Curis, indiesque pollet,
quo probatior eo acceptior, Vir sane moderato vitae Habitu, and gravissimi
Consilii: ac tramissis Inanibus, ad solidam Prudentiam natus. Quem nominare
Injuriosum foret: Nam qui ingenue describitur, sine Nomine intelligatur.

At merito Supremum in Affectus Imperium, sibi soli vindicavit Dignissima
Regalis Thalami CONSORS, Ipsa etiam longo Regum Stemmate oriunda, Sed satis est
dicere MAGNI HENRICI FILIA, ac IUSTI LUDOVICI SOROR. Quam, ob charissima jam
utriusque Sexus Pignora, ob Castissimae Venustatis Decus (and quod Conjugale
Vinculum maxim beat) ob congruos Mores, adeo Sancte and unice amas, ut merito
videaris ex Optimi Patroni, in Optimi Conjugis Titulum transivisse.
Castimoniae, Temperantiam adjunxisti, cognatam comitem: quas inter Impotentes
and Miseros, quis non tacitus praeteriret? Sed in Rege, sed in Juvene, tam
vegetae Aetatis; and in tanta ad omnes Appetitus explendos promptitudine,
laudemus magis an miremur, nescio.

Jam post haec Elogia, quae partim Amorem, partim etiam Stuporem conciliant; De
Temporis Tui Justitia vel dubitare, injustissimum fuerit.

Non pigebit tamen paulo fusius repetere rem in obscurae sortis Homine,
illustrissimi Exempli. Contigit Londini nescio quis Tumultus, ob quendam ex
Apparitorum manubus ereptum, qui alieno aere obstrictus in Carcerem ducebatur:
ubi inter confusos Animorum motus unus aut alter (ut ferme fit) ex fortuitis
vulneribus periere: unde Johannes Stamfordius Quidam, Vir manu promptus (qui se
his Turbis fataliter immiscuerat) pro Homicidii reo, in Vincula conjectus est.
Non caruit apud Majestatem Tuam Intercessoribus magni Nominis; Et certissima
jam effulgebat (ut in vulgus credebatur) impetrandae Veniae Spes, quia
Buckinghamiae Duci a Cubiculo fuerat, and inter suae Conditionis Clientes, Hero
aliquandiu gratissimus ob Eximium Corporis Robur and luctandi peritiam. Cujus
tum etiam recens adhuc Memoria: quod misellum fortasse Audaciorem fecerat. At
neque superstitum Preces, neque Viri ipsius notissima Fortitudo, Nec denique
tam dilecti nuper Capitis, cujus in Clientela fuerat, recordatio, apud
Majestatem Tuam Justitia praevaluere; Quin (magnum dictu:) Laqueo Vitam finiit.

Recentior est Memoria Supplicii, quod Baro pervetustae Prosapiae, palam passus
est ob Facinus Natalibus suis Indignum. Sed si vetus Ingeniosi Authoris
Observatio adhuc valeat, Quaedam esse Clariora, quaedam Majora; Equidem Baronis
Clarius Spectaculum, sed Stamfordii Majus crederem.

At quo me rapit, dum Haec Revolvo, non insuavis quaedam Meditatio? Habet
Majestas Tua in stricti Juris Tribunalibus, Idoneos Judices: Qui rigidius
pronunciant. Habet etiam consultissimum Aequi Bonique Antistitem, Antiquis
Praetoribus parem: Qui, pro Populi levamento, severiora emollit. Sed Hi
seorsim, discretis Soliis locantur. Si quis forte quaerat, cur non simul, quod
expeditius videatur? Dicam quod sentio. Exoptabant MAIORES nostri, ex
gravissima quidem Providentia, Iustitiam ac Lenitatem, Quae in Magistratu
inferiori divulsae sedent, in solo SUPREMI Pectore Societas. Et sane sic est.
Majestas Tua velut ad Majorum desiderium composita, Has adeo temperate
commiscuit, ut neque Mali audeant, neque doleant Boni. Hactenus intelligi velim
Me solum de Communibus quasi Flagitiis coercendis loquutum, quae ubique
Terrarum pullulant: Nam de Atrocioribus apud Nos (Divino Beneficio) Ne Verbum,
Imo, Ne Somnium quidem. Laboramus excellenti Ignorantia. Nescimus quid
Perduellio, quid contra salutem Publicam Machinator, quidve illud sit, quod
Grammatici Laesam Majestatem vocant. Cum Rebu, ipsa Vocabula obsoluerunt. Nec
mirum qui^em. Quis enim, nisi omnium Mortalium Stupidissimus idem and
Sceleratissimus, parique prorsus Vecord^a ac Nequitia, tam Justi P^que
MODERATORIS Quietem violaret?

Jam ut Justitiam (quam Imperii Tui Sanitatem dixerim) aequissimo libramine
tueris, hoc est, ne que tensis nimium, neque laxatis Nervis: Ita nec omittis
quae ad Securitatem spectant. Idem enim alioquin Imperiis, quod Corporibus
nostris, contingeret: Quae periculose subsistunt, ubi sola Valetudine,
sustinentur. Quare post Bellum cum duobus simul Potentissimis Regibus, Eventu
(ut in Humanis fit) vario, per Nova utrimque Foedera consopitum; Princeps Domi
Cura erat de maritimo Robore resarciendo, ut Insularium Regnorum TUTOREM
decuit. Unde Classis Regia quotannis Auctior and Instructior: Item, Commodiores
Navibus Stationes dilectae, and promptiore ad fortuitos Casus exitu: Majestate
Tua non solum jubente, sed and propriis Oculis ipsa loca subeunte: Ac si in re
tanti momenti, vix alienis crederes. Deinde accuratior quam unquam antea,
Armorum lustratio; and in universum exercitatior, statis Temporibus, Militia.

Inter haec, Incivile esset silere quod Prudentes Temporum adnotarunt,
Majestatem Tuam Consultis (ut vocant) de Statu, frequentius intervenire, quam
superiorum Quenquam Regum. Nisi forte ad EDOARDUM Sextum oculos reflectamus,
quem ferunt etiam Puerum raro abfuisse.

In illo Consilii Tui Coetu, Supremi Praesules Reverentiam, Ex utroque Regno
selecti Proceres Dignitatem, adjungunt. Sunt quos exterarum Rerum usus, Sunt
quos Municipalium Legum Peritia, exornat. Et Secretariorum Erudita, Fidelisque
Sagacitas accidentibus invigilat. Sed super haec, Ipsa Domini praesentia nescio
quid salutiferum spirat. Parum est quod dixi, Praesentiam solum. Imo ex iis qui
Consilia Tua participant (Non omnino, fateor, incuriosus, ignoscas rogo)
saepius accepi, quam attente quoties interesse libet, proposita revolvis: Quam
patienter auscultas; Quam acri Judicio singula quaeque expendis; Quam pertinax
sis (non enim utar molliori voce) ubi Bono, Quam Strenuus ubi Magno Animo opus
sit. Denique in Secretioribus Negotiis, Quam restrictam Taciturnitatem imponis,
and Quam severe exigis. In hoc quoque, Exemplo proprio praemonstrante quod
jubes. Quippe praeter alia, Duo quidem Majestas Tua beatissimo nexu copulavit:
Nimirum, Nullus usquam Principum, post Constituta Imperia, natus est Secreti
tutior Custos; Et tamen cu^s Secretum and Silentium minus timemus. Quod de
Optimo Viro Iulio Agricola dictum olim legimus, qui Romanorum Primus,
CALEDONIAE Tuae ^imbum invasit. Quippe Majestas Tua non in^rorsus and sinu
fovet immansuetas and subdolas cogi^ationes; Non offensionis scintillis incubat
donec ^raestuent: sed Celso and Nobilissimo Candore, si ^uae concepta fuerint,
recludis, and ut sic dicam, ^xhalas. Enimvero in nulla, fateor, Virtutum ^uarum
reverentia lubentius haereo, quam in hoc ^pso Heroicae Ingenuitatis Elogio. Nam
ut summus ^LTISSIMI Character Veritas est, Ita quid ^am in Terris imaginem
REFERENTES, ^agis quam ipsa Veracitas condecoret, aut magni^centius vestiat?

Vidimus Hactenus, erga Parentem obsequium; (...) Amicos Constantiam; In
Conjugio Fidem; In ^venda Republica non Regis sed Patris Affectum. ^ec inter
haec, pro condition Temporum and per^exo Rerum Statu, neglecta erga Sororem
Uni^m Optimi Fratris Officia, Quae mihi semper visa (...) sola sui Sexus
omnibus Malis Major, and ipsa ob^uritate Illustrior, and quidem Intra Fortunae
Sortem ^d Extra imperium Posita. Quam quantum ames, Imo quantum aestimes, ex
nupera Legatione patuit; Cum in gravissimo Viduae Luctu, deferendo Solatio
Primorem e Nobilibus, and priscis Ipsum Virtute ac Moribus Virum, ablegares: ut
amantissimae Legationi, ex ipso Legati Delectu, aliquid etiam Dignitatis
accederet. Hoc de Solamine.

Quod ad Subsidium spectat, Nonne Majest^ Tua ex Primoribus etiam Scoticae
Nobilitatis MARCHIONI, quanquam hic assiduis circa Teipsum and intimis officiis
obstricto, probandae Fortitudinis suae Veniam indulsit? Per quaesitissimas
Ambages, in tanto Viarum interclusu, Per Maris Terraeque Discrimina, Per loca
Urbesque Peste and Inedia obsitas: Ubi fere difficilius erat penetrare, quam
vincere: ac durius Pati, quam Facere. Si post haec Successus defuere; At non
animosa Regis Voluntas, At non Subditorum Virtus, At non sumptus variis modis,
At non Legationes interim Legationibus accumulatae, de sedanda, per aequas
Conditiones and amicabilem Tractatum, Orbis Insania De caetero vel SOLONIS
monitu acquiescendum, NEMO ANTEOBITUMGLORIETUR.

Jam inter tot Curas, quibus vel Optimi Reg^ maxim premuntur, non injucundum
fuerit, paulisper inquirere quam eleganter intervalla Otii disponis. Nobilium
Equorum usu gaudes; Qu^nemo peritius aut mansuetos flectit, aut feroci^tes
domat. Adeo ut aptius an dignius fecerit* ambigerim, Qui nuper Majestati Tuae
Statu^ Equestrem experenni Aere fundi curavit: LIS^ ERII vivax Opus.

Accedit Musica, quae tam Organica, quam V^calis, sub Te indies, quam antehac,
modulatio^ Utpote ad Aurium Tuarum Judicium accommodata. Hanc ne mollior
videretur, quasi Venatione temperas. Qua, Belli Imagine, adeo animosos Spiritus
exerces, ut difficile dictu sit, Venandi Voluptatem magis, an ipsum Laborem
ames: aut utrum de Praeda Victoriam, an longam Praedae Fugam malles.

Sed omnium Oblectationum Tuarum Splendidissima, est excellentium Operum and
Artificum Amor: Queis in utraque tam Pingendi, quam Sculpendi Art, ita Palatia
decorasti; ut Magnificentia Tua videatur Italiam, maximam elegantium Artium
Matrem, aut Saltem post Graecos, praecipuam Altricem, in Angliam transfudisse.

His Spectaculis quid amaenius, imo fere quid doctius, rogo, Quam elinguem
illam Umbrarum and Luminum Eloquentiam, ac tacitam Linearum Poesim, and quasi
animata Marmora contemplari? Hic Tinctoretti quos designavit Artus and
Musculos, moveri Spectator juraret. Hic Bassani Volucres cantillant, mugiunt
Boves, Pecora balant. Hic Rapbaelis Vultus spirant: Titiai etiam loquuntur. Hic
in Correg^ano Politiem: In Parmensi Concinnitatem laudares. Nec Belgicis etiam
sua Laus deest. Qui si Campos depinxerint; omne Vigentium Genus viret, Flores
rident, Montes eriguntur, Valles subsidunt. Eadem etiam in Statuis erudita
Varietas: Quarum Hae Membrorum vivacitate quadam; Aliae Mollitie gaudent. Sed
haec Oculorum delinimenta sunt. Ad Mentem reficiendam, Interdum librum aliquem
Selectioris Argumenti, plerumque Homines legis: Optime guarus, quantum PRINCIPI
expediat suorum nosse ingenia. Est and quando, veterum Epigrammata recensendo,
Animum oblectas, non minori Acumine quam componebantur.

Sic seria tua, sic remissiora cursim peragravi. At ipsa quam cepi in his
quanquam ita leviter delibandis Voluptas, Calamum jam currentem nescio quo modo
novo Impetu exstimulat, ut Majestatis Tuae veram Effigiem in Contractiori
Modulo, and quasi sub uno simul intuitu (si tantum Veniae indulseris) vel
mihimet ipsi repraesentem, Quam sic Mente concipio.

Staturam dicerem Justae proximam. Corpus erectum and Agile. Color in Universum
ex EBORACENSI Albore, quam LANCASTRIA Rubedine plus hausit. Caesaries nigella
quam flavae propior. Frons multum Fidei praefert: O ulos generosa quaedam
Verecundia honestat: non qualem olim de Sylla sed de Pompeio legimus. In
Gestubus nihil affectatum. In toto etiam Aspectu nil Turgidi, nil Efferati; sed
alliciens ac decora Suavitas. Alacritatem and Vigorem celerior incessus prodit:
Alioquin sedati Affectus and Compositi Mores. Propositi and Promissi
tenacissimus. Amans Very. Vitiorum Osor. Justus, Constans, Fortis: and non
simpliciter tantum, sed scienter Bonus.

Talis es: Talemque quanto Applausu recipiemus? Videre Mihi videor, dum Horrida
interdum and Tranquilla simul contendo, quotiescunque RICHARDUS ille TERTIUS
Eboraco forsan suo, aut longinquius Londinum remearet, and Proceres circa se
conciret, Quam nutabant Nobilium Capita, Quam pallebant Ora, Quam sollicitas
inter se suspiciones ac murmura conferebant, Ac si dirus repent Cometes, aut
infaustum aliquod Sidus supra Horizontem emersisset. Sed contra, Justi Bonique
PRINCIPIS Reditus, nihil aliud omnino est quam ipsa Solis Anastrophe, Cum
Vernalibus radiis deformem Hiemem expellit, ac blando Tepore cuncta
circumquaque refovet and exhilarat. Euge igitur Rex omnibus Bonis Gratissime.
Sed in quae Vota desinam? Veteribus in usu erat (quorum Exemplo percitus
exiguum hunc laborem audacter nimium subivi) post Trajani Tempora sub
Laudatissimo quoque Imperatore, hujuscemodi acclamandi Formula, Vive ANTONINE,
Regna THEODOSI, AUGUSTO faelicior, TRAIANO Melior. Sit autem Hic Imperii Tui
novissimus Character, quod Optanda sunt Laudandis Pauciora. Igitur postquam hoc
tantum ex Ardenti Affectu voverim, ut CAROLUS Optimus REX and DOMINUS noster
Regnet Vivatque Sibimetipsi soli Diuque similis, Finis esto O Fortunatos nimium
Bona si sua norint.


A PANEGYRIC TO King CHARLES; BEING OBSERVATIONS Upon the Inclination, Life,
and Government of our Late SOVEREIGN.

Written in Latin, By Sir HENRY WOTTON Knight, (Provost of Eton College) a
little before his Death.

And now Englished by a Friend of the Authors.

TO OUR Young CHARLES, DUKE of CORNWALL, EARL of CHESTER, etc.
HENRY WOTTON wishes long life.
THese following Vows and Acclamations wherewith Your Father (the best of
Kings) was received at his Return from Scotland) I dedicate not unadvisedly to
Your Highness: that when you shall be seasoned with Erudition (now your
Ornament from many Ancestors) you may draw from this (whatever) small memorial,
a Treasure more glorious then a triple Diadem, namely, AN HEREDITARY IMAGE OF
VIRTUE.

TO THE KING, At His Return from SCOTLAND; Sir HENRY WOTTON's Vows and
Acclamations.
Imperial CHARLES, my King and Master.
ACustome it was anciently, among the civiller Nations, so often as they enjoyed
a just and a Gracious King, (that their mute felicity might not contract a
dullness in their breasts) to pour forth their affections and joys in elogies,
wishes, and applauses; But chiefly then, when any nobler occasion invited the
rejoycers expressions. Which sacred customs Emulation in some sort, having
transported me, and dispelled the chilness from my breast, which the weight of
age has introduced, I shall with flagrant confidence betake my self to
celebrate this Day, whereon your Majesty does restore your Self to us, and us
unto our selves. So far indeed am I from being discouraged by the weakness of
my own elocution, that I am even ready to esteem my self thereby the abler.
For, what need is here of dressings Rhetorical? Wherefore over sollicitously
balance the weight of words? Susfice it this day simply to rejoice. Sincerity
is a plain and impolite thing, the less tricked, the more cheerful; and
Eloquence while it adorneth, corrupts our gladness. Nor is it my fear, that
this shall seem a flatterers act, (as it were) ambitiously prostrate at
Fortunes feet, which in truth were unworthy of that ingenuous modesty, derived
from my Parents, unbefitting that blessed Rest of mind I drew from liberal
Studies. Yet does one solitude at the very entrance, I confess, surround me,
lest (namely) even with true praises I offend that modesty, wherewith Your
Majesty uses so sweetly to season your other Virtues: for whereas you are most
stout in all things else, that requires Validity of Body, or Constantness of
Mind, I only doubt, lest you should beat this days Applauses and Elogies, by
so much the more tenderly, by how much they are the more justly due.

We read that Germanicus (and yet how great a Personage!) not long before the
battle against the Chatti; did under the disguise of a beasts skin, (that he
might not be observed) by night, approach his soldiers tents, to catch up by
dark what they conceived of him. So do those commonly with most tenderness
admit their own commendations, who most deserve them.

Whence I sufficiently foresee the necessity of assuring my access to your
Sacred Ears, not by Arguments drawn from the slight Magazines of Rhetoric, but
by others of a soberer sort. I shall therefore affirm it most equitable, that
neither the gallant, nor the baser lives of Princes be pressed down in ignoble
silence. But that both good and bad be transmitted equally to the knowledge of
Posterity, in a like freedom of writing, as living: and with no less reverence
of Truth, then of Majesty. Those, least virtuous examples failing, Virtues
themselves by degrees decay: These, that evading the power of Laws, yet may be
bridled through some awe of Record. This to you, I may dare to speak (my most
Gracious Master) and even that I may dare, I owe to your self alone, who now
have so lived 33 years, and so reigned near to nine, That you dread not truth.

Most famous was of old, and will live for ever, that answer of Virginius
Rufus, to Cluvius: You know, Virginius (says he) what credit is due to
History: wherefore if you read any thing in my books, otherwise then you would
have it, pardon me. To whom Virginius, Thou can not (Cluvius) be ignorant of
this, That therefore I did what I have done, that it might be free for you to
write what you pleased. This was indeed the confidence of a gallant, but yet of
a private man.

How much more eminent may the joy be of this day, for a King returned, of
whose Life and Morals we may speak both openly and safely. Yea, let me add
this with confidence, that if Nature her self (the first Architectress) had (to
use an expression of Vitruvius) windowed your breast: if your Majesty should
admit the eyes of all men, not only within the privatest parts of your
Bedchamber, but even into the inwardest closets of your heart: no other thing
at all would there appear, save the splendour of your Goodness, and an
undistemper'd serenity of your Virtues. What said I? if you would admit? As if
those whom the Supreme Power has set on high, and in the light, could be hid
from our eyes? or cover, as it were by a drawn cloud, the ways of their Lives
and Government? Herein, no doubt, Obscurity and Solitude it self, is more
veiled then Majesty. Thinks that Abissine Emperor (whom men report to appear to
public view but once a year) that therefore it is less known what he does in
secret? Know we not at this day, that Domitian even in his closest Cabinet,
wherein each day he shut up himself, did nothing but stick flies with a pointed
Bodkin? Lay Tiberius hid in his recess to the Islands of Caprea, when among so
many wounds and tortures of his conscience (which as so many furies tormented
him) many tokens of a distracted mind did daily break forth? Surely no.

Your Majesty has taught the Princes of your own, and future times, the only
and most wholesome way of self-concealing, in that you endeavor nothing to be
concealed. There are certain creatures of ungrateful aspect, as Bats and Owls,
condemned by nature to hate the light. I know also that some in power have also
held it among the secrets of State, and as a great mystery of craft, to be
served at a distance: as if reverence did only dwell in Dens, and Caves; not in
the light. Whence then these Subtilties of Government? In a word, and freely;
they walked in crooked paths, because they knew not (the shortest way) to be
good. But, your Majesty does not shun the eyes and access of your Subjects,
delight not in covert; nor withdraw your self from your own people: you do not
catch at false veneration with a rigid and clouded countenance; yea, sometime
you vouchsafe to descend even to some familiarity without offense to your
dignity: for thus you reason with your self in the clearness of your own
bosom; If it were not above our power to lie concealed, yet were it below our
goodness to desire it: then which nothing surely can be in effect more popular;
for good Kings all good men openly revere, and even the worst do it silently:
Whilst Virtues beauty, not unlike some brightest Rays, strikes into the most
unwilling eyes. Wherefore as of late, I took in hand Tranquillus Suetonius,
(who has laid open the very bowels of the Cesars) to beguile in the time of
your absence with some literate diversion, the tedious length of those days,
and fell by chance upon that passage, so lively describing the wailings of
Augustus, after the Varian defect, often crying out, Render me, Quintilius
Varus, my Legions; my desires of Your Majesty instantly flamed out, and my
wishes gowed for your Return: for it seems then much juster for England to
have solicited her SISTER with these panting suspirations, then Augustus the
Ghost of Quintilius, Restore to me, Scotland my Sister, our King; Restore the
best of men, whom none but the wicked love not; none but the ignorant praise
not: Restore both the Director and Rule it self of Morality, whereby we may
become not the gladder only, but the better too, while at hand we may
contemplate (a thing most rare) One in highest Place, not inaulging to himself
the least excess. Since therefore, such you are (O best of Kings;) suffer I
humbly pray, if rather by Prayers then Arguments you choose to be inclined,
That the nine Nations of different Language (for I reckon them no fewer) over
which you gently reign, may glory in your being such: and may each declare it,
not in their native Dialects alone (which would not give sufficient compass to
our joys) but however, in this also more public Tongue; That even forraigners
may know your Britany, which formerly bestowed upon the Christian World their
first and most renowed Emperor, is not become so barren yet as not to afford,
even at this day, a Type of the highest-famed King.

Having now thus (I hope) somewhat smoothed the way to your patience, in
hearing: good it will be henceforth out of the whole state of your Life and
Carriage thus far, summarily to pick up some particulars, as those do who make
their choice of Flowers. For I please my self more in the choice, then in the
plenty of my Matter. Although I am not ignorant neither, that in this kind of
speaking, the diligence, or ambition of the Ancients was so profuse, that
perhaps Timeus said not unwittily, That Alexander the Macedonian sooner subdued
all Asia, then Isocrates did write his Panegyric. Certainly, there seems then
to have been too great an indulgence to Art, while the Wits of Orators were
wanton in that fertile age of Eloquence: but it becomes me (mindful both of my
simplicity and age) to touch rather the heads of your praises, then to
prosecute them all; that even the succinctness of my speech, may as it were,
resemble the passage of my fleeting years. In the first place is offered the
eminent Nobleness of your Extraction: whereby in a long Order of antecedent
Kings, your luster is above them all, your Father himself not excepted. This in
brief I will deduce more clearly: Your Great Great-Grandfather Henry the
Seventh, (whether more valiant, or fortunate, I know not) being almost at once
an Exile, and a Conqueror, united by the Marriage of Elizabeth of York, the
white Rose, and the red, the Armories of two very powerful Families, which
being in division, had so many years polluted their own Country with blood and
deadly Fewds. The more blessed Colligation of the Kingdoms, then that of the
Roses, we owe to the Happiness of your Father, who even for that alone were to
be remembered ever with highest veneration. But, in you singly (most Imperial
Charles) is the conflux of the glory of all Nations, in all Ages, which since
the Romans have possessed Britany, either by right, or by Arms; in you, I say,
alone: whom the Cambrians first, the English-Saxons, Scots, Normans, and
finally the Danes do acknowledge with us, to be the branch of that Stock that
hith erto has worn the Crown. In this perchance (if the meanness of the
comparison be not rejected) not unlike to Europes famous Ister, which rolling
along through vast Countries, is ennobled with the waters of so many famous
streams. One not obscure among our Authors, has written, that our Ancestors
would not acknowledge the Norman Rule in England for legitimate (which had so
weak a beginning) until Maud marrying with Henry the First, had brought into
the world a child of the blood of the ancient Saxon Kings: she was Sister to
David, Nephew twice removed off King Ethelred, your Progenitor.

How much is there now a nobler cause for our embracing your Majesty with open
arms, who are descended unto us from so plentiful a Race of Kings, since the
access of the most ancient Cambrian Blood to the rest of your Nobility, by
Queen ANNE your Mother, a Lady of a great and masculine Mind? And how much the
more truly may we now repeat, that which in the former Age Buchana^ (a Poet,
next the Ancients, of most happy invention) sang to your Grandmother, I wish
with happier fate! From numberless Progenitors you hold
Transmitted Scepters, which they swayed of old.


But all these hitherto you scarcely account your own. I pass then to such as
are your own peculiar, which confer no less of luster, then they admit.

Three particulars we observe (O best of Kings,) which Appellation I now again
willingly, (and shall often use) in your Beginnings, of no small importance to
your succeeding Progress; as for the most part the first favor of Principles,
continues in the after-growths.

First, That you were not born to the supreme hope of Sovereignty, so as
flattery (though an evil swift and watchful) which attends the Cradles of
Potent Heirs, more gently pressed on your tender years. And the whiles your
native goodness drank in with a draught more uncompounded the generous liquor
of Integrity; for no doubt, how the earliest dispositions of private persons
(much more of Princes) be at first formed, and as it were instilled, that I may
so speak, is of highest importance to the Commonwealth; whereof they are to
become afterward not only the Props, but also the Precedents.

Next, That you succeeded a Brother of no small Natural Endowments, which begat
thence-forward in your Parents a more industrious and closer sedulity (for it
surpasses care) for the accomplishment of their only Son: Nay, your own
spirits daily grew the more intent, when now the weight of so vast an
expectation was lodged on your self alone. Then were advanced to you such who
faithfully instructed in learning that youth of yours, as yet unapt for
business. Then such were sent for, who as your strength increased, dressed you
in the exercises of the Horse; which I call to mind with how graceful a
dexterity you managed: until afterward at a solemn Tilting, I became uncertain
whether you struck into the beholders more Joy or Apprehension.

In the third place, It comes to mind, that for some time, while Nature was as
it were in struggling, you were somewhat weak of limbs, and far below that
vigor, which now with gladness we admire: which I may judge to have befallen
by the secret Council of Providence, thereby at that time to render more
intense the care of furnishing your mind, as became the Heir, then secretly
designed of a King; whom Malignants themselves deny not to have been the wisest
of all Princes from many Ages past. From your first Essaies I shall hasten to
your stronger times, not unmindful of my promised business.

After your foreign Travels, obnoxious to many hazards, you came unto the
Crown, whence it appeared, how much your self then dared to adventure, when the
while at home each one was trembling for your sake. But the favor of Heaven
brought you back safely to us; not so much as colored with outlandish Dye;
not unlike another Ulysses, who accounted it sufficient (even by Homers
witness) To have known the Morals of Men and Cities.

When you had assumed the Crown, before all other things, there was resplendent
in you a Religious mind: the Support of Kingdoms: the Joy of good men. The
Chapel Royal was never more in order. The number of eminent Divines daily
increased. Sermons in no age more frequented; In none more learned; And the
example of the Prince more effectual then the Sermons. No execrations rashly
proceeded from your mouth. Your ears abhorring, not only any wanton, but even
the least sordid word: which perchance under Edward the 4th, while toyish Loves
did reign, passed for Courtly eloquence; Neither stopped this piety within the
Walls of Court, but was diffused also through the Kingdom.

The Church Revenues were not touched; Temples here and there new founded;
D^apidations repaired; And, (which Posterity will chiefly speak of) the Riches
of your Kingdom, excited by your most religious exhortation, for restoration
of the Church consecrated to the Apostle of the Nations, (out of question the
amplest and equally ancient of the Christian world) which had sustained the
injuries of time. Where your Majesty's care was greatly conspicuous in
demolishing those private dwellings which disgraced the aspect of so goodly a
Fabric: And not less in imposing the management of that whole business upon
that most vigilant Prelate, who for his singular fidelity and judgment, has
lately merited far higher place.

Now (next to God) how tender was your affection to your People? When the
Sickness raged, by your Command recourse was had to public Fastings. When we
were pressed with greater fear then evil of Famine, the Horders of Provisions
were constrained to open their Garners, and the prices of grain abated. Among
these most pious cares, I cannot omit one peculiar Elogy, proper to your own
providence, whereof I must repeat the Original a little higher.

There were hatched abroad some years agone, or perhaps raked up out of
Antiquity, certain Controversies about high points of the Creed, which having
likewise flown over to us, (as flames of Wit are easily diffused) lest
hereabout also both Pulpits and Pens might run to heat and public disturbance:
Your Majesty with most laudable temper by Proclamation suppressed on both sides
all manner of debates. Others may think what pleases them; In my opinion (if I
may have pardon for the phrase) The Itch of disputing, will prove the Scab of
Churches. I shall relate what I have chanced more then once to observe. Two
(namely) arguing about some subject so eagerly, till either of them transported
by heat of contention, from one thing to another, they both at length had lost
first their Charity, and then also the Truth. Whither would restless subtilty
proceed, if it were not bounded: there is of captiousness no end: but
seasonable provision was made against it.

To these praises of Piety, I will add a very great evidence of Gratitude: and
almost a greater of Constancy, toward George Villiers Duke o^ Buckingham: him,
when amidst the dangers of the Spanish journey, he had been the nearest of your
attendants, your Majesty afterward, as in requital, bore safely with you at
home, through all the rocks of either Fortune, till an unforeseen day was his
conclusion.

We observed also no ordinary beams of your Favor to be cast upon another of
your trusty Associates in the same Journey, a Person of approved Judgment,
Neither do I recount these only among the arguments of an heart mindful of
faithful Offices (which indeed is Kingly) but likewise of singular
obsequiousness toward your Father, even when deceased; to whom the Duke of
Buckingham had been for many years a Favorite: as i^ Your Majesty had reputed
your self as much the Heir of his Affections, as you were of his Kingdoms; An
Example rare among the Memorials of all Ages. This Duke was indeed amiable in
many respects, which seldom are concurrent. Each limb of his body almost very
exactly composed: yet doubtful it was, whether his shape, or gracefulness
excelled: undubitably of an undaunted spirit; equally intent upon his cares,
whether imposed, or assumed: There was present with him in the midst of so many
distractions an incredible temper and equability. I will not deny his appetite
of glory, which generous minds do ever latest part from; but, above all, the
most pleasing was, That he had no austerity of behavior, nothing outwardly
tumerous: but was obvious, affable, and almost to all men free and open: as if
in so high a felicity, he had scarce been sensible of his happiness: for which
alone he may seem to have deserved a more gentle end.

Hence forward there began to be powerful, and so daily holds on in your
Majesty's most important cares, a person unquestionably of an habitual moderate
life, and sober counsel: and the oftener tried, the more acceptable; not swayed
to vanity, born to a solid prudence, whom to name might be injurious: for he
that is described ingenuously, may be known without a name.

But the highest Empire over your affections, is deservedly challenged alone by
the most worthy Consort of your Royal Bed, Her self likewise proceeding from a
long descent of Kings. But sufficient it is to know she is THE DAUGHTER OF
HENRY THE GREAT, AND THE SISTER OF LEWIS THE JUST; Whom, for dearest pledges
already of either Sex; for the comeliness of chastest graces, and (which
chiefly blesses the nuptial bed) For congruity of dispositions, Your Majesty
so religiously and so particularly does love, that justly you appear to have
passed from the Title of the best Patron to that of the best Husband.

To Chastity, you have added Temperance, her nearest Companion: which in
miserable and impotent men, who would not pass by with silence? but these in a
King! in one so young! of such vigorous age! and in such a promptness of
satisfying all desires, I know not whether we should more commend or admire
them. Now, after these Elogies (which in part beget affection, in part also
astonishment) to doubt once of the justness of your times, were most unjust.
Yet shall I not think amiss to repeat a little at large, a thing of noble
example, in a person of obscure condition. There fell out at London, I know not
what tumult, for one rescued from the Sergeants hands, whom for debt they were
leading to Prison. Amidst those confusions, one or other (as often it chances)
died of sudden hurts; whereupon one John Stamford, a man of a ready hand (who
had fatally run into the broyl) was apprehended as guilty of murder: He wanted
not intercessors of great power about your Majesty; and there seemed an assured
hope of obtaining his pardon (as the vulgar believed) because he had attended
on the Duke of Buckingham in his Chamber, and among the followers of his own
condition, had been for some time very acceptable to his Lord, for his singular
ability of body, and skill in wrestling, whereof the remembrance as then was
fresh, which perchance had made the poor man the more audacious. But neither
the intercessions of the living, nor the man's own well known valor, nor
finally the remembrance of such a Favorite but lately dead, whom he had
served, could prevail with Your Majesty above Justice, but that (which is
glorious to speak) he concluded his life at the Gallows. Fresher is the
remembrance of that Noblemans Death, a Baron of very ancient lineage, who
suffered publicly for a fact, unworthy of his Birth. But, if a witty Authors
old observation may yet have place, that some examples are nobler, others
greater, I should verily believe the Barons Nobler, but Stamfords Greater.

But whither does this pleasant meditation transport me, while I revolve these
things? At Common Law Your Majesty has in the Courts of strict Justice, able
Judges, which pronounce severely: you have also a most learned Chancellor for
right and equity (not inferior to the ancient Pretors) who, for the peoples
relief, qualifieth that severity; But these are in distinct Courts placed
apart. And if one should ask by chance, Why not together, since that might seem
the more dispatching way? I will deliver my opinion: It was the Wish of our
Ancestors (out of a most grave providence) that Justice and Lenity, which have
their seat disjoined in the inferior Magistrate, might be consociated in the
only breast of the Sovereign. And truly so it is; for your Majesty being
composed as it were, according to the wishes of those our Forefathers, has so
tempered these together, that neither the evil presume, nor the good repine.
Hitherto I would be understood to have only spoken of the restraint of common
vices, which swarm in all parts of the world; for of more heinous
transgressions among our selves (by Gods goodness) we have not a word, no not
so much as a dream: we suffer under an excellent ignorance: we know not what a
Rebel is; what a plotter against the Commonweal: nor what that is, which
Grammarians call Treason: the names themselves are antiquated with the things:
and (in truth) no marvel; for, what wretch (unless he were of all mortal men
the most stupid and wicked, and as foolish as malicious) would violate the
quiet of so just and pious a Moderator?

Now as you maintain your Justice, (which I may call the health of your
Kingdom) in a most even balance, that is neither too much strething, nor
slackning the Reins; so neither do you omit what concerns security; The like
else would befall Empires that happens to our bodies, which subsist dangerously,
if nothing but mere health sustain them. Wherefore after a War with two mighty
Kings together, with various event (as it chances in humane affairs) and
quieted by new Consederations on either side; your principal care at home, was
to repair the Maritime strength, as became the Defender of Insular Kingdoms.
Hence was the Navy Royal yearly more increased and furnished; and more
commodious Harbors chosen for the Ships, and of read^er issue upon sudden
occasion; Your Majesty not only commanding, but with your own eyes surveying
the places, as if in a matter of that moment you might scarce trust another
man's: Then a more exact view of Arms then formerly had been used, and generally
the Militia at set times much better trained.

Amidst these things, it were unhandsome to pass by with silence that which the
prudent of the time have noted; namely, that Your Majesty is more frequent at
the Councels of State (as we call them) then any of our former Kings, except
happily we cast back our eyes upon Edward the Sixth, whom they say, even in his
Child hood, to have been seldom absent.

In that assembly of your Council, the chief Prelates add reverence, the
Nobles chosen out of both Kingdoms dignity.

Some are there, whom foreign experience, some whom the knowledge of our Laws
adorns: and the learned and faithful Sagacity of your Secretaries watched over
all accidents; but above these, the presence it self of the Sovereign breaths
always, I know not what of happiness. Your presence only, have I said? That is
little; yea, of those who participate in your Counsels, have I many times heard
(not uninquisitive, I acknowledge, for which pardon me, I beseech you) how
attentively (as often you are pleased to be present) you revolve things
propounded; how patiently you hear, with how sharp judgment you ponder the
particulars; how stiff you are (for I will use no milder word) in good
resolutions, and how stout in great.

Finally, in secret affairs, what a close secrecy you command, and how severely
you exact an account thereof; in this also, your own example leading your
Commandment. For besides other, there are two things which Your Majesty has
most blessedly bound together; namely, There was ne^r Prince since the
Constitution of Empires, a safer preserver of a secret, and yet none whose
secrecy and silence we less may fear; which we read anciently noted of that
excellent man Julius Agricola, who was the first Roman that invaded the skirts
of your Caledonia: for Your Majesty does not nourish secretly in your bosom
fierce and crafty thoughts, nor cover the embers of offense till they break
forth into heat; but out of a high and most Noble Candor, if any chance to be
conceived, Your Majesty vents them, and (as I may say) exhales them. Truly I
confess, I do not more willingly insist in the reverence of any of your
Virtues, then in this very attribute of your heroical ingenuity: for as the
supreme Character of the MOST HIGH is Verity: so what can more become or more
magnificently deck his REPRESENTANTS on earth, then Veracity it self?

Hitherto we have observed your obsequiousness toward your Parents, constancy
toward your Friends, fidelity toward your Consort, and toward cherishing of
the Commonwealth, not only the affection of a King, but of a Father. Neither
amidst these (as the condition of the times, and the perplexed state of things
would bear) did you neglect the offices of an excellent Brother toward your
only Sister, whom I have always thought the only Person of her Sex, greater
then all troubles, and even by her obscurity the more resplendent: indeed,
placed within the chances of Fortune, but out of her command: Whom how much
Your Majesty loves, nay, how much you esteem, did appear by a late Embassage,
when in the depth of her Widow mournings, your Majesty, to carry her
consolations, sent the chief of your Nobility, and him a Personage of most
ancient virtue and behavior; that to a most affectionate Legation, some
addition might be made of Dignity, from the choice it self of the Ambassador.
This of Consolation.

Concerning her Support: did not Your Majesty give leave to a Marquess of the
chief Nobility in Scotland, though tied here to your Person by nea^ and
assiduous Attendance, to exercise his valor abroad? through intricacies most
studied, in such a stop of passages; through hazards by Sea and Land; through
Places and Towns beset with Plague and Famine: where it was almost easier to
conquer, then to get entrance, and harder to suffer, then to act? If after
this, Success was wanting, yet was not the generous affection of a King; not
the valor of his Subjects, not expenses of diverse kinds; not Legations (the
while) upon Legations, to appease (if it were possible) by equal conditions,
and by friendly Treaty, the frenzy of the time: for the rest, we must repose
our selves in Solon's advice, Let no man glory before his End.

Now amongst so many cares (wherewith even ^e best of Kings are chiefly
oppressed) it will not be ^pleasant to enquire a little, how elegantly Your
Majesty does dispose your vacant hours.

You delight in the use of the great Horse, whom already dressed, no man does
more skilfully manage; or better break, if rough and furious: Insomuch, as I
doubt whether it were more aptly or deservedly done of him, who has lately
erected an Equestrian Statue to Your Majesty of solid brass, the lively work of
Lisierius.

To this I must add Music, both instrumental and vocal, which under you grows
every day more harmonious and accurate, as being fitted to the judgment of
your ear. This (lest it should seem too tender a delight) you temper as it were
with hunting. In which Image of War you do so exercise your vigorous spirits,
that it is hard to say, whether you love the pleasure more, or the labor; or
whether you had rather wish the killing, or the long standing of the Game.

But the most splendid of all your entertainments, is your love of excellent
Artificers, and Works: wherewith in either Art both of Picture and Sculpture
you have so adorned your Palaces, that Italy (the greatest Mother of Elegant
Arts) or at least (next the Grecians) the principal Nursery may seem by your
magnificence to be translated into England.

What can be more delightful then those sights? nay I am ready to ask, what
more learned then to behold the tongueless eloquence of lights and shadows, and
the silent poesy of lines, and (as it were) living Marbles? Here would the
spectator swear the limbs and muscles designed by Tintoret to move; there the
birds of Bassano to chirp, the oxe^ bellow, and the sheep to bleat: Here the
faces of Rafael to breathe, and those of Titian even to speak: there a man
would commend in Correggio delicateness, in Parmesano con^innity. Neither do
the Belgians want their praise; who if they paint Landskips, all kind of
vegetables seem in their verdure; the flowers do smile, the hills are raised,
the valleys in depression: In your Statuary works the like learned variety; of
which some glory in a kind of vivacity, some in tenderness of parts; but those
are the entertainment of your eye. Now to recreate your mind, sometimes a Book
of choicest subject: but oftnest, Men you read, knowing full well how much it
does import a Prince to understand the conditions of his people. There are
times also when you refresh your thoughts in the rehearsal of some ancient
Epigr^, with no less acuteness then they were composed.

Thus have I cursor^ly run over your serious times, and your rem^ions: but the
very pleasure I have taken in passing through these, though but very lightly,
does (I know not how) infuse into my pen now in motion, a new spirit, to
represent (with Your Majesty's leave) though it be but to my self, your true
pourtraiture in little, and (as it were) in one short view together, which I
thus conceive in my fancy.

I may say your stature is next a just proportion; your body erect and active;
your color or complexion has generally drawn more from the white Rose of
York, then the red of Lancaster; your hair nearer brown then yellow; your brow
proclaims much fidelity; a certain verecundious generosity graceth your eyes,
not such as we read of Sylla, but of Pompey; in your gestures nothing of
affectation; in your whole aspect no swelling, nothing boisterous, but an
alluring and well becoming suavity: your alacrity and vigor, the celerity of
your motions discovers; otherwise your affections are temperate, and demeanor
well settled; most firm to your purposes and promises. Loving Truth, hating
Vice; Just, Constant, Courageous, and not simply so, but knowingly Good.

Such you are; and being such; with what applause shall we receive you! Me
thinks I see, when sometimes I compare together horrid and quiet Times, as
often as Rich. the Third returned, perchance from his York, or further off, to
London, and assembled his Peers about him; how the heads of Noblemen did hang!
how pale their cheeks! what solicitous suspicions and murmurs they conferred
together; as if suddenly some dismal Comet or inauspicious Star had risen above
the Horizon! But contrariwise, the return of a just, and a good Prince, is in
truth nothing else but the very approach of the Sun, when with his vernal
beams he does expel the deformed Winter, and with a gentle heat does comfort
and exhilarate all things about us.

Live therefore, O King, to all that are good, most grateful. But in what
vvishes shall I end? After Trajans times there was among the ancients (with
whose example smitten, I have too boldly undertaken this small labor) under
every renowned Emperor a form of acclamation in this kind, Long may thou
live, Antoninus; Long may thou reign, Theodosius; happier then Augustus,
better then Trajan: but let this be the concluding Character of Your Majesty's
time; That the things we can wish, are fewer then those we praise.

Wherefore, when I have out of an ardent zeal only wished this, that Charles
our excellent King and Master may reign and live like himself alone, and long;
Be this the Conclusion,
In what transcendent happiness were we,
If know we would how fortunate we be!


Robert Deuereux Earl of Essex
w. Dolle F.



OF ROBERT DEVEREUX, Earl of ESSEX; AND GEORGE VILLIARS, Duke of BVCKINGHAM:
Some Observations by way of PARALLEL, in the time of their estates of Favor.
AMongst those Historical Employments, whereunto I have devoted my later
years, (for I read, that old men live more by memory then by hope) we thought
it would be a little time not ill spent, to confer the Fortunes and the
Natures of these two great Personages of so late knowledge. Wherein I intend to
do them right with the truth thereof, and my self with the freedom.

The beginning of the Earl of Essex I must attribute wholy or in great part
to my Lord of Leicester; but yet as an Introducer, or supporter, not as a
Teacher: for as I go along, it will easily appear, that he neither lived nor
died by his discipline. Always certain it is, that he drew him first into the
fatal Circle from a kind of resolved privateness at his house at Lampsie, in
South Wales; where, after the Academical life, he had taken such a taste of
the Rural, as I have heard him say, (and not upon any flashes or fumes of
Melancholy, or traverses of discontent, but in a serene and quiet mood) that
he could well have bent his mind to a retired course. About which time, the
said Earl of Leicester bewrayed a meaning to plant him in the Queens favor;
which was diversely interpreted by such as thought that great Artizan of Court
to do nothing by chance, nor much by affection. Some therefore were of
opinion, that feeling more and more in himself the weight of time, and being
almost tired (if there be a satiety in Power) with that assiduous attendance,
and intensive circumspection which a long indulgent fortune did require, he
was grown not unwilling, for his own ease, to bestow handsomely upon another
some part of the pains, and perhaps of the envy.

Others conceived rather, that having before for the same ends brought in, or
let in Sir Walter Raleigh, and having found him such an apprentice as knew
well enough how to set up for himself, he now meant to allie him with this
young Earl, who had yet taken no strong impressions. For though the said Sir
Walter Raleigh was a little before this, whereof I now speak by occasion,
much fallen from his former splendor in Court: yet he still continued in some
luster of a favored man, like billows that sink by degrees, even when the
vvind is down that first stirred them.

Thus runs the discourse of that time at pleasure. Yet I am not ignorant, that
there was some good while a very stiff aversation in my Lord of Essex from
applying himself to the Earl of Leicester, for what secret conceit I know not;
but howsoever, that humor was mollified by time; and by his Mother; and to
the Court he came under his lee.

The Duke of Buckingham had another kind of Germination; and surely had he been
a Plant, he would have been reckoned among the Sponte nascentes, for he sprung
without any help, by a kind of congenial composure (as we may term it) to the
likeness of our late Sovereign and Master of ever blessed memory; who taking
him into his regard, taught him more and more to please himself, and molded
him, (as it were) Platonically, to his own Idea; delighting first in the
choice of the Materials, because he found him susceptible of good form; and
afterward by degrees, as great Architects use to do, in the workmanship of his
Regal hand: nor staying here, after he had hardened and polished him about ten
years in the School of observance, (for so a Court is) and in the furnace of
trial about himself, (for he was a King could peruse men as well as books) he
made him the associate of his Heir apparent, together with the now Lord
Cottington (as an adjunct of singular experience and trust) in foreign
travels, and in a business of Love, and of no equal hazard (if the tenderness
of our zeal did not then deceive us;) enough (the world must confess) to
kindle affection even betwixt the distantest conditions; so as by the various
and inward conversation abroad, (besides that before and after at home) with
the most constant and best natured Prince, Bona si sua norint, as ever England
enjoyed, this Duke becomes now secondly seized of favor, as it were by
descent (though the condition of that estate be commonly no more then a Tenancy
at will, or at most for the life of the first Lord) and rarely transmitted:
which I have briefly set down, without looking beyond the vail of the Temple,
I mean, into the secret of high inclinations; since even Satirical Poets, (who
are otherwise of so licentious fancy) are in this point modest enough to
confess their ignorance. Nescio quid certe est quod me tibi temperet Astrum.


And these were both their springings and Imprimings, as I may call them.

In the profluence or proceedings of their fortunes, I observe likewise not
only much difference between them; but in the Earl, not a little from himself.
First, all his hopes of advancement had like to be strangled almost in the very
Cradle, by throwing himself into the Portugal Voyage without the Queens
consent, or so much as her knowledge; whereby he left his friends and
dependants near six months in desperate suspense what would become of him.
And to speak truth, not without good reason: For first, they might well
consider, That he was himself not well plumed in favor for such a flight:
Besides, That now he vvanted a Lord of Leicester at home (for he was dead the
year before) to smooth his absence, and to quench the practices at Court. But
above all, it lay open to every man's discourse, that though the bare offense to
his Sovereign and Mistress was too great an adventure; yet much more, when
she might (as in this case) have fairly discharged her displeasure upon her
Laws. Notwithstanding, a noble report coming home before him, at his return all
was clear, and this excursion was esteemed but a Sally of youth: Nay, he grew
every day more and more in her gracious conceit: whether such intermissions as
these do sometimes foment affection; or that, having committed a fault, he
became the more obsequious and plyant to redeem it: Or that she yet had not
received into her Royal breast any shadows of his popularity.

There was another time long after, when Sir Fulke Grevill (late Lord Brook)
a man in appearance intrinsecal with him, or at the least admitted to his
Melancholy hours, either belike espying some vveariness in the Queen, or
perhaps (with little change of the word, though more in the danger) some
vvariness toward him; and vvorking upon the present matter (as he was
dexterous and close) had almost super-induced into favor the Earl of
Southampton; which yet being timely discovered, my Lord of Essex chose to
evaporate his thoughts in a Sonnet (being his common way) to be sung before
the Queen, (as it was) by one Hales, in whose voice she took some pleasure;
whereof the complot, me thinks, had as much of the Hermit as of the poet. And
if thou should by her be now forsaken,
She made thy Heart too strong for to be shaken.


As if he had been casting one eye back at the least to his former retiredness.
But all this likewise quickly vanished, and there was a good while after fair
vveather over-head. Yet still, I know not how, like a gathering of Clouds, till
toward his latter time, when his humors grew Tart, as being now in the Lees
of favor, it brake forth into certain sudden recesses; sometimes from the
Court to Wansteed, otherwhiles unto Greenwich, often to his own Chamber; Doors
shut, Visits forbidden, and which was worse, diverse Contestations (between)
even with the Queen her self, (all preambles of ruin;) wherewith, though now
and then he did wring out of her Majesty some petty contentments, (as a man
would press sour Grapes) yet in the mean time was forgotten the Counsel of a
Wise, and then a Prophetical Friend, who told him, that such courses as those
were like hot Waters, which help at a pang, but if they be too often used,
will spoil the stomach.

On the Dukes part, we have no such abrupt strayns and precipees as these, but
a fair fluent and uniform course under both Kings: And surely, as there was in
his natural Constitution a mavelous equality, whereof I shall speak more
afterward; so there was an image of it in his Fortune, running (if I may
borrow an ancient comparison) as smoothly as a numerous Verse, till it met
with certain Rubs in Parliament, whereof I am induced by the very Subject
which I handle, to say somewhat, so far as shall concern the difference
between their times.

When my Lord of Essex stood in favor, the Parliaments were calm: Nay, I find
it a true observation, that there was no Impeachment of any Nobleman by the
Commons from the Reign of King Henry the sixth, until the eighteenth of King
James, nor any intervenient precedent of that Nature; not that something or
other could be vvanting to be said, while men are men: For not to go higher,
we are taught easily so much by the very Ballads and Libels of the Leicestrian
time.

But about the aforesaid Year, many young ones being chosen into the House of
Commons, more then had been usual in great Councels, (who though of the
weakest vvings, yet are the highest Flyers) there arose a certain unfortunate
and unfruitful Spirit in some places; not sowing, but picking at every stone in
the Field, rather then tending to the general Harvest. And thus far the
consideration of the Nature of the Time has transported me, and the occasion
of the Subject.

Now on the other side, I must with the like liberty observe two weighty and
vvatchful Solicitudes (as I may call them) which kept the Earl in extreme and
continual Caution, like a Bow still bent; whereof the Dukes thoughts were
absolutely free.

First, he was to vvrastle with a Queens declining, or rather with her very
setting Age (as we may term it,) which, besides other respects, is commonly
even of it self the more umbratious and apprehensive, as for the most part all
Horizons are charged with certain Vapors toward their Evening.

The other was a matter of more Circumstance, standing thus, viz.

All Princes, especially those whom God has not blessed with natural issue,
are (by vvisdome of State) somewhat shye of their Successors; and to speak
with do Reverence, there may be reasonably supposed in Queens Regnant, a
little proportion of tenderness that way, more then in Kings. Now there were
in Court two names of Power, and almost of Faction; the Essexian, and the
Cecilian, with their adherents; both well enough enjoying the present, and
yet both looking to the future, and therefore both holding correspondency with
some of the principal in Scotland, and had received advertisements and
instructions, either from them, or immediately from the King, as indubiate Heir
of this Imperial Crown.

But lest they might detect one another; this was Mysteriously carried by
several instruments and conducts, and on the Essexian side, in truth, with
infinite hazard: for Sir Robert Cecil, who (as Secretary of State) did dispose
the public Addresses, had prompter and safer conveyance; vvhereupon I cannot
but relate a memorable passage on either part, as the story following shall
declare.

The Earl of Essex had accommodated Master Anthony Bacon in partition of his
House, and had assigned him a noble entertainment: This was a Gentleman of
impotent feet, but a nimble head, and through his hand ran all the
intelligences with Scotland; who being of a provident nature (contrary to his
Brother the Lord Viscount St. Albons) and well knowing the advantage of a
dangerous Secret, would many times cunningly let fall some words, as if he
could much amend his Fortunes under the Cecilians (to whom he was near of
alliance and in blood also) and who had made (as he was not unwilling should
be believed) some great proffers to win him away: which once or twice he
pressed so far, and with such tokens and signs of apparent discontent to my
Lord Henry Howard, afterward Earl of Northampton, (who was of the party, and
stood himself inmuch Umbrage with the Queen) that he flies presently to my Lord
of Essex (with whom he was commonly primae admissionis, by his bed side in the
morning) and tells him, that unless that Gentleman were presently satisfied
with some round sum, all would be vented.

This took the Earl at that time ill provided (as indeed oftentimes his Coffers
were low) whereupon he was fain suddenly to give him Essex-House; which the
good old Lady Walsingham did afterward dis-ingage out of her own store with
2500 pound; and before, he had distilled 1500 pound at another time by the same
skill. So as we may rate this one Secret, as it was finely carried, at 4000
pounds in present money, besides at the least 1000 pound of annual pension to a
private and bedridden Gentleman: What would he have gotten if he could have gone
about his own business?

There was another accident of the same nature on the Cecilian side, much more
pleasant, but less chargeable, for it cost nothing but wit. The Queen having
for a good while not heard any thing from Scotland, and being thirsty of news,
it fell out that her Majesty going to take the air toward the Heath (the Court
being then at Greenwich) and Master Secretary Cecill then attending her, a Post
came crossing by, and blew his Horn, The Queen out of curiosity asked him from
whence the Dispatch came, and being answered, From Scotland; she stops the
Coach, and calls for the Packet. The Secretary, though he knew there were i^
it some Letters from his Correspondents, which to discover, were as so many
Serpents; yet made more show of diligence, then of doubt to obey; and asks some
that stood by (forsooth in great have) for a knife to cut up the Packet (for
otherwise he might perhaps have awaked a little apprehension;) but in the mean
time approaching with the Packet in his hand, at a pretty distance from the
Queen, he tells her, it looked and smelt illfavouredly, coming out of a
filthy budget, and that it should be fit first to open and air it, because he
knew she was a verse from ill sents. And so being dismissed home, he got
leisure by this seasonable shift, to sever what he would not have seen.

These two accidents, precisely true, and known to few, I have reported as not
altogether extravagant from my purpose, to show how the Earl stood in certain
perplexities, wherewith the Dukes days were not distracted. And this has been
the Historical part (as it were) touching the difference between them in the
rising and flowing of their fortunes.

I will now consider their several indowments both of Person and Mind, and then
a little of their Actions and Ends.

The Earl was a pretty deal the taller, and much the stronger, and of the abler
body: But the Duke had the neater limbs and freer delivery; he was also the
uprighter, and of the more comely motions; for the Earl did bend a little in
the neck, though rather forwards, then downwards: and he was so far from being
a good Dancer, that he was no graceful goer. If we touch particulars, the Duke
exceeded in the daintiness of his leg and foot, and the Earl in the
incomparable fairness and fine shape of his hands; which (though it be but
feminine praise) he took from his Father: For the general Air, the Earl had the
closer and more reserved Countenance, being by nature somewhat more cogitative,
and (which was strange) never more then at meals, when others are least:
Insomuch, as he was wont to make his observation of himself, that to solve any
knotty business which cumbred his mind, his ablest hours were when he had
checked his first appetite with two or three morsels, after which he sat
usually for a good while silent: yet he would play well and willingly at some
games of greatest attention, which showed that when he listed, he could license
his thoughts.

The Duke on the other side, even in the midst of so many diversions, had
continually a very pleasant and vacant face (as I may well call it) proceeding
no doubt from a singular assurance in his temper. And yet I must here give him
a rarer Elogy, which the malignest eye cannot deny him, That certainly, never
man in his place and power, did entertain greatness more familiarly, nor whose
looks were less tainted with his felicity; wherein I insist the rather, because
this in my judgment was one of his greatest virtues and victories of himself.

But to proceed, in the attiring and ornament of their bodies, the Duke had a
fine and unaffected politeness, and upon occasion costly, as in his Legations.

The Earl, as he grew more and more attentive to business and matters, so less
and less curious of clothing: Insomuch, as I do remember, those about him had
a conceit, that possibly sometimes when he went up to the Queen, he might scant
know what he had on; for this was his manner: His Chamber being commonly stived
with Friends or Suitors of one kind or other, when he was up, he gave his legs,
arms, and breast to his ordinary servants to button and dress him, with little
heed, his head and face to his Barber, his eyes to his letters, and ears to
Petitioners, and many times all at once; then the Gentleman of his Robes
throwing a cloak over his shoulders, he would make a step into his Closet, and
after a short prayer, he was gone: only in his Baths, he was somewhat delicate.
For point of diet and luxury, they were both very inordinate in their
appetites, especially the Earl, who was by nature of so indifferent a taste,
that I must tell a rare thing of him (though it be but a homely note) that he
would stop in the midst of any physical Potion, and after he had licked his
lips, he would drink off the rest; but I am weary of such slight Animadversions.

To come therefore to the inward furniture of their Minds, I will thus much
declare.

The Earl was of good Erudition, having been placed at study in Cambridge very
young by the Lord Burleigh, his Guardian, with affectionate and deliberate
care, under the oversight of Doctor Whitgift, then Master of Trinity College,
and after Archbishop of Canterbury: A man (by the way) surely of most Reverend
and Sacred memory, and (as I may well say) even of the Primitive temper; when
the Church by lowliness of spirit, did flourish in high examples: which I have
inserted as a due recordation of his virtues, having been much obliged to him
for many favors in my younger time.

About sixteen years of his age, (for thither he came at twelve) he took the
formality of Master of Arts, and kept his public Acts. And here I must not
smother what I have received by constant Information, That his own Father died
with a very cold conceit of him; some say, through the affection to his second
son Walter Devereux, who was indeed a diamond of the time, and both of an hardy
and delicate temper and mixture: But it seems, this Earl, like certain
vegetables, did bud and open slowly; Nature sometimes delighting to play an
afrer-game as well as Fortune, which had both their turns and tides in course.

The Duke was Illiterate, yet had learned at Court, first to sift and question
well, and to supply his own defects, by the drawing or flowing unto him of the
best Instruments of experience and knowledge, from whom he had a sweet and
attractive manner, to suck what might be for the public or his own proper use;
so as the less he was favored by the Muses, he was the more by the Graces.

To consider them in their pure Naturals, I conceive the Earls Intellectual
faculties to have been his stronger part, and in the Duke his Practical.

Yet all know, that he likewise at the first was much under the expectation of
his after-proof; such a Solar influence there is in the Sovereign aspect. For
their Abilities of discourse or pen, the Earl was a very acute and sound
speaker when he would intend it; and for his writings, they are beyond example,
especially in his familiar Letters and things of delight at Court, when he
would admit his serious habits, as may be yet seen in his Impresses and
Inventions of entertainment, and above all in his darling piece of love, and
self love; his Style was an elegant perspicuity, rich of phrase, but seldom
any bold Metaphors; and so far from Tumor, that it rather wanted a little
Elevation.

The Dukes delivery of his mind, I conceive not to be so sharp, as solid and
grave; not so solid and deep, as pertinent, and apposite to the times and
occasions.

The Earl I account the more liberal, and the Duke the more magnificent; for I
do not remember that my Lord of Essex in all his life time did build or adorn
any house, the Queen perchance spending his time, and himself his means; or
otherwise inclining to popular ways; for we know the people are apter to
applaud housekeepers, then house-raisers. They were both great cherishers of
Scholars and Divines; but it seems the Earl had obtained of himself one
singular point, that he could depart his affection between two extremes: for
though he bare always a kind of filial reverence toward Dr. Whitgift, both
before and after he was Archbishop; yet on the other side, he did not a little
love and tender Mr. Cartwright, though I think truly, with large distinction
between the Persons and the Causes, however he was taxed with other ends in
respecting that party.

They were both fair-spoken Gentlemen, not prone and eager to detract openly
from any man; and in this the Earl has been most falsely blemished in our
vulgar Story: only against one man he had forsworn all patience, namely Henry
Lord Cobham, and would call him (per Excellentiam) the Sycophant (as if it had
been an Emblem of his name) even to the Queen her self, though of no small
insinuation with her; and one Lady likewise (that I may civilly spare to
nominate, for her sex sake) whom he used to term the Spider of the Court: yet
generally in the sensitive part of their Natures, the Earl was the worst
Philosopher, being a great Resenter, and a weak Dissembler of the least
disgrace: And herein likewise, as in the rest, no good Pupil to my Lord of
Leicester, who was wont to put all his passions in his pocket.

In the growth of their Fortunes, the Duke was a little the swifter, and much
the greater; for from a younger Brothers mean estate, he rose to the highest
degree whereof a Subject was capable, either in Title or Trust. Therein I must
confess, much more consortable to Charles Brandon under Henry the Eight, who
was equal to him in both.

For matter of Donative and addition of substance, I do not believe that the
Duke did much exceed him, all considered, under both Kings.

For that which the Earl of Essex had received from her Majesty, besides the
Fees of his Offices, and the disposition of great Sums of money in her
Armies, was (about the time of his Arraignment, when faults use to be
aggravated with precedent benefits) valued at three hundred thousand pounds
sterling in pure gift for his only use, by the Earl of Dorset, then Lord
Treasurer; who was a wise man, and a strict Computist, and not well affected
toward him. And yet it is worthy of note in the Margent of both Times, that
the one was prosecuted with silence, and the other with murmr; So undoing a
measure is popular judgment!

I cannot here omit between them a great difference in establishing of both
their Fortunes and Fames.

For the first: the Duke had a care to introduce into near place at the Court
diverse of his confident Servants, and into high places very sound and grave
Personages. Whereas, except a Pensioner or two, we can scant name any one man
advanced of the Earls breeding, but Sir Thomas Smith, having been his
Secretary; who yet came never further (though married into a noble House) then
to the Clerk of the Council, and Register of the Parliament: not that the Earl
meant to stand alone like a Substantive (for he was not so ill a Grammarian in
Court;) but the Truth is in this point, the Cecilians kept him back, as very
well knowing that upon every little absence or disassiduity, he should be
subject to take cold at his back.

For the other, in the managing of their Fames, I note between them a direct
contrary wisdom; For the Earl proceeded by way of Apology, which he wrote and
dispersed with his own hands at large, though till his going to Ireland they
were but aerie objections. But of the Duke this I know, that one a^ing offered
for his ease to do him that kind of Service; He refused it with a pretty kind
of thankful scorn, saying, that he would trust his own good intentions which
God knew, and leave to him the pardoning of his Errors; and that he saw no
fruit of Apologies, but the multiplying of discourse; which surely was a well
settled Maxim. And for my own particular (though I am not obnoxious to his
memory, in the expression of Tacitus, Neque injuria, neque beneficio, saving
that he showed me an ordinary good Countenance: And if I were, yet I would
distinguish between Gratitude and Truth) I must bear him this Testimony, that
in a Commission laid upon me by Sovereign Command, to examine a Lady about a
certain filthy accusation, grounded upon nothing but a few single names taken
up by a Footman in a kennel, and straight baptized, [A list of such as the
Duke had appointed to be poisoned at home, himself being then in Spain:] I
found it to be the most malicious and frantic surmize, and the most contrary
to his nature, that I think had ever been brewed from the beginning of the
World, how soever countenanced by a Libellous Pamphlet of a fugitive Physician
even in Print; and yet of this would not the Duke suffer any answer to be made
on his behalf, so constant he was to his own principles.

In their Military Services, the Characters of the Earls employments were
these, viz.

His forwardest, was that of Portugal, before mentioned.

The saddest, that of Roan, where he lost his brave Brother.

His fortunatest piece I esteem the taking of Cadiz Malez, and no less modest;
for there he wrote with his own hands a censure of his Omissions.

His jealousest employment was to the relief of Calais, besieged by the
Cardinal Archduke: about which, there passed then between the Queen and the
French King much Art.

His Voyage to the Azores was the best, for the discovery of the Spanish
weakness, and otherwise almost a saving Voyage.

His blackest was that to Ireland, ordained to be the Sepulcher of his Father,
and the Gulf of his own Fortunes.

But the first, in 88, at Tilbury Camp, was in my judgment, the very poison of
all that followed; for there whilst the Queen stood in some doubt of a Spanish
invasion (though it proved but a Morricedance upon our Waves) she made him in
Field Commander of the Cavalry (as he was before in Court,) and much graced him
openly in view of the Soldiers and people, even above my Lord of L^icester:
the truth is, from thenceforth he fed too fast.

The Dukes employment abroad in this nature, was only in the Action of the Isle
of Reez, of which I must note somewhat for the honor of our Country, and of
His Majesty's times, and of them that perished and survived, and to redeem it
generally from misunderstanding. Therefore after enquiry amongst the wisest
and most indifferent men, of that Action, I dare pronounce, that all
Circumstances pondered, A tumultuary landing on our part, with about 1000 in
the whole; On theirs, ready to receive us, some 200 Horse, with near 2000 Foot,
and watching their best time of advantage, none of their Foot discovered by us
before, nor so much as suspected, and only some of their Horse descryed
straggling, but not in any bulk or body; their Cavalry not a Troop of
Biscoigners, mounted in have, but the greater part Gentlemen of Family, and of
picked Resolution, and such as charged home both in Front and on both Flanks
into the very sea; about sixscore of their 200 Horse strewed upon the Sand, and
none of them but one killed with a great shot; and after this, their Foot
likewise coming on to charge, till not liking the business, they fell to
flinging of stones, and so walked away.

I say, these things considered and laid together, we have great reason to
repute it a great impression upon an unknown place, and a noble argument, that
upon occasion, we have not lost our Ancient vigor. Only I could wish that the
Duke, who then in the animating of the Soldiers showed them very eminent
assurance of his valor, had afterward remembered that rule of Apelles, Manum
de Tabula. But he was greedy of honor, and hot upon the public ends, and too
confident in the prosperity of beginnings, as somewhere Polybius, that great
Critique of war, observes of young Leaders, whom fortune has not before
deceived.

In this their Military care and dispensation of reward and punishment, there
was very few remarkable occasions under the Duke, saving his continual
vigilance and voluntary hazard of his person, and kindnesses to the Soldiers,
both from his own table and purse; for there could be few disorders within an
Island where the Troops had no scope to disband, and the inferior Commanders
were still in sight.

In the Earl we have two examples of his severity, the one in the Island
Voyage, where he threw a Soldier with his own hand out of a Ship; the other in
Ireland, where he decimated certain Troops that ran away, renewing a piece of
the Roman Discipline.

On the other side, we have many of his Lenity, and one of his Facility, when
he did connive at the bold Trespass of Sir Walter Raleigh, who before his own
arrival at Fayall, had landed there against his precise Commandment; at which
time he let fall a Noble word, being pressed by one, (whose name I need not
remember) that at the least he would put him upon a Martial Court: That I would
do (said he) if he were my friend.

And now I am drawing toward the last act, which was written in the Book of
necessity.

At the Earls end I was abroad, but when I came home (though little was left
for Writers to glean after Judges) yet, I spent some curiosity to search what
it might be that could precipitate him into such a prodigious Catastrophe; and
I must, according to my professed freedom, deliver a circumstance or two of
some weight in the truth of that story, which was neither discovered at his
arraignment, nor after in any of his private confessions.

There was amongst his nearest attendants, one Henry Cuffe, a man of secret
ambitious ends of his own, and of proportionate Counsels smothered under the
habit of a Scholar, and slubbered over with a certain rude and clownish
fashion, that had the semblance of integrity.

This Person, not above five or six weeks before my Lords fatal irruption into
the City, was by the Earls Special Command suddenly discharged from all further
attendance, or access unto him, out of an inward displeasure then taken against
his sharp and importune infusions, and out of a glimmering oversight, that he
would prove the very Instrument of his ruin.

I must add hereunto, that about the same time my Lord had received from the
Countess of Warwick (a Lady powerful in the Court, and indeed a virtuous user
of her power) the best advice that I think was ever given from either Sex; That
when he was free from Restraint, he should closely take any out-lodging at
Greenwich, and sometimes when the Queen went abroad in a good humor, (whereof
she would give him notice) he should come forth, and humble himself before Her
in the Field.

This Counsel sunk much into him, and for some days he resolved it: but in the
mean time, through the intercession of the Earl of Southampton, whom Cuffe had
gained, he was restored to my Lords ear, and so working advantage upon his
disgraces, and upon the vain foundation of vulgar breath, which hurts many good
men, spun out the final destruction of his Master and himself, and almost of
his Restorer, if his pardon had not been won by inches.

True it is, that the Earl in Westminster Hall did in general disclose the evil
persuasions of this man; but the particulars which I have related of his
dismission and restitution, he buried in his own breast for some reasons
apparent enough; indeed (as I conjecture) not to exasperate the Case of my Lord
of Southampton, though he might therewith a little peradventure have mollified
his own. The whole and true Report I had by infallible means from the person
himself that both brought the advice from the aforesaid excellent Lady, and
carried the discharge to Cuff^, who in a private Chamber was stricken therewith
into a swoun almost dead to the earth, as if he had fallen from some high
Steeple: such Turrets of hope he had built in his own Fancy.

Touching the Dukes sudden period, how others have represented it unto their
Fancies, I cannot determine: for my part, I must confess from my soul, that I
never recall it to mind without a deep and double astonishment of my discourse
and reason:

First of the very horror and atrocity of the Fact in a Christian Court, under
so moderate a Government; but much more at the impudency of the pretense,
whereby a desperate discontented Assassinate would after the perpetration have
honested a mere private revenge (as by precedent circumstances is evident
enough) with I know not what public respects, and would fain have given it a
Parliamentary cover. Howsoever, thus these two great Peers were dis-robed of
their Glory, the one by judgment, the other by violence, which was the small
distinction.

Now after this short contemplation of their diversities (for much more might
have been spoken, but that I was fitter for Rapsody then Commentary) I am
lastly desirous to take a summary view of their Conformities, which I verily
believe will be found as many, though perchance heeded by few, as are extant in
any of the ancient Parallel.

They both slept long in the arms of Fortune: They were both of ancient blood,
and of Foreign extraction: They were both of straight and goodly stature, and
of able and active bodies: They were both industrious and assiduous, and
attentive to their ends: They were both early Privy-Councellors, and employed
at home in the secretest and weightiest affairs in Court and State: They were
both likewise Commanders abroad in Chief, as well by Sea, as by Land: both
Masters of the Horse at home, both chosen Chancellours of the same University,
namely, Cambridge: They were both indubitable strong, and high-minded men; yet
of sweet and accostable Nature, almost equally delighting in the press and
affluence of Dependants and Suitors, which are always the Burres, and
sometimes the Briers of Favorites. They were both married to very virtuous
Ladies, and sole Heirs, and left issue of their Sex, and both their Wives
converted to contrary Religions. They were both in themselves rare and
excellent examples of Temperance and Sobriety; but neither of them of
Continency.

Lastly, after they had been both subject (as all Greatness and Splendour is) to
certain obloquies of their actions; They both concluded their earthly felicity
in unnatural ends, and with no great distance of time in the space either of
life or favor.

And so having discharged this poor Exercise of my Pen according to my
Knowledge and Reality, let us commit those two noble Peers to their Eternal
rest, with their memorable abilities remaining in few, and their compassionate
infirmities common to all.

THE DIFFERENCE AND DISPARITY Between the Estates and Conditions OF GEORGE Duke
of BUCKINGHAM, AND ROBERT Earl of ESSEX.
Written by the Earl of Clarendon in his younger days.
THough it shall appear an unseasonable itch of Wit to say ought in this
Subject, and an unskilful one, if invention reach not what is already said,
with all the swelling Elogies that shall attend all that fall from that Pen;
yet I shall presume (disavowing only the vanities) to think that in the
severest considerations of their Persons, in their Educations, in their
Insinuations into favor, in managing that Favor, in their whole Education
(but that they were both glorious in the eyes of their Princes) they were as
distant, as unfit, as impossible for Parallels, as any two virtuous and great
persons (for so they were both) we can direct our discourse to. Their
engagements, encumbrances, and disadvantages, being so different, that it was
the just wonder (and yet continues) of the world, that the Earl could everfall,
(his whole fate being in the discretion of his own soul;) and the Duke (who all
his life of favor, stood the mark shot at by the most petulant and malicious
spirits this Climate ever nourished) could stand so long.

He that shall walk in a short survey of both their times, actions, and
dependancies, shall find them these.

Though the first approach of the Earl to Court was under the shadow of the
Great Earl of Leicester, yet he owned him rather for his invitation thither,
then his preferment there.

For no question, he found advantage from the stock of his Fathers Reputation;
the people looking on his quality with reverence (for I do not find that any
young Nobleman had yet surprised their hopes, or drawn their eyes) and on his
youth with pity; for they were nothing satisfied concerning his Fathers death,
who had been advanced to honorable dangers by the mediation of such as
delighted not in his company; as it was the mysterious wisdom of those times
to poison with oil, and homines per honores ferire. And if there were not any
such compassion in the Queen, yet surely she beheld him as the son of an
excellent man, that died in her service, and had left a precious fame surviving.

In the Court he stayed not above a year, but undertook that journey into the
Low Countries with his Father-in-law, and went General of the Horse in a great
Army, though he was not full nineteen years of age, there being then no such
Criticismes as interpreted the acceptance or pursuit even of the greatest
dignity and command, a conspiracy against the State; but all men were glad to
see him set himself so brave a task, by undertaking such an Employment.

From this first action he took a Charter of the peoples hearts, which was
never cancelled; but as if they had looked only on the boldness, not the
success of his enterprises, he was sure to return with triumph, though the
Voyage miscarried: for amongst all his foreign undertakings, if they be
weighed in the peoples usual Scale, the Cost, though there was not above one or
two prosperous returns, and as many that had sad and calamitous issues; yet he
never suffered the least public imputation or murmr; but was received with
that joy, as if the Fleet or Army were sent out to bring him home, not any
spoil or conquest, (to which he had wholly dedicated his faculties.)

He moved only in his proper Orb; out of it he was extra sphaeram activitatis,
and rather of much business, (as a man toward whom the Queen had directed some
rays of affection) then of much dexterity above other men.

Surely, I by no means imagine him built or furnished for a Courtier.

For however the Arts and mysteries of a Court are undefinable, yet as in the
reformation and improvement of all Sciences, there are certain principles and
maxims unalterable and unquestionable, so there is a certain comparity,
conformity, and complacency in the manners, and a discreet subtilty in the
composition, without which (as with those principles) no man in any Age or
Court shall be eminent in the Aulical function.

Now how ill the Earl was read in this Philosophy, his servant Cuffe (whose
observations were sharp enough, whatever Stoicismes raved in his nature) well
discerned, when he said, Amorem and odium semper in front gessit, nec celare
novit.

And I shall not impute it to his want of will (though that would be but an ill
argument, for his Courtship) nor of power, for he did many greater things; but
only of skill to contrive conveniences of honors and preferments at Court, for
such friends as might have been good outworks to have fortified and secured
his own condition, except all his dependants were of another complexion then
could have lived in that Air.

And indeed, I do not find that the Earl much inclined to, or desired the
reputation of a Courtier, besides the preservation of himself, and the Queens
affection (which yet he endeavored rather to master, then to win;) but he
seemed, though he had such places of honor and attendance as be the most
significant badges of a Courtier, but in pace belli gerere negotium, and
retired only from the War to prevent Peace.

Then if we visit his correspondencies abroad (which he rather maintained out
of state, then contrived out of skill) we shall see they were always with an
eye upon actions, and his Intelligences had ever some hint of Tumult and
Commotion; as if the King of Spain was loud or frantic at his devotions, as
when he vowed at Mass, that he would be revenged of England, though he sold all
those Candlesticks upon the Altar: This Information was given by the Earl. But
it was observed then, that if there were ought intended against the Life or
Person of the Queen, though it were in the Court of Spain, where the Earl had
especially his Leigiers, the first notice came over by my Lord Cecil, for whom
(indeed) it seemed as necessary there should be treasons, as for the State that
they should be prevented. Insomuch as it was then (how unjustly soever)
conceived, that though he created none, yet he fomented some conspiracies, that
he might give frequent evidences of his loyalty, having no other advantage (as
the Earl and others had in person) to justify him in an ordinary estimation,
but by eminent services.

And those he knew must be best relished, that concerned her own preservation;
and therefore in the least vacations from Treasons, he was ever busy to set on
foot some vigilant and tender Law (as there was scarce any Parliament, without
some such) that had a peculiar eye to the Queens safety. Which (however they
are by such as cannot apprehend the danger of those times, looked upon without
much reverence) could not but make singular impression in the Queens heart of
his fidelity.

The Encumbrances that the Earl had to wrestle withal (for I shall only look
over his life without particular enquiry into his actions, which had all
glorious ends, or glorious intentions) were fewer then ever any great man ever
met withal, and his advantages more in number, and in weight.

It Is true, he was rivall'd by a strong and subtle faction, which cared and
consulted for his ruin, as a foundation they must build upon; and were intent
to betray him abroad, and mis-interpret him at home: yet the danger was thus
allayed, that they were all his public and professed enemies, and so known
unto the Queen, that they durst never impertinently urge ought against him,
since they were sure their malice was concluded, when the reason of their
objection happily might not be considered.

And indeed, that trick of countenancing and protecting factions (as that Queen
almost her whole Reign did with singular and equal demonstration of grace look
upon several persons of most distinct wishes one toward another) was not the
least ground of much of her quiet and success. And she never doubted but that
men that were never so opposite in their good will each to others, nor never so
dishonest in their projectments for each others confusion, might yet be
reconciled into their Allegiance toward her. Insomuch, that during her whole
Reign, she never endeavored to reconcile any personal differences in the
Court, though the unlawful emulations of persons of nearest trust about her,
were even like to overthrow some of her chiefest designs. A Policy seldom
entertained by Princes, especially if they have issues to survive them.

Among the advantages the Earl had (and he had many that will distinguish him
from any man that has, or is likely to succeed him) I shall rank the nature
and the spirit of that time in the first place. For I shall not mention his
Interest in the Queens favor, till the last, which shall appear greatest by
the circumstances that lost it.

'Twas an ingenuous un-inquisitive time, when all the passions and affections
of the people were lapped up in such an innocent and humble obedience, that
there was never the least contestations, nor capitulations with the Queen, nor
(though she very frequently consulted with her Subjects) any further reasons
urged of her actions, then her own will.

When there were any grievances, they but reverently conveyed them to her
notice, and left the time and order of the rest to her Princely discretion.
Once they were more importunate and formal in pursuing the complaints of the
Purveyers for provision, which without question was a crying and an heavy
oppression: The Queen sent them wor^, they all thought themselves wise enough
to reform the misdemeanors of their own families, and wished that they had so
good opinion of her, as to trust her with her servants too. I do not find that
the Secretary who delivered this Message, received any reproach or check, or
that they proceeded any further in their inquisition. In this excellent time
the Queens remarkable Grace indeared the Earl to the regard of the people,
which he quickly improved to a more tender estimation; neither was this
affection of theirs ever an objection against him, till himself took too much
notice of it; for the Queen had ever loved her people without the least scruple
of jealousy, nor was ever offended if he was the darling of their eyes, till
she suspected he inclined to be the darling of their hearts.

In his Friendships he was so fortunate, that though he contracted with ancient
enemies, and such as he had undeserved by some unkindness, as grievous as
injurious, it is not known that ever he was betrayed in his trust, or had ever
his secrets derived unhandsomly to any ears that they were not intended to: and
this, if he had not planted himself upon such, whose zeal to his service was
more remarkable then their other abilities, would have preserved him from so
prodigious a fate.

Lastly, he had so strong an harbor in the Queens breast, that notwithstanding
these dangerous indiscretions of committing himself in his recreations and
shooting-matches to the public view of so many thousand Citizens, which
usually flocked to see him, and made within the reach of his own ears large
acclamations in his praise; notwithstanding his receiving into his troop of
attendance, and under that shadow bringing into the Court, diverse persons not
liked by the Queen, and some that had been in prison for suspicion of Treason,
as Captain Wainman; and then his glorious feather-triumph, when he caused two
thousand Orange-tawny Feathers, in despite of Sir Walter Raleigh, to be worn
in the Tilt-yard, even before Her Majesty's own face (all which would have
found regret in the stomachs of most Princes:) yet neither these, nor any
whispers that were distilled into the Queens ears (for ought appears) ever
lessened him in her Highness's regard, till he committed such strange mistakes
as ever have been prosecuted with most exemplary punishments by the Laws
themselves: which (though in jealousy of Princes, they often compound Treasons
out of circumstances and possibilities) yet are as tender of the reputation of
great men as in any Commonwealth whatsoever.

If toward his period the Queen grew a less merciful interpreter of his
failings and successes; 'twas when she believed he grew too familiar, and in
love with his passions, and had a mind not to be satisfied but upon his
conditions, and too insensible of his own errors. And (truly) that would not be
unfitly applied to him, that was once said of the terrible Mountford Earl of
Leicester, in the reign of Henry the Third; (though nothing be more horrible to
me then the petulancy of that wit, which for an unhandsome jest, would accuse
him of a purpose to be King (for doubtless in his solemn purposes he was of a
firm and unshaken allegiance) that he had a spirit too great for a Subject. For
besides that he looked from above, and with a displeasure that had a mixture of
scorn more then anger upon such as courted not his protection, his talk was in
an high and unusual dialect; he took much delight to discover an hatred (like a
contempt) of the King of Spain, and would often mention his person as
familiarly as Luther did our Henry the Eighth; and as Fox begins his Book
against the Pope with the first lines of Tullies Oration against Cataline,
Quousque tandem, etc. and so he would write in his ordinary Letters, and
publish in his Apology, I will teach that proud King to know, etc. Which
sounded possibly not so acceptable to the Queen her self, who though she were
perfect enough in her dislike to that King, thought that the greatest Subject
ought not to approach the infirnities, or the mention of any King without some
reverence. And the Earl in his zeal to the Hollanders (when the great design
was to mediate a Truce between Spain and them, and almost the whole
Councel-board inclined that way) would not only in the violence of his
opposition show a dislike to the insolency and tyranny of the Spaniards, but of
the very Government of a Monarchy.

Then his carriage toward the Queen her self was very strange, and his usual
converse upon too bold terms, which proceeded not from any distemper but his
passions, (though natural choler be but an unruly excuse for roughness with
Princes:) but 'twas a way of traffic (I know not upon what unlucky success) he
had from the beginning fancied, and lasted even to his end. Insomuch, as upon
his first restraint, (which was not many months before his conclusion) he did
somewhat neglect the Queens pardon, because it came not accompanied with a new
grant of his Lease of the farm of sweet Wines, which was then near expired;
though she intimated to him, that she only deferred that Grace upon the
Physicians Maxims: Corpora impura, quo magis pascas, laeseris.

Lastly, If ever that uncouth speech fell from him to the Queen, which is
delivered to us by one that was much conversant then in the secrets of the
Court, That she was as crooked in her disposition, as in her carcass (when
happily there was a little unevenness in her shoulders) all my wonder at his
destruction is taken from me: and I must needs confess, I am nothing satisfied
with that loose report which has crept into our discourse, that shortly after
his miserable end, (which indeed deserved compassion from all hearts) I know
not upon what unseasonable delivery of a Ring or Jewel by some Lady of the
Court, the Queen expressed much reluctance for his death. I am sure no
discovery, no expression, either to his Memory, Friends, or Dependants, can
weigh down the indignity of the Sermon at Paul's Cross, and set out by Command,
or that Discourse that was so carefully commended abroad of his Treasons; which
were two of the most pestilent Libels against his Fame, that any Age has seen
published against any Malefactor, and could not with that deliberation have
been contrived, and justified by Authority, had not there been some sparks of
indignation in the Queen that were unquenched even with his blood.

It Is time to call my self homewards to the view of those considerations, in
which will clearly appear the in-quality of the Dukes condition, to what has
been said of the Earl: and it may be, I have been at my distance too bold an
undertaker of these actions, which were performed so many years before my
cradle.

I shall not much insist on the Dukes Morning, being so different from that of
the Earls, as would discountenance all purposes of bringing them into one
circle; he had no satisfaction in his friendships, or pretense in his quality,
but was his own Harbinger at Court. For though the Herald may walk in as large
a Field of his Pedigree, as shall concern any Subject, yet that being no inlet
to his advancements, or occasion of his favor, I shall leave to such as shall
have the preferment to write his Life. It Is true, that soon after his approach
was found to be acceptable, and that he was like enough to be entertained by
Him that had most power to bid him welcome; he received pretty conveniences
from the respects of some great men, which at most (being as much out of
disaffection to others, as tenderness to him) yielded him rather assistance,
then support; so that indeed he was (if ever any) Faber fortunae suae: and all
such as will not be impudent strangers to the discerning spirit of that King
who first cherished him, cannot but impute it to a certain innate wisdom and
virtue that was in him, with which he surprised, and even fascinated all the
faculties of his incomparable Master. He was noe sooner admitted to stand
there in his own right, but the eyes of all such as either looked out of
judgment, or gazed out of curiosity, were quickly directed toward him, as a
man in the delicacy and beauty of his color, decency and grace of his motion,
the most rarely accomplished they had ever beheld; whilst some that found
inconveniences in his nearness, intended by some affront to discountenance his
effeminacy, till they perceived he had masked under it so terrible a courage as
would safely protect all his sweetnesses.

And now he quickly showed the most glorious Star that ever shined in any
Court; insomuch that all Nations prosecuted him with love and wonder, as fast
as the King with Grace; and to his last he never lost any of his luster.

His swiftness and nimbleness in rising, may be with less injury ascribed to a
Vivacity, then any Ambition in his nature; since it is certain the Kings
eagerness to advance him, so surprised his youth, that he seemed only to submit
his shoulders, without resistance to such burdens as his Highness would be
pleased to lay on him; and rather to be held up by the violent inclination of
the King, then to climb up by any Art or industry of his own: yet once seated,
he would not affront that judgment that raised him, by an unseasonable
diffidence of himself, but endeavored with an understanding boldness to manage
those employments which his modesty would never suffer him to court.

During the Reign of his first Master, I cannot but say, he enjoyed an
indifferent calm in his Fortune and Favor; for though there were some
boisterous interruptions by the clamor of the people, yet shortly again their
affections were as violent (and almost as senseless) toward him, as ever their
accusations were before or after; Insomuch as the Chief Rulers among them
performed frequent visits to him, when he was somewhat diseased in his health,
and out of a zealous care of him, would have begot in him some jealousy, that
his Physicians and nearest Attendants about him, being (perhaps) of the same
Religion with the King of Spain, had a purpose by poison to revenge some
injuries (these people had conceived) in the right of that Nation. And here the
Fortunes of our great Personages met, when they were both the Favorites of the
Princes, and Darlings of the people. But their affections to the Duke, were but
very short lived.

And now it is seasonable to say somewhat of the disposition and spirit of this
time, since the Disparity of those we treat of, will be in that discerned, and
the Earl be found by so much to have the advantage, that there will be little
need of conferring the particulars of their lives. 'Twas a busy querulous
frowardtime, so much degenerated from the purity of the former, that the people
under pretenses of Reformation, with some petulant discourses of Liberty (which
their great Impostors scattered among them, like false glasses to multiply
their fears) began Abditos Principis sensus, and quid occultius parat
exquirere: extended their enquiries even to the Chamber and private actions of
the King himself, forgetting that truth of the Poet, -- Nusquam Libertas
gratior extat, -- quam sub Rege pio: 'Twas strange to see how men afflicted
themselves to find out calamities and mischiefs, whilst they borrowed the name
of some great persons to scandalize the State they lived in: A general disorder
throughout the whole body of the Commonwealth; nay the vital part perishing,
the Laws violated by the Judges, Religion profaned by the Prelates, Heresies
crept into the Church and countenanced: and yet all this shall be quickly
rectified without so much as being beholding to the King, or consulting with
the Clergy.

Surely had Petronius now lived, he would have found good cause to say, Nostra
regio tam praesentibus plena est numinibus, ut facilius possis deum quam
hominem invenire. For my part, whether the frenzy was nourished in the warm
breast of young men (who are commonly too much in love with their own time, to
think it capable of reformation;) or whether it was fomented by riper heads,
that had miscarried in their propositions of advancement, and are violent in
the successes of Queen Elizabeth; or whether it was only the revolution of time
that had made them unconcerned in the loyal fears that governed sixty years
since, I shall not presume to guess: but shall rather wish for the spirit and
condition of that time, as he did for wars and commotions, Quoniam acerbissima
Dei flagella sunt, quibus hominum pertinaciam punit, ea perpetua oblivione
sepelienda, potius quam memoriae mandanda esse.

King James being no sooner dead, but such as had from his beginning
impertinently endeavored to supplant him, and found that he was so deeply
rooted in his Sovereigns acceptance, that there should be no shaking him with
clamorous objections, found some means to commend over his condition and
transcendent power, as they termed it, as a matter of public consequence to
the people: and from this instant to his fatal end he stood as it were expos^d,
notwithstanding all the shelter of the Sovereigns regard, to all the calumnies
and obloquies the impudent malice of the Rabble could fling on him: and in all
their pretenses of Reformation, as if their end were only his shame, not
amendment, they rather cudge^ then repr^hend him. Of this wild rage (not
within the main purpose of an Apology) I shall give one or two instances,
insisting on them only as they were mentioned in the indigested noise of the
people, not as they were marshalled with other employments in any public
Declaration or Remonstrance.

There were two errors chiefly laid to his charge, and so eagerly urged, that
in them he was almost concluded an Enemy to the King and Country; which
certainly in the next Age will be conceived mavelous strange Objections: the
one being a strong Argument of his Worth, the other a piece of its Reward: the
first was the plurality of Offices, though they were immediately conferred on
him by the King, or else such as he was promoted to by his Majesty's own
allowance, to acquire to the which, there was no condition but his Majesty was
a witness, if not a surety for the performance; and yet for the execution of
them, never man studied more to apt himself, nor descended to meaner Arts to
give general content. And here possibly it concerned his Mirth to see his
ambition prosecuted of some, who desired to ease him of this Guilt by
undertaking his Trust.

The other was the preferment of his Kindred, upon whom his Majesty (delighting
to give all gracious expression of his affection to the Duke) would (to enliven
any branch that grew from the same Stock) confer both Honor and Living. And
this surely had so little signification of offense in the Dukes conscience,
that he thought he should have sinned against the Law of Nature, and a generous
disposition, that it would have been an eternal brand to his name and memory,
if being so seized of this great Kings favor, he had no regard but to his own
advancement.

And it is not improbable, that his noble care of his Family, confirmed him in
the estimation of his Master, who knew that all Fountains ought to bestow
themselves upon their Neighbour-brooks, and could have hoped for little effects
from his service, whose care was only directed for him^f.

Now whether the importunate clamor upon these two faults (whereof he found no
regret, but comfort in himself) made him so to esteem of the popular
discretion, and honesty; or whether he esteemed it the same ignominy to have
his allegiance exalted with blasphemy, as (for attending the Prince out of
Spain) he was called our Redeemer; or to have his misfortunes mistaken into
disloyalty, when his Enterprises succeeded not according to the impossible
expectation of the people: certain it is, that all his later time he wholly
neglected all compliance with them. It Is not unlikely he might wonder, that in
all the scrutinous enquiry for Reformation, there was never the least blemish
of dislike toward any great man, but such as were in the immediate regard and
estimation of the King: As if all misdemeanors had been committed within the
Verge of his Majesty's own Chamber.

I shall not confer any of these particulars with the Earl. When the noise of
the people had disquieted him into action from Court (which was his Orb) though
he could not put off the place, or rather the Title of Command, he committed
himself a most willing Pupil to the directions of such as were generally
thought fit to manage affairs of that nature: and here it cannot be denied, but
as he was a vigilant and observant Student in the contemplative part, so he
improved the courage of the whole Army by his example.

And surely, there is no cause to doubt, he would in short time have made so
glorious a progress in his profession, (however he seemed shaped for easier
skirmishes) as the world should have seen that promptness and alacrity in his
nature, that could happily have traveled in any path he could direct it, had
he not been cut off by that ex^crable Treason, as makes all good men tremble,
and Posterity shall start at it: and had he not been marvellously secured in
the tranquillity of his own soul from any of that guilt the Rabble had
conferred on him, it had been no hard matter to have fortified himself against
the knife of a Villain, though it were sharpened in the lewdest forge of
revenge the great Patron of Murder has countenanced since the spilling of the
first blood. But he that was unsafe only in the greatness of his own spirit,
could not be persuaded to wear any privy-coat, but (which he never put off) of
a good conscience. And the same Providence that conveyed him into grace, with
so different marks from other men, would not suffer him to fall, but by such a
fate as may determine all the Monarchies of the world; and which had been
seldom acted, but upon the most Eminent and Honorable Persons of their times.

And here again, he may be said to meet with the Earl, that they both died by
the people, though by very different affections, which continued so
preposterous, as Justice upon the One (for Justice is the execution of the Law)
was interpreted a Conspiracy; And Treason upon the Other, conceived Religion;
And yet one had the Royal Sacrifice of his Sovereigns sorrow, which the other
wanted.

In contriving and contracting his Friendships, he was provident and
circumspect enough (as may appear by those Marriages in which he linked his
House;) and in the observation of them he was so severe and real, as he wanted
some of that, which is usually the poison of Noble minds, Suspicion; looking no
further into the affections of those he chose, then the Testimony of their own
hearts, though this Confidence sometimes was like to prove dangerous to him.
And here the Earl had the day too: For his friends were Skreens between him and
envy, and his own infirmities taken from him, and imposed on them; when the
Duke was so far from that ease, or being discharged of the burden that
belonged to them, that he was traduced with all the mistakes of all his
friends, kindred, and dependants; as if he were the mischievous Agent, they
only improvident and surprised Instruments.

It Is true, they were neither of them much skilled in that Paradox of charity,
loving their enemies: and yet the Dukes easiness to reconcilement, and too soon
forgetting the circumstances of Grudges, betrayed him often to the injuries of
such as had not the same spirit.

Concerning the parts and endowments of his Mind, if the consideration of
Learning extend it self not further then drudgery in Books, the Dukes
employments forbids to suspect him for any great Scholar: but if a nimble and
fluent expression, and delivery of his Mind (and his discourse was of all
Subjects) in a natural and proper dialect be considered, he was well lettered:
but if he had that Eloquence of Nature or Art, I am sure he wanted that other
accident, (which the best Judge attributed to the Earl as an Eloquence that
passed the other two) the pity and benevolence of his hearers; insomuch that
his words and speeches were never entertained with that candor or common
charity of Interpretation, as civilly belongs to all Delinquents: witness that
speech in the fullness of his joy, he let fall to his Majesty in the behalf of
his people, which was immediately perverted and carpt at, as an aggravation of
his other imaginary and fantastic offenses.

He was besides not only of an eminent affection to learning in conferring
dignities and rewards upon the most learned men; either of which is seldom
without judgment; and he was the Governor in a Province of Learning, which
was an Argument he confuted the people by, when he suffered himself to be
chosen Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, even at the time when they
had concluded his destruction, as a man odious to all Subjects.

In his Liberalities and rewards of those he fancied, he was so cheerfully
magnificent, and so much at the mercy of his Dependants, that if they proved
improvident or immodest in their Suits, the inconveniency and mischief was
surely his; insomuch as he seemed wholly possessed from himself, and to be only
great for their use; and he had then so happy a bravery in deriving of his
Favors, and conferred them with so many noble circumstances, as the manner was
as obliging as the matter, and men's understandings oft-times as much puzzled as
their gratitude.

If the Earl sided him here, his bounty fell upon more unthrifty men; for there
are many Families owe their large possessions only to the openness of the Dukes
hand, though much be lost too in the ingratitudes of the Receivers.

But that which shined with most luster in him, and which indeed flowed in his
nature much above its proportion in other men, was an admirable affability and
gentleness to all men. And this was the pomp and glory of all his Titles;
Insomuch as though his Memory were a place so taken up with high thoughts, and
unlikely to have any room for matters of so small importance; he was ever known
to entertain his younger acquaintance with that familiarity, as if they had
been stairs by which he ascended to his greatness.

He had besides such a tenderness and compassion in his nature, that such as
think the Laws dead if they are not severely executed, censured him for being
too merciful; but his charity was grounded upon a wiser Maxim of St^te: Non
minus turpe Principi multa Supplicia; quam Medico multa Funera. And he believed
doubtless, that Hanging was the worst use man could be put to.

And now, me thinks, to believe a man dressed in all these real ornaments of
Honor, could be an Enemy to the Public, to his Country, is as ingenuous as
to believe a man of a solemn friendlyness to ten thousand men, and of a
resolved hatred to mankind.

Of all imputations, that was the most unskilful, which accused him of a
purpose and design to enrich himself. Certainly that was never in his vows; and
possibly the Auditors of his Revenues do not find his Estate so much increased
from the time of his first Master, though he enjoyed a glorious Harvest of
almost four years, which if it had been brought in to his own use, could not
but have made an envious addition. Since then, till their Evenings, these two
great Persons can hardly meet: Let not the violence of their deaths reconcile
them, since the same consideration might as well unite the great King of
France, and the Marshal Byron, and many others of more different conditions.

He that shall continue this Argument further, may happily begin his Parallel
after their deaths; and not unfitly: He may say, that they were both as mighty
in Obligations as ever any Subjects, and both their Memories and Families as
unrecompenced by such as they had raised. He may tell you of the Clients that
burnt the Pictures of the one, and defaced the Arms of the other, lest they
might be too long suspected for their Dependants, and fi^d dis-advantage by
being honest to their Memories. He may tell you of some that grew strangers to
their houses, lest they might find the Tract of their own footsteps, that
might upbraid them with their former attendance. He may say, that both their
Memories shall have a reverend savor with all Posterity; and all Nations. He
may tell you many more particulars, which I dare not do.

CRUX: FIDEI COTI-CULA


A VIEW OF THE LIFE AND DEATH OF George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF GEORGE VILLIERS, Late Duke of Buckingham.
I Determine to write the Life and the End, the Nature and the Fortunes of
GEORGE VILLIERS, late Duke of Buckingham: (esteeming him worthy to be Registered
among the great examples of Time and Fortune:) which yet I have not undertaken
out of any wanton pleasure in mine own Pen; nor truly, without often pondering
with my self beforehand what Censures I might incur. For I would not be
ignorant by long observation, both abroad and at home; That every where all
greatness of power and Favor is circumvested with much prejudice. And that it
is not easy for Writers to research with due distinction (as they ought) in
the actions of eminent Personages, both how much may have been blemished by the
envy of others, and what was corrupted by their own felicity; unless, after the
period of their Splendor, which must needs dazzle their beholders, and perhaps
oftentimes themselves, we could as in some Scenes of the fabulous Age, excite
them again, and confer a while with their naked Ghosts. However, for my part, I
have no servile or ignoble end in my present labor, which may on either side
restrain or embase the freedom of my poor judgment. I will therefore steer as
evenly as I can, and deduce him from his Cradle through the deep and lubrick
waves of State and Court, till he was swallowed in the Gulf of fatality.

I find him born in the year of our Savior 1592. on the 20th. of August, at
Brookeby in Leicestershire, where his Ancestors had chiefly continued about the
space of 400 years, rather without obscurity, then with any great luster, after
they had long before been seated in Kinalton in the Country of Nottingham. He
was the third Son of George Villiers Knight, and Mary late Countess of
Buckingham, and Daughter to Anthony Beaumont of Coleorton, Esquire, names on
either side well known of Ancient extraction. And yet I remember there was one,
who in a wild Pamphlet which he published, besides other pityful Malignities,
would scant allow him to be a Gentleman. He was nurtured where he had been
born, in his first Rudiments, till the years of ten; and from thence sent to
Billisden-School in the same County, where he was taught the principles of
Music, and other slight Literature, till the thirteenth of his age; at which
time his Father died. Then his beautiful and provident Mother, (for those
Attributes will not be denied her) took him home to her house at Goodby, where
she had him in especial care; so as he was first, (as we may say) a Domestic
Favorite: But finding him (as it should seem) by nature little studious and
contemplative, she chose rather to endue him with conversative Qualities and
Ornaments of youth, as Dancing, Fencing, and the like; Not without aim then,
perchance, (though far off) at a Courtiers life: To which lessons, he had such
a dexterous proclivity, as his Teachers were fain to restrain his forwardness;
to the end that his Brothers, who were under the same training, might hold pace
with him. About the age of eighteen, he traveled into France, where he
improved himself well in the Language, for one that had so little Grammatical
foundation; but more in the exercises of that Nobility, for the space of three
years, and yet came home in his natural plight, without affected sorms (the
ordinary disease of Travelers.) After his return, he passed again one whole
year (as before) at Goodby, under the Wing and Counsels of his Mother: And then
was forward to become a Suitor at London to Sir Roger Ashton's Daughter, a
Gentleman of the Bedchamber to King James, and Master of the Robes. About
which times, he falls into intrinsecal society with Sir John Greham, then one
of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Privy-Chamber: who, I know not upon what
Luminaries he spyed in his face, dissuaded him from Marriage, and gave him
rather encouragement to woo Fortune in Court. Which advice sank well into his
fancy; for within some while, the King had taken by certain Glances, (whereof
the first was at Apthorpe, in a Progress) such liking of his person, that he
resolved to make him a Masterpiece, and to mould him, as it were, Platonically
to his own Idea. Neither was his Majesty content only to be the Architect of
his fortune, without putting his Gracious hand likewise to some part of the
work it self. Insomuch as it pleased him to descend, and to avale his goodness,
even to the giving of his foresaid friend Sir John Greham secret directions,
how, and by what degrees he should bring him into favor. But this was quickly
discovered by him, who was then as yet in some possession of the Kings heart.
For there is nothing more vigilant, nothing more jealous then a Favorite,
especially toward the wayning time and suspect of saciety. So as many Arts
were used to discuss the beginnings of new affection, (which lie out of my
Road, being a part of another man's Story.) All which notwithstanding, (for I
omit things intervenient) there is conveyed to Mr. Villiers an intimation of
the Kings pleasure to wait, and to be sworn his servant; And shortly after, his
Cup Bearer at large; And the Summer following he was admitted in Ordinary.
After which time Favors came thick upon him, (liker main Showers, then
sprinkling Drops or Dews) for the next St. Georges-day he was Knighted, and
made Gentleman of the Kings Bed Chamber; and the very same day had an annual
Pension given him, for his better support, of one thousand pounds out of the
Court of Wards. At New-years-tide following, the King chose him Master of the
Horse. After this he was installed of the most Noble Order. And in the next
August he created him Baron of Whaddon, and Viscount Villiers. In January of
the same year, he was advanced Earl of Buckingham, and sworn here of his
Majesty's Privy-Counsel; as if a Favorite were not so before. The March
ensuing, he attended the King into Scotland, and was likewise sworn a
Counselor in that Kingdom; where (as I have been instructed by unpassionate
men) he did carry himself with singular sweetness and temper; which I held
very credible, for it behoved him, being new in favor, and succeeding one of
their own, to study a moderate style among those generous Spirits. About
Newyears-tide after his return from thence (for those beginnings of years were
very propitious unto him, as if Kings did choose remarkable days to inaugurate
their Favors, that they may appear acts as well of the Times, as of the Will)
he was Created Marquess of Buckingham, and made Lord Admiral of England, Chief
Justice in Air of all the Parks and Forests on the South Side of Trent,
Master of the King's Bench Office, (none of the unprofitable pieces)
Head-Steward of Westminster, and Constable of Windsor-Castle.

Here I must breath a while to satisfy some that perhaps might otherwise
vvonder at such an Accumulation of Benefits, like a kind of Embroidering or
listing of one Favor upon another. Certainly, the hearts of great Princes, if
they be considered as it were in abstract, without the necessity of States,
and Circumstances of time, being, besides their natural extent, moreover, once
opened and dilated with affection, can take no full and proportionate pleasure
in the exercise of any narrow Bounty. And albeit at first they give only upon
choice and love of the person, yet within a while themselves likewise begin
to love their givings, and to foment their deeds, no less then Parents do their
Children. But let us go on.

For these Offices and Dignities already rehearsed, and these of the like
nature which I shall after set down in their place, were (as I am ready to
say) but the facings or fringes of his Greatness, in comparison of that trust
which his most Gracious Master did cast upon him in the one and twentieth year
of his Reign, when he made him the chief Concomitant of his Heir apparent, and
only Son, our dear Sovereign, now being, in a journey of much Adventure, and
which (to show the strength of his privacy) had been before not communicated
with any other of his Majesty's most reserved Counselors at home, being
carried with great closeness, liker a business of Love then State; as it was
in the first intendment. Now, because the whole Kingdom stood in a zealous
trepidation of the absence of such a Prince; I have been the more desirous to
research with some diligence, the several passages of the said Journey, and
the particular Accidents of any moment in their way. They began their motion
in the year 1623, on Tuesday the 18th. of February, from the Marquess his house
of late purchase, at Newhall in Essex, setting out with disguised Beards, and
with borrowed Names of Thomas and John Smith. And then attended with none,
but Sir Richard Greham, Master of the Horse to the Marquess, and of inward
trust about him. When they passed the River against Gravesend, for lack of
silver, they were fain to give the Ferry-man a piece of two and twenty
shillings, which struck the poor fellow into such a melting tenderness, that
so good Gentlemen should be going (for so he suspected) about some quarrel
beyond Sea, as he could not forbear to acquaint the Officers of the Town with
what had befallen him, who sent presently Post for their stay at Rochester,
through which they were passed before any intelligence could arrive. On the
brow of the Hill beyond that City, they were somewhat perplexed by espying the
French Ambassador, with the Kings Coach and other attending him, which made
them baulk the beaten Road, and teach Posthackneys to leap Hedges. At
Canterbury, vvhither some voice (as it should seem) was run on before, the
Mayor of the Town came himself to seize on them, as they were taking fresh
Horses, in a blunt manner, alleging first a Warrant to stop them from the
Council, next from Sir Lewis Lewkver Master of the Ceremonies, and lastly from
Sir Henry Manwaring, then Lieutenant of Dover-Castle. At all which confused
fiction, the Marquess had no leisure to laugh, but thought best to dismask his
Beard, and so told him, that he was going covertly with such slight company,
to take a secret view (being: Admiral) of the forwardness of his Majesty's
Fleet, which was then in preparation on the Narrow Seas: This, with much
ado, did somewhat handsomely heal the disguisement. On the way afterward, the
Baggage Post-Boy, who had been at Court, got (I know not how) a glimmering
who they were; but his mouth was easily shut. To Dover, through bad Horses,
and those pretty impediments, they came not before six at night; where they
found Sir Francis Cottington, then Secretary to the Prince, now Baron of
Hanworth, and Mr. Endymion Porter, who had been sent before to provide a
Vessel for their Transportation. The foresaid Knight was conjoined, for the
nearness of his place, on the Princes affairs; and for his long Residence in
the Court of Spain, where he had gotten singular credit even with that
cautious Nation, by the temper of his Carriage. Mr. Porter was taken in, not
only as a Bedchamber servant of Confidence to his Highness, but likewise as a
necessary and useful Instrument, for his natural skill in the Spanish Tongue.
And these five were at the first the whole Parada of this Journey. The next
morning, for the night was tempestuous, on the 19th. of the foresaid Month,
taking ship at Dover about six of the Clock, they landed the same day at
Bull^yn in France, near two hours after Noon; reaching Monstruell that night
(like men of dispatch;) and Paris the second day after, being Friday the one
and twentieth. But some three Posts before, they had met with two German
Gentlemen that came newly from England, where they had seen at New Market the
Prince and the Marquess taking Coach together with the King, and retaining
such a strong impression of them both, that they now bewrayed some knowledge of
their persons; but were out-faced by Sir Richard Greham, who would needs
persuade them they were mistaken. Which in truth is no very hard matter, for
the very strangeness of the thing it self; and almost the impossibility to
conceive so great a Prince and Favorite so suddenly Metamorphosed into
Travelers, with no greater train, was enough to make any man living
unbelieve his five senses. And this, I suppose, next the assurance of their own
well resolved Carriage against a new accident, to have been their best Anchor
in all such Incounters. At Paris the Prince spent one whole day to give his
mind some contentment in viewing of a famous City and Court, which was a
Neighbor to his future Estates. But for the better vailing of their Visages,
his Highness and the Marquess bought each of them a Perriwig, somewhat to
over-shadow their fore heads. Of the King they got a sight after dinner in a
Gallery, where he was solacing himself with familiar pleasures. And of the
Queen Mother as she was at her own Table; in neither place descryed, no not by
Monsieur Cadinet, who saw them in both, and had been lately Ambassador in
England. Toward Evening, by a mere chance, in appearance, though under-lined
with a Providence, they had a full sight of the Queen Infanta, and of the
Princess Henrietta Maria, with other great Ladies, at the practice of a
Masquing Dance, which was then in preparation; having overheard two
Gentlemen who were tending toward that sight, after whom they pressed, and
were let in by the Duke De Mont Basin, the Queens Lord Chamberlain, out of
humanity to strangers, when diverse of the French went by Note here, even
with the point of a Diamond, by what oblique steps, and inimaginable
preparatives, the high Disposer of Princes Affections does sometimes contrive
the secrets of his will. For by this casual curiosity, it fell out, that when
afterward the Marriage came in motion between our Sovereign Lord, and the
aforesaid most Amiable Princess; it must needs be (howsoever unknown) no small
spur to the Treaty, that she has not before been altogether a stranger to his
Eye.

From the next day, when they departed at three of the Clock in the morning
from Paris, the 23. of February, were spent six days to Bayon, the last Town
of France, having before at Bourdeaux, bought them five riding-Coats, all of
one color and fashion, in a kind of Noble simplicity: Where Sir Francis
Cottington was employed in a fair manner to keep them from being entertained by
the Duke De Espernon, telling him they were Gentlemen of mean degree, and
formed yet to little Courtship; who perchance might otherwise (being himself no
superficial man in the practices of the World) have pierced somewhat deeper
then their outside.

They were now entered into the deep time of Lent, and could get no flesh in
their Innes. Whereupon fell out a pleasant passage (if I may insert it by the
way among more serious:) There was near Bayon, an Herd of Goats with their
young ones, upon which sight, the said Sir Richard Greham tells the Marquess,
he would snap one of the Kids, and make some shift to carry him close to their
lodging. Which the Prince over-hearing, Why Richard, says he, do you ^nk you
may practice here your old tricks again ^on the borders? Upon which words, they
^st gave the Goat Herd good contentment, and then while the Marquess and his
servant (being both on foot) were chasing the Kid about the stack, the Prince
from Horse back killed him in the Head with a Scottish Pistol. Set this Fear
for a Journal Parenthesis, which yet may show how his Highness even in such
slight and sportful damage had a Noble sense of just dealing.

At Bayon, the Count De Gramont, Governor of that jealous Key, took an
exquisite notice of their persons and behavior, and opened himself to some of
his train, That he thought them to be Gentlemen of much more worth then their
habits bewrayed; yet he let them courteously pass. And four days after they
arrived at Madrid, being Wednesday the fifth of March. Thus have I briefly run
over transcursions, as if my Pen had been posting with them. Which done, I
shall not need to relate the affluence of young Nobles and others from hence
into Spain, after the voice of our Prince his being there had been quickly
noised, and at length believed; neither will I stay to consider the Arts of
Rome, where now all Engines were whetted (though by the Divine blessing very
vainly) when they had gotten a Prince of Great Britain upon Catholic ground,
as they use to call it.

This, and the whole matter of Negotiation there, the open entertainments, the
secret working, the Apprehensions on both sides, the appearance on neither; And
in sum, all the circumstances and respect of Religion and State intermixed
together in that commixture, will better become a Royal History, or a
Councel-Table, then a single Life. Yet I cannot omit some things which
intervened at the meeting of two Pleiades, me thinks not unlike that which
Astrologers call a Conjunction of Planets, of no very benign Aspect the one to
the other; I mean, the Marquess of Buckingham, and the Conde d'Olivares. They
had some sharper, and some milder differences, which might easily happen in
such an intervene of Grandees both vehement on the parts which they swayed. But
the most remarkable was upon a supposition of the Condes, (as fancies are
cheap) that the Marquess had intimated unto her some hopes of the Prince his
Conversion; which coming into debate, the Marquess so roundly disavowed this
gilded dream, as Olivares alleged he had given him La-Mentida, and thereupon
forms: a Complement to the Prince himself; which Buckingham denying, and yet
Olivares persisting in the said Complement, the Marquess, though now in strange
hands, yet seeing both his Honor and the Truth at stake, was not tender
likewise to engage his life, but replied with some heat, that the Condes
asseveration would force him to do that which he had not done before; for now
he held himself tied in terms of a Gentleman, to maintain the contrary to his
affirmative in any sort whatsoever. This was the highest and the harshest point
that occurred between them; which that it went so far, was not the Dukes fault;
nor his fault neither, (as it should seem) that it went no further.

There was another memorable passage one day of gentler quality, and yet eager
enough. The Conde d' Olivares tells the Marquess of a certain flying noise,
that the Prince did plot to be secretly gone: To which the Marquess gave a well
tempered answer, that though Love had made his Highness steal out of his own
Country, yet Fear would never make him run out of Spain in other manner then
should become a Prince of his Royal and generous Virtues.

In Spain they stayed near eight entire months, during all which times, who
but Buckingham lay at home under millions of maledictions? Which yet, at the
Prince his safe arrival in the West, did die, and vanish here and there into
praises and Elogies, according to the contrary motions of popular waves. And
now to sum up the fruit of the Journey, discourses ran thus among the
clearest Observers. It was said, that the Prince himself, without any
imaginable stain of his Religion, had by the sight of Foreign Courts, and
observations of the different Natures of people, and Rules of Government, much
excited and awaked his spirits, and corroborated his judgment. And as for the
Marquess, there was note taken of two great additions which he had gained:
First, he was returned with increase of Title, having there been made Duke, by
Patent sent him, which was the highest degree whereof an English Subject could
be capable. But the other was far greater, though closer; for by so long and so
private; and so various consociation with a Prince of such excellent nature, he
had now gotten as it were two lives in his own Fortune and Greatness; whereas
otherwise the estate of a Favorite is at the best but a Tenant at will, and
rarely transmitted. But concerning the Spanish Commission, which in public
conceit was the main scope of the Journey, that was left in great suspense, and
after some time utterly laid aside; which threw the Duke amongst free Wits
(whereof we have a rank Soil) under diverse Censures. The most part were apt to
believe, that he had brought down some deep distaste from Spain, which
exasperated his Councels; Neither was there wanting some other, that thought
him not altogether void of a little Ambition, to show his power either to knit
or dissolve. Howsoever, the whole Scene of affairs was changed from Spain to
France; there now lay the prospective. Which alteration being generally liked,
and all alterations of State being ever attributed to the powerfullest under
Princes (as the manner is where the eminency of one obscureth the rest;) the
Duke became suddenly and strangely Gracious among the multitude, and was even
in Parliament highly exalted; so as he did seem for a time to have overcome
that natural Incompatibility, which in the experience of all Ages has been
noted between the Vulgar and the Sovereign Favor. But this was no more then a
mere bubble or blast, and like an Ephemeral fit of applause, as estsoon will
appear in the sequel and train of his life. I had almost forgotten, that after
his return from Spain, he was made Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, (which is
as it were a second Admiralty) and Steward likewise of the Manor of
Hampton Court; Dignities and Offices still growing of trust or profit: And the
King now giving not only out of a beneficent disposition, but a very habitual
and confirmed custom.

One year, six months, two days after the joyful reception of the Prince his
Son from Spain, King James of immortal memory (among all the lovers and
admirers of Divine and Humane Sapience) accomplished at Theobalds his own days
on Earth. Under whom the Duke had run a long Course of calm and smooth
prosperity: I mean long, for the ordinary life of favor; and the more notable,
because it had been without any visible Eclipse or Wave in himself, amidst
diverse variations in others.

The most important and pressing care of a new and Vigorous King, was his
Marriage, for mediate establishment of the Royal Line. Wherein the Duke having
had an especial hand, he was sent to conduce hither the most Lovely and
Virtuous Princess Henrietta Maria, youngest Daughter to the Great Henry of
Bourbon, of whom his Majesty (as has been said) had an ambulatory view in his
Travels, (like a stolen taste of something that provokes appetite.) He was
accompanied with none of our Peers but the Earl of Mountgomery, now Lord
Chamberlain, a Noble Gentleman, of trusty, free, and open nature; and truly no
unsuitable Associate, for that he himself likewise, at the beginning of King
James, had run his Circle in the wheeling vicissitude of Favor.

And here I must crave leave in such of high quality, or other of particular
note, as shall fall under my pen, (whereof this is the first) not to let them
pass without their due Character, being part of my professed ingenuity.

Now this Ambassy, though it had a private show, being charged with more
formality then matter, (for all the essential Conditions were before concluded)
could howsoever want no Ornaments, or bravery to adorn it. Among which, I am
near thinking it worthy of a little remembrance, that the Duke, one solemn day,
Gorgeously clad in a suit all overspread with Diamonds, and having lost one of
them of good value, perchance as he might be dancing, after his manner, with
lofty motion, it was strangely recovered again the next morning in a Court full
of Pages: Such a diligent attendant was Fortune every where, both abroad and at
home.

After this fair discharge, all Civil Honors having showred on him before,
there now fell out great occasions to draw forth his spirits into action, a
breach first with Spain, and not longafter with France it self, notwithstanding
so straight an affinity, so lately treated with the one, and actually
accomplished with the other. As if indeed (according to that pleasant Maxim of
State) Kingdoms were never married. This must of necessity involve the Duke in
business enough to have over-set a lesser Vessel, being the next Commander
under the Crown, of Ports and Ships.

But he was noted willingly to embrace those Overtures of public employment.
For at the Parliament at Oxford, his Youth and want of Experience in Maritime
service, had somewhat been shrewdly touched, even before the sluices and
floodgates of popular liberty were yet set open. So as to wipe out that
objection, he did now mainly attend his charge, by his Majesty's untroubled and
serene Commands, even in a tempestuous time. Now the men fell a rubbing of
Armor, which a great while had layn oyled: The Magazines of Munition are
viewed: The Officers of Remains called to account: frequent Councels of War, as
many private conferences with expert Seamen, a Fleet in preparation for some
attempt upon Spain.

The Duke himself personally employed to the States General; and with him
joined in full Commission the Earl of Holland, a Peer both of singular grace
and solidity, and of all sweet and serviceable virtue for public use.

These two Nobles, after a dangerous passage from Harwich, wherein three of
their Ships were foundred, arrived the fifth day at the Hague in Holland. Here
they were to enter a treaty, both with the States themselves, and with the
Ministers of diverse allied and confederate Princes, about a common diversion,
for the recovery of the Palatinate where the King's only Sisters Dowry had been
ravished by the German Eagle, mixed with Spanish Feathers: A Princess
resplendent in darkness, and whose virtues were born within the chance, but
without the power of Fortune.

Here it were injurious to over-slip a Noble act in the Duke during this
Employment, which I must, for my part, celebrate above all his Expenses: There
was a Collection of certain rare Manuscripts, exquisitely written in Arabic,
and sought in the most remote parts by the diligence of Erpenius, the most
excellent Linguist: These had been left to the Widow of the said Erpenius, and
were upon sale to the Jesuits at Antwerp, liquorish Chapmen of such Ware.
Whereof the Duke, getting knowledge by his worthy and learned Secretary Doctor
Mason, interverted the bargain, and gave the poor Widow for them five hundred
pounds, a sum above their weight in silver, and a mixed act both of bounty and
charity, the more laudable, being out of his natural Element. These were they,
which after his death were as Nobly presented, as they had been bought, to the
University of Cambridge, by the Duchess Dowager, as soon as she understood, by
the aforesaid Doctor Mason, her Husband's intention, who had a purpose likewise
(as I am well instructed) to raise in the said University (whereof he was
Chancellor) a fair Case for such Monuments, and to furnish it with other choice
Collections from all parts, of his own charge: perchance in some emulation of
that famous Treasury of knowledge at Oxford, without parallel in the Christian
World. But let me resume the file of my Relation, which this Object of Books
(best agreeable to my course of life) has a little interrupted.

The aforesaid Negotiation, though prosecuted with heat and probable appearance
of great effects, took up a Month before the Duke's return from his
excentricity, (for so I account Favorites abroad) and then at home he met no
good news of the Cadiz attempt. In the preparation thereof, though he had spent
much solicitude ex officio, yet it principally failed (as was thought) by late
setting out, and by some contrariety of Weather at Sea; whereby the particular
design took vent before hand, a point hardly avoidable in actions of noise,
especially where the great Indian Key to all Cabinets is working.

Not long after this, the King pondering in his Wisdom the weight of his
Foreign Affairs, found it fit to call a Parliament at Westminster: this was
that Assembly, where there appeared a sudden and mavelous conversion in the
Duke's Case, from the most exalted, (as he had been both in another Parliament,
and in common Voice before) to the most depressed now; as if his condition had
been capable of no Mediocrities. And it could not but trouble him the more, by
happening when he was so freshly returned out of the Low Country Provinces, out
of a meritorious employment, in his inward conceit and hope. Which being the
single example that our Annals have yielded, from the time of William de la
Pool, Duke of Suffolk, under Henry the Sixth, of such a concurrence of two
extremes, withinso short time, by most of the same Commenders and Disprovers,
(like the natural breath of man, that can both heat and cool) would require no
slight memorial of the particular Motives of so great a change, but that the
whole Case was dispersed by the Knights of Shires, and Burgesses of Towns,
through all the Veins of the Land, and may be taken by any, at pleasure, out of
the Parliament Registers. Besides that, I observe it not usual among the best
patterns, to stuff the report of particular lives with matter of public
record, but rather to dive (as I shall endeavor, before I wipe my Pen) into
secret and proper afflictions; howsoever, somewhat I must note in this strange
Phainomenon. It began from a traveled Doctor of Physic, of bold spirit, and
of able Elocution; who being returned one of the Burgesses (which was not
ordinary in any of his Coat) fell by a Metaphorical Allusion) translated from
his own Faculty, to propound the Duke's as a main cause of diverse infirmities
in the State, or near that purpose; being sure enough of Seconds, after the
first Onset, in the Lower House. As for any close intelligence that they had
before hand with some in the Higher, (though that likewise was said) I want
ground to affirm, or believe it more then a general conceit; which perhaps
might run of the working of envy amongst those that were nearest the object,
which we see so familiar, both in natural and moral causes. The Duke's Answers
to his Appeachments, in number thirteen, I find very diligently and civilly
couched: and though his heart was big, yet they all savor of an humble spirit,
one way, equitable consideration, which could not but possess every vulgar
conceit, and somewhat allay the whole matter, that in the bolting and sifting
of near fourteen years of such power and favor, all that came out, could not
be expected to be pure and white, and fine Meal, but must needs have withal
among it a certain mixture of Padar and Bran, in this lower age of humane
fragility. Howsoever this Tempest did only shake, and not rent his Sails. For
his Majesty considering that almost all his Appeachments were without the
compass of his own Reign; and moreover, That nothing alleged against him, had,
or could be proved by Oath, according to the Constitution of the House of
Commons; which the Duke himself did not forget in the Preface of his Answers.
And lastly, having had such experience of his fidelity, and observance abroad,
where he was chief in trust, and in the participations of all hazards, found
himself engaged in honor, and in the sense of his own natural goodness, to
support him at home from any further inquietude, and too dear buy his highest
testimonies of diverse important imputations, whereof the truth is best known to
his Majesty while he was Prince.

The Summer following this Parliament (after an Embarque of our Trading Ships
in the River of Bourdeaux, and other points of Sovereign affront) there did
succeed the action of Rheez, wherein the Duke was personally employed on either
Element, both as Admiral and General, with hope in that service to recover the
public good will, which he saw by his own example might quickly be won and
lost. This action, as I hear, has been delivered by a Noble Gentleman of much
learning, and active spirits, himself the fitter to do it right, which in truth
it greatly wanted, having found more honorable censure, even from some of the
French Writers, then it had generally amongst our selves at home.

Now, because the said work is not yet flowing into the light, I will but sweep
the way with a few notes, and these only touching the Duke's own deportment in
that Island, the proper subject of my quill; for in the general survey of this
action, there was matter of glory and grief so equally distributed on both
sides, as if Fortune had meant we should quickly be Friends again. Wherein let
their names that were bravely lost, be rather memorized in the full table of
time; for my part, I love no ambitious pains in an eloquent description of
miseries. The Duke's carriage was surely Noble throughout: to the Gentlemen of
fair respect, bountiful to the Soldier, according to any special value which
he spied in any, tender and careful of those that were hurt, of unquestionable
Courage in himself, and rather fearful of Fame, then Danger: In his
countenance, which is the part that all eyes interpret, no open alteration,
even after the succors which he expected did fail him; but the less he showed
without, the more it wrought intrinsecally, according to the nature of
suppressed passions. For certain it is, that to his often mentioned Secretary,
Doctor Mason, whom he laid in Pallet near him, for natural Ventilation of his
thoughts, he would, in the absence of all other ears and eyes, break out into
bitter and passionate Eruptions, protesting, That never his Dispatches to
diverse Princes, nor the great business of a Fleet, of an Army, of a Siege, of a
Treaty, of War, of Peace, both on foot together, and all of them in his head at
a time, did not so much break his repose, as a conceit, That some at home,
under his Majesty, of whom he had well deserved, were now content to forget
him; but whom he meant, I know not, and am loath to rove at conjectures.

Of their two Forts, he could not take the one, nor would he take the other;
but in the general Town he maintained a seizure and possession of the whole
three full months, and eighteen days; and at the first descent on shore, he was
not immured within a wooden Vessel, but he did countenance the landing in his
long Boat. Where succeeded such a defeat of near two hundred Horse (and these
not (by his ghess) mounted in haste, but the most part Gentlemen of Family, and
great resolution) seconded with two thousand Foot, as all circumstances well
balanced on either side, may surely endure a comparison with any of the
bravest Impressions in ancient time. In the issue of the whole business, he
seems charged in opinion with a kind of improvident conscience, having brought
of that with him to Camp, perchance, too much from a Court, where Fortune had
never deceived him: Besides, we must consider him yet but rude in the
profession of Arms, though greedy of Honor, and zealous in the Cause.

At his return to Plymouth, a strange accident befell him, perchance not so
worthy of memory for it self, as for that it seems to have been a kind of
prelude to his final period.

The now Lord Goring, a Gentleman of true honor, and of vigilant affections
for his Friend, sends to the Duke, in all expedition, an express Messenger,
with advisement to assure his own Person, by declining the ordinary Road to
London, for that he had credible Intelligence of a plot against his life, to be
put in execution upon him in his said journey toward the Court. The Duke
meeting the Messenger on the way, read the Letter, and smothering it in his
pocket, without the least imaginable apprehension, rides forwards; His company
being about that time not above seven or eight in number, and those no
otherwise provided for their defense, then with ordinary swords. After this,
the Duke had advanced three miles before he met with an old Woman, near a Town
in the Road, who demanded, Whether the Duke were in the company? and bewraying
some especial occasion to be brought to him, was lead to his Horse-side; where
she told him, that in the very next Town where he was to pass, she had heard
some desperate men vow his death: And thereupon would have directed him about
by a surer way. This old Woman's casual access, joined with that deliberate
advertisement which he had before from his Noble Friend, moved him to
participate both the tenor of the said Letter, and all the circumstances, with
his Company; who were jointly upon consent, that the Woman had advised him
well. Notwithstanding all which importunity, he resolved not to wave his way
upon this reason, perhaps more generous then provident, that if, as he said, he
should but once, by such a diversion, make his Enemy believe he were afraid of
danger, he should never live without. Hereupon his young Nephew, Lord Viscount
Fielding, being then in his Company, out of a Noble spirit, besought him, that
he would at least honor him with his Coat, and blew Ribbon through the Town,
pleading that his Uncle's life, whereon lay the property of his whole Family,
was of all things under Heaven the most precious unto him; and undertaking so
to gesture and muffle up himself in his hood, as the Duke's manner was to ride
in cold weather, that none should discern him from him; and so he should be at
the more liberty for his own defense. At which sweet Proposition, the Duke
caught him in his arms, and kissed him; yet would not, as he said, accept of
such an offer in that case from a Nephew, whose life he tendered as much as
himself; and so liberally rewarded the poor Creature for her good will. After
some short directions to his Company, how they should carry themselves, he rode
on without perturbation of his mind. He was no sooner entered into the Town, but
a scambling Soldier clapped hold of his bridle, which he thought was in a
begging, or (perchance somewhat worse) in a drunken fashion; yet a Gentleman of
his train that rode a pretty distance behind him, conceiving by the premises
it might be a beginning of some mischievous intent, spurred up his Horse, and
with a violent rush severed him from the Duke, who with the rest went on
quickly through the Town: neither, for ought I can hear, was there any further
enquiry into that practice, the Duke peradventure thinking it wisdom not to
resent discontentments too deep.

At his return to the Court he found no change in Faces, but smothered
murmurings for the loss of so many gallant Gentlemen; against which his friends
did oppose in their discourses the chance of War, together with a gentle
expectation for want of supply in time.

After the complaints in Parliament, and the unfortunate issue at Rheez, the
Dukes fame did still remain more and more in obloquy among the mass of people,
whose judgments are only reconciled with good successes: so as he saw plainly
that he must abroad again to rectify by his best endeavor under the public
Service, his own reputation. Whereupon new preparatives were in hand, and
partly reparatives of the former beaten at Sea. And in the mean while, he was
not unmindfull in his civil course, to cast an eye upon the ways, to win unto
him such as have been of principal credit in the Lower House of Parliament,
applying lenitives, or subducting from that part where he knew the humors were
sharpest: amidst which thoughts, he was surprised with a fatal stroke, written
in the black Book of necessity.

There was a younger Brother of mean fortunes, born in the County of Suffolk,
by name John Felton, by nature of a deep melancholy, silent and gloomy
constitution, but bred in the active way of a Soldier: and thereby raised to
the place of Lieutenant, to a Foot-Company, in the Regiment of Sir James
Ramsey. This was the man that closely within himself had conceived the Dukes
death. But what may have been the immediate or greatest motive of that
fellonious conception, is even yet in the Clouds.

It was said at first, that he had been stung with a denial of his Captains
place, who died in England; whereof thus much indeed is true, that the Duke,
before he would invest him in the said place, advising first (as his manner
was) with his Colonel; he found him to interpose for one Powel, his own
Lieutenant, a Gentleman of extraordinary valor, and according to Military
custom, the place was good, that the Lieutenant of the Colonels Company might
well pretend to the next vacant Captainship under the same Regiment. Which
Felton acknowledged to be in it self very usual and equitable, besides the
special merit of the person. So as the aforesaid conceit of some rancour
harbored upon this denial had no true ground. There was another imagination,
that between a Knight of the same County (whom the Duke had lately taken into
some good degree of favor) and the said Felton, there had been ancient
quarrels not yet well healed, which might perhaps lie festring in his breast,
and by a certain inflammation produce this effect. But that carries small
probability, that Felton would so deface his own act, as to make the Duke no
more then an oblique sacrifice to the fumes of his private revenge upon a third
person.

Therefore the truth is, that either to honest a deed after it was done, or to
slumber his conscience in the doing, he studied other incentives, alleging,
not three hours before his execution, to Sir Richard Gresham, two only
inducements thereof. The first, as he made it in order, was a certain libellous
Book written by one Egglestone a Scottish Physician, which made the Duke one of
the foulest Monsters upon the earth; and indeed, unworthy not only of life in a
Christian Court, and under so virtuous a King; but of any room within the
bounds of all humanity, if his prodigious predictions ^d the least semblance of
truth. The second, was, the Remonstrance it self of the Lower House of
Parliament, against him, which perchance he thought the fairest cover, so he
put in the second place. Whatsoever were the true motive, which I think none
can determine but the Prince of darkness it self; he did thus prosecute the
effect.

In a by-Cutlers Shop on Tower Hill, he bought a ten penny Knife (so cheap was
the instrument of this great attempt) and the sheath thereof he sewed to the
lining of his Pocket, that he might at any moment draw forth the Blade alone
with one hand, for he had maimed the other. This done, he made shift, partly,
as it is said, on Horseback, and partly on foot, to get to Portsmouth; for he
was indigent and low in money, which perhaps might have a little edged his
desperation. At Portsmouth on Saturday, being the 23. of August of that current
year, he pressed without any suspicion in such a time of so many pretenders to
Employment, into an inward Chamber, where the Duke was at breakfast (the last
of his repasts in this world) accompanied with men of quality and action, with
Monsieur de Soubes, and Sir Thomas Friar. And there a little before the Dukes
rising from the Table, he went and stood expecting till he should pass through
a kind of Lobby between that Room and the next, where were diverse attending
him. Toward which passage, as I conceive, somewhat darker then the Chamber
which he voided, while the Duke came with Sir Thomas Friar close at his ear, in
the very moment as the said Knight withdrew himself from the Duke, this
Assasinate gave him with a back blow a deep wound into his left side, leaving
the Knife in his body. Which the Duke himself pulling out, on a sudden effusion
of spirits, he sunk down under the Table in the next Room, and immediately
expired.

Certain it is, that some good while before, Sir Clement Throckmorton, a
Gentleman then living, of grave judgment, had in a private conference advised
him to wear a Privy-Coat, whose Counsel the Duke received very kindly; but gave
him this answer, That against any popular fury, a Shirt of Mayl would be but a
silly defense; and as for any single man's assault, he took himself to be in no
danger. So dark is Destiny.

One thing in this enormous accident, is, I must confess, to me beyond all
wonder, as I received it from a Gentleman of judicious and diligent
observation, and one whom the Duke well favor That within the space of not
many minutes after^d, fall of the body, and removal thereof into the first
Room, there was not a living creature in either of the Chambers, no more then
if it had lien in the Sands of Aethiopia; whereas commonly, in such cases, you
shall note every where a great and sudden conflux of people unto the place, to
hearken, and to see. But it should seem the very horror of the fact had
stupefied all curiosity, and so dispersed the multitude, that it is thought
even the murderer himself might have escaped (for who gave the blow, none
could affirm) if he had not lingered about the House below, not by any confused
arrest of conscience, as has been seen in like examples, but by very pride in
his own deed, as if in effect there were little difference between being
remembered by a virtuous fame, or an illustrious infamy.

Thus died this great Peer, in the 36 year of his age complete, and three days
over, in a time of great recourse unto him, and dependence upon him, the House,
and Town full of Servants and Suitors, his Duchess in an upper Room, scarce
yet out of her Bed; and the Court at that time not above six or nine miles from
him, which had been the Stage of his Greatness.

I have spent some enquiry whether he had any ominous presagement before his
end. Wherein though both ancient and modern Stories have been infected with
much vanity; yet oftentimes things fall out of that kind which may bear a sober
construction, whereof I will glean two or three in the Dukes Case.

Being to take his leave of my Lords Grace of Canterbury, then Bishop of
London, whom he knew well planted in the Kings unchangeable affection by his
own great abilities; after courtesies of course had passed between them: My
Lord, says the Duke, I know your Lordship has very worthily good accesses
unto the King our Sovereign, let me pray you to put his Majesty in mind to be
good, as I no ways distrust, to my poor Wife and Children. At which words, or
at his countenance in the delivery, or at both, my Lord Bishop being somewhat
troubled, took the freedom to ask him whether he had never any secret
abodement in his mind. No (replied the Duke) but I think some adventure may
kill me as well as another man.

The very day before he was slain, feeling some indisposition of body, the King
was pleased to give him the honor of a visit, and found him in his Bed; where,
and after much serious and private discourse, the Duke at his Majesty's
departing, embraced him in a very unusual and passionate manner, and in like
sort his friend the Earl of Holland, as if his soul had divined he should see
them no more: which infusions toward fatal ends, had been observed by some
Authors of no light Authority.

On the very day of his death, the Countess of Denbigh received a Letter from
him; whereunto all the while she was writing her answer, she bedewed the Paper
with her tears; And after a most bitter passion (whereof she could yield no
reason, but that her dearest Brother was to be gone) she fell down in a swound.
Her said Letter ended thus:

I will pray for your happy return, which I look at with a great cloud over my
head, too heavy for my poor heart to bear without torment; but I hope the great
God of Heaven will bless you.

The day following, the Bishop of Ely, her devoted friend, who was thought the
fittest preparer of her mind to receive such a doleful accident, came to visit
her; but hearing she was at rest, he attended till she should awake of her
self, which she did with the affrightment of a dream, Her Brother seeming to
pass through a field with her in her Coach; where hearing a sudden shout of the
people, and asking the reason, it was answered to have been for joy that the
Duke of Buckingham was sick. Which natural impression she scarce had related
unto her Gentlewoman, before the Bishop was entered into her Bedchamber for a
chosen Messenger of the Dukes death.

This is all that I dare present of that nature to any of judgment, not
unwillingly omitting certain prognostic Anagrams, and such strains of fancy.

He took to Wife, eight years and two months before his death, the Lady
Katherine Manners, Heir general to the Noble House of Rutland; who besides a
solid addition to his Estate, brought him three Sons and a Daughter, called the
Lady Mary, his first born; his eldest Son died at Nurse, before his Journey at
Rheez; and his third, the Lord Francis, was born after his Fathers death; so as
neither his first nor his last were participant of any sense of his misfortunes
or felicities: His second Son, now Duke of Buckingham, was born to cheer him
after his return from that unlucky Voyage.

For these sweet pledges, and no less for the unquestionable virtues of her
Person and Mind, he loved her dearly, and well expressed his love in an act and
time of no simulation toward his end, bequeathing her all his Mansion-houses
during her natural life, and a power to dispose of his whole personal Estate,
together with a fourth part of his Lands in jointure: He left his elder Brother
of the same womb a Viscount, and his younger an Earl; Sir Edward Villiers, his
half Brother on the Fathers side, he either preferred or removed (call it how
you will) from his step-mothers eye to the Presidentship, where he lived in
singular estimation for his justice and hospitality; and died with as much
grief of the whole Province, as ever any Governor did (before his religious
Lady of sweet and Noble disposition) adding much to his honor. The eldest of
the Brethren, and Heir of the Name, was made a Baronet, but abstained from
Court, enjoying perhaps the greater Greatness of self-fruition.

He left his Mother a Countess by Patent, in her own person, which was a new
leading example, grown before somewhat rare, since the days of Queen Mary. His
Sister of Denbigh (that right character of a good Lady) he most humbly
recommended to the Queen; who after a discharge of some French in her Court
that were to return, took her into three several places of honor and trust.

In short, not to insist upon every particular Branch of those private
preferments, he left all his female kindred, of the entire or half blood,
descending of the Name of Villiers or Beaumont, within any near degree, either
matched with Peers of the Realm actually, or hopefully with Earls Sons and
Heirs; or at least with Knights, or Doctors of Divinity, and of plentiful
condition: He did not much strengthen his own subsistence in Court, but stood
there on his own feet, for the truth is, the most of his Allies rather leaned
upon him, then shoared him up.

His familiar servants, either about his person in ordinary attendance, or
about his affairs of State, as his Secretaries; or of Office, as his Steward;
or of Law, as that worthy Knight whom he long used to solicit his Causes; He
lest all both in good Fortune, and, which is more, in good Fame.

Things very seldom consociated in the instruments of great Personages.

THE GREAT ACTION BETWEEN POMPEY AND CAESAR, Extracted out of the Roman and
Grecian Writers, by H. W. Knight. for an Historical Exercise.
The DEDICATION to Sir EDMUND BACON Knight and Baronet.
WHEN Rome in the revolution of 702. years, was grown pregnant of an universal
Monarchy: After hard labor with foreign Hostilities, and ^orse with inward
Rents and Divisions which mangled her own bowels. The State yet free (or
Looseness mistaken, as it is often, for Liberty) seemed now to stand most in
danger of two eminent Gentlemen, Caius Julius Caesar and Cneus Pompeius: The
one of all men living, the likeliest to stir up again the Sinders of the
Marian, the other of the Syllan Party. These Gallants of the time had some
years before, besides their near alliance by Marriage of Pompey to Julius
Caesar's Daughter, (a Lady of imperious allurement) been likewise united
together in a Triumviral Knot with Marcus Crassus, the wealthiest of the whole
Nobility, which Consortship was in effect a kind of Segregate, or
Cabinet-Senate; importing secretly no less, then that no Act of Moment should
pass without consent of all three: So as upon this foundation, by their own
personal Pursuits, by the mutual Strength and Coherence of their several
Dependants; and by all other insinuative and ambient Arts, (in a long corrupted
Commonwealth, still forbidden, and still increasing) after they had run
through the principal Dignities at home: Crassus on the Eastern side, with a
puissant Army (as Money wants no Followers) went Governor of Syria: Pompey
Southward, got Libya of new, and retained both Spains under former Lieutenants:
As for Caesar, who by an insolent Consulship had awaked much jealousy, they
gave him at first only Illyricum, and the nearer Gallia, Provinces then of
little doings, (as it were to impound his spirits:) yet least the People (whose
good will had cost him deep) should bluster in his behalf, the Senate was
afterward (between Favor and Fear) content to extend his Commission to Gallia
Narbonensis, beyond the Alps. Thus were the Three distributed at distance
enough as perchance was thought meet, upon more doubt hitherto of their too
much agreement, and conference of Counsels and Plots together, then of any
rupture, or disunion at hand: So short-sighted is that which we call humane
Providence, and so easily can the Supreme Mover delude our Imaginations. For
Crassus not long after, either greedy of Fame or Spoil, and too confident (as
it should seem) in the weakest of Advantages, Number, being miserably
overthrown, and slain by the Parthians. And Iulia a little before dying of an
Abort in Childbed, together with the Infant she bare, it lay thenceforth open
and clear in every Man's eye, that the Triumvirate dissolved, and She gone,
without any Slip remaining, who had been the fastest Cement to hold her Father
and Husband together, there would soon ensue, but a dry and sandy Friendship
between them, being now left at large to the Scope and Sway of their voluntary
Appetites.

Wherefore, having undertaken for some entertainment of my private time, to
compile out of the best of Ancient Memories, that mighty Action which anon
under these two Chiefs involved almost the whole World, then known, I impute it
not impertinent, to take first a short view how they stood before hand in
Parallel together.

They were both, in general, esteemed of Affections too strong for their own,
or the common Quiet: That the one could not endure a Superior, nor the other an
Equal; we are told both in Prose and in Verse, by ingenious Authors: But
whether they agreed to leave us a draught of the greatness, or of the weakness
of their Minds, I dare not affirm; some seeming Magnanimities being indeed (if
you found them well) at the bottom, very Impotencies. Certainly, in sober
conceit, howsoever they stood toward other, they were impatient of all
comparison or approach between themselves; and of their former nearness, no
fruit remaining but this, That the more inwardly they had then studied and
understood each other, they now loved the less. For point of invading the
Sovereignty, such narrow Humorists as could look through them, thought Pompey
of the two, rather the closer, then the better. For Caesar's was not a
smothered, but a flagrant Ambition, kindling first by Nature, and blown by
Necessity; in the course whereof one might observe a kind of Circular Motion:
for as his vast Desires had exhausted him with unmeasureable gifts above
private Condition; so again, when he was grown (as he would often sport with
himself in earnest) a great deal worth less then nothing: He fell next to
resolve (by an usual Coincidence of extremes) that he could not subsist, unless
he were Master of all. In their practical ways Pompey had one very ignoble
custom, to insert, or (as I may term it) to inoculate himself into other men's
merits and praises: So he undermined Lucullus in Asia, and Metellus in Spain:
the first a wise and magnificent, the other a good plain Souldier-like
Gentleman. But on the other side, all that went for good or bad in Caesar, was
clearly his own; having so little need to borrow from any other virtues, or
vices, that he left it a Doubt among the best Wits of his time, whether of
which himself had most, in the two proper Dowries of that Age, Eloquence or
Arms.

A CHARACTER OF FERDINANDO di MEDICI Grand Duke of Tuscany. DEDICATED TO THE
KING.
BEing desirous, albeit I dare promise little fruit, or pleasure, to others by
any use of my Pen; yet at least to record unto my self some such Observations
as I picked up abroad in the time of my former travels and employments.

I stand obliged in grateful memory, to say somevvhat of a Prince long since at
rest; namely, Fordinando Grand Duke of Tuscany, which was the ancient
Hetruria, whose Palace of Piti at Florence, when I came often to review, and
still me thought with fresh admiration; being incomparably (as far as I can
yet speak by experience, or report) for solid Architecture, the most
magnificent and regular Pile within the Christian World. It pleased him, by
means of the Cavalier Vieta, his principal Secretary of Estate, to take some
notice of my Person, though no intruder by Nature, and (God knows) of little
ability.

The said Duke Ferdinando was reputed a wise and wary Prince; and it was a
Solid wisdom, rather then a Formal. He had been long a Cardinal, and at two or
three Conclaves (as they call them) or Elections of Popes: so as he came to the
Dukedom well seasoned before with practice, and well broken to Affairs: and
with such an impression of his first Tincture (as falls out naturally in all
things else) that he always maintained a great interest in the Roman Court; as
indeed was necessary for a near and jealous Confiner. He was in his Civil
Regiment of a fine composition, between Frugality and Magnificence: A great
cherisher of Manual Arts, especially such as tended to splendour and ornament;
as Picture, Sculpture, cutting of Chrystals, Ambers, and all of the softer
Gems, inlaying of Marbles, limning of Birds, Beasts, and Vegetables; Imbossing,
and the like. In all which he drew to him from all parts the most exquisite
Artificers with a settled Pension, and placed them in several compartments of
his Palace, where he would come oftentimes to see them work for his own
delight: and so he did furnish his Cabinets with Rarities at an easy rate,
being, in truth, one of the greatest Oee^nomists of his Age. And as he had much
at first of the Deacon, and more of the Prince, so he did now and then not
disdain to have a little of the Merchant; 'twas as well as fighting with his
Galleys. After the death of the Duke Francesco his Brother, it was a while
somewhat an Ambiguous Deliberative, whether he should divest the Cardinalship,
or rule with a double Greatness, Ecclesiastical and Civil: But the hope of
Posterity overbalanced the scale; and so he took to Wife the Daughter of
Loraign, as it were to interest himself now in the Borders of France: whereas
his Name before had spread it self in the Body. He was by nature more reserved
then popular, and had virtues fitter to beget estimation then love; yet he
would duly in his Coach take almost every day a revievv of the City, and
receive Petitions willingly. Besides, I have been showed a strange device of
State, namely, an outward hole, like a Trunk, in a Wall of one of his
Galleries, the bottom whereof was under lock and key, into which any one
might let forth any secret intelligence, and convey it closely to the ears of
the Prince: enough to disquiet all the days of his life. He was served by able
Instruments of State, and diligently attended in Court; but rather by choice
then number, and with more neatness then noise. He had a close and intrinsecal
Favorite, by Birth a Stranger, being born in Piedmont, but by his favor made
Archbishop of Pisa, a notable Screen between him and his Subjects; upon whom
the Duke would handsomely bestovv all manner of complaint; and he as
willingly bear it. He was unquestionably the powerfullest of all the Italian
Dukes: and being centred in the very Navel of italy, thereby the furthest from
Invasion on all sides, and the most participant of the common Interest; which,
I believe, among other causes, has much preserved that State in busy times:
yet surely, a little overawed, or over-looked by the King of Spain, who
holds in actual possession Pont Hercule, Telemene, and Piombino, which we
may perchance not improperly call the Fetters of Hetruria. Of stature he was
somewhat above the mean, a gross body, not apt to motion, and as quiet a
Countenance. His Moneys were the purest and least corrupted within the
Italian bounds: and his Markets the best ordered for prices of comestible Ware;
where, in all his Towns, a man might have sent out a Child for any flesh, or
fish, at a rated price every Morning. To which temper more septentrional
unlimber Nations have not yet bent themselves. On the other side, there was
nothing brought into Florence from the Field, to the least sale, but by a long
insensible servitude paid somewhat. This was the Civil and Natural habit of
that Prince: and more might be said, if I were not pounded within an Epistle.
This Duke, while I was a private Traveller in Florence, and went sometime by
chance (sure I am, without any design) to his Court, was pleased, out of some
gracious conceit which he took of my fidelity, (for nothing else could move
it) to employ me into Scotland with a Casket of Antidotes, or Preservatives,
(wherein he did excel all the Princes of the World) and with a Dispatch of
high and secret Importance, which he had intercepted touching some practice
upon the Succession to this Crown; so as I am much obliged to his Memory
(though it was a painful journey) for that Honor, and other Favors and
Beneficences; and especially because I came thereby first into the notice of
the King your Father, of ever blessed memory, when your Majesty was but a
blooming Rose, which afterward drevv on my employment to the Republic of
Venice.

THE ELECTION OF THE DUKE OF VENICE: With other Papers concerning that STATE
prefixed.
A Letter to the KING,
December 9. 1622. May it please your most Sacred Majesty,
BY this right honest and learned Gentleman, by name Adolphus Ryplingham (who
has spent some time abroad in the best observations) I send your Majesty more
Melon-seeds, of all sorts, which have been diligently chosen, and will, I hope,
take better then the former. In my Letter to Master Secretary Calvert, I have
discharged other duties, among which some will come very seasonably unto your
Majesty about Christmass-time, to increase your recreation: For it is indeed a
merry piece of service that I have sent your Majesty, a testimony of your
conscience from Rome. Now, for this Letter, I have reserved a private and
voluntary subject, which I have taken the freedom most humbly to present unto
your Majesty's benign censure. It is the preface to one of mine own poor
labors, comprehending the argument thereof, and the motives. In which as yet
unfinished lucubration (for so I may justly call it, having been for the most
part born in the night) I have had occasion to fall upon some weighty
considerations of Church and State; while I did search the progress of this
Republic, among the clouds and confusions of the middle Age. Between which
times it was a kind of refreshment, and yet withal but a miserable pleasure, to
contemplate how the Empire grew lank, and the Popedom tumorous proportionably,
till Superstition, like a wild and raging fire, could at length be contained,
neque suis terminis, neque alienis. These remarkable points I have now touched,
to procure from your Majesty some pardon for a bold invocation therein of your
Royal Name; being confident, that this h^gh Theoreme of State, which I handle
(though my self but a poor Student in meaner speculations) may prove not
unworthy, in the subject it self, to receive some luster from your gracious
countenance. To conclude, the trouble that I have given your Majesty, instead
of some present more valuable, to inaugurate the new approaching year. I do
humbly submit the death or life of this work to your only doom, and though that
ancient conceit was well commended when it was first born; Mallem Augusti
judicium, quam Antonii Beneficium: yet I must crave leave to think it somewhat
ignoble. And for my part, to assure your Majesty, that I shall more rejoice in
the approbation of your judgment, then in the fruition even of your own
benefits. And so I most humbly commit your most dear and Royal Person to God's
continual love; remaining

Your Majesty's faithful Vassal, and long devoted poor Servant, Ottavio Baldi.

[Praefatio in Historiam Venetam.]
HEnricus Wottonius Anglo-Cantianus, postquam quatuor december fere annorum
spatium legationibus apud Venetos exhauseram; Anno unici Mediatoris supra
Millesimum sexcente simum vicesimo secundo, Aetatis meae quinquage simo tertio
jam labente, de illorum Imperio scribere sum aggressus; ut si non satis
vigilasse foris, pr^ publico munere, at saltem vixisse videar. Quippe levi
profecto distant discrimine silentes a defunctis; nec multum interest, nos
terminet fatalis dies, an praestinguat inertia. Igitur libido saepius sopita,
nunc ardentius rediit, revolvendi vetera, novaque; ut ex radicibus eliciam, quo
Fati ductu, queis maxim institutis, quibusque Artibus, tam Inclyta Christiani
Orbis Civitas tot saecula superaverit, inter varias Mari Terraque tam cladium
quam victoriarum vices, nec minora fortasse ipsius Otii, quam Bel^i mala. Hujus
faelicitatis progressus, and fulcimenta retro quaerenti, duo praecipue, si
recte aestimo Fontes recludent: Historia temporum, and Imperii forma. Quae quam
potero brevissime, and quasi delibatim expediam. Ut hoc qualecunque conceptum
Opus delectu magis rerum quam ubertate gestiat: simul etiam ne in alienae
Reipublicae ar^nis longius haerendo, Hospitis verecundiam violarem.

Te vero sapientissime Jacobe Rex and Domine, sub cujus indulgentis Iudicii
praesidio imbecillitas nostra civilibus ministeriis incubuit, quam quidem
natura potius ad simplicior a studia damnaver at: Te, inquam, Clarissimum
saeculi Lumen, in exordio prasentium curarum invocare liceat, ut tanti nominis,
velut adflatu quodam alacrius incaeptum peragam. Sed quia non levia meditamur,
quod ante ingressum ingenui Authors solent, id quoque profiteor, ne sine
obtrectatione, sine blanditiis, sensus, quos per omnem laboris partem res ipsa
suggerit, liberrime prolaturum, ne argumenti dignitatem dehonestet servilis
oration.

Jam urbem Venetam, etc.
[A Letter concerning the Original of Venice.]
Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
I Owe your Lordship, even by promise, some account of my foreign Travels: and
the Observations which I have taken touching this City and Republic, are these;

The general position of the City of Venice, I find much celebrated, even by
the learnedest of the Averhoes.
Arabians, as being seated in the very middle point between the Equinoctial and
the Northern Pole, at 45. degrees precisely, or next hand, of latitude: yet
their Winters are for the most part sharper then ours, though about 6. degrees
less of elevation; perchance by vicinity tothe chilly tops of the Alps, for
Winds as well as Waters are tainted in their passage; and the consequence which
men make in common discourse, from the Degree of the place to the Temper, is
indeed very deceiveable, without a due regard to other circumstances.

The Circuit thereof, through diverse Creeks, is not well determinable; but as
Astronomers use to measure the Stars, we may account it a City of the first
Magnitude; as London, Paris, Gaunt, Millain, Lisbon, etc.

How they came to be founded in the midst of the Waters, I could never meet
with any clear Memorial. The best and most of their Authors ascribe their first
beginnings rather to chance or necessity, then counsel; which yet in my opinion
will amount to no more then a pretty conjecture intenebrated by Antiquity: for
thus they deliver it; They say, that among the Tumults of the middle Age, when
Nations went about swarming like Bees; Atylas, that great Captain of the
Hunnes, and scourge of the World (as he was styled) lying long with a
numerous Army at the Siege of Aquileia, it struck a mighty affrightment and
confusion into all the nearer parts; vvhereupon, the best sort of the bordering
People, out of diverse Towns, agreed either suddenly, or by little and little
(as fear will sometimes collect, as well as distract) to convey themselves
and their substance into the uttermost bosom of the Adriatic Gulf, and there
possessed certain desolate Islets, by Tradition, about seventy in number,
which afterward (necessity being the Mother of Art) were tacked together with
Bridges, and so the City took a rude form, which grevv civilized with time,
and became a great example what the smallest things well fomented may prove.

They glory in this their beginning two ways: First, that surely their
Progonitors were not of the meanest and basest quality; (for such having
little to lose, had as little cause to remove.) Next, that they were timely
instructed with Temperance and Penury (the Nurses of Moderation.) And true it
is, that as all things savor of their first Principles, so does the said
Republic (as I shall afterward show) even at this day: for the Rule will
hold as well in Civil as in Natural Causes.

Caetera desunt.

[An Epistle Dedicatory of the following Discourse.]
Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
HAving here lately seen the deaths of two, and the elections of two other
Dukes, within the compass of six weeks, I have been bold to entertain your
Lordship with a little story of these changes and competitions, though with
small presumption that you can take any pleasure in my simple report thereof,
unless it win some favor by the freshness or the freedom.

For the rest, the whole Town is here at the present in horror and confusion,
upon the discovering of a foul and fearful conspiracy of the French against
this State; whereof no less then thirty have already suffered very condign
punishment, between men strangled in prison, drowned in the silence of the
night, and hanged in public view; and yet the bottom is invisible.

If God's mercy had not prevented it, I think I might for mine own particular
have spared my late supplication to the King about my return home toward next
Winter: For I cannot hope that in the common Massacre public Ministers would
have been distinguished from other men; nay, rather we might perchance have had
the honor to have our ^ses thought worthiest the rifling. I shall give your
Lordship a better account of this in my next; having now troubled you beyond
excuse with my poor Papers. Our blessed God keep your Lordship in his love.

Venice this 25. of May, 1618. Your Lordships with all true devotion, HENRY
WOTTON.

THE ELECTION OF THE NEW DUKE OF VENICE After the Death of GIOVANNI BEMBO.
ON Friday, being the 16 of March, in this year 1618. about an hour before
Sunsetting, Giovanni Bembo the 91 Duke of Venice, ended his days in the 75
year of his Age: His disease was a Fever occasioned by some obstruction in his
reins that stopped the course of his water: Whether the Physicians did hasten
his end, by taking from him more blood then his years could spare, is now too
late a question. His name is one of the Ancientest among them. His Father was a
Gentleman, almost of the lowest poverty, till he matched with a wealthy
Citizens Daughter, who afterward proved the Heir of her Father, leaving issue
male this Duke Giovanni and Philippo his Brother: Philippo (who only was
married, being not the Custom of Venice for more Brothers then one to take
Wife) died some few months before the Duke, in greater reputation then degree:
For their Laws do suppress the Brothers of their Dukes. The Duke himself did
arise by Employments at Sea; His first Action of note was in the Battle of
Lepanto; where besides some wounds that he received for his own share, the
success of that great day, in such trepidation of the State, made every man
meritorious. He was lastly (to omit his middle steps) while the. Republic
stood under Excommunication by this Pope (the King of Spain likewise then
arming) made General of their Maritime Forces. This is the solemnest Title they
can confer under the Princedome, being indeed a kind of Dictatorship: to which
they have no Charge equivalent on the Land, having been content (as it seems)
in honor of their Situation, to give the Prerogative of trust to that Element:
To the Princedome he was chosen, being none of the Competitors then in voice.
Who unable to make themselves, and unwilling to make their Concurrents, (as he
fashion is) agreed in a Third: He held the Place two years, three months, and
twelve days with general good liking: though indeed, his praises were rather
Moral then Intellectual, as more consisting in goodness of disposition, then
any other eminent Ability. For he was neither eloquent, profound, nor learned,
only notable in his splendor and oeconomical magnificence, beyond ordinary
example, and perchance in another nature beyond Permission: For these
Popularities among them, are somewhat hazardous. To Ambassadors he gave small
satisfaction, save with his eyes, which were very gracious and kind. In his
Countenance otherwise, there was an invincible weakness, always blushing while
he spoke, and glad when he had done. Whereby his Answers were the more scant
and meager. But this did imitate Wisdom: For a Duke of Venice that opens
himself much, will be chidden. To conclude, he was in his civil course a good
Patriot, and in his natural, a good man. They that are willing to censure him
further, think his whole composition fitter for the quality of the State, then
the times. Now being thus passed away, the first public Care was to order his
Funeral; till when, the Custom does not suffer that a new can be chosen. This
was done the Thursday following with all due solemnity; and in the mean time
was made five Correctors and three Inquisitors. The Correctors are to consider
what Laws be fit to be added or amended touching the future Election, or in the
form or the Dukes Oath, which they gently call his La Promissi^ne Ducal^.
Promise: The Inquisitors are, upon Complaint (and not otherwise) against the
deceased Prince, especially in matter of Extortion, to enquire of the truth,
and accordingly to punish his Heirs. Which Office does continue in Authority
the term of a year. The Correctors at this time presented four new Law.

1. That the Brothers and Children of the Prince shall take place in public
Processions, after the principal Magistrates, namely, next to the Censors.

2. That immediately after the choice of any new Duke, in the next Grand
Council, shall be openly rehearsed all former Decrees against Defrauders of the
Public Chests. This they call in their Dialect Intaccamento di Casse, as
unpardonable here as Treason.

The other two merit no Memory, being only about little increase of Provision
for the Dukes Attendants, and some Enlargement of time for the Correctors
Office, which heretofore did determine as soon as the Election began.

These new Orders thus made, and approved by the Grand Council (from whence all
Authority flows) they proceeded on Friday morning to the Election.

About which time were discovered four Competitors, Antonio Priuli, Gieconimo
Giustiniano, Augustino Nani, and Niccolo-Donato. The three first all
Procuratori di St. Marco; Who are in number Nine, in degree the second
Personages of the State, and commonly the Seminary of their Princes; though not
of necessity, as well appears by the fourth Concurrent, who was yet no more
then a Senator of the Wide Sleeve; a Vesture of eminent Gravity and Place in
their Councels. Of these Priuli and Giustiniano having before been chosen
Commissioners in the Business of the Uscocchi, were by a new Warning and
Penalty in the Senate on Friday before (the Prince then languishing) commanded
to be gone. But this did not prejudice their Hopes. For I have noted one
singular property in the Composition of this State, That no man's fortunes,
without other Demerits, are hindered by their Absence.

Now it shall be fit to set down, with what Foundations, and with what
Oppositions, they entered the List.

Priuli had passed through all the principal Charges of the State in the Civil
way; And had lastly in the Military been Generalissimo (till sickness sent him
home) in the Austrian Action. His own Family numerous; His Alliance strong;
Himself a man of moderate nature, of pleasant and popular Conversation, rather
free then sour and reserved; of good extemporal judgment and discourse, for
the satisfying of public Ministers, which is the Dukes proper part. Lastly,
Threescore and ten years old (for that must not be forgotten among his helps.)
But he suffered two Objections, though both rather within his Fortune, then his
Nature. The one, that he was the Father of a Cardinal, which might distract his
Affection between the State and the Church. The other, that he was poor, and
somewhat behind-hand. Of which Objection on the other side, his Favorers made
up part of his merit, as having indebted himself in the public Service.

Giustiniano was a Gentleman, that had likewise passed through the best places
at home, of excellent Gravity and Judgment, and of most unquestionable
Integrity; not violent, not avaricious, singularly beloved of the people; to
whose satisfaction in a time of this nature, it was perhaps meet to yield
somewhat. He was besides, one year elder then Priuli; but his old age did not
help him so much as he was hindered by the Antiquity of his Name For the
Princedome having been for the two last Successions in the old Families, it was
likely, the new would now strive to bring it back again among their own Blood.

Nani had carried himself meritoriously in foreign Employments, particularly
against the Pope, in the time of the Interdict; which held up his Credit among
the good Patriots. And having been near the Supreme Place at the last Election,
he re-entred now with the more hope. Besides, being by nature stiff and
sensitive, his cunning friends did mould that to his advantage; the time
seeming to need such a man. But two wild rumors did much oppress him, The one
with the better sort, that he had purchased by close gifts certain of the poor
Gentlemen's Favors: The other with the people, that he had of late been Author
of some hard Decrees; his age besides was but 63 years, and his complexion
durable.

Donato (surnamed Testolina, for the littleness of his head) had been long time
conversant in the gravest Consultations, was reputed one of the wealthiest
Gentlemen of the whole City, of good natural capacity, and above the rest
adorned with Erudition. Besides, he had the Commendation of fourscore years,
and of a weak body. But it was thought somewhat presumptuous, that he should
contend with persons of higher Rank: whereupon some conceived his end, only to
gain a friend by his voices, and to make himself Procurator in the room of him
that should be Prince.

With these hopes, and with these objections, they entered the Field, after they
had labored their friends one whole Week, namely, from the Friday night of the
Dukes death, to the Friday morning following, and perhaps a good while before:
within which time, at the place of their Broglio (as they term it) where the
Concurrents sue for voices, Nani the youngest of the four, was noted by some
vacant searching wits, to tread softly, to walk stoopingly, and to raise
himself from Benches where he sat with laborious and painful gesture, as
Arguments of no lasting man. Such a counterfeiting thing sometimes is Ambition.
To come now to the Election.

The Election of the Duke of Venice is one of the most intricate and curious
Forms in the World; consisting of ten several precedent Ballotations. Whereupon
occurreth a pretty Question, What need there was of such a deal of solicitude
in choosing a Prince of such limited Authority? And it is the stranger, for
having been long in use, the ancient Forms being commonly the most simple. To
which doubt, this Answer may serve the turn, that it was (as the tradition
runs) a Monks Invention of the Benedictin Order. And in truth, the whole
mysterious frame therein, does much ^avour of the Cloister. For first, a Boy
must be snatched up below, and this Child must draw the Balls, and not
themselves, as in all other Elections: then is it strangely intermingled, half
with Chance, and half with Choice. So as Fortune, as well as Judgment or
Affection has her part in it, and perhaps the greater. One point (as now and
then happens, even in the most curious webs of this nature) seems somewhat
unequal. Namely, that the 41 (who are the last immediate Electors of the Duke)
must be all of several Families, and of them twenty five at least concur to his
Nomination. For hereby the old names (which are but twenty four) cannot make a
Duke without help from some one of the new. And that is not easily gotten,
through emulation between them, as strong perhaps as any public respect. So as
the two last Dukes, Memo and Bembo; both of the ancient Blood, may upon the
whole matter be accounted Irregularitives of Fortune, who has likewise her
Anomola.

Now to set down the Variations of Chance in every step of these Scrutinies,
were tedious. Sure it is, that at the enclosing of the 41. (for those must be
shut up like our Jurors of Inquest, but that they are better fed) Donato had
fifteen sure Balls, Nani twelve, Giustiniano ten, and Priuli but four. So as no
one of them had voices enough to exclude the other three from making a Duke:
for to this Privative Power are required seventeen Balls at least. Nor any two
of them, except Donato and Nani had reciprocally an inclusive Power to advance
each other by joining: for though Donato might have made Giustiniano, yet he
could not be made by him, because their united strength was but precisely
twenty five, which number indeed would have served the turn, but that one of
them on Donato's part (himself being of the number) must be abated. For
contrary to the form of Election in the Empire, no man here can bestow his Ball
upon his own person. So as upon the matter does arise a kind of Riddle, That
Donato was the weaker by his presence.

Thus they stood in their several Strengths when they were shut up with a Guard
about the Palace: where during this Election, all Inferior Tribunals cease,
only the College of the Preconsultors (as they term it) is daily open for the
hearing of Ambassadors; the Senate likewise, and the High Council of Ten in
their ordinary vigor. They remained close twelve full days: In which time
diverse false voices were vented. But none of the Competitors arriving to a
sufficient number of Balls, they fell (as the fashion is) to ballote some
others that did not concur. Among whom, nothing was so memorable as the
Ballotation of Lorenzo Vini^ro; who having in the late Fight at Sea, with the
Neopolitane Fleet preserved his honor, when the rest were nearer shame, had
now eighteen Balls for the supreme place of his Country, though otherwise as
yet, of but small rank himself. At last these 41 Electors tired with trials,
Nani unable to make himself, not inclining to Giustiniano, as being of an old
House, with Priuli privately distated, and generally, wishing him best, that
was unlikeliest to live long; On Thursday morning, being the fifth of April,
declared unto his friends, that he would join with Donato: which the rest
understanding, they owed (though not to him, yet) to themselves more good will,
then not to favor that which they could not hinder. And so Niccolo Donato was
made Duke, with thirty nine Balls, his own exempted (as I have said) by Law,
and some one of the rest shrinking, I know not how, per Capriccio perhaps,
rather then despite. This is the sixth man under the Degree of a Procurator,
that has been made Duke since the foundation of the City; which makes Nani the
more odious among his own Colleagues, for advancing an inferior Order; which
perchance hereafter upon the example may grow more familiar. He was published
with slight Applause, and with more approbation (as it seems) of the Stars,
then of men. For it is vulgarly reported from his own mouth, and here strongly
believed, That an Astrologer some years since in Padoua, having cast his
Nativity, told him he should die in Carcere nobili, which they now apply to so
restrained a Princedome, helping it with Conceit; as commonly those kind of
Predictions do need.

The Election of the following Duke after the death of Niccolo Donato.
ON Tuesday the eighth of May Niccolo Donato died, about two hours of the
night, as near as the moment could be known, which his Nephews and Servants did
conceal, and is never hastily published by the State. His disease was an
Apoplexy, wherewith being surprised after a gentle fit or two of an Ague, he
had no leisure, or no mind to alter a former Will, made while he was but a
Senator, so miserably, as if he had meant to be frugal even after his death:
For therein he left but twenty five Ducats to all his Servants, and only twenty
to the Nuns of Sta. Chiara at Murano, where he disposed his Body to be laid.
The short time of his Princedome (having been but a month and two days) did
yield little matter of observation. One thing was notable, that entering with
small applause of the common men, he suddenly got their favors upon a false
conceit. For a Decree having passed in his Predecessors time about the
reformation of Bakers (who made scant loaves) and being conceived to be his
deed, the Plebeyity (whose supreme Object is Bread) cried in all corners, Viva
Donato. In his nature there was a strange Conjunction of two things rarely seen
together, Love of learning, and Love of money. And this is all that can be said
of him.

Now being gone, the following Election was likely to be short, the same
Concurrence appearing as before, and the affections having been so newly
sounded and prepared. Therefore (not to extend discourse) the Dukes Funeral
Rites being performed the Monday after his death, the Thursday morning
following, Antonio Priuli was made Duke, with all Balls. For Giustiniano having
but eight voices among the last One and forty Electors, and Nani (by strange,
and almost prodigious fortune) none, the foresaid eight friends of Giustiniano,
unprofitable for him whom they loved best, did immediately concur with Priuli's
thirty three voices. And so a solemn Embassage is preparing out of the body of
the Senate to determine his Commission in Friuli, and to recall him to the
supreme honor of his Country. When at the very same time or little
difference, one of the two Austrian Commissioners on the other side, is dead in
the midst of the Treaty. So various are humane Fortunes and Conditions.

A MEDITATION Upon the Twenty second Chapter of GENESIS.
By H. W.
IN this wonderful Piece of Sacred Story, behold the Father of the Believers,
at extreme Age, surprised (as it should seem by the Circumstances of the Text)
in his Bed by a Commandment from GOD, to sacrifice his only Son: In which case,
all the powers of his mind being suddenly shaken with an infinite combat
between Faith and Nature, we may upon the whoie matterter conceive Him to have
broken forth into some such discourse with himself, as follows.

WHat! Could this possibly be the voice of GOD, which I heard? or have not
rather some strange impressions of the Night deluded my Fancy? Yea, Thy voice
it was (my GOD) i^ was thy voice: How can thy humble Servant deny (...)? with
whom seven times before descending from the Throne of thy Glory, thou have
vouchsafed even to commune in this Vale of Tears.

When thou did first call me out of the darkness of my Fathers house into thy
saving Light; when thou did often cherish and encourage me in the steps of my
Pilgrimage; when thou did furnish me with Plenty, and Crown me with Victory
in a strange Land, when, lastly, thou did ^en overlade my feeble age with joy
in a rightful Heir of mine own Body; was I forward at all these times to
acknowledge thee the GOD of my support and comfort? and shall I now question
thy voice, when thou demandest but a part of thine own Benefits? No, (my dear
Isaac) although the Heavens know how much I love thee; yet, if thou were, or
could be millions of times more precious in the eyes of thy trembling
Father, I would summon together all the strength of mine aged Limbs to render
thee unto that gracious GOD from whom I had thee. Alas (poor Boy) how sweetly
thou slumbrest, and in thy harmless Bed do little think what change is
toward thee! but I must disturb thy rest. Isaac, arise, and call up my
Servants; bid them prepare for a journey which we are to make unto the Mount
Moriah: and let some Wood be carried for the burning of a Sacrifice. Mean while
I will walk out a little by my self to contemplate the declining Stars, and the
approach of the Morning.

O ye Ornaments of the Sky, who when all the World is silent, obey your Maker
in the determinate Order of your Motions! Can Man behold his own duty in a
fairer Volume? why then stand I gazing here, and do not rather go my self to
hasten my Servants, that I may execute his Will? But stay: His Will? Why? Is
his Will contrary to the example of his own Justice? Did he not heavily punish
Cain, even at the beginning of the first World, for killing but a Brother? and
can I stay my Child, and imbrue my hands in mine own Bowels, without offense of
his Immortal Majesty? Yes; why not? The Act of Cain, was the Act of his own
sinful malice; but I have received an immediate Command from God himself. A
Command? Why? Is his Command against his Law? shall the Fountain of all Truth
be served with Contradictions? Did not the same God, straight after the
universal Deluge, (as our Fathers have told us) denounce this Judgment; That
whosoever sheddeth man's blood, his blood shall be shed? How then can I herein obey
my God, but I must withal disobey Him?

O my weak Soul, what poor Arguments do thou search to cover thine own
rebellious Affections! Is there any Warrant higher then his Will? or any better
Interpreter of his Will then himself? If the Princes of the Earth (who are but
mortal Types of his invisible Glory) can alter their Edicts at pleasure; shall
not the Lord of the whole (whom Angels and Men adore) have leave to dispense
with his own Prohibitions? Yes surely: But then how shall the Blessing that my
good God has determined upon my Seed, and even upon this very Child, be
accomplished, if I destroy the Root? O Lord, was not thy Divine goodness
pleased, in the depth of thy Mercy, to accept my Belief for Righteousness? and
shall I now frustrate thy Promises with my Obedience? But what! am I fallen
again into a new Reluctation? Have I before contested with thy Justice? and
shall I now dispute thy Power? Did thou not create the Light before the Sun?
and the effect before the cause? and shall I bind thee to the Passions of a
natural Agent? Did thou not make this All of Nothing, even by thy Word (which
was thy Wisdom?) and foment all that thou have made by thy Spirit (which is thy
Love?) and shall I doubt but thou can raise innumerable Nations out of the
very Ashes of my poor Isaac? Nay, did I not even at first receive him in a
manner from a dead Womb? and art not thou still the same Almighty and ever
living God, Merciful Father, full of all tenderness and compassion, that see
from Heaven whereof we are made? Pardon my Discourses, and forget my Delays; I
am now going to perform thy good Pleasure. And yet there is remaining one
humble Suit; which refuse not (O my God) though it proceed from the weakness of
thine unworthy Creature: Take my Child, and all that is mine; I have resigned
him with my whole Heart unto thy Will. He is already thine, and mine no longer;
and I glory that he shall die upon thy holy Altar. But yet I fear withal, that
these my shaking hands, and fainting Limbs, will be seized with horror; be
not therefore (Dear Lord) displeased, if I use my Servants in the Execution.
How now, my Soul! do thou shrink in the last Act of thy Loyalty? Can I yet
walk up and down about vile and ordinary Functions, and when my God is to be
served, do my Joints and Members fail me? Have I humbled my desires to his
Will, and shall I deny him the choice of his own Instrument? Or if his
indulgent Mercy would permit it, shall I suffer another to anticipate the
cheerfulness of my Obedience? O thou great God of Life and Death! who might
have made me an insensible Plant, a dead Stone, or a poisonous Serpent, and yet
even in that likewise, I should have conduced to the variety of thy glorious
Wisdom; but have vouchsafed to endue us with the form of Man, and to breath
into our first Parent that spark of thy Divine Light which we call Reason, to
comprehend and acknowledge therewith thy high and indisputable Sovereignty over
all Nature; Thou then (Eternal maker and Mover, whose Will is the first of
Causes, and whose Glory is the last of Ends) direct my Feet to the Place which
thou have appointed; strengthen there these poor Hands to accomplish thy
Pleasure, and let Heaven and Earth obey thee.

A MEDITATION UPON CHRISTMAS DAY: Of the Birth and Pilgrimage of our Savior
CHRIRT on Earth.
O Glorious Morning, wherein was born the Expectation of Nations; and wherein
the long Suspired Redeemer of the World, did ((...) his Prophets had cried)
rent the Heavens, and come down in the Vesture of Humanity! Thou, that by the
Virtue of the Highest, were conceived in the Womb of an inviolate Virgin, of
all Women the most blessed; and yet more blessed by being thy Daughter, and thy
Servant, then thy Mother. Thou, at whose Birth the Quire of Heaven did sing
Hallelujahs, and Angels made haste to acquaint even Shepherds with the news!
Stay, my Soul, before I go further, and crave leave of thy Lord to ask some
Questions. Why would thou be first made known to the meanest condition of
Men? why were they sent to see their Savior, not in some gorgeous Palace, but
in the vilest Room of a common Inn, and (instead of a Cradle decked with Rich
Imbroideries) lying in a Despicable Manger? Why did Thou not choose for the
Place of thy blessed Mothers Delivery, either Athens the Learned, or Rome the
Imperial, or Jerusalem the Holy City? Or since poor Bethlehem, by thy Prophets
prediction, must receive that Honor, why did Thou not send Millions of
Cherubims and Seraphims before Thee for thy Harbingers? No, my God, it was Thy
Will, it was Thy Will (which is the highest of Reasons) by thy low beginning in
the flesh, to confound all Pride, and to teach the Glories of the Earth to
blush. Yet, thus born, and thus homely received; behold, a new Star descending
to illustrate thy obscurity, and to conduct the Wise Men of the East (now wise
indeed) with their choicest Presents to adore Thee. O strange Phenomenon! Did
ever Hipparchus, or the great Trismegist, or the greater Moses, or all the
Egyptian Gazers contemplate before such a Planet? So irregular, so
excentrical, as if the Celestial Lights had forsaken their proper Motions and
Position, to welcome the Lord of all Nature into the World!

And now, in the Course of Thy precious Life, what shall I first, what shall I
most admire? All is depth, all is wonder and amazement. Shall I first Celebrate
Thy ever-blessed Name, for convincing the great Doctors of the Law, at twelve
years of Thine Age, when Thy Divine Essence began to blaze, which had lain
before, as it were, slumbring in the Vail of Thy Manhood? Or shall I pass from
this Miracle of Knowledge to Thy Miracles os Charity, in healing the Blind, the
Lame, the Deaf, the Dumb? Or shall I more insist upon the Acts of Thy Power, in
checking the Winds, in walking on the Waves, in raising the Dead, in ejecting
the impure Spirits? Or shall I remain stupefied (as all the Learnedest part of
the World was, which lay grovelling in the Contemplation of Inferior Causes)
that at Thy Coming, all their false Oracles and Delusions were stricken mute,
and nothing to be heard at Delphos, or Hammon? Or shall I contemplate, that at
Thy Passion all Nature did suffer, the Earth did shake, and the Heavens were
darkened? Or lastly, after Thou had triumphed over Death and Hell (whose Keys
are in thine hand) shall I glorify Thy Assumption into the Highest Heavens?

Yes, Lord, all this, and much more there is then the whole World can contain,
if it were written: Yet one thing remains, even after Thy glorious Departure,
for the comfort of our Souls, above all the Miracles of Thy Goodness, and of
Thy Power, That Thou have dispensed Thy saving Doctrine unto curious Men, not
only by Eloquent Sophists, and Subtle Schoolmen, (such as have since
distracted and torn thy Church in pieces;) but by the simpliest and silliest
Instruments: so as it must needs be Thy Divine Truth, since it was impressed by
no Humane Means. For, give me leave again, my dear Lord, to demand, in the
Ecstasy and Admiration of one of Thy blessed Vessels, Where is the Wise? Where
is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this World? How should we have known,
how should we have apprehended Thy Eternal Generation, if Thou had not been
pleased to vouchsafe a silly Fisherman to lean on Thy Breast, and to inspire
him to tell us from his Boat, that, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God?

Therefore to Thee, Thou Incarnate Word, and Wisdom of the Father; Thou only
true Messiah, in whom all Prophecies are accomplished, and in whom the Will of
God, and the Desires of Men are fulfilled, look down upon us Thy unworthy
Creatures, from where Thou sit in Thy Glory: Teach us Thy Love; but such a
Love as does fear to offend Thee: Teach us Thy Fear; but such a Fear as first
does love Thee. And indue us with Thy Grace, whilst by Thy Permission we walk
on this Globe, which Thy blessed Feet have trodden, to solemnize this Day of Thy
Nativity, not with wanton Jollities, but with Hymns of Joy, and Meditations of
like Comfort.

LETTERS TO SEVERAL PERSONS.

LETTERS TO SEVERAL PERSONS.
To Sir Arthur Throckmorton.
SIR,
I Have been desirous of some fit opportunity, to render you humble thanks for
a very kind Letter which I received from you; and I cannot have a fitter, then
by the return of this Gentleman, who bears much devotion to your Name. I will
therefore by his honest hand, present you the service of a poor Scholar, for
that is the highest of my own Titles, and in truth, the farthest end of my
Ambition: This other Honor (wherewith it has pleased His Majesty to cloth my
unworthiness) belonging unproperly unto me; who, I hope, am both born, and
formed in my Education, fitter to be an Instrument of Truth then of Art. In the
mean while; till His Majesty shall resolve me again into my own plain and
simple Elements, I have abroad done my poor endeavor, according to these
occasions which God has opened.

This Gentleman leaves Italy in present tranquillity, though not without a
little fear of some alteration on the side of Savoy: Which Prince seems to
have great and unquiet thoughts, and I think, they will lack no fomentation
from abroad. Therefore after the remembrance of my most affectionate poor
service to your self, and to my Honorable Ladies, your Wife and Daughters, and
your whole House, (with which we are now so particularly conjoined) I commit
You and Them to our merciful God.

Your willing Servant, HENRY WOTTON.

To Sir Arthur Throckmorton.
SIR,
I Am sorry, that having so good opportunity to write unto you, joined with so
much Obligation, I have withal so little matter at the present: yet I will
entertain you with a few Rapsodie^.

My Lord my Brother is returned a day sooner then he thought, out of Kent, for
that the King (who is now at Hampton Court) has appointed all his Counselors,
and all the Judges, to meet Him here to morrow about matters of the Mint, as it
is voiced, perhaps to cover some greater Subject, and yet Money is a great one.

On Saturday the King goes to Windsor, there to honor with his presence both
his Sons and his Favorites at their Instalments.

On Sunday last the new Venetian Ambassador had his first Audience at
Greenwich: at which time the old took his leave, and received from the King
three Honors, An addition of the English Lion to his Coat Armor, Knighthood,
and the Sword with the Furniture from the Kings side, wherewith he had Knighted
him: which last, being more then was done to any of his Predecessors, and done
to him who had deserved less then any, is enough to prove, that wise Kings know
how to do graces, and hide affections: so mystical things are Courts.

Now, to lead you a little abroad; for I have no more to say within our own
visible Horizon: We have advice out of Germany, that they have extorted from
the Emperor his consent to make Matthias King of the Romans: so as having
first spoiled him of obedience and reverence; next, of his estates and titles;
they have now reduced him to so low a case, that he is no longer Patron of his
own voice. Howsoever, this violent cure is likely to settle the Motions of
Germany; out of which Country, when they are quiet at home, they may perhaps
send us some suitors hither. This is all (Sir) that I can write at the present;
which is your advantage; for if there had been more, you had been further
troubled: And so with many hearty thanks for your kind Letters, and with many
hearty wishes for the prosperity of your whole House, I humbly rest

May 8. 1611. Your most affectionate poor Friend to serve you, HENRY WOTTON.

Feb. 1613. SIR,
ONe Reason of my writing now unto you, is because it seems a great while
unto me since I did so. Another, to give you many thanks (which upon the
casting up of my reckonings, I find I have not yet done) for that Gelding
wherewith you so much honored me: which, in truth, either for goodness or
beauty runs for one of the very best about this place; And I have had a
great deal of love made unto me for him by no small ones. After this, I must
plainly tell you, that I mean to persuade you, I am sorry I cannot say, to
invite you, (for my Mind would bear that word better then my Fortune) to bestow
your self, and your whole Family upon us this Shrovetide, if it be but for
three days at the conjunction of the Thames and the Rhene, as our ravished
Spirits begin to call it. The occasion is rare, the expense of time but little,
of money inconsiderable: You shall see diverse Princes, a great confluence of
Strangers, sundry entertainments to shorten your patience, and to reward your
travel: Finally, nothing spared, even in a necessitous time. I will add unto
these Arguments, that out of your own Store at home, ^ou may much increase the
beauty of this Assembly; and your Daughters shall not need to provide any great
splendor of Clothing, because they can ^pply that with a better contribution,
as has been ^ell authenticated even by the Kings own testimony of them. For
though I am no longer an Ambassador, yet am I not so bank-rupt of Intelligence,
but that I have heard of those rural passages.

Now let me therefore, with this hobling Pen, again and again pray you to
resolve upon your coming, if not with all the fair Train, yet your self and my
Lady, and my Nephew and his Wife, or at the least of leasts, the Masculine.

We begin to lay off our mourning habits, and the Court will shortly, I think,
be as merry as if it were not sick. The King will be here to morrow: The Friday
following he goes to Windsor, with the Count Palatine, about the Ceremony of
his Instalment. In the mean time, there is expected the Count Henry of Nassaw,
to be at the said Solemnity, as the Representant of his Brother. Yesternight,
the Count Palatino invited all the Counsel to a solemn Supper, which was well
ordered: He is a Gentleman of very sweet hope, and has rather gained upon us,
then lost any thing after the first Impression. And so, Sir, having ended my
Paper, I will end my Letter with my hearty prayers for the prosperity of your
self, and yours, ever resting

Your faithful poor Friend to serve you, HENRY WOTTON.

To the King. 1615.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
I Beseech your Majesty to pardon me a little short repetition, how I have
spent my time since my departure from your Royal sight, because I glory in your
goodness.

I have been employed by your favor in four several Treaties differing in the
Matter, in the Instruments, and in the Affections.

The first was for the sequestration of Juliers, wherein I was joined with the
French.

The second for the provisional possession of the two Pretendents: wherein
(contrary to the complaint of the Gospel) the Laborers were more then the
Harvest.

The third was for a defensive League between the united Provinces and the
united Princes: Who though they be separate Bodies of State, do now by your
only Mediation, make one Body of Strength.

The fourth was for the composing of some differences between your own and this
People; in matter of Commerce; which has exceeded the other Three, both in
length and in difficulty, for two Reasons as I conceive it:

First, Through the sensibleness of the Subject, which is private Utility:
next, because it had a secret commixture of public respects, and those of no
light consequence: For surely, it imports more to let the King of Spain
dispense alone the Commodities of the East, then for either of us to want them.

Now of the three former Treaties, I have given your Majesty an account in
diverse Dispatches, according to my poor apprehensions. As for this last, they
that have eased my weakness in the conduct thereof (I mean my good Associates,
by whose light and leadings I have walked) will ease me likewise, by your
gracious leave, in the Relation. By them it may please your Majesty to
understand in what fair terms we have left it; somewhat resembling to my fancy
those Women of Nombre de Dios, who (they say) are never brought to bed in the
place where they conceive, but bring forth their children in a better Air: And
so I hope that our travels and unformed conceptions will take life in your own
Kingdom, which will be more honor to their Birth. For our parts, I dare
affirm of these your Commissioners, that now return unto the comfort of your
gracious Aspect, That they have discharged their Duties and their Consciences,
with all faithful care of your Majesty's Commandments. I am confident likewise
that they will give me their honest Testimony: And we are bound jointly to
profess unto your Majesty (from whom we receive our estimation) the respects
and kindnesses that have been here done us, as your Vassals.

And so with my continual prayers to God for your blessed Being, I here remain,
till your Majesty shall vouchsafe me again the grace of your eyes,

Your Majesty's long devoted poor Servant, HENRY WOTTON.

To the Marquess of Buckingham,
January 25. 1619. My most Noble Lord,
I Will be bold, by this opportunity, to give His Majesty, through your
Lordships hands, an account of a Command which I had from him at Theobalds,
about sounding how the Venetian Ambassador stood satisfied with the late
determination touching his predecessor Donato.

I did visit the said Ambassador immediately at my return from the King, and
saluted him, as by express Commandment; interjecting some words of mine own
gladness, that he had received contentment in this tender point, which would
signalize his beginnings. This I said, because in truth I had found him always
before the more passionate in it, by some reflection upon himself. His answer
(after due thanks for His Majesty's gracious remembrance of him from abroad)
was, that for his own part, he was Contentissimo, and had represented things
home in the best manner. He hoped likewise it would be well tasted there also,
though with some doubt, because the State, out of their own devotion toward
His Majesty, might form a confidence of expecting more.

I replied, that the King upon the matter (if we consider disgrace) had done
more then themselves: for he was but once banished at Venice, and twice here;
viz. once from the verge of the Court, and secondly from London; which was as
much as could be done with preservation of rational immunities, and more then
would have been done at the suit of of any other Ambassador here resident; or
perhaps of any of their own hereafter, if the like Case shall occur. For (as I
told him) it was the Kings express will, that his particular respect to the
Republic, and to him in this business, should not be drawn into Examples. With
this point he was not a little pleased, for his own glory; and said, that
indeed Master Secretary Nanton had told him so. This was the sum of what passed
between us, omitting impertinencies. Let me end, (my dear Lord) as I am bound,
in all the use either of my pen, or of my voice, with an humble and hearty
acknowledgement of my great obligations toward your Lordship, which will make
me resolve, and in good faith unhappy, till I can some way show my self,

Your Lordships most thankeful, and faithful Servant, H. W.

To the KING,
From Augusta the 8/18 of August, 1620. May it please Your most Sacred Majesty,
FRom this place I determined to make my first Dispatch unto Your Majesty,
hoping in such Cities and Courts whereunto I had address on the way, to take
up somewhat that should be considerable, and till then unwilling to entertain
Your solicitous Mind with immaterial things.

I have hitherto been with five several Princes and Communities, the Duke of
Loraign, the Archduke Leopoldus, the Town of Strasburg, the Duke of
Wirtenberg, and the Town of Ulme, in the same order as I have set them down;
among whom I spent in all twelve days, and the rest of the time in uncessant
journeys, whereof I shall now render Your Majesty a full account in the
substance, retrenching impertinencies.

Unto the Duke of Loraign, I had no credential address from Your Royal hand;
and yet to pass silently (like a stream through his Land) by a Prince of so
near conjunction in blood with You, and interessed in the scope of my errand,
as a member of the Empire, had been some incongruity. Therefore excusing (as I
might justly) the want of Letters, with my purpose to have taken another way,
till I heard that the French King had cleared the confines of Loraign, by
drawing such Forces as lay hovering there, with some hazard of Passengers, over
the River of Marne toward Normandy: I say, after this excuse, I told him, I
knevv Your Majesty would be singularly pleased to understand by me of his
health; and that I had, in transitu, conferred with him Your Christian ends,
wherein You could not but expect at his hands a concurrence both of Counsel
and Affection. This I said, to dravv civilly from him as much as I could, being
a Prince cumbred (as I found him) with the German troubles on the one side,
and the French on the other; and therefore bound to study the passages of both:
especially having a State, which perhaps is harder for him to keep neutral
then himself. In the rest of my discourse, I possessed him with two main heads
of mine Instructions: First, with Your Majesty's innocence in the Bohemian
business at the beginning; next, with Your impartiality therein, even to this
hour: both which did render You in this cause, the fittest Mediator of the
World. And so I shut up all with this, That God had given Your Majesty two
eminent blessings; the one, Peace at home, the other (which was surely the
greater, and the rarer) a Soul desirous of the like abroad; which You found
Your self tied in the Conscience of a Christian King to prosecute by all
possible means: and therefore, though You had before in the beginning of the
Bohemian Motions, sent Your good meaning by a solemn Embassage to the Emperor,
in the Person of a dear and zealous Servant of great Quality, even before any
other King had entered into it, which, through the crudity of the matter, as
then, took not the wished effect: yet now hoping that time it self, and the
experience of vexation, had mollified the affections, and better digested the
difficulties, You had not refused by several Ambassages to both sides, and to
all the intervenient Princes and States, to attempt again this high and
Christian Work. Thus much, though in effect extracted from Your Majesty's own
directions, I have here once rehearsed, to save the repetition thereof in my
following Audiences at other places.

The Dukes answer was more tender, then free, lamenting much the present
condition of things, commending as much Your Majesty's good mind, proclaiming
his own, remitting the whole to those great and wise Kings that had it in
hand, and concluding (with a voice, me thought, lower then before, as if he
had doubted to be overheard, though in his private Chamber) that the Princes of
the Union would tell me what his affections were in the Cause: For which I
gave him thanks, commending in all events to his continual memory, that Your
Majesty's Daughter, my gracious Lady, and her Descendents were of the Blood of
Loraign: Yea, said he, and the Elector likewise. This was all that passed from
him of any moment. After which, he brought me to Monsieur de Vaudemont, whose
principal business (as I hear) at the present, is to work the Dukes assent,
and the Popes dispensation, for a Marriage between his own Son and his Brothers
Daughter; a thing much affected by that People, and no doubt fomented by
France, to keep so important a Province from Strangers. In the mean while de
Vaudemont's Son, for improvement of his merit and fame, is bestowed in the
Command of those Troops which were suffered to pass the Rheine at Brysack on
Whitson-Monday last. Before I leave Loraign, I cannot but advertise Your
Majesty that at Faltsbourg, a Town in the confines of that Province toward
Elsatia (inhabited and built by many good men of the Religion) the Ministers
came unto me, bewailing the case of the Inhabitants, who for some thirty years
had possessed that place quietly, till of late by instigation of the Jesuits at
Nancy, the Duke had given them warning to be gone within the term of two
years, whereof some good part was expired. Their request unto me was, that
by Your Majesty's gracious Mediation, they might be received into a place
within the Palatine Jurisdiction, near their present seat, which they offered
to enlarge, and fortify at their own charge, upon the grant of reasonable
immunities: which I have assumed to treat by Letter with Your Majesty's
Son-in-lavv; needing no other commission from Your Majesty in things of this
nature, then Your own goodness.

The Archduke Leopald, I was forced to seek three days journey from his
ordinary seat; where, being at his private sports of the field, and no fit
things about him, he desired me to turn back half (...) days journey to
Mulzham, the notorious nest of Jesuits: commanding the Governors of his Towns,
in the mean time, to use me with all due respects; among whom he made choice
of an Italian, by name Ascanio Albertine, (a man of singular confidence with
him, and surely of very fair conditions) to sound me, though in a merry
fashion, and half laughing, (as there was good cause) how I would taste it, if
he should receive me in the Jesuits College: for at Mulzham those were his
Hosts, being destitute of other habitation. I answered him, as merrily as it
was propounded, that I knew the Jesuits had every where the best rooms, more
splendent then true, fitter to lodge Princes then Monks; and that their
habitations were always better then themselves. Moreover, that for mine own
part, though I was not much afraid of their infection; and that Saint Paul did
not refuse to be carried in a Ship, which was consecrated to false Gods; yet
because on our side they were generally, and (no doubt) justly reputed the true
causes of all the troubles of the Christian World, I doubted it would be a
scandalous Reception; and that besides, those Artificers would go near to make
appear on my part, a kind of silent approbation of their Order and course. This
was my answer, which being faithfully transported by the Italian, the Archduke
made choice of another mean house in the Town, where he received me truly in a
noble sweet fashion: to whom having presented Your Majesty's Letters, and Love,
he disposed himself with sharp attention to hear me. To him, besides that which
I had said to the Duke of Loraign, I added two things:

The first, that not only Your Majesty was clear of all foreknowledge, or
counsel, in the business of Bohemia; but likewise Your Son-in-law himself of
any precedent practice therein, till it was laid upon him, as You knew by his
own high affirmations, and most infallible testimonies.

The second, that though Your Majesty to this hour did continue as equal
betwixt both parties, as the Equinoctial between the Poles, yet about the time
of my departure You were much moved, and the whole Land likewise, with a voice,
I know not how spread abroad, that there were great preparations to invade the
Nether Palatinate; which if it did fall out, Your Majesty should have just
reason to think Your Moderation unthankfully requited; the said Palatinate
being the Patrimonial Lands of Your own Descendents, and no way connexed with
the Bohemian Business. Whereupon I persuaded him fairly, in Your Majesty's
Name, being a Personage of such authority in the present actions, to keep them
from any such precipitious and impertinent rupture as might preclude all
Mediation of Accord: and because Your Majesty had now, which was a second
Argument of Your equity, sent several Ambassadors to the Fountains, for Your
better information in the merit of the Cause, by Your own Instruments, I
besought him to illuminate me, who was the weakest of Your Creatures, as far as
he should think fit, and to assist me with his best advice toward this good
end, whereunto, besides the dear Commandment of the King my Master, I would
confer mine own plain and honest zeal.

His answer, to all the points, which he had very orderly laid up, was this: Of
Your Majesty's own clearness he professed much assurance; of Your Son-in-law as
much doubt, charging him both with close practice with the Bohemians at the
time of the Emperors Election at Francfort, and more foully with a new
practice, either by himself or by others, to introduce the Turk into Hungary.
Of any design upon the Lower Palatinate, he utterly disavowed all knowledge on
his part; yet would not deny, but the Marquess Spinola might perchance have
some such aim; and if things went on, as they do, men would no doubt assail
their enemies wheresoever they should find them. In such ambiguous clouds as
these, he wrapped this point. Of the Emperors inclination to an agreement, he
bade me be very assured; but never without restitution of the usurped Kingdom,
which was not a loss of easy concoction, especially being taken from him by
the Count Palatine his Subject, as he often called him; and once added, that he
thought he would not deny it himself. Of the merit of the cause, he said he
had sent diverse records and papers to the Emperor, where I should find them.

Lastly, he acknowledged himself much bound unto Your Majesty for the honor
You had done him, to take such knowledge of his Person, and was contented to
bestow some thanks upon me for mine honest inclination, which he would present,
before my arrival, at Vienna. I had almost omitted a point touched by him, that
he had knowledge of some English Levies coming toward the Palatinate: About
which I cleared him, with confessing that Your Majesty's People, and some of
Your principal Nobility, had taken Alarm upon a voice of an Invasion there, and
meant voluntarily to sacrifice themselves in that action; but without any
concurrence of Your Majesty thereunto, either by money or command. To which he
replied, that in truth so he had heard, and made no question of Your Royal
Integrity. In the afternoon of this day, he took me abroad with him in his
Coach, to show me some of his nearer Towns and Fortifications; and there
descended into many familiarities, and amongst other, to show us how to make
Frogs leap at their own skins: a strange purchase, me thought, at a time when
Kingdoms are in question: But it may be it was an Art to cover his weightier
Meditations.

Amongst other discourse, there was some mention of Your Majesty's Treaty with
Spain, in point of Alliance; which I told him, was a concluded business: for
that warrant I had from Your own Royal mouth in Your Gallery at Theobalds,
having let fall none of Your syllables. Whereupon he said, That he did not
despair upon so good an occasion, to salute Your Majesty in Your own Court. The
morning following, he sent unto me Seignior Ascanio, with express desire, that
since Your Majesty's intentions were so clear, I would as frankly acquaint him,
whether in mine Instructions I had any particular form of accord to project
unto the Emperor: which himself likewise at my second Audience did somewhat
importunely press, excusing his curiosity with a good meaning, to prepare the
Emperor, in as good manner as he could, to accept it. My answer was, that Your
Majesty thought it first necessary on both sides to dispose the affections, and
then by reciprocal Intelligence between Your Servants, from Vienna and Prague,
to collect some measure of Agreement; for otherwise, if we should find both
Parties fixed in extreme resolutions, it were a folly to spend any further the
Honor of our Master. Here again he told me, that I should find the Emperor
peswasible enough, if his Reputation may be saved: and for his own part, he
thought that the Count Palatine, being the Inferior, might yield without
prejudice of his. To terms of this height he revolved, and of the same
complexion are his Letters to Your Majesty, that I send herewith, of which I
must needs say, that in some part, Olent Patrem Henricum, so they call a Jesuit
of inward credit with him. Always true it is, that they were couched in the
College, for his Secretaries were absent, as the Italian told me, at his
ordinary place of residence. At my leave-taking, he spoke with much reverence
of Your Majesty, with much praise of Your Christian mind, and with much
thankfulness of the Honor You had done him. He is a Prince of good stature, of
fair complexion, inclining to fullness: His face, the very best, as they tell me
of the House of Austria; and better indeed then his fashion. No curiosity in
his clothing, no affectation in his discourse; extreme affable, both to
strangers, and among his own: Patient of labor, and delighting in motion. In
sum, little of a Bishop, save the Bishopric and a long Coat; with which short
character of his Person, I have taken the boldness to end, being (as I conceive
it) the duty of Servants to represent unto their Masters the Images of those
(with whom they treat) and as well their natural as artificial Impressions.

Of Strasburg and Ulm, I may speak conjunctively, being of one nature; both
free, and both jealous of their freedom, which makes them fortify apace.
Toward me likewise they joined in one point of good respect, namely, in not
suffering me to come to their Senate House, but in treating with me where I was
lodged by the deputed Persons, out of the reverence (as they professed) due to
Your Majesty, who had done them so much honor with Your Letters, and with
communication of Your ends by Your humble Servant. They both commended Your
Majesty's Christian intensions, and professed themselves hitherto in the same
Neutrality; but because it were uncivil for them to contribute their Counsels,
where such Kings did employ their Wisdom and Authority, they would only
contribute their Prayers, with the like temperate conceits as these, appearing
likewise in their Letters, which I send by this Bearer.

Into the Duke of Wirtenberg's Court I was received very nobly, and kindly
feasted at his Table, with the Princess, and other great Ladies, and most part
of the day lead by himself, to view his Gardens, Buildings, and other Delights.

The material points collected here, I must divide partly into my discourse
with himself, and partly into such knowledge as he commanded Monsieur
Buvinckhousen to give me, which comes in a Paper apart, being very material.

In his own Speech, he made great profession toward Your Majesty, wherein no
Prince of the Empire should exceed him; and as much toward the King of Bohemia,
as he ever called Your Son-in-law: of whose clearness from all precedent
practice, when I fell to speak, he told me, that in that point he would ease
me; for himself visiting the Elector, a little after he was chosen, he found
him extremely perplexed, even to effusion of tears, between these two
considerations, That if he accepted the offer, the World would falsely conceive
it to have sprung from his Ambition; if he refused it, that People was likely
to fall into desperate Counsels, with danger of calling more then Christian
help. In the rest of his discourse, I was glad to hear him often vow, that he
would defend the Palatinate with all his power, being tied thereunto not only
by the Bond of Confederacy, but likewise by Reason of State, not to suffer a
Stranger to neighbor him.

I have now ended for the present Your Majesty's trouble. There remain of my
Commission, the Duke of Bavaria, and the Emperor. The Duke of Bavaria I shall
find actually in arms about Lintz, in the upper Austria, and the Emperor at
Vienna: from both places I will make several Dispatches unto Your Majesty, and
afterward weekly, or more frequently, as the occasion shall rise. Let this in
the mean time end in my humble thanks to Almighty God for the repose of Your
own Estates, and in my hearty Prayers for the preservation of Your dear and
sacred Person.

October. 1620. Right Honorable,
OF my purpose to depart from Vienna, and to leave the Emperor to the Counsels
of his own Fortune, I gave his Majesty knowledge by my servant James Vary.

I will now make you a summary account of what has happened here, which is to
be done both out of Duty to your Place, and out of Obligation to your
Friendship.

The Count Tampier had some twelve days since taken from the Hungarians by
surprisal in the Field, thirteen Cornets of Horse, and one Ensign of Foot,
which here with much ostentation were carried up and down, and laid on Sunday
was sevennight under the Emperors feet, as he came from the Chapel.

Some note, that the vanity of this triumph was greater then the merit; for the
Hungarians by their ordinary discipline, abound in Cornets, bearing one almost
for every twenty Horse, so as Flags are good cheap amongst them, and but
slightly guarded: Howsoever the matter be made more or less, according to the
wits on both sides, this was brave gaudium, and it self indeed some cause of
the following disaster; For the Count Tampier, being by nature an enterprising
man, was now also inflamed by accident; which made him immediately conceive the
surprisal of Presburg, while the Prince of Transylvania was retired to the
siege of Guns, some six or seven Leagues distant. A project in truth, if it had
prospered, of notorious utility.

First by the very reputation of the Place, being the Capital Town of Hungaria.

Next, the access to Comar and Rab, (which places only the Emperor retains
in that Kingdom of any considerable value) had been freed by water, which now
in a manner are blocked up.

Thirdly, the incursions into these Provinces, and ignominious depredations had
been cut off.

And lastly, the Crown of Hungaria had been recovered, which the Emperor
Matthias did transport to the Castle of Presburg, after the deposition of
Rodolph his Brother, who always kept it in the Castle of Prague; which men
account one of the subtle things of that retired Emperor, as I hear by
discourse. So as upon these considerations, the enterprise was more commendable
in the design, then it will appear in the execution; being thus carried.

From hence to Presburg is in this month of October an easy nights journey by
water. Thither on Thursday night of the last week, Tampier himself, accompanied
with some four or five Colonels, and other remarkable men of this Court,
resolves to bring down in 25 Boats, about 3000 Foot, or such a matter; having
given order, and space enough before, for certain Horse, partly Dutch, and
partly Polonians, to be there, and to attend his coming about two hours before
Friday morning. And to shadow this purpose, himself on Thursday in the
afternoon, with affected noise goes up the River the contrary way, though no
reasonable imaginations could conceive vvhither; for the lower Austria was
then all reduced. By which Artificial delay, and by some natural stops in the
shallows of the water, when they fell silently down again, it was three or
four hours of clear day before he arrived at Presburg the next morning: Where
his meaning was, first to destroy the Bridge built upon Boats, and thereby to
keep Bethlehem Gabor, (as then on the Austrian side) not only from succouring
the Town, but from all possibility of repassing the Danuby nearer then Buda.
Next, to apply the Petard to one of the Gates of the Citadel. Some say, he had
likewise inward intelligence, that at his approach, the Wicket of the Castle
should be opened unto him by one Palfy an Hungarian Gentleman; which conceit,
though perchance raised at first to animate the Soldier, yet has gotten much
credit, by seeing the enterprise against all discourse continued by daylight.
Be that point how it will, his fatal hour was come: for approaching a Skonce
that lies by the Castle-gate, and turning about to cry for his men to come on,
he was shot in the lowest part of his Skull nearest his Neck, after which he
spoke no syllable, as Don Carolo d' Austria (second base Son to Rodolph the
Emperor, and himself at that time saved by the goodness of his Armor) does
testify. After which, some two or three Soldiers attempting to bring away
his Body, and those being shot, the rest gave it over, and the whole Troops
transported themselves to the other side, leaving the Boats behind them, as if
they had meant to contribute new provision for the mending of the Bridge,
whereof they had only broken one little piece.

This was the end of the Count Tampier; By his Fathers side a Norman, by his
Mothers a Champaigne, a servant twenty two years to the House of Austria.
Himself Captain of a thousand Horse: but Commander diverse times in chief,
especially before the coming of the Count Bucquoy, from whom he was severed
to these nearer Services, being of incompatible natures: a valiant, and
plotting Soldier; In Encounters more fortunate then Sieges; Gracious to his
own, and terrible to the Hungarians. To the present Emperor most dear, though
perchance, as much for Civil, as Military Merit: for this was the very man
that first seized upon the Cardinal Clesel, when he was put into a Coach, and
transported hence to Tirol: So as now we may expect some Pamphlet the next
Mart from Ingolstat, or Colen; That no man can end well, who has laid
violent hands upon any of those Roman Purpurati.

To this point, I must add two remarkable Circumstances; The first, that
Tampier, among other Papers found in his Pockets, is said to have had a
Memorial of certain Conditions, vvhereon it should be fit to insist in his
Parley with the Town, as having already swallowed the Castle. The other, that
his Head having been cut off by a Soldier, and sold for five Dollars to
another, who meant to have the merit of presenting it to the Prince, the
Presenter was rewarded with a stroke of a Sable, for insulting over the dead
Carcass of a Gentleman of Honor.

Lord Bacon to Sir Henry Wotton.
My very good Cousin,
YOur Letter which I received from your Lordship upon your going to Sea, was
more then a compensation for any former omission; and I shall be very glad to
entertain a correspondence with you in both kinds, which you write of: for the
latter whereof I am now ready for you, having sent you some Ure of that Mine. I
thank you for your Favors to Mr. Mewtus, and I pray continue the same. So
wishing you out of that honorable Exile, and placed in a better Orb, I ever
rest,

York-house October. 20. 1620. Your Lordships affectionate Kinsman and assured
Friend, Fr. Verulam Canc.

Sir Henry Wotton to Lord Bacon.
Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
I Have your Lordships Letters dated the 20th. of October, and I have withal by
the care of my Cousin Mr. Thomas Meawtis, and by your own special favor, three
Copies of that Work, wherewith your Lordship has done a great and ever-living
benefit to all the children of Nature; and to Nature her self, in her uttermost
extent and latitude: who never before had so noble nor so true an Interpreter,
or (as I am readier to style your Lordship) never so inward a Secretary of her
Cabinet: But of your said Work (which came but this Week to my hands) I shall
find occasion to speak more hereafter; having yet read only the first Book
thereof, and a few Aphorisms of the second. For it is not a Banquet, that men
may superficially taste, and put up the rest in their Pockets; but in truth, a
solid feast, which requires due mastication. Therefore when I have once my
self perused the whole, I determine to have it read piece by piece at certain
hours in my domestic College, as an ancient Author: For I have learned thus
much by it already, that we are extremely mistaken in the computation of
Antiquity, by searching it backwards, because indeed the first times were the
youngest; especially in points of natural discovery and experience. For though
I grant, that Adam knew the natures of all Beasts, and Solomon of all Plants,
not only more then any, but more then all since their time; Yet that was by
divine infusion, and therefore they did not need any such Organum as your
Lordship has now delivered to the world; nor we neither, if they had left us
the memories of their wisdom.

But I am gone further then I meant in speaking of this excellent Labor, while
the delight yet I feel, and even the pride that I take in a certain
Congeniality (as I may term it) with your Lordships studies, will scant let me
cease: And indeed I owe your Lordship even by promise (which you are pleased to
remember, thereby doubly binding me) some trouble this way; I mean, by the
commerce of Philosophical Experiments, which surely, of all other, is the most
ingenuous Traffic: Therefore, for a beginning, let me tell your Lordship a
pretty thing which I saw coming down the Danuby, though more remarkable for the
Application, then for the Theory. I lay a night at Lintz, the Metropolis of the
higher Austria; but then in very low estate, having been newly taken by the
Duke of Bavaria: who, blandiente fortuna, was gone on to the late effects:
There I found Keplar, a man famous in the Sciences, as your Lordship knows, to
whom I purpose to convey from hence one of your Books, that he may see we have
some of our own that can honor our King, as well as he has done with his
Harmanica. In this man's study I was much taken with the draught of a Landscape
on a piece of paper, me thoughts masterly done: whereof enquiring the Author,
he bewrayed with a smile, it was himself; adding, he had done it, Non tanquam
Pictor, sed tanquam Methematicus. This set me on fire: At last he told me how.
He has a little black Tent, (of what stuff is not much importing) which he can
suddenly set up where he will in a Field, and it is convertible (like a
Windmill) to all quarters at pleasure, capable of not much more then one man,
as I conceive, and perhaps at no great ease; exactly close and dark, save at
one hole, about an inch and a half in the Diameter, to which he applies a long
perspective Trunk, with the convex-glass fitted to the said hole, and the
concave taken out at the other end, which extends to about the middle of this
erected Tent, through which the visible radiations of all the objects without,
are intromitted, falling upon a paper, which is accommodated to receive them,
and so he traceth them with his pen in their natural appearance, turning his
little Tent round by degrees, till he has designed the whole Aspect of the
Field. This I have described to your Lordship, because I think there might be
good use made of it for Chorography: for otherwise, to make Landskips by it
were illiberal; though surely no Painter can do them so precisely. Now from
these artificial and natural curiosities, let me a little direct your Lordship
to the contemplation of Fortune.

Here, by a slight Battle full of miserable errors (if I had leisure to set
them down) all is reduced, or near the point. In the Provinces there is nothing
but of fluctuation and submission, the ordinary consequences of Victory;
wherein the triumphs of the Field do not so much vex my soul, as the triumphs
of the Pulpit: For what noise will now the Jesuit disseminate more in every
corner, then victrix causa Deo placuit; which yet was but the Gospel of a Poet:
No, my Lord, when I revolve what great things Zisca did in the first troubles
of his Country, that were grounded upon conscience, I am tempted to believe
the Alldistinguishing eye has been more displeased with some humane affections
in this business, then with the business it self.

I am now preparing my departing toward my other employment, for in my first
Instructions I had a power to go hence, when this controversy should be
decided, either by Treaty, or by Fortune; whereof now the worser means have
perverted the better.

Here I leave the French Ambassadors upon the Stage, as I found them; being
willing (quod solum superest) to deal between the Emperor and Bethlehem Gabor,
with whom I have nothing to do as he is now singled.

Betwixt this and Italy I purpose to collect the memorablest Observations that
I have taken of this great Affair, and to present a Copy thereof unto your
Lordships indulgent, not to your severe judgment.

The present I cannot end (though I have too much usurped upon your precious
time) without the return of my humble thanks unto your Lordship, for the kind
remembrance of my Cousin Mr. John Meawtis in your Letter to me, and of your
recommendation of him before; being a Gentleman, in truth of sweet conditions
and strong abilities: I shall now transport him over the Alps, where we will
both serve your Lordship, and love one another. And so beseeching God to bless
your Lordship with long life and honor, I humbly rest,

Your Lordships,

Right Honorable,
OF my appearing to this State, and of my reception here, I gave your Lordship
notice by my former Letters.

The Counsels of this State I find to be calm; for the new Pope has assured
them, He will keep storms out of Italy.

True it is, that he has bravely denied already passage to the Neopolitan
Cavalry and Infantry, through the Ecclesiastical State, though instantly
pressed by the Spanish Ambassador; in which Humor, if he shall persevere
without warping, we shall think him here a well-seasoned piece of Timber.

We hear of an Ambassador from Savoy on his way to you; C. C. a plain
Instrument from a subtle Prince, and therefore the more proper to deceive us,
and to be first deceived himself. The business I shall need not to tell you,
nor indeed can I say much of the hope of it.

How we stand here, will appear by the two enclosed Copies.

-- But for those things I shall give his Majesty continual advertisement, as
time shall change the prospect of this Theater, whereon I am placed.

So with all my duties remembered, as well those of Thankfulness, as those of
Affection, I will subscribe my self, as truly I am,

Your Lordships, etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
This very Morning, which is the Nuncio's ordinary day of Audience, He has
surprised the Duke and Senators with presentation of a Jubilee unto them from
his Master. Some discourse, that it is to gain Fame and Favor by an indulgent
Beginning.



To the Marquess of Buckingham.
Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
I Know your Lordship cannot want Presents of the best kind from all Countries,
if you would be but pleased to bewray your Desire: For your Favor is worthy to
be studied, both because you are powerful, and because in the common judgment
(of which we hear the sound, that are far off) you employ your power nobly.

For my part, though I am not able to reach unto any thing proportionable to
your Dignity, nor even to mine own mind; yet I must not suffer Venice (where I
have served the King so long) to be wholly disgraced. And therefore I have
taken the boldness in a Ship newly departed from this Harbor, to send your
Lordship two Boxes of poor things: which because they need a little
explication, not so much for their value, as their use, I have desired Mr.
Nicholas Pey, one of the Clerks of his Majesty's Kitchen, who is my friend of
trust at home in all my occasions, to acquaint your Lordship with a note of
them. Wherein my end is plain, only to excite your Lordship with this little
taste, to command me further in whatsoever may better please you. And so I most
humbly commit you to Gods blessed Love.

Venice, this 16. of May. Your Lordships with all devotion to serve you, H.
Wotton.

To the Lord Keeper Williams, (ut videtur) 1621/2.
Right Reverend, and Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
HAving not yet passed with your good Lordship so much as the common duty of
Congratulation, (to whom I am so obliged, both for your love to my dearest
Nephew, and for your gracious remembrances of mine own poor Name) I thought it
even a particular duty to my self, to acquaint your Lordships Secretary, my
ancient and worthy Friend, with the Story of mine own evils, that your Lordship
may know my silence to have been, as I may well term it, a Symptom of my
infirmity.

I am now strong again to serve your Lordship, and I know that I have a Friend
of trust at home (it is honest Nicholas Pey that I mean) who has often leave,
by your Favor to wait upon you. Therefore I could wish, if this place (where I
am grown almost a free Denison) may yield any thing for your use or delight,
that you would be pleased either to acquaint me by my said Friend plainly
(which shall be a new obligation) with your Commands, or at least to let him
mark your Desires. Now in the mean time, because I know that I can do your
Lordship no greater Service, then to give you occasion of exercising your own
goodness. I will take the freedom most humbly and heartily to recommend unto
your charitable and honorable affections, a very worthy Person, whose fortune
is no better at the present, then to be my Chaplain; though we are, or at least
ought all to be the better by his virtuous example, and our time the better
spent by his learned conversation. I shall, I think, not need to name him to
your Lordship, and as little to insist either upon his moral or intellectual
merit. Therefore I will so leave it, and commit him to your gracious Memory,
upon some good occasion that God may lay before you. And now I would end, but
that I conceive it a duty to tell your Lordship first, how we stand here at
this date. For Ambassadors (in our old Kentish Language) are but Spies of the
time.

We are studying how we may safely and cheaply countenance the new Motions of
the Garrisons, with an Army on our own Borders pointing that way; which even
Reason of State requires, when our Neighbors are stirring. And therefore yet
the King of Spain can take no scandal at a common wisdom. If the Successes
shall go forward according to the beginnings, Prosperity, peradventure, may
invite us, further to the Feast. For my part, if they would have tasted my
Counsels, they had been long since engaged, both within and without Italy. But
I dig in a Rock of Diamonds. And so concluding with my hearty Congratulations
for your Lordships Promotions, both Spiritual and Civil, and with my prayers
for your long enjoyment of them, I will unfaignedly subscribe my self,

Your good Lordships devoted to serve you, H. W.

SIR,
HAving not long written unto you, whose Friendship toward me has given you a
great interest in me; I send you a Report of a late Transaction, even for a
little entertainment, lest you should think me to live without observation.

For that the Case of the late Cavalier Antonio Foscarini has been diversely
mis-reported, and perhaps not the least, even by those that were his Judges, to
cover their own disgrace, I have thought a little curiosity not ill spent in
research of the whole Proceeding, that his Majesty (to whom he was so well
known) may have a more due information of this rare and unfortunate example.
There is among the partitions of this Government a very awful Magistracy under
Title of Inquisitori di Stato; to which are commonly deputed three Gentlemen of
the gravest and severest natures, who receive all secret Delations in matter of
practice against the Republic, and then refer the same, as they shall judge
the consequence thereof, to the Decemviral Council, being the supreamest
Tribunal in criminal Enquiries; of which Body they are usually themselves.

To these Inquisitors, about the beginning of April last, came two Fellows of
mean condition, born about the Lago di Garda, but Inhabitants in Venice, by
name Girolamo and Domenico Vani; as some say, Uncle and Nephew: certainly near
of kindred, which in this report is a weighty circumstance; for thereby they
were the likelier to conspire, and consequently their united testimonies of the
less validity. These Persons capitulate with the Inquisitors of that time
(whose names may be civilly spared) about a reward (which is usual) for the
discovery of some Gentlemen, which at undue times, and in disguised Forms, did
haunt the Houses of Foreign Ministers, and in particular, of the Spanish
Agent: who being the most obnoxious to Public jealousy, these Accusers were
likeliest upon that Subject to gain a favorable hearing. In the head of their
secret List, they nominate Anthonio Foscarini, then an actual Senator, and
thereby upon pain of death restrained from all conference in this ombragious
State with public Instruments, unless by special permission. To verify their
discovery, besides their own testimonies, they allege one Giovan Battista,
who served the foresaid Spanish Agent, and had, as they said, acquainted them
with the accesses of such and such Gentlemen unto him. But first they wished,
or so the Inquisitors thought fit, to proceed against Foscarini, upon this
double attestation, without examining the foresaid Giovan Battista; because
that would stir some noise, and then perhaps those other, whom they meant to
delate, might take fear and escape: Hereupon Foscarini, coming from the next
Senate at night down the Palace, was by order of the Inquisitors suddenly
muffled, and so put in close Prison, and after usual examinations, his own
single denial being not receivable against two agreeing Informers, he was by
sentence at the Council of Ten, some fifteen days after his retention,
strangled in Prison, and on the 21. of the foresaid April, was hanged by one
leg on a Gallows in the public Piazza, from break of day till Sunset, with
all imaginable circumstances of infamy: his very face having been bruised by
dragging on the ground, though some did conster that for a kind of favor, that
he might be the less known.

After this the same Artificers pursue their occupation, now animated with
success; and next they name Marco Miani. But one of the Inquisitors, either by
nature more advised then the rest, or intenerated with that which was
already done, would by no means proceed any farther, without a
pre-examination of the foresaid Giovan Battista: which now might the more
conveniently, and the more silently be taken, because he had left the house of
the Spanish Agent, and was married in the Town to a Goldsmiths Daughter. To
make short, they dravv this man to a secret account; where he does not only
disavovv the having ever seen any Gentleman in the Spanish Agents house, but
likewise all such interest as the Accusers did pretend to have in his
acquaintance, having never spoken with any of them, but only three words by
chance with the elder, namely Girolamo, upon the Piazza di St. Stephano.
Hereupon the Inquisitors confronted him with the Accusers; they confess
without any torture their malicious Plot, and had sentence to be hanged, as
was afterward done. But now the voice running of this detection, the Nephews
of the executed Cavalier, namely Nicolo and Girolamo Foscarini, make haste to
present a Petition (in all opinion most equitable) to the Decemviral Tribunal,
That the false Accusers of the abovesaid Marco Miani, might be re-examined
likewise about their Uncle. The Counsel of Ten, upon this Petition, did
assemble early in the morning, which had not been done in long time before; and
there they put to voices, Whether the Nephews should be satisfied?

In the first Ballotation, the Balls were equal: in the second, there was one
Ball more (as they say) in the negative Box: Either because the false
Witnesses, being now condemned men, were disabled by course of Law to give any
farther testimony, or for that the Council of Ten thought it wisdom to smother
an irrevocable error. The Petition being denied, no possible way remained for
the Nephews to clear the defamation of their Uncle (which in the rigor of this
Government, had been likewise a stop to their own Fortunes) but by means of the
Confessor, to whom the Delinquents should disburthen their souls before their
death; and by him, at importunity of the said Nephews, the matter was revealed:
Whereupon did ensue a solemn Declaration of the Council of Ten, touching the
innocence of the foresaid A^thonio Foscarini, eight months and twenty five days
after his death. Whether in this case there were any mixture of private
passion, or that perhaps some light humors, to which the Party was subject,
together with the taint of his former Imprisonment, might precipitate the
credulity of the Judges, I dare not dispute: But surely in 312. years that the
Decemviral Tribunal has stood, there was never cast upon it a greater blemish;
which being so high a Piece, and on the reputation of whose grave and
indubitable proceedings the regiment of manners has most depended, is likely
to breed no good consequence upon the whole. Since the foresaid Declaration,
the Nephews have removed the body of their Uncle from a place where condemned
Persons are of custom interred, to the Monument of their Ancestors in another
Temple, and would have given it a solemn Burial: But having been kept (though
rather by disswasion then prohibition) from increasing thereby the public
Scandal, they now determine to repair his fame with an Epitaph, the last of
miserable remedies. It is said, that at the removing of his body, his heart was
found whole: which kind of conceits are easily entertained in this Country, and
scant any notable case without some superstitious adjunct. It is said likewise,
that by Testament he did appoint a great sum for him that should discover his
innocence: which receiving from credible Authors, I was willing not to omit;
because it argues, that notwithstanding some outward lightness, he was
composed of generous Elements. Certain it is, that he left diverse Legacies to
the best Patriots, as now appears not artificially. But here I may breed a
question, with which I will end this report: How a man in his case could
dispose of his Fortune? I must answer, That in the composition of this State
Confiscations are rare, be the Crime never so high, unless in case of
interverting the public Money; which the Delinquent is commonly condemned to
repair, not so much in the quality of a Traitor, as of a Debtor. Whereof
searching the reason, I find this to be the most immediate; That if in a
Dominion merely managed by their own Gentry, they should punish them as much in
their means, as in their persons, it would in conclusion prove a punishment,
not of particulars, but of the general: For it is a rule here, that the poorest
Families are the loosest.

To the DUKE.
My most honored Lord and Patron,
THese poor lines will be presented unto your Lordship by my Nephew (one of
your obliged Servants) and withal some description, as I have prayed him, of my
long infirmities, which have cast me behind in many private, and often
interrupted even my public duties; with which yet I do rather seek to excuse
some other defects of service, then my silence toward your Lordship. For to
importune your Lordship seldom with my Pen is a choice in me, and not a
disease, having resolved to live, at what distance soever from your sight, like
one who had well studied before I came hither, how secure they are whom you
once vouchsafe any part of your love.

And indeed, I am well confirmed therein by your own gracious lines: for
thereby I see that your Lordship had me in your meditation, when I scant
remembered my self. In answer of which Letter, after some respite from mine own
evils, I have deputed my said Nephew to re-deliver my fortune into your Noble
hands, and to assure your Lordship, that as it should be cheerfully spent at
your command, if it were present and actual, (from whose meditation I have
derived it) so much more am I bound to yield up unto your Lordship an absolute
disposition of my hopes: But if it shall please you therein to grant me any
part of mine own humor, then I would rather wish some other satisfaction then
exchange of office; yet even in this point likewise I shall depend on your
will, which your Lordship may indeed challenge from me, not only by an humble
gratitude, and reverence due to your most worthy Person; but even by that
natural charity and discretion which I owe my self: for what do I more therein,
then only remit to your own arbitrament the valuation of your own goodness? I
have likewise committed to my foresaid Nephew some Memorials touching your
Lordships familear service (as I may term it) in matter of art and delight. But
though I have laid these offices upon another, yet I joy with mine own Pen to
give your Lordship an account of a Gentleman, worthier of your love, then I was
of the honor to receive him from you. We are now, after his well-spent travels
in the Towns of purer Language, married again till a second divorce; for which
I shall be sorry, whenever it shall happen. For in truth (my good Lord) his
conversation is both delightful and fruitful; and I dare pronounce, that he
will return to his Friends as well fraught with the best Observations, as any
that has ever sifted this Country; which indeed does need sifting, for there
is both Flower and Bran in it. He has divided his abode between Siena and
Rome: the rest of his time was for the most part spent in motion. I think his
purpose be to take the French Tongue in his way homewards, but I am persuading
with him to make Bruxels his seat, both because the French and Spanish
Languages are familiar there; whereof the one will be after Italian a sport
unto him, so as he may make the other a labor: And for that the said Town is
now the Scene of an important Treaty, which I fear will last till he come
thither; but far be from me all ominous conceit. I will end with cheerful
thoughts and wishes; beseeching the Almighty God to preserve your Lordship in
health, and to cure the Public diseases. And so I ever remain

Venice, July 29. 1622. Your Lordships most devoted and obliged Servant, H.
WOTTON.

To the DUKE.
My most honored and dear Lord,
TO give your Lordship occasion to exercise your noble Nature, is withal one of
the best exercises of mine own duty; and therefore. I am confident to pass a
very charitable motion through your Lordships hands and mediation to his
Majesty.

There has long lain in the Prison of Inquisition, a constant worthy
Gentleman, viz. Master Mole: in whom his Majesty has not only a right as his
Subject, but likewise a particular interest in the Cause of his first
imprisonment: For having communicated his Majesty's immortal work, touching the
Allegiance due unto Sovereign Princes, with a Florentine of his familiar
acquaintance, this man took such impression at some passages, as troubling his
Conscience, he took occasion at the next shrift, to confer certain doubts with
his Confessor; who out of malicious curiosity, enquiring all circumstances,
gave afterward notice thereof to Rome, whither the said Mole was gone with my
Lord Ross; who in this story is not without blame: but I will not disquiet his
Grave,

Now having lately heard that his Majesty, at the suit of I know not what
Ambassadors, (but the Florentine amongst them is voiced for one) was pleased to
yield some releasment to certain restrained Persons of the Roman Faith; I have
taken a conceit upon it, that in exchange of his Clemency therein, the great
Duke would be easily moved, by the Kings gracious request, to interceed with
the Pope for Master Mole's delivery: To which purpose, if it shall please his
Majesty to grant his Royal Letters, I will see the business duly pursued. And
so needing no arguments to commend this proposition to his Majesty's goodness,
but his goodness it self, I leave it (as I began) in your Noble hand. Now
touching your Lordships familiar service, (as I may term it) I have sent the
Complement of your bargain, upon the best provided, and best manned Ship that
has been here in long time, called the Phoenix. And indeed the cause of their
long stay, has been for some such Vessel as I might trust. About which, since
I wrote last to your Lordship, I resolved to fall back to my first choice: so
as now the one Piece is the work of Titian, wherein the least Figure (viz. the
Child in the Virgins lap playing with a Bird) is alone worth the price of your
expense for all four, being so round, that I know not whether I shall call it a
Piece of Sculpture, or Picture: and so lively, that a man would be tempted to
doubt, whether Nature or Art had made it. The other is of Palma, and this I
call the speaking Piece, as your Lordship will say it may well be termed; for
except the Damsel brought to David, whom a silent modesty did best become, all
the other Figures are in discourse and action. They come both distended in
their Frames: for I durst not hazard them in Rowls, the youngest being 25 years
old, and therefore no longer supple and pliant. With them I have been bold to
send a Dish of Grapes to your Noble Sister, the Countess of Denbigh, presenting
them first to your Lordships view, that you may be pleased to pass your
censure, whether Italians can make Fruits as well as Flemings, which is the
common glory of their Pensils. By this Gentleman, I have sent the choicest
Molon seeds of all kinds, which his Majesty does expect, as I had Order both
from my Lord of Holderness, and from Mr. Secretary Calvert. And although in my
Letter to his Majesty (which I hope by your Lordships favor, himself shall
have the honor to deliver, together with the said Seeds) I have done him right
in his due Attributes; yet let me say of him farther, as Architects use to
speak of a well chosen foundation, that your Lordship may boldly build what
Fortune you please upon him, for surely, he will bear it virtuously. I have
committed to him for the last place, a private Memorial touching my self,
wherein I shall humbly beg your Lordships intercession upon a necessary Motive.
And so with my heartiest prayers to Heaven for your continual health and
happiness, I most humbly rest,

Venice, Dec.2/12 1622. Your Lordships ever obliged, devoted Servant, H. W.
POSTSCRIPT.
My Noble Lord,
It is one of my duties to tell your Lordship, that I have sent a servant of
mine (by Profession a Painter) to make a search in the best Towns through
Italy, for some principal Pieces, which I hope may produce somewhat for your^
Lord ships contentment and service.



To the Earl of Holderness, 1622/3;.
Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
IN a late Letter from your Lordship by my Servant, I have, besides your own
Favors, the Honor of Employment from the King, in a piece of his Delight:
which does so consort with the opportunity of my Charge here, that it has
given me acquaintance with some excellent Florists, (as they are styled;) and
likewise with mine own disposition, who have ever thought the greatest pleasure
to consist in the simplest Ornaments and Elegancies of Nature; as nothing could
fall upon me more happily. Therefore your Lordship shall see how I will
endeavor to satisfy this Command. I had before Order by Mr. Secretary
Calvert, to send his Majesty some of the best Melon-seeds of all kinds; which I
have done some Weeks since, by other occasion of an express Messenger; and sent
withal a very particular Instruction in the Culture of that Plant. By the
present Bearer I do direct unto your Lordship, through the hands either of my
Nephew, or Mr. Nicholas Pey (as either of them shall be readiest at London) for
some beginning in this kind of Service, the Stem of a double Yellow Rose, of no
ordinary nature; For it flowereth every month (unless change of the Clime do
change the property) from May, till almost Christmas. There has gone such care
in the manner of the Conveyance, as, if at the receiving, it be presently put
into the earth, I hope it will prosper. By the next commodity I shall send his
Majesty some of the rarest Seeds.

Now for mine own Obligations unto your Lordship, (whereof I have from some
Friends at home very abundant knowledge) What shall I say? It was in truth (my
Lord) an argument of your noble Nature, to take my fortune into your Care, who
never yet made it any great part of mine own business. I am a poor Student in
Philosophy, which has redeemed me not only from the envying of others, but
even from much solicitude about my self. It is true, that my most Gracious
Master has put me into civil practice, and now after long Service, I grow into
a little danger of wishing I were worth somewhat: But in this likewise I do
quiet my thoughts: For I see by your Lordships so free, and so undeserved
estimation of me, that like the Criple, who had lain long in the Pool of
Bethesda, I shall find some body that will throw me into the water when i^
moves. I will end with my humble and hearty thanks for your Favor, and Love.

To the PRINCE.
May it please Your Highness,
BEside that which I have now represented unto your Highness, by my (...) to
your worthy Secretary, I must (...)* crave leave herein to be delivered o^*
(...) wherewith my Pen is in travel.

I have observed in your Highness, among other noble Endowments of your Mind, a
quick and delightful apprehension of the fundamental Causes of all Secrets,
both natural and artificial, that have been brought to your View; which surely
is the highest pleasure of a discoursive Soul. Now of this part of your
Highness's delectation, I am serious to take hold. For having been a long Lover
of Philosophy, and from the contemplative Part, being slid into the practical;
I shall hope for pardon, if I take so much freedom from the ingenuity of mine
own Nature, and Studies, as to entertain your Highness now and then, with some
Experiments, especially such as do not end in wonder, but reach to public
Use^: For mere Speculations have ever seemed to my conceit, as if Reason were
given us like an half Moon in a Coat of Arms, only for a Logical Difference
from inferior Creatures, and not for any active power in it self. To begin
therefore, by your Gracious Leave, this kind of Intelligence with your
Highness; I have charged this Gentleman with the humble Presentation of a
Secret unto you, not long since imparted to this State, and rewarded with a
Pension to the Inventer, and to his Posterity; the scope being indeed of
singular use, and at the first hearing of as much admiration: namely, a way how
to save Gunpowder from all mischance of Fire in their Magazines, to which they
have been very obnoxious by a kind of fatality. The thing it self in a small
Bulk, with the description thereof, according to mine own Trial and
Observations, will be consigned to your Highness apart from this Letter.

And so having laid a beginning to these poor Philosophical Services, with hope
of encouragement therein by Your favorable acceptance, I will conclude with
my humblest prayers to the Sovereign Lord of all Nature, and Fountain of all
Knowledge, to continue his sweet and dear Blessings upon Your Highness. To whom
I remain, etc.

To the DUKE.
May it please your Grace,
HAving some days by sickness been deprived of the comfort of your sight, who
did me so much honor at my last access, I am bold "to make these poor lines
happier then my self: and withal, to represent unto your Grace (whose noble
Patronage is my refuge, when I find any occasion to bewail mine own fortune) a
thing which seemed strange unto me. I am told (I know not how truly) that his
Majesty has already disposed the Venetian Embassage to Sir Isaac Weak; from
whose sufficiency if I should detract, it would be but an argument of my own
weakness.

But that which herein does touch me, I am loath to say in point of Reputation,
surely much in my livelihood (as Lawyers speak) is, that thereby, after
seventeen years of foreign and continua^ employment; either ordinary, or
extraordinary, I am left utterly destitute of all possibility to subsist at
home; much like those Seal-fishes, which sometimes (as they say) oversleeping
themselves in an Ebbing-water, feel nothing about them but a dry shore when
they awake. Which comparison I am fain to seek among those creatures, not
knowing among men, that have so long served so gracious a Master, any one to
whom I may resemble my unfortunate bareness. Good my Lord, as your Grace has
vouchsafed me some part of your love, so make me worthy in this, of some part
of your compassion. So I humbly rest,

Your Graces, etc. H. WOTTON.

1626.
My dear Nic. Pey,
THis is the account of me since you saw me last.

My going to Oxford was not merely for shift of air, otherwise I should approve
your counsel to prefer Boughton before any other part whatsoever; that air best
agreeing with me, and being a kind of resolving me into my own beginnings; for
there was I born.

But I have a little ambitious vanity stirring in me, to Print a thing of my
Composition there: which would else in London run through too much noise before
hand, by reason of the Licenses that must be gotten, and an eternal trick in
those City-Stationers, to rumor what they have under Press.

From Oxford I was rapt by my Nephew, Sir Edmund Bacon, to Redgrave, and by
himself, and by my sweet Niece detained ever since: (so I say,) for believe me,
there is in their conversations, and in the freedom of their entertainment, a
kind of delightful violence.

In our way hither we blanched Paul's Perry, though within three miles of it,
which we are not tender to confess, (being indeed our manifest excuse;) for
thereby it appears, the pains of the way did not keep us thence.

In truth, we thought it (coming immediately from an infected place) an
hazardous incivility to put our selves upon them; for if any ^nister accident
had fallen out about the same time (for Coincidents are not always Causes) we
should have rued it for ever.

Here, when I had been almost a fortnight in the midst of much contentment, I
received knowledge of Sir Albertus Morton's departure out of this World, who
was dearer unto me then mine own being in it. What a vvound it is to my heart,
you will easily believe: But His undisputable Will must be done, and
unrepiningly received by His own Creatures, who is the Lord of all Nature, and
of all Fortune, when he takes now one, and then another, till the expected
day wherein it shall please him to dissolve the whole, and to vvrap up even
the Heaven it self as a Scrol of Parchment.

This is the last Philosophy that we must study upon the Earth: let us now,
that yet remain while our Glasses shall run by the dropping away of Friends
reinforce our Love to one another; which of all Virtues both spiritual and
moral, has the highest privilege, because Death it self shall not end it. And
good Ni^. exercise that love toward me, in letting me know, etc.

Your ever poor Friend, H. WOTTON.

To the KING, 1627.
May it please Your Majesty,
THe Gracious Aspect which I have ever observed in Your Majesty toward me,
does bind me (though there were no other reason) next under God, to approve all
my actions to Your Judgment: Let me therefore most humbly make known unto Your
Majesty, that it has pleased the Fountain of all good thoughts to dispose my
mind, by his secret Providence, to enter into the sacred Orders of his Church:
having confirmed in me (for which his high Name be ever blessed) the reverence
and love of his truth, by a large experience of the abuses thereof, in the very
seat and sink of all corruption, Rome it self: to which my wandering curiosity
carried me no less then four times in my younger years; where I fixed my
Studies most upon the historical part, in the politic management of Religion,
which I found plainly converted from a Rule of Conscience, to an Instrument of
State; and from the Mistress of all Sciences, into a very handmaid of
Ambition. Neither do I repent me of bending my observation that way. For though
the Truth perhaps may more compendiously appear in ordine doctrinae; yet never
more fully, then when we search the original veins thereof, the increase, the
depravations, and decays, in ordine temporum.

This is the Point wherein I have traveled most, and wherein I will spend the
remainder of my days; hoping that the All-sufficient God, will in the strength
of his mercy enable my weakness, either by my Voice or Pen, to celebrate his
Glory. Now, though I was thus far confident in my self, (with all humility be
it spoken) that neither my life, nor my poor erudition, would yield much
scandal to others; and likewise might well have presumed, that this resolution
could no ways offend Your Majesty's religious heart; but might rather be
secure in Your favor and encouragement; yet having been employed so many years
abroad in civil use, I thought it undutifull to change my calling, without the
foreknowledge and approbation of my Dear Sovereign. This is the humble Message
of these few lines unto Your Majesty.

The Almighty, who has endued Your Majesty with excellent Virtues, and so
early taught You the rare Consort between Greatness and Goodness, long protect
Your Royal Person and Estates under his singular Love.

Your Majesty's most faithful and devoted Vassal, H. Wotton.

To my Dear Dynely. S. P. (...).
Pauca meo Gallo, sed quae legate ipsa Licoris.
IT were an injury to use a Cipher by a Friend so warmly and so justly
commended hither by you: nay almost, to write a Letter; but that I am tender to
trouble him and lade him with our privacies.

Of Himself first let me say thus much, that I think surely he is the fittest
stranger that could have been chosen to overcome, among our Academicks, the
envy of a stranger. For he has a fair carriage, and very discreet temper, and
by the prompt use of our Language is almost naturalized already: And I cast no
doubt of the inward furniture, per quel gusto saporito, that we have taken in a
short conversation with him: wherein, you that procured us the benefit of his
company, must answer for the poorness of his entertainment.

Now, for my self, I have not yet entered into the first Order of the Church, by
a strange accident: upon which there lies likewise some civil note. The Bishop
of Lincoln (sometimes Lord Keeper) is the Prelate from whom I resolved to take
it: not for any personal respect; but because he is our Diocesan, and Visiter
at this College, and to whom I acknowledge a kind of homage for the place I
hold, which fell into his disposing formally by Lapse. This Bishop (you must
know) on this very day seven-night came to London about ten of the Clock in the
morning, to perform an Election of the Scholars at Westminster (whereof he is
Dean) usual at this time of the year, as with us. In the evening of that day,
Sir John Cook, Secretry, visits him, with Command from His Majesty to be
presently gone. What Questions thereupon passed between them upon such a
surprise, I omit. Basta. He went away the next morning at eight of the Clock;
and so I am put upon another means, which before my next unto you, will be
done: For I abound in choice, but I am a little curious; (...) will tell you
hereafter the Reasons of my curiosity. You will note (as I touched before) upon
this; That the Dukes power is great even in his absence, and that he has in
Court very vigilant Instruments both Spiritual and Temporal. I want time to
explain my self; but it shall follow.

Of the present Voyage let me venture to say a little. I am afraid we shall
unite all France, if it be thither; yet the provisions are fair, and the Duke
resolved, and he is departed, with the Soldier, and from the Coast, as beloved
a man, and with as many acclamations there, as imprecations within the Land:
Such a floating thing is the Vulgar. Of this more at leisure.

Tuus H. Wotton.
From the College, this 10th. of July, 1627.
To the KING.
My Most Dear and Dread Sovereign,
AS I gave Your Majesty foreknowledge of my intention to enter into the
Church, and had Your Gracious Approvement therein, so I hold it a second duty
to Your Majesty, and satisfaction to my self, to inform you likewise by mine
own hand, both how far I have proceeded, and upon what Motives; that it may
appear unto your Majesty (as I hope it will) an act of conscience, and of
reason; and not of greediness and ambition. Your Majesty will be therefore
pleased to know, that I have lately taken the degree of Deacon; and so far am I
from aiming at any high flight, out of my former Sphere, that there I intend to
rest. Perhaps I want not some perswaders, that measuring me by their
affections, or by Your Majesty's goodness, and not by mine own defects or ends,
would make me think, that yet before I die, I might become a great Prelate. And
I need no persuasion to tell me, that if I would undertake the Pastoral
Function, I could peradventure by casualty, out of the Patronages belonging to
Your Royal College, without further troubling of Your Majesty, cast some good
Benefice upon my self, whereof we have one, if it were vacant, that is worth
more then my Provostship. But as they were stricken with horror, who beheld
the Majesty of the Lord descending upon the Mount Sinai: so, God knows, the
nearer I approach to contemplate his greatness, the more I tremble to assume
any cure of souls even in the lowest degree, that were bought at so high a
price^ premant torcular qui vindemiarunt: Let them press the Grapes, and fill
the Vessels, and taste the Wine, that have gathered the Vintage. But shall I
sit and do nothing in the Porch of Gods House, whereinto I am entered? God
himself forbid, who was the Supreme Mover. What Service then do I propound to
the Church? or what contentment to mine own mind? First, for the point of
Conscience, I can now hold my place Canonically, which I held before but
dispensatively, and withal I can exercise an Archidiaconal Authority annexed
thereunto, though of small extent, and no benefit, yet sometimes of pious and
necessary use. I comfort my self also with this Christian hope, That Gentlemen
and Knights Sons, who are trained up with us in a Seminary of Churchmen,
(which was the will of the holy Founder) will by my example, (without vanity be
it spoken) not be ashamed, after the sight of Courtly Weeds, to put on a
Surplice. Lastly, I consider, that this resolution which I have taken, is not
unsuitable even to my civil employments abroad, of which for the most part
Religion was the Subject; nor to my observations, which have been spent that
way in discovery of the Roman Arts and Practices, whereof I hope to yield the
World some account, though rather by my Pen, then by my Voice. For though I
must humbly confess, that both my Conceptions and Expressions be weak, yet I do
more trust my deliberation then my memory: or if Your Majesty will give me
leave to paint my self in higher terms, I think, I shall be bolder against the
judgments, then against the faces of men. This I conceive to be a piece of
mine own Character; so as my private Study must be my Theater rather then a
Pulpit; and my Books my Auditors, as they are all my Treasure. Howsoever, if I
can produce nothing else for the use of Church and State, yet it shall be
comfort enough to the little remnant of my life, to compose some Hymns unto
his endless glory, who has called me, (for which his Name be ever blessed)
though late to his Service, yet early to the knowledge of his truth, and sense
of his mercy. To which ever commending Your Majesty, and Your Royal Actions,
with most hearty and humble prayers, I rest,

Your Majesty's most devoted poor Servant.

To the KING, 1627.
May it please Your most Gracious Majesty,
HAving been informed that certain persons have, by the good wishes of the
Archbishop of Armagh, been directed hither with a most humble Petition unto
Your Majesty, that You will be pleased to make Mr. William Bedel (now Resident
upon a small Benefice in Suffolk) Governor of Your College at Dublin, for the
good of that Society; And my self being required to render unto Your Majesty
some testimony of the said William Bedel, (who was long my Chaplain at Venice
in the time of my first Employment) I am bound in all Conscience and Truth, (as
far as Your Majesty will Vouchsafe to accept my poor judgment) to affirm of
him, that I think hardly a fitter Man for that Charge could have been
propounded unto Your Majesty in Your whole Kingdom, for singular Erudition and
Piety, Conformity to the Rites of Your Church, and zeal to advance the Cause of
God, wherein his travels abroad were not obscure in the time of the
Excommunication of the Venetians. For it may please Your Majesty to know, that
this is the Man whom Padre Paulo took, I may say, into his very soul, with whom
he did communicate the inwardest thoughts of his heart, from whom he prosessed
to have received more knowledge in all Divinity, both Scholastical and
Positive, then from any tha^ he had ever practiced in his days; of which all
the passages were well known unto the King Your Father of most blessed Memory.
And so, with Your Majesty's good Favor, I will end this needless office: For
the general fame both of his Learning, and Life, and Christian Temper, and
those religious Labors which Himself has dedicated unto Your Majesty do
better describe him,

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful Vassal, H. Wotton.

To the DUKE.
My most noble Lord,
WHen like that impotent man in the Gospel, I had lain long by the Pools side,
while many were healed, and none would throw me in; it pleased your Lordship
first of all to pity my infirmities, and to put me into some hope of subsisting
hereafter. Therefore I most humbly and justly acknowledge all my ability, and
reputation from your favor. You have given me in couragement, you have valued
my poor endeavors with the King, you have redeemed me from ridiculousness, who
had served so long without any mark of favor. By which Arguments, being
already and ever bound to be yours, till either life or honesty shall leave me,
I am the bolder to beseech your Lordship to perfect your own work, and to draw
his Majesty to some settling of those things that depend between Sir Julius
Casar and me, in that reasonable form which I humbly present unto your Lordship
by this my Nephew, likewise your obliged Servant, being my self, by a late
indisposition, confined to my Chamber, but in all estates such as I am,

Your Lordships, H. WOTTON.

SIR,
I Send you by this Bearer (to keep you in mirth) a piping Shepherd, done by
Cavalier Bassaw, and so well, as may merit some place in your Chamber, which I
hear is the Center of good Music; to which, out of my pieces at home, I have
commanded James to add a Messara playing upon a Timbril, done by Allessandro
Padovano, a rising Titian as we esteemed him.

Good Sir, let us know some true passages of the plight of the Court. I have
laid about for some constant intelligence from foreign parts, being strangely
relapsed into that humor in my old age. Shall I tell you why? In good faith,
for no other use that I mean to make of news, but only that when God shall call
me to a better, I may know in what state I leave this World.

Your affectionate Friend to serve you, H. WOTTON.

To Mr. Nicolas Arnauld.
SIR,
THis young Gentleman, my very near Kinsman, having gotten enough of Veneti^
Italian to seek better; and being for that end directed by me to Siena, I will
take the boldness to commend him to your disposing there, assuring myself, that
you have gained much friendship and power wheresoever you are, by that
impression which you have left in us here. And so, with those thanks which were
long since due, for your kind remembrance of me by a Letter from Florence, I
commit you to Gods dear blessings and love, and lever rest,

From Venice. Your very affectionate poor Friend to serve you, H. WOTTON.

To the Lord Treasurer Weston.
My most honored good Lord,
I Most humbly present (though by some infirmities a little too late) a strange
New Years Gift unto your Lordship, which I will presume to term the cheapest of
all that you have received, and yet of the richest materials. In short, it is
only an Image of your Self, drawn by memory from such discourse as I have taken
up here and there of your Lordship, among the most intelligent and unmalignant
men; which to pourtrait before you I thought no servile office, but ingenuous
and real: and I could wish that it had come at the Day, that so your Lordship
might have begun the New Year, somewhat like Plato's definition of Felicity,
with the contemplation of your own Idea.

They say, That in your foreign Employments under King James, your Lordship
won the Opinion of a very able and searching Judgment, having been the first
discoverer of the Intentions against the Palatinate, which were then in
brewing, and masked with much Art. And that Sir Edward Conway got the start of
you both in Title and Employment at home, because the late Duke of Buckingham
wanted then for his own Ends a Martial Secretary. They say, That under our
present Sovereign, you were chosen to the highest charge at the lowest of the
State, when some instrument was requisite of undubitable integrity and
provident moderation; which Attributes I have heard none deny you. They
discourse thus of your Actions since, that though great Exhaustions cannot be
cured with sudden Remedies, no more in a Kingdom then in a Natural Body, yet
your Lordship has well allayd those blustering clamors wherewith at your
beginnings your House was in a manner daily besieged. They note, that there
have been many changes, but that none has brought to the Place a judgment so
cultivated and illuminated with various Erudition as your Lordship, since the
Lord Burghley under Queen Elizabeth, whom they make your Parallel in the
ornament of Knowledge.

They observe in your Lordship diverse remarkable combinations of Virtues and
Abilities, rarely sociable. In the Character of your Aspect, a mixture of
Authority and Modesty. In the Faculties of your Mind, quick Apprehension and
Solidity together. In the style of your Port and Train, as much Dignity, and as
great Dependency as was ever in any of your Place, and with little noise or
outward fume. That your Table is very abundant, free and noble, without Luxury.
That you are by nature no Flatterer, and yet of greatest power in Court. That
you love Magnificence and Frugality both together. That you entertain your
Guests and Visiters with noble courtesy, but void of complement. Lastly, that
you maintain a due regard to your Person and Place, and yet are an Enemy to
frothy Formalities.

Now, in the discharge of your Function, they speak of two things that have
done you much honor: namely, That you have had always a special care to the
supply of the Navy: And likewise a more worthy and tender respect toward the
Kings only Sister, for her continual support from hence, then she has found
before. They observe your greatness as firmly established as ever was any in
the Love (and which is more) in the estimation of a King, who has so
signalized his own Constancy: Besides your addition of Strength (or at least of
Luster) by the Noblest Alliances of the Land.

Among these Notes, it is no wonder if some observe, That between a good
willingness in your affections to satisfy All, and an impossibility in the
matter, and yet an importunity in the Persons, there does now and then, I know
not how, arise a little impatience, which must needs fall upon your Lordship,
unless you had been cut out of a Rock of Diamonds, especially having been
before so conversant with liberal Studies, and with the freedom of your own
Mind.

Now after this short Collection touching your most honored Person, I beseech
you give me leave to add likewise a little what Men say of the Writer. They
say, I want not your gracious good will toward me according to the degree of
my poor Talent and Travels, but that I am wanting to my self: And in good faith
(my Lord) in saying so, they say truly; for I am condemned, I know not how, by
nature, to a kind of unfortunate bashfulness in mine own business, and it is
now too late to put me in a new Furnace. Therefore it must be your Lordships
proper work, and not only your Noble, but even your Charitable goodness that
must in some blessed hour remember me. God give your Lordship many healthful
and joyful years, and the blessing of that Text; Beatus qui attendit ad
attenuatum. And so I remain with an humble and willing Heart, etc.

To the Queen of Bohemia,
July, 1636. Most resplendent Queen, even in the darkness of Fortune.
THat was wont to be my style unto Your Majesty, which You see I have not
forgotten. For though I have a great while forborne to trouble You with any of
my poor lines; yet the memory of Your sweet and Royal Virtues, is the last
thing that will die in me. In these months of my silence, I have been busy (if
any work of my brains may be termed a business) about certain compositions of
mine own, partly imposed, and partly voluntary: whereof some would fain be
struggling into the light; but I do check their forwardness, because I am afraid
they will be born before their time: in the mean while, I have gotten a subject
worthy to exercise my pen unto Your Majesty, which is the choice of the New
Lord Treasurer; upon which Mar. 6. 1635.
place Your Majesty has always some dependence in Your Domestic Affairs. I
believe Your Majesty has never personally seen him, therefore I will take the
boldness to paint him before You; though I must speak, as yet, more out of the
universal opinion, then from my own experience: for Your Majesty knows my
nature, I am always one of the last intruders. Now the best and the shortest
draught that I can make of him, will be this; There is in him no tumor, no
sowreness, no distraction of thoughts, but a quiet mind, a patient care, free
access, mild and moderate Answers.

To this I must add a solid judgment, a sober plainness, and a most
indubitable character of Fidelity in his very face: so as there needs not much
study to think him both a good man, and a wise man. And accordingly is his
Family composed; more order then noise, and his nearest Instruments carefully
chosen, for he wanted no offers: But above all, there is a blessed note upon
him, that his Majesty has committed his Moneys, where he may trust his
Conscience. Upon the whole matter, it is no marvel that the Charge lay a full
year under Commission.

For the King himself (as we hear) did openly profess, that he had spent the
most of that time, not in deliberating whom he might choose, but in wooing of
him whom he had chosen, to undertake it: For it is a hard matter indeed (if so
good a King had not been the Orator) to draw a man out of the settled repose of
a learned Life, into such an ocean of public Solicitude, able to swallow an
ordinary Spirit. But God, who has raised him to it, has made him fit for it.

This is all that I was in travel to advertise Your Majesty upon the present
occasion; my next will be touching the two sweet Princes, Your Sons, whose Fame
I have only hitherto enjoyed in the common Voice; having by some weakness in my
Legs, and other symptoms of Age, and by mine own retired Studies, been
confined to privacy: But I hope to make known unto Them, how much I reverence
my Royal Mistress, their Mother, and the Images of her Goodness, at the solemn
Meeting the next Month in Oxford: For an Academy will be the best Court for my
humor. And so I humbly rest,

Your Majesty's ever faithful, ever devoted poor Servant, H. W.

To the Lord Treasurer Iuxon.
May it please Your good Lordship,
I Was in hope long since to have waited on your Lordship with an a count, I
dare not say of any fruit, yet at least of some use of my private time: But
through certain fastidious fumes from my Spleen (though of late I thank God
well allayed) I have been kept in such Jealousy of mine own conceptions, that
some things under my Pen have been born very slowly. In the mean while,
remembering an old Pamphlet of mine, of the Elements of Architecture, which I
cannot in any modesty suppose that your Lordship had ever seen, though it has
found some vulgar favor among those whom they call gentle Readers, I have
gotten such a Copy as did remain to present unto your Lordship: And because my
fortunes were never able to erect any thing answerable to my Speculations in
that Art, I have newly made, at least an essay of my Invention, at least in the
Structure of a little poor Standish, of so contemptible value, as I dare offer
it to your Lordship without offense of your integrity. If I could have built
some Rural Retreat worthy of your Reception, according to the six Precepts of
my Master Vitruvius, I would have invited and entertained your Lordship
therein, how homely soever, yet as heartily as you were ever welcomed to any
place in this world; and I would then have gloried to have under my Roof as
worthy a Counselor and Treasurer as ever served the best of Kings: But as I
am, I can say no more for your Lordships gracious respects and goodness toward
me, then that I live in a tormenting desire, some way to celebrate the honor
of your Name, and to be known

Your most humble, professed, and obliged Servant, H. WOTTON.

To the KING, 1637.
May it please my most Gracious Sovereign,
IF I were not more afraid to break the Laws of that humble Modesty, which
becomes the meanness of my desert, then I am to exceed the bounds of Your
Majesty's Royal Goodness: I should be a poor Suppliant unto Your Majesty to
confer upon me the Mastership of the Savoy, in case Dr. Belcanquel (my good
Friend) shall (as the voice goes) be removed to the Deanery of Durham; wherein
the Remove and the Substitution are but one stroke of Your Benignity.

God knows, and the value of the Thing it self may speak as much, that I do not
aim therein at any utility: Only, it may be some ease of expense, and Commodity
of Lodging, when I shall come (as I am afraid shortly) to oversee certain poor
things of mine own at Press: wherewith yet I hope Your Majesty, whose Honor
only I study, will not be displeased. I have further considered with my self,
that the said place is not incompatible with that which I now hold by Your
Majesty's intercession with Your ever blessed Father, as it may please You to
remember, though You forget nothing so easily as Your own bounties: which place
here never before subsisting in the Memory of man, without some Addition, I
have now near fourteen years sustained in that integrity as I found it, and
with as good Scholars sent annually to Your Royal College at Cambridge, of my
particular Choice, as have gone thither since the Foundation; whereof I could
show Your Majesty a published Testimony out of that University, in Dr.
Winterton's Dedication of Dionysius de situ orbis, unto me; if it were not a
miserable thing for me to make up so slight a merit even with a vanity. Besides
this, I most humbly confess, that though my fortunes are poor, and my Studies
private, yet I cannot deny certain Sparkles of honest ambition, remaining in
me, whereby I desire the World should know, that my most Virtuous, and most
Dear and Royal Master has not utterly forgotten me. And so I most humbly rest,

Your Majesty's most humble, faithful, hearty Subject and Servant, H. W.

To the Archbishop.
May it please your Grace,
EMboldened by your favor, I humbly present herewith to your Grace, and
through your only hands (which in our lower Sphere, is via Lactea) my Letter
to his Majesty, and the Copy thereof. If it shall pass the file of your
Judgment, my poor Lines will have honor enough; but if they take effect by
the virtue of your Mediation, I shall be sorry that I cannot be more

Your Grace's then I am, and will ever be, H. W.

To Mr. MILTON.
SIR,
IT was a special favor, when you lately bestowed upon me here the first taste
of your acquaintance, though no longer then to make me know that I wanted more
time to value it, and to enjoy it rightly; and in truth, if I could then have
imagined your farther stay in these parts, which I understood afterward by Mr.
H. I would have been bold, in our vulgar Phrase, to mend my draught, (for you
left me with an extreme thirst,) and to have begged your conversation again
jointly with your said Learned Friend, at a poor meal or two, that we might
have banded together some good Authors of the ancient time: Among which, I
observed you to have been familiar.

Since your going, you have charged me with new Obligations, both for a very
kind Letter from you, dated the 6th. of this Month, and for a dainty piece of
entertainment that came therewith. Wherein I should much commend the Tragical
part, if the Lyrical did not ravish me with a certain Dorique delicacy in your
Songs and Odes; whereunto I must plainly confess to have seen yet nothing
parallel in our language Ipsa mollities. But I must not omit to tell you, that
I now only owe you thanks for intimating unto me (how modestly soever) the true
Artificer. For the Work it self I had viewed some good while before with
singular delight, having received it from our common Friend Mr. R. in the very
close of the late R's Poems, Printed at Oxford; whereunto is added (as I now
suppose) that the Accessory might help out the Principal, according to the Art
of Stationers, and to leave the Reader Con la bocca dolce.

Now Sir, concerning your Travels, wherein I may challenge a little more
privilege of discourse with you. I suppose you will not blanch Paris in your
way; therefore I have been bold to trouble you with a few Lines to Mr. M. B.
whom you shall easily find attending the young Lord S. as his Governor, and
you may surely receive from him good directions for the shaping of your farther
journey into Italy, where he did reside by my choice some time for the King,
after mine own recess from Venice.

I should think that your best Line will be through the whole length of France
to Marseilles, and thence by Sea to Genoa, whence the passage into Tuscany is
as diurnal as a Gravesend Barge. I hasten, as you do to Florence, or Siena, the
rather, to tell you a short story from the interest you have given, me in your
safety.

At Siena I was tabled in the house of one Alberto Sci^ioni, an old Roman
Courtier in dangerous times, having been Steward to the Duca di Pagliano, who
with all his Family were strangled, save this only man that escaped by
foresight of the Tempest: with him I had often much chat of those affairs;
into which he took pleasure to look back from his native harbor, and at my
departure toward Rome (which had been the Center of his Experience) I had won
confidence enough to beg his advice, how I might carry my self securely there,
without offense of others, or of mine own conscience. Signor Arrigo mio (says
he) I Pensieri stretti, and il viso sciolto: That is, Your thoughts close, and
your countenance loose, will go safely over the whole World. Of which Delphian
Oracle (for so I have found it) your judgment does need no Commentary; and
therefore, Sir, I will commit you with it to the best of all securities, Gods
dear love, remaining

Your Friend as much at command, as any of longer date, H. WOTTON.
POSTSCRIPT.
Sir, I have expressly sent this my Footboy to prevent your departure, without
some acknowledgement from me of the receipt of your obliging Letter, having my
self through some business, I know not how, neglected the ordinary conveyance.
In any part where I shall understand you fixed, I shall be glad, and diligent
to entertain you with Home-Novelties; even for some fomentation of our
friendship, too soon interrupted in the Cradle.



Right Honorable,
MAster Nicholas Pey (through whose hands all my businesses did pass both in my
former employments here and now) has betrayed your Honor unto me in some
things that you would desire out of this Country, which if he had not done, he
had betrayed me: For I have long wished nothing more then some occasion to
serve you; and though this be a kind of intrusion, to insert my self in this
manner into your desires; yet I hope it will please you to excuse it, because I
do it not only with willingness, but in truth with pleasure: for it falls
out, that I have a little skill, or at least an interest of Affection in the
things that you wish from hence, and therefore even mine own nature does lead
me to serve you, besides my duty. I have begun with a very poor Present of
Strings for your Music, whereof I will provide hereafter better store, and if
it be possible, of better quality: by the first Ship your Honor shall receive
some Lutes of Sconvels and Mango, and withal a Chest of Glasses of mine own
choosing at Murano, wherein I do somewhat pretend; and those Artificers are well
acquainted with me. Thus much in private: For the Public, I have made by this
Bearer a Dispatch unto the whole Body of His Majesty's most Honorable Council,
wherein your worthy Person is comprehended; and therefore, I hope, that writing
twice to your Honor now at once, it may serve (by your favor) for some
redemption of my former silence. The subject of my Dispatch is as high as ever
befell any foreign Minister; wherein, though mine own Conscience (I thank God)
does set me at rest, yet I shall be glad of your Honorable approbation, if it
will please you to, afford it me: And so I humbly commit your Honor to Gods
blessed love, remaining,

At your commandment.

Much honored Sir,
SInce I had the favor and the delight of any Letters from you, you have had
the trouble of two or three from me, besides the present, which I hope will
find you according to my continual vvishes, in perfect health, though you live
in a Theater of Tragical Actions this year. I am here newly delivered of one of
the most fastidious pieces of my life, as I account, for my part, the Week of
our Annual Election of Scholars, both into this Seminary, and out of it for
Kings College in Cambridge; whereunto has been a mavelous Concourse, and
much distraction in our Votes through Letters from Court. Pardon me, Sir, a
Question by the way, Have you no Child of your own, or at least of some of
your Friends, whom you could vvish trained in this course? I would fain beg
some employment from you, which makes me offer you this, or any other of those
poor services which lie within my circumference, as this Bearer has
particular charge from me. This is that Nicholas Oudart, for whom you did a
great favor in procuring the Cardinal Infanta's Letters to Mechelen in his
behalf: which took so good effect, as he is now personally flown over to
consummate that business, having information from his Correspondents there,
that it is ripened for him. He has served me from a little Page, and of late
years has managed the chief part of my Domestic Affairs; so as if it were not
for his own urgent occasion, I could hardly miss him that short time within
which I expect his return. You will find him, I hope, worthy of your love, I
am sure of your trust. His profession is Physic, toward which he is very
well grounded in the learned Languages: But his Scope now is Business, not
Knowledge. If there shall by chance remain any thing to be added unto your
former honorable Courtesy, for the expedition of his Cause and Return, you
have given us both good cause to be confident both in your power and
friendship: And so, Sir, leaving him in your loving arms, I rest for ever,

Your obliged and faithful Friend to serve you, H. WOTTON.

To the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
July 30. 1637. May it please your Grace,
WE very humbly acknowledge, that your Grace has made us confident in your
favor, both by your former Letters, (which are the true images of your mind)
and by that report which Mr. Weaver, and Mr. Harison, brought us from your
most Reverenced Person: yet, till after the Term, when we might suppose your
Grace somewhat freer then before (though ever environed with more Honor then
Ease) we were tender to trouble you with any prosecution, on our parts, of
your good Intents toward this Collegiat Body, about the yet unperfected,
though well imprimed Business of New- Winsor. But now, after due Remembrance of
our humble Devotions, I am bold to signify unto your Grace in mine own, and in
the name of the rest, that having (according to the fair Liberty which you were
pleased to yield us) consulted with our Council at Law, about some convenient
form for the settling of that which his Majesty has already granted by your
Grace's Intercession, we find the King can no way be bound but by his own
goodness, neither can we wish his Majesty in better or in safer Bonds:
therefore we hope to propound an Expedient, which to my understanding, will (as
Astronomers use to say) save all appearances, Namely, etc.

Master Cl^avers Election shall be the more honored, by being a single
example; in whose Person we are sorry for nothing, but that he needs not thank
us for his choice. And so doubting as little of your Grace's favor, as we do
of your Power, in the consummating of our humble, and as we hope they will
appear, of our moderate desires, I ever with most hearty zeal remain

From the College this 30. of july, 1637. At all your Grace's commands, H.
WOTTON.

Right Honorable and our very good Lord, the Lord Keeper,
IT is so open and so general for any that fly unto your Lordships Tribunal,
to receive there a fair and equitable measure, as it has (we know not how)
wrought in us a kind of unnatural effect: For, thereby we have been made the
slower to render your Lordship our most humble thanks in our own proper Case,
because we knew not how to single it from the common benefit which all find in
your goodness: But we can now forbear no longer to join among our selves, and
with the universal voice, in a blessing upon your Name.

And as we bring a true and humble acknowledgment in our particular, that this
College is bound to celebrate your Honor for that charitable Injunction
wherewith you have sustained a great and important portion of the livelihood of
so many young Plants of good Literature, till a further discussion of our
Right: so likewise we most*humbly beseech your good Lordship in the sincerity
of our own desires of quietness, and in the confidence of our cause, that you
will be pleased to entertain with favor a Petition which our Council will
present unto your Lordship, for some Day of bearing that shall best sort with
your great affairs. And so with all our joint and hearty Prayers, both of Young
and Old, for your long preservation, We rest,

Your most humble and devoted Servants.

My most honored Lady,
YOur young Kinsman shall be welcome hither at your pleasure, and there shall
want, no respects on my part to make the place both fruitful and cheerful unto
him.

Touching the other part of your last; wherein I am so much obliged by your
confidence, which in truth, is the greatest of Obligations, let me assure your
Ladyship, by all the protestations of a Christian man, that I never heard
before the least whispering of that whereof you write concerning my Niece:
Neither, in good faith, did I know so much as that there was a Lord T. Your
Ladyship sees in what darkness, or with what incuriosity I live.

I shall, ere it be long, be my self in Kent among my Friends; but I will
write more speedily, according to your command.

In the mean while (if I may be pardoned so much boldness) I could vvish your
Ladyship would take some hold of one well known in Court on both sides,
namely Master Nicolas Pey: He is a right honest and discreet man in himself,
and of great trust with my Lady T. the Grandmother, under whom my Niece was
bred, and likewise with her Father and Mother: and I am not tender that your
Ladyship should tell him, you have understood so much from me, if it please you
to send for him. And so I most humbly rest,

Your Ladyships with all devotion to serve you, H. WOTTON.

To Sir Richard Baker Knight.
SIR,
I Conceive that you have been pleased, out of our ancient friendship, (which
was first, and is ever best elemented in an Academy) and not out of any
valuation of my poor judgment, to communicate with me your Divine Meditations
on the Lords Prayer, in some several sheets, which have given me a true taste
of the whole; wherein I must needs observe, and much admire the very
Character of your Style, which seems unto me to have not a little of the
African Idea of Saint Augustine's Age, full of sweet Raptures, and of
researching Conceits; nothing borrowed, nothing vulgar, and yet all flowing
from you (I know not how) with a certain equal facility: So as I see your
vvorldly troubles have been but Pressing-Irons to your heavenly cogitations.

Good Sir, let not any modesty of your Nature, let not any obscurity of your
Fortune smother such an excellent employment of your Erudition and Zeal: for it
is a work of Light, and not of Darkness. And thus vvishing you long health,
that can use it so well, I remain

Your poor Friend to love and serve you, H. WOTTON.

To his Sacred Majesty.
I Do humbly resume the ancient manner, which was adire Caesarem per libellum:
with confidence in the Cause, and in Your Majesty's Gracious Equity, though not
in mine own Merit.

During my late Employment, Sir E. P. then Master of the Rolls died. By his
death Sir Julius Caesar claimed not only the Succession of that place, but the
gift of all the Clerkships of the Chancery, that should fall void in his own
time.

Of these Clerkships: Your Majesty had formerly granted two Reversions: The one
to the late Lord Bruce; for which Mr. Bond, Secretary to my Lord Chancellor,
had contracted with him. The second to me. The said Bond got his Grant through
the favor of his Master, to be confirmed by Sir Julius Caesar before his
entrance into the Rolls: but through my absence in Your Majesty's Service, and
want of pressing it in the due season, my Grant remained unconfirmed, though
Your Majesty was pleased to write Your Gracious Letter in my behalf. Which
makes me much bewail mine own case, that my deserts were so poor, as Your
Royal Mediation was of less value for me, then my Lord Chancellours for his
Servant. The premises considered, my humble Suit unto Your Majesty is this:
That Sir Julius Caesar may be drawn by Your Supreme Authority, to confirm unto
me my Reversion of the second Clerkship, whereof I have a Patent under Your
Great Seal. Wherein I have just confidence in Your Majesty's Grace, since Your
very Laws do restore them that have been any ways prejudiced in Servicio Regis.

Your Majesty's long devoted poor Servant. H. WOTTON.

1621/2.
SIR,
BEsides the Address of my public Duties unto your hands, I have long owed you
these private lines, full of thanks from my heart for your favor and affection
in all my occasions at home, and particularly in the Point of my Privy Seal,
about my German Accounts: wherein (as I am abundantly informed both by my
Nephew, and by Mr. Nicholas Pey, whom I repute my best Oracles in the
information of mine own Obligations) it pleased you to stand by me, not only Da
vero Amieo, but indeed, Da vero Cavagliere: From which, though the benefit
which did remain in my purse, after the casting up of what was lost, was (as
God knows) so little, that I may justly build some hope of your further charity
in the authorizing of such Demands as I now send: yet on the other side, I must
confess, that without your former so friendly, and so noble compassion, I had
received a most irrecoverable ruin and shame, beyond all example, and my case
would have been very strange; for I should have been undone by the Kings
goodness, upon assurance whereof (though almost forgotten) I had increased my
Train. Now Sir, this acknowledgement of your singular Love, I was never more
fit to pay you then at the present, being intenerated in all my inward feelings
and affections by new sickness, which with loss of much blood, even no less
then twenty ounces within these fourteen days, has brought me low. In which
time (if God had called me from the Travels of this earth) I had left you, out
of my narrow fortune, some poor remembrance of my thankfulness: which I have
now (finding my self by Gods pleasure in a good way of recovery) transmitted to
my abovesaid Friend Mr. Pey. Before I end, I must not forget to ease your
Honor of such thanks as in your Letters you have been pleased to bestow on me,
in respect of your Kinsman Mr. B. because his being with me, I do very rightly
reckon among my bands to your self: for in good faith, his integrity and
discretion does sustain my House; besides his fellowship in certain Studies,
wherein we aim at no small things, even perchance at a new Systeme of the
World; at least, since we cannot in the Practical and Moral, I would we could
mend it in the Speculative Part. But lest these private Contemplations (on
which I am fallen) transport me too far, I will conclude as I began, with
humble thanks for all your Favors; and with commending your Honored Person to
the Author of all Blessing; remaining ever, etc.

Most dear Lord,
WHile I had your Lordship (as I am always bound) in my Meditation, and
somewhat under my Pen, (wherewith I hope in due time to express how much I
honor your Noble Virtues) I am (as if I had not been overladen before)
surprised with a new Favor (for that is the true Title of your Commands)
touching a fine Boy of this College, whom I perceive by your Letters of the
30th. of the last Month to pertain to your care. Quid multa? It shall be done:
Only in one thing I must crave pardon, to pass a little gentle Expostulation
with your Lordship. You are pleased in your Letter to except my inconveniences,
as if in the Nobleness of your Nature (notwithstanding your desire) you would
yet allow me here a liberty of mine own Judgment, or Affection. No, my Good
Lord, That privilege comes too late, even for your self to give me, when I
once understand your mind. For let me assure your Lordship, that I have such a
conscience, and real feeling of my deep Obligations toward your Noble Person,
as no value nor respect under Heaven can purchase my voice from him, on whom
you have bestowed it. It is true, that the King himself, and no longer then
three or four days before the date of your Letters (so nimble are the times)
did write for another; but we shall satisfy his Majesty with a pre-election,
and yours shall have my first nomination; which, howsoever, will fall timely
enough for him within the year. For there belongs (after they are chosen) *a
little soaking, as well as a baking before, into our Boys. And so not to insist
any longer upon such a poor obedience, I humbly lay my self, and whatsoever is,
or shall be within my power, at your Lordships feet, remaining,

Your Lordships in the truest, and heartiest devotions.

Worthy Sir,
ALL health to your self, and to yours both at home and abroad. Sorry I was not
to be at Eton when Mr. B. your Nephew, and my Friend came thither to visit me,
being then in procinct of his travels: But I had some good while before, at
another kind visitation, together with your Sons and Mr. S. given him a
Catholic Rule which was given me long since by an old Roman Courtier, with
whom I tabled in Siena, and whose Counsels I begged for the government of my
self at my departure from him toward the foresaid Court, where he had been so
well versed. Sinor Arrigo (says he) There is one short remembrance will carry
you safe through the whole World. I was glad to hear such a preservative
contracted into so little room, and so besought him to honor me with it.
Nothing but this (says he) Gli Pensiere stre^ti, and il viso sciolto: That is,
as I use to translate it, Your Thoughts close, and your Countenance loose. This
was that moral Antidote which I imparted to Mr. B. and his fellow-travellers,
when they were last with me, having a particular interest in their well
doings, both as they are yours, and as they have had some training under my
poor Regiment: To which ties of friendship you have added a third, that they
are now of the College of Travelers, wherein if the fruit of the time I have
spent, were answerable to the length, I might run for a Deacon at least.

If I had not been absent when Mr. B. came last, I would have said much more
in private between us; which shall be supplied by Letter, if I may receive a
safe form of address from you. I continue mainly in the same opinion which I
touched unto them, That after their impriming in France, I could vvish them to
mount the Pirenies into Spain. In that Court (as I hear) you have an assured
Friend; And there they may consolidate the French vivacity with a certain
Sosiego (as they call it) till they shall afterward pass from Barcolona over
to Italy, where lies the true mean between the other two humors. You see
(Sir) by this discourse, that I am in mine own Country at leisure; I pray
pardon it, whatsoever it be, because it proceeds from hearty good will: And
so I rest,

At your Commands, H. W.
Sir, My Servant the Bearer has somewhat to say unto, you about a piece of
Painting, which I would fain send to your House in the Country, covered till
it come thither, because it is soberly naked, and ready to be set up, being in
a gilded Frame already.
1633.
Right Honorable,
I Received such a Letter from you touching my poor Pamphlet of Architecture,
which I yet preserve among my preciousest Papers, as I have made it a
Resolution to put nothing forth under my Name, without sending one of the
first Copies unto your indulgent hands.

There is born a small welcome to the King from Scotland (whom I have not yet
seen since his Return) I know not how, out of a little indignation. They have
sent us over from Leiden, from France, from Polonia, etc. a tempest of
Panegyricks, and Laudatives of their Princes; whereupon I debated with my self;
What? Have we not as good a Theme and Theater as they? Or do we want Sense, or
Zeal to express our Happiness? This stirred my very Bowels, and within a while
my Pen, such as it is. I confess the Subject is so high, as I fear may condemn
my Obscurity to have undertaken it; but withal so true, as I hope will not
mis-become mine ingenuity. Howsoever, I submit it to your judgment: and if in
charity you shall be pleased to like any thing in it, I humbly beseech you that
you would be pleased to take some occasion of speaking favorably of it to the
King himself; for though I aim at nothing by it, save the very doing of it, yet
I should be glad to have it impressed by better judgments then my own; And so
I most humbly rest,

At, etc.

To Dr. CASTLE.
Worthy Sir,
TIll the receipt of your last, and the like from others of both Universities;
and one from Bruxels, Ejusdem Argumenti; I thought, in good faith, that as I
have lived (I thank God) with little Ambition; so I could have died with as
much silence as any man in England. But now I see that the most unvaluable
things may serve to make a noise.

And I have now no more to say, but that while the foresaid report shall be
false; the under-writer is

Truly Yours, H. Wotton.

My dear Nic.
MOre then a voluntary motion does now carry me toward Suffolk, especially
that I may confer by the way with an excellent Physician at B. whom I brought
my self from Venice, where (as either I suppose or surmise) I first contracted
my infirmity of the Spleen, to which the very Seat is generally inclined, and
therefore their Physicians (who commonly study the inclinations of places) are
the likeliest to understand the best remedies.

I hope to be back by --

It wrinckles my face to tell you, that my -- will cost me 500 l. that done, my
thoughts are at rest, and over my Study* door you shall find written, INVIDIAE
REMEDIUM. Let me end in that word, and ever rest,

Your heartiest poor Friend, H. WOTTON.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Forbear to write further, having a world of Discourse to unload unto you;
like those that weed not a Garden till it be grown a Wood.



To Iz. Wa. In answer of a Letter requesting him to perform his promise of
Writing the Life of Dr. Done.
My worthy Friend,
I Am not able to yield any reason, no, not so much as may satisfy my self,
why a most ingenuous Letter of yours has lain so long by me (as it were in
Lavender) without an Answer, save this only, The pleasure I have taken in your
Style and Conceptions, together with a Meditation of the Subject you propound,
may seem to have cast me into a gentle slumber. But, being now awaked, I do
herein return you most hearty thanks for the kind prosecution of your first
motion, touching a just Office, due to the memory of our ever memorable Friend:
To whose good fame, though it be needless to add any thing, (and my age
considered, almost hopeless from my Pen;) yet I will endeavor to perform my
promise, if it were but even for this cause, that in saying somewhat of the
Life of so deserving a man, I may perchance over-live mine own.

That which you add of Doctor King, (now made Dean of Rochester, and by that
translated into my native soil) is a great spur unto me: with whom I hope
shortly to confer about it in my passage toward Boughton Malherb, (which was
my genial Air) and invite him to a friendship with that Family where his
Predecessor was familiarly acquainted. I shall write to you at large by the
next Messenger, (being at present a little in business) and then I shall set
down certain general heads, wherein I desire information by your loving
diligence; hoping shortly to enjoy your own ever welcome company in this
approaching time of the Fly and the Cork. And so I rest,

Your very hearty poor Friend to serve you, H. WOTTON.

To the same.
My worthy Friend,
SInce I last saw you, I have been confined to my Chamber by a quotidian
Fever, I thank God, of more contumacy then malignity. It had once left me, as
I thought; but it was only to fetch more company, returning with a surcrew of
those splenetick vapors that are called Hypocondriacal; of which most say, the
cure is good company; and I desire no better Phisician then your self. I have
in one of those fits endeavored to make it more easy by composing a short
Hymn; and since I have apparelled my best thoughts so lightly as in Verse, I
hope I shall be pardoned, a second vanity, if I communicate it with such a
Friend as your self: to whom I wish a cheerful spirit, and a thankful heart to
value it, as one of the greatest blessings of our good God; in whose dear love
I leave you, remaining,

Your poor Friend to serve you. H. WOTTON.

A Hymn to my God in a Night of my late Sickness.
OH thou great Power, in whom I move,
For whom I live, to whom I die,
Behold me through thy beams of love,
Whilst on this couch of tears I lie;
And cleanse my sordid soul within,
By thy Christ's Blood, the Bath of Sin.
No hallowed Oils, no grains I need,
No rags of Saints, no purging fire,
One rosy drop from David's Seed,
Was worlds of Seas to quench thine Ire.
O precious Ransom! which once paid,
That Consummatum est was said:
And said by him, that said no more,
But sealed it with his sacred Breath.
Thou then that have dispung'd my Score,
And dying wast the death of Death,
Be to me now, on thee I call,
My Life, my Strength, my Joy, my All.
H. WOTTON.

To Doctor C.
Worthy Sir,
I Cannot (according to the Italian phrase, at which I have been often ready to
laugh, among a Nation otherwise of so civil language) accuse the receipt of any
Letter from you, since your remove from these parts, save of two by this
Bearer, my Servant and yours, as all mine shall be. Neither can I satisfy my
imagination (so far I am from quieting my desire) where a third (which you
intimate in your last) may yet lie smothered in some pocket, for which I should
have made a great research, if that were not the diligentest way to miss it.
The truth is, as I do highly estimate every line from your Pen, so on the other
side, I am as jealous that any of them should stray: For when a Friend of mine,
that was lately going toward your City, fell casually into some discourse with
me, how he should cloth himself there; I made some sport to tell him, (for a
little beguiling of my Melancholy Fumes) that in my opinion the cheapest stuff
in London was Silence. But this concerns neither of us both, for we know how
to speak and write safely, that is, honestly: Always, if we touch any tender
matter, let us remember his Motto, that wrote upon the Mantle of his Chimney,
where he used to keep a good fire, OptimusSecretariorum.

I owe you abundant thanks for the Advertisements in your last, so clearly and
judiciously delivered; you cannot do me a greater favor: for though I am a
Cloystered Man in the Condition of my present Life, besides my Confinement by
Infirmity, yet having spent so much of mine Age among Noise abroad, and seven
Years thereof in the Court at home, there does still hang upon me, I know not
how, a certain Concupiscence of Novelties.

I am sorry I have nothing in that kind at the present to interchange with you.

In mine own sickness I had of late, for one half night, and a whole day
following, a perfect intermission like a Truce from all Symptoms: but some of
them are returned again, and I am afraid it will be hard to throw out
altogether this same Saturnine Enemy, being now lodged in me almost a full year.

In your way of applying the Leeches, I have found sensible benefit.

If I could get a lodging near Paul's Church, I would fain pass a week there
yet before the great Festival.

Pardon me (Good Sir) this Communication with you of my Domestic purposes; and
pardon me likewise the use of another man's hand in this Letter, for a little
ease of mine own Head and Eyes. And so I rest,

Your hearty Friend and Servant in all occasions, H. WOTTON.
Sir, Your subscription of Aldrovandus puts me in mind of a mishap which
befell me in the time of my private Travels; I had been in a long pursuit of a
much commended Author, namely Johannes Britanicus de re Metallica, and could
never see him, but in the Library of the brave Monks of Mont d'Oliveto in the
Contaao di Siena; where while I had taken order to have him transcribed,
Aldrovando passing that way, borrowed him from the Monastery: and I sending not
long after unto him in Bologna, my Friend found him newly dead: And this was
the period of my fruitless curiosity.



To Doctor C.
Worthy Sir,
I See by your Letters, by your discourses, and by your whole conversation,
that you are a Friend of great Learning, and (which are commonly consociated)
of as great humanity; which shall make me study by any means, within the
narrowness of my fortune and judgment, to deserve your love.

The rest I leave to this Bearer, my Servant,

As I am Yours, H. WOTTON.

To Doctor C.
Worthy Sir,
HEnceforward no Complemental forms between us. Let others repute them
according to the Latin denomination, Fine civil filling of speech and Letters.
For my part, in good faith ex Diametro, I ever thought they were mere
emptinesses: yet they may chance serve between some natures to kindle good
will; but I account our Friendship no longer in fieri.

You have so represented -- unto me, as methinks I see him walking not like a
Funambulus upon a Cord, but upon the edge of a Razor. What shall I retribute to
you from hence? Nothing but a pretty Accident in a sad Subject. There was, you
know, inhabitant in -- a young Widow of value: Who lately dying at London,
whither she went to solace with some of her Friends, left order by Will that
her Body should be buried in her dwelling Parish, as it was this week, where --
made the Funeral Sermon, who had been one of her professed Suitors: and so she
did not want a passionate Elogist, as well as an excellent Preacher.

For the estate of mine own Body, it is not so well as my Servant seems by your
Letter to have laid it before you. It is true, that the Symptoms are well
allayed, or otherwise peradventure Custom has taught me to bear them better,
being now familiarized and domesticated evils, I am mansueta mala: Yet still
the hot fumes continue in the night, and the salivation by day, but in somewhat
a lesser measure; besides a streightness of breathing, which I should be glad
to know whether you observe in other Hypochendriacal Patients. And if you can
advise me of a good Errynum, I have a strong fantasy, ex Fernelio, that it
will discharge my head: but such juyces and expressions as he appointed, are
not now to be had. Sir, pardon me this trouble: and God have you in his love,

Your affectionate Friend to serve you unceremoniously, H. WOTTON.

To Doctor C.
Worthy Sir,
I Now return unto you your secret Papers again; whereof, lest I should violate
the Communications of such a Friend, I have not so much as reserved a Copy
(though I might have done it, by your leave) but I have perused them so often,
as I think, I can say them without Book. The Scene seems since then much
changed to the worse; yet I hope all will resolve into nothing: And that when
things appear most tempestuous, they will be nearest a calm; according to your
great Aphorism in Physic, Nox ante Crisin est molestissima.

I beseech you, Sir, not to conceive by the tardity of my Answer unto you, any
faintness in the acknowledgement of your favors: but to prosecute your
friendly intelligence upon occasion, even when I shall be on the other side of
you, as perchance I shall be shortly in my genial soil: For I will teach the
Foot-Posts of that place to find your Lodging. And so leaving you in Gods dear
love, I rest,

Your professed poor Friend and Servant, H. WOTTON.

To Doctor Castle.
SIR,
LEt me pray you, that the subject of these lines may be only to recommend unto
your Counsel and good Affection the Bearer of them, Mr. John Gainsford, the
nearest Kinsman on my Mothers side that I have living, and yet my nearer
Friend, so as I have more then a single interest in his health: He is much
traveled with an exorbitant effusion of -- which, though it be a natural
preventive to some evils; yet surely, without either stop or moderation, must
needs exhaust his spirits. He has had heretofore some taste of your
acquaintance at large, and you have left in him illos aculeos, which you do in
all that (after the Scottish phrase) get but a gripe of you: for you are indeed
a wounding Man, as my Servant Nicholas says, to whom I showed your last
Letter. This my dear Cousin, in one thing especially, is capable of good hope
from your advice, that he believes in it by my discourse with him, who truly
must confess that I have received much benefit by yours, touching my
splenetical Infirmity; which differs from his no more then the stopping or
running of the same Spout. Besides this, he is the fitter for you to work upon,
because he has yet tried no remedy, not so much as the ordinary diversion of
opening another vein. Sir, I commend him most heartily into your hands: and
because you have two Capacities, (as our Lawyers speak) a Political and
Philosophical, from both which I draw much good: Give me leave to entertain you
with a Letter of some few Novelties from Oxford, received as I was thinking to
shut up the Present, which shall end in ever professing my self,

Your very hearty poor Friend, H. WOTTON.

To Doctor C.
Worthy Sir,
YOu are the very man, who has authenticated unto me that sentence which we
read in the life of Attious, delivered by Cornelius Nepos, That Prudentia est
quaedam divinatio. So as truly hereafter, when I shall receive from the
intelligences of your Friends, and your own judgment upon them, any sinister
Prognostic, it will make me open your next Letter with trembling fingers.

It is one among many wonders unto me, that the young Lord C. has made a
transition to the contrary Party: I thought he had been better elemated at Eton.

I send you herewith, for a little exchange, the Copy of an Elegant Letter,
which came unto me by the last Boat from a Friend, both of Studies and Affairs
touching foreign troubles; which it is not amiss to contemplate, if it be but
for some diversion from our own; Christendom was never, within our Age, so
inflamed. I hope the ends of the World are come upon us.

I shall shortly remove into Kent; but while I am absent, there is one shall
wait on you weekly in London, to receive and to convey any of your Commands to
me; for that is the true name of all your Requests,

To your professed plain Friend, H. Wotton.
POSTSCRIPT.
MY Lords Grace of Canterbury has this week sent hither to Mr. Hales, very
nobly, a Prebendaryship of Windsor unexpected, undesired, like one of the
favors (as they write) of Henry the Seventh's time.



To Doctor C.
Worthy Sir,
IHave received your last of the 24th. of May, through the hands of Mr. Iowes
of Windsor, immediately upon my return to mine ordinary Cell; whence I made a
short retirement during the late Solemnities, with intention, in truth, to have
visited the City of Bath, and to see whether among all kind of affected persons
confluent thither, I could pick out any counsel to allay that sputative
Symptom which yet remains upon me from my obstructions of the Spleen. But
that journey is laid asleep.

Now, Sir, in answer to your said Letter; it grieves me to tell you a truth,
which this my Servant well knows, That I am for the future Election of this
year, so engaged already to four Privy-Councellors (and three of them of the
highest) and moreover to a Friend of great interest in all the breath that I
have to bestow, that, in good says, I know not how to struggle for a voice for
a Child of rare, and almost prodigious hopes, who is one of my poor Scholars,
and much less for any other propounded so late as your Friend, Son: For it is
now more then a month since the day of our Election was proclaimed on our
College and Church-gates; the World is nimble in the anticipating of Voices,
and for my particular, according to my improvidence in all things else, I am in
this likewise no reserver of my good will till the last: I must therefore
heartily beseech you, as I have delivered my self at your disposal, so to
dispose of me when I am my self, which I am not now. And so I rest,

Unquiet till I shall some way serve you, H. WOTTON.

To Doctor C.
Worthy Sir,
IT is one of the wonders of the World unto me, how your Letters come so
slowly; which if either themselves or their Bearers knew how welcome they are,
would fly. I speak this both by some other before, and by your last or the 19.
of December, which was almost nine days on the way: and I hope the Scene of
Scotland much changed in the mean while to the better.

But to let go exotic matter, if that may be so termed, I must congratulate
with you your actual possession of the Place of the -- For although your own
Merit was (before you had it) in their judgments that understand you, a kind
of present investure; yet I learned long since of our old Master at Oxford,
That Actus is better then Potentia: which yet, I hope, will not divert you from
your Philosophical Profession, wherein I know no man of sweeter or sounder
ability. And so, Sir, I rest,

Very truly and affectionately, at your Command, H. WOTTON.

Honorable Sir,
FOr this time, I pray you, accept in good part from me a Bottle made of a
Serpentine Stone, which has the quality to give any Wine or Water that shall
be infused therein, for four and twenty hours, the taste and operation of the
Spanwater, and is very medicinable for the Cure of the Spleen and the Gravel,
as I am informed: But sure I am, that Sir Walter Raloigh put a value upon it,
he having obtained it amongst the Spoils of the Governor of St. Omy, in his
last fatal Expedition, and by his Page understood the virtues thereof, and that
his Captain highly esteemed it. And surely, some good Cures it has wrought
since it came into my hands, for those two infirmities, etc.

Etracted from a Letter of the Earl of Cork, written to Sir Henry Wotton,
December. 22. 1636.

SIR,
FIrst, I must thank you for the fruition of your L. at life here, though it
was too short. Next, for your Pictures; whereof I return one by this first
Boat, and retain the other longer by your courtesy.

Thirdly, and most of all, for a promise which I receive from you by my
Servant, or at least a hope, that you will send me some of your own rural
Poesy: That will be a nearer image of your inward self, especially when you
were retired into your self. I do therefore expect it greedily by this; for I
well remember to have seen some lines that flowed from you with much strength
and grace. When you have any great piece of news, I pray now and then Candidus
Imperti to

Your professed Servant, H. WOTTON.

SIR,
ALthough I am now a retired and cloystered man, yet there do still hang upon
me, I know not how, some relics of an harkening humor.

The easiest way for you to quench this appetite in your poor Friend, is to
empty your self into my Servant, whom I send to salute you, and to know two
things.

First, whether you be of the Parliament your self. Next, whether I should be
sorry that I am not of it. You can by this time resolve me of both. We are here
only fed with certain Airs of good Hope, Camelions food.

More I will not say now, and you see by this little, how tender I am to
usurp upon your time: Yet before I end, let me ask a third question; Have you
no playing and breathing days? If you be of the House, might you not start
hither for a night or two? The interposing of a little Philosophical diet, may
perchance lighten a man's spirits surcharged with public thoughts, and prevent
a surfeit of State. Howsoever, hold me fast in your love; and Gods mercy be
where you are.

Your poor Friend and Servant, Alla suiscerata, H. WOTTON.

To Dr. C. 1638.
Worthy Sir,
I Find in the bowels of your last (which I received yesternight, shall I say
by your or by my Nicholas) much harsh and stiff matter from Scotland, and I
believe insusceptible of any farther Concoction, unless it be with much time,
quod concoquit omnia. But let me lay all public thoughts aside for the
present, having now with you a bosome-business, which may perhaps fall out to
concern us more here. Our Nicholas (for I account him at least halfed between
us) tells me that you have good means to know when -- will be in Town. About
whom you may perhaps have heard of certain (as I think for my part) well
conceived wishes (though but yet in the Air) touching a virtuous conjunction
between him and --; so dear unto me, both in my affection and judgment, and in
all respects, that if our nearness in blood did not make me more tender to
violate mine own modesty, then I need to be with such a Friend as you are; I
would boldly say, that there are few better Matches in this Kingdom, for the
indowments of her Person and Fortune; nor in the whole World, for the sweetness
and goodness of her Mind. And on the other side, albeit I have no acquaintance
with the Gentleman; yet I hear likewise so much good of him, as makes me wish I
had more interest in his familiarity. I write this from whence I wrote my last
unto you, being on my wings toward Canterbury; whence I shall ((...)) return
hither again within six or seven days. And this Bearer, my domestic Friend (a
German Gentleman of value) will from London meet me at Canterbury, by whom I
shall be glad to hear from you, about what time the foresaid -- is expected of
return to the City, and any thing else that you shall think fit to be told me:
But I pray let this privacy which I have passed with you, sleep between us.

As I rest in your Love, H. WOTTON.

To Sir C. C.
SIR,
LEt me first thank you much for that Rural Communication with your own
Thoughts, the best of all Companions. I was first taken with the Virginity (as
I may say) of the inscription in our Vulgar. Next, with a natural suavity in
the Elocution; which, though it be Lyrical, yet it shows you can put on the
Buskin when you list: And when you are tempted again to solicit your own
spirits, I would fain have you venture upon some Tragical Subject, though you
borrow it out of Arabia; For I am glad our England cannot yield it. I hear, for
matter of Novelty, That Sir Thomas Roe (a well-chosen Instrument) is to take
his leave on Sunday next at Court, being designed to be one of the great Synod
of Protestant Ambassadors, that are to meet at Hamborough; which to me sounds
like an Antiphone to the other malign Conjunction at Colen. And so (Sir)
committing you to Gods dear love, I rest,

At your Commands, H. W.
Sir, I retain your Poem for a Pawn that I shall have the rest.

And I send you a few poor Lines, which my pains did beget: I pray keep them
under your own favorable judgment, and impart them tenderly to others; for I
fear that even the best of our thoughts may be vainly clothed.



SIR,
I Had sooner given you an account of your two last kind Letters, even for mine
own sake, upon whom otherwise you should have had just cause to bestow no more
of your excellent intelligence; But that I have had this my servant (and I can
assure you as much yours) every day upon his wings toward you a pretty while.

To abbreviate Complement, which never agreed with my Nature. In a few plain
words, both my self, and all about me are yours.

Sir, I was glad by your last, to see in the Scottish Ruptures a Thread of Hope
yet left. It is like an Instrument wholly out of tune, but yet not all the
strings broken or cut; especially if it be true, which is here voiced with us,
that my Lord -- a popular Orator, is sent thither to smooth the way toward a
pacifical Treaty, between certain of the Kings Deputation, and others of the
Covenant.

This Bearer will tell you what we hear of certain rumorous Surmises at N. and
the Neighboring Towns, God (who is himself the true Center of Rest) make us
all quiet, and have you in his Love.

By your affectionate, professed poor Friend, H. WOTTON.

POEMS.
A Poem
written by Sir HENRY WOTTON in his youth.
O Faithless World, and thy more faithless part, a Woman's heart!
The true Shop of variety, where sits nothing but fits
And fevers of desire, and pangs of love, which toys remove.
Why, was she born to please, or I to trust, words writ in dust?
Suffering her Eyes to govern my despair, my pain for air;
And fruit of time rewarded with untruth, the food of youth.
Untrue she was: yet, I believed her eyes (instructed spies)
Till I was taught, that Love was but a School to breed a fool.
Or sought she more by triumphs of denial, to make a trial
How far her smiles commanded my weakness? yield and confess,
Excuse no more thy folly; but for Cure, blush and endure
As well thy shame, as passions that were vain: and think, it is gain
To know, that Love lodged in a Woman's breast, Is but a guest.
H. W.
Sir Henry Wotton, and Sergeant Hoskins riding on the way.
Ho. NOble, lovely, virtuous Creature,
Purposely so framed by Nature
To enthral your servants wits.

Woe. Time must now unite our hearts:
Not for any my deserts,
But because (me thinks) it fits.

Ho. Dearest treasure of my thought,
And yet were thou to be bought
With my life, thou were not dear.

Woe. Secret comfort of my mind,
Doubt no longer to be kind,
But be so and so appear.

Ho. Give me love for love again,
Let our loves be clear and plain,
Heaven is fairest, when it is clearest.

Woe. Lest in clouds, and in differing,
We resemble Seamen erring,
Farthest off, when we are nearest.

Ho. Thus with numbers interchanged,
Wotton's Muse and mine have ranged,
Verse and Journey both are spent.

Woe. And if Hoskins chance to say,
That we well have spent the day,
I, for my part, am content.

H. W.

On his Mistress, the Queen of Bohemia.
YOu meaner Beauties of the Night,
That poorly satisfy our Eyes
More by your number, then your light,
You Common people of the Skies;
What are you when the Sun shall rise?
You curious Chanters of the Wood,
That warble forth Dame Natures lays,
Thinking your Voices understood
By your weak accents; what is your praise
When Philomel her voice shall raise?
You Violets, that first appear,
By your pure purple mantles known,
Like the proud Virgins of the year,
As if the Spring were all your own;
What are you when the Rose is blown?
So, when my Mistress shall be seen
In Form and Beauty of her mind,
By Virtue first, then Choice a Queen,
Tell me, if she were not designed
The Eclipse and Glory of her kind?
H. W.

To a Noble Friend in his Sickness.
UNtimely Fever, rude insulting guest, (heat^
How did thou with such unharmonious
Dare to distune his well-composed rest;
Whose heart so just and noble strokes did beat?
What if his Youth and Spirits well may bear
More thick assaults, and stronger siege then this?
We measure not his courage, but our fear:
Not what our selves, but what the Times may miss.
Had not that blood, which thrice his veins did yield,
Been better treasured for some glorious day:
At farthest West to paint the liquid field,
And with new Worlds his Masters love to pay?
But let those thoughts, sweet Lord, repose a while,
Tend only now thy vigor to regain;
And pardon these poor Rimes, that would beguile
With mine own grief, some portion of thy pain.
H. W.

A short Hymn upon the Birth of Prince Charles.
YOu that on Stars do look,
Arrest not there your sight,
Though Natures fairest Book,
And signed with propitious light;
Our Blessing now is more Divine,
Then Planets that at Noon did shine.
To thee alone be praise,
From whom our Joy descends,
Thou Chearer of our Days,
Of Causes first, and last of Ends:
To thee this May we sing, by whom
Our Roses from the Lilies bloom.
Upon this Royal Flower,
Sprung from the chastest Bed,
Thy glorious sweetness shower,
And first let Myrtles Crown his Head;
Then Palms and Laurels wreathed between;
But let the Cypress late be seen.
And so succeeding men,
When they the fullness see
Of this our Joy, shall then
In consort join as well as we,
To celebrate his Praise above,
That spreads our Land with fruits of Love.
H. WOTTON.

An Ode to the KING, At his returning from Scotland to the Queen, after his
Coronation there.
ROuse up thy self, my gentle Muse,
Though now our green conceits be gray,
And yet once more do not refuse
To take thy Phrygian Harp, and play
In honor of this cheerful Day.
Make first a Song of Joy and Love,
Which chastely flame in Royal Eyes;
Then tune it to the Spheres above
When the benignest Stars do rise,
And sweet Conjunctions grace the Skies.
To this let all good Hearts resound,
While Diadems invest his Head:
Long may he live, whose Life does bound
More then his Laws, and better Lead
By high Example, then by Dread.
Long may He round about Him see
His Roses and His Lillies bloom:
Long may His only Dear and He
Joy in Ideas of their own,
And Kingdoms Hopes so timely sown;
Long may they both contend to prove,
That best of Crowns is such a Love.
Upon the sudden Restraint of the Earl of Somerset, then falling from favor.
Dazzled thus with height of place,
Whilst our Hopes our wits Beguile,
No man marks the narrow space
'Twixt a Prison and a Smile.
Then since Fortunes favors fade,
You that in her arms do sleep,
Learn to swim and not to wade;
For the Hearts of Kings are deep.
But if Greatness be so blind,
As to trust in Towers of Air,
Let it be with Goodness lined,
That at least the Fall be fair.
Then though darkened you shall say,
When Friends fail and Princes frown,
Virtue is the roughest way,
But proves at night a Bed of Down.
H. W.

The Character of a Happy Life.
HOw happy is he born and taught,
That serves not another will?
Whose armor is his honest thought,
And simple truth his utmost skill?
Whose passions not his masters are,
Whose soul is still prepared for death;
Unti'd unto the World by care
Of public fame, or private breath.
Who envies none that chance does raise,
Nor vice has ever understood;
How deepest wounds are given by praise,
Nor rules of State, but rules of good.
Who has his life from rumors freed,
Whose conscience is his strong retreat:
Whose state can neither flatterers feed,
Nor ruin make Oppressors great.
Who God does late and early pray,
More of his grace then gifts to lend:
And entertains the harmless day
With a Religious Book, or Friend.
This man is freed from servile bands,
Of hope to rise, or fear to fall:
Lord of himself, though not of Lands,
And having nothing, yet has all.
H. W.

On a Bank as I sat a Fishing: A description of the Spring.
ANd now all Nature seemed in love,
The lusty sap began to move;
New juiee did stir th'embracing Vines,
And Birds had drawn their Valentines:
The jealous Trout, that low did lie,
Rose at a well-dissembled fly:
There stood my Friend, with patient skill
Attending of his trembling quill.
Already were the Eves possessed
With the swift Pilgrims daubed nest.
The Groves already did rejoice
In Philomels triumphing voice.
The showers were short, the weather mild,
The morning fresh, the evening smill'd.
Ione takes her neat-rub'd Pale, and now
She trips to milk the Sand-red Cow;
Where for some sturdy football Swain,
^ne strokes a sillabub or twain.
The Fields and Gardens were beset
With Tulip, Crocus, Violet:
And now, though late, the modest Rose
Did more then half a blush disclose.
Thus all looked gay, all full of cheer,
To welcome the New-livery'd year.
H. W.

A Translation of the CIV. Psalm to the Original Sense.
MY soul exalt the Lord with Hymns of praise:
O Lord my God, how boundless is thy might?
Whose Throne of State is clothed with glorious rays,
And round about have robbed thy self with light.
Who like a curtain have the Heavens displayed,
And in the watery Roofs thy Chambers laid.
Whose chariots are the thickened clouds above,
Who walk'st upon the winged winds below,
At whose command the airy Spirits move,
And fiery meteors their obedience show.
Who on this Base the earth did firmly found,
And made the dee^ to circumvest it round.
The waves that rise would drown the highest hill,
But at thy check they fly, and when they hear
Thy thundering voice, they post to do thy will,
And bound their furies in their proper sphere:
Where surging floods, and valing ebbs can tell,
That none beyond thy marks must sink or swell.
Who has disposed, but thou, the winding way
Where springs down from the steepy crags do beat,
At which both fostered Beasts their thirsts allay,
And the wild Asses come to quench their heat;
Where Birds resort, and in their kind, thy praise
Among the branches chant in warbling lays.
The mounts are watered from thy dwelling place,
The barns and meads are filled for man and beast;
Wine glads the heart, and oil adorns the face,
And bread the staff whereon our strength does rest;
Nor shrubs alone feel thy suffizing hand,
But even the Cedars that so proudly stand.
So have the Fowls their sundry seats to breed,
The ranging Stork in stately Beeches dwells;
The climing Goats on hills securely feed,
The mining Conies shroud in rocky Cells:
Nor can the heavenly lights their course forget,
The Moon her turns, or Sun his times to set.
Thou make the Night to over-vail the Day;
Then savage Beasts creep from the silent wood,
Then Lions whelps lie roaring for their prey,
And at thy powerful hand demand their food:
Who when at morn they all recouch again,
Then toyling man till eve pursues his pain.
Lord, when on thy various works we look,
How richly furnished is the earth we tread!
Where, in the fair Contents of Nature's Book,
We may the wonders of thy wisdom read:
Nor earth alone, but lo, the sea so wide,
Where great and small, a world of creatures glide.
There go the Ships that furrow out their way;
Yea, thereof Whales enormous sights we see,
Which yet have scope among the rest to play,
And all do wait for their support on thee:
Who have assigned each thing his proper food,
And in due season do dispense thy good.
They gather when thy gifts thou do divide;
Their stores abound, if thou thy hand enlarge;
Confused they are, when thou thy beams do hide;
In dust resolved, if thou their breath discharge.
Again, when thou of life renew'st the seeds,
The withered fields revest their cheerful weeds.
Be ever gloried here thy Sovereign Name,
That thou may smile on all which thou have made;
Whose frown alone can shake this earthly frame,
And at whose touch the hills in smoke shall vade.
For me, may (while I breathe) both harp and voice,
In sweet indictment of thy Hymns rejoice.
Let Sinners fail, let all Profaness cease;
His Praise, (my Soul) His Praise shall be thy Peace.
H. WOTTON.

Tears at the Grave of Sir Albertus Morton (who was buried at Southampton) wept
by Sir H. Wotton.
SIlence (in truth) would speak my sorrow best,
For, deepest wounds can least their feelings tell;
Yet, let me borrow from mine own unrest,
But time to bid him, whom I loved, farewell.
O my unhappy lines! you that before
Have served my youth to vent some vvanton cries,
And now congealed with grief, can scarce implore
Strength to accent! Here my Albertus lies.
This is the sable Stone, this is the Cave,
And womb of earth that does his Corpse embrace;
While others sing his praise, let me engrave
These bleeding Numbers to adorn the place.
Here will I paint the Characters of vvoe,
Here will I pay my tribute to the Dead,
And here my faithful tears in showers shall flow,
To humanize the Flints vvhereon I tread.
Where though I mourn my matchless loss alone,
And none between my weakness judge and me;
Yet even these gentle vvalls allow my moan,
Whose doleful Echoes to my Plaints agree.
But is he gone? and live I rhyming here,
As if some Muse would listen to my Lay,
When all distun'd sit waiting for their Dear,
And bathe the Banks where he was wont to play?
Dwell thou in endless Light, discharged Soul;
Freed now from Natures, and from Fortunes trust:
While on this fluent Globe my glass shall role,
And run the rest of my remaining dust.
H. W.

Upon the death of Sir Albert. Morton's Wife.
HE first deceased; She for a little tried
To live without him: liked it not, and di'd.
H. W

This Hymn was made by Sir H. Wotton, when he was an Ambassador at Venice, in
the time of a great sickness there.
ETernal Mover, whose diffused Glory,
To show our grovelling Reason what thou art,
Unfolds it self in Clouds of Natures story,
Where Man, thy proudest Creature, acts his part:
Whom yet (alas) I know not why, we call
The Worlds contracted sum, the little all.
For, what are we but lumps of vvalking clay?
Why should we swel? whence should our spirits rise
Are not bruit Beasts as strong, and Birds as gay,
Trees longer lived, and creeping things as wise?
Only our souls was left an inward light,
To feel our weakness, and confess thy might.
Thou then, our strength, Father of life and death,
To whom our thanks, our vows, our selves we owe,
From me thy tenant of this fading breath,
Accept those lines which from thy goodness flow:
And thou that were thy Regal Prophets Muse,
Do not thy Praise in weaker strains refuse.
Let these poor Notes ascend unto thy throne,
Where Majesty does sit with Mercy crowned,
Where my Redeemer lives, in whom alone
The errors of my wandering life are drowned:
Where all the Quire of heaven resound the same,
That only Thine, Thine is the saving Name.
Well then, my Soul, joy in the midst of Pain;
Thy Christ that conquered hell, shall from above
With greater triumph yet return again,
And conquer his own Justice with his Love;
Commanding Earth and Seas to render those
Unto his Bliss, for whom he paid his Woes.
Now have I done: now are my thoughts at peace,
And now my Joys are stronger then my grief:
I feel those Comforts that shall never cease,
Future in Hope, but present in Belief.
Thy words are true, thy promises are just,
And thou will find thy dearly bought in Dust.
H. WOTTON

POEMS Found among the Papers of Sir HENRY WOTTON.
A Description of the Countries Recreations.
QUivering fears, Heart-tearing cares,
Anxious sighs, Untimely tears,
Fly, fly to the Courts;
Fly to fond worldlings sports,
Where strained Sardonick smiles are glosing still,
And grief is forced to laugh against her will;
Where mirth's but mummery;
And sorrows only real be.
Fly from our Country pastimes! fly,
Sad troop of humane misery;
Come serene looks,
Clear as the Crystal brooks,
Or the pure azur'd heaven, that smiles to see
The rich attendance of our poverty.
Peace and a secure mind,
(Which all men seek) we only find.
Abused Mortals! did you know
Where Joy, Hearts-ease, and comforts grow;
You Would scorn proud towers,
And seek them in these bowers, (shake,
Where winds sometimes, our woods perhaps may
But blustering care could never tempest make,
Nor murmurs e're come nigh us.
Saving of fountains that glide by us.
Here Is no fantastic Mask, nor dance,
But of our Kids, that frisk and prance:
Nor wars are seen,
Unless upon the green
Two harmless Lambs are butting one the other;
Which done, both bleating run, each to his Mother.
And wounds are never found,
Save what the Plow-share gives the ground.
Here are no false entrapping baits,
To hasten too too hasty fates;
Unless it be
The fond Credulity
Of silly fish, which vvorldling-like, still look
Upon the Bait, but never on the Hook:
Nor envy, unless among
The Birds, for prize of their sweet song.
Go! let the diving Negro seek
For Gems hid in some forlorn creek;
We all Pearls scorn,
Save what the dewy morn
Congeals upon each little spire of grass;
Which careless Shepherds beat down as they pass;
And gold never here appears,
Save what the yellow Ceres bears.
Blessed silent Groves! o may ye be
For ever Mirths best Nursery!
May pure contents
For ever pitch their tents (Mountains,
Upon these Downs, these Meads, these Rocks, these
And peace still slumber by these purling Fountains!
Which we may every year
Find when we come a fishing here.
Ignoto.

Imitatio Horatianae Odes 9. donec gratus eram tibi, Lib. 3.
A DIALOGUE betwixt GOD and the SOUL.
Soul. WHilst my Souls eye beheld no light (sight
But what streamed from thy gracious
To me the worlds greatest King,
Seemed but some little vulgar thing.

God. Whilst thou prov'dst pure; and that in thee
I could glass all my Diety:
How glad did I from Heaven depart,
To find a lodging in thy heart!

S. Now Fame and Greatness bear the sway,
('It Is they that hold my prisons Key:)
For whom my soul would die, might she
Leave them her Immortality.

G. I, and some few pure Souls conspire,
And burn both in a mutual fire,
For whom I Would die once more, ere they
Should miss of Heavens eternal day.

S. But Lord! what if I turn again,
And with an adamantine chain,
Lock me to thee? What if I chase
The world away to give thee place?

G. Then though these souls in whom I joy
Are Seraphius, Thou but a toy,
A foolish toy, yet once more I
Would with thee live, and for thee die.

Ignoto.

Doctor B. of TEARS.
WHo would have thought, there could have
Such joy in tears, wept for our sin? (bin
Mine eyes have seen, my heart has proved
The most and best of earthly joys:
The sweets of love, and being loved,
Masks, Feasts, and Plays, and such like toys.
Yet, this one tear, which now does fall,
In true delight exceeds them all.
2.
Indeed, mine eyes at first let in
Those guests that did these vvoes begin,
Therefore mine eyes in tears, and grief,
Are justly drowned: but, that those tears
Should comfort bring, is past belief:
Oh God! in this thy grace appears,
Thou that make light from darkness spring,
Make joys to vveep, and sorrows sing.
3.
Oh where am I? what may I think?
Help, help, alas my heart does sink;
Thus lost in seas of vvoe,
Thus laden with my sin,
Waves of despair dash in,
And threat my overthrow.
What heart oppressed with such a weight
Can choose but break, and perish quite?
4.
Yet, as at Sea in storms, men use
The Ship to save, the goods to lose;
So, in this fearful storm,
This danger to prevent,
Before all hope be spent,
I Will choose the lesser harm:
My tears to seas I will convert,
And drown my eyes to save my heart.
5.
Oh God my God, what shall I give
To thee in thanks? I am and live
In thee, and thou did safe preserve
My health, my fame, my goods, my rent,
Thou make me eat while others sterve:
Such unto me thy Blessings are,
As if I were thy only care.
6.
But, oh my God! thou art more kind,
When I look inward on my mind:
Thou fill'st my heart with humble joy,
With patience, meekness, fervent love,
(Which does all other loves destroy)
With faith (which nothing can remove)
And hope assured of heavens bliss;
This is my state: thy grace is this.
By Chidick Tychborn (being young and then in the Tower) the night before his
Execution.
1.
MY prime of youth, is but a frost of Cares,
My feast of joy, is but a dish of pain,
My Crop of Corn is but a field of tares,
And all my good is but vain hope of gain:
The day is past, and yet I saw no Sun,
And now I live, and now my life is done.
2.
The Spring is past, and yet it has not sprung;
The fruit is dead, and yet the leaves are green:
My youth is gone, and yet I am but young:
I saw the world, and yet I was not seen.
My thread is cut, and yet it is not spun:
And now I live, and now my life is done.
3.
I sought my death, and found it in my womb,
I looked for life, and saw it was a shade:
I trod the earth, and knew it was my tomb,
And now I die, and now I am but made.
The glass is full, and now my glass is run,
And now I live, and now my life is done.
1.
RIse, oh my Soul, with thy desires to Heaven,
And with Divinest contemplation, use
Thy time, where times eternity is given, (buse*
And let vain thoughts no more thy thoughts a^
But down in darkness let them lie,
So live thy better, let thy worse thoughts die.
2.
And thou, my Soul, inspired with holy flame,
View and review with most regardful eye,
That holy Cross whence thy salvation came,
On which thy Savior, and thy sin did die:
For in that Sacred object is much pleasure,
And in that Savior is my life, my treasure.
3.
To thee (O Jesu) I direct my eye;
To thee my hands, to thee my humble knees,
To thee my heart shall offer sacrifice,
To thee my thoughts, who my thoughts only sees:
To thee my self, my self and all I give;
To thee I die, to thee I only live.
Ignoto.

Sir Walter Raleigh the Night before his Death.
EVen such is time that takes on trust
Our youth, our joys, our all we have,
And pays us but with age and dust;
Who in the dark and silent Grave
(When we have wandered all our ways)
Shuts up the story of our days.
But from this earth, this grave, this dust,
My God shall raise me up, I trust.
W. R.

The World.
THe World's a bubble: and the life of man less then a span.
In his conception wretched; from the womb, so to the tomb.
Nursed from his cradle, and brought up to years, with cares and fears.
Who then to frail mortality shall trust,
But limns on water, or but writes in dust.
Yet, whilst with sorrow here we live oppressed, what life is best?
Courts are but only superficial Schools, to dandle Fools:
The rural part is turned into a den of savage men:
And where is a City from foul vice so free,
But may be termed the worst of all the three?
Domestic cares afflicts the Husbands bed, or pains his head:
Those that live single, take it for a curse, or do things worse: (none,
These would have children, those that have them or wish them gone:
What is it then to have, or have no wife,
But single thraldom, or a double strife?
Our own affections still at home to please, is a disease.
To cross the Seas to any foreign soil, peril and toil.
Wars with their noise affright us, when they cease we are worse in peace.
What then remains, but that we still should cry
For being born, and being born, to die?
Fra. Lord Bacon.

De Morte.
Man's life's a Tragedy: his mothers womb
(From which he enters) is the tyring room;
This spacious earth the Theater; and the Stage
That Country which he lives in: Passions, Rage,
Folly, and Vice are Actors: The first cry
The Prologue to the ensuing Tragedy.
The former act consists of dumb shows;
The second, he to more perfection grows;
In The third he is a man, and does begin
To nurture vice, and act the deeds of sin:
In The fourth declines; in the fifth diseases clog
And trouble him; then Death's his Epilogue.
Ignoto.

EPIGRAM.
IF breath were made for every man to buy,
The poor man could not live, rich would not die.
John Hoskins to his little Child Benjamin from the Tower.
SWeet Benjamin, since thou art young,
And have not yet the use of tongue,
Make it thy slave, while thou art free,
Imprison it, lest it do thee.
LETTERS TO Sir EDMUND BACON.
SIR,
IT is very just, since I cannot personally accompany this Gentleman, yet that
I do it with my Letter: wherein if I could transport the Image of mine own mind
unto you, as lively as we have often represented you unto our selves abroad,
then I should not think us asunder while you read it. But of my longing to see
you, I am a better feeler then a describer; as likewise of my obligations
toward you, whereof it is not the least, that I have been by your mediation,
and judgment, and love, furnished with so excellent a Comforter of my absence,
and so loving and discreet a divider and easer of my Travels; after whose
separation from me, I am ready to say that which I remember the younger Pliny
does utter with much feeling, after the loss of his venerable and dearest
Friend Cerellius Rufus; Vereor (says he) ne posthac negligentius vivam. But
herein my case is bettter then his: for I cannot but hope, that some good
occasion will bring him again nearer me: And I must confess unto you, I should
be glad to see him planted for a while about the King, or Prince, that so if
his own fortune be not mended by the Court, yet the Court may be bettered by
him in that which it does more desperately want. Now, Sir, Besides himself,
there comes unto you with him an Italian Doctor of Physic, by name Gasper^
Despotini; a man well practiced in his own faculty, and very Philosophical and
sound in his discourses: By birth a Venetian; which though it be not Urbs
ignobilis (as Saint Paul said of his own Mother-City) yet is his second birth
the more excellent; I mean his illumination in Gods saving Truth, which was the
only cause of his remove; and I was glad to be the conductor of him where his
conscience may be free, though his condition otherwise (till he shall be known)
will be the poorer. This Stranger I was desirous to present unto you as my
friend, in his company, whose testimony may more value him then mine own: And
so committing them both to your love, and your self with all that family to
Gods blessing hand, I rest,

From my Lodging in Kings-street April 2. 1611. Your poor Friend, and Servant,
H. WOTTON.

SIR,
IT is late at night, and I am but newly come to the knowledge that my Lord is
to send a Messenger unto you to morrow morning: yet howsoever, I have resolved
not to be left out of this dispatch, though in truth I had rather be the
sootman my self, then one of the Writers. But here I am tied about mine own
business; which I have told you like a true Courtier: for right Courtiers
indeed have no other business but themselves. Our Lord Jesus bless you all as
you are now together, and wheresoever you shall be.

From Greenwich, May 27. 1611. Your Uncle by your own election, and your
Servant by mine, H. WOTTON.

1612, 13.
SIR,
I Must now acknowledge it true which our Navigators tell us, that there be
indeed certain variations of the Compass: for I think there was never point of
a needle better touched then you have touched me, having ever since I parted
from you, been looking toward you, and yet still by something or another, I am
put out of my course. I will therefore hereafter not promise you any more to
come unto you, but I will promise my self it; because indeed I have no other
means to be at peace with my self: for I must lay this heavy note upon your
conversation, that I am the unquieter for it a good while after.

This is the first part of what I meant to say. After which I would fain tell
you, That I send this Foot man expressly unto you to redeem some part of my
fault, for not answering your late kind Letter by the Messenger that brought
it: But the truth is, I had some special occasion to send to Berry: and
therefore I will set no more upon your account, then his steps from thence to
Redgrave, where perhaps you now are. See what a real Courtier I am, and whether
I be likely to prosper. Well, howsoever, let me entertain you a little by this
opportunity, with some of our discourses. The King departed yesterday from
hence toward you; having as yet, notwithstanding much voice, and some wagering
on the other side, determined nothing of the vacant places: Whereupon the Court
is now divided into two opinions; the one; that all is reserved for the greater
honor of the marriage; the other, that nothing will be done till a Parliament,
or (to speak more precisely) till after a Parliament; which latter conceit,
though it be spread without either Author or ground, yet as many things else of
no more validity, it has gotten faith enough on a sudden. I will leave this to
the judicial Astrologers of the Court, and tell you a tale about a subject
somewhat nearer my capacity.

On Sunday last at night, and no longer, some sixteen Apprentices (of what sort
you shall guess by the rest of the Story) having secretly learnt a new Play
without Book., entitled, The Hog has lost his Pearl; took up the White-Fryers
for their Theater: and having invited thither (as it should seem) rather their
Mistresses then their Masters; who were all to enter per buletini for a note of
distinction from ordinary Comedians. Toward the end of the Play, the Sheriffs
(who by chance had heard of it) came in (as they say) and carried some six or
seven of them to perform the last Act at Bridewel; the rest are fled. Now it is
strange to hear how sharp-witted the City is, for they will needs have Sir John
Swinerton the Lord Mayor be meant by the Hog, and the late Lord Treasurer by
the Pearl. And now let me bid you good night, from my Chamber in King Street
this Tuesday, at Eleven of the night.

Your faithfullest to serve you, H. WOTTON.
Francesco has made a proof of that Green which you sent me; against which he
takes this exception, That being tried upon Glass, (which he esteems the
best of trials) it is not translucent; arguing (as he says) too much density
of the matter, and consequently, less quickness and spirit then in colors of
more tenuity.



Cambridge, Sunday at Night. SIR,
TO divert you from thinking on my faults, I will entertain you with some News
out of a Letter which I have here received from Venice, of much consequence
diverse ways.

The Bishop of Bamberge, a Practical Almain Prelate (of which kind there be
enough of that Coat, though not in that Country) was treating in Rome a League
against the Protestant Princes of Germany, with whom His Majesty (you know) was
first by Articles, and is now by alliance more nearly confederate: His
Commission he had from the Emperor, S^tto parole tacit as they call it. Now,
while this matter was there moulding, a Chiaus arrives at the Emperors Court,
with a Letter from the Turk, importing a denuntiation of War, grounded upon a
heap of complaints easily found out between Princes that do not intend to
agree. And accordingly the Turk is departed in Person from Constantinople into
Hungary with great Forces (as my Friend writes) on a morning quando nevicava a
furia (by which appears the sharpness of the humor) having made a leavy
before his going of 5000 youths out of the Seragli; a thing never seen before.
He has left behind him Nasuf Bassa as President of his affairs, who told the
Batolo of Verice there resident, that his Master was but gone to hunt: and
seems to have held the same language with the other Ambassadors: whether out
of meet wantonness of conceit, or as esteeming a war with Christians, but a
sport in respect of that which he had newly concluded with the Persian, I know
not: howsoever, this is likely to quash the Bishops business, and I fear it
will fall heavy upon Germany: which first in it self was never more dis-united;
and besides, the Emperor in small good will with th^se that should help him.
It will likewise in my conjecture hasten the departure of the Count Palatine,
or at least (if it so please him) it may well serve his turn for that purpose.

This is all that I have for your entertainment: To morrow morning I depart
hence toward London: whence I determine to write by every Carrier to you, till
I bring my self.

In your last, you mentioned a certain Courtier that seems to have spoken
somewhat harshly of me; I have a guess at the man: and though for him to speak
of such as I am, in any kind whatsoever, was a favor; yet I wonder how I am
fallen out of his estimation, for it is not long since he offered me a fair
Match within his own Tribe, and much addition to her Fortune out of his private
bounty. When we meet, all the world to nothing we shall laugh; and in truth,
Sir, this world is worthy of nothing else. In the mean time, and ever, our
sweet Savior keep us in his love.

Your poor faithful Friend and Servant, H. WOTTON.

March the last, 1613. SIR,
I Returned from Cambridge to London some two hours after the King. The next
day was celebrated with twenty Tilters, wherein there entered four fraternities:
the Earls, Pembroke and Mongommery; my Lord Walden, Thomas and Henry Hawards;
the two Riches, and the two Alexanders, as they are called (though falsely, like
many things else in a Court.) The rest were Lenox, Arundel, Rutland, Dorset,
Chandowes, North, Hey, Dingwel, Clifford, Sir Thomas Sommerset, and Sir John
Harrington. The day fell out wet to the disgrace of many fine Plumes. Some
Caparisons seen before, adventured to appear again on the Stage with a little
disguisement, even on the back of one of the most curious: So frugal are the
times, or so indigent. The two Riches only made a Speech to the King: the rest
were contented with bare Imprese: whereof some were so dark, that their meaning
is not yet understood; unless perchance that were their meaning, not to be
understood. The two best, to my fancy, were those of the two Earls Brothers:
The first a small exceeding white Pearl, and the word, Solo candore valeo. The
other a Sun casting a glance on the side of a Pillar, and the Beams reflecting,
with this Motto, Splendonte refulget. In which devices there seemed an
agreement; the elder Brother, to allude to his own nature, and the younger to
his fortune. The day was signalized with no extraordinary accident, save only
between Sir Thomas Haward, and Sir Thomas Sommerset, who with a counter-buff
had almost set himself out of the Saddle, and made the others Horse sink under
him; but they both came fairly off without any further disgrace. Of the merits
of the rest I will say nothing, my Pen being very unfit to speak of Lances.

To this solemnity, of the public Ambassadors, only the Archduke was invited,
for the healing of the distaste he had taken for the preference of the Venetian
at the marriage. But I doubt the Plaster be too narrow for the sore; which he
seemed not much discontented that men should note in his whole countenance that
day. Toward the evening a challenge passed between Archie and a famous Knight,
called Sir Thomas Parsons; the one a fool by election, and the other by
necessity: which was accordingly performed some two or three days after, at
Tilt, Tornie, and on foot both completely armed, and solemnly brought in before
their Majesty's, and almost as many other meaner eyes as were at the former.
Which bred much sport for the present, and afterward upon cooler consideration
much censure and discourse, as the manner is.

The departure of the Count Palatine and my Lady Elizabeth is put off from the
Thursday in the Easterweek, till the Tuesday following: which day I think will
hold. The Commissioners that accompany her, have the titles of Ambassadors, to
give them precedence before Sir Ralph Winwood at the Hague; and likewise in any
encounters with Almaign Princes. Sir Edward Cecil goes as Treasurer, to keep
up that Office in the name; though it be otherwise perhaps from a General,
rather a fall then an ascent. Before this journey there is a conceit, that the
Duke of Lenox will be naturalized a Peer of our Parliament, and my Lord of
Rochester be created Earl of Devonshire. The foreign matter is little
increased since my last unto you from Cambridge. The Savoy Ambassador not yet
arrived. The Turks designs hitherto unknown, and marching slowly according to
the nature of huge Armies: In which suspense the Venctians have augmented their
guard in the Gulf: enough to confirm unto the world, that States must be
conserved, even with ridiculous fears. This is all that the Week yields. My
Lord and Lady have received those Letters and loving salutations which my Foot
man brought. And so with mine own hearty prayers to God for you, and for that
most good Niece, I commit you both to his blessing and love.

Your faithfullest of unprofitable Friends, H. WOTTON.
I pray Sir remember me very particularly to my Cousin Nicholas your worthy
Brother, for whose health our good God be thanked.

Sir James Cromer is this week dead of an Aposteme in his stomach, and in him
the name; unless his Lady (as she seems to have intention) shall revive it
with matching one of her four Daughters with a Cromer of obscure fortune, which
they say is latent in your Shire.



From my Chamber this Thursday, St. George his Eve, 1613. SIR,
THe last week, by reason of my being in Kent, was a week of silence; and this
I think will appear unto you a week of wonder.

The Court was full of discourse and expectation, that the King being now
disincumbred of the care of his Daughter, would toward this Feast of St.
George fill up either all or some at least of those places that had lien vacant
so long, and had been in this time of their emptiness a subject of notorious
opposition between our great Viscount and the House of Suffolk. Thus I say ran
the opinion: When yesterday about six of the Clock at evening, Sir Thomas
Overbury was from the Council Chamger conveyed by a Clerk of the Council, and
two of the Guard to the Tower; and there by Warrant consigned to the Lieutenant
as close Prisoner: Which both by the suddenness, like a stroke of Thunder, and
more by the quality and relation of the person, breeding in the Beholders
(whereof by chance I was one) very much amazement; and being likely in some
proportion to breed the like in the Hearers, I will adventure for the
satisfying of your thoughts about it, to set down the forerunning and leading
Causes of this accident, as far, as in so short a time I have been able to wade
in so deep a water. It is conceived that the King has a good while been much
distasted with the said Gentleman, even in his own nature, for too stiff a
carriage of his fortune; besides that scandalous offense of the Queen at
Greenwich, which was never but a palliated cure. Upon which considerations, His
Majesty resolving to sever him from my Lord of Rochester, and to do it not
disgracefully or violently, but in some honorable fashion; He commanded not
long since the Archbishop by way of familiar discourse, to propound unto him
the Embassage of France, or of the Archdukes Court; whereof the one was
shortly to be changed, and the other at the present vacant: In which
proposition it seems, though shadowed under the Archbishops good will, that
the King was also contented some little light should be given him of His
Majesty's inclination unto it, grounded upon his merit. At this the Fish did
not bite; whereupon the King took a rounder way, commanding my Lord Chancellor,
and the Earl of Pembroke to propound jointly the same unto him (which the
Archbishop had before moved) as immediately from the King, and to sweeten it
the more, he had (as I hear) an offer made him of assurance before his going
off the place, of Treasurer of the Chamber, which he expects after the death
of the Lord Stanhop; whom belike the King would have drawn to some reasonable
composition. Notwithstanding all which Motives and impulsives, Sir Thomas
Overbury refused to be sent abroad, with such terms, as were by the Council
interpreted pregnant of contempt, in a Case where the King had opened His
will; which refusal of his, I should for my part esteem an eternal disgrace
to our occupation, if vvithall I did not consider how hard it is to pull one
from the bosom of a Favorite. Thus you see the point upon which one has
been committed standing in the second degree of power in the Court, and
conceiving (as himself told me but two hours before) never better then at that
present of his own fortunes and ends. Now in this whole matter, there is one
main and principal doubt, which does travel all understandings; that is,
Whether this were done without the participation of my Lord of Rochester: A
point necessarily enfolding two different consequences; for if it were done
without his knowledge, we must expect of himself either a decadence or a
ruin; if not, we must then expect a reparation by some other great public
satisfaction, where of the world may take as much notice. These clouds a few
days will clear: In the mean while I dare pronounce of Sir Thomas Overbury,
that he shall return no more to this Stage, unless Courts be governed every
year by a new Philosophy, for our old Principles will not bear it.

I have showed my Lord and Ladies Sister your Letter of the 18. of April, who
return unto you their affectionate remembrances, and I many thanks for it. The
King has altered his journey to Thetford, and determines to entertain himself
till the progress nearer London. The Queen begins her journey upon Saturday
toward Bathe. Neither the Marquess di Villa (who comes from Savoy) nor Don
Pedro di Sarmient^ (who shall reside here in the room of the present Spanish
Ambassador) are yet either arrived, or near our Coast, though both on the way:
So as I can yet but cast toward you a longing, and in truth an envious look
from this place of such servility in the getting, and such uncertainty in the
holding of fortunes, where methinks we are all overclouded with that sleep of
Jacob, when he saw some ascending, and some descending; but that those were
Angels, and these are men: For in both, what is it but a Dream? And so, Sir,
wishing this Paper in your hands, to whom I dare communicate the freest of my
thoughts, I commit you to Gods continual Love and Blessings.

Your faithful poor Friend and Servant, H. WOTTON.
I pray, Sir, let me in some corner of every Letter tell my sweet Niece that I
love her extremely;



SIR,
I Have newly received your last of the 25th of April, and acquainted my Lord
with the Postscript thereof, touching your Fathers sickness; of which he had
heard somewhat before by Sir R. Drury, who at the same time told him the like
of my Lady your Mother. But we hope now, that the one was never true, and that
the other (which you confirm) will be light and sufferable, even at heavy years.

The long expected Ambassador from Savoy arrived rived yesternight at Dover: so
as now I begin by the virtue of a greedy desire to anticipate before hand, and
to devour already some part of that contentment which I shall shortly more
really enjoy in your sight and conversation.

Sir Thomas Overbury is still in the Tower, and the King has since his
imprisonment been twice here, and is twice departed, without any alteration in
that matter, or in other greater.

My Lord of Rochester, partly by some relapse into his late infirmity, and
partly (as it is interpreted) through the grief of his mind, is also this
second time not gone with the King: some argue upon it, that disassiduity in a
Favorite, is a degree of declination; but of this there is no appearance: Only
I have set it down, to show you the hasty Logic of Courtiers.

The Queen is on her journey toward Bathe.

My Lady Elizabeth and the Count Palatine, having lain long in our poor
Province of Kent languishing for a Wind, (which, she sees, though it be but a
vapor, Princes cannot command) at length on Sunday last toward evening did
put to Sea; some eight days after a Book had been Printed and published in
London, of her entertainment at Heidelberg; so nimble an Age it is. And because
I cannot end in a better jest, I will bid you farewell for this week,
committing you, and that most beloved Niece, to Gods dearest blessings.

London this Thursday the 29th. of April, 1613. Your own in faithfullest love,
H. WOTTON.

1613.
SIR,
YOur Friend Sir Robert Killegrew has been committed to the Fleet, for
conferring with a close Prisoner in a strange Language: which were (as I hear)
the two circumstances that did aggravate his error.

Of his case whose love drew him into it, I can yet make no judgment: The
humor seems to be sharp, and there is wisdom enough in those that have the
handling of the Patient to manage the matter, so that at length his banishment
from the Court may be granted as a point of grace. The nature of his alteration
was (as you rightly judge it) in the first access somewhat apoplectical, but
yet mingled in my opinion with diverse properties of a lethargy; whereof we
shall discourse more particularly when we meet, which I now long for,
besides other respects, that we may lay aside these Metaphors.

This very morning shall be heard at the Star Chamber the Case of Sir Peter
Buck, an Inhabitant at Rochester, an Officer (as I take it) of the Navy, who
has lain some good while in Prison, for having written to a Friend of his at
Dover a Letter containing this news, That some of the Lords had kneeled down to
the King for a toleration in Religion: besides some particular aspersion in the
said Letter of my Lord Privy Seal; whom likewise of late a Preacher or two have
disquieted; whereby he has been moved besides his own nature, and (as some
think also) besides his wisdom, to call these things into public discourse;
quae spreta exolescunt, if ancient grave Sentences do not deceive us.

My Lady of Shrewsbury, my Lord Gray, and the Lady Arabella remain still close
Prisoners since their, last restraint, which I signified unto you in a little
ticket. Sir William Wade was yesternight put from the Lieutenancy of the Tower.

I set down these accidents barely, as you see, without their causes; which
in truth is a double fault, vvriting both to a Friend, and to a Philosopher:
but my lodging is so near the Star Chamber, that my Pen shakes in my hand: I
hope therefore the Ambassador of Savoy (who has already had two Audiences)
will quickly be gone, that I may fly to you, and ease my heart. By the next
Carrier I shall tell you all his business. In the mean while, and ever, our
dear Savior bless you.

Your faithful poor Friend to serve you, H. WOTTON.
1613. This Friday morning, May 7. in such haste, that I must leave my dear
Niece unanswered, till I can better assemble my spirits, and call the aid of
the Muses.
SIR,
YOur Kinsman and Friend Sir Robert Killegrew, was in the Fleet from Wednesday
of the last week till the Sunday following, and no longer; which I reckon but
an Ephemeral fit, in respect of his infirmity who was the cause of it; which
to my judgment does every day appear more and more hectical. Yesterday his
Father petitioned the King (as he came from the Chapel) that his Son might
have a Physician, and a Servant allowed him, as being much damaged in his
health by close imprisonment: which for my part I believe, for the diseases of
Fortune have a kind of transfusion into the body, and strong vvorking spirits
vvanting their usual objects, revert upon themselves; because the nature of the
mind being ever in motion, must either do or suffer.

I take pleasure (speaking to a Philosopher) to reduce (as near as I can) the
irregularities of Court ^o constant principles. Now to return to the matter:
The King has granted the Physician, but denied the Servant: by which you may
guess at the issue; for when graces are managed so narrowly by a King,
otherwise of so gracious nature, it does in my opinion very clearly demonstrate
the asperity of the offense. Sir Gervis Elvis before one of the Pensioners) is
now sworn Lieute^nt of the Tower, by the mediation of the House of Suffolk,
notwithstanding that my Lord of Ro^ster was the commender of Sir John Keys to
that charge; which the said Keys had for a good while (and this makes the
case the more strange) always supplied even by Patent in the absence of Sir
William Wade. Upon which circumstances (though they seem to bend another way)
the Logicians of the Court do make this conclusion; That His Ma^sty satisfying
the Suffolcians with petty things, ^tendeth to repair the Viscount Rochester
in the ^ain and gross. And therefore all men contem^ite Sir Henry Nevil for the
future Secretary; ^me saying that it is but deferred till the return of the
Queen, that she may be allowed a hand in (...) Introduction: Which likewise
will quiet the voices on the other side; though surely that point be little
necessary: For yet did I never in the Country, and much less in the Court, see
any thing done of this kind, that was not afterward approved by those that had
most opposed it: such vicissitudes there are here below, as well as of the
rest, even of judgment and affection. I would say more, but I am suddenly
surprised by the Secretary of the Savoy Ambassador, who I think will depart
about the end of the Whitson holy days, for which I languish. With his
businesses I can acquaint you nothing till the next week, by reason of this
surprizal: And besides, it has disturbed my Muses so, I must remain still in
debt to my sweet Niece, for that Poetical Postscript that dropped out of her
Pen. I do weekly receive your Letters, which in truth are more comfort then I
could hope to purchase by mine: so as whereas before I had determined to
continue this my troubling of you but till I should see you next, I have now
made a resolution to plant a Staple, and whensoever we shall be separated, to
venture my whole poor stock in traffic with you, finding the return so
gainful unto me. And so committing you to Gods dearest blessings, I ever rest,

May 14. 1613. Your faithfullest poor Friend and Servant, H. WOTTON.

SIR,
I Have not yet presented to my Lord that Box which came with your Letter of
this week; for he removed on Wednesday with the King and Household to
Greenwich: And I still remain here, to show you, that the Court does, like a
Loadstone, dravv only those that are intra orbem virtutis suae: I mean, within
the compass and circle of profit.

The Savoy Ambassador seems in his second Audience to have discharged all his
Commission; or otherwise he wants authority to proceed further then to a
general overture, till the arrival of the Cavalier Battista Gabaleoni, who is
hourly expected, and is here to remain as Resident for the said Duke.

With him likewise come certain other Gentlemen of Title, who should from the
beginning have dignified the Ambassadors Train: but the cause of this
straggling, was a sudden attempt, which the Duke immediately after the
Ambassadors departure (who appointed those Gentlemen to follovv him) made upon
the Marquisat of Monferato, where he surprised three Towns with the Petarde:
the first time (as one writes from Venice) that ever that pestilent invention
had been put in practice beyond the Alps.

The cause of this attempt, was, for that the Cardinal Gonzaga (now Duke^ of
Mantua) had yielded to send home the Dowager Infanta to the Duke of Savoy her
Father; but would retain her only Child, a Daughter of two years: in whose
right the said Duke of Savoy pretends colourably enough to the foresaid
whole Marquisat; and clearly to all the movables left by the late Duke of
Mantua her Father, who died intestat. Into which point of Law, there entered
besides some jealousy of State: being unfit for respects that would have
fallen easily into the apprehension of duller Princes than the Italian, to
leave a Child out of the custody of her Mother, in his, that was to gain by the
death of it: Yet am I of opinion, who have a little contemplated the Duke of
Savoy's complexion, that nothing moved him more in this business, then the
threatenings of the French Queen, who had before commanded Didiguires to fall
into the said Dukes estates by way of diversion, if he should meddle with the
least Village in the Monserrato: which feminine menacement did no doubt incite
him to do it out of the impatience of scorn: And vvithal, he built silently
upon a ground, which could not well fail him; That the King of Spain would
never suffer the French Soldiers to taste any more of the Grapes and Melons of
Lombardy, because L'apetit vient en mangeant: which the issue of the
businesses has proved true; for the Governor of Milan, having raised a
tumultuary Army of Horse and Foot, did with it only keep things in stay from
farther progres, on both sides, till the agreement was made between the Duke
of Mantua himself in Person, and the Prince of Piedmont, within the Town of
Milan. The accord is advertised the King from Venice and Paris. The conditions
will be better known at the arrival of Gabaleoni, and then likewise we shall
see the bottom of this errand, which has been hitherto nothing, but a general
proposition of a match between the same Lady that was formerly offered, and
our Prince now living: which the Ambassador has touched so tenderly, as if
he went to manage his Masters credit. Upon the whole matter, I cannot
conceive (though he seems to let fall some phrases of haste) that he will be
gone yet this fortnight or three vveeks, till when I languish. And so let me
end all my Letters, ever resting,

May 21. 1613. Your faithfullest poor Friend and Servant, H. WOTTON.

May the 27. SIR,
J do as unwillingly put my Pen to tell you, as I am sure you will be to hear,
what has befallen my Nephew Albertus this week. He was going on Friday last
toward evening in a Coach alone, whose driver alighting (I know not upon what
occasion) hard by Charing Cross, the Horses (being young) took some
affrightment, and running away so furiously, that one of them tore all his
belly open upon the corner of a Beer Cart; my Nephew (who in this mean while
adventured to leap out) seems to have hung on one of the pins of the Boot,
from whence struggling to get loose, he brake the waste-band of his Hose behind,
and so fell with the greater violence on the ground, hurting only the
hindermost part of his head, by what possibility we cannot conceive, unless the
motion of the Coach did turn him round in the fall. The force of the concussion
took from him for some hour or thereabouts, the use of his voice and sense,
which are now well restored; only, there yet remains in his left arm a kind
of Paralitical stupefaction, and his right eyelid is all black with some knock
that he took in the agitation of the Coach; which peradventure may have been
the motive to make him leap out. But these external evils do not so much
trouble us, as an inward pungent and pulsatory ach withing the skull, somewhat
lower then the place of his hurt; which has continued more or less since his
fall, notwithstanding twice letting blood, and some nights of good rest, and
shaving of his head for the better transpiration; which we doubt the more,
because it comes sine ratione, his hurt being only in the fles^y part, and
very slight, without fracture of the skull, without inflammation, without any
Fever, and all the principal faculties, as memory, discourse, imagination
untainted. The King has in this time much consolated us both with sending unto
him, and with expressing publicly a gracious feeling of his case: but we must
fetch our true comforts from him, who is Lord of the whole; and so I leave it.

Since my last unto you, I am sure you hear how Sir Robert Mansfield has been
twice or thrice convented before the Lords, and committed to the Marshalsie;
partly for having consulted with Mr. Whitlock the Lawyer about the validity of
a Commission drawn for a re-search into the Office of the Admiralty, whereof
himself is an Accomptant; and partly for denying to reveal the name of the said
Lawyer his Friend, who before had been committed to the Fleet for another case
much of the same nature. The point touches a limb of the Kings Prerogative,
and immediate Authority. Sir Robert Mansfield's Answers (by report) had as much
of the Philosopher, or of the Hermit, as of the Soldier, or Courtier;
professing openly his little care of this World, or of his own Fortunes in it:
and diverse other phrases of that complexion. Sir Thomas Overbury is still where
he was, and as he was, without any alteration: The Viscount Rochester yet no
way sinking in the point of favor; which are two strange consistents.

Sir R. Drury runs at the Ring, corbeteth his Horse before the Kings window,
haunteth my Lord of Rochesters Chamber, even when himself is not there; and in
secret divides his observances between him and the House of Suffolk: And all
this (they say) to be Ambassador at Bruxels. So as super uta materia, I see
appetites are not all of a kind: Some go to the Tower for the avoiding of that
which another does languish to obtain. I will end with my Paper, and by the
next Carrier either tell you precisely when I shall see you, or prevent the
telling of it. And so our sweet Savior bless you and my dear Niece.

H. WOTTON.

SIR,
BY the next Carrier (for yet I must say so again) you shall hear when this
Ambassador will be gone. The mean while let me entertain you with the enclosed
Paper, which the Duke of Savoy has published in his own defense; joining
together the Sword and Reason.

Sir Robert Mansfield is still in restraint. Sir Thomas Overbury not only out
of liberty (as he was) but almost now out of Discourse.

We have lately started at a dispatch from Ireland, importing a variance there,
about the choice of a Speaker in the summoned Parliament; which came to so
sharp a point, that the Deputy was fain to fetch wisdom from hence. Sure it
is, that the humors of that Kingdom are very hovering, and much awaked with
an apprehension taken that we mean to fetter them with Laws of their own
making; which in t^th were an ingenious strain of State. My (...) and Lady are
stolen down into Kent for a few days to take in some fresh air. They go not
this next Progress, if my Brother can get leave of the King to see his
Grandchildren; where he intends to spend some fortnight, and the rest of the
time between Boughton and Canterbury.

A Match treated and managed to a fair probability between my Lord Cook's Heir,
and the second Daughter of Sir Arthur Throckmorton, is suddenly broken; the
said Lord Cook having underhand entertained discourse about the Daughter of the
late Sir Thomas Bartlet, who in defect of her Brother, shall be Heir of that
Name.

I have nothing more to say; and therefore God keep you and my sweet Neice in
his continual love.

Your poor Uncle, faithful Friend, and willing Servant, H. WOTTON.
Albertus (God be thanked) grows better and better, and in the midst of his
own pains, has remembered those in Suffolk, whom we both so much honor.



SIR,
IN my last I told you, that the Ambassador of Savoy was to meet the Queen at
Windsor, which pains she has spared him by her own coming yesternight to
Greenwich, where I think she will settle her self a day or two before she admit
him. Now, seeing the time of the Commencement at Cambridge so near as it is,
and being able to determine of this Ambassadors departure within that space, I
have resolved to take those Philosophical exercises in my way to you, hoping in
the mean time to see Albertus admitted by Oath to a Clarkship of the Council,
or at least to the next vacancy, for he is now strong enough again to swear.

Sir Robert Mansfield, and Mr. Whitlock were on Saturday last called to a very
honorable hearing in the Queens Presence Chamber at Whitehall before the Lords
of the Council, with intervention of my Lord Cook, the Lord chief Baron of the
Exchequer, and Master of the Rolls, the Lord chief Justice being kept at home
with some infirmity. There the Attorney and Solicitor first undertook Mr.
Whitlock, and the Recorder (as the Kings Sergeant) Sir Robert Mansfield;
charging the one as a Counselor, the other as a questioner in matters of the
Kings Prerogative and Sovereignty, upon occasion of a Commission intended for a
research into the administration of the Admiralty: against which the said Sir
Robert Mansfield (being himself so principal an Officer therein) had sought
some provision of advice, and, This was the sum of the charge; which was
diversely amplified. Whitlock in his answer, spoke more confusedly, then was
expected from a Lawyer, and the Knight more temperately, then was expected
from a Soldier. There was likewise some difference noted, not only in the
manner, but in the substance between them: For Whitlock ended his speech with
an absolute confession of his own offense, and with a promise of employing
himself hereafter in defense of the Kings prerogative. Sir Robert Mansfield on
the other side, labored to distinguish between the error of his acts, and the
integrity of his zeal and affection toward the King his Master: protesting he
should hold it the greatest glory under Heaven to die at his feet, and that no
man living should go before him, if there were occasion to advance his
dominions; with some other such Martial strains, which became him well. The
conclusion of his speech had somewhat of the Courtier, beseeching the Lords, if
the restraint he had endured were not in their judgments a sufficient
punishment of his error, that then they would continue it as long as it
should please them, and add unto it any other affliction of pain or shame
whatsoever; provided that afterward he might be restored again into his
Majesty's favor, and their good opinions. To tell you what they all severally
said that day, were to rob from the liberty of our discourse when we shall
meet. In this they generally agreed, both Counselors and Judges, to represent
the humiliation of both the Prisoners unto the King in lieu of innocence, and
to intercede for his gracious pardon Which was done; and accordingly the next
day they were enlarged upon a submission under vvriting. This is the end of
that business, at which were present as many as the room could contain, and
men of the best quality; whom the King was desirous to satisfy, not only
about the point in hand, but in some other things that were occasionally
awaked; which I likewise reserve to our private freedom.

The Kings Officers are returned from my Lady Elizabeth; whom they left at
Goltzheime the last of May, where His Majesty's expense did cease. This place
was chosen for her consignment in stead of Bacherach, suspected of contagion.
She was at Andernach feasted by the Elector of Cullen; at Confluence, or
Cobolentz (as they call it) by the other of Trier; and at Mentz by the third of
those Ecclesiastic Potentates, very Royally and kindly, and (which was less
expected) very handsomely. The Count Maurice, and his Brother with troops of
Horse, and a guard of Foot, accompanied her to Cullen, and entered themselves
into that City with her: (I need not tell you, that though themselves were
within, the Horse, and most of the Foot were without the Walls) Which is
here (by the vviser sort of Interpreters) thought as hazardous an act, as
either of them both had done in the heat of War; and indeed no way
justifiable in foro sapientiae. And therefore such adventures as these must
appeal ad forum Providentiae; where we are all covered by his vigilant mercy
and love: to which I commit you, and my sweet Niece in my hearty prayers.

Your faithful poor Friend, Uncle, and Servant, H. WOTTON.

SIR,
I Send you a sprigg of some Flowers, which I have newly received out of
Piedmont, in Winter and Summer the same; and therein an excellent type of a
Friend.

I am bold likewise to keep my self in the memory of my Niece, till I see her,
with a poor pair of Gloves of the newest fashion:

Inventore Henrico Wottono, Sculptore Crocio.
The 18. of June, 1613.
Friday the 25. June, 1613. SIR,
I Told you in my last, that I would take the Commencement at Cambridge in my
way toward you, where I shall be God vvilling to morrow seven-night. This I
now repeat, to save the telling of it again by the next Carrier, foreseeing
that I shall then be impatient of so much delay as a line of mine own effusion,
which even now does torture me, while I contemplate some of those green Banks
(that you mention) where when I have you by me (to express my contentment in
the Italian phrase) Non scrivero al Papa fratello. The Ambassador of Savoy
departed yesterday, making much have homewards, or at least much show of it;
where he is likely to come timely enough to the vvarming of his hands at that
fire which his Master has kindled; whose nature in truth does participate
much of the flint, as well as his state. But is not all this out of my way?
Sir, Believe it, my spirits do boil, and I can hold my Pen no longer then till
I have wished all Gods blessings to be with you, and with that best Niece of
the World.

Your poor Uncle, and faithful Servant, H. WOTTON.
Albertus was yesterday with me at the Court. And though there be great
disproportion in the space, yet I dare conclude, that as much strength as did
carry him to Greenwich, will bear him to Redgrave.



July 2. 1613. SIR,
WHereas I vvrote unto you, that I would be at Cambridge as on Saturday next;
I am now cast off again till the Kings return to London, which will be about
the middle of the week following. The delay grows from a desire of seeing
Albertus his business settled before we come unto you, where we mean to
forget all the world besides. Of this we shall bring you the account.

Now, to let matters of State sleep, I will entertain you at the present with
what has happened this week at the Banks side. The Kings Players had a new
Play, called All is true, representing some principal pieces of the Reign of
Henry 8. which was set forth with many extraordinary circumstances of Pomp and
Majesty, even to the matting of the Stage; the Knights of the Order, with their
Georges and Garter, the Guards with their embroidered Coats, and the like:
sufficient in truth within a while to make greatness very familiar, if not
ridiculous. Now, King Henry making a Masque at the Cardinal Wolsey's House, and
certain Canons being shot off at his entry, some of the Paper, or other stuff
wherewith one of them was stopped, did light on the Thatch, where being thought
at first but an idle smoke, and their eyes more attentive to the show, it
kindled inwardly, and ran round like a train, consuming within less then an
hour the whole House to the very grounds.

This was the fatal period of that virtuous Fabrique; wherein yet nothing did
perish, but Wood and Straw, and a few forsaken Cloaks; only one man had his
Breeches set on fire, that would perhaps have broyled him, if he had not by the
benefit of a provident wit put it out with bottle Ale. The rest when we meet:
till when, I protest every minute is the siege of Troy. Gods dear blessings
till then and ever be with you.

Your poor Uncle and faithful Servant, H. WOTTON.
I have this week received your last of the 27, of June, wherein I see my steps
lovingly calculated, and in truth too much expectation of so unworthy a guest.



November. 5. 1613. SIR,
NOw I begin: but why not before? That question shall be answered by the next
Carrier or by a special Messenger the next week, at which time you shall have
an account of all that has passed, and some prognostication also upon the
future: for my Pen is grown bold and eager with rest, as Dogs that are tied up.

At the present all my care is to let you know that I have received your last,
with the enclosed; which although I well understand my self, yet I have not had
time since the decyphering to acquaint the party with it, which shall be done
as soon as I have sealed this, and sent it to the Carriers.

I thought now to have said no more; but lest it lose the grace of freshness, I
pray let me tell you, that yesterday morning the Viscount Rochester was very
solemnly in the Banqueting hall in the sight of many great ones and small ones,
created Earl of Somerset; and in the afternoon, for a farther honoring and
signalizing of the day, my Lord Cook (brought in by the said Earl) was sworn a
Privy Counselor; to counterpoise the difference of the profit between the
Common Pleas, and the Kings Bench.

I will turn over the leaf though I die for it, to remember the heartiest love
of my soul to that good Niece, to that sweet Niece; to whom I have much to say
by the next opportunity. Our dear Savior keep you both in his continual love.

Your faithful Servant, H. WOTTON.
Touching the project of our House, believe it Sir, I boil in it; and am ready
to begin again, that I may tell you how busy I have been in the matter; but
let this also be put over till the following week, which is likely to fall
heavy upon you.

Written on the day of our great Preservation, for which our God be ever
glorified.


On Tuesday the 16th. of November. SIR,
AN express Messenger will ease us both of the trouble of a cipher: but I was
in pain whether I should send another, or be that Messenger my self, being now
as near you as Royston, and scant able to obtain pardon of mine own severity
for not passing farther; yet this may be said for me, that the present occasion
required little noise; and besides, I am newly engaged into some business,
whereof I will give you a particular account, when I shall first have
discharged that part which belongs to your self.

My Lord, my Brother, having been acquainted with the matter enclosed in your
last to me, dispatched the very next day Mr. Pen down to Boughton, for such
writings as had passed at your marriage; which having consulted with his
Lawyers, he found those things to stand in several natures, according to the
annexed Schedule.

For the point of your coming up, he refers that to your own heart; and I
have only charge from him to tell you, that without any such occasion as this,
which seems to imply your affectionate respect of his Daughter, your own
Person and conversation shall be ever most welcome and dear unto him.

As for my Lady, through whose knowledge, and myself, through whose hands you
have passed this point of confidence, if you could behold us, and compare us
with my Lord, you should see, though no difference in the reality, yet some in
the fashion. For to him you must allow the sober forms of his age and place;
but we on the other side are mad with gladness, at the hope we have now taken
by this occasion of enjoying both you and my Niece this Winter at London; and
we are contented to profess it as profusely as it is possible for a better Pen
to set it down: Nay, for my part (who in this case have somewhat single) I
flatter my self yet farther, that the Term (whereof not much now remains)
will accelerate your coming; which if you resolve, I pray then let me only by
this Bearer know it, that I may provide you some fit Lodgings at a good
distance from White Hall, for the preservation of blessed liberty, and
avoidance of the comber of kindness; which in troth (as we have privately
discoursed) is no small one. Now touching my self.

It may please you, Sir, to understand, That the King, when he was last at
Hampton, called me to him, and there acquainted me with a general purpose that
he had to put me again into some use. Since which time, the French Ambassador
(and very lately) having at an Audience of good length besought His Majesty (I
know not whether voluntarily, or set on by some of our own) to disincumber
himself of frequent accesses by the choice of some confident Servant, to whom
the said Ambassador might address himself in such occurrences as did not
require the Kings immediate ear. It pleased him to nominate me for that charge,
with more gracious commendation then it can beseem me to repeat, though I
write to a Friend in whose breast I dare depose even my vanities. But lest
you should mistake, as some others have been apt to do here, in the present
constitution of the Court (which is very ombragious) the Kings end in this
application of me, I must tell you, that it is only for the better preparing of
my insufficiency and weakness for the succeeding of Sir Thomas Edmunds in
France; toward which His Majesty has thought meet first to indue me with
some knowledge of the French businesses, which are in motu. And I think my
going thither will be about Easter.

Thus you see (Sir) both my next remove, and the exercise of my thoughts till
then; wherewith there is joined this comfort, besides the redemption from
expense and debt at home (which are the Gulfs that would swallovv me) that
His Majesty has promised to do something for me before I go.

I should now, according to the promise of my last, tell you many things,
wherewith my Pen is swollen; but I will beg leave to defer them till the next
opportunity after my coming to London: And they shall all give place now to
this one question; Whether there be any thing in this intended journey, that
you will command? Which having said, I will end; ever resting

Your faithfullest poor Friend and Servant, H. WOTTON.

June 8. 1614. SIR,
IT is both morally and naturally true, that I have never been in perfect
health and cheerfulness since we parted; but I have entertained my mind, when
my body would give me leave, with the contemplation of the strangest thing that
ever I beheld, commonly called in our Language (as I take it) a Parliament:
which has produced nothing but inexplicable Riddles, in the place of Laws. For
first, it is aborted before it was born, and nullified after it had a being;
insomuch as the Count Palatine (whose Naturalization was the only thing that
passed in both Houses) is now again an Alien. And whereas all other Parliaments
have had some one eminent quality that has created a denomination; some being
called in our Records mad Parliaments, some merciless, and the like: This I
think from two properties almost insociable or seldom meeting, may be termed
the Parliament of greatest diligence, and of least resolution that ever was, or
ever will be; For our Committies were as well attended commonly, as full Houses
in former Sessions, and yet we did nothing, neither in the forenoon nor after;
whereof I can yield you no reason but this one, that our diversions were more
then our main purposes; and some of so sensible nature, as took up all our
reason, and all our passion, in the pursuit of them. Now, Sir, what has
followed since the dissolution of this Civil Body, let me rather tell you, then
lead you back into any particularities of that which is passed.

It pleased His Majesty the very next morning to call to examination, before
the Lords of His Council, diverse Members of the House of Commons, for some
Speeches better becoming a Senate of Venice, where the Treaters are perpetual
Princes, then where those that speak so irreverently, are so soon to return
(which they should remember) to the natural capacity of Subjects. Of these
Examinants, four are committed close Prisoners to the Tower: 1. Sir Walter
Chute: 2. John Hoskins: 3. One Wentworth a Lawyer: And 4. Mr. Christopher
Nevil, second Son to my Lord of Abergaveny.

The first made great shift to come thither: For having taken in our House some
disgrace in the matter of the Undertakers (of whom he would fain have been
thought one) to get the opinion of a bold man, after he had lost that of a
wise; he fell one morning into a declamation against the times, so insipid, and
so unseasonable, as if he had been put but out of his place for it of Carver,
(into which one of my Lord Admirals Nephews is sworn) I should not much have
pitied him, though he be my Countryman. The second is in for more wit, and for
licentiousness baptized freedom: For I have noted in our House, that a false or
faint Patriot did cover himself with the shadow of equal moderation; and on the
other side, irreverent discourse was called honest liberty: so as upon the
whole matter, No excesses want precious names. You shall have it in Pliny's
language, which I like better then mine own translation; Nullis vitiis desunt
pretiosa nomina.

The third is a silly and simple creature, God himself knows: and though his
Father was by Queen Elizabeth at the time of a Parliament likewise put into the
place where the Son now is; yet has he rather inherited his fortune, then his
understanding. His fault was, the application of certain Texts in Ezekiel and
Daniel, to the matter of impositions; and saying, that the French King was
killed like a Calf, with such like poor stuff: against which the French
Ambassador (having gotten knowledge of it) has formed a complaint, with some
danger of his wisdom.

The last is a young Gentleman, fresh from the School, who having gathered
together diverse Latin Sentences against Kings, bound them up in a long Speech,
and interlarded them with certain Ciceronian exclamations; as, O Tempora, O
Mores. -- Thus I have a little run over these accidents unto you, enough only
to break out of that silence which I will not call a symptom of my sickness,
but a sickness it self. Howsoever, I will keep it from being hectical; and
hereafter give you a better account of mine own observations. This week I have
seen from a most dear Niece a Letter, that has much comforted one Uncle, and a
Postscript the other. Long may that hand move, which is so full of kindness. As
for my particular, Take heed of such invitations, if you either love or pity
your selves: For I think there was never Needle touched with a Loadstone that
did more incline to the North, then I do to Redgrave. In the mean time, we are
all here well; and so our Lord Jesus preserve you there.

Your faithfullest poor Friend and Servant, H. WOTTON.
Sir, I pray remember my hearty affection to my Cousin Nicolas Bacon, and all
joy to the new conjoined. I shall propound unto you the next week a very
possible Problem, unto which if you can devise how to attain: Non scriveremo
al Papa, fratello.



London, June 16. 1614. SIR,
THe Earl of Northampton, having after a lingering Fever, spent more spirits
then a younger body could well have born, by the incision of a wennish tumor
grown on his thigh, yesternight between eleven and twelve of the Clock departed
out of this world: where, as he had proved much variety and vicissitude of
fortune in the course of his life, so peradventure he has prevented another
change thereof by the opportunity of his end: For there went a general voice
through the Court on Sunday last, upon the commitment of Doctor Sharp, and Sir
Charles Cornwallis to the Tower, that he was somevvhat implicated in that
business; whereof I will give you a little account at the present, as far as
I have been hitherto able to penetrate. John Hoskins (of whose imprisonment I
vvrote unto you by the last Carrier) having at a re-examination been
questioned, whether he well understood the consequence of that Sicilian
vesper, whereunto he had made some desperate allusion in the House of
Parliament, made answer (and I think very truly) that he had no more then a
general information thereof, being but little conversant in those Histories
that lay out of the way of his profession: vvhereupon being pressed to
discover whence he then had received this information, since it lay not
within his own reading; he confessed to have had it from Doctor Sharp, who
had infused these things into him, and had solicited him to impress them in the
Parliament: And further, that Hoskins hereupon demanding what protection he
might hope for, if afterward he were called into question; the said Doctor
should nominate unto him, besides others, (whose names I will spare) that
Earl who has now made an end of all his reckonings: assuring him of his
assistance by the means of Sir Charles Cornwallis, with whom the Doctor was
conjoined in this practice. Thus came Sir Charles into discovery: who being
afterward confronted with the Doctor himself, though he could not (as they
say) justify his own Person, yet did he clear my Lord of Northampton from any
manner of understanding with him therein upon his Salvation: which yet is not
enough (as I perceive among the People) to sweep the dust from his Grave. Thus
you see (Sir) the natural end of a great Man, and the accidental ruin of
others, which I had rather you should see in a Letter, then as I did on Sunday
at Greenwich: where it grieved my soul to behold a grave and learned Divine,
and a Gentleman of good hopes and merits, carried away in the face of the
whole Court, with most dejected countenances, and such a greediness at all
windows to gaze at unfortunate spectacles.

The Earl of Northampton has made three of his Servants his Executors, with a
very vast power, as I hear; and for Overseers of his Will, my L. of Suffolk, my
L. of Worcester, and my L. William Haward: To the Earl of Arundel he left all
his Land (which will amount to some 3000 l. of yearly revenue) besides three or
four hundred to Mr. Henry Haward, whereof he had before assured him at the time
of his marriage; but neither of them to enjoy a penny thereof as yet this eight
year: all which time he intends the fruits of his estate shall be collected
and distributed in legacies and pious uses according to his will, which has
not yet been seen: but thus much as I have told you was understood before his
expiration. To my Lord of Suffolk he has left his House, but has disposed of
all the movables and furniture from him: And it is conceived, that he died in
some distasteful impression, which he had taken against him upon the voices
that ran of my Lord of Suffolk's likelihood to be Lord Treasurer; which place
will now assuredly fall upon him; and the world does contemplate my Lord of
Rochester for Lord Privy Seal, and Lord Warden of the five Ports. As for the
Lord Chamberlainship, it is somewhat more questionable between my Lord of
Pembroke, the Duke of Lenox, and my Lord Knowls. A few days will determine
these ambitions. In the mean time, I commit you, who have better objects, to
the contemplation of them, and to the mercy of our loving God in all your ways.

Your faithfullest poor Friend and Servant. H. WOTTON.
Sir, I have (I know not how) mislayed the Character which I left you,
therefore I pray send me in your very next a Copy. Therefore I have deferred
the matter which I am to propound unto you, till the next week, because I must
send you some Ore of Lead, and Iron withal, which I have ^ot yet gotten.

Is there no room left for the remembrance of that ^ar Neice? God forbid. And I
pray, Sir, tell ^r besides, that a certain Uncle here (whom yet I ^ill not
suffer to love her better then my self) does greedily expect some news from her.



On Midsummer Morning, 1614. SIR,
LIke a Woman great with Child, I have threatened you almost every week with a
proposition of profit; in which kind of breedings, methinks I am of hard birth:
but I hope to be brought to bed by the next Carrier. This week has yet yielded
^n the public small effects to entertain you withal; ^nly, some change of
opinion about the future great Officers, which are now thus discoursed.

The Earl of Suffolk is still beheld as a Lord Treasurer, and that conjecture
has never fainted ^nce the very first rising of it. But it is thought, that
the dignity of Privy Seal shall lie vacant as it did in the Cecilian times, and
that the execution thereof with the title of Lord Chamberlain, shall be laid on
my Lord of Sommerset; for if my Lord of Suffolk should remove from the Kings
Privacy to a place of much distraction and cumber, without leaving a friend in
his room, he might peradventure take cold at his back: which is a dangerous
thing in a Court, as Ruygomezde silva was wont to say, that great Artisan of
Humors. Of the Office of Five Ports, I dare yet pronounce nothing. My Lord, my
Brother, will none of it (as I heard him seriously say) though it were offered
him, for reasons which he reserveth in his own breast: yet the late Northampton
did either so much esteem it, or thought himself to receive so much estimation
from it, as he has willed his Body to be laid in the Castle of Dover.

Chute, Hoskins, Sharp, and Sir Charles Cornwallis are still in the Tower, and
I like not the complexion of the place. Out of France, we have the death of Dr.
Carrier, whose great imaginations abroad have had but a short period. And so,
Sir, commending you, and that dearest Neice, to Gods continual blessings and
love, I rest,

Your own in faithfullest affection, H. WOTTON.

The 7. of June, Style of the place, 1615. SIR,
I Hear a little voice that you are come to London, which to me is the voice of
a Nightingal; for since I cannot enjoy your presence, I make my self happy with
your nearness: And yet now, methinks, I have a kind of rebellion against it,
that we should be separated with such a contemptible distance. For how much I
love you, mine own heart does know; and God knows my heart. But let me fall
into a passion: For what sin, in the Name of Christ, was I sent hither among
Soldiers, being by my profession, Academical, and by my Charge, Pacifical? I
am with a day or two to send Cisthbert my Servant home, ^y whom I shall tell
you diverse things. In the ^ean while, I have adventured these few lines, ^o
break the Ice of silence; for in truth, it is a ^old fault. Our sweet Savior
bless you.

Servidore, Arrigo Wottoni.
My hot love to the best Neice of the World.



SIR,
AMong those that have deep interest in whatsoever can befall you, I am the
freshest wit^ss of your unexpressible affections to my most ^ar Neice; whom God
has taken from us into ^s eternal Light and rest; where we must leave (...),
till we come unto her. I should think my ^lf unworthy for ever of that love she
bare me, ^in this case I were fit to comfort you. But it is ^t only God who can
reconsolate us both: Who when he has called now one, and then ^other of his
own Creatures unto himself, will ^clasp the final Book of his Decrees, and
dis^lve the whole. For which I hope he will ra^er teach us to thirst and
languish, then to re^ne at particular dissolutions. I had in a pe^liar
affliction of mine own (all within the ^pass of little time) much consolation
from (...); which cannot but be now present with ^our self; for I am well
acquainted with the ^ength of your Christian mind.

Therefore being kindly invited by the good Master of the Rolls to write by his
express Messenge^ unto you; let me (without further discourse o^ our griefs)
only join in this with him, to wis^ your company divided between him and me.

We will contemplate together when we meet ou^ future blessedness, and our
present uncertainties (...) And I am afraid we shall find too much argument t^
drown our private feelings in the public solicitude. Gods love, wherein is
all joy, be with us.

From Westminst. this 16. April, 1626. Your ever true and hearty Servant, H.
WOTTON.

From the College the 14. of December. 1628. SIR,
I Have received from London the favorable lines wherewith you honored me
then near your departure; which you have somewhat allayed, with the promise of
your return at the beginning of the next Term, which consorteth well with a
change of my purpose to Christmas in Kent, born in me as I was reading your
Letter: For what should I do there in such have after the Nuptials, when I
shall come so as well in Lent? Much ado there has been toward the point of
conclusion; like that Aphorism of Hyppocrates: Nox ante Christ est
molestissima. Loves being in this like Fevers, as well as in the rest; for one
definition will serve them both: Cordis accensio.

Jack Dinely is not yet arrived, but we expect him daily as Messenger from the
Queen his Mistress, of her late happy delivery, after a foul report that had
been maliciously thrown abroad of her miscarriage by a fall. The Doctor
likewise as yet has given me no answer; but I will quicken him, and put life I
hope into the business.

Now, let me tell you, That the noble Sir Ger^se Clifton (as in good faith he
is in ipsis visceribus) has been lately here with us, at a time when he has
been content to be entertained with the pastimes of children; a Latin and a
Greek Hyppolitus. How often you were remembered between us, is harder for me to
tell you, then I hope for you to believe. Among other discourse he showed me a
little excrescence that he has beginning upon the uttermost ball of his eyes,
a filmy matter, like the rudiment of a Pin and Web as they call it. Whereupon
fell into my memory a secret that Mr. Bohan had told me his Mother knew: How to
take away that evil in growth, and perchance much more in the infancy, with a
Medicine applied only to the Wrists. And I have heard your self likewise speak
of a rare thing for that part. I beseech you (Sir) be pleased with all possible
speed to entreat that receipt from Mr. Bohan, to whom we shall both be much
beholden for it. And Sir Gervase Clifton is already so possessed, that he both
says and thinks, that nothing will cure him better then that which any way
shall come through your hand unto him. No peace as yet with either of the
Kings: The more wished I think with France, the likelier perchance with Spain.
No Offices disposed in Court. No Favorite but the Lord Treasurer. More news in
my next. For the present, God keep you in his dear love.

Servidore, H. WOTTON.

To the Queen of Bohemia.
[The beginning is wanting.]

-- YEt my mind and my spirits give me, against all the combustions of the
World, that before I die I shall kiss again your Royal hand, in as merry an
hour as when I last had the honor to vvait upon your gracious eyes at
Heidelberge.

I will now take the boldness to conclude my poor lines with a private and
humble suit unto your Majesty; which I bring with me out of Suffolk from Sir
Edmund Bacon's House, and that whole Family; among whom your Majesty's name
and virtues are in singular admiration.

There is of that House a young Plant of some sixteen years, well natured, and
well molded both for face and limbs, and one of the bravest spirited Boys in
Christendom. It is their joint ambition, and they have made me their
Intercessor, that your Majesty would be pleased to take him for one of your
Pages. They want not means otherways to bestow him, but their zeal toward
your Majesty, and their judgments guide them to this humble desire, for his
more virtuous and noble nurture. And lest the ordinary number of your Majesty's
Attendants in that kind, being perhaps full, might retard their hope of this
high favor, I have commission to assure your Majesty, that their meaning is
not to aggravate your charge, for he shall have yearly a competent provision
allowed to maintain him in good fashion. If my Niece Bacon, of dearest memory,
were alive, (whom God took, not long after my Nephew Albertus, into his
eternal Bliss) I am sure she would join in this suit unto your Majesty, that
all Sexes might enter into the Obligation: But it is your Majesty's own
goodness, from which only we can hope for a favorable Answer. And so with
all our Prayers, and with my particular obliged devotion, I most humbly commit
your Majesty to God's reserved Blessings, and continual Love, ever resting,

Your Majesty's poor Servant, in all truth and zeal, H. WOTTON.

On the 6. of March 1628. SIR,
I Beseech you let these lines, with as much affection, though with less
civility, convey my good vvishes after you, which I should my self have
brought before your departure.

You seem to have left the Town somewhat Prophetically, not to be near the
noise of a very unhappy morning on Monday last; at which time the Parliament
assembling again (which you know had been silenced till that day) was then
re-adjourned by the Kings especial Command till Tuesday next: Whereupon the
Lower House fell into such heat (one passion begetting another) that the
Speaker (who as discharged by the Royal Power, did refuse to read a kind of
Remonstrance which Sir John Eliott had provisionally set down in Paper) was
forced into the Chair. It is strange to consider the lubricity of popular
favor: For he that before during this whole Session (if so we may call it)
and the former, was so highly commended, and even in this very act by some of
the soundest and soberest of the House; yet with the general Body is so stripped
of all his credit in a moment, that I have hardly seen in any Chemical work
such a precipitation. What has insued, will be better told you by this good
Captain. Some think the Parliament does yet hang upon a thread, and may be
stitched again together: But, that is an airy conceit in my opinion; yet the
peace of Italy, and the preparations of France against us, are voyced so
strongly, that I verily believe we shall have a new summons.

The States of the low Provinces have since their Western great Prize, newly
taken a Careck out of the East, of huge value: so as their acts are, Sub
utroque sonantia Phoebo.

I have not yet sent those Verses to Mrs. Katharine Stanhope, that she may
rather have them in the second Edition: For the Author has licked them over,
and you shall have a new Copy sent you by the next Carrier. We have met
together once or twice since your going loco solito; but like a disjoynted
company, wanting one of our best pieces: God send us often cheerfully together;
and so I rest.

Your hearty Servant, H. W.
When Jack Dinely shall return out of Lincolnshire, I will give you an account
what I writ by him to the Queen of Bohemia about your Spiritous Nephew. And I
will not forget to rouse the Doctor it Cambridge in the charitable intention. I
pray remember my service to your whole name, and to my Noble Cousin Sir Drue:
To whom I will write the next week.



SIR,
I Know that between us there needs little complement; for which I am for my
part so unproper and so unmoulded, that I often neglect even civil duties; as
well appeared by my coming from London without taking leave of you: but yet I
cannot be wanting unto your self, nor to the least of your name in any real
service, for that were too much violence to my nature; therefore before my
coming from Westminster, I wrote such Letters to the Queen of Bohemia, about
your Spiritous Frank (as I hope, together with the good offices of the bearer
thereof) will place him with the Prince of Orange when he has taken the Buss.
I could have wished that his lively blood had been a little fleshed at that
siege. But Jack Dinelies long stay at London for his dispatch, and at Gravesend
for a wind, has lost us time. We hear that the King of Spain upon the peazing
of his affairs in Italy (where a palm of ground imports him more then a
Province abroad) was resolved to make the Marquess Spinola Governor of Milan,
and that the Count Henry Vanden Berge should command the Armies in chief under
the Infanta. If this be so, there will be there Bella plusquam Civilia, for you
know he is near of blood to the Prince of Orange, though he has some a little
nearer; for he has one or two by his own Sister, as I remember they told me in
his Town of Maestrick. The other employment of the Marquess, is a Counsel,
plainly taken rather from necessity then reason. For otherwise jealousy of
State would hardly commit so much power to a Genouese in the Confines of his
own Country, unless I have forgotten my foreign Maxims.

I have my head toward Kent, with a hope to see you first there, and
afterward at our Election: which will be the third of August. And so with my
humble and hearty remembrance to that best of Men, and noblest of Ladies, I rest

This Monday night late. 1629. Il suisceratissi manente vostro, H. WOTTON.

SIR,
ALthough I intend to write again speedily, and at a little more ease unto you
by James, and then to send you and Sir Gervase Clifton the Copy of a Letter,
which Giovanni tells me you both desire: yet lest you should send over your
Frank (who has from you all his sails and fraught) without part of his
balast from me, I have hastened the enclosed Letters unto your hand, with the
Copy of mine to the Queen of Bohemia: the other are ad hanc formam. I could
vvish that he would begin with Jack Dinely, and slide first unseen to Leyden;
who will bring him thence to the Queen, and acquaint him with all due
respects.

I have written to the Countess of Levistain to cherish him also: a great and
assiduous Lady with the Queen, and by Title, my noble Secretary. This is all
that I need say at the present. Doctor Sharp and I do threaten you the next
Christmas. In the mean while

From the College this Tuesday. 1629. Your humble Servant, H. WOTTON.
Optimo virorum; and to his most worthy Lady. S.
SIR,
THe very truth is, your love has prevented me: for I meant by Giovanni to
give you some account of what has passed since our divorcement. When I had
slept half an hour after you were gone from Darford, I found my self fresco
come una rosa: but I awaked in a strange dream, that had seldom before befaln
me in an Inn; finding nothing to be paid, not so much as for mine own Horses:
whereby the reason was plain of the paleness of my water which you observed;
for none of the tincture of my gold was gone into the reckoning of the drink,
as you had handled the matter.

At the top of Shooters-hill my Footman staid, as if he had been watching the
Beacon rather then for me; and told me there were good provisions made at Sir
Adam Newtons for you and me, with kind expectation of us both. But my self
being desirous to reach Eton that night, as I did, (for my horses I see travel
best upon another man's purse) I blanched the house, and sent thither by
Giovanni a fair excuse. True it is, we are much of a humor: Cento Bue will
hardly draw us in a journey to any strange place.

At that time likewise Will brought me a Letter from Mr. Griffith, which had
been expressly sent to Gr^esend the night before: whereby I saw Giovanni had
taken a false alarm; for he was not to be gone till the Monday morning
following: so as I have had time to ballast him with Letters. And I have
intimated beforehand to your Jack Dinely, your purpose to pass over the
spiritous Frank as soon as you can trick him. We are now toward the Festival
of our Election; wherein annually I make a shift to lose four or five Friends,
and yet do my self no good; so as they are angry with me on the one side, and
they laugh at me on the other.

I apprehend this year a great poverty of Venison with us: for I came too late
to exchange your Warrant; and my Lady Throckmortons will not serve my turn.

Since my coming, Mr. Turvil, a French practical man, of good erudition, has
passed a day or two with me, from whom I hear a shrewd point: That the oath of
peace (which should have been taken between the two neighboring Kings upon the
same day) is put off for a month: I believe the stop be in France, to gain
time to disturb our Treaty with Spain.

Mr. Pim (a man whose ears are open) told me likewise yesterday a strange
thing, that the Queen of Bohemia has newly, being hunting, been chased away
her self with some affrightment from Rhenen by certain Troops of the enemy that
have passed the Isel. With whom it was feared the Count Henry Venden Borge
would join, and ravage the Velow Yet withal were come tidings, that the Prince
of Orange at the Buss had had parley offered him. But my intelligences are
Cistern-waters, you are nearer the Fountain. And not only, Dulcius ex ipso
Font bibuntur aquae, but verius too. For both will stand in the verse.

Before I end, let me beseech you, to remember my humble and hearty devotion
(in the very style of Seneca to his Lucilius, and I shall need to say no more)
Optimo Virorum. I envy your enjoyments and conversations, and most when they
are privatest, for then they are freest. I hope the Noble Lady will return
quickly again to her Hesperian Garden: To whom, I pray, likewise let my humble
service be remembered. And so I rest,

From the College this Wednesday night, 1629. Excepto quod non simul esses,
caetera laetus; H. WOTTON.

To the Queen of Bohemia.
May it please your Majesty.
THis Bearer is that Lad, by name Frank Bacon, for whom your Majesty's
intercession with the Prince of Orange, has bound so many unto you here. It is
your goodness that has done it, and therefore he is addressed by his Friends
(and by me who am the meanest of them) first through your Gracious hands, and
laid down at your Royal feet.

There is in him (I believe) metal enough to be cast into good form: and I
hope it is of the noblest sort, which is ever the most malleable and pliant.
Only one thing I fear, that coming from a Country life, into the luster of
Courts, he will be more troubled with it, then with the hissing of Bullets.

Now when I consider (as I do at the present) that besides your Majesty's
ancienter favors toward me, and to them that have been, and are so dear unto
me; some gone, and some remaining: you have lately received the Child of my
very worthy Friend, Mr. Griffith, about the Prince your Son, and honored this
other with your especial recommendation, in such a forcible and express manner
as you were pleased to do it: I say; when I consider all this, I cannot but
fall into some passionate questions with mine own heart. Shall I die without
seeing again my Royal Mistress my self? Shall I not rather bring her my most
humble thanks, then let them thus drop out of a dull Pen? Shall such a
contemptible distance, as between Eton and the Hague, divide me from beholding
how her virtues overshine the darkness of her fortune? I could spend much paper
in this passion, but let it sleep for the present: And God bless your Majesty.

August 16. 1629. As I am Yours, H. WOTTON.
After this humble and just acknowledgement of my obligations unto your
Majesty, it were a miserable thing for me to tell you, that at our late
Election, I have remembered your Commandment in the first place, I should indeed
rather ask what your Majesty will have next done.



My noble Nephew,
I Am sorry that your Cast of Bucknames cannot be served at this Election: for
to choose one of them (and that must have been in a low place) had been
discomfortable, they will fly best at ease together. Yet I have thought of a
way the next year, in all event not to fail; which is, to divide them between
Westminster and Eton. Their Election preceedeth ours some three weeks; and
truly upon my late observation there, I must needs say, that School mouldeth
good Scholars, and of certainer preferment to either of the Universities (for
some go to Oxford, and some to Cambridge) then this; out of which the issue is
always hard, and the entrance not always* easy. Glad I am to hear by your
Letter, that you have gotten so good a Schoolmaster, that they may be well
mued in the mean while. Betwixt this and the next turn, I shall lay you down an
infallible course for them. And this must content their good Father at the
present.

If your Masons Brother (who was here on Sunday) had staid till the next
morning, there was some practicable hope to have sped the Boy this year to
Cambridge, but some unfortunate haste, and despair of so many places as fell
open, carried him away.

If you had not intimated your own coming to London, you might perchance have
been troubled with me in the Country: But I will now languish for the hour
you promise this place of seeing you here; where your Venison (which we
enjoy by exchange from Master Vice-Chamberlain has given us all occasion to
remember you thankfully, as a Benefactor to this Board. I will entertain you
with no home-novelties; but let me tell you a fresh piece of no small noise
from abroad. The King of Sweden has landed with 200 Ships a great Army of
some 40000 in Germany, with intention (if the Party of our Religion be not all
drowsy) to redress the common Cause; or at least, to redintegrate his near
Kinsman in Meckleburge, confiscated, you know, by the Emperor: And the
opportunity is fair, while the Austrian power is diverted for the help of
Spain into Italy. God bless it, and cherish it as his own business; and in his
dear love I leave you: Ever remaining,

From your College this 27. July, 1630. Your faithful Servant, H. WOTTON. As
intricate as a Flea in a bottom of Flax.
Sir,
I will write to you at large after our Election, when my Brains are settled.



Noble Sir, and my most dear Nephew.
WE were for three vveeks together so besieged at your Eton, first with an
overflow of water from the West, and then with a deep Snow out of the East,
(contrary quarters conspiring against us) that our ordinary Boats, which
usually go and return twice a week, could not pass under the Bridges: whereby
such a Letter from you as never man received, lay silent at my Chamber in St.
Martins-lane till mine own coming to London; to the utter condemnation of my
unthankfulness in the mean time: Which truly I should fear, but that it is the
natural property of the same heart, to be a gentle Interpreter, which is so
noble an Obliger.

Now, Sir, After I had received and read your Letter, I took some days to
deliberate what I should do, and to let my judgment settle again which was
distracted with so kind a surprisal: should I use a feathered quill to write
unto you? or fly my self to Redgrave? for you had given me vvings. At last, I
resolved upon both. First, to make this true protestation by vvriting from my
very bowels where it is engraven. That though your bounty (considered in all
the circumstances, as well the form, as the matter, and the very opportunity
of the time wherein it came, and especially without any imaginable pretense
of desert in my self) has been such, as never befell me before, nor can ever
befall me again: yet have you therevvith not enriched, but stripped and
despised me for ever: Nothing that was before, either in my power or
possession, being after this mine own: for it is all yours, if it were both
the Indies. So as your kindness howsoever flowing from a tender affection: yet
is with me like hard wax, dropped and sealed together.

The next after this, shall be to follow it my self: but therein (after the
Spanish phrase) I will take language at the Rolls, where I shall understand
more punctually about what time you purpose to be here. For, I aim at the
convoying of you up to your Eton. About which I will write more by the next
Carrier: and prepare your self (Sir) with patience while we live, to be
troubled weekly with my Letters; wheresoever I am, even when I shall have no
more to say then this, which is the least that can be spoken, that I am

Feb. 13. 1632. Yours, H. WOTTON.

From St. Martins by the Fields, this 18. of April. 1633. To my Noble Nephew
long and cheerful years. SIR,
BY beginning first with Philosophy, I will discover the Method of my nature,
preferring it before the speculations of State.

Take any Vegetable whatsoever, (none excepted in the effect, though some
difference in the degree) express the juice; put that in any vessel of Wood or
Stone, with a narrow neck and mouth, not closed at the top, but covered with
any thing, so as it may work out above: Set it afterward in some cold hole in
a Cellar, let it stand there some three weeks, or a month, till by
fermentation it have both purged it self upwards, and by sediment downwards.
Then decant from it the clear juice, and put that in a Limbeck in Balneo Maris,
or in Balneo Roris. The first that rises will be Aqua ardens, useful perchance
according to the quality of the Plant; as of Wormwood for the Stomach, of
Succory, or any of those Incubae, for the Liver: And on the sides of the
Limbeck will hang a Salt; this is the extracting of Salt without calcination;
which otherwise certainly must needs consume all the active powers of any
Vegetable, and leave nothing but a palastick and passive virtue.

For the point of preserving that Salt afterward from resolution by Air into
Water, I hold it impossible, notwithstanding the proper examples that you
allege; which yet must of necessity yield to it. For as your excellent Uncle
says, and says well, in not the least of his works (though born after him) of
his Experiments; Air is predatory.

I have forgotten (for memoria primo senescit) whether I told you in my last a
pretty late experiment in Arthritical pains: it is cheap enough. Take a roasted
Turnip (for if you boil it, it will open the pores, and draw too much) apply
that in a Poultice to the part affected, with change once in an hour or two, as
you find it dried by the heat of the flesh, and it will in little time allay
the pain.

Thus much in our private way, wherein I dare swear, if our Medicines were as
strong as our wishes, they would work extremely.

Now, for the Public, where peradventure now and then there are distempers as
well as in natural bodies.

The Earl of Holland was on Saturday last (the day after your Posts departure)
very solemnly restored at Council - Table (the King present) from a kind of
Eclipse, wherein he had stood since the Thursday fortnight before: All
considered, the obscuration was long, and bred both various and doubtful
discourse; but it ended well. All the cause yet known, was a verbal challenge
sent from him by Mr. Henry Germain in this form to the now Lord Weston, newly
returned from his foreign employments, That since he had already given the
King an account of his Embassage, he did now expect from him an account of a
Letter of his, which he had opened in Paris, and he did expect it at such a
time, even in the Spring garden (close under his Fathers Window, with his
Sword by his side.

It is said (I go no farther in such tender points) that my Lord Weston sent
him by Mr. Henry Percy (between whom and the said Lord Weston had in the late
journey (as it seems) been contracted, such friendship as overcame the memory
that he was Cousin-German to my Lord of Holland) a very fair and discreet
answer: That if he could challenge him for any injury done him before, or after
his Embassage, he would meet him as a Gentleman, with his Sword by his side
where he should appoint. But for any thing that had been done in the time of
his Embassage, he had already given the King an account thereof, and thought
himself not accountable to any other. This published on Thursday was
fortnight, the Earl of Holland was confined to his Chamber in Court, and the
next day morning to his House at Kensington, where he remained without any
further circumstance of restraint or displeasure Saturday and Sunday: on which
days being much visited, it was thought fit on Monday to appoint Mr.
Dickenson one of the Clerks of the Council, to be his Guardian thus far, that
none without his presence should accost him. This made the vulgar judgments
run high, or rather indeed run low, That he was a lost and discarded man,
judging as of Patients in Fevers, by the exasperation of the fits. But the
Queen, who was a little obliquely interested in this business; for in my Lord
of Holland's Letter, which was opened, she had one that was not opened, nor
so much (as they say) as superscribed; and both the Queen's and my Lord of
Holland's were enclosed in one from Mr. Walter Mountague (whereof I shall
tell you more hereafter.) The Queen I say, stood nobly by him, and as it seems
pressed her own affront. It is too intricately involved for me so much as to
guess at any particulars. I hear generally discoursed, that the opened dispatch
was only in favor (if it might be obtained) of Monsieur de Chateau Neuf, and
the Chevalier de Jarr; (who had both been here) but written with caution
(and surely not without the Kings knowledge) to be delivered, if there were
hope of any good effect; and perchance not without Order from His Majesty to
my Lord Weston afterward, to stop the said Letters, upon advertisement that
both Chateau Neuf, and de Jarr were already in the Bastille. But this I leave
at large, as not knowing the depth of the business.

Upon Monday was seven-night fell out another quarrel, nobly carried
(branching from the former) between my Lord Fielding and Mr. Goring, Son and
Heir to the Lord of that Name. They had been the night before at Supper, I know
not where, together; where Mr. Goring spoke something in diminution of my
Lord Weston, which my Lord Fielding told him, it could not become him to
suffer, lying by the side of his Sister. Thereupon, these hot hearts appoint a
meeting next day morning, themselves alone, each upon his Horse. They pass by
Hide-Park, as a place where they might be parted too soon, and turn into a
Lane by Knights-bridge; where having tied up their Horses at a Hedge or Gate,
they got over into a Close; there stripped into their Shirts, with single
Rapiers, they fell to an eager Duel, till they were severed by the Host and
his servants of the Inn of the Prince of Orange, who by mere chance had taken
some notice of them. In this noble encounter; where in blood was spent,
though (by Gods providence) not much on either side, there passed between them
a very memorable interchange of a piece of courtesy, if that word may have
room in this place: Says my Lord Fielding, Mr. Goring, If you leave me here,
let me advise you not to go back by Piccadillia-hall, lest if mischance befall
me, and be suddenly noised (as it falls out in these occasions now between
us) you might receive some harm by some of my friends that lodge thereabouts.

My Lord (replies Goring) I have no way but one to answer this courtesy: I
have here by chance in my Pocket a Warrant to pass the Ports out of England,
without a Name (gotten, I suppose, upon some other occasion before,) If you
leave me here, take it for your use, and put in your own Name. This is a
passage much commended between them, as proceeding both from sweetness and
stoutness of spirit, which are very compatible. On the solemn day of Saturday
last, both this difference and the Original, between the Earl of Holland and
the Lord Weston, were fairly reconciled and forgiven by the King, with
shaking of hands; and such Symbols of agreement: And likewise Sir Maurice
Dromand, who had before upon an uncivil ture on his part, between him and my
Lord of Carlisle, been committed to the Tower, was then delivered at the same
time: and so it all ended, as a merry Fellow said, in a Maurice. But whether
these be perfect cures, or but skinnings over and Palliations of Court, will
appear hereafter: Nay, some say very quickly; for my Lord Westons Lady, being
since brought to bed of a Daughter, men stand in a kind of suspense, whether
the Queen will be the Godmother after so crude a reconcilement, which by the
Kings inestimable goodness, I think may pass in this forgiving week.

For foreign matter, there is so little and so doubtful, as it were a misery
to trouble you with it. The States confuted Treaty is put to the stock; and the
Prince of Orange (by account) gone to the Field two days since, having broken
the business (as they say) by three demands: the resignment of Breda and
Guelder, the dismantling of Rheinberge, and the equality of free exercise of
Religion on either side. The States are strong in Arms, weak in Money, owing
above six hundred thousand pounds sterling in bare Interest, besides the
Capital. The Enemy has neither Money, nor Men, nor Agreement. Arena sine
calce; yet I hear (and ex bonis Codicibus) that the States are absolutely
resolved to besiege no Town this year, unless it be some such place as may
happily fall gently into their lap. They will range with divided Troops.

I will have a care in my Letters to the Kings only Sister (for that is now her
published style, even in Sermons) so to commend your Frank unto her, (whom she
was wont to call, when he went first over, her little Pig) that he may speedily
have a Captains place.

God bless him, and bless your whole name; to which I am so much tied, both by
the alliance of the sweetest Niece that ever man had, and by your own kindness
since her departure to Heaven. And so I rest,

Your indissoluble Servant, H. WOTTON.
Your Hester is re-entred into the green sickness, fault de je seay quoy.

I pray burn this hasty Letter when you have read it.

SIR, If you have (as I remember once you told me) the Will of Sir William
Pickering, I pray favor me with a Copy of it for a certain purpose; out of
which if I pick any good, you shall be partaker of it.

I have been for the most part sick since I wrote last unto you, but am now
cheerful again.




To my Noble Nephew many cheerful years. SIR,
IT is worth the noting, how commonly the casual firings of Houses in Towns do
follow one another; and so (methinks) do the inflammations of spirits in
Courts: For after the solemn quenching of our late quarrels, there is fallen
out a new, and shrewdly pursued, between Mr. Harbert Price, a Sewer to the
Queen, and Mr. Eliot, Page to the King.

The beginning they say was upon very slight occasion: but because a young
Lady is an ingredient in the story, I will pass it over. To field they went two
days since upon hot and hasty blood (which somewhat saves it from a deliberate
Duel) both shooting the Bridge in several Boats; yet the matter being before
suspected, my Lord Chamber^ain sent one Mr. Haies (a Scottishman, and a good
Surgeon, though of late an ordinary Courtier on the Queens side) in quest of
them: who found them both on the Surry side, a mile or two below Bridge,
closed, and (I hear) on the ground. But Mr. Price already hurt in three places,
in one of his sides, in ^is face, and in three of his fingers: the other is
come off untouched. This Price has been formerly bred a Soldier, and
sometimes (they say) a Lieutenant in the Low Provinces. Mr. Eliot scarce yet a
man in years; but for height and strength at his full prime, and in both above
the common scantling. The King is herewith highly offended, succeeding so
freshly upon the late reconcilements: And it is doubted, they will at least
lose their places.

The journey to Scotland continues hotly, and His Majesty removes House to
Theobalds, that way, on Saturday come fortnight. But first must be censured the
Bishop of Lincoln for too many words, and the Citizens of London in their
undertakings in Ireland for too few deeds; which I believe will both trench
deep. I shall stay long enough in London (not intending to be gone before the
Kings remove) to tell you the event: and truly without your benificent
courtesy, I had been wrapped in a strange riddle; for I could neither have staid
^or departed.

I received the Communion in St. Bartholomews on Sunday last (being Easter Day)
in the same Pew with your Hester and her Mother; your Hester either becomes a
little tincture of the Green sickness well, or that becomes her well: well she
looks, I am sure, and in my fancy draws toward the countenance of her Sister
Stanhop more and more, but stealingly. My Niece Margaret is come home from her
Artisan in Southwark, with some pretty amendment. The manner of his cure in
those imperfections is somewhat strange; he uses no bindings, but oils and
stroakings; of which I take him to be (in all my reading) both the Instrument
and the Author. My Niece Ann will prove one of the handsomest Creatures of the
World; being much grown, and having rectified a little squinting, or oblique
look which she had in one of her eyes, so far as the remainder will turn to a
beauty. Her Mother has of late been much troubled (and I think as much in her
fancy, which is the greater cure, as in her body) with a pain in her right
side, which changes place, and therefore is sure but a flatuous infirmity: yet
it hasteneth her removing to better Air.

From my Lady, my Sister at Canterbury, we hear nothing; I believe she is in
travail with her own thoughts, about desacing the inscription of the Tomb, as
far as Catholica and Catholica amount unto. And I could wish, as she took your
advice in the invention and word upon the Marble, she had done so in the rest:
but in that you were no apt Counselor.

Now for foreign matters. We have fair tidings from Germany, that the Princes
hold fast together, and things go well: and I am of opinion, tha^ when those
parts have learnt as well as the lower Provinces, to spend a Summer upon the
siege of a Town, the War will nestle there as well as below. For they abound in
strong places; and War it self is a great refiner of spirits in little time.

The States are in the Field earlier then heretofore: and in all judgment it
imports no less, then the countenancing and covering of a general revolt of
the geheerten Provinces, as they call them: of that more in my next. And so
(Sir) leaving you in our blessed Saviors love, I rest,

From my Lodging in S. Martins-lane by the Fields, April 25. 1633. Your
Suiscerato servidore, H. WOTTON.
SIR,
When I have sent you (as I will do by the next Carrier) a new character, I
will open my files.




St. Martins-lane by the Fields, June 3. 1633. To my Noble Nephew, long and
cheerful years. SIR,
THis other day at the Cockpit in Shoe-lane (where my self am rara avis) your
Nephew Mr. Robert Bacon came very kindly to me, with whom I was glad to
refresh my acquaintance, though I had rather it had been in the Theater of
Redgrave.

I asked him of his Brother, your Frank; and he told me he had been so hindered
by winds, as he thought he was not yet gotten over: At which I was sorry, for
he has lost the honor of taking Rheinberge: He may come yet timely enough to
see Guelders yielded, and after that to have his share in Iuliers, which they
write from the Camp, will be the next piece; and so the States will be Masters
of all the tract that lies between the Maese and the Rhene, and backed with one
of the fattest Provinces of Christendom. Besides, we hear they have recovered
their former footing in Brasil, and beaten the Spanish Fleet. It is hard to
say, into what these prosperities will run out: for surely, if they can
establish a right correspondency with the upper Armies of Germany, and either
both hold out, or neither agree without the other; even this Summer will breed
notable effects, and among other I hope, the restitution of the Palatinate;
where, as much as the Swede had taken, is offered for 16000. Dollers; whereof
the half is paid already by the Duke of Simmern, Administrator to the young
Palatine in his minority, and the other moiety is expected from hence. One
thing I must not omit to tell you, that the said young Prince was at the siege
of Rheinberge to initiate him in action. The young Cardinal Infant is come you
know to Milan, and they say will there reside as Governor till he can recover
Casale and Pignerolo, and purge Italy of the French: so as I believe he will
come to Bruxels (for thither he finally tends) in the Spanish pace. Having thus
a little skimmed over our foreign news, give me leave now to entertain you
with some novelties of Art. I send you herewith two printed Caps, a triangular
Salt-celler, and the top of an Amber-Ring. The Caps is a pretty fresh invention
of a very easy rate; for they will run shortly at some six pence apiece: and
they say the sale is monopolized by a Woman at Amsterdam; which may come to
some pretty perfection in the ornament of Curtains and Valances of Beds, or in
some fine historified Table-cloth for a Banquet, or the like. In the invention
of the Salt-celler you have an interest your self; for I remember (Sir) you
showed me a whole furniture of Marble Salt-cellers for a Table of your
bespeaking: But there is one that has only gone beyond you in the cheapness of
the Material; for this which you now receive is but of Seacole, and it is
strange to see what a polishment so base a stuff does take, like the ennobling
of a Clown. To the broken Ring there belongs a little more discourse. I bought
for a trifle in Lombard Street long since, because it had a Fly intombed in the
sealing part; which if it had been precisely in the middle, would have showed
like the sculpture of the Signet it self. Now a while since by a fall from a
Table to the ground, it brake, though in a boarded room: vvhereupon there fell
a conceit into my mind, that the Ring was Artificial Amber, and not Natural;
as indeed my Servant Giovanni and I have since plainly discovered. Now I
cannot choose but smile when I think how much more the first Seller of it
might have had from me for the fashood (if he would have said so) then for the
truth: For surely many rare things may be made of this composition, and entire
insectiles of any greatness, and in any posture be enclosed therein; which I
am sure will inflame you, as it has set me on fire already to find the way
how to clarify the Pasta, which seems to be of Rosin, and perchance some
dust of true Amber. And thus you see what easy vvayes I take to please my
self, while I am conversing with you. Let me add to these, a strange thing to
be seen in London for a couple of pence, which I know not whether I should
call a piece of Art, or Nature: It is an English man like some Swabber of a
Ship come from the Indies, where he has learned to eat Fire as familiarly as
ever I savv any eat Cakes, even whole glowing Brands, which he will crash
with his teeth, and swallovv. I believe he has been hard famished in the
Terra de Fuego, on the South of the Magellan strait.

Sir, I have heard (I know not by whom) that you had a purpose to be here
this Whitsontide; but imagining that at least Mr. Chitock may meet you by the
way, I have ventured the trouble of these lines unto you. For mine own estate,
I must acquaint you, (because whether well or ill, I am yours) that of late I
have been much troubled with certain splenetick vapors, mounting to the top
of my Stomach when it is empty: For which I am in a course of gentle Physic
at the present, remembering that of Galen. Ego soleo hortari amicos meos, ut in
melancholicis affectionibus abstineant a validioribus remediis. My best Physic
will be your company,

To whom there is none bound in truer service then, H. WOTTON.

OH my most dear Nephew (for so I still glory to call you, while Heaven
possesses her who bound us in that Relation) how have I of late, after many
vexations of a fastidious infirmity, been at once rent in pieces by hearing
that you were at London: What! said I, and must it be at a time when I cannot
fly thither to have my wonted part of that conversation, wherein all that
know him enjoy such infinite contentment? Thus much did suddenly break loose
from the heart that does truly honor you. And now (Sir) let me tell you both
how it has gone with me, and how I stand at the present. There is a triple
health: health of Body, of Mind, and of Fortune; you shall have a short account
of all three.

For the first; it is now almost an whole Cycle of the Sun, since after
certain fits of a Quotidian Fever, I was assailed by that Splenetick Passion,
which a Country good Fellovv that had been a piece of a Grammarian meant,
when he said he was sick of the Flatus, and the other hard word; for
Hypocondriacus stuck in his Teeth: It is the very Proteus of all Maladies;
shifting into sundry shapes, almost every night a new, and yet still the same;
neither can I hope, that it will end in a solar Period, being such a Saturnine
Humor; but though the Core and Root of it be remaining, yet the Symptoms (I
thank my God) are well allayed: And in general, I have found it of more
contumacy then malignity; only since the late cold vveather, there is
complicated with it a more Asthmatical straitness of respiration then
heretofore: yet those about me say, I bear it well, as perchance custom has
taught me; being now familiarized and domesticated evils: In the Tragedians
expression, Iam mansueta Mala. And thus much of the habit of my Body. On the
other side, my Mind is in a right Philosophical Estate of health; that is, at
an equal distance both from desire and hope; and ambitious of nothing, but of
doing nothing, and of being nothing: yet I have some employment or my thoughts
to keep them from mouldring, as you shall know before I close this Letter. But
first, touching the third kind of health. My condition or fortune was never
better, then in this good Lord Treasurers time: the very reverse of his proud
Predecessor, that made a scorn of my poverty, and a sport of my modesty;
leaving me in bad case; and the world so, as though we now know by what Arts he
lived, yet are we ignorant to this hour by what Religion he died, save only
that it could not be good, which was not worthy the professing. This free
passage let me commit to your noble breast, remembering that in confidence of the
receiver, I have transgressed a late Counsel of mine own which I gave to a
young friend, who asking me casually of what he should make him a suit, as he
was passing this way toward London; I told him that in my opinion, he could
not buy a cheaper nor a more lasting stuff there then silence. For I loved him
well, and was afraid of a little freedom that I spied in him. And now, Sir, I
must needs conclude (or I shall burst) with letting you know, that I have
diverse things in wild sheets that think and struggle to get out of several
kinds, some long promised, and some of a newer conception: but a poor exercise
of my Pen (wherewith I shall only honor my self by the dedication thereof unto
your own person) is that which shall lead the way by mine and your good leave,
intending (if God yield me his favor) to Print it before it be long in Oxford,
and to send you thence, or bring you a Copy to our Redgrave. What the subject
is you must not know before hand: for I fear it will want all other grace, if
it lose virginity. And so the Lord of all abundant joy keep you long, con
quella buona Ciera, which this my Servant did relate unto me,

Who live, at all your commands, H. WOTTON.
From your College this Ashwednesday, 1637. Postscript.
Mr. Clever one of the now Fellows of this College (where have been diverse
changes since it had the honor and the gladness to receive you) being this day
returned hither from the Excellent Lord Keeper, to whom we had addressed him
about a business that concerns us: Tells me even at this instant in the
account of his journey; that it pleased his good Lordship to enquire of him
twice or thrice very graciously touching my health. I beseech you (My Noble
Nephew) let his Lordship see, if it please you, this whole Letter (for I dare
trust his indulgent goodness, both with my liberties and with my simplicities)
and that will tell him my present Estate: which by making it any part of his
care, is for ever at his most humble service.



Noble Sir; above all the most honored and loved.
UPon the receipt of a Letter from you (which came late, and I know not by what
misadventure, half drowned, to my hands) with advertisement, that you had been
at Sudbury in your passage homewards assailed with a Quartan: I resolved
immediately to visit you by this Bearer the best of my flights, and lately well
acquainted himself with farther travelers, who yet has been kept here after
my said resolution, that he might bring you a full account of the business
touching my inviolate Niece so dear unto us both, which was a part of your
foresaid Letter, and wherein I am confident you will receive very singular
contentment out of the very Originals of some, and true Copies of other
Letters, which I send you by this my said inward servant; and if he were not
so, I would not have entrusted him with so tender Papers. The rest of his stay,
was only that I might collect among my poor memorials and experiments something
conducible to the recovery of your health, wherein I reckon my self as much
interessed as in any one thing of this world. I will not say unto you, Courage,
as the French use to speak: for you have enough of that within your self: Nor,
Be merry, in our English phrase (for you can impart enough of that even to
others in the incomparable delight of your conversation) But let me give you
two comforts, though needless to the serenity of your spirits. The first, That
I hope your infirmity will not hold you long, because it comes (as I may speak,
according to the barbarous Translators of Avicenna) In complexionato suo: that
is in the very season of the revolution of melancholic humors, for Omnis
Morbus contra complexionatum Patientis vel Temporis, est periculosus aut
longus. The other, That it has not succeeded any precedent caustic disease,
because those Quartans are of all the most obstinate which arise out of the
Incineration of a former Ague. The rest I have committed to the instructions
and memory of this Bearer, being himself a Student in Physic; and though I
dare not yet call him a good Counselor, yet I assure you, it is a good
Relator: with this dispatch I will intermingle no other vulgar subject, but
hereafter I will entertain you with as jolly things as I can scamble together.
And so, Sir, for the present, commending you into the sweet and comfortable
preservation of our dear God: I rest,

Your faithful poor Servant, H. WOTTON.
From the College November. 6. 1638.
My Noble, Honored, Loved, ever Remembered, ever Desired Nephew.
I Shall give to morrow morning Matthew Say our Boat-man, before his going, a
shilling, and promise him another at his return to deliver this small packet
with his own hands at the Green-Dragon in Bishopsgate-street, according to the
form of your address, not for any value of mine own Papers, but for some things
therein contained, which I wish may come safely and quickly to you. And first,
I send you your immortal Uncles Confession of his Faith, which I did promise
you at Canterbury, solidly and excellently couched, as whatsoever else had the
happiness to fall under his Meditation and Pen. Next; you receive a Letter
freshly written me from Cambridge, with mention (God bless us) of a Jesuit of
your name: who seems (as all that comes from any of you is piercing) to have
sent over lately some pretty insinuative Book in matter of Theological
Controversy, perchance better dressed then any before, and with more relish
commended to the vulgar taste, but I believe it will be the same to the
stomach: for well they may change their form, but it is long since we have
heard their substance over and over, still the same ad fastidium usque. I shall
languish to know how he touches upon your Name and stirp. The Name of my
friend who writ me the said Letter, I have defaced for the censure of some
other things therein, which I should be sorry to adventure at large: but you
shall know him from me hereafter; and believe it, he will be worth your knowing.

I cannot forbear to tell you a thing (I know not whether I should call it
news, because it is nearer you then to us) but strange in truth, written me
from the said University at the same time by the Provost of Kings College
there; between whom and me does pass much familiar correspondency. It is of a
weekly Lecture there performed heretosore by the Person of Mr. Christopher
Goad, and lately deposed with severe commandment (as it should seem) from
above, whereupon the Women especially by way of revenge for that restraint do
flock to St. Mary's in such troops, and so early, that the Masters of Art have
no room to sit; so as the Vice Chancellor and Heads of Houses were in
deliberation to repress their shoaling thither. Methinks, it is a good thing,
when zeal in a land grows so thick and so warm. But soft, if I lanch any
farther, I may perchance run (which yet were a great mistake) into the name of
a Puritan. For that very Lecturer which is now deposed, did live heretofore
with me at my Table upon especial choice: being in truth a man of sweet
conversation, and of sober solidity.

Now, for other things, Nicolas Oudard brought me the Friday after his
departure from you the glad tidings of your Agues discharge, as you then
conceived it would be at the twentieth Access, according (as you seem to have
told him) to a common observation with you there: so as in Suffolk, I see you
count Quartan fits, as you do your Sheep, by the score. I could heartily wish
you would take for some time after it Alternis Diebus, my preparation of the
Lignum Sanctum, with addition likewise of the roots of China, Enula Campana,
and a sprig of Tamarisque, all in the decoction of Barley-water, and quickened
with a little sprinkling of a Lemmon: a rare Receipt to corroborate the
Viscera, and to keep the Stomach in Tono. My said Nicolas tells me likewise,
that you began to chirp upon being in London the next Term. I should be glad
with your favor to know that point precisely: for having a purpose (by Gods
dear blessing) to visit you at Redgrave (which will be the best Cordial I took
in long time) I would shape my course circularly, either from Suffolk to Kent,
or from Kent to Suffolk, as I shall hear of your motions toward the beginning
of next Lent. For novelties of Court and State, all men's minds at the present
with us seem magnetical, looking toward the North. Order is come down this day
to the Justices of this Shire, about a general muster at Alisbury the next
week, and for especial watch at the Beacons; so as any burning of a bush by
chance near one of them, would set the whole Province in an alarm; but
notwithstanding these good providence, we hope well of the issue; and the
rather, for that a pretty strong conceit runs, that the Deanary of Durham is
reserved for Doctor Belkanquel, as a reward of his travels to and fro in this
great business. While we are uniting our ceremonious breaches, the Kings of
France and Spain abroad treat hard this Winter about a peace, as one writes,
(and I believe very truly) without consideration of any other Prince or State
but themselves. If this be so, and take effect in that manner, then is Charles
de Loraine Exutus Lepidus stripped to his shirt, the Count Palatine left at
large, and the Swede must stand upon his own feet. But Brevibus Momentis summa
vertuntur: all depends upon the taking, or not taking of Brisach, the Helena of
Germany: and though a Town indeed of great strength and advantage, yet a poor
price for so much blood as has been lost about it. While I am talking of War,
let me tell you what I hear, that your Sir Jacob Ashley is grown a great man at
Court in private introducements to the King, together with the Earl Marshal:
our good Sovereign will feel a sufficient man quickly. The States lie still and
close oppressed with the adversities of the last year; and with nothing more,
then the late ruin of forty well laden Ships by the Texel, wherein with
deploration of the whole Province were lost one thousand Mariners.

Touching the subject whereof I sent you an account by Nicolas, I have heard
nothing since to increase my hope, and much less my faith. You shall have more
the next week. Till when and ever our sweet Jesus have you in his love.

Your Servant alla suiscerata, H. W.
SIR, Since I concluded this, Mr. Hales (our Bibliotheca ambulans, as I use to
call him) came to me by chance, and told me, that the Book of Controversies
issued under the name of Baconus, has this addition to the said name, alias
Southwell; as those of that Society shift their names as often as their shirts:
And he says it is a very poor thing, only graced with a little method.

From your College December. 5. 1638.



SIR,
AFter the rest of your trouble, at the present there remains a proposition
to be consulted with you; about which I should esteem the charge of an express
Messenger not ill expended, though you were at Jerusalem. And both Mr. Harison
and my self think no man living more proper to solve it, then our Sir Edmund
Bacon. The Question is this, whether there may not be found some natural
Philosophical way to determine the measure of a minute, or quarter, or half, or
entire hour, or any portion of time more precisely and uniformly, and
infallibly then has been yet invented by any Mechanical and Artificial motion?
And particularly, whether it may not be done by the descent of drops through a
Filter, either in Menica Hippocratis, or in a tongue of cloth equally thick,
with consideration likewise of all circumstances in that liquid substance which
must sink through it. If th^s may be done, there will be a mighty point
obtained in the rectifying of the Longitudes of the Earth, which depend upon
the thoment of the Lunar Eclipses; and Mose, upon the exact determination of
the beginning and ending of an hour: for which purpose the great Tychs Brach
composed diverse Horologies, and Hour-glasses, some running with simple Water,
some with distilled Spirits, some with pulverized Metals, and some with crude
Mercury; but never to any infallible satisfaction of the point propounded:
which likewise would be of singular use in diverse Astronomical observations, if
it could be once justly regulated. This we commend to your curious judgment.
My Servant Nicolas and I hope to send you some good Flints to be Agatized by
your miraculous invention.

I pray, Sir, if you have any of those Island stones which you mentioned unto
me at Canterbury, bestow a few upon me. But above all, forget not to let me
know where you will be about the beginning of Lent.

Iterum and Iterum vale.

A late Letter written toward the end of Lent, by Sir Henry Wotton Provost of
his Majesty's College at Eaton.
To the Right worthy his ever truly Honored, Sir Edmund Bacon Knight and
Baronet, touching the loss of Friends, and final resignation of our selves.
SIR,
ALl the faculties of my mind (if they had ever been of any value) and all the
strength of my body, must yield to the seignory and sovereignty of time over
us: But the last thing that will die, or decay in me, is the remembrance, how
amidst that inestimable contentment which I enjoyed (as all others do) in the
benefit and pleasure of your Conversation (being then with you at Redgrave in
Suffolk, both your delightful Mansion and Philosophical retreat, where you are
best, because there you are most your self, though every where well imparted to
your Friends) I was then surprised with an advertisement from Court, of the
death of Sir Albertus Morton, my dear Nephew, in the ^ruality (as I may term
it) of his employments and fortunes under the best King and Master of the
World: And how no great time after (as adversities are seldom solitary) there
succeeded in the same place the departure of my no less dear Niece, your long,
and I dare say, your still beloved Consort (for love and life are not
conterminable) as well appears by your many tender expressions of that
disjuncture, and by that Monument of your own excellent invention which you
have raised to her memory.

This (Sir) ever freshly bleeding in me, and with^ll revolving often in my
retired thoughts, how I ^ve long since over-lived my loving Parents, all ^ine
Uncles, Brothers and Sisters, besides many ^f mine especial Friends and
Companions of my ^outh, who have melted away before me, and that I am now my
self arrived near those years which (...) in the suburbs of Oblivion, being the
sole Mas^line Branch of my good Fathers House in the County of Kent: So as that
poor Name and Repu^tion which my Ancestors have heretofore sustain^d by Gods
permission, must expire and vanish in ^y unworthiness: I say (Sir) again and
again, debating often these Circumstances with my self (and truly not without
the common weaknesses and passions of humanity, from which I am of all men
least exempted) an extreme desire did lately assail me to entertain between my
other Private Studies, some such discourse as might work upon mine own mind,
and at least abstract a while, if not elevate my cogitations above all earthly
objects. Whereupon, toward the end of this last Lent (a time of contracted
thoughts) I fell to think of that Theme, which I have now entitled, The loss
of Friends, and final Resignation of our selves. Intending, though it be the
highest and uttermost point of Christian Philosophy, to familiarize it between
us as much as I can, and to address it in form of a Letter to your self. For,
with whom can I treat of this matter more properly, being both of us almost
precisely of equal age, and by the love which you are pleased to bear me, all
Joy in the Fruition, and all Grief in the Privation of Friends common between
us.

Now Sir, etc.
My dearly and worthily ever honored Nephew,
THis is that Saturnine time of the year which most molesteth such splenetick
bodies (as mine is) by the revolution of melancholic blood, which throws up
fastidious fumes into the head, whereof I have had of late my share: Howsoever,
this trusty Fellow of our Town being hired by one about some business to
Cambridge (as he is often hither and thither) and acquainting me commonly with
his motions, I have gladly stretched his present journey as far as the
Redgrave: hoping by him to have an absolute account of your well being, which
Nicolas my Servant left in a fair disposition.

Let me therefore by this opportunity entertain you with some of our newest
things; but briefly, for I dare not trust my brains too much.

First, for the affairs of Scotland: Est been non potuit dicere, dixit, Erit.
The wisest Physicians of State are of opinion that the Crisis is good; and I
hope your Sir Jacob Ashley, and my Sir Thomas Morton, will have a fine
employment upon the borders; Honor by the choice of their persons, money by
their journal pay, little pains, and no danger. Our Court mourns this whole
Festival with sad frugality for the untimely death of the young Duke of Savoy,
our Queens Nephew, hastened they say by the Cardinal his Uncle, who would first
have illegitimated him, and that not taking effect by the supportment of Spain,
he fell to other Roman Arts; so as the said Cardinal to decline this black
report, is gone a wandering; and as it is thought, will visit barefoot the Holy
Land. In the mean time, methinks I see him with a crew of Banditi and Bravi in
his company, and his own Conscience a continual Hangman about him. The Queen
Mother stirs little between Majesty and Age: She has published a short
Manifesto, touching the reasons of her recess from Bruxels, wherein is one very
notable conceit: That she had long born silently the affronts done her by the
Prince, Cardinals, Counselors, and Underofficers, upon no other reason, then
the very shame to have received them. Of himself she speaks with good
respect, but I know not how the Character of Humility (which she gives him)
will be digested: for perchance he had rather have been painted like a Lion
then a Lamb. Our Queens Delivery approaches, in a good hour be it spoken.
There is newly sworn her Servant, a lovely Daughter of Sir Richard Harisons,
our Neighbor in Barkshire, to answer Mademoiselle Darci on her Mothers side.
The Count Palatine since his late defeat, is gotten in disguised habit to
Hamborough, and as they say, has been there visited by the King of Denmark,
amidst that cold Assembly of Ambassadors: But in his passage between the said
Town and Bremen, was like to have been taken by an ambush of Free-booters, who
no doubt would have made sale of him. Certain it is, that his Brother Prince
Rupert sought very nobly before he yielded; whereof such notice was taken, even
by the Count of Hatfield himself, that he has ever since been kept by him in a
strong place, rounded, day and night with a guard of naked Swords; yet in the
Tablets of one that had leave to visit him, the Prince made a shift to comfort
the Queen his Mother with a line or two to this sense: That whatsoever became
of himself, he would never change his Religion, nor his Party. We hear my Lord
Craven has made his composition under 20000. l. As for Ferents, I believe his
own head must ransom him, or his heels. The Popes Treaty at Colen goes Il
pass del Gambaro, rather backward then forward. And all deliberatives of State
seem to depend much upon the event of Brisach, which I use to call the German
Helena, long woed, but for ought I hear yet, an Imperial Virgin. These are our
foreign Rapsodies: I will end in somewhat nearer us. You receive herewith the
Copy of my last or second Letter to Mr. Carry Raleigh, and his answer thereunto.
Believe it Sir, (whatsoever conceit his actions shall breed) that he is a
Gentleman of dextrous abilities, well appearing in the management of a business
so tender and delicate, as that which now runs between us, which for my part
I resolve to press no further: For (to depose my mind as plainly as I may
safely in your breast) I never could observe my great good effect to ensue upon
violent disswasions in businesses of this nature, but rather an obduration then
an abversion: Howsoever, I would fain (as the occasion suggesteth) propound
unto your judgment a pretty Moral doubt, super tota materia, which I have
heard discussed, and resolved affirmatively among some skilful Humorists, who
^evv the World well. The Question was this, Whether in such a case precisely
as ours of mere scandal, without apparent truth, some inclining to think the
worst, and some the best, there be left room for any middle imagination between
good and ill? In the solution of which point, I will crave pardon to reserve a
secret till we meet, at which I believe you will smile.

We are here (God be blessed) all well: Our Audit ended a little before
Christmass-day, more troublesome then fruitful, after the fashion. The same
Officers as the year before, every man of them your Servant, or otherwise they
had wanted my voice. Mr. Harison has been of late somewhat more then
heretofore troubled with certain Nephritical fits; but they are transient and
light, Et jam mansueta mala. Mr. Powel speaks of you with much devotion, as
all other whom you have once touched with your Magnetical virtue. In the
Conclusion let me, as with a Box of Marmalad, close up your stomach with one of
the Genialest pieces that I have read in my lifetime, of the same unaffected
and discheveled kind, (as I may term it) sent me newly from London; which if
you have seen before, I am out of countenance. And so (Sir) vvishing you (for I
cannot vvish you better on earth) after the sweet apprehension of Gods
continual favor, the fruition of your self: I rest, at what distance soever,

From the College on the Eve of the New year, through which God send you a
blessed passage, and many more.

Your unseparable Servant, H. WOTTON.

ADDITIONAL LETTERS TO SEVERAL PERSONS: Now first Published from the Authors
own Copies.
King James to Sir Henry Wotton, 1616.
To Our Right trusty and well-beloved Sir Henry Wotton, Knight, Our Ambassador
Resident with the State of Venice. James R.

RIght trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well. Whereas many of the Gentry,
and others of Our Kingdoms, under pretense of travel for their experience, do
pass the Alps, and not contenting themselves to remain in Lombardy or Tuscany,
to gain the language there, do daily flock to Rome, out of vanity and curiosity
to see the Antiquities of that City; where falling into the company of Priests
and Jesuits, or other ill-disposed persons, they are not only corrupted with
their Doctrine, but poisoned with their Positions, and so return again into
their Countries, both averse to Religion, and ill-affected to Our State and
Government. Forasmuch as we cannot think upon any better means to prevent that
inconvenience hereafter, then by imposing the care of that business in part
upon you: These are therefore to require you, to take notice with diligence of
all such, as by the way of Venice shall bend their courses thither, and to
admonish them, as from Us, that they should not presume to go beyond the bounds
of the Dukedom of Florence, upon any occasion whatsoever. After which advice
of yours given unto them, if any Subject of Ours, of what degree or condition
soever, shall be either so much forgetful of the duty he does owe to Us, or so
little respective of his own good, as to press further, to the breach of Our
Commandment delivered them by you; Our Will and Pleasure is, that you should
forthwith acquaint us with the Names of the persons, who shall so miscarry
themselves, that upon notice thereof from you, We may take such further order
with them, for the redress of this mischief, as to Our Wisdom shall seem good.

Given under Our Signet at Newmarket, the seventh day of December, in the
fourteenth year of Our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland
the fiftieth, 1616.
[Venice, 1618.]
My most Honored Lord and Patron,
MY humble suit unto your Lordship is this: It is His Majesty's usual Grace, to
yield His foreign Servants the comfort of His Gracious sight once in three
years, as this Republic does likewise recall their Ministers, which Term by
my Privy Seal will end on the first of February next.

I do therefore humbly beg, that by your Lordships intercession, I may have
leave to return home for a month or six vveeks, concurring two urgent
occasions.

The one, for the pursuit of a business depending on a Patent long since
granted to Sir Edward Dymock and me, whereunto I am summoned by His Majesty's
Attorney, as will appear unto your Lordship by the Copy of the said Attorneys
Letter, (coming herewith) written to my Brother Sir James Wotton, my Feoffee
in trust; wherein my presence is necessary, by reason of some differences
between the said Sir Edward Dymock and me. And this is a Case wherein we are
to maintain His Majesty's Title, as has been endeavored, with our own moneys
hitherto unfruitfully spent.

The other, for the re-ordering of my Exchanges, which have been much
incommodated by the failing of Seignor Burlamachie's credit here, (though it
stand well in other places) by a trick that was played him.

While I shall be at home, I will challenge nothing from His Majesty's
Exchequer, though perchance I shall bring some observations, not altogether
unprofitable, as a public Instrument. I will likewise neither trouble His
Majesty as the Fountain, nor your Lordship as the Means, with any private
suit, in the way of mine own fortune. For by His Royal Goodness, and by your
favorable mediation, I am already abundantly satisfied in some Expectatives,
(as marks of His Grace, and of your Patronage) which have not only exceeded my
merits, but even quieted mine appetites. Only thus much I humbly crave, That by
His Majesty's toleration of my weaknesses, I may still retain this charge, and
live upon his service, without farther burden unto him, because I see no man
hasty at home, to die for my benefit.

1619. A Report of my Negotiation in Germany, and of some Particularities
occurring in my Journey.
To my most Gracious Sovereign and Master.
I Came to Munichen, the Court of Bavaria, in the evening before the Feast of
Corpus Christi, and in my company, the Duke Ioachimus Ernestus of Ho^stein,
who since the ceasing of Arms in Friuli, had lived with me at Venice: which
I mention as a duty, having been recommended unto me, and to that State, by
Your Majesty's special Letters, and in truth likewise by his own worthy
dispositions. Here we thought only to have stolen a sight, in some private
vvindow, of the Procession the next day, where we were told the Princes and
whole Court would be: But in the morning we were prevented by the Duke
Maximilian, who having gotten knowledge of our qualities, sent a Baron of his
Bedchamber with Coaches to conduct us to the Court; which gracious surprisal
we could not civilly resist. At the Court we were placed, by the Dukes own
appointment, in a Gallery; where when we saw a more solemn and sober
Procession, then I had beheld even at Rome, under the Popes eyes; as perhaps,
all superstition is loosest at the fountain. In this Procession, a little after
the Duke and his Brother Albertus, went two young Sons of one of them, that
were thrown out of the window at Prage, who since then have been fostered in
Bavaria: And from hence we took our first judgment of the affections of that
Court. I cannot omit, that at this Solemnity were two Jesuits; who otherwise
in Italy do studiously decline the familiarity of such public appearances, for
preservation of respect: At which when I did express some wonder, I was told
between jest and earnest, that indeed the greater Fathers were more reserved of
their presence; but these were only like Ushers over the Seminary Boys, to
keep them in awe at this Show.

This done, the Duke of Holstein and my self were led and lodged in several
Quarters of the Palace: and before Dinner, the Duke Maximilian (though tired
with walking) sent singly for me, and passed with me more then an hour in
private and free discourse: Falling into it, with as serious protestation as
mine ears ever heard, that though he was bred in the Roman Faith, yet no Prince
living did more honor and reverence the great virtues, and eminent wisdom of
the King my Master, to whom he had the honor to be allied, both by marriage,
and by his own descent; and therefore should have thought it a disgrace for
him, to let me go that way, without offering me, after I had passed the Alps,
a little commodity of repose in that poor House, as he was pleased to term it;
being otherwise one of the most capable, magnificent, and regular Fabrics of
Christendom; and all of his own device and erection in five years. He told me
besides, how sensible he was of the honor which the Count Palatine had done
him with a personal surprisal; and how ashamed, that the times had not yet
permitted him to revenge that favor, which he had vowed to do with the first
opportunity: And the rather, that he might invite Your Majesty's most virtuous
Daughter (who has filled these Countries with her excellent fame) to come and
take possession in Bavaria of her Woods and Fields, and to kill all there that
had either wings or feet. This was the Complemental part of his Speech. In the
rest, he bewailed the present appearance of unquietness in the Empire: He
lamented likewise the situation of his own State, which made it hard for him to
preserve himself neutral, though he had studied it. He spoke of Ferdinando's
person, kindly; of his fortune, doubtfully: of the Bohemians, with a cool
temper; rather censuring the form of their proceeding, then the cause: of
himself, with singular moderation, and without the least discovery of any
ambitious affections, though we found his Courtiers warm enough in their hopes.

After Dinner, he sent for the Duke of Holstein: And then came himself with his
whole train to visit me on that side where I was placed, (an honor done
seldom before^, as I heard, to any Ambassador) where he spent with me about
half an hour, with new affirmations of his reverent respect toward Your
Majesty: As likewise, the morning following; when with much ado, we got leave
to be gone. Which noble language he afterward (as not contented with a verbal
profession) did prosecute in a Letter that I received from him on the way,
which I reserve to be shown Your Majesty.

This was my entertainment in the Bavarian Court, by a Prince (I am bound to
say) every way good, but in that wherein he should be best: of noble manner in
his hospitality; of sharp conceit, of great erudition; and both orderly and
lovingly served. Which Circumstances I have thought it my part to set down the
more particularly, for that, I am certainly informed of much jealousy both
taken and expressed by the Pope, at the Count Palatine's reception in that
Court; and more, for a Book written by his Chancellor, and published by the
Dukes direct Command, (prefixed in the front thereof) in defense of Ludovicus,
the Bavarian excommunicated Emperor: Which things considered, make his kindness
to Your Majesty's Servant, and professions toward Your Royal Person, more
notable. Now to proceed:

At Augusta I took language, that the Princes and States of the Union had
deferred their Assembly ten days: which gave me opportunity to find them
together at Heilbrun, whom I should have missed at their own homes. And for due
respect, I gave the Count Palatine notice of my intent to be there, by a
Gentleman expressly sent. Of what I did in Augusta for Your Majesty's service, I
bring with me the Account. Being arrived at Heilbrun, the day after the first
sitting of the Princes, I repaired immediately to the Count Palatine, as
Director, not only of the Union; but likewise of me; (for so I told him was
Your Majesty's. Will:) who after he had spoken with his Associates, did order
the form of my proceeding in this manner: With himself, I was to treat in
Individuo, both for respect of privacy, being Your Majesty's Son-in-Law, and of
Dignity, being then Provisor of the Empire, as his right style is, and not
Vicar. To the four Princes, I went jointly; they agreeing upon a room where
they would assemble, and sending for me their Coaches and Courtiers; namely,
the Marquess of Anspach, (who has the precedence, as an Electoral branch) the
Duke of Wirtemberg, the Marquess of Baden, and the Prince Christianus of
Anhalt, respondent for his own House: The Landgrave Maurice of Hassia was not
there, but voiced to be sick. The Marquess of Brandenburg was out of the Empire
in Prussia, and his Son in the Low Provinces. The Representants of the three
United Cities, Nurenburg, Strasburg, and Ulm, (which direct the meaner Towns)
were to come all jointly (as they did) to my Lodging. The Count Palatine met me
at the Stair-head; and did render me the visitation, where I lay, in person:
The Princes came all jointly down into the very Street, to take me from my
Coach; and in like manner brought me down again unto it; and did afterward
visit me all together: The Marquess of Anspach then presenting unto me their
Answer in writing, with all due commemoration of their obligations to Your
Majesty. The Representants of the Cities did present their Answer verbally at
my Lodging by the Syndic of Strasburg, with no less zeal and devotion then the
Princes had done. And this was the formal part, full of all just respect that
could be expressed in that place. Now touching the real part: When I had
conferred with the Count Palatine your Majesty's scope in the main business, I
found him in truth for himself exceeding forward; but for the other Princes and
Towns he objected two difficulties: The one was, the present distractions of
Germany, which made the Proposition somewhat unseasonable. The other was, the
differences between our Church and those of the Augustine Confession; which
though but few, yet perchance might a little hinder their concurrence with us
in this excellent work: especially the Lutheran Princes, being likely to do
nothing without counsel of their Ministers, and they being the passionatest Men
amongst them. These two objections considered, it was thought fit by the Count
Palatine, (into whose hands I had delivered my self) after deliberation with
his own Counselors, that I should at this time only dispose the other Princes,
and Representants of Cities, in your Majesty's Name, toward a concurrence,
with apt lenitives and probabilities; and that I should endeavor, by your
Majesty's Christian persuasion, to remove all asperity that might impeach it,
leaving a more particular prosecution thereof till the noise of the Empire were
settled: in which mean while, many things might be further thought on to
advance this purpose, and be conferred afterward by Letters.

Hereupon I framed my Speech to the Princes in the manner following.

I told them, that I brought thither two sorts of Commissions, The one from the
Duke and Senate of Venice, sub fide tacita, which I presented in writing,
containing a profession of much good will from that State toward them, and a
clear inclination to a streighter correspondence with them: In contemplation of
whom, the Republic had resolved not to permit the transport of any succors
cross their Gulf into Austria, for the further troubling of Germany. This was
the substance of that I brought under silent confidence, without any other
credit then mine own honesty might bear; which had been delivered unto me by
order of Senate, whom I acquainted thus far, that I would take homewards the
way of Germany. Wherein I craved from the Princes and the rest some taste of
their inclinations, that these fair offers might be farther prosecuted by your
Majesty's mediation, whom I knevv much to desire the further strengthening of
this Body with good Amities.

My other Commission was (as I said) from mine own Royal Master, from whom I
brought Letters of his confidence unto them; after presentation whereof, and
all other due premises, I told them,

That your Majesty having long and deeply considered the corruptions that have
grown in your own Kingdoms, and in the States of your Confederates and Friends,
by the secret practices of Jesuits, did finally observe but one only cause of
this creeping mischief, and but one only remedy; which you had thought meet
to communicate with them by an express though a covered Legation, under the
color of my return homewards. The cause of the said evils was, that we had
left the Pope at too much ease in his own Provinces; the remedy would be, to
cut him out so much work at home, as should force him to gather his thoughts
about himself, and in conclusion to revoke his Emissaries for the maintaining
of Italy. To do this, there were but four means:

1. By the advantage of Arms in time of Action. 2. By open Preaching. 3. By
dispersion of Books. 4. By secret Semination.
For the first, it was true, that the late necessity of calling French* (among
whom there were many of our Religion) into Piedmont, and the Dutch, Flemish,
and English into Friuli, had done some good by freedom of conversation, all
Inquisition ceasing at such times: But this violent way must be left to
further occasion.

For the second, although there had been for one whole Lent public preaching
against the Roman doctrine in Venice; yet that Liberty and the Popes
Excommunication did cease together, and must so abide till new opportunity.

For the third, I acquainted them how greedy the Italians were of our
Treatises in matter of Controversy, and of diverse ways that had been used both
to excite, and to satisfy that curiosity, both by the works of the Arch
bishop of Spalato, since his retirement into your Majesty's protection; and of
a Discourse that was ready to come abroad, wherein should be discovered by a
great intelligent man, even of their own breeding, all the Practices of the
Council of Trent, out of the Original Registers and secret Papers; wherein
your Majesty had a hand, for the benefit of the Christian World.

For the fourth and last way, of secret Semination, wherein we had been
hitherto wholy deficient and asleep: This I said was the particular scope of
my present charge.

In this your Majesty did exhort them by all fervent persuasion to join with
you their counsels and cares, their diligence and powers, according to such
vvays as should be hereafter propounded either by your Majesty to them, or
conceived amongst themselves. Whereunto your Majesty had been stirred, first by
the zeal of Gods glory; next, by a Religious shame and indignation, to see
Superstition more active then the Truth: Thirdly, by the instance of diverse
well-affected Persons, both within the Body of Italy, and in the Confines
thereof. And lastly, by the opportunity which the present time it self did
yield unto it: which I did particularly remonstrate unto them; but being
matter of secrecy, I will keep it in my pen till I arrive with your Majesty.

After which, I concluded with your Majesty's most loving and Christian
persuasions unto them (which they could not refuse, coming from such a Friend)
to lay aside our own small differences, to suppress the heat of passionate
Divines by Civil Authority, and to join together against the common Adversary
of our Churches and States.

And because the free passage into Italy was a point much importing the
present purpose, as likewise in other respects very considerable, your Majesty
did entreat them to spend their earnest intercession by a common Letter to the
Cantons of Zurick and Bern, That they would endeavor by all means possible (as
being incomparably the fittest Mediators) to re-establish the League between
the Venetians and the Grisons; to which both parties were well inclining,
but there vvanted a third to break the business, and to remove the scruple of
who shall begin, which had hitherto hindered the effect.

This was my poor exposition of Your Commands: whereof I thought it my duty to
render Your Majesty this preambulatory Account, for Your ease at mine arrival,
and for mine own discharge: bringing with me, the Letters and Answers of the
Princes, as I hope, to Your Majesty's full contentment.

I will conclude with my most humble thanks unto Your Royal Goodness, for this
Employment above all other: And with my prayers to God, that the weakness of
the Instrument, may not prejudice the excellent intention of the Master and
Director.

1620.
Instructions to Our trusty and well-beloved Servant Henry Wotton Knight, at
his employment about the Affairs of Germany, to the Emperor Ferdinand to Our
Dear Son-in-Law JAMES'.
Fred^ick the Prince Elector, and Count Palatine of Rhene, etc. to the Princes
of the Union in Body, or to their Sub-director in place of Our said Son-in-Law;
And to other Princes and States, as the Duke of Saxony, Bavaria; and upon
occasion, as his particular Letters of Credence shall direct him.

YOu are to know, that this your employment is, for the present, merely
exploratory and provisional, to give Us a clear and distinct Account of the
present Affairs, both how they stand at your arrival there, (being every day
changeable) and how they incline in the future; and particularly, to sound the
affections, and the matter, how far they be capable of any reasonable measure
of agreement; that from thence We may take judgment, whether it shall be fit
for Us to add any others unto you in a main Treaty, with safety of Our Honor,
and benefit of the Cause; or to send others in your room, and to release you
from that business, to your ordinary Residence at Venice. Wherein We are
contented to defer thus much to your discretion; that if you shall find things
desperate, and the Emperors Party absolutely victorious, you may then, after a
Currier dispatched unto Us with advertisement of all circumstances, take your
way to Venice: If, otherwise, you shall find the Forces on both sides to stand
within such terms of equality, as the event is like in probability to continue
dubious, and uncertain, you shall then attend the issue, till the blow shall be
stricken; and upon all important variations of occurrences, you shall signify
the same unto Us.

2. According to this scope of your employment; you shall hold with all those
Pri^s, from the highest to the meanest, and from those that are most remote in
respect, to those that are nearest unto Us in nature and Alliance, the same
language; assuring them all, that We constantly continue in Our own Principles,
that is, in first desiring the quiet of Christendom, and particularly of those
parts, by all possible means, wherein We have formerly expressed by a noble
Embassage of one of Our nearest Servants, before Our Brother the French King
did enter into it, and before Our Selves shall be drawn to any other
resolution; which We thought meet to make publicly known, both by Our said
former Ambassador the Vicount Doncaster, and now by you; leaving the rest to
God and time.

3. Touching your address, first or second, to one part or other, We leave it
to your discretion upon the place, when you have consulted with the Princes of
the Union in general, or with their Subdirector for the time, whither you may
best direct your self; whom you shall pray in Our Name to assist you therein
with their best advice: as likewise in all things else concerning the present
Affairs: That after this exploration of the business, being much altered since
our first Embassage, We may know what it shall be fit for Us further to direct.

4. Whereas We are informed, that the Ambassadors of Our Brother the French
King, have Instructions to propound two things, 1. A Surceasance of Arms, 2. An
Imperial Diet; you shall signify, that in the first of these motions We mainly
concur with Him; and in the other, so far as by the directions of Our Dear
Son-in-Law you shall find convenient for the public good, and His own.

5. Touching the Dukes of Saxony and Bavaria, and any other Prince not
comprised within the Union, you shall desire them heartily in Our Name to join
with Us for the common tranquillity, that things may not pass to a further
irritation of those Princes and States, and particularly of Our Selves, which
otherwise profess Pacifical and Christian ends: fortifying your exhortation
therein with the best reasons that you can collect out of the present Affairs,
as they shall appear unto you.

6. To all Princes whom it may any way concern, you shall make it known, that
in the Election of Our Son-in-Law to the Crown of Bohemia, We had no part by
any precedent Counsel or practice; which We affirm in the faith and truth of a
Christian Prince: And are likewise informed of his own clearness therein, by
vehement affirmations, and by most probable Circumstances.

A Copy of my Dispatch to the King, from Vienna, September. 7. 1620.
May it please my most Gracious Sovereign,
IF Your Majesty, since my last Account from Augusta, of what I had handled
with the Duke of Loreign, and Wirtenberg, with the Archduke Leopold, and with
the Communities of Strasburg and Ulm; shall have expected to hear before now,
what I do in this place, the obligation of Your own goodness, and bounties
toward me, besides the conscience of my charge and duty, may in the mean while
have assured Your Majesty, that no diligence or fidelity on my part has been
wanting in the pursuit of Your Commands and Christian ends, as I hope shall
appear by this Dispatch: Wherein first, It may please Your Majesty to
understand, that I have been ten days here in Vienna, after I had been four
whole days stayed by the Emperor at Clo^ster-Nyberg on the Dannby, not above
a Dutch mile or little more from this Town, whilst a House, and all other
things were preparing for my reception: Which course was likewise held with the
French Ambassadors in the same measure. During which time of my stay, the
Emperor sent me, some Provisions, and vvithal the young Baron of Harach to
conduct me hither, and here continually to assist me, for procurement of my
Audiences, or any other conveniences, being a Gentleman of the Emperors
Bedchamber, twice heretofore employed in foreign Ambassages, Son-in-lavv to
the Count Eckemberg, the Emperors Favorite, and Son to the next of his
Counselors in grace and credit; though the young Baron of Mersberg, Captain of
his Guard, was sent to the French, yet I perceive in the choice of this other
Gentleman, an equality of respect toward your Majesty was used.

An hour after my arrival here, he sent to bid me vvelcome the Count of Mecaw,
heretofore Lord Chamberlain to the Emperor Matthias, and a Counselor to
this, in tertiis quartisve. I am placed near to the Court, in the House of the
Baron de Gabriana, with rich furniture and good attendance, and hitherto at
the Emperors charge, which within a while must cease, of which I have given
the Reason in my Letter to Mr. Secretary Nanton. In the mean time I must
profess unto your Majesty, that no circumstance of due regard to the Honor of
your Name has been here omitted, but all done with unexpected freedom; in so
much as to accompany me at my Table, are sent and admitted Gentlemen of both
Religions, and of the best degree, which in the meaner Courts of Germany I
have noted to pass with more restraint. Thus much concerning my Reception,
which is the formal part.

Now before I pass unto the material, it is a piece of curiosity to tell unto
your Majesty, what discords I here find amongst the public Instruments,
which seem somewhat considerable: The French Ambassadors have been here about
seven vveeks, and to this hour are unvisited by the Spanish (though close
adjoining them) upon a meagre punctuality; for thus it stands, The French
arrived on the Monday at night; the Spaniard sent immediately to vvelcome them
his Secretary, ex forma. They have Audience the next morning following: that
passed, the Count Ognate demands leave to visit them in the afternoon; they
desire to be excused, being a day of ordinary dispatch. The excuse is accepted;
but because they did not afterward, without a second demand, send him word
that they would be at leisure, incrassatus est sanguis, on the Spanish side. A
much deeper and incurable case is fallen out betwixt the French and the
Extraordinary Ambassador of Parma, who, after the French sent first unto him,
as they say, (though he affirms it was the Spaniard) did yet visit the
Spaniard before them belike, according to the method of his devotion, and
proximity to his Master, or of Authority in this Court: howsoever, hereupon the
Duke of Angolesme assigned the same Ambassador a day to visit him, and when
he came alla buona, he shut his Gates upon him: Which is here generally the
worse interpreted, because he is a Bishop, seeming an affront to both his
qualifications. In such a touchy time as this, I had almost had my share; to
whom, after the three French Ambassadors had sent their three Secretaries (for
prevention of the Spaniard) as far as Cloister Newburg, where I made my stop:
they were likewise the first here that sent to visit me, but came all three
together, and with them Monsieur de Beaugie the Ordinary Agent: Whereupon fell
a little disputation between us, Whether visits of respect between
Representants of equality, being received in specie, should be paid in
individuo? which seemed unto me no good complemental Logic: but finding
afterward, first, that their Commissions were the same; then, that the
Emperor had sent to their several Lodgings; and the Popes Nuncio, though
visited in gross, had visited them apart, I made an end of this scruple: yet
not before a promise, that if your Majesty should send more Ambassadors hither,
they will proceed a la pareille with them: having gained thus much by this
small debate, that perchance they think me not over-punctual, nor altogether
supine. I have likewise received and rendered to the Spanish Ambassador all due
formalities, and from all other Ambassadors and Agents, except the Popes, and
the Duke of Parma's, whose habits make us incommiscible. Of the rest I need
not speak at all; of the French and Spanish I will presume to speak my
opinion, as far as may conduce to the main. I find the French surely of good
intention toward a peace here, but not hasty either to believe in truth that
the Crowns of Hungaria or Bohemia were Hereditary. Here, at their first
coming, they had more credit (as I receive from a good hand) then they seem to
have now; which is thought to proceed from the Spanish Ambassador, who in
this Court is not only the Supreme Counselor, but has in truth a Dictatoriam
potestatem, as the French find; the reason being not very obscure: for when I
put in the major, that the Emperors resolutions depend upon necessities; and in
the minor, that his necessities depend upon Spain, I think I may spare the
conclusion. Thus stand the public Ministers here, and thus they stand one
with another; which I thought fit to set down, because it has some influence
into the general business.

Now to proceed to the scope of my employment in matter of substance. I had
Audience of the Emperor (as the French) the second day after my arrival, where
what I said, will best appear to your Majesty out of the Memorial, which I
afterward [sent] unto him, at his own requisition, here following word for
word, as I have translated it out of the Italian, in which language the
Emperor treats most willingly.

The Proposition of Henry Wotton Knight, Ambassador Extraordinary from his
Majesty of Great Britain, delivered in the Name of his Sovereign-Lord the King
with all real intention to his Sacred Imperial Majesty, the 23 of August, stylo
vet. did contain four points.
FIrst, That his Imperial Majesty would be pleased to make known his
inclination toward a sincere Treaty upon the present Motions.

Secondly, That it will please him by one or two, or more, to inform the said
Ambassador of all the fundamental Arguments in the merit of the Cause, which
shall be most faithfully represented by him to the King his Master.

Thirdly, Either his Imperial Majesty will refuse, or agree to enter into
Treaty: In the first case, It were vain for Representants of Princes of good
intentions, to spend further the Reputation of their Masters. In the second,
His Majesty of Great Britain does think it most convenient, that both the
Parties, together with their Confederates, be contented to condescend to a
cessation of Arms for some competent time; lest while their Reconcilements
were in Treaty, their passions be more exasperated then before.

Fourthly, That for the furthering of their Reconcilement, His Imperial Majesty
would be pleased to free the passages of Curriers from Vienna to Prague; which
shall be procured likewise on the other side.

Besides these substantial points, the said Ambassador did touch three
Considerations about the Person of His Sovereign Lord the King, which did
render Him with His Imperial Majesty of indubitable credit, although interessed
by so strait Bonds in the contrary side.

First, His Majesty's clearness in the beginning of these Motions:

Secondly, His Neutrality in the progress thereof:

Thirdly, His Equity in the present.

Touching the first point, the Ambassador declared in His Majesty's Name, with
high and holy affirmations, that He had had in Election of His Son-in-Law to
the Crown of Bohemia, no participation of Counsel, or foreknowledge. Which
His Majesty did not only affirm for Himself; but as indubitably in the Person
of His Son-in Law, that he had no way fore-practised that Election.

For the second point, of Neutrality, the Ambassador said, that His Majesty had
not yet given the Title of King to His Son-in-Law, or of Queen to His Daughter,
in any Letter either public or private; nor had permitted the same Title, in
any Sermons, within His Kingdoms.

As for the third point, of Equity, the Ambassador showed most evidently, the
great moderation and aequanimity of the King his Master, in not having settled
any firm judgment touching the merit of the Cause, upon information from that
side wherein His Majesty is most interessed, without first requiring farther
knowledge from the Emperor himself by an express Minister.

This was the Memorial of my Proposition.

Four days after, the Emperor sends me word, that his Answer was ready;
giving me my choice, whether I would receive it from himself, or else from
the Baron of Eckemberg his Principal Counselor; and, whether verbally, or in
vvriting, or both. In this gracious option, I took hold of the vvriting,
because scripta manent: and wished I might have it from the Baron, without
the Emperors farther trouble, till from it might rise some new occasion. To
the Baron I was called two days after; whom I found infirmer of his feet then
of his head; for in truth he is a Gentleman of strong conceit, and fair
delivery, though (as most of the Court are) tainted with the Jesuit. From him
I received (besides complements, and many thanks, for the honor that your
Majesty had done his Master; and vehement protestation of entire belief in your
Christian intentions at the present, and of your former clearness) the Paper
that comes herewith, indorsed, Contenta Resolutionis Caesareae data
Nobilissimo Legato serenissimi Regis Magnae Brittanniae. In delivery whereof,
the Baron seeming much to insist upon the persons [to] whom the Emperor had
formerly been content to commit the business: as first, to the four
Interposers, whereof the Count Palatine himself was one; then to the whole
Electoral College, even after sufficient offense to distaste him from the
Bohemians, who would have hindered his Election at Francfort; I say, by these
recapitulations perchance silently inferring, that the German Princes were the
properest Intervenients: I was moved to tell him, that I knew, Your Majesty in
this case was more ambitious of the good, then of the glory; and if Your
worthier Servants at Prague, and I here, cooperating with the French, could
prepare the matter, is it were in Chylo, for a fuller concoction hereafter by
more hands, we should think our selves very happy: With which reply he seemed
extremely pleased.

To the third point, about a Cessation, he spoke somewhat more gloriously, then
we here see cause; that things were now too far run on, the Emperors
preparations being made, and his friends in motion: wherein he gave a touch
(though more, I think, then he could then say) upon Saxony: he added likewise,
that no doubt the Count Palatine was as forward with his powers, and
Confederates, naming Bethlem Gabor, and perchance, said ^e, by his means the
Turk I replied (as I had done before to the Emperor himself) that the event of
Arms was uncertain; and pittyfull to conceive, what desperation might breed:
But in the mean time, I had heard wise men of opinion, that the Count Palatine
had done the Emperor no d^spleasure in accepting the Crown of Bohemia, laid
upon him by those, which peradventure, might otherwise have placed it on a
worse neighbor to these Provinces. To which truth the Emperor (when I said
it) nor himself replied any thing: and upon my conscience, so they think.

To the last, about freeing the Passage, he understood me too largely, as if I
had meant the re-establishment of a Current Post, which round about this place
is every where broken: but he has granted his safe Conduct, upon occasion, as
far as he is able; though ea condition, as Your Majesty sees in his written
Answer, ut non alias, quam dicti Domini Legati literas deferant. The only point
of jealousy that I have met with since my coming.

To the second, which I make the last, because I have most to say upon it, he
told me, that the Emperor would send to my Lodging some Persons of dignity,
and knowledge, to inform me in that Cause. As he did, the day after: namely,
the Baron Pople, Great Chancellor of Bohemia, the Baron of Straulendorf, Chief
President of the Aulical Counsel, Der Here Mostitz, Consiliarius Aulicus; the
first a Bohemian, the other two Germans: of whose persons I shall afterward
inform Your Majesty. But to proceed: The Errand, delivered by the Great
Chancellor, consisted for the most part of things I knew were often published
already, which I shall the less care for to repeat, because Your Majesty
received lately the substance thereof, under the title of, -- ex
Constitutionibus. and Privilegiis, etc. consigned to me by the said Deputies;
and likewise the same again more clearly set down and more fully expressed by a
new Author, as yet unknown, a Book the Emperor himself sent me, the day after
this Conference, to be conveyed unto Your Majesty. Two things they urged with
much vehemence: [First,] certain Letters, both from the Bohemian [Directors.]
and which is more, from all the States of Hungary, with pendent Seals; wherein
they call this Emperor [King] fifteen months after they had chosen him, and
yet the Chancellor having spoken nothing in all that time, they afterward
pretended that the Election was null. They showed likewise an Original Letter
from the Count Palatine himself, dated at Hidelberg April 23. 1619. tempore
Vicariatus, to the now Emperor, as King of Bohemia, both in the Subscription,
and the Superscription. The second urged point was, that neither the Silesians,
nor the Moravians, which concurred in the Election of the Count Palatine, had
any power to do it at that time, but that it was approved at their return home,
ex post facto. Lastly, all objections made against Ferdinando, in point of
Regiment, or Intrusion during the life of the Emperor Matthias, they are
contented, for ought I see, to bestow upon Matthias himself.

This is the substance of a long Conference, beautifully interlarded with
diverse praises of the Emperors good nature; which I think truly are due unto
him, if he be considered in his own capacity: but these Orators could give it
no credit, being, as I hear, the greatest inflamers of all this business, and
principally the principallest of them; a man saved at the time of the
defenestration, dum regnabat rosa, only by being here.

This is a faithful Relation of all that has hitherto passed between the
Emperor, or his Servants, and me in this place; wherein your Majesty sees, that
I have obtained two things: First, a freedom to propound, and next a freedom to
send: whereupon the French Ambassadors, and my self, have this very day
accorded to send jointly to Prague, for there we must begin, even in point of
civility. This is but an exploratory, and pretentative purpose between us;
about the form whereof, and the matter, we shall consult to morrow: and your
Majesty immediately upon the return of our Messengers from thence, and some
feeling of the Emperor here, shall have knowledge of all by another express
Currier.

September. 23. 1620. Duplicate of Secretary Nantons Letters.
My Lord Ambassador,
HIs Majesty has commanded me to make you this short Answer to your fair and
well-digested Relation sent by Ballard.

1. That He allows very well, and is thoroughly satisfied with the good
endeavors you have used with the Emperor.

2. That He would have you give thanks to His Imperial Majesty, for the good
respect showed to His Majesty in your Person, being His Ambassador; which we
conceive, by your Lordships Letters, to have been every way equal at least, if
not beyond those demonstrations that have been afforded the French; of which we
have received other informations out of France, that they have no more then
answered their expectations.

3. That your Lordship can do no better Service to Christ, and to his Majesty,
then to open any fair way to a Treaty. Macte, ergo, and quam nactus es spartam
exorna. You have begun well, wherein you have already facti plusquam dimidium:
know your own understanding and judgment to be such, and your zeal to the
Public, and to our Great Masters Service, that you will need neither
encouragement, nor further directions for the main, then those you carried
along with you:

That you are to deal effectually with the Emperor, not to proceed too hastily
to the publishing of the Banne, seeing that would be to deliver over the
Patrimony of His Majesty's Children unto Strangers; which were an unkind
requital of His Majesty's Princely, sincere, and moderate intentions and
proceedings toward him; and must of necessity interest and imbarque His Majesty
in the defense of His Childrens inheritance; which His Majesty hopes the
Emperor will take into his advised and serious consideration.

This is all I have to recommend unto you for the present, as from His Majesty:
for my self, I promise it my self from you, that you are resolved I am and will
remain

Your Lordships most assuredly to do you service.
Whitehal Sept. 23. 1620.
September. 1620. The Copy of my Letter written to His Majesty's Ambassadors at
Prague.
S. P.
I Do address the present unto your Lordships, or in your absence to Sir
Francis Nethersole, by this Gentleman Mr. Walter Waller, coming in company of
Monsieur de Sigonie, whom the French Ambassadors, Duke d'Angolesme, Monsieur de
Bethunes, and Monsieur de Preaux, do conjoyn with me in this Dispatch; the
scope whereof I cannot well set down, without first telling what does lead it.
I have been here almost a fortnight, well received with all imaginable
circumstances due to the honor of our Gracious Master. My proposition to the
Emperor did consist of these four points:

1. That it would please him to make known his inclination toward a sincere
Treaty upon the present Motions.

2. That he would be likewise pleased to instruct me by one, or two, or more
Persons, of choice and knowledge, in all the fundamental Arguments touching the
merit of the Cause; promising to represent them faithfully to the King my
Master.

3. To condescend to a cessation of Arms for some competent time, least while
the Reconcilement is in Treaty, the passions be more and more exasperated.

4. That for the furtherance of these good intentions, the Emperor will be
pleased to grant Passports for Curriers from Vienna toward Prague, upon all
occasions where his Armies lie.

Of these, he has yielded to the first and last; namely a freedom to treat
(whereof I made some doubt) and a freedom to send; whereupon the French
Ambassadors and my self have jointly formed this present Dispatch* to this
end, that the Elector Palatine may likewise by your Lordships, or by his
Majesty's Agent there, be drawn as far as we have disposed the Emperor in the
first and last points of my Proposition; for to this hour the Prince Christian
of Anhalt (though the French Ambassadors before my coming had written and
expressly sent unto him) has given no Answer, by which conjecture may be made,
whether the foresaid Elector will treat or no, or whether the Bohemians will
suffer it. Now because if I should end here, so much only as I have hitherto
said, would scantly import the price of the carriage, we have thought fit (I
speak still plurally in the names of the French and my self) to acquaint your
Lordships, and Sir Francis Nethersole, with some ways that have been conceived
for the effecting of our Masters good intentions about the Public repose.

It has been first thought very expedient, that both parties were drawn to
remit these great differences to a Diet at Regensburg of German Princes, with
intervention of foreign Ambassadors.

Next, some have gone so far (and this both the French and my self profess to
have taken up on the way, even amongst the Friends of the Elector) as to
project a form of Agreement upon some such Articles as these that follow.

1. That the Elector Palatine be contented to relinquish the title and
possession of the Kingdom of Bohemia.

2. That the Emperor Ferdinando, according to the first Election of the
Bohemians, and by virtue thereof shall enjoy the entire profits and title of
the said Crown, during his natural life.

3. That after the decease of the said Emperor, it shall be free for the
Bohemians to choose what King they will, and much more to admit him whom they
have designed, namely the Palatine Heir apparent.

4. That for assuring the immunities of that People, and future freedom in the
exercise of both Religions, the Emperor be contented to commit the Regiment of
the said Kingdom to the Naturals thereof.

5. That of Persons on each side banished, whether Spiritual or Civil, nothing
be said till a full agreement about the rest. Concerning these things (I mean
as well the Diet as the project) the French Ambassadors and my self do jointly
pray your Lordships, or in your absence Sir Francis Nethersole, by your wisdoms
to sound the inclinations of that place where you are, that accordingly we may
here, upon your Answer, likewise feel the Emperor (with whom it were ill
manners to begin.) Not fixing our conceits upon this which has now been
represented, but leaving it as a Bears whelp, which may be licked into a better
form; and remaining here both willing and desirous to receive either this
better polished, or some new conception from your Lordships, that we may drive
to the wished end: Of all which an account has been given from hence to our
Sovereign Master, that his high and Christian wisdom may approve, or alter what
it shall please him. And so commending to Almighty God, the God of Peace and
Love, your Lordships and the Public health, I humbly rest,

Vienna. 1620. At your Commandments, H. WOTTON.
Postsc.
I have done Mr. Dickenson (my Friend and Consociate in the Treaty at Santoan)
a great deal of wrong not to mention him in this Dispatch, if he be with your
Lordships, of which I was doubtful.



The Ambassadors Answer from Prague, October. 18. 1620.
Right Honorable,
SIr Francis Nethersole communicated unto us your Lordships of the 7th of
September St. vet. the 9th present, the impediments of journeying, with the
delays we met with at Dresden, having made our arrival so late here, that he
had not only given overture to the business, but gained such an Answer, as the
present constitution of the state of affairs, and affections of parties would
admit: for which we refer you to his Relation to whose endeavors the honor is
due. You will easily believe, that we would give all the force we could to
second this great good work, so piously intended by our gracious Master, so
requisite for Christendom, and so needful to draw our Masters dear Son-in-law,
and his blessed Lady, out of the extreme difficulties they are in, and, in this
work, to be joined with your wisdom and dexterity. Here you will find ready
affections to Peace, to treat, to admit the ways and conveniences to Treaty,
if a cessation of Arms may be accorded: but the difficulty lies to find the
medium. The Kingdom of Bohemia, and the Appurtinances, are the very question;
and they tell you here, that the granting of a disposition thereof, is to
overthrow their Privileges, Immunities, and Rights: So to leave the possession
of the Kingdom, and to keep it, is to reconcile Yea and No. Yet our earnest
longing being to see a good end of our gracious Masters blessed designs, we
cannot but think of ways to keep on foot the contentment of Traffic with you,
and communicate them, though but raw indigested conceptions of our own, to be
produced further, if your judgment and hope warrant them. This granted, that
both Parties have affection to Treat, does warrant the freedom of access to the
Instruments. Whereupon we propound as follows: That whereas His Majesty's
Son-in-law (for ought we can find) is resolute to hold both the Title and
Possession of this Kingdom, it may be advised, whether the Emperor may be drawn
to content himself with the Title, and such a compensation by a yearly
proportion of Money, as competerit and equal Arbitrators shall judge to be fit.
Hereto may be added, the quitting of Austria on the one part, and restitution
of the Palatinate on the other. As for banished Men on both sides, and
particular Rights, both Civil and Criminal, the same Arbitrators may deal
therein according to equity. Having besides Sir Francis Nethersale's faithful
endeavors, sounded with our best lines, and we cannot say found the depth, but
a kind of scantling, we offer you to measure, whether this heat of War and
Confusion may by such a Chanel be drawn to a peaceable Haven; the perfect good
steering of which, we present to your great practice in affairs of
consequence, to the good guidance whereof, we offer all our powers and
endeavors, while they may be of use; but if we find no other ground of hope
here then we have hitherto, we are resolved to dravv toward home; and in
that case, your Lordship finding occasion, may continue your addresses to Sir
Francis Nethersole, of whose careful correspondence you may rest assured.
Wherewith we rest,

From Prague, October 18. St. vet. 1620. Your Lordships in all true affection
to serve you, Edw. Conwey. Rich. Weston. J. Dickenson Secr. assistant.


October. 1620. Amico Veteri S. P.
ACcepi quas ad me Wormatia dederas Octobris 10. quibus effusius respondebo per
unum ex meis quem isthac in Angliam destinavi intra triduum.

Iamdiu scis, legatos Gallicos and me simul singulos Nobiles utriusque Nationis
cum totidem famulis in Bohemiam ablegasse, ad explorandam Coronati Electoris
mentem super eadem fere Concordiae formula, quam ipsemet mihi Stutgardae
injeceras, quamque commemorati legati, credo, etiam hauserant ex eodem font.
Ex nostris Nobilibus Gallus, nomine Sigonius, solus rediit: Is Anglum in
Oppidulo Austriae superioris (quod Freystadt vocant) reliquit sub potestate
morbi. Duo Famuli Pragae periere ex Febre Hungarica, quae perexiguo intervallo
distat a peste: Literae intactae pervenerunt, per quas incipio conjectari, quam
operosares sit circa quam sudamus. Nemo te melius novit, quantulum legati
valiant in turbatis temporibus. Igitur recte videris, exuto Civili munere
militare subiisse. Utcunque, been speramus; and de eventu, qualiscunque demum
fuerit, te faciam brevi certiorem. Interim hoc scias velim, natos hic rumores
per omnium ora, de magna Bohemorum strage, super Sigonii Galli reditu, tanquam
ipse id attulisset: quod profecto in hac Aula est familiaris ludus. Somniant
quae volunt; and cuicunque ex Castris advenienti aliquid affingunt; praecipue
paulo ante Mercurii aut Sabbati diem, quo hinc Cursores in omnes oras avolant;
quia falsa impressio interdum causa est magnorum motuum. The Memorial Exhibited
to his Imperial Majesty by Henry Wotton Knight, Ambassador Extraordinary from
the King of Great Britain, after his Audience of the 17. of November, 1620.
Translated ad verbum from the 27. Still. nov.
Italian.

1. THe said Ambassador began with thanks in the King his Masters Name, for
the good Reception he had found here, in all points of due respect to the
honor of his Majesty whom he served.

2. After this, he said, that as his Majesty had to this hour conserved himself
purely neutral in the Business of Bohemia, so he would remain hereafter, till
more liquid information then he had yet seen from either side, touching the
merit of the cause; and would proceed with all real intention in the Christian
Office of a Mediator, without entering into those of a Judge, and much less of
a Party.

3. That although his said Majesty was resolved to suspend his judgment,
forasmuch as might concern the differences between the Emperor and Bohemians;
yet he found himself tied both by nature and by reason, not to leave the
Patrimonial inheritance of his own descendents, that is, neither the inferior
nor superior Palatinate in the hands of any alien Usurper: the said Patrimony
being a thing separate from the rest of the present Controversy, and so
understood in the Treaty of Ulm by the common consent of the Lieutenants of the
Union and the League.

4. That as his Majesty of Great Britain would be unwillingly persuaded,
without the Emperors. own affirmation, that the Marquess Spinola was by his
Order entered hostility into the lower Palatinate; so much less could he
believe, that his said Imperial Majesty would lend any Authority ex post facto
to so injust an intrusion, by way of proscription, or otherwise; with which the
moderate proceeding of his Majesty in the whole progress of this Cause, from
the very first motions, should be ill recompensed.

Lastly, The Ambassador besought his Imperial Majesty, according to the
declaration of his Will already passed, to condescend actually to a sincere
Treaty upon the Bohemian Business, to which the French Ambassadors and himself
had already jointly disposed the other part.

A Copy of the Emperors Answer to my Audience, 28. Nov. 1620.
AD ea quae Serenissimi Magnae Britanniae Regis Legatus nuper, cum ore tenus,
tum scripto proposuit; Sacratissima Caesarea, and Hungariae Bohemiaeque
Majestas, Dominus noster Clementissimus, benign respondet, uti animum suum ad
solidae amicitiae atque benevolentiae studia cum 1. The Style of the Emperors
Chancery when he treats with Kings, is not Majestas, which he reserveth for
himself, but either Serenitas, or Regia Dignitas: This made him angry, when he
heard that the French Ambassadors styled Bethlem Gabor, Serenissimum: who on
the other side, gave them leave to entitle him how they would, adding this
Reason, That they were not Ambassadors which could make or unmake Kings.
serenitate sua sincere continuanda proclivem jam tum ab initio Legationis suae
dicto Domino Legato declaravit, ita etiamnum eidem s^se proposito firmiter
inhaerere.

Ad negotium autem Bohemicum quod attinet, in quo Majestati suae Caesareae
Regiaeque non alia Controversia est, quam quae Principibus, cum subditis suis
rebellibus ad obedientiae metam reducendis esse solet; certo sibi persuadet,
Serenissimum Magnae Britanniae Regem, pro singulari sua prudentia atque
integritate evidentem, quae pro Majestate sua Caesarea militat, causae
justitiam atque aquitatem agnoscere and observare; eoque magis gratum habet,
quod Affinitatem, and Genus, and Foedera, Regio sane judicio, 2. Of these words
he takes advantage, which were in your Majesty's Credentiall Letter delivered
by me.
infra Conscientiae legem hactenus sese locasse scripserit. Optasset autem
Majestas sua Caesarea, at hoc ipsum tot auxiliaribus copiis e Serenitatis suae
Regnis atque Provinciis iniquissimae causae 3. I wonder he should touch this
point, wherein I had cleared both the Archduke Leopoldus and the Emperor
himself: namely, that the first subsidiary Troops sent toward the Palatinate,
were-meerly Voluntaries, without Your Majesty's Contribution, and defensively
intended, before any noise of the Invasion.
subsidio missis, aut certe permissis, nequaquam Serenitas sua dubium
reddidisset: Sed potius Generum suum, non tantum prudentissimis monitis, atque
consiliis, verum etiam viribus substractis, ab iniqua cupiditate alienis se
Regnis immiscendi absterruisset; unde non alius quam optatus alma pacis
fructus, and ut Majestati suae in Bohemia, Palatino vero in Ditionibus, quas
Majestatis Caesareae, Saerique Romani Imperii beneficio tenebat, res
tranquillae persisterent, sperari potuisset. Nunc si in Ditionibus propriis,
quas a Suprema Majestate Caesarea, Sacroque Imperio, infeudum cum fidelitatis
obsequio recognoscere debebat, quasque Dominus Legatus 4. In declaring Your
Majesty's Will and determination from the beginning touching the Palatinates,
if they should be assailed, I told the Emperor, that though in the single
Business of Bohemia You had suspended Your judgment till more liquid proofs;
yet You found Your Self tied, both by Nature and Reason, not to suffer the
Patrimonial Inheritance of Your Own Descendents in the hands of an Alien
Usurper.
Patrimonium appellat, poenam temerarii ambitus contra Dominum and Imperatorem
suum, Serenissimi Regis. Gener experitur, non habet quem culpet, praeterquam
quod animo suo obsecundare, and intempestivis suorum consiliis, quam
prudentissimis Majestatis suae Cesareae, Regum, Electorum and Principum,
ipsiusque Soceri sui consiliis defer maluerit.

Et sane nullus non iniquissimum aestimabit, si tempestive praecavere non
liceret, ne Feuda and beneficia quae a Supremo Monarcha fluunt, in propriam
suam injuriam redundent: quod quidem Serenissimo Magnae Britanniae Regi (cui
perpetuam in Regnis suis pacem ex animo Majestas sua Caesarea precatur) uti
rerum humanarum vices sunt, tam aliquando obesse posset, quemadmodum nunc ad
injustam Generi causam colorandam praetenditur.

Hinc itaque Dominus Legatus rations haud obscure colliget, quibus permota
Majestas sua Caesarea, vigore Constitutionum Imperialium, ad turbatam Imperii
pa^em redintegrandam, and Inclytae Domus suae Iura vindicanda, Primarium
Imperii Principem, and Patruelem suum charissimum, Archiducem Albertum
requisiverit, a quo 5. At this Audience I told the Emperor, that Your Majesty
would hardly be persuaded, without his own affirmation, that Spinola had
invaded the Palatinate by his express Order: And much less believe, that he
would lend any approbation thereunto ex post facto, by way of Ban, or
otherwise. Which action of Spinola, the Emperor does here assume: But whether
such was his meaning, from the beginning; or that his success in Bohemia has
bred this resolution, may be somewhat questionable. Always sure it is, that he
affirmed unto the French Ambassadors long since, that the Marquess Spinola was
to come into Bohemia.
Marchio Spinola cum florente exercitu, Literis Majestatis suae Caesareae
Patentibus munitus, adversus eum submissus, qui nulla injuria lacessitus,
rebellibus subditis, infami and abominando quibuscunque Regibus and Principibus
exemplo, patrocinari, and Regiae Imperatoris atque Domini sui Coronae verticem
suum submittere ausus fuit.

Circa Tractatum de Pace instituendum, declarat se sua Caesarea Majestas ab
eodem b^d quaquam alienum; quodque intellecto Consilio Inclytae Domus suae
Principum, nec non Electorum and Principum, quorum hictenus fidelem operam
adhibuit, 6. Of this term of 40 days, and the following restriction, not to
treat touching any Province that in the mean time shall be reduced to his
obedience, I have written the true cause in my Letter to Your Majesty.
intra dies quadraginta circiter se resolvet: quem tamen Tractatum ad illas
saltem Provncias extendi vult, quae interim vel armis, vel alio modo, ad
debitam Regi Dominoque suo obedientiam non fuerint reductae; reservato sibi
quoque jure interim tum Armis, tum Legibus and Constitutionibus Imperialibus,
contra quoscunque Pacis publicae perturbatores, and adversarios suos procedendi.

Et in his omnibus, quemadmodum Majestas Caesarea Iure and recta Conscientia
freta, nihil ambigit, omnes Christiani Orbis Reges and Principes ea probare,
quae pro omnibus Regibus and Principibus, quantum ad exemplum attinet, gessit:
ita quicquid in posterum ex Iuris praescripto in hac causa sanciet, iisdem
facile se comprobaturam confidit. Domino autem Legato gratiam suam Caesaream
clementer offert.

Per Imperatorem Die Nov. 28. Anno 1620.
December. 4. 1620. A Copy of the Emperors Answer to my Audience, about the Ban
or Proscription intended against the Palatine.
SAcra Caesarea and Hungariae Bohemiaeque Regia Majestas, Dominus noster
Clementissimus, iisque Serenissimi Magnae Britanniae Regis Legatus de
suspendenda declaratione Banni Imperialis contra Palatinum Rheni Electorem, de
expresso 7. In Letters from M. Secretary Naunton of the 23. of Sept. which came
so late unto my hands, that the Emperors Ban was already formally touched, and
ready to be put to the Print.
Regis sui mandato proposuit, in hunc sensum respondet.

Magni semper Majestatem suam Caesaream dicti Serenissimi Regis sibi
addictissimi, officia, amicitiam, mutuamque cum Inclyta Domo sua Austriaca
conjunctionem aestimasse, and etiam nunc aestimare; ac ne minimum quidem
ambigere, quin si prudentibus and pacificis Soceri sui consiliis. Gener
obsecundare, quam turbulentis pravorum instigationibus, atque animo suo morem
gerere maluisset, ingens malorum necessitas tempestive praecaveri atque
declarari potuisset. Cum vero parta nuper, singulari Dei beneficio, prope
Pragam contra Majestatis suae Rebels memorabili victoria, ne nunc quidem
dictus Palatinus sanioribus sese conseliis accommodet, sed in eodem
inobedientiae tramite 8. This I think was added, out of mere conjecture: For
we have heard nothing of the Electors Actions, since his retiring into Silesia.
pertinaciter perseveret, quin etiam refractarios Majestatis suae subditos,
atque Provincias quae caeteroquin Regis Dominique sui, a quo desciverunt,
gratiae haud duble sese submitterent, ad Rebellionem male coeptam, desperate
continuandam animet, atque instiget: Nulla Majestaeti suae Caesareae, hoc loci,
benignitatis vel indulgentiae commonstrandae, vel declaratianis poenae etiam ad
momentum suspendendae occasio superet. Quae tamen pro innata sibi bonitate, and
singulari erga Serenissimum Magnae Britanniae Regem benevolentia, in hoc
gravissimo negotio, ea adhuc 9. So as upon my Intercession the Emperor has
granted some suspense of the Banne: Which I required for two principal Reasons:

1 Because the King my Masters moderation in the Bohemian Business, not Cause,
Who was so much interessed in the Persons, did justly merit from the Emperor an
exchange of temperate proceeding.

2. Because such an Imperial Proscription would but more and more inflame the
minds of all Princes interessed by reason of Blood or State in the subsistence
of the Palatine, and would be the cause of a perpetual War in the bowels of the
Empire, contrary to the Christian endeavors and wishes of Your Majesty: Whose
good intentions were now so manifested to the World by sundry Ambassages, that
You were satisfied in Your Own Conscience, and justified before God and man,
whatsoever should ensue. I told him besides, that I thought Your Majesty would
take it kindly, if at Your request this Proscription were forborne.


temporis moderatione. quam causae Iustitia, Sacri Romani Imperii
Constitutiones, Suprema Officii sui Caesarea Authoritas, and ipsa denique
necessitas permissura sint, procedet.

Per Imperatorem Die 4. Dec. 1620.
A Dispatch from Vienna, in December. 1620. To His Most Sacred Majesty.
ALthough I had from Your Majesty a power in my Instructions to depart hence to
my other Employment, as soon as this Controversy should be decided, either by
Treaty or by Fortune; yet I have stayed here a month and an half after the
Battle, that I might view the final resolutions; whereof I shall now render
Your Majesty an account: Which I am bound to begin with my humblest thanks for
Your benign approbation of my poor endeavors, as I have understood from both
Your Secretaries; wherein I see that Your Majesty is still pleased by the
excellency of Your Nature, and by the indulgency of your judgment, to accept
honest zeal for discretion in your own Creature. Serving therefore so good and
so gracious a Master, I will proceed cheerfully to the discharge of the rest,
as the affairs stand.

By my last to Mr. Secretary Nanton, your Majesty understood the cause of
Monsieur de Preaux his going into Hungary: And by this you may expect the fruit
of his journey: There arriving after news of the defeat before Prague, He found
much alteration in their faces, and much altercation in their Councels; about
which he was once publicly admitted; where he undestood passion enough,
being the common language of Nature, but nothing else: for they spoke in their
own Tongue. At last this was the Conclusion, That a Gentleman should be
immediately dispatched to the Elector Palatine (supposed at Preslaw in Silesia)
to understand whether he would join with the Hungarians in a Treaty with
the Emperor: and in case of either delay or denial, to make a solemn
protestation, that they would provide for themselves: Of the event whereof
the Prince of Transylvania undertook by the 15th of this Month, aut circiters
to give knowledge hither. I must profess unto your Majesty, that I did little
expect (for my part) so much formality from the said Prince, in hoc statu
rerum, as to attend a return from Silesia; having before (as has been written)
so closely begun here to practice of his own reconcilement: But the truth is
(and well he knows it) that he may be heard when he lists, by reason of the
Turk at his back; under whose shadovv he will ^it himself.

Now touching mine own peculiar duties. For with Bethelem Gabor and the
Hungarians I have nothing to do in single consideration (as your Majesty's*
Servant) till we shall hear whether the Elector your Son-in-lavv, and that
Kingdom, will treat with the Emperor conjunctively or no.

Before the going of de Preaux, I had one access to the Emperor, and two other
while he was away.

The first after consultation here with the French Ambassadors, about the
Answer which we had (with no small loss of time and advantage) so late
received from Bohemia, addressed unto me by Sir Francis Nethersale in French,
as it came to him from the Camp.

The other two, touching your Majesty's declaration of your self in the
Palatine cause, and intercession against the Emperors Bann, as they call it:
about which I shall need to trouble your Majesty no further then with the
perusal of such Marginal Notes as I have added both to the foresaid French
Paper, and to the Emperors two Answers in Latin, which come herewith, and
contain all that may concern your latter directions in two Letters from Master
Secretary Nanton. Yet I must not omit, that between the second and third of
these Audiences, I was visited by the Baron of Eckenberg (the Emperors
inwardest Counselor and Favorite) who spent an hour or two at my Lodging,
with much protestation of his Masters respect toward your Majesty; of his
grief that things were gone on to such expense of blood; of his vvishes that
your Son-in-lavv had rather taken your Majesty's counsel then the Duke of
Bovillons; of his forgiving nature; of his desire to recover only his own, and
to redeem this Imperial House from open scorn: Lastly, that the King of Spain
also had written hither, how glad he would be that your Majesty might have
all possible satisfaction. This was after the Emperor had been informed of his
success at Prague; whereunto there was, as to all other fair discourse of
this kind, but one only reply on my part; That your Majesty might justly
promise your self very good respect here, and good offices from Spain, by the
merit of your own moderation in the Bohemian Cause, and by your Christian
endeavors for the common quiet with such perseverance. I must not forget
likewise to inform your Majesty, that my self visiting here the Spanish
Ambassador (as I have usually done after my Audiences with the Emperor) and
falling (as I thought might well become me) into vvonder at Spinola's
intrusions, enough to inflame all Christendom, which your Majesty (measuring
other Princes by the equity of your own heart) had no reason to expect. He
asked me, after a little deliberation, Whether the Marquess of Buckingham were
not a Gentleman of Honor? I need not profess how glad. I was of such occasion
to do your Majesty's Dearest Servant, and mine own most Noble Patron, all the
right that my voice could utter; but in truth, on the other side, extremely
surprised with so impertinent a question to my discourse, till he eased me
with the sight of a Paper out of his Cabinet. It was the Copy of a Letter
written by my Lord Marquess, in your Majesty's Name, to the Spanish Ambassador
residing with you; wherein your Majesty did thus far justify the Spanish
proceedings, As never to have made any promise that they would not assail the
Palatinate. Whereupon this Ambassador inferred, that the said Letter written
by so Noble a Personage, and in your Majesty's Name, was a high discharge for
Spain in the point of real dealing. I replied, That indeed I had never heard of
any direct promises, or denial made about that matter; but that your Majesty's
Servants employed therein (whereof I was one my self to the Archduke
Leopoldus) did rather complain of Answers obseure and ambiguous, and very
different from our plain English style. This was all that passed between the
Conde d'Ogniate and me, into which I have a little digressed. Now then to
recollect how we stand here in point of Negotiation.

The Prince of Transylvania has prefixed the 15th day of this Month, or
thereabout, (as I said before) for his Term; within which he will signify in
what manner he intends to Treat, according to the Answer out of Silesia. The
Emperor on the other side, did take the term of forty days for the declaring of
his mind fully to me and the French Ambassadors, which expire, by our
computation, on the 27. of this said Month; intending in the mean time to
preconsult with his Friends, or rather (as we perceive) with his Fortunes: And
howsoever, Not to Treat of any Province, or part, as then reduced to his
obedience. So as plainly enough he chose that respite to contemplate the
intervenient changes: For at first he was more tractable; he spoke of no
Friends whose advices were before to be asked; he demanded no term to think
farther on the matter; he added no restriction: all these are the suggestions
of his prosperity. And so we stand in point of business.

In the state of the Provinces I can deliver nothing but fluctuation and
submission, the ordinary consequences of Victory.

The first were the Bohemians, who forgetting both Oaths and Contracts, yielded
up the Original Patent of their Combination to the Duke of Bavaria, as the
Emperors Commissary.

The next were the Moravians; who after the Count Bucquoy had taken Trigla, one
of their wealthiest, and summoned Zuam, the chiefest of their Towns, resolved
in a full Assembly of their States, to submit themselves by Deputies, who are
hourly expected here.

The other Appendants to the Bohemian Crown are likely to follow the Moravian
example, being incomparably (as has well appeared) the most resolute piece of
the whole knot, and that which gave vigor to the rest, dum Troja stabat.

What the Hungarians shall determine of themselves, I will set down in a
Postscript; for which I have long suspended the dispatch of this Bearer.

I cannot conclude without representing unto your Majesty, in all event, two
humble remembrances, whereof your higher wisdom may perchance make some use.

The first is, That I conceive the French King bound to join with your Majesty
in the Palatine Cause: I do not mean only by reason of state and jealousy of
this spreading House, cujus gliscit potentia, as I may modestly say, nor by
Ancient obligation and gratitude to the said Electoral Line, or to your own
Kingdoms in the needful days of hi, Father, but by a fresher band, even by the
Treaty of Ulm, where his Ambassadors did intervene: For they tell me, that by
virtue thereof, neither direct nec indirecte, any of the Provinces belonging
to the League, or to the Union, could be molested by either side. Which the
Electors of Mentz and Colen have broken by permission of Spinola; nay, diverse
ways, by subministration of commodities to his Army. And I hear, that to save
themselves, they have procured Patents from the Emperor, that as his
Commissaries, they may do some things which they could not do or permit as
Leaguers. Always sure I am, that the Duke of Bavaria did three or four days
withstand the nominating of the French Ambassadors in the foresaid Treaty,
which the other side did as vehemently affect; for no other imaginable reason,
within my penetration, then only to engage France in the maintenance thereof.
This I have touched, not that I doubt of your accommodating of those things
civily without Arms, or that your Majesty shall need (if extremity require the
sharpest remedies) any help to vindicate your own Descendents from violence;
but because en tout cas the conjunction of France would be some ease to the
Princes of the Union, whereof your Majesty is the head.

The other point that I am bold to offer unto your Majesty's consideration, is,
That the King of Spain himself is bound by his own protestation to revoke
Spinola: For therein he declares, that his meaning was not by assisting the
Emperor, Cuiquam Mortalium per injuriam vim infer, aut in aliena cupiditatem
suam extendere: which protestation the Emperor received from his own Ambassador
in the Spanish Court, and by his Secretary here did communicate the same with
me, to be sent unto your Majesty, as I did in my first Dispatch; and have now
again sent another Copy, least the former should be strayed. And so with my
humble Prayers to the eternal God for your blessed health and joy, I ever rest,

Your Majesty's long devoted Servant, and faithful Vassal, H. W.
POSTSCRIPT.
The expected Advertisement is now come from the Prince of Transylvania to this
effect. He greatly complains of the faintness and defection of his
Confederates in general: And in particular, first, that an Embassage which he
addressed since the Battle to the Moravians, with animating persuasions, took
no place. Next, that the Elector Palatine (to whom he expressly sent into
Silesia Johannes Krauss, Secretary of the Kingdom of Hungaria) has not
vouchsafed him any clear or determinate Answer to the Subject of his Errand,
which I have before set down. Nay farther, that the Prince of Anhalt, and the
Count of Hollock, came jointly together unto the said Johannes Krauss in
Preslaw, and there among other discourse told him, That the remainder of this
affair was not to be handled by the French Ambassadors, nor by me here; which
the French take very sensibly, especially their offer and intercession having
before by the said Prince of Anhalt been unaccepted, and a Letter which they
wrote unto him, to this hour unanswered; though sent by Monsieur de Ste
Catherine, no suspected person, but one who had been so long resident in the
Palatiae Court. Upon which premises, they have seriously desired me to testify
unto your Majesty (as in truth I am bound) their willingness to have mediated
in this cause, and their continual frank and faithful conferences with me about
the common end. On the other side, I have desired them to represent things
fairly to the King their Master, and not upon any private distaste to abandon
the common interest, which so many Princes have in the subsistence of the
Palatine. Since this Advertisement from Bethelem Gabor and his Hungarians (who
are resolved to Treat singly, and have sent hither to propound it) we have
gotten knowledge, that such a Letter is come to the Emperor from the Duke of
Saxony, touching the Palatine Elector, as makes us conceive he will use his
mediation rather then ours: So as I am preparing toward Venice in this hard
season, where (as your Majesty's Servant) I have the honor to be much expected
and desired, as I hear by their Resident in this place; especially the
Republic standing in no small perplexity and solicitude at the present diverse
ways. There I shall attend your Majesty's farther directions, and leave the
French (as I found them) upon this Stage, till they get leave to depart, for
which they have dispatched home an express Currier, intending in the mean time
to deal between the Emperor and Bethelem Gabor.



The Accord of Ulm, June 23. 1620. (mentioned in the foregoing Letter.)
NOus Maximilian par la grace de Dieu Conte Palatin du Rhein, Duc de la haute
and basse Baviere, etc. Et nous Joachim Ernest par la mesme grace, Marquis de
Brandenbourg. Duc de Prusse, Stetin, and Pomeranie, des Casoubes, and Wenden,
de Silesie, de Croonen and Jagendorff, Burgrave de Nurnberg, and Prince de
Rugen:

Be it known unto all and every one, that seeing as well within the Sacred
Empire of Germany, as in diverse Kingdoms and Neighboring Estates, Troubles and
Tumults, and Alterations have been on foot, and long continued, whereas not the
Catholics only, but the Electors, Princes, and Confederate States of the
Religion, have taken occasion to Arm themselves, which indeed has been the
cause of great differences and misprisions, if these preparations of Arms, and
levy of Soldiers should proceed further on both sides, to offend and destroy
one another: Therefore that such despite may be removed, and good friendship
between both Parties in the Empire established, We have made a firm and
constant Agreement, by means likewise of the French Ambassadors, which were at
that time in the Imperial City of Ulm.

And first of all, We Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, as General of the Catholic
League, by virtue of our Authority; and We Ioachim Ernest Marquess of
Brandenburg, as Lieutenant General of the Union, by virtue of our Authority, in
the presence and approbation also of other Princes, States, Alliants, Deputies
with full Power and Authority, do promise and vow for our Selves of each Party,
Alliants, Electors, Princes, and States, by all the real Words of Truth and
Fidelity, in the best and most stable form that may or ought hold, or stand
firm by all the Rules of Right, That none Electors, Princes, Alliants, States,
of either Party, in what manner soever, or under whatsoever pretense, neither
by themselves nor any other, shall with Arms pertaining to either Party, offend
or cut off the Treaty of Peace, nor discommodate, pillage, spoil, attaint, or
trouble one another, nor any thing to them belonging, as Electoralities,
Principalities, Subjects, Towns, Villages, Revenues Ecclesiastical or Civil:
But that as well the Catholics with the Gospellers, as they again with the
Catholics, be and remain in true and unfeigned Peace, Concord, and Charity,
every of them secure in their own Proprieties, without fear of Trouble or
Assault. And to the end that this Promise and Confidence (being otherwise
required and enjoined between Princes and Neighboring Estates, by
Constitutions of the Empire) may faithfully be continued, it is provided, That
the two Armies here near encamped, with all possible speed remove out of the
places where they were pitched, without any detriment to either Party, and that
they lodge not together in one place.

Secondly, it is concluded, That if perchance any Elector, Prince, Confederate,
State, of either Party, or indeed either of them in gross, should require upon
necessity a Passage, by virtue of Ordinances of the Empire, for the Defense and
Security of them and their Subjects, having first peaceably given sufficient
Caution, neither of them ought to deny it: Provided the same requisition be
seasonably made, not upon rash and precipitate Advice, when the Army be upon
the Frontiers, or indeed within the Territories of them, with complaint or
discommodity of the Subject.

Thirdly, Forasmuch as We Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, and other Electors,
Princes, Catholic Estates and Alliants, have excluded from this present Treaty
the Kingdom of Bohemia, with the Incorporated Provinces, and other States
Hereditary of the House of Austria, and comprehended within the Treaty, only
the Electorals, and Countries belonging to Electors, Princes, and States
Confederates of either Party, under which also is contained the Electoral
Palatinate, with all Inheritances thereunto belonging, situate within the
Empire; They ought not to be expended further, seeing at this present we
persist not in these differences, that having nothing common with the rest, but
we will keep good Correspondence with them without any suspicion: Which
likewise We Ioachim Ernest Marquess of Brandenburg, do agree to the Resolution
of the Electors, Princes, and States Catholic, touching the Kingdom of
Bohemia, and the United Provinces, with other Inheritances appertaining to the
House of Austria, for Us, our Alliants, Electors, Princes and States; and We
will no less on our side, that the said Kingdom of Bohemia, with the United
Provinces and Countries Hereditary to the House of Austria, be not comprised in
this Treaty, understanding as well this Declaration to be for the
Electoralities, Principalities, and Estates situate and being within the
Empire.

Fourthly, Whereas during this Treaty, diverse times mention has been made of
the Griefs of the Empire not yet decided, the decision of the same is remitted
to some more convenient time, seeing this was too short, and the Grievances
touched not only those of either Party, but in general all, both Catholic and
Evangelical States of the whole Empire, concerning which, for this present,
there is no sufficient Power or Authority to determine.

And seeing both of either Party pretend losses and damages done and received
by either side, and particularly at the Village of Sandthaim, and thereabouts,
it shall be shortly treated of reasonable restitution for the same. All which
things, we Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, and we Ioachim Ernest, Marquess of
Brandenburg, as well for us, as for the abovenamed our Confederates,
Electors, Princes and States, do promise to maintain and keep inviolably: In
vvitness of which, we have set to our Hands and Seals,

the 3.July / 23.June An. 1620. Locus O Sigilli Maximilian. Locus O Sigilli
Ioachim Ernest.


A Dispatch by Ralph from Venice, 1621.
SIR,
I Choose at the present to write thick and small, for the closer conveyance
of that which follows, first to your faithful hands, and by them
immediately unto our Sovereign Lord the King.

The deputed Cardinals of the Congregation or Committee in Rome touching his
Majesty's Matrimonial Treaty with Spain, having resolved negatively, even
after six Assemblies; the Cardinal Ludovisio and the Spanish Ambassador went
jointly to the Pope, to pray him, that by no means the negative resolution
might be divulged as yet, but suppressed for a time; because some turns were
to be done by the concealment thereof. Hereupon the Ven^tian Ambassador, by
name, Reniero Zen, (the most diving man that ever the Republic has held in
that Court, and of much confidence with the Pope upon old acquaintance)
observing that the foresaid Congregation had voted, and that their censures
were concealed; comes to the Cardinal Ludovisio, the Popes Nephew,
before-named, and extracts from him the whole matter, with the means and
reason of the suppression. This I have received from a credible, and I would
say, from an infallible fountain, if it did not become my simplicity, in a
point so much concerning the eternal dishonor of a great King, to leave
always some possibility of misinformation. Yet thus much more I must add,
not out of intelligence, but from sober discourse; that although the present
Pope has been hitherto esteemed more French, then any of his Predecessors a
great while; yet is not the King of Spain, such a Bankrupt in Rome, but that
he might easily have procured an assent in the forenamed Congregation, or at
least a resolution sooner, then after five or six meetings of the deputed
Cardinals; unless delays had been studied. Be it how it will; as to his
Majesty does belong the Sovereignty of judgment; so to his poor honest
Creatures abroad, the liberty of relation, and a frank discharge of our zeal
and duties. To which I will subscribe my unworthy Name.

Venice, Feb. 15/25. 1621.
A Dispatch about the King of Bohemia's Affairs at Venice, 1622.
Right Honorable,
I Have formerly acquainted his Majesty, through your hands, how my self being
then in Padoua under Physic (of late my familiar evil) I was recalled to
Venice, by the arrival here of Seignor Filippo. Calandrini, expressly sent to
solicit some contribution from this Republic to the support of Count
Mansfelt's Army, wherein my joint endeavor was required by Letters from the
Elector himself (as then at the Hague) And likewise I was thereunto the better
enabled by very careful instruction from Sir Dudley Carlton under cipher, of
the whole business how it stood. Neither did I need any new immediate Command
from his Majesty, to serve in the Cause of his own descendents, especially
after your Letters of the 19th, of January, by Order whereof I had before in
his Royal Name made a general exploration here of their good will toward us,
and now by the present employment of the foresaid Calandrini, as also upon
Letters from the Elector to this Duke, (whereof the delivery and pursuit was
recommended to me) I found apt occasion to descend a Thesi ad Hypothesin;
which with what discretion it has been handled, I dare not say; but sure I
am, with as much zeal and fervor, as the capacity of my heart could hold;
whereof the account is now due, as follows:

Two full Audiences I had upon this Subject at mine own demand, and a third at
their calling as long as both the former. In my first (to make it appear more
serious then an ordinary duty) I told them I would do that which I had never
done before. For whereas we commonly leave the reference of our Propositions
to a Secretary of the State, who stands always by the Ambassador, and is the
transporter both of our Arguments and of our affections to the Senate: The
Tribunal where we speak being not diffinitive (which is no small
disadvantage) I now promised to ease his memory my self with an extract of
what I had said, which was accordingly sent him the next morning, containing
two principal heads:

1. The merit of the Cause; 2. The community of the Interest;
Both as clear as the Sun. For touching the first, the question now was only
de recuperatione proprii, violently invaded: In the course of which action, it
did appear by pregnant inferences, lately published, together with those
intercepted Letters which Friar Hiacintho, an outcast from this Town, did
carry in his Wallet, that the Duke of Bavaria had practiced the Electorate of
Rhine before the true Elector was called to the Crown of Bohemia; which I
thought the fitter to be touched; for that I knew the Duke had newly received a
Copy of the said divulged Letters from his Agent at the Hague, and it was a
point of great impression.

Now their Interest was as plain as the Case it self: For if such violences
shadowed with Imperial Authorities, should likewise be countenanced and
comforted with success, what could hinder, within a while, the same Torrent
to overflow Italy, and especially this Dominion, circondato da affetti poco
sicuri d'ogni intorno, as I told them I might well say, even with modesty.
These premises being laid, I inferred, that his Majesty, upon a Cause so just,
and a common Interest so clear, was most confident in the vvisdome of this
grave Senate, that having spent with palpable benefit in their last Motions of
fresh memory qualche bona summa (indeed about two millions of Ducats) to
maintain a diversion so near at hand as il Piede delli Monti, they would find
it more reasonable to foment the like further off; all diversions and
revulsions (both Politic and Natural) being so much the more effectual, by how
much the more remote. Lastly, that though his Majesty in exchange of that open,
frank, and voluntary Declaration, which he made of himself heretofore in time
of their Troubles, might now expect the like again from them ex aequo; and that
no Prince living knevv better what the declared Authority of a Dominion so
eminent, would import to the sum of the business. Yet not to press his Friend
too far, his Majesty would be contented with a silent Contribution without
noise, under any form that should best please them, and in such proportion as
should be conformable to their Love; whereby they should oblige his Royal
Person and Progeny, not to be wanting unto them in any of their own just
Occurrents. This was the substance of my first Audience, and of my Memorial
sent to the Secretary. At my second, after I had pressed the same Inducements
more effectually, and informed them that the Elector was now gone in Person to
add vigor to his Subjects, so as their help could never come in a better
season: I fell to tell the Duke, that though it could not become my simplicity
to prescribe any form to so wise a Prince, yet I would ^rave leave to insinuate
thus much that they might under the Name of the States (with whom their
Confederacy was already known) pass their good will toward his Majesty and his
Son-in-law, without any further imaginable noise, by adding what they should
please moreover to that Contribution (whereunto they are tied by League) of
50000 Florins, or 5000 l. sterling per mensem, for which surcrew (whatsoever it
should be) the States would be answerable to the Elector. Nay farther, I told
him, albeit now by long service, and by the very conscience of my zeal toward
them, I might presume to merit some part of their confidence; yet I would
therein dispense even with mine own ambition, and undertake as much likewise
for Signior Calandrini, leaving it free unto them to exercise their friendship
through the hands of Signior Surriano, their own Minister at the Hague, without
acquainting us here with their determination, for the more silent carriage
thereof: yet withal, I was not tender to re-intimate unto them, that both the
King my Master did merit a Noble and open Proceeding; and on the other side,
this Republic was by Gods blessing so powerful, as they should not need to
smother their Resolutions in so just a Cause. In conclusion I told him, that I
did languish for the Senates answer; for well I knew that they are much guided,
like the wisdom of a Merchant, by accidents, which makes them so prone to
defer, still hearkening how things fall or rise, and accordingly shaping their
Counsels. Between these Audiences Signior Calandrini did likewise twice
interceed in name of the States, whose persuasion (as their Instrument) he
spent apart from mine, though otherwise our agreement was well enough known.

On Wednesday last, some five or six days after my second Audience, I was
called to college, and the Senates Answer read unto me very loud and treatably,
as the Duke willed the Secretary; whereof yet I required a second reading, for
Copies are not usually granted; which I must note for another disadvantage of
moment in negotiating with this State, because they may appeal from our
Memories. In this Answer were repeated, with some new beautifying, the three
points wherein they did pretend to have prevented his Majesty's former
imploration of their concurrence, when he wrote his own Letters in behalf of
his Son-in-law. The three points were these:

1. Their Contribution to the States, by which they maintain in those Provinces
4000 men.

2. Their Entertainment and Pensioning of the Count Mansfelt, with intent to
fix him where he is, who else might have been drawn away by other offers.

3. Their Promise to join with the French King and Savoy in the Rhetian
business.

All which three, they call Points of Common Interest with his Majesty, and of
Common Benefit to the Elector by way of Diversion; and two of them Actual
Engagements of this Republic. Now to these in the foresaid Answer, they added
a fourth, for a little stronger excuse at the present; namely, a fresh and
sharp Insurrection amongst the Grisons, where the Patriots of the Dieci
dritture, seemed to have overmatched the Party of the Archduke Leopoldo with
such considerable success, that the Can^on of Surick (who are nearest the
truth) are likewise in some motion to help them; so as this State expects
also to be called to that Feast, and well inclined thereunto. This was all the
new garnishment that I could observe in their Answer. Toward the end whereof I
was much surprised with their telling me, in plain terms, that his Majesty was
well satisfied with those former Demonstrations of their good will in the
Common Cause, represented unto him by their Ambassador La^do, as he had written
hither. To which Point, though the last of theirs, I replied first, That indeed
his Majesty (whose excellent heart does believe always the best of his Friends)
had no reason to mislike their former Answer: And so far I had co-operated with
their own Instrument, as to represent it con buon' sapore; but yet no further
then the matter would bear, which was but a generality of good will, and no
direct satisfaction. And whereas now they did desire me likewise to reiterate
to the King my Master, their great sensibility of the Common Interest; I told
them ingeniously con un' stringer di spalle, that I knew not well how to do it,
till they gave me more subject: For Philosophy (whose naked Principles I had
more studied then Art of Language) had taught me, even in one of her most
Fundamental Maxims, that ex nihilo nihil fit. Hereupon the Duke fell very
seriously to dilate upon the Senates Answer, and left me indeed with some
occasion of contentment: For he told me, I might mark by the said Answer, a
Resolution in the Senate not to neglect a Cause wherein they held themselves so
interessed, and (as had been said before) already actually engaged, though the
business of the Grisons, and the new noise from thence did at the present
distract them. Of this I took presently hold; replying, That I would receive
this Speech as a Commentary upon the Senates Answer; and represent unto his
Majesty, that when the principal reason of their excuse should cease, namely,
these fresh stirrings so near them, which seemed to require their abetment,
then they would give us more particular satisfaction. For which (to rivet it
the better) I gave thanks, and told him, I would hearken after the issue of
this Rhetian noise, and accordingly put him in mind again of our own
necessities: to which he gave me un gratioso accenamento, and so fell to tell
me, with extreme gladness, their news of the late defeat given by Mansfelt to
the Bavarian Troops.

Now to collect the fruit of my poor endeavors, thus we stand; If action shall
grow on this side, we shall surely receive more benefit by that diversion, then
we should by contribution: For the Archduke Leopoldo would by chance be drawn
from Alsatia to think of Tirol; and the Neapolitan and Milan Levies, which
should supply Germany, will be spent here. If Italy be quiet, then (dicam audax
verbum) this State must necessarily help us, that it may be so still; for I
shall not need to make them sensible of the vicissitude of humane, troubles,
either here or there, which is their common Text: But all depends upon his
Majesty's urging of his own merits, which was my highest Argument, together
with that Obligation which he will acknowledge, as his own gracious Letters
import.

This account I send with some diligence, that it may prevent the new Venetian
Ambassadors first Audience, or at least the leave-taking of the old; into whom
it may please his Majesty to infuse his good thoughts, and to take notice of
these Audiences which I had here in the way of his Service. And so the Lord of
Heaven bless Him and His.

POST SCRIPT.
Signior Filippo Calandini came hither with Instructions from the States, much
resembling a Quadruple entrenchment; wherein being beaten from the first, he
was to retire to the second, and so forth. The first was, To solicit a free
and open Contribution. The second, That they would at least Contribute under
the Name of the said States. The third, That they would Contribute jointly
with the States. The fourth, That at least they would pay the Arearages of
10000 Florins per mensem, that have run due by virtue of their League, from the
9th of April, 1621. Since which term, the said States pretend to have
re-entred into Action; and in this Case the States promise to contribute five
of those Months to the Elector. Now, considering the hopeful Answer that I
have received, I have dealt with Signior Calandrini, to spend the persuasion
of the States in the first point absolutely; and in the last, to urge only the
Arearages upon the Contract, without adding the intention of the States to
contribute any portion thereof to the Elector; least it might prejudice the
hope of a greater Contribution, which no doubt his Majesty may have from
hence, if it please him to urge his own merits.



1624. S. P.
I Send you both the enclosed, unclosed, and my Seal vvithal, that when you
have perused them, you may seal them; for because they contain a recommendation
of your self, it were somewhat incongruous to present them open.

You had yesterday received them, but that I suspended my hand too long in
expectation of James; about whom we are yet in much doubt of some
misadventure by his stay. You see that in the Postscript to the Duke, I mention
the design of Caprarola, which I have left out of his Letter, that you may not
come unto him with empty hands.

It shall be fit for your self to offer him your service abroad, which I have
(as you see) offered the Prince through Mr. Thomas Carie's hands, who, I hope,
will let his Highness see my Letter.

And so languishing to hear somewhat from my Nephew, with all my duties
remembered to all, I rest,

This Tuesday Morning. Your ever true Friend, HENRY WOTTON.
Upon the Design you must play the Mountebank. And tell the Duke, that the one
Paper contains the Plant or ground-Lines, the other, the reared work, in
Perspective with all the Dimensions so exactly, as if it please him he may
easily have a Model made thereof in Pastboard.

If Mr. Thomas Carry should by chance have been sent away again into France,
then deliver, with my humble service, the Letter to my Lord of Lepington his
Father, and beseech him to show it the Prince.



May, 1626. The Copy of my Report after the Examination of the Lord of
Oldebare's Daughter.
ACcording to His Majesty's good pleasure signified unto me by an Order from
His Counsel. Table, under the 19th. of May, and delivered by an express
Messenger on Monday morning the 22. of the said Month, at His Majesty's
College of Eton, that I should examine the Lord of Oldebare's Daughter, now
resident in the Town of Windsor, in the circumstances of a business which His
Majesty had committed to my trust; vid. concerning a certain Roll of Names
mentioned in a late malicious diffamatory Pamphlet, which one George Eglisham
had scattered in Print; pretending therein that it was a Roll of diverse great
Personages which were to be poisoned by the now Duke of Buckingham, and among
those Great ones, the said George Eglisham himself for one; which said Roll (as
the said Eglisham affirms) the foresaid Daughter of the Lord Oldebare had
brought to the late Lord Marquess of Hamilton her Cousin, who was one of the
enrolled to be poisoned; grounding this defamation upon the testimony of that
Roll, brought by the said Gentlewoman to the foresaid Marquess: I say,
According to His Majesty's Command herein, I When I had first enquired out her
Lodging.
repaired, the next day after the receipt thereof, to the said Lord of
Oldebare's Daughter, by Name Anne Lion, (though not nominated by the foresaid
Eglisham, but under her Fathers Title) at her Lodging in Windsor, where I found
her accompanied with her younger Sister, and a Gentlewoman of her attendance,
who were all three in the Room while I spoke with her, and I brought in with me
Mr. Michael Branthwait, heretofore His Majesty's Agent in Venice, as a
Gentleman of approved confidence and sincerity. At my access unto her, because
I was a stranger, and the business somewhat harsh and umbrageous, I labored to
take from her all manner of shadow touching her self; which in truth I found
very needless: For after I had showed her my Commission, and the places in
Eglisham's Book wherein she was traduced for a Witness of this foul defamation,
she was so far from disguising or reserving any circumstance, that she
prevented all my inquisitiveness in some Questions which I had prepared, making
a clear, a free, and a noble report of all that had passed, which she did
dictate unto me, as I wrote in her Window, in her own words, without any
inforcement or interruption, as follows:

At His Majesty's being in Spain, a Carr-man of one Smith a Woodmonger in
Westminster, found a Paper, as he said, and gave it to my Mothers Footman to
read, whose Name was Thomas Allet, who brought it immediately to me; it was
half a sheet of Paper laid double by the length, and in it was written in a
scribled hand, the Names of a number (above a dozen) of the Privy Counsel: some
words had been written more, which were scraped out. The Names were not writ in
order as they were of quality. In it, next to the Marquess of Hamilton, was
writ, Dr. Eglisham to imbalm him. No mention of poisoning, or any such thing,
but very Names. I not knowing what it might import more, the Marquess of
Hamilton not being at that instant in Whitehall, I sent for James Steward
Servant to the Duke of Richmond, and desired him to show his Lord that Paper,
wherein was his Name. He said he would not present it himself, but would give
it to Alexander Heatley, his Secretary: So he took the Paper from me; and
within a day or two after he brought it back to me, and said, the Secretary
thought it not necessary to trouble his Lord with all, for as he did conceive,
some that had a Cause to be heard before the Privy Counsel, or in the Star
Chamber, had written these Names to help his own memory, to reckon who would be
with him or against him. Immediately then I sent the said Allet to David
Strachen, Servant to the Marquess of Hamilton, and bade him give that to his
Lord from me immediately; which he said he did, and that his Lord read it, and
put it in his Pocket.

These are the very express and formal words, which this noble Gentlewoman,
with a very frank and ingenious spirit, as I am bound to testify of her, did
dictate to me, in the presence of the abovenamed: Whereby may appear to any
reasonable creature, what a silly piece of malice this was, when Mr. Alexander
Heatley, a Gentleman of sober judgment, to whom the Roll was first sent,
though that be concealed by Eglisham, did think it too frivolous to be so much
as once showed to his Master, howsoever named therein. At this first
Conference, as I was ready to depart, my Lord of Oldebare's Daughter desired of
me a view of the Book, out of which I had read her some passages, wherein her
Name was traduced; which could in no equity be denied. So I left it with her
till the next day, praying that I might then have her full judgment of it:
When repairing again unto her, she told me as freely as the rest, in the
hearing of the same company as before, except her Gentlewoman, that Eglisham
had gone upon very slight grounds in so great a matter.

The Copy of my Letter to the Duke about the same Examination.
I Send unto your Grace by this Bearer, Mr. Michael Branthwait, the Examination
of the Lord of Oldebare's Daughter, touching the Roll of Names said to be found
in Westminster, of Great Personages which were to be poisoned here, while you
were in Spain: In the delivery whereof, I have been careful, as an Examiner,
and Relater, to set down nothing but her bare and free report; which is the
Historical part: The Critical now remains; for after the examination of
circumstances, there is a liberty of judgment.

I have seen many defamatory and libellous things of this nature, abroad and at
home; though for the most part always without truth, yet oftentimes contrived
with some credibility: But this appears, in the whole contexture, utterly
void of both, even though we had never known your Grace; nay, I will say more,
though we had known you to be as bad, and as black, as this Author would paint
you. For first, the main ground upon which he would raise this defamation, is
the foresaid Roll of Names, found, forsooth, not in a Cabinet, but in a dirty
Street. Now, when we come to hunt it home, the authentical Instruments that
should give it credit, are a Carrman, and a Footman; till at last it came to
Mr. Alexander Heatley: a Gentleman indeed (as I have conceived of him) of sound
abilities. Then what does he with it? Marry, He thought it so frivolous, that
albeit it had passed to him through the hands of a noble Gentlewoman of his own
Country, yet he would not once trouble the late Duke of Richmond his Master
so much as with a sight of it, though his said Master was one of the
enrolled. Then, it comes back again, and the Gentlewoman conveyeth it by
another hand to the late Marquess of Hamilton: What does he with it? It sleeps
in his Pocket. There, we are not only at a fault, in the Hunters term; but at
a rest, as if we were but playing at Tennis: I am sorry to charge the memory
of that Worthy Gentleman, to whom I was much bound for his favor, so far as
his Doctor has laden him; that if he thought it more important then Mr.
Heatley did, either by want of charity he would smother so horrible a
practice against the lives of at least a dozen of his Colleagues in Privy
Counsel, or for want of courage not prosecute his own Cause: Especially, your
Grace (whose power this Pamphletter does allege for the impediment of all
prosecution) being then (as appears by the Examination) in Spain.

Much more might be said upon the matter: but I value, not only your Graces,
but mine own time at a greater price: Yet I have committed a remembrance or two
to this Bearer; for whose sincerity I am bound to answer, because I did choose
him for a Witness in the Examination. One scruple only I had in point of
formality, Whether I should address this account or no to the Counsel. Table,
whence I received the Commission. But considering, that it came unto me,
though by Order from thence, yet under the Kings trust; I have directed it to
your hands, whom it most concerns.

I had vvaited with it on your Grace in person, but that in truth, some
straitness by distillations in my breast, makes me resolvs to enter anew into a
little course of Physic. And so having discharged this duty according to my
Conscience and capacity, I humbly leave your Grace in Gods blessed love;
remaining,

Your Graces ever devoted and professed Servant, HENRY WOTTON.

1626. The Copy of my Letter to the Queen of Bohemia.
Most Resplendent Queen, even is the darkness of Fortune,
I Most humbly salute Your Majesty again, after the longest silence that I have
ever held with You, since I first took into my heart an image of Your excellent
Virtues. My thoughts indeed have from the exercise of outward duties been
confined within my self, and deeply wounded with mine own private griefs and
losles; which I was afraid, if I had written sooner to Your Majesty, before
time had dried them up, would have freshly bled again. And with what shall I
now entertain Your sweet Spirits? It becomes not my weakness, to speak of deep
and weighty Counsels, nor my privateness, of great Personages: Yet because I
know Your Majesty cannot but expect, I should say somewhat of the Duke of
Buckingham, whom all contemplate, I will begin there; and end in such comforts
as I can suggest to Your present Estate: which shall be ever the Subject both
of my Letters and of my prayers. But before I deliver my conceit of the said
Duke, I must use a little Preface. I am two ways tied unto him: First, for his
singular love to my never forgotten Albertus; therein likewise concurring with
Your Majesty's inestimable affection. Next, for mine own particular, I hold by
his mediation this poor place, as indeed, for the benefit, I may well call it,
though not for the contentment: But if it were worth Millions, or Worlds, I
protest unto Your Majesty (to whom I owe the bottom of my heart) I would not
speak otherwise of him, then I conceive. Therefore, setting aside both fears of
Parliament, and hopes of Court, I will spend my opinion, which is all my
freehold.

And truly (my most gracious and Royal Mistress) I cannot weigh his Case
without much wonder: being one of the strangest (all considered) that I ever
yet took into my fancy. Not, that the Commons assembled should sift and winnow
the actions even of the highest of the Nobility: Not, that an obscure Physician
then among them (ambitious of some glory out of his own profession) should dare
to give the first onset on so eminent a Personage: Not, that such a popular
pursuit once begun by one, and seconded by a few other, should quickly kindle a
greater Party. These are in their nature no marvels, nor Novelties. Neither can
I greatly muse, that in a young Gentleman, during thirteen years of such
prosperity and power, the height of his place exposing him to much observation
and curiosity; the Lower House l^kewise opening the way to all kind of
complaints, (as they did;) and examining nothing upon Oath, (as they never do;)
there should be matter enough gleaned to make up thirteen Objections, and none
of heinous degree: For after such boltings to the quick, even among men of far
meaner managements, I think there would be found every where some Bran.
Therefore I can pass all this over with easy belief. But there is a
consideration or two, which do much confound my judgment. First, for the
matter it self: That this very Noble man, who at the Parliament of 1623. was so
universally applauded and celebrated in every corner, as a great Instrument of
the Public good, (in so much as for my part, I conceived him then to be that
which few or none had been before in all ages, No less Favorite, I mean, to the
People, then to the King) should now be persued with these dislikes, when for
the most part the very same Objectors were in the foresaid Parliament, and the
very same Objections (except one or two) might as well then have been alleged:
This is, I must confess to my understanding a Labyrinth. Again, When (from the
matter turning to the Person) I view the fairness and equality of his temper
and carriage, I can in truth descry in his own nature, no original excitement
of such distaste, which commonly arises, not so much from high fortune, as
from high looks. For I most ingeniously avow unto your Majesty, that among all
the Favorites which mine eyes have beheld in diverse Courts, and times, I never
saw before a strong heart, and eminent condition, so clearly void of all pride
and swelling arrogance, either in his face or in his fashion.

These are partly the Reasons that make me vvonder, how such offense should
grow like a mushrome in a night. But there is one thing above all other that
has stricken deepest into my mind, and made me see, how the greatest men have
this unfortunate adjunct in their felicity, to be sometimes obnoxious to the
foulest and falsest reports; whereof in the person of this very Duke himself,
I shall lay a monstrous example before your Majesty, out of mine own particular
knowledge and employment.

It pleased my Sovereign now being, to direct unto me hither a Commission to
examine my Lord of Oldebares Daughter, by name Mistress Anne Lion (I think
sometimes not unknown unto your Majesty) then resident at Windsor, about an
abominable Pamphlet published and printed toward the time of the last
Parliament, in diverse Languages, by one Doctor Eglisham, a Scottish Physician,
who therein charge the Duke of Buckingham with such trifles as these: The
death of the Marquess Hamilton, his near Friend and Ally; the death of our late
King, of ever blessed memory, his most dear Master; the intended deaths of
diverse Counselors of Estate, his Associates: painting, in effect, a nature far
beyond that of Richard the Third, when he was Duke of Gloucester. And for a
Witness hereof he traduceth the foresaid Gentlewoman, or rather as the main
ground of his whole Book: which occasioned her examination, at the Dukes
pursuit against himself; whereof I send your Majesty a Copy herewith, as I took
it from her own free delivery; wherein you shall see a bare Note of a few
Counselors Names, found at first, not in the Dukes Cabinet, but in the very
kennel of King Street by a Car-man, Servant to a Woodmonger: Secondly, by him
brought to a Footman; by which honorable degrees it came to the Gentlewoman
all dirty. And at last, it is turned by this Doctor into Bill of Personages to
be poisoned, out of a very charitable interpretation then reigning in him. I am
doubtful, what passion it will most stir in your Majesty, when you read the
Circumstances; whether mere laughter at such a ridiculous slander, or a noble
indignation at so desperate impudency. And so not to stay any longer upon this
Cobweb, I will end with such comforts as I propound to my self in contemplation
of your present being.

The first shall be a general impression which we have taken of his Majesty's
Nature: And it is this, That he is not only (to consider him absolutely in his
own composition) of singular virtue and piety, and resolution in good; but
likewise (to consider him relatively) he is an excellent Husband, Brother, and
Friend. I call Favorites the Friends of Kings, as your Majesty (who is so well
versed in the best of Books) knows I may do with very good warrant: For was not
Hushai the Archite so styled to David, and after him Zahud to Solomon? Nay, had
not the Highest of all Examples, in the time of his Humane lowness, both among
the living a Beloved that lay on his bosom, and another also whom he calls his
Friend, even when he called him from the dead? Thus much I could not abstain to
let fall from my pen, by the way, against all murmurers at any singularity of
affection, which abound both in States and Families. But of these three
Relations, I will now only contemplate that which respects your Majesty;
which indeed is as clear and visible as the rest: For surely all the
Parliaments that our most Gracious Sovereign has hitherto assembled, and all
the Actions that he has undertaken abroad, either of himself or by
combinations, and his private Counsels at home, have principally levelled at
your support and restorement; as the Deliberations likewise that went before,
in the latter time of your most blessed Father. So as your Majesty, in the
justness of your Cause, and in the sweetness of your Nature, does stand firmly
invested in both the titles of as beloved a Sister as you were a Daughter. And
I am confident, that our living and loving God, who did accept the zeal of your
Royal Brother, and bless his own and the public devotions at home, with almost
a miraculous conversion of the infirmity which raged, into health, and of the
sterility which was feared, into plenty; will likewise find his own good time
to favor our pursuits abroad.

Your Majesty's second comfort, is the universal love of all good Minds. To
which I may justly add, a particular zeal in him who is nearest his Majesty, to
foment his best desires toward you; which he has expressed sundry times
within my hearing.

The last and inwardest consolation that I can represent unto your Majesty, is
your self, your own soul, your own virtues, your own Christian constancy and
magnanimity: Whereby your Majesty has exalted the glory of your sex, conquered
your affections, and trampled upon your adversities. To conclude, you have
showed the World, that though you were born within the chance, yet without the
power of fortune.

And so having sought to redeem so long a silence, I tear. with too long a
trouble; I will promise your Majesty to commit no more of the former fault, and
humbly beg your pardon for the other: ever and ever remaining,

Your Majesty's poor Servant with all humble and hearty devotion, HENRY WOTTON.

To my most dear and worthy Friend, Mr. John Dinely, at the Hague.
My ever most dear Jack Dinely,
THe Queens last Letter (wherewith her Majesty did too much honor me) coming
when my voices of any value were no more in mine own power, was nearer a
torment then a surprizal. It shall teach me to reserve my self, as wiser men
do, for such supervenient temptations, I must confess, above all strength, if
the least possibility had been lest. It is true, I could have given him a
latter place: but in that, I should have disgraced the suitor, and disrespected
the Commander. I have therefore rather chosen to put him in the Vanguard the
next year, being the Son of a Soldier, then now in the Rear. And this is the
sum of my humble answer to her Majesty, though in other terms.

Your Anthony (who is my Guest every Saturday night) is well grown in stature,
and more in knowledge. I verily believe he will prove both a wise and learned
man, and certainly good. We have passed over quocunque modo the most
troublesome Election, that, I think, was here ever seen. Wherein, according to
my usual fashion, I have lost four or five friends, and yet I thank God, not
gotten the value of one Harrington: So as they are angry at me on the one side,
and they laugh at me on the other. If my most gracious Mistress will in her
goodness be pleased to drown her displeasure till the next turn, I shall
cheerfully in the mean time, bear the weight of mine own simplicity.

I have gotten, with much ado, some of the Psalms translated by my late most
blessed Master, for the young Prince of Bohemia, (which is one of your
memorials that have slept too long by me) and I have ransacked mine own poor
Papers for some entertainment for the Queen: which shall be sent together.
Though it be now a misery to revisit the fancies of my youth, which my
judgment tells me, are all too green, and my glass tells me, that my self am
gray. Till my next, let me trouble you no farther. The love of God be with us,
and we are well.

Your poor true Friend, HENRY WOTTON.
From the College at midnight, the 12. of August, 1628. I hear that one has
offered to the Prince of Orange, an invention of discoursing at a great
distance by Lights: Is it true?

A Noble Lady who is desirous to bestow her Son at Leyden, would fain be first
informed, what commodity for education the place does yield: wherein you shall
do me and her a great favor.



To my very worthy and ever dear Friend, Mr. John Dinely, at the Hague.
My ever dear Jack Dinely,
YOur last of the 6th. of October were vvelcome beyond all expression:
intimating a hope that I shall see your self shortly; which will be mill
Epistolae. I do not see how you can fail of the thing whereof you write, if
you come quickly. The Letter in your behalf from our Royal Mistress to his
Majesty here, is too faint, being molded in your own modesty: Therefore, I
have a little invaded it, with some violence unto you. When you consult with
me about the Personage that should first, or second, or tertiate your business
with the King, I must answer as Demosthenes did of Action; My Lord Thresorer,
My Lord Thresorer, and so again. We contemplate him, not only in the quality of
his Place, but already in some degree of a Privado; and even the fresh
introducement of Sir F. Cottington to the Counsel-Table, is no small argument
of his strength, though otherwise a Subject of merit.

I hear likewise, that his own sorraign employments have given him a great
taste of things abroad: So as you will not find him incurious to discourse
with you: And I verily believe, that he will take an address of you from the
Queen unto him, as the principal Personage, to the heart; wherein, methinks,
it were fit and proper, that her Majesty would be pleased likewise to favor
you with some lines to my Lord Conaway, because they were joined in Embassage
unto Her at Prage. This is all that I shall need to say, till your own coming.
Your little Anthony prospers extremely well; and I dare now say, he will
prove a good Scholar. And so being in truth in no very cheerful disposition at
the present, but newly come out of two or three fits of an Ague, I will
trouble neither of us both any further: ever resting,

From London, ready to return to my Coll. at Eton, this 13. of Nov. 1628. Your
poor professed Friend, HENRY WOTTON.
If the Queen have not heard the Epitaph of Albertus Morton and his Lady, it is
vvorth her hearing, for the passionate plainness Authoris Incerti.
: He first deceased. She for a little tried
To live without him: Liked it not, and died.



POSTSCRIPT.
In a Letter under this date to her Majesty, I conclude with a supplication,
that She will be pleased to receive a Page, at the joint suit of the House of
Bacons: A Boy of singular spirits, without aggravation of her charge; for he
shall want no means to maintain himself in good fashion about so Royal a
Mistress. I pray heartily further this motion, and be in it your self, Nuncius
laetitiarum.



Part of a Letter to the Lord Treasurer, Earl of Portland (ut videtur.)
THis is the reckoning of my unpleasant time, whereby your Lordship sees, that
my silence has been a symptom (as I may term it) of my infirmity, from all
outward respects and duties, contracting my thoughts about my self. But can
that serve my turn? No in troth (my good Lord) For I should while my self was
in contemplation, have remembered, that I was bound to congratulate with your
Lordship even for mine own sake, especially when I found by the long use of two
or three Physicians, the exhaustion of my Purse, as great as other evacuations.
It would breed wrinckles in my face, if I should stay any longer upon this
point. I will cheer my self, that your Lordship did love me, even before I was
so worthy of your compassion. I have tasted the benefit of your discourse, I
have enjoyed your hospitality, I have been by your favor one of your familiar
guests, I have had leave to interchange some good tales and stories in your
company, and to exercise my natural freedom. Besides, we have been conjoined in
a serious business, wherein, I do even yet hope for some good by your means: So
as I have had in your Lordship the interests both of earnest, and of pleasant
conversation, which gives me the boldness to assure my self, that I am still
not only within your Lordships remembrance, but likewise within your loving
care.

But I dig in a Rock of Diamonds.

To the KING, 1628.
May it please Your most Sacred Majesty,
IT is more to be bound to Your Majesty's judgment, then to be bound to Your
favor. Therefore, I do not only joy, but glory (though still with humble
acknowledgement and feeling what my self am) that You have been pleased (as I
understand from my Lord of Dorchester) to apply my Pen to so noble an end:
being confident, that the very care, not to disgrace Your Majesty's good
pleasure, and indulgent choice of me, will invigorate my weakness. But before I
enter into the description of others actions and fortunes (which require a free
spirit) I must present at Your Royal feet, and even claim from Your natural
equity and goodness, such compensation, (as it shall please You) in that which
follows.

I served the King Your Father of most blessed memory, from the time he sent
for me, at the beginning of his Reign, out of France, (retaining then some
gracious remembrance of my service with him in Scotland) twenty years, that is,
almost now a third part of my life, in ordinary and extraordinary employments
abroad. I had many comfortable Letters of his contentment, or at least, of his
gracious toleration of my poor endeavors: And I had under his own Royal hand,
two hopes in reversion. The first, a moiety of a six Clerks place in Chancery.
The next, of the Office of the Rolls it self. The first of these, I was forced
to yield to Sir William Beecher, upon the late Duke of Buckingham's former
engagement unto him by promise, even after Your Majesty had been pleased to
intercede for me, with Your said ever blessed Father. And that was as much in
value, as my Provostship were worth at a Market. The other of the Reversion of
the Rolls, I surrendered to the said Duke in the Gallery at Wallingford-House,
upon his own very instant motion (the said Duke then intending it, upon the now
Attorney, Sir Robert Heath) though with serious promise, upon his honor, that
he would procure me some equivalent recompense, before any other should be
settled in the place.

The truth of my humble claim, and of his sincere intentions toward me, I
present herewith unto Your Majesty, in a Letter all under his own hand.

I could likewise remember unto Your Majesty, the losses I have sustained
abroad, by taking up moneys, for my urgent use, at more then twenty in the
hundred; by casualty of fire, to the damage of near four hundred pounds in my
particular; by the raising of moneys in Germany, whereby my small allowance
(when I was sent to the Emperors Court) fell short five hundred pounds, as
Seignor Burlamachi too well knows; and other ways.

Now for all this (that I may not press Your Majesty with immoderate desires) I
most humbly beg from Your Royal equity, and I may say, from Your very
compassion, but two things: First, That Your Majesty will be pleased, in
disposing of the Rolls (to which I was assigned) to reserve for me some small
proportion, toward the discharge of such debts as I contracted in public
service, yet remaining upon interest. Next, That You will be likewise pleased
to promise me, the next good Deanery, that shall be vacant by death or remove:
whereof I also had a promise from Your blessed Father then at Newmarket, and am
now more capable thereof in my present condition. And thus shall Your Majesty
restore me, both to the freedom of my thoughts, and of my life; otherwise so
intricated, that I know not how to unfold it. And so with my continual prayers
to the Almighty, for his dearest and largest blessings upon Your Royal Person,
I ever rest,

Whitehall, Feb. 12. Still. vet. 1628. Your Majesty's most faithful poor
Subject and Servant, HENRY WOTTON.

To my most worthy Friend Mr. John Dinely Esquire at Boston in Lincolnshire.
My dear Jack Dinely,
YOu see I keep my familiarity, though you be the governor of Princes: And I
see by your Letter, that I am every where in your remembrance, even where so
many natural pledges divide you. The Parliament is, since your going, dissolved
by the King, upon such reason, as in good faith, all sober minds must approve,
even while they wish it otherwise. Never was there such a morning, as that
which occasioned the dissolution, since Phacton did guide his Fathers Chariot.

We are now cheared with some foreign news: but I am still sorry, that we must
fetch our comfort from abroad, and from the discords of Italy, instead of the
harmony of England. Our Lords sit often, and were never more close: insomuch
as it is as hard to get any thing out of the Counsel-Chamber, as out of the
Exchequer.

Sir Henry Vane is suddenly sent Extraordinary Ambassador to the Hague; with
the more vvonder, because Sir Robert Carr is yet there, omni par negotio. The
others having been Cofferer, breeds some conjecture that the business is
pecuniary. Nothing is yet done about the Rolls, and those other places in
sequence: And my Lord of Bristow's re entry into the Court (who the last week
carried the Sword before the King) fills us with new discourse, as if he
should be restored to the Vice-Chamberlainship, which yet lies amortized in
your Noble Friend.

Mine own businesses stand as they did: And the best is, they are rather
stationary then retrograde. I pray remember my hearty affection to your worthy
Brother, and give him the best hope of his Anthony. And so languishing for you
again, I commit you all to Gods dear love.

March 11. 1628. Your faithfullest poor Friend, HENRY WOTTON.

To the same.
My sweet and dear Jack Dinely,
I Am come newly from those Ladies, who think themselves more lovely then
before, and perhaps then they are, ever since I showed them your Character of
their beauties, in your Letter from the Gally-Gravesend. Never was a Town
better Epithited. They all remember themselves extreme kindly unto you. While I
was there, I should have written Letters provisionally to go with Mr.
Griffith: But my Brains are even yet in some distraction among good Ideas,
whereby I am put now to write these, and other that go with them, in have:
For my said Friend has given me warning that he shall be gone to morrow
morning from London.

I have written to our Royal Mistress, upon a touch in your last, (which
found me at Bocton) that I had now sent her my Niece Stanhop's Picture in
little, if an express Messenger sent for it, the very night before I came away,
by my Lord of Chesterfield (to whom it was promised) had not ravished it out
of my Pocket. But I shall have it in a greater form at my return thither
immediately after our Election; which will begin to morrow seven-night: And
the Friday morning following Sir George Kevet's Son is in the head of our List;
For Lentum est, to say he shall be, after your late refreshment of the Queens
Commands. Sir Edmund Bacon was likewise with me at Bocton: when your Letter
so over-joyed him, that he called in the very instant for some Paper to send
for the spiritous Frank Bacon from Redgrave. And Seen viene volando, as fast as
he can trick him up for the Soldier. Of whom I will write more by himself.
For to discharge the thanks that are due for him, is no sudden business. To
return to Mr. Griffith; No man living ever took a kinder impression then he
has done of his obligations toward you: And it is indeed a piece of his
Character, to take the least kindness to heart. He knows all news. You have him
now in your hands. And God be between you both.

Your poor Friend suisceratissimamente, H. WOTTON.

To my most worthy dear Friend Mr. John Dinely, Attendant on the young Prince
at Leyden.
From the College the 16. of August, 1629.
My sweet Jack Dinely,
WE have newly concluded our Anniversary business, which has been the most
distracted Election that I verily believe had ever before been seen, since this
Nurse first gave Milk, through no less then four recommendatory, and one
mandatory Letter from the King himself; besides intercessions and messengers
from diverse great Personages for Boys both in and out, enough to make us think
our selves shortly Electors of the Empire, if it hold on. Among which
confusions, I did not forget (as I have written to our Royal Mistress) to put
Sir G. Kevets Son in the head of our List.

After this, which I have truly told you, you cannot well expect many lines
from me; for as the Seas require some time to settle, even when the winds are
ceased, so need our brains after such an agitation: yet somewhat I must say by
the Bearer. You have gotten a great interest in the whole Family, and in all
that touch upon it, by the pains which you have taken, and yet they reserve
themselves not to be more beholden to you for the introduction, then they hope
to be for you^ direction of him there; though he comes, I can tell you, with
severe advice from his Uncle, that if ever he be an inch from the eye of the
Prince, (unless with the Queen) either in time of security or danger; Actum
est; between them. We leave him now to your moulding, as if he were (as he is
indeed) to be melt in a new furnace: there is spirit enough to work upon,
though perchance overshadowed with some rural modesty; but that among Camps and
Courts is now and then too soon divested. I shall be glad to hear how he
appears di prima vista; as likewise of little Griffith, after whom I hearken
with no less affection.

Dum verser in hac materia: I could wish you at some times to quicken your
Anthony here with a line or two; which in Persius phrase, Patrnum sapiant: Not
truly that I perceive any slackness in him, but you know what our Italian
Horsemen say, Un Caval del Reguo vuol anche gli sproni.

We are divided by sundry reports from you, between hopes and fears, both
great; your next will ease us: which will find me in Kent, whether I am turning
my head again for a while, that I may be present at my Niece Stanhops good time.

My Niece Hester is absolutely reclaimed from those foolish impressions which
she had taken, Gods Name be ever blessed for it; and it is none of the least
ends of my going to rivet that business I hope at the next Term to do some
wonders for my self; so I call them, and so they must be if I do them: for
among Courtiers I am a wonder, as Owls are among gay Birds. Now farewell for the
present: let us still love one another, and our dear God love us both.

Your truest poor Friend, H. W.
I had made it a resolution to my self never to write to the Queen, without
somewhat likewise to the King; but understanding that they are now separated, I
have this time forborne to trouble him in so noble an action.



To my most dear and worthy Friend Mr. John Dinely, Secretary to the Queen of
Bohemia.
My dear J. Dinely,
FOr I am loath to lose the possession of our familiarity; you left me here your
Letters and your Love in deposito, and I have since received other from you,
somewhat of a sad complexion, touching the affairs of Germany as then they
stood: But more newly we hear, that Barhard of Weinmar does miracles upon the
Danuby, the River sometimes of our merry passage.

We vvish in this House (where you have placed me with much contentment) that
every Molehill that he takes were a Province; and that the Duke of Bavaria
were not only fled to Saltzburg (as is voiced) but even to the Capital of
Rome, and all others with him, that adore the purple Beast.

Here we live in daily (sed hoc lentum est) let me say, in hourly (quin and
illud frigidum) nay in continual remembrance of our Royal Mistress, the very
Triumph of Virtue. I have at the present written to her Majesty, as I shall do
often, being now in the proper place of her addresses, and (...) such
opportunity to express our zeals, as hath-less a lazy Pen no imaginable excuse
hereafter.

Through your hand I now send her my late Panegyric, which I blush to tell
you how well it takes here with some indulgent and merciful Readers.

The interpretation to her Majesty of as much therein as concerns her self, I
can commit to no spirit more sweetly, then to yours, who are so conversant
with her virtues.

With us here Things stand as you left them. Most indubitably an infinite
affection in the King toward so precious an only Sister: But I know not well
how our Times will sort with your Propositions. Yet I hope well, as Abraham
did, when he vvanted a Sacrifice, Deus providebit. And so for this time, in
confused have I rest,

From you know where, Dec. 10. 1633. Your ever vowed poor Friend, HENRY WOTTON.
I have written to the Queen touching James Vary, who commits himself to your
affectionate memory: And we languish for a return from you.

I pray remember my humble service to his Majesty's most worthy Resident with
you, to whom and to my Noble Secretary I will write by the next occasion.



SIR,
I Am glad of this opportunity to acquaint you, before your going, with the
cause why Mr. Avery's Son did fail at our late Election.

When the Boy came before us, being asked the ordinary Questions, Quod est tibi
Nomen? Quot Annos natus ^s? Quo Anni tempore? Quo Comitatu? Quo Oppido? Quave
Villa? (To all which his Answers must remain upon Record in our Indentures of
that year, if he be chosen) he stopped a little at the two last; and then (as
if he had meant to suffer like a Martyr for the Truth) he told us flatly, That
he was born in the Low Countries at Delft. This retrenched all farther
Examination of him; for thereby he was ineligible, our Statutes only admitting
the English Shires, with exclusion, not only of Ireland and Scotland, but even
of Wal^s; and much more of any foreign Province. Hereupon we called in his
Father, who handsomely skirmished in his behalf, That Children born of English
Parents in the Staples of Merchants abroad, were by an Act of Edw. the third,
habilited to all purposes at home, as well as the inward Natives. And thereupon
he went and took Counsel o^ Mr. Newbury, Steward of Windsor, and no obscure
Lawyer, who did set down his Judgment in writing clearly for him, That all
Local Statutes are void which are either against the Common Law, or against a
general precedent Statute, as he said this was. Now although we could have been
glad all to be left as free as your Arminians leave our Will; yet considering
that our Local Statutes were long after the foresaid Act of Habilities, and
that how invalid soever they may appear to some other man, yet that they bind
us at least in Conscience, especially after so long Custom. These points I say
considered, the last good will we could express toward the Father, was to
offer him (as I did) to propound the Case to my Lord of Canterbury, our Visitor
Paramount, and now in Ordinary (the B. of Lincoln being in an unvisitable case
himself) that so his Grace might relieve him withhis Interpretation: wherein I
got the Provost of Kings to concur with me; and so I drew a Letter with all
possible advantage on his side, enclosing therein the favourablest Branch of
our Statutes. This Letter Mr. Avery carried to Croydon with paternal Affection
and Have, and brought us back an Answer to this substance; That though his
Grace should be heartily willing in respect of the Fathers relation to her
Majesty of Bohemia (as I had represented him) to do any thing for the Child:
yet being a binding Precedent against Custom he could not suddenly determine
the Point, being at that time without Civil Lawyers, by whose advice his Court
was guided: And therefore if we would defer our Election till Michaelmas, he
would then orderly decide it. But we being by other Statutes bound not to
prolong our Election an hour after such a time as was already near spent, and
to tell you in Sinu, being loath to leave our selves so long upon
Interpretation, we gave it over. I understand since a circumstance that must
needs trouble Mr. Avery more then the Business it self: That it failed by his
fault, and not the Boys. For after our Usher (the Child's Tutor) had instructed
him, That by no means he should confess his foreign Birth, his Father, whom
the Boy had not acquainted with his Tutors Instruction, not knowing our
Statutes, bade his Son answer, when he should be asked the last Question, That
he was born in Comitatu Hollandiae; and so the Child trusting his Father more
then his Tutor, fell through the Basket.

With this Story I have entertained you at large, because, besides my zeal
toward any thing that our Royal Mistress can wish to be done, I was engaged in
a promise to your self, whom I will follow with Letters to her Majesty by
the conveyance of Sir Abra. Williams, and with a little Nuptial Present to
your self, which you had had with you, if a Friend of mine, who should have
made it ready, had not been skared from London. And yet (to show you my
poverty) it is only a pair of Sheets which I mean to send, with this Mark at
the corners, PRO DINLEIANIS. In the mean while, God hold you and your Love in
his Love, wherein after the uncertain Traverses of Courts below, dwells all
Abundance and Infallibility above.

By your ev^r the same affectionate poor Friend, HENRY WOTTON.
Dictated from my Bed, August 18.
To Mr. John Dinely, at Westminster.
SIR,
I Understand by your last kind lines that you were to be at Court as to
morrow; so as I hope by our next Foot-Post to hear the Crisis of that day: and
am sorry to hear in the mean time that your dreams were impropitious. We had
here taken a voice and strong belief coming from a Recusant, (who know many
things, and quickly) that the Infanta Queen of France was brought to bed of a
Dolphin, and not of a Distaff. But your Letter saying nothing either of the one
or of the other, I have suspended my faith.

London is the Ocean of Novelties: Here we speak of nothing but a certain new
Aguish disease, which invadeth many Families, but with little mortality.

The Plague at Dover is by Gods blessing ceased, and their Tents taken down. At
Boughton the Small Pox fallen first upon a Chaplain, and after, upon one of the
fair Faces, but a Deering; will keep me, I doubt, from that place: Not that I
apprehend any Contagions whatsoever (as I think you know) but the Winter
coming on, and the Place bleat, a small excuse will serve my turn. God send
you all comfort in your first and second self: To whose goodness I leave you,
resting,

Your most affectionate Alla Suiscerata, HENRY WOTTON.
From the Palace by Canterbury, August last, 1638.
SIR,
NExt your own and your dear Consorts health, I languish to hear of your first
reception at Court. For though I suppose it was short, yet we Philosophers
say, that Principia plus valent virtute quam mole. Next that, I pray let me
know your opinion of the prodigious escape of the Queen Mother of France, out
of the Spanish clutches to the Hague: And whether she be trajectura, as our
right worthy Friend Dr. Dorislaus vvriteth me. I am come hither in a very
benign Constellation, and silent conspiracy of my chiefest Friends that have
met here at the same time; Sir Edmund Bacon, Sir Francis Barnham, and Sir
Thomas Culpepper: All, men of singular conversation; and some of them, though
of the same County, yet that had not been here in seven years before. Of
which, my Nephew Sir Edmund and my self are to pass this next week under the
Roof of my L. Chief Justice Finch, at his House of Mote close by, through his
Noble and unresistable Importunity. God keep us in his Love, wherein is all
joy and abundance.

Your ever most affectionate, HENRY WOTTON.
From the Palace by Canterbury, this St. Bartholomew's day, 1638.
SIR,
I Send you enclosed the preparation of Guajacum, as I have found incomparable
benefit thereby. I expect in exchange the Letter touching the Duchess de
Cheureuse. I am in great perplexity by hearing no News of Nicholas Oudard since
the first of September Stylo novo from Bruxels: being that afternoon to go to
Mechelen with a Letter of Authority for his present dispatch; so as he vvrote,
he would either send me word, if any impediment should intervene; or bring
the first News himself. Besides, Monsieur Gerbier thought his business in so
fair a way, as he left a Maid there to come over in the company of himself,
and his Mother. When I lay these things together, I can make no good
interpretation of it: Yet I will not anticipate and prejudge mine own mishaps,
as I should account the loss of him, whom I have trained from a Child. God
grant all be well. If you could meet with Monsieur Gerbier and enquire
whether he has heard any thing, it would much ease my heart one way or
other. And so leaving you in the Lords protection, I rest,

Your true Friend in omni fortuna, HENRY WOTTON.
From the College, September. 26. 1638.
SIR,
I Was glad for all the private in a late Letter from you, and sorry for the
public, both foreign, and inward: But I like Plato's counsel well; In
adversities to compress murmur: For our Providence (says he) is too short to
judge, whether there may not lie under the outside of an apparent evil some
in-imaginable good. The last Philosophy is, Voluntas tua fiat Domine. Upon
hearing, some good while since, of the misadventures in the Palatine House;
his loss of Meppen, before he had it; the defeat of his Troops, as soon as he
had gathered them; the taking of his Brother, etc. I fell upon a conceit, that
perchance these unpleasant things might call over Sir R. Cave; the Prince being
destitute of counsel, and of proper Instruments of Action, (for they say,
Ferentz is likewise prisoner) And so there would be room here for your
Employment: which I would vvish you to press extremely. But of this more in
my next. I now send you an Hogshead of more then Soror Tonantis; and very
willingly, though so long after March you take us Sul basso. But one thing I
must tell you, that for your Wives Splenetique Infirmity, there is nothing
worse in the world then either strong or stale Beer. Now, that we have you out
of the Streights and in the Ocean (as you call it) both of novelties as well as
of other things, Matthew Say shall have order to call upon you at least once a
week. And for the present I leave you in his Love that never fails: remaining,

Your very truly affectionate, HENRY WOTTON.
From the College this Thursday morning, 1638.
SIR,
BEtween you and me Complemental Letters are as needless and improper, as I
hope, the provisions of Armor in the Tower will be. As for Novelties of State,
you are in the Center, and we rural Wights in the Circumference, and Skirts,
entertained with nothing but some cold icesickles and droppings from you
Londoners: Imagine us therefore to stand gaping for the return of the Lord
Marquess. In the mean while I should be glad to know in what quality my Nephew
Colonel Morton is employed toward the North; for I hear of one Sergeant Major
Thelwel in more noise. And so intending (as soon as it can be ready) to
entertain you with a strange Collar of Brawn, I rest,

Ever your own, HENRY WOTTON.
This Epiphany, 1638.
SIR,
MY Pen has not conversed with you for certe Gite of our Boat a pretty while;
not wanting affection, but matter. You are in the Center of Novelties. God send
all well, as I have no doubt it will be at last. I am within some few weeks
tending to my Genial Soil at Boughton Malherb; and thence about by Redgrave I
shall make a Circle hither again, taking perchance both Universities in my Line
homewards. You married men are deprived of these evagations. While we stand in
a little suspense touching the event of inward Affairs; I am glad to hear from
abroad in the High Dutch Gazette, that there is a Treaty of Exchange in hand
between Prince Rupert, and Prince Casimir of Poland, whom the Swedes have in
custody. Methinks, it is a pretty balanced intention, and of no improbable
issue; the King of Hungaria (alias Emperor) growing every day lower, and lower.
I desire much to know how your virtuous Consort stands in her health, and how
your self proceeds in your hopes; resting,

Semper, Semper Tuus, HENRY WOTTON.
From the College, Feb. 21. 1638.
Charissime,
I Am sorry to hear of new Oaths in Scotland between the Covenanters, who they
say will have none but Jesus Christ to reign over them: A Sacred Cover of the
deepest Impiety. God open their eyes, and soften their hearts. I have read a
good part of the Declaration, wherein the Dean of Durh^ns Pen does well appear:
and the whole business is very black. Never was there such a stamping and
blending of Rebellion and Religion together. I thank you for your news touching
Prince Rupert; but I fear the Hungarian King will hold him too fast. To your
Question about mine own Remove, it will be toward the ending of this week
for a night or two to London; so as I hope to save you the labor of journeying
hither. My Lodging, if it be not prepossessed, will be at Mr. Alkinds House in
the Strand, or otherwise peradventure with your Friend in Lombard Street,
whereof you shall have notice in time.

I am yours every where, H. WOTTON.
From the College April 21. 1639.
SIR,
I should be sorry for your departure toward our Royal Mistress, before some
short meeting at least between us: for I have much discourse to unlade in your
honest breast; and I can tell you, we had need lay up discourse safely; which
I hope you will take for some excuse of my seldom vvriting unto you: for I
suspect a certain natural fr^edom in mine own Pen.

In the Scottish Affairs, it is one mystery, that we know not what to believe.
Only this we can say, That there is nothing to be praised in it on their part;
and I could wish, there were as little to be feared on ours. Deus operatur
omnia suaviter: And to his Power and Mercy we must leave our selves.

Your ever faithful poor Friend, H. WOTTON.
From the College April 17. 1639. Sir, My Coachman is yet crasie, from a late
great sickness; but if it please you to specify the time of your convenience,
my Geldin shall vvait upon you at Branford; A poinct nomme.



SIR,
I long now to hear of nothing more then a little Deynleiolus; and if it prove
of another Gender in Grammar, then let Philosophy comfort you, that says, It is
Natures method to begin ab Imperfectiori: But by my contemplation of your own,
and your Wives complexion, and of her late sickn^ss, I should imagine that
Fortior pars trahet sexum.

We are sorry to hear that the Scottish Gentlemen, who have been lately sent
to that King, found (as they say) but a brusk vvelcome; which makes all fear,
that there may be a rebullition in that business.

We have a new strange voice flying here, that the Prince Palatine is toward
a Marriage.

I apprehend much the event of your new Embassage from the States, being
carried by a man who has had his whole fortune out of France; but the wisdom
of the Instrument may mollify all. I should be glad to know, whether his
Son-in-law Constantinus Hugeinus be in his company. Lastly, I should be glad to
hear that you are un tantino promoved in your own ends; for when the first
way is plained, all will go smoothly. Let us howsoever love one another, and
God love us both.

Your poor Friend, H. WOTTON.

A TABLE OF THE Several Tracts contained in this Book.
1. THe Elements of Architecture. 2. A Survey of Education. 3. Aphorisms of
Education. 4. Characters of some Kings of England. 5. Vita Henrici Sexti. 6. Ad
Regem e Scotia reducem H. W. Plausus and Vota. 7. A Panegyric to King Charles.
8. The Parallel. 9. The Disparity. 10. The Life of the Duke of Buckingham. 11.
The Great Action between Pompey and Caesar. 12. A Character of Ferdinand, Grand
Duke of Tuscany. 13. The Election of the New Duke of Venice; with other Papers
concerning that State. 14. A Meditation on Genesis 22. 15. A Meditation on
Christmas. day. 16. Letters to several Persons. 17. Poems. 18. Letters to Sir
Edmund Bacon. 19. Additional Letters to several Persons: Never before Printed.
FINIS.

