THE CHVRCHES PVRITY; OR, THE DIFFERENCE BETVVEENE THE CHVRCHES FRAME IN DARK
TIMES; AND her settlement in the purest times.

Printed Anno Dom. 1641.

TO THE HIGH, AND MIGHTY, AND OUR ROYAL KING CHARLES;
By the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc. The
Lord grant, to his Honors increase, to his days length, and to his Royal
Person and posterity (both here and hereafter) Eternal Glory. Amen.
Most Royal Sovereign,
I Do not presume to sore so high; in Respect of the worth of my labors above
others; for had they been penned by a far more exquisite Author, yet might a
much inferior patronage (notwithstanding) have been a worthy favor: I am I
do confess altogether unworthy under such a patronage to purchase favor to a
popular eye: how then shall I crave favor of your Sacred Majesty to deem a
gracious eye upon me. To prostrate these before your Highness, as a present,
they proceed from too inferior an Author; Or as counsels, it were too great
presumption. Yet your gracious, meek, and pious Sovereignty emboldeneth me to
devote the fruit of my mean labors to your Princely eyes, because (though
weak, yet) faithful, which though it cannot be good enough to deserve that
gracious countenance of my Royal Sovereign, yet this I can protest, that my
heart, my tongue, my hand and pen, shall be always, upon all opportunities
(next under God) devoted to my Royal King, and Gracious Sovereign.

And be glad as I am able (though unworthie) to extol Your Highness worthy
praise. H. Walker.

THE CHVRCHES PVRITY; Or, the difference between the Churches frame in dark
times, and her settlement in the purest times.
It is a false saying to conclude, that a thing which was once well done, must
in no wise be altered; for when the cause of the time is changed, good reason
does require the well done thing to be reformed also, says Saint Augustine in
his 5. Epistle to Marcellinus.

Though the frame of the Church of England, as it was settled at the reformation
of Popery, was approved by good men; yet (nevertheless) in these more pure
times, it may and ought to be reformed in many particulars.

1. Argument.
THat Church, 1. Arg^ment.
whose frame does differ from the Doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ in any
particular, may and ought in such particulars, to be reformed. But the frame of
the Church of England, as it now stands, does differ from the Doctrine of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ in many particulars: Therefore the frame of the Church
of England, as it now stands, may and ought to be reformed in many particulars.

2. Argument.
2. Argument.
THough a Church be Reformed from Idolatry, and settled in the purest form,
which then can be attained unto, yet nevertheless; time producing by better
experience, many inconveniences, wherein it may be again reformed; and that
upon good grounds, such inconveniences may, and ought to be reformed. But the
Church of England, though it be reformed from Popery and Idolatry; and settled
according to the purest form; which at her reformation it could attain unto;
yet (nevertheless) since such her settlement, time has produced by
experience, many inconveniences wherein it may and ought to be again Reformed;
and that upon good grounds; Conclusion
Therefore the Church of England may, and ought to be Reformed in all such
things.

Concerning the 1. Argument.
I. To prove that that Church whose frame does differ from the doctrine of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ in any particular, may and ought in such particulars to
be reformed. Therefore says Saint Cyprian, In his Ep. unto Cecilius. l. 2.
Epist. 3.
we ought not to take heed (says he) what any man has thought good to be
done before us, but what Christ which was before all men, has done before
that; for we must not follow the custom of men, but the truth of God. And
Saint Paul tells us, that those things (says he to the Church at Philippi)
which ye have both learned and received, and heard, and seen in me; those
things do, and the God of peace shall be with you, Phil. 4.8, 9. Whereby we
may plainly see, that if any Church shall entertain any thing that is
contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: such things upon trial
being found to be so, ought to be reformed.

II. To prove that the frame of the Church of England, as it is now, does
differ from the Gospel of Jesus Christ in many particulars, which to reckon up
in this place I am not resolved, I will only propound five Queries and refer
them to the judgment of those who please to search the Scriptures there
underquoted.

5. Queries.
I. Whether the Lordly government of the Bishops in the Church of England, and
their being, as they now stand, do not differ from the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. Luke 22.25, 26. 1. Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. Matt. 20.25, 26. Mark 9.32. 2. Tim.
4.1. Tit. 1.5, 6, 7. 1. Tim. 3.1, 2 3.2. Tim. 2.24,

II. Whether Excommunication be used in the Church of England upon such
persons, and according to the true manner of the discipline of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 16.22. 1. Cor. 5.5.

III. Whether the service in the Church of England be according to the Gospel
of Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 14.6. Acts 13.15, 16. 1. Cor. 14.26. Acts 1.13. Mat. 5.

IV. Whether those unpreaching and ill-living Ministers, which are placed to
serve many Churches, be according to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Mat: 5.15.
Luke 10.2. Mat. 10.27. Luke 12.42. Mat. 28.9. Acts 10.28. John 10.13. Romans
10.14. 1. Cor. 9.14. Phil. 2.21. 1 Pet. 5.2.

V. Whether those superstitious Ceremonies of Crossing in Baptism, bowings,
and cringings in the Churches of England, and other such like Ceremonies, be
according to the Doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Mat. 15.3. Mark 7.8.
Acts 15.10. Coloss. 12.8. Tit. 1.13, 4. 1 Pet. 4.11. But because I am verily
persuaded that there is no man of any discretion or judgment, but will
confess each particular in the first argument to be true; I am therefore
brief in it, and pass to prove the second.

Concerning the 2. Argument.
I. To prove that though a Church be ^eformed from Idolatry; and settled in the
purest form, which then can be attained unto, yet nevertheless time producing
by better experience many inconveniences, wherein it may be again reformed;
and that upon good grounds, such inconveniences may and ought to be reformed.
What though our fathers, and our grandfathers, etc. lived well under such a
form of Church discipline, as we now enjoy; and blessed be the Lord that we
do still enjoy it: and are kept from the Idolatry under which not many
predecessors before us were afflicted, yet I say notwithstanding, blame not
them who cry for the reformation of the Church of England. They thought
themselves happy under this form, so do we; But what if they saw not those
things which we now see; what if the Lord revealed not so much light to them,
as he is pleased (in these days) to reveal to us, or what if they did labor
as much as they could for reformation of such things as we now do, and could
not effect it, or whatsoever the cause was, I intend not at this time to
dispute.

They are gone, yet perchance not all, nay; do not some abide with us still
which can witness both how much and how often this reformation of the Church
has been labored for, from time to time? Let no man then accuse those who in
these days seek the reformation of the Church.

Indeed some are ready to accuse us as factious, Object.
and lovers of novelty, because we desire the Churches conformity to her head
Christ: Ans. In his book of a solitary life.
To whom I say as Saint Bernard once said; It is not new, it is the corruption
of such tongues, to call it new (says he) the truth is so manifestly light,
that such are not able to shadow it; and therefore they do but cavil with it by
the name of novelty. But how dare they call it noveltie (says he) it is no new
vanity, no it is a matter of old religion, and of perfect godliness founded in
Christ.

And lest any man should depend on the discipline of former ages too
confidently not regarding whether it be according to the Gospel of Christ, yea
or no, let them consider what S. Paul writes to the Galathians, If we (says
he) nay S. Paul goes further; If an Angel from Heaven (says he) preach unto
you otherwise then that ye have received, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. For
do I preach man's doctrine or Gods, says he: nay he told them moreover, that
if he should teach them the doctrine of men; that he was not the servant of
Christ, verse 10.

Object. It may be some will say, why do you trouble us now with such things,
seeing the Church has continued peaceably so many years under this happy
form; where has this age so much wisdom above former ages?

Ans. I might here answer, either by reason of that experience which we have
had above former ages: who were then newly reduced out of Popery; or by reason
of those weeds which we see since sprung up amongst Gods corn in these
Churches as well as others; or many other reasons which I might allege, but
rather choose at this time to answer this objection in a word with Saint Austin,
that the counsel of God that sent it is unsearchable to the wisdom of man,
In his 10. book of his Trinity.


II. To prove that the Church of England, though it be reformed from Popery and
Idolatry, and settled according to the purest form; which at her reformation it
could attain unto; yet nevertheless since such her settlement, time has
produced by experience many inconveniences upon good ground; wherein it may,
and ought to be again reformed: which I will prove in three several
circumstances.

I. Because the Church of England, saw not many inconveniences in her first
reformation from Popery, which we now find in these after times. II. Because
there are many things in that form, which was then established; which can now
be proved upon good grounds to stand in need of reformation. III. Because
such inconveniences as are found to be in the Church, are of greatest
consequence to be looked after, and ought chiefly to be reformed.
First, to prove that the Church of England did not see many inconveniences in
her first reformation from Popery, which we now find in these after times;
else how comes that government then settled, to be so much excepted against;
how come men's consciencies now to be bound to observance of such Ceremonies
which they never intended: though as a thing indifferent they permitted such
things, as those several gestures of the body, at the receiving of the
Sacrament, at the reading of the Gospel before the Altar, at the name Jesus,
etc. the Cross in Baptism, and in the hornebook, the Priests garments, etc.
those holy men saw not the inconveniences of permitting them; but now the
Church cries out under such superstition: they saw not these inconveniences of
Lordly Pastors, which we now find: they saw not those relics of the Popish
Mass which is in these times discovered; they pass over these and many things
more in the Church, which we now see the superstition and inconvenience of, and
therefore desire reformation.

Let us but consider how full of dross and trash Popery is* though Popery be a
profession of Christ, yet that Religion is full of dross, full of weeds, it
is like a garden over-runne with weeds: fuller of ceremonies then substance,
nothing but shadows, and superstition, and vanity.

Is it possible that pure gold should be refined clear from the dross at one
heat; Is it possible that all the weeds should be rooted out of a garden at
once so clean, that no relics of them should revive again; no, the gold
must come to the fire again, and again, seven times; before it be pure gold;
the garden must be often weeded, before the weeds be utterly rooted out.

The form of the Church being newly refined from Popery, in those days, it is
very probable that there will be much dross of Popery left behind; all the
weeds of Popery cannot be utterly rooted out at one bout; no no; in the name
of God bring it to the purifying fire; I mean the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
there purify it again and again, and leave no dross at all behind; root
out the stinking weeds of Popery again, and again; weed them out upon your
knees, weed them out with your hands, with your hearts, etc. never leave till
they be all weeded out of our Churches, that so the English Protestant Church
may become a glorious Church of Christ.

In those days holy men were rejoiced to see the grounds of Popery cast out of
our Churches, and the Protestant discipline established, repugnant to the
Church of Rome which was then established, as time and opportunity would
permit them: but we in these times, upon more mature deliberation and longer
time of experience, may reform what their so sudden change could not foresee,
or accomplish.

Let us receive the discipline of those times as praiseworthy, but withal; In
his 198 Epist. unto Fortunatus.
let us consider that saying of Saint Austin, we receive not (says he) the
disputation of any men, be they never so catholic, or praise worthy, as we
receive the Canonical Scriptures, though they be holy men, yet (says he) we
may well reproove such things in their writings, wherein we find that they
have otherwise thought then the truth may bear them: such am I (says he) in
the writings of others: and such would I wish others to be in the writings of
mine. And Saint Paul says to the Church at Corinth, I have planted (says he)
Apollos waters* but God gives the increase; so then neither is he that
planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase, 1
Cor. 3.6, 7.

There are two great reasons, why at the first reformation they could not see;
2 Reasons
nor establish the form of the Church discipline* in that purity, which we by
the grace of God may in these times. First in respect of those times of
darkness. Secondly, in respect of those times of trouble and fear: And first
in respect of those times of darkness.

Should Rome, or any Popish Nation or Church when Popery is settled, be
reformed, and become a Protestant Church, could it be expected that such pure
discipline should be there established in each particular form in such a
Church at the first, as in after times upon more experience, being better
practiced; and receiving more light from other reformed Churches also? can all
inconveniences be reformed before a long time; yea, and often reformation
too, have not the Apostles, has not Christ; yea has not God himself, been
often troubled in the conversion of a people in this kind? And what are we?
We by the grace of God have so long enjoyed the peace of the Gospel, and have
been so many years reformed from Popery, and so abide still under our
gracious King, whom God grant long to reign amongst us; and we have a form
of Church discipline established since the reformation from Popery; but is this
all? oh, there is (by the grace of God) a greater measure of light and
knowledge of Jesus Christ, we are a more grown Church: to whom the Lord has
revealed a greater measure of understanding by reason of our longer time of
experience in the Doctrine of the Gospel, then was at the first reformation. On
Math. 11. Chap.
So that we may say as Erasmus said upon another occasion; that what was once
received in part, may now be grown and increased, the purity of Religion is
like fruit, it grows to eternal life, Romans 6.22.

Secondly, In respect of those times of trouble and fear: Let us but a little
look upon our selves, in our own present state: oh, how many, and how great
are those troubles, and fears, which our age has seen to bring to pass this
happy opportunity of reformation, we Protestants under the government of our
Church, and our King, whose Royal will it is, that all abuses and
inconveniences should be reformed, and the Church settled according to the
discipline of former ages, in the purest times: yet what by the tyranny of the
Prelates, and the close clouded ways of other favorites of superstition; his
Majesty's Royal will has not hitherto been fulfilled: In these troubles of
seeking reformation, many have suffered, and been imprisoned, where some have
laid down their lives, and there ended their days. Indeed these things
should not be so; oh that there were every where in our Churches, and Kingdom,
one heart truly zealous toward God, and faithful toward our Royal King and
Kingdom.

If then it be so troublesome in these days, wherein we live, to bring to
pass the reformation of those evils and inconveniences in the Church, which
our age finds out; and that it is notwithstanding his Majesty's Royal will,
that such reformation should be, according to the discipline of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ; How could it choose then but that greater troubles, and fears,
were a hindrance to that reformation which was immediate from popery. It is no
wonder though we now discover many inconveniences and evils which they then
passed by.

Upon what ground therefore is that saying of many amongst us, that the form
of the discipline of the Church of England now stands, as it was settled by
holy, wise, and learned men; and therefore it ought not to be altered whereas
you see, that for many causes they were forced to let pass many evils and
inconveniences, which they could not then reform.

In his proheme of his 3 book of Trinity.
Therefore I say of them, as Saint Austin said of himself, be not bound unto my
writings (says he) as unto the Canonical Scriptures, but when thou shall
find any thing in the Scriptures, which thou did not believe, believe it
without doubting or delay; but when thou find that in my writings which thou
did not know certainly before, except that thou shall certainly unstand
it to be according to the Scriptures, do not stiffely affirm it.

We ought not to be bound to the form of those holy men further, then they
agree with the Discipline of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; therefore says Saint
Paul to the Church at Corinth, let no man (says he) rejoice in men, 1 Cor.
3.21.

II. To prove that there are many things in that form which was then
established, which can now be proved (upon good grounds) to stand in need of
reformation.

Is there not great want of reformation in the Church, as it now stands in that
form; wherein our Lordly Bishops who are lifted up in honor above their
brethren cry out, away with all Puritan Preachers, let them be silenced, let
them be suspended if they will not bow, etc. And in the mean while those
faithful Preachers, and Ministers of Gods word, avouch such Lordly Prelacie to
be unlawful, and such superstition as they appoint to be Idolatry.

The Prelates cry for more superstitious Ceremonies to be brought into the
Church, and labor by their power to force them in, and to bind men's
consciences to the observance of them: and in the mean while the faithful,
painful Ministers of God, both pray and labor for the suppressing of those
superstitions which are already crept in. The Prelates will have the Church to
be ruled by them; The faithful in the Church, will be ruled by the
Scriptures; and under God by our Royal King: and not by the Prelates wherein
they abuse both the Doctrine of Christ, and the honor of the King.

The Prelates say they are the true Vickers of Christ in the Church of God; But
the Church says with Saint Chrysostom, In the unperfect work. Hom. 49.
we believe them not: Their disipline is no worthey, or sufficient knowledge of
the Godhead. And afterward expresses, that out of the very true Churches come
forth (often timts) disceivers Therefore we may not believe them, unless they
speak, and do such things, as are agreeable to the Scriptures.

The Prelates can plead their Prelasie from our forefathers, whom we respect
as such men as were holy; and did many things well, which we now find the
comfort of; yet let us not esteem their doings above the holy Scriptures; for
the Scriptures are given by the inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach,
to reprove, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, 2 Timothy 2.16.

Let us take a little view upon the form of our Church discipline as it
stands; how it agrees with our peace; and we shall find, that it stands in
great need of reformation. 1. In respect of private miseries. 2. In respect of
public dangers.

First in respect of private miseries. How have the faithful Ministers of God
been straightened, and have had their mouths, as it were locked up; who have had
so many private snares laid for them, that some have been feign to fly into
other lands, others have suffered in this land, imprisoned, dismembered, etc.
and many have been constrained to be silent in the congregation, in what they
have earnestly prayed in their own closets; and for fear of such as waighted
purposely to ensnare them.

Virgil in his 6 book and 13. Chap. of invention of things.
Might not they complain (with Polidorus) that the world is come to such
outrage and mere madness herein, that this part of holiness differs (in
some men) very little from open wickedness for many good men have suffered, and
the whole Church has been oppressed because they would not hear the words of
them that taught lies. Ier. 23.16.

Secondly, In respect of public miseries. Is not the whole kingdom sensible
of those public calamities, proceeding from the same; And those eminent
dangers which the same has brought upon us, by reason of those inconveniences
which have risen from the form thereof, how many are there amongst us very
sensible hereof; And that not only by the Prelates Courts, which have been
such an universal purgatory to the Church: but those wars, and frights,
which have been by their means raised to the disturbance of the whole land,
and the impoverishing not only of the North, but generally of all trading
through the whole kingdom.

Nay have they not been so politic herein, that the hearts of all people
have been so discomfited, that betwixt hope and fear, they have been ready
to prophecy, the return of Popery: But blessed be the Lord, who has hitherto
preserved our gracious King, and Kingdom. And how does the Church now rejoice,
since it has pleased our Royal King to prevent their designs, in calling and
confirming of the High, and Honorable, Wise, and Godly Assembly in the high
court of Parliament.

Thirdly, to prove that such inconveniences, as are found to be in the Church,
are of greatest consequence, to be looked after, and ought chiefly to be
looked to. A godly kingdom is an happy kingdom, but nothing whatsoever more
ruinates a Church, State, or Kingdom then sin. And the reformation of the
evils and inconveniences in Church discipline, is a great fence against sin;
but the permission of error is a dangerous downfall, and a great dungeon; In
his 3. Sermon f^ Lazarus.
and as Saint Chrysostom says, brings the loss of salvation, it brings in
heresies, and vicious life, and turns all things up side down; And this is
condemnation (says Christ) that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness more then light, John 3.19.

Object. If any one shall yet object and say, where shall we look for a form
of Church discipline, since even at this time Christ is taught to us now as
clearly, and truly, as ever in former ages.

Answ. In his 3. chap. of the unity of the Church.
I say with the judgment of Saint Austin, that we ought rather to seek the
Church in the words of Christ, then in the words of men, for that Christ is the
truth, and better knows his own body. And Christ himself gives us the same
rule also. Search the Scriptures (says he) for in them ye think to have
eternal life, and they are they which testify of me, John 5.34.

Thus have I been brief in the general expression of the Churches purity,
concluding this part with prayer to Almighty God; that such things as stand not
with his glory, the Kings honor, the building up of the Church, and the peace
and the tranquillity of the Kingdom may be Reformed.

FINIS.

