A SCRIPTURE Catechism.

(...), A FORM OF Sound Words: OR, A Scripture-Catechism; SHOWING What a
Christian is to Believe and Practice, in order to Salvation. Very useful for
Persons of all Ages and Capacities as well as Children.

Composed by the Pious and Learned JOHN WORTHINGTON D. D. Deceased.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty.
MDCLXXIII.

THE PREFACE.
THat the seasoning of Youth with Truth and the pure genuine Doctrine of
Christianity is a business of mighty consequence, cannot be in the least
doubted by any that observe (as who may not?) that the lamentable ignorance of
the generality of those who are honored with the name Christians, and the
gross Erroneousness and Misunderstanding of the Gospel, that multitudes, which
yet make a great profession of it, are manifestly guilty of, are to be imputed
to no one thing so much as to the neglect of that duty: And that the want of
pious education has more than any other thing whatsoever rendered ineffectual
the industrious endeavors of faithful Ministers for the good of Souls.

First, this is apparently the grand and fundamental Cause of so many peoples
gross Ignorance of that Religion which they are baptized into, and have all
their days lived under the preaching of; and it is not to be denied that those
whose understandings gain none, or but very inconsiderable improvement by
hearing the Holy Scriptures read, and the Doctrines they contain, explained in
the Church, are almost universally such as whose Parents, or those that had the
charge of them, took none or very little care to instruct at home.

And who does not see also, that the strange proneness of people to be misled,
and turned about with every wind of Doctrine, is nothing so much to be
attributed to their want of good Preaching, as to their not being prepossessed
and early anticipated with the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, their
not being timely antidoted with the Doctrine that is according to godliness,
against the poisonous Principles of the many Deceivers that are entered into the
world, and make such sad Havoc of souls among our selves.

And as the constant experience of mankind assures us, that there is no such
time for improving in other Sciences or Mysteries, as Youth, and that few
become very considerable in any profession, who have not studied it in their
younger years, so it is rare to find any that have attained to but a competent
proficiency in the great Mystery of Godliness, in whom the grounds of it have
not been laid in that age. Therefore the wise man advises to remember our
Creator in the days of our youth, and to train up a Child in the way that he
should go, adding that when he is old, he will not then depart from it. And as
S. Paul told Timothy, who had a religious Mother and Grandmother, that from a
Child he had known the Scriptures, which are able to make him wise to
salvation, so has it always been the practice of truly pious Parents and
Governors of Youth, to take care that God and the good things of his Law may
get the first possession of their Childrens hearts; and not to neglect the well
principling of them till they arrive at a mature and settledjudgment: as well
knowing that Young ones are ordinarily as much more docile and tractable than
those of Ripe years, as is a Twig more lithe and yielding than the body of a
Grown Tree; and that it is far easier to prevent the fixing of evil habits in
their Souls, than to extirpate them being fixed.

Now in order to the better instructing of Youth, the way of learning them
Catechisms, or Books containing and explaining the Substance of Religion by
Questions and Answers, is commended by the General and very Ancient practice of
the Church of God; but it must be acknowledged that through the too imprudent
and unskilful composure of most Catechisms, this way has not proved so
successful, as it might (with the blessing of God) have been, had due care and
judgment been used about them.

It Is easy to show how much there is of mistake and men in them; and that,
whereas God commanded the Jews to teach their Children his Laws and Statutes,
not any notions of their own, they are generally too faulty in this particular:
And by this means have become greater propagators of some uncertain
Speculations, and even dangerous Errors, than furtherances of useful and
necessary knowledge; and possessed the Learners of them both with a wrong
notion of Christianity in general, and such particular opinions as tend to
enervate and make insignificant the wholesome Doctrine taught by them.

This great abuse has very much been complained of by Wise and Good men; and
it was the affecting sense that the most pious and worthy Person, our Author,
had of it that prevailed with him to compose this Catechism: of whom (by the
way) I cannot forbear (notwithstanding the extremely narrow room I am here
confined to) to give this general and very short Account, viz.

That as he was highly valued (by men capable of understanding the worth of
that accomplishment) for his excellent Learning, so all Good men that had the
happiness of knowing him could do no other than greatly love and honor him for
the incomparably more noble endowment of a divine temper and most Christ-like
spirit that appeared in him. Among other, there were no virtues he was more
observed to be an Example of, than a Dovelike innocence and simplicity, a
Lamblike meekness, humility and peaceableness, the greatest benignity, candor
and ingenuity, the most Christian (that is unlimited and universal) charity;
(in which those that dissented from him in matters of Religion (which is rare
in these days) had not only a real but great interest) entire self-resignation
to the will of God, and a very devout temper of mind toward him. And those
must needs conclude that he loved God and the souls of men in an eminent
degree, that observed how very public spirited he was, and wonderfully
industrious in contriving and promoting designs for the bettering of the World,
and in exciting others to do the like.

To omit other lasting Monuments of his pious industry, Mr. Mede's most
elaborate Discourses, by him collected and published in one great Volume, will
perpetuate his memory. All that know what he has there alone performed will
pronounce him a most indefatigable pains taker for the public good.

And I presume that those that shall consider the following Catechism will
acknowledge it a no less laborious than judicious work, and consequently that it
is another very singular instance of his solicitous concern for their better
part: And as I said, that the sense he had of the ill services that too many
Catechisms do in the world, was the occasion of his composing this, so I verily
believe that a more effectual course cannot well be taken for remedying of that
mischief.

For, first, that so it may neither be too large nor yet defective, he has
with excellent judgment made it to consist of all the most necessary and
important points of Religion, and of none other.

2. That so all Christians of what denomination soever may have no temptation
to suspect the truth of it, he has composed it of Texis of Scripture; and not
taken liberty to express any one Doctrine, whether relating to Faith or
Manners, in words of his own invention: nor has he any where made use of such
Scriptural Phrases as to men of competent understandings are obscure or
ambiguous; or so much as seemingly misapplied any: but all he uses are very
pertinent to his purpose, according to the apparent sense of them; as, I
promise my self, all persons not grossly silly or prejudiced will bear me
witness.

And whereas several phrases are briefly explained in other words, it is done
only for the sake of the most ignorant, and to render them at first sight
intelligible to the very lowest capacities: Nor are any of those explications
such as, I can see, may be called in question with any shadow of reason. But
besides, that no man may think his judgment imposed upon by them, taking notice
that they are not to be esteemed as a part of the Catechism; and that so it may
readily be read without them, they are all marked to be printed in a distinct
Character, and moreover enclosed with two strokes as Parentheses.

In short, the Reader may reap these following advantages, by the careful
perusal of this Catechism.

1. He may be instructed thereby in the main body and substance of simple pure
Christianity, without the adulterations and spurious mixtures (to borrow a
phrase from a very excellent Doctor) of Manmade Divinity.

2. He may here at once and with the self-same labor be both taught the main
points of his Religion, and how to prove them.

3. He here has them expressed in the m^st affecting manner and with greatest
authority, because in the words of the holy Scriptures: which are certainly
more commanding, strike with greater awe and a quicker and more pungent sense,
more powerfully influence our minds and sweetly insinuate their sense into our
souls, than can any of our own devising. And I may hereto apply the well known
Verse, Dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur aquae.
Pipe-waters vapid taste and dead
To those drunk at the Fountainhead.


4. He will hence evidently perceive that the Christian Religion is no
Speculative but a purely Practical Science, and that the design and business
thereof is (though those that would not have it so will not see it) to make men
inwardly and really Righteous, to purify our souls from all fleshly and
spiritual pollutions, and endue us with a God-like and divine nature.

I shall now make two humble and earnest requests, and then conclude my already
too long Preface.

First, That Parents and others that have the charge of Youth, will be pleased
to instruct them thoroughly in this Catechism; I mean after they have well
learnt and digested that which the Church has set forth for them: concerning
which I must needs say, that as it is very well adapted to the capacities of
young ones, so (whatsoever too many do think of it) it is an excellently good
foundation to superstruct upon.

Secondly, That those that are more than Children, either in age or
understanding, will not disdain (because this is a Catechism) frequently to
read it and consideratively to weigh and ponder it. I have said enough to
persuade my Readers not to deny me these requests.

Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make us perfect in every good work to do his will, working in us that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, ( by blessing to us this and all those many other
excellent helps he has graciously afforded us for that purpose) to whom be
glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
Edward Fowler.

IMPRIMATUR,

Sam. Parker.
Ex Aed. Lambethanis. November. 8. 1672.
A Scripture-Catechism; OR, A FORM OF Sound Words: Showing What a Christian is
to Believe and Practice, in order to Salvation.
Quest.

WHat is the main Duty and Concernment of Man?

Answ.

To Fear God and keep his Commandments is the whole Duty of Man. Eccles. 12.
13.


Q. What is God?

A. God is a Spirit Jo. 4. 24.
, most pure and holy 1 Samuel 2. 2. Revel. 4. 8. 1 Jo. 3. 3. Job. 4. 17. Isa. 5.
16.
, most good, merciful and gracious Mat. 19. 17. Psalm. 103. 8. 119 68. 145. 8, 9.
, most just and rightcous Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Job 34. 10. Genesis 18. 25. Isa. 26. 7.
, most true and faithful Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Psalm. 31. 5. 146. 6. Lam. 3. 23.
, Allknowing Jo. 21. 17. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Isa. 40. 13, 14. Prove. 15. 3.
, Almighty Revel. 4. 8. Luke 18. 27. Dan. 4. 33. Job 42. 2.
, Eternal Genesis 21. 33. Romans 16. 26. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Revel. 1. 8. Isa. 40. 28. 41
4. 57. 15. Psalm. 90. 2.
, and every where present Jer. 23, 24. 1 Kings 8. 27. Psalm. 139. 8, 9. 10.
.

Q. How may it be known that there is a God?

A The Invisible things of God from the Creation of the World are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal power and
Godhead. Romans 1. 20. Psalm. 19. 1.


Q. How many Gods are there?

A. There is none other God but one; for though there be that are called Gods,
whether in Heaven or in earth (as there'be Gods many and Lords many) yet to us
there is but oneGod the Father, of whom are all things, etc. 1 Cor. 8. 4, 5, 6.


Q. What does the Scripture affirm of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost?

A The Scripture says that there are three that hear Record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word ( or the Son) and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. 1
John ^. 7.


Q. What is meant by God's being a Spirit?

A. By God's being a Spirit is meant that he has not flesh and bones, that he
cannot be handled or seen Luke 24. 39. Deuteronomy. 4. 12, 15, etc. Col. 1. 15. 1 Timothy
6. 16.
, so that there is nothing to which we can liken him, nor any likeness which we
may compare unto him Isa. 40. 18. Acts 17. 29.
.

Q. What do you 'earn from this, that God is a Spirit?

A. From this, that God is a Spirit, I learn, that they that worship him must
worship him in Spirit and in Truth. John 4. 24.


Q. What is meant by God's being most pure and holy?

A. By God's being most pu e and holy is meant, that he is not a God thatrhath
pleasure in wickedness Psalm. 5. 4.
, that he is of purer eyes than to behold evil Habak. 1. 13.
, ( that is, with a liking of it) and that he cannot be tempted with evil,
neither does he tempt any man James 1. 13.
.

Q. What do you learn from the Consideration of God's purity and holiness?

A. From the Consideration of God's purity and holiness, I learn, that I ought
to abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good Romans 12. 9.
, to purify my self even as he is pure 1 John 3. 3.
, and to be holy in all manner of Conversation, as God is holy 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16.
.

Q. What is meant by God's being most good, merciful and gracious?

A. By this that God is most good, merciful and gracious is meant, that his
tender mercies are over all his works Psalm. 145. 9.
, that he does good Psalm. 119. 68. Acts 14. 17.
, and gives good things unto them that ask him Mat. 7. 11.
, that he is full of compassion and longsuffering Psalm. 84. 5. 15.
, ready to pardon, slow to anger and of great kindness Nehem. 9. 17.
, and that he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked
turn from his way and live Ezekiel. 33. 11. 18. 32.
, and is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance 2 Pet. 3. 9.
.

Q. What duty toward God do you learn from theconsideration of his goodness
and mercy?

A. The duty toward God, that I learn from the consideration of his goodness
and mercy is this, that we ought to love God because he first loved us 1 John
4. 19.
, that we should praise him and give thanks unto him Psalm. 106. 1.
, and be persuaded by his mercies to present our bodies a living Sacrifice,
holy, acceptable to God, which is our reasonable service Romans 12. 1.
.

Q. What duty toward man do you learn from the consideration of God's goodness
and mercy?

A. The duty toward man which I learn from the consideration of God's goodness
and mercy is this, that we should be patient toward all men, not rendering evil
for evil to any man 1 These. 5. 14, 15.
, but do good to all Gal. 6. 10.
, even to them that hate us Mat. 5. 44.
and to be merciful as our Father also is merciful, and kind to the unthankful
and to the evil Luke 6. 35, 36.
, and forgive one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us Ephesians.
4 32. Colos. 3. 13.
.

Q. In what especially is the kindness, love and mercy of God manifested to us?

A. In this was manifested the love of God to us, in that he sent his only
begotten Son into the world, to be the propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world, that we might live through
him. 1 John 4. 9, 10. and 2 2. and 4. 14.


Q. Does the goodness and grace of God in the Gospel give security to Sinners,
or shall we continue in sin that Grace may abound?

A. God forbid Romans 6. 1, 2, 15.
; for the goodness of God leads us to Repentance Romans 2. 4.
, and the grace of God that brings salvation teaches us that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, rightcously and godlily
in this present World Titus 2. 11, 12.
.

Q. You said that God is most just and righteous, what is meant thereby?

A. By God's being most just and righteous is meant, that God the Judge of all
the Earth will do right Genesis 18. 25.
, and render to every man according to his deeds Romans 2. 6. Job 34. 10, 11.
Jer. 32. 19.
, that his ways are right Hos. 14. 9.
, and equal, Ezekiel. 18. 25.
and his judgment is according to truth Romans 2. 2.
.

Q. What duty toward God do you learn from his justice and righteousness?

A. The Duty toward God that I learn from his justice and righteousness is
this, that seeing God, without respect of persons, judges according to every
man's work, we ought to pass the time of our sojourning here in fear 1 Pet. 1.
17. Eccles. 12. 13, 14.
; and I farther learn, that when God's judgments are in the earth, the
inhabitants of the world should learn righteousness Isa. 26. 9.
, and acknowledge that God is just and righteous in all his works that he does
Nehem. 9. 33. Dan. 9. 14.
, and that therefore we should not complain Lam. 3. 39.
, but be humbled and accept of the punishment of our iniquities Lev. 26. 41.
, and bear the indignation of the Lord because we have sinned against him Micah
7. 9.
.

Q. What duty toward man do yo learn from the justice and righteousness of God?

A. The duty toward man that I learn from the justice and righteousness of God
is this, to do no evil to my neighbor Psalm. 15. 3. Romans 13 10.
, nor go beyond or defraud my brother in any matter, the Lord being the avenger
of all such 1 These. 4. 6.
; but, without having respect of persons Prove. 24. 23.
, to do justice and judgment, which is more acceptable to the Lord than
Sacrifice Prove. 21. 3.
, to render unto all their dues Romans 13. 7.
, and to do to others as I would that they should do to me Luke 6. 31.
; and lastly, when I am reviled not to revile again, when I suffer not to
threaten, but to commit my self ( as Christ did) to him that judges
righteously 1 Pet. 2. 23.
.

Q. You said that God is most true and faithful, what is meant thereby?

A. By God's being most true and faithful is meant, that God cannot lie Titus
1. 2. 1 Samuel 15. 29.
, nor deny himself 2 Timothy 2 13.
, that with him is no variableness nor shadow of turning James 1. 17.
, but that he keeps covenant and mercy to them that love him and keep his
Commandments Dan. 9. 4. Nehem. 1. 5. 2 Chronicles. 6. 14.
; he will do, and make good what he has spoken Numb. 23. 19. 2 Chronicles. 6. 15.
, nor shall any word fail of all that he has promised 1 Kings 8. 56. Josh. 23.
14, 15. Exodus 12. 41.
.

Q. duty toward God do you learn from his being most true and faithful?

A. The duty toward God which I learn from his being most true and faithful is
this, that we draw near to God with a true heart in full assurance of says
Heb. 10. 22.
, and call upon him in truth Psalm. 145. 18.
; for he tries the heart and has pleasure in uprightness 1 Chronicles. 29. 17.
, he requires truth ( or sincerity) in the inward parts Psalm. 51. 6.
, and will give ear unto the prayer that goes not out of feigned lips Psalm.
17. 1.
.

Q. What farther duty toward God do you learn from his truth and faithfulness?

A. I do farther learn from the truth and faithfulness of God, that if we
suffer according to the will of God, we should commit the keeping of our souls
to him in well doing as unto a faithful Creator 1 Pet. 4. 19.
, as being persuaded that he is able to keep that which we commit to him
against that day 2 Timothy 1. 12.
, ( and therefore will do it) and that we should hold fast the profession of
our faith without wavering, he being saithful that promised Heb. 10. 23.
, and will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but will with
the temptation also make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it 1 Cor.
10. 13.
, and will establish us and keep us from evil 2 These. 3. 3.
.

Q. What duty toward man do you learn from God's being most true and faithful?

A. The duty toward man which I learn from God's being most true and faithful
is this, that putting away lying, every man should speak truth with his
neighbor Ephesians. 4. 25. Zech. 8. 16.
, from his heart Psalm. 15 2.
, and that in our mouth Rev. 14. 5.
and spirit there should be no guile Psalm. 32. 2.
but in simplicity and godly sincerity we should have our conversation in the
world 2 Cor. 1. 12.
: For lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, but they that deal truly,
Prove. 12. 22.
and are upright in their way are his delight Prove. 11. 20.
.

Q What is meant by this that God is All-knowing?

A. By God's being All-knowing is meant, that he is perfect in knowledge Job
36. 4. 37. 16.
, and his understanding is infinite Psalm. 147. 5. Isa. 40. 28.
, that he understands our thoughts a far off, and is acquainted with all our
ways, and that there is not a word in our tongue but he knows it altogether
Psalm. 139. 2, 3, 4. Isa. 66. 18.
, neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all
things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do Heb.
4. 13.
.

Q. What do you learn from God's being most wise and All-knowing?

A. From God's being most wise and Allknowing I learn, that I ought to serve
him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind; for the Lord knows all
hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
, and his eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give to every
one according to his ways and according to the fruit of his doings Jer. 32. 19.
17. 10.
.

Q. What is meant by this, that God is Allmighty?

A. By God's being Almighty is meant, that he is the blessed and only Potentate
1 Timothy 6. 15.
, whom none is able to withstand 2 Chronicles. 20. 6.
, that with him nothing is impossible Luke 1. 37.
, nothing is too hard for him Jer. 32. 17, 27.
, and that he does whatsoever he pleases in heaven and in earth Psalm. 135. 6.
Dan. 4. 35.
, and no thought of his can be hindered Job 42. 2. marg.
.

Q. What do you learn from Gods being Almighty?

A. From God's being Almighty I learn, that we ought ( above all) to fear him,
and to tremble at his presence Mat. 10. 28. Jer. 5. 22.
, as also to submit our selves unto him James 4. 7.
, to humble our selves under his mighty hand 1 Pet. 5. 6.
, and to walk before him and be perfect Genesis 17. 1.
( that is, in all things obedient) and on the contrary to take heed how we
provoke him to jealousy, who is stronger than we 1 Cor. 10. 22
, and that we harden not our selves against him Job 9 4.
.

Q. What do you farther learn from God's being Almighty?

A. From God's being Almighty I farther learn, that we ought to trust in him,
and not be afraid what man can do unto us Psalm. 56. 4, 11.
; for if God be for us, who can be against us Romans 8. 31. Psalm. 118 6.
? that we be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might Ephesians. 6. 10.
, and be fully persuaded that what God has promised, he is able also to
perform. Romans 4. 20,21.


Q What is meant by God's being Eternal?

A. By this that God is Eternal is meant, that he is from everlasting to
everlasting Psalm. 90. 2.
, the beginning and the end Rev. 22. 13.
, which is, and which was, and which is to come Rev. 1. 8. 16. 5.
, that he is the same, and his years have no end Psalm. 10^. 27.
, that he only has immortality 1 Timothy 6. 16.
, ( that is, originally and from himself) is uncorruptible Romans 1. 23.
, unchangeable Mal. 3. ^.
, and lives for ever and ever Rev 4. 10. 15. 7.
.

Q. What do you learn from God's being Eternal?

A. I learn from God's being Eternal, that there is to be given unto him honor
and glory for ever and ever 1 Timothy 1. 17. 6. 16.
, that he is to be blessed from everlasting to everlasting Psalm. 41. 13. and
Psalm. 106. 48.
, and that we ought to trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength Isa. 26. 4.
.

Q. You said that God is every where present, what is meant thereby?

A. By this, that God is every where present, is meant, that he fills heaven
and earth, Jer. 23. 24.
yea the heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain him 1 Kings 8. 27.
, that his greatness is unsearchable Psalm. 145. 3.
, so that there is no flying from his presence Psalm. 139. 7, 8.
, nor can any hide himself in secret places that God shall not see him Jer. 23.
24.
.

Q. What do you learn from God's being every where present?

A. From God's being every where present I learn, that we are to pray every
where, lifting up holy hands 1 Timothy 2. 8.
, God being nigh unto all them that call upon him: to all that call upon him in
truth Psalm. 145. 18.
, and if we pray to our Father which is in secret, he which sees in secret
will reward us openly Mat. 6. 6.
.

Q. What do you farther learn from God's being every where present?

A. I from thence farther learn, that we ought to walk before him in truth and
with a perfect heart, and do that which is good in his sight Isa. 38. 3.
, that it concernsus to keep his precepts, for that all our ways are before him
Psalm. 119. 168.
, and the eyes of the Lord are in every place beholding the evil and the good
Prove. 15. 3.
.

Q. Having seen what God is in his Nature and Attributes, proceed we to the
Works of God: Tell me then who made the World, and preserves all things
therein.

A. God the Lord alone made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host,
the earth and all things that are therein, the seas and all that is therein,
and he preserves them all. Nehem. 6. 9. Genesis 1. Isa. 45. 18. Acts 4. 24. Rev.
10. 6. Jer. 51. 15. Prove. 3. 19. Psalm. 89. 11. Psalm. 33. 6.


Q. What learn you from God's creating and preserving the World and all things
therein?

A. I learn that God the Lord is worthy to receive glory and honor and power,
for that he has created all things, and through his pleasure they are, and
were created Rev. 4. 11.
; and because he preserves man and beast, and the whole earth is full of the
goodness of the Lord Psalm. 33. 5.
, our mouth should speak the praise of the Lord, and all slesh bless his holy
name for ever and ever Psalm. 145. 21.
: Seeing that of him and through him are all things, to him be glory for ever
and ever Romans 11. 36. Psalm 148. 2.


Q Who governs the World, and all things therein?

A. God that made the World and all things therein, is Lord of heaven and earth
Acts 17. 24.
, he has prepared his throne in the heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all
Psalm. 103. 19.
, he does whatsoever he pleases both in heaven and in earth Psalm. 135. 6.
and works all things according to the counsel of his own will Ephesians. 1. 11.


Q. What learn you from God's governing the World and all things therein?

A. From God's governing the World and all things therein I learn, that
therefore the Earth should rejoice Psalm 97. 1.
; for justice and judgment are the habitation ( or establishment) of his
throne, and mercy and truth shall go before his face Psalm. 89. 14.
; and that from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof God's name is
to be praised; for who is like unto the Lord our God who dwells on high, and
humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven and in earth Psalm.
113. 3, 5, 6.
?

Q. What do you farther learn from God's governing the world and all things
therein?

A. I do farther learn from thence, that we should say, whatsoever befalls
us, with Eli, it is the Lord ( that is, the Lord has appointed or permitted
it) let him do what seems him good 1 Samuel 3. 18.
, and with Christ, not my will but thine be done Luke 22. 42.
, and with Job, whether the Lord gives or takes away, blessed be the name of
the Lord Job 1. 21.


Q. What do you yet farther learn from God's governing the World and all things
therein?

A. I do yet farther learn from thence, that we should commit our way Psalm. 3.
-- 5.
and work Prove. 16. 3.
unto the Lord, and in all our ways acknowledge him, who then will direct our
paths Prove. 3. 6
, that we should trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men,
especially of them that believe 1 Timothy 4. 10.
, and cast all our care and burden upon him, who cares for us, and will
sustein us 1 Pet. 5. 7. Psalm. 55. 22.
.

Q. How did God create man?

A. God made man upright Eccles. 7. 29.
, and created him in his own image Genesis 1. 26.
.

Q. Wherein does God's image in man consist?

A. God's image in man does consist in knowledge Col. 3. 10.
, righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.
and in the dominion which God made him to have over the works of his hands
Psalm. 8. 6. Genesis 1. 26.
.

Q. Did our first parents, Adam and Eve, continue in that good estate wherein
they were created?

A. No, they fell from it by sinning against God, in that they did eat of the
tree whereof God commanded that they should not eat. Genesis 3. 6, 11, 12. Eccles.
7. 29.


Q. What then followed upon Adam's Transgression?

A. By that one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned Romans 5. 12.
, for the wages of sin is death Romans 6. 23.
.

Q. Did God leave man to perish in this miserable condition, or did he in love
and pity to us, provide a way and means for us to be saved from sin and death?

A. So God loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son Jesus Christ John
3. 16.
, to save us from our sins Mat. 1. 21.
, and that we should not perish, but have everlasting life John 3. 16. 1 These.
1. ^0. 1 John 4. 9.
.

Q. What do the Scriptures inform us concerning this Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of God?

A. The Scriptures inform us, that he is the brightness of his Fathers glory
and the express image of his person Heb. 1. 3.
, that in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily Col. 2. 9.
, that he is over all God blessed for ever Romans 9. 5.
, that he was foreordained before the foundation of the World 1 Pet. 1, 20.
, and when the fullness of time was come God sent forth his Son made of a woman
Gal. 1. 4.
, being conceived of the Virgin Mary by the holy Ghost and power of the most
high Luke 1. 31, 35.
, that he was holy, harmless and undefiled in his lise Heb. 7. 26.
, that he did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth 1 Pet. 2. 22.
, that he went up and down doing good Acts 10. 38.
, and was approved of God by miracles, wonders, and signs which God did by him
Acts 2. 22.
, that he died for our sins, and was buried, and rose again the third day,
according to the scriptures 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4.
, and in the sight of the Apostles while they beheld Acts 1. 9, 11.
, he was received into heaven and sat at the right hand of God Mark 16. 19.
, from whence he shall come in like manner Acts 1. 11.
, at the end of the world Mat. 13. 40.
, being ordained of God to judge the quick and the dead Acts 10. 42.
.

Q. How did Jesus Christ save us from sin and death?

A. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law by being made a Curse (
or enduring a cursed death) for us Gal. 3. 13.
, and God made him to be Sin ( or a Sacrifice for sin) for us, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him 2 Cor. 5. 21.
, he tasted death for every man Heb. 2. 9.
, and gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works Titus 2. 14.
.

Q. What do you learn from God's love in sending his Son to be the Propitiation
for our sins?

A. I learn from thence, that if God so loved us, we ought also to love one
another 1 John 10. 11.
, and that if God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, he
will with him also freely give us all things Romans 8. 32.
.

Q. What do you farther learn from God's love in the gift of his Son?

A. I learn to say with the Apostle, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
JesusChrist, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ, in
whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace Ephesians. 1. 3, 7.
; and to declare with the Elders before the throne, that worthy is the Lamb
that was slain, and by his blood has redeemed us unto God, to receive power
and riches and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and blessing Rev. 5. 9,
12.
, unto him thererefore that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood, to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen Rev. 1. 5, 6.
.

Q. Who are those that shall receive forgiveness of sin, and Eternal life and
Salvation by Jesus Christ.

A. They that believe in Christ John 3. 16. Acts 16. 31.
, and repent 2 Pet. 2.9.
, shall not perish John 3. 16.
, but receive remission of sins Acts 10 43. 3. 19. Luke 24. 47.
, and everlasting life John 3. 16. 20. 31.
; and he is the Author of Eternal salvation to all them that obey him Heb. 5. 9.
.

Q. Seeing then that Faith and Repentance and New Obedience are of absolute
necessity to Salvation by Jesus Christ; First, what is true and saving Faith?

A. True and saving Faith is to believe with the heart Romans 10. 9, 10. Acts 8.
37:
, that Jesus is the Christ John 6. 69. 11. 27. 1 John 5. 1.
, that is, that he was anointed Luke 4. 18. Acts 4. 27. 10. 38. Dan. 9. 24.
, and sent of God John 3. 34. 17. 3, 21, 23.
, to be a Prophet Acts 3. 22. Luke 24. 19.
, Priest Heb. 5. 5, 6, 10. 7. 24, 26.
, and King Psalm. 2. 6, 7. 1 Timothy 6. 15. Rev. 17. 14. 19. 16. Ephesians. 1. 22.
, and to receive him as such John 1. 12.
.

Q. What is it to believe with the heart that Jesus Christ was anointed and
sent of God to be a Prophet, and to receive him as such?

A. To believe with the heart that Jesus Christ was anointed and sent of God to
be a Prophet, and to receive him as such, is ( effectually and thoroughly) to
believe that he was anointed and sent of God to preach the Gospel Luke 4. 18.
, whereby he has brough life and immortality to light 2 Timothy 1. 10.
, that he was sent to speak unto the world those things which he heard from God
John 8. 26.
, who gave him commandment what he should say and speak John 12 49.
, and therefore to hear him ( that is obey him) in all things Acts 3. 22.
.

Q. What if we shall refuse or neglect to hear this Prophet, and shall disobey
his doctrine?

A. Every soul which will not hear this Prophet shall be destroyed from among
the people Acts 3. 23.
; for he that despises him, despises him that sent him, Luke 10. 16.
and if they escaped not that refused him [ Moses] that spoke on earth, much
more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him [ Christ] that speaks from
heaven Heb. 12. 25.
. And if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape if we
neglect so great Salvation Heb. 2. 2, 3.
?

Q. What is it to believe with the heart that Jesus Christ was anointed and
sent of God to be a Priest, and to receive him as such.

A. To believe with the heart that Jesus Christ was anointed and sent of God to
be a Priest, and to receive him as such, is ( effectually) to believe that he
offered himself without spot to God Heb, 9. 14.
, and gave himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet
smelling savor Ephesians. 5. 2.
, to the end that he might make reconciliation for iniquity Dan. 9. 20. Heb. 2.
17.
, and put away sin by the sacrifiee of himself Heb. 9. 26.
, and therefore to look for redemption through his blood Ephesians. 1. 7.
, and not to expect salvation in any other; for there is none other name under
heaven given among men whereby we must be saved Acts 4. 12.
.

Q. Did Christ perform and execute all that belonged to his Priestly office
here on earth, or does he yet continue a Priest in heaven?

A. Christ our High Priest having once offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever
Heb. 7. 27. 10. 12.
, he with his own blood entered in once ( for all) into heaven, there to appear
in the presence of God for us Heb. 9. 12, 24.
, and he is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them Heb. 7. 25.
.

Q. What encouragement does the belief of Christ's continuing and acting as a
Priest in heaven afford unto us?

A. Seeing we have a great High Priest, Jesus the Son of God, that is passed
into the heavens Heb. 4. 4.
, and is set down at the right hand of God Heb. 10. 12. 8 1, 12. 2.
, and also makes intercession for us Romans 8. 34.
, we may come boldly ( that is freely) to the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need Heb. 4. 16.
.

Q. What is it to believe with the heart that Jesus Christ is anointed of God
to be King, and to receive him as such?

A. To believe with the heart that Jesus Christ is anointed of God to be King,
and to receive him as such, is ( effectually and powerfully) to believe that
God his Father has put all things under him 1 Cor. 15. 27.
, that he is the head of all principality and power Col. 2. 10.
, and crowned with glory and honor Heb. 2. 7.
, that he has all power given him in heaven and in earth Mat. 28. 18.
, that he must reign till he has put all enemies under his feet Cor. 15. 25,
28.
, that he is the one Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy James 4. 12.
; and therefore to observe all things whatsoever he has commanded Mat. 28. 20.
.

Q. Seeing that Christ is our Lord and King, what learn you from thence?

A. I learn from Christ's being our King, that therefore Sin should not reign
in our mortal body that we should obey it in the lusts thereof Romans 6. 12.
; for what communion has light with darkness, and what concord has Christ
with Belial 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15.
?

Q. What are the enemies that Christ our King is to subdue and destroy?

A. The enemies that he is to subdue and destroy are, Satan Heb. 2. 14. Col. 2.
15. Genesis 3. 15.
, and wicked men Luke 19. 14, 27. Rev. 19 15. Psalm. 2 9. Psalm. 110. 1.
, and sin 1 John 3. 5, 8. 1 Cor. 15. 56, 57. Romans 8. 2.
, and death, which is the last enemy that shall be destroyed 1 Cor. 15. 26.
.

Q. What will this King Jesus Christ do for the Righteous who sincerely obey
him?

A. When he shall come with all his holy Angels, and sit upon the throne of his
glory, he shall say unto the Righteous, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world Matthew. 25. 31,
34, 46.
, and to those that overcome ( their spiritual enemies) he will grant to sit
with him on his throne, even as he overcame and is set down with his Father on
his throne Rev. 3. 21.
, and to those that shall be faithful to the death he will give a Crown of life
Rev. 2. 10.
.

Q. Having seen what it is to believe in Christ, tell me, what are the
properties and notes of true Faith set down in Scripture?

A, The properties and notes of true Faith set down in Scripture are these
five. 1. It purifies the heart Acts 15. 9.
. 2. It works by love Gal. 5. 6.
. 3. It is made perfect by works James 2. 22.
. 4. It overcomes the world 1 John 5. 4.
. 5. It quenches all the fiery darts of the wicked one, that is the Devil Ephesians.
6. 16.
.

Q. Having seen what is meant by Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, let us
see what is meant by Repentance, which is also necessary to qualify and fit us
to receive pardon of sin and salvation by Jesus Christ: What is it therefore
truly and savingly to Repent?

A. Truly and savingly to Repent is, with a godly sorrow 2 Cor. 7. 9, 10.
and shame Ezekiel. 36. 31, 32. Jer. 31. 19.
for sin, to turn from all sin Ezekiel. 18. 21, 30, 31.
, unto God Acts 26. 20. Isa. 55. 7.
.

Q. It is not sufficient then only to confess our si is to God?

A. It is not; but whosoever confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy. Prove.
28. 13. Jer. 55. 7.


Q. Is not sorrow for sin saving Repentance?

A. No, but godly sorrow works Repentance to salvation not to be repented of.
2 Cor. 7. 10,


Q. You cannot think that good purposes and resolutions of amendment are
sufficient to Salvation?

A. No, by no means, but we must thoroughly amend our ways and doings Jer. 7. 5.
, we must do works meet for Repentance Acts 26. 20.
, and bring forth fruits answerable to amendment of life Mat. 3. 8.
: for every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast
into the fire Mat. 3. 10. 7. 19.
.

Q. Having seen the nature of Faith and Repentance, tell me, what is meant by
New and Spiritual Obedience, which is also absolutely necessary to Salvation?

A. By new and Spiritual Obedience is meant, that we must make us a new spirit
Ezekiel. 18. 31.
, ( that is, do our best endeavor for it) and walk in newness of life Romans 6.
4.
; that we must put off as to the former conversation the old man which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of our
mind; and put on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness Ephesians. 4. 22, etc.
.

Q. How is this new and spiritual Obedience farther explained in Scripture?

A. It is thus farther explained, namely, That we should not walk nor live
after the flesh, but after the spirit ( or according to the spiritual Precepts
of the Gospel) Romans 8. 1, 12.
that we should not any longer live to the lusts of men, but to the will of God
1 Pet. 4. 2.
: that we should yield our selves unto God Romans 6. 13.
: and that as we have yielded our members servants to uncleanness and to
iniquity unto iniquity, even so now we should yield our members servants to
righteousness unto holiness Romans 6. 19.
.

Q. By what arguments and motives does the Scripture inforoe, and press us to,
this new and spiritual Obedience?

A. One ground and argument in Scripture for spiritual obedience is this, That
if any man be in Christ ( or a true Christian) he is a new creature 2 Cor. 5.
17.
, and if we are new Creatures, and God's workmanship, we are created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, to the which God has before prepared us that we should
walk in them Ephesians. 2. 10.
, and therefore they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts Gal. 5. 24.
.

Q. What other argument or motive do you remember in Scripture for spiritual
Obedience?

A. A second argument is this, That Christ his own self bare our sins in his
own body on the tree, to the end that we, being dead unto sin, should live unto
righteousness 1 Pet. 2. 24.
; and he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works Titus 2. 14.
.

Q. What other argument or motive in Scripture can you rehearse for spiritual
Obedience?

A. A third argument is this, That Christ has said, if we love him, and keep
his commandments, he will love us, and manifest himself unto us John 14. 15, 21.
, and also that his Father will love us, and they both will make their abode
with us v. 23.
.

Q. What other argument or motive in Scripture can youthink on for spiritual
Obedience?

A. A fourth argument is this, That if we live after the flesh we shall die,
but if we through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body we shall live
Romans 8. 13.
; If we sow to the flesh, we shall of the flesh reap corruption, but if we sow
to the spirit, we shall of the spirit, reap life everlasting Gal. 6. 8.
; That being become the servants of God we shall have our fruit unto holiness,
and the end everlasting life Romans 6. 22.
; That great peace have they that love God's law Psalm. 119. 165.
, and in Keeping thereof there is great reward Psalm. 19. 11.
. And ( therefore) blessed are they that do his commandments Rev. 22. 14.
.

Q. What are the works of the flesh which every Christian is to crucify?

A. The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery,
sornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders,
drunkenness, revellings and such like; and they that do such things, shall not
inherit the kingdom of God. Gal. 5. 19. etc.


Q. What are the fruits of the Spirit that every Christian is to bring forth?

A. The fruits of the Spirit are Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, and against such there is no law. Gal.
5. 22, 23.


Q. Will not outward privileges or respects avail us any thing to justification
and salvation without this new and spiritual obedience?

A. Neither circumcision avails any thing nor uncircumcifion, but a new
creature Gal. 6. 15.
, and the keeping of the commandments of God 1 Cor. 7. 19.
; and not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of his Father which is in heaven Mat. 7. 21.
; For why call ye me Lord, Lord, ( says our Savior) and do not the things
which I say Luke 6. 46.
? The hearers of the Law are not just before God, but the doers of the Law
shall be justified Romans 2. 13.
.

Q. May it not suffice to keep some of the Commandments of God, but must we
obey all?

A. We must have respect unto all God's commandments Psalm. 119. 6.
, and hate every false way Psalm. 119. 104.
; for whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet ( wilfully) offend in one
point, he is guilty of all James 2. 10.
; ( or liable to the punishment due to the breach of all, viz. Eternal death.)

Q. Will God accept at our hands nothing short of absolutely perfect Obedience?

A. Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear
him; for he knows our frame, he remembers that we are but dust Psalm. 103.
13, 14.
, and if there be a willing mind it is accepted, according to that a man has
and not according to that he has not 2 Cor. 8. 12.
. ( That is, it is accepted, if we demonstrate that we are reallywilling, by
our acting in a good suitableness to the strength we have received.)

Q. Do you think that you can deserve forgiveness of sin and eternal Salvation
at God's hands by obeying his commandments?

A. No, by no means; but when we have done all those things that are commanded
us, we must say that we are unprofitable servants, we have done but that which
was our duty to do Luke ^^. 10.
; and not by works of righteousness which we have done ( that is, not for the
desert of them) but according to his mercy he saves us by the washing of
regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost Titus 3 5.
, and he makes us accepted in the beloved, by whom we have redemption through
his blood, the forgiveness of sin, according to the riches of his grace Ephesians. 1.
6, 7.
.

Q. Seeing we cannot merit at God's hands by any thing we can do, and that we
are pardoned and saved purely by the free Grace of God in Christ, how comes
obedience to his commandments to be indispensably necessary to our being so?

A. Obedience to God's commandments is therefore indispensably necessary to our
being pardoned and saved, because that the righteous Lord loves righteousness
Psalm. 11. 7.
, but hates wickedness Psalm. 45. 7.
, and all the workers of iniquity Psalm. 5. 5.
, insomuch as he that justifies the wicked is an abomination unto the Lord
Prove. 17. 15.
, so that without holiness no man shall see the Lord Heb. 12. 14.
; for thereby we are made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints
in light Col. 1. 12.
, nor can we have fellowship with him and walk in darkness 1 John 1. 6.
; for God is light and in him is no darkness at all 1 John 1. 5.
. Wherefore God having raised up his Son Jesus sent him to bless us by turning
every one of us from our iniquities Acts 3. 26.
, and has exalted him to be a prince and a Savior ( first) to give repentance
and ( then) forgiveness of sins Acts 5. 31.
, and he came not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it Matthew. 5. 17.
; ( that is to perfect it or preach it fully:) [So the same word is used Romans
15. 19. and Col. 1. 25.]

Q. Then you will never be persuaded to believe that Faith in Christ freeth us
from our obligation to the Moral Law, or any one precept of it.

A. Do we make void the law through faith? God sorbid, yea we establish the law
Romans 3. 31.
: And to live soberly, righteously and godlily in this present world is that, (
even the sum of all that) which the grace of God that brings salvation teaches
us Titus 2. 11, 12.
. Nay it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than one jot or tittle of
the law to fail till all be fulfilled Luke 16. 17. Mat. 5. 18.
; ((...) or till all things be done, that is, till the world be destroyed.)

Q. Which are the ten Commandments into which the Moral Law, as it was given by
God to Moses, is divided; of which the four first contain our duty toward God,
and the other six our duty toward man?

A. God spoke all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which has
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage.

1. Thou shall have no other Gods before ( or besides) me.

2. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven image or the likeness of any
thing, that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in
the water under the earth: thou shall not bow down thy self to them nor serve
them: For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me: and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my
Commandments.

3. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

4. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: Six days shall thou labor, and
do all thy work: But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it
thou shall not do any work, thou nor thy Son nor thy Daughter, thy Manservant,
nor thy Maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy
gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in
them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath
day, and hallowed it.

5. Honor thy Father and thy Mother: that thy days may be long upon the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6. Thou shall not kill.

7. Thou shall not commit adultery.

8. Thou shall not steal.

9. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Exodus 20. 1, etc.
10. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors House, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maidservant, nor his Ox, nor
his Ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.

Q. How are these ten Commandments abridged by our Savior Christ?

A. He has reduced them all to these two; Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind and with all
thy strength. This is the first Commandment ( or the first Table) And the
second is like, namely this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Mark
12. 30, 31.


Q. How is the love of God expressed?

A. This is the love of God that we keep his Commandments. 1 John 5. 3.


Q. How is this second Commandment or Table farther explained by Christ?

A. He has farther explained it thus; As ye would that men should do to you,
do ye also to them likewise. Luke 6. 31. Mat. 7. 12.


Q. Can a man love God and hate his brother, or refuse to supply his
necessities according to his ability.

A. If a man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he that
loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen 1 John 4. 20.
? and whosoever has this world's goods, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him 1 John 3. 17.
?

Q. Has not Christ given a new commandment concerning the loving of our
brethren?

A. A new commandment he has given to us, That we love one another, as he has
loved us that we also love one another John 13. 34.
. And as hereby perceive we the love of God because he laid down his life for
us; so we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren 1 John 3. 16.
.

Q. Are the commandments of Christ impossible or difficult to be obeyed?

A. His commandments are not grievous 1 John 5. 3.
, but his yoke is easy and his burden is light Mat. 11. 30.
. Nor has God in any thing wearied us that we should testify against him
Micah 6. 3.
.

Q. Are we able of our selves to believe and repent and keep all the
commandments of God?

A. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God 2 Cor. 3. 5.
, whose grace is sufficient for us 2 Cor. 12. 9.
. It is God that works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure
Phil. 2. 13.
; but as without Christ we can do nothing John 15. 5.
, so we can do all things through Christ which strengthens us Phil. 4. 13.
.

Q. Are we therefore to lie idle, and only to live in expectation of power from
above to work in us both to will and to do what is required of us?

A. No verily, but we are to work out our own salvation with fear and
trembling, because it is God which works in us both to will and to do: ( that
is, because we are enabl ed by the concurrence of God's grace with our
endeavors both to resolve firmly to do well, and to perform accordingly.)
Phil. 2. 12, 13.


Q. Seeing we are unable without the supply of God's grace and Spirit to keep
his commandments, and therefore it cannot but be absolutely necessary for us to
pray to him that we may be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inward
man, what encouragement have we to hope for spiritual strength upon our praying
for it?

A. We are encouraged from those words of Christ; Ask and it shall be given
you: seek and ye shall find: knock and it shall be opened unto you, etc. If ye
being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children: how much more shall
your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him. Luke 11. 9, 10,
13.


Q. What further encouragement have we to expect spiritual strength?

A. We are further encouraged from the tenure of the new Covenant, which is
this; I will put ( says God) my Laws into their mind, and write them in their
hearts Heb. 8. 10
; I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
heart of flesh, and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in
my statutes, and ye shall keep my commandments and do them Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.
and 11. 19.
( Which Promises suppose that we must not be wilfully or carelessly wanting to
our selves in the use of means) [as is manifest by comparing these texts with
Ezekiel. 18. 31. and James 4. 8. and many such like.]

Q. What are the chief ordinary means which God has appointed for the working
and furtherance of Faith, Repentance and all graces in us?

A. They are these three: 1. Prayer: 2. The holy Scriptures or Word of God: 3.
The Sacraments.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. Prayer'is the making known our requests to God Phil. 4. 6.
, and the pouring out our hearts before him Psalm. 62. 8. Lam. 3. 41.
, that so we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need Heb. 4. 16.
.

Q. How must we pray to God that we may be heard and accepted by him?

A. That we may be heard and accepted by God, we must ask in the name of Christ
John 14. 13, 14. and 16. 24.
, and such things only must we ask as are according to his will 1 John 5. 14.
.

Q. What else is necessary to make our prayers acceptable?

A. It Is farther necessary, to the making of our prayers acceptable, that we
call upon God in truth Psalm. 145. 18.
( and sincerity) and not with feigned lips Psalm. 17. 1.
, that we pray with humility Psalm. 10. 17. Genesis 18. 27.
and submission, saying, Not my will but thine be done Luke 22. 42.
, that we ask in faith James 1. 6.
( that is, believing in the wisdom, power and goodness of God) that we lift up
holy hands without wrath 1 Timothy 2. 8.
, or forgiving all that have trespassed against us Mark 11. 25.
; and lastly whatsoever we ask we shall receive, if we keep his commandments,
and do those things that are pleasing in his sight John 3. 22. John 9. 31.
; but if we regard iniquity in our hearts the Lord will not hear us Psalm. 66.
18.
.

Q. But must we not with prayers to God join also praise and thanksgiving?

A. Yes, in every thing must our requests be made known to God by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving Phil. 4. 6.
; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus that in every thing we give
thanks 1 These. 5. 18.
, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ Ephesians. 5. 20.
, by whom we are to offer the sacrifice of praise continually unto God Heb. 13.
15. Col. 3. 17.
.

Q. How did Christ our Lord teach his Disciples to pray?

A. He taught them to pray after this manner:

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy
will be done on earth as it is in heaven: Give us this day our daily bread, and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: for thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the Glory, sor ever and ever. Amen. Mat. 6. 9. Luke
11. 2.


Q. What is the second means for begetting and increase of Faith and all other
Virtues?

A. It is the word of God, or the holy Scriptures, which are able to make us
wise unto salvation 2 Timothy 3. 15.
; for all the Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in rightcousness ver. 16.
, that the man of God ( and every faithful Christian) may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished for every good work ver. 17.
.

Q. How must we receive the word of God, that it may become an effectual means
of grace unto us?

A. We must receive the word with meekness James 1. 21.
, and all readiness of mind Acts 17. 11.
, with an honest and good heart Luke 8. 15.
, and laying aside all malice, and all guile and hypocrisies and envies and
evil speakings, as new born babes we must desire the sincere milk of the word
that we may grow thereby 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2.
.

Q. It is not enough then merely to hear or read God's word?

A. By no means, but we must meditate n the law of the Lord day and night Psalm.
1. 2. 119. 97.
, we must lay it up and hide it in our hearts Psalm. 119. 11.
, and having with an honest and good heart heard the word, we must keep it and
bring forth fruit with patience Luke 18. 15.
( or perseverance) for if we be hearers only of the word, and not doers, we
deceive our own selves James 1. 22.
.

Q. What is meant in Scripture by those thorns which choke the good seed of the
word?

A. The cares of this world and the deceitfulness of riches, and the pleasures
of this life, and the lusts of other things, these are the thorns which choke
the word, so that it becomes unfruitful. Mark 4. 19. with Luke 8. 14.


Q. The third and last means you mentioned was the Sacraments; How many
Sacraments are there under the New Testament?

A. There are only two, namely Baptism Mat. 28. 19.
and the Lords Supper. 1 Cor. 11. 20, etc.


Q. What is Baptism?

A. Baptism is washing with water Acts 8, 38. 10. 47.
, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost Math, 28. 19.
.

Q. What does this Baptism or washing with water signify?

A. This Baptism or washing with water signifies the washing away of sins Acts
22. 16.
, or the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost Titus 3. 5.
.

Q. What are they engaged to in reference to God the Father and the Son and
Holy Ghost who are baptized in ( or into) the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost?

A. They are engaged so to live, as that the name of God and his doctrine be
not blasphemed by them 1. Tim. 6. 1.
, but that the name of Christ may be glorified in them 2 These. 1. 12.
, they are obliged to put onChrist Gal. 3. 27.
, and as they name the name of Christ ( or profess his Religion) so to depart
likewise from all iniquity 2 Timothy 2. 19.
; and seeing that they who are baptized into Jesus Christ are baptized into his
death Romans 6. 3.
, they are to reckon themselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God
ver. 11
, unto whom they are to yield themselves as those that are alive from the dead
ver. 13
. And lastly, they are engaged not to grieve the holy Spirit of God, whereby
they are sealed unto the day of Redemption Ephesians. 4. 30.
.

Q. What are they engaged to in reference to men who are baptized into Christ?

A. They are engaged to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace Ephesians.
4. 3.
, for there is one Baptism Ver. 5.
, and by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body 1 Cor. 12. 13.
,

Q. What is the Sacrament of the Lord's supper?

A. The Lord's Supper is a Sacrament wherein (after the giving of thanks and
blessing) bread is broken and eaten, and wine is poured out and drank in
remembrance ( or for a commemoration) of Christ. Mat. 26. 26, etc. 1 Cor. 11.
23, etc.


Q. What does the Bread broken fignifie and teach us to remember?

A. The Bread broken signifies and teaches us to remember the Body of Christ,
which was given Luke 22. 19.
, and broken for us 1 Cor. 11. 24.
; for he was wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our iniquities Isa.
53. 5.
, he gave himself a ransom for all 1 Timothy 2. 6.
, and by his stripes we are healed Isa. 53. 5.
.

Q. What does the Wine poured out into the Cup signify and teach us to
remember?

A. The Wine poured out into the Cup signifies and teaches us to remember the
Blood of Christ which was shed for many for the remission of sins Mat. 26. 28.
; for he poured out his soul ( or life) unto death Isa. 53. 12.
, and by his blood he has redeemed us unto God Rev. 5. 9.
.

Q. How may we worthily receive the Lord's Supper?

A. Let a man examine ( or approve) himself, and so let him eat of that bread
and drink of that Cup. 1 Cor. 11. 28.


Q. Of what benefit and advantage is the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to
those that worthily receive it.

A. The Cup of blessing which we bless it is the communion ( or communication)
of the Blood of Christ, and the bread which we break it is the communion ( or
communication) of the body of Christ. 1 Cor. 10. 16.


Q. What is the danger of receiving the Lord's Supper unworthily?

A. Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord 1 Cor. 11. 27.
, and he eats and drinks damnation ( or judgment) to himself, not
discerning the Lord's body ver. 29.
. ( That is, not eating it in a holy manner, or making no difference between it
and ordinary food.)

Q. How do the sufferings and death of Christ represented in this Sacrament
show unto us the evil and heynousness of sin, and by that means engage us to
godly sorrow and repentance?

A. The sufferings and death of Christ represented in this Sacrament show unto
us the evil and heynousness of sin, in that we are not redeemed from it but
with the precious Blood of Christ 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
, his soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto death Mat. 26. 38.
, it pleased the Lord to bruise him and to put him to grief Isa. 53. 10.
, and to lay upon him the iniquities of us all ver. 6.
. ( That is, he would not admit sinners to terms of reconciliation with himself
without such a Sacrifice for sin as that of his own dear Son.)

Q. How does the love of Christ in dying for us engage us to live a new life?

A. The love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died
for all, then were all dead, and that he died for all, that they which live
should not henceforth live unto themselves, ( that is, to their lusts and
carnal affections) but unto him which died for them. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.


Q. How does the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper engage Christians to love each
other?

A. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper engages us to love each other, in that
we being many are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
bread 1. Cor. 10. 17.
, and are all made to drink into one Spirit 1 Cor. 12. 13.
. ( That is, our drinking all of the same Cup signifies our being animated by
the same spirit.)

Q. How farther does the Lord's Supper engage us to Christian love?

A. It farther engages us to Christian love, in that we are commanded to walk
in love as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us, an
offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, ( and in this
Sacrament this Sacrifice is commemorated.) Ephesians. 5. 2.


Q. Seeing Jesus Christ has set Bishops and spiritual Governors and Teachers
over his Church, who by their prayers, preaching the Word and administration of
the Sacraments, and Ecclesiastical Discipline, are for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry and edifying of his body, and has
promised to be with them to the end of the world; How are we to behave our
selves toward them? [ 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 1 Timothy 3. 1. Mat. 28. 19,
20.]

A. We are commanded to obey them that have the rule over us, and submit our
selves ( to them) for they watch for our souls as they that must give account,
that they may do it with joy and not with grief Heb. 13. 17.
, and to esteem those that are over us in the Lord, and admonish us, very
highly in love for their works sake 1 These. 5. 13.
, and to account them worthy of double honor 1 Timothy 5. 17.
. But as for those false Apostles and deceitful workers 2 Cor. 11. 13.
, which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which we have
learned we must avoid them, for they serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple
Rom 16. 17, 18.
, having a form of Godliness but denying the power thereof, ( from such I say)
we must turn away 2 Timothy 3. 5.
, that so we henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive Ephesians. 4. 14.
.

Q. Having spoken of the three chief outward means for the begetting and
increase of grace and holiness, what are those four last things (as they are
commonly called) which being duly considered would excite and engage us to a
serious minding of Holiness?

A. The four last things which being duly considered would excite and engage us
to a serious minding of Holiness are Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell.

Q. What does the Scripture tell us of Death?

A. The Scripture tells us that it is appointed unto men once to die Heb. 9. 27.
, and that our life is even as a vapor that appears for a little time and
then vanishes away James 4. 14.
.

Q. What should the shortness and uncertainty of our life here engage us to?

A. The shortness and uncertainty of our life here should engage us so to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Psalm. 90. 12.


Q. What is that wisdom which we are to apply our hearts unto?

A. The fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding. Job 28. 28.


Q. What does the Scripture tell us of the Judgment to come?

A. The Scripture tells us, that God has appointed a day in the which he will
judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained Acts 17. 31.
, even by Jesus Christ Romans 2. 16.
, who is ordained of God to be the judge of quick and dead Acts 10. 42.
, and we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the thing done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad 2 Cor. 5. 10. Rev. 22. 12.
.

Q. What shall immediately precede the general Judgment?

A. The hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and shall come forth, they that have done good, unto
the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of
damnation. John 5. 28, 29.


Q. What should the serious consideration of the last judgment engage us to?

A. The serious consideration of the last Judgment should engage us to fear God
and keep his commandments; for God shall bring every work into judgment, with
every secret thing Eccles. 12. 13, 14.
, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ Romans 2.
16. 1 Cor. 4. 5.
.

Q. Seeing then that God, who knows the secrets of the heart, will bring
every work into judgment, and judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, what
must we do that we may not be condemned with the world at the day of judgment?
[ Psalm. 44. 21. 1 Cor. 11. 32.]

A. That we may not be condemned with the world at the day of judgment, let us
search and try our ways and turn again to the Lord Lam. 3. 40.
, and let every man prove his own work Gal. 6. 4.
, for every man shall bear his own burden ver. 5.
, and shall give account of himself to God. Romans 14. 12.


Q. But seeing the Heart is deceitful above all things, is it not needful to
pray unto God that we may not be deceived in searching our ways, and proving
our own works? [ Jer. 17. 9.

A. Surely it is meet for us to say unto God, That which I see not teach thou
me: and if I have done iniquity I will do no more Job 34. 31, 32.
, for who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from my secret faults
Psalm. 19. 12.
; Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, and see if
there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting Psalm. 139.
23, 24.
.

Q. Forasmuch as the Heavens and the Elements and the Earth shall be dissolved,
when the day of the Lord shall come; what does the consideration hereof engage
us to?

A. Seeing that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness 2 Pet. 3. 11.
, giving diligence that we may be found of God in peace, without spot and
blameless ver. 14.
.

Q. Who are those that are secured from being condemned with the world, and may
have boldness in the day of Judgment?

A. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
aster the flesh but after the spirit Romans 8. 1.
, and such may have boldness in the day of judgment, because as Christ was, so
are they in this world 1 John 4. 17.
; for hereby know we that we are in him if we keep his word 1 John 2. 5.
, and walk even as he walked ver. 6.
.

Q. What does the Scripture tell us of Heaven?

A. The Scripture tells us of Heaven, That it is a place of Rest 2 These. 1. 7.
Rev. 14. 13.
, and comfort Luke 16. 25.
, and joy Mat. 25. 21, 23.
, even of fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore Psalm. 16. 11.
, and that there is reserved for the Saints an inheritance incorruptible and
undefiled, and that fades not away 1 Pet. 1. 4.
.

Q. Can you give me a particular description of the Heavenly state?

A. Now are we the sons of God, but it does not yet appear what we shall be;
but we know that when he shall appear we shall be like him: for we shall see
him as he is 1 John 3. 2.
; and then shall we ever be with the Lord 1 These. 4. 17.
, who will also change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all
things unto himself Phil. 3. 21.
.

Q. Who are thosethat shall not inherit the kingdom of God or Heaven?

A. We know that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God, and
particularly neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous,
nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, nor such like shall inherit the
kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6. 9. Gal. 4. 21.


Q. Then you are thoroughly convinced that it is necessary that we become new
creatures, that so we may enter into the kingdom of Heaven?

A. Verily except we be born again John 3. 3, 5.
, except we be converted Mat. 18. 3.
, and become as little children, we cannot see nor in any wise enter into the
kingdom of Heaven Luke 18. 17.
.

Q. How then should every one live and behave himself that hopes to see God and
his kingdom?

A. Every one that has this hope in him should purify even as God is pure 1
John 3. 3.
, ( or endeavor to be as like him in holiness as he can) and walk worthy of
God who has called him to his kingdom and glory 1 These. 2. 12.
.

Q. What are they further engaged to do, who believe and look for the heavenly
kingdom and inheritance?

A. They are further engaged to have their conversation in heaven Phil, 3. 30.
, and to set their affections on things above and not on things on the earth
Col. 3. 2.
.

Q. What is the fruit of the consideration of the glorious Rewardin heaven, as
to active obedience, and doing the will of God?

A. The consideration of the glorious reward in heaven encourages us to be
steadfast, and unmovable, always to abound in the work of the Lord, forasmuch
as we know that our labor is not in vain in the Lord 1 Cor. 15. 58.
, and not to be weary in well doing, seeing that in due season we shall reap if
we faint not Gal. 6. 9.
, and whatsoever we do to do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men,
knowing that of the Lord we shall receive the reward of the inheritance Col. 3.
29. 24.
, and that to those that by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory
honor and immortality God will render eternal life Romans 2. 7, 8.
.

Q. What is the fruit of the consideration of the glorious Rewardin heaven, as
to passive obedience and suffering the will of God?

A. The consideration of the glorious reward in Heaven encourages us to run
the race that is set before us with patience Heb. 12. 1, 2.
, because we reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to
be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us Romans 8. 18.
: Nay, when men shall revile and persecute us, and shall say all manner of evil
against us falsely for Christ's sake, we are to rejoice and to be exceeding glad
Mat. 5. 11, 12.
, and even leap for joy, because that great is our reward in Heaven Luke 6. 23.
; and our light affliction which is but for a moment works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory 2 Cor. 4. 17.
.

Q. What does the Scripture tell us of Hell?

A. The Scripture tells us that Hell is a place of torment Luke 16. 23, 24, 25,
28.
, and everlasting punishment Mat. 25. 46.
, where shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth Luke 13. 28. Mat.
13. 50.
.

Q. Who are those that shall be thus everlastingly punished?

A. They that know not God and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, they
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power 2 These. 1. 8, 9.
, and shall be cast into Hellfire Mark 9. 47. Mat. 25. 41.
; where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched Mark 9. 48.
.

Q. Tell me once more, what must we do to be saved from eternal misery, and to
escape the wrath to come?

A. That we may be saved from eternal misery and escape the wrath to come, we
must believe on the Lord Jesus Christ Acts 16. 31.
, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance Mat. 3. 8.
, and turn from all our transgressions; so iniquity shall not be our ruin
Ezekiel. 18. 30.
.

Two Short PRAYERS For the Use of CHILDREN. By the same Author.
Morning Prayer.
MOst Great and Gracious Lord God, the Father of mercies, and the God of all
comfort: Thou art worthy to receive all thanks and praise for all thy mercies
and favors toward me. -- Blessed be thy name for preserving me the night past
from all danger and evil, for refreshing me with comfortable sleep, and raising
me up to see the light of another day. -- In thee I live and have my being: Thy
mercies are new every morning and thy compassions fail not: Grant therefore, O
Lord, that as I live by the mercy and goodness, I may also live to thy service
and glory; that I may love thee with all my heart and with all my strength, and
that I may be careful (as thy obedient child) to please thee, O merciful
Father, in all things. -- O give me understanding, that I may learn thy
Commandments. Teach me to know thy will, and enable me to do it; that I may not
sin against thee at any time. -- Keep me this day from all evil, and preserve
me from all danger. O Lord, preserve my going out and my coming in, from this
time forth and for evermore. And give me grace, I beseech thee, to serve thee
in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life, and to do that which is
well pleasing in thy sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done on earth as it is in heaven: Give us this day our daily bread, and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: for thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
Evening Prayer.
O Almighty God and most merciful Father, I thy poor Creature desire to praise
thy holy name, and to give thee all humble and hearty thanks for thy fatherly
care over me this day, and for all the blessings and comforts which I have
received of thee day after day. -- O Lord, in mercy forgive my unthankfulness
and all my other sins. Forgive, I beseech thee, every evil thought, word and
deed, whereby I have sinned against thee this day, or at any other time. And
grant, O Lord, that for the time to come I may serve thee better, and obey thee
in all things. --

Heavenly Father, watch over me this night, keep me from all evil and danger:
refresh me with comfortable rest and sleep, and raise me up in health and
safety to behold the light of another day. -- And grant that the longer I live,
the better I may live; and as I grow in age, that I may also grow in grace, and
in the knowledge of thee and of thy Son Jesus Christ. --

Bless, O Lord, all that I am bound to pray for, all my friends and kindred:
Bless all in this house; and give us all grace to live in thy fear, that we may
die in thy favor, and be received into thy heavenly and everlasting Kingdom,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, to whom be glory both now and for
ever.

Amen.
THE END.
Some new Books Printed for Richard Royston at the Sign of the Angel in St.
Paul's Churchyard.

THe Christian Sacrifice, a Treatise showing the necessity and manner of
receiving the Holy Communion; together with suitable Prayers and Meditations
for every Month in the Year, and the Principal Festivals in memory of our
blessed Savior: in 12.

The Devout Christian instructed how to Pray and give Thanks to God: or, a Book
of Devotions for Families and for particular Persons in most of the concerns of
Humane Life. By the Author of the Christian Sacrifice: in 12.

The Practical Christian, a Treatise explaining the Duty of Self-examination;
together with Confessions, Meditations and Prayers: By R. Sherlock D. D. Rector
of Winwick.

The Principles of holy Christian Religion, or the Catechism of the Church of
England paraphrased, by the same Author.

A manifest Discovery of the Gross Ignorance, Erroneousness and most
Unchristian and Wicked Spirit of one John Bunyan, Lay-preacher in Bedford,
which he has showed in a vile Pamphlet, published by him, against The Design
of Christianity.

The End.

