BISHOP WRENS Petition to the PARLIAMENT, in defense of Episcopacie. In the
behalf of himself and the rest of the Bishops.

WHEREIN, He endeavors to ebreviate and lessen the liberty of the Subject;
being his sole resolution to extenuate the privilege of Parliament.

AS ALSO, How his most especial intents contain (in the ensuing Petition) the
corroborating of Prelaticall primacie.

WITH Many reasons inducing him to the presentation of the same to the Right
Honorable the High Court of Parliament.

portrait portrait

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bates. 1642.

BISHOP WRENS Petition to the PARLIAMENT, in defense of Episcopacie.
HUMBLY SHOWS. intolerable abuse of us all espe^^^lly of such as have any
adherence or else that do appear of Episcopal government* or Puri(...)on.

Which government (...) (...)ited with the first point of Protestant Religion,
yea instituted by Christ himself and the Apostles, and have ever since
successively continued, being the next antiquity to Apostolical men though the
abusive detractions of the Brownists and Separatists in our time have derogated
the Classical authentic and approved authority thereof, they have been the
sole men that have opposed the Episcopal Hierarchy, and although they have
externally denied (all innovations) (as they call them) in their common
appellation: yet principally they have and do make daily more inovations
themselves; betwixt both which, there is a repugnant authority as for the former
it tended only to the honor and glory of God, the decency of the Church, and
the credit of the King and Kingdom, but for the latter nothing but
schismatic (...)sions, and confusive distractions are introduced by them. I
therefore implore your honor with all humility, maturely to consider all their
proposterous actions, they have contaminated the purity of Religion so much,
that it is almost become leprous, they swarm so promiscuously in our streets,
that like the Egyptian Locusts they eat up the sanctity of our Church
government; yea withal, they are now grown so licentious, that they will not
be curbed by humane reason, nor disapproved, although confuted by the holy
Scripture. The fervency of my desire, is, therefore that the church may be
purgel from such opposite enemies to true Religion, and that the fountain of
Piety may not be corrupted by such turbulent obstacles: and withal* I beseech
your honors to consider the abuse intollerably offered, and promiscuously
intended against scientiall learning, that it may not be so defaced and
discountenanced by the Ignorants, but rather that you would be pleased to
advance it to its perfect luster, dignity, and irradiation, it being the prime
supporter of all true loyalty and obedience, order, rule, regularity, and
obsequious civility in all states: for the defective derogation from the duties
of our religion, will incontinently prove a consumption unto any kingdom, and
that Basis of Churchgovernment, and foundation of Piety, which if not first
rooted and grounded in Christ, is not only weak of it self, and infirm, but
likewise debilitates, a whole Nation. If it be so, then they consequently do
promerrit the strict execution of Justice, that would bring the church to a
distructive Anarchy, the denial of Episcopacie is the abridgment of sacred
Piety, the dispossessing of the Church of that primogeniture and predominant
head, which should govern, guide, and direct it. The refusal of Justice in
conducting the taking away of equity, in patrocinating and the excluding those
1. and absolute institutions of the Church are such obst^uctions beyond the
limit of any former Authors, and the wounds of our Prelaticall property lets
out the very life blood of the people* the reformation whereof must necessarily
be a work of much consequence.

But God be praised, the defense is not desperate beyond cure, we serve one
God, we believe in one Christ, and we all acknowledge and profess one Gospel,
the difference is only de natura, we vary but in the Ceremonies; to reduce
which to the primitive practice, was all our former endeavors, and cannot
effectually be inacted without our assertions, and your mutual concurrence:
the condoleable disrespect of our function, the divisions and various
distractions of the Schismatics, the almost Anarchicall government of the
church, the languishing impurity of religion, has at this time respectively
induced me to present this humble petition unto your honors favorable
respects, imploring your favor to concur unanimously in this petitory
construction,

And your Petitioner shall be ever bound to pray, etc.
FINIS.

