A TRVE RELATION Of the chief passages between Mr. Anthony Wotton, and Mr.
George Walker, in the year of our Lord 1611. and in the years next following
until 1615.

Written by George Walker, out of his own papers which he has yet to show;
for the vindicating of himself from some imputations laid on him by Mr. Thomas
Gataker, in his defense of Mr. Wotton.

Printed at London for William Branch, and are to be sold in St. Olaves
Churchyard upon Breadstreete hill. 1642.

A true relation of the chief passages between Mr. Anthony Wotton, and Mr.
George Walker, in the year of our Lord, 1611.
THe foul brand which Mr. Gataker has labored to set upon me in his
preface, to wit, breach of piety and charity, and defect of humanity and common
honesty, is so scandalous to the person and calling of a living Minister and
Pastor in Gods Church, that Mr. Gataker in going about to set it on me, does
manifestly appear to have printed it deeply in his own forehead. The words
of truth spoken of a dead man, in the defense of a divine and saving truth, and
in confuting of a dangerous error can be no such breach of piety or charity,
as the unjust scandal and slander laid on a man living and laboring in the
work of the Lord: For this tends to bring his Ministry and the word of God by
him preached into contempt; to disgrace his person most uncharitably, and to
add affliction to him who has suffered persecution and bonds for the truths
sake, by wounding him deeply in his reputation, which is contrary to humanity
and common honesty.

Mr. Wotton in his papers which he dispersed in this City, and which he
acknowledged to be his own when I brought them to his face before Mr. Gataker
and eight other grave Ministers, does deny the imputation of the whole
obedience of Christ, to the Law of God; both active and passive, both jointly
and severally. He affirms that there is no end or use whatsoever of the
imputation of Christ his righteousness for justification. He renounceth the
law in whole and part, performed by our selves, or any other in our stead for
our justification. In stead of man's own works of righteousness, performed to
the law in his own person which was the condition of justification, and life
in the first covenant, and instead of Christ's fulfillng of the law for us which
is the condition of justification and life to believers in the covenant of
grace, he sets up faith, even the Act of believing for righteousness, affirms
that it is said to be imputed in a proper sense without a trope, and serves for
all purposes in our justification under the Gospel, as perfect righteousness
of works performed to the whole law did for man's justification in the first
covenant. He denies the punishment of our sins in Christ, and the
satisfaction which. in him our head and surety was made to Gods justice for
purchase of our pardon. For (says he) I see no place left for pardon, if we in
Christ be said to have satisfied Gods justice, and to have suffered in him the
punishments due to sin; for pardon and punishment are contrary. Thus he
overthrowes our redemption by Christ, and that Christ is our ransom, as
Socinus did, (though he hold the words of Scripture with Socinus in an
improper sense; to wit, Redeemer, Ransom, Propitiation, and the rest.) For no
man can dream of any other way by which Christ is said in Scripture to redeem
us, and to be a ransom for sin, but only by being made under the Law, and a
perfect fulfiller of it in our stead. If faith serves for all purposes to
justification, as a man's perfect righteousness of works performed to the full
in his own person would have done in the first Covenant; then it serves to
this purpose to be our formal righteousness; yea our own inherent
righteousness by which we are justified. Which is most contrary to the truth
of the Gospel, and contradictory to his own words in other places. These and
such like speeches I condemned for Socinian Heresy and blasphemy, as Beza,
Paraeus, and Lubertus had done before me, and for this Mr. Gataker did deride
me, when I gave in my charge against Mr. Wotton 27. years ago, and now blames
it in me as falsehood and dishonesty. I desire no better defense of my
innocence but Mr. Wottons own confession in his Expositions which Mr. Gataker
has published for his defense. For in his answer to the first proposition, he
confesses that the denying of the imputation of Christ's righteousness as a
meritorious cause of justification is both heretical and blasphemous. And this
he himself does in the words which are cited out of his own papers, to prove
him guilty of the first error, as you may see in the 12 page of Mr. Gatakers
defense, where they are thus laid down and translated out of Mr. Wottons Latin
Theses. No necessary use or end can he assigned of the imputation of the
obedience of Christ to the justification of a sinner. And in an English
Manuscript of his, which I also showed, and he acknowledged for his own, he
uses more peremptory words, saying, I dare not admit of Christ's righteousness
imputed to any end whatsoever. I find no testimony or proof of it in any part
of Gods word, no signification in any Sacrament of the Gospel, no necessary
use or end thereof. Which words if we take them as Mr. Gataker has related
them, prove him to be an Heretic and blasphemer by his own confession.
Unless Mr. Gataker can persuade us, that to be imputed as a meritorious cause,
is to be imputed for no end or use whatsoever.

But before I proceed to my narration, I will first lay down the occasion, by
which I have provoked Mr. Gataker to proclaim so bitterly against me, and to
brand me with breach of piety, charity, and defect of humanity and common
honesty. In my discovery and confutation of Socinianisme I perceived that Mr.
Goodwins disciples did admire and extol him as a deep searcher out and
discoverer of divine truth, which none could ever find out before him; To
convince them of folly and ignorance I rehearsed the names of several persons
who had published and taught the same things before Mr. Goodwin, and for them
and other errors and Heresies which are therein necessarily included, have
been condemned in former ages; as Peter Abailard, Servetus, Socinus, Arminius,
and Mr. Wotton, out of whose book De Reconciliatione, Mr. Goodwin stole his
opinions. My words are these, The fifth perverse publisher of this heresy, who
first openly professed it in England, and in manuscript Pamphlets, and printed
books dispersed it in London, and from thence into several places of the
Country, about twenty eight years ago, was Anthony Wotton. I would gladly
know what just offense can be taken at any of these words. That Mr. Wotton was
the perverse publisher of this heresy, and the first that openly professed it
in England, is a manifest truth; as my parallel of him with Socinus published
by Mr. Gataker now in print, proves most fully.

If he be offended, because I call this error an heresy, though he and his
fellow Subscribers to Mr. Wottons exposition, out of their great love to Mr.
Wottons person, and upon his promise of reformation, did think it not fit to
call any thing in his exposition of his speeches, by the name of heresy or
blasphemy: I answer, first, that his speeches which I cited in my parallel
are manifestly blasphemous and heretical by his own confession; and of them
and his opinion in them published, do I speak and call it heresy. Secondly,
though I rather assent to Beza, Paraeus, Lubertus, and other most learned and
orthodox Divines, who condemn some things in Mr. Wottons expositions for
heresy, and blasphemy, rather then to Mr. Gataker and his fellows, who were
pleased to think otherwise; I hope I give therein no offense, especially
seeing I have Gods Word for my warrant, and have such clear knowledge and full
persuasion of the blasphemy of some of his speeches, That I did (as Master.
Downham, Dr. Gouge and others present at our meeting did hear and see, and if
their memories fail them not, will confess) challenge Mr. Wotton and Mr.
Gataker also, if he would take his part to defend some passages in those
expositions, and promised that I would ask Mr. Wotton forgiveness on my
knees, if I did not by convincing arguments in strict syllogismes prove them to
be heretical: which they cowardly then refused with show of scornful disdain.

But if Mr. Gataker be so highly offended, because I call Mr. Wotton by the
bare name of Anthony Wotton; I must answer that therein I did him a favor. For
under that obscure title, his person might have been hid, and not made known
to any, but those who were acquainted with all the passages between him and
me. But Mr. Gataker by discovering him more plainly, and blazoning his arms,
has exposed his person to much shame, and stained the name and memory of him
long ago dead and buried in the dust with the brand of Heresy, and has made
all the world see, that he was the man who first sowed these Socinian tares in
the fair field of the Church of England. As for my self, I am assured, that
the goodness of my cause, which is the cause of God and his truth, will bear
me out, and justify me against all his misreports. And if any man be
forestalled with prejudice and a sinister opinion of my proceedings against Mr.
Wotton, let him read this my relation, which I can justify both by living
witnesses, and by my papers, which I have in my custody until this day.

When Mr. Wottons opinions were first made known to me upon the occasion
mentioned in my letter to Mr. Wotton, which hereafter follows; I by means of
my late reading of the controversies between Junius and Arminius, Lubertus,
Bertius, Gomarus, and others of the Remonstrants, did easily discern them to
be of the same stamp with the heresies of Servetus, and Socinus, newly revived
and set on foot in Holland by Vorstius, Arminius, and those of that faction. I
showed Mr. Wottons papers to Mr. Alexander Richardson a most learned and
judicious Divine, to whom for his singular learning in Divinity, and all other
learned Arts, and excellent knowledge in the original tongues of holy
Scripture, diverse studious young men did resort from Cambridge to his dwelling
in the parish of Barking in Essex, to be directed in their study of Divinity,
and other arts: among which these proved men of good note in our Church, Mr.
Hooker, Mr. Chauncey, Mr. Yates, Mr. John Barlow, Mr. Perry, with others. Mr.
Richardson approved my censure of them, and so detested them that he could not
read one passage without sighing. He also sent to Mr. Wotton, to meet him in a
conference before some judicious hearers, which Mr. Wotton promised, but did
not perform. I also sent and desired that he would admit me, to come to him
and confer with him; but as he was afraid to meet Mr. Richardson, so he
disdained my youth and years, and referred me to one Spencer a tradesman, a
factious Disciple of his, as I have objected to him in my letter: upon this I
preached two sermons in the Church of which I am now Pastor, in the one I laid
open briefly, the true received doctrine of justification; in the other I
discovered Mr. Wottons opinions to be Socinian heresy, and showed the danger
of them. The next day some of Mr. Wottons friends being startled came to me,
and entreated me to go with them to him, and promised that he should purge
himself from those errors, and give me good satisfaction: I yielded to their
desire, and went along with two of them to Mr. Wottons house, who welcomed me
coldly in words, though his heart seemed by his countenance to be hot with
indignation and disdain. At my first entrance into his Study he told me very
abruptly, that I had untruly affirmed that the whole stream of learned
Orthodox Divines did hold the same doctrine which I had taught concerning
justification by Christ's righteousness imputed to believers. And withal he
showed a place out of Luther upon the Galatians, in which Luther denied
justification by our own works and righteousness of the law: but in the
words which next followed upon the top of of the next page, (which Mr. Wotton
covered with his fingers as he held the book in his hand) Luther in plain
words affirmed that Christ's fulfilling of the law for us is our righteousness;
and in the same page also says, that faith is not sufficient for righteousness
without Gods imputation of Christ's righteousness. I snatched the book out of
his fingers, read the words, which were directly against himself, blamed him
before the two witnesses for his dealing d^lo malo, and going about purposely
to delude us, and with great compassion and tears in mine eyes professed my
grief to see him, a man of great esteem (whom I had never seen before, but
had much reverenced for the reports which I had heard of his great learning) to
play the prancke of a deceiver and juggling Sophister. After many words which
passed between us, but in no strict form of disputation, which I desired and
M. Wotton refused; he confessed that my doctrine, which I taught concerning
imputation of Christ's righteousness, was sound and saving truth, able to save
believers, though they went no further: but he had dived more deeply into the
points of justification, and did go further, but not a contrary way; But I
protested against his opinion and told him it was as contrary to my doctrine
and faith, as darkness is to light. Mr. Standish one of the witnesses who went
along with me, desired me to rest satisfied and to break off; to which I
yielded, and took my leave. And no sooner were we entered into the street, but
the said Mr. Standish brake out into speeches of dislike against Mr. Wottons
fraudulent dealing, protested that he would never hearken to his opinion and
doctrine in these points any more, and that he was much comforted and confirmed
by that acknowledgment of the truth which I at length did wring from Mr.
Wottons own mouth. The second day after this I went to Cambridge and returned
not to London till three months after; in which time what lies were dispersed
in London concerning my apostasy to Mr. Wottons errors, my letter to him
shows.

The next year after I came to be settled in my pastoral charge, and because I
found some in my parish much inclining to Mr. Wottons opinion out of respect to
his person more then any knowledge, being not able to give any reason for it at
all, I spent many Sabbaths in preaching the doctrine of justification out of
the fifth chapter of the Epistle to the Romans; and in discovering and
confuting all errors contrary to the truth professed in the reformed Churches,
and amongst the rest the errors of Socinus: What affronts were offered me in
the Church and what clamours raised against me in the city, my letter to Mr.
Wotton will tell you in part. I could rehearse many passages which would move
laughter and discover the absurdity and ridiculous folly of diverse people who
were factiously addicted to admire all things in Mr. Wotton, good or bad; I
will Instance in one example only. It was this. I was requested to preach at
Blackfriars on a Wednesday in the absence of Mr. Gouge, some weeks after I
had finished my text concerning Justification. In that assembly, there were
many ancient professors of Religion, who knew me not by face, and who were so
taken with my Sermon, that they were very inquisitive to know my name, and
hearing that I was Pastor of Saint John Evangelists, and my name Walker, they
were so possessed with an evil opinion of me by the slanders and railings of
Mr. Wotton, and his disciples, that they cried, Hang him, he will be hanged
before he come to preach such a godly Sermon as this is, we will never believe
that this is that Walker which has preached against that man of God, Mr.
Wotton, and belyed him in the pulpit. My Clerk being well acquainted with
them, and overhearing, did affirm to them that I was the man, and told them
that they themselves might easily come to be hanged in hell, if they did not
repent of their wicked railings against me so unjustly: By this you see what
wrong I suffered, and what hu^t shameless slanders of wicked hypocrites, may
do to the good name of the most innocent, even among them that are religious.
These and such injuries and reproaches heaped on me together with a ridiculous
book written against me by one Spencer a disciple of Mr. Wotton, forced me to
write a challenge in my letter to Mr. Wotton, by which I at length brought him
to the conference, which is the subject of M. Gatakers invective against me.
This letter, because it contains a just complaint and a rehearsal of the ill
behavior of M. Wotton and his Disciples toward me, I have thought good here
to insert, that the world may see the intolerable provocations, wherewith I was
provoked to call M. Wotton to account, before some brethren in the Ministry
equally chosen by both parties.

Anthonio Wottono, Georgius Walker resipiscentiam and sanam mentem precatur.
SIr, my hearty desire, and prayer to God for you is, that you may repent and
be saved. And as I do, and by the grace of God will continually pray to God
for you, so long as there is any hope: So now also I will not spare to exhort
you, and in the bowels of Jesus Christ beseech you, (yea if need require) by
thunderings and threatenings of Gods heavy judgments, proceed and go forward
to puty ou in fear, that if it be possible you may repent, and recant, and
that the errors and thoughts of your heart may be forgiven; for I perceive that
you are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity. You will
perhaps say, A sharp and a fierce onset, who can bear it? To remove and
prevent all prejudice I answer, if it be sharp, it is as it ought to be, for a
deep and festered wound has need of a sharp corrasive, but such I am
persuaded in my soul, that yours is; and upon my conscience, and before God I
speak it, whom I know to be the searcher of all hearts. Wherefore though an
heart settled in error, and over-runne with perverse affection cannot brook
any sharp reproof, but will hate the reproover, according to that saying of
the wise man, Reproove a scorner and he will hate thee: yet I will against hope
believe under hope, though my experience would persuade me the contrary, and
will hope better things of you; yea I will thus say to my heart, Fear not,
neither be afraid of his countenance, though it be as hard as brass, for if
he be ordained to life, and be within the compass of Gods election, though he
be troubled, and frett at the first, yet spare not to rebuke, for by this
means thou shall find more favor in the end. I am not ignorant that by my
former both writing and preaching against your errors, and by my fervency and
vehemence of words I have troubled, and vexed you, neither would I have you
think, that I have thus dealt with you upon any distempered affection or such
like infirmity: I profess ingenuously that I have done it upon good
deliberation and of set purpose, because I have judged, and do yet still deem
that course to be the best for diverse reasons. First, because I knew that the
errors and opinions which you maintain, and wherewith you have infected
diverse, are of all that ever were sown by the enemy of God and men among
Christian people the most pe^^ilent and dangerous, being nothing else but the
heresies of Serve^us and Socinus, those most damnable and cursed heretics,
the greatest monsters that ever were borne within the borders of Christ's
Church, as I can plainly show by your own writings and theirs compared
together, and would have already showed, if you had not refused to join with
me in a Christian conference before eight learned and godly Ministers. Now
being persuaded, yea knowing that your opinions are so dangerous, and
pe^nicious; do you not think that I am bound before God to lay them open, and
to inveigh against them, after the manner of Gods Prophets, whose fashion has
ever been to brand less sins then these, and less dangerous errors, with
the name of abomination, blasphemy sorcery, witchcraft, and such like?

The second reason of my fervency is godly jealousy, because I see that you
labor by all means to draw men's hearts from the love of the truth of my God
generally professed unto your errors, and that many who are grounded in
knowledge of good things, are so overcome with a conceit of you, and affection
to your person, that rather then they will forsake you, they will forgo the
truth; this being (as you know) the ground upon which all heresies have been
builded, and the special means by which they have been dispersed, and have
gotten head, and made factions in the world, in all ages heretofore. Can you
blame me, whom God has called to be a watchman over his flock, if I be
jealous over you, and if for love to my God and his truth, and the salvation of
his people, I do bring you, to the utmost of my power, into just disgrace with
them, by uncovering your shame, so far as may stand with equity, and
conscience, and by painting out your errors in most ugly manner, for the
terrifying of Gods people from meddling with them?

The third reason, and indeed the greatest of all, is your obstinacy,
arrogance, pride, perverseness, fraud; and dissimulation, the special marks
of wilful heretics; all which I have good reason to suspect in you, yea,
(if we may know a man by his fruits and works) I know and have tried to be
deeply rooted in you. And that you may know I speak upon judgment, not in
affection, I will name some particulars.

First, when I first heard of your errors by one of your near^^ disciples, I
observed in him such forwardness to (...) before me, being to him a stranger,
such (...) in urging and maintaining them, with no other arguments then your
authority, whom he so odiously compared with all learned and godly Divines,
chief pillars of our Church, as Calvin, Beza, Whitakers, Perkins, and others;
that he was not ashamed to call them foolish boys in comparison of you; not
worthy to carry your books; whereupon I conceived present suspicion, that
these gross and stinking sins did proceed from some secret sparks of hellish
fire, either by you suggested, or by him foolishly conceived, and that such a
malicious and railing spirit was not free from gross error. And therefore for
mine own better information, I desired to confer with you, and to learn
from you the substance of your opinion, and according to my small ability, to
reason and dispute the question with you, if so be you held as he affirmed; the
message he willingly took upon him, and promised to bring me to you, to
confer in a kind and friendly manner, (for that was my desire, for the
reverence I did bear to your person, being then, by report of others only,
known to me:) But I found your answer far differing from that which I
expected, I looked for the spirit of meekness, humility, love, gentleness,
and had good hope to be admitted into familiarity, and acquaintance with you;
And you in scorn sent me to one Spencer, a fellow of ill report among all
honest men; who all with one voice, when I inquired after him, told me, he was
a vain idle giddy-headed fellow, and so I now find indeed, and his own
handwriting shall testify unto the world. If this be not an infallible token
of your pride and scornefulnesse, let the world judge, thus to send a Minister
of the Gospel in contempt to one of your disciples, to learn of him, as if
you thought your self too high, and all others too base to be admitted to your
presence.

This your doing, when I complained to you of it, face to face, you excused, as
done out of ignorance of mine intent and desire. Afterward, you for shame
utterly denied it, and sent about your disciples to disprove my report of it.
And now lastly, you have again so justified it, that you are not ashamed to
say, you did me no wrong, in affirming that Spencer understands the Doctrine of
Justification better then I; And that your pride, obstinacy, and perverseness,
might show it self to the full; you still go on from worse to worse, and now
you have set Spencer to confute me, and to make a challenge; whose writing will
(I hope) be the utter ruin either of your errors, or of your selves. All
judicious men to whom I show it, are ready to stop their noses at the first
sight and smell of the stinking folly, blindness, and ignorance, wherewith
almost every line is stuffed, so miserably does he beat himself, and eat the
flesh of his own arm, saying, and unsaying, lying and mistaking every point:
These courses, and proceedings, whether they argue and convince you of pride,
obstinacy, and perverseness, I leave to the judgment of others.

Secondly, when (after my first Preaching against your errors for the
satisfaction of some who were wavering and doubting) one of your disciples
brought me unto you, did not I then show all patience, love, and good affection
toward you? Did not I beseech you with tears to be silent in these points,
till you had further sifted them, and thoroughly disputed them with others? Did
not you use me scornefully, and go about to wrest a place in Luthers
Commentary on the Galations, and out of it to prove that Luther denied the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us; and this against your own
conscience? For by a mark of your own making in the same page, I was directed
to words in the same page, in which he plainly disproved you, and this you
would have smothered by covering the place with your fingers, till I plucked
the book from you. Did not I patiently put up this, though it wounded my
soul? and did not this your dealing dolo malo, show your fraud, and forgery,
and that you are (...), which sins being damned of himself? If you deny
this, God is my witness and mine own conscience* Your book also, and the
mark in the marg^^ (...)against you; and besides, I have another witness,
(...) godly Christian who was there present.

Thirdly, after my departing for a time into the Country, your disciples
thinking I had quite left the City, did most falsely and abominably report
abroad, that you did so put me down by arguments, that I with tears
acknowledged mine error, and vowed to live and dye in your opinion. How wicked
and false this was, you, and I, and they who were present, know; I am sure that
never did the Papists and Jesuits more falsely slander Calvin and Beza, then
they did me in this report. If these be not the arts of the devil, the Father
of liars, let all Christians judge.

Fourthly, after my return out of the Country, when they saw their lies
discovered by my open profession, and constancy in the truth which I had
Preached; they and you were so far from shame and amendment, that you made me
amends with all railing, and reviling speeches, insomuch that in many men's
mouths, I hear your outrageous exclamations, in which you call me in ass, a
sot, a boy, an impudent and brazen-faced fellow; yea, your disciples have not
been afraid to make mowes at me, Preaching in the Pulpit, as mine eyes, and
the eyes of diverse others did often see and can testify, and oftentimes have
they cried out in the Church, and derided me, and scoffed at the word of God,
by me delivered, and that so loud, that all round about have heard, and been
offended. And yet all this I have endured, though the Law was in my hand, to
make them be apprehended, brought before the Magistrate, and punished; and for
all this, there is no remorse nor amendment. Shall I, nay, can I (think you)
in this case judge any better of them, then as of wilful heretics, and
blasphemers, and of your Doctrine, which leads them into this excess, then as
of devilish heresy? For the Doctrine which I delivered and they derided, did
not in one sentence differ from the doctrine of Calvin, and all learned
Divines, as by my papers and notes shall appear.

Lastly, for I will not repeat all particulars, (which were an endless work)
you still go on in your opinions, and send out pamphlet after pamphlet, full
of contradictions, and falsifications, as I can show you to your face. You will
neither confer before any of our learned Brethren, godly Ministers privately;
nor publicly before the Reverend Bishop of London. You dare not commit
yourselfe to him, because he is a wicked Judge, and will respect persons in
Judgment, my friends are too potent with him: these are your excuses; and I
know them all to be false. For so cunningly did you dissemble with that good
Bishop, and hide your errors, that he rather blamed me, than you, (as I
hear.) Can you therefore in conscience blame me, if I, for these, and such
like reasons, think hardly of you, as of an Heretic, and though my zeal do
burn against you like a fire, though I cannot without grief look upon you?
May not a Christian Minister; nay, is he not bound in conscience being thus
persuaded, to cry out against you, and to lift his voice like a trumpet, and
make men know your abominations? yea, to threaten hell, destruction, and all
curses against you, except you repent? Surely my conscience does not accuse me
of any thing which I have done in this cause; I have the examples of the
Prophets to warrant and encourage me, and to justify my doings. If you will
stop my mouth, you must either by words or deeds persuade me to think
otherwise; and I promise you I will; yea, I desire to be otherwise persuaded,
if you will but purge your self from the crimes whereof you are openly
convicted. Wherefore I will once again entreat you, and earnestly request
you, yea, charge you in the name of Jesus Christ, that if you desire the peace
of the Church, and can abide to have the truth tried, you will cast off those
carnal and corrupt, yea hellish affections of pride and disdain, or at least
this show of them which appears in you; and meet me as a Christian before
eight godly and learned Ministers, chosen equally by both, that they be
witness between you and me; and that it may be seen whether I do justly
charge you with heresy and blasphemy or no; and whether your writings do not
show you to be a Socinian. The four Ministers which I will choose for my part,
shall be Mr. Stock, Mr. Downham, Mr Westfield, and Mr. Gouge. I profess, and
take God to witness, that I desire your conversion, not your confusion. It is
my love and zeal for truth, more then hatred or indignation against you, which
makes me so hot and earnest against your errors.

The first offense that ever you gave me, was the injury which you have done
to the obedience, righteousness and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, whom
you deny to be so made mine, that his obedience is imputed to me for
righteousness, and his blood for the satisfaction of Gods justice. For this
(if you obstinately persist in it) I must hate you with a perfect hatred, as if
you were mine enemy, neither shall there ever be peace so long as your errors
are so great, and pernicious. God himself I am assured, will trouble you, And
quickly confound you, except you repent. O consider therefore from whence you
are fallen, and suspect your self. Cannot that faith be sufficient for you,
which has saved so many Saints of God, and for the which so many godly and
noble Martyrs have heretofore shed their blood, even in this place, and in this
Kingdom? Me thinks that the name of Servetus, and Socinus should terrify your
conscience, if it were so tender as you have heretofore professed. Can you hope
for any good or pure water, from such foul and polluted Cisternes, full of all
heresy and blasphemy?

O that you would but lay these things to your heart, and be moved! My heart, I
assure you, is open to embrace you with all love, if you would truly repent;
God forbid that I should hate you any otherwise, then as you are the enemy of
Christ. And God forbid, that I should give you one (...), or God save you, if
you persist in this heresy, which is so contrary to the wholesome doctrine of
salvation. Wherefore, if now you will show but one sign of amendment by
yielding to my request, and appointing a time and place where we may meet, I
will much relent from my Jealousy over you, and I hope that God will give good
success. But if I find you so incurable, that you will not admit of the least
means, which tends to the cure of your soul, but will still upon no grounds
at all persist in your novelties, and publish them for the seducing of others,
to the overthrow of Gods ttuth, and the disturbance of the Church: I do think
my self bound in conscience to forbear no longer, but to publish your errors
to the world, that all may see those many errors, blasphemies and
contradictions, which I have faithfully gathered out of your own words and
writings. And because you do go about by your disciple Spencer to challenge
me, and to debase my calling and Ministry, by laying false imputations upon
me, as ignorance, slander, and the like: I have resolved to draw articles
against you, and to collect your errors, and misdemeanors into one
supplication, and to present it to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, and to the High Commission, that there and before them it may be tried
and seen, whether you do not jumpe with Socinus in his heresy. I know and
have traced you in all your Socinian and Arminian tricks, and distinctions,
and if you trust to them you are deceived. If you compel me to take this last,
and most desperate course with you, and if it turn to the subversion and ruin
of your whole estate, and of your self and your disciples: blame your self,
and not me. For you see I admonish you first, and it is in your own hand to
prevent it. I am loath to be a means of your open shame and confusion; but if
no better will be, Melius est ut pereat unus, quam unitas. Our Savior Christ
(you know) gave this commandment, that when you will not be privately
admonished, then we must tell the Church, Sure I am, that if you be once
brought in public, and persist in your errors; you shall perish, and your
blood shall be on your own head: But on them that put away shame from Israel,
and are instruments to root out heresy from the Church, and on their seed,
and on their house shall be peace for ever from the Lord. The God of power and
strength give you an heart to fear his judgments, and to hearken to them that
admonish you in his name; And if it be his will I pray that you may be
converted in his good time, that the truth may flourish, and the peace of our
Church may be surely established unto the end of the world. Thus you see I have
opened my mind freely unto you. If I be deceived in you, it is error amoris,
non amor erroris, I will so soon as I perceive it, change my style, and mine
affection toward you. I pray you let me have your answer as shortly as you
can; if you send not quickly, I will take it for granted that you scorn to
hearken to me, and despise my Christian admonitions, as heretofore you seem to
have done; and I will proceed in my resolution against you. God is my witness,
I desire your good, and the good of his Church. If I were not careful of your
safety, I would not steal this time from my nights rest and sleep, this
Sabbath day at night, after my body is wearyed with reading, Preaching, and
administering the Lords Supper.

From my study this second of May, past one a clock in the morning, Anno Dom.
1614. Yours, if you be Christ's, George Walker.


Upon the receipt and reading of this Letter, Mr. Wotton sent me a Letter of
defiance, and therein professed his scorn and disdain of my threatenings: but
the next day he sent me another, wherein he promised to yield to my motion. And
yet to prevent our meeting, he used means by Mr. Mason, the Bishop of Londons
Chaplain, an Arminian, to make it known to the Bishop, in hope that he would
forbid our meeting: Notwithstanding the Bishop gave way, and we did meet upon
a day appointed, before the eight Ministers named in Mr. Gatakers defense. I
brought for me, Mr. Stock, Mr. Downham, Mr. Westfield, and Mr. Gouge, now
Doctors. He brought for him, Mr. Balmeford, Mr. Randall, Mr. Gataker, and Mr.
Hickes, the last of which appeared to be already of Mr. Wottons mind in all
points. And both Mr. Gataker and be, bare themselves toward me, as toward an
adversary, and as advocates for Mr. Wotton. Dr. Westfield being the only man
with whom I then had any great familiarity, did perceive a general inclination
in them all, to favor Mr. Wotton as much as they could, being all his old
familiar friends, and I a stranger of two years residence in the City; after
our first meeting, refused to meet any more, fearing what followed, and I
chose Dr. Baylie in his place.

I being the Plaintiff and procurer of the meeting, did first show what I
desired, namely, that I might have Mr. Wottons writings, which were come to my
hands, viewed; and by Mr. Wotton acknowledged; which he could not deny, but did
confess them to be his own handyworke. And that I having rehearsed Mr.
Wottons words out of his books and writings, which I had in my Sermon
confuted, under the name of Socinian heresies, and having paralleled them in
writing, with the words of Socinus, and made them appear to be the same, by
showing and comparing the books and writing; They would give me their hands to
my parallel, and subscribe that I had not either charged Mr. Wotton with any
opinions or words but his own, or confuted under the name of Socinianisme any
words of his, but only those wherein he did concur with Socinus. If I had
either mis-related his words, or confuted under the name of Socinianisme, any
point wherein he did not jumpe with Socinus, I desired them to censure me. The
Parallels being read and examined, appeared to some of them so clear, and my
charge so just, that the same day at Mr. Randall Wetwoods table, where Dr.
Baylie and Mr. Downham dined with me, the Doctor did protest that I had
discovered Mr. Wotton to be as damned an heretic as ever did tread on English
ground: Mr. Downham, Mr. Wetwood, Mr. Tailor, and Mr. Hopkins were
eare-witnesses of this, and all yet living, as well as my self. Mr. Wetwood
asked why they did not justify me and censure him without more ado, seeing
that was the purpose of our meeting, that they should judge of things
accordingly as they were proved. They pretended that they desired to convert,
not to confound Mr. Wotton, that they perceived him to be afraid of shame like
to fall on him, and that if I would yield to let him expound himself, he would
by a wrested exposition gainsay, and contradict his former words and opinions
and run from them, which being gotten from him under his hand, they would
either hold him to it, or shame him for ever, if he did fall back again. This
course being Mr. Gatakers device, I refused to yield unto, because I had never
opposed him, but only in opinions formerly published, and not in future
expositions, and because I had fully proved my charge, I desired their verdict
and just judgment. But after much importunity I yielded, and so lost my cause,
and was drawn into a new business that was to contend with Mr. Wotton, not
about his former opinions, which I had formerly confuted; but about new
expositions, which he would make in answer to my parallells. At another day
appointed he brought his expositions, which when they had read in my hearing, I
did except against diverse passages in them, and some contradictions, which I
desired to argue against, with Mr. Wotton face to face, in strict syllogismes;
but he refused to answer me, and our Judges refused to hear me, or to suffer
me to have a copy of his expositions, as he had of my parallels.

Whereupon I protested against their unequal dealing, and departed, threatening
to bring him and them before higher Judges. After that they had read the
expositions which Mr. Gataker did plead for most hotly, Mr. Wotton promised to
make and publish a large declaration, wherein he would free himself from all
Socinian errors. In the mean time he begged this favor, that they would
subscribe to his expositions, that they found no heresy or blasphemy in them.
Upon this promise and entreaty, they did subscribe as follows.

Howsoever, we whose names are underwritten, do differ from Mr. Wotton in some
points of the former doctrine of Justification, contained in these his
expositions: yet we hold not the difference to be so great and weighty, as that
they are to be justly condemned of heresy and blasphemy.

Jews Baylie, James Balmeford, John Randall, Richard Stock, John Downham,
Thomas Gataker, William Gouge, William Hickes.


THE Expositions thus subscribed, were commtited to Doctor Baylie, with charge
that he should keep them close, and not suffer me or any other man to see, or
read them, until Mr. Wotton had made a larger Exposition, and fully purged
himself from Socinianisme. By which it appeared, that they durst not openly
justify their subscription, nor suffer it to come into my hands. And that it
was a thing with much importunity wrung from them which the better part of them
would never have yielded unto, but upon promise of a better and larger
exposition, and in hope to draw Mr. Wotton wholly from his errors; some of
which he had already contradicted, and acknowledged to be heretical and
blasphemous, to wit, his denying of Christ's Righteousness imputed for any use
or end whatsoever.

Dr. Bailey the first of the Subscribers had (upon the first reading of those
speeches of Mr. Wotton which I showed out of his own writings, and did
parallel them with Socinus) condemned Mr. Wotton for an heretic, and his
errors for blasphemy. Mr. Downham heard his censure uttered at Mr. Wetwoods
table, and by silence assented to it. Mr. Randall did argue very hotly against
Mr. Wottons opinions that same day that they subscribed, and told him before as
all, that he had protested against them often in private, and had dissuaded him
from them; and that he for his part abhorred them. Dr. Gouge has publicly
confuted them, and in the pulpit condemned them under the name of Socianisme.
Mr. Stock did ever abhor them, as he often told me in private. And one time,
I by a pretty Stratageme brought him before other witness, to condemn them
for heresy and blasphemy. Mr. Wetwood mine host in whose house I then lodged,
having by much importunity obtained of Dr. Bailey the sight of Mr. Wottons
expositions subscribed, as you heard before, and committed to his custody, did
lend them to me for the space of two hours, till I had copied out both them,
and the subscription word for word with the men's names, which copy I have yet
to show.

And one Sunday at night being invited to supper by Mr. Thomas Goodyeare, my
parishoner, I brought it with me to show it to Mr. Goodyeare, who was very
desirous to see and read it. Mr. Stock and his wife being at the same time
invited came in while we were reading it together And seeing me (...) in my
hand, asked what it was. I answered that it was a paper of new and strange
opinions, which when he desired to hear, I did read to him that passage in Mr.
Wottons Expositions, where he says; This I say, that in this proposition
(Faith is counted for Righteousness,) the word (Faith) is to be taken properly,
not tropically; and I asked him what he thought of it: He not knowing that it
was Mr. Wottons Exposition, out of which I read it, did answer that it was
Popery, or worse. I asked him whether he did not think it to be the heresy
and blasphemy of Socinus: he answered, yes verily. I asked him then what he
thought of certain learned Divines, who had subscribed to this, and other such
speeches, that they were neither heresy nor blasphemy: He said he thought none
but mad men would do it, and asked who they were. I presently read the
subscription and among the rest his own name, and withal showed him the copy.
Mr. Goodyeare laughed heartily, and said to Mr. Stock, O Master, our Parson is
too cunning for you, I never saw any man so finely taken in a snare, as he
has taken you in your own snare. I have ever told you, that in this
controversy you were too partial for your old friend and familiar Mr. Wotton.
Mr. Stock could plead nothing but this, That Mr. Wotton had promised them to
silence himself and his disciples in these points, and to write a large
declaration; whereby he would purge himself fully from Socinianisme. In hope
whereof they did gratify him with this subscription, for the suppressing of
clamours, till he had further cleared himself. But Mr. Wotton had broken his
promise, and boasted of that which made nothing for him in the maine cause, but
only upon the by; and had requited their favor toward him, with disgrace to
them, and danger to himself; and that it had been better he had never been
borne, then to trouble the Church of God with his false opinions. By this you
see how dangerous a thing it is, even for godly men, to be judges in a cause of
controversy between a familiar friend (as Mr. Wotton was to these men) and a
stranger, as I at that time was to the most of them.

As for the other three, to wit, Mr. Balmeford, Mr. Gataker, and Mr. Hickes,
they were Mr. Wottons advocates, rather then equal Judges: Mr. Balmeford was
Mr. Wottons silenced brother; Mr. Hickes was Mr. Wottons disciple, one who
would jurare in verba Magistri; Mr. Gataker did more angrily and peevishly
speak against me, and snarle at me then my adversary Mr. Wotton himself, so
that I was forced to challenge him as well as Mr. Wotton, and to offer to
dispute against them both.

What Mr. Wottons intent was in begging such a beggarly subscription, and Mr.
Gatakers in procuring it from the rest, the event has showed. For Mr. Wotton
and his disciples did presently report through London, that I could prove
nothing against him, nor bring any thing out of his books, or writings to
convince him of Socinianisme, and that the eight learned Ministers had
justified him, and condemned me for a false accuser. And upon this he grew more
bold, and wrote certain Essaies concerning Justification, a copy whereof I
have to show, wherein he denies the true, real, and spiritual union of the
faithful with Christ, and Chrits meriting of justification, and salvation for
them; he affirms that when they are said to be one with Christ, the speech is
Metaphorical, and that there is no mention of Christ's merits in all the
Scripture. By which his violent breaking out, and going on from evil to worse,
I was forced to write my Antithesis Wottonismi, and Christianismi; wherein I
discovered more of his errors, and his sactious and Schismatic behavior:
This I presented to the then Archbishop of Canterbury, who committed it to
Doctor Nidd^ his Chaplain, who being himself a favourer of Arminians,
neglected to make report of it to his Lord. And indeed I never called upon him,
because Mr. Wotton having intelligence of it, silenced himself and all his
disciples, being admonished by his friends of the danger in which he was,
unless he and they did forbear to justify and maintain his errors, and
further to provoke me by their false reports and calumnies.

Thus was the fire quenched, and no man opened his mouth to defend Mr. Wottons
opinions; though I with many others, did often (as occasion was offered by the
Scriptures which we expounded) confute and condemn them: In the mean time Mr.
Wotton wrote his book De Reconciliatione in Latin, wherein he seemed to
recant and to contradict diverse of his former writings; but yet he vented so
much poison in it; that when it was sent over to Leiden to be Printed, the
Professors there rejected it, as being full of Socinian errors; and (as I have
been informed) did also send to Amsterdam to stop the Printing of it, which
was there attempted also; So that Mr. Wottons disciples were forced to Print it
at their own charge by stealth, in some further place beyond the Seas, and to
disperse the copies here in England. Upon one of which Mr. Goodwin, a lover of
novelties, and strange doctrines unhappily stumbled; and thence stole his
opinions, which his foolish followers receive, and admire, as new revelations
from heaven, never heard of before.

Thus have I briefly related the chief passages between Mr. Wotton and my
self. I have heard of others also, who did privately oppose Mr. Wotton,
especially Master Woodcocke, a grave Preacher, Parson or Vicar of Chessam, who
did in writing confute Mr. Wotton, and admonished him to forsake his errors.
One thing I cannot omit, which was a strong motive to move diverse godly people
in London, to abhor Mr. Wottons opinions; that was the sharp censure which
that holy man of God, Master Alexander Richardson gave against them on his
death bed, and which Mr. John Barlow an eare-witnesse thereof, did report to
diverse from his mouth. Mr. Richardson being ready to leave this world, Mr.
Barlow who had often before resorted to him for direction in his study, and
resolution of doubts, in many points of Divinity, was at that time present with
him, and told him that he had heard me the Sabbath before, propounding the
Doctrine of Justification, to be laid open out of the fifth Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans, and to be maintained against Papists, Socinians, and
other Heretics, some of which were of late revived in the City, and withal
desired to know his judgment concerning Mr. Wottons opinion, who denied
Christ's fulfilling of the Law for justification of believers, and the
imputation of his Righteousness; and held faith to be imputed in a proper
sense without a trope: Mr. Richardson answered and said, Take these words of me
a dying man. I have read and well weighed Mr. Wottons papers, and opinions, and
I know them to be so pestilent and dangerous, that whosoever lives and dies
in the belief of them, shall never enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Commend
me to Mr. Walker, and desire him from me, (as being my last request to him) to
be courageous in the cause of God, and for that saving truth which he has
undertaken to maintain against those dangerous and deadly errors, lately set
on foot by Mr. Wotton. This message being delivered unto me before diverse
witnesses, some of which are alive to testify it, did much encourage me, and
made me more bold to lay open the abomination of Mr. Wottons opinions
publickely in my Sermons, without fear or regard of the slanders and revilings
of his factious and furious disciples. This was in the year 1613. And I praise
God, I am constant in the same mind, and do pray and hope that God will give
me grace to persevere in this belief to the end. As for Mr. Gatakers invective
against me in Mr. Wottons defense, I do as little regard it, as Mr. Goodwins
railing Libell, which (some say) Mr. Gataker counseled him to write against me.

If it were not vain expense of precious time, I could produce Socinianisme
out of Mr. Gatakers Printed works, and prove him a party. I could prove him to
be Thomas of all sides. Sometimes holding that the elect and faithful are
clothed with the garment of Christ's Righteousness, and again, disputing
against their communion and imputation of Christ's Righteousness. But I pray
God to give him a more settled judgment in the truth, and a more charitable
heart to his laborious neighbors, who spend their time in better studies then
writing of Treatises for unlawful gaming and card-playing, and bedawbing
Margents with many quotations to small purpose, but only for ostentation of
much reading.

Yet give me leave to ask Mr. Gataker a few questions, which if he cannot
answer with any credit, let him for shame hold his peace, and blush to think
of his defense of Master Wotton, to the accusing and defaming of himself.

1. Question, Whether is it truth and honesty, to say that all the eight
Ministers, with unanimous consent, generally resolved and pronounced, that
there appeared not to them either heresy or blasphemy, in ought that Mr.
Wotton was by me convinced to have delivered or maintained? When their
subscription shows, that they meddled only with his Expositions, and not with
his heretical and blasphemous speeches, in which I paralleled him with Socinus
the Heretic.

2 Quest. Whether Mr. Gataker does think that Mr. Wotton renouncing the Law of
God, and the righteousness thereof performed by Christ in our stead for our
justification, does not in so doing deny Christ his ransom paid, and
satisfaction made to Gods just Law, for our redemption and for remission of our
sins?

3 Quest. Whether man's perfect fulfilling of the Law in his own person, under
the covenant of works, was not formal inherent righteousness, and would have
made man worthy of life: And if so, how he can excuse Mr. Wotton, from making
faith the formal inherent righteousness of believers, in the covenant of the
Gospel, by which they are worthy of justification, and eternal life, seeing he
says that faith under the Gospel serves to all purposes, for obtaining
eternal life, as man's perfect fullfilling of the Law did in the covenant of
works?

4 Quest. Whether Mr. Wotton professing his dissent from Socinus in those
things which are Orthodox and true, to wit, That faith is obedience to Christ's
Commandments, who commands us to believe and repent; That repentance which
comes not but by faith, is the means to obtain forgiveness of sins which
Christ has brought, that is to get the sense and assurance of forgiveness;
And that faith is a believing of that which Christ taught, and an assurance of
obtaining that he promised upon our repentance and obedience: can therefore be
justified from the heresies of Socinus, in the point of justification, when he
holds other things which are condemned in Socinus for heresy, as that faith
used in a proper sense, not tropically, is said to be imputed for
righteousness to justification, and not the righteousness of Christ,
apprehended and applied by faith; And that Christ has not redeemed us, and
satisfied for our sins, and procured our pardon and justification, by
fulfilling the Law in our stead; And that faith, though not for the merit,
worth and virtue of it, yet by the place and office which the Lord of his mercy
has assigned, is the condition upon which God does justify and adopt us, and
is accepted of God and counted for righteousness?

5 Quest. Whether Mr. Wotton does not deny the free covenant of Grace, when he
holds that God does not covenant to justify and give life, but upon a
condition, performed on our part, equivalent for all purposes, to a man's
perfect fulfilling of the Law in his own person under the covenant of works?

6 Quest. Whether Mr. Wotton affirming that if we be freely pardoned, then our
sins were not punished in Christ our head and surety, does not deny Christ's
satisfaction for sin?

7. Quest. Whether Mr. Wotton be not guilty of heretical tergiversation, and
gross contradiction in these passages. First, when he says, that there is no
end or use of the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, page 12. of Mr.
Gatakers defense. And again, page 21. That it is heretical and blasphemous,
to say that Christ's Righteousness is not imputed as the meritorious cause of
Justification. And again, in his Essays says, that there is no mention of
the merit of Christ in all the Scriptures.

Secondly, when he says, That Faith does not justify us, per se, by it self,
and yet is said properly, and not tropically, to be imputed to us for
Righteousness, page 27. of the Defense; and is the only condition which God
requires on our part for Justification, page 13. Also, when he says, That
Faith does not justify us, but only as it apprehends and applies Christ
and his Righteousness, page 27. And yet denies that Christ's Righteousness is
so apprehended and applied by Faith, that God counts it our Righteousness to
Justification, page 12.

Thirdly, when he renounceth the Law of God, performed by our selves or any
other in our stead, for the justifying of us before God, page 12. And denies
that we are punished for our sins, in Christ our head and surety, for the
satisfying of Gods just wrath, page 29. And yet page 34. says, I acknowledge
and profess that Christ has made satisfaction for us, by paying a true price
to God his Father. Is not this the same tergiversation, which the Heretic
Socinus uses? Who in some places confesses in the Scripture phrases, that
Christ is our Redeemer, our Ransom, and the propitiation for our sins: And
in other places denies Christ's satisfying and paying of a ransom to God for
our Redemption and justification.

Fourthly, when he says, that we are not accounted to be formally righteous,
by fulfilling the Law, and satisfying the Justice of God in Christ, and yet
says, that we are accepted of God as Righteous for Christ's obedience no less
then if we had indeed performed those things, page 32. and page 26. For ought
I hold of Faith, Christ's Righteousness may be even the formal cause of our
Justification. But page 22. He confesses that he denies Christ's
Righteousness to be imputed as the formal cause whereby we are made formally
Righteous; which is a flat contradiction of the Apostles words, Romans 5. 19. By
the obedience of one many shall be made righteous, that is, constituted and
made formally righteous, for so the Greek word (...) does signify.

8. Quest. Whether Mr. Wotton can with a good conscience by Mr. Gataker be
justified and proclaimed free from heresy, when he will fully and perversely
denies the very form, essence, and being of Justification, to wit, the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness, which he first simply rejects, as being
of no use, and afterward as the formal cause of justification, seeing he (the
said Mr. Gataker) has publickely extolled, and commended for Orthodox, the
like Treatise of Mr. William Bradshaw, wherein he makes imputation of Christ's
Righteousness the form of Justification, and inveighed against some, (meaning
me, who had opposed some errors and contradictions which are in that Book) in
his funeral Sermon, Preached at Mr. Bradshawes buryall?

9. Quest. Whether the faithful being by one spirit united to Christ, and made
one spiritual body, and partakers of his righteousness, and whole obedience
to the Law of God, and thereby constituted righteous before God, can without
heretical perverseness be denied again and again to be formally, that is,
truly and really righteous, by that Righteousness, though not inherent in
every believer, but only spiritually communicated from the head to every
member of the body?

10. Quest. Whether Mr. Wotton might not justly be judged to be possessed with
the spirit of Socinian blindness, and giddiness, when he derides Orthodox
Divines, For making every believer justified by imputation of Christ's
satisfactory obedience, a Redeemer and Savior, and satisfyer for all the elect
and faithful (for thus he argues. If Christ's Righteousness and satisfaction,
be imputed to every believer, then must every believer be counted a Redeemer,
Justifyer, and Satisfyer, for all the Elect: But this is absurd, Ergo the
Antecedent is false. In one of his written pamphlets) though they do not hold
that Gods imputing of Christ's obedience and satisfaction, is an accounting of
it to be performed by them in their own persons, or imputed as a meritorious
efficient cause; but only his accounting it theirs by communion from Christ
the head to every member so far as to make him formally righteous. And yet he
himself contradicting his former absolute denial of imputation, page 12. does
hold imputation of Christ's Righteousness, as a meritorious, and efficient
cause of Justification, page 21. Which is a manifest falling into that
absurdity, which he would pin upon others. For if it be counted ours, as a
meritorious efficient cause, then are we all counted justifyers, who do
justify the Elect, and merit their justification.

I could propound diverse other Questions, but when Mr. Gataker sees himself
seriously to answer these, I hope he shall perceive (if he has ever an eye
left to see) that his defense of Mr. Wotton, is worse then standing at his
back, till his head be broken, even a breaking of his head, and a defaming of
him by going about to defame me unjustly in this pretended Defense, the issue
whereof is, That by publishing in Print, those damnable heretical speeches,
which I in private objected against Mr. Wotton, out of his own writings (not
one word whereof he could deny) he has made Mr. Wottons name to stink, like
the issue of a running Cancer in a most foul body, and like those Sepulchers
dogs, which scratch rotten carcasses out of their graves, he has raked up
Mr. Wottons rotten body of errors out of his grave; (as some godly Divines
have said, upon the reading of his defense.) For what true Christian, when he
reads those desperate speeches which I objected in my parallel, now Printed by
Mr. Gataker, (viz. That there is no end or use whatsoever of the imputation of
Christ's obedience, active or passive, for the justification of sinners; That
Faith, taken in a proper sense, is by God counted for Righteousness: And is
for all purposes, as sufficient to justification under the Gospel, as the
fulfilling of the Law by a man in his own person, was in the covenant of
works; that he renounceth the fulfilling of the Law by Christ for our
Justification: And that our sins are not punished in Christ, nor Gods wrath
satisfied thereby) is not so offended with the ill savor of those rotten
heresies, that he is forced to stop his nose at the reading of them, as
passengers do, when they pass by the valley of Hamon Gog? Ezech. 29. 11.

If Mr. Gataker be so profuse and prodigal of his Reputation, as to subscribe
to them, that there is no heresy or blasphemy in them; when Beza, Paraeus,
Lubertus and others, our betters, have, before me, so proclaimed them to be:
Yet he has with breach of piety and charity, and with greater virulency and
defect of humanity, and common honesty than he has proved to be in me; most
falsely fathered on those dead Saints, Mr. Randall, and Mr. Stock, and on
those living pious men, Doctor Gouge, and Master Downham, a subscription to
those errors; that they saw no heresy, or blasphemy in them. Whereas, indeed
and in truth, I have to show in writing, that their subscription was not to all
or any thing, which I produced out of his writings against him; but only to
his Expositions, wherein he denied many of his errors, and set a false gloss
on the rest.

Indeed some things in those Expositions, I did then show to be already
condemned for heresy and blasphemy, by the learned before named; and thereupon
I did blame their subscription, and protested against it, and desired to
dispute with Mr. Wotton, and prove those points heresy; but Mr. Gataker
interposed and prevailed so with the rest, that I could not be heard, neither
could I by any entreaty obtain a copy of those Expositions; but they were
committed to Doctor Baylie to be kept; till Mr. Wotton had more fully in
writing purged himself, and the Doctor durst never suffer me once to read
them, fearing lest I should write a public confutation of them. Howbeit I
wrote a confutation of so much as I could remember, by hearing them once read,
at the time when they were subscribed, and on Wednesday, being the second day
after, did show it to Doctor Gouge, and Mr. Downham after the Sermon at
Blackfryers. And a long time after, I with much ado, by Mr. Wetwoods means,
obtained the sight of them, for two hours, in which space I copyed them out,
as is before related; so far was I from pressing Doctor Baylie to conceal
them, (as Mr. Gataker would intimate, page 37) that I never labored for any
thing more earnestly, then to have them published for the freeing of my self
from the crimes which Mr. Wotton then, and now Mr. Gataker by false reports
would lay and fasten on me, page 39. of his Defense.

As for that testification rehearsed, page 38. and subscribed by John Downham,
and William Gouge, it was gotten by Mr. Wotton seven years after, when the
business was almost forgotten: And (as Mr. Downham told me) it was upon this
occasion. Mr. Wotton having written his Book de Reconciliatione, came to him
and told him, that now he had fully purged himself from Socinianisme, (as he
promised) in a Book which Mr. Mason the Bishops Chaplain would license for
the Press, if two or more of them who heard the Controversy, between him and
me, would testify that I did not convince him of heresy before them; and that
they all had so subscribed. And upon this suggestion, which was false, they two
only gave that attestation, which Mr. Stock, and Dr. Baylie, abhorred to do,
repenting of what favor they had showed him at the first.

If this be not so, let Mr. Downham, and Dr. Gouge, speak for themselves: As
for the rest of Mr. Gatakers defense, it is so frivolous, that a short answer
will serve. His maine charge against me is, that I make Mr. Wotton to hold the
same things which have formerly been condemned for heresy in Abailard,
Servetus, and Socinus; for this he accuses me of iniquity, but the iniquity
returns upon his own head.

First, for Peter Abailard, he held that our sins are not punished in Christ,
and that it had been injustice in God to punish one for another, and to impute
the obedience of one to others: And against him Saint Bernard disputes Epist.
190. in these words, It was man who was indebted, and man satisfied. If one
dyed for all, then all dyed in him, that the satisfaction of one may be imputed
to all; for he who offended and forfeited was not one, and he who satisfied,
another; the head and the body are one Christ. And a little after. I call my
self righteous, but by his Righteousness. Which is that? Christ, the end of
the Law for Righteousness to every believer. And again, Man is mercifully
redeemed, or delivered, yet so as that there Justice executed even in the
deliverance. If the heresy of Abailard, thus confuted by Bernard, be not the
same which I proved to be held by Mr. Wotton, let the Reader judge. If Abailard
did deny in plain words the eternal Deity of Christ, and after him Servetus
and Socinus also: so also did Mr. Wotton in effect, though in words he
professed the contrary. For he held that Christ's obedience did serve only to
justify himself, and to bring him into high favor with God, so that God
justifies us by him as by a favorite, only upon condition of our trusting in
him. Now where is the infi^^^^ value of his Deity, if he needed justification
and favor for himself?

Secondly, that Servetus and Socinus were in the same error, and that Mr.
Wotton in the points of justification holds with them, I have proved out of his
own words. It is a poor defense for Mr. Gataker, to excuse him by naming
other heresies of theirs which he professed not; neither did I charge him with
them; And to plead, that because they were condemned for other heresies, more
then this; therefore this was no heresy. I know it to be heresy and
blasphemy, and with the learned before named do proclaim it to be so. Yea Mr.
Wottons own conscience told him that his opinions were condemned for heresy
and blasphemy, and for fear of shame, denied them at sometimes; and most
frequently contradicted himself, saying and unsaying, as Socinus his Master
often did.

I am loath to spend more time, to answer to this last part of Mr. Gatakers
defense, which one short breath is sufficient to blow away. If he be forward to
break out into a further defense of these errors, and of Mr. Wotton, (who in
his first paper speaking of the Doctrine of justification, as it is held and
maintained by all Orthodox Divines of the reformed Church, did not blush to
say, I am enforced to dissent from them all; what spirit enforced him, I cannot
conceive unless it was the spirit of Abailard, who is condemned by Saint
Bernard for saying, Omnes doctores nostri post Apostolos in hoc convenient, etc
All our Doctors or teachers since the Apostles agree in this point; but I am of
another opinion: sic omnes, non sie ego, all other think so, but I do not
think so) I shall by Gods grace be as ready to resist him still. And I doubt
not but the hand of all Orthodox Divines will be against him who takes part with
one against all; yea against the holy Scriptures, and the holy Penmen of them.
My faith, by which I believe that I shall be saved, is a firm belief that
Christ is my head and surety, who fulfilled the whole Law for me, that he might
thereby, redeem, reconcile, and justify me, and that my sins were punnished
in him, and his righteousness, is my righteousness, in which I stand
righteous before God. I know whom I have believed. I fear not what any man can
say against me. If God be with me, I care not who be against me. If he justify
me, who can condemn? I will therefore rest on that promise of the Lord, Esaias
54. 17. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue
that rises up against thee in judgment thou shall condemn. This is the
heritage of the servants of the Lord; and their righteousness is of me, says
the Lord.

FINIS.

