A SPEECH spoken in the Council Chamger of the City of OXFORD, the 16 th of
September, 87. by William Wright, Esquire Deputy Recorder of the said City, being
the Day on which the Right Honorable James Earl of Abingdon took the Oath, and
accepted the Office of Lord High Steward of the City aforesaid.
Mr. MAYOR,
IT was the Custom of the ancient Romans, the greatest and wisest People that
ever lived, to dedicate their Cities and Free-towns to the care and protection
of some God, to whom they fled in all their Calamities, if they were environed
by their enemies, or threatened with any impendent danger, there they sought and
there they expected to find relief.

IN conformity to this great example, we of this place, though we do not pretend
to such a choice, have sought and gained too the protection of one of the
greatest men; a person, who for his temperate zeal, for the established
religion, his firm adherence to the Laws of England, his steady and unshaken
loyalty to the Crown, is deservedly the glory of the present, and will be the
wonder as well as the example of all succeeding Generations.

WE have seen his unwearied pains in serving the Crown, we have tasted his
pious care of us, our Liberties and Franchizes, and have in all respects found
him a zealous asserter of the public Good; and that which makes him more dear
to us now, a Champion for the Rights and Privileges of this Corporation.
Therefore he that shall search the Records and look into the former Triumphs
and Glory of this City, will at no time find a greater occasion of Joy than is
now afforded us; for what can he that consults the honor and reputation of
this City desire greater than to see this noble Lord become our Patron and
Protector, to see him that has always made it his choice now make it his Duty
to assist and defend us?

MY LORD,

In humble Confidence of this, we do repose in your Lordship's Care, a City in
some measure worthy of so noble a Patron, a City composed of wise, discreet,
and understanding Members, that have been in all Times famous for their Loyalty
and Integrity to the Crown, and have therefore, in every King's Reign, since
Henry II. been adorned with fresh Grants of Royal Franchizes, as Monuments, and
noble Rewards of their courageous, and brave Adherence to their Sovereign. And
lastly, a City that has been always honored with the Protection of the Prime
and Flower of the English Nobility, such as amongst many other were Chapter
Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, Tho. Lord Cromwell, Francis Earl of Bedford, Robert,
Earl of Essex, John Lord Williams, the Lord Hunsdon, Sir Tho. Knollys, the Lord
Eleemore, Lord High Chancellor of England, the Lord Knollys, the Earl of Berks,
and the late Duke of Buckingham, and we have now obtained the Protection of
your Lordship also, as the Crown and Glory of them all.

MY LORD, Lord High Steward of this City, requires no other measures, than what
you have always practiced. It has been your Lordship's continual Study to do
us good, and thereby you have performed that Office, without the least View to
your Lordship's Person.

Your Lordship is now become as a Guardian Angel to this Place, and have given
us a Title to bring our Complaints, and to pray your Assistance in all our
Difficulties; and by the Security of so Noble a Patronage, your Lordship has
given us an everlasting Establishment, and made us the Envy of all other
Corporations, and thereby, as an humble Acknowledgement of the great Honor
your Lordship has done us, I do, in behalf of myself, of this House, and of the
whole Body of this City, return your Lordship our humble and hearty Thanks,
making this our most earnest Request to Heaven, that your Lordship may flourish
in all Honor and Greatness, and that there may never be wanting one of your
Lordship's Name and Blood to protect us so long as this Corporation last, which
I hope will be to the World's End.

Price Twopence.


