Divine Hymns, OR A PARAPHRASE UPON The TEDEVM, etc. And the SONG of The Three
Children OR CANTICLE Benedicite omnia opera, etc. AS They are in the Book OF
COMMON PRAYER.

By T. Walker, B.D. Fellow of Sidney-Sussex College.

Omnis creatura non voce, sed opere laudat dominum, quia ex creaturis
consequenter creator intelligitur, and in singulis operibus atque effectibus
Dei magnificentia demonstratur. Hieron. Comment. in Cantic. Benedicite omnia
opera, etc. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by J. Hayes, Printer to the University; for W.
Graves, Bookseller there. 1691.

PREFACE.
IT IS much to be lamented that the most ancient and excellent Art, or rather
gift of Poetry, should be so much despised, and neglected on the one hand, and
abused and corrupted on the other. Indeed the great abuses to which it has been
exposed, and the disservice that men have thereby done to Religion and Virtue,
are the only Apology that can be made, for those affronts and reproaches which
have been cast upon this, otherwise noble and useful way of expressing our
thoughts; and which can only account for the contempt, under which it labors
at present, in the esteem of some men. For certainly when good sense and
virtuous admonitions are decently expressed, in smooth and elegant language,
when the periods of our discourse are closed, with a pleasing sort of Harmony,
and there is a grateful cade^e^ in every sentence; when manly and becoming
sentiments and representations of things are set off with these, and all the
other advantages of Poetic numbers, and invention; they must needs address
themselves more pow'rfully to our minds, and have a greater force upon our
affections, either to excite, or quell our Love and Fear, which are the springs
of most other p^ssions, than when our conceptions are propounded naked, and
destitute of this advantageous clothing. To which purpose the admired Mr Waller
writes excellently to the Earl of Roscommon:

Well-sounding Verses are the Charm we use,
Heroic thoughts, and virtue to infuse;
Things of deep sense we may in Prose unfold,
But they move more, in lofty numbers told;
By the loud Trumpet, which our Courage aids,
We learn, that sound, as well as sense, persuades.
And without question, it was by delivering good precepts of morality, in
numerous and tunefull Verses, and not with the sound of his Hary alone, that
Orpheus wrought such wonders amongst his country men, as to reduce them from a
savage barbarity, to a civil and virtuous conversation; which is understood by
his drawing Trees after him, by the charming Music of his Lyre. It seems to
appear from this instance, as well as from several others, which might be
produced, that the Light of Nature taught this manner of writing, as the most
commodious and easy way of infusing her precepts into our tender minds; which
are more apt to imbibe those rules which are gently instilled into them, by the
soft and insinuating distillations of Poetical numbers, than when they are
dictated with a Magisterial authority, and enjoined with severe threats, in
harsh and ruggid language: For men have naturally a good opinion of themselves,
and are jealous of another ufurping authority over them, and therefore do not
like so well to be forced into their duty, as to be won with mild and alluring
methods. Seeing then this way of writing is apt to have such an influence upon
our minds, as to raise in them passions, and affections correspondent to the
matter it treats of, and the instructions it inclucates, we ought to be the
more concerned to regulate the abuse of it, and endeavor to employ it about
such subjects, which may render it useful and beneficial to our selves, as well
as to the public; instead of being dangerous and pernicious unto them both.
Now there is nothing which is so likely to effect this design, as well as to
retrieve its credit, as a serious application of it to that end and purpose,
for which it was designed by Nature and its Author God himself: for to set
forth his praise, to record his Judgments and his mercies, was the first
matter about which Poetry was employed, as we find from the songs of Moses, the
most ancient Poetic Hymns that it may be ever were; but for certain none that
are now extant can compare with them for Antiquity: for that divine Anthem
which Moses, and the children of Israel Sang, after they had passed the red
Sea, in which the Egyptians were drowned, was made and rehearsed above Five
Hundred years before Homer was born, as appears from computation of the Time in
the exactest Chronologers. Thus did Poetry serve its apprentiship in the
Temple, and was very early dedicated to the offices of religious worship; and
for a long time kept it self free from the vile Arts of flattery, and the viles
offices of being instrumental in exciting men to Lewdess and irreligion. But as
the Devil loves to dance upon holy ground, and to play his magic tricks in
imitation of divine miracles, so he envying the service that was done to
religion, by the help of divine Hymns, attempted to deflowr the chaste virgin,
and to divert his sacred, and unpolluted stream into prophare and muddie
channels. The Learned need not be instructed how he was wont, of old, to dress
his oracular Responses in a Poetical garb; as well to make them look more
august and solemn, as by the Harmony of their Numbers, to charm his credulois
Devoto's, into a belief of their Divinity and prophetic inspiration: And since
those Oracles have been silenced, by the Son of God, as they themselves were
forced to confess, he has been industrious to convey his poison into the minds
of men, through other pipes, in a no less pernicious, tho in a less pompous
manner; by exciting men to the composition of Atheistical Poems, lewd Songs,
and scurrilous Rhimes; Tribe of Levi, etc.
in which inglorious sort of Wit some of our modern Poets have only exceeded
their forefathers; and in which they have vented so much spite and rancour
against an Order of men, whose but siness it is to promote Religion, that any
one with half an Eye may see, that the Authors of those abusive Satyrs, strike
at Religion, whilst they wound the credit and reputation of those men who are
chiefly employed in its service: for the readiest way to bring a contempt upon
that, is to vilify those who immediately attend upon it; and by more than
ordinary obligations, are engaged to stand up in its vindication. Methinks if
no other restraints could bridle the petulancy of such licentious writers, yet
the indecency, and unmannerlyness of being rude and scurrilous, might have some
effect upon men who pretend to good breeding; and that the supposed faults of a
few, should not provoke them to spit such venom against the whole order, lest
others of as good sense as themselves, make use of their own weapon to wound
themselves with, and take the same method of arguing against them, that they do
against others, thus, that, by the same way of reasoning, a man might write
Satyrs against all mankind, who, if they be not very Ciphers of the Creation,
are listed, and to be reck'ned into some profession, rank, or denomination; in
which it will not be difficult to find many irregularities, and offenses: but
if upon this account men of different degrees and stations, should take the
liberty to expose each others party, to be worried with slanders, and
reproaches, what strife, disorder, and confusion must needs follow from such
inhuman, and irrational proceedings? it would be more eligible to spend our
lives in a retired solitude, remote from all company, and to forego, all the
advantages of human society, rather than to be loaded with all the crimes, and
reproaches, which perhaps one in some Hundreds may deserve to be accused off,
and with which he may without injustice be upbraided. I shall close my
reflections upon this point, with the words of one of the best Poets, Mr W.
this age has produced, which afford both matter of instruction, and reproof.

He that proportioned wonders can disclose,
At once his fancy and his Judgment shows,
Chaste moral writing, we may learn from hence,
Neglect of which no Wit can recompense;
The fountain which from Helicon proceeds,
That sacred stream, should never water weeds,
Nor make the crop of thorns and thistles grow
Which Envy or perverted nature sow.
It Is needless to enlarge in the commendation of divine Poetry, especially to
those who have any reverence for Religion; seeing that God has been pleased
that so considerable a part of holy Scripture should be indicted in this way of
writing; or to spend Time in setting forth its deserved praise to those, who
have any respect or esteem for Antiquity. In other cases we have usually a
great veneration for it, and men pore upon the broken letters of an old, and
rusty inscription, as if they had been written with the pen of an Angel; whenas
after much pains taken, perhaps they find, by the poorness of its fancy, and
expression, that it is some rude composure of an illiterate Monk; or a barbarous
relic of the Goths and Vandals: how much more worthy of our study and regard,
are those divine Songs, recorded in the Scripture; which for Antiquity, exceed
the most ancient Monuments extant; and in sublimity of expression, and
profoundness of sense, excel all human compositions, as do all the other
writings of their inspired Authors. And tho the two Hymns I have at present
undertook to paraphrase, be no part of canonical Scripture, yet are they so
full of divine sense, and affectionate devotion, as to be thought worthy to
deserve a place in our public Liturgy. The first beyond question being as
ancient as St Ambrose; and a faithful record of orthodox Divinity, and sincere
Piety. The Church of Rome indeed, without sufficient ground, admits the Song of
the Three children into the Canon of holy Writ, and places it in the Third
Chapter of Daniel; where it was not to be found, either in the Hebrew Text; or
Transtation of the Seventy Interpreters, when St Hierom translated the Bible
into Latin: for he says himself in his Comments upon this song, that he turned
it from the version of Theodotion, which he would not have done, if it had been
to be found in either of the forementioned copies of Hebrew, or Greek; which at
the same time, both shows that it is of good Antiquity, and also disproves the
pretenses of the Roman party, of its being an authentic portion of canonical
Scripture. But zeal and prejudice have so blinded the Understandings of some,
in other respects, Judicious men, that rather then they will forego their
false, but preconceiv'd opinions, and notions, they run into gross mistakes,
and commit intolerable blunders; and are so intent upon gaining their point,
that they skip over all the little niceties of probability and proof. Otherwise
how could it happen, that so learned a Man as Morinus, in his Edition of the
Septuagint at Paris, with Nobilius his Notes, should place this Song in the
Third Chapter of Daniel, as part of the Seventy's translation, without offering
any reason, or making any Apology for his so doing: which he could not but be
convinced was a cheat put upon the world: except he imagined, that the vulgar
Latin, which stands over against it, and is made the only authentic Text, by
the Council of Trent, by the virtue of its usurped authority, could, as
Chemists are said to transmute Metals, change the Greek of Theodotion into that
of the Septuagint: for as has been showed before, this Canticle was not in the
Seventy's Translation in St Hierom's time: for if it had he would certainly
have translated his Latin from thence, it being of more authority than the
Greek of Theodotion. A man may venture to guess at the reason, without fear of
being reputed a conjurer, that induced the Council of Trent, to receive those
books into the Canon of holy Scripture, which we, according to the Judgment of
the ancient council of Laodicea, and the sense of the learnedest Fathers, in
the best ages, account to be but Apocryphal: because they being destitute of
better proofs to maintain some doctrines, in which they dissent from us, and
the Catholic church, fancy they find a colorable authority to support them in
these books; as for Instance, because Ananias, Azarias, and Misael are called
upon in this Canticle, to praise God, therefore from thence they frame an
argument for the Invocation and worship of Saints: but it much betrays the
badness of a cause, to endeavor to establish it by such infirm props, and
invalid reasons, which unlike to Rome of old don't ruin themselves by their own
strength, but by their own weakness: for by a parity of reason, they may as
well bring an argument for the lawfulness of worshipping the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, which are likewise called upon, and excited to praise God in this Song.
I am sensible of having trespassed upon the candid Readers patience, by
prefixing so large a prelude, to so slender a performance: but whilst I was
thinking to say sowewhat to the purpose, one thing brought in another, and I
could not without some reluctance, suppress the conceptions, and resentments
which offered themselves to my meditation. I shall only beg the favor of
adding a few Lines more, concerning my present undertaking. In the first Hymn,
I have endeavored to keep close to the sense of it, and hope I have not
omitted, or misinterpreted any thing material therein. Where the Song seems to
begin afresh, Thou art the King of Glory O Christ -- I have inserted Four lines
to usher it in; Thus whilst on Earth, etc. In the latter I have had respect to
Horace his rule, to which all other rules must be subject, as to the most
Essential, as Rapin well observes, viz. Reddere convenientia cuique, Hor. de
Art Poet.
by endeavoring to observe a Decorum in bringing in every creature praising
God, after that manner, which seems most agreeable to its Nature, wherein if I
have at any time failed, the defect was in my Judgment not in my will. I must
confess the difficulty of expressing the same sense, almost in every Stanza,
with different Phrases, and of concluding each with Three Rhimes, to which I at
first tied my self, has forced me to make use of some words, not altogether so
fit, and proper, as I could have chosen, if I had not been fettered with this
threefold chain; but yet, I hope, I have not distorted the sense of any word so
far, or used any phrase so uncouthly, but that a candid interpretation, and
Poetical liberty may be fairly allowed to plead my excuse.

A PARAPHRASE UPON The Te Deum, etc.
WE, with our Hearts, our tunefull voice will raise,
In grateful Hymns, to great Jehovah's praise;
Nor will we any other Gods confess,
Who all than Him are Infinitely less.
Thee, mighty Father, all the world adore,
Invoke thy Bounty, and thy Help implore;
For Bounty cannot exhaust thy endless store.
When Thou command'st, the Angels swiftly run,
And, in their flight, out-go the posting Sun;
Whose splendid faces tho they brightly shine,
Yet are but darkness, when compared with Thine:
They, in continual songs, resound thy Praise,
And make the Heavens echo to their Lays.
Thee Cherubin, and Seraphin proclaim,
And, in such strains as these, dilate thy Name;
Thrice Holy Lord of Hosts, what tongue can find
Clear language, to express the laboring mind?
When it attempts, in fitting words, to tell,
The hidden wonders, that in Three-One dwell:
Thy Fame, Tho Heaven's so high, and earth's so low,
Does their too narrow limits overflow;
And tho there were a Thousand Worlds in store,
Thy spreading Glory still would ask for more.
The Apostles, by the World so rudely scorned;
Now with the brightest rays of light adorned,
And in sublimest Bliss, exalted High,
With praises fill the Circles of the Sky.
The Prophets too, who taught thy Heavenly Law,
And things to come, in Dreams, and visions saw;
With clearer eyes, view thy resulgent face,
And all thy winding providence trace:
Then, in an ecstasy of Joy, admire
And rend the Heavens in a chanting Quire.
The Martyrs, who a Thousand deaths withstood,
And swam to Heaven, in Seas of Purple Blood,
Now, with Triumphant Garlands crowned, rehearse
Thy matchless praise, in never-dying verse:
The fruitful offspring of their blood they view,
And then again their Joyful songs renew.
Thee, Holy Church throughout the World does own,
The Eternal Father, of the Eternal Son,
He Is truly so, not by Adoption Thine;
But with the same coeval rays does shine:
None others with him in this Glory share;
Thy only, true, and Honorable Heir:
That worship which we Justly pay to Thee,
We offer Him, upon the bended knee,
Worship divine supposes Deity.
One undivided Essence still remains;
Which Father, Son, and Holy Ghost contains:
To Him the Universal Church does sing,
Who over the Waters spread his brooding Wing,
When darkness overlaid the formless Deep,
And all things in Nonentity did sleep:
Before the Sun his Flaming course began;
Or passive Earth was fashioned into Man.
To Him all Hearts, which He inspires, do bow;
Who from the Father, and the Son did flow,
In streams, which from Eternity did run;
Like Floods of light, from the Ocean of the Sun:
Tho He Is the God of comfort, and of Love,
He does the wicked World for sin reprove.
Thus, whilst on Earth, she blows Her dying fire,
'Till she be mingled with the Heavenly Quire,
Does, with fresh Songs, the immortal Theme pursue,
And thus again Her fainting breath renew.
Enlarge the Gates of Praise; shut those of Sin,
And let the Eternal King of Glory in:
O Christ! who never did beginning own;
But sat'st upon the Everlasting Throne,
With God the Father, happy in that state,
Before you did the spacious World create:
And when the noblest creature that was made,
By Sin, and Folly, had himself betrayed;
Thou, with compassion, viewed his coming Fate,
And did the rigor of his Doom rebate:
And when thou did the endearing work begin,
To expiate the heinous guilt of Sin,
Thou thy transcendent Glory did entomb,
And shroud thy Godhead, in the Virgins womb:
Those radiant beams, that did surround thy Head,
Which would have struck frail mortal Nature dead,
Were with a veil of darksom Flesh o'respread.
Nor did thy Love the tedious paths decline,
To which thou did thy patient Soul resign:
A Thousand terrors in thy breast did roll,
And ghastly sights dismayed thy fainting Soul;
Such dreadful Agonies thy body tore;
That clotted blood sprang from each widened pore:
But Oh! what tongue can fully represent
The grief, when nails thy Hands, and Feet had rent?
A sable darkness clad the mourning Sky,
And even Rocks relented at thy Cry;
They burst in sunder at that dolo'rous groan,
Which could not pierce some harder hearts of stone:
Then for a time thy Godhead did retire,
And left Thee in a painful death t'expire.
Then all our Sins on thy strong Shoulders lay;
But thou, like Sampson, bore the Gates away:
And as a Victor, marching from the Plain,
Gover'd with mangled bodies of the slain;
With Laurel crowned, laden with richest spoil,
Does then reward his Valiant Soldiers Toil:
So Thou, when death lay vanquished at thy Feet,
In Triumph, did thy faithful servants meet,
And thus with smiles, and pleasing language greet.
Your sins no longer shall your Joys delay;
I Have opened now to Heaven the inviting way,
To you, who have died e're since the World began,
And unto every true believing man:
Enter the blisful seats of endless Joy,
Where neither pains, nor woe, nor fears annoy.
Thus having all thy weary stages gone,
Thou did ascend up to thy Native Throne:
With Joys surrounded, and with glory crowned,
With which the Father does not more abound.
But when the Day of Universal Doom,
Blessed to the good, but direful unto some,
Shall over the Hills ascend, with trembling ray,
And drive the less affrighting Night away;
Then with the brightest robes of Light arrayed,
(The Sun to Thee will seem but like a shade)
Thou will descend: the Ethereal Trump shall sound,
Louder than Thunder; all the World around;
And from the dark recesses of the grave,
And watery bowels, of the surging wave,
Shall summon all the Dead: the listening dust
Of wicked men, as well as of the Just,
Shall hear, and to their fellow Atoms cry
Rise up, to meet the Judge enthroned on High:
Then those, who never tasted bitter death,
Shall in a moment loose their fleeting breath;
New shapes assume of Glory, or of shame,
And be consigned to Bliss, or endless flame.
Myriads of Blessed spirits on Thee wait,
And, in a Pompous Train, attend thy State:
Shrill Clarions sound, and waving Banners play,
Whilst through the air they cut their easy way.
The rosy Sun, amidst his hasty flight,
Suspends his course, to view the amazing sight;
Affrighted then, shoots forth such fiery beams;
That melted Mountains flow in pitchy streams.
The spangled Heavens, and the Spears above,
Astonished too, in dire confusion move:
From crackling Orbs, the Stars come tumbling down,
And, in the hissing Sea, their Tapers drown.
The Frame of Nature does dissolve, and dye,
New Hev'ns and Earth, the former's place supply.
Then holy Church with flagrant ardour burns,
Her sweetest praise, to zealour prayers she turns:
Assist with thy Almighty aid we pray,
And guide poor mortals in the rightful way:
We of our selves, are helpless, weak, and blind,
Unthankful, proud, inconstant as the wind.
Overcome with passions, and with Lusts oppressed,
With Legions of infernal fiends possessed:
Yet for such wretches thou resigned thy breath,
And underwent a smart, inglorious death:
Those streams of blood, which from thy body ran,
Were shed to save, and rescue sinful Man:
That precious blood, which issued from thy side,
Would have redeemed a Thousand Worlds beside:
No finite tongue its value can repeat,
Whose worth, and price, was infinitely great.
This wondrous Love relieves our pining care:
Supports our minds, and banishes despair;
Inspires with Hope, and drives away our Dread;
And makes us dare to raise our drooping Head;
And beg the greatest Boon that can be given,
The blessed enjoyment of a glorious Heaven:
Where with the Saints, we shall for ever sing,
Sweet Halelujah's, to the Eternal King.
What Joys and raptures fill that blisfull place:
Where we shall view the Godhead face to face.
Heaven! the best object of our longing mind;
Where happy Souls, true, solid pleasures find:
Securest Harbor, whither can we fly;
When storms, and clouds obscure our troubled Sky.
And that we may this calm, safe Port obtain;
Save us from Shipwreck, on the boistrous main;
From Pirates guard us, and from Sirens keep,
Whilst we are Sailing over the dangerous Deep.
Let not the Wolf, the Lion, or the Fox,
Devour thy Church; or harm thy tender Flocks;
But with thy true, and faithful Pastors, feed
The Scattered remnants of thy chosen seed.
Defend them from their proud insulting foes,
Whose rage still more, and more embittered grows:
Their sinking minds, and feeble bodies bear
Above the reach of worldly hope; or fear:
And if thy wisdom thinks it just and mere,
Let all their foes lie prostrate at their feet.
(We Are daily mindful of thy constant care,
And daily offer up our thankful player:
In sacred Hymns, w' extol thy glorious Name,
And in Thy Temple celebrate thy Fame.
And as thy Church for ever shall endure;
Under thy watchful providence secure;
Nor blasting envy; nor malicious rage,
With which so often; unarmed, she does engage,
Shall ever her foundation overturn;
Though men, and Devils too, against it spurn:
So, whilst she sojourns here, she will always bring
An humble Tribute to her Heavenly King.
Nor will she cease to praise, and worship Thee,
When Time lies, buried in Eternity.
Conscious of guilt, and of our frailty too,
How prone we are our failings to renew,
We beg thy aid, and thy assisting grace,
To keep our feet from stumbling in our Race.
And seeing Time so swiftly flies away,
And even to its self becomes a prey,
It Is Folly to neglect the present Day.
Teach us our Instant moments to improve,
In all the duties, both of fear, and Love;
For life's uncertain, and the Years to come,
May not be sprung from Times unfathomed womb,
E're we be rotting in a loathsome Tomb.
Our faults are many, and our sins are great;
Therefore our calls for mercy we repeat:
Have mercy, Lord! for mercy still we cry;
Let not thy Love our humble suit deny;
For who could stand before thy Judgment seat,
If Mercy did not with thy Justice meet
We should not boldly thus thy favor crave;
But that we know no other Gods can save:
We dare not to the best of Saints resign,
That fear, and trust, which are entirely Thine:
And as we place our confidence in Thee,
So from confusion ever keep us free,
From Worldly shame, and Satan's Tyranny.
NOTES.
PAGE the 2. lin. 1. I have used resound in a transitive sense, upon the
authority of Virgil:

Formosam resonare doces Amaryllida sylvas. Eclog. 1. lin. 5. Page the 8. lin.
5, 6.

Then those who never tasted bitter death,
Shall in a moment loose their sleeting breath.
Here I allude to the Mystery St Paul speaks off, in the 15. Chap. of the 1.
Epist. Cor. 51. v. where he says we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed; which I conceive is not so to be understood, as that those who shall
be found alive at the day of Judgment, shall wholly escape the sentence
denounced against Sin, viz. Death, Romans 5.12.
which is to pass upon all, seeing that all have sinned: but that they shall
all dye suddenly, either through fear; or some other preternatural cause, and
under go a separation of their souls from their bodies; but they being quickly
to be reunited again, and their bodies neither laid in the grave, or turned to
dust, the persons so dying may be said not to sleep, tho they were really dead,
because they were not laid in the grave; for to sleep with their Fathers, or to
be buried with their Fathers, are synonymous terms in holy Scripture. So that
this seems to be the Apostle's meaning: we shall not all dye, so us to be
buried in our graves, there to lie 'till we be rotten, but some immediately, or
soon after the dissolution of their soul and body. will have them reunited
again, and so appear in Judgment: for it is appointed unto all men once to
dye, Heb. 9.27.
and after that the Judgment* But then wherein consists the Mystery mentioned
by the Apostle? herein, as I suppose, that from the instance of those who shall
be found alive at the day of Judgment, the Corinthians should not take any
occasion, either to disbelieve, or make any objection against the resurrection
of the body: for St Paul having before discoursed only concerning the
resurrection of those bodies, which were turned into dust, he does in the verse
before quoted, as well farther instruct the Corinthians in this matter, as
preoccupy an objection which they might make against his preceding doctrine,
which we may suppose to be framed after this manner: You have, in your
foregoing discourse, treated concerning the body's being raised from dust, and
have illustrated your doctrine from seed sown in the ground, V. 36.
which is not quickened except it dye. i.e. unless it be buried and dissolved in
the Earth: and after the same manner, V. 42.
you say, is the resurrection of the dead, it is sown in Corruption, it is
raised in incorruption; and if so, them what will become of those who shall be
found alive, at the day of Judgment, whose bodies will not lie in the grave to
be corrupted, and turned to dust, Shall not they therefore rise again? Yes they
shall; and this is a Mystery I tell you, tho they shall not sleep i. e. be
lodged in the grave 'till they be turned to dust, as those have been who died
before them; yet they shall both dye, and be raised up again, and their
corruptible bodies shall be changed into incorruptible. From which
Interpretation of the Text, P. 579.
Oecumenius, upon the place, does not disagree, (...), etc. As to what is said,
we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, it ought to be understood
in this sense, that we shall not sleep so long a sleep, that we shall either
lie in the grave, or be turned to corruption; but those who shall be found
shall undergo a short death, who cannot enjoy any long sleep, by reason of the
sudden resurrection that will follow, but all shall be changed, that is, all
shall put on incorruption.

A PARAPHRASE Upon the Canticle Benedicite omnia opera, etc.
I.
O Earth arise! ye Heavens downward bend,
And to your great Creators praise attend:
The inspiring Theme will flowing Numbers lend.
II.
Let all the Works which Gods commanding word,
From Nothing, into Being brought, afford
Immortal praises to the Eternal Lord.
III.
Ye Angels that in wondrous strength excel,
Praise the most High, because you never fell,
And on that copious Theme for ever dwell.
IV.
Ye Spheres whose high and vast expanded Face,
Cannot limit Him, who knows no Time nor Place;
Extend Gods praise beyond your bounded Space.
V.
You who so nimbly climb, and swiftly fly,
And in perpetual rolls dance round the Sky;
Your motions Tune to grateful Harmony.
VI.
Ye Waters which the Almighty does prepare,
Above the spacious Regions of the Air,
In murmuring sounds His dreadful Name declare.
VII.
Ye Natu'ral Powers, whose dark mysterious Laws,
Confound the searchers into every Cause,
'Advance His Power whence Nature virtue draws.
VIII.
Bright Sun, when thou arifest from thy bed,
And on the World, thy powerful beams do shed,
God's praise, with Heat, and Light, together spread.
IX.
Thou and the Moon, which guide the Day and Night,
Send back your Rays up to the source of Light,
And raise God's Glory bove your dazzling Height.
X.
Ye Stars, whose faint and languid beams bestow
A weaker Influence, on Things below,
Unite your force, and God's Just Praises show.
XI.
Let fruitful showers, which cool the gaping Ground,
And make the Earth with Corn and Wine abound,
God's praises over the Hills and Vales resound.
XII.
Ye Dews which on the Herbs fresh verdure bring,
Fly back in vapors to your Heavenly spring,
And carry Praises on your balmy wing.
XIII.
Ye boistrous Winds, which rend the trembling Sky,
Where ever your never-flagging Wings shall fly,
Disperse your Sov'reigns Praises far and nigh.
XIV.
Let breezing Gales, which Fan the buxom Air,
And over the Seas the floating Castles bear,
Perfume their gentle breath with thankful Prayer.
XV.
Enlivening Heat, and All-consuming Fire,
From human use, to sacred Rites retire,
And unto Heaven in flaming Praise aspire.
XVI.
Ye different Seasons of the changing year,
Summer and Winter, let your Praise appear,
Through every cloudy Day, in every clear.
XVII.
Let blooming Spring, and fruitful Autumn try,
In richest praise, each other to outvie,
And never cease 'till aged Time shall die.
XVIII.
Let all the Meteors hauging in the Air,
The honey Dews, and Frosts with silver Hair,
Pure, virgin Praises unto God prepare.
XIX.
Let lambent Flames, which round our Temples play*
And wandering Fires, which lead us from our way,
God's praise adorn in every shining Ray.
XX.
Ye gaudy colors of the Showrie Bow,
Which from reflection, and refraction flow,
Let streaming Praise surround your painted Brow.
XXI.
Ye Frost and Cold, whose rigorous force delays
The pleasing Comforts of the warmer Days,
Bend all your rigor to the Almighty's Praise.
XXII.
Let Snow, which clothes the naked Earth in white,
And Ice, which stops the liquid water's flight,
Dissolve in Praises to the God of might.
XXIII.
Wake sluggish Nights, sing Days with cheerful joy;
Your precious Hours to Gods great praise employ,
'Till He shall your alternate Course destroy.
XXIV.
Let Light, the offspring of the glorious Sun,
Whose flight's so swift it is finished when begun,
As swiftly toward God in Praises run.
XXV.
Let Darkness too, which fills the World with Dread,
And over the Earth does quiet silence spread,
In awful Praises hide its gloomy Head.
XXVI.
Ye Lightnings which the affrighted world amaze,
And dart quick death from your sharp-pointed rays,
In vocal Flashes speak the Thund'rer's praise.
XXVII.
Ye Clouds, which from the Earth in vapors rise,
And intercept the Influence of the Skies,
Let praises trickle from your weeping eyes.
XXVIII.
Let Mother Earth which Herbs and Fruits does bent,
And with a Thousand Joys relieves our care,
A solemn, grateful Feast to God prepare.
XXIX.
Ye lofty Mountains of the greatest Fame,
Over your aspiring Heads exalt his Name,
Then Eccho't to the Valleys down again.
XXX.
Ye little Hills, with fruitful vineyards Crowned;
For healing Plants, and flowing springs renowned,
Let Praises from your shaggie Tops rebound.
XXXI.
Ye verdant Pastures, and ye flowery Plains,
Which glad the careful hearts of laboring Swains,
Praise the Almighty in your Runal strains.
XXXII.
Let Cedars, Cypress, and the ^ery Pine
The budding Rose, the Olive and the Vine,
Flourish in Praises to the King Divine.
XXXIII.
Ye springs, that do the Tops of Mountains creep,
In hollow caverns, from the briny Deep,
Soft, lulling Notes to God's great Glory weep.
XXXIV.
Some for unusual Ebbs, and Flows renowned,
Others that borrow virtue from the Ground,
Let all your Glory to the Lord redound.
XXXV.
Ye curling Seas, that beat the crooked Shore,
With foaming Mouths, your thanks to Him restore,
Who curbs your waves, and calms you when you roar.
XXXVI.
Ye grateful Floods, which travel to the Main,
And pay your Homage, in a watery Train,
Return with humble Praises back again.
XXXVII.
Ye Whales, and Tenants of the watery Coasts,
Tho dumb and silent, praise the Lord of Hosts,
In signs, more grateful then the loudest Boasts.
XXXVIII.
Ye winged People of the azure Sky,
Where e're you can your well-fledg'd Pinions try,
In Artless Notes, declare that God is High.
XXXIX.
Ye savage Beasts, which over the Deserts stray,
When in your Paws, you have seized your panting Prey,
With Howls, and horrid Yells, your Thanks repay.
XL.
Ye creeping Insects, that with tardie pace,
Advance your Snakie foulds, from place to place,
In all your winding turns, God's Glory trace.
XLI.
Ye fleecy Flocks, upon a Thousand Hills,
Whose hungry mouths the great Creater fills,
Bleat praise to Him, from whom your Food distills.
XLII.
Your Shepherd never does his Temples steep,
In clammy Dews, of soft, refreshing fleep;
But with a watchful eye, your Folds does keep.
XLIII.
Let other Beasts, that in fat pastures feed,
The Lowing Ox, the Gow, land neighing Steed,
Proclaim His Bounty, who supplies their Need.
XLIV
Ye sons of Men, whom reason ought to sway,
Tho Lords of all below, no pride betray
But Homage to the Worlds sole Monarch pay.
XLV.
You, who are endu'd with an Immortal mind,
Whom Angels leave not very far behind,
In praises be as constant, and refined.
XLVI.
Let Israel, God's peculiar people, tread
His Courts with praise, who them from Egypt led,
And in the Wilderness, with Manna fed.
XLVII.
Remember how you went over ruddie sand;
Whilst wondering waves, like walls of glass, did stand,
'Till you were safely guarded to the Land.
XLVIII.
Then did the willing streams together meet,
And with a humid kiss each other great,
And wash the drowned Egyptians floating feet.
XLIX.
Let holy Priests with frag^^^^ Incense come,
And load God's Altars with the choicest Gum,
Then with sweet praise their sacrifice perfume.
L.
Ye Levites, your devoted Hearts inflame
With praises, due to Gods tremendous Name,
And in Melodious Quires his Deeds proclaim.
LI.
Ye servants of the Lord, whose faithful eye,
Can Heavenly Things, thr^ Earthy Types def^^y,
Contemn this World, in Praise ascend on High.
LII.
Ye Souls, who from the Earth have took your flight*
Released from clay, and clothed in Robes of White,
Let praises be your Joy, and chief delight.
LIII.
Ye holy Men, who tread the unbeaten way,
Which leads to Regions of Eternal Day,
Praise God because you do not go astray.
LIVE.
Ye humble Hearts, whose only pride and Skill*
Is to pursue what is good, and fly from Ill,
To praise the Lord is to observe his Will.
LV.
O Shadruch, Meshach, and Abednego,
Whom cruel Men into the Flames did throw,
Flames less revengefull than your raging Foe;
LVI.
You, who by Miracle, escaped that Fire,
Mount up to Heaven, in Flames of hot desire,
And blessing live, and praising God expire.
NOTE.
PAGE 15. Stanza ^. It may be asked why the Angels are called upon and exerted
to praise God, seei^ng it as their constant employment in Heaven to sing
Hallelujahs unto him. To which it may be answered, that their being excited to
praise God, is as much by way of congratulation as exhortation, according to
that saying of Ovid,

Qui monet ut facias, quod jam facis, ipse monendo
Lafudat, and hortatu comprobat acta suo.
He that advises; what thou do, to do,
At once exhorts Thee, and commends thee too.
FINIS.

