HERO AND LEANDER, IN Burlesque.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXIX.

HERO AND LEANDER. IN BURLESQUE.
THe Towns of Sestus and Abidus stood
As near to one another as they could;
For spightfull Hellespont still 'tween them ran,
Of whose outragiousness you will hear anon:
Yet that they still communicated, note,
By floating Bridge now called a Ferry-boat,
Which if this year lay on Abidus's side,
The next to Sestian Dock was to be tied:
For Senates sage of both Towns could agree
By turns to be the Masters of the Sea:
But always when Abidus had the Boat,
The State, and it had but the same Pylot;
A shrewd old Swabber with a neck a tight,
And evermore inclined to the right;
His fellow Burgers sage remark, and cause
Why he was chosen fisher of the Laws:
Besides the situation of his ears
They saw was such, no trayt'rous whisperers
Could easily approach them, one was still
Pricked up to heaven to receive her will,
The Other did earthward lop, good man, with pain
To hear the needy, and oppressed complain.
But when you know his Education, you will
Allow the man in all points fit to rule.
He was brought up to danger, and to rapin,
Dabled ith'sea, and with a line, and a pin,
Which the young Urchin cunningly would crook,
With fly, or worm disguise it then, and rook
The Ocean of her fish; for e're a Swabber
He was a Sprat-catcher, or good Eele-bobber.
Alcides when a whuleing piss-abed
By Poets (if you will trust 'em) has been sed
Over a thumping Adder to prevail;
This little Rogue could hold an Eele by th'tail:
And with his strength his art increased, was able
Soon well to steer a Skiff, and grasp a Cable,
Could tack about, shift sails, wheedle the wind,
And make it come before him, or behind:
Knew where the rocks did ly, and sneaking shelves,
And places where bold men might drown themselves;
Kenn'd Storms far off, knew whether they had more
A mind to come to Sea, or stay a shore:
But to be short, and plain, he knew as well
The Sea, as Beggar does his Dish, could tell
What the least Cockle did in's shell, and guess
How many arms length where 'twas bottomless;
Such was the man for sway, you will think him now
Worthy as Roman newly taken from Plow:
Yet know his praises I have not begun,
Fine Gentleman Leander was his Son,
With whose most generous inclination he
To's cost (few Fathers do so) did agree,
And bound him Prentice to a worthy Barber,
The best, not such another in the harbor,
Unless our poor Leander had lived to it
Most probable opinion to confute.
He was so handy, nimble, tight, so neat
In's person, and his implements complete:
His Towels, like his skin, were white, and fine,
Naught but his face his basin could outshine;
So picked, so washed his Combs of Ivory,
Unless his teeth their whiteness naught came nigh,
With others that were made of horn, or box,
He often would compare his golden locks;
With whom (if none had too much beard) he would play,
And innocently sport out half the day;
But when you did sit down, with such a grace
Handled your throat, your ears, your nose, your face,
Tickled where others pain; Maids who did eye him
Wished themselves Satyrs to be trimmed by him:
Could dive into the channels of your brain,
And with a feat dexterity make plain
The passage, though before 'twas nere so rough,
Yet with less pain to you, then taking snuff;
For he wore nails as long as bill of Bittern,
For that to scrape teeth, and to play on Cittern;
Nay he had all good qualities, could tie
A Cuff-String, or Crevat so jantyly:
With all had conscience, and for copper spanker
Would make Seafaring beard look like an anchor.
For's mettle, and agility, with which
Writers are bound their Heroes to enrich;
I must confess I cannot say much, but know
For certain he could crindge, and bow full low.
For throwing of the Bar he never cared,
Cudgels, nor wrestling, that I ever heard,
Or any brutish sports, which make men wrangle;
On Holy Days he went alone to angle;
Loved swimming well, and swam like any Duck;
But where most skill there ever is least luck:
And Arts, like women after a long wooing,
Often shame our industry, and prove undoing.
Now towe me Muse over to the other side,
Where most egregious Hero did abide;
You sacred Dame I mean who once did steer
The prosperous praise of great Magnanos dear;
If you have any time, help me ashore
With Heroes commendation, and though poor
I am, in socket trimmed with bays I swear,
I Will tall rush candle to thy glory rear;
Which likewise may as Pharo serve to light
Your groaping Orators, when it is night,
Throughout Parnassus; come it is as folks say,
Who'd have his business done, must bribe, not pray.
What do you pause at now? I know as Muse
To scorn good wages was your simple use;
With me hang not an arse: Hero then was
A bonny buxom bounsing Sestian Lass,
Of all the Grecian Girls the very Flower,
Lived at the Towns end at the sign of Tower,
With her own Mother a large hearted woman,
Whose house to merry Greeks was always common;
A comely Widow, and had long been so,
For th'oldest in the town did never know
The Father of fine Hero, whence disputes
That some Sea-god disguised in fishing boots
Did catch her on the shore, and there did strand her,
And so contrived a Mistress for Leander.
But whether so, or no, or how it was,
She grew too great for Mortal to embrace,
And haughtily did stave off many proffers,
Resolved to keep the Keys of her own Coffers,
And scorned to be with any a yoke fellow,
Or to admit competitor of pillow:
But kept the Empire of her bed to cough,
Snore, belch, break wind, and no one should cry soh:
And hows'ere Love, and Lover did contrive it,
The cunning willful Widow did not wive it,
Unless she practiced secret Matrimony,
For license but for wine she had not any.
But what of that? I warrant she was wise
Enough to keep her self from Church Excise.
Was Hero not in spite of all the Clerg'in
Sestus, and what they all could do, a Virgin?
And to her Mother was but young, yet could
Some say as much as she, nay much more did
Within-doors, and long of her complaisance
It was, her mothers liquor had good utterance.
For she was still in motion, now i'th'Garret,
And strait down in the Cellar drawing Clarret;
Hasty as lightning she would shoot the stairs,
If no one did oppose her unawares;
Would bolt into the room like startled Cunny,
But still dropped at the door due Ceremony;
Then mumpt out, Gentlemen what do you lack --
When strait she is answered with a bob, or smack:
But some one rising, in her ear does tell her,
She answers him aloud, the best i'th'Cellar:
He follows down, and broaches where he will,
But with a gentle caution not to spill.
She made, and unmade beds most nimblely,
Not like her Dammes, hers was a slim-belly:
And now and then, with her sweet company
Could satisfy gay guest for lodging high;
His rageing bowels supper should not miss,
For she could stay a stomach with a kiss:
At coming in and out could complement
The guests, and give 'um marvelous content.
For truly she well-spoken damsel was,
Like favorite Advocate brought all to pass,
And not as foolish Maids with nature nice,
But boldly used her own good qualities
Not only for her self, but other foke,
Could break mad ranting Girls to th'marriage yoke.
To bashful, or dumb Lovers she was common,
And public mouth, or as we say, Spokes-woman:
In other terms a Maidenhead-ensurer,
A Wife, or as it were a Wife-procurer:
For in old Grecian Writ it manifest is,
Hero had Orders, and was Venus Priestess.
At once she drew, and answered Lovers pleas,
'Tween them she made, and carried messages,
Hagler of chere entier, and did supply,
For modest gain, humane necessity;
But needy folks for nothing would relieve*
And still of her own store was free to give.
She was, I vow and swear, as good a creature
As ever wore bright Symptom of good nature,
Loves Cobweb, or his net, or golden fleece,
As Poets say, who can choose Mistresses,
And they their meanest Hero will not bed,
With any thing whose Hair is not Fox-red.
Her Brows soft Fur was of a paler Dye,
Conformable to that which prettily
Peeped on her upper Lip, and cowardly
Made show of Heroine Virility.
Day in her large Cow-Eyes was broad awake,
No heavy sleepy Morn there seemed to break.
Sir Phoebus given, as you know, to flatter,
With his own Luster did her Face bespatter:
For then Freckles of night on Cheeks not strewn
To make the White remaining be allowed:
Her Lips -- but stay, was not Pigmalion won
With a senseless Description of his own?
Let it suffice then all who are concerned,
That in her Face 'twas openly discerned
How near she was to Venus in her place;
And by her Stature seen her Heavenly Race:
For she not only straight, but tall as Mast:
Beauty's whole World in all perfection vast.
Yearly at Sestus Town for Venus sake,
Mother of Wakes, was kept a jolly Wake:
But Greeks say 'twas a customary Howling
For her Adonis, or Annual Condoling
Their Goddesses and Countries active Drudge,
Who keenly carried on their mortal Grudge
Against a certain Outlaw, who in the Woods
Reigned Lord, and King, and lived on true men's Goods:
That reaped and mowed where he did never plow,
But where he plowed, none e're could reap or mow:
Who Plow-mans Joy did trample under foot,
And Tyrant-like, let nothing near him sprout.
But those small faults, such as the Greeks could pardon,
And composition Carrots out of Garden
Had given him yearly, would the Churl have spared
But their meat, drink, and cloth in the Vineyard:
Yet he would not be weaned; but at their charges
Basely alone went on carowsing Verjuice,
And was before the pressing of the Liquor,
Of jolly Grecian Bowls the shrewdest Nicker:
Whence all the thirsty Greeks grew mad, and swore
Deeply, they would drink the rest out in his Gore;
And straight the bold Associates pitched upon
A Chief to lead them, or to bid 'em on;
Who though he had no hair on Chin, or Breast*
Had Valor nevertheless most manifest:
And Mars himself it is thought has often outdone;
For it is certain Venus loved none
Like him of all her Lusty Boys, and Cronies
Good Bit of flesh, called as I said, Adonis;
Had gift of Vigilance to boot, no Snorter:
Must rise betimes that could beat up his Quarter;
For when Night 'gan to peel, and Day was dawning,
Up he would get, and leave his Goddess yawning,
Who waking, turned to the Wall, and thought t'ave had 'im,
As other Utensils, where she had laid him;
But found the eager Huntsman still would leap
The Fence, not taking notice of the Gap:
Whence straight in rage she called him curtailed Fellow,
And then to ease her heart, she cuff'd her Pillow.
So when the Hare is mist where she was squatting,
Next Bush the mump'd Pursuers fall a beating.
But when sh'ad paused (quoth she) it is Phoebe is chief
Cause, and Contriver always of my Mischief:
That long-legg'd Ramp, that daggle-tail'd she-Ranger,
To well disposed Folks still Dog in Manger:
She leads the able Youth astray, bewitches
Them with that early Itch of leaping Ditches;
And in their warm Bed will not let them tarry,
Where if they love toil they might be aweary,
And to the prickly Thickets need not roam;
Till out of breath might beat the Bush at home.
But let 'um go like Fops, for know stale Maid,
(With that she snear'd) that we have men more staid,
And you but spoil our sport to make it better,
And when my Foe, in truth art but my Setter.
So fumbling Bards do often depose a Rhyme,
But to admit one that will better chime.
Mean while the Goddess held all these discourses,
Adonis was a tooting for his forces:
For note though Hunting's said to be in fashion,
Much like to grinning Honors Recreation;
In this they disagree, for in the War
O'th Woods, the Captain is the Trumpeter,
And makes the first proof of his scorning Death,
By being free, and lavish of his Breath.
So did our Leader, who when he had drawn
His Band of Green-coats out upon the Lawn,
By Proverbs sage advise to escape a trip,
Resolved with them to look ere he did leap;
Which to wise Warriors custom is according,
Who ere they fall to Blows, do fall a Wording;
By which means those that are in Reason stout,
The Enemy before they see him, rout.
And first as they in Story often did find,
Sly Ancients did, they made the most of the wind:
Then sent abroad their Scouts, which man still reckons
In time of War or Peace, his faithful Seconds.
For when the Shepherd has a mind to sleep,
They are the Guard, and Hectors of the Sheep;
And when it is his pleasure to go murder,
In that Heroic Virtue none go further;
So that if I may judge, they have much wrong,
To be left out of Registering Song.
But he which makes, not he who ends the quarrel,
Is known to run away still with the Laurel.
But to leave off the wont Poetic Pother,
Small sense with heaps of words t'orelay and smother.
The Chase, know then in few words, was begun,
And nimble Rogues had got the start of the Sun,
And to the Forest merrily did trudge
With Pole on shoulder to leap Ditch, or Hedge,
Which Pole (some say) had iron Peg at end on it,
In case that Boar should chance to prove Defendant.
By Thorn, or Holly Turn-pikes of the Wood
The doubty Yongsters scorned to be withstood;
For through the surly Thickets each did rush,
And manfully then fall upon his Bush:
So that, alas, throughout the spacious Forest,
The smallest of her Tenants could have no rest.
The Hare (...) lurking Cunny, and the Squirril,
Must all have then sat still at their own peril.
For lazy (...) himself began to reckon
That he (...) move if he would save his Bacon;
And as all Heroes who are truly bred,
Scorned to be caught by sneaking Death abed;
So took his heels; yet as bold Parthian,
His teasing Foes still wounding as he ran:
But finding odds against him, not afraid,
Yet danger prudently with honor weighed;
And since not able to resist their force,
Bravely resolved to beat 'um in a course:
Or rather (as some guess) he had the cunning
Of the sly Roman who made a show of running,
His Foes not to avoid, but separate;
That singly with 'em he might try his fate.
For when the Sentinel Adonis popt
Out of his Hawthorn ambush, strait he stopped;
And Youth no sooner showed his meaning cruel,
But Boar tossing his Snout, received the Duel.
But Fate not half so meek as now adays,
Contented to take up with bloodless frays,
Sends folks afield to measure Swords, and Valor,
And after trial neither found the taller;
But both lest Fame should lie, do live to tell
The world that they were both invincible:
Nor then was Honor bound by Law of Quarter,
To chouse her self of many a brave Martyr.
The Boar, as wise folks say, harm watch, harm catch,
In's own defense, his Huntsman did dispatch:
Now tender Virgins who are always ready
To show you have bowels, hold yet till I bed ye:
Hold, hold, I say, a while, if ye are able,
For Subject to ensue more lamentable.
The savage Conqueror not satisfied,
Till's stomach as his vengeance he had cly'd,
And Tartar-like not only to overthrow
Contented, but must dine upon his Foe,
Alas! first of that chary Morsel carved
Sacred to Venus, while she for it starved,
And many others since, by the Confession
Of Sestian Virgins yearly Lamentation,
In which poor Hero bore the greatest part,
And wronging none did take it most to heart;
And yet her Beauty truckled not to grief,
For both she was the Representative
Of Widow Venus, and at once did make
Stout hearts with Love and Pity both to ache;
But most the Youngsters of Abidus, who
Came over the water but to see the show;
The show! fie, let us employ words more in fashion;
The holy March, or Trapesing, or Procession:
Much such as now adays when to keep Noses
From sense of Death, are worn Rosemary Posies.
But how now fisking Muse, again a straying?
Let Us back to Hero, who as I was saying
Did lead the dumpish Rout, which 'twas suspicious
Whether to her, or to the day officious;
For some it is sure scorning the Gods to flatter,
But cause she went before to Church, went a'ter.
So if the Gods good Houses have resort,
Our mortal Goddesses they may thank for it.
But she minding her grief, or pride to cheer
Their drooping hearts, refused but with a Lear,
And but when each the other 'gan to justle,
And only to come near her made a bustle,
Turned to 'um, yet with hanging Lip, and Frown,
TO assure 'um she would not be blown upon.
So have I -- but comparisons are odious,
Yet tell not me with Rhimes So is commodious;
So then as Hero I have seen the teasty
Proud paramour of the Heroic Masty,
Trot on in have; and would not deign to mind
Humble Addresses made to her behind;
Unless, as with her Betters it is the fashion,
To snub, to snarl at, or snap up a passion.
So all Loves mystery is jogging on,
And savage Mistresses must be run down.
Leander knew't, and therefore did not falter
In's course, but chased fair Murdress to the Altar,
Where a la Negligence Dame Venus loll'd,
And Supplicants with smerking looks cajoled.
But if some meddling Gossip should ask why,
As every other watchful Deity,
She in her Temple did not stand upright:
In the other posture sure she did delight,
Above them all; nor was her comely mold
Of Marblefram'd, obdurate still, and cold,
But willing Wax, whose nature did express
The complaisant, and gentle Goddesses.
Nor did she, as all other heavenly fo'ke,
Put Mortals to the charge of Veil, or Frock,
Mortals whose blind Zeal so the Gods blaspheme,
Imputing to their spotless Worships shame:
She graciously showed all, so did provoke
To Adoration the most frozen stock.
The little Ape her Son with Bow unbent
(As shock guarding the Toes of Monument)
Lay at her feet, but not to hold'um, for
She like her self Compulsion did abhor;
As on the Chapel walls it often appeared,
Which Daw ber without Pencil had besmeared
With artful scratches, and in smutty scores
Of Charcole smutty doings, or Amors
Of Gods laid open, but in manner ampler,
Then in Madam Arachnes bawdy Sampler.
Nay sure they were the Types, Hints, or Instructions
To Aretines pathetical Productions,
The modest Aretine; for none of those
Was he, whose Art on Nature (...) impose:
Pragmatick saucy slaves who take upon (...)
To teach their Dame, they might as well their Grannum;
And with Mechanic Drapery do hide
But their own botches, and frank Natures pride,
At least unreas'nably from neck do stretch
White Hankerchief to cover whiter Breech,
And for the naked Nymphs of their own Locks
Contrive 'um Aprons, Petticoats, and Smocks:
But Apron sure not one of them must lack,
Though the poor Slut has never a Rag to'r back,
For they to any thing will run of the score,
Rather than Nymph should Facing want before.
They Will pluck Loves Wings, and tear his Clout from's eyes,
Take Satyrs Beard, Fawns Scut, so mak't appear
Like Russians Cap, or Frizlanders Montier;
Take Monkeys tickling Paw, or Ear of Dazy,
While four-leg'd Favorite in Lap is lazy;
Take shading Branches from the Trees high top:
But Aretine not so
He complaisant to Nature, and to Female,
Allows her no Covering, but the Male:
And precious things of man does only hide
In Cabinet which Nature did provide.
But Virgin who perhaps may long to know
What Gods of the Temple-walls did seem to do,
Faith I do beg thy pardon, for it is certain
I Have been too long in drawing of the Curtain:
Yet I might hope that patience Feminine
Would stay the praising of great Aretine.
First Jove the surly Master of the Fam'ly
Had left off's Thunder, and there looked so tamely,
And turned away his feathered Steed, for hark ye,
His Eagle was not hatched of Tuscan Turkey:
Therefore he in her stead did then bestride
A plump young Goldy-lock called Ganimed;
Which though performed flyly under cloak,
Made of the thickest of Aetherial smoke,
He there was found out by his restless Juno,
(The Jealous have but little sleep, as you know)
For rage of the sight her blew-thin-lip she bit;
And tore her Smock from Navel down to'r feet;
So showed her own, and Husbands discontent,
Which made him leave her, and his high-built Palace,
To seek him to his heavenly Gusto a Lass.
And if he had not, he had been to blame,
To lie still with his Sister was a shame.
To the whoring Earth incognito he goes,
But not as Gallants now with Cloak over Nose;
The habit of a Town-bull there he took,
Not to bear yoke, but ramping Nymph over brook;
And the all-knowing four-legg'd Thunderer
To get upon her, first got under her.
So Bow must bend (as Cupid makes it out)
Ere the aimed Arrow does come near the Clout:
And all but Whore, and Widow Amazon
By sneaking, and submission still are won.
In the next place the immortal Bullock did
Gore his dear Heifer Io till she bled.
Then was he seen in shining Coat of Mail
Of Ginneys, Danaes Fortress to assail;
Mere Whore who till she was greased in the Fist,
Was always devilish straight about the Twist.
Then Laeda he appeared to trapan;
Who taking him but for a Goose or Swan,
Lay still like Stock;
Next with Asteria he did seem to struggle,
And you may swear he made not the spread Eagle.
But yet in all this sport his Royal Dame
Was but an envious looker on of the Game.
With her he did not deal a single Bout;
For Wrangler, or for Wife she was shut out.
The heavenly Ruffian next as stout's he is,
By naked Venus was brought on his knees:
Hers, and her Husbands Prisoner, for a Grate
He made for warlike Bum to look out at.
O subtilty of thinking Cuckolds Brains,
Who still blow up themselves with their own trains!
Vulcan, thou only did a fault proclaim,
Of which thou only were to bear the shame:
In the next place the Queen of Sluts alone is
With dainty fine Hober-de-hoy Adonis,
Who for his part much rather would have bin
A setting Springes, laying Snare, or Gin,
Than lie a Prisoner in a Female Trap,
Or irksom Pitfal of a Woman's Lap.
Yet from her for his heart he could not flirt,
Sh'ad better hold than by the tail of Shirt.
Apollo then in Shepherds Calves-skin suit
(As Francion) taught a Wench to play of the Lute.
Neptune like Sea-Calf next upon a Bed
Of Sedges got Aeolian Maidenhead.
Then nimming Mercury with his sly Art,
Went the next way to steal a Maidens heart,
With Picklock opening Virgin Chest,
Where still the more is robbed, the less is mist.
His Wench did seem to sleep, but though Dogsleep,
Such was his Art, she naught from him could keep.
Then Saturn whom time almost made a Guelding,
To get a manly Fool leaped kicking Heiding.
The Wood-Gods next appeared in Dells and Ditches,
A clapping of some Ramping Wenches Breeches.
And here and there a two legged Goat a rutting,
With little Sluts that thither came a nutting.
And while in private shades the Nymphs lay snug,
Kind Satyrs covered them with living Rug.
And lest they for their scratching Dame should whoop,
They with their Tongues and Beard their mouths did stop.
For honor then of white-breech'd Patroness,
The Dawber thought that he could do no less
Than judgment draw, judgment not to afright
(Like Angelo's) Spectators, but delight.
It was that of the upright Phrygian judge,
To whom three squabling Goddesses did trudge,
And by the fair Looks of her Face and Breech,
Each from his hand the Golden Ball beseech.
But if in Dawber there be any trust,
To Venus giving it, he was most just.
Yet some say she bribed him, as he did her,
And gave the Ball for, Wench that made great stir;
For Pimp as well as Lawyer does deserve his
Reward before that he has done his Service;
Since he is a Pleader too, and does discover
The miserable case of Plaintiff Lover,
And seldom it is but does obtain Relief.
But what before was I a saying? if
That Venus's Competitors were such
As Painter made 'um, no true man would grutch
Her sure the sentence; and to bring't to trial
Before plain-dealing Swain, yet youthful Spy-all
Offore-sight Juno sage had not a whit,
And Pallas, though a snotty Nose, no Wit.
What though Dame Juno there appeared so proper,
That not a Car-man in the World could top her:
And Dawber gorgeously her head had dressed;
For her dear Peacocks Rump paid for her Crest;
And had bestowed on her the killing mien
Of Drunkards Eye, Purse-mouth, and bridled Chin
Made up; but kindness more than that came to
She had, he made her stand cross-legg'd, that so
What 'twas a shame to see might lurk behind;
That which is out of sight is out of mind.
And sure the heavenly What-d'y'-calt's dimension
Could not be spann'd by mortal comprehension.
For there was left apparent competency
For the most hungry Youngsters, who do fancy
Of that good thing they never can have enough,
Until they are condemned unto the proof.
But married men, ye greedy dogs can tell ye,
Your Eyes are always bigger than your Belly.
What though Dame Pallas too was tricked up in
A French Hood not of Velvet, but of Tin;
So Trulla have I seen in Coif of Mettle,
To ease her dear Lords shoulder of a Kettle;
But such as our bright Amazons now wear,
When to Hide-Park they ride to make fokes stare,
O Wits, was your Aunt Pallas's Montier!
By whose reflection as a face divine
In flaunting Coyf of Glory hers did shine.
With mien was furnished too by Dawber partial,
Keen as her Thought, and as her Headpiece Martial.
Her Mouth the Mansion of her Charms, or Shop
Of Eloquence he kindly had set open,
To show she was a Wit; but sure moreover
The vastness of its Treasure to discover.
For not like common Baggage, or mean Girl,
Were her Gums set with beggarly seed Pearl:
But such each was as you might see, when State
Bids the great Spanish Monarch cock his Hat;
Or else in Chamber of Escurial most rich,
Is hung as in spruce Parlour Egg of Estrich.
And (as for Juno's) to keep Judge from loathing,
For her Obscenity he found a clothing,
Causing a Flap, or Apron natural
Half way down to her knees to fall.
But do the Artist what he could, a Blouze
She was, and Juno too to Vulcan's Spouse,
Who though with Mars had newly had a Ruffle,
And black and blew eyes had got in the Scuffle,
Was tumbled, jumbled, tous'd, and mous'd, and wurry'd,
And so disturbed the Pigs-tails on her Forehead;
The native Corral of her Lip too missing,
By boyst'rous sharp-set Hectors cruel kissing:
But not as some may doubt were the fair Cherries
By smutty Cuckolds Chaps turned to Mulberries:
Yet howso'ere her Graces were impaired,
The Judge for's heart could not defer's award,
But strait his Conscience in his Face up-star'd.
And while the wonder of her Form he kenn'd,
All that he had about him stood an end,
The sole unfeigned way Lass to commend.
Of Hero's such Leander's commendation,
Who made (while she to th'Gods) to her Oration.
But hold a stroke, you nimble Slut; for sure
We skip the Chapels choicest Furniture,
Which for the sake of Sex inquisitive,
For tail of our Description I Will retrive;
Though you would let it, to save pains, escape us.
The Romans had a God well-known Priapus:
The Greeks too had the like, for Heathen none
So blind, but his Almightiship would own.
And Romans now who their old Gods reject,
Have seriously for him a great respect.
The mighty, and yet humble God did dwell
There to his mind in dark, and narrow Cell:
But could not hide himself; for pale-faced Rout
Of Virgin Penitents soon found him out:
And Mother, and the Son lay both unheeded,
While they invoked him whose aid they needed,
And not the common way did they adore him;
But as they should, lay prostrated before him.
The little piss-tail Girls made long Oration
To's Worship, to be freed from Chalkes temptation
The ugly stale despairing Maids petition
But in a Dream for's heavenly apparition.
New married Dames did only laud his Name,
And seemed his Bounty to receive with shame.
But the starved Widows were importunate,
As Spanish Beggars who do scorn to wait;
And ask as if they would not be denied,
And yet so as they cannot be supplied.
Amongst those Cravers Hero was not hindmost,
As Swabbers Son observed, who her did mind most*
And while all show the Gods their Whites of eyes,
In Hero's bright ones he his Heaven spies.
Yet Hero's so on Heaven were not bent,
But they on leering Lover eke did squint,
And through the corner of their Lids did wander
Some of their keenest Rays upon Leander;
So Gods and him at once brought to her beck,
And raised his hope, yet did his Courage check.
For like a bashful Spaniel strait he stole
With modest joy his Nose into his Pole,
His tail between his Legs, yet slided to her,
And had the Heart, though not the Face, to woe her
In words like these; I must fu-forsooth own
I am a harmless poor Youth of our Town,
Who but to see fine sights this morning came here,
And not to learn of little Love to stammer;
Who tongue, as well as Heart, from me has taken,
So that I cannot, if that I would, complain;
Yet something I would say if that I durst,
But I would have these jeering Fokes gone first.
Scarce had he whispered that, but Congregation
Quite weary of their deaf Gods Conversation,
Rose up, and ending their unanswered Speeches,
To their Discourteous Worships turned their Breeches.
But when he saw that they indeed were gone,
And had left him with Hero all alone,
(As if it had been for the nonce) he fain
Would have invited them all back again;
And with a new wish did recant his former;
For though his Rival's gone, he durst not storm her.
And she (thinking no harm, as one would say)
Did even for it then behind them stay.
For Women when they dare to keep the Field,
Would have you know they do not fear to yield.
While dumb Leander looked down on his Toes,
And numbered the Pinks upon his Shoes,
She did survey his Leg, the shape and fashion
Of the whole Youth with silent commendation.
For modest Maid I hope may leer and peer
On all man has, if he, or none else see her.
And if by fear a Lovers voice be frose,
May break the Ice, and prisoner Tongue let loose.
Hero therefore (that knew the world) took on her
For slouching Lad the wooing in brisk manner;
And roundly said, Feat Youth, for want of speaking,
D'y' think that I will suffer a heartbreaking?
When Men are become Women, Women then
May without shame (I take it) become Men.
But Custom's crueller than Love, to gag us:
For Silence more than Love before does plague us.
Why must nice Slut be dumb, though racked, nay pressed,
When it is impudence not to confess't?
Alas when I Am on fire, I must cry out
Can Female-hold keep Loves Wildfire withindore?
If we do shut the Door, 'twill out at Windore.
We are but Paper Lanthorns to his Torch,
Whose Wafer-sides he instantly will scorch,
And never leave till through a way he find,
To blaze out lavishly before the Wind.
So to hold Love, for Maids as hard a matter,
As when they are tickled, it is to hold their water.
But why pray should it trouble Lovers Brains
If his kind well-bred Mistress save him pains?
Though proffered Service stinks, you will say; my mind is
To give before one's asked, endears a Kindness,
But for it wilful men I know do slight one,
And all but shy, and sullen Sluts set light on.
But Men in Love more savage, rude, and stupid
Than Brutes, and more do shame their Tutor Cupid:
And four-legg'd Dame may without Vanity
Vye with our Lords, their Lords humanity.
And we must own the Bear, Boar, Ass appear
Indeed to have more of the Cavalier.
When th'Asses solitary Miss does bray
For want of him, he does not farther stray,
Nor stop his ears, her voice he thinks melodious,
Nor is she for her Summons to him odious:
Nay when Whip cannot, by her is wrought upon
To leave his Spanish Gravity, and run.
And for their Wench will fight brave Bear and Boar,
After enjoyment, as well as before.
Nor will their noble Spirits let a Mistress,
While they do live, be brought to want, or distress.
But may be they so good are and observing,
Because their Dames are more than us deserving.
And to speak truth, I do believe those Ladies
Are something constanter than we now adays;
More generous by far, and bravely scorn
To take half Crown, or Guinney for good turn.
Their wit too, and discretion ours out-does;
Lovers they run not from, but lead by the Nose,
But such as never put finger in the eye,
Like ours, who snivel, sob, and sigh, and cry,
For what but they themselves themselves deny.
When Love by shoulder look their Dames do crave,
They stare not on 'um, and ask what they would have.
And happy Dames, they never were put to it yet
To speak as I am now, or go without it.
Then to Leander she made but one stride,
To peer in's Face, which his coy Hands denied,
But to withdraw 'em, when in vain she asked him,
She like a Bully swore, and then unmasked him
By force of Arms, since she could not entreat him,
And vowed she could find of her heart to beat him.
Then poor Leander gave himself for gone,
And thought his Breeches were already down:
And of remorse in her he quite despairing,
Took heart, and spoke out thus, in her own hearing;
Are you the same that looked but now forsooth
As if Butter would not melt in your mouth?
She that just now refused to bait the passion
Of gaping Lovers with the least temptation?
She that did make green Apron fall so low
One might have seen that same as soon as Toe?
And rather than she would take up her Coat,
She with a shameless daggle-tail did trot,
To keep her Followers from sight-provoking
Of Blew, of Russet, or of yellow-Stocking?
And while she followed was with humble praying,
She never looked back, but gave them all their saying.
She could not speak, at least that one could hear her,
And is she grown of the sudden such a Tearer?
Hero mean while was not abashed a whit;
But rather glad he Venom had to spit:
I mean, that of his Tongue he was so able,
To which she suddenly was responsible:
And with a shrug, a mouth, and cogging smile,
Such as of wrath a Cuckold would beguil,
She said, What will you be a new way jealous,
And 'cause I am not kind to other Fellows,
Naughty Leander, think that I can be
But from Teeth outward other ways to thee?
And 'cause for you their Suits I do reject,
Will you inconscionable mine neglect?
The Turtle might as well repudiate
His Female, 'cause with him she will only mate,
And scorns the common Flocks communication;
But groans out to him (all day) her chaste passion,
And 'cause with neck thrust out shows she is willing,
As well might he (I say) refrain from Billing;
As you, because you see that I am coming,
Refrain the most delicious sport of Bumming;
And (as it is falsely said of us) to spite
Others, will not your self, loved self delight?
Be It so, I with your hardship am content,
But you for me shall not your self torment:
For in spite of your teeth you shall consent,
To take on me your full divertisement.
So took him 'bout the neck, and was so quick,
Leander had not time to turn his Cheek.
But scarce could Five be told, when with his Fist,
Placed in the Pit-hole of her Lovesick Breast,
Her tender Breech he had laid on the ground,
Had not kind Hassock in its way been found,
Which raised up lower end so fav'rably,
That something there Leander did espy,
That called back to his heart Humanity:
And then taking her up by painful halling,
Did expiate his laying her a sprawling.
And mannerly with Leg drawn back did own
His heinous fault in throwing of her down;
But she good-natured Maid, said it was none:
And asked him pardon if sh'ad done him wrong.
Alas, said he, good Hero, if your Tongue
You had kept to your self but when you kissed,
I likewise to my self had kept my Fist.
Catso, quoth Hero, was that all the Matter?
Indeed you shall not find fault with that herea'ter,
But try me once again: he cried Come 'an.
But from her Sluts Trick she could not refrain:
Whereat Leander once more did look big,
And sputt'ring called her Impudent Tom-Rigg:
While she with Court'sie said, no one exact is
In any thing at first; but let me practice
On you a while, and whip me, if I Am missing
A Tittle in your Method nice of kissing;
But sweet Leander, do not turn away
A faithful willing Servant the first day.
As Courts do say, Assurance innocent
I have, but not as you said, Impudent:
I have no harm in me, although I Am frolic,
Which most men (as my Mother tells me) do like.
Therefore but for your satisfaction,
And but to you have now good humor shown.
For as you did observe your self, I Am rugged
To other solkes, ill-natured, cross, and dogged:
But would endeavor to please you alone,
'Cause besides you I pleased am with none.
With that she pumped some tears into her eyes,
Which into his did pump up some likewise.
For tears do tears beget, and it is a true thing,
The Lovers falling out is Loves renewing.
But while he sob'd, Hero had prudent thought
Of striking of the Iron while 'twas hot.
Therefore took out cracked Groat from Purse of Leather,
To witness they would thenceforth lie together,
And asked him if he would deign to break it with her.
He cheerfully did lend her all his force;
So they to join themselves cracked Groat divorce.
Now Lover mark you well from Custom antique
I mean thou silly Rogue that art so frantic
To bustle for a Mistress, sigh, and sob,
When thou have not a Penny in thy Fob:
For all your pains is lost when you have wooed her,
If Money you have not your hearts to so'der.
For now not one like Hero will disburse
On Love a gray Groat out of her own Purse.
Nay they will not trust on tick a pair of Kisses,
Nor can you trade with Rhimes, or fine promises.
But Hero was a Lady of a thousand,
Who by her self of her own heart was cousen'd:
For sure Leander knew no Politics,
No Lime-twig words, or subtle sly Dog-tricks
To chase, to circumvent her, or to catch'er;
Or where she itch'd did know, or where to scratch her;
For she was forced, although 'twas not the fashion,
To put him first in mind of consummation;
And told him that about Twelve of the Clock
She would expect him with clean Sheets and Smock,
At her own Mothers House, at sign of Tower:
But warned him he should knock at the Backdoor;
And that her old Nurse should sit up, and spin,
To drown the noise he would make, and let him in.
In the mean time to the May Pole, and the Green
She bid him go to see, and to be seen,
Or where he would might saunter up and down,
And count the Signs, and fine things of the Town:
Or to the Shore might go, if nothing else
He had to do, and pick up pretty Shells.
But howsoever himself he chose to recreate,
He should be sure to keep her Honors Secret.
There are, quoth she, who kill a woman's honor,
Rather than lose their Glory to have won her.
But were there Justice, sure they should have reason
By Halter done, to their pernicious treason.
For plaguey, and unspeakable's the wrong
To the whole world by those Blabs of their tongue
Many an Innocent on both sides mourn,
Look pale, and pine away, in Fevers burn,
And cannot trust, nor be trusted for good turn,
But he who is of Female good name chary,
With the whole Sex sure as it were may marry.
Be warned Leander then; for I defy
'Till now the world to say that black's my Eye,
And none could touch my Reputation
'Till now with man I Have been two hours alone;
Which lest that it should come to be Town-talk,
Prithee my sweet Leander, let us walk.
Why don't you wag, my Heart, why do you stay?
Quoth he, d'y' think that I Will lead you the way?
Sure, sure, Fair Hero, I Will not go before ye:
Pish, pish, quoth she, again that is such a Story,
I am the Priestess, and must shut the door;
Leave Fooling prithee, and go on before.
Only remember that you keep your hour;
And when it is dark, find out your way to the tower.
Then rather than be troublesome, he chose
To do as he was bid, and fallows Nose:
And to the Woods (as Lovers use) did ramble.
Mean while his Mistress to the Town did amble.
But 'twixt true Lovers (you will say it is a wonder)
There Is no absence though never so much asunder.
For busy mind can find out no evasion,
Sweet Miss will hang upon imagination.
Though Hero and her Dear went quite contrary,
Yet in his heart and mind she still did tarry;
Or else ('it is thought) ere Twelve he had been weary;
Though he had all the pretty Recreations,
With which Lovers do hush their whuling passions.
As he stalked on sometimes he fell a Quaiting
Round Tiles to be unmindful of his Waiting.
And as he reeled along the green Hedge-Rows,
He rummag'd them for Black-berries and Sloes.
Or then on Molehill squatted, with a Key,
Did whistle out a chearing Roundeley,
'Till Emmet put him out to make him scratch
Impatient Buttock, where she made it itch:
Or by cool Spring lay down on Bed of Dazies,
And on her Cristal Surface made Love-faces,
Or in her murmuring soft conversation
Did weep, and murmur too to cool his Passion:
With Philomel, or Pie, or Daw did prate,
And sometime too with Gossip Echo chat:
Or with the Tag of Codpiece Point on Bark
Of Trees did scratch and scribble Hero's Mark*
Or did unravel all her Sacred Name,
To knit it up again in Anagram.
And sometime in tight Rhyme as much belied her,
As if the Rogue never in his Life had spied her;
For sure Leander was a Burlesque Poet,
Though 'till in Love (like me) he did not know it.
In such like exercise he whil'd away
The fant'ring minutes of the tedious day:
But when night came, to keep off Spright or Else,
He talked, and sung, and whistled to himself.
But in the Woods no longer then would tarry,
Lest that his Breech should feel the Nails of Fairy.
He therefore back to Sestus Town did creep,
And while Folks were abed, and all asleep,
(As often his Betters) on a Bulk, or Bench,
Three or four hours had patience for his Wench.
But ere the drawling Clock knocked out thrice four
He was a knocking at backdoor of Tower,
But first (some say) he had a special care
To make the most of his long yellow hair,
And with his Comb, and Fingers made it stare
Methodically, and look killing big,
For he grand Virtuoso was in Wig.
Besides he put his willing Hat in mind
Of cocking up before, and eke behind:
And then with single Knuckle; and no more,
Informed the watchful Nurse he was at door,
By whom ('it is said) he was not long unheard;
As Hero knew she was a trusty Card.
For on Love-Errands often she made her trudge,
Indeed, she was an honest careful Drudge,
Loves painful Char-woman, and ever did
Help on all Bawdy work in time of need.
When she had let Leander in, she made him
Pull off his Shoes ere she to Hero led him:
For by the door of Hero's Mothers Chamber
To Hero's Garret he was bound to clamber.
Besides she knew Love is inhans'd by fear;
So stolen Bread and Cheese is mighty Cheer.
But though Leander went as if on Eggs,
Yet he so loftily did bear his Legs,
That of four or five steps, he made but one,
And lingering Hero was no more alone,
Nor unprepared for his Reception.
Her Garret was new swept, and she well dressed
For exercise in Just-au-Corps or Vest,
As those who cannot endure to be strait-lac'd;
Or may be in a Petticoat, and Wastcoat,
In Bawdy Indian Gown, or Bawds long last-coat,
In Cloak of Ermin, or a Tyrian Mantle;
But for my part, what she had on, I cannot tell;
For some are not ashamed to say a Blanquet;
But two joyn'd-stools were covered with a Banquet,
Which made her Dear Leander not much matter
How she was dressed, 'twas that made his mouth water:
She saw't, and therefore let her Passion wait,
Till hungry Lover had taken out his Bait.
So strait, to lose no time, did pull him down
Into a Chair with Arms, and cried, Fall on,
If you can like of any thing that is here.
He vowed it was most excellent good Cheer,
But he did praise it better by his Swallow,
And there was naught that was not a Regallo.
Botargo first, and a Red Herring, for
She still had her pet it morceau aboire.
But for Leanders curious maiden Chaps
There were provided dainty fine Flip-flaps,
Apple-pie, Custard, Florentine, and Cheese-cake,
And only as I said before, for his sake,
Gingerbread, and stewed Prunes of her own stewing,
And for his Drink, Stypone of her Brewing;
To which, Hero, and he were both beholden,
For modest Lover it did soon embolden,
To take her by the sweaty hand, and sip
Far stronger Nectar from her Blabber-Lip.
And when she had made him drink off his rest,
He could begin a Brimmer to the Best.
But subtle Hero in her over-tunning
Of empty Lover, was but over-cunning.
For quite contrary to her wise intent,
All she tunn'd up in him had a false Vent.
Indeed she made him ready for the Bed,
And had the Drunkards sport to hold his head,
But she unfortunate, meant something else,
And ere she was aware, o're-turn'd the Bells;
So oflewd expectation quite did miss,
As now chaste Reader does I Am sure, of his.
But be not angry, ere Cock-crowing season,
To you, and Hero too I Will see done reason.
But let her put Leander first to Bed,
And on Flock-Pillow rest Lop-heavy Head;
Then fit it with a Coifin stead of Cap,
Tuck up the Clothes in order to his Nap,
And then let her a while but pick her Toes,
And Lamp goes out, and into Bed she goes.
Then (as I told you) ere the Cock crow'd thrice
And Hero had pissed once, Leander twice,
(But forward Sir, pray do not now mistake)
Did yawn, and stretch, and civilly awake
At the first Summons of her Elbow, which
On purpose lent his side a plaguie stitch.
Then did he puff, and belch, and sigh, and groan,
And to the Gods make lamentable moan:
But Hero for her sake took pity on him,
Did stroke him, feel his Pulses, and bemoan him,
And charitably too his Stomach settle,
By help of Life-restoring Pewter Bottle:
So by her Aid, Directions, and Dalliance,
As well's he could he made out's new Alliance.
But spiteful Jade Aurora strait intruding,
There was an end then of the Secret Wedding:
And glad Leander in such have arose,
That out of Bed he tumbled on his Nose;
And for his own Stockings put on Hero's:
Fate's still contriving Lovers to disclose.
Nor staid to wash his stinking hands, or put on
His Azure Band, or Shamey Doublet button:
But with a Kiss took leave of his dear Bride,
Resolving for her not to lose his Tide;
For from the Shore was heard thrice, Eastward hol
And with his Towns-folkes he was mad to go:
So lost no time; but while he was let out,
To the old Nurse made this true Lovers doubt,
That Hero would procure her self some Monsieur,
Who many a good time and often would bounce her
Ere he should get of the the other side 'oth' water.
To which she said Fie, Fie man, no such matter.
Though heavy Judgments fall upon ye, you men
Will never leave your base thoughts of poor Women.
But time will come (and she or none could tell,
For she in Magic Art had devilish skill,
And on a Col-staff often had galled her Breech,
Was tried, and got off'cause she was a Witch)
When all men shall for something be afraid,
And for your Jealoufie be soundly paid.
When Love incensed, will not tyrannize alone
In Lovers heart (as now he does) but bone:
When Lover for his Miss obtained shall groan,
And through a single Nostril tune his moan:
And jealous man shall envy happy Brute,
Who without fear, or shame does go to Rut.
To this Leander nothing could reply,
For Prophesies must give themselves the Lie.
But Pox upon her soul for her Record,
All the World knows she was as good's her word.
She would have farther spun the Pockey Riddle,
But Youth in have did break't off in the middle,
And left her, and Town Sestus 'till dark night,
When he was to return by Candlelight;
The same that was as Sea-light in that Entry
Where marking Hero in the Bar sat Centry;
As he, and Hero had contrived, was his
To keep him in his way where no path is.
And by her means he did not run aground,
But in the right Port whither he was bound
Unladed safe, and sound his precious Stowage,
And made (as Folks do say) a happy Voyage,
Nay some (at least) say half a dozen, but
Dame Fortune first, or last, does prove a Slut.
She did contest with the more faithless wind,
Which should be more false to him, or unkind,
For in the Window of vexed Hero's Garret
Five or six long Watch-lights in vain did blare out,
Ere he could put to Sea; and when he did,
It had been better he at home had staid.
But though the huffing surly Winds did nose him,
And strutting Billows crowded to oppose him,
From's Mistress he no longer would be kept,
But like a drunken Hero headlong leapt
Amidst his Foes, resolving to come at her,
Though Seas on Seas were set, and hills of Water
On watery hills to intercept his course;
But Death old-fashioned Lovers cannot divorce.
As Reader (if you have any patience) you
Too soon, too soon, alas, alas! shall know:
But Gossip first I know you would be prying
Into the manner of our Lovers dying:
Leander would not give his head for the washing
You may be sure, nor was afraid of Dashing:
He cuff'd the Waves aside, and through did break
His way, in spite of Northern Blubber-Cheek;
Mean while ('it is said) they made e'ne nothing of him,
And while he puffed, and sputtred, did but scoff him.
And as in Blanket you would toss a Whelp,
Tossed him, while he no more himself could help.
And though he sprawl'd, and kept on going still,
It was, as one may say, e'ne but up hill.
So to his Oars of Flesh such chearing words,
Was fain to use, as Errants to their Swords;
And told them, if they would row stoutly on,
They should embrace his naked Miss anon.
But finding soon that Harangue proved but idle,
He turned his Style, the wind and waves to whedle:
And vowed if they would please but to reprieve him
From drowning 'till he came back, he would forgive 'um.
But Fate whose slaves they were, could not be choused,
For all his Vows he still was soundly dous'd:
Yet sneering Fate but to augment her sport,
Permitted him almost to touch his Port.
So Tyrant Puss of Mouse does make a Fool,
And let us him get again half into's hole.
But then Leanders time was come, when Lamp
Went out, or when his left Leg had the Cramp.
For he so much in Love was you may see,
He quite forgot a String about his Knee,
Hero mean while who in her Bed had tossed
As much as he at Sea had, or almost.
For she had dreamed of Flowers all the night,
Shrewd sign that some body is to turn Spright.
So weary of her Dreams, awaked and rose;
But some say she awaked taken by the Nose
With the rude Haut-Goust of deceased Lamp,
Which Omen seized her heart with pannick Damp
For her Sweetheart, but ah! when she did hear
The Winds and Sea so loud, she was past fear,
And by her croaking bowels then could tell
(Were he at Sea) all with him was not well,
So grown impatient, to the Window flew,
And from her Eyelids proking off the Glue,
Into the boiling water fell a staring,
Where she perceived her dear Duck dead as herring.
But Day but just had shown her Scarlet Snout,
So she had time for comfortable doubt,
And took her poor Leander for a Whale;
But prying to find out the proof of's Tail,
She out of Window thrust her self so far,
That Tiptoes slipped, and ere she was awar
(Some do dispute it though) she tipped clean over
Into the Brine upon her pickled Lover.
Now hasty Lover do not damn the River,
Which though a while true Lovers it did sever,
Yet did unite 'um afterward for ever.
And let none take my tristful Song to heart,
Or for drowned Lovers be concerned a Fart;
For they but dived directly to Elysium,
Where such Folks pass their time as you could wish 'um.
FINIS.

