THE SUBSTANCE Of Several SERMONS, FROM JOHN, ix. 39.

PREACHED At the Request of a Friend, and now Published for the Benefit of the
Public.

By Nathanael Wyles, an Unworthy Labourer in Christ's Vineyard.

I am small and despised, yet do I not forget thy Precepts, Psalm. 110. 141.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, and sold at his Honse in Shadwel, School.

THE SUBSTANCE OF Several DISCOURSES, From John IX, and XXXIX:
And Jesus said, For Judgment I am come into this World; That they which see
not, might see; and that they which see, might be made blind.

IN this Chapter you have an Account of Christ's curing a man on the Sabbath
Day, who was blind from his Birth, which wonderful and miraculous Cure is
described three Ways, viz.

First, By the Occasion and Precedent Circumstances of it, from the 1st. to the
6th. verse: In the last Verse of the former Chapter, you read, That the Jews
and Pharisees took up Stones, to stone our dear Savior; because he said,
before Abraham was, I am, Verse 58. But Jesus hid himself, and went out of the
Temple, going through the midst of' em, and so passed by; and says the first
verse of this 9th. Chapter, As Jesus passed by, he saw a Verse 1.
Man that was blind from his Birth.

Where Christ passed by, the Evangelist does not tell us; but the word imports,
a passing by some way side, when he saw this poor man, who was born blind: His
being blind from his Birth, is particularly named; because such Blindness is
judged incurable as to the Art of Man. The Disciples upon this, came to Christ,
and asked him; saying, Master who did sin, this man, or Verse 2.
his Parents, that he was born blind; Christ gave them this Answer, That
neither this Man nor his Parents had sinned, but that the Works of God should
be made manifest in him. Verse 3.
You must not understand our Savior here, as either asserting, that this blind
Man, or his Parents had no sin, and a degree of Sin, that justly deserved such
a Punishment; for no man (since the Fall) was born, or lived without sin,
except Christ, who was holy, harmless, and without sin. But the meaning of
Christ's Answer is this, viz. That this Affliction came not upon this Man,
either for any personal Sin of his own, (for he could not be guilty of actual
sin, before he was born) nor yet for any sin that his Parents had committed,
But that the Works of God might be manifested, and made glorious in John 11 4.
him; both his Work of Power, in afflicting of him, and his Works of Mercy, in
Curing him; as there are Afflictions, which Note.
are Punishments from God, for sin; so there are some that are only Trials. For
a season (if need be) says the Apostle, Ye are in Heaviness, through manifold
Temptations, that the 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7.
Trial of your Faith, being much more precious than of Gold that perishes,
etc. might be found unto Praise and Honor at the appearing of Christ.

Though sin is the Cause of all Afflictions; Note.
yet God does not always afflict his People for sin: Sometimes he does it, to
try their Faith and Patience, and to make known his Power, and Goodness, in
helping and saving of them: But,

Secondly. This Cure is described by the Manner and Means of it, And that was
Clay and Spittle, a very unlikely Means to effect Verse 6 7.
such a great Cure. Verse 6, 7. Jesus spat upon the Ground, and made Clay of
the Spittle, and he anointed the Eyes of the blind Man with the Clay; and said
unto him, go wash in the Pool of Siloam, and he went his way therefore, and
washed, and came away seeing. Observe this by the way, That true Faith, joined
Note.
and accompanied with hearty and sincere Obedience, never fails the
Expectation of them that exercises it: He went to the Pool (believing the
means would do,) and came away seeing

Christ wrought this Miracle, to prove his Divinity and Godhead, which the Jews
denied; and that he might do it effectually, He 1st. makes choice, not only of
a Blindman, but one that was born blind, that was incurable to the Judgment of
humane art. 2dly. He made use of such Means (to effect this Cure) that had not
any appearance of Virtue in it; nay, the Means he used, was more like to put
out the Eyes of one that saw, than give sight to one that was blind. This shows
the Power and Godhead of Christ, who is able not only to work with Note.
little Means or without Means, but to effect great and strange things, even by
contrary Means, as here.

Thirdly. By the Consequents, or Events that ensued upon it which are these
Four, Viz.

1st. The man cured (being returned home to his Parents,) The Neighbors
brought him to the Pharisees, informing them what a Cure Christ had done, and
wrought, from the 8th. to 14th ver. This Cure was so miraculous, That the
Neighbors when they saw the Man, they were at a stand, whether it was he, or
not; some said, it was he, others said it was Ver. 8, 9.
not he; but he said, I am he that was blind. Then they asked him, how his eyes
were opened, and who opened them? and he said, a man that Ver. 10. 11.
is called Jesus, made clay, and opened mine eyes. He told them not only, who
did this Cure, but the Means by which it was effected. But

2dly. He being brought to the Pharisees, (whether in the Temple, or in some
great Court, is not certain, nor material.) They enquired of him, how Christ
cured him, and where he was? which at the present he could not tell: They chid
him severely, for his confessing Christ, and cast him out upon that account;
From the 14th. to 35th, The Pharisees seeing the Man, and the Cure, were in a
debate among themselves, whether Christ was from Ver. 15. 16.
God, or not: Some of them said, He was; others said he was not, but he was a
Sinner, (because he kept not the Sabbath Day;) being in this debate, they asked
the blind Man, what he thought of the Man that had opened his eyes? Ver 17.
and he said, he is a Prophet: Then they called his Parents, and asked them, if
this were their Son, that was born blind, and who cured him, and how he was
cured? to which his Parents Ver. 19, 20, 21.
answered discreetly and warily; they said, That he was their Son, and that he
was born blind; but how, or by what means he was cured, they said, they could
not tell; he is of Age (said they) ask him, he shall speak for himself; his
Ver. 22, 23.
Parents spoke these Words, because they feared the Jews; for the Jews had
agreed already, that if any Man did confess he was the Christ, he should be put
out of the Synagogue.

Observe, That Fear is often a temption Note.
to Men, to deny the Truth, or at least not to own it: Solomon says, That the
fear of Man, brings a Sword: The Pharisees not being able to get any thing
out of his Parents, calls for the Man that was blind, and said unto him, give
God the Praise, for me know that this Man is a Sinner: Thus Ver. 24.
far they spoke well; for the Man had great Cause to praise God, by whose Power
exerted by Christ his Son, he had received his sight: But the Design of these
Wretches was to vilify Christ, in, through, and by whom God the Father is
glorified: They told the poor Man that Christ had cured, that he which had
opened his Eyes, was a sinner; here they maliciously defamed Christ, affirming
that he was not only a Sinner, but a notorious scandalous Sinner: Well, says
the poor Man, whether he be a sinner, or no, Ver. 25.
I know not; but this I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see: They could
not by all their Skill, cause the Man to deny the Miracle wrought; he stood
stoutly to affirm that he was born blind, and that Christ (whom they said was a
Sinner) had cured him: Upon this, they reviled him, and said, thou art one of
his Disciples, but we are Moses's Ver. 27. 28.
Disciples: Here they oppose Christ, and Moses; whereas Moses was but the Type,
Christ the Antype; they spoke honorably of Moses, but revilingly of Christ,
who was above him, calling him Fellow, and said, they knew not whence he was:
They might have Ver. 29.
known, that he was from God; for he did those things, which never Man did, and
could not be effected by any thing less than by a divine Power; but their Eyes
were blinded, and their Hearts judiciously hardened, as a just Judgment, for
their wilful shutting their Eyes, and rejecting of Christ the Son of God: They
studied all they could to ^hut out the Light, by which they should have seen
and known from whence Christ was: The poor Man marvelled at their Ignorance,
and blindness, in not knowing from whence Christ was, since he had done Ver. 30.
such a great thing, as to open the Eyes of one that was born blind: He goes on
to prove Ver. 31.
that Christ came from Heaven, and was sent of God. As yet this poor Man did
not apprehend, Note.
that Christ had opened his eyes by an immediate divine Power, but that he was
a Prophet sent of God, who by his Power and Authority, had opened his eyes, if
this Man were not of God; that is, if he had not Ver. 32, 33.
some special Power and Authority from God, and some special Presence of God
with him, he could do nothing; that is, nothing of this Nature, to open the
eyes of one born blind; this is a work (as if he had said) that is beyond the
Power of Man, and beyond that Power that we read, God did ever betrust any Man
with, therefore he must be from God; upon this they excommunicated him, casting
him out of Communion with the Jewish Ver. 34.
Church: But,

3 ldy. Christ, upon this their dealing thus with the Man, Meets him, and
Reveals himself more fully to him, from the 35th. to 39. Jesus heard, that they
had cast Him out; and when he had found Him (whether casually, or Ver. 35.
by diligent searching for Him, is not said.) He said unto him, do thou
Believe on the Son of God? art thou ready truly to Embrace Me the Savior of
Lost Sinners? who am not only the Son of Man, but the Son of Ver. 36.
God. The poor man (as yet being ignorant of Christ's God head) said, who is he,
Lord, that I may Believe on him? As if he had said, Lord, I am ready to Believe
on him, and give up my self in Obedience to him, Ver. 37.
may I but know who he is. Jesus said unto him, thou have both seen him, and it
is he that talks with thee. As if Christ had said, I am here, thou have not
only seen him with the Eyes of thy Body, but thou have had Experience of his
Divine Power, in opening thine Eyes who were Blind. Miracles do not work faith,
but Confirm it: This poor blind man, had experienced a Miracle wrought upon
himself; but yet he was unbelieving, till Christ gave him the Revelation of his
Word, and so revealed himself more fully to him: Upon this, the man's Faith was
Terminated, and Confirmed in Christ; he said, Lord I believe. Now is the work
of faith wrought with Power in his heart: He said, Lord, I acknowledge, and
receive thee as the Son of God: I am fully persuaded thou art more than a mere
man, I do give up my self to thee to be ruled, and governed by thee as my Lord:
And says the Text, he Worshipped him: He fell down Ver. 38.
upon his face before him; and as a Testimony of his Faith in Him as the Son of
God, he performed some external Act of Adoration to Him.

But lastly, Christ upbraids the Jews, for their blindness, and unbelief; from
the 39, to the end. The Pharisees being with Christ Ver. 39.
(when he said) For Judgment I am come into this World, that they which see
not, might Ver. 40.
see, etc. Said unto him, Are we blind also? They began to be angry, being
proud, and not patient to be thought, or called blind: They looked upon
themselves as the Greatest Lights in the Jewish Church: Now, (says Christ) in
answer to the Inquiry, Are we blind also? If you were blind, you should have no
sin; that is, if your Ignorance of me, or of my Gospel, where simple, and not
affected, which is the worst of Ignorance, you should not have so much sin, as
you have upon you; but now ye say, we see your sin remains: Since you are
opinionated, Ver. 41. Note.
that you see, and boast of your Knowledge in the Law, as if you were the only
Persons that saw, or knew any thing, and upon this Presumption Reject me, and
the Doctrine of Salvation, your sin remains, and is not pardoned to you.

Whence observe, that without a true saving sight of sin, which carrys the Soul
Note.
out of its self to Christ for Pardon, and Remedy, There is no hope of Pardon,
from all the Mercy that is in God.

Thus I have brought you to the words of my Text, which are big with Mercy, and
Judgment, in which words you have these three parts. viz.

First, the Person speaking, and that is The parts of the Text.
Jesus Christ. And Jesus said: These words dropped out of the Sweet Mouth and
Lips of Christ, who Taught not as the Scribes, Matt. 7. ult. 29.
but as one having Authority.

2dly. The persons spoken to, namely the Jews, and Pharisees, a Wise and
Learned Romans 2. 19, 20. 21.
People in the Law; they boasted of their Wisdom, and Goodness, when indeed
they were Blind and Ignorant, and in a miserable condition. Whence observe,
that peoples Note.
opinion of themselves, may be better than their states are: Solomon tells us of
some, that are pure in their own eyes, and yet Pro. 30. 12.
were not washed from their filthyness: Many think and flatter themselves that
they are Rich, and full, and have need of nothing, and know not that they are
Poor, Rev. 3. 15, 16.
and Blind, Naked, Wretched, and Miserable: Thus, many deceive themselves, and
put a dreadful cheat upon their precious Souls.

But 3dly. you have the predicate, or thing spoken of, by Christ, to this
People, in these words: For Judgmemt I am come into this World, that they which
see not, might see; and that they which see, might be made Blind; a startling,
and a wakening Word!

Before I lay down the Proposition, I must a little open the word Judgment in
the Text, which will give great Light into it.

Judgment, is taken many ways in the Holy Scripture: 1st. It is sometimes taken
for the Just Statutes, and Holy Commandments of God, Ps. 19. 9. the Judgments
of the Lord (says Ps. 19. 9.
David) are Pure, and Righteous altogether: 2dly. For punishments Inflicted
upon Christ by God, for our sins, which we must have suffered in Hell, had not
he born them for us on Earth: Acts. 8, and 33. In his Humiliation, his Judgment
was taken away, and who can declare his Generation? By humiliation here, is
meant the Grave, and the bands of Death, which Christ suffered, and lay under
for our Sins; and by Judgment is meant, the Hand (says one) and Counsels of
God, justly afflicting, and punishing his Son, our Surety, for our Sins, and
sakes; but this is not meant in our Text. 3dly. It is taken sometimes, for the
moderation, or measure which God keeps in Chastizing of his People: O Lord
Correct me, (says the Prophet) but with Judgment; let it be with measure, and
moderation, not in thine Jer. 10. 24.


Anger, lest thou bring me to nothing. God has not tied himself, not to
Afflict his people; he will debate with them, but it shall be in measure he
keeps time and measure with his in afflicting of them, so that they cannot
enter into Judgment with God: But 4th. for the Wrath, and Vengeance of God,
which he Mat. 8. 28.
will Execute upon Wicked Men, at the last day; the Lord, says the Apostle,)
will Come Jude. 5. 15.
with Ten thousand of his Saints; to do what? To Execute Judgment upon all that
are Ungodly etc. The day of Judgment, will be a passing of an Irrevocable
Sentence, and Condemnation, upon all that shall then be found Enemies to
Christ, and his Pure Gospel: But lastly: It is also sometimes taken for the
Spirit of Wisdom, and Justice, to know and discern what is Right, what is
wrong, what is Good, and what is Evil. Give the King (says the Pfalmist) thy
Judgments, and thy Righteousness Psalm. 72. 1, 2.
to the King's Son; but neither of these senses are meant in the Text.

Quest. What is then meant by Judgment?

Answ. 1st. Some by Judgment here understand the Eternal Counsel and Decree of
God, as if Christ had said, I am come into this World, to Execute the Righteous
Will, and Counsels of my Father; and the Event of it is this, viz. that some,
who saw not, see; and some who see, in a sense are made blind: This I conceive,
is not primarily meant here; it is true, Christ came into the World, to do the
Will of his Father, and John 6. 38. 39.
to Execute his Eternal Purposes of Grace, in the Salvation of Sinners, by his
Death; but yet I cannot think, that this is meant primarily by Judgment here;
though some great Men, would have it so: But,

Secondly. Others by Judgment here, understand the Sentence of Condemnation;
as if Christ had said, I am come to execute the Judgment of Condemnation; but
this is not meant by it, for if you take it in this Sense, you will find it
hardly reconcilable with what is said; John 3. 18. God sent not his John 10.
10.
Son to condemn the World, but that the World through him might have life:
Christ's first coming was not as a Judge, but as a Savior; he came not in the
days of his Flesh, to condemn Sinners, but by his Death and bloody Luke 19. 10.
Agony. to save them from Hell, and Wrath: I had rather Fall in, and acquiesce
with those Divines, that by Judgment here, understand the spiritual Government
of the World by Christ, committed to him as Mediator, by Christ, committed to
him as Mediator, by God his Father, and managed by him with perfect Equity and
Righteousness: Thus Judgment is sometimes taken in Scripture; The Father (says
Christ,) judges no man, that is, but by his Son, for he has committed all John
5. 22. 16. 11.
Judgments to him, thus it is understood in my Text: God governs and judges
the World now by his Son Christ, that all men may honor him, as they honor
the Father, and great part of this Government of the World by Christ, was his
promulging, and publishing his everlasting Gospel, which is called the word of
Life, the Power of God, Phil. 2. 15. Romans 1. 16.
to the saving of them that believe, and the Law of Faith: The Effect of this
is twofold, 1st, That they which see not, might see, i. e. that those poor
Souls who are spiritually blind, and so utterly unable to see, and find the way
that leads to Life, might through the Spirit (as this Man born blind saw clearly)
be enlightened into the saving Knowledge of Christ, and of the divine Truths of
the Gospel.

The second Effect is, and a dreadful one too, that they which See might be made
Blind; that is, that those who think they see, and boast of their Knowledge (as
these did) might through their prejudice to the Gospel, and Infidelity, be more
Blind, than they were from their Birth: There are two things signified, in
making persons blind; first, to keep men from seeing, and knowing the Truth,
when the Light of it is set before them; this is a dreadful judgment, and how
many are there, in this miserable case, they have the Light of the Word,
shining in the midst of them, and yet they discern it not: The Bible is a
sealed Book to many, they know nothing savingly, and feelingly, of the truths
and mysteries of the Gospel: Their eyes are blinded, Psalm. 69. 23.
(that though the Light shine,) they cannot behold it; is not the case of such
Souls dreadful, to whom the Gospel is hid? yes (says Paul) if our Gospel be
hid, it is hid to them that are lost. But 2dly. To make blind, is to increase
Ignorance, for the great Abuse of former Knowledge and Light; this happened to
them, spoken of by Paul, 2 These. 2. 11, 12. For this Cause God shall send them
2 Cor. 4. 4.
strong Delusions, that they should believe a Lie, that they all might be
damned, who believe not the Truth, but have pleasure in Unrighteousness: This
is a dreadful Judgment; but what is the Cause of it? Verse 10th tells you,
Because they received not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved: By
Truth is meant Ephesians. 1. 13. Romans 1. 18.
the saving Truth of the Gospel, which is called the Word of Truth: There is a
Truth natural which the Heathens had, and detained in Unrighteousness, which
brought Gods Wrath down from Heaven upon them: There is a supernatural Truth
from divine Revelation: This is here meant, the Abuse of which Truth highly
provokes God to give up men judicially to the Delusions of Sin and the Devil;
and at last (as the just Event and Effect of their rejecting the truth, and
believing Lies) are damned: These Wretches, that receive not the Love of the
truth, are first punished with spiritual Judgments, and then with eternal ones;
they are first blinded here judicially, and then as the just Reward, (of their
rejecting Christ, and the truth as it is in Jesus) they are damned. Having
divided, and opened the Text, I shall lay down this one general Proposition,
viz.

Doct. That God by Christ, in just Judgment, gives over such as are enemies to
his Gospel, to the Delusions of the Devil, and their own Hearts, to be hardened
and blinded, while others in Mercy are enlightened, and converted by it.

That Gospel which makes the way of Salvation by Christ, clear and evident to
many souls who are in darkness, and sit as in the shadow of Death; to others
(through their Ignorance, Prejudice and Malice, and the righteous Judgment of
God, for their Perverseness and Infidelity) proves a means to blind and harden
their Hearts: That Word and Gospel, which to some is a Savor of Life unto
Life, to others through their Pride and Unbelief, is a Savor of Death 2 Cor. 2.
15, 16.
unto Death. In this sense, these words agree with what was prophesied by the
Prophet Isaiah, He shall be for a sanctuary, Isaiah 8. 14, 15.
(speaking of Christ,) but for a stone of stumbling, and for a Rock of Offense
to both the Houses of Israel: For a Gin, and for a Snare to the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and many among them shall stumble and fall, and be broken, snared,
Luke 2. 34.
and taken: And with the words of good old Simeon, to Mary the Mother of our
Lord, This Child is set (says he) for the Fall, and Rising again of many in
Israel; and for a sign to be spoken against. By the Fall and Rising again, is
here meant undoubtedly, the Salvation and Damnation of many. Christ will be the
occasion of many Peoples Damnation, even of all that reject him, and his
precious Gospel, and believe not in him: As Christ is the Cause of many Peoples
Salvation, even of all that believe, and shall be saved; Acts 4. 12.
(for there is no other Name, by which men can be saved, but by his): So he is
the Cause of their Damnation, eventually and accedentually, who oppose his
Gospel, and believes not in him; for he that believes not shall be damned:
This is the thing, which Mark 16. 16.
Christ tells us of, in my Text, and is spoken of by Paul, Behold I lay in Sion
a stumbling stone, and rock of Offense, whosoever believes Romans 9. 33.
on him, shall not be ashamed, nor confounded.

For the opening of this weighty Point, I shall first show you what those sins
are, which provoke God and Christ to such a-degree, as to blind and harden men
by that means, by which others are enlightened and softened.

Secondly, Lay down some Conclusions, for the better clearing up this great
Truth.

Thirdly, show you, how this stands with the Holiness and Goodness of God, to
give Men up to Blindness of Mind, and Hardness of Heart, to believe Lies; that
as Paul says, 2 These. 2. 10, 11.
they may be damned.

Fourthly, Then I shall sum up the whole with some practical Application.

O Lord, God, the Father of the Spirits of all Flesh, help thy poor sinful
Dust, (the meanest of all employed in thy Vineyard.) Give him thy holy Spirit,
and Wisdom from above to manage this great Point, for thy Glory, and the good
of Souls. O! let him not darken Counsel, by words without Knowledge, but be led
into all truth, and cause it to shine transparently, to the Convincing of the
erroneous World, the Conversion of sinners, and the est ablishing thy Children
in their most holy Faith, etc. for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with thy Self,
and eternal Spirit of Truth, be Honor and Glory for ever. Amen.

First, I shall show you what those sins are, which provoke God to such a high
degree, as to give men over to Blindness under the Gospel.

Would you know what those sins are, that provoke God to blind and harden many
by the Word? I Will tell you in general, They are sins against Knowledge and
Light.

1st. Sins against the Light of Nature: There are such sins, which Paul speaks
of, that are of a provoking Nature, and highly displeasing Romans 1. 21, 22.
unto God: When they knew God; that is, by the Light of Nature; for the Light
of the Word they had not; as for his Judgments and his Statutes, (says the
Psalmist) they have not known them; they glorified him Ps. 147. 20.
not as God, but became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish Hearts
were darkened: These Heathens had the Light of Nature, which was sufficient to
let' em know that there was a God, and that He was not like a Man, or a Beast,
or a creeping thing, as they foolishly imagined; for that which might be known
of God, is manifest Ver. 29. Ver. 20.
in them, for God has showed it unto them; for the invisible things of him,
from the Creation of the world, are clearly seen. What is seen? Even his
eternal Power and Godhead: But how is this seen and understood? Why, by the
things that are made: So that they are without Excuse, the Heavens declare Gods
Psalm. 19. 1, 2. Ver. 23.
Glory, and the Firmament shows his handy Work. Now this Light they abused and
misimproved; they changed the Glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image
made like to corruptible Man, and to Birds, and four footed Beasts, thus they
became vain in their own Imaginations: For which cause God gave Ver. 24.
them up to uncleanness, through the Lusts of their own Hearts; yea, he gave them
up to vile Affections, and to a reprobate Mind; or. Ver. 26.
to a mind void of Judgment, to do those things which are not convenient: Now,
if sins against the Light of Nature, be of such an aggravating Nature, as to
provoke God, to give up Persons to blindness of Mind. What will sins against
the Light of the Gospel do? the greater the Light is that persons sin against,
the greater must their Sin be, and the more provoking in the Sight of God.
Which brings me to the

Second thing, Namely, sins against the Light of the Gospel; these are great
sin, and provoke God highly to Anger; to reject Christ, and his Gospel, and not
receive the Love of the Truth, as it in Jesus, is the ready way to be
judicially hardened and blinded, and to be given up by the holy God, to believe
Lies, that we may be damned: 2 These 2. 10, 11.
If you read the Scriptures in the margent, you will plainly see, that Gods
judicial Mat. 13. 14 Mark 4. 12 Acts 28. 26, 27.
giving over this People to blindness, etc. was consequent to their sinful
stopping of their Ears, shutting of their Eyes, and sinning against the light
of the Word, and of their own Consciences received from it: It is dreadful
sinning against the Light of Conscience, (which is Gods spy, and Man's Overseer)
and the Light of the holy Word; for this cause many are blinded, and judicially
hardened by God the Judge of all: God has given them, (says St. Paul) the
Spirit of slumber, Eyes that they should not see, and Romans 11. 8. 9.
Ears that they should not hear unto this day.

Quest. But who are they, that thus sin against Light? The Light of the Word,
and of Conscience, which so highly provoke God to anger against them?

Answer. First, They are such as sin after the many Warnings, and Admonitions
given them by God, in his holy Word. God's Trumpet (viz. his Word,) is blown in
Sinners ears daily, which calls them to retreat and break off from sin: (God
says) My Son, if Sinners entice you, (if they would Prove. 1. 10, 11.
have partake with them in their Sins) consent thou not; give no way to them,
nor to their Temptations; they that sin with others, must look to suffer with
others in their plagues, without true Repentance. They that like Simeon and
Lovi, Brethren in Iniquity, shall also be Brethren in Misery: Therefore (says
God) enter not into the Path of the wicked, go not in the way of evil Prove. 4.
14. 15. 16, 17.
Men: Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away; for they sleep
not, except they have done Mischief, and they eat the Bread of Wickedness, etc.
Oh! how cautelous is this Caution, to have a Care of sin, and of being led away
by the Wicked into the evil Ways of it: Forsake (says God) the way of the 2
Cor. 6. 17, 18.
Foolish, and walk in the way of Understanding, and come out from amongst them;
and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and be your God, and
you shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord. Sinners! You cannot plead
Ignorance, as an Excuse for your sins, who live under the Gospel: You have
heard the Word of God preached often by a many of Gods Servants, which call you
to break off Sin by Repentance; to plow up the fallow Ground of your Hearts,
and not sow among Thorns; lest the Fury of the Jer. 4. 3, 4.
Lord come forth like Fire, and none can quench it, because of the evil of your
Doings. The Word calls you to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lust; and to
live s^berly, righteously and Tit. 2. 11. 12.
godly in this present World: You have (you Wretches) been told often of Sin,
and warned against it; and yet you will venture upon it: You have been told of
your Pride, and Malice, and Swearing, calling God to damn your Souls; and of
your Drunkenness, and Sabboth-Breaking, and yet you live in these Tim. 3. 13. 1 Timothy 6. ^, 12.
Sins. This is indeed to sin against Light; Oh! have a Care, you provoke not
God to give you up to blindness of Mind, to deceive and to be deceived. Flee
these things, and follow after Righteousness and Godliness, Faith, Patience,
Love and Meekness: But,

2 dly. Such sins against Light, etc. as Live in the total neglect of those
Holy duties, which God calls for, and that they know well, they should be found
in the practice of: You have been told often, that Gal. 4. 2. 1 These. 5. 19, 20.
you ought to Pray, to continue in Prayer, and to Pray always; that is, always
to have your hearts in a praying frame for God, and yet you Live in the neglect
of it; there are many prayerless persons, who mind not this Work, which is
their privilege as well as duty: You have been told also, that it is your duty
to hear God's Word often, and to live the Sermons in your Lives, which you hear
with your Ears, out of the Pulpit; and to read the Scriptures much, which are
able to make you Wise unto Salvation: But Oh! how is this Work neglected by
many? if they do hear, and read now and then, they mind it not, but cast the
Word of God behind them: What wretches are these, not to mind what the Great
King of Heaven, and Earth says to them: I have called (says God) but they have
Prove. ^. 25, 29.
refused, and have set at naught all my Counsels, and would not be reproved by
me; they hate knowledge, and have not chose the Lord; this is matter of
Lamentation, and it shall be for a Lamentation, that the great God should call
after sorry sinful man, and he refuse to hear and regard; Is not this
provoking? what will God do to such? Will he let them go unpunished? No, he will
lay his Ireful Rod upon them, and Laugh when their Calamity comes. Many are
convinced, that it is their Ver. 27. 28.
duty to pray in their Families, and yet can go Days, Weeks, and Months without
it, and God never hear of them. I fear many professors are guilty in this
point; let me tell you, in the Name, and Fear of the dreadful God, that these
are dreadful sins, and a ready way to bring Gods Curse down upon you: Pour out
(says the Prophet) thy Fury upon Jer. 10. ult.
the Heathen, and the Families, which call not upon thy Name: Here Heathens,
and prayerless Families, and Persons, are reckoned together, as being nothing
better than they. Think often upon that word of the Apostle, He that knows to
do good, and does it not, to Jam. 4. 18.
him it is a sin. But,

3 dly. Such persons sin greatly against Light, that Live in the practice of
those sins which they condemn in others; it is the trick of Hypocrites, and
wicked Men, to condemn that in others, which they allow, and practice
themselves: But what says Paul to such kind of men, Art thou inexcuseable Romans
^. 1, 2, 3.
O man, whosoever thou art, that Judge? For wherein thou Judge another,
thou Condemnest thy self; for thou that judge, do the same things. But we
are sure (says he) that the Judgment of God is according to Truth, against
such, as commit such things; think thou this, O man! That judge them which
do such things, and do the same; that thou shall escape the Judgment of God?
Seneca wrote against Superstitions, and the Superstitious, and yet worshipped
Images himself: Many condemn that as sinful in others, which they allow in
themselves; is not this to sin against Light? Let such persons have a care,
they be not left of God, to blindness of Mind, and hardness of Heart: One he
Condemns for Covetousness, and yet he is Covetous; another for Pride, and yet
he is Proud; such were these in my Text; they said, men must not commit
Adultery, and yet Romans 2. 19. 20, to 24.
they committed Adultery; they pretended to abhor Idols, and yet committed
Sacrilege: They taught, that a man must not Steal, and yet they Stole; so,
while they boasted of the Law, they became Transgressors of it, and Dishonored
God: But,

4 thly. They sin against Light, that sin against the express Threatenings of
God in his Word against sin. Has not God said, that to be sure your sins shall
find you out? i. e. the punishments due to you for them. Has not the Lord said
expressly, that the Wicked Psalm. 9. 17.
shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God? and yet you go
on, as if God were but in jest, and did not mean as he spoke. God has
thundered out his Judgments against Sin, and Sinners; he has said, that he
will wound the Head of his Enemies, and Psalm. 68. 21.
the hairy Scalp of him that remains still in his sins: And yet you go on,
and hold your sins fast; though God sets the point of the Sword at your Breast,
yet you will go on in your sins, and Rebellion against him. Is not this (think
you) to sin against Light? does not this argue that the pleasures of sin does:
more delight and please you, than the Threatenings of God afright you? Are not
many sinners like the Leviathan, Job. 41. 29.
that Laughs at the shaking of the spear? many Laugh when they hear of Hell,
but they will not when they come there; there be many so bold, that they deride
Gods threatenings; they say as them (who draw Iniquity with Cords of Vanity) Let
him Isaiah 5. 19, 20.
make speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it, etc. As if they had said,
we have heard that God will do much against sinners, and that his Judgments
will Light upon them: Why do not he do it? We would fain see it.

Let the Counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know
it. What wretches are these, thus to deride Gods threatenings! Let such vile
ones remember this, that for men to see Gods Flaming Sword as it were, drawn
against sin and sinners, and yet strengthen themselves in sin, is to sin
against Light and Knowledge, and the way highly to provoke God.

But Lastly, such sin indeed against Light, as sin after many Promises, and
Vows made against it. How many have promised God fairly, to amend and leave
sin, and yet they go on in it? What says Solomon to such? When thou vowest a
vow unto God, defer not to pay it: For he has no pleasure in fools; pay that
Eccl. 5. 4, 5, 6.
which thou have vowed: Better is it, that thou should not vow, than that
thou should vow, and not pay: Suffer not thy Mouth to cause thy Flesh to
sin, etc. Many put God off, with a many good morrows, and fair promises to
Repent, and amend their-ways, but mind not to perform'em. A Vow is a religious
promise What a Vow is,
made to God, to dedicate our selves to him, and to be for him, and for no
other but him. Now, how greatly do they sin, that have not only purposed, but
promised to leave sin, and yet they Live in it? Every man that vows, makes
himself a debtor; he binds himself to God, in a solemn manner: Now for a man to
sin after a vow, to vow himself to God, and yet give himself to Sin, and the
Devil, is to sin against Light, with a witness. Let men have a care what they
do in this point, and especially professors, who have the vows of God upon
them. It is dangerous to Leave God, when we have vowed our selves to him: Thus
much for the first general.

2dly. I shall now lay down a few propositions, for the better clearing of the
Doctrine; and they are, these six following, viz.

First Prop. That God sometimes punishes sin, with sin; for sin, he gives men
up often to be led Capuve by their base Lusts. God gave them up (says Paul) to
uncleanness, Romans 1. 24, 26.
through the Lust that were in their Hearts. When men harden their hearts
wilfully, God often hardens them judicially: Pharaoh would not let Exodus 7. 3,
4.
the People go: Well (says God) with he not let my Son go to serve me? I will
Harden his Heart, that he shall not let them go, etc. They that will not Repent
when God would have them, but harden their Hearts, and say they will do so
again, shall not have a Heart, nor Grace to Repent to purpose; when for Fear of
Judgments, they with Esau, seek a place for Repentance. It is a dreadful
Judgment, for God to Punish sin with sin. But,

2dly. Spiritual Judgments, of all, on this Prop. 2.
side Hell, are the worst; a Judicial Blindness of Mind, and Hardness of Heart,
(of all Rev. 22. 17 Hos. 4. 19.
Plagues) are the worst. For God to say, Let him that is Filthy, be Filthy
still, and he that is Unjust, be Unjust still, is very dreadful. Spirit, strive
not with him any more, he is joined to Idols, let him alone: What can be more
dreadful on this side Hell, than for God to say Ez.. 24. 13.
to Sinners, because when I have Purged thee, thou wast not Purged; thou shall
not be Purged from thy Filthiness, till I cause my Fury to rest upon thee?
Spiritual Judgments, and Plagues, are the worst, and that for these three
Reasons.

First Reason is, in respect the Subject upon whom they Fall; and that is the
Soul which Mat. 16. 26.
is a rare, and precious Jewel. The Soul of Man is worth more than all the
World; for the World cannot with all its Riches, save, nor redeem it. The Soul
is a spiritual substance in Man, Created by God the Father of Spirits, which
can exist, when separated from the Body. Now, by how much the Soul What the
Soul is. Ecc. 12. 7.
is better than the Body, by so much must it be worse; for the Soul to be
afflicted, as mercies to the Soul, are the greatest, so judgments upon it, must
be the greatest. But,

2dly. Because these plagues are the greatest Evidences of Eternal Wrath; What
surer mark for Hell can there be than this? for a Person judicially to be left
of God here, John 3. 36.
and given up to Blindness of Mind, to believe Lies, is a sure mark of eternal
ruin, and destruction.

3dly. Spiritual judgments are the worst, because they hinder, and withold
from us the best good, which is God, and Christ: Now that which restrains and
keeps from us the best, and chief good, (without which our Souls cannot be
happy) must needs be the worst kinds of restraints, and judgments: What plagues
are like those of Hardness of Heart, a Spirit of slumber, taking away the gifts
of the Mind, and giving men over to the power of Satan, and to the love of Sin,
withholding that good by the Gospel, which our Souls need, and others in mercy
enjoy? But,

3dly. The sins of a Person and People, may provoke God to curse their very
Blessings, Prop. 3.
and cause those things which are Mercies in themselves, to prove Judgments to
them: As for instance, Rain is a great mercy; to have the former, and the
latter Rain in Jer. 5. 24.
its Season, is no small Blessing: Yet how has sin turned this into a Judgment
to many? In every drop of Rain, there is an Ocean of Isa. 42. 21, 26.
Wisdom, Goodness and Mercy; but sin often makes it a Judgment to many: Fire
is a Mercy; Yet how often for sin has it been sent in a way of Judgment; it
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and laid them in Mark 9. 43.
Ashes for their sins. How many dreadful Fires has sin kindled in this Nation
and City? And there is one Fire kindled by it, that will never go out, and that
is the Fire of Hell? etc. To have the Gospel, is a great Mercy; but how shall
we escape, (if we refuse to hear Christ, that speaks in it) and neglect Heb.
2. 3, 12 25.
so great a Salvation: Sin provokes God to curse our blessings, and turn them
into Judgments. If ye will not hear, and if ye Mal. 2. 2, 3.
will not lay it to heart, to give Glory unto my Name, (says the Lord of Host)
I will even send a curse upon you; and I will curse your Blessings; yea, I have
cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to Heart. Here is the Cause of
the Curse, and it is a Cause so just, (as they upon whom it falls) have no
Reason to complain of Gods too severe proceeding against them. God (beloved) is
the Author and Inflicter of all Judgments; he sends his Curse for sin, but
especially for Amos 6 3.
Corruptions in Religion, and Contempt of his holy Word. When God's Word and
Gospel is heard and preached, it must be Prove. 13. 13. Jam. 1. 22, 23. Ps, 119.
9. Luke 2. 19 Heb. 6. 8.
attended upon, and obeyed. For without this, Hearing is counted no hearing; we
had as good not hear, as not lay the Word to our hearts, and practice it in our
lives. God's word must be hid in our Hearts, and Christ's sayings must be
pondered there, or else we hear not to purpose. Careless and fruitless Hearers
are nigh unto Cursing, whose end (Paul tells us) is at last dying so, to be
burned: But,

Fouthly, From one and the same Cause, may arise diverse and contrary Effects;
that Prop. 4.
which softens one, may harden another; that which enlightens one, may be a
means to blind another. Christ that is a Stone of Foundation to a believer, is
a Stone of stumbling to the Unbeliever. The Gospel of Peace, Mat. 3. 12. 2 Cor.
2. 15, 16.
and glad Tidings to a wicked Man, is a fire, a sword and a fan; but to the
godly, it is a savor of Life, and a means to bring' em to God through Christ,
and to Salvation. As the Sun melts the wax, and hardneth the clay; so the
Gospel accidentally (by the corruption that is in wicked men, and by the
fearful Judgments of God) hardens and blinds them, while others are softened,
and made anew by it. The Gospel to some is the Power of God, but to others a
Stone of stumbling, and very foolishness. The Gospel 1 Cor. ^. 23, 24.
that is a blessing to some, (through sin and unbelief) proves a Judgment to
many. Oh!

Let Persons have a care, that they do not rest in the having barely the means
of Salvation, as the preaching of the Word, etc. It is a Mercy indeed, to enjoy
the Gospel; but it is not to be rested in by any; for through their Corruption
and Sin, it may be a greater means of Damnation: Bless God for the means of
Grace, be thankful to him for his holy Word; but be sure you be not satisfied,
without the Grace of means, lest Romans ^. 16.
you be blinded, etc. Say, when you go to hear the Word preached, Lord, let it
be thy power, to the saving of my poor Soul: But,

Fifthly, The Judgments which fall upon Prop. 5.
particular wicked men, for their Sins and Unbelief, are to be accounted the
Punishments of the whole Body of Unbelievers. This Judgment of Blindness in
our Text, which happened to many of the Jews and Pharisees, for their rejecting
Christ and his Gospel, is the Punishment of all Persons, that shall be found
such Offenders: And that for four Reasons,

Because all the Judgments that sell upon Paul to this? If they (says he) that
despised Moses's Law, dyed without Mercy, etc. Of how much forer Punishments
shall they be thought worthy, who have Heb. 10. 28.
trodden under Foot the Son of God, and have counted the Blood of the Covenant
an unholy thing? etc. Surely, such Wretches cannot think at last, to escape the
deserved Judgments of God, who undervalue Christ, and trample upon his Blood
and Merits: Vengeance Ver. 30.
is mine (says God) and I will repay it. I will ease me of mine Adversaries,
and be avenged on all them, that despise my Son, and cast my Word behind them.
Oh! Let Sinners hear and tremble, and lay this Ver. 31. Psalm. 2. 12.
to heart, that'tis a fearful thing, to fall into the bands of an angry God:
For while his Wrath is kindled but a little; blessed are they that trust in
him: But secondly,

Because when God threatens some, he he that believes shall be saved, and not
at last confounded; so, he Mar. 16. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 6.
that believes not shall be damned. Christ, the Judge of all, will come at
last in staming Fire (that is, in a terrible Manner) to take Vengeance on them
that know not God, and obey not his Gospel, who shall be punished with 2 These
1. 7, and 9.
everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, etc. Let all Persons
have a Care (Young and Old, Rich and Poor) they be not found at last Rejecters
of Christ, and his Gospel. For remember, that the Judgments inflicted others,
God means to you; Who so despises the Word, (let him Prove. 13. 13.
be who he will, and as great as he will) shall be destroyed: it is not said,
they may, but they shall be destroyed.

3dly. Because no ungodly Men in the turned into Hell, as Psalm 9. 17. Mat. 24.
48. to the end.
others for their Disobedience and Unbelief are. Does not the word of the holy
God say, that all the wicked shall be turned into Hell? and are you sure this
shall not be your Portion? Were these wretches in my Text, blinded for their
Unbelief, and despising dear Jesus and his precious word? And are you sure
(Sinners!) that this Judgment will not fall upon you, if you thus continue to
sin, and reject the Grace of the Gospel? Have many for their sins, (as a just
Judgment from God) been blinded and damned by the Word, which have been a
means through Grace, to save others? Oh! Co^^^er this, you that forget God, lest
he tear Psalm 50. 21, 22, Prove. 29. 1, 2.
you in Pieces, and there be none to deliver you. Remember what the word says,
that he, who is often reproved, and yet hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy. But,

4dly. It is thus, because the Judgments Mat. 13. 21.
this, that any fearful Judgments that fall upon others for their sins, may
fall up: on you; and that God is as well displeased with your sins, as with
those that he has plagued, and sent to Hell; this our blessed Lord Jesus tells
you is a truth. Think ye (says Christ,) That they upon whom the Luke 13. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6.
Tower of Siloam fell, and slew them, that they were sinners above all men that
dwelt in Jerusalem? Were there none in that City to be parallelled with them
for their sins? I tell you, except ye repent, you shall all likewise perish: It
is no matter what Sinners they were, if you do not repent, and leave your sins,
you shall all perish as well as they: But so much for the fifth Proposition.

6thly. God by Christ is just and righteous, Prop. 6.
in this dispensation of his, in causing some to see, and others by the same
means, to be hardened and made blind. None shall have ought to say against him
at the Last day; but all then shall be made to say, Righteous art Jer. 12. 1.
thou O Lord. Christ will have enough to lay to the Charge of wicked Men, for
their rejecting of Him, and the tenders of his Grace to them, in and by his
Word. But their Mouths shall then be all stopped and muzzled; for none shall
enter into Judgment with God, nor have Mat. 22. 12.
any thing to say for themselves, nor against God: Some now say, that God will
not turn them, and that he has reprobated them to Hell; and if they pine away
in their Sins, how con they help it? Thus many quarrel with God here, but no
such complaints shall Ez. 33. 10, 11.
be heard against God at the Last day; for then all sinners shall see that
their Damnation is Just, and so shall clear God, and forever Condemn
themselves. One will say, (when in Hell) God is Just in sending of me hither,
for by my sins I have deserved to come to this place of Torments. Another will
say, my Pride has brought me hither; another, my Swearing and Prodigality; a
third, my Unbelief, and rejecting of Christ, and his Word, has sunk me into
this abyss of misery. Oh! What complaints will sinners make against themselves?
How will they reiterate again and again those good Sermons, and wholesome
Instructions they have heard, and misimprov'd here on earth? each one will say,
How have I hated Instruction, and my Heart despised reproof; and have not
Obeyed the ways of Prove. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14.
my Teachers, nor Inclined my Ear to them that Instructed me. The Lord (will
every one then say) is Just and Righteous, in sending me here to this place of
endless, and easless Misery: For by my sins, I have deserved it a Thousand
times over. Thus much for the Propositions:

I shall now 3dly, show you, how this stands with the Holiness and Kindness of
God, to 3d. Head 2 These. 2. 10, u.
give Men up to Blindness of Mind and Hardness of Heart, to believe Lies (that
as the Apostle says) they may be damned.

This I must confess, sounds harsh at the first, and seems to be Inconsistent
with that goodness and kindness, that God has expressed in his Word to sinner:
But I hope anon, you will see clearly, that in these tremendous dispensations,
God is both Good and Just. Before I speak directly to this case, I shall
premise two things, that will give you great Light in this matter.

First, that God in all his dispensations of Grace and Providence, acts in a
way of Sovereignty Prem 1.
like himself, as not being bound to his Creatures: He has Mercy on whom he
will have Mercy; and whom he will, he hardneth. Why does God write some Names
in Romans 9. 18.
the Book of Life, and leave out others? Why does he save some, and Condemn
others at last? Why are some Enlightened, and others Blinded by the same Word?
Why does not God Accompany it with the Efficacy, of his Spirit in some, as well
as in others? What (beloved) will you resolve these things into, but the
Sovereign Will and Pleasure of God, Who gives no Account of his matters Job.
33. 13.
unto any? Why are some Rich and others Poor? some Noble, and others Ignoble?
some Strong and Healthy, and others Sickly and Weakly? etc. Why, it is the Will
and Pleasures of God it should be so. God gives Grace when and to whom he
pleases, as well as other things. Why does not God mould the Heart to a Gospel
frame, when he fills the Ear with a Gospel sound? Why are not all Converted by
the Word, as well as some? Why does God strike off the Chains from some, and
tear off the Veil from the Heart; while he leaves others in Slavery, and
Egyptian darkness? Why do some ly under the bands of Death, while others are
raised to spiritual Life? There is no reason for these things, but the
Sovereign Will of the Great God, who works in us both to will, and to do,
Phil. 2. 13.
of his own good pleasure.

Secondly, though God Blinds some, and causes Prem. 2.
others to See, Save some and Condemn others; soften some by the word, and
hardens others by it; yet he is Just and Righteous. Genesis 18. 25.
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? Yea surely, he that is all
righteousness cannot Act contrary to himself, though God does terrible things in
the way of his providence, yet he does them all in Righteousness; He is
righteous Psalm. 65. 5.
in all his Ways, and holy in all his Works, Ps. 145. 17.
both in his Works of Judgment, as well as Mercy. He that Acts in a way of
Sovereignty (remember it) always Acts in a way of perfect Righteousness and
Equity. Who can charge God with sin, and say that he is not Just and Righteous
in what he does? Oh! be sure, that in all things you acknowledge God to be
Just, though you understand not well the reason of things done by him: Remember
though you may want a reason for Gods dealings in the World, yet he has always
a reason for what he does; and that is his Will, which is the Rule of
Perfection, and the supreme Reason. He works all things according to the
Council of his own Will, that Ephesians. 1. ^^. 12. Mat. 11. 25. 26.
the Mysteries of the Gospel are revealed to Babes, and hid from the Wise and
Learned ones of the Age, is from Gods Will, who Acts Righteously in all he
does: Inquire not then, into the reason of Gods Will, but submit your selves to
it: Say not, why are some softened, and others hardened; some elected, and others
reprobated; some saved, and others damned? Remember that God is Good and Just;
though the manner of God's dealings, may sometimes be hidden, yet it never is,
nor can be unjust: If God reprobate sinners, it is because it agrees with
their deservings; and if he elects the sinful, it is because it agrees with his
goodness: So that, be sure you retain this as a great Truth, that God is
Righteous in all he does: Let God be true (says the Apostle) but every man a
Liar. Having thus premised these two things, I shall now come to the point, and
show you how this stands with the holiness and kindness of God, etc.

That I may clear and open this to you, we must first consider what God does in
the tremendous dispensations, of blinding some by that means, by which others
in Mercy are made to see; this I shall speak to these two ways, viz. 1st. By
way of Negation, 2dly. Affirmation.

1st. I shall speak to it Negatively, and show you what God does not: In these
3 things,

First, when God is said to blind or harden any, he does not Infuse any malice
into their James. 1. 44. 18.
Hearts: To assert this, were to make God the Author of sin, which he is not.
He is the Author of all Good, and of his own Judgments, but not of sin; for he
tempts no man to Evil. The Papists and the Arminians brand us with this
falsely, of making God the Author of sin, which we abhor. All that we say is
this, that the Holy God, is the Author of all his own Judgments: When God
judicially blinds or hardens any, he does not put nor excite malice in them:
Sin is the abominable Jer. 44. 18.
thing that God hates; therefore he cannot be the Author of it.

2dly. This blinding, etc. is not by the patience of God only, in sparing to
punish sinners for their sins: In this sense, wicked men are said to blind and
harden themselves, in the abuse of Gods long suffering and patience. Paul tells
us of some who through the hardness of their Hearts despised the goodness, and
Romans 2. 4, 5.
long forbearance of God, which leads to Repentance; and so they treasured up
Wrath, against the day of Wrath, and the revelation of the Righteous Judgment
of God; God in this sense (beloved) is not said to blind any; but as sinners
are said to blind and harden themselves by his Patience and Goodness to Eccles.
8. 11.
them. Some sin because Grace abounds, and are the more sinful, because God is
kind to them, and patient with them. But,

3dly. This blinding, etc. is not by bear permission only, as some think and
assert: God blinds and hardens; that is, he permiteth and suffers sinners to
be hardened, says some, etc. It Is true, there is Gods permission in this
dispensation; but you must know, that there is more than that in this action.
Permission in the sense of some Men, does suppose God either to be idle, and
negligent, or against his will to suffer things to be done in the World. To
assert this, is to cast upon the Great God,

First, an imputation of negligence, or indulgence; as Old Eli permitted his
Sons to sin; that is, Indulged them in their sins. But who dare be so bold, as
to charge God with Negligence, or Indulgence, who is always Ruling, and
Overruling all things in the World for his own Glory? His Throne is Psalm. 103.
9.
prepared in the Heavens, and his Kingdom Rules over all. But,

2dly. Of impotency, in permitting things which he cannot hinder. If God
(beloved) only barely permits this, then it is either by way of Indulgence,
or for want of Power to prevent it; but it is not from either of these,
therefore there is more than God, bare permission in it. Beloved, God is said
Seven or eight times over, to harden Pharoahs heart; and it is observable, that
the words which the Scripture makes use of, to signify Gods Exodus 4. 21. 7. 3.
10. 3.
penal action in blinding sinners, are such, as cannot be expounded by a bare
permission, or dissertion only. God in these tremendous dispensations, (acting
as a Judge by way of punishment) must Act not merely privitively, but
positively: And I prove it this way; namely, that an Insliction of Punishment
always argues a positive Judgment of God; he Acts as a Judge in it, and
therefore must do something positively. We need not be over solicitous and
curious, to examine the manner how God Acts; for whither we be able, or not
able to open the manner, etc. God is Just and Righteous in it: Wheu God gives
persons over to vile affections, and a reprobate mind, as Acts of Punishment;
he does it always by a Just, though it be by a secret providence; so, that though
his ways are sometimes in the Deep, that we cannot well search them out, yet
they are never unjust. Thus you see in short, that God does more than permit
this, etc. for he is the Author of his own Judgments. Paul tells us (speaking
of the Jews) that God has given them the Spirit of slumber Romans II. 7, 8, 10,
11.
(not as it is a sin) but as it is a Judgment, which he is Author of, and yet
most Just and Righteous ^ur. 2dly. by way of affirmation in these three things.

First, when God does judicially blind Persons, and give them over to believe
Lies, etc. he does undoubtedly withdraw those means which should enlighten
their Minds, and keep them effectually from the reigning Power of their Lusts.
God does not harden and blind by imparting Malice, or putting Hardness into the
Heart; but by withholding or withdrawing that means and grace, that should
soften and enlighten. Now, is God unrighteous in this? surely no; (for as
Christ says) he may do what he will with his own: Matt. 20. 15.
Had not God withheld his Grace from the Angels, and from our first Parents,
(says a learned Man) the first had not fallen from their glorious state, nor
the second from their state of Innocence; by which (says he) D. E. on
Providence.
it appears, that this is no more than God might have done, if man had not
sinned, etc. To say the contrary, is to make God a debtor to the Creature,
which he is not; who can say, God owed him any thing? We are debtors to him,
but he is not to us; he gives, or withholds his grace, when and to whom he
pleases, and none must, nor dare say to him, what do thou? All the
Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as nothing, Dan. 4. 35.
and he does according to his Will in the Army of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants Job. 9. 12. Isa. 45. 9. Jer. 18. 6. 7.
of the Earth, and none can stay his Hand, or say to him, what do thou?
Behold! he takes away, who can hinder him, who will say unto him, what do
thou? But,

2dly. When God judicially blinds Persons, he delivers them up to the power of
the Devil, to be more blinded, seduced and hardened; he suffers them to be led
away captive by the devil at his will: The Lord thus blinds many, by giving
them up to the power of Satan, for him to work upon; thus wicked Saul and Ahab
were hardened, and those mentioned in 2 These. 2. 10. 11. Satan seduceth Souls
by command from the holy God, as appears in the story of wicked Ahab; the
Lord has put a lying spirit in the month of all these thy Prophets, etc. The
God 2 Kings 22. 22. 23. 2 Cor. 4. 5. 6.
of this World (says Paul) has blinded the minds of them that believe not,
etc. But,

3dly, When God blinds and hardens Persons judicially, he leaves them to the
Impetus and force of their Lusts and Corruptions: Thus God hardens them by
themselves, giving them up to the power of their own Lusts: He gave the
Heathens up to vile Affections, Romans 1. 26.
and permitted them to sin yet more and more; proud Pharaoh by his sin and own
free will, hardened his heart, and God hardened Exo 1. 4. 21, 22.
it by his Judgments, giving him up to his Lusts. This (Beloved) is a general
way of God in this dispensation; for all that perish, are thus left to
themselves, to act according to the Impetus of that original Corruption and
Lust that is in their hearts. Now none can deny, but this is consistent with
the Justice and Kindness of God: For if Gods leaving and suffering men to walk
in their own ways, not quenching the original Lust that is in their Hearts, but
suffering them to put it forth in actual Wickedness: I say, if Gods doing this,
would make him the Author of sin, then he must be concluded to be the Author of
all sin that is committed in the World. But that he is not, for Wickedness
proceeds from the Wicked; as says 1 Samuel 24. 13.
the Proverb of the Ancients: The word of God tells us, that he will have
Mercy on whom he will; and his Grace could not be Grace, were it not free. Now,
pray consider, Man being by the Fall a sinner, and full of Corruption, and so
justly worthy of eternal Death, (for by one man's Sin, Judgment has passed
upon all men to Condemnation, and the Wages of Sin is death. I say, it being
thus, etc. God is not unjust in saving some, and leaving others to the Force of
their own Lusts, when for sin he might have damned all. I hope there is none
will doubt, but that if a Traitor justly deserved to die, and to be starved to
death, (though the Prince had it in his Power to Pardon, or supply him with Bread
to keep him from dying in this manner; Yet the Prince were just if he did
neither, but suffered him to perish according to his deserts. Surely, then God
is not unjust in so doing, since all men are Traitors and deserve to die
eternally: This as I think, is denied by none; but that which is greatly
disputed and controverted by learned Men, is, whether God in blinding Sinners,
does not act something positively. Bellarmine and the Arminians deny this in
opposition to whom, our Divines (not without good ground) say this, viz. That
though God does not positively blind, or harden any Sinners, yet he does some
positive Acts, that relate to the hardening of them; it is true, God does not
positively harden any, i. e. he does not make their soft Hearts hard, nor shut
their Eyes, and of seeing, makes them blind: This, (I say) God does not, yet
he is not a mere Spectator, or an idle Looker on, upon the Works of his
Providence. In all Acts of Punishments, God does something positively. The
Scripture speaks of him, as giving up some men to vile Affections, and to a
reprobate Mind, as Acts of Punishment; therefore God, as to them, does
something positively, though he positively hardens none.

The Sum of all then, in short, is this; God may judicially give many up to
their Lusts and to Satan, to be seduced at his Pleasure, and be righteous in
it. But he cannot punish the former sins of any, by putting any Lust or Malice
into their hearts, by which they become more evil and vile. This I say, God
cannot do any otherwise, than accidentally, stirring up that Lust and Malice
that is in their hearts: This is the Sum (as far as I know) of what our Divines
say, as to Gods Acts in the Punishments of Sin, etc. Blindness then in short,
is caused, 1st. By the Word occasionally. 2dly. By his own Malice
meritoriously. 3dly. By the Devil efficiently. And lastly, by God judicially.
So that Satan is the Tormentor, sinful Man the guilty Person, and the holy God
the Judge. Thus far we have seen, so far as we are able to comprehend of what
God does by Christ, in this Act of punishing Sin with Sin, and how just and
righteous he is in it. We shall now,

2dly, Consider the Circumstances those 2 Bron. of the Answer.
are under, whom God brings under such a severe dispensation.

1st. These Persons whom God in a way of Justice thus deals with, are not only
sinners; Romans 3. 23. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
(for God does not deal thus severely with every sinner) all are sinners
against God; but all are not blind and hardened sinners; some are enlightened
and called out of darkness into mavelous light: Therefore,

2dly, These sinners thus blinded, etc. are such as have provoked the Most High
to a very great degree, shutting their eyes against the Light which shined upon
them, and contemning the means which he used to reclaim them; such a Wretch was
proud Pharaoh: first he hardened his heart, and blinded his Exodus 7. 3. 4.
own mind, and then God said, as a just punishment upon him) that he would
harden his heart, etc. Such Wretches were the Heathens mentioned by Paul, they
sinned prodigiously against the Light of Nature, for which, God (in a way of
judgment, as have been hinted) gave them up to Uncleanness, Romans 1. 28.
through the Lusts of their own hearts, and to a reprobate mind, to do those
things which were not convenient: These People in my Text mentioned, had sinned
greatly against Light, and trampled upon Christ, and his Righteousness;
therefore God in a way of just Judgment upon them for their monstrous
wickedness, suffered them to be blinded, while others in mercy were brought
into Christ, and savingly enlightened.

Now (beloved) this being rightly understood, I appeal to all your Consciences
that hear me this day, That (though this be a most tremendous Dispensation of
God) yet whether it be not very consistent, both with the Holiness, Justice and
Kindness of God. What do you think, is it not just with God to punish Sinners,
to avenge him of his Adversaries? Especially such, as have wilfully shut their
eyes, lest the Light of the Gospel should shine upon them, and they should
convert, and Christ heal them: What says Christ of such wretches, I spoke to
them in Parables, in dark sayings, because in seeing they see not, and in
hearing they hear Mat. 13. 13, 14, 15
not, neither do they understand: This Peoples heart is waxed gross, and their
Ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time
they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should
understand with their hearts, and be converted, and I should heal them. Such
Sinners as these, you will say, deserved to be punished, and sent to Hell for
their abominable wickedness. Now if it be just and righteous in God, to turn
such Rebels into Hell for their Sins; Why should it not be just in him, to seal
them up now to that Damnation? Why may not God leave such destitute of his
Grace, and give them over to a reprobate Mind, and to a hard Heart, and yet be
just and righteous? Are there any of you that doubt, whether this be consistent
with the Goodness and Holiness of God? Let me ask you this one Question, viz.

May not God deny the means of grace, to whom he pleases, and yet be a holy
and Satan, and to their Lusts to be seduced and hardened? Are not these his
Instruments in punishing Sinners? And may not the just and holy God, use what
Instruments he please, for the Execution of his wrath for Sin? But here you
will multiply Objections against what I have said, which I shall briefly Answer.

Some of you will say, Is not Blindness of

Hardness and Blindness is not of God, 1. John 3. 4.
holy and righteous Law; surely none can be the Author of it, but he that does
it, and persuades and invites to the doing of it. James 1. 14. 15
Now God, he neither does evil, nor commands, nor infuseth that Lust and
Sin, that is exercised and committed by ungodly men; therefore he is not the
Author of it: But if you consider sin, as the Punishment of sin, so the
Permission of it, is but a just Dispensation of God, and a judicial Act. Now,
surely, God may be the Author of his own Judgments, without being the Author
of Sin: But,

2dly. You must know, that there is a difference between Hardness and Hardening,
Hos. 13. 9. Romans 14. 4.
one) that we should sin by him, by whom we repent, and rise from sin; it is
from God that we stand, from our selves that we fall. So that God is not the
Author of Sin, in giving men up to blindness of mind, to believe Lies.

God (say some) is not angry with his own works, but he is with men for their

Hardness and Blindness, as it is a sin and

3dly. God (says others) gives Occasions

This is true in a sense; but remember Egypt, and which Christ wrought before
the Jews and Pharisees, and the Sermons which he, and the Apostles preached,
had not in themselves any Tendency to produce such an Effect as this, of
blindness: Yet these (you see) through the Lusts of their hearts, were
occasions of their hardening. The Mistress of a house (says one) does not think
that she is accessory to her servants Theft, because she suffers Plate to go
freely about the House, for the use of the Family; which possibly is a
Temptation to the Lust of her Servant, to make him, or her steal. God (beloved
does great things Psalm. 145. 17.
in the world, and shows much Kindness to the Sons of men; he gives them freely
of his Mercies, and sends his word unto them, Psalm. 105. 25.
which to many through their Corruption, is an Occasion of their hardening: The
Egyptians hated Gods people, because he blessed them; and in this sense it is
said, That God turned their Hearts to hate his people, to deal subtly with
his Servants: God (says David) turned their Hearts to hate his people, etc.
That is, by the Occasion of those Benefits which he bestowed upon them: Thus
many are blinded, by the Preaching Let such consider this Text well. Luke 29.
19, 20.
of the word, they through their Corruptions, pervert it to their own
Destruction. As the middle region of the Air, (says one) is more cold by the
Antiporistasis; so, the hearts of many are more hardened, not properly but
accidentally, by the preaching of the Gospel. Now, will you call these
Occasions, viz. God showing of mercy, and giving his holy word? Is he
unrighteous in this? Surely, no: Are not they Romans 6. 1. 2.
wicked indeed, who sin because Grace abounds. How many Peoples Eyes are evil,
because Gods are good; they are sinsul, because he is merciful and long
suffering. Solomon tells us of some, who are so vile, that because Sentence
against an evil work, is not Ecc. 8. 11. Rom: 2. 4, 5.
executed speedily, therefore their hearts are set in them fully to do evil.
There be many, who because God takes them not at their word, and damn them in
the Act of sin, that are the more vile, and so presume upon that mercy and
Goodness that should lead them to true Repentance: But,

4thly. God (says some) knew, that these

This must be granted, for God knows all things that have been, are, and shall
be

Fourthly, I shall wind up all by way of

By way of Information, in these three

You may see here, that as an ill Stomach Solomon tells us, That riches are
kept for the Eccl. 5. 13.
owners thereof, for their hurt; make some men rich, and then they will be
proud, covetous, and profane. If Saul be a King, he will run from God to the
Devil; if Judas Matt. it. 21, 22, 23, 24. Consider this Text well.
be an Apostle, it will be a Snare to him. Oh! How does Sin turn our Mercies
into Judgment, and makes those things which are Blessings, to be Curses to us,
and prove means to our greater Condemnation. But,

2dly. See here, what cause you have that believe, 1 Cor. 4. 7. 8. Matt. ^^ 11,
12.
Grace? who says Paul, has made thee to differ? Or what have thou, that thou
have not received? Why do thou boast, as if thou had not received? Oh!
Admire the free Grace of God, in Christ; for to you it is given to know the
mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but to others it is hid. Blessed are your
Eyes, for they see, and your Ears, for they Hear; for many Prophets, and
Righteous Men have desired to hear those things which you heard, and to see
those things which you have seen, and have not seen them. Oh wonderful Grace!
You may, and ought all that believe, to say with Paul who was a great admirer
of free Grace: By the Grace of God, 1. Cor. 15. 10.
I am what I am; by the Grace of God, I am out of Hell; by the Grace of God, I
that was a Persecutor, am now a Preacher of Christ, and his Gospel. I that was
a Child of Wrath, and an Heir of Hell, am now an Heir of Glory; I that was a
Rebel, am now made a Saint; I that was in the gall of bitterness, and in the
Devils Kingdom, am now by rich Grace translated into the Kingdom of Christ.
Thus may you all say, who through Grace have believed, and do believe in Christ:
For it is by Grace (from first to last) that you Ephesians. 2. 5. 8.
are Saved.

But, 3dly, see here, and Learn, that you David, when God had deserted, and
afflicted him, and seemed not to harken to the voice of his roaring. Thou art O
Lord (says he) holy thou that Psalm. 22. 1, 2. 3.
Inhabitest the praises of Israel. God, I have told you is not unjust in any
thing that he does. Who art thou O Man, that reply against Romans 9. 20.
God? Shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, why have thou made me
thus? Shall the Wood quarrel with the Carpenter? The Iron with the Smith? Shall
sorry sinful man quarrel with God? Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker.
Let the Potsherd Isaiah 45. 9, 10.
strive with the Potsherds of the Earth. Oh reverence the secrets of God, and
do not quarrel with him! Inquire not into the reason of his doings which thou
can not understand; if you could understand it, you would understand much
more, that you have no just reason to complain against God: Oh, be sure that
you acknowledge that to be Just which the holy God does! There be many things,
Deuteronomy. 29. 39.
which the Wise God has not revealed: Oh do not search them, nor censure them;
for he is Just in all! God suffered the Gentiles, about 2000 Years (says one)
to walk in darkness, and then he revealed the Gospel to them. What is the
reason? Is there more merit in us than in our fore Fathers? Surely no, our
Impiety is a like: Who can understand the reason? We see the thing, but Psalm.
39. 9. Jer. 12. 1, 2.
we understand not the cause. O! be dumb with David under the rod of God, and
say with Jeremiah, the Lord is Righteous in all his ways. Corrupt man is not
to dispute with the Holy and Just God about his Judgments; Job 9 1. 2, 3, 4, 5.
he is Wise in Heart, and Mighty in Strength who has hardened himself against
him, and has prospered: Thus much for Information: The,

2d. Use is by way of examination: What good O Christians have you received by
the 2. Use of Trial. 2 Cor. 2. 15. 16. Romans 2. 16, 17. Mie. 2. 12.
Word? Have you sound it to be a savior of Life unto Life, and the power of
God to the saving of your Souls? Does not my word says God, do good to the
upright: O examine what good you have found by the Gospel? You have been
hearers of it many Years; what! Have you received no Soul-benefit by it? Let me
ask you two, or three questions, and do you ask them seriously your own Souls.

Have you been savingly enlightened by the Ephesians. i. 18. 19.
one that is brought to Christ, and Interested in him, are Spiritually
Illuminated; their understandings, which were darkened, are enlightened by the
Spirit: Is it thus with you? Have the Spirit by the Word, set up a divine Light
in your Souls? Is the Veil taken from off your Eyes? Are you that were darkness
2 Cor. 3. 16. Ephesians. 5. 8. Acts 26. 18 1 Cor 4. 5, 6.
in the abstract, made Light in the Lord? Are you turned from Darkness to
Light, and from the power of Satan, to God. In a Word, Has God commanded the
Light to shine into your Souls, and shown you his Glory, in the face of Jesus
Christ? God (says Paul) that commands the Light to shine out of Darkness,
has shined into our hearts: to give the Light of the Knowledge, of the glory of
God in the face of Christ: Is it thus with you? Have you found God dealing thus
with your Souls?

Are your hard and frozen Hearts, softened Peter's Sermon? Men and Brethren, what
shall we do? That beloved, which neither can be bruised, nor broken with any
strokes, nor softened with any Moisture, is hard indeed: By this you may know
your Hearts: Will no means, and monitions of the Word, break your Hearts? Will
no exhortations, entreaties, nor promises in it melt you? Surely thy heart, O
sinner! Must be hardened indeed, that nothing will move, nor melt it. Oh! have
the Word, or rather the Spirit by the Word, broken, and melted any of your
Hearts? Have you found it a hammer, and a fire? A hammer to break your rocky
Hearts, Jer. 23. 29.
and a fire, to burn up your Lusts, and melt down your hearts into Godly
Sorrow. Can you mourn for sin, as sin? And are you grieved that you can love
Christ no better, nor bring forth no more Fruit for his Glory? are you
concerned for his absence? And do you greatly rejoice in his presence? If it be
thus, it is a good sign your hearts are softened.

Are you transformed by the Gospel, into the Image of Christ? Is the Old man
put off, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23.
with is deeds, and the New man put on? Can you truly say with Paul, from good
experience, we all with open face, beholding as in 2 Cor 3. 18.
a glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from Glory to
Glory? Even by the Spirit of our God, have you had transforming sights of
Christ, in the pure Glass of the Gospel: Are you become new Creatures? Can you
remember, it was not with you once, as it is now? Is sin Loath some, and Christ
Lovely to you? Then you have received good by the Word; and it is not a
Judgment, but a Mercy to you.

3d. Use is by way of exhortation. Oh!

First, be exhorted and persuaded to abstain David and Peter did: But have a
care (as one says) of cold blood, and continuing in known sins: Remember that
knowledge takes away all excuse of sin. If I had not come (says Christ to the
Jews) and spoken to them, they had not had John 12. 22.
sin; but now they have no Cloak, or Excuse for their sin: Ignorance (if not
affected) may excuse a tanto, but not a toto; but Knowledge will not excuse any.
Do thou know that drunkenness O Man! is a sin? And that Lying, Whoredom, and
Sabboth-breaking, are abominable sins; and yet Live in them? Alas! what hope
can thou have? A willing practice of known sins, and true repentance, cannot
stand together: Nay remember it, it is the ready way to a reprobate Mind, and to
Eternal Ruin: Though (while in this mortal State) you cannot but sin; yet beware
of two things.

First, of being willingly Ignorant of that, which God gives you the means to
know: This O sinner! Is the mark of a Reprobate Wretch. Peter tells us of some
that are willingly Ignorant of this; that by the Word of the Lord, the Heavens
were of Old. There 2 Pet. 3. 5, 6.
be many that do not know Christ savingly; and this is their misery; they do
not desire to know him: They say unto God, depart from Job. 21. 4.
us, we desire not the Knowledge of thy ways: Oh! beware of this, for to be
Ignorant, and not desire to know, is a sad sign of a hardened Heart, and a
blinded Mind.

But, 2dly. beware of doing contrary to your knowledge; For to him that knows
to 2. James 4. 18
do good, and does it not, to him it is a sin. His knowledge aggravates his
fault. To sin against Light, and Knowledge, is a crimson sin; a sin, of a deep
dye. Every infirmity, every thing that falls short of the Rule, is sin; but
much more, that which contradicts the Rule. This Man's sin is a heinous sin, a
capital sin; it is a sin with a witness, and will be punished with a vengance:
If he that sins Ignorantly, will be damned, surely then, he that does not what
he knows, but contrary, shall be double Luke 12. 47.
damned. He that knows his Master's Will, and does it not, shall be beaten
with many stripes.

But, 2dly, be exhorted to comply and fall in with the motions of the Blessed
Spirit in the Word. Do not the Spirit at no time move upon your Hearts, and
cause some convictions in your Consciences? etc. Oh! see, that when the Spirit
move, you do not resist; For his Spirit (God has said) shall Genesis 3. 6.
not always strive with Man. Oh! quench not the Spirit, turn not a deaf Ear to
his Calls; do not drown his convictions (as some in a Cup of Ale, or in merry
Company. But I must not enlarge: Therefore in the

Third and last Place; Be exhorted and

Some may ask me, what they must do

First, When ever you hear the Word preached, hear it with Reverence and
Attention, Keep thy Foot when thou go to Eccles. 5. 1, 2. Psalm. 119. 11.
the house of God, be reverent in his Presence, and hear the word with due
Attention, as it is the word of God: Let it not go in at one Ear, and out of
the other, but hide it in your hearts, that you may not sin against God.

2dly. Meditate upon the Grace of God in Christ, to poor sinners; think daily
on the freeness, fullness and riches of it: If the serious Thoughts of Grace and
Love to undone Sinners, will not melt you, and constrain you to leave your sins
and love Christ, who have loved you to the Death; I know not what will: The
prodigal Son when he thought of the fullness of Bread, that was in his Fathers
House; then he resolved to return home, and fell down at his Fathers Feet, and
said, Father, I have sinned Luke 15. 18, 19.
against Heaven, and before thee, and am not worthy to be called thy Son.
Nothing like Grace and Love to constrain, melt, and humble the Sinner. Oh!
Think much on God's Love and Grace.

But lastly, For I must not enlarge; pray That he will take away the Heart of
Stone, and Ezekiel: 36. 26.
give a heart of Flesh: Oh! Pray that every Sermon may soften your Heart, and
melt it Gal. 4. 2.
down into godly Sorrow: Many cry God damn me, but there is few in good earnest;
Pray for Grace, and for a tender Heart: Oh! 1. These. 5. 17. Luke 18. 1. 6.
Turn the word preached into Prayer; and say, Lord, make this and every word of
(...), a good word unto my Soul.

I shall add do more, but leave what has been said to the Blessing of the
GREAT GOD.

SOLIDEO GLORIA.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Pray, Courteous Reader, mend with your Pen these following Faults.

PAge 7. line 32. for Sword read Fear. In the same Page, for Temption read
Temptation. Page 13. line 23. for Means read Meant. Page 9. line 3. for
Judiciously read Judicially. Page 15. line 32. for Promulging read
Promulgation. Page 38. line 3. for Ways read Voice. Page 39. line 10. for
Pleasures read Pleasure. In the same, for To read Into.

A FUNERAL SERMON.
2 Timothy iv. Verse vii. viii. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the Faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at that Day:
And not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.
SOlomon the Wise tells us; To every thing there is a Season, and a Time, a
Time to be Born, and a Time to Die, a Time to Mourn, and a Time to Rejoice,
Eccles. 3. 1. etc.

I doubt not, All the Godly and the Serious, and Sensible here present, will
readily acknowledge with me, That this is a Time to Mourn: But will it not look
like the adventuring on a Paradox, to affirm to you, That it is also a Time to
Rejoice?

A Time it is indeed to Mourn for the loss of so dear a Relation, and so Pious
and Christian a Friend: But are we not Christians as well as Men? And while
Nature seeles, sighs, nay sinks at the dismal Loss of Friends, or Relations;
Grace should triumph over Nature, and Faith over Sense. While we are bemoaning
their loss, we should be Rejoicing in the Crown and Glory of Saints, of which
number she was we have so great Reason to be assured. Our Deceased Friend was
one of their Number, who by their Holy Conversation give a plain, and sensible
demonstration of the Power of the Principles of our Holy Profession, both by
their Life, and their Death; For Words have not that Energy and Force, that
Action and Conversation has; a shining Life, and a triumphant Death, persuade
beyond all the Power of Argument, or charms of Rethoric.

And concerning the not only unblameableness, but Piousness of her Life, for
whose Death we now Mourn, it was so well known to all that knew her, that she
has therein a better Character, than I can give her; for modesty of Style, and
Reserves of Expression become me, when I consider the Modesty and Humility of
her Deportment, through the whole of her Life.

I come therefore now to the Text I have proposed to Discourse upon. The whole
Text is drawn in Figures, borrowed from the Olimpic Games, well known in the
Times, and Places in which the Apostle wrote. Games appointed for all the
activities of Persons, prepared by Frame, and Constitution of Body, Vigor of
Mind, and Inclination, and strictly Disciplined, Dieted, and Exercised
thereunto: Such an allusion is at other times made use of by the Apostle, as 1
Cor. 9. 24. And being Sanctified by the Divine Spirit, is most elegant and
expressive of holy Senses.

In this Place The Apostle of the Gentiles gives us under these Emblems a
threefold Character of himself; and then sets out the Prize.

1. His Encountering, and Combating all the Temptations of Satan within, and of
the World without; wherein he Fought, not as one that beats the Air, but at
sharps (as they say) with great effect for Offense and Defense, as those
Combatants alluded to used to do.

2. He (who received the Prize) Finished his Course. Therein he alludes to
those, who Run in a Race that they might Obtain: He Ran not as in certainly: He
Ran the whole Course of Doing and Suffering, and of his Ministry, and
Apostleship, the whole Race set before him to the very Mark.

3. He kept the Faith, the great Faith of the Gospel, in union to the Crucified
Jesus, which was the scandal of the Jews and Gentiles; even the Cross of
Christ, and the Obedience of Faith in all the Holiness, Mortification to the
World, and the Lusts of it within, and without; and does extend to all kinds of
Suffering, Heavenlyness of Mind, and Conversation: Hereby he behaved himself,
as a mighty Champion, that by no means would let go his Hold, or Deposium, the
Pearl of great Prize, or surrender it to the violence against it.

And so he leads us to the second Part of this great Text, under the same
allusion, The Crown, or the Prize; not the Corruptible Crown of those Games,
but the Incorruptible; to which the Apostle refers, a Man is not Crowned except
he strive Lawfully; and herein he thus expresses himself; Henceforth is laid up
for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Righteous Lord shall give me.

Before I begin with the First Character, I would consider the Apostles
Expression of himself; I have Fought, I have Finished, I have Kept. Now it is
certain the Apostle, who acknowledges himself chief of Snners, and least of
Saints, would not speak of himself, as in, or of, or by himself; but is to be
interpreted by 1 Cor. 15. 10. etc. By the Grace of God I am what I am; and not
I, but the Grace of God that was with me. And Gal. 2. 10. I Live, yet not I;
but Christ Lives in me. Although therefore at the first view, the Apostle may
appear, as a self-Subsisting, a self-Confident Person in that three fold (I:)
Yet when we duly weigh what he says in those places, Not I: It shows, when he
speaks thus, he considers himself as in Christ the Head, and Savior of the
Body, who represented his, in all he Did and Suffered. But further, He is in
all his united to him by Faith, He does all their Works in them, and for them,
and thus in him, by the Power they receive from him, by being strong in the
Grace, that is, in Jesus Christ. They do all, They do, so that the Apostle when
he says, (I) does not mean himself, by (I) as single, solitary, divided from
Christ; but as in him, by him; as to the Strength, Life, Principle he acted
from. He did all in Christ; and not only so, but as the Power, and the Action
flowing from it was in Christ; So the acceptance, the making up the
Imperfections, the taking away the Guilt, the Corruption; The setting him free
from the Law of Sin and Death; In regard of condemnation falling upon Sin
dwelling in him. In all this, he looks wholly to Christ; and so his Fighting,
Finishing his Course, keeping the Faith, Are to be limited; Not I, but Christ
alone did all in me and was accepted for me

This is therefore, the not only Encouragement, but the very support, nay more,
the subsistnce of Saints in all their holy Action and Motion: All is in Christ.

And this is their consolation in the midst of so many Clouds of Guilt, and
Imperfection; that they have a faithful and merciful high Priest who makes
Reconciliation; and perfumes their Persons, and services with his much Incense.
And though many are ignorant of this great Gospel Doctrine, this was the
consolation of our Friend in her Dying Hours.

Now this Explication of the Apostles as it shuts out on one side all the
Pharisaie Boasts in our selves, all the Self-righteousness and Self-sufficiency
of Legalists; so it utterly condemns all the Licentious pretensions of
Carnalists, to live as they please; or to be Slothful, Negligent, Careless,
Unactive in these great Transactions: For though they live all in Christ,
depend wholly on Him for acceptance; yet all His are under the Holy Constraints
of Love, and the Obligations of Filial Obedience; and Christ in them is a
Principle of Spiritual Life, and Highest Activity. So that they can neither be
loose or plead Liberty as a Cloak of Wickedness, nor be dull, and stupid in the
ways of Christ. And herein our Deceased Friend had learned Christ; In all
things sensible of Duty; but Living as to Justification and Acceptance with God
above. With those, who are the Circumcision, Worshipping God in the Spirit,
rejoicing in Christ Jesus; and having no confidence in the Flesh, and so she
was able, though so young a Person, to sing the Song of Victory: O Death Where
is thy Sting? Oh Grave! Where is thy Victory? I thank God through Jesus Christ
my Lord, who has given me the Victory. This made Her earnestly desire a remove
out of the Body, and to be with Christ.

Thus I have given the True Evangelical sense of the Apostle placing so much
upon himself, I have Fought, and Finished, and Kept. It Is but as if he had
said, I have, I can do all things through Christ strengthneing me: and I can
look look upon all with Joy and Triumph, because all my Impurities and
Imperfections are answered for, and my Person is washed with the pure Water of
his Sacrificing Blood.

Let us then consider the great sense of the Apostle; I have faught a good
Fight. Wherein he comes forth in the strength of Jehovah Jesus Christ the Lord
of Hosts. As David the Warrior of the Lord, under the Captain of Salvation.
Resolved, and armed at all Points; and that had with Courage and Fidelity,
almost now to the very last, carried on so far, as his Station reached, the
full Conquest and Victory of Jesus Christ, he is now triumphing over all
Enemies.

For the Explaining of this warfare, in the wars of the Lord, as they are
styled, Numb. 21. 14. We are to consider the Great Lord mighty in Battle, who
arms all his; even the Lord Jesus, who appoints them; who are therefore styled
Good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, who has Redeemed them, from being slaves of
Justice, of Wrath, of Satan; and they therefore are said to overcome by the
Blood of the Lamb. So their very setting out is by his Blood; They are Armed by
him with Courage, Spirit, and Might within. He teaches their hands to War, and
their Fingers to Fight; by him they run through a Troop, by him they leap over
a Wall; it is he that Girdeth them with strength to the Battle, that they may
help the Lord against, the mighty; and that all Enemies may be subdued to him;
and trherefore the Fight is called a good Fight with great Reason.

1. The Apostle had to Fight with himself, his carnal Reason to Throw down the
strong holds of that, to bring every thought into Captivity to Christ, all
those high Thoughts of self-Righteousuess, to slight all conferences with Flesh
and Blood, and to repel them, when tempted to such disloyal Treaties; to bring
under the Law of his Members that warred against the Law of his Mind, and would
bring him into Captivity to the Law of Sin, and Death, to bring under
subjection that carnal Mind; that is enmity to God; not subject to the Law of
God, nither indeed can be; that in dwelling Sin. All those Willings and
Lustings against the Spirit; In regard of which, the Apostle Expresses himself
in the Language of a Combatant in those Games, that deals the most subduing,
and mortifying Strokes and Blows; so he upon all Bodily Inclinations and Lusts.
And this is one great Point of the good Fight, the Apostle reviews with so much
comfort: But it is in Christ, and through Christ, by whom, in whom as Crucified
with him, the Flesh with its Lusts and Affections are Crucified and not in, or
by himself.

2. The Apostle had to Fight with the World, in all both its inticements and
blandishments, and in regard of its Threats, Rages, and Persecutions; In both
regards says He, I am Crucified to the World, and the World to me, Gal. 6. 14.
But it is in Christ, and his Cross alone enabled Him.

3. He had to Fight with all the Enemies of the Gospel of Christ, in resistance
to the Grace of Christ in the Hearts of all, to whom He Preached; For speaking
of the Preaching of the Gospel, He says, The Weapons of our Warfare are
mighty: So with the open professed Oppositions to the Truth of Christ in his
Redemption. To the Jews a Scandal; as it it was contrary to all the Revelation
of God, in the Old Testament; and to the Gentiles Foolishness as if it had no
Agreement with the Reason, Learning, and Wit of Men of Understanding, and
Accomplishment, 1 Cor. 1. 23.

4. He had to Fight with the Powers of Darkness, Spiritual Wickednesses in high
Places; as every Christian has, For as He says, we War not; That is, not
principally; against Flesh, and Blood, but against Principalities and Powers,
the Rulers of the Darkness of this World. And for the maintaining this Fight,
He had the same necessity with all Saints; To take to himself the whole Armor
of God, that he might stand in the evil day, and having drne all to stand, Ephesians.
6. 10.

5. All the Persecutors, and their cruelty, like the Beasts of Ephesus, in what
Sense soever taken, He had to Fight with; wherein He suffered, as an evil doer;
and was Killed all the Day long. But in all, He was more than a conqueror,
through him who Loved him.

6. He had to Fight with Guilt, Death and the Grave, the Wrath to come; and
with all the unbelief of his own Heart; But he over came by the continual
Application He made to the Death and Resurrection of Christ Jesus, who Loved
him, and gave himself for him, in whom he desired to be Found. So that he Ran
up to that assurance, to make that challenge, who shall lay any thing to my
^harge, as one of Gods Elect; to be assured, that neither Life, nor Death,
Things present, nor Things to come, should be able to separate him from the
Love of Christ; and so he could Sing that Triumphant Song; Oh Death where is
thy Sting? Oh Grave where is thy Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin; the
Strength of Sin is the Law, but thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord,
as in the case of the Body of Sin and Death. All he places still in Christ; and
thus we see on all accounts, The Apostle Fought a good Fight, and through
Christ had the Prospect of a High and Noble End of the War, that is, of
Victory.

Head 2. I come then to the Second Point of the Apostles Triumphing Declaration
of his own State in Christ; I have finished my course; That we may rightly
apprehend, Here are two things to be understood by it.

I. The General course of a Christian State in its own Motion, Action,
Conversation, from the Time of Conversion unto the very Hour of Death. This was
one thing the Apostle understood by his course, for God having drawn out the
Line of Life, as he has seen fit for every one of his Servants; Their course
of Christian Action is by him drawn out proportionable; So that there is no
part to be unadorned; Something of Public, Private, Secret, Unholy Action is
to be applied to every part of it; There must be a Running to obtain: It is
called therefore Running the Race, that is set before us; Looking to Jesus; to
show in whose strength the whole Race is run; So, It is expressed concerning
David, by his serving his Generation according to the will of God; and of John's
fulfilling his course, as a Servant of God in a Holy Conversation, besides his
Ministerial service: How many great concernments has every Christian to look
to; His Implantation into Christ, Renovation, New Creation; The In-dwelling of
the Spirit, the Graces, and Fruits of it; His Living, walking in the Spirit;
The work of Faith with Power; Sorrow after God working Repentance to Salvation
never to be Repented of. The constraining Love of Christ, the living to him,
the dying Daily; Converse with the Word of God, Hearing, Reading, Meditation,
Holy Discourse, Prayer, Thanksgiving; Self-denial, Sufferings, being made meet
to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light: All these with much
more set before us in Scripture, show us, what the Race of a Christian is; what
his course is; Now to find our Heart engaged herein, with all earnestness
Pressing forward to reach the mark by the utmost stretch and extending our
selves to it, is what the Apostle speaks of himself: He had run on in this
Christian course, on this Line, to very near the End of his Line of Life; and
it is a Glorious Review of a sincere, much more of an Eminent Christian; while
he can behold Christ, the Alpha, and Omega, the Beginning, and End of All; All
the Haltings, the Falls, False-steps, the many Lingerings, made up, Answered,
and Attoned for by the Author, and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy set
before Him, ran the whole course, the Father Lined out to Him, Doing always the
things pleasing in his sight; Who set every step according to his Obediential
Love to the Father, and thefore went forth to his Death with highest
Resolution; Let us Arise (says he) and (John 14. 31.) Go hence: He endured the
Cross, despised the shame, and is set down on the right hand of the Majesty on
High: And thus his servants follow his steps, and so we have reason to hope of
this his Servant, that she was swift, she Finished her course, she Finished the
course she was set in, though a more private, and retired one, before she was
Prohibited, as the true sense of that word, we Translate (Not suffered)
signifies, Heb. 7. 21. To continue any longer therein.

2. There is yet a higher, and more exalted sense of the Apostle Finishing his
course; not a more substantial or Fundamental sense; For that is indeed the
Fundamental; All the redeemed of Christ in, and by him, running their course,
and so entering into their Masters Joy; but there was also in all times a more
Public, and high sphere of Action; Into which God has been pleased to raise
some of his servants; and there has not been a higher, then the Ministry of
the Gospel; and most particularly, the Apostolic; and to this undoubtedly the
Apostle had regard, when he here says, I have Finished my course.

For herein the Apostle had a Line given to him and a measure, the measure of
the Line, which he would not stretch himself, nor into other Men's Labors, but
according the Rule or Line prescribed him by God, 2 Cor. 10. 13, etc. And this
was so abundant, that he Labored more abundanily, then any other, 1 Cor. 15.
10. He was the Apostle of the Gentiles, Ministering the Gospel of God so to
them, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be a Sacrifice, Acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ, being sanctified by the Holy Spirit; which was indeed a
high sphere of Christian Gospel-Activity; and whereof he says, He might Glory;
And the Line was so every way enlarged, that he Preached the Gospel round about
from Jerusalem to Illyricum, Romans 15. 16, etc. He did fully, or Fulfill to
Preach the Gospel of Christ, and He strived to Preach where Christ had not been
Named; And all this was made efficacious, by Mighty Signs, and Wonders, by the
Power of the Spirit of God. So that it was best for the Churches, and more
needful he should continue, though to his loss, Phil. 1. 21. In all this
Notwithstanding; He was most mindful to ascribe all to Grace, 1 Cor. 15. 10. By
the Grace of God be was All, that He was; and after all his Discourse of his
Line, and measure, He concludes; He that Glories, Let him Glory in the Lord, 2
Cor. 10. 17. The Apostle Finished this course, under and by the High Priest,
and Apostle of our Profession, whose the fupreme Glory in all is; Inasmuch as
He, who Built the House has more Honor, then the House; whose House with all
Prophets, Apostles, and Saints, Heb. 3. 1. The Apostle was; For He, who Built
All Things in his Church, is God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Head 3. I come now to the third Head, or Character, the Apostle gives of
himself. I have kept the Faith: This Completes the whole: Herein the Apostle
speaks again, as a mighty Champion, that retained the Riches of Faith, Much
more precious, then of Gold, that Perishes: The Faith he retained with such a
Might, and would by no means suffer it to be forced out of his Hand.

1. That Great Principal, and most essential Faith, the Apostle kept, or held
fast, is Jesus Christ Himself, and his Righteousness, who is pleased, because
he himself is indeed the All of Faith, to be styled Faith it self, Gal. 3. 23.

2. It is the whole Truth of the Gospel, as the Apostle Jude gives it the
Honorable Title of the Faith once, at once, once for All; Delivered to the
Saints, Jude 3. Comprizing the Righteousness of Faith by which the Just Live,
and receive even full assurance of understanding: The Righteousness of God
revealed from Faith to Faith; The Faith embracing the truth that is after
Godliness, which whoever walks contrary to, denies the Faith; The Faith that
looks to the Eternal State and Condition; which Hymeneus and Philetus, denying
by saying, The Resurrection was past already, overthrew the Faith of some. This
the Apostle held, fast in all the senses of it, now given, and would by no
means part with, or betray to any Seducers, or Adversaries of one sort, or
other; as was before asserted under the first Character of Fighting a good
Fight.

3. The inward Grace of Faith in the Heart, and Holy confession of which the
Apostle says. Romans 10. With the Heart, Man believes unto Righteousness, and
with the Mouth confession is made to salvation; The Life, he lived by the Faith
of the Son of God, who loved him and gave himself for him. The Faith even the
Plerophory of it, sprinckling the Heart from an Evil Conscience by the Blood of
Jesus, the Faith, by which we have Peace with God, the faith that embraces the
Promises, by which we cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of Flesh, and
Spirit; the shield of faith, The Apostle Exhorts above all to take, to quench
the fiery Darts of the Devil; The faith, by which the Elders obtained so
Honorable a Testimony, and Memory, Heb. 11. In all those their great Acts; The
faith that passes through all afflictions, temptations, and trials, till those
Pillars are set up with this Inscription, Rev. 13. Here is the Faith and
Patience of the Saints, here are they, who keep the Commandments of God, and
hold the Testimony of Jesus; Lastly the faith, the very presence of things
hoped for, raises to that Plerophory of hope, that enters within the Veil. All
Saints with the Apostle who by faith have dyed, and slept in, and by Jesus, and
are entered into rest with him, even as this servant of the Lord has done by
the same faith; and whom God even our Lord Jesus will bring with him, the
Living remaining Saints shall not Anticipate; The Lord my God will come, and
all his Saints with him: But in all this faith, our whole subsistence is in,
and by the Author, and Finisher of Faith.

And so we are come to the second part of the Text; Henceforth is laid up for
me a Crown of Righteousness; This is the Prize of the High Calling of God in
Jesus Christ; Eternal Glory, the Eternal Inheritance, Eternal Redemption; the
whole Excellency, Glory, and Blessedness of the Eternal State is the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light; which is alone by Jesus Christ in us, the
Hope of Glory reserved in Heaven: This the Lord as a Righteous Judge gives, and
he gives as a Crown of Righteousness; Because Jesus Christ has purchased it
with his own Blood, and Obedience; And in him, it is that Saints are able to
subsist in this Eternal Glory; Being made like him, by seeing him as he is; but
most Glorious, herein is that State, He in the Father, the Father in Him; and
Saints hereby in Christ, and in the Father; and the Love wherewith the Father
Loved Him, even before the Foundation of the World is in them, because He is in
them, and in all this the Son Intercedes with the Father, as a Righteous
Father, John 17. 24, etc.

To open this part of the Text, according to the Tenor of the present
Discourse, so far, as we have proceeded.

1. That expression of the Apostle; Henceforth, or as the word in the Greek
signifies, (...), That which remains is, there is laid up for me, etc. An
expression suitable to this is that, Heb. 4. 9. There remains a rest for the
People of God; This has an Immutable certainty; If the Judgment of wicked Men
be laid up in store with God, and Sealed among his treasures, Deuteronomy. 32. 34. How
much more the Salvation, the Glory, and Blessedness of his Saints: It is as
cerrain, and much more certain, then as in themselves, the precedent Fighting
the good Fight, etc. For their assurance is not in themselves; They would fail
and come behind, as Combatants not obtaining the Prize, If all the certainty
were in themselves; as the Angels not Elect, and Adam failed, or fell short:
But the Prize it self to be given to them, who do Fight, and Run, is in the
nature of the thing out of themselves, and in God alone; and is assured by his
Righteousness, and Veracity, that cannot fail. This remainder is so Connexed,
as not possible to be separated, from what went before; and more Impossible by
far to fail, then what went before, as in us, but as all is sure in the Great
surety, It is to be fulfilled in all his; Even as the Debt He paid for them is
set far above all doubts.

2. In this assurance of the Prize, the Apostle speaks so triumphingly of, he
says, The Lord, the Righteous Judge shall give me; He Styles the Lord, the
Judge, and the Righteous Judge, in agreement with the custom of those Games; In
which there was a Person, solemnly constituted, who should adjudge the Prizes,
and Determine the Lawfulness of the striving, as the Apostle says, a Man is not
Crowned, except he strive Lawfully. And it was expected from such a Person in
that State of Honor, that he should be Fair, Equal, and Just in all his
Judgment, and Determination; and it assures the Judgment of the Lord to be in
all things, admirable for its greatest Equity, Righteousness, and Judgment; For
the Righteous Lord Loves Righteousness, Psalm. 11. 7. And thus in allusion to
this in that so known Seat of allusion to these Games, the Apostle says; I keep
under my Body, and with the Austerest methods, Bring it into subjection; Least
while I Preach to others; I my self should become one Rejected, to whom the
Prize is not Judged; one unworthy the Prize; Because he who Determines, is a
Righteous Judge, and will not be Imposed upon with outsides, or Formalities.

But here the great doubt is, where is the Saint to be found, who can stand
before a Judge, a Righteous Judge, such a Righteous Judge as the Lord is?

And the alone Answer is, according to what has been said already; That it
depends wholly upon what has been done by the Captain of their salvation; His
Obedience and his Sacrifice, the Author, and Finisher of Faith; What he has
done without them; That, in which he was wholly alone, and none of his with
him; and that which he works in all his, as their Head of Life, and Influences;
making them strong in the Grace, that Resides supremely, and vitally in
Himself, and flows continually into them; and that by way of inward Residence
and Possession, by his Dwelling in them, John 6. 57. And they in him; Even as
the Living Father sent him, and he Lives by the Father, so all Believers live
by Him and in Him;

This then being the Fundamental Meritorious Account; Christ All, and in All,
there is a Glorious, Resplendent Justice, and Equity in Gods Adjudication of
the Prize to all Saints in Him; Because there is an exact Balance, between
what is Christ's, and the Glory of the Crown, and of the Prize; So that
Scripture delights in the use of the Word, Just, Righteous, Righteousness in
the Admensuration to all in Christ at that Day Just, and the Justifier of Him
that believes in Jesus; He is Just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousuess, by way of Acquitance, and Judiciary discharge;
because, The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son has by satisfaction, and Sacrifice
for sin, first cleansed from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1. 10. And there is an
Illustrious Ensign of Justice, and Righteousness, in the Judgment of God,
(...); And a Flag of Defyance against all Adversaries, the Calumnies of
Malicious Devils, and enraged Spiof wicked Men, 2 These. 1. 5, etc. Hung out;
(we translate a manifest token) in that Day, a Day of Adjudging the Prizes;
That Day of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2. 5.

And therefore the Crown is called, as in some places a Crown of Glory, 1 Pet.
5. 4. And a Crown of Life; So here a Crown of Righteousness, as due to Christ
in his; though to us, as in our selves, It is a Crown give^ the Gift of Free
Grace; as Eternal Life, o^pos'd to Death the wages, due demerit, desert of Sin:
It is Free Gift in Jesus Christ upholding the Glory of Justice, and
Rigteousness in that Gift.

3. The Crown (says the Apostle) shall be given at that Day; There are two
Times eminently Styled in Scripture, that Day.

1. The Day of the first opening of the Glory of the Gospel; and after a time
of Eclipse by the Antichristian Apostasy, shining out again in Glory; In which
first and last the great Prophecies of Scripture are Fulfilled; we find
therefore often in the Prophet; In those Days, and In that Day, as all
Comprised under that great Point of time, the Fullness of time; the appearance
of Christ in the Flesh, Gal. 4. 4. And the time from thence running to his
appearance.

2. The, that Day of the Appearance of Jesus Christ, and of his Kingdom; as
they are joined a little before the Text; that Fullness of All Times, when all
shall be placed, that is Happy and Blessed under their Head, Ephesians. 1. 10. And so
that Day is often used in the Epistles of the New Testament; as here, and
continually; that Great Day, that Day, wherein shall be so Gl^^^us an
Unveiling, a Revelation of the things, that have now been kept secret, but
shall then be set out in the truest, and most Glorious Light; The Beauty of
every thing in its own proper season, to which God has referred in that
General Table of time, God has drawn, and that Solomon gives in short the
Heads off, in that so wise Book, the Book of Ecclesiastes, or of the Preacher.
At the End of the several events, there recorded; saying, God has made every
thing Beautiful in its season; But, because it does not, or may not without
wise References to that Eternal World be understood to be so; He says, God has
set Eternity, or the Eternal World in their Hearts, Eccl. 3. 1, etc. Then also
are all the Great Mysteries of the Gospel shall be clearly unfolded, and laid
open; All the various dealings of God with his own, and with the Men of his
present Hand, and might; the Men of this World; shall be unriddled, and
disengaged from all their Darks, and Intricacies, and the Crown set with
Glory, and the Glory of Righteousness on all his Saints: And this because it is
the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God; And then as the wicked shall
be all in Horror, Tribulation, Anguish, and Amazement; So Christ will be
Glorified in the Saints, and Admired, in all them, who believe, who have Fought
the Good Fight, so as not to beat the Air; They have run not as Incertainly,
and as in Naval Contests, have not Shipwrack'd, but held fast the Faith: And so
the Crown Adjudg'd to them by the Righteous Judge of the Combatants, and their
Activities in and through their great Agonothetes, Jesus Christ and the suprme
Agonistes, Master of All, and chief Combatant.

4. The Apostle joins with himself all those, who, Love the appearing of Jesus
Christ, as those, whom the Righteous Judge will give the Crown of Righteousness
unto, And this expression offers two considerations to us.

1. That seeing, the Apostle gives this short Character of Saints in General,
and not so particularly, (as Fighting the good Fight; Finishing all their
course, and keeping the Faith,) but Loving the appearance of Jesus Christ; It
shows, there may be; and there is a different eminency of Saints; But as they
all meet in the Head, Root, Corner Stone; So whatever their different measures
are in making up the full st^ture in Christ, yet they are all alike in the
Glory, the Crown of Righteousness; Because it is all given by grace in Christ
and so the Least, as well as the greate^t are Crowned in Him; He gives the same
Crown to the Last, as to the First, even as in the Parable, Mat. 20.

2. In that all Saints Love the Appearance of Christ, it is made certain; They
are those, that have Fought, Run, hell fast the great Depositum, Committed to
them, so as to obtain, and not to be rejected; the Faith, which gives them the
assurance, and lifting up of the Head at the appearance of the great Judge, and
Arbitrator of the Prize; and so they desire, long for, and Love his Appearance;
And thus I have given a brief View, and Examination of the words of this Great
Text.

Applic. That which I would now infer from the whole discourse by way of
Doctrinal conclusion, by way of Practical enforcement, by way of Consolation,
relating to the particular occasion, shall be.

First, That we would look to it; To hold the Faith of Jesus Christ in its own
Purity; For the Gospel is so pure, separate from all mixtures, as Silver
Purified in a Furnace of Earth, Purified seven Times, that we must not pervert
it any way; Every Word of God, Prove. 30. 5, 6. Much more the Great
Gospel-Points: Whoever add to it, or diminish from it, will be found Liars unto
it; Blessed are they that trust in it, It will be to them a Shield of
Salvation. As to that Great Point, Righteousness by Faith in Christ without
works; How suddenly do Men slide down to Another Gospel under the Apostles
Anathema; and yet It is not another, but the clear, pure streams of
Gospel Truth and Grace are hereby troubled; and the satisfaction, and comfort
of Believers disturbed, and the Invitingness of it to strangers much obscured
and defiled: Now here in the subtility of the Enemies of the pure Doctrine of
the Gospel is seen; That they being afraid to take up the Insolent,
Antichristian Word; Merit, or as the Apostle calls it, Debt. They would yet
Privily bring in such a supposed presence of works after Grace, as sincere
obedience, though not perfect into Justification, as the condition of that
Covenant, upon which it justifies; even as perfect obedience was the condition
of the Covenant of Works; and yet merit not once Named nor Allowed; Because
Adams strength to work by, if he had rightly applied it, was indeed from the
Bounty and Goodness of the Creator; yet as in a way of Condecency, of such a
Creator to such a Creation, as the Humane Nature; that came pure and perfect
out of His Hand: But what Believers do is from Grace in Christ, by and from His
Spirit, Vouchsafed to Sinners, and so cannot Merit: Now this has indeed very
great Truth in it; Yet it does not Answer the High Expression of the Gospel,
excluding all Created, or Creature-Righteousness in the Court of Righteousness,
or Justification; and placing all in the Righteousness of God by Faith in Jesus
Christ; In his obedience, in his Expiation, Filling up, and so replenishing
that Court; That nothing else can enter, but is kept out by the Flaming Sword
of the Fiery Law: Yea, Angels that never sinned, yet Cover their Faces, Esa. 6.
and their Feet, their Excellency and the Nakedness, and Folly of all Created
Being before Increated and consist in and by Christ: Christ, as the Head of
Amity, and Perseverance in their Glorious State; and Adam, not Flying to it
upon those tenders of it signifid to Him, as by that real evidence of it; That
he was, and could be no more, then the Figure of Him that was to come, Romans 5.
12. And that His, and His Posteritys standing in Him, was only their standing
in Christ; as this was also represented in those Sacramental Types, the Tree of
the Knowledge of Good and Evil, Genesis 2. Warning Him against subsisting in
Himself, as a God knowing, or able to determine Good and Evil, but to look to
the Tree of Life, so great a Type of Christ; as we find in the Revelation;
Nothing therefore can enter into the Court of Justification, but Poor empty
single Faith Receiving, Owning, Acknowledging, Grace; Receiving Grace in
Abundance, (excluding all else,) and the Gift of Righteousness by Jesus Christ
alone; And to this it is enabled by Grace, and Accepted only for that
Righteousness sake it does receive.

As to the enforcement by way of Action, and Practice, we see in this Great
Portraicture, the Apostle gives of a Man in Christ; that Fights the Good Fight,
Finishes his Course, keeps the Faith; That a Believer in Christ is not a Loose,
or an Idle, Slothful, Unactive Person; but shall appear in that Day, as of the
Overcomers in those so Famed Games, or Exercises of all Prowess, Courage,
Action; so as to be judged worthy of those Crowns of which they were so
Ambitious, though but corruptible, by the justest Judges, or Arbitrators of
them; So the Saints shall be presented before the Father, the Lord Jesus, the
Eternal Spirit of Holiness and before Saints, and Angels, to the Terror, and
Amazement of all the Lost, as Persons of distinct Excellency; and the
Overcomers, as in the Apocalyptic Expression is repeated; and yet all in
Christ, and to the Glory, and Praise of Grace in Him; So that the Doctrine of
Free Grace is indeed the most Powerful, Effective, Fruitful Doctrine of
Holiness, and so is most Discriminative of Persons in Christ, and with greatest
severity on those, who are not; and of those, who shall be thought worthy of
the Crown, and who not; and yet without the least Injury to Free Grace in
Christ.

3. Great Consolation have they, who knew our Deceased Friend; who had always
Admiring, Adoring thoughts of Free Grace; and thereby a great sense of
Perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God, but all through Christ strengthening
Her; and in Fighting, Running, holding fast, an Eye to the Crown, but as
purchased for her by Jesus Christ; and that therefore she Loved the Appearance
of Jesus; When the Crown already received, shall with Glory be set upon her at
that Day.

That we may yet enter into the deeper enquiry into, and consideration of all
this Triumphant Declaration of the Apostle concerning Himself, and all Saints
in that supreme Point; their receiving the Crown of Righteousness; I will
propose to give a brief resolution of these following Points.

1. How in the lost undone State of the Children of Adam, there can arise such
a Generation of Servants of God, both more eminent and smaller in this World.

2. How, or why they fall all under the Prohibition of serving God any longer
here in the World, then the Finishing such a Course of service on such a
Measure of their Line Prescribed by God.

3. Why this Prohibition is served upon them by Death; Two Persons only, Enoch
and Elias, and why they only excepted.

Herein I shall with all the care and Caution according to the understanding
given to me by, and from the Word of God Discourse each of these.

Point. 1. It is indeed the wonder of Divine Grace, and Power; That there
should have been, and are such a Generation of the Servants of God in the
World, in every Age down to the present Time, in the midst of such a World of
Men, Ignorant of God, Alienated from his Life, without God in the World,
without Christ and Enemies in their Minds; so much given up to the World, and
the Lusts of it, as to be called; The World and the Men of this World, in a
State of Enmity to God, and his Kingdom; the Seed of the Serpent, the Dragon,
Haters of his Servants, and on all opportunities Slaying them; as Cain, the
Seed of the Wicked one, Did Abel in the very Beginning; That yet in the midst
of all these, there should be a Generation of Men and Women, that should be in
an (...), a course, a Lincal succession of the Saints and Servants of God, like
the succession, as in the House of Levi, of the Preisthood; and of the High
Preisthood in the Family of Aaron; the more Eminent, and the less Eminent among
the Servants of God; but all a Royal Priesthood; or like the Stars of the First
Magnit^de in the Regions above, and those they call, the Sporades, the
Multitude of the lesser Stars.

Now the very Root, and Foundation and Corner Stone of all this is; That Grand
Elect Servant of God, in whom His Soul delights; who in Raising up a
Generation of the Servants of God, deals with all mildness, A Bruised Reed
shall He not break, nor smoking Flax shall He quench, but shall send forth
Judgment unto Truth of Victory, Esa. 42. 1. That Servant of the Lord, with the
Key of David on his shoulder, and strengthn'd with the Girdle of Faithfulness
and Righteousness; The Nail sasten'd in a sure place, Esa. 22. 20, etc. Upon
whom is Hung all the Glory of his Fathers House, the offspring, and the Issue;
All Vessels of Greater and smaller Quantity, from the Vessels of Cups, even to
All the Vessels of Flagons; Had not He been a Servant in the Foundation, There
had never been a Servant of God in the World. It is He, who has Loved, and
washed in His Blood; and constituted Kings and Priests unto God and His Father,
Rev. 1. 5.

Now the Charter of His making Servants to God among the Children of Men, was
given to the Second Adam: Immediately upon the Fall of the First Adam, so quick
and immediate as to surprise the Power of Satan in the First Effort; when God
in a Judiciary process upon Satan, says, to Him, under the disguise of the
Serpent; I will put enmity between thy Seed and of the Woman; and this Seed of
the Woman, the one Seed, Christ shall break the Head of the Serpent, Genesis 3.
unto perfect Victory; and Thou shall bruise His Heel; (of which is presently to
be spoken;) There must be therefore a Seed of the Second Adam; Servants of God
in every Generation, who shall Fight, Finish their course, Hold the Faith of
the Seed of the Woman, the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the Quickening
Spirit, the Savior to the uttermost, who Lives for ever to make Intercession,
and so sustains all the Servants of God, coming to God by Him; He Bears them up
in their State of Preisthood, as the Priest for ever; Constituted after the
Power of an Endless Life, consecrated by the word of the Oath for evermore; the
High Priest and Apostle of our Profession, the Captain of our salvation; This
supports the whole State of the Servants of God in all the Service here
recounted here by the Apostle; Fighting, Running, Finishing their course in
order to the Receiving the Crown: And thus the Line of the succession of the
Servants of God has been continued from Adam through all Ages. From Adam by
the Patriarks, to Moses, Joshuah, the Judges, Kings, Prophets, Zerubbabel, and
Ezra, so to the Great Lord appearing in his Temple, Malach. 3. 1. Then the
Apostles, and successive Ministers of the Gospel, and the Witnesses, Revel. 11.
3. in the Time of the Apostasy; who being the Last course of the Servants of
God; There is an express mention of that First Representation of things; the
Serpent early appearing, as a Dragon in the Slaying Abel; and the Seed of the
Woman, He endeavored to devour by making War with them, by the Beast. Who
kills them, and they Lie Dead in the street of the Great City; Till the Spirit
of Life from God enter into them; And then the course of things goes on to the
Binding the Dragon, Satan, the Old Serpent, Chaining and Sealing up in the
Abyss, in his own Hell and Chains of Darkness; and then after a short Loosing
to show his ever remaining Diabolick Spirit, we have with all his Dead His
Final Casting into the Lake, which is the Second Death: And thus we have the
First Point cleared, How comes there to be such a Line and Succession of the
Priests, or Servants of the Most High God in so Degenerate a Humane Nature? And
how Long? Even till they come into the Glorious State of being Priests of God
and Christ, and Reigning with Him a Thousand Years; seeing His Face, as His
Servants serving Him with His Name on their Foreheads, and at Last delivered up
with the Kingdom to God All in All; which is the State of pure, and perfect
Eternity, Eternal Life in its Highest Orb.

Point. 2. I come therefore now to the second Point; How comes it to pass,
there is such a strict Limitation of the Servants of God: First under such an
Honorable Limitation, as Fighting the Good Fight, even unto Victory; their
Finishing their course, even unto obtaining the Prize; and their Keeping the
Faith, without betraying, Basely surrendering, or having made Shipwreck of it;
and so presenting it before the Righteous Judge, and receiving the Crown at
that Day; All these are Honorable, and yet Limitations; Their Fight, Course,
Keeping the Faith are not Lengthened out to that very Day; Now of this there
are very Great Reasons.

1. The Great Lord of Time has drawn the whole time with such exactness of
Wisdom, and Holiness; That every thing is in its own Place, Season, and Time;
and as it fills that up, and nothing is wanting, so it cannot exceed, nor reach
beyond it; And thus Every thing is Beautiful in its season; Thus from the very
Beginning; Abel the First Martyr Finished his Course, though short; Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, theirs; In the midst of whom appeared
Melchisedec, made like to the Son of God, without Beginning of Days, or End of
Life, Abridgeth a Priest continually; He was not a Type of the Son of God in
some particular excellency, but He was made like to the Son of God throughout;
And thus is the Line of every Saints service drawn out, nothing can crowd into
it; and this Line can by no Violence be cut shorter, nor can any Zeal for
Service draw it out longer; The only Elect Servant is He, whose Service has no
Limitation; but, as was said, The Son Consecrated by the Word of the Oath for
evermore; and constituted after the Power of an Endless Life: Melchisedec
therefore, who was made like Him, was under no Limitation of Service in the
History we have of Him: Jacobs Patriarchal Line reached even to Moses, and
there ceased; Moses Faithful in All his House Run that whole, and very Great
Line of Service in the Wilderness; but was so Limited, He must by no means
enter into Canaan, but must Dye in the Borders; And Joshuah must enter upon his
Course; and having settled the People of Israel in Canaan, and after the Lord
had given them rest round about; He Finished his course. Then came on the Days
of the Judges, and their course with Samuel reached (with the Intervention of
Saul) unto David, who served his Generation according to the Will of God; And
so the Line came down to John Baptist Fulfilfilling his course, as a
Forerunner; and so to our Lord Jesus, who walked, as He said in his course here
on Earth, (though as the Son, an Eternal Priest) this Day, and to Morrow; and
the Third Day should be perfected. Then the course of the Apostles, and the
Witnesses under a most Definitive Line, as has been said: This therefore gives
great satisfaction in the Term of Life; Calls for Great self-Resignation, and
to have our Eye Fixed on the Great End of Life, the Line of Faith and Service.

It is true, There is a Line allowed to Evil Men in their Wickedness, and in
their Enjoyments of their Lusts, and Pleasures of this World; and they cannot
exceed it; But this is not of the present consideration; But it is most
necessary here to remember; That the Lowest and Meanest, even the Infant
Servants of God have their Line and Service, and the Just Times of it Fixed by
God; even as their Reward; because it is wholly the Reward of Free Grace, It is
in the essence of the Reward equal, as has been argued.

2. The Time of the Servants of God is therefore Defined, and Limited; That it
may be seen, God has no need of this, or that Servant, or Generation of
Servants; but that He has successive Servants, or Generations of Servants; and
He is so Far off being in want of them; That He can allow them no longer Time,
how Eminent, how Excellent soever, then He has appointed, and resolved with
Himself; and of Free Grace, as their Honor and Privilege, chosen them unto.

3. The Servants of God are many; That they may reach through, and unto the
Time of his Kingdom; And each must have His Time; and each must therefore, of
those, who go before, give way to those, who are to follow after; and so every
one is Limited to his own Time; For though it may be thought; They might be
together; The Wise God having appointed Times more Dark, and more Glorious; How
many of his Servants are proportioned to each, He sees, and knows, and so
Limits accordingly: There was one Noah, and no more in the Old World; One
Elijah only in view, in that so Fowl Apostasy of the Ten Tribes; And when the
Light is clearest and most High, It must not be clear Light till his Kingdom.
The General Assembly cannot be before, so each Time has such, and such Numbers
of Stars, which He tells the Number of, and calls them All by their Names,
and knows, what Luster of Rays and Beams each and together shall cast; There
is a Counterpoizing consideration of Wicked Men in the World, and the Darkness,
and Fire of Hell, they spread; But that is not within the present purpose.

4. There is a Gracious Pleasure of God; There should such Numbers of his
Servants be all along from Age to Age with Jesus Christ their Lord, Philip. 1.
Dissolved from Body, and with Him in Spirit; Absent from the Body, and present
with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 1, etc. And in their House not made with Hands,
Eternal in the Heavens; And that our God may come and All His Saints with Him,
Zech. 14. He comes with Ten Thousand of his Saints, as the Armies of Heaven on
white Horses, Bodies of the Resurrection washed in the Blood of Jesus, in fine
Linen, clean, and white, Rev. 19. 14. To show, This has been all along from
the former Times of the World; There is a Reception in Heaven Styled, Abraham's
Bosom; A Jerusalem above, the Mother of us All, that shall come down from
Heaven, Gal. 4. With all its Children, Rev. 21. There is the State of the
Spirits of Just Men, Heb. 12. Who shall be made perfect in Bodies, made like to
his Glorious Body, Phil. 3. ult. There must be therefore a Limitation of their
Time of Service here below; That they may be taken within the Veil and made
acquainted with the Glory, that is to be Revealed; And the Apostle Intimates;
These Dead in Christ shall have some precedence; For the Dead in Christ, shall
not be prevented by the Living Remaining, as we Translate; but shall not be so
much, as overtaken according to the true force of the Original; we shall not
attain, or come equal with those asleep, 1 These. c. 4. v. 13. (...), Nullo Modo
Assequemur; Now in all such Particularities, God is pleased to be at Liberty in
dealing with His own Servants; The essential Glory, the Crown of Righteousness,
the Crown of Life, the Crown of Glory being alike, sure to all: And so I have
opened the second Point proposed; The Limitation of the Time of the Servants of
God, continuing in His Service here on Earth; I come to the Point 3d.

3. That the Limitation of their Time is made known to them in the manner of a
severe, and angry Process, in the way of, what we Call, a Prohibition, the
proper sense of what we Translate, not saffered, Heb. 7. 23. And this is a
Point worthy to be enquired into for the removing the fears of Death, and for
the Consolation of Saints in Death

1. It must then be Acknowledged, that the outward Face, and appearance of
Death, bears the Resemblance of a Judgment, and of that Denunciation, In the
Day thou Eatest, thou shall Dye; Dust thou Art, and to Dust thou shall return.
It comes, as a King of Terrors, Flesh and Blood is ready to be affrighted at
it; Life is naturally Dear, even to the Servants of God; who desire not to be
uncloathed; They desire to continue in the Service of God here; but when they
are raised by Higher Considerations of being present with the Lord, Clothed
upon with their House from Heaven, they even desire to be Dissolved. And it
cannot be denied; That God does in the Dying of his Servants bear a Regard to
that Justice, and Truth of His Word; That when Sin came in, Death came in and
passed upon All, because All have sinned, Romans 5. 12. Wheu the Servants of God
therefore are warm and zealous, and lively in His Service, Often there comes a
Prohibition; Thou may no longer continue in my Service here; like the
command to Moses, to anoint Eleazar and to strip Aaron of his Priestly
Garments, who was presently to Dye; A Prohibition to Moses, to carry Israel
over Jordan, but to come up to Mount Nebo and to Dye; Deuteronomy. 33. God plainly
sent to Hezekiah, to set His House in Order and to Dye; against which
Prohibition that it might be under, as it were an Arrest of Judgment, He so
earnestly Prayed.

It is therefore to be duly considered; That for the Display of the Judgment,
and Indignation of God against sin, and because of the present State of the
Saints under a Remaining Body of Sin, and so of Death; and in the present State
of this World, full of Sin and Evil, and of so many of the Children of Adam,
Children of Death, even of the Second Death; In the Wisdom and Holiness of God,
It was by the Counsel of the Father, and the Son, that Death should continue,
and have the Face of a Judgment, and of a Legal Prohibition to continue in the
Service of God any longer on Earth; Till the Kingdom of Christ, the Kingdom of
Redemption should bring in a State of the Living Saints, then Remaining being
changed, and not to Dye.

2. Jesus Christ our Lord, Because the Children were Partakers of Flesh and
Blood, He took part of the same, that through Death, He might subdue Him, that
had the Power of Death; that is, the Devil; and Deliver them, who all their
Life were subject to Bondage by reason of the Fear of Death; and now therefore
Death came upon Him with the Violence, and Terror of a Judgment from which He
was taken and from Prison, Esa. 53. 8. By the Mighty Power of his Resurrection;
It becomes all His to submit then to the Face of a Judgment in Dying, that they
may be conformed to their Captain and from the First Born, Heb. 2. 14.

Obj. It may be Objected against this necessity of Dying, How were those two
Enoch, and Elias, exempted from that sentence of the Righteous, and Holy Law
that is stretched out so upon all; seeing sin had extended it self on them, as
well, as on others?

Answ. The Death of Jesus Christ, stood as a Full Ransom, and Price of
Redemption from the very first promise, so that it is not indeed a Point of
Justice, or of the Truth of God; That Believers in Jesus Christ are served (as
I may so speak) with a Prohibition by Death; but a Wise, and Holy Dispensation
of Government with Relation to the Servants of God in the present World; where
therefore, in that wise Government God thinks fit; there might be such an
exemption from the General Statute of Dying, or Prohibition by Death, as of
Enoch and Elijah; and many more Examples of such Exemptions, there might have
been, if He had seen Good, having received such full satisfaction to his Law,
and to his Justice; and He has it in reserve an Universal Exemption at the
Kingdom of Christ, the Kingdom of Redemption; when the Apostle says, We shall
not all dye, but we shall all be changed; and he prefaces before it: Behold I
show you a mystery; And I am much persuaded and even assured; These two were
Types of the Living, Remaining caught up to meet the Lord in the Air, 1 Cor.
15. He delivers up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, and has put down all
Rule Authority, and the last Enemy and cast it into the Lake, Rev. 20. ult.
When the Gentle Hand of Power shall Transpose the Saints; as the Great Prophet
Enoch, of the Lord coming with Ten Thousand of his Saints, and the Living
Remaining changed, and the Flames of Fire upon All Enemies, shall convey them
as in Elijahs Chariot to Heaven.

3. The Judiciary part of Death is absolutely removed; For the Sting of Death
is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law, but thanks be to God who has given
us the Victory through Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 12. So that Death is to Saints,
a sleeping in Jesus, a Resting from Labors, an entering into Rest, a becoming
present with the Lord; A being with Christ, a being in Paradise, a being
clothed upon with our House from Heaven. And to show, It was not a Deadly
stroke; Before the Pronunciation of that Universal Prohibition of continuing
here; Dust thou Art, and to Dust thou shall Return; Death was more gently
expressed, and with assurance of Victory; The Woman's Seed shall break the
Serpents, Head, but the Serpent shall only Bruise the Heel of the Woman's Seed.

Applic. I will now by way of Applicatory Review, close the whole; How fit this
Context of the Apostle is to a Discourse with Relation to the Death of one, or
more of the Servants of God, appears by the Apostles Preface to it; I am even
now as it were already, as in Conformity to my Great Lord Offered, and
Sacrificed, as a Martyr, and the Time of my Dissolution is at Hand; and so He
goes on, I have Fought, etc. As if He Preached his own Funeral Sermon, while
Living, and a Great one it is; but it has its Principal sense in Christ; and
in God; as appears in the following Part of the Chapter, v. 17. wherein we have
this Great acknowledgment, that in his Fighting the Good Fight, and Finishing
his Course, the Lord stood with Him, strengthened Him; that by Him the
Preaching might be Fully known, and the Gentiles hear, and the Lord Delivered
Him, out of the Mouth of the Lion, the Lord would deliver Him from every Evil
Work, and preserve Him unto His Heavenly Kingdom, and to Him he ascribes the
Glory of All for Ever; And He Includes all Saints; Even all, who Love the
appearing of Jesus Christ, this High Elogium, or Speech of Praise, else I must
acknowledge, I have no Opinion of the Large Encomiums, or Praisings used in
Funeral Sermons, observing the Grand Exemplar of them; Gods Gracious
Remembrance of Moses, John 1. Moses my Servant is Dead and no more, and yet
that Fixed so Dashing a Character of Honor upon Him; that He is remembered by
it to the Last, Rev. 15. They Sang the Song of Moses the Servant of God, and of
the Lamb: But this of the Apostle Joined with that of Heb. 7. 23. Gives me such
a History of the Life and Death of Saints; That I cannot, but Recommend it to
all the Servants of Christ, as the most excellent Rule of Life, and as the
Ground of the most Consolatory Hope in Death, and that the very Discourse of it
may be upon the Deceased Christian Friend a Memorial of Honor; And so I most
Humbly Recommend it to the Relations of all the Friends of the so many lately
Removed Servants of God, and of this Particular one, the occasion of whose
Death it is Published; through Him, who though the Eternal Liver, as the Son of
God without Beginning, or End of Days, yet in our Nature Became Dead for our
sakes, but behold He is Alive for Evermore; Even so have all his Servants
Reason to say, Even so Amen. And He has the. Keys of Hell, and Death; Let Him
Lay His Hand on his Servants of God in this Discourse, and Bless it to Them and
to his Servants of all States and Conditions; saying unto them, Fear not. And
to Him be Glory for Ever.

FINIS.

