SOME INSTRVCTIONS CONCERNING THE ART OF ORATORY. Collected for the use of a
Friend a Young STUDENT.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivy lane, 1659.

Parts of Rhetoric.
1. INvention, in which SECT. I.1. Of Common places for Arguments, Number 2.
wherein: 1. To use our own invention first -- and in this not to be too
curious, in the beginning, for our matter or expression. -- But, in a second
copying to reject what is slight, to order what is approved, to correct the
expression, etc. -- To expose them rude in writing, rather than to burden the
memory -- Not to prosecute long one Argument, but seek after variety, number. 12.
etc. 2* After our own, to use other men's, Inventions -- to alter -- enlarge
them. -- n. 15.
SECT II.2. Of disposing the invented matter in some order, and under certain
Heads. -- SECT. III.3. Of Transitions from one matter to another, -- n. 1. 1.
By some words relating to both. n. 2. 2. By Comparison, n. 3. 1 Of Cause and
Effect, etc. 2. Of Similitude. 3. Of Opposition.
3. By Gradation. n. 7. 4. By Interrogation. n. 8.

II. Elocution -- wherein SECT. IV. -- I. Of words. To be avoided 1. Words
ill-sounding: Monosyllables, etc. n. 2. 2. Auxiliary, and Expletive, n. 4. 3.
Circumlocutory, n. 5. 4. Tautologies, n. 7. 5. Omoptota's to be disjoined, n.
8. 6. In the second Clause of a Period words needlers, not to be repeated. n. 9.
SECT. V. -- II. Of Periods. 1. Exact correspondence 1. of the several branches
therein, n. 2. 2. of the parts of any branch.
2. Advantageous transposition of the words, n. 4. 1. For better Emphasis, n.
5. 2. For apter connection, n. 6. 3. For accent and suspended gravity of the
speech, n. 7. 4. For the sweeter cadence and Rythm, n. 8. 1. In like beginnings
of several clauses. 2. Like endings. 3. Both like* 4. Beginning of one and end
of the other like, etc.

Transposition of words in tongues modern and undeclined, n. 12.

SECT. VI.III. Of the Ornaments of speech: Figures. 1. Epithets n. 2. 2.
Metaphors n. 4. These to be Not obscure, n. 5. Not below the thing. Not too
much. Not changed.
3. Similies, expressed -- n. 9. 1. With a Note* 2. Without. 3. Before. 4.
After. 5. By Question. 6. The Simile only explained. 7. The thing only
explained.
4. Dissimilies and Contraries, expressd - n. 10. 1. By Disjunction. 2.
Conversion. 3. Denomination.
5. Amplification, n. 14. 1: By repetition of the same words, n. 15. 2. By
multiplication of the like expressions, n. 17. 3. By enumeration of Parts, or
Descriptions, n. 18. By a simple accumulation of them. By Gradation. By
Division. By interpretation, n: 23.

4. By Aetiology or giving reasons. n. 24. 1. Either preceding 2. Or following
By Epiphonema or Sentence. By a Conjunction Causal.
3. Or Interposed, n. 27.

SECT. VII. -- IV. Of Style. 1. To be perpetually varied, n. 1. In the
Expressions, n. 2. In the Illations, n. 3. Varied. 1. By Interrogation. 2. By
Objection. 3. By frequent commutation of Persons. 4. By Dubitation. 5. By
Admiration. 6. By Consultation. 7. By Praeoccupation. 8. By Correction. 9. By
Concessions. 10. By Suppositions of Absurdities.

2. To be 1. Concise for the Pen. 2. More diffused and copious for speaking,
-n. 13. 3. Yet more circumlocutory and verbous for extempore-speech.
3. Of short and long styles, compared, n. 14. 4. Of Perspicuity of Style, -n.
15. 5. Of other necessary steps to Oratory* n. 24.
SECT. VIII. -- V. Of Recitation. SECT IX. -- VI. Of Pronunciation. SECT. X. --
VII. Of Action.
INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING The ART of ORATORY
SECT. I.
Nu. 1. THE Parts of Oratory are Invention, The Parts of Oratory.
taking care for the Matter; and Elocution, for the Words and Style.

1. Invention in which
2. Invention consists in an acute Consideration, and particular weighing of all
circumstances, etc. out of which any argument may be raised to advance the
subject in hand. 1. Of Common Places of Arguments.
Therefore your Fancy, in this ought not to be committed, and left, to chance;
gazing about, and waiting, as it were, what may by sudden Enthusiasm drop into
it, but to be excited and guided by Reason; diligently beating and examining
the Causes, Effects, Adjuncts, and whatever may have relation to your subject,
that (at least) some of them may afford materials to your design, Brief Tables
of which, and sufficiently exact, in all the three kinds of Discourses,
Demonstrative, Judicial, Deliberative, see in Quintil. lib. 5. cap. 10. and in
Farnabi's and other Modern, Rhetoricks. A many of which are also rudely put
together in these verses: An? Quis? Quid? Cujus? Cui? Quo? Quibus auxiliis? Cur?
Quomodo? Circa quid? Qualis?
Quantum? Ex, In, and a quo?
Quamdiu? Ubi? Quando? Quoties?
Quotuplex? Quot? and Unde?
Or in that shorter, Quis? Ubi? Quid? Quibus auxiliis?
Cur? Quomodo? Quando?
Who? What? How? When?
Where? and why?


3. For Example; Common places for Arguments; * To prove any thing to be good,
may be such as these; --

-- Because it is the chief end, all men, or the wisest of men, aim at -- all, or
the wisest commend -- because it produces some good -- preventeth or remedieth
some evil -- procures us much pleasure, -- profit, -- reputation, -- honors, --
things, we account good. -- is rewarded -- is difficult to attain -- is
contrary to all excess, etc. -- is dictated by nature -- is followed with
content -- other things for its sake accounted good, etc.

4. * To prove any thing more good, such as these;

-- Because it is the end, and so more worthy than the means -- chosen for its
self, and not for another -- conducing to a better, worthier end -- conversant
about a nobler object -- can better be without the other, than the other
without it -- is the cause of the other -- more beneficial -- beneficial to
more -- more rare -- more beautiful -- more lasting -- more rewarded -- more
easy to be procured (for on both sides arguments are probable) -- more pursued
by wise men -- better, according to circumstance of person, time, place,
action, etc. -- Any of whichmediums, caeteris paribus, is persuasive.

5. The contraries serve, * To prove a thing evil, or less good. * To aggravate
a Crime, such as these, drawn

-- From the greatness of the damage -- the impossibility of reparation --
from the quality of the person, by whom; to whom -- from doing it alone; or
first; or often -- with no, with small, benefit to himself -- with a
determinate purpose, having no plausible motive toit -- not very feasible; --
from its being a thing contrary to nature -- to express law -- savouring of
brutishness, and inhumanity -- Done in a holy place, in the court, etc. -- in
such a time -- against a Kinsman, a Benefactor, a Magistrate -- giving so much
scandal -- so much encouragement.

6. * To extenuate a fault;

-- That it was not done at all -- not so done -- that it was done so; but that
it was well done -- not well done; but yet of those things that are usually
pardoned -- that it was not an injury -- but an error; a misfortune -- not done
with an ill mind -- not with deliberation -- that not a part only, but the
whole action be considered -- not that action, but the whole course of his life
-- what good, as well as what evil, he has done -- not to regard the words of
the Law, but the intent of the Lawgiver -- not the Law (failing in
particulars,) but equity.

7. All Discourses are either of Things; Persons; or Facts: In Persons,
considerable are; their Descent, Nation, Country, Sex, Age, Fortune, Manners,
Education, Relations, of Father, Master, Citizen, etc. In facts; The Cause,
Time, Place, Instrument, the Manner, etc. In things,(that is, Substances, and
Qualities) the An sit, Quid sit, Quale, Quotuplex; its Genus, Species,
Properties, etc. -- In gross, for all subjects (which are most-what mixed of
these three, i. e. Persons, Actions, Qualities) Proofs are derived from
Persons, Causes, Times, Places, Antecedents, Consequents, Efficients, Effects,
Events, Conjugates, Similies, Contraries, Contradictories, Comparison with
Things Greater, Lesser, Equal; from Correlates, Examples, Suppositions, and
Reduction ad absurdum,(as is used in the Mathematics) to a Consequence that
all grant to be false; from their Genus, Definition, Division, etc. Amongst
which * Similitudes ( i. e. Like Cases resembling it:) * Contraries (which much
manifest one another:)* Examples, Instances, Suppositions and Reduction ad
absurdum, are diligently to be sought out; proving a thing many times much
more, than reasons to our Auditory; who, when by the one they see not how it
can be done; by the other they easily see that it is done; and therefore
Exemplum is not in vain made one species of argumentation.

8. Several Examples of Arguments drawn from such Topics. As; From effects,
Scipio was a better General then Hannibal, he conquered Hannibal. -- He is
valiant, for he feared not death. -- From the Instrument; He killed him, for
his weapon was found in the wound -- From the Antecedents; He killed him, for
hethreatned his death, went out by night armed, way-layd him. -- From
Circumstances; Cic. Clodius laid wait for Milo, and not Milo for Clodius: He
went forth with lusty servants armed; This with a few women; He mounted on
horseback; This in a Coach. -- From the Consequents; Sylla took not up arms
for ambition sake, witness the resigned Dictatorship. -- A majori; If lawful to
kill an Adulterer, it is so to beat him. -- Who has committed sacrilege, will
not scruple to commit a theft. -- A minori; If Theft a capital crime, much more
Sacrilege. From Similies; If Continency be a virtue, then such is Absti^nence.
-- As Mariners can do nothing without a Pilot, so neither Soldiers without a
Commander. -- From Conjugates; an honest thing it is to learn, therefore to
teach. -- From Contraries; If War be the cause of all evils, Peace is the
remedy of them. -- If he deserve pardon who wrongs one unawares, he merits a
reward, who purposely does one a favor. -- From Contradictories; When he
refused to entertain him having all men's approbation, would the same entertain
him with so many men's offense? -- From Division; That any one be a Citizen, he
must either be born, or made so; but he neither of these -- So from Dilemmas;
where either side chosen evinceth the same thing: -- Putting a man to the rack,
no sure way to discover truth: for either he can endure the pains, and then he
will lie amidst his torment; or he cannot endure them, and then he will say any
thing, to end them. See concerning these Topics Quintil. Instit. l. 5. c. 10.
etc. and the first and second Book of Aristotle's Rhetoric.

9. Now there being infinite other places of Arguments besides these,
(especially where the subject is more complexe) and many of these not
furnishing any one subject, except with very trivial and common matter (which
is to be rejected) they are only set down to give hints to your invention
whilst yet unpractised; which, when more exercised, will presently repair to
those chiefly serviceable, and less accommodable to other subjects, without at
all saluting the rest.

10. Invention on most subjects is to look two ways. To prove in the first
place; in the second to disprove: to confirm, and then to confute; (...), to
state first; and (...), to make and answer objections. (There being nothing,
that so much can be said for, but something also may be said against it) which
affords a double field of matter to be drawn from these, and such like heads.
The first part uses to be more solid; the second, more acute. Hence the
natural parts of a discourse are, 1. an Exordium or P^eface; 2. Declaring and
proving our own Positions. 3. Refuting the contrary; 4. A short recapitulation
and concluding, called Peroratio.

11. In all our Proofs we have recourse to, either things of sense; or common
received Axioms, and Truths, or Laws, and Customs, or the Concessions of our
Adversary, or of our Auditors. Neither is it needful to ascend to the ultimate
Causes of every thing, but to stay our Probation at our Auditors grants.

12. On these to exercise your own Invention first; and in this not to be too
curious at first, for your m^tter, or expression.
In inventing take heed of torturing your fancy too much at first; either in
the quest of more curious matter, or in setting it down in the most exact form.
For, besides that the mind does more heavily and less accurately, perform many
things at once; the Wit especially, is of so delicate a sharpness, that any
forcing presently turns the edge; and where we make too much difficulty, it
becomes only amazed and astonished; and thus circumscribed and limited to none
but extraordinary productions, like a pent flame, it blazeth not the more for
this, but is rather choked and put out. De ingenio suo pessime merentur (says
Quintil.) qui diligentiam putant, facere sibi scribendi difficultatem. The best
way therefore is, * to give it leave to expatiate it self in its work, and
heat, and grow more active by degrees; * to take what it spontaneously
produces; and pass by, what it does not readily pass through; which (like the
deficient memory) at another attempt, or, by and by, at the same, answers of
its own accord our formerly-frustrated expectation. What orderly matter
therefore, it shall (unforced) offer you, set down; that by this, as a lower
step, the Fancy may ascend, and scrue it self up to something more choice;
which it cannot so easily mount unto at the first, without taking, by the way,
this meaner rise. But then we must take the pains of twice writing, But in a
second copying to reject what is slight, correct the order, expression, etc.
that the second Copy may cast away (according to its better Provision) what is
ordinary and common in the former.

13. To expose them rude in writing, rather than burden the memory.
Rather than reserve your compositions in your mind, till they are exactly
formed, write them down at first without curiosity, and correct them after in
your Paper: It Is said of Virgil, that he drew out his matter first in Prose,
then composed it in verse at large; then again contracted those verses to a
smaller number, and better expression. Many things are, as easilier, so sooner,
done severally, then at once: as our strength, in parcels, quickly takes up the
weight, which united in one it can never move. For the mind traveling with
many conceptions at once (undisburdned of any) must needs be much surcharged,
retarded and confounded; but she beholds them now much more clearly and
distinctly, when thus by writing laid before her face; by this she has fewer
businesses to attend at once, more room to perfect, and ease to range them, now
not so easily skipping and withdrawing themselves out of her sight, or
interturbing one another, as when they were all confusedly floating in the
fancy. * Intellectus (says Sir Fr. Bacon) cogitationibus gravatus clarescit,
etc. si literis mandentur. * Whosoever has his mind fraught with many
thoughts, his wits and understanding do clarify and break up [by committing
them to writing] He tosseth his thoughts more easily, he marshalleth them more
orderly, he sees better how they look, when they are turned into words;
finally he thus waxes wiser than himself. Though for some smaller pieces of
Invention, perhaps Plini's way of composing set down in his Epistles l. 9. Ep.
36. is not to be disliked.

14. Not to prosecute long, one argument, but to seek after variety.
To be furnished with variety of good matter (without which change, both the
Orators fancy, and the Auditors attention, are soon tired) you must not pursue
any one particular Argument too far, and draw it out as it were to the dreggs;
for much, upon any one head, cannot be said well: but if well, perchance, by
some pregnant wit; yet how much, upon diverse objects, will that wit say better;
and by this advantage, go so much beyond it self, as without it, it does beyond
others? It is convenient therefore, often to break off the thread you are
spinning; and set your imagination on work afresh, upon some other new
circumstance, as if nothing at all had been meditated before. All which variety
of in-cohering matter is to be joynted and set together in the second review.

15. After your own, to make use of other men's Inventions:
After the exercising of your own thoughts upon your subject (and not before)
use the help of other men's. Whose Writings you find to have handled something
pertinent to it. For, if you exercise your own Meditation, after you have read
theirs, most-what, the wit is not so active and loving of trouble; but that,
like other bodies in motion, it will follow a Track and Rote made before it,
rather, than its own Biass, and Force; And as unlikely as it is, before the
seeing what others in the first place have done, that your inventions should
coincidate with theirs; so difficult it is, after, that yours should vary from
them. Be wary therefore of accepting in the first place the auxiliaries of your
Books or of your memory: which (doing it without pains) is always ready with
the tendering of her provisions, though never so mean, to prevent the labors
of the fancy.

To alter. To enla^ge them.
Alter and concoct the matter received from others into your own style; and
improve it, as only a hint given you, by many additions varying from it.

SECT. II.
I. 2. Of disposing the invented matter in some order, and under certain heads.
IN all your Compositions, especially those of any length, upon all your
Materials revised, a Division, and distribution of them under certain Heads,
such as best fits them, is always to be cast, and contrived; though not
necessary always to be mentioned, yet in many also not to be concealed. Which
Division as, by having the several sorts of matter taken (as it were) out of a
confused heap, and distinctly sorted by themselves, it much clears the
Discourse, helps the Auditors judgment, and shows the Orators, so likewise
it exceedingly facilitates the Transitions, assisteth the Memory, guides the
Oration steady from an uncertain and unequal fluctuation (like a weather-driven
ship destitute of her Pilot) and makes it steer a certain and methodical course
to the Point, whither the Orator designs it: By which also the Oration is freed
from tediousness (Partitiotaedium levat, Quint. l. 4. c. 2.) Whilst the
Auditors attention more patiently passeththrough many moderate discourses, than
one long: and it seems excessive to him for one subject, which for many,
seems but short, and reasonable. In which by the Orators mentioning continually
his Transitions from one part to another he is refreshed to see, how much is
already finished, and the bounds also of what is yet to come, ( minus longum
videtur, in quo, quid ultimum sit, certum est. Quint.) and proceeds to a new
subject with a more erected attention. For the same reason, after a long
discourse, Recapitulations arenecessary, that the Auditor may discern, that the
Speaker is methodical.

2. Paucity of parts (not ordinarily to exceed three or four) commends a
division: and as a partition is better, than the unity of a discourse; so that
partition is better, that does not much recede from it. ( Neque prudentia
auditoris confusione partium impedienda, neque memoria multitudine). And in the
distributing of your matter, you are chiefly to look out, what is fittest to be
first, and what to be last, said, that the beginnings and endings of all these
may be the most weighty, which by the Auditor are most observed. ( Quae primo,
aut postremo dicuntur, maxim inhaerent.)

3. For the composing therefore of a more accurate Discourse, I conceive these
four things are to be observed;

1. The setting down your Inventions confusedly; and the transcribing out of
other Authors of what fits your purpose.

2. Partition, i. e. the seeing what Heads arise out of these materials; the
setting these Heads down, and marking each matter with several figures or
letters in the Margent, showing to which Head it belongs.

3. The ordering of these Heads.

4. The Composition of this matter under every Head. But this Composition also
is not to be done without some division, or gradation observed in it. (See
sect. 3. n. 7. -- sect. 6. n. 2 1.) There being no part of an Oration, but that
has also its parts.

SECT. III.
1. 3. Of Transitions from one matter to another.
THe several pieces of Invention under each Head must next be sowed and tenanted
together, and so let into one another, that seams and joints may not appear
(unless where it is for our advantage to show them): but that the Oration may
seem continuous, and all of one thread: which is done by several artifices.

2. 1. By some words relating to both.
First, By bringing in such apt words into the close of one matter, as have some
near relation and affinity also to the following; by which mediums they may
seem fastened-together, and naturally drawing-in one another.

Examples (which for a great part I have taken out of Plinius Secundus his
Panegyric and Epistles, being an Author you are well acquainted with, where
you may be pleased to see them more at large; for I am afraid I have obscured
many of them by too much contraction.) Quod evenire contra solet, magis
admiratus sum, postquam penitus inspexi. Inspexi autem penitus; nihil a me ille
secretum etc. -- Amas Marcellinum, atque etiam mihi saepe commendas; Amabis
magis commendabisque, si cognoveris, etc. -- Dabitur non cubiculum Principis,
sed ipsum Principem cornore in publico, in populo, sedentem. Populo, cui
locorum quinque millia adjecisti etc. -- Quo magis scires, quam gratum mihi
foret, si susciperes quod injungo. Injungo autem and pro rei magnitudine etc.
and pro etc. -- vide Sect. 6. n. 16.

3. 2. By Comparison.
2. By making some comparison (where the Transition is more discovered) between
what precedes and what follows. Where note, that any other Conjunctions,
Discretive, Redditive, Conditional, Causal, Adversative, are more elegantly
used, than that which is called the Copulative -- As -- seeing that -- whereas
-- whilst -- which besides that -- although, etc. yet -- whether this -- or
that, etc. -- not only, but also -- if both, etc. It both, and also -- which
as it, etc. so it -- which shall, etc. if first -- This, not to etc. but to --
If his justice etc. yet his clemency -- (so Relatives are also used: Quem,
illum -- quo, eo --) which, as they serve for chains to link the several
clauses of a period together; so likewise for signs, to suspend the Auditors
attention, till that which corresponds to them, is inferred. Now this
Comparison usually is;

4. 1. Of Cause and Effect,etc.
1. Either of Cause, and effect, priority, and posteriority, between them; in
time, nature, dignity, etc. As --

Plin. Quibus omnibus ita demum similis adolescet, si imbutus honestis artibus
fuerit, etc. [and so he passes to speak of his education in the liberalharts].

5. 2. Or of Similitude.
2. Or of some similitude between them; as-

Quoniam de genere belli dixi; nunc de magnitudine pauca dicam. -- sit hoc
inhumanitatis tuae; stultitiam incredibilem vide^e. -- Protexi viros optimos;
Eosdemque gratissimos; [and then he proceeds to speak of their gratitude] mihi
certe debere se praedicant, etc.

6. 3. Or of Opposition.
3. Or of Some Opposition.

Et hoc quidem virtutis praemium; illud solatium doloris accepit, quod silio
ejus etc. -- Haec laus acti Consulatus; illa dilati, quod, etc. [Thus
proceeding to speak of laus dilati consulatus] Esto; sit in verbis tuis hic
stupor: quanto in rebus sententi is que major.

7. 3. By Gradation.
Or thirdly (which is the chief, and scarce ever to be omitted, and which
renders all transitions very easy and graceful) by a certain gradation and
ascent in the matter it self; leading the Auditor (fastidious enough in the
greatest art) still from something less, to something more considerable and
weighty; Augeri debent sententiae, and insurgere, Quint. (as the Merchants best
wares are showed last) the stronger still seconding the more infirm; and that
being set first, which placed last would appear superfluous; or at least a fall
from a former height. As --

Sed hoc utcunque tolerab^le; gravius illud, quod etc. -- Ingens hoc meritum
majus illud [thus proceeding to speak of another merit] See Tully Orat. 2.
Philip. At beneficio sum usus tuo? Quo? 1. quanquam hoc, quod commemoras,
semper prae me tuli, etc. Sed quo beneficio? Quod me non occideris, etc. 2. At
occidere non poteras. 3. Fac potuisse. Quale beneficium istud, etc. 4. Sed sit
beneficium vel summum, in quo p^tes me dicere ingratum? etc. -- Literas, quas
me ^ibi misisse diceret, recitavit; 1. Cujus inhumanitatis recitare palam
literas?etc. Sed 2. quid in istis, quod mihi opponas? etc. Sed quid opponas
tandem, 3. si negem me unquam istas ad te misisse? etc. 4. At ego non nego.
Quod enim verbum in istis non plenum humanitatis? etc. 5. At ego tuas literas
proferre possum, in quibus etc. -- ostendam 1. Causam non fuisse, cur a
Praetore postulares, ut bona P. Quintii possideres? 2. Deinde ex edicto te
possidere non potuisse; 3. Postremo non possedisse, Cic.

It ought to be no easy thing to condemn 1. a man of heresy; 2. much less a
Church; least of all 3. so ample, and large a Church as the Greek; 4.
especially so, as to make them no Church. B. Laud. -- (See Sect. 7. Number. 3.)

8. 4. By Interrogation*
Or fourthly, When Transitions are more difficult, they are not unelegantly
ushered in, by the Orators making Interrogations himself, or Objections from
others. -- As --

At beneficio sum usus tuo? Quo? etc. -- (as before) -- At dicet hic aliquis?
At cui materi^ hanc se ^^^i^^^em praestiterunt? nempe veteri, etc. -- Actaque
est saepius cum magna varietate. Unde varietas? unde plures actiones? Cacilius
etc. -- [passing thus to another matter.] -- (See Sect. 7. Number. 3, 4.)

SECT. IV.
1. 2. Elocution.
THus much of 1. Invention, and Arguments; and 2. of the partition of them; Now
3. of Elocution. (Parts officii Oratorii, argumenta invenire; inventa
disponere; disposita exornare.)

And, in it, 1. first, concerning words. 2. Then of Periods; and of the various
artificial placing of the words in them. 3. Next, of the several figures, and
modes of livelier and more passionate expression. 4. of styles. After which I
shall add something, 5. of Recitation. 6. of Pronuntiation. and 7. of Action.

2. 1. Of Words, To be avoided
1. Concerning words.

1. Too many Consonants or Vowells coming together are to be avoided, as
causing an ungrateful sound.

Words of extraordinary length, to be rejected; 1. Words ill-sounding;
Monosyllables, etc.
Monosyllables ((.i.) where Polysyllables may be had) more: the first making
the language dull and slow, the other (by reason of their many consonants, and
often endings) abrupt, and unfluent (Monosyllaba, si plura sunt, male
continuabuntur; quia necesse est compositio multis clausulis concisa subsultet
(Quint l. 9. c. 4.) Est enim in ipsa divisione verborum latens tempus.) Hence
compounds more elegantly used, than their simples.

3. * Words, smooth and sweeter-sounded (which happens by an equal mixture of
vowels and consonants) are to be used rather than rough and harsh: [as, adore,
for worship -- assentation, for flattery: -- levity, for lightness.] In
speaking of things not sensitive, * words translated and figurative, which may
present them as it were to the eve, rather than proper: [as, tears for grief].
Again, such words rather, as are less common (so they be not obsolete, or
new-forged); which, for their rarity, are more observed ((for we look on,
words, as men; admire strangers, pass by domestics): Especially this to be
observed in Poetry:) so those derived from the Latin, if first made familiar
by some use, are to be pre-chosen; being mostwhat far smoother, than the
Saxon-English; and, (by reason of all Sciences delivered chiefly in that
tongue) more adaptated for many discourses. Where note, that Latin Nouns are
more easily translated to our tongue, than verbs. as reverence, inspection,
loquacity, etc. because their terminations are, in other words of common use,
made familiar unto us.

4. 2. Since languages undeclinable, 7. Auxiliary and expl^tive.
and that are without variations of Moods, Person, Tense, in Verbs; and of
Cases in Nouns, abound infinitely more in subservient monosyllables; [as the
Latin words habuit, authoris, are three words, each, in the English] these
therefore to be excluded, where they May (as often they may) be spared;
(especially in verse) Now such exclusion may be made several ways, of which I
will set you down some (on condition that you will not censure me for
descending to things of so trivial and common observation.) Such then are * the
adjectiving of the Substantive, by adding [s] As

The sword of Caesar -- Caesar's sword. Of the goodness of whom. -- etc. of
whose goodness: (so, their, for of them: what, whereof, wherewith, whereby,
etc. for, that which, of which,

Example, He knows not that which he does -- He knows not, what he does.)
--

* The omitting of the Relative [ whom, which] in the oblique cases, when its
antecedent immediately precedes, by putting its Preposition or sign after the
verb (yet this to be forborne in the end of a Period, which Monosyllables do not
so decently conclude, especialy the serviant). Example;

The thing of which we speak; -- the thing we speak of.

* The changing of the subjunctive with its sign, into the Infinitive, or
Participle.

He endeavored, that he might find out -- He endeavored to find out -- I,
when I saw, I seeing. -- I, he being absent, I, in his absence. -- Rerum, quae
ingenio exercentur etc. Of things exercised by wit. -- They showed more craft,
than they did valor, -- more craft, than vaelour. (vide n. 9.)

* The changing of the Pronoun and Verb into the Noun; or Verb into the
Participle.

Those that teach, Teachers: That which is contained, the contents. Not knowing
the contents.

-- Per cunas alimentaque prima precatur
Ut sibi committat, quicquid dolet
The Nurse, by her first food, and Table, pressed
Her griefs disclosure
Nisi quod aequiore animo ferunt homines, quem Princeps parum fideliter genuit,
quam quem male elegit, -- more patiently admit the unhappy issue, than the ill
choice of Princes.

-- Tremulasque manus annisque metuque
Tendit, and ante pedes supplex procumbit Alumnae.
-- Her hands with years
And terrors trembling (kneeling to her rears.
-- Iam tunc qui posset amari
Narcissumque vocat --
Brought forth a boy, even then to be beloved,
Narcissus named
She weeps and beggs -- Weeping she beggs
-- Deus ipse monebat
Signaque certa dabat
-- This Heaven foreshew'd
By sad presages
* The changing of the Passive verb into the Active; the Noun preceding this,
that followed the other.

Her beauty was destroyed by paleness -- Paleness destroyed her beauty.

-- Obscuraque moto
Reddita forma lacu est.
The motion much obscured the fleeting shade.
So [ As, with, of, etc.] are elegantly spared, by the Noun being preposed. As

Thunder-strucken; Seagreen; etc. leisure-houres, hours of leisure.
Chamber-pleasures, pleasures of the chamber.

* The avoiding or changing of the Auxiliar verbs [Sum, Habeo.] into some other
of more weight.

Sed tamen eventus vestrae, fortissime, pugnae
Quis fuit?
But what event, O great in Valor crowned
Your famous combat?
-- Quam quae comprendere verbis
In promptu mihi sit
Although my deeds surmount my utterance.
Impetus est fulvis and vasta Leonibus ira.
And Lions with impetuous furies rave.
-- Tanta est discordia mentis
Such discords rackt her mind.
Yet are the foresaid servients many times usefully retained, where they are
necessary to make the repetition more vehement, and solemn. -- Example;

In which they have suffered more loss far, than they have gotten praise. He
endeavored by force and terror, and fair speeches and rewards to obtain their
consent.] More vehement [byforce, by terrors, by fair speeches, by rewards] --
Obliged by so many covenants and benefits to so gracious a Lord] more pressing
[by so many covenants, by so many benefits] -- Their common power for order,
and safety, was committed to one] more distinct [for order, for safety.]

3. Circumlocutory.
5. 3. That not to be expressed in many words, which may be as fully in one. As

Compass about, encompasse: agreed-together, combined: Bring in, import. Hold
up, sustain. Go away, depart, etc.

Where the infelicity of the English, by reason of Prepositions disjoined from
the Verb, and so from verbal-nouns may in many words, be helped by recourse to
the Latin compounds, such as are naturalized to this language; [as come
between, intervene]: yet note, that some Prepositions in our own tongue there
are, which may be prefixed at pleasure, as un, dis, (un, negative, dis,
privative) re, fore, mis -- so [lesse] to nouns; fatherless, foodlesse. So
nouns, for brevity, are sometimes verbalized: as, to complete, to contrary, to
experience. Sometimes by [ fy] affixed; as, to make clear, to clarify, to
beautify.

6. Terminations of Verbal Nouns [both Substantive and Adjective] may be varied
lawfully, though they be not stamped and made current by former custom; and
sometimes advantageously also; both 1. for the signification; (the termination
much alteringit, some of them being augmentative, some diminutive;
frequentative some; some of similitude; some expressing a quality, some an act,
some a power, some a habit, etc.) and 2. for the sound; (some being more smart;
or smooth, and mollifying, some more hard, polysyllable, polyconsonant;) Add
to this, that verbs (where else circumlocution must be used) nominalized, do
admit one termination familiarly, that suffer not another; and Latin words
(where our language is deficient) Englished, unforcedly receive some or other
of them, if discreetly applied. Several terminations are usual, such as these;
beautiful beauteous -- doleful, dolorous -- narrative, narration --
contentment, contentedness, contentation, content -- temperance,
temperatenesse, temper, temperament, temperature -- verity, veracity --
standing, station -- irremediable, remediless -- white, whitish, whited,
whiting --

Plurals are of a fuller signification than singulars, and so many times more
elegantly used. As splendors, beauties, sorrows.

4. Tautologies
Tautology, and often repetition of the same word to be avoided [ Cujus
rationis ratio non extat, ei retioni ratio non est fidem habere]; except where
it is used in the same sentence, by conversion, gradation, retorsion, etc. with
much acuteness and elegancy (See sect. 6. number. 16.) The design of which is
easily discerned from that reduplication, which in distinct sentences without
any grace at all proceeds only from defect of words.

Now any word is most easily varied, * By Synonymas, Metonymies, Synecdoches,
Metaphors, Circumlocutions.

See in Plini' s Panegyric the varying of Domus to avoid Tautology -- Ergo in
vestigia sedesque nobilium immigrant pares domini; nec jam clarissimorum
virorum receptacula habitatore servo teruntur, aut faeda vastitate procumbunt.
Datur intueri pulcherrimas aedes deterso situ auctas and vigentes. Magnum hoc
tuum non erga homines modo, sed erga tecta ipsa meritum, solitudinem pellere,
ingentia opera eodem, quo extructa sunt, animo ab interitu vendicare. -- Muta
quidem illa and anima carentia sentire quidem and laetari videntur, etc.

Or at least * by a gentle deflexion of the same word, in changing the
substantive with the adjective, or adverb; the verb active, with the passive,
or the participle, or the noun:

As Magna merita; magnitudo meritorum -- Doctissimus; nemo doctior. -- Alii
judicent; aliorum esto judicium -- judicare, judicatum, judicaturus, ad
judicandum, judicandi causa, ut judicet.

5. Omoptota's disjoined.
5. Omoptota's and words of the like termination, being a sound next to
Tautologies, are to be, to a certain distance, severed: or, where they cannot
be so, avoided: for as, divided, they make in the sentence a very sweet and
grateful rythme; so, concurring, they have a very harsh and unpleasing accent.
Example: Clarorum exempla virorum -- nemo illorum inimicus mihi fuit
voluntarius -- 2. Phil. -- Gravitate, prudentia, fide prope singulari --
Titulis, imaginibus, signis. -- [so almost in all Asyndetons one of them is
chosen of a different termination.]

6. In the second clauses of a Period words needless not to be repeated.
6. Repeat not, in the several clauses of a period, words, by being expressed in
one, sufficiently understood in the rest; such a conciseness, not only
avoiding a kind of Tautology, but savouring of a great deal more acuteness,
force, and clearness of conceit ( frustr a per plura, quae per pauciora)
especially in those things, which are not meditated to be spoken (which require
a looser and diffused style) but written to be read. Example: Defendi
rempublicam adolescens, non deseram senex. -- -- Contempsi Catilinae gladios,
non pertimescam tuos. which words common to both clauses are pro libitu
sometimes placed in the beginning, sometimes in the end, sometimes in the
middle of the sentence.

In this Figure Tacitus very frequent; serving many nouns, and several cases of
them, with one verb (though to some of them it be a little improper) rather
then entertaining any redundance.

Essigiem animalis, quo monstrante errorem sitimque depulerant, sacravere. --
Adversus sontes miseratio oriebatur, tanquam, non utilitate publica, sed in
saevitiam unius, absumerentur. -- Necare quenquam ex agnitis, nefas, animasque
peremptorum aeternas, putant. -- Eadem de infernis persuasio, coelestium
contra. -- Cui cauta potius consilia cum ratione, quam prospera, ex casu,
plac^erant. --

SECT. V.
2. Concerning Periods.
n. 1. 2. Of Period
EVery Period is constituted of two members at least, except it be a sentence:
but to speak always sententiously, is not Oratorlike; since they, being single
Propositions, are not Reasoning; and many of them together, if without
connexions, but implicit argumentation at most. But since all reasoning, the
concisest, is an Enthymem, and must have two Propositions; hence must Periods
have so too: And matter also, sententiously delivered, is then granted to be
more graceful, stately, and observed, when, either the whole sense has a
duplication, by a varied expression; (a piece of Rhetoric constantly observed
by the gravity of the Hebrew, and other Eastern languages and people); or some
part or word thereof at least, is synonymized; as of which we would make a
fuller impression. As:

Miserat etiam Epistolas Romam jactantes, and gloriosas, etc -- Ne satietate
and taedio quodam justitia cognoscentium, severitasque languesceret. (vide
sect. 6. n. 17.

1. Exact correspondency
1. of the several branches therein.
Every Period then consists of two (and the best (say the Masters of this Art)
of four) branches. Now in these, it is one of the chiefest Rules in Oratory, that
there always be a correspondency, and exact similitude (as far as the matter
will permit) of every particle of one branch to those of another; every
reddition ecchoing, as it were, to the proposition foregoing, every accent
thereof. But if any exceed, the last clause rather to be the longer. Which is
to be observed, not only in the length of sentences, but of words; among which
a multisyllable better answers a monosyllable precedent, then a monosyllable a
multisyllable.

Yet monosyllables correspond better to monosyllables: as the words [ fear] and
[ love] correspond better than [ fear] and [ affection]: and words of a like
cadence, better than of a diverse; as the words [ experience] and [ science]
correspond better than [ experience] and [ knowledge].

Wheresoever therefore you perceive a halting in the Period, some expletives
(than which nothing is easier) must be inserted, though the sense were before
perfect -- and it makes the reddition more full to use rather synonyma's to a
former word, than relatives to it [ It, these, them. etc.]

Ut oration, quae scripta placet, recitata non probetur. i. e. non place at. --
Which though religion did not commend to us, yet civil prudence could not but
extol.

So likewise that matter is many times better divided into several like
clauses, which may be involved all in one. As

[It is great inhumanity to deprive those men, who are confessed to have done
no wrong, of their rights] Betther us [It is, etc. to deprive those men of
their rights, who are confessed to have done no wrong.]

And, to advance this parity the voice (Active or Passive) Tenses, Cases, etc.
are, as much as may be, to be continued, the same, and unvaried, through the
several parts of the sentence. Which uniformity of phrase much helps
perspicuity. (See sect. 7. number. 14.) Examples of such parity in the branches of
a Period.

Te miror, Antoni, quorum facta imitere, eorum exitus non perhorrescere --
Alterum peto a vobis, ut pro me dicentem, benign; alterum ipse efficiam, ut
contra illum cum dicam, attente, audiatis. -- Verum implicata inscitia,
impudentia est, si nec scit, quod Augurem, nec facit, quod pudentem ^ecet. --
Nunc enim nihil legere, nihil scribere, aut assidenti vacat, aut auxio libet.
--

2. Of the parts of any branch.
And as for whole Periods, so for any part thereof doubled, when the rest is
not; a correspondency of the several particles of it, as far as the sense will
permit, is not to be neglected. Example:

The proud oftentation of men's abilities for Invention; and the vain
affectation of varieties for expressions, merit not the name, etc.

2. Advantageous transposition of the words.
Next concerning the placing of the several words in a Period: Transposition of
them diverse from the Grammatical construction, especially in Languages
distinguishing Numbers, Tenses, Cases, by their proper terminations (by which
they become much less liable to ambiguity) has always been practiced, and is
of much use (provided that our style by this be not much obscured). Fit
frequentissime aspera and, dura, and dissoluta and hians oration, si ad
necessitatem ordinis verba redigantur, etc. differenda igitur quaedam, and
praesumenda: nec aliud potest sormonem facere numerosum, quam opportuna ordinis
mutatio. Quint. Example:

Quae res in Civitate duae plurimum possint, eae contra nos ambae faciunt, in
hoc tempore summa gratia, and eloquentia.

Of much use (I say)

1. 1. For Emphasis.
For the adding of a greater emphasis to words most considerable. So since the
beginnings and ends make deepest impression (there being some stay still,
before the one, and after the other) it is fit the weightiest words should there
be placed. Therefore it is usual, * to commence with things, rather than
persons: with the Accusative, rather than the Nominative; which also may have
more reference to what next precedes: again, * to conclude with that, without
which the sense is not perfect (to keep the Auditor in an attentive suspense,
till all is said:) and upon which the rest chiefly depend; which is commonly a
Verb a Participle or Adjective; words much-what of the same power: and all of
much more than the rest, being words expressing some action or passion about
the rest. Verbo sensum claudere, multo, si compositio patiatur, optimum est. In
vrbis enimsermonis vis inest. Quint. l. 9. c. 4. ( Vide exemp sect. 5. number. 12.)

2. For Connection.
For the apter Connection, that so those words might be placed together, which
have nearer dependence one of another (as the oblique cases always have on
others): without which location, doubt many times happens, in tongues that are,
in their Cases and Tenses, invariable; so the confirmation of any thing claims
the next place to it, with an Orator, who above all things ought to regard
perspicuity.

3. For Accent and suspended gravity of the speech.
For the sweeter Symphony and Accent. So the Period is handsomely interwoven, and
gravely suspended by Interpositions between, (generally) all Correspondents;
which, as also Omoptota's accord better, being severed. So Nominatives, and
Verbs; Accusative and Verb; Substantive and Adjective; are many times with more
elegancy dis-joyned.

4. For the sweeter Cadence, and Rythme.
Words either the same, or several, of the same termination, (or (in the
unlearned Languages) words of the same part of speech and relating to one
another [whether Substantives, Adjectives, Participles, or Verbs.]) being
artificially disposed and interchanged, do confer a much better Rythme and
Harmony to the speech, and a greater correspondency (or sometimes a variation,
pleasanter than it) to the clauses. And this several ways.

1. In like beginnings of several clauses.
Either when by them * the beginnings of the several clauses accord. As

Liber offensis, liber gratia, liber and secundis casibus and adversis, caret.
-- Habebat puer mannulos multos vinctos and solutos: habebat canes majores,
minoresque: habebat luscinias, psittacos, merulas. --

So in words of like termination --

Ubi aut jucundius morarentur, quam in patria? aut pudicitius continerentur,
quam sub oculis parentum, etc. --

Ends accord.

Poenos Populus Romanus justitia vincit, armis vincit, liberalitate vinicit. --
Quis eos postulavit? Appius. Quis produxit? Appius,etc. --

So in words of like sound --

Nunc enim nihil legere, nihil scribere, aut assidenti vacat, aut anxio libet.
-- Recta ingenia debilitat verecundia, perve^sa confirmat audacia. -- Ipse est
studiosus, literatus, etiam disertus. -- Puer simplicitate, comitate juvenis,
senex gravitate.

3. In both like
Or, * both, the beginnings, and ends of both, accord.

Ut est in summa avaritia sumptuosus, in summa infamia gloriosus, etc.

4. 4. In the beginning of one, and end of the other like, etc.
Or lastly; * the beginning of the former with the end of the latter: and the
end of the former, with the beginning of the latter: Thiis inversion being
sometimes more grateful for its varying. As;

Multa super Priamo rogitans, super Hectore multa. -- Been est mihi, quia tibi
been est. --

So in like-ending words.

Quid autem illo aut fidelius amico, aut sodale jucundius? -- Saluti eorum
potius consulam, quam voluntati. -- Quae in Senatu saepe ab inimicis, ab
improbis saepe jactata sunt. -- Detestanda avaritia illius, qui tam multa
concupiscebat, cum haberet super vacua tam multa. --

Transposition of words in tongues modern, and undeclined.
Although these transpositions are more incident to the learned tongues, yet of
them the modern are not wholly destitute; which because they be most are not made
use of; or never used by design, but only by chance; It (perhaps) may not be
amiss here to set you down some examples of those which our own Tongue is
capable of which I have borrowed out of Hooker, one in our Language very
eloquent. Where you may see, that we also have a graceful liberty.

1. * Of observing many of those elegancies in the correspondent beginnings and
endings of sentences, exemplified before in the Latin tongue (where the apt
disposing of words of the same part of speech, and that have some relation to
one another (especially of Verbs and Participles) is many times very
Emphaticall and Graceful) Example.

It is but justice to exact of you; and perverseness it is in you to deny, etc.
Your teachings we heard; we read your writings. -- Gross for men of this
quality; wise, and grave, men. -- They thought it better, to be somewhat hardly
yoked at home, than for ever abroad discredited. -- the exercise of this kind
of judgment our Savior required in the Jews, in them of Beraea, the Scripture
commends it. -- wherein they which did impose were holy, and they
unrighteous, which did bear the burden. -- I need not give instance in any one
sentence so alleged, for that I think the instance in any alleged otherwise a
thing not easy to be given. -- They accuse you, and against you they plead --
For one kind as many reasons may be brought, as for another. -- Though in which
we are, oftener, than they, mistaken. -- They will sell your bodies, your
wives, etc. all these things; and if there be ought else etc. they will sell.
-- these be the two fair supporters, etc. either the inducing tyranny, or the
reducing. -- Showing how good, how gainful, how happy, it must needs be. -- How
shall a man know to do himself this right, how to perform this honorable duty.
-- None has brought ceremony on more, or more driven holiness out. -- And by
how much the less contentious it is, by so much it will be more Christian.

2. * Of ending many times with the Verb or Adjective.

For in a Civil State, more in-sight, and in those affairs more experience,
must needs be granted them. -- Forced to confess, that, with whom the truth is,
they know not. -- That evil spirit, which is, even in his illusions strong --
As the simple sort are, even when they see no apparent cause, jealous. -- His
vehement requests herein, as touching both points, were satisfied. -- Some
things are so plain, that truth, from falsehood, is, most easily discerned. --
which thing though in it self most ture, yet is, in your defense most weak. --
Yea they are, of their due and deserved sufferings, no less proud, than etc. --
Be found, unto all kinds of knowledge, a Stepmother.

3. * Of placing the Accusative Case (and so the Infinitive Mood) before the
Nominative, and before the Verb.

To do as the Church of Geneva did, the learned in some other Churches must
needs be more willing. -- somewhat needs ye must do -- Dangerous it was, etc.
-- The other they would rather accept -- Two things of principal moment there
are --

4. * Of dividing and transposing the Substantive and Adjective.

The description is, as suited best to those times, typical and shadomy. -- yet
we shall find them broken well-nigh all, by etc. -- Practicing to subdue the
mighty things of this world by things weak. -- And the jurisdictive power in
the Church there ought to be none at all. etc. -- Ways of peaceable conclusion
there are but these two certain -- so that of peace and quietness there is not
any way possible -- As for any other means withour this, they seldom prevail.
--

5. * Of placing the oblique cases with their signs or prepositions [of, to,
from,etc.] (which being dependents on others, are not so fit to conclude the
sense) before the verb they are governed of; or between the Auxiliar Verbs and
the Participle or Adjective following it; and in any part of the sentence: as
is seen in many of the former examples.

Relatives, or other Pleonasms of speech, ordinarily used for this purpose;
which also many times render the sense more distinct, full, and pressing; see
the former examples.

Rythme and Correspondency of like Moods, Tenses, Cases, in the several
branches of a Period, though in modern Tongues we have not a like termination
of the same Cases, to make these Con-sonancies, yet have we like signs, or
prefixes going before them; so that, if there be a like ending in theirs, ours
have a like beginning. As

Homini, Pecudi. To a man, To a beast.

SECT. VI.
n. 1. 3 -- Of the Ornaments of speech; Figures.
THus much for Periods. Next, concerning the several Ornaments, Figures, and
Habits for setting out the matter more speciously, and making our Inventions
more lively, and plausible; grave, and persuasive; now such are, Epithets,
Metaphors, Similes, Amplification, etc.

1. Epithets
Epithets; useful especially in descriptions, and in metaphors; without which
the speech shows incompt and naked; yet is it likewise too much clogged, and
hindered, if it be loaded with too many. Which inconvenience sooner happens to
the Latin tongue, than to the English: they there (being multisyllables), too
much swelling the phrase; and either causing a harsh superfluity of like
terminations, or else forcing a dislocation of the words too much poetical, and
obscure; as we see in those Writers, who much use them: Barclay.

Novo cogitabam ludibrio suspectas saevire blanditias.

But here (being many of them monosyllables) giving the style but a just
clothing, and freeing it from all hiatus, and emptiness. Besides, the English
(as S. Ph. Sidney observes) has an elegant way of expressing them (much
beyond the Latin) in a dexterous decomposition of two, or three words together.
As: Tast-pleasing fruits. -- High-erected thoughts. -- Sea-thron'd Thetis. --
By all well-judging eyes. -- These could not stop their all-ore-bearing course.
-- cold-flowing waters -- the silver-lake -- the Christal-stream. --

His honors were a true-nam'd punishment.
Projicit acceptas, lecta sibi part, tabellas.
And on the ground the half-read Tables threw.
Lumina mors clausit Domini mirantia formam.
Deaths cold hand closed his self-admiring eyes.
Now two ill-fated Lovers in one die.
[which Compositions monosyllables fit best.]

Orator's design in using Epithets, Participles, present, future, preterit, as
also Verbal-adjectives (as, Dominatrix animi cupiditas) and all Appositions
whatsoever, are, as serviceable, and often more, than simple Adjectives. As:

O Domine Domine, qui inclinasti coelo; and descendisti etc. quibus modis te
insinuasti --

Dicam in auribus Dei mei, Domini mei, and Regis mei, qui est in excelso. --

And those many times, that are contrary to the nature of the thing they are
joined to, yet are the best expressive of our sense. As S. Aug.

Istae; laetitiae meae ^lendae cum laetandis maeroribus contendebant. -- Ego
Hydram etc. expertus sum tam (...) exitio, ut territi Gentiles in haec amplius
portent a non incurrant. --

Again many times the reason of things preposed, is, expressed (or, being
expressed before, reiterated) by way of Epithet, not more briefly, than
elegantly. As:

Suspecti, invisique, juvenis caedem destinavere. -- i. e. quia suspectus erat
and invisus. --

The Orator's Epithets being not (like the Poets, or those of Homer inferred
for verse-sake), to set down some unnecessary quality of the thing, but some
way to advantage also the discourse. Examples:

As calm in the description of his saddest condition, as of his serenest
fortune. -- A constant soul, which none of his sad infelicities can alter. --
God on whom his patient eyes do wait for better help. -- Men of the next sad
and miserable age will attribute. -- By long deb^te and toilsom rowing against
the impetuous tides of ignorance -- striving with faint and wearisome steps,
during this hazardous voyage. --

2. Metaphors.
Metaphors. (used chiefly in Descriptions) which are similitudes contracted to
a word; whereby we endeavor, not so much to render our conceits intelligible
to the Auditors reason, as to paint them visible to his sense. For things of
sense only illustrate; and amongst them, those of sight, most. Those
expressions therefore are most significant, which are borrowed, and translated
to our matter from things amongst which our life is much conversant; as from
Buildings; Plants; Seasons of the year; Navigation; Astronomy; All sorts and
all qualities of Bodies; Physic; Husbandry; Mechanics; Military discipline;
any ingenious Arts and Professions, etc. (See the examples thereof number. 8.)
which so soon as named, the well-acquainted Auditor with ease, as it were
prognosticates the rest of the discourse, and applies them further than the
speaker ( Illud facile accipiunt animi, quod agnoscunt). And they commonly
thrive better in the ground of a large and open style (where, by many
explications, and duplicated expressions, clearing one the other, they have
room enough to shoot out to some fair extent) than in a Laconick, and strict
one, which scarce touches, before it quits, them. In them,

1. To be, Not obscure.
Take heed, first, that they be not obscure; and a comment be required to
explain the Metaphor, which is inferred to explain the thing. 2. 2. Not below.
That they be not below, and depress the subject, which are brought to elevate
and advance it. (As, to call the Sun the Taper of the day,etc.) unless your
purpose be to disparage. 3. 3. Not too much.
That they be not too, much: for so like colors laid on too thick, instead of
giving a gloss to, they by little and little, obscure the sense. ( Metaphors,
indeed, never being the most proper expression, though many times the best).
Besides; so, they betray affectation, (always odious). Lastly; so, they
become, though never so good, by their nimiety fastidious, and no more
appearing good. ( Quae sunt commodissima; desinunt videri, cum paria esse
coeperunt.) To set out the light of a picture, there must be some shadow
intermixed. 4. 4. Not changed.
That they be not often changed in the same period; but that, with what
Metaphor the sentence begins, it be ended.

Metaphors are numbered all those expressions * wherein, to things inanimate,
are attributed the nobler actions of life: or, to qualities, etc. the actions
of a person. Example:

-- It is gone, and the place thereof shall know it no more. -- Audite, audite
P. C. and cognoscite reip. vulnera. -- Sed urbes and regna celeriter tanta
nequitia devorare potuisset? Me quidem miseret parietum ipsorum, atque
tectorum. Quidenim unquam domus illa viderat nisi pudicum? etc. Peccarem in
amicitiam tuam -- i. e. in Te amicum -- Iam quod tergum crudeli supplicio
lacerasti vindicabit atrocior stylus etc. -- In tanta solitarius frequentia
expecto benignitatem hospitii, quod diluat, etc. -- Quanquam facio his, etc.
injuriam humanitati vestrae -- Et hoc est, quod promiserat liberalis vultus,
etc. -- Et caenae moras fallo ingenti, etc. -- Misertum est querelarum mearum
numen propitium, etc. -- Puduit solemn diutius haec videre, and servitutem meam
libera solutaque nocte occuluit -- Postquam decoctum tota nocte dolorem prima
lux sopiverat etc. --

His lachrymis veniam damus, and miserescimus ultro.

Or, * wherein to Concretes, the names of their Abstracts. As:

Habet aviam maternam Serenam, nostri saeculi mores. Eucolpus noster, ille
seria nostra, ille deliciae. -- Quo laudabilius testamentum est; quod pietas,
fides, pudor, scripsit. --

-- Hoc Tibi --

Mittimus, O rerum faelix Tutela, salusque. i.e. Domitianus.

Or (contrary) wherein to accidents the names of their subjects: As:

For darkness, night; nights of sorrow: for light, the eye; the eye of reason:
for deepness, pit, dungeon,etc. for glory, a crown. -- concavity, womb. --
roundnesse, circle.

Allegory also is only a long-prosecuted Metaphor, which, when used, ought to
be mixed with some interwoven expressions, proper and plain; that as the one
makes it elegant, the other may make it understood.

Metaphors and Allegories borrowed from the subjects forenamed ( n. 4.)

The Ocean of whose mercy knows no shore. --
They gather what thy bounteous hands bestow,
And in the Summer of thy favor grow. --
Now was the winter of his prosperity at hand, and the leaves of his prosperous
fortune ready to fall, and that of Cyrus in its flower and first spring. -- A
Prince, whom without assentation, I may be bold to call, the sweetest and
fairest blossom that ever budded either out of the white or red Rosary. -- For
to make a strong party at the shutting up of the evening of our late Sovereign.
-- You intended a forestalment of the Kings lawful claim, when the fruit should
fall from the wasted Tree: and the fainting Sun, whose beams about that time
begun to wax both dim and waterish, must of necessity set in our Hemispheare.
-- The common law would punish Treason in the very heart, if the eye of
Inquisition could extend so far -- A tyrant builds the whole body of his State
upon the Columns of fear. --

Princes fear not the fires are kindled in foreign States, before some spark
light on their neighbors houses, or their own Palaces. -- The Pope more
moderate, etc. had not cut off as yet the King formally, as a withered or
unfruitful branch. -- To discover by what degrees this mystery of ambition
began to mine into the strength of Monarchy. -- Necessity forcing them to abate
their sails in a storm of distress. --

Their chiefest study, to be protected under the wings of the secular State. --
Thus we see with what tenderness he opened that vein, which he knew apt to
bleed above the measure of the Doctors prescription -- Seeing it dangerous, in
a body so diseased, to change or stir any thing, seeing all alterations set
humors on working. -- None of Natures greatest secrets are so oreshadowed with
an impenetrable veil, but that the diligent and wary hand of reason may unmask
them. -- So long as the plow of persecution made deep furrows on the backs of
godly Bishops, it rent up all those weeds of ambition, etc. which, in calm
seasons, are apt to spring out of the rank grounds of origenal infirmity. --
The old compass of honor is quite forgot, and our Pilots now adays know no
other root then that of their own fortunes; according to which they tack and
untack all public affairs. Whilst the goodly vessels of this State,
misguided, etc. are sometimes run aground upon the sands of shallow and
uncertain policy; or are kept at anchor in the deep gulf of security; where
they take in more matter of ruin and corruption in six months, than can be
pumped out again in seven years. Whilst the heavens never blew more favorably
for our advantage if we had the grace to have fitted our sails to the fairness
of the occasion. --

See many such patterns in Bacons Henry 7. and the Earl of Northamptons speech
against the gun-powder-Traitors.

3. Similies, expressed 1. With a Note.
Similitudes, which are very variously expressed.

* Sometimes with the note of similitude.

Ut quidam, morbo aliquo, and sensus stupore, suavitatem cibi non sentiunt; Sic
libidinosi, avari, faci^o^osi, verae laudis gustum non habent. -- Ut enim faces
ignem assidua concussione custodiunt; dimissum agerrime reparant; Sic and
dicentis calor, and audientis intentio, continuatione servatur, intercapedine
and quasi remissione languescit.

2. Without.
* Sometimes without.

Ira est equus indomitus. -- Penelope venit, abit Helena: -- Maria videmus, qua
part ^^uvios accipiunt, ea, aquarum accessu dulcescere. Ut mirum non sit, si
orator assiduo poetici fontis haustu peregrinum inde saporem ducat. --

3. Before.
* Sometimes before the matter, they illustrate.

Corrumpit sine talione Caelebs. --
Caecus perdere non potest, quod aufert.
Nil est deterius latrone nudo. -- [The thing alluded to follows.]
Nil securius est malo Poeta. --
4. After.
* Sometimes after.

Ac sicut veremur, ne quibusdam pars aliqua non probetur, ita confidimus, ut
universitatem omnibus varietas ipsa commendet; -- Nam and in ratione
conviviorum, quamvis a plerisque cibis singuli temperemus, totam tamen coenam
laudare cuncti solemus -- Although he want weight of matter, yet has he plenty
of words: Vessels never give so great a sound, as when they are empty. --
Quintilian [Against too frequent using of sentences] -- Sint ista, ut voles,
ornamenta, and lumina Orationis; sint stellae, ac sydera, quibus sese irradiet
eloquentia: at non ubique syderibus, coelum constat; and annulis gemmisque
onerare digitos articulosque omnes plebeiis in more est. -- Ego vero haec
lumina orationis, velut oculos quosdam esse eloquentiae credo, sed neque oculos
esse toto corpore velim. --

4. By Question.
* Sometimes proposed interrogatively.

Munera magna quidem misit, sed misit in hamo:

Et piscatorem piscis amare potest?

Unaquaeque arbor alit, quod genuit; and non alet matter suo lacte liberos? --

6. The Simile only explained.
* One while the simile explained, not the thing.

Hypponax similis est vespae; non magnum quidem murmur excitat, sed acriter
pungit: Demosthenes, tibiis; quibus si collum demas, reliquum erit inutile. --

7. The thing only.
* Elsewhere the thing explained, the Simile only mentioned. Quemadmodum lag^na
aquam, ita animus hominis ingrati beneficia, facile admittit, sed reddit cum
murmr and querela. -- [an Orator being never to observe one certain Tract,
though absolutely the best.]

4. Dissimilies and Contraries.
Dissimilitudes; or Comparisons with, and illustrations by Contraries --
Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt. This conducing much also to the
suspension, and gravity; parity and equal ballancing of a sentence.

Expressed
Which Dissimilitudes are expressed, * 1. By Disjunction.
either by Disjunction,

Non sapiens, sed astutus; non fortis, sed audax fuit. -- Nam literae ex
periculo ejus tantum discrimen adierunt, quantum ex salute, gloriae
cansequentur. -- Habet assentatio jucunda princi^i^, exitus amarissimos. --
Plus hujus inopia possit ad misericordiam, quam illius opes ad crudelitatem. --
Quod nequaquam blandum auribus imperitorum, tanto majorem apud doctos habere
gratiam debet, quanto minorem apud indoctos habet. --

Each place handsome without curiosity, and homely without loathsomness. --
Neque enim satis amarint bonos principes, qui malos satis non oderint. -- Visus
es mihi in scriptis meis annotasse quaedam ut tumida, quae ego sublimia, ut
improba, quae ego audentia, ut nimia, quae ego plena, arbitrabar --.

2. By Conversion.
* Or by Commutation and Inversion and several ways of comparing together, and
reflecting upon them.

Edere oportet ut vivas: non vivere ut edas. --

Scis, ut sicut diversa natura dominatio and principatus; ita non aliis esse
principem gratiorem, quam qui maxim dominum graventur. -- Regulus filium
amisit; hoc uno malo indignus, quod nescio, an malum putet.

Parvula nam exemplo est magni formica laboris. --

3. By Denomination.
* Or by denominating them also one of another. Which because commonly not done
without strength of fancy in the Orator, is the more remarked and admired by
the Auditor, much taken to see opposites agree, and contradictions true. --
(Nihil magis eloquentiam, quam ancipitia commendant. Multi advertunt, quod
eminet, and extat. Plin.)

Quisquis ubique habitat, Maxim, nusquam habitat. --

Queritur se diem quod non perdiderit, perdidisse. -- [ spoken of some
well-imployed against their will.] His infructuosos esse, magnus fructus est.
-- Est enim quaedam etiam dolendi voluptas, prasertim si in amici sinu defleas.
-- Discrimina dignitatum, si confusa, turbata, permista sunt; nihil est ipsa
aequalitate inaequalius. -- Ideoque vincta quaedam quasi solvenda de industria
sunt; illa quidem maximi laboris, ne laborata videantur. -- Summae artis est,
celare artem -- Homine^^ne Romanum tam Graece loqui? non medius fidius ipsas
Athenas tam Atticas dixerim. -- Super est, ne rursus Provinciae, quod damnasse
dicitur, placeat; agatque poenitentiam poenitentiae suae. -- Quos ego cum
recordor, in re inani, frigida, assidua, tam insatiabiliter decidere; capio
aliquam voluptatem, quod hac voluptate non capior. --

Linivit flores malesicis succis, and in venenum mella convertit --

[ Myrrha enamored on her Father.]
Now, in that mine, not mine: Proximity
Dis-joyns us: nearer, were we not so nigh.
5. Amplification.
Amplification. Done many ways: Especially 1. By Repetition; or 2. By
Multiplication of the expression; or 3. By Enumeration of parts; 4. Or by
Aetiology.

1. -- By repetition of the same words.
By Repetition. Which by how much it shows more passion in the speaker, by so
much makes deeper impression on the hearer: fixing his fancy ( remuent, and
volatile) upon one object; and thereon insensibly still winding up his passion
higher; which usually, upon any divertisement to another thing, grows remiss
and runs suddenly down again.

This is more decently used, where there is something interposed, and when it
also brings with it some new additions. Example:

Vos, vos appello, fortissimi viri. -- Majus his, majus patrat Medea monstrum.
-- Hunc unum diem; hunc unum inquam, hodiernum diem, hoc punctum temporis, quo
loquor, defend, si potes, cur armatorum corona senatus septus est. 2. Philip.
-- Non es commotus, cum tibi matter pedes amplescretur, non es commotus.

Quicquid illud est, ibi Nebridius meus vivit, dulcis amicus meus, ibi vivit:
nam quis alius tali animae locus? Ibi vivit: unde me multa interrogavit, etc.
Quibus tenere cogebar Aeneae nescio cujus errores, oblitus errorum meorum; and
plorare Didonem mortuam, quis se occidit ob amorem; cum interea meipsum in his
a te morientem, Deus, Vita mea, siccis occulis ferrem miserrimus. Quid enim
miserius misero non miserante seipsum: and flente Didonis mortem quae fiebat
amando Aeneam, non flente au^em mortem suam, que fiebat amando te? --

vide n. 22. etc.); or further to prosecute, and augment it; or to qualify, as
it were, and correct it.) -- Wherein the wit does most triumph, to sport and
show it self, its subtility, its fecundity, in raising variety of Music, out
of the several touches and stops only of the same string -- Examples of
Conversion;

Et tamen non de meo, sed aliorum judicio loquor: qui sive judicant, sive
errant, me delectant: unum precor, ut posteri quoque aut errent similiter, aut
judicent. --

-- Nam parvulum differt, patiaris adversa, an expectes: nisi quod tantum est
dolendi modus, non est timendi: doleas enim quantum scias accidisse, timeas,
quantum possit accidere. -- Et admones and rogas, ut suscipiam absentis
Corelliae causam; Quod admones, gratias ago; quod rogas, queror; Admoneri enim
debeo, ut sciam; rogari non debeo, ut faciam; quod mihi non facere turpissimum
est. -- Nec ignor^ alios hujusmodi casus nihil amplius vocare, quam damnum,
eoque sibi magnos homines and sapientes videri: qui an magni sapientesque sint,
nescio: certa homines non sunt.

Vt laud^ri juvenes in bonis mallent, ita ad pejora laud ducuntur. -- Me
praedia materna parum commode tractant, delectant tamen ut materna. -- Quid
indignor? Ridere satius est; ne se magnum quid adeptos putent, qui huc
foelicitate, perveniunt, ut videantur. -- Est eadem opinio cujusdam
eruditissimi, quo magis adducor, ut neutrum falli putem, cum non credibile est,
utrumque falli. -- Habet has vices conditio mortalium, ut ex secundis adversa,
ex adversis secunda noscantur. -- Et sine aemulo secum certare etc. ac sicut
imperat solus, solus ita esse, qui debeat imperare. -- Etenim cum artifex
ejusmodi sit, ut solus dignus videatur esse, qui in scena spectetur, tamen vir
ejusmodi est ut solus dignus videatur, qui eo non accedat. -- lta fit, ut omnia
grata sint, quae facis, licet gratiae causa nihil facis. Amatur quidem a me:
judicio tamen meo obstat charitas hominis, quae ex judicio nata est. -- Tantus
audic^di, quae fecerint, pudor, quibus nullus faciendi, quae audire erubescunt.
-- Ut satius est, unum aliquid insigniter facere, quam plurima mediocriter: ita
plura mediocriter, si non potes aliquid unum insigniter. -- Edicat quid
absumpserit, ita fiet, ut non absumat, quod pudeat dicere. -- Hodie confiteris
peccata; and cras iterum perpetras confessa. -- Nulla enim studia tanti sunt,
ut amicitiae officium des^ratur, quod sanctissime custodiendum studia ipsa
praecipiunt -- Who avoids not pride, with not knowing her excellencies: but by
making that one of her excellencies, to be void of pride. -- As their courage
was guided with skill, so their skill was armed with courage. -- He cunningly
in making greater the fault, made the faultiness less, and in seeming to
desire nothing but death as ashamed to live, he the more begged life, in the
refusing of it. -- Though they liked not the evil he did, yet they liked him
that did the evil; and though not counselors of the offense, yet protectors of
the offender. --

Examples of Reflection by way of Correction.

Quibus ex causis necesse est tanquam immaturum mortem ejus in sinu tuo
defleam: si tamen fas est, aut flere, aut omnino mortem vocare, qua tanti viri
mortalitas, potius quam vita, finita est. -- Quas ille leges, si modo leges
nominandae sunt, ac non faces. -- Quippe qui vicesimo and quinto demum (tot
enim annis regnum tenuit; si quidem vi and libidine omnia agere, regnare est)
liberam vocem audivit. -- Potest fortasse Princeps inique, potest tamen, odio
esse nonnullis, etiamsi ipse non oderit. -- etc. -- Unde potest avidus captae
Leo parrcere praede?

Sed tamen esse tuus dicitur, ergo potest. --

Postea revisa and purgata in librum grandem quidem, unum tamen coarctasse. --
Audivimus quidem te omne munus consulis obiisse, -- sed audivimus, etc.

So for Authorities (Divine, or Humane); Axioms; Proverbs; words of more
moment; it adds much to their force and weight, if they be cited first in their
own, or a foreign language, and then repeated in the vulgar: yet more, if they
be read out of the book. All more fixing the Auditors intention upon them.

By Multiplication of the like expression.
By Multiplication of the expression. Nam plerisque longiore tractu vis quaedam
and pondus accedit: utque corpori ferrum, sic oration animo non ictu magis quam
mora, imprimitur. Plin. lib. 1. Ep. 20. -- And nothing is more Orator-like than
this (especially in a sterile, and jejune subject) to agitate, spread and mould
the same lump of matter, after many diverse fashions; to change and invert the
figure, parts, order, ornaments, of our speech, and in such a manner, rehearse
the like, or indeed the same, that it seems still diverse, and quite another
thing: At least it is, with the best Masters of this Art, usual to render every
sense in a doubled expression, the latter of which sometimes explains the
former, most-times rises higher, (as it were in emulation) and out-goes it,
and makes descant, on the preceding plain song; the first, exhibiting the
matter naked, the other, adorning it. The Hebrew and other Eastern-tongues use
this reduplication only for the more state, and gravity, without varying at
all the conceit. As:

O my people give ear to my law; incline your ears to the words of my mouth. --
Often did they provoke him in the Wilderness; and grieve him in the desert. --
He consumed their days in vanity, and their years in trouble. --

So Pliny:

Obsepta diutina servitute ora reseramus; fraenatamque tot malis linguam
resolvimus. -- Veterem consuetudinem fori and pristinum morem judiciorum minime
videt. --

Quamobrem illa arma, centuriones, cohortes, non periculum nobis, sed
praesidium denunciant; neque solum ut quieto, sed etiam ut magno, animo simus,
hor tantur; neque silentium modo defensioni meae, verum etiam auxilium
pollicentur. -- Cic. pro Milone; O me infoelicem! Revocare tu me in patriam
potuisti per has [milites] ego te in patria per eosdem retinere non potero? Me
non potuisse Milonis salutem tueri per eosdem, per quos nostram ille servasset?

[Examples of more ascending expressions:]

Sunt ingenio simili, qui, quod huic donant, auferunt illi; famamque
liberalitatis avaritia petunt. --

Perfectum opus, absolutumque est; nec jam splendescit lima; -- sed atteritur.
-- Non tibi benefaciendi fuit causa, ut quae male feceras, impune fecisses:
amor impendio isto, non venia quaesita est; Populusque Romanus obligatus a
tribunali tuo, non exoratus, recessit. --

Postulamus, ut futuros Principes doceas etc. induere praetextam, quam, cum
dare possint, occuparint; ascendere curulem, quam detineant; esse denique, quod
concupierint; nec ideo tantum velle Consules fieri, ut fuerint. --

Tam autem eras excors, ut tota in oratione tecum ipse pugnares, ut non modo
non cohaerentia inter se diceres, sed maxim disjuncta and contraria; ut non
tanta mecum, quanta tecum, tibi esset contentio. -- 2 Phil.

His very courthesies are intolerable, they are done with so much arrogance and
imputation; and hi is the only man you may lawfully hate after a good turn;
and reckon it among your calamities, to be beholding to him. --

By enumeration of Parts or Descriptions.
By Enumeration of Parts i.e. of all particular Circumstances, Antecedents,
Consequents, Adjuncts, Causes, Effects, Matter, Form, Parts constituent, or
integrant; Time, Place, Motives, Ends, Accidents whatsoever, etc. which are all
Descriptions in their several kinds; All descriptions consisting only; 1. in
an exact enumeration, series, and complexe, of very many particulars (such as
any way conduce to our purpose). And 2. in a lively draught of these, as it
were to the eye of sense, by expressions translated from those things, with
which the Auditor is most acquainted; of which note that rule, Circumstantiis
nimio pluribus orationem vestire, taedium parit; iisdem penitus carere,
abruptum quiddam est and ingratum, Bacon. Examples of such Descriptions and
Histories of things (under which I comprehend Ethopoea's and the deciphering
and character of Manners, of Passions, of any moral habits, etc. as well as of
any other works of nature) are too large to be here inserted.

Vide Plin. Of a Fountain lib. 8. Ep. 8. -- Of an Earthquake Lib. 6. Ep. I6. --
Of a Flood Lib. 8. Ep. I7. -- Of Rejoicing, Pan. p. 388. -- Of Trajans
familiarity, Paneg. p. 344. -- Of the affections of one that is sick, Lib. 7.
Ep. 26.

Enumeration of Parts is done; either 1. By a simple exaggeration and
synthroismus of them. Or 2. By Gradation. Or 3. by Division. Or 4. by
Interpretation.

1. By a simple exaggeration of them.
Exaggeration and accumulation of parts: (Omnia per parts considerata videntur
majora, Bacon.

Minus est totum dicere, quam omnia. Quine.) Wherein is used a multiplying also
of the words, and expression; as Consilio, Authoritate, Sententia, Dux and
Legatus, and Miles; -- Seditions, Uproares, Tumults, Mutinies, Rebellions, etc.
-- Usually not above three congested, -- sometimes with, sometimes without, any
Conjunction. (the middle one differing in termination, to avoid an ill Emphasis
-- Amamus, Jocamur, Ludimus. -- Gravitate, Prudentia, Fide, prope singulari.
--) -- In which also some tacit gradation is by Orators most-what observed,
and the weightiest word said last: or, in diminutions, the contrary. Example:

Etenim cum homines nefarii de patriae parricidio confiterentur, consciorum
indiciis, sua manu, voce pene literarum coacti, se urbem inflammare, cives
trucidare, vastare Italiam, delere Rempublicam, consensisse; quis esset etc. --
Accusa Senatum; accusa equestrem ordinem, qui tum etc. accusa omnes ordines,
omnes cives; dum confiteare etc. -- Cum te neque Principes civitatis rogando,
neque majores natu monendo, neque frequens Senatus agendo de vendita atque
addicta sententia movere potuit. -- At quo temperamento Dii boni potestatem
tuam, fortunamque moderatus es? Imperator titulis, and imaginibus, and signis:
caeterum modestia, labor, vigilantia, dux, and legatus, and miles. -- He
neither spared old men, as respecting their gravity; nor children, as pardoning
their weakness; nor women, as compassionating their sex. --

2 Or by Gradation.
Gradation: Which, from the less considerable, orderly ascends to what is more.
A Rule to be observed in the whole Oration; in every period; in every clause;
and in every Articulus. Example:

Tolerated, countenanced, encouraged, applauded. --

Facinus est, 1. vincire civem Romanum; 2. scelus, verberare; 3. prope
parricidium, necare. 4. Quid dicam, in crucem tollere? --

Imaginare, quae solicitudo nobis, qui metus, quibus 1. super tantare, 2. in
illo coetu, 3. praesente Caesare, dicendum erat. -- Quid homines putarent, si
tum occisus esset, cum tu illum 1. in foro. 2. spectante Populo Romano, 3.
gladio stricto insecutus es etc? --

1. In coetu vero Populi Romani, 2. negotium publicum gerens, 3. magister
equitum, 4. cui ructare turpe esset, 5. is vomens, frustis esculentis vinum
redolentibus 6. gremium suum and totum tribunal implevit. -- Ad hanc Regulus
venit; primum; imprudentiam hominis, qui venerit ad aegram etc. esto si venit
tantum: sed ille etiam proximus thoro sedet etc. -- Without controversy great
is the mystery of godliness -- 1. It is a mystery. 2. A mystery of
godliness. 3. A great one, without controversy. -- Bishop Andrews. -- ( see
S. 3. N. 7.)

3. Or by Division.
Division and prosecution of the parts severally:

* Sometimes with a capitulation of them first.

Tuam vero magnanimitatem, an modestiam, an benignitatem, prius mirer?
Magnanimitas fuit expetito semper honor abstinere, modestia cedere;
benignitas, peralios frui. --

Quousque nobis and tibi invidebis? Tibi maximam gloriam, nobis voluptatem. --

* Sometimes without.

Quis interpretari potest; impudentiorne, qui in Senatu: an improbior, qui in
Dolabellam: an impurior, qui patre audiente: an crudelior, qui in illam miseram
tam spurce, tam impie, dixeris? --

By which, 1. either all the parts being proved, or confuted, the whole is so.

Mira illius asperitas, mira faelicitas horum. Illius asperitas, qui numero
civium excidit, quem socium etiam in liberis habuit. Faelicitas horum, quibus
successit in locum patris, qui patrem sustulerat. -- An satius* fuit, foelicem
vocare? quod non moribus, sed fortunae datum est. Satius magnum? cui plus
invidiae, quam pulchritudinis inest. --

Urbanos, qui illa censuerunt, putem? an miseros? Dicerem urbanos, si Senatum
deceret urbanitas. Miseros ergo, sed nemo tam miser est, ut ad illa cogatur. --
Ambitio ergo and procedendi libido? sed quis adeo demens, ut per publicum
dedecus procedere velit? etc. --

2. Or all the rest of the parts being excluded, one only remains affirmed, or
denied.

Quod scelus conflarunt Judaei, cur a Deo olim tam pr^pitio, tamdiu deserantur?
Simulachris immolant? At eorum contactum perhorrescunt. Commentitios Deos
asciscunt? At efferuntur eo nomine quod Deum colant verum. Immanibus moribus
efferati sunt? At ipsi summam sibi laudem aequitatis and pietatis assumunt.
Parumne supplices preces ad Deum adhibent? Immo in precibus assidui sunt. Tum,
his succisis. Vera causa infertur; Judaeorum perfidia and inimicitia in
Christum Dominum. -- Quid putem? contemptumne me? non video nec in vita, nec in
gratia, etc. quid despicere possit Antonius. An in Senatu de me detrahi posse
credidit? Qui or do been gestae reip. testimonium multis, mihi uni conservatae,
dedit. An decertare mecum voluit contentione dicendi? Hoc quidem beneficium est
etc. and pro me, and contra Antonium dicere. Illud profecto est; non
existimavit, sui similibus proba^i posse, se esse hostem patriae, nisi mihi
esset inimicus.

4. Or by interpretation.
Interpretation, or Comment by way of Parenthesis, helping much to extenuate,
or aggravate, what is said. Example:

Lascivam verborum licentiam [ i. e. (...) linguam] excusarem, si meum esset
exemplum. -- Nec brevitatem dicentibus, sed copiam [hoc est, diligentiam]
suadent. -- Quid agis etc. ipse vitam jucundissimam, [hoc est, ocios^ssimam]
vivo. -- Epigrammata Curione non indigent, and ^ontenta sunt sua i. e. mala
lingua -- Matrem ejus (nihil possum illustrius dicere) tantae foemiuae matrem.
-- At mehercule alienissimi homines in honorem Quadratillae (pudet me dixisse,
honorem) per adulationis officium cursitabant etc. -- Amat me (nihil possum
ardentius dicere) ut tu. -- Hanc ille vim (seu quo alio nomine dicenda est
intentio, quicquid velis, obtinendi) ad meliora etc. -- Quid magis interest,
quam ut liberi) dicerem tui, nisi nunc illos magis amares) digni illo patre
reddantur, etc. -- Compulit non solum consensus Senatus (quanquam hoc maxim)
verum etiam (quidem minoris, sed tamen) numeri etc. -- Unde auguror quaeris,
non quia ipse dixit (quo mendacius nihil est) sed quia etc. Tempus fuit (ac
nimium diu fuit) quo alia etc. -- Nam in hoc uno, vir alioqui prudentissimus,
(honestissimo quidem, tamen) errore, versatur. -- On the mast they saw a young
man (at least if he were a man) bearing, etc. -- Omnibus titulis (nihil volo
elatius de homine modestissimo dicere) parem. -- ( See Number. 26, 27.)

4. -- By Aetiology or giving reasons --
The fourth way of Amplification is by frequent Aetiologies, or giving reasons
for what we say. For note that the Orator discourses and argues as the
Logician, by Syllogismes, or Enthymems, Inductions, and Examples; only in a
manner somewhat diverse. The Orator proving the premises (where weak) as he
lays them down, before he infers his conclusion from them; and, where the
Discourse is somewhat long, making a second repetition of the premises [As in
that instance in Cic. de Inventione 1. to prove the World governed by
Providence, he shows first; That the best governed things are governed so: then
proves this, in a house; a ship; or an army; far better managed, where there is
advice, etc. Then next shows, that the Heavens, Earth, etc. are as wisely, and
regularly ordered, as any of these; proving this again from the constant course
of the stars, etc. and thus descends at last to his Thesis or Conclusion.] The
Orator therefore is frequently to confirm (and this as briefly, and as
immediately, as may be) what he says, by these Aetiologies, that he may render
the fabric of his speech not only beautiful, but strong; to leave no
dubitation in his Auditors, or (also) to give them the more delight; every one,
out of natural affectation of wisdom, being much pleased, rerum cognoscere
causas. Therefore is he every where to bring in the causes; principles,
generals* (except when universally known (as far as he can reach them)) upon
which his particulars, his positions, his conclusions depend: inferred, either
in the form of a reason; or many times of an Axiom and Sentence: (Frequens
rationibus, frequens sententiis, debet esse oration. Quintil.)

1. Either preceding.


Sometimes by prosecuting the order of nature; descending from the causes and
principles gradatim to the effect and conclusion. As:

Melius illa administrari, quae consilio; nil autem melius mundo administrari;
ergo mundum consilio regi. --

Cum argentum legaverit omne, pecuniam quoque legavit, quae est in argento.

[ By Interrogation.]

Quis equus generosissimus? nonne qui velocissimus? etc. -- Ita and hominum
generosissimi habendi, non qui na^^lium splendore, sed virtutis gloria
praestant. -- Quem igitur cum omnium gratia noluit, hunc voluit cum aliquorum
querela?

By Sentence.

Corrumpit sine talione caelebs.
Nil est deterius latrone nudo:
Nil securius est malo poeta.
reason of it: the reason either set 2. Or following. By Epiphonema or Sentence.
* absolutely, by way of Epiphonema, and Sentence: -- As:

Tantas conversiones, aut fragilitas mortalitatis, aut fortunae mobilitas
facit. --

Or By a Conjunction causal.
* relatively, by Conjunctions causal Quia, nam, si, sicut, qui, sicut, etc. --

Or sometimes by Interrogation; Example:

Bonum est virtus, quia nemo illa male uti potest. -- Jure occisus Saturnius
res novas moliens, sicut Gracchi. --

Anima immortalis est, nam immortale est quicquid ex seipso movetur. -- Ejus
igitur mortis sedetis ultores, cujus vitam si putetis per vos restitui posse,
nolitis? --

Quem alienum fidum invenies, si tuus hostis fueris? --

Quo fit ut scribere longiores epistolas nolim, velim legere; illud tanquam
delicatus, hoc tanquam ociosus: nihil est enim aut pigrius delicatis, aut
curiosius ociosis.

The Argument, Sum delicatus, ideoque piger, and igitur scribere nolim, etc. --

Absit superbia, asperitas, nec timueris contemptnm. An contemnitur qui
imperium, qui fasces habet, nisi qui se primus ipse contemnit? --

The Argument. Fasces habes, ergo contemptum non timeas. --

Nam cum familiaritatem nostram ad praesidium ornamentumque tibi sumpseris,
nihil est quod negare debeam, praesertim pro patria roganti; quid enim
precibus, aut honestius piis, aut efficacius amantis? --

The Argument: Preces suntpiae, sunt obsequentis, sunt amantis, ergo negari non
debent.

Longeque valentior amor, ad ob^inendum quid velis, quam timor: nam timor ab
sit si recedas; manet amor; ac sic, ut ille in odium, hic in reverentiam
vertatur. --

The Argument. Amor manet in recessu; imo in reverentiam vertitur: Timor abit
and mutatur in odium: ergo valentior amor timore.

Pulchrius hoc Caesar, quam si recusares omnes: nam recusare omnes [honores]
ambitionis, moderationis est eligere parcissimos. -- Quintil. pro Caeco. --
Aliis tradidit in parentum sanguinem luxuria ferrum. Luxuria videntium crimen.
Aliis meretriculae amor immodica poscentis.

Amor, cui renunciant oculi. --

2. Philipp. At placuit L. Catulo, cujus semper in hac republica, etc. --
placuit M. Catoni; qui cum multa etc. -- Abstinui causis agentlis: primum quod
deforme etc. His quoque accedit etc. --

The Argument. Deforme erat etc. ergo abstinui etc.

A quibus libenter requisierim, cur concedant (si concedant tamen) Historiam
debere recitari? quae non ostentationi, sed fidei veritatique componitur: cur
Tragoediam? quae non Auditorem, sed Scenam and Actores: cur Lyrica? quae non
Lectorem, sed Chorum, and Lyram postulant. --

The Argument. Historia ostentationi non componitur; ergo non debet recitari
etc.

An satius fuisset di^cisse [foel^ c^m? quod non moribus, sed fortunae datum
est. Satius, magnum? cui plus, invidiae, quam pulchritudinis inest.

The Argument. [Foelix] est nomen fortunae; ergo non satius fuit etc. ( See
Sect. 1. Number. 4. Sect. 6. Number. 15, 16.

3. Or interposed.
Sometimes by interposing in the middle of the Discourse the reason, (when it
may be briefly expressed) by a Parenthesis, or an Ablative causal. Example:

De amicitia, quam a me violatam esse criminatus est (quod ego gravissimum
crimen judico) pauca dicam. 2 Philip. --

The Argument. Violatio amicitiae gravissimum crimen; and de ea criminatus est
me etc. ergo pauca dicam.

Jam illud, cujus est, non dico audaciae? (cupit enim se audacem dici) sed,
quod minime vult, stultitiae etc. --

Esto, hoc imperite (neque enim ab homine nunquam sobrio postulanda prudentia)
sed videte impudentiam. --

Unde auguror quaeris? non quia affirmat ipse (quo mendacius nihil est) sed
quia certum est, etc. --

Audivi Fundanum ipsum (ut multa luctuosa dolor invenit) praecipientem quod
etc. -- Inde dictum Boeticorum (ut plerumque dolor etiam venustos facit) non
illepidum ferebatur etc. -- Tu equidem (pro caetera diligentia tua) admones me,
etc.

SECT. VII.
n. 1. -- 4. Of Style.
THus much of the chief Figures adorning an Oration. It remains, in the next
place, that we speak something of Style, the several kinds and fashions
thereof; and the figures more proper to it.

1. 1. To be perpetually varied.
And here first you are above all things to avoid a perpetual equality, and
likeness in it; 1. either for the expression of your matter; 2. or for the
illation. Any one, thought the best form of style, being worse, than a mixed.

1. In the Expressions.
For your expression. You are not every where to use either flourishing
Metaphors, as some of our Moderns: or grave sentences, as Seneca: or acute, and
exactly-according periods, as Tacitus: or sweet and consenting cadencies, as
Isocrates: but, interchangeably, something of them all; now one, now another.
(Adnixi certe sumus, ut quamlibet diversa genera lectorum per plures dicendi
species teneremus, etc. Plin. l. 2. Ep. 5.) That the diversly-affected
Auditors, may, notwithstanding find every one something, with which he may be
taken. Or at least, that the likeness of it may not cause a tediousness to
them, or, in the speaker, bewray affectation. Add to these, that your
invention may, thus, be more relieved, and recreated, as it were, which, still
kept in the same Track, contracts also a wearisomness to it self; and,
delivering things still in the same manner, is quickly exhausted. For the wit
enlarges it self, not so much by the forging perpetually new conceptions, as
by the several dresses and disguisings of the old, put in a new figure, that
they may not be known for the same.

2. In the illations.
For your illation. (See Sect. 3. Number. 1. etc.) which an Orator varieth many
ways.

1. 1. By interrogation.
By making frequent interrogations, which are the very life and spirit of an
Oration, continually awakening, and exciting the drowsiness of the Auditor, or
Reader, as if he were demanded, or else consulted-with, for an answer. And yet,
for the most part, nothing is so much out of question, as that which is made a
question of.

An ego verear, ne me, etc. --

[Usual for Transitions.]

Bishop Andrews. -- By me Kings reign. A cause of Kings reigning then. What is
that cause? Per me. And Per me is a person. What person? Per me regnant; and
that is not per se regnant. A person, and another person. And who is that other
person? Let me tell you this; first, it is but one person. Per me, not per nos.
-- One person it is: I ask then this one person who he is?

This we find by etc. to be God. By God then they reign. I ask yet further, by
what Person of the Godhead? The Context, etc. warrants us, that it is per Jesum
Christum Dominum nostrum, etc. -- (See Sect. 3. Number. 8.) --

2. By Objection.
By making frequent objections;

Dicet aliquis -- Quaeret quispiam -- si quis forte miretur. -- At enim te in
disciplinam meam tradideras. -- At aliud est actio bona, aliud oration. Scio
nonnullis ita videri; sed ego etc. --

3. By frequent commutation of Persons.
By frequent change in his speech of the persons.

Sometimes speaking of himself.

Testor mentem meam, dum haec scribo. -- Quantum mihi tamen cernere datur. --
Simul cogito, cum sint ista etc. -- Etenim memini, tunc verissime, etc. --

Sometimes to a second Person.

Te miror, Antoni, quorum facta imitere, eorum exitus non perhorrescere? --

Sometimes of a third.

See it frequent in Cic. 2. Phil.

Non video, quid in me despicere possit Antonius. --

Sometimes making a third to speak. As in all Prosopopoeia's, etc.

-- Cic. pro Milone -- Me quidem, Judices, exanimant and interimunt hae voces
Milonis, quas audio assidue; valiant, inquit, valiant cives mei, sint incolumes
etc. --

4. By Dubitation.
Often doubting, and reasoning with himself. Often speaking of his own
qualifications; often declaring his own affections; or delivering for, and as,
his own judgment, or opinion, what he knows is every man's else, because he
will not seem to impose upon his Auditor.

Neque enim ego, ut multi, invideo -- Assirmo and licet impunita, etc. affirmo
audacter (atque ut spero, tuto) profiteor. -- Adjiciam, quod me docuit usus,
magister egregius -- Utique breviter, quod sentio, enuntiem. -- Sed ego
(forsitan fallor) persuasum habeo. -- Scio nonnullis ita videri; sed ego, etc.

5. By Admiration.
Often falling into admiration, or exclamation; and always heightning his own
passions first, to excite other men's.

6. 6. By Consultation.
Often directing his speech more particularly to his hearers, as consulting and
deliberating with their wisdom; as appealing to their judgment.

Aestimate quae vita etc. -- Quid agam Judices? quo conferam me etc.

7. By Praeoccupation.
Or many times pre-occupating it: and taking for granted, that they are, what
he desires, that they should be: whilst they also like it better, by him to be
supposed knowing, than instructed, as ignorant.

Adnotasse vos credo (Patres) -- Quis enim nescit (Judices) hanc famae esse
naturam? --

8 By correction.
Reflecting upon, correcting and revoking, as it were, something said, but to
make some further advantage thereof. As

Filium unicum adolescentulum habeo. Ah! quid dixi habere me? imo habui Chreme;
nunc habeam, necne, incertum est, etc. -- Quas ille leges; si modo leges, and
non faces belli, and pestes reipublicae, nominandae sint. -- sed nimis urgeo,
commoveri videtur adolescens. -- sed finis sit; Neque enim prae lachrymis loqui
possum: and hic [Milo] se lachrymis defendi vetat. -- (See Sect. 6. Number. 16.)

9. By Concessions.
Often arguing with his adversary, and frequently conceding to him something,
after he has already proved the contrary against him, with an [ Esto; Grant it
be so,]: when he has enough besides to oppose; or something also to urge out
of such concession.

Sed quid opporas tandem, si negem -- fac potuisse -- sed sit beneficium -- 2
Philip.

10. By suppositions of Absurdities.
Relating contrary opinions, as well as his own; but when there is a sufficient
prejudice of them; inferred with an Ironical [ Scilicet, or, Credo, or Nisi
forte; Nisi vero etc.]

If I do not on these Heads furnish you with many examples, it is because any
common Rhetorick-book will afford you plenty.

History, and a Panegyric; a Letter, and an Oration; a Controversy, and a
Moral Discourse; If one in a Letter to a servant, about some domestic affair,
or in a strict controversy, or in a narrative history, should use lofty
Metaphors, frequent Interrogations, Apostrophe's, Prosopopoeia's, Exclamations,
etc. would he not be most ridiculous? yet are some or other of these Rules and
Schemes, in all compositions whatever, serviceable.

2. To be 1. Concise for the pen: 2. more diffused and copious for speaking.
You ought to vary your style, according as it is prepared for the ear or for
the eye; for an Auditor, or for a Reader. For speaking, it is necessary, that you
observe a fuller and opener style; a stricter for the pen. For the same man,
when an Auditor, is not so curious and vigilant, as when a Reader. Repetitions
here, and doubled sentences, and enlargements by Synonymal words etc. before
the shutting up of the period, are but necessary: ( Brevitas, quae ociosum
fortasse lectorem minus fallit, audientem transvolat, nec, dum repetatur,
expectat. -- Sint omnia dilucida, and negligenter quoque audientibus aperta.
Nam non, ut intelligere possit multis frequenter cogitationibus avocatus, sed
ut omnino non possit non intelligere, curandum. -- Quint. lib. 8. cap. 2.)
There what can be more tedious? All the force also and smartness, and sting of
the speech being lost by languishing explications, dilatations and paraphrase.
Whereas, meanwhile, if brevity chance sometimes to be obscure, the Readers
diligence (who mostwhat are the learned) may stay upon it, till he has
discovered it: if any thing of moment is but once said, his undistracted
solitude either easily remembers it, or at pleasure (where all lies still
before him) reviews it.

3. Yet more circumlocutory, and verbous for Extempore.
Extemporal Eloquence especially must use a long and compassing style; that
whilst he slowly effunds what is already prepared in his memory, the fountain
of his wit may have the more time to replenish it with more, and never suffer
this cistern to be quite exhausted. Therefore such must rather make use of
Metaphors, and Similes, and Descriptions, and Paraphrase of their matter, and
digressions, than of acute sentences, and concise Periods: and generally must
rather imitate Tully than Tacitus.

3. Of short and long styles:
In general, addict your self rather to that style, to which your natural
abilities incline you; some persons having a more acute conceit, fit for a
short, others a more voluble expression, agreeable to a longer style.

Of which there is no one sort but has its proper graces and defects. A short
period loses so much of smoothness, as a long and round one of acuteness: One
is more harsh, and the other blunt. One suits with reason; the other with the
passions, better: and the Rhetoric of the one is more sweet, of the other more
powerful. If the one seem more learned, the other seems more natural and
unaffected; and if this has an elegancy, the other has a simplicity that
pleases one. One entertains naturally some sorts of figures, which the other
cuts off; as the short is adverse to Metaphors etc. the long to exact
correspondence, and libration of its parts. Of the two, the short receives more
disadvantage in the speaking, except where there happens a pronunciation most
accurate; and the long more in the reading; seeming to have something
superfluous to the stricter examination of a now passion-less judgment. Either
very long, or very short, periods are subject to obscurity: one not opening and
spreading the matter enough; the other over-burdening the Auditors memory. Yet
who so will not lose the acuteness and elegancy in the one, or suffer the
dismembring in the other, must in some things hazard the imperspicuity of his
style. La soverchia chiarezza (says the Italian) fa l'oratione humile. And
again, L'oscurita genera la grandezza de l'oratione. --

4. Of perspicuity in style.
Whatever style you rather entertain, you ought before all things to endeavor
a sufficient perspicuity therein; which as it ought to be the chiefest care of
an Orator (the design of whose speaking surely, is to be understood) so is it
often hindered by the ornaments of speech.

Hindered. Hindered, 1. By multiformity of style in the same period.
1. By not observing cautiously an uniformity of style (I mean for the same
period) which much directs the Reader, or Auditor) but often changing, without
necessity in the following clause, the Verb, or its Nominative, or the Cases of
the Nouns, the Voices and Tenses of Verbs, the Connexions, etc. which are
assumed in the precedent Clause* Example:

When we desire the same perfection, what hinders that the same means may not
be used by us? -- more uniform this [that we may not use the same means]. --
These are unspeakable ravishments to a refined intellect, though a sensual
appetite does not discern their excellencies -- better [though undiscerned
excellencies to a sensual appetite. -- Would men guide themselves by reason,
and were the dictates of nature observed by them -- more uniform [and observe
the dictates of nature.] -- As these things cause much joy to the children, so
the parents are greatly afflicted by them -- better [so great affliction to
their parents.] -- Wealth is seldom severed from from pride, and humility more
often accompanies poverty-better [and poverty more often is accompanied with
humilty. --

2. By a too curious transposition of words.
By too curious a transposition of words (for the emphasis or numbers sake,
(Vide Sect. 5. Number. 4.) from their natural place.

(Adhuc pejor est [ad impediendum intellectum] mistura verborum, qualis in illo
versu;

S^xa vocant Itali mediis quae in fluctibus aras.)

Especially by Oblique Cases, or Adverbs (as [ only, also, again, etc.]) being
carelessely adjoined to one word, when in the sense they belong to another. As:

[I only desire this] applied to the Pronoun [I] or Verb [desire] when
belonging to the Article [this] I desire onely-this]. -- [He brought some part
to the Table, of his provisions. For; [He brought to the Table some part of his
provisions.]

3. By using too many Metaphors.
By using of too many Metaphors; or prosecuting the same too far; which though
many times the best expression, yet are they not also the most plain.

4. By too much contraction of speech.
By contracting our speech (for the avoiding of Tautologies and repetition, or
also for the more brevity, and acuteness of the style) and pa^ing away some
words necessary to the explication of our sense, endeavoring wittily not to be
understood.

And here happens a fault many ways, 1. By expression of Relatives or other
Expletives in one clause, and not in the other, when both clauses refer in the
same manner to a third. As:

[It was the only matter, worth standing upon, etc. or that a judicious man
would press] for [onely matter that was worth etc. or that a judicious man,
etc.]

Or by omitting of the illative, or redditive to some Conjunction causal, or
conditional, preceding; when that which is inferred stands at some distance
from it. As after [ because, when, since that,] omitting [ therefore, then, it
follows that etc.]

[Since, or because, they could not do the work, they could not expect the
reward] for [therefore they could not expect, etc.]

Such illatives omitted (I say) where the premise is extended to some length,
cause much ambiguity. Secondly, By leaving a relative [which, etc.] single (to
avoid tautology) where it may have a doubtful respect to many antecedents:
wherein some are apt to imitate in their English the phrase of those learned
languages, where, by reason of the variation of genders, such ambiguity is not
incurred. Here therefore you are either to make the true antecedent the last;
as it is better thus: The valor of Caesar, who -- Caesar's valor, which etc.]
-- than, [ Caesar's valor, who -- the valor of Caesar, which -- ] Or, where
the composure permits not this, to repeat with, or before, the relative, that
antecedent to which it belongs, or to join to the relative a Synonyma thereof.
As:

That happiness only is to be found in piety; for the acquiring of which men
compass sea and land. Where [ Of which] referrs to happiness, not piety. To be
made clear thus [for the acquiring of which happiness] or [of which felicity].
or to be repeated again [ that happiness] for the acquiring of which] or the
precedents to be thus ordered; in piety only is to be found that happiness,
for the acquiring of which, etc. --

Thirdly, By using, Participles, rather than Verbs with their articles and
conjunctions. As:

-- He, grieved, forsook: -- for [He, who was, after, whilst, when, because,
he was grieved forsook] the participle [grieved] being either indicative, or
causal. They found him, much inclined to passion, exceedingly displeased upon
this relation etc. -- for: [him, who was much, or because he was much inclined
to passion, to be exceedingly displeased, etc.] Things thus ordered, he hasted
to conclude -- for: [after, or whilst that things were thus ordered] -- [They
suffering patiently, he will succour] -- for [if they shall suffer patiently,
etc.]

Or by using some other contractions (mentioned before Sect. 4. Number. 9.) where
is some danger of ambiguity. --

5. By too long protraction of Periods.
By long deferring the conclusion of a Period: (Non in longum dilata conclusio,
Quint. l. 8. cap. 2.) which happens, either

Either by Paraphrases,
By circumlocution of our meaning, and accumulation of empty words, out of an
affectation to copiousness and fluency, the sense thus suffering more darkness
from that length, which is used for the more perspicuity: (whereas the matter
is more clear, where only nothing is wanting, than where something also does
redound.) Of this Quintilians rule is to be strictly observed (especially in
what is penned for a Reader.) Nihil neque desit, neque superfluat. An usual
fault among those, who affect good words and expressions, is this redundancein
their style; who between two equally-good illustrations, loath to lose either,
intrude both.

Or by Parenthesis.
by interposing many parentheses, and accumulating many considerations and
circumstances in the same period, out of fullness of matter, and its pertinency
to to that place (a disease to which luxuriant wits (especially those who would
enclose much matter in a little compass) are very subject, and where invention
is a great enemy eloquence) by which whereas we strive to say all, we do not
say so much to the Auditors understanding, as if we said less, and withal
disturb the uniformity of our style. Etiam interjectione (i. e. Parenthesi) ut
medio sermon aliquem inserant sensum, impediri solet intellectus; nisi quod
interponitur, breve est. Quint. l. 8. c. 2. -- And Circumstantiis nimio
pluribus orationem vestire parit taedium. Bacon. Where note that it much
helps for perspicuity not to put terms too far asunder, which relate one to
another; (as Nominative and Verb, Comparatives etc.) As:

What differs he, who subverteth the laws, etc. -- from a Tyrant] where the
matter interposed is very long, better premising it thus [He who subverteth,
etc. what differs he from a tyrant] ( See Number. 22.)

6. By want of exact division of our matter.
By not making a division, and sorting, of our matter (See Sect. 2. 1. Number. 2.)
or Secondly after this made, by the not duly mentioning our Transitions. Or
Thirdly, by prosecuting severally the members of a division without first
numbering them all together (a frequent fault) which capitulation of them,
especially when we dwell long upon the particulars, is first to be made, (and
the branches of it again severally to be repeated, as they come to be handled.)
As you may see in some of those examples mentioned before Sect. 6. Number. 22. --

Brevis esse laboro -- Obscurus fio. -- Hor.) or 2. a style full of
Parentheses. For remedying the first:

1. In a Laconick style you must use a multiplication of the like expressions;
and the substance of what is said briefly, must be said more than once, (only
the expression changed), both to make a further explanation of the matter, and
to leave a perfecter impression in the Auditor. Lastly it is to be, in effect,
the same with a long style. Est quaedam partium brevitas, quae longam tamen
efficit summam. Quint. One of those longer periods must be answered with a heap
of these smaller, and the magnitude of the one equalled with the multitude of
the other.

parenthesis is a short necessary explication, or interpretation of a word, it
may be any where inserted: if not so; the matter thereof is 1. Either some
praecognitum; and then it is best placed next before such a period. Or 2. some
reason and argument to confirm somewhat there asserted; and then it is either
to be made part of the sense to fill up the remainder of the period: the
intended sequence of matter being removed to the next, when the parenthesis
has nearer relation; or (a memorandum being made of it in a by-paper as you
are writing) it is to be inferred after the period finished. Inferred, either *
by a Conjunction, Causal, Illative, Exceptive, etc. [although, but, yet,
because, for, therefore, since that,] as the parenthesis is a reason or a
consequent of what is said. As*

[ Caesar (who intended to revenge his etc.) invited the Commanders etc.] where
the parenthesis is very long, is better changed thus: [ Caesar intended to
revenge -- and therefore invited -- ]. Or [ Caesar invited -- because he
intended to revenge -- ]

Or * by the repeating that word of the former period, to which the parenthesis
appertains, and so joining the parenthesis to it after the period. As:

[Dabitur non cubiculum Principis, sed ipsum Principem cernere, in publico, in
populo (cui locorum quinque milli^ ad ecit. etc.) sedentem] where the
parenthesis happens to be very long is better changed thus; [in populo sedentem
Populo, cui locorum quinque millia adjecit etc -- ]

For all parentheses, that are not explications, are mostwhat aggravations
unto, and elegant gradations, or reflections upon, what is formerly said; and
since they are so, and may be so well husbanded, this ingrafting of several
matters into one another by parenthesis, if it argues a good wit, it shows a
weak and unthrifty Orator; whose orderly production of his matter is one of his
greatest perfections; besides the regard he is to have to uniformity of style,
and the intellect of his Auditor, who much better discerns things severed, than
many intwisted together, and offered all at once in a crowd to his examination.
Or 3. lastly, if the parenthesis be long, and the matter thereof can neither
well be premised, nor deferred, the words preceding the parenthesis are to be
again repeated and resumed after it, that the perspicuity of the sense no way
be lost. As:

Those persecutions (which have bin, etc.) those long persecutions (I say) have
not extinguished, etc. --

-- Thus may Parentheses, and the intertexture of various matter many ways be
prevented; but not without the inconvenience of multiplication of words, and
further extension of the discourse.

Parentheses are not half so troublesome to a Reader, as to an Auditor, because
they are marked out in the paper to the eye, but cannot be so in the voice to
the ear: therefore in compositions which are to be spoken, they are much more
carefully to be avoided.

Some other necessary steps to Oratory.
After all the Rules of Oratory well studied and known, the practice of three
things is yet further necessary unto you, for the acquiring this Art.

1. The frequent and assiduous reading of some Authors and pieces that are
eloquent; using rather some one that is excellent, than many. Prono studio,
affectu, consilio, feratur Oratoriae Candidatus, ut alicujus in dicendo sit
similis, quem tota mente atque omni animo defixus intueatur, ille autem sit
unus, quo aequabilior componatur stilus.

2. Translating. 3. Frequent exercise of your style, and Imitation. Usus,
dicendi Magister est optimus ( says pliny junior) modo sit diligens primo, non
celeris stilus.

* Simply and ad verbum; but this never further, than it well consists with the
propriety of the Language into which you translate; which you are always
diligently to observe, as well by inversion and alteration of the phrase for
excluding expletives (see s. 4. n. 4.) and preserving the weightiest words in
their due place (of which see s. 5. n. 4.) as by inserting words necessary, (as
Epithets), etc. in the English Tongue (see s. 6. n. 1.) and excluding
redundants to the sense in the orderly expression of that Language into which
you translate. (For every tongue, from the varying of their Grammar, has a
several capacity of expression) rather offending in being too concise, than too
copious; it being a reputation to the amplitude of that Language, which can
signify more matter in fewer words.

2. * By rendering verse in prose: a little bending the expressions, and
mitigating the poetical, into an Orator's Style.

3. * By contracting things copiously said by others; and again, amplifying,
what others have delivered concisely.

SECT. VIII.
Nu. 1. 5. Of recitation of our compositions.
IN all your compositions, after the last hand added to your style; yet, to try
whether the words be well placed, and the numbers well fitted, and the phrase
enough perspicuous, an audible recitation of them is not to be omitted. And you
are to sound them distinctly and tunably, and as you would do before an
audience, * to take the experience of your voice also, and (after the
contrivance of them in the brain, and the examining of them again, when set
down in writing, by the eye) * to bring them at last by their sounds, to the
test and trial of the ears: which have a most acute judgment residing properly
in them (as also all the other senses have) distinct from that of the mind, and
of which the soul is not capable, but by this instrument; (for what but the ear
can measure sounds?) discovering to her, besides the defects of numbers, and
ill-soundings in the cadence, (which the soul, in the silence of the pen and of
composing, discerns not) discovering also befides these (I say) many latent
obscurities of the style, which seeming clear to the fancy that conceived them
(as our own things are by our selves more easily understood) and again to the
eye that easily recollects them (that being permanent before it in the paper,
what passes away in the sound) yet are many times dark and obscure, not only
to the Auditor, but to the probation of this out-lodging sense of the Composer;
whose own ears give him almost as impartial a censure, as those of other men's,
concerning the perspicuousness and obscurity, smoothness and roughness, of his
style. In which ear if the Oration please not, it is much less effective on the
passions. (Nihil intrare potest in affectum, quod in aure, tanquam quodam
vestibulo, statim offendit, says Quintilian.) and, Acerrimum est aurium
judicium, (says Pliny); ita ut oration, quae scripta placet, recitata non
probetur. First then we ought to try our composures this way; by which the
soul, receiving them more remotely, conveyed to the ear by the voice, and from
this returned to her, as it were, from abroad, and that only in a transient
sound, sits now as the most disinterested Arbiter, and impartial judge of her
own works, that she can be. Which office Pliny, the more exactly to perform,
procured his own compositions to be recited to him by some other than himself.

examen, which may be too partial to our own conceptions, to try them before
some friend, or company, or communicate them to them to be perused. See Plini's
diligence herein lib. 7. ep. 17. Nullum emendandi genus omitto: Ac primum quae
scripsi mecum ipse pertracto, deinde duobus aut tribus lego: mox aliis trado
annotanda; notasque eorum, si dubito, cum uno rursus aut altero pensito;
novissime plaribus recito, ac (si quid mihi credis) tunc acerrime emendo; nam
tanto diligentius, quanto solicitiu^, intendo. Optime autem reverentia, metus,
pudor, judicant. -- Et cum multis, and saepe, tractandum, quod placere and
semper and omnibus cupias -- Nec vero ego, dum recite, laudari, sed, dum legor,
cupio. -- For even those who are much inferior in the same faculty, and not
able to produce the like, may yet judge of what we compose, better than our
selves, and that not only for cadence, perspicuity, singularities, and
indecent affectations, etc. (which as it is somewhat hard for us to discern, so
it is for them to mistake) but also concerning the whole matter, disposition,
and ornaments, of our work.

For 1. first what lets, that those, short of us in fancy, may exceed us in
judgment? Or 2. if not, yet are we more dis-enabled to this office by self-love
to our own productions, than they by ignorance, etc. Therefore our selves also
judge perfectlier of these, when we have for a while laid them aside, and the
ardency of love, which we have to any new parturition, is by some space of time
abated, after that we have diverted to some other employment, amongst which, as
amongst children, commonly the youngest is most affected. Or, 3. if not this
neither; yet since our works are according to other men's capacity, and not our
judgment, estimated, and, as they are composed by us, so, are, for them, we
ought perchance in something to depart even from the right, where they disallow
it. (It was Pomponius Secundus his saying Provoco ad Populum. Plin. lib. 7. Ep.
17.) For none is an Orator to himself, but others; and therefore what is not
writ agreeable to their apprehensions, is written to small purpose; and what is
most accommodated to these, do not themselves best determine? what is writ for
others, is either to profit, or to delight them; but nothing in this kind
profits much, which does not first please; and what best pleases them, they
best judge. Therefore since a discreet Orator would only use what they may
like, it is also very requisite, that he try how they like what he uses.
Only in this he is to observe not singular opinions, but some more general
consent in their judgment; which, when in many the same, is seldom mistaken.

SECT. IX.
Pronunciation and Action.

1. Number. 1. 6. Of Pronunciation.
In the Pronunciation; 1. Monotonia i. e. the same continued Tone; 2. The same
stay upon every word; and 3. The same Pause between them, are ungraceful, and
to be avoided. (Non solum in membris, sed etia^ in articulis, est aliqua
pronunciandi varietas, sine qua nihil neque majus neque, minus est. Quint. l.
11. c. 3. The height, the length, and distance between words, are still to be
varied, and that not only in the conclusion, but in every article and clause
of a Period; some words being spoken higher, some lower; some swifter, and with
force, some slower and more mollified: Else nothing said is made more or less
considerable, than another; when yet always something is so. And so for
pauses; comma's, and all other distinctions require some, yet not all the same
stay. Nay several words have a different stop from the several syllables of the
same word. (Est quoddam in ipsa divisione verborum latens tempus. Quint.) And
this not without much reason. For besides that hereby, what is most eminent in
our reasoning is elevated, and prolonged beyond the rest, and the columns of
our discourse singled out for the Auditors special observance; besides this, I
say, as in all other things men are both eased and delighted with perpetual
variety, and change, so it is in Pronunciation; the varying whereof yields a
great delight to the ear, but also as great an ease and refreshment to the
voice. What gives singing such a ravishing power over us, but a well
proportioned variety of the Notes? What advances Verse above Prose, but a
perpetual change of the feet? (the harmony of which, when placed in such an
order, being once observed, made afterward a disposition of them, a law for
Verse) even the same power these retain, * in the Orators style, as in verse,
though it must needs be more loose (non vacat exiguis) and * in his
pronunciation, as in a song; though it must needs be less curious, and affected.

chiefly to stay upon, and give an extraordinary Emphasis to, are such, in
which there lies some figure, as all Antitheta's and correspondents, and words
relating to another, and generally the mediums (in which lies the greatest
burden) of our arguments. (Observandum quo loco sustinendus, and quasi
suspendendus sermo sit. Quint.) Examples.

Integritas tua te purgavit, pudor eripuit. --

An lingua and ingenio patefieri aditus ad urbem potuit, manu and virtute non
potuit?

Which as they were purchased by us, so provided for them; they have the right
of what we have the possession.

(Ratio pedum magis and desideratur in claus^lis and apparet. Quint. -- and --
Aures tum magis judicant, cum orationis impetus stetit, and intuendi tempus
dedit.) Here therefore the chiefest Orators, though negligent of all the rest,
have observed certain measures and feet; placet plerisque dichoraeus, says
Quintilian: and Tully's [esse videatur] is famous. Yet this strictness extends
not to above four or five of the last syllables. A due and tunable clause
therefore of a Period after the last Pause that is made before it (i. e. the
Comma or other Point that precedes etc.) ought to be ordinarily at least of
four syllables; because the voice begins its variation some Notes before the
syllable that concludes: (For who can conclude handsomely that knows not of
it, before he is entered into the last word or syllable?) And these syllables
are better all long, than all short* those having more stability and weight;
better long and short interchangeably, than all long; the short being far more
smooth and sweet, and the voice also requiring by courses some syllables,
wherein to spare (as in the short) and some again, wherein to extend it self
(as in the long.) By long, I mean those whereon the emphasis of the word
rests; and by short, those which the voice usually touches more lightly, as
fa- in [ favour] and -ward in [ reward] are to be accounted long; -vour, and
re-, short.

And therefore in verse (wherein there is more care of Euphony in every part)
though the English does not strictly observe set quantities, yet has it a
great latitude of roughness or smoothness, according as these are well placed;
nor flows it so gracefully, 1. * unless ordinarily every second syllable, or
latter part of the foot be long (especially the latter syllable of the first,
and of the penultime, foot). As this verse:

[These in the Summer of thy favor grow] runs better than this:

[ In the Summer of thy favor these grow]. And note, that Iambicks are better
than Trochae's, and Spondae's than Dactyles. As for terminations, those usually
short in the Latin (not regarding position) are so in the English, as the
Liquids, etc. And those again long, which have long vowels, double consonants,
and endure a harder pronunciation, easily known to every ones experience. And
Secondly, * Unless more frequently words ending with a consonant be received by
others beginning with a vowel, and e contra.

Monosyllables, harsh, and requiring, as several words, some little pause
between them, conclude not so tunably. (Monosyllaba, si plura sunt, male
continuabuntur. Quint.

longest verse usual in any Language; and two feet the shortest. And by these
metrical members of Poetry (which were only first used, because found more to
please; the Orators aim, as well as the Poets) all our prose also is tacitly
modelled: though it must always avoid the appearance thereof, lest it should
seem to be more affected, less natural, less masculine, by so much trimming; as
also to be strict therein would be too troublesome.

(Mediis inter acutum and gravem utendum sonis, and intermediis imum
supremumque spatiis.) Else put in a Base, how can it descend, or ascend, in a
Treble? As a singing tone, and a verselike cadence are always to be avoided,
so that composition and pronunciation coming nearest them, is the best, and,
that the voice in speaking be rather elevated somewhat, than depressed; because
we are more prone, for our ease, or from our modesty, to a low tone; which yet,
being too deep, and full, and less clear, and making accordingly a weaker
impression upon the Auditor, is the worse, of the two extremes: ( Submisso illo
murmr debilitatur omnis intentio. Quint.). For the length of your
pronouncing, Tardity is to be chosen, rather than precipitancy, and a scanning
as it were (though this also no small fault) of all your syllables, rather than
making perpetual Syneloepha's; and drowning that which follows, by too much
straining that which goes before: whereas the articulation of all ought to be
distinct, and every syllable, to have some, though seldom all to have an equal,
share, of the pronunciation.

Vox respondeat animo. Flexum vocis maxima ex part praestant motus animorum,
sonatque vox, ut feritur.) Therefore this to be excited, that the other may be
exactly performed; which is as it were the hand to this instrument of the
voice, by which it is tuned several ways, to the begetting like motions, in
the minds of others, to those with which our selves are first affected.

SECT. X.
PRonunciation ought to be accompanied with some decent action and comportment
of your body. Number. 1. 7. Of Action.


This Action is especially of the Eyes and the Hand. Of the Hand thus Scaliger:
Ratio est manus Intellectus; oration, Rationis; Orationis, manus, and Manus
membrum hominis loquacissimum. Acting with the hand is using in our discourse
the same motion of them, which they have when with them we act or manage the
thing whereof we speak. As to hold out the hand, when we speak of begging: up,
when we speak of praying: griping the hand, when of striking: the hand beating
on any thing, when of anger: clapping the hands together, when speaking of
wonders: Opening one or both the hands, when making a thing plain or
explaining: Arms drawn back close to the sides, when requesting: putting out
the forefinger, when demonstrating, and as it were showing a thing (therefore
is that finger called the Index). So the hand is put forward with the thumb
bended in, for demonstrating. The first finger turned down, for urging, and
pressing as it were: put up, for threatening: the middle finger put out, for
reproching: The left thumb touched, by the Index of the right hand, for
reasoning, and disputing: the touching a finger with the other hand, for
distinguishing, and for numbering. The hand brought toward one, in saying any
thing of himself; toward the head, when speaking of the understanding; to the
breast, when of the soul, will or affections. Folding the arms in sadness, etc,
And lastly; one, and that no small, service of the Hand, is, that it keeps
time, in our speech, with our periods; being in a kind of suspense and waving,
while the sentence is so, and, at the end thereof, returning still to the first
posture, as the voice does to such a tone.

decorum. An Orator (...), in his action, 1. must be free from any imitations
of levity, as of a Fiddler, Dancer, etc. 2. must be aware of too much
finger-action, being not grave. 3. must not undecently extend his arms too far
any way, either upward, above the eye, or down-ward, below the breast: or much
side-wayes, or backward, or circularly. 4. must turn the action of the hand the
same way, as the voice. 5. must withdraw, and end the action of his hand with
his sentence; and in the same sentence must not often change it. 6. must avoid
a perpetual similitude of gesture; but, more than this, a mimical restless
variation (too little being a more tolerable fault, than too much). In which
the chief care is to be, that it may not seem affected; but forced from his
passion: 7. Lastly, though both the hands do more fully express the Orators
conceits, yet the left hand in action many times needs not be used; must never
be used, as principal.

FINIS.

