Love in a Wood, OR, St James's Park. A. COMEDY, As it is Acted at the Theater
Royal, by his Majesty's Servants.

Written by Mr WYCHERLEY.

-- Excludit sanos helicone poetas Democritus; -- Horat. LONDON, Printed by J.
M. for H. Herringman, at the Sign of the Blew Anchor, in the Lower-Walk of the
New Exchange. 1672.



Academiae Cantabrigiensis (...)

TO HER GRACE THE Duchess OF CLEAVLAND.
MADAM,
ALL Authors whatever in their Dedications are Poets; but I am now to Write to
a Lady, who stands as little in need of Flattery, as her Beauty of Art;
otherwise, I should prove as ill a Poet to her in my Dedication, as to my
Reader in my Play: I can do your Grace no Honor, nor make you more admirers
then you have already; yet I can do my self the honor to let the world know, I
am the greatest you have; you will pardon me, Madam, for you know, it is very
hard for a new Author, and Poet too, to govern his Ambition; for Poets, let
them pass in the world never so much, for modest, honest men, but begin praise
to others, which concludes in themselves; and are like Rooks, who lend people
money, but to win it back again, and so leave them in debt to 'em for nothing;
they offer Laurel and Incense to their Hero's, but wear it themselves, and
perfume themselves. This is true, Madam, upon the honest word of an Author, who
never yet writ Dedication; yet though I cannot lie like them, I am as vain as
they, and cannot but publicly give your Grace my humble acknowledgments for
the favors I have received from you: This, I say, is the Poets Gratitude,
which in plain English, is only Pride and Ambition; and that the world might
know your Grace did me the honor to see my Play twice together; yet perhaps my
Enviers of your Favor will suggest 'twas in Lent, and therefore for your
Mortification; then, as a jealous Author, I am concerned not to have your
Graces Favors lessened, or rather, my reputation; and to let them know, you
were pleased, after that, to command a Copy from me of this Play; the way
without Beauty and Wit, to win a poor Poets heart. It Is a sign your Grace
understands nothing better, then obliging all the world, after the best and
most proper manner; But, Madam, to be obliging to that excess as you are,
(pardon me, if I tell you, out of my extreme concern, and service for your
Grace) is a dangerous quality, and may be very incommode to you; for Civility
makes Poets as troublesome, as Charity makes Beggars; and your Grace will be
hereafter as much pestered with such scurvy Offerings as this, Poems,
Panegyricks, and the like, as you are now with Petitions: And, Madam, take it
from me, no man with Papers in's hand, is more dreadful then a Poet, no, not a
Lawyer with his Declarations; Your Grace sure did not well consider what you
did, in sending for my Play; you little thought I would have had the confidence
to send you a Dedication too: But, Madam, you find I am as unreasonable, and
have as little conscience, as if I had driven the Poetic trade longer then I
have, and never consider you had enough of the Play; but (having suffered now
so severely) I beseech your Grace, have a care for the future, take my Counsel,
and be (if you can possible) as proud, and ill-natured, as other people of
Quality, since your quiet is so much concerned, and since you have more reason
then any to value your self; for you have that perfection of Beauty (without
thinking it so) which others of your Sex, but think they have; that Generosity
in your Actions, which others of your quality, have only in their Promises;
that Spirit, Wit, and Judgment, and all other qualifications, which fit Hero's
to command, and would make any but your Grace proud. I begin now elevated by my
Subject, to write with the Emotion and Fury of a Poet; yet the integrity of an
Historian; and I could never be weary, nay, sure this were my only way, to make
my Readers never weary too, though they were a more impatient Generation of
people then they are. In Fine, speaking thus of your Grace, I should please all
the world but you; therefore I must once observe, and obey you* against my
will, and say no more, then that I am,

MADAM, Your Grace's Most obliged, and most humble Servant, WILLIAM WYCHERLEY.

Prologue.
CVstom, which bids the Thief from Cart Harangue,
All those that come to make, and see him hang,
Wills the damned Poet (though he knows he is gone)
To greet you, e're his Execution.
Not having fear of Critic before his eyes,
But still rejecting, wholesome, good advice;
He even is come to suffer here to day,
For counterfeiting (as you judge) a Play,
Which is against dread Phoebus highest treason,
Damned damning Judges, therefore you have reason;
You he does mean, who for the self same fault,
That damning Privilege of yours have bought;
So the huge Bankers when they needs must fail,
Send the small Brothers of their trade to Goal;
Whilst they by breaking Gentlemen, are made,
Then more then any scorn, poor men o'th trade;
You hardn'd Renegado Poets, who
Treat Riming Brother, worse then Turk would do;
But vent your Heathenish rage, hang, draw, and quarter,
His Muse will dye to day a fleering Martyr;
Since for ball'd Jest, dull Libel, or Lampoon,
There are who suffer persecution,
With the undaunted briskness of Buffon,
And strict Professors live of Raillery,
Defying Porters Lodge, or Pillory:
For those who yet write on our Poets fate,
Should as Co-sufferers commiserate;
But he in vain their pity now would crave,
Who for themselves (alas) no pity have,
And their own gasping credit will not save;
And those, much less, our Criminal would spare,
Who never in Rhyme transgress, (if such there are)
Well then, who nothing hopes, needs nothing fear;
And he, before your cruel Votes shall do it,
By his despair, declares himself no Poet.
The Persons.
Mr. Heart. Mr. Ranger, Young Gentlemen of the Town. Mr. Bell. Mr. Vincent,
Young Gentlemen of the Town. Mr. Kinnaston. Mr. Valentine, Young Gentlemen of
the Town. Mr. Lacy. Alderman Gripe, seemingly precise, but a covetous,
leacherous, old Usurer of the City. Mr. Wintersell. Sir Simon Addleplot, a
Coxcomb, always in pursuit of Women of great Fortunes. Mr. Mohun. Mr.
Dapperwit, a brisk conceited, half-witted fellow of the Town. Mrs. Boutell.
Christina, Valentines Mistress. Mrs. Betty Cox. Lydia, Rangers Mistress. Mrs.
Knepp. My Lady Flippant, Grip's Sister, an affected Widow, in distress for a
Husband, though still declaiming against marriage. Mrs. Farlowe. Mrs. Martha,
Gripe's Daughter. Mrs. Cory. Mrs. Joyner, a Match-maker, or precise City Bawd.
Mrs. Rutter. Mrs. Crossbite, an old cheating Jilt, and Bawd to her Daughter.
Mrs. Betty Slade. Miss Lucy, her Daughter. Mrs. James. Isabel, Christina's
Woman Mrs. Gartreight. Leonore, Servant to Lydia.
Crossbites Landlord, and his Prentices, Servants, Waiters, and other
Attendants.

The Scene London.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 11. for a woman, read of a Woman, p. 4. l. 3. for he is hear, r.
Is he here? p. 14. l. 9. for his Jilt, r. this ^ilt. p. 23. l. 2. for lead 'em,
r. lead her, p. 25. l. 9. for he, r. she, p. 36. l. 20. r. for Ran. He
Whispers, r. Ran. five doors off on the right hand, p. 40. l. 23. for in the
Playhouse, r. into the Playhouse, p. 40. ^. 27. for sick of envy, r. sick
with envy, p. 52. l. 1. for Gripe getting a Chair, r. Gripe setting a Chair, p.
84. l. 1. for ruminate in them, r. ruminate on them.

Love in a Wood, OR, St James's Park.
ACT. I.
SCENE. I. Gripes House in the Evening.
Enter My Lady Flippant, Mrs. Joyner. Flip. NOT a Husband to be had for money.

Come, come, I might have been a better House-Wife for my self (as the World
goes now,) if I had dealt for an Heir with his Guardian, Uncle, or
Mother-in-Law; and you are no better than a Chouse, a Cheat.


Join. I a Cheat Madam.


Flip. I am out of my Money, and my Patience too.


Join. Do not run out of your patience whatever you do,
It Is a necessary virtue for a Widow without
A Jointure in truly.

Flip. Vile Woman, though my Fortune be something
Wasted, my Person's in good repair;
If I had not depended on you, I had had a Husband
Before this time; when I gave you the last five pound,
Did not you promise I should be Married by Christmas.

Join. And had kept my promise if you had Cooperated.


Flip. Cooperated, what should I have done?
It Is well known no Woman breathing could use more
Industry to get her a Husband than I have;
Has not my Husbands Scutcheon walked as much ground
As the Citizens Signs since the Fire,
That no quarter of the Town might be ignorant
Of the Widow Flippant,

Join. It Is well known Madam indeed.


Flip. Have I not owned my self (against my Stomach) the relict of a Citizen to
credit my Fortune?


Join. It Is confessed Madam.


Flip. Have I not constantly kept Covent-Garden-Church, St. Martins, the
Play Houses, Hide-Park, Mulbery-Garden, and all other the public Marts where
Widows and Mayds are exposed?


Join. Far be it from me to think you have an Aversion to a Husband;

But why Madam have you refused so many good Offers?


Flip^ Good Offers Mrs. Joyner, I Will be sworn I never had an Offer since my
late Husbands; if I had had an Offer Mrs. Joyner; there is the thing Mrs. Joyner.


Join. Then your frequent, and public detestation of Marriage, is thought real;

And if you have had no Offer, there is the thing Madam.


Flip. I cannot deny, but I always rail against Marriage
Which is the Widows way to it certainly.

Join. It Is the desperate way, of the desperate Widows, in truly.


Flip. Would you have us as tractable as the Wenches that eat Oatmeal; and
fooled like them too.


Join. If no body were wiser then I, I should think, since the Widow wants the
natural alurement which the Virgin has, you ought to give men all other
encouragements in truly.


Flip. Therefore on the contrary, because the Widows Fortune (whether supposed,
or real) is her chiefest Bait, the more chary she seems of it, and the more she
withdraws it, the more eagerly the busy gaping frye will bite: with us Widows
Husbands are got like Bishoprics, by saying no; and I tell you, a young Heir
is as shie of a Widow, as of a Rook, to my knowledge.


Join. I can allege nothing against your practice,
But your ill success; and indeed you must use
Another Method with Sir Simon Addleplot.

Flip. Will he be at your House at the hour?


Join. He Will be there by ten, it is now nine,
I warrant you he will not fail.

Flip. I Will warrant you then I will not fail,
For it is more then time I were sped

Join. Mr. Dapperwit has not been too busy with you, I hope your experience
has taught you to prevent a mischance.


Flip. No, no, my mischance (as you call it) is greater then that; I have but
three Months to reckon, e're I lie down with my Port and Equipage; and must be
delivered a Woman, a Footman, and a Coachman. For my Coach must down, unless
I can get Sir Simon to draw with me.


Join. He will payr with you exactly if you knew all.


Aside. Flip. Ah Mrs. Joyner, nothing grieves me like putting down my Coach;
for the fine Clothes, the fine Lodgings; let 'em go; for a Lodging is as
unnecessary a thing to a Widow that has a Coach, as a Hat to a Man that has a
good Peruque, for as you see about Town she is most properly at home in her
Coach, she eats, and drinks, and sleeps in her Coach; and for her Visits she
receives them in the Playhouse.


Join, Ay, ay, let the Men keep Lodgings
(As you say Madam) if they will.

Gripe and Sir Simon Addleplot following him as his Man in the Habit of a
Clarke at one door, and Mrs. Martha at the other. Flip. Do you think if things
had been with me as they have been, I would ever have housed with this counter
fashion Brother of mine, (who hates a Vest as much as a Surplice) to have my
Patches assaulted every day; at Dinner my Freedom sensured, and my Visitants
shut out of Doors; poor Mr. Dapperwit cannot be admitted.


Join. He knows him too well to keep his Acquaintance.


Flip. He is a censorious ridged Fop, and knows nothing.


Gripe. So, so -- Behind.


Join. He is hear. Aside.

To my Lady Flip. Nay with your pardon Madam, I must contradict you there. He
is a prying Common-Wealths-man, an implacable Majestrate, a sturdy pillar of
his cause, and --

But oh me is your Worship so near then? if I had To Gripe. Thought you had
heard me --


Gripe. Why, why Mrs. Joyner,
I have said as much of my self e're now,
And without vanity I profess.

Join. I know your Virtue is proof against Vainglory;
But the truth to your face, looks like flattery in your Worships servant.

Gripe. No, no, say what you will of me in that kind,
Far be it from me to suspect you of flattery.

Join. In truly your Worship knows your self,
And knows me, for I am none of those --

Flip. Now they are in -- Aside.
Mrs. Joyner I Will go before to your House,
You Will be sure to come after me. Exit Flippant.

Join. Immediately; but as I was saying,
I am none of those --

Gripe. No Mrs. Joyner, you cannot sew Pillows,

Under Folks elbows; you cannot hold a Candle to the Devil; you cannot tickle a
Trout to take him, you --


Join. Lord how well you do know me indeed;
And you shall see I know your Worship as well,
You cannot backslide from your Principles;
You cannot be terrified by the laws;
Nor bribed to Alegiance by Office or Preferment;
You --

Gripe. Hold, hold, my praise must not interrupt yours.


Join. With your Worships pardon, (In truly) I must on.


Gripe, I am full of your praise, and it will run over.


Join. Nay sweet Sir, you are --


Gripe. Nay sweet Mrs. Joyner, you are --


Join. Nay good your Worship, you are Stops her mouth with his Handkerchief.


Gripe. I say you are --


Join. I must not be rude with your Worship.


Gripe. You are a Nursing mother to the Saints;
Through you they gather together;
Through you they fructify and increase; and through you
The Child cries from out of the Hand-Basket.

Join. Through you Virgins are married or provided
For as well; through you the Reprobates Wife
Is made a Saint; and through you the Widow is not
Disconsolate, nor misses her Husband.

Gripe. Through you --


Join. Indeed you will put me to the blush


Gripe. Blushes are badges of Imperfection,
Saints have no shame: You are the flowr of Matrons Mrs. Joyner.

Join. You are the Pink of curtious Aldermen.


Gripe, You are the Muffler of Secresy


Join. You are the Head-band of Justice.


Gripe. Thank you sweet Mrs. Joyner, do you think
So indeed? you are --
You are the Bonefire of Devotion.

Join. You are the Bellows of Zeal.


Gripe. You are the Cup-board of Charity.


Join. You are the Fob of Liberality,


Gripe. You are the Rivet of sanctified Love or Wedlock.


Join. You are the Picklock and Dark-Lanthorn of Policy;
And in a word, a Conventicle of Virtues.

Gripe. Your Servant, your servant sweet Mrs. Joyner,
You have stopped my mouth.

Join. Your Servant, your servant sweet Alderman,
I have nothing to say.

Sir Simon. The half Pullet will be cold Sir.


Gripe. Mrs. Joyner you shall Sup with me.


Join. Indeed I am engaged to Supper with some
Of your man's Friends; and I came on purpose.
To get leave for him too.

Gripe. I cannot deny you any thing; but I have forgot to tell you what a kind
of Fellow my Sisters Dapperwit is; before a full Table of the Coffee-house
sage^ he had the impudence to hold an Argument against me in the defense of
Vests and Protections; and therefore I forbid him my house; besides when he
came, I was forced to lock up my Daughter for fear of him, nay, I think the
poor Child her self was afraid of him: come hither Child, were you not afraid
of Dapperwit?


Martha. Yes indeed, Sir, he is a terrible man.
Yet I durst meet with him in the Piazzo at midnight. Aside.

Gripe. He shall never come into my doors again.


Marth. Shall Mr. Dapperwit never come hither again then?


Gripe. No, Child.


Marth. I am afraid he will.


Gripe. I warrant thee.


Marth. I warrant you then I Will go to him. Aside.
I am glad of that, for I hate him as much as a Bishop.

Gripe. Thou art no Child of mine, if thou do not hate Bishops and Wits:
Well, Mrs. Joyner, I Will keep you no longer. Jonas, wait on Mrs. Joyner.


Join. Good night to your Worship.


Gripe. But stay, stay Mrs. Joyner, have you spoken with the Widow Crossbite
about her little Daughter, as I desired.


Join. I will to morrow early, it shall be the first thing I Will do after my
Prayers.


Gripe. If Dapperwit should contaminate her; I cannot rest till I have redeemed
her from the Jaws of that Lion, good night.


Join. Good Gentleman. Exeunt Gripe and Martha.


Manent Sir. Simon Addleplot and Joyner. Sir Sim. Hah, hah, ha, Mrs Joyner.


Join. What Is the matter, Sir Simon?


Sir Sim. Hah, hah, ha -- let us make haste to your House, or I shall burst,
faith and troth to see what Fools you and I make of these people.


Join. I will not rob you of any of the credit, I am but a feeble Instrument,
you are the Engeneer.


Sir Sim. Remember what you say now when things succeed, and do not tell me
then, I must thank your wit for all.


Join. No in truly, Sir Simon.


Sir Sim. Nay I Am sure Dapperwit and I have been partners in many an Intrigue,
and he uses to serve me so.


Join. He is an ill man to intrigue with, as you call it.


Sir Sim. I, so are all your Wits; a pox, if a man's understanding be not so
public as theirs, he cannot do a wise action but they go away with the honor
of it, if he be of their acquaintance.


Join. Why do you keep such Acquaintance then?


Sir Sim. There is a Proverb, Mrs. Joyner, You may know him by his Company.


Join. No, no, to be thought a man of parts, you should always keep Company
with a man of less wit then your self.


Sir Sim. That Is the hardest thing in the world for me to do, says and troth.


Join. What, to find a man of less wit then your self?
Pardon my Raillery, Sir Simon.

Sir Sim. No, no, I cannot keep Company with a Fool, I wonder how men of parts
can do it, there is something in it.


Join. If you could all your wise actions would be your own, and your money
would be your own too.


Sir Sim. Nay, faith and troth that is true; for your Wits are plaguely given to
borrow; they will borrow of their Wench, Coachman, or Link-boy their hire. Mrs.
Joyner, Dapperwit has that trick with a vengeance.


Join. Why will you keep Company with him then, I say? for to be plain with
you, you have followed him so long, that you are thought but his Culley; for
every Wit has his Culley, as every Squire his lead Captain.


Sir Sim. I his Culley? I his Culley Mrs. Joyner!
Lord that I should be thought a Culley to any Wit breathing.

Join. Nay do not take it so to heart, for the best Wits
Of the Town, are but Culleys themselves.

Sir Simon. To whom, to whom, to whom, Mrs. Joyner.


Join. To Sem'steresses, and Bawds.


Sir Sim. To your knowledge, Mrs. Joyner.
There I was with her.

Join. To Tailors and Vintners, but especially to the French Houses.


Sir Sim. But Dapperwit is a Culley to none of them for he ticks.


Join. I care not; but I wish you were a Culley to none but me, that is all the
hurt I wish you,


Sir Sim. Thank you Mrs. Joyner; well I will throw off Dapperwits acquaintance
when I am married, and will only be a Culley to my Wife, and that is no more
then the wisest Husband of 'em all is.


Join. Then you think you shall carry Mrs. Martha?


Sir Sim. Your hundred Guineys are
As good as in your Lap.

Join. But I am afraid this double plot of yours
Should fail, you would sooner succeed,
If you only designed upon Mrs. Martha,
Or only upon my Lady Flippant.

Sir Sim. Nay then you are no Woman of Intrigue, faith and troth it is good to
have two strings to one Bow; if Mrs. Martha be coy; I tell the Widow I put on
my disguise for her; But if Mrs. Martha be kind to Jonas, Sir Simon Addleplot
will be false to the Widow, which is no more then Widows are used to, for a
promise to a Widow is as seldom kept as a Vow made at Sea, as Dapperwit says.


Join. I am afraid they should discover you


Sir Sim. You have nothing to fear, you have your twenty Guineys in your pocket
for helping me into my Service, and if I get into Mrs. Martha's quarters you
have a hundred more, if into the Widows fifty, happy go luckey, will her
Ladyship be at your house at the hour.


Join. Yes.


Sir Sim. Then you shall see when I am Sir Simon Addleplot and my self, I Will
look like my self, now I am Jonas I look like an Ass; you never thought Sir
Simon Addleplot could have looked so like an Ass by his ingenuity.


Join. Pardon me Sir Simon.


Sir Sim. Nay do not flatter faith and troth.


Join. Come let us go it is time.


Sir Sim. I will carry the Widow to the French house.


Join. If she will go.


Sir Sim. If she will go; why, did you ever know a Widow refuse a treat? no
more then a Lawyer a Fee faith and troth; yet I know too.

No treat, sweet words, good mien, but sly Intrigue
That must at length, the jilting Widow fegue. Exeunt.

The scene changes to the French House, a Table, Wine, and Candles. Enter
Vincent, Ranger, Dapperwit. Dap. Pray, Mr. Ranger, let us have no drinking to
night.


Vin. Pray, Mr. Ranger, let us have no Dapperwit to night.


Rang. Nay, nay, Vincent.


Vin. A pox, I hate his impertinent Chat more then he does the honest Burgundy.


Dap. But why should you force Wine upon us? we are not all of your gusto.


Vin. But why should you force your chaw'd jests, your damned ends of your
moldy Lampoones, and last years Sonnets upon us, we are not all of your gusto?


Dap. The Wine makes me sick, let me perish.


Vin. Thy Rhymes make me spew.


Ran. At Reparty already, come Vincent, I know you would Gives him the Glass.
rather have him pledge you here Dapperwit; but why are you so eager to have him
drink always.


Vin. Because he is so eager to talk always, and there is no other way to
silence him.


Waiter to them. Wait. Here is a Gentleman desires to speak with Mr. Vincent.


Vin. I come. Exit Vin.


Dap. He may drink because he is obliged to the Bottle, for all the wit and
courage he has, it is not free and natural like yours.


Ran. He has more courage then wit, but wants neither.


Dap. As a Pump gone dry, if you power no Water down you will get none out, so
--


Ran. Nay I bar similes too, to night.


Dap. Why is not the thought new, don't you apprehend it.


Ran. Yes, yes, but --


Dap. Well, well, will you comply with his sottishness too, and hate brisk
things in complaisance to the ignorant dull age? I believe shortly 'twill be as
hard to find a patient friend to communicate ones wit to, as a faithful friend
to communicate ones secret to. Wit has a few true Judges as painting I see.


Ran. All people pretend to be judges of both.


Dap. I they pretend -- but set you aside,
And two more. --

Ran. But why has Vincent neither courage nor wit.


Dap. He has no courage because he beat his Wench for giving me les douces yeux
once; and no wit because he does not comprehend my thoughts; and he is a Son of
a Whore for his ignorance; I take ignorance worse from any man then the Lie,
because it is as much as to say I am no Wit. Vincent Returns. You need not take
any notice, though, to him of what I say.


Vin. Ranger there is a Woman below, in a Coach would speak with you.


Ran. With me. Exit Ran.


Dap. This Ranger, Mr. Vincent, is as false to his Friend as his Wench.


Vin. You have no reason to say so,
But because he is absent.

Dap. It Is disobliging to tell a Man of his faults to his face, if he had but
your grave parts, and manly wit, I should adore him; but a pox he is a mere
Buffon, a Jack-pudding let me perish.


Vin. You are an ungrateful fellow, I have heard him maintain you had wit,
which was more then ere you could do for your self; I thought you had owned him
your Maecenas.


Dap. A pox he cannot but esteem me, it is for his honor; but I cannot but be
just for all that, without favor or affection, yet I confess I love him so
well, that I wish he had but the hundredth part of your courage.


Vin. He has had the courage to save you from many a beating to my knowledge.


Dap, Come, come, I wish the man well, and next to you, better then any man,
and I am sorry to say it, he has not a courage to snuff a Candle with his
fingers; when he is drunk indeed, he dares get a Clap, or so -- and swear at a
Constable.


Vin. Detracting Fop, when did you see him desert his Friend.


Dap. You have a rough kind of Raillery Mr. Vincent, but since you will have
it, (though I love the man heartily, I say) he deserted me once in breaking of
Windows, for fear of the Constable, Ranger Returns. but you need not take
notice to him, of what I tell you; I hate to put a man to the blush.


Ran. I have had just now a visit from my Mistress, who is as jealous of me, as
a Wife of her Husband when she lies in; My Cousin Lydia, you have heard me speak
of her.


Vin. But she is more troublesome then a Wife that lies in, because she follows
you to your haunts; why do you allow her that privilege before her time?


Ran. Faith, I may allow her any privilege and be to hard for her yet; how do
you think I have cheated her to night? Women are poor credulous Creatures,
easily deceived.


Vin. We are poor credulous Creatures, when we think 'em so.


Ran. Intending a Ramble to St. James's Park to night, upon some probable hopes
of some fresh Game I have in chase, I appointed her to stay at home, with a
promise to come to her within this hour, that she might not foil the scent and
prevent my sport.


Vin. She Will be even with you when you are married I warrant you: in the mean
time here is her health Dapperwit.


Ran. Now had he rather be at the window writing her Anagram in the Glass with
his Diamond, or biting his nails in the corner, for a fine thought, to come and
divert us with at the Table.


Dap. No a pox I have no wit to night, I am as barren and hide-bound as one of
your damned scribbling Poets, who are sotts in company for all their wit, as a
Miser poor for all his money; how do you like the thought.


Vin. Drink, drink.


Dap. Well I can drink this, because I shall be repreiv'd presently.


Vin. Who will be so civil to us.


Dap. Sir Simon Addleplot, I have bespoke him a Supper here, for he treats to
night a new rich Mistress.


Ran. That Spark who has his fruitless designs upon the bedridden rich Widow,
down to the sucking Heiresses in her pissing cloute; He was once the sport, but
now the public grievance of all the fortunes in Town; for he watches them like
a younger Brother that is afraid to be mump'd of his snip, and they cannot
steal a Marriage, nor stay their stomachs, but he must know it.


Dap. He has now pitched his Nets for Gripe's Daughter the rich Scrivener, and
serves him as a Clerk to get admission to her, which the watchful Fop her
Father, denies to all others.


Ran. I thought you had been nibling at her once, under pretense of love to her
Aunt.


Dap. I confess I have the same design yet, and Addleplot is but my Agent
whilst he thinks me his; he brings me Letters constantly from her, and carries
mine back.


Vin. Still betraying your best friends.


Dap. I cannot in honor but betray him (let me perish,) the poor young Wench
is taken with my person, and would scratch through fowr walls to come to me.


Vin. It Is a sign she is kept up close indeed.


Dap. Betray him, I Will not be a Traitor to Love for any man.


Sir Simon Addleplot to them with the Waitor. Sir Sim. Know 'em, you are a
saucy Jack-straw to question me, (faith and troth) I know every body, and every
body knows me.


All. Sir Simon, Sir Simon, Sir Simon.


Ran. And you are a welcome man to every body.


Sir Sim, Now son of a Whore, do I know the Gentlemen? a dog, he would have had
a shilling of me before he would let me come to you.


Ran. The Rogue has been bred at Court sure;
Get you out Sirrah.

Sir Sim. He has been bred at a French house, where they are more unreasonable.


Vin. Here Is to you Sir Simon.


Sir Sim. I cannot drink, for I have a Mistress within, though I would not have
the people of the house to know it.


Ran. You need not be ashamed of your Mistresses, for they are commonly rich.


Sir Sim. And because she is rich, I would conceal her, for I never had a rich
Mistress yet, but one or other got her from me presently faith and troth.


Ran. But this is an ill place to conceal a Mistress in, every Waiter is an
Intelligencer to your Rivals.


Sir Sim. I have 'trick for that, I let no Waiters come into the Room, I Will lay
the Cloth my self rather.


Ran. But who is your Mistress.


Sir Sim. Your Servant, -- your Servant, -- Mr. Ranger.


Vin. Come will you pledge me?


Sir Sim. No, I Will spare your Wine, if you will spare me Dapperwits company, I
came for that.


Vin. You do us a double favor, to take him and leave the Wine.


Sir Sim. Come, come Dapperwit.


Ran. Do not go unless he will suffer us to see his Mistress too.


Aside. Sir Sim. Come, come man.


Dap. Would you have me so incivil as to leave my company; they will take it ill?


Sir Sim. I cannot find her talk without thee; pray Gentlemen persuade Mr.
Dapperwit to go with me.


Ran. We will not hinder him of better company.


Dap. Yours is too good to be left rudely.


Sir Sim. Nay Gentlemen I would desire your company too, if you knew the Lady.


Dap. They know her as well as I, you say I know her not.


Sir Sim. You are not every body. Aside.


Ran. Perhaps we do know the Lady Sir Simon.


Sir Sim. You do not, you do not, none of you ever saw her in your lives; but
if you could be secret, and civil. --


Ran. We have drunk yet but our Bottles a piece.


Sir Sim. But will you be civil Mr. Vincent?


Ran. He dares not look a Woman in the face under three Bottles.


Sir Sim. Come along then, but can you be civil Gentlemen? will you be civil
Gentlemen? pray be civil if you can, and you shall see her. Exit Sir Sim.


Returns with my Lady Flippant and Mrs. Joyner Dap. How has he got his Jilt
here? Aside.


Ran. The widow Flippant! -- Aside.


Vin. Is this the Woman we never saw. Aside.


Flip. Does he bring us into company, and Dapperwit one? though I had married
the Fool, I thought to have reserved the Wit as well as other Ladies. Aside.


Sir Sim. Nay, look as long as you will Madam, you will find them civil
Gentlemen and good Company.


Flip. I am not in doubt of their civility but yours,


Join. You Will never leave snubbing your Servants, did you not promise to use
him kindly. Behind.


Flip. It Is true. Aside.

We wanted no good company, Sir Simon, as long as we had yours.


Sir Sim. But they wanted good company, therefore I forced them to accept of
yours.


Flip. They will not think the Company good they were forced into certainly.


Sir Sim. A pox I must be using the words in fashion though I never have any
luck with 'em, Mrs. Joyner help me off.


Join. I suppose, Madam, he means the Gentlemen wanted not inclination to your
company, but confidence to desire so great an honor, therefore he forced 'em.


Dap. What makes this Bawd here? sure Mistress you Bawds should be like the
small Cards, though at first you make up the Pack, yet when the play begins,
you should be put out as useless.


Join. Well, well, jibeing companion, you would have the Pimps kept in only?
you would so?


Vin. What they are quarrelling?


Ran. Pimp and Bawd agree now a days like Doctor an Apothecary.


Sir Sim. Try Madam if they are not civil Gentlemen, talk with them, while I go
lay the cloth no Waiter comes here:

My Mother used to tell me, I should avoid all occasions of talking before my
Mistress, because silence is a sign of love as well as prudence. Aside.


Flip. Methinks you look a little yellow on it Sir Simon laying the Cloth. Mr.
Dapperwit; I hope you do not sensure me because you find me passing away a
night with this Fool; he is not a man to be jealous of sure.


Dap. You are not a Lady to be jealous of sure.


Flip. No certainly, but why do you look as if you were jealous then.


Dap. If I had met you in Wheatstones-Park with a drunken Foot-Soldier, I
should not have been jealous of you.


Flip. Fie, fie, now you are jealous certainly, for people always when they
grow jealous, grow rude; but I can pardon it since it proceeds from love
certainly.


Dap. I am out of all hopes to be rid of this eternal old acquaintance, when I
jear her, she thinks her self praised, now I call her Whore in plain english,
she thinks I am jealous Aside.


Flip. Sweet Mr. Dapperwit be not so sensorious, I speak for your sake, not my
own, for jealousy is a great torment, but my honor cannot suffer certainly.


Dap. No certainly, but the greatest torment I have is your Love.


Flip. Alas sweet Mr. Dapperwit, indeed Love is a torment, but it is a sweet
torment; but Jealousy is a bitter torment; I do not go about to cure you of
the torment of my love.


Dap. It Is a sign so.


Flip. Come, come, look up man, is that a Rival to contest with you?


Dap. I will contest with no Rival, not with my old Rival your Coachman, but
they have heartily my resignation, and to do you a favor, but my self a
greater, I will help tie the knot you are fumbling for now, betwixt your Culley
here, and you.


Flip. Go, go, I take that kind of jealousy worst of all, to suspect I would
be debauched to beastly Matrimony; but who are those Gentlemen pray? -- are
they men of Fortunes Mrs. Joyner.


Join. I believe so.


Flip. Do you believe so indeed; Gentlemen. --


Advancing toward Ranger and Vincent. Ran. If the civility we owe to Ladies,
had not controlled our envy to Mr. Dapperwit, we had interrupted e're this your
private conversation.


Flip. Your interruption, Sir, had been most civil, and obliging, for our
discourse was of Marriage.


Rang. That is a subject Madam, as grateful as common.


Flip. O fie, fie, are you of that opinion too? I cannot suffer any to talk of
it in my company.


Ran. Are you married then Madam?


Flip. No certainly.


Ran. I am sure so much Beauty cannot despair of it.


Flip. Despair of it --


Ran. Only those that are married, or cannot be married, hate to hear of
marriage.


Flip. Yet you must know, Sir, my aversion to marriage is such, that you nor no
man breathing, shall ever persuade me to it.


Ran. Cursed be the man should do so rude a thing as to persuade you to any
thing against your inclination; I would not do it for the World, Madam.


Flip. Come, come, though you seem to be a civil Gentleman, I think you no
better then your Neighbors; I do not know a man of you all, that will not
thrust a Woman up into a corner, and then talk an hour to her impertinently of
marriage.


Ran. You would find me another man in a corner, I assure you, Madam, for you
should not have a word of marriage from me, whatsoever you might find in my
actions of it; I hate talking as much as you.


Flip. I hate it extremely.


Ran. I am your man then, Madam, for I sind just the same fault with your Sex
as you do with ours; I never could have to do with a Woman in my life, but
still she would be impertinently talking of marriage to me.


Flip. Observe that, Mrs. Joyner. Aside.


Dap. Pray Mr. Ranger let us go, I had rather drink with Mr. Vincent, then stay
here with you; besides it is Park-time.


Ran. I come. To Dap.

Since you are a Lady that hate marriage, I Will do you the service to withdraw
the company, for those that hate marriage, hate loss of time.


Flip. Will you go then, Sir, but before you go, Sir, pray tell me is your
aversion to marriage real?


Ran. As real as yours.


Flip. If it were no more real then mine. Aside.


Ran. Your servant, Madam.


Flip. But do you hate marriage certainly? Plucks him back.


Ran. Certainly.


Flip. Come, I cannot believe it, you dissemble it, only because I pretend it.


Ran. Do you but pretend it then, Madam?


Flip. I shall discover my self -- Aside.

I mean, because I hold against it, you do the same in complaisance; for I have
heard say, cunning men think to bring the coy and untractable women to
tameness, as they do some mad people by humoring their frenzies.


Ran. I am none of those cunning men, yet have too much wit to entertain the
presumption of designing upon you.


Flip. 'Twere no such presumption neither.


Dap. Come away, 's death don't you see your danger?


Ran. Those aims are for Sir Simon, good night, Madam.


Flip. Will you needs go then? the gentlemen are a going, Sir Simon, will you
let 'em.


Sir Sim. Nay, Madam, if you cannot keep 'em, how should I?


Flip. Stay, Sir, because you hate marriage, I Will sing you a new Song against
i^.

She Sings. A Spouse I do hate,
For either she is false or she is jealous;
But give us a Mate,
Who nothing will ask us, or tell us.
She stands on no terms,
Nor chaffers by way of Indenture,
Her love for your Farms;
But takes her kind man at a venture.
If all prove not right,
Without an Act, Process, or Warning,
From Wife for a night,
You may be divorced in the morning.
When Parents are Slaves,
Their Bratts connot be any other;
Great Wits, and great Braves,
Have always a Punk to their Mother.

Flip. Though it be the fashion for women of quality to sing any Song whatever,
because the words are not distinguished; yet I should have blushed to have done
it now, but for you, Sir.


Ran. The Song is edifying, the Voice admirable, and once more, I am your
servant, Madam.


Flip. What, will you go too, Mr. Dapperwit?


Sir Sim. Pray, Mr. Dapperwit, do not you go too,


Dap. I am engaged.


Sir Sim. Well, if we cannot have their company, we will not have their Room,
ours is a private back Room; they have paid their reckoning, let us go thither
again.


Flip. But pray, sweet Mr. Dapperwit, do not go; keep him Sir Simon?


Sir Sim. I cannot keep him. Exeunt Vin. Ran. Dap.

It is impossible; (the World is so,
One cannot keep ones Friend, and Mistress too. Ex. Omnes.

ACT. II.
SCENE. I. St. James's Park at night.
Enter Ranger, Vincent, Dapperwit. Ran. HAng me if I am not pleased extremely
with this new fashioned catterwouling, this midnight coursing in the Park.


Vin. A man may come after Supper with his three Bottles in his head, reel
himself sober, without reproof from his Mother, Aunt, or grave relation.


Ran. May bring his bashful Wench, and not have her put out of countenance by
the impudent honest women of the Town.


Dap. And a man of wit may have the better of the dumb show, of well trimmed
Vest, or fair Perruque; no man's now is whitest.


Ran. And now no woman's modest, or proud, for her blushes are hid, and the
rubies on her lips are died, and all sleepy and glimmering eyes have lost their
attraction.


Vin. And now a man may carry a Bottle under his arm, instead of his Hat, and
no observing spruce Fop will miss the Crevat that lies on ones shoulder, or
count the pimples on ones face.


Dap. And now the brisk reparty ruins the complaisant Cringe, or wise Grimace,
something 'twas, we men of virtue always loved the night.


Ran. O blessed season.


Vin. For good-Fellows.


Ran. For Lovers.


Dap. And for the Muses.


Ran. When I was a Boy I loved the night so well, I had a strong vocation to be
a Bellman's Apprentice.


Vin. I a Drawer.


Dap. And I to attend the Waits of Westminster, let me perish.


Ran. But why do we not do the duty of this and such other places, walk,
censure, and speak ill of all we meet?


Dap. It Is no fault of mine, let me perrish.


Vin. Fie, fie, Satirical gentlemen, this is not your time, you cannot
distinguish a Friend from a Fop.


Dap. No matter, no matter, they will deserve amongst 'em the worst we can say.


Ron. Who comes here, Dapperwit?


Dap. By the toss of his head, training of his People walking slowly over the
Stage. feet, and his elbows playing at bo-peep behind his back, it should be my
Lord Easy.


Ran. And who the woman?


Dap. My Lord, what do you call's Daughter
That had a Child by --

Vin. Dapperwit, hold your tongue?


Ran. How are you concerned?


Vin. Her Brother's an honest Fellow, and will drink his Glass.


Ran. Prithee, Vincent; Dapperwit did not hinder drinking to night, though he
speak against it; why then should you interrupt his sport? now let him talk of
any body.


Vin. So he will, till you cut his throat.


Ran. Why should you in all ocasions thwart him, contemn him, and maliciously
look grave at his jests only?


Vin. Why does he always rail against my friends then, and my best friend a
Beer-glass?


Ran. Dapperwit, be your own Advocate, my Game I think is before me there? Exit
Ran.


Dap. This Ranger, I think has all the ill qualities, of all your Town Fops,
leaving his company for a spruce Lord, Or a Wench.


Vin. Nay, if you must rail at your own best friends, I may forgive you,
railing at mine.


Lydia and my Lady Flippant walking over the Stage Lyd. False Ranger, shall I
find thee here? Aside.


Vin. Those are women, are they not? To Dap.


Dap. The least, seems to be my Lucy sure. Aside.


Vin. Faith, I think I dare speak to a woman in the dark, let us try.


Dap. They are persons of quality of my acquaintance; hold.


Vin. Nay, if they are persons of quality of your acquaintance, I may be the
bolder with 'em.


The Ladies go off, they follow them; Lydia and Flippant re-enter. Lyd. I come
hither to make a discovery to night.


Flip. Of my love to you certainly; for no body but you could have debauched me
to the Park certainly; I would not return another night, if it were to redeem
my dear husband from his grave.


Lyd. I believe you, but to get another Widow.


Flip. Another Husband, another Husband, soh!


Lyd. There does not pass a night here, but many a match is made.


Flip. That a woman of honor should have the word match in her mouth: but I
hope, Madam, the fellows do not make honorable Love here, do they? I abominate
honorable Love, upon my Honor.


Lyd. If they should make honorable Love here, I know you would prevent 'em.
Vincent and Dapperwit Re-enter and walk slowly toward them. But here come two
men will inform you what they do.


Flip. Do they come? are they men certainly?


Lyd. Prepare for an assault, they will put you to it.


Flip. Will they put us to it certainly? I was never put to it yet; if they
should put us to it, I should drop down, down certainly.


Lyd. I believe, truly, you would not have power to run away.


Flip. Therefore I will not stay the push they come, they come, oh the fellows
come! Flippant runs away, Lydia follows, and Vincent, and Dapperwit after them.
Flippant Reenters at to'th^r door alone. So I am got off clear, I did not run
from the men, but my companion, for all their brags, men have hardly courage to
set upon us, when our number is equal; now they shall see I defy 'em, for we
women have always most courage when we are alone; but a Pox -- the lazy Rogues
come not, or they are Drunk and cannot run: Oh drink, abominable drink instead
of inflaming Love, it quenches it, and for one Lover it incourages, it makes a
thousand impotent. Curse on all Wine, even Renish-Wine and Sugar -- Enter
Addleplot muffled in a Cloak. But Fortune will not see me want, here comes a
single Bully, I wish he may stand;

For now anights the jostling Nymph is bolder,
Then modern Satyr with his Cloak over shoulder.
Well met Sir. She puts on her Mask.


Sir Sim. How shall I know that, forsooth, who are you? do you know me?


Flip. Who are you? don't you know me?


Sir Sim. Not I faith and troth.


Flip. I am glad on it, for no man e're liked a woman the better for having
known her before.


Sir Sim. I, but then one cannot be so free with a new acquaintance, as with an
old one; she may deny one the civility.


Flip. Not till you ask her.


Sir Sim. But I am afraid to be denied.


Flip. Let me tell you, Sir, you cannot dis-oblige us women more, then in
distrusting us.


Sir Sim. Pish, what should one ask for, when you know on's meaning? but shall
I deal freely with you?


Flip. I love of my life men should deal freely with me; there are so few men
will deal freely with one --


Sir Sim. Are you not a Fireship? a Punk, Madam?


Flip. Well, Sir, I love Raillery.


Sir Sim. Faith and troth I do not railly, I deal freely.


Flip. This is the time and place for freedom, Sir.


Sir Sim. Are you handsome?


Flip. Jone's as good as my Lady in the dark certainly; but men that deal
freely, never ask questions certainly.


Sir Sim. How then! I thought to deal freely, and put a woman to the question,
had been all one.


Flip. But let me tell you, those that deal freely indeed, take a woman by --


Sir Sim. What, what, what, what?


Flip. By the hand and lead 'em aside.


Sir Sim. Now I understand you come along then.


Enter Torches and Music at a distance. Flip. What unmannerly Rascals are
those that bring light into the Park? 'twill not be taken well from 'em by the
women certainly; still disappointed -- Aside.


Sir Sim. Oh the Fidles, the Fidles, I sent for them hither to oblige the
women, not offend 'em; for I intend to Serenade the whole Park to night; but my
Frolic is not without an intrigue, faith and troth; for I know the Fidles will
call the whole Herd of vizard Masks together; and then shall I discover if a
strayed Mistress of mine be not amongst 'em, whom I treated to night at the
French-house; but as soon as the Jilt had eat up my meat, and drank her two
bottles, she run away from me, and left me alone.


Flip. How! is it he! Addleplot, that I could not know him by his faith and
troth. Aside.


Sir Sim. Now I would understand her tricks, because I intend to Marry her, and
should be glad to know what I must trust to.


Flip. So thou shall, but not yet. Aside.


Sir Sim. Though I can give a great guess already; for if I have any intrigue
on sense in me, she is as arrant a Jilt, as ever pulled pillow from under
husbands head (faith and troth) moreover she is bow-legg'd, hopper-hipp'd, and
betwixt Pomatum and Spanish Red, has a Complexion like a Holland Cheese, and no
more Teeth left, then such as give a Haust-goust to her breath; but she is rich
(faith and troth.)


Flip. Oh Rascal! he has heard some body else say all this of me; but I must
not discover my self, lest I should be disappointed of my revenge, for I will
marry him. Aside.


The Torches and Music approaching. Ex. Flippant. Sir Sim. What gone? come
then, strike up my lads.


Enter Men and Women in Vizards, and Dance. Addleplot for the most part
standing still in a Cloak and Viz^rd, but sometimes going about peeping, and
examining the Women's clothes; the Dance ended. Exeunt Dancers, Torches, Music,
and Addleplot. Enter Flippant, Lydia, after them Vincent, Dapperwit. Flip. Nay,
if you stay any longer, I must leave you again. To Lydia.


Vin. We have over-taken them at last again, Flip. going off. these are they,
they separate too, and that is but a challenge to us.


Dap. Let me perish Ladies --


Lyd. Nay, good Madam, let us unite, now here is the common enemy upon us.


Vin. Dam me Ladies --


Dap. Hold, a Pox you are to rough, let me perish Ladies.


Lyd. Not for want of breath, Gentlemen, we will stay rather.


Dap. For want of your favor, rather sweet Ladies.


Flip. That Is Dapperwit, false villain; but he must not know I am here; if he
should, I should lose his thrice agreeable company, and he would run from me,
as fast as from the Bailiffs. What you will not talk with 'em I hope?


Lyd. Yes, but I will.


Flip. Then you are a Park-woman certainly, and you will take it kindly if I
leave you.


Lyd. No, you must not leave me. Apart.


Flip. Then you must leave them.


Lyd. I Will see if they are worse company then you first.


Flip. Monstrous impudence, will you not come? Pulls Lydia.


Vin. Nay, Madam, I never suffer any violence to be used to a woman, but what I
do my self; she must stay, and you must not go.


Flip. Unhand me you rude fellow.


Vin. Nay, now I am sure you will stay and be kind; for coyness in a woman is
as little sign of true modesty, as huffing in a man, is of true courage.


Dap. Use her gently, and speak soft things to her.


Lyd. Now do I guess I know my Coxcomb. Aside. Sir, I am extremely glad I am
fallen into the hands of a Gentleman, that can speak soft things; and this is
so fine a night to hear soft things in; moring I should have said.


Dap. It will not be morning, dear Madam, till you pull off your Mask; that I
think was brisk -- Aside.


Lyd. Indeed, dear Sir, my face would frighten back the Sun.


Dap. With glories, more radient then his own;
I keep up with her I think. Aside.

Lyd. But why would you put me to the trouble of lighting the World, when I
thought to have gone to sleep?


Dap. You only can do it, dear Madam, let me perrish.


Lyd. But why would you (of all men) practice Treason against your friend
Phoebus, and depose him for a mere stranger?


Dap. I think he knows me. Aside.


Lyd. But he does not do you justice, I believe, and you are so positively
cock-sure of your wit, you would refer to a mere stranger your Plea to the
Bay Tree.


Dap. She jears me, let me perish. Aside.


Vin. Dapperwit, a little of your aid, for my Lady's invincibly dumb.


Dap. Would mine had been so too. Aside.


Vin. I have used as many arguments to make her speak, as are requisite to make
other women hold their tongues.


Dap. Well, I am ready to change sides, yet before I go, Madam; since the Moon
consents, now I should see your face, let me desire you to pull off your Mask,
which to a handsome Lady is a favor, I Am sure.


Lyd. Truly, Sir, I must not be long in debt to you the obligation; pray, let*
me here you recite some of your verses, which to a Wit, is a favor I Am sure.


Dap. Madam, it belongs to your sex to be obliged first; pull off your Mask,
and I Will pull out my paper.

Brisk again of my side. Aside.


Lyd. 'Twou'd be in vain, for you would want a Candle now.


Dap. I dare not make use again of the luster of her Aside. face: I Will wait
upon you home then, Madam.


Lyd. Faith no, I believe it will not be much to our advantages, to bring my
face, or your Poetry to light, for I hope, you have yet a pretty good opinion
of my face, and so have I of your wit; but if you are for proving your wit, why
do not you write a Play?


Dap. Because it is now no more reputation to write a Play, then it is honor to
be a Knight: your true wit despises the title of Poet, as much as your true
gentleman the title of Knight; for as a man may be a Knight and no Gentleman,
so a man may be a Poet and no Wit, let me perish.


Lyd. Pray, Sir, how are you dignified or distinguished amongst the rates of
Wits? and how many rates are there?


Dap. There are as many degrees of Wits, as of Lawyers; as there is first your
Solicitor, then your Aturney, then your Pleading-Counsel, then your
Chamber-Counsel, and then your Judge; so there is first your Court-Wit, your
Coffee-Wit, your Poll-Wit or Pollitick-Wit, your Chamber-Wit or Scribble-Wit,
and last of all, your Judg-Wit or Critic.


Lyd. But are there as many Wits as Lawyers? Lord, what will become of us? what
employment can they have? how are they known?


Dap. First, your Court-Wit is a fashionable, insinuating, flattering,
cringing, grimacing, fellow; and has wit enough to solicit a suit of Love; and
if he fail, he has malice enough to ruin the woman with a dull Lampoon, but he
rails still at the man that is absent, for you must know, all Wits rail; and
his wit properly lies in combing Perruques, matching Ribbonds, and being severe
as they call it, upon other peoples clothes.


Lyd. Now, what is the Coffee-Wit?


Dap. He is a lying, censorious, gossiping, quibling wretch, and sets people
together by the ears over that sober drink Coffee; he is a Wit, as he is a
commentator upon the Gazet, and he rails at the Pirates of Algiere, the Grand
Signior of Constantinople, and the Christian Grand Signior.


Lyd. What kind of man is your Poll-Wit?


Dap. He is a fidgeting, busy, dogmatical, hotheaded Fop, that speaks always
in sentences and proverbs, (as others in similitudes) and he rails perpetually
against the present government; his Wit lies in projects and monopolies, and
penning speeches for young Parliament men.


Lyd. But what is your Chamber-Wit or Scribble-Wit?


Dap. He is a poring, melancholy, modest Sot, ashamed of the world; he searches
all the Records of Wit, to compile a breviate of them for the use of Players,
Printers, Booksellers, and sometimes Cooks, and Tabacca-men; he imploys his
railing against the ignorance of the age, and all that have more money then he.


Lyd. Now your last.


Dap. Your Judg-Wit or Critic, is all these together, and yet has the wit to
be none of them; he can think, speak, write, as well as all the rest, but
scorns (himself a Judge) to be judged by posterity; he rails at all the other
Classes of Wits, and his wit lies in damming all but himself: he is your true
Wit.


Lyd. Then, I suspect you are of his Form.


Dap. I cannot deny it, Madam.


Vin. Dapperwit, you have been all this time on the wrong side, for you love to
talk all, and here is a Lady would not have hindered you.


Dap. A pox, I have been talking too long indeed here; for Wit is lost upon a
silly weak woman, as well as courage. Aside.


Vin. I have used all common means to move a woman's tongue and mask; I called
her ugly, old, and old acquaintance, and yet she would not disprove me: but
here comes Ranger, let him try what he can do, for since my Mistress is dogged,
I Will go sleep alone. Exit.


Ranger Enters. Lyd. Ranger! it is he indeed; I am sorry he is here, but glad I
discovered him before I went, yet he must not discover me, lest I should be
prevented hereafter, in finding him out, false Ranger. Aside. Nay, if they
bring fresh force upon us, Madam, it is time to quit the Field. Ex. Lyd. Flip.


Ran. What, play with your quarrey till it fly from you^


Dap. You frightened it away.


Ran. Ha! is not one of those Ladies in mourning?


Dap. All women are so by this light.


Ran. But you might easily descern it, don't you know her?


Dap. No.


Ran. Did you talk with her?


Dap. Yes, she is one of your brisk silly Baggages.


Ran. It Is she, it is she, I was afraid I saw her before, let us follow 'em,
prithee make haste. Exeunt. It Is Lydia. Aside.

Lydia, my Lady Flippant return at the other door,
Ranger, Dapperwit, following them at a distance.

Lyd. They follow us yet I fear.


Flip. You do not fear it certainly, otherwise, you would not have encouraged
them.


Lyd. For heavens sake, Madam, wave your quarrel a little; and let us pass by
your Coach, and so on foot to your acquaintance in the old Pell-mell; for I
would not be discovered by the man that came up last to us. Exeunt.


The Scene changes to Christina 's Lodging. Enter Christina, Isabel. Isa. For
Heavens sake undress your self, Madam; they will not return to night, all people
have left the Park an hour ago.


Chri. What is it a Clock?


Isa. It Is past one.


Chri. It cannot be.


Isa. I thought, that time had only stolen from happy Lovers; the Disconsolate
have nothing to do but to tell the Clock.


Chri. I can only keep account with my misfortunes.


Isa. I am glad they are not innumerable.


Chri. And truly my undergoing so often your impertinency, is not the least of
them.


Isa. I am then more glad, Madam, for then they cannot be great, and it is in
my power, it seems, to make you in part happy, if I could but hold this
villainous tongue of mine, but then let the people of the Town hold their
tongues if they will, for I cannot but tell you what they say.


Chri. What do they say?


Isa. Faith, Madam, I am afraid to tell you, now I think on it.


Chri. Is it so ill?


Isa. Oh, such base unworthy things.


Chri. Do they say, I was really Clerimont's Wench as he boasted; and that the
ground of the quarrel betwixt Valentine and him, was not Valentines
vindication of my honor, but Clerimonts jealousy of him.


Isa, Worse, worse a thousand times, such villainous things to the utter ruin of
your reputation.


Chri. What are they?


Isab. Faith, Madam, you will be angry, it is the old trick of Lovers to hate their
informers, after they have made 'em such.


Chri. I will not be angry.


Isab. They say then, since Mr. Valentines flying into France, you are grown
mad, have put your self into Mourning, live in a dark room, where you will see no
body, nor take any rest day or night, but rave and talk to your self
perpetually.


Chri. Now what else?


Isab. But the surest sign of your madness is, they say, because you are
desperately resolved (in case my Lord Clerimont should dye of his wounds, to
Transport your self and Fortune into France, to Mr. Valentine, a man that has
not a groat to return you in exchange.


Chri. All this hitherto, is true; now to the rest.


Isab. Indeed, Madam, I have no more to tell you, I was sorry, I Am sure, to
hear so much of any Lady of mine.


Chri. Insupportable insolence.


Isab. This is some revenge for my want of sleep to night; so I hope my old
second is come; it is seasonable relief. Aside.


Knocking at the door. Chri. Unhappy Valentine, could thou but Exit.
Isabella. see how soon thy absence, and misfortunes have disbanded all thy
Friends, and turned thy Slaves all Renegades, thou sure would prize my only
faithful heart.


Enter my Lady Flippant, Lydia, Isabel, to her. Flip. Hail faithful
Shepherdess; but truly, I had not kept my word with you, in coming back to
night, if it had not been for this Lady, who has her intrigues too with the
fellows, as well as you.


Lyd. Madam, under my Lady Flippants protection, I am confident to beg yours;
being just now pursued out of the Park, by a relation of mine, by whom it
imports me extremely not to be discovered; but I fear he is now at the door.
Knocking at the door. Let me desire you to deny me to him courageously, To
Isabel going out. for he will hardly believe he can be mistaken in me.


Chri. In such an occasion where impudence is requisite, she will serve you, as
faithfully as you can wish, Madam.


Flip. Come, come, Madam, do not upbraid her with her assurance, a
qualification that only fits her for a Ladies Service; a fine Woman of the
Town, can be no more without a woman that can make an excuse with an assurance,
then she can be without a glass certainly.


Chri. She needs no Advocate.


Flip. How can any one alone manage an amorous intrigue; though the Birds are
tame, some body must help draw the Net; if 'twere not for a Woman that could
make an excuse with assurance, how should we whedle, jilt, trace, discover,
countermine, undermine, and blow up the stinking fellows, which is all the
pleasure I receive, or design by them; for I never admitted a man to my
conversation, but for his punishment certainly.


Chri. No body will doubt that, certainly.


Isabel returns. Isab. Madam, the Centleman will not be mistaken, he says you
are here, he saw you come in; he is your Relation, his name's Ranger, and is
come to wait upon you home; I had much ado to keep him from coming up.


Lyd. Madam, for Heavens sake help me, it is yet in your power, if but while I
retire into your Dining Room, To Christina. you will please to personate me,
and own your self, for her, he pursued out of the Park; you are in Mourning
too, and your Stature so much mine, it will not contradict you.


Chri. I am sorry, Madam, I must dispute any command of yours; I have made a
resolution to see the face of no man, till an unfortunate Friend of mine, now
out of the Kingdom, return.


Lyd. By that Friend, and by the hopes you have to see him, let me conjure you
to keep me from the sight of mine now; Dear Madam, let your charity prevail
over your superstition.


Isab. He comes, he comes Madam.


Ranger enters. Lydia withdraws and stands unseen at the door. Ran. Ha! this is
no Lydia.


Chri. What unworthy defamer has encouraged you to offer me this insolence.


Ran. She is liker Lydia in her style, then her face; I see I am mistaken, but
to tell her I followed her for another, were an affront, rather then an excuse;
she is a glorious creature. Aside.


Chri. Tell me, Sir, whence had you reason for this your rude pursuit of me,
into my Lodging, my Chamber; why should you follow me?


Ran. Faith, Madam, because you run away from me.


Chri. That was no sign of an acquaintance.


Ran. You Will pardon me Madam.


Chri. Then it seems you mistook me for another, and the night is your excuse,
which blots out all distinctions: but now you are satisfied in your mistake, I
hope, you will go seek out your Woman in another place.


Ran. Madam, I allow not the excuse you make for me; if I have offended, I will
rather be condemned for my love, then pardoned for my insensibility.


Lyd. How Is that? behind.


Chri. What do you say?


Ran. Though the night had been darker, my heart would not have suffered me to
follow any one but you; he has been too long acquainted with you, to mistake
you.


Lyd. What means this tenderness; he mistook me for her sure? behind.


Chri. What says the Gentleman? did you know me then Sir?


Ran. Not I, the Devil take me, but I must on now. Aside. Could you imagine,
Madam, by the innumerable crowd of your admirers, you had left any man free in
the Town, or ignorant of the power of your Beauty.


Chri. I never saw your face before, that I remember.


Ran. Ah Madam! you would never regard you humb'lest Slave; I was till now a
modest Lover.


Lyd. Falsest of men. behind.


Chri. My woman said, you came to seek a Relation here, not a Mistress.


Ran. I must confess, Madam, I thought you would sooner disprove my dissembled
error, then admit my visit; and I was resolved to see you.


Lyd. It Is clear. behind.


Ran. Indeed, when I followed you first out of the Park, I was afraid you might
have been a certain Relation of mine, for your Statures and Habits are the
same; but when you entered here, I was with joy convinced: Besides, I would not
for the world have given her troublesome love, so much encouragement, to have
disturbed my future addresses to you; for the foolish woman does perpetually
torment me, to make our relation nearer; but never more in vain, then since I
have seen you, Madam.


Lyd. How shall I suffer this? it is clear he disappointed me to night for her,
and made me stay at home, that I might not disappoint him of her company in the
Park. behind.


Chri. I am amazed! but let me tell you, Sir, if the Lady were here, I would
satisfy her, the sight of me should never frustrate her ambitious designs upon
her cruel Kinsman.


Lyd. I wish you could satisfy me. behind.


Ran. If she were here, she would satisfy you, she were not capable of the
honor to be taken for you (though in the dark) faith, my Cousin is but a
tolerable woman to a man that had not seen you.


Chri. Sure to my Plague, this is the first time you ever saw me?


Ran. Sure to the Plague of my poor heart, it is nor the hundredth time I have
seen you; for since the time I saw you first, you have not been at the Park,
Playhouse, Exchange, or other public place, but I saw you; for it was my
business to watch and follow you.


Chri. Pray, when did you see me last at the Park, Playhouse, or Exchange.


Ran. Some two, three days, or a week ago.


Chri. I have not been this month out of this Chamber.


Lyd. That is to delude me. behind.


Chri. I knew you were mistaken.


Ran. You Will pardon a Lovers memory, Madam.

A pox, I have hanged my self in my own line, one would think, my perpetual ill
luck in lying, should break me of the quality; but like a loosing Gamster, I am
still for pushing on, till none will trust me. Aside.


Chri. Come, Sir, you run out of one error into a greater, you would excuse the
rudeness of your mistake, and intrusion at this hour, into my Lodgings, with
your gallantry to me, more unseasonable and offensive.


Ran. Nay, I am in Love I see, for I blush, and have not a word to say for my
self.


Chri. But, Sir, if you will needs play the Gallant, pray leave my House before
Morning, lest you should be seen go hence, to the scandal of my honor.


Chri. Rather then that should be, I Will call up the House and Neighbors to
bear witness, I bid you be gone.


Ran. Since you take a night-visit so ill, Madam, I will never wait upon you
again, but by day; I go, that I may hope to return, and for once, I will wish
you a good night without me.


Chri. Good night, for as long as I live. Ex. Ranger


Lyd. And good night to my Love, I Am sure. Behind.


Chri. Though I have done you an inconsiderable service, I assure you, Madam,
you are not a little obliged to me.

Pardon me dear Valentine. Aside.


Lyd. I know not yet, whether I am more obliged then injured; when I do I
assure you, Madam, I shall not be insensible of either.


Chri. I fear, Madam, you are as liable to mistakes, as your Kinsman.


Lyd. I fear, I am more subject to 'em, it may be for want of sleep, therefore
I Will go home.


Chri. My Lady Flippant, good night.


Flip. Good night, or rather good morrow, faithful Shepherdess.


Chri. I Will wait of you down.


Lyd. Your Coach stays yet, I hope.


Flip. Certainly. Ex. Omnes.


Enter Ranger, Dapperwit. The Scene, the Street. Dap. I was a faithful
Sentinel, no body came out, let me perish.


Ran. No, no, I hunted upon a wrong scent; I thought I had followed a Woman,
but found her an Angel.


Dap. What is her name?


Ran. That you must tell me; What very fine woman is there lies hereabouts?


Dap. Faith, I know not any, she is I warrant you some fine woman, of a Terms
standing or so in the Town; such as seldom appear in public, but in their
Balcones, where they stand so constantly, one would think they had hired no
other part of the House.


Ran. And look like the Pictures, which Painters expose to draw in Customers;
but I must know who she is, Vincents Lodging is hard by, I Will go and enquire of
him, and lie with him to night; but if he will not let me, I Will lie with you,
for my lodging is too far off --


Dap. Then I will go before, and expect you at mine. Ex.


The Scene, Vincents Lodging. Enter Vincent, Valentine, in a riding habit, as
newly from a Journey. Vin. Your Mistress, dear Valentine, will not be more glad
to see you; but my wonder is no less then my joy, that you would return ere you
were informed Clerimont were out of danger; his Surgeons themselves, have not
been assured of his recovery, till within these two days.


Val. I feared my Mistress, not my Life; my Life I could trust again with my
old enemy Fortune; but not longer, my Mistress, in the hands of my greater
Enemies, her Relations.


Vin. Your fear was in the wrong place then, for though my Lord Clerimont live,
he and his Relations, may put you in more danger of your life, then you
Mistresses Relations can of loosing her.


Val. Would any could secure me her, I would my self secur my life, for I
should value it then.


Vin. Come, come, her Relations can do you no hurt; I dare swear, If her Mother
should but say, your Hat did not cock handsomely, she would never ask her
blessing again.


Val. Prithee leave thy fooling, and tell me, if since my departure, She has
given evidences of her love, to clear those doubts I went away with, for as
absence is the bane of common and bastard Love; it is the vindication of that,
which is true and generous.


Vin. Nay, if you could ever doubt her love, you deserve to doubt on; for there
is no punishment great enough for jealousy, but jealousy.


Val. You may remember, I told you before my flight, I had quarreled with the
defamer of my Mistress, but thought I had killed my Rival.


Vin. But pray give me now the answer, which the suddenness of your flight
denied me; how could Clerimont hope to subdue her heart, by the assault of her
honor?


Val. Pish, it might be the stratagem of a Rival, to make me desist.


Vin. For shame, if 'twere not rather to vindicate her, then satisfy you, I
would not tell you, how like a Penelope she has behaved her self in your
absence.


Val. Let me know.


Vin. Then know, the next day you went, she put her self into mourning, and --


Val. That might be for Clerimont, thinking him dead, as all the world besides
thought.


Vin. Still turning the daggers point on your self, hear me out; I say she put
her self into mourning for you -- loc'kd up her self in her chamber, this month
for you -- shut out her barking Relations for you -- has not seen the Sun, or
face of man, since she saw you -- thinks, and talks of nothing but you -- sends
to me daily, to hear of you -- and in short (I think) is mad for you -- all
this I can swear, for I am to her so near a Neighbor, and so inquisitive a
friend for you --


Servant to them. Ser. Mr. Ranger, Sir, is coming up.


Vin. What brings him now? he comes to lie with me.


Val. Who, Ranger?


Vin. Yes, pray retire a little, till I send him off, unless you have a mind to
have your arrival published to morrow, in the Coffee-houses.


Ran. What, not yet a-bed? your man is laying you to sleep Valentine retires to
the door behind. with Usquebaugh or Brandy, is he not so?


Vin. What Punk will not be troubled with you to night, therefore I am, is it
not so?


Ran. I have been turned out of doors indeed just now, by a Woman, but such a
Woman, Vincent --


Vin. Yes, yes, your women are always such women. --


Ran. A Neighbor of yours, and I Am sure the finest you have.


Vin. Prithee do not asperse my Neighborhood with your acquaintance; 'twould
bring a scandal upon an Alley.


Ran. Nay, I do not know her, therefore I come to you.


Vin. 'Twas no wonder, she turned you out of doors then; and if she had known
you, 'twould have been a wonder she had let you stay; but where does she live?


Ran. -- He whispers.


Vin. Pish, pish --


Ran. What Is the matter?


Vin. -- Does she live there, do you say?


Ran. Yes, I observed them exactly, that my account from you, might be as
exact; do you know who lives there?


Vin. Yes, so well, that I know you are mistaken.


Ran. Is she not a young Lady scarce eighteen, of extraordinary beauty, her
stature next to low, and in mourning?


Val. What is this? Behind.


Vin. She is; but if you saw her, you broke in at window.


Ran. I chased her home from the Park, indeed, taking her for another Lady who
had some claim to my heart, 'till she showed a better title to it.


Vin. Hah, hah, hah.


Val. Was she at Park then? and have I a new Rival? Behind.


Vin. From the Park did you follow her, do you say? I knew you were mistaken.


Ran. I tell you I am not.


Vin. If you are sure, it was that house, it might be perhaps her woman stolen
to the Park, unknown to her Lady.


Ran. My acquaintance does usually begin with the Maid first, but now 'twas
with the Mistress, I assure you.


Vin. The Mistress! I tell you, she has not been out of her doors since
Valentines flight; she is his Mistress, the great Heiress Christina.


Ran. I tell you then again, I followed that Christina from the Park home,
where I talked with her half an hour, and intend to see her to morrow again.


Val. Would she talk with him too? behind.


Vin. It cannot be.


Ran. Christina, do you call her? faith I am sorry she is an Heiress, lest it
should bring the scandal of interest, and design of lucre upon my Love.


Vin. No, no, her face and virtues will free you from that censure; but
however, it is not fairly done to Rival your friend Valentine in his absence;
and when he is present, you know 'twil be dangerous, by my Lord Clerimont's
example; faith if you have seen her, I would not advise you to attempt it again.


Ran. You may be merry, Sir, you are not in Love; your advise I came not for,
nor will I for your assistance; good night.


Val. Here Is your Penelope, the woman that Ex. Ranger. had not seen the Sun,
nor face of Man, since my departure; for it seems she goes out in the night,
when the Sun is absent, and faces are not distinguished.


Vin. Why, do you believe him?


Val. Should I believe you?


Vin. 'Twere more for your interest, and you would be less deceived; if you
believe him, you must doubt the chastity of all the fine Women in Town, and
five miles about.


Val, His reports of them, will little invallidate his testimony with me.


Vin. He spares not the Innocents in Bibs and Aprons (I Will secure you) he has
made (at best) some gross mistake concerning Christina, which to morrow will
discover; in the mean time let us go sleep.


Val. I will not hinder you, because I cannot enjoy it my self;

Hunger, Revenge, to sleep are petty Foes,
But only Death the jealous Eyes can close. Exeunt.

ACT. III.
SCENE. I. Crossbites House.
Enter Mrs. Joyner, Mrs. Crossbite. Join. GGod morrow, Gossip.


Cross. Good morrow; but why up so early good Gossip?


Join. My care and passionate concern for you, and yours, would not let me rest
(intruly.)


Cross. For me and mine?


Join. You know, we have known one another long; I think it be some nine and
thirty years since you were married.


Cross. Nine and thirty years old Mistress? I Would have you to know, I am no far
born Child; and if the Register had not been burned in the last great fire
alas; but my face needs no Register sure: nine and thirty years old said you,
Mistress?


Join. I said you had been so long married; but, indeed, you bear your years as
well as any she in Pepper-Alley.


Cross. Nine and thirty, Mistress.


Join. This it is; a woman now-adays, had rather you should find her faulty
with a man, I warrant you, then discover her age, I warrant you.


Cross. Marry and it is the greater secret far; tell a Miser he is rich, and a
Woman she is old; you will get no money of him, nor kindness of her: to tell me
I was nine and thirty (I say no more) 'twas unneighbourly done of you, Mistress.


Join. My memory confessess my age, it seems, as much as my face, for I thought
--


Cross. Pray talk, nor think no more of any ones Age; but say, what brought you
hither so early?


Join. How does my sweet God-daughter? poor wretch.


Cross. Well, very well.


Join. Ah sweet Creature; alas, alas, I am sorry for her.


Cross. Why, what has she done to deserve your sorrow, or my reprehension?


Lucy comes to the door. Lucy. What are they talking of me? behind.


Join. In short, she was seen going into the Meeting House of the Wicked,
otherwise called the Play house, hand in hand, with that vile fellow Dapperwit.


Cross. Mr. Dapperwit; let me tell you, if 'twere not for Master Dapperwit, we
might have lived all this Vacation upon Green Cheese, Tripe, and Ox-cheek; if
he had it, we should not want it; but poor Gentleman, it often goes hard with
him, for he is a Wit.


Join. So then, you are the Dog to be fed, while the house is broken up; I say
beware, the sweet bits you swallow, will make your daughters belly swell,
Mistress; and after all your Junkets, there will be a bone for you to pick,
Mistress.


Cross. Sure, Master Dapperwit is no such manner of man?


Join. He is a Wit, you say, and what are Wits? but contemners of Matrons,
Seducers, or Defamers of married Women, and Deflourers of helpless Virgins,
even in the Streets, upon the very Bulks; Affronters of midnight Magistracy,
and Breakers of Windows in a word.


Cross. But he is a little-Wit, a modest-wit, and they do no such outrageous
things, as your great Wits do.


Join. Nay, I dare say, he will not say himself he is a little-Wit, if you ask
him.


Lucy. Nay, I cannot hear this with patience; with your Aside. pardon mother,
you are as much mistaken, as my God-mother in Mr. Dapperwit; for he is as great
a Wit as any, and in what he speaks or writes, as happy as any; I can assure
you, he contemns all your tearing Wits, in comparison of himself.


Join. Alas, poor young wretch, I cannot blame thee so much as thy mother, for
thou art not thy self; his bewitching Madrigals have charmed thee into some
Heathenish, Imp with a hard name.


Lucy. Nymph, you mean God-mother.


Join. But you Gossip, know what is what; yesterday, as I told you, a fine Old
Alderman of the City, seeing your Daughter in so ill hands as Dapperwits, was
Zealously, and in pure Charity, bent upon her redemption; and has sent me to
tell you, he will take her into his care, and relieve your necessities, if you
think good.


Cross. Will he relieve all our necessities?


Join. All.


Cross. Mine, as well as my Daughters?


Join. Yes.


Cross. Well fare his heart; d'y here Daughter, Mrs. Joyner has satisfied me
clearly; Dapperwit is a vile fellow, and in short, you must put an end to that
scandalous familiarity between you.


Lucy. Leave sweet Mr. Dapperwit -- Oh furious ingratitude! was not he the man
that gave me my first Farrenden Gown, put me out of Worsted Stockings, and
plain Handkerchiefs, taught me to dress, talk, and move well.


Cross. He has taught you to talk indeed; but Huswife, I will not have my
pleasure disputed.


Join. Nay, indeed you are too tart with her, poor sweet Soul.


Lucy. He taught me to rehearse too, would have brought me to the Playhouse,
where I might have had as good luck as others: I might have had good Clothes,
Plate, Jewels, and things so well about me; that my Neighbors, the little
Gentlemen's Wives, of Fifteen hundred, or Two thousand pound a year, should have
retired into the Country, sick of the envy, of my prosperity and greatness.


Join. if you follow your mothers counsel, you are like to enjoy all you talk
of sooner; then by Dapperwits assistance; a poor wretch that goes on tick for
the Paper he writes his Lampoons on; and the very Ale and Coffee that inspires
him as they say.


Cross. I am credibly informed so, indeed, Madam Joyner.


Join. Well, I have discharged my Conscience; good morrow to you both. Exeunt.


Enter Dapperwit, Ranger; Crossbites Dining Room. Dap. This is the Cabinet, in
which I hide my Jewel, a small house, in an obscure, little, retired street too.


Ram. Vulgarly an Alley.


Dap. Nay, I hid my Mistress, with as much care, as a Spark of the Town does
his money from his Dun, after a good hand at Play; and nothing but you could
have wrought upon me for a sight of her, let me perish.


Ran. My obligation to you is great; do not lessen it by delays, of the favor
you promised.


Dap. But do not censure my honor, for if you had not been in a desperate
condition -- for as one nail must beat out another, one poison expel another,
one fire draw out another, one fit of drinking cure the sickness of another; so
the Surfeit you took last night of Christina's eyes, shall be cured by Lucy's
this morning, or as --


Ran. Nay, I bar more similitudes.


Dap. What, in my Mistresses lodging? that were as hard as to bar a young
Parson in the Pulpit, the fifth of November, railing at the Church of Rome, or
as hard as to put you to bed to Lucy, and defend you touching her, or as --


Ran. Or as hard as to make you hold your tongue -- I shall not see your
Mistress, I see?


Dap. Miss Lucy, Miss Lucy -- Knocks at the door, and returns. the Devil take
me, if good men (I say no more) have not been upon their knees to me, to see
her, and you at last must obtain it.


Ran. I do not believe you.


Dap. It Is such a she, she is beautiful, without affectation, amorous without
impertinency, airy, and brisk without impudence, frolic without rudeness; and
in a word, the justest creature breathing to her asignation.


Ran. You praise her, as if you had a mind to part with her; and yet you
resolve, I see, to keep her to your self.


Dap. Keep her, poor Creature, she cannot leave me; and rather then leave her,
I would leave writing Lampoons or Sonnets almost.


Ran^ Well, I Will leave you with her then.


Dap. What, will you go without seeing her?


Ran. Rather then stay without seeing her.


Dap. Yes, yes, you shall see her; but let me perish if I have not been offered
a hundred Guinnies, for a sight of her; by -- I say no more.


Ran. I understand you now; if the favor be to be Aside. purchased, then I Will
bid all I have about me for it.


Dap. Fie fie, Mr. Ranger, you are pleasant i^faith; do you think I would sell
the sight of my rarity? like those Gentlemen who hang out Flags at
Charing Cross, or like --


Rang. Nay, then i am gone again.


Dap. What, you take it ill I refuse your money? rather then that should be,
give us it; but take notice I will borrow it; now I think on it, Lucy wants a
Gown, and some Knacks.


Ran. Here.


Dap. But I must pay it you again; I will not take it, unless you engage your
honor, I shall pay it you again.


Ran. You must pardon me; I will not engage my honor for such a trifle; go
fetch her out.


Dap. Well, she is a ravishing Creature, such eyes, and lips, Mr. Ranger.


Ran. Prithee go.


Dap. Such neck and breasts, Mr. Ranger.


Ran. Again, prithee go.


Dap. Such, feet, legs, and thighs, Mr. Ranger.


Ran. Prithee let me see 'em.


Dap. And a mouth no bigger then your Ring; I need say no more.


Ran. Would thou were never to speak again.


Dap. And then so neat, so sweet a Creature in bed, that to my knowledge, she
does not change her Sheets in half a year.


Ran. I thank you for that allay to my impatience.


Dap. Miss Lucy, Miss Lucy, Miss. Knocking at the door.


Ran. Will she not open?


Dap. I am afraid, my pretty Miss is not stirring, and therefore will not admit
us.


Dap. Fie, Fie, a quibble next your stomach in a morning; what if she should
hear us, would you lose a Mistress for a quible? that is more then I could do,
let me perish.


Ran. Is she not gone her walk to Lambs Conduit?


Dap. She is within, I hear her.


Ran. But she will not hear you; she is as deaf, as if you were a Dun or a
Constable.


Dap. Pish, give her but leave to gape, rub her eyes, and put on her
day-Pinner; the long patch under the left eye; awaken the Roses on her cheeks,
with some Spanish wool, and warrant her breath with some Lemmon Peil; the door
flies off of the hindges, and she into my arms; she knows there is as much
Artifice to keep a victory, as to gain it; and it is a sign she values the
conquest of my heart.


Ran. I thought her beauty had not stood in need of Art.


Dap. Beauty's a Coward, still without the help of Art, and may have the
fortune of a Conquest, but cannot keep it; Beauty and Art can no more be
asunder, then Love and Honor.


Ran. Or to speak more like your self, wit and judgment.


Dap. Don't you hear the door wag yet?


Ran. Not a whit.


Dap. Miss, Miss, it is your slave that calls; come, all this tricking for him;
lend me your Comb, Mr. Ranger.


Ran. No, I am to be preferred to day, you are to set me off; you are in
possession; I will not lend you arms to keep me out --


Dap. A Pox, don't let me be ungrateful; if she has smugg'd her self up for me,
let me Prune, and Flounce my Perruque a little for her; there is never a young
fellow in the Town but will do as much, for a mere stranger in the Playhouse.


Ran. A Wits Wig, has the privilege of being uncomb'd in the very Playhouse,
or in the presence --


Dap. But not in the presence of his Mistress; it is a greater neglect of her
then himself; pray lend me your Comb.


Ran. I would not have men of Wit, and Courage, make use of every Fops mean
Arts, to keep, or gain a Mistress.


Dap. But don't you see every day, though a man have never so much Wit and
Courage, his Mistress will revolt to those Fops that wear, and Comb Peruques
well; i will break off the bargain, and will not receive you, my Partner.


Ran. Therefore you see I am setting Combs his Perruque. up for my self.


Dap. She comes, she comes, pray, your Comb.


Snatches Rangers Comb. Enter Mrs. Crossbite to them. Cross. Bargain, what are
you offering us to sale?


Dap. A Pox, is it she? here take your Comb again then. Returns the Comb.


Cross. Would you sell us? it is like you y'fads.


Dap. Sell thee, where should we find a Chapman? go prithee mother, call out my
dear Miss Lucy*


Cross. Your Miss Lucy; I do not wonder you have the Conscience to bargain for
us behind our backs, since you have the impudence to claim a propriety in us,
to my face.


Ran. How Is this Dapperwit?


Dap. Come, come, this Gentleman will not think the worse of a Woman, for my
acquaintance with her; he has seen me bring your Daughter to the Leur with a
Chiney Orange, from one side of the Playhouse to the other.


Cross. I would have the Gentleman, and you to know, my Daughter is a Girl of
reputation, though she has been seen in your company; but is now so sensible of
her past danger, that she is resolved never more to venture her Pitcher to the
Well, as they say.


Dap. How Is that Widow? I wonder at your new confidence.


Cross. I wonder at your old impudence, that where you have had so frequent
repulses, you should provoke another, and bring your Friend here to witness
your disgrace.


Dap. Hark you Widow a little.


Cross. What, you have Mortgaged my Daughter to that Centleman; and now would
offer me a snip to join in the security.


Dap. She overheard me talk of a bargain; 'twas unlucky; Aside. your wrath is
grounded upon a mistake: Miss Lucy her self shall be judge, call her out pray.


Cross. She shall not, she will not come to you.


Dap. Till I hear it from her own mouth, I cannot believe it.


Cross. You shall hear her say it through the door.


Dap. I shall doubt it, unless she say it to my face.


Cross. Shall we be troubled with you no more then?


Dap. If she command my death, I cannot dis-obey her.


Cross. Come out Child. Lucy (holding down her head) to them.


Dap. Your Servant dearest Miss, can you have? --


Cross. Let me ask her.


Dap. No, I Will ask her.


Ran. I Will throw up Cross or Pile who shall ask her.


Dap. Can you have the heart to say, you will never more break a Cheese-cake
with me, at New Spring-garden, the Neat-house, or Chelsey; never more sit in my
lap at a New Play, never more wear a Suit of Knots of my choice; and last of
all, never more pass away an afternoon with me again, in the Green Garret? in
-- do not forget the Green Garret.


Lucy. I wish I had never seen the Green Garret; Demm the Green Garret.


Dap. Demm the Green Garret, you are strangely altered.


Lucy. It Is you are altered.


Dap. You have refused Colby's Mulberry Garden, and the French-houses, for the
Green Garret; and a little something in the Green Garret, pleased you more then
the best Treat the other places could yield; and can you of a sudden quit the
Green Garret?


Lucy. Since you have a design to Pawn me for the Rent, it is time to remove my
Goods.


Dap. Thou art extremely mistaken.


Lucy. Besides, I have heard such strange things of you this morning --


Dap. What things?


Lucy. I blush to speak 'em.


Dap. I know my Innocence, therefore take my charge as a favor; what have I
done?


Lucy. Then know vile Wit, my mother has confessed just now, thou were false
to me, to her too certain knowledge; and have forced even her to be false to me
too.


Dap. Faults in drink, Lucy, when we are not our selves, should not condemn us.


Lucy. And now to let me out to hire like Hackney; I tell you my own dear
mother shall bargain for me no more; there are as little as I can bargain for
themselves now-adays, as well as properer women.


Cross. Whispering all this while; beware of his snares again, come away Child.


Dap. Sweet, dear, Miss.


Lucy. Bargain for me; you have reckoned without your Hostess, as they say,
bargain for me, bargain for me. Exit. Lucy.


Dap. I must return then, to treat with you.


Cross. Treat me no treatings, but take a word for all; you shall no more
dishonor my Daughter, nor molest my Lodgings, as you have done at all hours.


Dap. Do you intend to change 'em, then, to Bridewel, or Longs powdering-Tub.


Cross. No, to a Bailifs house, and then you will be so civil, I presume, as not
to trouble us.


Ran, Here, will you have my Comb again, Dapperwit?


Dap. A pox, I think women take inconstancy from me, worse then from any man
breathing.


Cross. Pray, Sir, forget me, before you write your next Lampoon. Ex. Cross.


Sir Simon Addleplot in the dress of a Clark. To Ranger and Dapperwit. Sir Sim.
Have I found you? have I found you, in your by-walks, faith and troth? I am
almost out of breath in following you; Gentlemen when they get into an Alley,
walk so fast; as if they had more earnest business there, then in the broad
streets.


Dap. How came this Sot hither? Fortune has sent him to ease my choler. Aside.

You impudent Rascal, who are you? that dare intrude thus on us. Strikes him.


Sir Sim. Don't you know me, Dapperwit? sure you know me. Softly.


Dap. Will thou dishonor me with thy acquaintance too? thou rascally,
insolent, pen and ink-man. Strikes him again.


Sir Sim. Oh, oh sure, you know me, pray know me.


Speak softly. Dap. By thy saucy familiarity, thou should be a Marker at a
Tennis-court, a Barber, or a Slave that fills Coffee.


Sir Sim. Oh, oh.


Dap. What art thou? Kicks him.


Sir Sim. Nay, I must not discover my self to Ranger, for a kick or two; oh,
pray hold, Sir, by that you will know me.


Delivers him a Letter. Dap. How, Sir Simon!


Sir Sim. Mum, mum, make no excuses man, I would not Ranger should have known
me for five hundred -- kicks.


Dap. Your disguise is so natural, I protest, it will excuse me.


Sir Sim. I know that, prithee make no excuses, I say; no ceremony between thee
and I man; read the Letter.


Dap. What, you have not opened it?


Sir Sim. Prithee don't be angry, the Seal is a little cracked; for I could not
help kissing Mrs. Martha's Letter, the word is, now or never, her Father she
finds will be abroad all this day, and she longs to see your friend, Sir Simon
Addleplot: faith, it is a pretty jest; While I am with her, and praising my self
to her, at no ordinary rate; let thee and I alone, at an intrigue.


Dap. Tell her, I will not fail to meet her, at the place, and time, have a
care of your charge; and manage your business like your self, for your self.


Sir Sim. I warrant you.


Dap. The gaining Gripes Daughter, will make me support the loss of this young
Jilt here. Aside.


Ran. What fellow's that?


Dap. A Servant, to a Friend of mine.


Ran. Methinks, he something resembles our acquaintance, Sir Simon, but it is
no complement to tell him so; for that Knight, is the most egregious Coxcomb,
that ever played with Ladies Fan.


Sir Sim. So; thanks to my disguise, I know my Enemies. Aside.


Ran. The most incorrigible Ass, beyond the reproof of a kicking Rival, or a
frowning Mistress; but if it be possible, thou do use him worse, then his
Mistress, or Rival can; thou do make such a Culley of him.


Sir Sim. Does he think so too? -- Aside.


Dap. Go friend, go about your business, Ex. Sir. Simon. a pox, you would spoil
all, just in the critical time of projection; he brings me here a Summons from
his Mistress, to meet her in the evening; will you come to my Wedding?


Ran. Don't speak so loud, you will break poor Lucies heart; poor creature, she
cannot leave you, and rather then leave her, you should leave writing of
Lampoons, or Sonnets -- almost.


Dap. Come, let her go, ungrateful baggage; but now you talk of Sonnets; I am
no living Wit, if her love has not cost me two thousand Couplets at least.


Ran. But, what would you give now, for a new Satyr against women, ready made;
'twou'd be as convenient to buy, Satyrs against women, ready made, as it is to
buy Crevats ready tied.


Dap. Or as --


Ran. Hay, come away, come away, Mr. or as -- Exeunt.


Enter Mrs. Joyner, Gripe. Gripe. Peace, Plenty, and Pastime be within these
Walls.


Join. It Is a small House you see, and mean Furniture, for no Gallants are
suffered to come hither; she might have had ere now, as good lodgings, as any
in Town; her Moreclack-Hangings, great Glasses, Cabinets, China embroidered
Beds, Persia Carpets, Gold-plate, and the like, if she would have put her self
forward; but your Worship may please, to make 'em remove to a place, fit to
receive one of your Worships quality; for this is a little scandalous in truly.


Gripe. No, no, I like it well enough, I am not dainty; besides privacy,
privacy, Mrs. Joyner, I love privacy, in opposition to the Wicked, who hate it?


Join. What do you look for, Sir? Looks about.


Gripe. Walls have ears, Walls have ears; but besides, I look for a private
place to retire to, in time of need; oh here is one convenient. Turns up a
Hanging, and discovers the slender provisions of the Family.


Joyn^ But you see poor innocent Souls, to what use they put it, not to hide
Gallants.


Gripe. Temperance is the nurse of Chastity.


Join. But your Worship may please to mend their fare; and when you come, may
make them entertain you, better then, you see, they do themselves.


Gripe. No, I am not dainty, as I told you; I abominate Entertainments; no
Entertainments, pray Mrs. Joyner.


Join. No. Aside.


Gripe. There can be no entertainment to me, more Luscious and Savoury, then
the communion with that little Gentlewoman; will you call her out, I fast till
I see her.


Join. But intruly your Worship, we should have brought a bottle or two of
Rhenish, and some Naples Biscuit, to have entertained the young Gentlewoman;
it is the mode for Lovers to Treat their Mistresses.


Gripe. Modes, I tell you Mrs. Joyner, I hate Modes and Forms.


Join. You must send for something to entertain her with.


Gripe. Again entertaining; we will be to each other a Feast.


Join. I shall be ashamed, intruly your Worship; besides, the young Gentlewoman
will despise you.


Gripe. I shall content her, I warrant you, leave it to me.


Join. I am sure you will not content me, if you will not content her; it is as
impossible for a man to love, and be a miser, as to love and be wise, as they
say. Aside.


Gripe. While you talk of Treats, you starve my eyes; I long to see the fair
One; fetch her hither.


Join. I am ashamed she should find me so abominable a liar; I have so praised
you to her, and above all your Virtues, your Liberality; which is so great a
Virtue, that it often excuses Youth, Beauty, Courage, Wit, or any thing.


Gripe. Pish, Pish, it is the virtue of Fools, every Fool can have it.


Join. And will your worship want it then? I told her --


Gripe. Why would you tell her any thing of me? you know I am a modest man; but
come, if you will have me as extravagant as the wicked; take that, and fetch us
a Treat, as you call it.


Join. Upon my life a Groat, what will this purchase?


Gripe. Two Black Pots of Ale, and a Cake, at the next Cellar; come, the Wine
has Arsenick in it.


Join. Well, I am mistaken, and my hopes are abused; I never knew any man so
mortified a Miser, that he would deny his Letchery any thing; I must be even
with thee then another way. Goes out. Aside.


Gripe. These useful old Women are more exorbitant, and craving in their
desires, then the young ones in theirs; these Prodigals in white Peruques,
spoil 'em both; and that is the reason when the Squires come under my cluchess;
I make 'em pay for their folly and mine, and it is but Conscience: Oh here comes
the fair One at last.


Enter Joyner leading in Lucy, who hangs backward as she enters. Lucy. Oh Lord,
there is a man God-mother!


Join. Come in Child, thou art so bashful --


Lucy. My mother is from home too, I dare not.


Join. If she were here, she would teach you better manners.


Lucy. I Am afraid she would be angry.


Join. To see you so much an Ass; come along I say.


Gripe. Nay, speak to her gently; if you will not, I will.


Lucy. Thank you, Sir.


Gripe. Pretty Innocent, there is I see, one left yet of her age; what hap have
I! sweet, little Gentlewoman, come and sit down by me.


Lucy. I am better bred, I hope, Sir.


Gripe. You must sit down by me.


Lucy. I Would rather stand, if you please.


Gripe. To please me, you must sit, Sweetest.


Lucy. Not before my God-mother, sure.


Gripe. Wonderment of Innocence!


Join. A poor bashful Girl, Sir; I Am sorry she is not better taught.


Gripe. I am glad she is not taught; I Will teach her my self.


Lucy. Are you a Dancing Master then, Sir? but if I should be dull, and not
move as you would have me, you would not beat me, Sir, I hope?


Gripe. Beat thee, honey Suckle; I Will use thee thus, and thus, and thus; ah,
Mrs. Joyner, prithee go fetch our Treat now.


Kisses her. Join. A Treat of a Groat, I will not wag.


Gripe. Why don't you go? here, take more money, and fetch what you will; take
here, half a Crown.


Join. What will half a Crown do?


Gripe. Take a Crown then, an Angel, a Piece; be gone.


Join. A Treat only will not serve my turn, I must buy the poor Wretch there
some toys.


Gripe. What toys? what? speak quickly.


Join. Pendents, Neck-laces, Fans, Ribbonds, Points, Laces, Stockings, Gloves
--


Gripe. Hold, hold, before it comes to a Gown.


Join. Well remembered, Sir, indeed she wants a Gown, for she has but that one
to her back; for your own sake you should give her a new Gown; for variety of
Dresses, rouses desire, and makes an old Mistress seem every day a new one.


Gripe. For that reason she shall have no new Gown; for I am naturally
constant, and as I am still the same, I love she should be still the same; but
here take half a piece for the other things.


Join. Half a Piece --


Gripe. Prithee be gone, take the other Piece then; two Pieces, three Pieces,
five; here, it is all I have.


Join. I must have the Broad-Seal Ring too, or I stir not.


Gripe. Insatiable Woman, will you have that too?
Prithee spare me that, 'twas my Grandfathers.

Join. That Is false, he had never a Coat; so now I go; this is but a violent
fit, and will not hold. Aside.


Lucy. Oh, whither do you go God-mother? will you leave me alone?


Join. The Gentleman will not hurt you; you may venture your self with him
alone.


Lucy. I think I may, God-mother; what, will Ex. Joyner. you lock me in, Sir?
don't lock me in, Sir.


Fumbling at the door, locks it. Gripe. It Is a private lesson, I must teach you
fair.


Lucy. I don't see your Fidle, Sir, where is your little Kitt?


Gripe. I Will show it thee presently Sweetest;
Necessity, Mother of invention; Gripe getting a Chair against the door.
Come my dearest. Takes her in his arms.

Lucy. What do you mean, Sir? don't hurt me, Sir, will you -- Oh, Oh, you will
kill me! murder, murder, oh, oh -- help, help, oh -- Cries out.


The door broke open; Enter Crossbite, and two men in Aprons, her Landlord, and
his Prentice. Cross. What, murder my Daughter Villain?


Lucy. I wish he had murdered me, oh, oh --


Cross. What has he done?


Lucy. Why would you go out, and leave me alone? unfortunate woman that I am.


Gripe. How now, what will this end in? Aside.


Cross. Who brought him in?


Lucy. That Witch, that Treacherous false Woman, my God-mother, who has
betrayed me, sold me to his lust; oh, oh --


Cross. Have you ravished my Daughter then, you old Goat? ravished my Daughter,
ravished my Daughter, speak Villain.


Gripe. By yea, and by nay, no such matter.


Cross. A canting Rogue too; take notice Landlord, he has ravished my Daughter,
you see her all in tears and distraction; and see there the wicked Engine of
the Pointing to the Chair. filthy execution; Jeremy, call up my Neighbors, and
the Constable, false Villain, thou shall dye for it.


Gripe. Hold, hold; nay, I am caught. Aside.


Cross. Go, go, make haste --


Lucy. Oh, oh --


Cross. Poor wretch, go quickly.


Gripe. Hold, hold; thou young Spawn of the old Serpent; Wicked, as I thought
thee Innocent; will thou say I would have ravished thee?


Lucy. I will swear you did ravish me.


Gripe. I thought so, Treacherous Eve, then I am gone, I must shift as well as
I can. Aside.


Lucy. Oh, oh --


Cross. Will none of you call up the Neighbors, and the Authority of the Alley?


Gripe. Hold, I Will give you Twenty Mark among you, to let me go.


Cross. Villain, nothing shall buy thy life.


Land. But stay, Mrs. Crossbite, let me talk with you.


Lucy. Oh, oh --


Land. Come, Sir, I am your Friend; in a word, I have appeased her, and she
shall be contented with a little sum.


Gripe. What is it? what is it?


Land. But five hundred pound.


Gripe. But five hundred pound; hang me then, hang me rather.


Land. You will say I have been your friend.


Pren. The Constable, and Neighbors are coming.


Gripe. How, how; will you not take a hundred? pray use conscience in your
ways. Kneels to Crossbite.


Cross. I scorn your money, I will not take a thousand.


Gripe. My enemies are many, and I shall be a scandal to the Faithful, as a
laughing stock to the wicked; Aside. go, prepare your Engines for my
Persecution; I Will give you the best security I can.


Land. The instruments are drawing in the other room, if you please to go
thither.


Cross. Indeed, now I consider; a Portion will do my Daughter more good, then
his death; that would but publish her shame; money will cover it, probatum est,
as they say -- let me tell you, Sir, it is a charitable thing to give a young
Maid a Portion. Exeunt Omnes.


The Scene changes to Lydias Lodging. Enter Lydia, my Lady Flippant. Lyd. It Is
as hard for a woman to conceal her indignation from her apostate Lover, as to
conceal her Love from her faithful servant.


Flip. Or almost as hard as it is, for the prating fellows now adays, to
conceal the favors of obliging Ladies.


Lyd. If Ranger should come up, (I saw him just now in the street) the
discovery of my anger to him now, would be as mean as the discovery of my love
to him before.


Flip. Though I did so mean a thing, as to love a fellow, I would not do so
mean a thing, as to confess it, certainly, by my trouble to part with him; If I
confessed Love, it should be before they left me.


Lyd. So you would deserve to be left, before you were; but could you ever do
so mean a thing, as to confess love to any?


Flip. Yes; but I never did so mean a thing, as really to love any?


Lyd. You had once a Husband.


Flip. Fie, Madam, do you think me so ill bred, as to love a Husband.


Lyd. You had a Widows heart, before you were a Widow I see.


Flip. I should rather make an adventure of my honor, with a Gallant, for a
Gown, a new Coach, a Neck-lase, then clap my Husbands cheeks for them, or sit
in his lap; I should be as ashamed to be caught in such a posture, with a
Husband, as a brisk well bred of the Town, would be, to be caught on his knees
at prayers, unless to his Mistress.


To them, Ranger, Dapperwit. Lyd. Mr. Ranger, 'twas obligingly done of you.


Ran. Indeed Cousin, I had kept my promise with you, last night, but this
Gentleman knows --


Lyd. You mistake me, but you shall not lessen any favor you do me; you are
going to excuse your not coming to me last night, when I take it as a
particular obligation, that though you threatened me with a visit, upon
consideration you were so civil, as not to trouble me.


Dap. This is an unlucky morning with me; here is my eternal persecution, the
Widow Flippant. Aside.


Flip. What, Mr. Dapperwit!


Ran. Indeed Cousin, besides my business, another cause, I did not wait on you,
was, my apprehension, you were gone to the Park, notwithstanding your promise
to the contrary.


Lyd. Therefore, you went to the Park, to visit me there, notwithstanding your
promise to the contrary.


Ran. Who, I at the Park? when I had promised to wait upon you at your lodging;
but were you at the Park, Madam?


Lyd. Who, I at the Park? when I had promised to wait for you at home; I was no
more at the Park then you were; were you at the Park?


Ran. The Park had been a dismal desert to me, notwithstanding all the good
company in it; if I had wanted yours.


Lyd. Because it has been the constant endeavor of men, to keep women
ignorant, they think us so, but it is that increases our inquisitiveness, and
makes us know them ignorant, as false; he is as impudent a dissembler as the
widow Flippant, who is making her importunate addresses, in vain, for ought I
see. Aside.


Flippant driving Dapperwit from one side of the Stage, to the other. Flip.
Dear, Mr. Dapperwit, merciful, Mr. Dapperwit.


Dap. Unmerciful, Lady Flippant.


Flip. Will you be satisfied?


Dap. Will Not you be satisfied.


Flip. That a Wit should be jealous! that a Wit should be jealous! there is
never a brisk young fellow in the Town, though no Wit Heaven knows; but thinks
too well of himself, to think ill of his Wife, or Mistress; now that a Wit
should lessen his opinion of himself, for shame. Aside to Dapperwit.


Dap. I promised to bring you off, but I find it enough to shift for my self --
Softly apart to Ranger.


Lyd. What, out of breath, Madam?


Flip. I have been defending our cause, Madam; I have beat him out of the Pit;
I do so mumble these prating, censorious fellows, they call Wits, when I meet
with them.


Dap. Her Ladyship indeed, is the only thing in Petty-coats, I dread, 'twas
well for me there was company in the Room; for I dare no more venture my self
with her alone, then a Culley that has been bit, dares venture himself in a
Tavern, with an old Rook.


Flip. I am the revenger of our Sex, certainly.


Dap. And the most insatiable one, I ever knew, Madam; I dare not stand your
fury longer; Mr. Ranger, I will go before and make a new appointment, with your
friends that exppect you at dinner, at the French-house, it is fit business,
still wait on Love.


Ran. Do so -- but now I think on it, Sir Thomas goes out of Town this
afternoon, and I shall not see him here again these three months.


Lyd. Nay, pray take him with you, Sir.


Flyp. No, Sir, you shall not take the Gentleman from his Mistress: do not go
yet, sweet Mr. Dapperwit. Aside.


Lyd. Take him with you, Sir; I suppose his business may be there, to borrow,
or win, money, and I ought not to be his hinderance; for when he has none, he
has his desperate designs upon that little I have; for want of money, makes as
devout Lovers as Christians.


Dap. I hope, Madam, he offers you no less security, then his liberty.


Lyd. His liberty, as poor a pawn to take up money on, as honor; he is like the
desperate Banke-routs of this age, who if they can get peoples fortunes into
their hands, care not though they spend them in Goal, all their lives.


Flip. And the poor crediting Ladies, when they have parted with their money,
must be contented with a pitiful composition or starve for all them.


Ran. But Widows are commonly so wise, as to be sure their men are solvable,
before they trust 'em.


Flip. Can you blame 'em; I declare, I will trust no man, pray do not take it
ill, Gentlemen; Quacks in their Bills, and Poets in the titles of their Plays,
do not more disapoint us, then Gallants with their promises; but I trust none.


Dap. Nay, she is a very Jew in that particular; to my knowledge, she will know
her man, over and over again, before she trust him.


Ran. Well, my dearest Cousin, good morrow; when I stay from you, so long
again, blame me to purpose, and be extremely angry; for nothing can make me
amends for the loss of your company, but your reprehension of my absence; I Will
take such a chiding, as kindly, as Russian Wives, do beating.


Lyd. If you were my Husband, I could not take your absence more kindly, then I
do.


Ran. And if you were my wife, I would trust you as much out of my sight, as I
could, to show my opinion of your virtue.


Flip. A well-bred Gentleman, I warrant; will you go then cruel Mr. Dapperwit?
Ex. Ranger and Dapperwit.


Lyd. Have I not dissembled well, Leonor? Apart.


Leo. But, Madam, to what purpose; why do you not put him to his trial, and see
what he can say for himself?


Lyd. I am afraid lest my proofs, and his guilt, should make him desperate, and
so contemn that pardon, which he could not hope for.


Leo. It Is unjust to condemn him, before you hear him.


Lyd. I will reprieve him till I have more evidence.


Leo. How will you get it?


Lyd. I will write him a Letter in Christina's name, desiring to meet him; when
I shall soon discover, if his love to her be of a longer standing, then since
last night; and if it be not, I will not longer trust him with the vanity, to
think she gave him the occasion, to follow her home from the Park; so will at
once disabuse him and my self.


Leo. What care the jealous take in making sure of ills, which they, but in
imagination, cannot undergo.


Lyd. Misfortunes are least dreadful, when most near.
It Is less to undergo the ill, then fear. Exeunt.

ACT. IV.
SCENE. I. Gripe's House.
Enter Mrs. Joyner, and Gripe in a Blew Gown and Night Cap. Join. WHat not well
your Worship? this it is, you will be laying out your self beyond your
strength; you have taken a Surfeit of the little Gentlewoman, I find; indeed,
you should not have been so immoderate in your embraces, your Worship is
something in years, intruly.


Gripe. Graceless, Perfidious Woman, what make thou here? art thou not afraid
to be used like an Informer, since thou have made me pay thee for betraying me?


Join. Betray your Worship, what do you mean? I an Informer, I scorn your words.


Gripe. Woman, I say again, thou art as Treacherous as an Informer, and more
unreasonable; for he lets us have something for our money, before he disturbs
us.


Join. Your money, I Am sure, was laid out faithfully; and I went away because
I would not disturb you.


Gripe. I had not grudged you the money I gave you, but the five hundred pound;
the five hundred pound, inconscionable false woman; the five hundred pound; you
cheated, trappand, robbed me of the five hundred pound.


Join. I cheat you, I rob you; well, remember what you say, you shall answer it
before Mr. Double-Cap, and the best of --


Gripe. Oh impudent woman, speak softly!


Join. I will not speak softly, for innocence is loud, as well as barefaced;
is this your return, after you have made me a mere drudge to your filthy lusts?


Gripe. Speak softly, my Sister, Daughter and Servants will hear.


Join. I would have witnesses, to take notice, that you blast my good name,
which was as white as a Tulip, and as sweet as the head of your Cane; before
you wrought me to the carrying on the work of your fleshly carnal seekings.


Gripe. Softly, softly, they are coming in.


Enter Flippant and Martha. Flip. What Is the matter Brother?


Gripe. Nothing, nothing Sister, only the Godly woman is fallen into a fit of
Zeal, against the enormous transgressions of the Age; go, go, you do not love
to hear vanity reproved; pray be gone.


Join. Pray stay, Madam, that you may know --


Gripe. Hold, hold, here are five Guinies for thee, pray say nothing. Aside. To
Joyner.

Sister, pray be gone, I say; would you prejudice your own reputation, to
injure mine? Ex. Flippant and Martha.


Join. Would you prejudice your own Soul to wrong my repute, intruly? She seems
to weep.


Gripe. Pray have me in excuse; indeed, I thought, you had a share of the five
hundred pound, because you took away my Seal Ring, which they made me send,
together, with a Note to my Cash-keeper for five hundred pound; besides, I
thought none, but you, knew it was my wonted token to send for money by.


Join. 'Twas unlucky I should forget it, and leave it on the Table; but, oh the
Harlotry! did she make that use of it then? 'twas no wonder you did not stay
till I came back.


Gripe. I stayed till the money released me.


Join. Have they the money then? five hundred pound.


Gripe. Too certain.


Join. They told me not a word of it; and have you no way to retrive it?


Gripe. Not any.


Join. I am glad of it; Aside. is there no Law but against Saints?


Gripe. I will not for five hundred pound, publish my transgression my self;
lest I should be thought to glory in it; though, I must confess, 'twould tempt a
man to conform to public praying and sinning; since it is so chargeable to
pray, and sin in private.


Join. But are you resolved to give off, a loser?


Gripe. How shall I help it?


Join. Nay, I Will see you shall have, what the young jade has; for your money,
i will make 'um use some conscience however; take a man's money for nothing?


Gripe. Thou say honestly indeed; and shall I have my penniworths out of the
little Gentlewoman for all this?


Join. I Will be engaged body for body for her, and you shall take the forfeiture
on me else.


Gripe. No, no, I Will rather take your word, Mrs. Joyner.


Join. Go in and dress your self Smug, and leave the rest to me.


Gripe. No man breathing would give off a loser, as she says.


Exeunt. Enter Sir Simon Addleplot, sitting at a Desk writing as a Clerk, my
Lady Flippant jogging him. Sir Sim. It Is a Lords Mortgage, and therefore
requires the more have; pray do not jog me, Madam.


Flip. Dull Rascal. Aside.


Sir Sim. They cannot stay for money, as other Folks; if you will not let me
make an end on it, I shall loose my expedition fee.


Flip. There are some Clerks would have understood me before this. Aside.


Sir Sim. Nay, pray be quiet, Madam; if you squeeze me so to the wall, I cannot
write.


Flip. It Is much for the honor of the Gentlemen of this Age, that we Persons
of Quality are forced to descend to the importuning of a Clerk, a Butler,
Coachman, or Footman; while the Rogues are as dull of apprehension too, as an
unfledged Country Squire, amongst his Mothers Maids. Aside. Jogs him again.


Sir Sim. Again, Let me tell you, Madam, familiarity breeds contempt; you will
never leave, till you have made me saucy.


Flip. I would I could see that.


Sir Sim. I vow and swear then, get you gone; or i will add a black patch, or
two, to those on your face.

I shall have no time to get Mrs. Martha out, for her. Aside.


Flip. Will you, Sir, will you? Jogs him again.


Sir Sim. I must have a plot for her, she is a coy woman.
Aside. I vow and swear if you pass this Creviss,
I Will kiss you in plain English.

Flip. I would I could see that, do you defy me?


Steps to him. He kisses her. Sir Sim. How Is this? I vow and swear, she kisses
as tamely as Mrs. Ticklish, and with her mouth open too. Aside.


Flip. I thought you would have been ashamed, to have done so to your Masters
own Sister.


Sir Sim. I hope you will be quiet now, Madam?


Flip. Nay, I Will be revenged of you sure.


Sir Sim. If you come again, I shall do more to you then that; I Will pursue my
plot, and try if she be honest. Aside.


Flip. You do more to me then that; nay, if you will do more to me, then that --
She throws down his Ink, and runs out, he follows her.


Enter Joyner. Join. I must visit my young Clyants in the mean time.


Sir Simon returns holding up his hands. Join. What Is the matter, Sir Simon?


Sir Sim. Lord, who would have thought it?


Join. What aile you, Sir Simon?


Sir Sim. I have made such a discovery, Mrs. Joyner.


Join. What is it?


Sir Sim. Such an one, that makes me at once glad, and sorry; I am sorry my
Lady Flippant is naught, but i am glad I know it; thanks still to my disguise.


Join. Fie, fie.


Sir Sim. Nay, this hand can tell --


Join. But how!


Sir Sim. She threw down my Ink glass, and ran away into the next room; I
followed her, and in revenge, threw her down upon the bed; but in short, all
that I could do to her, would not make her squeek.


Join. She was out of breath man, she was out of breath.


Sir Sim. Ah, Mrs Joyner, say no more, say no more of that.


Enter Flippant. Flip. You rude, unmannerly Rascal.


Join. You see she complains now.


Sir Sim. I know why, Mrs. Joyner, I know why. Apart.


Flip. I Will have you turned out of the house, you are not fit for my brothers
service.


Sir Sim. Not for yours, you mean, Madam. Aside.


Flip. I Will go and acquaint my Brother --


Join. Hold, hold, Madam, speak not so loud, it is Sir Simon Addleplot, your
Lover, who has taken this disguise on purpose to be near you; and to watch, and
supplant his Rivals.


Flip. What a beast was I, I could not discover it, you have undone me; why
would you not tell me sooner of it. Aside to Joyner.


Join. I thought he had been discernable enough.


Flip. I protest I knew him not; for I must confess to you, my eyes are none of
the best, since I have used the last new wash of Mercury water; what will he
think of me?


Join. Let me alone with him; come, come, did you think you could disguise your
self from my Ladies knowledge; she knew you man, or else you had never had those
liberties; alas, poor Lady, she cannot resist you.


Flip. It Is my weakness.


Sir Sim. How Is this? but here comes my Master.


Enter Gripe and Martha. Gripe. Come, Mrs. Joyner, are you ready to go?


Join. I am ever ready when your Worship commands.


Flip. Brother, if you go to to'ther end of the Town, you will set me down near
the Playhouse.


Gripe. The Playhouse, do you think I will be seen near the Playhouse?


Flip. You shall set me down in Lincolus-Inn-Fields then, for I have earnest
business there; (When I come home again, I Will laugh at you soundly, Sir Simon.)
Apart.


Sir Sim. Has Joyner betrayed me then? it is time to look to my hits. Aside.


Gripe. Martha, be sure you stay within now; if you go out, you shall never
come into my doors again.


Mart. No, I will not, Sir; I Will never come into your doors again, if once I
should go out.


Gripe. It Is well said. Girl. Ex. Gripe, Joyner, Flip.


Sir Sim. 'Twas prettily said, I understand you, they are dull, and have no
intrigue in 'em; but dear, sweet Mrs. Martha, it is time we were gone, you have
stole away your Scarfs, and Hood from your Maid, I hope.


Mart. Nay, I am ready, but --


Sir Sim. Come, come, Sir Simon Addleplot, poor Gentleman, is an impatient man
to my knowledge.


Mart. Well, my venture is great, I Am sure, for a man I know not; but pray
Jonas do not deceive me; is he so fine a Gentleman, as you say he is?


Sir Sim. Pish, pish, he is the -- Gentleman of the Town faith, and troth.


Mart. But may I take your word Jonas?


Sir Sim. It Is not my word, it is the word of all the Town.


Mart. Excuse me, Jonas, for that; I never heard any speak well of him, but Mr.
Dapperwit, and you.


Sir Sim. That Is because he has been a Rival to all men, and a Gallant to all
Ladies; Rivals, and deserted Mistresses, never speak well of a man.


Mart. Has he been so general in his Amors, his kindness is not to be vallu'd
then?


Sir Sim. The more by you, because it is for you he deserts all the rest, faith
and troth.


Mart. You plead better for him, then he could for himself; I believe, for
indeed they say, he is no better then an Idiot.


Sir Sim. Then believe me, Madam, for no body knows him better then I; he has
as much Wit, Courage, and as good a Mien to the full, as I have; he an Idiot?


Mart. The common Gull, so perspicuous a Fop, the women find him out, for none
of 'em will marry him.


Sir Sim. You may see now, how he and you are abused; for that he is not
Married, is a sign of his Wit; and for being perspicuous, it is false, he is as
mysterious as a new Parliament man, or a young Statesman, newly taken from a
Coffee-house, or Tennis-court.


Mart. But is it a sign of his Wit because he is not Married?


Sir Sim. Yes, yes, your Women of the Town ravish your Fops; there is not one
about the Town unmarryed, that has any thing.


Mart. It may be then he has spent his Estate.


Sir Sim. How unluckily guessed. Aside.
If he had, he has a head, can retrieve it again.

Mart. Besides, they say, he has had the modish distemper.


Sir Sim. He can cure it with the best French Chyrurgion in Town.


Mart. Has his practice, on himself, been so much?


Sir Sim. Come, come.
Fame, like deserted Jilt, does still belie men,
Who doubts her man, must be advised by Hymen.
For he knows best of any, how to try men. Exeunt.

The Scene, The Old Pell Mell. Enter Ranger and Dapperwit. Ran. Now the Lucy's
have renounced us; hey for the Christina's, she cannot use me worse, then your
honorable Mistress did you.


Dap. A Pox, some young Heir, or another, has promised her Marriage; there are
so many Fools in the world, it is impossible for a man of Wit to keep his Wench,
from being a Lady, let me perish.


Ran. But have you no other acquaintance that sticks to her vocation, in spite
of temptations of honor, or filthy lucre; I declare, I make honorable Love,
merely out of necessity; as your Rooks play on the square, rather then not play
at all.


To them Leonore, Lydias woman masked, with a Letter in her hand. Dap. Come,
the Devil will not lose a Gamester; here is ready money for you, push freely.


Rang. You Are as well met, as if by assignation. To her.


Leon. And you are as well met, as if you were the man I looked for.


Rang. Kind Rogue --


Leon. Sweet Sir.


Rang. Come, I am thy Prisoner, (without more words) show but thy warrant. Goes
to pull off her Mask.


Leo. You mistake, Sir, here is my Pass. Gives him the Letter.


Ran. A Letter, and directed to me. Reads.

I cannot put up the injuries, and affronts you did me last night; (a challenge
upon my life, and by such a messenger) therefore conjure you by your Honor, at
eight a Clock precisely, this evening, to send your man to St. James's Gate, to
wait for me with a Chair, to conduct me, to what place you shall think most
fit, for the giving of satisfaction to the injured Christina.


Christina! I am amazed! what is it a Clock Dapperwit?


Dap. It wants not half an hour of eight.


Rang. Go then back, my pretty Herald, To the Maid. and tell my fair Enemy,
the service she designs my man, is only fit for my Friend here; of whose Faith
and Honor, she may be secure of; he shall, immediately, go wait for her at St.
James's Gate; whilst I go to prepare a place for our ran-counter, and my self
to dye at her feet: Ex. Leonore.

Dapperwit, dear Dapperwit.


Dap. What lucky Surprisal's this?


Ran. Prithee ask no questions, till I have more leisure, and less
astonishment; I know, you will not deny to be an instrument in my happiness.


Dap. No, let me perish, I take as much pleasure to bring Lovers together, as
an old Woman, that as a Bankrupt Gamester loves to look on, though he has no
advantage by the play; or as a Bully that fights not himself, yet takes
pleasure to set people together by the ears; or as --


Ran. God's Death, is this a time for similitudes?


Dap. You have made me miscarry of a good thought, now let me perish.


Ran. Go presently to St. James's gate, where you are to expect the coming of a
Lady, ('it is Christina) accompanied by that woman you saw even now; she will
permit you to put her into a Chair, and then conduct her to my lodging, while I
go before to remove some Spies, and prepare it for her reception.


Dap. Your lodging; had you not better carry her to Vincent's, it is hard by,
and there a vizard Mask, has as free egress, and regress, as at the Playhouse.


Ran. Faith, though it be not very prudent, yet she shall come thither in my
vindication; for he would not believe I had seen her last night.


Dap. To have a fine woman, and not tell on it, as you say, Mr. Ranger --


Ran. Go, and bring her to Vincent's lodging, there I Will expect you. Exeunt
severally.


Enter Christina, Isabel, her Woman. Isab. This is the door, Madam, here Mr.
Vincent lodges.


Chris. It Is no matter, we will pass it by, lest the people of our lodging
should watch us; but if he should not be here now.


Isab. Who, Mr. Valentine, Madam? I warrant you, my intelligencer dares not
fail me.


Chris. Did he come last night, said he?


Isab. Last night late.


Chri. And not see me yet; nay, not send to me; it is false, he is not come; I
wish he were not, I know not which I should take more unkindly from him,
exposing his life to his revengeful Enemies; or being almost four and twenty
hours so near me, and not let me know it.


Isab. A Lovers dangers, are the only secrets kept from his Mistress; he came
not to you, because he would not purchase his happiness with your fear and
apprehensions.


Chris. Nay, he is come, I see, since you are come about again of his side.


Isab. Will you go in, Madam, and disprove me if you can; it is better then
standing in the street.


Chris. We Will go a little farther first, and return. Exeunt.


Vincent 's Lodging. Enter Vincent and Valentine. Vin. I told you I had sent my
man, to Christina's, this morning, to enquire of her Maid, (who seldom denies
him a secret) if her Lady had been at the Park last night; which she
peremptorily answered to the contrary, and assured him, she had not stirred out
since your departure.


Val. Will not Chamber-maids lie, Vincent?


Vin. Will not Ranger lie, Valentine?


Val. The circumstances of his story proved it true.


Vin. Do you think so old a Master in the faculty, as he, will want the varnish
of probability for his lies?


Val. Do you think a Woman, having the advantage of her Sex, and Education,
under such a Mistress, will want impudence to dis-avow a truth, that might be
prejudicial to that Mistress?


Vin. But if both testimonies are fallible; why will you needs believe his? we
are apter to believe the things we would have, then those we would not.


Val. My ill luck has taught me to credit my misfortunes, and doubt my
happiness.


Vin. But Fortune we know inconstant.


Val. And all of her Sex.


Vin. Will you judge of Fortune by your experience, and not do your Mistress
the same justice? go see her, and satisfy your self and her; for if she be
innocent, consider how culpable you are, not only in your censures of her, but
in not seeing her since your coming.


Val. If she be innocent, I should be afraid to surprise her, for her sake; if
false, I should be afraid to surprise her, for my own.


Vin. To be jealous, and not inquisitive, is as hard as to love extremely, and
not be something jealous.


Val. Inquisitiveness as seldom cures jealousy, as drinking in a Fever
quenches the thirst.


Vin. If she were at the Park last night, it is probable she will not miss this; go
watch her house, see who goes out, who in; while I in the mean time search out
Ranger; who, I Will pawn my life, upon more discourse, shall avow his mistake;
here he is, go in, how luckily is he come?


Enter Ranger. Valentine retires to the door behind, over hearing them. Vin.
Ranger, you have prevented me; I was going to look you out, between the Scenes
at the Play Houses, the Coffee-house, Tennis-Court, or Giffords.


Ran. Do you want a pretense to go to a Bawdy House? but I have other visits to
make.


Vin. I forget, I should rather have sought you in Christina's lodgings, ha,
ha, ha.


Ran. Well, well, I am just come to tell you that Christina --


Vin. Proves not by daylight, the kind Lady you followed last night out of the
Park.


Ran. I have better news for you, to my thinking.


Vin. What is it?


Ran. Not that I have been in Christina's lodging this morning; but that she will
be presently here in your lodging with me.


Val. How! behind.


Vin. You see now, his report was a jest, a mere jest: Drawing back to the
door, where Valentine stood, and speaking softly to him. well, must my lodging
be your Vaulting School still; thou have appointed a Wench to come hither, I
find. To Ran.


Ran. A Wench; you seemed to have more reverence for Christina last night.


Vin. Now you talk of Christina, prithee tell me what was the meaning of thy
last nights Romance of Christina.


Ran. You shall know the meaning of all, when Christina comes; she will be here
presently.


Vin. Who will, Christina?


Ran. Yes, Christina.


Vin. Ha, ha, ha.


Ran. Incredulous envy; thou art as envious, as an impotent Letcher at a
Wedding.


Vin. Thou art either mad, or as vain as a Frenchman, newly returned home from
a Campagn, or obliging England.


Ran. Thou art as envious as a Rival; but if thou art mine, there is that will
make you desist; Gives him the Letter. and if you are not my Rival; intrusting
you with such a secret, will, I know, oblige you to keep it, and assist me
against all other interests.


Vin. Do you think I take your secret as an obligation? don't, I know, Lovers,
Travelers, and Poets, will give money to be heard; but what is the Paper? a
Lampoon upon Christina, hatched last night betwixt Squire Dapperwit and you,
because her maid used you scurvily.


Ran. No, it is only a Letter from her, to show, my company was not so
disgustful to her last night, but that she desires it again to day.


Val. A Letter from her. Behind.


Vin. A Letter from Christina; Reads.
Ha, ha, ha.

Ran. Nay, it is pleasant.


Vin. You mistake, I laugh at you not the Letter.


Ran. I am like the winning Gamester, so pleased with my luck, I will not
quarrel with any, who calls me a Fool for it.


Vin. Is this the style of a woman of honor?


Ran. It may be, for ought you know; I Am sure, it is well if your female
correspondents can read.


Vin. I must confess, I have none of the little Letters, half name, or title,
like your Spanish Epistles Dedicatory; but that a man so frequent in honorable
Intrigues, as you are, should not know the summons of an impudent common woman,
from that of a person of honor.


Ran. Christina is so much a Person of Honor, she will own what she has writ,
when she comes.


Vin. But will she come hither indeed?


Ran. Immediately, you will excuse my liberty with you; I could not conceal such a
happiness, from such a friend as you, lest you should have taken it unkindly.


Vin. Faith, you have obliged me indeed; for you, and others would often have
made me believe your honorable Intrigues, but never did me the honor to
convince me of 'em before.


Ran. You are merry, I find, yet.


Vin. When you are happy, I cannot be otherwise.


Ran. But I lose time, I should lay a little Person in Aside. ambush, that
lives hard by, in case Christina should be impatient to be revenged of her
Friends, as it often happens with a discontented Heiress; Women like old
Soldiers, more nimbly execute, then they resolve. Going out.


Vin. What now, you will not dis-appoint a woman of Christina's quality?


Ran. I Will be here before she comes, I warrant you. Ex. Ran.


Vin. I do believe you truly: what think you Valentine?


Val. I think, since she has the courage to challenge him; she will have the
honor of being first in the Field.


Vin. Fie, your opinion of her must be as bad, as Rangers of himself is good,
to think she would write to him; I long till his bona-roba comes, that you may
be both dis-abus'd.


Val. And I have not patience to stay her coming, lest you should be dis-abus'd.


Enter Christina and Isabel. Vin. Here she is in faith; I Am glad she is come.


Val. And I Am sorry; but I will to my post again, lest she should say she came
to me.


Vin. By heavens, Christina her self, it is she! Aside.


Christina pulls off her Mask. Val. It Is she; cursed be these eyes, more
cursed, then when they first betrayed me, to that false bewitching face. Behind.


Chris. You may wonder, Sir, to see me here --


Vin. I must confess I do.


Chris. But the confidence your Friend has in you, is the cause of mine; and
yet some blushes it does cost me, to come to seek a man.


Val. Modest creature. Behind.


Vin. How am I deceived! Aside.


Chris. Where is he, Sir, why does he not appear to keep me in countenance?
pray call him, Sir, it is something hard if he should know I Am here.


Vin. I hardly can, my self, believe you are here, Madam.


Chris. If my visit be troublesome, or unseasonable, it is your Friends fault, I
designed it not to you, Sir; pray call him out, that he may excuse it, and take
it on himself, together with my shame.


Vin. How impatient she is! Aside.


Chris. Or do you delay the happiness I ask, to make it more welcome? I have
stayed too long for it already, and cannot more desire it; dear Sir, call him
out, where is he? above, or here within? I Will snatch the favor which you will
not give: Goes to the door, and discovers Valentine. What do you hide your self
for shame?


Val. I must confess I do.


Chris. To see me come hither --


Val. I acknowledge it. Val. offers to go out.


Chris. Before you came to me; but whither do you go? come I can forgive you.


Val. But I cannot forgive you.


Chris. Whither do you go? you need not forge a quarrel, to prevent mine to
you; nor need you try if I would follow you; you know I will, I have you see.


Val. That impudence should look so like innocence. Aside.


Chris. Whither would you go? why would you go?


Val. To call your servant to you.


Chris. She is here, what would you with her?


Val. I mean your Lover, the man you came to meet.


Chris. Oh heavens! what Lover? what Man? I came to seek no man but you, whom I
had too long lost.


Val. You could not know that I was here.


Chris. Ask her, 'twas she that told me. Points to Isabel.


Val. How could she know?


Chris. That you shall know hereafter.


Val. No, you thought me too far out of the way, to disturb your assignation;
and I assure you, Madam, 'twas my ill fortune, not my design; and that it may
appear so, I do withdraw, (as in all good breeding, and civility, I am obliged)
for sure your wished for Lover's coming.


Chris. What do you mean? are you a weary of that title?


Val. I am ashamed of it, since it grows common. Going out.


Chris. Nay, you will not, shall not go.


Val. My stay might give him jealousy, and so do you injury, and him the
greatest in the world; Heavens forbid! I would not make a man jealous; for
though you call a thousand vows, and oaths, and tears, to witness, (as you
safely may) that you have not the least of love for me; yet if he ever knew,
how I have loved you, sure he would not, could not believe you.


Chris. I do confess, your Riddle is too hard for me to solve; therefore you
are obliged to do it your self.


Val. I wish it were capable of any other interpretation, than what you know
already.


Chris. Is this that generous good Valentine, who has disguised him so. She
weeps.


Vin. Nay, I must withold you then: Stops Val. going out. methinks she should
be innocent; her tongue, and eyes, together, with that flood that swells 'em,
do vindicate her heart.


Val. They show but their long practice of desimulation.


Going out. Vin. Come back; I hear Ranger coming up; stay but till he comes.


Val. Do you think I have the patience of an Alderman?


Vin. You may go out this way, when you will, by the backstairs; but stay a
little, till -- Oh, here he comes.


Ranger enters. Val. My revenge will now detain me. Valen. retires again.


Upon Rangers entrance, Christina puts on her Mask. Ran. What, come already?
where is Dapperwit? Aside.

The blessing's double that comes quickly; I did not yet expect you here,
otherwise I had not done my self the injury to be absent; but I hope, Madam, I
have not made you stay long for me.


Chris. I have not staid at all for you.


Ran. I am glad of it, Madam.


Chris. Is not this that troublesome stranger, who To Isabel. last night
followed the Lady into my lodgings? it is he. Aside.


Removing from him to the other side. Ran. Why does she remove so disdainfully
from me? Aside.
I find you take it ill, I was not at your coming here, Madam.

Chris. Indeed I do not, you are mistaken, Sir.


Rang. Confirm me by a smile then, Madam; remove that Cloud, which makes me
apprehend Goes to take off her Mask. foul weather: Mr. Vincent, pray retire;
it is you keep on the Ladies Mask, and no displeasure, which she has for me;
yet, Madam, you need not distrust his honor, or his faith; but do not keep the
Lady under constraint; pray leave us a little Master Vincent.


Chris. You must not leave us, Sir; would you leave me with a stranger?


Val. How Is that! Behind.


Ran. I Have done amiss, I find, to bring her hither, Aside. Madam, I understand
you -- Apart to Christina.


Chris. Sir, I do not understand you.


Ran. You would not be known to Mr. Vincent.


Chris It Is your acquaintance I would avoid.


Ran. Dull Brute, that I was, to bring her hither: Aside. I have found my
error, Madam; give me but a new appointment, where I may meet you by and by,
and straight I will withdraw, as if I knew you not. Softly to her.


Chris. Why, do you know me?


Ran. I must not own it. Aside.
No Madam, but -- Offers to whisper.

Chris. Whispering, Sir, argues an old acquaintance; but I have not the vanity
to be thought of yours, and resolve you shall never have the disparagement of
mine: Mr. Vincent, pray let us go in here.


Ran. How Is this! I am undone I see; but if I let her go thus, I shall be an
eternal laughing stock to Vincent.


Vin. Do you not know him, Madam? I thought you had come hither on purpose to
meet him.


Chris. To meet him.


Vin. By your own appointment.


Chris. What strange infatuation does delude you all? you know, he said, he did
not know me.


Vin. You writ to him, he has your Letter.


Chris. Then you know my name sure? yet you confessed but now, you knew me not.


Ran. I must confess, your anger has disguised you, more then your Mask; for I
thought to have met a kinder Christina here.


Chris. Heavens! how could he know me in this place? he watched me hither sure;
or is there any other of my name, that you may no longer mistake me, for your
Christina? I Will pull of that which sooths your error. Pulls off her Mask.


Ran. Take but the other vizard off too; I mean your anger, and i will swear you
are the same, and only Christina, which I wished, and thought to meet here.


Chris. How could you think to meet me here?


Ran. By virtue of this your Commission, Gives her the Letter. which now, I
see, was meant a real challenge; for you look, as if you would fight with me.


Chris. The Paper is a stranger to me, I never writ it; you are abused.


Vin. Christina is a Person of Honor, and will own what she has written,
Ranger.


Ran. So, the Comedy begins; I shall be laughed at sufficiently, if I do not
justify my self; I must set my impudence to hers, she is resolved to deny all
I see, and I have lost all hope of Aside. her.


Vin. Come, faith Ranger --


Ran. You will deny too, Madam, that I followed you last night from the Park,
to your lodging, where I stayed with you till morning; you never saw me before
I warrant?


Chris. That you rudely intruded, last night, into my lodging, I cannot deny;
but I wonder you have the confidence to brag of it; sure you will not of your
reception?


Ran. I never was so ill-bred, as to brag of my reception in a Ladies Chamber;
not a word of that, Madam.


Val. How! if he lies, I revenge her; if it be true, I revenge my self.


Valentine draws his Sword, which Vincent seeing, thrusts him back, and shuts
the door upon him before he was discovered by Ranger. Enter Lydia and her
Woman, stopping at the door. Lyd. What do I see! Christina with him! a
Counter-plot to mine, to make me, and it, ridiculous; it is true, I find they
have been long acquainted, and I long abused; but since she intends a triumph,
in spite, as well as shame (not emulation) I retire; she deserves no envy, who
will be shortly in my condition; his natural inconstancy, will prove my best
revenge on her -- on both. Exeunt Lydia with her Woman.


Dapperwit to them. Dap. Christina's going away again; what is the matter?


Ran. What do you mean?


Dap. I scarce had paid the Chair-men, and was coming up after her, but I met
her on the stairs, in as much haste, as if she had been frightn'd.


Ran. Who do you talk of?


Dap. Christina, whom I took up in a Chair, just now at Saint Jamses's Gate.


Ran. Thou art mad, here she is, this is Christina.


Dap. I must confess, I did not see her face; but I am sure the Lady is gone,
that I brought just now.


Ran. I tell you, again, this is she; did you bring two?


Chris. I came in no Chair, had no guide, but my woman there.


Vin. When did you bring your Lady, Dapperwit?


Dap. Even now, just now.


Vin. This Lady has been here half an hour.


Ran. He knows not what he says, he is mad, you are all so, I am so too.


Vin. It Is the best excuse you can make for your self, and by owning your
mistake, you will show you are come to your self; I my self saw your woman at the
door, who but looked in, and then immediately went down again, as your friend
Dapperwit too affirms.


Chris. You had best follow her, that looked for you; and i will go seek out him,
I came to see; Mr. Vincent, pray let me in here.


Ran. It Is very fine, wondrous fine!


Christina goes out a little, and returns. Chris. Oh he is gone! Mr. Vincent,
follow him; he were yet more severe to me, in indangering his life, then in his
censures of me; you know the power of his Enemies is great, as their malice;
just Heaven preserve him from them, and me from this ill, or unlucky man. Ex.
Christina, her Woman, and Vincent.


Ran. It Is well -- nay, certainly, I shall never be master of my Senses more;
but why do thou help to distract me too?


Dap. My astonishment was as great as yours, to see her go away again; I would
have stayed her if I could.


Ran. Yet, again, talking of a woman you met going out, when I talk of
Christina.


Dap. I talk of Christina too.


Ran. She went out just now; the woman you found me with, was she.


Dap. That was not the Christina I brought just now.


Ran. You brought her, almost, half an hour ago; god's death, will you give me the
lie?


Dap. A Lady disappointed by her Gallant, the night before her journey, could
not be more touchy with her Maid, or Husband, then you are with me now, after
your dis-appointment; but if you thank me so, i will go serve my self hereafter;
for ought I know, I have dis-appointed Mrs. Martha for you, and may lose thirty
thousand pound by the bargain: farewell, a raving Lover is fit for solitude. Ex.
Dap.


Ran. Lydia, triumph, I now am thine again; of Intrigues, honorable or
dishonorable, and all sorts of rambling, I take my leave; when we are giddy,
it is time to stand still: why should we be so fond of the bypath of Love?
where we are still way-lay'd, with Surprises, Trapans, Dangers, and Murdering
dis-appointments:

Just as at Blind-mans Buff, we run at all,
Whilst those that lead us, laugh to see us fall;
And when we think, we hold the Lady fast,
We find it but her Scarf, or Veil, at last. Exeunt.

ACT. V.
SCENE. I. St. James's Park.
Enter Sir Simon Addleplot, leading Mrs. Martha, Dapperwit. Sir Sim. AT length,
you see, I have freed the Captive Lady, for her longing Knight. Mr. Dapperwit,
who brings off a Plot cleverly now.


Dap. I wish our Poets were half so good at it; Mrs. Martha, a thousand welcoms
--


Dapperwit Kisses and Embraces Mrs. Martha. Sir Sim. Hold, hold, Sir; your joy
is a little too familiar, (faith and troth.)


Dap. Will you not let me salute Mrs. Martha?


Mart. What Jonas, do you think I do not know good breeding? must I be taught
by you?


Sir Sim. I would have kept the Maidenhead of your lips, for your sweet
Knight, Mrs. Martha, that is all; I dare swear, you never kissed any man before,
but your Father.


Mart. My sweet Knight, if he will be a Knight of mine, must be contented with
what he finds, as well as other Knights.


Sir Sim, So smart already, faith and troth!


Mart. Dear, Mr. Dapperwit, I am overjoyed to see you; but I thank honest
Jonas for it.


Sir Sim. How she hugs him! Aside.


Mart. Poor, Mr. Dapperwit, I thought I should never have seen you again; but I
thank honest Jonas there --


She hugs Dapperwit. Sir Sim. Do not thank me, Mrs. Martha, any more then I
thank you.


Mart. I would not be ungrateful, Jonas.


Sir Sim. Then reserve your kindness, only, for your Worthy Noble, Brave,
Heroic Knight; who loves you only, and only deserves your kindness.


Mart. I will show my kindness to my Worthy, Brave, Heroic Knight, in being
kind to his Friend, his dear Friend, who helped him to me. Hugs Dap. again.


Sir Sim. But, Mistress Martha, he is not to help him always; though he helps
him to be married, he is not to help him when he is married.


Mart. What, Mr. Dapperwit, will you love my worthy Knight, less after
marriage, then before? that were against the custom; for marriage gets a man
friends, instead of losing those he has.


Dap. I will ever be his Servant, and yours; Dear, Madam, do not doubt me.


Mart. I do not, sweet, dear, Mr. Dapperwit; but I should not have seen you
these two days, if it had not been for honest Jonas, there -- She Kisses Dap.


Sir Sim. For shame, though she be young and foolish, do not you wrong me to my
face. Apart to Dap.


Dap. Would you have me so ill bred, as to repulse her innocent kindness; what
a thing it is to want Wit! Aside.


Sir Sim. A Pox, I must make haste to discover my self, or I shall discover,
what I would not discover; but if I should discover my self in this habit,
'twou'd not be to my advantage; but i will go, put on my own clothes, and look
like a Knight: Aside. Well, Mrs. Martha, i will go seek out your Knight; are you
not impatient to see him? To her.


Mart. Wives must be obedient, let him take his own time.


Sir Sim. Can you trust your self, a turn or two, with Master Dapperwit?


Mart. Yes, yes, Jonas, as long as you will.


Sir Sim. But I would not trust you with him, if I could help it; Aside.

So married Wight, sees what he dares not blame;
And cannot budge for fear, nor stay for shame. Ex. S. Sim.

Dap. I am glad he is gone, that I may laugh; it is such a miracle of Fops, that
his conversation should be pleasant to me, even when it hindered me of yours.


Mart. Indeed, i am glad he is gone too, as pleasant as he is.


Dap. I know why, I know why, sweet Mrs. Martha; I warrant you, you had rather
have the Parsons company, then his? now you are out of your Fathers house, it is
time to leave being a Hypocrite.


Mart. Well, for the jests sake, to dis-appoint my Knight, I would not care if
I dis-appointed my self of a Ladyship.


Dap. Come, I will not keep you on the Tenters, I know you have a mind to make
sure of me; I have a little Chaplain, I wish he were a Bishop, or one of the
Friars, to perfect our revenge upon that Zealous Jew, your Father.


Mart. Do not speak ill of my Father, he has been your friend, i am sure.


Dap. My Friend --


Mar^ His hard usage of me, conspired with your good Mien, and Wit, and to
avoid slavery under him, I stoop to your yoke.


Dap. I will be obliged to your Father, for nothing but a portion, nor to you
for your love; 'twas due to my merit.


Mart. You show your self Sir Simons original, if 'twere not for that vanity --


Dap. I should be no wit, it is the badge of my calling; for you can no more
find a man of wit without vanity, then a fine woman without affectation: But
let us go, before the Knight comes again.


Mart. Let us go before my Father comes, he soon will have the intelligence.


Dap. Stay, let me think a little. Pauses.


Mart. What are you thinking of? you should have thought before this time, or,
I should have thought rather.


Dap. Peace, peace.


Mart. What are you thinking of?


Dap. I am thinking, what a Wit without vanity is like; he is like --


Mart. You do not think we are in a public place, and may be surpised, and
prevented by my Fathers Scouts.


Dap. What, would you have me lose my thought?


Mart. You would rather lose your Mistress, it seems.


Dap. He is like -- I think i am a Sot to night, let me perish.


Mart. Nay, if you are so in love with your thought.


Offers to go. Dap. Are you so impatient to be my Wife? he is like -- he is
like -- a Picture without shadows, or, or -- a Face without Patches -- or a
Diamond without a Foyl; these are new thoughts now, these are new.


Mart. You are wedded already to your thoughts, I see, good night.


Dap. Madam, do not take it ill;
For loss of happy thought, there is no amends.
For his new jest, true Wit will lose old Friends.
That Is new again, the thought's new. Exeunt.

Enter Gripe, leading Mrs. Lucy, Joyner, Crossbite following. Gripe. Mrs.
Joyner, I can conform to this mode of public walking by Moonlight, because
one is not known.


Lucy. Why, are you ashamed of your company?


Gripe. No, Pretty one; because in the dark, or as it were the dark, there is
no envy, nor scandal; I would neither lose you, nor my reputation.


Join. Your reputation; indeed, your Worship, it is well known, there are as
grave men, as your Worship; nay, men in office too, that adjourn their cares,
and businesses, to come and unbend themselves at night here, with a little
vizard mask.


Gripe. I do believe it, I do believe it, Mrs. Joyner.


Lucy. I God-mother, and carries, and treats her at Mulberry Garden.


Cross, Nay, does not only treat her, but gives her his whole gleanings of that
day.


Gripe. They may, they may Mrs. Crossbite, they take above six in the hundred.


Cross. Nay, there are those of so much worth, and honor, and love, that they will
take it from their Wives and Children, to give it to their Misses; now your
Worship has no Wife, and but one Child.


Gripe. Still for my Edification. Aside.


Join. That Is true indeed, for I know a great Lady, that cannot follow her
Husband abroad to his Haunts, because her Farrendine is so ragged and greasy;
whilst his Mistress is as fine as sippence, in her embroidered Satens.


Gripe. Politickly done of him indeed; if the truth were known, he is a
Statesman by that, umph --


Cross. Truly, your women of quality, are very troublesome to their Husbands; I
have heard 'em complain, they will allow them no separate maintenance, though
the honorable Jilts, themselves, will not marry without it.


Join. Come, come, Mistress, sometimes it is the craft of those Gentlemen, to
complain of their Wives expenses, to excuse their own narrowness to their
Misses; but your Daughter has a Gallant can make no excuse.


Gripe. So Mrs. Joyner -- my friend Mrs. Joyner --


Cross. I hope, indeed, he will give my Daughter no cause to dun him; for, poor
wretch, she is as modest as her Mother.


Gripe. I profess, I believe it.


Lucy. But, I have the boldness to ask him for a Treat; come Gallant, we must
walk toward the Mulberry Gard'n.


Gripe. So -- I am afraid, little Mistress, the rooms are all taken up by this
time.


Join. Will you shame your self again? Aside to Gripe.


Lucy. If the rooms be full, we will have an arbor.


Gripe. At this time of night; besides, the Waiters will never come near you.


Lucy. They will be observant of good Customers, as we shall be; come along.


Gripe. Indeed, and verily, little Mistress, I would go, but that I should be
forsworn, if I did.


Join. That Is so pitiful an excuse --


Gripe. In truth, I have forsworn the place, ever since I was pawned there for
a reckoning.


Lucy. You have broken many an Oath for the good old cause, and will you boggle
at one for your poor, little Miss? come along.


Lady Flippant behind. Flip. Unfortunate Lady, that I am! I have left the Herd
on purpose to be chased, and have wandered this hour here; but the Park affords
not so much as a Satyr for me, (and that is strange) no Burgundy man, or drunken
Scourer will reel my way; the Rag-women, and Synder-women, have better luck
then I -- but who are these? if this mungril light does not deceive me, it is my
brother, it is he, there is Joyner too, and two other women; I Will follow 'em; it
must be he, for this world has nothing like him; I know not what the Devil may
be in the other. Ex. Omnes.


Enter Sir Simon Addleplot in fine clothes, Dapperwit, and Mrs. Martha, unseen
by him at the door. Sir Sim. Well, after all my seeking, I can find those I
would not find; i am sure 'twas old Gripe, and Joyner with him, and the Widow
followed; he would not have been here, but to have sought his Daughter, sure;
but vigilant Dapperwit has spied him too, and has, no doubt, secured her from
him.


Dap. And you. Behind.


Sir Sim. The Rogue is as good at hiding, as I am at stealing a Mistress; it is
a vain conceited fellow, yet I think, it is an honest fellow: but again, he is a
damnable Whoring fellow; and what opportunity this air, and darkness may
incline 'em to, Heaven knows; for I have heard the Rogue say himself, a Lady
will no more show her modesty in the dark, then a Spaniard his courage.


Dap. Ha, ha, ha --


Sir Sim. Nay, if you are there my true Friend, i will forgive your harkning, if
you will forgive my censures? I speak to you, dear, Madam Martha; dear, dear --
Behold your worthy Knight.


Mar. That Is far from neighbors.


Sir Sim. I's come to reap the fruit of all his labors.


Mart. I cannot see the Knight; well, but i am sure I hear Jonas.


Sir Sim. I am no Jonas, Mrs. Martha.


Mart. The night is not so dark, nor the Perruque so big, but I can discern
Jonas.


Sir Sim. Faith and troth, I am the very Sir Simon Addleplot, that is to marry
you; the same, Dapperwit solicited you for; ask him else, my name is not Jonas.


Mart. You think my youth, and simplicity, capable of this cheat; but let me
tell you, Jonas, it is not your borrowed clothes, and title, shall make me marry
my Fathers man.


Sir Sim. Borrowed title; i will be sworn I bought it of my Landress, who was a
Court Landress; but, indeed, my clothes I have not paid for, therefore in that
sense they are borrowed.


Mart. Prithee, Jonas, let the jest end, or I shall be presently in earnest.


Sir Sim. Pray be in earnest, and let us go; the Parson, and Supper, stay for
us, and I am a Knight in earnest.


Mart. You a Knight, insolent, saucy Fool?


Sir Sim. The Devil take me, Mrs. Martha, if I am not a Knight now; a Knight
Baronet too: a man ought, I see, to carry his Patent in his Pocket, when he
goes to be married, it is more necessary then a License; I am a Knight indeed,
and, indeed now, Mrs. Martha.


Mart. Indeed, and indeed, the trick will not pass, Jonas.


Sir Sim. Poor wretch, she is afraid, she shall not be a Lady: come, come,
discover the Intrigue, Dapperwit --


Mart. You need not discover the Intrigue, it is apparent already; unworthy Mr.
Dapperwit, after my confidence reposed in you; could you be so little generous,
as to betray me to my Fathers man? but i will be even with you.


Sir Sim. Do not accuse him, poor man, before you hear him; tell her the
intrique man.


Dap. A Pox, she will not believe us.


Sir Sim. Will you not excuse your self? but I must not let it rest so; know
then Mrs. Martha --


Mart. Come, I forgive thee before thy confession, Jonas; you never had had the
confidence to have designed this cheat upon me, but from Mr. Dapperwits
encouragement, 'twas his Plot.


Sir Sim. Nay, do not do me that wrong, Madam.


Mart. But since he has trapan'd me out of my Fathers house, he is like to keep
me as long as I live; and so good night, Jonas.


Sir Sim. Hold, hold, what d'y' mean both? prithee tell her I am Sir Simon, and
no Jonas.


Dap. A Pox, she will not believe us, I tell you.


Sir Sim. I have provided a Parson, and Supper, at Mulberry Gard'n, and invited
all my Friends I could meet in the Park.


Dap. Nay, rather then they shall be dis-appointed, there shall be a Bride and
Bridegroom, to entertain 'em; Mrs. Martha, and i will go thither presently.


Sir Sim. Why, shall she be your Bride?


Dap. You see she will have it so.


Sir Sim. Will you make Dapperwit your Husband?


Mart. Rather then my Fathers man.


Sir Sim. Oh the Devil --


Mart. Nay, come along Jonas, you shall make one at the Wedding, since you
helped contrive it.


Sir Sim. Will you cheat your self, for fear of being cheared?


Mart. I am desperate now.


Sir Sim. Will thou let her do so ill a thing, Dapperwit, as to marry thee?
open her eyes, prithee, and tell her I am a true Knight.


Dap. 'Twou'd be in vain, by my life, you have carried your self so like a
natural Clerk -- and so adieu good Jonas.


Ex. Martha, and Dapperwit. Sir Sim. What, ruined by my own Plot, like an old
Cavalier: yet like him too, I will plot on still, a plot of prevention, so I
have it -- her Father was here even now, i am sure; well -- i will go tell her
Father of her, that I will;

And punish so her folly, and his treachery,
Revenge is sweet, and makes amends for leachery. Ex.

Enter Lydia, and her Woman Leonore. Lyd. I wish, I had not come hither to
night, Leonore.


Leon. Why did you, Madam? if the place be so dis-agreeable to you.


Lyd. We cannot help visiting the place often, where we have lost any thing we
value; I lost Ranger here last night.


Leon. You thought you had lost him before, a great while ago; and therefore
you ought to be the less troubled.


Lyd. But 'twas here, I missed him first, i am sure.


Leon. Come, Madam, let not the loss vex you, he is not worth the looking after.


Lyd. It cannot but vex me yet, if I lost him by my own fault.


Leon. You had but too much care to keep him.


Lyd. It often happens, indeed, that too much care, is as bad as negligence;
but I had rather be robbed, then lose what I have carelessly.


Leon. But, I believe, you would hang the Thief, if you could.


Lyd. Not if I could have my own again.


Leon. I see, you would be too merciful.


Lyd. I wish I were tried.


Leon. But, Madam, if you please, we will wave the discourse; for people seldom
(I suppose) talk with pleasure, of their real losses.


Lyd. It Is better then to ruminate in them; mine, i am sure, will not out of my
head, nor heart.


Leon. Grief is so far from retrieving a loss, that it makes it greater; but
the way to lesson it, is, by a comparison with others losses; here are Ladies,
in the Park, of your acquaintance, I doubt not, can compare with you; pray,
Madam, let us walk and find 'em out.


Lyd. It Is the resentment, you say, makes the loss great, or little; and then
i am sure, there is none like mine; however go on. Exeunt.


Enter Vincent and Valentine. Vin. I am glad I have found you, for now I am
prepared to lead you out of the dark, and all your trouble; I have good news.


Val. You are as unmerciful, as the Physician, who with new Arts, keeps his
miserable Patient alive, and in hopes, when he knows the disease is incurable.


Vin. And you, like the melancholy Patient, mistrust, and hate your Physician,
because he will not comply with your despair: but i will cure your jealousy now.


Val. You know, all Diseases grow worse by relapses.


Vin. Trust me once more.


Val. Well, you may try your experiments upon me.


Vin. Just as I shut the door upon you, the woman, Ranger, expected, came up
stairs; but finding another woman in discourse with him, went down again, I
suppose, as jealous of him, as you of Christina.


Val. How does it appear she came to Ranger?


Vin. Thus, Dapperwit came up after, who had brought her, just then, in a Chair
from St. Jamses's, by Rangers appointment; and it is certain your Christina
came to you.


Val. How can that be? for she knew not I was in the Kingdom.


Vin. My man confesses, when I sent him to enquire of her woman, about her
Lady's being here in the Park last night; he told her you were come, and she,
it seems, told her Mistress.


Val. That might be -- Aside. But did not Christina confess, Ranger was in her
lodging last night?


Vin. By intrusion, which she had more particularly informed me of, if her
apprehensions of your danger had not posted me after you; she not having yet
(as I suppose) heard of Clerimonts recovery: I left her, poor creature, at
home, distracted with a thousand fears for your life and love.


Val. Her love, i am sure, has cost me more fears, then my life; yet that little
danger is not past, (as you think) till the great one be over.


Vin. Open but your eyes, and the Fantastic Goblin's vanished, and all your
idle fears, will turn to shame; for Jealousy, is the basest cowardice.


Val. I had rather, indeed, blush for my self, then her.


Vin. I Am sure you will have more reason --
But is not that Ranger there?

Ranger enters, followed by Christina and her Woman, after them, Lydia and her
Woman. Val. I think it is.


Vin. I suppose, his friend Dapperwit is not far off; I will examine them both
before you, and not leave you so much, as the shadow of a doubt; Rangers
astonishment at my lodging, confessed his mistake.


Val. His astonishment might proceed from Christina's unexpected strangeness to
him.


Vin. He shall satisfy you now himself to the contrary, I warrant you, have
but patience.


Val. I had rather, indeed, he should satisfy my doubts, then my revenge;
therefore I can have patience.


Vin. But what women are those that follow him?


Val. Stay a little --


Ran. Lydia, Lydia -- poor Lydia.


Lyd. If she be my Rival, it is some comfort yet, To her Maid. to see her follow
him, rather then he her.


Leon. But if you follow them a little longer, for your comfort, you shall see
them go hand in hand.


Chris. Sir, Sir -- To Ranger.


Leon. She calls to him already.


Lyd. But he does not hear, you see; let us go a little nearer.


Vin. Sure it is Ranger?


Val. As sure as the woman that follows him closest, is Christina.


Vin. For shame, talk not of Christina; I left her just now at home, surrounded
with so many fears and griefs, she could not stir.


Val. She is come, it may be, to divert them here in the Park; I Am sure it is
she.


Vin. When the Moon, at this instant, scarce affords light enough to
distinguish a man from a tree, how can you know her?


Val. How can you know Ranger, then?


Vin. I heard him speak.


Val. So you may her too; i will secure you, if you will draw but a little
nearer: she came, doubtless, to no other end but to speak with him; observe --


Chris. Sir, I have followed you hitherto; To Ranger. but now, I must desire
you to follow me out of the company, for I would not be overheard, nor
disturbed.


Ran. Ha! is not this Christina's voice? it is I am sure, I cannot be deceived
now -- dear Madam --


Vin. It is she indeed. Apart to Val.


Val. Is it so?


Chris. Come, Sir -- To Ranger.


Val. Nay, I Will follow you too, though not invited, Aside.


Lyd. I must not, cannot stay behind. Aside. Exeunt.


They all go off together in a huddle, hastily; Christina, her Woman, and
Valentine, return on the other side. Chris. Come along, Sir.


Val. So I must stick to her when all is done; her new servant has lost her in
the crowd, she has gone too fast for him; so much my revenge is swifter then
his love: now shall I not only have the deserted Lovers revenge, of
dis-appointing her of her new man; but an opportunity infallibly at once, to
discover her falseness, and confront her impudence. Aside.


Chris. Pray come along, Sir, I am in haste.


Val. So eager, indeed -- I wish that Cloud may yet withold the Moon, that
this false Woman, may not discover me, before I do her. Aside.


Chris. Here no one can hear us, and i am sure we cannot see one another.


Val. God's Death, what have I giddily run my self upon?
It Is rather a trial of my self then her;
I cannot undergo it. Aside.

Chris. Come nearer, Sir.


Val. Hell and vengeance, I cannot suffer it, I cannot. Aside.


Chris. Come, come; yet nearer, pray come nearer.


Val. It is impossible, I cannot hold; I must discover my self, rather then her
infamy.


Chris. You are conscious, it seems, of the wrong you have done me, and are
ashamed, though in the dark.


Speaks, walking slowly. Val. How Is this! Aside.


Chris. I Am glad to find it so; for all my business with you, is to show you
your late mistakes, and force a confession from you, of those unmannerly
injuries you have done me.


Val. What! I think she is honest; or does she know me? sure she cannot. Aside.


Chris. First, your intrusion, last night, into my lodging, which I suppose,
has begot your other gross mistakes.


Val. No, she takes me for Ranger, I see again. Aside.


Chris. You are to know then, (since needs you must) it was not me you followed
last night to my lodging, from the Park, but some Kinswoman of yours, it seems;
whose fear of being discovered by you, prevailed with me to personate her,
while she withdrew, our Habits and our Statures being much alike; which I did
with as much difficulty, as she used importunity to make me; and all this, my
Lady Flippant can witness, who was then with your Cousin.


Val. I am glad to hear this -- Aside.


Chris. Now, what your claim to me, at Mr. Vincent's lodging meant; the letter,
and promises, you unworthily, or erroneously laid to my charge, you must
explain to me and others, or --


Val. How Is this! I hope I shall discover no guilt but my own; she would not
speak in threats to a Lover -- Aside.


Chris. Was it because you found me in Mr. Vincent's lodgings, you took a
liberty to use me, like one of your common Visitants? But know, I came no more
to Mr. Vincent, then to to you; yet, I confess, my visit was intended to a man
-- A brave man, till you made him use a woman ill, worthy the love of a
Princess; till you made him censure mine; good as Angels, till you made him
unjust; why -- in the name of honor, would you do it?


Val. How happily, am I dis-appointed! poor injured Christina. Aside.


Chris. He would have sought me out first, if you had not made him fly from
me; our mutual love, confirmed by a contract, made our hearts inseparable; till
you rudely, if not maliciously, thrust in upon us, and broke the close, and
happy knot: I had lost him before for a month, now for ever. She weeps.


Val. My joy, and pity, makes me as mute, as my shame; yet I must discover my
self. Aside.


Chris. Your silence, is a confession of your guilt.


Val. I own it. Aside.


Chris. But that will not serve my turn; for strait you must go clear your
self, and me, to him you have injured in me; if he has not made too much haste
from me, to be found again; you must, I say, for he is a man that will have
satisfaction; and in satisfying him, you do me.


Val. Then he is satisfied.


Chris. How! is it you? then I am not satisfied.


Val. Will you be worse then your word?


Chris. I gave it not to you.


Val. Come, dear Christina, the Jealous, like the Drunkard, has his punishment,
with his offense.


To them Vincent. Vin. Valentine, Mr. Valentine.


Val. Vincent --


Vin. Where have you been all this while?


Valentine holds Christina by the hand, who seems to struggle to get from him.
Val. Here, with my injured Christina.


Vin. She Is behind with Ranger, who is forced to speak all the tender things
himself; for she affords him not a word.


Val. Pish, pish, Vincent, who is blind now? who deceived now?


Vin. You are, for I Am sure Christina is with him; come back and see.


They go out at one door, and return at the other. Ranger to Lydia. Ran. Still
mocked, still abused! did you not bid me follow you, where we might not be
disturbed, nor overheard? and now not allow me a word?


Vincent to Valentine. Vin. Did you hear him? Apart to Val.


Val. Yes, yes, peace -- Apart to Vin.


Rang. Disowning your Letter, and me, at Vincent's lodging, declaring you came
to meet another there, and not me; with a great deal of such affronting
unkindness, might be reasonable enough, because you would not entrust Vincent
with our love; but now, when no body sees us, nor hears us, why this
unseasonable shyness? --


Lyd. It seems, she did not expect him there, but had appointed to meet
another; I wish it were so. Aside.


Ran. I have not Patience; do you design thus to revenge my intrusion into your
lodging last night? sure if you had then been displeased with my company, you
would not have invited your self to it again by a Letter? or is this a
punishment for bringing you to a house, so near your own, where, it seems, you
were known too? I do confess, it was a fault; but make me suffer any Penance,
but your Silence, because it is the certain mark of a Mistress's lasting
displeasure --


Lyd. My cue is not yet come. Aside.


Ran. Not yet a word? you did not use me so unkindly last night, when you chid
me out of your house, and with indignation bid me be gone; now, you bid me
follow you, and yet will have nothing to say to me; and I am more deceived this
day and night, then I was last night; when, I must confess, I followed you for
another. --


Lyd. I Am glad to hear that. Aside.


Ran. One that would have used me better; whose love, I have ungratefully
abused for yours; yet from no other reason, but my natural inconstancy --

Poor Lydia, Lydia -- Aside.


Lyd. He muttered my name sure, and with a sigh. Aside.


Ran. But as last night, by following (as I thought) her, I found you: so this
night, by following you in vain, I do resolve, if I can find her again, to keep
her for ever.


Lyd. Now I am obliged, and brought in debt to his inconstancy; faith, now
cannot I hold out any longer, I must discover my self. Aside.


Ran. But, Madam, because I intend to see you no more, i will take my leave of
you for good and all; since you will not speak, i will try if you will squeek --


Goes to throw her down, she squeeks. Lyd. Mr. Ranger, Mr. Ranger --


Vin. Fie, fie, you need not ravish Christina sure, that loves you so.


Ran. Is it she! Lydia all this while? how am I gulled, and. Vincent in the
Plot too?


Lyd. Now false Ranger.


Ran. Now false Christina too; you thought I did not know you now, because I
offered you such an unusual civility.


Lyd. You knew me, I warrant you knew too, that I was the Christina you
followed out of the Park last night; that I was the Christina that writ the
Letter too.


Ran. Certainly, therefore I would have taken my revenge, you see, for your
tricks.


Val. Is not this the same woman that took refuge in your house last night,
Madam? To Christina.


Chris. The very same.


Val. What, Mr. Ranger, we have chopped, and changed, and hid our Christina's so
long, and often, that at last, we have drawn each of us our own?


Ran. Mr. Valentine in England! the truth on it is, you have jugled together,
and drawn without my knowledge; but since she will have it so, she shall wear
me for good and all now.


Goes to take her by the hand. Lyd. Come not near me.


Ran. Nay, you need not be afraid, I would ravish you, now I know you.


Lyd. And yet, Leonore, I think it is but justice, to pardon the fault, I made
him commit? Apart to Leonore, Ranger listens.


Ran. You consider it right, Cousin; for indeed, you are but merciful to your
self in it.


Lyd. Yet, if I would be rigorous, though I made the blot, your oversight has
lost the game.


Ran. But 'twas rash woman's play, Cousin, and ought not to be played again, let
me tell you. Dap. to them.


Dap. Who Is there? who is there?


Ran. Dapperwit.


Dap. Mr. Ranger, I am glad I have met with you; for I have left my Bride just
now, in the house at Mulberry Garden, to come and pick up some of my Friends in
the Park here, to sup with us.


Ran. Your Bride! are you married then? where is your Bride?


Dap. Here at Mulberry Garden, I say, where you, these Ladies, and Gentlemen,
shall all be welcome, if you will afford me the honor of your company.


Ran. With all our hearts; but who have you married, Lucy?


Dap. What, do you think I would marry a Wench? I have married an Heiress worth
thirty thousand pound, let me perish.


Vin. An Heiress worth thirty thousand pound!


Dap. Mr. Vincent, your servant, you here too?


Ran. Nay, we are more of your acquaintance here (I think) go, we will follow
you, for if you have not dismissed your Parson, perhaps we may make him more
work. Exeunt.


The Scene changes to the Dining Room, in Mulberry-Garden-house. Enter Sir
Simon Addleplot, Gripe, Mrs. Martha, Joyner, Crossbite, Lucy. Sir Sim. It Is as
I told you, Sir, you see.


Gripe. Oh graceless Babe, married to a Wit! an idle, loytering, slandering,
foul-mouthed, beggarly Wit; Oh that my child should ever live to marry a Wit!


Join. Indeed, your Worship had better seen her fairly buried, as they say.


Cross. If my Daughter, there, should have done so, I would not have gi'n her a
groat.


Gripe. Marry a Wit!


Sir Sim. Mrs. Joyner, do not let me lose the To Joyner. Widow too; for if you
do, (betwixt friends) I and my small annuity are both blown up; it will follow
my estate. Aside.


Join. I warrant you. Aside.


Flip. Let us make sure of Sir Simon to night, To Joyner. or -- Aside.


Join. You need not fear it, like the Lawyers, while my Clients endeavor to
cheat one another; I in justice cheat 'emboth. Aside.


Gripe. Marry a Wit!


Enter Dapperwit, Ranger, and Lydia, Valentine, Christina, and Vincent.
Dapperwit stops 'em, and they stand all behind. Dap. What is he here, Lucy and
her Mother? Aside.


Gripe. Tell me how thou came to marry a Wit?


Mart. Pray be not angry, Sir, and i will give you a good reason.


Gripe. Reason for marrying a Wit!


Mart. Indeed, I found my self six months gone with Child, and saw no hopes of
your getting me a Husband, or else I had not married a Wit, Sir.


Join. Then you were the Wit. Aside.


Gripe. Had you that reason? nay, then --


Holding up his hands. Dap. How Is that! Aside.


Ran. Who would have thought, Dapperwit, you would have married a Wench? Aside.


Dap. Well, thirty thousand pound will make me amends; I have known my betters
wink, and fall on for five or six. To Ran. What, you are come, Sir, to give me
joy? To Gripe and the rest. you Mrs. Lucy, you, and you? well, unbid guests are
doubly welcome --

Sir Simon, I made bold to invite these Ladies, To Sir Simon. and Gentlemen,
for you must know, Mr. Ranger, this worthy Sir Simon, does not only give me my
Wedding Supper, but my Mistress too; and is as it were my Father.


Sir Sim. Then I am as it were a Grandfather to your new Wives, hans en
kelder; to which you are but as it were a Father; there is for you again, Sir --
ha ha --


Ran. Ha, ha, ha -- To Vincent.


Dap. Fools sometimes say unhappy things, if we would mind 'em, but -- what,
Melancholy at your Daughters Wedding, Sir?


Gripe. How deplorable is my condition? Aside.


Dap. Nay, if you will rob me of my Wench, Sir, can you blame me for robbing
you of your Daughter? I cannot be without a Woman.


Gripe. My Daughter, my Reputation, and my Money gone -- but the last is
dearest to me; yet at once I may retrieve that, and be revenged for the loss of
the other; and all this by marrying Lucy here: I shall get my five hundred
pound again, and get Heirs to exclude my Daughter, and frustrate Dapperwit;
besides, it is agreed on all hands, it is cheaper keeping a Wife then a Wench.
Aside.


Dap. If you are so melancholy, Sir, we will have the Fiddles, and a Dance to
divert you; come.


A Dance. Gripe. Indeed, you have put me so upon a merry pin, that I resolve to
marry too.


Flip. Nay, if my Brother come to marrying once, I may too; I swore I would,
when he did, little thinking --


Sir Sim. I take you at your word, Madam.


Flip. Well, but if I had thought you would have been so quick with me --


Gripe. Where is your Parson?


Dap. What, you would not revenge your self upon the Parson?


Gripe. No, I would have the Parson revenge me upon you; he should marry me.


Dap. I am glad you are so frolic, Sir; but who would you marry?


Gripe. This innocent Lady. Pointing to Lucy.


Dap. That innocent Lady?


Gripe. Nay, I am impatient, Mrs. Joyner, pray fetch him up, if he be yet in
the house.


Dap. We were not married here; but you cannot be in earnest.


Gripe. You Will find it so; since you have robbed me of my Housekeeper, I must get
another.


Dap. Why? she was my Wench.


Gripe. I Will make her honest then.


Cross. Upon my repute he never saw her before: but will your Worship marry my
Daughter then?


Gripe. I promise her, and you, before all this good company, to morrow I will
make her my Wife.


Dap. How!


Rang. Our Ladies, Sir, I suppose, expect the same To Val. promise from us.


Val. They may be sure of us without a promise; but let us (if we can) obtain
theirs, to be sure of them.


Dap. But will you marry her to morrow? -- To Gripe.


Gripe. I will verily.


Dap. I am undone then, ruined let me perish.


Sir Sim. No, you may hire a little room in Covent Garden, and set up a
Coffee-house; you, and your Wife, will be sure of the Wits custom.


Dap. Abused by him, I have abused!
Fortune our foe, we cannot over-wit,
By none but thee, our projects are Cross-bit.

Val. Come, dear Madam, what yet angry? jealousy sure is much more pardonable
before marriage, then after it; but to morrow, by the help of the Parson, you
will put me out of all my fears.


Chris. I am afraid then you would give me my revenge, and make me jealous of
you; and I had rather suspect your faith, then you should mine.


Ran. Cousin Lydia, I had rather suspect your faith too, then you should mine;
therefore let us even marry to morrow, that I may have my turn of watching,
doging, standing under the window at the door, behind the hanging or --


Lyd. But if I could be desperate now, and give you up my liberty; could you
find in your heart to quit all other engagements, and voluntarily turn your
self over to one woman, and she a Wife too? could you away with the
insupportable bondage of Matrimony?


Ran. You talk of Matrimony as irreverently, as my Lady Flippant; the Bondage
of Matrimony, no --

The end of Marriage, now is liberty,
And two are bound -- to set each other free.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 11. read of a Woman, p. 4. l. 3. r. Is he here? p. 14. l. 9. r.
this Jilt. p. 23. l. 2. r. lead her, p. 25. l. 9. r. she, p. 36. l. 20. r. Ran.
five doors off on the right hand, p. ^0. l. 23. r. into the Playhouse, p. 40.
l. 27. r. sick with envy, p. 52. l. 1. r. setting a Chair, p. 84. l. 1. r.
ruminate on them.

Epilogue
Spoken by Dapperwit.
NOW my Brisk Brothers of the Pit, you will say,
I Am come to speak a good word for the Play;
But (Gallants) let me perish, if I do,
For I have Wit, and judgment, just like you;
Wit never partial, judgment free and bold,
For fear or friendship never bought or sold,
Nor by good Nature, e're to be Cajoled.
Good Nature in a Critic were a crime,
Like mercy in a Judge, and renders him
Guilty of all those faults, he does forgive:
Besides, if Thief from Gallows you reprieve,
He Will cut your Throat; so Poet saved from shame,
In damned Lampoon, will murder your good name.
Yet in true spite to him, and to his Play,
(Good faith) you should not rayl at 'em to day;
But to be more his Foe, seem most his Friend,
And so maliciously, the Play commend,
That he may be betrayed to Writing on,
And Poet let him be, to be undone.
FINIS.

