A Prospective Glass: WHEREIN ENGLANDS BONDAGE Under the NORMANE yoke, with
the Rise, growth, and continuation, is clearly asserted.

A Subject not yet treated upon, viz:

Showing how the Law came to be in an unknown Tongue, and from whence the
Judges, and other inferior Lawyers had their beginning: and in opposition to
former Law, how the 4. Terms of the Year came to be kept.

As also, the corruption of this Law, bringing with it the Fines and Rents to
the Lord of the Manor for all Freeholds and Copyhold Land.

BEING A Collection from the most choice of Modern Historians.

WITH SOME Brief Observations upon Scripture, as proving from thence, that this
Law is contradictory to the Nature of Gods dealing with the sons of Men, and
contrary to the Nature of Freedom.

By a Lover of English-mens Freedoms.

An evil Custom be it for continuance never so ancient, is naught: else then
the oldnesse of Error. Plato. LONDON: Printed at the Authors Charge. 1649.

TO ALL THE COMMONERS OF ENGLAND.
IN all the dealings of God with the sons of men, when judgment and
righteousness is not executed between man and man, God then brings one
punishment or other upon the Land, that makes inquisition for blood that has
been spilt, wrongs that has been done, wickedness that has been acted by
unrighteous men.

But yet the end of Gods dealing thus with his creatures is love, as in Ier.
30. 17, 18. a restoring of health, an healing of wounds: though Ephraim is
smitten, yet Ephraim is loved, he is a dear son, a tender child, there is
health in the latter end.

Whosoever looks upon these times outwardly, may see a poor distressed
Kingdom, groaning under the heavy burdens, that lie upon it: and whosoever
looks beyond the outward state of the Kingdom, may see love, peace, and joy,
spread into the hearts of creatures, discovered in several (yet) glorious
administrations.

The occasion of bondages, troubles, that has been, and yet is, in this
Nation, makes the members of this Nation to enquire for Freedom, to search and
sift out the root, and foundations of bondages, of all sorts, some after this
manner, some after that, as has been evidently seen, in the Petitions of many
well affected people of England, which have been presented to the Parliament at
sundry times.

Among the rest, I my self desired to know the foundation of some bondages,
that have inslaved the Nation for almost this six hundred years; and by
Providence I found some recorded in Records, which I now commend to the
consideration of all honest hearted people, lest any should say, I speak
against the persons of men: I desire them to understand, that I speak against
the practice of men which is destructive to the well being of the Nation, be
they Nation or person whatsoever, it matters not to me, for honesty in a Turk,
or Jew, Heathen, or Pagan, is as good, as honesty in those that are called
Christians: I could wish, that the nature of Christianity was more looked upon,
and the name of Christianity less looked upon; for it is the cunning sleight of the Man of sin to make people think themselves happy, as having the name of
Christians, without looking any further unto the nature of Christianity: I am
not ignorant how people have been looked upon as bearing the name of Sectaries,
or Independants, and so for Presbyterians, or Episcopal, the envy of the name
in one another hearts, has bred abundance of heart-burnings one toward
another; My advice therefore is to all, to let names fall, let honesty and
godliness be embraced in any man; and let oppression, Arbitrary power, and
cruelty be looked upon in any, as destructive to the well being of the Nation:
if we do so, we shall look upon things as being acted in the center of them,
and so esteemed. I leave this following Discourse, to all men to be looked upon
by the eye of equity, and remain,

A lover of Freedom.

Not the respecting of persons whosoever, but in love to my Country, for
Liberty, and Freedom; and a hating of Tyranny, Arbitrary Power, and Cruelty: I
begin this ensuing Discourse.
IN the making of way to this ensuing Discourse it is requisite to show; for
satisfaction to them that shall read this Discourse, the party, by whom the
bondages of this Land came in, not in any way of disgrace to his person, but
rather to discover the acts that he did, which rose from his oppressing mind
and will. And first of the Person.

In the lives of the three Norman Kings of England, in page 1. there is a
relation of William the Conquerers birth, which is expressed in these words.

Robert Duke of Normandy, the sixth in descent from Rollo, riding through
Fallis a Town in Normandy, espied certain Damsels dancing near the way, among
whom he fixed his eye upon a certain Damsel, whose name was Arlote, of mean
parentage, a Skiners daughter, whom he procured that night to be brought unto
him, of whom he begat a Son, who afterward was named William: By this relation
it appears, that Will: the Conqueror was base son of Robert Duke of Normandy,
as may more fully appear, in the Summary of English Chronicles, in page 37.
William Duke of Normandy, surnamed Conqueror, base Son of Robert the sixth,
Duke of that Duchy. But lest any should think, that I make this discovery on
purpose to disgrace the Conqueror, I say I do not, for I say no more then what
Chronicles do testify of him.

Secondly, a bastard sometime has been an Instrument of deliverance to the
people of God, as Iephthah, Judge. 11. 29. The Spirit of the Lord came upon
Iephthah, ver. 32. the Lord delivered his Enemies into his hand: so that God
made use of Iephthah to work deliverance.

Thirdly, a bastard is not to be blamed, as being a bastard, for it is the
parents, not the child that must be blamed, or shamed. I shall say no more,
touching William the Conquerers birth, and reasons, why I do think that
Williams person is not to be despis^d of any, as being a base son to Robert
Duke of Normandy: but proceed further to show by what means he came to be
crowned King of England: In the Summary of English Chronicles, in page 37.
declares unto us, that William the Conqueror came to be crowned King of
England, by Conquest in these words.

William Duke of Normandy, surnamed Conqueror, base Son to Robert, the sixth,
Duke of that Duchy, and Nephew unto King Edward, began his Reign over this
Realm of England, the 14th of October, in the year of our Lord, 1066. after the
battle at Hastings, Duke William came to London, where with great joy he was
received, both of the Clergy and people; and was proclaimed King, and crowned
on Christmas day, by Aldred Archbishop of York.

It must be agreed on by all parties, that God gives the Kingdoms of the Earth
to whomsoever he will: Dan. 4. 32. 35. So God gave all Kingdoms of the Earth
unto Nebuchadnezzar; but if Nebuchadnezzar tyrannise over the people, then
great Kings should serve themselves of him: Ier: 25. 13, 14. And so though
Assiria did reign, yet it must be brought low: Even so though God did give
this land into the hand of William the Conqueror, yet he setting up of such
Laws as tend to the destruction of the poor, it is just with God to take the
Government out of the hands of his posterity, who uphold, and maintain those
Laws that were made to inslave the Commoners of England.

Before I come to declare the bondages of this Nation, that was brought upon
them by William the Conqueror, I shall speak of some remarkable things of
Edward the Confessor, King of England before the Conquest; as I find recorded
in the Acts and Monuments of the Church, in page 165.

They that write the History of St. Edward the Confessor, make mention of a
dream, (or revelation) that should be showed unto him in the time of his
sickness: How that because the Peers and Bishops of the Land were not the
servants of God, but of the devil, God would give this Land into the hand of
others, and the King desired that utterance might be given him, that he might
declare it to the people, whereby they might repent: here note if true, as for
my part I cannot gainsay it, see the mercy of God toward this Land, as to
forewarn them of the danger that should come upon them; which not long after
this Kings death did come to pass, when William the Conqueror overcame this
Land.

This Edward in that dark age, made such good and wholesome Laws, which were so
just, so equal, and so serving the public profit, and weal of all estates,
that mine Authors say, that people did long rebel against their Heads, (and
Rulers) to have the same Laws again, being taken from them, could not obtain
them.

William the Conqueror, at his coming in, did swear to use and practice the
same good Laws of Edward, for the Common Laws of the Realm; afterward being
established in the Kingdom, he forswore himself, and placed his own Laws in
their room, much more worse and obscurer. Also this King Edward describes the
office of a King, in the Acts and Monuments of the Church, in pa. 166. The
King, because he is the Vicar of the highest King, is appointed for this
purpose, to rule the Earthly Kingdom, to set up good and wholesome Laws, such as
be approved; such as be otherwise he ought to repeal them, and thrust them out
of his Realm; he ought to do justice and judgment in his Kingdom.

Three servants a King ought to have under him as vassals, fleshly lusts,
avarice greedy desires; whom if he keep under him, as servants, he shall reign
well and honorably in his kingdom; But William the Conqueror, omitted these
Laws, contrary to his Oath at his Coronation, inserting and placing the most
part of his Laws in his own language to serve his purpose; and which as yet to
this present day, in the same Normane language do remain. See here by this
Declaration the difference of the two Kings, Edward making good Laws, and
William changing of them, contrary to his oath at his Coronation, making Laws
at his own pleasure, destructive to the peoples good and freedom.

King Edward, surnamed Confessor, for his excellent holiness, is until this
day, called, St. Edward; who so soon as he had gotten his Fathers Kingdom, of
his free will, released the Kingdom of 40. thousand pound, called, Dane gilt,
which the English people, even from the very beginning of the reign of the
Danes was compelled to pay to their Kings every year; and this did King Edward
in a year when the earth yielded not her fruit, the tribute being gathered by
the Treasurers, he commanded that the money should be restored to the owners
again. Here we may see, the love that this King had to the Subjects, freely
forgiving them the tribute that they had paid to other Kings before him: and
this God, says he, has chosen, in Isa. 58. 6. to loose the bands of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free: this
kingly act of Edward the Confessor, may serve for an example for all Governors
to follow.

William the Conqueror did contrary to King Edward, for he sought how to
inslave the people of England, by making inquiry what riches the people had,
and then to tax them accordingly, as is declared in the Summary of English
Chronicles, in page the 41. King William caused inquiry to be made, how many
acres of ground were sufficient for one plough by the year, how many beasts to
the tilling of one hide, how many Cities, Castles, Farms, Graunges, Towns,
Rivers, Marshes, and woods, what rent they paid by year, and how many Knights
(or Soldiers) were in every County of the Realm; all which was put in writing,
and remains at Westminster, in the Kings treasury; afterward he took six
shillings of every plough, that is, of every hide of Land throughout the Realm;
and to this agrees the report, in the History of the Lives of the 3. Norman
Kings of England, in page 98. William the Conqueror, caused the Land to be
described, in one general Roll, so that there was not one hide of Land, but
both the yearly rent, and the owner thereof was therein set down, how many
plough lands, what pastures, what fennes, or marshes, what woods, Parks Farms,
and tenements was in every Sheere, and what every man was worth; also how many
Villens every man had, what beast or cattle, what fees, what other goods, what
rent or commodity, every man's possessions did yield: this book was called the
Roll of Winton, because it was kept in the City of Winchester; by the English,
it was called Doomes-day book, either by reason of the generality thereof, or
else instead of Domus Dei book, for that it was laid in the Church of
Winchester, in a place called, Domus Dei; according to this Roll, Taxations
were imposed, sometimes two shillings, sometimes six shillings upon every hide
of Land, throughout the Realm; an hide containing twenty acres, besides
ordinary provision for his house.

One of the punishments that was threatened against the children of Israel, was
to be given into the hands of those their enemies whose Tongue they could not
understand. Deuteronomy. 28. 49, 50, 51, 52. who should take the increase of the Land:
And surely so did William the Conqueror squeese the fat of this Land unto
himself, from the Commoners of England, as appears by this declaration of him.

In the Acts and Monuments of the Church, in page 173. it is reported of
William the Conqueror, that forasmuch as he obtained the Kingdom by force and
dent of Sword, he changed the whole state of the governance of this
Commonwealth; and to this agrees the History of the Lives of the three Normane
Kings of England, in page 91. Many heavy taxations were imposed on the English,
their ancient Lords were removed, their ancient Laws and Policies of State
were dashed to dust, all lay couched under the Conquerers Sword to be newly
fashioned by him, as should be best fitting for his advantage. And in the 86.
page of the same History, the stoutest of the Nobility and Gentlemen were spent
either by war or banishment, or by voluntary avoidance out of the Realm, all
these he stripped of their estates, and instead of them he placed his Normanes,
insomuch as scarce any family of the Nobility of England was left to bear any
office, or any authority, within the Realm. And so likewise in the Acts of the
Church, in pa. 173. he gave the Normanes the chiefest possessions of the Land;
he changed all the Temporal Laws of the Realm. And so in the Summary of
English Chronicles, in p. 41. the Normanes accomplished their pleasure upon the
Englishmen, that there was no Nobleman of that Nation left to bear rule over
them, so that it was a reproach to be called an Englishman.

In the Acts and Monuments of the Church, in page 173. that William the
Conqueror ordained Laws at his own pleasure, profitable to himself, but
grievous and hurtful to the people; abolishing the Laws of King Edward the
Confessor, whereunto notwithstanding he was sworn before to observe and
maintain, And so in the Acts of the Church, in page 44. he changed all the
Temporal Laws of the Realm. And so likewise again in the Acts and Monuments of
the Church, in page 166. contrary to his Oath at his Coronation, he abolished
the Laws of Edward the Confessor, and placed the most part of his own Laws in
his own language to serve his purpose, which as yet to this present day in the
same Normane language do remain.

Further, to make the thing in hand clearer, I shall speak as it is declared in
the Lives of the three Normane Kings of England, in pa. 101. William the
Conqueror caused part of those Laws which he established, to be written in the
Normane language, which was a barbarous and broken French, not well understood
of the natural French, and not at all of the vulgar English, the residue were
not written at all, but left almost arbitrary, to be determined by reason and
discretion at large. Hereupon it followed partly through the ignorance of the
people, and partly through malice of some Officers of Justice* who many times
are instruments of secret and particular ends, that many were extremely
tangled, many dangered, many rather made away, then justly executed. And in the
96. page of the same History of the Lives of the three Normane Kings of
England, William the Conqueror, in the beginning of his Reign, ordained that
the Laws of King Edward should be observed, together with other Laws that he
did prescribe; but afterward he commanded that nine men out of every County
should be chosen, to make a true report what were the Laws and Customs of the
Realm, of these he changed the greatest part, and brought in the customs of
Normandy in their stead, commanding that Causes should be pleaded, and all
matters of form dispatched in French. And in the Summary of English Chronicles,
in pa. 41. there sprang up wicked Customs, the more the people spoke of
equity, the more wrong was done; the Justicers were authors of all
unrighteousness.

In these words these things offer themselves to consideration.

First, that the end of William the Conquerers Laws was for his own profit; and
that appears by the way that he took, in making of his Laws in his own
language, which was a barbarous and broken French, not well understood of the
natural French, and not at all of the vulgar English; so that the people of
England was under a Law that they understood not, which must of necessity be a
sore and heavy yoke for the people to bear: from this Will: the Conqueror,
arose the Law in an unknown tongue, which to this day is a bondage to the
English Nation.

For a Nation to be under a Law that they know not, is to be under a curse: so
in Deuteronomy. 28. 49, 50, 51. The Lord shall bring a Nation against thee as swift as
the Eagle flies, a Nation whose tongue thou shall not understand: A Nation of
a fierce countenance, which shall not regard the person of the old, nor show
favor to the young. He shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, the fruit of thy
land, until thou be destroyed: All these things have come upon this Land by
the Normanes in these words. In the Acts of the Church, he gave the Normanes
the chiefest possessions of the Land, he changed all the Temporal Laws of the
Realm.

Secondly, the Laws of William the Conqueror, were, and are bondages to the
English Nation; when as by policy he commanded that nine men out of every
County should be chosen, to make a true report what were the Laws and customs
of the Realm before the Conquest, and then to change the greatest part, and
bring in the customs of Normandy in their stead, commanding that Causes should
be pleaded, and all matters of form dispatched in French.

By this it is apparent, from whom the pleading of Causes by Lawyers came up;
and surely if the thing be well considered, it is a grievous burden to the
Commoners of England, that must give away their money to the Lawyers to plead
their Causes: by this the poor Commoner of England pays dear for coming by
that which is his own, when he has occasion to deal with the Lawyer.

By this pleading of Causes by Lawyers, the poor Commoner buys his Law at a
very hi^h and excessive rate; A poor man may work a quarter or half a year, to
get as much money as the trial of one Suit at Law will cost, and when the
Lawyer has pleaded and gotten the money, the thing at last must be ended by
arbitration.

I find in the way two main things to be answered. The first is this: From what
principal the Lawyers and Counselors as they now stand, did rise.

To this I answer. From an arbitrary power, profitable to themselves, but
grievous and hurtful to the people; And if the original of their standing be
looked into, it will so appear. For the Conqueror making such Laws, as that the
Commoners of England could not have the benefit of the Law, but through the
Normane Lawyers making merchandise of the Law to the people, and so great gains
came in to the Lawyer, through this subtilty, and knowing well that by that
craft they had their living, made Laws that none should be a Lawyer, but he
that took his degrees at the Universitie, or Inns of Court: so that it came to
a custom, (and yet is) that parents set their children to School to study Law,
that thereby they might be rich; and having learned the Art to use the silver
hook they became great: the parents nor the child consider not at all the
tyranny of the rice of that custom.

And thus as a child is bound to a mas^er to learn his trade, and to be a Free
man of that place in which he has served the time of his Indenture; so the
Lawyers through the unjustnesse of their custom, served a time to come to be a
Lawyer, whose first rice was from the will of a Tyrant.

The original of a servant serving a time to a master is to learn a trade,
that so he may make the benefit of his ware* even so the rice of a man being a
Lawyer, is that he may sell the Law to his chapmen (otherwise called Clyants)
so that the Law is bought and sold by the Lawyer and the Clyant.

Surely if this were looked into with an eye of reason, it would appear to be
as unjust, (namely, the practice of Lawyers to ingroce the Law into their own
hands to make merchandise of it) as the monopolizing Pattentees.

The second quaere that may be made, is how the Lawyers appear to be bondages
to the Commoners of England.

I answer in this, that if any one seek for the benefit of the Law, he must fee
his Lawyer, or else he must loose his right: So that as in the time of Christ,
the Jews could not have the benefit of their Law but by the Roman governors,
and that appears about the trial and condemning of Christ, they must lead him
away to Pilate that he might condemn him, for they could not of themselves
without Pilate: Even so the Commoners of England cannot have the benefit of the
Law, but by feeing the Normane custome-upholders.

Another quaere may be made. But how should any man come by that which is his
own, but by the Lawyers?

To this I answer. That it is the Law, not the Lawyers, that gives any man his
right; and if there were no Lawyers, yet persons might come by their own by
Law. For I reason thus. That the Lawyers themselves ought to plead according to
Law, and then if it be so, it must be considered, that the ground of the
Lawyers plea ought not to be from themselves, but from the Law, and so
consequently it must follow, that the Lawyers themselves are in no other place
but to get away money from the Clyant; who might, if things were equally
carried, come by his right without them.

In the History of the Lives of the three Normane Kings of England, in pa. 98.
says thus: That William the Conqueror ordained also his Council of State, his
Chancery, his Exchequer, his Courts of Justice, which always removed with his
Court: these places he furnished with Officers, and assigned four Terms in
the year, for the determining of controversies among the people; whereas before
all Suits were summarily hea^d and determined in the gemote or monthly
Convention, in every hundred without formalities or delay.

If it be looked upon in the Courts of Chancery and Exchequer, the Officers
that are in those Courts are such as stand by the Normane customs; and that
appears in their customs of pleading Causes for money, making merchandise of
the Law, and so consequently of other Courts of Law; the benefit of making
merchandise of the Law is only in the hands of Judges, Councellers, and
Lawyers And further, that the Commoners of England may be kept in ignorance
from knowing the Law, that they may live under, and are judged by, all Writs
are issued forth in Latin, and Causes pleaded in Latin.

The second thing that presents it self unto consideration, is the four Terms
in the year, to end controversies among the people; and the custom of this is
a great bondage to the Commoner when he has occasion to go for Law: and the
bondage consists in three things.

First, the coming from all parts of the Kingdom to Westminster four times a
year, whereby the poor Commoner is put to great charges and pains, to get all
things ready for his journey, and many times are constrained to borrow money to
bear their charges, the journey being long, and chargeable; and for the
experience of them that have had to come upon such designs to Westminster from
all parts of the Kingdom, testify by the filling of their purses at home, and
their emptying of them by the way, and at London and Westminster.

Secondly, this is not all: the laying out, and spending of their money in the
long journeys from all parts of the Kingdom to Westminster; but when they come
thither, there are Lawyers and Counselors to fee, which is many times as much
and more twice told, then the clyants expenses in his journey. Thus has the
Normane customs brought heavy burdens upon us, and upon our forefathers in
this thing: so that well may that speech of Christ which he spoke to the
Lawyers in his time, be justly applied to the Lawyers in our time: Woe unto you
also ye Lawyers, for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be born.

Thirdly, this is a bondage again in this sense, by hindering the old custom
before the Conquest, (which was) to have every man's Cause tried in the Hundred
where he lived, without coming to Westminster at all, and so had justice in the
Hundred once every month.

From the things that have been spoken, these things do offer themselves to our
consideration.

First, that for persons so judged by Laws in an unknown tongue, is an
arbitrary power contrary to true reason, and honest plain dealing.

Secondly, for Lawyers to have money for pleading of causes, is to make
merchandise of the Law to the people.

Thirdly, for the standing and custom of Lawyers, as now they are, is a
representative of slavery and bondage.

Fourthly, for pleading of Causes in an unknown tongue, is to take away the key
of knowledge: Luke 11. 52. from the people of their liberties, birthrights,
and Laws; and to keep them in blindness and ignorance.

Fifthly, for coming to Westminster from all parts of the Kingdom, is a spending
of the Commoners money, loosing of his time, and neglect of justice done to the
Commoner, as was in that short time once every month in every Hundred before
the Conquest.

According unto that equal rule, As ye would that men should do unto you, so
do you unto them: for this is the Law and the Prophets; is the practice of all
Arbitrary power whatsoever condemned. And surely if ever there was an arbitrary
power in any thing, it was, and is in this, to make Laws in an unknown tongue
to govern and rule a people.

The unjustnesse of this custom may more fully appear, if we look into the
manner of Gods giving of his Laws, unto the sons and daughters of men; if it be
looked into in what manner God gave the Law unto the children of Israel, it
will appear to be given in that tongue they could understand. Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12,
13. This Law which I command thee this day, is not hid from thine eyes, neither
is it far off. It is not in heaven, that thou should say, Who shall go up for
us into heaven, and bring it unto us, and cause us to hear it, that we may do
it? Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over the
Sea for us, and bring it unto us, and cause us to hear it, that we may do it?
But the word is very near thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, to do it.

God deals thus with creatures in his giving of laws unto them so plainly in
that tongue, and manner of way that is known unto them, that they cannot say,
We have not heard it, nor known it; but it is very near them, in their mouths
and hearts to do it; so that they are left without excuse. Romans 1. 20.

Gods ways are equal ways; and therefore he so gave the Law unto the
children of Israel, that they were not to know it only themselves, which heard
the Law delivered by the hand of Moses, but they were to teach it unto their
children, and to talk of them when they tarried at home, when they walked by
the way, when they rose up, when they lay down, and to put them as frontlets
between their eyes, and to write them upon the posts of their doors, and upon
their gates, being publicly to be known, and declared unto all the Nation.

Also this manner of making Laws, or giving Commandments to people in a known
tongue, was practiced even by Heathen: This appears in Esther 8. 9. Then were
the Kings scribes called at that time in the third month (that is, the month
Sivan) on the three and twentieth day thereof, and it was written unto the
Jews, and to the lievtenants, and the deputies and rulers of the Provinces
which are from India unto Ethiopia, an hundred twenty and seven Provinces, unto
every Province according to the writing thereof, and to every people after
their language, and to the Jews according to their writing, and according to
their language. So much equity was among the Heathen, that in this thing they
are our examples for us to follow their way, to make laws according to the
language of the people that are to be guided by them.

It is a sign and token of a disobedient servant, that goes about to do
things contrary to the way and mind of his Master: even so is it a sign and
token of the Governors of this Nation, that made laws in an unknown tongue,
that the people of this land understand not; to be disobedient stewards unto
God. They are against the nature of God, and against the actings of God;
against his ways by which he does manifest himself unto the sons and daughters
of men in these things.

First, God is light, and in him there is no darkness at all. 1 John 1. 5. And
whatsoever the dealings of God toward the creatures are, they are light, and
make known to the creature the will of God, and how to know him.

This is clear throughout all the Scripture, from Genesis to the Revelation.
David says, Psalm. 119. 105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto
my paths: that is, the Law, the Commandments of God was his rule that guided
his steps. But when the Law that should guide the Nation is in an unknown
tongue, it is neither lamp nor light for the peoples paths.

This may fully appear, that the ways of God are light to enlighten the
people. God sent his Son, whom he says is light: in Isa. 49. 6. A light to
lighten the Gentiles: Luke 1. 79. Light to them that sit in darkness: Joh. 9.
5. The light of the world. Luke 1. 77. To give knowledge of salvation unto
people for the remission of sins: That which makes Princes, Rulers and People
to be like God, are works of light; of which, one is to make a known Law, in a
known language, that the people might understand the Law.

It is one of the works of the devil, to blind the eyes of the understanding.
2 Cor. 4. 4. and then consider what, and whose work it was to put it into the
heart of William the Conqueror to make Laws in an unknown tongue; and who it is
that sits in the hearts of the Judges, Lawyers and Counselors of this
kingdom, who still hold up the custom of trying the Causes of the people in
an unknown tongue: I suppose it must be concluded it is the devil, by these
Reasons.

First, because the works of the devil are works of darkness, and not light;
the end shows the event. Now the work to make Laws in an unknown tongue for
this Nation to be guided by, is a work of darkness, for the effect of it
proves darkness, and so brings darkness, and keeps the people in darkness,
and so consequently is of the devil. Do men gather grapes of thorns, and figs
of thistles? by their fruits ye shall know them. Matthew. 7. 16.

Secondly, the works of the devil are destroying works; therefore he is said to
be as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: 1 Pet. 5. 8. And as the devil
is said to be as a roaring Lion, so likewise are tyranous Princes compared to
Lions. Prove. 28. 15. As a roaring Lion, and a ranging Bear; so is a wicked
Ruler over the poor people. So that both devil and cruel Princes are
compared both to one thing: then it will follow, that those Laws that are
cruel, and hard yokes for the people to bear, are the works of the devil in
all such rulers.

Now if this thing be examined, namely, the Law in an unknown tongue, I am bold
to say, that it will be found to be one of the greatest destructives to the
well-being and freedom of the people, as ever was heard of in any Nation. For,

First, those people that are free Commoners of England have been by that
blinded, and their eyes closed, that they have not seen their privilege in
their free birthrights.

Secondly, they have been constrained to come from all parts of the Kingdom to
Westminster, and there commit the pleading and censure of their Causes to such
men as made merchandise of the Law, and their Causes as they pleased.

Thirdly, they have been kept, it may be, some 2, 3, 4, or 5. years in Law,
whereby the Normane custome-upholders have greatly enriched themselves, by
removing the Suit out of one Court into another, that many times it falls out
that the Lawyer is enriched, but the Clyant undone. Experience proves this to
be a truth.

Again, if this thing be well considered, namely, the Law in an unknown tongue,
it is right opposite to the way of God.

First, in the giving of his Son to be salvation to the ends of the earth, Isa.
49. To open the blind eyes, this was Christ's work; but the Law in an unknown
tongue does not open the blind eyes, but those that are blind it keeps still
in blindness: so in this it is opposite to Christ's work.

Secondly, Christ was sent to proclaim liberty to the captives, Isa. 61. 1. But
the Law in an unknown tongue proclaims no liberty, no glad tidings, no freedom
to the oppressed; but declares curse, bondage, and woe. Deuteronomy. 28. 49, 50, 51,
52. Ier. 5. 15, 16, 17.

One of the privileges that God promises to his people, Isa. 33. 19. is, Thou
shall not see a fierce people, a people of a deeper speech then thou can
perceive; of a ridiculous or stammering tongue, that thou can not understand.
So that it is liberty and freedom to be under a Law that the people can
understand. Nothing makes the government of England to be like the Church of
Rome so much as this, to lead and govern people in an unknown tongue. For as
the Papists keep the people in ignorance concerning their spiritual estate, by
an unknown tongue: even so the Judges, Lawyers, and Councellers keep the people
of England in ignorance in their civil or temporal estate, by an unknown
tongue.

Further, the Law in an unknown tongue is both against the way and end that God
gave the Law unto the children of Israel, if we consider the way it was in that
tongue they understood, Deuteronomy 30. To that it is opposite, and it is opposite
also to the end, which was, first, that it should be in all their mouths and
hearts, that they might continually talk of them. 2ly, that they might teach
their children. 3ly, that it might be written upon the posts of their houses,
and upon their gates.

First, it is opposite that the Law should be in all the peoples mouths; for
it is that it should be in some of the peoples mouths, namely, Judges,
Counselors, Lawyers, they only are to know the Law, and no other by this
custom.

Secondly, the Law was given to this end, that the children might know it, but
the Law in the unknown tongue to the contrary. For whereas the children of
Israel was to teach the Law unto their children; by this Law in an unknown
tongue the parents of the English children, are constrained to ask counsel of
the Lawyers: and so in this it is directly opposite.

Thirdly, the Law was to write upon posts, and gates, that thereby the people
might know the Law generally, being known so openly. But the Law in an unknown
tongue, causes the Law to be kept and showed only at Westminster, the Inns of
Court, and Universities, and Judges, Counselors, and Lawyers Chambers. Thus
far to show the tyranny of the Law in an unknown tongue over the people of
England.

The second thing that presents it self to our consideration, is recorded in
the History of the Lives of the three Normane Kings of England, in page 99.
that in all those lands that William the Conqueror gave to any man, he reserved
dominion in chief to himself; for acknowledgement whereof a yearly rent was
paid unto him, and also a Fine whenever the tenement did allen or dye; these
were bound as clyants unto him by oath of fidelity and homage: and if any dyed
his heir being in minority, the King received the profits of the land, and had
the custody and disposing of the heirs body until his age of 21. years.

These words declare unto us two great bondages that have been in England; the
one is thrown down by this Honorable Court of Parliament, called, The Court of
Wards; the other bondage remains still untaken away: Of that I intend
somewhat to speak.

The bondage being looked upon with a single eye, will appear to be great two
ways. First, in the greatness of it in extent. Secondly, in the heaviness of
it upon the poor man.

First, for the greatness of the extent of it, and that is over every one
dwelling in a Town; except the Lords of the Manor who is the yoke-master, and
not a sufferer under the yoke.

The heaviness of it appears in these two things. First, when a man has
bought a piece of Copyhold-land so called, when he has paid for his
Copyhold-land of the owner thereof, yet notwithstanding must pay a Fine to the
Lord of the Manor, or else he cannot enjoy it. This is a most grievous
oppression upon the people.

Secondly, when the party either leaves his Living, then another Fine is to be
paid; and also when the party dies, then a Harriot, so called, is to be paid
again.

Those who are Countrymen, and deal in Farms and Land, I suppose can testify
this by woeful experience; and therefore I leave this to their consideration:
only I shall show how the Lord complains of such things in Scripture.

This oppression does reach the poor widows that has lost their husbands, and
is left poor, comfortless and needy, their stay, their upholdes is dead, and
yet notwithstanding must loose the best goods they have for an Harriot to the
Lord of the Manor. This or such like kind of oppression Job spoke of, Job 24.
9. they take a pledge of the poor. And Isa. 10. 2. turn aside the needy from
judgment, and take away the right of the poor of my people, that widows may
be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless. What greater wrong can be
done to any, then to take their goods, that which is properly the parties own?

Among the children of Israel was found such like grievous oppression: Ier. 5.
26, 27, 28. For among my people are found wicked men: they lay wait as he that
sets snares, they set a trap, they catch men As a cage is full of birds, so
are their houses full of deceit: therefore they are become great, and waxen
rich. They are waxen fat, they shine, they overpasse the deeds of the wicked.
The snares that are set by Rulers to catch the people, are those grievous Laws
that are like snares, that the people by this means are brought into great
bondages and slavery, under cruel masters. As witness when a man has bought
a piece of land before he can enjoy it, he must pay a Fine to the Lord of the
Manor; and if he come not in to take it up in the Court, he then forfeits his
land.

What righteousness is in such a law or custom, I find very little or none at
all; but against righteousness, justnes and equity, to practice such arbitrary
tyrannous customs, grievous for the people to bear.

Now then it is not to be looked upon, whether it be not right to pay Fines or
Harriots to the Lord of the Manor, according to that Law or custom that is
now in England for that purpose* but it ought to be known whether that Law that
demands such unreasonable things, as Fines and Harriots to the Lord of the
Manor, be according to the rule of equity. And then I suppose that if that be
the quaere, it will be answered, that such a Law is not according to the law of
equity: for these Reasons.

First, that Law that tends only to that end to inslave the people in
bondage under heavy burdens, cannot be concluded to be according to the Law
of equity: for God says that this pleases him. Isa. 58. 6. To lo^se the
bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free,
and that ye break every yoke So that in this, obedience is better then
sacrifice. For what does it avail the people to have Fasts set up, and
Humiliations observed by the great ones of the land, and have not their burdens
and yokes taken off from them?

Secondly, that Law that tends (to this end) to oppress the widow and the
fatherless, cannot be concluded to be according to the Law of equity. God
says expressly in Exodus 22. 22. Ye shall not afflict any widow or fatherless
child. And in Zach. 7. 10. God tells them that they should not oppress the
fatherles nor the widow. This was that which God always exhorts the people
unto by the mouths of the Prophets: Zach. 7. 7. Isa. 58. 6. Isa. 1. 17. Then
if it be considered, that the widows are not to be oppressed, the Law of taking
of Harriots of widows must be concluded to be Arbitrary power over the poor
people. Thus far to show the arbitrarinesse of Fines, and Rents, and Harriots
that are paid to the Lord of the Manor,

I shall apply my self to give an Exhortation to the Commoners of England, that
they may see the great works of God, that the Lord has showed from time to
time unto this Nation since these troubles began, that they might have them in
their remembrance.

The Exhortation.
GLorious and great things has the Lord the great Jehovah showed unto this
Nation since these troubles began; and if well considered, they are the
dealings of mercy toward us, even thoughts of love, and of peace and good will,
If we consider the knowledge of our bondages that are now brought to light,
that have of long time inslaved this Nation for almost six hundred years, that
were brought upon us by Conquest, and from the wills of tyrants over the
people, as the Law in an unknown tongue, the standing of the Society of the
Lawyers, the pleading of Causes in an unknown tongue in Westminster Hall, the
four Terms in the year, the feeing of Lawyers, the being kept ignorant from
knowing the Law, and their birthrights, the bondage of Rents, and Fines, and
Harriots to the Lord of the Manor, the burden of Tithes: all these things
have, and are looked into to be tyrannous to the Nation. And although the Land
has suffered much since these wars began, yet wars could not be avoided, but
they must needs be. For as the bondages of this Nation came in by the Sword,
even so by the Sword the liberties thereof must be gained: and that will
appear, because the Rulers of this land having brought the people into bondage,
there was no way for their greatness to fall, but by the Sword. This way in
the eyes of God was good, and the Sword has prevented those actings of
oppression even in the same members themselves; if we do but mind it, as last
Summer, when they made an Ordinance for to persecute men for conscience, then
presently after was the rising in Kent, and Essex; also when they would have
brought home the King upon his terms, by a Treaty, they were disappointed in
that also. By these actings of God it is evident, that he will destroy those
things that are of the flesh in Noblemen, to hinder them in the gentry: to
hinder them in others, to hinder them that he only may be exalted.

Oh therefore look upon the work of God, rather then to look upon men according
to dignities; For as dignities are of the earth, so they must be brought low,
even to the ground: So that men shall not be looked upon as in reference to
dignities, but their actings shall be looked upon, whether they be good or
evil, and so accordingly judged. Therefore now in this time of searching, let
every one endeavor to know those things that are freedom and liberty, free from
arbitrarinesse and ungodliness, that they may know that which is profitable to
all the Commonaltie of the Kingdom, things good and wholesome to all the people
of the Kingdom.

The end of my writing this Discourse, is, first to give the Commoners of
England knowledge, from whom the bondages that have inslaved the Nation
proceeded.

Secondly, that the Commoners of England may see how clear these bondages are
against God, against his way, and against freedom and liberty.

Thirdly, that the Commoners of England seeing of the unjustnesse of such
customs, may look for customs of liberty and freedom, which is the desire of
a Commoner of England.

For the further satisfaction of those that shall read and meditate upon this
foregoing discourse, I shall quote some Scriptures that speaks against the
ways of men, that make, follow, and uphold the customs before mentioned, that
they are against the mind of God, as he has declared in word; and also
threatens punishments unto those that practice them.

The unknown tongue for a people to be governed under, is a curse to the
Nation, and not profitable.
Deuteronomy. 28. 49, 50, 51. The Lord shall bring a nation against thee from far, a
nation whose tongue thou shall not understand. Jer. 5. 15. Lo, I will bring a
nation upon you, it is a nation whose language thou know not, neither
understandest what they say. 1 Cor. 14. 4. He that speaks in an unknown
tongue, edifieth himself. 6. Now brethren, if I come unto you speaking with
tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak unto you either by
revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine. 7. And even
things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a
distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or harped? 8.
For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the
battle? So likewise you, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be
understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye speak in the air. 10.
There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them
are without signification. 11 Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice,
I shall be unto him that speaks, a Barbarian, and he shall be a Barbarian to
me.

Against gifts or unreasonable Fees, that Lawyers and others take of the
Clyant, whereby many times there is neglect of Justice.
Exodus 23. 8. And thou shall take no gift, for the gift blinds the eyes and
perverteth the words of righteousness. Deuteronomy. 16. 19. Isa. 1. 23. Thy Princes are
rebellious, and companions of thieves: every one loves gifts, and follows
after rewards. Micah 3. 11. The heads thereof judge for reward, the priests
thereof teach for hire, the prophets thereof divine for money.

Against oppression by the Lord of Manors in taking of Fines.
They covet fields, and take them by force; and houses, and take them away* so
they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his family. Amos 4. 1. Hear
ye this word, ye kine of Bashan, that are in the mountain of Samaria, which
oppress the poor, which crush the needy Amos 8. 4. Hear ye this, O ye that
swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of the land to fail.

Exhortations to amend.
Jer. 18. 11. Return ye now every one from his evil, and make your ways and
your doings good. Zach. 1. 4. Turn ye from your evil ways, and from your
evil works. Isa. 1. 17. Learn to do well, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow.

Blessings promised upon amendment.
If ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless and the widow, and shed no
innocent blood: if ye thoroughly amend your ways, and your doings; if ye
thoroughly execute judgment between a man and his neighbor, then will I cause
you to dwell in the land that I gave to you. Jer. 7. 5, 6, 7. When I say unto
the wicked, Thou shall surely dye, if he turn from his sin, and do that which
is lawful and right; If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had
robbed, walk in the statutes of life; he shall surely live, he shall not dye.
Ezekiel. 33. 14, 15.

Punishments threatened to them that do unjustly after admonition.
Prove. 29. 1. He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall suddenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy. Prove. 1. 30, 31. They hated knowledge,
and did not choose the fear of the Lord, they would have none of my counsel:
they despised all my reproof. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their
own way, and be filled with their own devices.

The reason why I quote these Scriptures is, that all oppressors of what sort
soever may see, that God abhors all manner of arbitrary power and cruelty;
And if we look into the Scriptures, we may see how the Lord from time to time
has brought judgments upon them. I conclude with that in Micah 6. 8. He has
showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but
to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

FINIS.

