THE DUTY OF Honoring the King, And The Obligations we have thereto: Delivered
in a SERMON Preached at RICHMOND in Yorkshire, on the 6th. of February,
1685/6. Being the Day on which His MAJESTY began His happy Reign. At a general
Assembly of the Loyal Gentry of those Parts, held there on purpose to celebrate
the KING's quiet and peaceable Succession to the Throne of His Ancestors.

By Christopher Wyvil M. A. Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, and
Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Ormond.

Printed at the request of the Gentlemen that heard it.

Imprimatur,

To. Altham, Rmo. P. Dno. Johan. Archiep. Ebor. a sacris Domesticis.



YORK, Printed by Io. White, for Richard Lambert Bookseller, at the Crown
within the Minster-Gates, Anno Dom. M. DC. LXXXVI.

To the Right Honorable CONYERS Earl of HOLDERNESS, Lord DARCY, and MEINIL.
My Lord,
THe only Reason that obtained my consent to the publishing of the ensuing
Discourse, was the Opinion they had who heard it, that it might be serviceable
to his Majesty, by reducing some of His misguided Subjects into a right sense
and practice of their Allegiance toward Him; to which end I beseech our good
God to give it his blessing.

And the Honor I have to be related to your Lordships truly Loyal and
Religious Family obliges me to Dedicate it to your Lordship; most humbly
begging your Lordship's acceptance of it as a Testimony of the Duty owing to
your Lordship, from

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most obedient Grandson and Most humble Servant Chris.
Wyvil.

THE DUTY OF HONORING THE KING.
1 Pet. 2. 17. Honor the King.
THat which in the Primitive Age of the Church raised many Enemies to the
Christian Faith, and induced the Potentates of the Earth to endeavor its
extirpation, was a groundless Suspicion of its inconsistency with Civil Powers:
a Calumny invented, no doubt, and spread abroad by the Devil and his Agents, on
purpose to alienate the minds of men from making profession of it, and to bring
it into the contempt and hatred of Kings and Princes; they being thereby
persuaded that the Kingdom of Christ (howsoever it was taught not to consist of
this world) was Ioh. 18. 36.
an encroachment upon their Dominions; that the preaching of the Gospel
(howsoever it was said to be the Gospel Ephesians. 6. 15.
of Peace) carried nothing else with it but Fire and Sword, wheresoever it was
planted, that Faction and Sedition, Conspiracies and Rebellion were the only
product of its. Doctrine; and that they who Taught and embraced it, were no
better then common Incendiaries, Subverters of the public Peace and quietness,
Seducers of the People Acts 24. 5.
where they came, and even turned the world upside down. Acts 17. 6.


But the vanity and the falsehood of this Suggestion, both by the Practice of
Christ, and of the Writings of his Apostles, does sufficiently appear: For our
Savior did not only give Commandment to his Followers to render Mat. 22. 21.
unto Caesar the things which be Caesar's, as well as unto God Mar. 12. 17, etc.
the things which be God's; but, that he might confirm his Doctrine by his own
Example, he patiently submitted Luke 20. 25.
himself to the Jurisdiction of an Heathen Governor, John 17. 11.
freely owning the Power and Authority he had over him.

Nor were his Disciples less careful to imprint the same Doctrine in the minds
of their Proselytes, strictly charging them as to live in unity and concord one
with another; so more particularly to be obedient to Government and Governors,
and to pay a just deference to the Civil Magistrate. St. Paul exhorts every
soul to be subject to the higher Powers, and to pay tribute to whom tribute,
Romans 13. 1, 7.
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor is due. And he
charge Titus to put the Tit. 3. 1.
People in mind of being subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey
Magistrates.

Which Subject is also prosecuted by St. Peter in this Chapter of my Text,
where he exhorts his own 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2, 13, 14.
Countrymen the Jews that were dispersed here and there throughout Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, to submit themselves to every
ordinance of man, for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or
unto Governors as unto them that are sent by him. And he had some special
Reason for so doing; for there was then, as there is now, a Generation of men,
that under a pretense of Christian Liberty, thought themselves under no
obligation to temporal Princes, denying to pay them even civil Respect,
esteeming all men as equal, and vainly imagining that no mortal man ought to be
accounted a Prince or a Lord over them. It was therefore but necessary for our
Apostle to put these men in mind of their Duty, and to require them so to be
free as 1 Pet. 2. 16, 17.
not to use their Liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of
God, and to fear God, yet so as to Honor the King also.

And it is very considerable, that the Persons to whom he directs this Epistle,
were at that time under the Supreme Government of the Emperor Claudius, a
profane Suet. in vita Claudii cap. 34.
Infidel, and a cruel Tyrant; a worshipper of the Heathen Idols, according to
the custom of the ancient Romans, a Man naturally merciless and given to
bloodshed, and yet such an unbelieving and bloody Oppressor this blessed
Apostle does exhort the believing Jews to honor. Now if such deference was to
be paid to him, how much more reasonably is it due to a Christian King? And
with what alacrity should we be ready to yield it to our present Sovereign, who
has not only shown himself merciful already to a great degree, in Pardoning
the Lives of some of those Men whose hands were unnaturally lift up to take
away his; but by his Sacred Word, (which was wont to be more unalterable then
any of the Laws of the Medes and Persians) and by his repeated promises, (which
he has made unconstrained, unaskt, unsought for; God Almighty bless his Royal
heart for it) has given us sufficient assuranccs that he will support and
defend our Church?

It is one great excellency of our Holy Faith that as it is very consistent
with order and civil Society, and fitted for the prosperity and Happiness of
men of all degrees, So the just Rights and Privileges of temporal Princes
cannot be better secured then by the rules of its Doctrine, all persons by the
Christian Religion being enjoined obedience to those in Authority not only for
wrath but also for Conscience sake; every man as he is Romans 13. 5.
bound to fear God being also obliged to honor the King.

And we cannot but admire and adore the Wisdom and goodness of God, that when,
for the preservation of Order and Government in the World, he did ordain that
Power and Authority by which Kings do reign and Princes decree justice, he did
at the sametime determine to provide for the support of it; and took great care
for the securing of their Persons from violence and their Crowns from contempt,
as by many good Laws and precepts, so more especially by that of Honoring the
King: a Duty upon which many others do mainly depend; a duty incumbent upon all
the Kings Subjects in what parts of his Dominions soever they live, by
whatsoever Titles they are distinguished, whether they be Noble or Ignoble,
whether they be Laymen or Ecclesiastical Persons; a Duty which if rightly
practiced would tend to the universal good and welfare of the whole Kingdom,
and of every member of it, 'twould make the King great at Home and considerable
Abroad, that we may therefore rightly understand it, that we may all duly
practice it, and carefully avoid what is forbidden by it, I shall by Gods
assistance in my following discourse endeavor to do these two things.

1. To explain the Duty, and the several parts of it, And 2dly. To show the
Obligations we have to it.

1. First, for explanation of the Duty; by Honoring the King may in short be
meant, an awful framing and composing of the whole man respectively to his
Authority. For it has respect to the very cogitations of out hearts to which
none but God and our selves are conscious; it concerns our speech, and puts a
bridle upon our tongues; it has an eye upon our actions, and directs the
regulation of them. But that we may more fully discern what it does positively
require, what consequently it does plainly forbid, be pleased to take notice of
these following particulars.

1. Honoring the King does require a Reverential esteem of him, an inward
respectiveness of the soul to him, so as in our thoughts to have a worthy
opinion of him, and to think of him very highly according to the dignity of his
Office, and the eminent Character he bears amongst us. Such (no doubt) was that
honorable account which the Subjects of King David had of him, when they owned
him to be worth ten thousand of them, as you may find in the Second Book of
Samuel the 18th. Chapter and the 3d. verse: as likewise when in the same Book
of Samuel the 21st. chapter and the 17th. verse, they held him to be the Light
of Israel. Such were the thoughts which men conceived of Zedekiah (who yet was
no very good King) when, upon his fatal Captivity under the King of Babylon, he
was lamented by the character of the breath of their nostrils. Such every
lawful Lament. 4. 20.
Governor that sits upon the Throne of Majesty ought to be esteemed, such
apprehensions should every one of us have of our King.

We must have so great thoughts of his high Calling as to look upon him to be
Gods immediate Vicegerent within his own Dominions, and to be accountable to
him only for what he does; for where the word of a King is there is power and
who may say unto him what do Eccles. 8. 3.
thou? we must esteem him under God to be the Supreme Governor, and not
imagine that any man or any number of men either within or without his Realms
has any power or Superiority over him. In which respect it was that Saul was
said by Samuel to be the head of the tribes 1 Samuel 15. 17.
of Israel, and the King is called Supreme in this very chapter 1 Pet. 2. 13.
of my text, and by the good Laws and Constitutions of this Land our present
Sovereign is declared to be. So in all Causes and over all persons, to think
otherwise of him is to wrong him, and detracts from that honor which by the
Laws of God and man belongs unto him. Let the Votaries of the Church of Rome
who think the Pope to be above him, and the upstart Sect of Presbyterians or
Independents that would have him truckle under the Cognizance of their
Classical meetings. See how at the last great day they will answer to God their
denial of this part of his just prerogative. The Loyalty of the Church* of
England teaches us another Doctrine, we all being thereby obliged to believe
that the King has all Power both Ecclesiastical and temporal; and so long as
we are members of this Church, we must do him that right and afford him that
honor in our hearts, as to be firmly persuaded that no humane Authority is
above his, or equal to it, that none may constrain or limit it.

And as we are not to lessen his Sovereignty in our thoughts, so neither should
we think ill of him, much less devise or contrive any evil against him. Honor
is properly an inward act of the Soul, which if it be true and sincere cannot
afford harbor for any base intentions or treacherous designs. evil purposes
and malicious imaginations can no more consist with it then Light with
Darkness, or love with hatred; and for a man to profess that he honors the
King and at the same time to entertain thoughts and designs of harm against 2 Samuel: 3. 27.
his Crown and Dignity, is like Ioab to speak fairly and friendly to his
Neighbor, and presently to smite him 2 Samuel; 20. 10.
under the fifth rib to the very heart. The imaginations of our hearts ('it is
true) are only known to God; But, if they be void of that due regard we should
have for our Sovereign, if they give way to any bloody intendments and
Teasonable Practices, although no mortal man that is not made privy to them can
make them known, yet that all-searching eye that pierces into the very secrets
of the heart can, and often does discover them (be they never so cunningly and
closely contrived) by ways and methods sufficiently declaring his care and
providence in the protection and preservation of his Vicegerent. And because
the persons of Princes are more Sacred then the persons of private men,
therefore God has promised in his holy word that curses though but in the heart
conceived Eccles: 10. 20.
against them shall be detected by the Birds of the Air, that is, in some
Notorious and Remarkable manner if by ordinary means they cannot be revealed.
So detestable in the sight of God are but the least intentions of evil against
the Lords anointed. And may all those Devilish devices be confounded, and those
false and evil thoughts blasted, that shall at any time be hatched in the
breast of any man against the Life or against the Honor of our Lord the King.

Now when this Reverential Esteem and Awful regard for the King is once well
settled and grounded in the heart, it will soon exert it self in real and
substantial matter in outward and visible Signs that may plainly testify and
manifest our inward respect. Honor conceived in the thoughts will not rest
wholly there, but will be productive of apparent indications of it; it is the
root that gives life and nourishment to the branches that sprout up from it;
the Original and Spring from whence several considerable Duties, as so many
rivulets from the Fountainhead, do naturally flow, it is not sufficient to
pretend an inward respectiveness, without giving an outward and sensible
evidence thereof, for that would be but vile mockery; as on the other hand an
outward submissiveness without an inward, hearty and sincere reverence would be
but downright hypoerisy: Wherefore,

( 2dly.) Honoring the King does require that we should speak Honorably of
him, feldome making mention of his name but in such a manner as may Savor of
respect and best express the esteem and awful regard which we do bear or ought
to bear toward him; upon good occasions giving him his due Titles, and such
appellations as either the word of God or the Laws of the Land, or the Custom
of the Age we live in, do allow and approve of. Such was that common 1 Samuel 24.
8. 26. 19. 29. 8.
phrase which we so often meet with in the Old Testament my Lord the King. Such
is that style which the Acts of Parliament do commonly make use of, 2 Samuel: 9.
11 13, 33 14. 15, 17 18, 28.
the Kings most Excellent Majesty. Such are those honorable epethites which
our Liturgy has given him, Ier. 38. 9.
Our gracious Sovereign, Our Dread Sovereign, Our most gracious King and
Governor. Such expressions Esther. 1. 4.
as these carry with them a Specimen of respect, and do well denote the sense
we have of his high Calling and Authority over us.

Our words oftentimes are good indications of our mind, and whosoever he be for
whom we have a real honor, we cannot but sometimes by our very speech make a
discovery of it. but to let the tongue fly out in evil Language and bitter
expressions against him are no way consisting with it, What shall we then think
of those railing Rabshakey's and cursing Shimei's (If there be any such now
living) that make it their business to traduce the Sacred Majesty of their
Sovereign not only with Saucy, impudent, reproachful, and scandalous but false
names? What shall we say of those two Arch-Traytors the late Duke of Monmouth,
and the late Earl of Argile, that in their Traitorous Declarations had the
brazen Confidence to call His present Majesty a Tyrant and Usurper? Words that
our very Souls should abhor to think of; but they had the Fate they deserved,
and may all such revilers of Authority fare no better!

We cannot but consider, and should seriously lay it to our hearts, how that
St. Paul, having called Ananias Acts 23. 5.
a whited Wall, no sooner was told that he was the high Priest but he retracted
his word and acknowleded his error, saying, I wist not brethren that he was
the high Priest, for it is written, thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of
thy people. And St. Jude, amongst great Jude 8.
Sins reckons up a despising of Dominion, and speaking evil of Dignities.
Should we be admitted into the King's Presence, and had we the honor to speak
to Him face to face, doubtless our behavior would be profoundly reverent, and
our words accordingly. And is it then proper or becoming us to give our tongues
the liberty of speaking any ways contemptibly of him, or with less respect unto
him behind his back? Wherefore, O all ye that pretend to honor the King, let
it be your care that it may be known by your words that you really do so.

3dly. Honoring the King does require that we should actually do such things
as may contribute to his honor, promote the grandeur of his State, and be a
Means of his making a good Figure both in his own Dominions and amongst his
neighboring Princes. For the persons whom we heartily honor, we cannot but
endeavor to advance in their credit and reputation in the world, and do all we
can that may be for their well-being, and make them great and happy. Now those
things that may obtain that blessed end I conceive to be these. First,
supplying of his Wants; Secondly, assisting him against all his Enemies; and
Thirdly, praying unto God for him.

First, Supplying of his Wants, whether it be by paying of him his just Tribute
and Custom, or by raising a fresh Contribution for Him, as his present
occasions shall require: Then the doing of which nothing seems to be more
reasonable; for how otherwise shall he be enabled to provide for the Public,
and to maintain his People in Peace and Safety? It is he that acts for the
Public Good and Happiness of all his Subjects, and it cannot surely be deemed
unreasonable that he should be supplied out of the public Stock: They that
deny him that Justice, do as much as in them lies to open a gap for any
Intruder to dispossess him of his Throne, and to work the Ruin of his
Kingdoms. The fullness of the King's Treasures is next under God the Strength
and Sinew, the main Support and Bulwark of the Land; and if we suffer that to
be very low and remain in an ebbing condition, we then deprive him of all
Capacity of doing us good, expose our selves to diverse unavoidable Calamities.
So that keep Him bare and Poor is in effect to be injurious to our own selves,
to cut off our own hands, and disenable us from helping and relieving our
selves upon any emergent Occasion.

We do usually account it unnatural for a son to deny his Father, in his
Necessity, seasonable Relief and Comfort: how much more reasonably should it be
so esteemed to withhold Supply from the King, who is Pater Patriae, the common
Father of his Country, upon whose Happiness and Prosperity so much public Good
does mainly depend?

Besides, without such supply he cannot keep up the Port and Dignity, the State
and Majesty of a King, so as to live with Credit, or in any tolerable Splendour
befitting the Quality and Office whereunto God has called him, which must
necessarily expose him to the Ignominy and Contempt of other Crowned Heads, who
upon that account may make nothing of Deriding and Despising him, and even
Trampling him under their Feet.

Our Savior Christ thought the payment of Custom Mat. 17. 27.
to be so very right and equitable, that he wrought a Miracle to pay
Tribute-money, and has commanded Mat. 22. 21.
us (as in the beginning of this Discourse I took notice of) to give unto
Caesar the things that be Caesar's; and Mark 12. 17.
the supplying of Caesar's Wants is as much Caesar's Due Luke 20. 25.
as any thing whereof we have a rightful Possession may properly be called our
own.

To conclude therefore this point, if we love the King, as we are bound to do;
if we value his honor which should be dear unto us; if we have any regard to
our own temporal happiness which is much bound up in his and cannot well be
separated from it. Let us then not be backward or unwilling to afford him such
a pecuniary supply as his important affairs may demand or the great Council of
the Nation may at any time think fit to tax us with.

Secondly, Assisting him against all his Enemies is another means whereby we
may promote the Kings Honor, which if they ever prevail against him must
consequently be much impaired and eclipsed. The Kings enemies are ours, and we
should be as active and vigorous in helping him to overcome them as if their
Swords were directy levelled at our own hearts.

Now the Kings Enemies are either Foreign or Domestic; his Foreign Enemies
are the Inhabitants of other Nations, with whom he may at any time be obliged
for his own honor or his Kingdoms good to wage War; against whom we are bound
to fight, and ventured our Lives and Persons in his just defense, which should
be as much at his Command and Service as our Estates and Fortunes.

His Domestic Enemies of the two are the worse; for a man can have no worse
Adversaries then those Mat. 12. 25.
of his own Household. a Kingdom divided against it Mar. 3. 24.
self cannot stand; and if an house be divided against it self (unless the good
hand of Providence intervene) Luke 11. 17.
the ruin of that house must needs be near. Now his Majesty's Domestic
Enemies are those of his Natural Subjects, that being instigated by the Devil,
do bear an ill will to his Person, and carry on evil Designs, and evil
Practices against his Government.

Of which some (perhaps) may be in open Rebellion, and with a bare face commit
Acts of Hostility against him. And a Man would really wonder that there should
ever be such Monsters in Nature, such unnatural bruit Beasts as thirst after
the Blood of their own Father, endeavor to rip up the Womb of their own
Mother, and seek the subversion of the Place of their own Nativity; the which
all they may be supposed to do that draw their Swords against their Liege Lord
and Sovereign, and by a civil War disturb the public Peace. And it is but the
last Years Revolution that makes us experimentally know that there may be
Devils upon Earth in humane shape, as well as there are really Devils in Hell,
and as these rebel against God, so do they rebel against Gods Vicegerent. Now
when Rebels are got to such an Head, as to appear in open Arms, it is the part
of good Subjects to show themselves for the Kings side, by resisting and
opposing them, by preventing their Numbers to increase, by cutting them short
of Relief, by Declaring openly against them, by animating each other to
withstand them, all of them in their several Capacities contributing some way
or other to quell and subdue them.

Again, others there are of the King's Domestic Enemies that appear not so
openly, but yet covertly manage the same mischievous and treasonable Designs.
And they are by so much the more formidable and dangerous by howmuch the more
unperceivable and unsuspected their ways and methods of Proceeding are: such
are they who will not professedly declare and level War against him, but they
will lay cunning Plots and privy Conspiracies to deprive him of his Life.
Others will profess an abhorrence of such a bloody Enterprise, and declare that
they have no ill will toward His Person, but yet they will not stick at
seizing of his Guards, taking Him out of the hands (as they think) of evil
Counselors, and keeping Him under a Restraint till he shall be forced to
comply with their unreasonable Demands, or they will endeavor (as was the
Saying, and the Design of that ungrateful Traitor the late Earl of Shaftsbury)
Declaration of the late Conspiracy, published by his late Majesty's Order, Page
9.
leisurely to walk His Majesty out of His Dominions, by setting up factious
Clubs, and Cabals of disaffected and discontented People; by subtle and crafty
Insinuations, withdrawing the Vulgar from the Duty of their Allegiance,
infecting their Minds with seditious Principles, and making them sit for any
sudden Assault and Insurrection: which things they do, some for some particular
disgrace, which they deservedly received at Court, seeking to revenge their
private Quarrel, by setting the whole Nation on a Flame; some out of Pride and
Ambition, not thinking themselves sufficiently rewarded for their former
Services; some out of a vain affectation of Popularity, desiring to be esteemed
the Head of a Party; some out of a design to fish in troubled Waters, and to
become gainers by public Destractions; and lastly some for the mere sake of
doing Mischief, like the Scottish Ferguson, that remorseless Villain, that,
when the accursed Treasons of his Confederates were hapily detected, had
notwithstanding the boldness to profess that Declaration of the late
Conspiracy. Page 69.
for his part he would never be out of a Plot as long ash lived. Now when such
men are busied upon such hellish Contrivances, it is the Duty of all those that
truly Honor the King, to be assisting to him in counterplotting their Designs,
in suppressing their Meetings, in making (if possible) a discovery of their
Actions, and bringing their Persons to condign Punishment.

Particularly it should be the Endeavor of all inferior Magistrates and
subordinate Officers, who are to be a terror to evil Works, to take care that
the King suffers Romans 13. 3.
no wrong by such Workers of evil; that none of His just Rights and
Prerogatives be invaded and violated by them; to keep the Populacy quiet, and
make them do their own Business; to suppress seditious Tumults in time, lest by
connivance and forbearance they 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
become too headstrong and unruly; and by a vigilant Circumspection, to look
well to the Trust which their great Master has reposed in them.

Nay, it concerns all the loyal Party, when the Faction grows insolent and
daring, it mainly (I say) concerns us all to be no less courageous and active
according to our power, in asserting the King's Cause, and vindicating his
honor, and not to suffer it to be run down by Noise and Clamor, and by Fury
and Violence: in such a Case to sit still and be afraid to own Him, is to
betray him, and quietly permit him to become a Prey to those that hate him: we
should speak our Minds freely and act boldly in the Defense of him, and choose
rather to be buried in the Ruins of the Royal Family (if that must fall) then
part with our Loyalty, and side with their Enemies. But,

Thirdly, As we may be very instrumental in promoting the King's honor by
relieving his Wants, and by assisting him against all his Enemies, so likewise
may we be so in praying unto God for him: which, as it is a Duty enjoined us by
St. Paul, exhorting us to pray as for all Men, so more particularly for Kings,
so it is in its 1 Timothy 2 1. 2.
self most easy and in every Man's power to perform. For whereas all men have
not wherewithal to contribute toward the relief of the King's wants, all men
may nevertheless pray for Him. The poorest man in his Dominions can make him
this Offering, and the richest can afford him nothing better. He that begs his
bread from door to door, and is himself destitute of present Sustenance, may
enrich his Prince by the Tribute of his Prayers, and advance him higher then
all the Kings of the Earth. And again, whereas all the King's Subjects are not,
nor indeed conveniently can be actually engaged in his Service by fighting for
him, and assisting him against his Enemies, yet they may all pierce Heaven by
their Prayers, and derive down showers of blessings upon his Armies, and make
them Successful and Victorious.

Now those things which we should chiefly beg of God for him are, that he may
be endowed First, With all Spiritual blessings with the Piety of David, with
the Wisdom of Solomon, and with a daily supply and increase of all other gifts
and graces that may be needful for him; 2dly. With all temporal blessings that
he may be delivered from all dangers incident to his place from Private
Conspiracies, from Tumultuous Factions, and from Open Rebellion; that he may
overcome and subdue all his Enemies, that they may have no advantage over him
nor the Wicked approach to hurt him; that his Life may be long and his Reign
happy, and that all his Subjects may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
Godliness and honesty. 1 Timothy 2. 2*


Such were the Petitions which the Primitive Christians put up to God for the
Heathen Emperors, praying for their very Persecutors, vitam prolixam, imperium
Tert Apol:
securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, etc. a long life, a secure Empire, a
safe family, Valiant Armies, cap. 30.
and so on as Tertullian tells us; the example therefore binds much more when a
King has submitted his Scepter to the standard of Jesus, and makes profession
of the Christian faith.

Nor indeed can we reasonably expect that the King should be happy and
prosperous, without our sincere observance of this Duty; for let us do what we
can to make him so, though we cheerfully assist him with our Fortunes and our
Lives (as we are bound to do when need so requires) yet if we do not add our
Prayers to the King of Kings to crown him with his favor and loving kindness,
in vain may all our endeavors be, for there is no King that can be saved by
the multitude of an host, Psalm: 33. 16.
neither is there any man delivered by much strength, and except the Lord keep
the City (and by his good Providence Psalm: 127. 1;
guard the Kingdom) the Watchmen waketh but in vain. But if all the Kings
Subjects would but most affectionately Pray for him, and with one heart and one
mind humbly beg the blessing of God upon him, we might then have great hopes
that the joynt-addresses of a whole Nation, would be very prevalent at the
Court of the King of Heaven. Wherefore that men do not truly Honor the King,
that is negligent in this Duty of Praying for him, forasmuch as he neglects
that one expedient that may so much tend to his true Interest and true honor.
But further,

( 4thly.) As Honoring the King does require that we should do such things as
may tend to his honor, so it does likewise oblige us to do nothing that may
lessen it, and to endeavor to prevent and suppress whatever may be prejudicial
unto it. For it is natural for us to abhor and avoid as much as we can whatever
may tend to the discredit of those whom we really Love and Honor; nor can that
honor which we ought to have for the King consist with any thing that may
defame him, or cast a blemish upon his Govenment; and those things that may
have this malevalent effectare, First Scurrilous Libels, Secondly, Scandalous
Reports; and Thirdly, the blazoing abroad his personal errors and failings.

First, Scurrilous Libels, whether they be in writing or in Print, in Prose or
in Verse do not only make the King ridiculous but contemptible too; they have a
direct tendency to the wronging of his Person, to the lessening of his
Authority, to the weakening of his Power, and in conclusion to the very
shakening of his Throne; and that man that can find in his heart to wound the
Kings Honor by making Libels upon him, would not stick upon a convenient
occasion to embrue his hands in his blood he that keeps them is as bad for he
thereby approves of what the other has done; else why does he keep them? why
does he treasure them up and is so chary of them? is it for the wit and
Elegancy of speech he meets with in them? but what wit can there be in Ribaldry
invectives and Scurrilous reflections upon the Lords Anointed? is not that wit
vilely misemploy'd and that ingenuity degenerated into folly that is spent upon
such unworthy Designs? What loyal heart can endure to see his Sovereign vilely
abused and bespattered in the most witty, and most elegant Language? Could a
man be well content to have himself, or his dearest Friend so served? and can
we then with patience and contentedness, with pleasure and delight, behold the
Sacred Majesty of our King (which one would think should be exempted from such
Usages) Satyrically exposed and libelled? much less shall we give entertainment
and harbor to such Scurrilities, and not rather with indignation and
abhorrence reject and tear them?

But then he that gives vent unto them, and makes them public, spreads the
malignity of them, and is not perhaps well aware what great Injury as well as
what great Indignity he thereby does the King; but if he be aware of it, if he
knows the harm and considers the Mischief that may from thence arise, and yet
forbears not to hand them from one to another, he is a Traitor to the King, a
betrayer of His Honor, and an enemy to his Kingdoms. In a word, they that make
them, they that keep them, they that disperse them are all Blameable. If we do
indeed heartily honor the King, if we have any value for the preservation of
His Credit and Renown, as we should never make such Libels our selves, so
having found them, being made we should presently seek to suppress them, and
make them quite away. So likewise should we do in reference

Secondly, To scandalous Reports, whether they be true or false; if true we
should forthwith stifle them in their very first birth, keep them wholly to our
selves, and prevent the farther growth of them; if false, we should contradict
them, rectify the Mistakes, and discover the Cheat and Malice of them, and not
only so but do all we can to keep them from spreading; for if scandalous
Reports do but once take air, how senseless and unreasonable soever the grounds
for them may be, yet they will not only find entertainment with credulous and
easy People, but also be apt to increase in the telling; such I make account
are those that concern bad News, misrepresentation of the Kings actions
traducing of his good ones, missinterpretation of his words, odious reflections
on the Government, the raising of Fears and jealousies, and the like. All
which, or any of them, may by degrees lessen the King in the esteem and regard,
the Love and affections of his People; may make them weary of his Government,
and breed in them an aversion and hatred to his Person; such Reports are of
very pernicious consequence, and may have a malignant influence upon the honor
and the happiness of the King and his Kingdoms. And therefore as it should be
the great concern of us all to beware of them, so more particularly is it the
Duty of all Masters of Families to take care that neither their Children nor
Servants nor any under their Authority be the broachers or the publishers of
such reports let them not suffer them to have the liberty of talking of State
Affairs, or censuring the Actions of their Superiors, or making any
reflections upon them, or showing their islike of them, or setting themselves
up for Politicians and reformers of what their idle fancy may think amiss; and
let no man amuse himself or others with fears and jealousies of ills to come,
we know not when nor how, to perplex our selves with such thoughts and to vent
them abroad, is not only to wrong the King's Justice, the King's Wisdom, and
the King's Goodness, but to distrust the Providence of God too.

Thirdly, The blazoning abroad the King's personal Errors and Failings, may
also be very prejudicial to his honor, and make some of his weak Subjects
conceive an ill Opinion of him. It is I suppose, a Saying in the common Law,
that the King can do no wrong, that is, no wrong which any humane Law or
Judicature can call him to an account for. But as he is a Man, and subject to
the like Frailties with our selves, He may have several deviations from the Law
of God, to whom only he is responsible for them. There is no man upon Earth
that lives and has not some Failings, and is not guilty of some Miscarriages
and Sins, and happy is he that has the fewest and the least to answer for; and
we cannot expect that the King, who is subject to greater Temptations then
other men should be wholly without. But then for us to pass our Censure upon
them and make them the subject of our daily Discourse is not only the height of
rudeness and unmanner liness, but a great Affront to his Sacred Person, and
directly tends to his public Defamation. We should rather endeavor to conceal
them and not talk of them at all; or if we do, it should only be to extenuate
and lessen them, and as far as we can make good excuses for them. That
Christian Charity which obliges us not Mat. 7. 1
to judge our Brother will much less suffer us to do so of Luke 6. 37
our King. What Man would be pleased to have his Romans 14. 10, 13.
own Failings, or the Failings of his own Father publicly exposed, and made
the common talk of the Country? And is it fitting that we should deal less
respectively with the Father of it? The King's Reputation ought to be as dear
unto us as our own, or any of our nearest and dearest Relations and Friends;
and if we have a true honor for him, we must not, nay we cannot do any thing
that may ruin it, that may but lessen or shake it.

5thly. Honoring the King does require, that we should submit our selves to
him, and obey all his just and lawful Commands, readily and cheerfully without
murmuring, without regret, without repining at, or complaining of them. We
should behave our selves toward him like the Soldiers of the Centurion in the
Gospel, to any of whom if he said go, he went, or to another come and he came;
or to another do this, and he did it. Mat. 8. 9.
Without this Submission and Obedience, we shall but imperfectly fulfill the
Duty of my Text: For to pretend to honor the King, and at the same time to
disregard his lawful Commands is in effect a manifest rejection of his
Authority, a great affront to his Sovereign Power, and a plain violation of
that dutiful respect that is due unto him. Honor is that which an Inferior
ought to pay to a Superior, nor can he better evidence the reality and
sincerity of it, then by his obedience to what shall lawfully and justly be
imposed upon him. Whence it is that those whom we heartily honor we are ever
ready to obey, cheerfully attending upon the Execution of their will and
pleasure, designing thereby to testify the deference and regard we have for
them: Nor can we do less toward the King's Majesty, if indeed we sincerely and
unfeignedly do honor him. Nay, we have somewhat a greater Obligation to be
obedient to Him then to any other Man; for all the King's Laws and Commands, so
far forth as they are not contrary to the Laws and Commands of God, do bear the
Stamp of a divine Sanction; and those things that in their own Nature are
purely indifferent do then cease to be so when by him they are enjoined or
forbidden; And he being God's Representative upon Earth, they do upon that
account expect and demand our just compliance with them. If indeed his Laws
should plainly interfere with the Laws of God, if he commands any thing that is
manifestly contrary to the will of God revealed in his Word, if what he enjoins
be in it self directly sinful, we must then say with the blessed Apostles of
our Lord, that it is better to obey God then Men. But we that live under Acts
4. 19. 5, 29
the happy Government of these Nations, and in the Reign of so just a Prince,
need not trouble our thoughts with such Supposals: however neither upon such an
account, nor upon any other pretense whatsoever should we use any violence
toward him, or make any resistance against him: but we are by Scripture, by
Reason, and the consent of Antiquity strictly obliged either actually to
perform his Will, or patiently suffer his will to be done upon us. This is the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church, This the Doctrine of the particular Church of
England, this the opinion of all Orthodox Loyal and good men, This was the
profession and Practice of the Primitive Christians.

6thly. And lastly, Honoring the King does require that we should at some
certain time and in some solemn manner celebrate the memory of any notable
achievement performed by him, of whatsoever deliverance out of Eminent
dangers, or happy success in great undertakings, or extraordinary blessing upon
his Person and Government has through Gods Providence befallen him, or us
through him; and that we should endeavor the best way we can to testify the
joyfulness of our hearts and our sincere thankfulness to God Almighty for the
same. The doing of which as it is a very good and laudable Custom (received in
all Countries, practiced throughout all Ages) so it is a direct Honoring of
him; we thereby giving some demonstration that we love and respect him, that
his Happiness and his Life are of great Concern to us. Solemn times of
Festivals and Public Thanksgivings for the Divine favors and Benedictions
conferred upon our Sovereign do well express the sense we have of them and are a
good Sign that we highly value and Esteem them: and for a man upon such
occasions to give no indication of joy, no testimony of gratitude to God for
them looks as if he were discontented at the Kings Prosperity, or not well
pleased with it or could heartily have wished it had been otherwise.

And if any Nation under Heaven ever had a just cause of such Solemnities,
certainly we of this have not the least. For if we call to mind what mercies
and deliverances God was graciously pleased to vouchsafe our King both before
and since his coming to the Crown; how after a long and tedious Banishment from
his native Country, he was again with his late Royal Brother brought back in
Peace; how miraculously he escaped the danger of Shipwreck in the Gloucester
Frigate; how Providentially he was deliverred from the Barbarous assassination
intended at the Rye, And Lastly, how wonderfully Successful his Arms were in
the Suppression of the late Rebels both in England and Scotland; when (I say)
we reflect upon these things, we cannot but discern and adore the good hand of
God that out of such Perils both by Sea and Land, has reserved Him at last to
Sway the Scepters of these Kingdoms, and prospered the beginning of his Reign
with a Victory so Remarkable and so much conducing to the good of his Subjects.
But particularly should we affectionately upon this Day Commemorate his quiet
and peaceable Succession to the Throne of his Ancestors. For when were consider
how maliciously the Minds of ill men were not long since set against him; what
endeavors we made use of to exclude him from his just Rights, (Him the next
Heir to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, Him the entirely beloved Brother, the
only Brother of that most merciful Prince King Charles the Second, Him the Son
of that Royal Martyr King Charles the First, Him that had often hazarded his
Royal Life in the defense of this Nation, and by his Courage and Conduct had
gained Credit and Glory to it,) and farther what Rumors and Stories to that end
were made of Him; what bandyings and Consultations were held to work his Ruin
and Subvertion, and thereby to involve the whole Land in a Miserable Confusion
and Sea of blood; and yet that, notwithstanding all this, all those restless
endeavors of unreasonable men should be quite frustrated and brought to
naught, that the Strivings of the People should so soon be converted into a
joyful reception of him, and that he should so quietly and so peaceably enter
upon the Entire Possession of his just Birthright and full Power, without
Bloodshed, without Tumults, without any Opposition, with the joyful Triumphs
and Acclamations of all good men, and receive no disturbance till the Late
Unnatural Risings; when (I say) we consider all this, how great reason have we
to Rejoice Unfeignedly, and most heartily to give the most Merciful God all
Thanks and Praise who so wonderfully and so happily brought to pass the quiet
Settlement of his Anointed, and thereby delivered him and us from those Direful
effects that must necessarily have been the sad Consequents of that black Bill
of EXCLVSION.

Nor can it be any diminution of the honor or any reflection upon the memory
of Our Late most Gracious Sovereign to make the Day on which he deceased a day
of Joy and Thansgiving. For we cannot but at the same time gratefully
commemorate the many blessings we enjoyed during the Reign of that most
excellent Prince; and in the midst of our Holy Triumphs for the happy
Succession of the next Heir, we cannot but affectionately remember that it was
He next under God who by his Vigilant care and Prudent management of affairs,
allayed the heats and madness of the People, stem'd the current of Popular
fury, brought the face of things to so good an issue, and made the entrance to
the Throne so plain and so easy for his Lawful Successor.

It was God's great mercy to us that he Lived so long to do so great things,
that he Died a quiet and a natural Death, and after all the Storms and Tempests
he strugled with, left his Kingdoms in so serene a posture.

Wherefore, whilst we endeavor to express our Joy and our Thankfulness to God
for the King's quiet and peaceable Succession, let us not forget him who
through God's blessing was the great cause and instrument of it. So shall we
honor the King that now is, and not wrong the Memory of the King that is dead.

And I beseech you my Friends, give me leave to exhort you to celebrate the
Feast of this Day thankfully, cheerfully, and soberly; not in Rioting and
Drunkenness, not in Licentiousness and Disorder, lest whilst you pretend to
observe it in honor of the King, you should by your Intemperance dishonor God.

Having thus at large explained the Duty of Honoring the King, and shown you
the chief Parts whereof it does consist, I shall in the

2d. Second place, but very briefly touch upon the Obligations we have to this
Duty, and so conclude.

1st. The first of which may be taken from the Consideration of the Authority,
by which he Reigns, and that is no less then Divine; for by me (says God)
Kings Reign and Princes decree Justice, by me Princes Prove. 8. 15, 16.
rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. He derives not his Power
from the People, (for they are but his Natural Subjects) nor from the Solemnity
of his Coronation, (for that is but a Ceremony of State) nor from inherent or
infused Grace, (for the most graceless Heathens have been invested with
Sovereign Dominion,) but from the Constitution and appointment of God, for
there is no power (St. Paul tells us) but of God, the powers that be are
ordained of God. Whence it is that all Kings and Supreme Rulers are called in
Scripture the Lord's Anointed. And particularly Cyrus the Persian Monarch by
Profession a mere Heathen is in Isaiah said by God himself to be Isa. 45. 1
his Anointed; and all civil Magistrates, those especially that have the
Supreme Jurisdiction are also upon this accouut said to be Gods, of whom God
himself says, I have said ye are Gods: Psalm. 12. 16.
and that very fitly and properly, for they only act in his name by his Power,
upon his account; and as God is the only Supreme Governor over all the World,
so are these under him in their respective Dominions, 1 Cor. 8. 5.
and so there may be as St. Paul says, Gods many and Lords many. Usurpers that
by Violence and Rebellion step into the Throne of Majesty, such as was the Late
Protector, falsely so called, have not this Prerogative, nor is their power from
God; of such it is that God speaks, in the 8th. of Hosea and the 4th. verse
they have set up Kings, but not by me, they have made them Princes, and I knew
it not. But all Lawful Governors that come in by right and Lawful means (such
as beyond all condradiction is Our present Sovereign) have their Character from
the God of Gods and derive their Authority from a Divine Sanction.

Wherefore looking upon the King not barely as a Man, but as a man by Gods
appointment Reigning over us, we cannot but find our selves obliged to Honor
him. Forasmuch as by honoring him we Honor the Ordinance of God; and by not
Honoring Him, neither do we Honor the Ordinance of God. We should Honor him
for the Lords Sake, who has always esteemed any affront 1 Pet. 2. 13.
or disrespect done to His Anointed as if it had been directly offered to
himself. And if there be some degree of Honor due to the Kings Ambassadors
abroad as they are his Representatives, and to all Inferior Magistrates at Home
as they act by his Commission and are sent by him, how much greater Honor does
there then belong to the King himself, who is the Public Minister of God and
his immediate Vicegerent?

2. Another Obligation to this Duty may be taken from the Advantages that
accrue to us through his Government; for he is set over us for our good, and
makes it his business to take care of us and protect us. And therefore to do
him honor is but a just Retribution for the Benefits we receive by him.

3. To which, thirdly and lastly, we are obliged from the Principles of our
Holy Catholic Religion, as it is derived throughout all Ages from Christ
himself, and as it now stands planted and reformed in the Church of England.
Which Church as it teaches us all true Faith toward God, so it obliges us to
all true Loyalty to the King. Nor can we any longer be good Members of this
Church, nor consequently good Christians, then whilst we remain firmly Loyal.
The King has often Declared himself well satisfied with the Principles of our
Church, as they are for Monarchy and Loyalty, and if we would not have our
actions contradict our Principles, if we would have them still preserved in
that good Opinion he has of them, we must honor him in all those particulars
which I have mentioned to belong to this Duty; which whosoever does not
conscientiously observe cannot be a truly Loyal Man, nor does he well deserve
to be accounted (as by being Members of this Church we all justly profess our
selves to be) a Member of the Catholic Church.

My Friends and Gentlemen, I am very sensible that I have detained you very
long; But the Subject I have handled is Great and Noble, Copious and
Seasonable, nor could I have in any tolerable degree discharged my Duty had I
said less of it, though I could say much more. But I will make no Apology for the
tediousness of this Discourse, well knowing that a Congregation that Loves and
Honors the King, (such as I believe this to be) cannot be displeased though it
may be tired with Exhortations to Loyalty: Nor shall I detain you any longer,
then till I have Concluded with that short but comprehensive Form of Blessing
the KING, or wishing well unto Him, 2 Samuel 16. 16.
which was so frequently made use of in Times of Old, 2 King. 11. 12.
which is so suitable to the Day and my Text, and wherein I doubt not but I
shall have your hearty Consent; 2 Chr. 23. 11.
and that is, God save the KING. Amen.

FINIS.

