A TERRIBLE OUTCRY AGAINST THE LOYTERING EXALTED PRELATES: Showing the danger,
and unfitness of Conferring them in any Temporal Office or Dignity. Wherein
the Devil is proved to be a more diligent Prelate, then any of our English
Bishops are, leaving them to the Consideration of the Kings Majesty, and the
high Court of PARLIAMENT. By Mr. PRINNE, a faithful Witness of Jesus Christ,
and a Sufferer under them.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Smethrust. 1641.



A TERRIBLE OVT-CRY against the BISHOPS.
THis has been one great Abuse in England these many years, that such Offices
as have been of most importance, and weight, have commonly been committed to
Bishops and other Spiritual men; whereby their devilish mischiefs, and
inconveniences have happened in this Realm, to the great dishonor of God, and
utter neglect of the flock of Christ, the which three be these.

1. They have had small leisure to attend to their Pastoral Cures, which
thereby have been utterly neglected, and left undone.

2. It has also puffed up many Bishops, and other spiritual persons in such
haughtiness, and pride, that they have thought no Nobleman in the Realm worthy
to be their equal, and fellow; (whence Hall in his Chronicle observes, 22. H.
8. fol. 184.) that the Authority of Cardinal Woolsey, set the Clergy in such
a pride, that they disdained all men, wherefore when he was fallen, they
followed after.

3. Where they by this means, knew the very secrets of Princes, they (being in
such high Offices) have caused the same to be known in Rome before the King
could accomplish and bring his intents to pass in England. By this means has
the Papacy been so maintained, and things ordered after their wills, and
pleasures, that much mischief has happened in this Realm, and others, sometime
the destruction of Princes, and sometime to the utter undoing of many
Commonwealths.

Mr. Hooper, both a Bishop and a Martyr of our Church, delivers his judgment
of the point, in these ensuing terms: upon the 8. Commandment page 78. For the
space of 400. years after Christ, (says he) the Bishops applied all their wit
only to their own vocation; to the glory of God, and the honor of the Realm
they dwelt in; though they had not so much upon their heads, as our Bishops
have, yet had they more within their heads, and the Scriptures and Histories
testify. For they applied all the will they had, unto the vocation and
ministry of the Church whereunto they were called. But our Bishops have so
much wit, that they can rule, and serve (as they say) in both States, in the
Church, and also in the Civil Policy, when one of them is more then any man
is able to satisfy, let him do always his best diligence. If he be so
necessary for the Court, that in Civil causes he can not be spared, let him
use that vocation, and spare the other. It is not possible he should do both
well.

It is a great oversight with Princes, thus to charge them with two burdens.
The Primitive Church had no such Bishops as we. They had such Bishops as did
preach many godly Sermons in less time, then our Bishops horses be a bridling.
If it be so now, let every man judge.

If the fourth part of the Bishopric remained to the Bishop, it were
sufficient, the third part to Schoolmasters, the second to poor, and
Soldiers were better bestowed.

If any be offended with me for this my saying, he loves not his own health,
nor Gods Laws, nor man's. See Bucer, de Regno Christi, li. 2. ca. 12. and in his
Apology he says: It is both against Gods Laws, and man's, that Bishops and
Clergy should be Judges over any Subjects within this Realm, for it is no part
of their office.

Who would put a sword in a mad man's hand? Thus the good Prelate Mr. Latymer,
who gave over his Bishopric out of conscience, (as Saxton Bishop of Salisbury
likewise did) and skipped for joy, being divested of his Bishop-like habit,
because he felt his shoulders so light, and was discharged of so heavy a
burden. How many such Prelates have we now in England?

But now for the fault of unpreaching Prelates, me thinks I could guess what
might be said for excusing of them. They are so troubled with lordly living,
they be so placed in Palaces, couched in Courts, ruffling in their rents,
daunting in their dominions, burdened with Embassages, pampring of their
panches, like a Monk that makes his jubilie, munching in their mangers, and
moyling in their gay Manours, and Mansions, and so troubled with loytring in
their Lordships, that they cannot attend it. They are otherwise occupied, some
in Kings matters, some are Ambassadors, some of the Privy Council, some
furnish the Court, some are Lords of Parliament, some are Presidents, and
Controulers of Mints. Well, well, is this their duty? is this their calling?
are these meet Offices for Priests? is it a meet Office for a Minister of Gods
word to be Controuler of Mints? is this his charge? who controuls the Devil in
his Parish, while he controuls the Mint?

As Paul said to the Corinths, 1. Corinthians. 6. Is there not among you a wise
man, etc. So say I to England, Is there never a Nobleman to be a Lord
President, what a shame is this? must it needs be a Prelate? is there never a
wise man in the Realm to be a Controuler of the Mint? I speak it to your shame,
If there be never a wise man, make a Water-bearer, a Tinker, a Cobbler, a Page
to be in that Office. Make a mean Gentleman, a Groom, a Yeoman, make a poor
beggar Lord President.

The King has a great many Wards; and there is a Court of Wards, why is there
not a School for those Wards? why are they not set to school where they may
learn, that they may serve the King when they come to age; But there is
Noblemen enough for these Offices. And now I would ask a strange question, who
is the most diligent Bishop and Prelate in all England, that passes all the
rest in doing his office? I can tell who it is. But now me thinks, I see you
listening, harkening that I should name him, will you know who it is? I will
tell you: It is the Devil: he is never out of his Diocese, he is never from
his cure, he is ever in his Parish: no lording, no loytring can hinder him; ye
can never find him idle I warrant you: and among all the pack of them that
have Curates, the Devil shall go for my money. Oh all ye unpreaching Prelates,
learn of the Devil, if you will not learn of God; he will give you an example
of diligence in your Office.

Verses written by our renowned Poet, Sir Geffry Chaucer many years ago,
authorized to be printed by Act of Parliament, in the 34. and 35. H. 8. c. 1.
THe Emperor yafe the Pope some time,
So high Lordship him about,
That at last the sely Ryme,
The proud Pope put him out.
So of this Realm is in doubt,
But Lords beware, and them defend,
For now these folk been wondrous stout,
Moses Law forbad it tho,
That Priests should no
Lordships weld
Christ's Gospel bids also
That they should no Lordships held,
Ne Christ's Apostles were never so bold
No such Lordships to them embrace,
But smeren her sheep, and keep her fold,
God amend hem for his grace, etc.
Learn to be diligent for shame, ye Prelates; But God be thanked, there is
good hopes; that the King and Parliament will order you, which that they may,
God grant. Amen.

FINIS.

