THE HUMBLE PETITION AND REMONSTRANCE OF RICHRD WILD, Merchant and Adventurer
in the East India Trade,

Laying open the many wilful Neglects, Illmanged Actions and Improvident
Courses, the Governors and Committees of the East India Company, have
heretofore, and still do practice in all their way of Trade to the East Indies,
to the exceeding great prejudice of the Adventurer and Nation in general.

TOGETHER WITH A Narrative of the principal Wrongs and Injuries the Dutch have
barbarously perpetrated upon the Persons, Ships and Goods of the Company in
Amboyna, and other parts of INDIA;

AS ALSO The manner of Trade the Potugals heretofore, and now the Dutch have,
and do practice, to their exceeding great increase of Stock which our Company
would never be persuaded to follow, in so full and ample manner as they ought
to have done.

Printed in the year 1654

TO HIS HIGHNESS, OLIVER, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging.
The humble Petition of RICHARD WILD Merchant.
Humbly shows,
THat whereas the Trade of the East Indies was begum now 54. years past, and
has been continued ever since by a Company, and managed by Merchants, and
other Citizens of London, for some years by Voyages, which discovering every
day new Trades, proving profitable, both to the Adventurers, and Nation in
general, gave encouragement to all degrees of People, to subscribe a large
Joint Stock of above 1500 thousand pounds, which for some years prospered,
until after discovery and setting a factory in Surrat, the trade of Silk of
Persia came known to us, and proved of very great consequence, as to the
expense of much broad cloth and other Manufactures of England, as also of many
other of India, (whereof the Portingalls, had then the whole trade to
themselves) which our Turkey Merchants envying more especially this of the
silk of Persia, as fearing, that if the trade of India did thrive, and grow
rich, it would bring all, or the greater part of the Silk of Persia, by way of
India, became therefore adventurers in the same stock: And the better to
strengthen their party, and get the managing of the whole action unto
themselves by electing Aldermen, and other rich Merchants Governors, Deputies,
and commitees of their own society, they carried all things to their own minds,
even to the raining of four joint stocks and as many, or more voyages by their
wilful neglects, improvident courses, and ill managed actions, As your
Highness will perceive by the following Remonstrance, wherein I have not only
represented the said Companies errors, but also showed your Highness how those
might have bin, and yet may be (if rightly manged made most rich, and
profitable trades to this Nation, adding thereunto some of the most notorious
wrongs, and injuries, the Dutch have perpetrated upon the persons, ships and
goods of our people in India, to the loss of some Millions of pounds for many
years past, and for ever hereafter, if your Highness does not take the same
into most serious consieration, and make it a State Action, the best way of
recovering from the Dutch, all, or at least one third part of the Mollucca
Islands, as our Just due, or at least the third part of the Spices thereon,
according to the Contract made in 1619. with satisfaction for their long
detention of the said Spices from our Company; which Composition, if strongly
pressed, (as it deserves) may be such as may give reasonable satisfaction to the
Company, and a large proportion of Stock to prosecute all those rich Trades of
India, Persia, Arabia, Mollucca Islands, Manillios, China, and Japon, to the
great increase of Treasure to your Highnesse's Eachequer, and Stock of the
Nation, or by laying it open and free for every subject of England, etc. that
has a mind to trade into (...) parts, being regulated by Agents and Consulls,
as your Highness shall please to appoint in every principal Port, as are the
Turkey and Muscovia Merchauts, that so every man may be Master of his own
Goods, both abroad and at home, and dispose of them at his own pleasure; and
not to be tied to joint Stocks, as hitherto, which as they are the worst of
Monopolies, so are they little better than Cheats to the Adventurers and
Nation, whereof this is the greatest as will appear by the following Discourse.

Your Pet therefore does (in the behalf of the whole Nation) most humbly
entreat your Highness to take the same into your grave and wise Consideration,
That if upon due examination, the Trade be found profitable to the Nation, by
making it a State Action, or laying it open and free for one seven years
experience, it may be supported in a full and plentiful way of trade; if
otherwise it prove not such, it may be suppressed and quite given over.

SIR,
AS the trade of India, in former times, when we had Wars with the Portugals,
did require a greater number of Shipping, then now that we have peace with
them; so did those many, and great Shipping, require a far larger stock to
maintain their great charge and expense; who of necessity were forced to spend
two, if not three years in that Country, which could not well be done, but by
sufficient Stock, to be sent out upon them for trade between Port and Port, in
India it self: whereunto the Court of Committees of our East India Company,
would never be persuaded, nor yet to follow the same in so full and ample
manner, as might be able to bear so great a charge; Notwithstanding the many
and earnest advices and solicitations of their Servants, and Factors, both from
Surrat, Bantam, Persia, Factors s^licitations for increase of Stock, for Trade
from Port to Po^t, not ^elished.
Muslapatan, and Macassar, from whence all the best commodities for Trade were
to be provided, and which did yield at least 2. 3. some 4. for one, within the
compass of one Monsoon or six Months time, as by their own Accounts, and
Letters, (if duly examined) will plainly appear.

Now for as much as I have not the accounts of what passed Abstract of ^^x
years disbu^semen^ in I^dia, what St^ck sent out, and what promised for the
future.
in Surrat before, and since my being there, nor yet have seen those at Bantam;
I cannot, nor will not, deliver any thing as from my own experience, but shall
refer them to their own Accounts and Letters from those parts, which will
sufficiently Prove, what I have asserted. Yet for the six years, and an half,
I was in Surrat, I shall deliver a true abstract of Stock yearly sent thither,
every years charges and expenses, together with every years returns from
Surrat, whereby your Highness will plainly see, what wilful and improvident
courses, those grave and wise men, that governed at the Helm of that action,
did steer, to the great loss and hinderance of the General Adventurers,
(though to their own private ends, enough advantageous)in the interim, not
letting to make great shows of real intentions to follow that Trade, in a
more full and ample manner than formerly; as by an Order and Command by their
Letters, of the 16. of March, 1624. to provide Goods in Surrat, to the value of
141447 l. 10 s. 00 d. for yearly returns for England only; which with
charges there, would have cost at least 160000 l. starling, the partiulars
whereof, I forbear to insert here, to avoid your Highness trouble, as not
material unto the work in hand.

To perform all which, they sent out the same year, but 36000l. in Goods and
Moneys, earnestly requiring by their said Letters, that all the said goods,
might be provided every year for Annual returns for England, and which was
performed most years at high Interest, of 13. and 14. per cent. whereof they
had notice every year, both by Letters and Accounts, yet did they not send out
sufficient Stock, to pay that great devouring debt, but let it continue 11. or
12. years unpaid, to the great hinderance of the General Adventurers,
ignorant of their wilful intentions, as to the ruin of that second, and great
joint Stock, by their ill-managing thereof; which, that it may most clearly
appear to your Highness, I will give you the abstract of all disbursements in
India, what the Company sent out every year, as also what returns they had
thence, for the six years I was in India.

In April 1624.
l. The Company sent out upon four Ships and two Pinnaces, in Goods and
Moneys, 62000 l. as appears by that years account Sh. Tun. James 1000 Jonah
800 Star 400 Eagle 300 Spy 40 Scout 30 2570
62000 Whereof was sent to Persia, in Money and Goods 6225 And to Mocha in in
the Red Sea, in Goods 725 And to Bantam in Goods for Macasser, etc. 7768 And to
Muslapatan by Exchange 126 And to Acheen, and thence to Bantam 5359 And for
England upon the Star, besides what was sent upon the William and Blessing the
same year, on former account 14050 Disburst for Customs in and out in Surrat
7786 By Charge Merchandise in all there Factories 5097 By Ships expenses for
Provisions 5985 By House-expences, and House-rent in all the Factories 2945 By
Factors Wages on the Shore 2230 The whole Disbursments in Surrat this year is
58296. 58296 And there remained for Investments for England the next year, but
3703

Yet, did the President and Counsel send home upon the James and Jonah, next
year, Goods to the value of 80000 l. in India, though at high Interest,
whereby may be observed the improvident way of Trade the Managers of that
Action did run here at home, notwithstanding the second and great Joint Stock
of sixteen hundred thousand pound then in being.

In April 1625.
l. 1625. James and Jonab sent home with Goods, which cost in India above 80000
l. Saerl.
The Company sent out upon four Ships in Goods and Moneys 36000 l. but by
accident there came to Surrat that year in Money and Goods from England, but
10500 And from Mocha in the Red Sea upon the Ship Ann's account 2613 From
Bantam in Goods and Ryalls of Eight 27448 Received in all for this years
Investments in Goods for England Ships Tuns Palsgrave 800 Dolphin 600 Lion 400
Faulcon 250 2050.
40561 Whereof was sent to Bantam in Goods and Money 1792 And to Persia in
Goods and Money 3445 Disburst in Surrat, etc. for Customs in and out 5510 In
Charge Merchandise in all the Factories 7998 In Ships expenses for Provisions
6318 In House expenses 2500 l. and Factors wages 1332 l in all, is 3832 In
House-rent, and Kishme Castle 401 l. in Presents 633 l. in all 1034 Disburst in
Surrat this year 29929. 29929 And there remained for Investments for next
year for England 10632

In April 1626.
The Company sent out upon five Ships in Goods and Moneys from England Sh. Tu.
William 800 Blessing 800 Discovery 600 Maurice 500 Christoph. 400 3150.
90710 And by the Palsgrave and Dolphin, who were beaten from their Port the
last year by the Portugals, in Goods and Money, as appears 25486 In all for
this years Investments 116196 Sum carried over to the outward Marg. 116196
Sum brought over from the outward Margent 116196. l. Whereof was sent to
Bantam and Muslapatan in Goods 19413 And to Persia in Goods and Moneys 39265
Disburst in Surrat for Customs in and out 5817 In Charge Merchandise in sundry
Factories 4152 By Factors wages on Shore 1350 By House-rent in all their
Factories 265 By Ships expenses for Provisions 4876 By Present in all their
Factories 698 By House expenses in all their Factories 2256 Sums disburst in
Surrat is 78092. 78092 And there remained for investments for the next year
381^4

This year 1626. the Dolphin was promised to be sent home, No ship sent home
this year, though fairly promised. And Goods enough in a readiness for 1.
Ships lading, and 8. Ships in Port. Sh. Tun. Pallgrave 800 William 800 Blessing
800 Dolphin 600 Discovery 600 Maurice 500 Christoph. 450 Faulcon 250 4800.
there being at least ^600. Bales of Goods ready housed in Surrat and Raneale,
besides Pepper, notwithstanding all which, there was sent home no Ship that
year, to the great hinderance and disheartening of the General Adventurers,
as appears by the Companies Letters of the 12. of March 1627. wherein they did
heavily complain for want of Returns that year, by which it may be probably
conjectured, there had some private order been given from some particular
Committees, not to send any Indicoe home that year, else could it not possible
be, that having eight great Ships in Ports, idle, and without employment, and
so many Goods in a readiness, which lost one whole years return, to the no
small prejudice of the Adventurers, there should be committed so great an
oversight, and after so great and just complaints, not to be questioned for it
at coming home, when my self, who succeeded him, upon receipt of those
complaining Letters, endeavoring to salve up that error, and reincourage the
Adventurers, did engage my self at Interest, for upwards of 120 thousand
pounds, and sent and brought them home upon eight great Ships the two following
years, Goods which cost in India upwards of 210 thousand pounds, was for the
same cause, and no other, sent for home in a disgraceful manner, as I shall in
its due place make known, to the admiration and wonderment of all the general
Adventurers.

In April 1627.
l. The Company sent out in six Ships for Surrat in Money and Goods Sh. Tun.
Ma^y 1000. Heart 600 Star 400 Hopewell 250 ^^fuge 150 Scout 30 2430.
64700 And from Bantam was sent in Goods 6541 In all 71241 Whereof was sent to
Persia in Goods and Money 4077 And to Bantam in Goods 11889 And to Mocha in the
Red Sea, in Goods 6094 Disburst in Surrat for Customs in and out 4763 By Ships
expenses for Provisions 5626 By House expenses in all the Factories 3916 By
House rent in all the Factories 360 By Charge Merchandise in all the Factories
10352 By Factors wages on the Shore 1350 By Presents in all the Factories 2964
Disbursed in all 51391. 51391 And there remained for Investments for the next
year 19850 January 1627. And the same year was sent home upon three Ships,
Goods which cost Sh. Tun. Palsgrave 800 Dolphin 600 Discovery 600 William 800
2800
90569 And in April following, upon the Ship William, Goods which cost 71816
Sent home this year 162385 In April 1628.
l. The Company sent out two Ships to Surrat in Goods and Moneys Sh. Tun. Iona
800 Expodition 350 1150.
61345 And from Bantam was sent in Goods 7378 In all 68723 Whereof was sent for
Persia in Goods and Moneys 6400 And to Mocha, in the Red Sea, in Goods 2800
Disburst in Surrat for Costomes in and out 6676 By Ships expenses for
Provisions 3547 By House expenses in all the Factories 1973 By Charge
Merchandise in all the Factories 3375 By Factors Wages on the Shore 1225 By
House-rent in all the Factories 165 By Presents in all the Factories to the
Governors 910 Sum laid out 27071. 27071 And remained for Employment for the
next year 41652 The same year in January 1628. on three Ships, and in April
following, upon other three Ships, was sent for England Goods for Sh. T.
Ex^hange 800 Blessing 800 Sta^ 400 Heart 600 Expedition 350 Hopewell 250 3200
130000 April 1629.
l. The Company sent out upon the Charles, in Goods and Moneys Sh. Tun. Charles
1000
61000 Disburst in Surrat in Customs, etc. in and out 5400 By Ships expenses
for Provisions 2500 By House expenses in all the Factories 2000 By Charge
Merchandise in all the Factories 4500 By Factors Wages on the Shore 1250 By
House-rent in all the Factories 150 By Presents to the Governors and Merchants
900 Sum disbursed 16700 And there remained for Employments the next year
44300

And the same year was brought for England, upon the Ships Charles and Jonah,
Goods, which cost in India upwards Sh. Tun. ^^^rles 1000 ^^^^h 800 1800
of fourscore thousand pounds, in conclusion of the second and great joint
Stock, by all which may be observed, that the greatest part of Returns sent
home, was upon high interest in India, and which lay many years unpaid, to the
exceeding prejudice of the Adventurers.

Whereas, had they sent out 200000 l. every year in quick stock, as they have
been often advised, and earnestly entreated by their Factors in India, that
great interest had been saved, and the charge had increased nothing more than
in Customs, and Charge Merchandise; but the profit, both abroad and at home
would have been such, as would have born all losses, which have happened and
befalne that action, by the improv^dent sending home their Ships late in the
year, and an overplus of fair gain to have encouraged the general
Adventurers in the pursuance of that brave and rich Trade, if rightly managed.

Being now fallen upon the unhappy losses this trade has sustained, it will not
be out of season, to let you know how improvidently they ordered the return of
their Ships from India late in the year, occasioned chiefly for want of stock
in the ^ountry, to provide Goods in the best season, that so their Ships might
come thence in December at farthest, so would they bring a Somer season all the
way, and at home also; whereas coming thence in April, as for the most part
they have done heretofore, they bring with them a Winter season, about the Cape
of good Hope and all the way, and upon our own Coast also, which has
occasioned the greatest losses by Sea, as woeful experience has taught the
general Adventurers: And truly, if your Highness shall rightly observe, the
constant course of the Dutch, in sending away their Ships about the beginning
of December, together with the long experience of The late coming of our ships
ou^ of India cause o^ so many losses.
their Ships safe and seasonable arivall in Holland, and the Companies many
losses, and hazardous adventures, they have run upon those Ships, which have
come thence so late in the year; you cannot but conclude, those that managed
that action, to have been, and still are, most wilfully improvident in their
way of trade, as if they did not desire its prosperity and welfare: And no
less careless were they in the overcharge of shipping, and unreasonable
burden of unnecessary servants at home; notwithstanding the many and often
complaints of the general Adventurers, even of late, when we had Unnecessary
charge of Servants, ab^oad and at home, a very great hinderance to our small
stock.
not in stock above a hundred four thousand pounds; our charge was as much here
at home, and much more abroad, than when we had that great stock of 1600
thousand pounds, yet could they not prevail with that Court to lessen this
heavy burden of unnecessary charge.

In Anno 2627.
We had on our hands in Surrat only, twelve great Ships, Twelve great ships in
Su^rat with little or no stock to employ them.
with little or no stock wherewith to employ them, as may appear by the
foregoing account, and their own Letters of the 12 of March 1627. when the
same year we sent to Bantam Goods for 11889 l. which was scarce 100 tons of
tunnage, upon eight of the greatest Ships, six whereof went from Bantam on a
Wildgoose Chase about the Island of S. Laurence, in search of the Portugalls
Carrackes, but never looked out for them, nor came near the place of their
wonted randevouze.

All which Ships, with those sent out the year following, notwithstanding our
small means then in the country (and I left by my Predecessor, forty six
thousand pounds in debt at interest* were laden for England and Bantam, and
thence home, with large Cargazones, as by the foregoing account and relation
following; which, that your Highness may the better understand, I will give
you some particular Clauses of the Companies own Letter of the 12 of March
1627. alluding to the not sending home of the Dolphin, according to promise,
and their own acknowlegement of the great number of ships we had upon our
hands, and little stock wherewith to lade them home.

The Clause of the Companies Letters
12 March 1627.
The want of our expected returns from you this year, has Bl^me for not
sending home retu^ns yearly, the life of trade.
much disheartened our Adventurers, and disinabled us from sending you such
supplies, as we desired to do, for which omission of yours so directly against
your writing to us in your Letter, and so contrary to our continual advice to
you, we cannot choose but blame you much, seeing our advice in every of our
Letters, for many years together, was that you would not fail to send us home
returns yearly, in such season as you could; for the said Returns are the life
of Trade, both in regard of heart and means; wherefore we must needs say
again, that you did not well in the omission thereof, for you have thereby
much disappointed our expectations, and seem very slightly to have regarded
our advice.


Another.
By reason of the great number of Ships, which we have there upon our exceeding
great charge, as you well know, ten The general Adventurers disheartened for
want of returns.
great Ships, and two Pinnaces, if Captain Hall^s Fleet be safely there (as we
hope they are) we have therefore thought good to furnish and send you but two
ships for this voyage, namely, the Jonah of 800. tons, and the Expedition of
350. and howsoever, as we said before, the Adventurers are much disheartened
for lack of returns from you this year; yet have we, with much difficulty,
prevailed with them for a conclusion of this second joint Stock, and best
advancement of the same, to send you a reasonable supply of Money and Goods, in
these our two Express command to send home all their Ships.
Ships, whereby you may be the better provided, not only to lade home
themselves, but all the rest of our Ships there also, for whom you have not
sufficient stock there already, knowing that those you shall not lade home,
will in one year eat out more than their own worth, in men's wages and victuals
only besides the wearing out of themselves, their furniture, stores and
provisions (as costly experience has taught us) which duly recommended, you
will acknowledge what damage we sustain, by keeping our ships there unreturned.
wherefore we pray you, at any hand, to relade them all away with all
expedition, that so we may have the whole returns of this our second joint
Stock from thence, upon its own adventure, without any lag or remain (if
possible) or as few as may be to be transported to our next joint stock, for
erection whereof we have resolved presently after dispatch of these two ships,
to send forth a Book amongst the Adventurers for a new Subscription, which we
have hitherto deferred, until we might see what conclusion Promise of
enlargement of stock not performed not really intended.
the Kings Majesty will make for us with the Dutch which is now but newly in
handling, as in a former clause is more largely expressed: upon our said next
Account we shall God-willing enlarge our trade for Surrat, and furnish it more
amply than ever heretofore we have done: In the mean time, fail not to relade
home all our ships if it be possible for the Adventure of this present stock.


By the former clause of the said Companies Letters your Highness may plainly
see how much they did blame the President Blame for not sending home the
Dolphin according to promise. Which disheartneth Adventurers from sending out
more stock.
then in being, for not sending the ship Dolphin home that year, according to
promise: And by the second, how earnestly they desire speedy return of all
their ships, That the Adventurers were so disheartened for want of Returns, (the
life of trade) that they had with much difficulty prevailed with them to send
out more Stock: That if their ships were kept out but one year longer they
would eat out themselves in Victuals, and men's Wages, with sundry other
expressions to this purpose.

All which I conceiving had been really meant and intended, The Auth^ur engaged
for above 120 thousand pounds at interest in India.
according to the tenor of their said Letters: And out of an earnest desire to
revive that declining trade then gasping for breath of large supplies; And to
reincourage the Adventurers to a new and large Subscription for another Stock
did engage my self for upward of 120 thousand pounds in Notwithstanding which
he did send home six ships with goods cost 130 thousand lib. in one year.
India (as I said before) at Interest, and in January 1628, sent them home
three ships, and in April following other three ships, with Goods to the value
of 130 thousand pounds in India: My Predecessor having the foregoing year, upon
four ships sent and carried home Goods to the value of 170 thousand pounds in
India; And upon the Maurice, Mary, His predecessor having sent home 170
thousand lib. upon four ships the year before. Charles 10004 l. Jonah 800 18004
l.
Faulcon, and Christopher for Bantam, in Goods for 35 thousand pounds: And in
April 1630, I followed my self with Goods upon the Charles, and Jonah, which
cost in India at least 80 thousand pounds.

All their ships being thus returned in safety, and fully laden with rich Goods
with which the Adventurers were again encouraged, above 600 thousand pounds
clear gained little less than 100 thousand pounds saved in shipping, the lives
Above 600 thousand li. gained 100 thousand li. saved in shipping and 2000 men's
lives preserved.
of near 2000 land and seamen preserved, which else had perished; And the
action raised from 45 and 50, to 112 1/2 per cent. according to their own
valuation: I did expect not only thankful acknowledgment from the Court of
Committees, as I had from the general Adventurers, but even a large Gratuity
for this my good service: but so far were those former from giving me any,
either thanks, or reward, that presently upon the Arrival of those six ships,
sent them from Surrat, in one year, they sent out another to supply my place,
calling for me home, under color of a Private Trader only, kept 500 li. from
me for wages, 300 li. due to me by their Pursers books, and 12 hundred and 50
pounds A fine of 2500 li. laid on me for doing too much good service.
paid into the third joint Stock, above ten years denied me allowance for
supplying the prime Places of charge and command in India, to maintain the
credit and reputation thereof, cost me at least 100 li. a year extraordinary
for the four first years when I was Accomptant; and 250 li. a year for three
years from the time I was chosen President, when as those that supplied the
place of Accomptant both before and since my time had 200 li. a year, and the
place of President 500 li. a year; and in the close of all, after two years
attendance, without laying to my charge any dishonest action, For which they
told me I had done them better service if I sunk their ships in the sea, or
fired them in ^dia.
They shamed not in a most injust and illegal way, themselves being both Judges
and Parties in their own cause, to assume such arbitrary power as to lay a fine
of 2500 li. upon me, which I refusing to pay, and pressing hard for a Reward
for my good services done the generality of Adventurers; some of the great
Committees let not to tell me diverse times, in a public and full Court of
Committees (what others had often done in private) That I had done them better
service if I had sunk their ships in the Seas, or fired them in India, than I
did by sending and bringing them home so richly laden, wherein had those
dishonest Managers of that action suffered alone by those many ships and goods
that have been sunk in the seas and fired in India, both before and since (and
not fallen upon the general Adventurers) it had been but a just recompense for
their ingratitude both to God and man.

Here is a mystery beyond ordinary apprehension or common reason, not to be
discerned but by those that have narrowly searched into their unjust ways,
which that your Highness may the better understand I shall humbly desire your
Highness to look back unto the end of Anno 1628, and beginning of 1629, when
they had a very great parcel of Indico come home upon the Palsgrave, Dolphin,
Discovery, and William, of value above 200 thousand pounds; a parcel too big
for any one, or a few to meddle with, yet must not be sold but in gross and
altogether; upon this great parcel (as I have been informed, and that most
truly) did some particular Grandes, rich Committees, Aldermen, etc. cast an eye
of private interest, and the better to work their own ends, and discourage
other men from meddling therewith, they did cunningly sell off some small
parcels of Indico formerly bought at under-rates, by this means beating down
the price and delaying to put the other to sale for almost a whole year, until
themselves were provided of moneys and a season fitting their own dishonest
intentions, which could not be until they were assured the ships that went
that year for India were gone clear from off our coast, having in their Letters
by those ships given order unto their President and Council in Surratt to buy
no more Indico except at 8, or 9 Rupies the Maund; a price not known in our
time, nor yet many years before; whih was as much as to say, Buy Order sent
into India to buy no more Indico.
none at all; which they durst not plainly say, lest the rest of the Court, not
privy to their deceitful design should discover it.

The ships thus gone with this advise, which they believed A Court of Sales
called in a most surrepritious way contrary to their own orders of Court.
would have been observed in India, (as it might have been, if timely given)
they forthwith caused a Bill of Sale for this great parcel of Indico to be set
upon the Pillars in the Exchange at Eight days warning (which if I be not
misinformed) ought by their own orders of Court, to have been at Eight weeks,
that so men might have had time to join together, agree and provide moneys, or
security for so great and vast sums as that parcel would and did amount unto.

This Day of Sales being come, few Buyers appeared, (but The Indico sold at
undervalue, at rebate for months, 40 mo: which is 33 per cent. and 15 per cent.
the impost of 6 d. per lib. is 48 per cent. gains, before it go out of the
land.
those combined to out-bid all offers) that durst adventure upon so great a
parcel as that was, especially seeing a great and rich Alderman make the first
offer (though low) and backed with diverse other of his kindred, friends, and
Copartners, whom they feared to displease; It was suddenly put to the Candle,
(a fine Cheat, where a cunning Secretaty has the art of Extinguishing) which
was soon out; and the commodity his at a lower price than ever sold at before;
And that at five, six months day of payment, upon rebate at 10 li. per cent.
for five, eight months paying in ready money, as they did, rebating for 40
months, which is 33 1/3 per cent. which with 6 d. upon every pound of Indico
for impost which they A most notorious abuse to the Adventurers.
received back after the rate of 10 groats a pound, which is 3 s. upon every 20
s. or 15 per cent. more, which together makes 48 3/1 per cent. a present and
sure gain, before the commodity went out of the River, which if sold abroad, at
the same price it cost here is a fair recompense for what they lost with the
generality in the under rate they bought it at.

Add hereunto the great weight and choice of the best of the Commodity given
them by their own Servants: To preserve The dishonesty of their servants, in
giving over weight to their Masters to preserve favor.
their favor, some of whom also shared with them in their good bargains; which
great wrong and injury to the general Adventurers was beyond all honest and
faithful dealing, whereunto both Masters and Servants are, or ought to be
every year by oath obliged; The like abuse is too familiary practiced in the
sale of all other Commodities, themselves The same abuse in all other
commodities.
being both Buyers and Sellers of the same, to the exceeding great prejudice of
the Adventurers, who have entrusted them with the managing of their business
in hopes of fair and just dealing.

But to come more near to the mystery it self, which is, why the general
Adventurers, should so much applaud my good service done for them by saving
them 100 thousand pounds in shipping by preserving at least 2000 land and
seamans lives, which must have perished with their ships if sunk in the sea, or
fired in India, by gaining them above 600 thousand pounds by the Goods, so
sent, and brought home; all which raised the Action to 11 1/3. per cent. as I
said before. And for the very same cause, and no other, that Court of
Committees should wish all those Ships sunk in the Sea, or fired in India, to
the utter ruin of that Trade, which they have endeavored, and now brought
almost to their desired ends, as I shall more fully discover, when I come to
discourse of the Trade for the silk of Persia.

That which now troubled them was, first, the frustrating The arrival of 8.
Ships in two years, with great store of Indico, lost their hoped for gain.
of their own, expected gains, which they had made to themselves, in hopes of
at least two years time, for the sale of the said Indicoe, at their own
prises, having presently raised it to 50l. per cen. Profit, when unexpectedly,
here arrived the same Summer six Ships, with a second great parcel of Indicoe
which I had bought, and provided, before their said forbidding Letters came to
my hands, and my self following Which caused such Inhumauiries fall from them,
as to discover their evil intentions.
the next year, with a third great parcel brought down the piece again, to
almost what they had bought theirs at, which was the cause he and they lost of
their hoped for gains, and moved such inhumanities to fall from them, fair and
true expressions of their evil affection to those so rich Trades of India, etc.

A second was, a crossing their design of buying all the And crossing their
base design of buying of Adventures, a trick now again in practice.
Adventures of the Nobility, Gentry, Widows and Orphants, as they had bought
of many, at half their value, as will plainly appear by their own accounts;
proposing amongst themselves, to ingrosse all Adventures, to the end, to make
the whole Trade their own, and gain that composition, expected from the Dutch,
wholly to themselves, an intention, as foul, as false, to the betrayed trust
of the Adventurers.

And it will be no hard matter to prove that some of the Order for no mork
Pepper to be sent home, as was formerly given for Indico, in prejudice of the
Adventurers.
present Grandees, and ruling Gommittees, who having lately engrossed all the
Pepper of two years returns, at base and low prizes, did so order the
business in India, that no more Pepper should be sent home the following
year, as formerly they did upon the like occasions, forbid any more Indico to
be bought, not regarding the great loss the general Adventurers did sustain
by keeping a great Ships ladeing of Pepper in India, a whole year, which might
have been sent home one year sooner; which Ship, and Pepper, was in great
danger, to be surprised by the Dutch, for want of timely advice given their
Factors of the breach of Peace, as if in heart they desired the Ship and Pepper
might be taken by them, or perish at Sea. But God Almighty frustrated The
Pepper Ships long detention in Plimoth, not without a mystery if well examinep.
their desires, and brought in the Ship to Plymoth in safety, where she lay
some Months, with fair winds, rather wilfully detained by their underhand
dealing, than for want of Convoy, which must be laid upon the Council of States
failing in their promised supply; an old trick of that Court, to fling scandals
upon the Supreme Power, in all their general meetings, as they did heretofore,
when ever the Dutch's Wrongs and Injuries were in question, the Supreme Powers
must bear the blame, when themselves never made other than slight addresses
unto them, as more willing they should not be composed, until their own
designs were perfected.

Another heavy abuse to the general Adventures, was theie neglect of Pressing
the late King, and present Gouncil of State, for the lessening of the
overgreat Impost laid upon Indico, Pepper, and other India Commodities, which
because in former times, when Indico was worth 5s. and 7s. The Impost of
Indicoe, and Peper of so great profit to the Committees, that they do not
desire its easement as they ought.
6d. a pound, and Pepper, 3s. 4d. a pound, there was laid upon Indico 6d. and
Peper 2d. a pound Impost, and now Indico being fallen one third part in price,
and Pepper to 12d. a li. they are not able to bear it; the General
Adventurers, at many meetings, have complained, as a neglect in the Governors,
and Court of Committees, not ceally informing the Counnil of State of this
over-charge; they have been made believe it is not their fault, having
earnestly importuned the Council of State to lessen that great Impost on
Pepper, etc. but could never prevail, when indeed they have been so far from
pressing it, that they rather desire its continuance, as to them more
beneficial, in the buying of these commodities. As for Example,

Suppose there be in a Stock 100. thousand pounds (as there is little more in
that now in being) and that a Committee man have 1000/. Stock, Adventure
therein, which is one hundred part of the whole, and there is two Millions of
pounds of Pepper come home this year, which at 12d. the pound makes one hundred
thousand pounds, which at 2 d. the Therefore why the Committee desire not to
have the Impost of Pepper taken off, is their own privote gain thereby.
pound impost is, 16666 l. 13 s. 4 d. upon the whole; the 100 part whereof, is,
166 l. 13 s. 4 d. which the said Committeeman loses in the whole parcel with
the General Adventurers; but this Committee-man buyeth this 100000 pounds
worth of Pepper, and shipping it out again within 12 months, bath 2 d. for
every pound of Pepper allowed him back for Impost, which is, 166666 l. 1 3 s. 4
d. so as here remains clear of gains, 16500 l. before the Commodity is gone out
of the 16500 l.
Land, without any advantage at all to the general Adventurers, who may not
wonder if the Court of Committees desire not the taking off this great Impost,
though sensilbe edough of their betrayed Trust, and breach of Oath, to manage
all things in an upright way, and for the General good.

But were all those that have the managing of that Action here at home, bound,
both by Oath and Bond, from being If the Committee Men were bound from buying
and selling the Companles Commodities, they would never eover to be Committees.
Buyers and Sellers of the Companies Commodities, neither directly for
themselves, nor indirectly by other men for them, no Aldermen, nor great rich
men, would trouble themselves to be Committee Men, as now they do; a course
most injust and dishonest, to enrich themselves by the ruin of the
Adventurers, which has ever been, and will be so, until duly reformed by the
States, taking the Action into their own protection, or laying it open and free
for every man, that is willing to trade into the remote parts of India, and be
Masters of their own Goods, both abroad and at home, to dispose of them to
their own best advantage; for Joint Stocks do now too plainly appear to be the
worst of Monopolies, as this has been the most hurtful? that ever was to this
Nation.

Nor is your Highness and State a little abused by this manner of returning of
Impost upon all India Goods, that are transported within 12 Months, as
accustomed, if not done by, and for the general advdenturers account, to which
end I suppose it was granted as a thing just and equal with all other
Merchants; but with this Company, the greater part (if not all) of the
Commodities brought out of of India, are bought, and Ship out again by
particular Committee Men, that, peradventure, have not above 3. or 400. l.
adventure 3 o 400 l.
in the whole Stock; What reason is there, that that man that has but 300. l.
adventure (perhaps none at all, but as a Perhaps none at all, but as a Freeman.
Freeman) shall buy for 10, 20, 30, 4000 l. or more, in any Commodity, and
receive back the Impost of the whole, without any benefit at all to the
general Stock, which first paid it, but so much real loss to the State; for,
suppose a Committee-man of 300 l. adventure, buyeth a parcel of Pepper worth
10000 l. which he shippeth out within 12. months (according to the former evil
Custom) whereby he has 2 d. in the pound Impost returned, which comes to 1666
l. 13 s. 4 d. whereas his due is but 33 l. 65. 8. the Impost of 300. pounds
worth of Pepper, whereby this Committee-man gains in one year, almost five
times his whole adventure, and so proportionably, if he buy for 20. 30. 50. or
100. thousand pounds worth of Pepper, as some men have often bought, to the
great enriching of themselves, without any advantage at all to the Company in
general, and great loss to the State for these many years past, which may be,
for the future, remedied. This being one prime reason, that so many Aldermen,
and great rich men, become Committe-men, and are Buyers and Sellers of their
own Commodities, at their own prices, and long time, with rebate for 8. months
for every 6. months a notorious abuse to the general Adventurers, as I have
said elsewhere, and may be worthy your Honors and States consideration, in
prevention of future abuses in this kind. It is not so with the Merchant that
tradeth into other parts, if he bring in a Commodity that finds not that vent
for it here, as he can have elsewhere, shippeth out again all, or part,
receives back the Impost he himself formerly paid, which is but just, but these
Committee Men of the East India Company receive back the Impost, not only of
what concerns their own proportion of stock, but even what the whole body of
Adventurers did formerly pay, and wherein they themselves had no real
interest, an abuse worthy reformation for the future, as having bin some years
40. or 50000l. loss, and more, to the State, as will appear upon the
examination of their Accounts.

By the foregoing discourse, your Highness may in part see The improvident way
of trade which our Grandees have practiced, appears in neglaect of trade from
Port to Port, in India it self.
the improvident way of trade, those great and wise men did run, even when they
had so large and plentiful means, as was that of the second and great Joint
Stock: But when your Highness shall consider how wilfully negligent they have
been of the trade between Port and Port, in India it self, you will, with
admiration, wonder that such wise and understanding Merchants, as they were,
should commit such gross errors; if not done on purpose to ruin the Action,
which that your Highness may the better apprehend, and see the difference
between the immediate trade from England to Surratt, and Muslapatan, and thence
back again for England, and that of one or two years employment between
Surratt, or Muslapatan, and the Southern parts, as to Bantham, Acheen,
Macassar, etc. and thence back again to Surrat, or Muslapatan, and so for
England.

Suppose there be twenty thousand pound in Rialls of Eight, To the sending
20000 l. to Surrat, there to be invested in Goods for England, may yield here
23000 l.
and Goods sent to Surrat, or Muslapatan, which might yield there five or six
thousand pounds profit, allowing 2000 l. to defray charges there, and there
remains 23000 l. to be invested in Indico and Callicoes, etc. which sent
directly for England, might, according to accustomed computation, have yielded
here three for one, or 69 thousand pounds, from which, allow 15 thousand pounds
for freight, assurance, forbearance of their money, customs, and other
charges, and there remains 34 thousand pounds clearly gained; a fair
recompense, if no unhappy loss befall it: but if that 23000 l. But invested in
Goods for the Southwards, and then reinvested in Goods for Surrat again, and
then for Engl. would have made here 216000 l.
in Surrat, had been invested in Commodities, fitting Macassar, Acheen, Janiby,
and Bantham, would have yielded two for one, at least, clear of all charges, or
46 thousand pounds; which again re-invested in Cloves, Maces, Nutmegs, Lignum
Allois, Turtle shells, Camphir, Benjamin, China roots, Pepper, and other
Druggs, would have made in Surrat and Persia, at least two for one more, or
92000 l. from which allow 20000 l. for customs, etc. charges, and there had
remained 72000 l. to be invested in Indico, Callicoes, etc. for England, which
at three for one, is here 216000 l. a large Recompense for one or two years
stay longer in India; all which, as a real truth, will appear by their own
Accounts, and the testimony of their Servants, that have been in those
employments. This was the manner of trade used by the Portugalls and Dutch, to
their exceeding great profit, as appeared to all the world; yet would our Court
of Committees not be persuaded thereunto, until of late years, when Trade was
overlaid by the Dutch, and Shame, and the urgent pressures*of The trade from
Port to Port, is that which made the Portugal, and now the Dutch, to thrive.
Mr. Smithwick, and others, upon my information of the trade of India, began to
look more narrowly into their improvident ways, and neglect of trade, did
enforce them thereunto. Having thus far enlarged m discourse, on the want of
stock in India, ill managing of that little sent out, with an overcharge of
Shipping, without employment for them: I will proceed to that of Persia.

I am now come to discourse of that, no less rich than profitable trade for
Silk of Persia, wherein I must ingenuously The trade for Silk of Persia, cause
of the loss of the Mollucca Islands, and all the best trades of India, China
and Japon.
confess I was in a Labyrinth of admiration and wonderment, when I considered
the many inconveniences and mischiefs, which the ruin of this trade has
brought upon that of the East Indies inparticular, and the Commonwealth in
general: had it fallen alone, and perished upon its own ruins, it had been a
most heavy loss to this Nation: but to be the means and the cause of the loss
of all the Mollucca Islands, and with them the best of the trade of India,
China and Japon, to the unspeakable prejudice of the Adventurers in the several
Joint Stocks, is worthy due consideration.

For the East India Action, strengthened with that great and powerful means,
as was the second Joint Stock, was The second Joint Stock was able to have
carried all the trade of India against Portugal and Dut. if rightly managed.
able (if wisely managed) to have carried all the best of the Mollucca Islands,
and other trades in India, China, and Japon, in despite of all the force the
Portugals or Dutch could have set in opposition, had it not met with many evil
disposed people of their own Society, bound by Oath and public Trust to
advance that Action, to the utmost of their power and best endeavors.

Such were the Portugal Merchants, who, that they might have The Portugal
Merchants enemies to our Company trading for India.
have the furnishing of England, with all sorts of Spices, Indico, and other
India Commodities, as heretofore did rather desire the Portugal might hold
that Trade to themselves, as in former times.

Such also were the Merchant Adventurers, who (besides So also were the Du^ch
Merchants more interessed in the Dutch Action than in ours.
many of them more interest in the Dutch Action, than the English) rather
desired the Dutch should enjoy the whole trade of India, than the English or
Portugals, that so they might have Spices, and other India Commodities, wherein
to make returns in a more profitable way, than by exchange, as they do, to loss.

Yet were both these of little or no consideration (setting The Company
unwilling to plant themselves in India, because the State would place Governors
and Commanders therein, as in other Plantations.
apart that general dislike, that the State should have any power or command
in their Plantations) in respect of the Turkey Merchants, who would that
neither the Portugals, Dutch, nor English, might enjoy those so rich trades of
India, etc. much less that of the Silk of Persia, that they only might supply
England, and other parts, with all those forementioned Commodities from
Alexandria, especially with the Silk of Persia, from Alleppo, Smyrna, and other
Ports of Turkey.

Nor did these rest here only, for they seeing that if the Their fear of
b^inging the S^lk of Pe^sis by way of Ind^a, was the only cause of the ^^ss of
the trade of India.
trade of India did prosper, and go on in a thriving way, that Stock, in few
years, would be able to bring all the Silk of Persia, by way of India; rather
than which, the whole trade of India, with all thereunto belonging, must be
lost, and that great Joint Stock consumed in a most improvident way of trade,
as before related, that so they might (as they did) discourage and weary out
all the Nobility, Geutry, Widows and Orphans, interessed therein, to sell off
their Adventures at To which end they st^engthen thems^l^^s with the greater
number of Committees of their company, h^ better to overruled all at their
pleasure.
half their value to themselves, as I said before.

And the better to carry on this design, for ruining the trade of India, and
Stock, they strengthen themselves with Governors, Deputies, and most of
Committees of their own Society, of Turkey Merchants, that upon all occasions
they might overruled all opposition, as they did that most noble and brave
proposition of Sir Robert Sherley, for settling the staple of that rich
Commodity of silk in England; A thing so much desired of the King of Persia,
to divert the great Revenue, the Grand Senior (his mortal enemy) made by the
Customs, etc. of the said Silk, in hopes whereof, and in consideration of the
aid the English gave him against the Portugals, in surprising the Island, and
City of Ormus, he granted to the Nation those many and great Privileges, such
as the Nation injoyes in no part of the World besides: All The great
privileges the K. of Persia granted the English almost lost to the Nation.
which they have so neglected, with that so commodious Contract made with the
King of Persia, that in a manner, both Trade and Privileges are of little
value or consideration at this day, in respect of what they might have been, if
rightly managed.

Be pleased here also to observe the most unjust and dishonest They oppose Sir
R. Sherley's Propositions for settling the Staple of silk in England, in
prejudice of the Company and Commonwealth.
carriage of their business, in opposition to the said Sir Robert Sherley, so
notoriously contrary to the true interest of the East India Action, that
nothing was, or could be proposed as more advantageous to the said Company,
than was that of settling the Staple of the Silk of Persia in England, yet did
that overruling power of Turkey Merchants, not only procure an Ambassador
from Persia into England, but so prevailed with the late King to send another
from hence with the said Sir Robert Sherley, into Persia, at the great and The
charge whereof did properly belong to the Turkey Company, and not to that of
East India.
vast charge of the East India Company, which did properly belong to the Turkey
Company, whose interest it really was, and so far from prejudice to the East
India Company, as nothing could be more advantageous to them, nor more
honorable to the State and Commonwealth of England, than would that Staple of
Silk have been, if rightly managed to its best advantage, as I shall make
appear in my following discourse.

Having in some measure showed your Highness the evil affection of several
Committees in that Government, but especially of that of the Turkey Merchants;
I will briefly lay down the manner of the said Companies complying with that
Contract made with the said King of Persia, in the best of times, by the yearly
Stock sent thither from England, during my abode in India, not at all, or very
little, enlarged since, except one year, in Tin, acommodity of least
expense, lay therefore many years before it was quite spent; Hereby any
judicious man, may easily perceive their Good affection to that Trade, which
done, I will show your Highness how commodious, rich, and profitable that Trade
would have bin to that company in particular, and yet may be to the whole
Commonwealth in general, if rightly settled and managed to its best advantage,
viz. Stock sent into Persia in six years of my time very little increased
since.
Li. In Anno 1624. was sent to Persia, Stock, 6225 In Anno 1625. was sent in
Money and Goods 3445 In Anno 16^6. in Goods and Moneys 39265 In Anno 1627. in
Goods and Moneys 4077 In Anno 1628. in Goods and Moneys 6040. In Anno 1629.
Nothing. In six years was sent in Stock 59412.

Here the Annual Investments for Persia from England, in six years, (one year
excepted) was scarce sufficient to Scarce enough to maintain their Factors
expense on shore.
maintain the great charge and expense, in that high Port their Factors lived
at, which considered, there will appear little Stock remaining to be invested
in Silk: And this if your Highness please to observe, in the best of times,
when Silk was worth from four Nobles to thirty Shillings a pound, at which
prices, there had been gained at least three and a half for one, which would
have advanced their stock very much beyond their desires; which, had our
Company embraced in any reasonable manner, if not to the full, as they might
have done with that great Stock then in being, two years employment 300000l.
^tock would have brought all the Silk of Persia into England every year.
of 300 thousand pounds in the manner, I shall by and by lay down, would so far
have enlarged that Stock, as should not only have been able to bring all that
Silk into England, have made this City the Staple of that Commodity for all
Europe, but have carried all, or the greater part of the trade of India, China
and Japon, to the exceeding great advance of this Action, and enriching of this
Commonwealth and Nation, the wilful neglect and loss whereof, if duly
weighed, may render the Managers of that Action extremely blamable, and worthy
heavy reproofs from the higher Powers, unto whose Wisdom, and better Judgment,
I will leave them,

And proceed to the business it self, and show your Highness The Company
blameworthy for neglecting that so rich trade for Silk of Persia.
how that Trade might have bin followed in a most brave and flourishing way, as
heretofore, often intimated to some of the principal Actors themselves; but
they had always deaf ears to all that was propounded unto them at any time,
that had relation to that Trade for Silk of Persia, though themselves had the
several Contracts made with the said King, on whom they laid the blame of not
complying with them, at all the meetings of the Adventurers, at general
Courts, when indeed the blame was their own, as may appear The Contract with
the K. of Persia. 1622.
by their yearly supplies, sent out as before in the infancy of ^^at Trade, and
best of times, and the Contract our people made with the said King; first in
Anno 162^. and renewed again in 1627. as follows, viz.

A Contract with the King of Persia.

That what quantity of English Goods the English should import his Dominions,
accompanied with one fourth part treasure, the said King was to take them at
the prices following, viz.

Broad Cloth about 11 l. price, of 36. yards long, at Renewed in 1627. the
p^ises of English Cloth, as also of Silk.
38. Shahees, the Coved or English yard, which is 12 s. 8 d. the yard, the
Shahee being 4 d. English.

Broad Perpetuanies of 23. yards long, at 15. Shahees, or 5 s. the yard.

Devon-shire Kersies of 30. yards long, at 18. Shahees, or 6 s. English the
yard.

Tynne at 70. Shahees the Maundshaw of 8 l. English, and in lieu thereof, the
said K. was to deliver Silk at 48. Tomans the load, every Toman is 3 l. 6 s. 8
d. English, and every load contains 72. Maundshaws, of 8 l. English, so as 72.
Maundshaws of 8 l. makes 576 l. of 16 ounces, or 384 l. of 24. ounces; and 48.
Tomans, of 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. makes 160 l. sterling, so as to buy 1000. load of
Silk at 160 l. per load, three fourth part Goods, and one fourth part
Treasure, I have estimated thus, English goods to be sent into Persia, with one
fourth part Treasure, for 100. thousand pound, to buy 1000. load of Silk.
li. s. d. 3000. Broad-Cloaths, about 11 l. price, and 36. yards long, amounts
to 33000. 00. 00. 3000. Kersies of 13. yards long, at 40 sh. a piece 6000. 00.
00. 3000. Perpetuanies of 23. yards long, at 3 l. a piece 9000. 00. 00. 2000.
Quintals of Tin, at 5 l. the hundred of 112 l. 10000. 00. 00. 168000. Rialls
of Eight, at 4 s 4 d. per Riall 36400. 00. 00. The whole Cargazone of Goods and
Money to be sent out is 94400. 00. 00. Whereunto add for Customs, and other
Charges at home 5600. 00. 00. In all amounts to 100000. 00 00

All which delivered into the Kings Warehouse, at the prises agreed on, viz.
li. s. d. 3000. Broad-Cloaths of 36. Coveds long, at 38. Shahees per Coved, or
yard, and the Shahee at 4 d. Eng. amounts to 68400. 00. 00. 3000. Kersies of
13. yards, or Coveds long, at 18. Sh^hees per Coved 11700. 00. 00. 3000.
Perpetuanies of 23. yards long, at 15. Shahees, per Coved 17250. 00. 00. 2000.
Quintalls of Tin, of 112 l. is 224000 l. or 28000. Mand. shawes of 8 l.
English, or 70. Shahees or Groats per Maund, amounts to 32666. 13. 4. 168000.
Ryalls of Eeight, at 5 s. per Ryall, amounts to 42000. 00. 00. Goods and Moneys
to be delivered into the Kings Warehouse 172016. 13. 04. In return whereof
the King was to deliver 1000. load of Silk, of 72. Maundshaws, at 48. Tomans,
or 160 l. starling, per load of Silk, is 160000. 00. 00. And there will
remain toward Charges there 12016. 13. 04. Besides Freight and Customs to
and from Persia, which may be 4983. 06. 08. In all toward charges there in the
Country 17000. 00. 00. Which 1000. load or 2000. great bales of silk,
weighing here 384l. at 20 s. a pound, a moderate price, makes 284000 l. gained
toward Freight, etc. in 2 ^ years, and after in 13 Months forever, if Stocks
sent out, and trade continued.
384000. 00. 00. From which deduct 100000 l. Goods and Moneys sent out 100000.
00. 00. And there had been gained by the Adventurers the sum of 284000. 00.
00.

A fair recompense toward Freight, Custom and other Charges here at home,
upon so rich and staple a Commodity, and all this to be performed in 27. or 28.
Months, for the first voyage, and afterward in 12. or 13. Months at most,
sending out stock every year.

But if the stock be at any time hereafter, able to send out, or otherwise to
furnish this trade of Persia, with English goods, Spices and other India
Commodities, to the value of 300. thousand pounds every year, with one quarter
part Money, as I said before, it will bring 3000. load, or 6000 great bales of
silk, which is the proportion conceived to be brought them every Commodities
out of Persia, neglected by the Company.
year into Turkey, and would make here (besides Grogeran, yarne, Gauls,
Anniseeds, Carpets, Goat Skins. ready dressed in Colors, and other Commodities
which our Company would never look after) at least ten hundred thousand pounds
starling, at 20sh. a pound, a moderate price, from which deduct 300. thousand
pound to be first sent out, and there will remain 700. thousand pound gains
toward Freight, etc. Charges at home. And so every year after the two first
years, and a quarter, or thereabouts. And by this means have made England the
Staple and Magazine of all Europe, for that Commodity, which was the real
intention of the King of Persia, and the brave and noble design of Mr. Robert
Sherley; however shamefully opposed by our East India Company, utterly against
the true interest of that Action, and to the extreme prejudice of the
Adventurers in particular, and the whole Nation in general: A State-Action A
State-action the most hohourable and profitable way of trade.
will be therefore the best, most honorable, profitable, and safe way of trade
for this Commonwealth, and not by Joint Stocks governed as hitherto, neither
yet by an open and free trade, as is that of Turkey, especially if governed by
Turkey Merchants (as this has been) utter enemies to this trade for Silk of
Persia, and consequently to the whole trade of India, etc.

It may be here objcted, that the trade of India, Persia, etc. if followed with
a full stock, would carry out a great deal of treasure, and impoverish the
Land of money: against which our State did wisely provide heretofore, by
obliging the said Company, to bring in as much (if not more) than they did
yearly transport, which, for some years, was duly observed, and may again, by
this means, bring in greater quantities by the proceed of Silk only; besides,
what other India Commodities do produce from Spain, France, Italy, and other
parts, from whence all the Treasure, which else would come for England, is now
carried for Turkey to buy Silk of Persia, which if brought directly from
thence, by way of India, would not only furnish the great expense of the
Manufacture of Silk in this Land, but be a means to draw all that treasure
(which is now carried into Turkey by other Nations, to buy Silk of Persia) into
our own Country, to the great enriching thereof, especially in the increase of
Treasure in your Highness's Exchecquer, beyond any means whatsoever. If your
Highness can obtain from the King of Persia to renew the Contract for all his
Silk, as formerly.

For, all that Silk the Merchant brings now from Turkey, is bought with ready
money, at 14 s. the pound, or more, Silk of Persia bought in Turkey with ready
Money, which else would have been brought home.
whereas it does not cost in Persia, 8 s. at most, ready money; our Cloth, and
other Commodities, are sold in Persia for above 100 l. per 100 profit, Tin
almost three for one; in Persia we pay no Customs, which are ten in the
hundred inwards, and as much outward, never had Avenues or Mulcts laid on the
Nation, whereas in Turkey, our Cloth, and other Commodities, seldom, or never,
yield 30. per Our Ships make as short a Voyage for Pe^sis, as do others from
Scandarroon, after the first Voyage.
100 profit; pay heavy and great customs in and out, and have many Avenues put
upon them every-yeare, in one place or other; our Ships also may make their
Voyage in as short a time as usually from Scandaroon', after the first two
years and a quarter, with much less danger of Pirates or other accidents,
whereunto the other are incident.

But had our Company (as I said before) when they had Spices sent into India
and Persia would have yielded 8. or 10. for one, profit.
one third part of the Spices, sent a reasonable proportion into several parts
of India and Persia every year, it would have yielded there eight, ten, and
more, for one, which would have raised the stock to such a value, as would have
brought a large proportion of Silk from Persia, which again would have yielded
two one half for one, at the rate of 20 s. the pound, an indifferent and
moderate price, and a very fair recompense for one years time spent in India:
but our Company, governed by Turkey Merchants, would never be persuaded to
follow that trade from Port to Port in India, though never so profitable,
fearing that their Stock Unto which our Company would never hea^ken, nor hear
of trade from Port to Port in India.
would grow so rich and powerful, as to be able to bring all, or the greatest
part of the silk of Persia, by way of India, to their particular prejudice,
whereby it too plainly appears that private interest is the ruin of all
public Actions.

Here falls in an Objection, which one of the prime managers of that trade, not
long since, made to me, when in discourse I complained of the Companies neglect
of that trade for silk of Persia, of so great profit and consequence, as I did
Object: why the Dutch do not buy silck of Persi^, in return of spices and
other Commodities.
then make appear to him, though he would not seem to apprehend it; answered
me, if that trade were so profitable as you say, why do not the Dutch fall into
it, who carry not only English Cloth, as we do, but even Spices, and other
India Commodities also, yet do not invest the proceed thereof in Silk, which,
if it did yield so much profit as you say, they would not have so long
neglected it.

Unto this I have in Answer two Reasons: First, that the Dutch made much more
benefit by the Treasure they carried Answered, that they make more profit of
treasure they carry thence for China than they carry silk for Holland. Again,
some of our Committees had made a private Contract with the Dutch, not to being
the silk of Persia into Europe. To which end it may be supposed, they neglected
the receipt of their Customs in Persia.
freely out of Persia into the Mollucca Islands, and China, to buy Spices, and
Silk, and other Commodities for Japon, than the silk of Persia would have made
at home in Holland; which he granted for good: A second reason was, that I had
heard some Dutch in India (as I believe he had done the like) say that their
Company had agreed with some of our Grandees, that if they, the said Dutch
Company would forbear the bringing of silk from Persia into Europe, that might
hinder their trade for it into Turkey, they would underhand let fall all their
complaints of the Amboyna Massacre, and other wrongs offered our people in
India, or at least so slightly prosecute the same, as it should never come to
any issue, as it has not until some few weeks past: unto this he very angerly
replied (for it went to the quick;) these are but suggestions of those that
have been in India, and would feign possess the General^ty of Adventurers, of
greater matters than can be expected, and so in passion break off our
discourse, though in his own Conscience he knew it to be aparent truth.

Here also your Highness may be pleased to observe, that The Dutch falling into
the trade of Persia, ^roubled our Company more than the loss of the
Spice-trade.
in the same Month of Feb. and year 1622. when our people aided the King of
Persia in the taking of Ormus from the Portugals, the Dutch executed their so
inhumane butchery on our people in Amboyna, and the year following fell upon
the trade of Persia, where they had never been before; which later did more
trouble the overruling Grandees of our Company, than the loss of all the
Spice-trade; yea, and of that of all India, which they have now brought by a
long and lingering Consumption, even to its last gasp, and must suddenly expire,
if your Highness do not take it into your own protection, and make it a
State-action, by giving it new breath of life, and by Stock and Countenance
revive Which now languish for want of stock to keep up the Action.
its decaying spirits, now out of all hopes of recovery by Joint Stocks of
Adventurers; so much disheartened by the wilful Neglects and wrongful abuses,
improvident Courses of the former Managers of their Estates, that none but
Madmen or Fools will put themselves upon the like again, unless None but
madmen or foo^es will venture upon Joint St^ocks any more.
better regulated in its government, or laid open and free for all men that
have a mind to trade into those parts.

Much more I could say, as to the evil managing of that action, to the great
hindrance of the particular Adventurers, and the whole Nation in general; As
also their great neglects The trade of China and Japon neglected, have been
very profitable to the Portugal and Dutch ever since.
of those rich trades of China and Iapon, such they have been heretofore to the
Portugalls, and now to the Dutch, as one Jacob Mathews, a Dutchman, a few
years since, upon his going for Holland, and thence Commander of a Fleet for
India, did tell me in discourse about the trade of China and Japon, that their
Ships did bring thence every year 70 or 80 tons of Gold, which according to
their computation, is 7. or 800 thousand pounds Sterling. a year: I have also
heard some Dutch (some years since in India) say, that they did then send to
Japon every year ten or twelve thousand Broadcloaths; if so many so long
since, surely at this time many more: All which has been long since intimated
to our Company, as most profitable trades (if rightly followed) yet would they
never hearken thereunto, or any thing that tended to the advance of that Stock,
lest growing rich, should fall upon the trade of Silk; by which means they not
only kept that Commodity to themselves, but cunningly traded But our Comp.
would trade for no more than themselves could take off in supply of their trade
into, the Levant Seas, and else where.
into India for no more than themselves could take off in supply of their own
trades into the Levant Seas and other places, at long time, and wrongfully
rebates to the great hinderance of the Adventurers, so as if they lost a
hundred pound a year a man, with the Adventurers in the general Stock, they
gained thousands by buying their own Commodities (as I said before.)

And when I call to mind the often boastings of Peter The Dutch suspected to
have over-bribed the Committee below,
Vanderbrook, Commander of the Dutch in Surrat, that their Company had chains
of Gold that would reach from Amsterdam to London; I rather believe they have
over-bribed the Managers of that Action here below, than those Lords above, so
much complained of to the Generality; had they had a mind to improve that
trade to its best advantage, they had stock enough (besides the justness of
their Cause) to have vyed stakes with the Dutch, especially here at home, Which
hind ed their Complaints above.
where they could find means sufficient to maintain an Arbitrary power, to
abuse and wrong their servants, or any man that labored the good of that
Action; so also could they find means to bribe, and keep Mr. Smithwick from a
fair Hearing when he complained of their dishonest Proceedings: in these
cases, and the like, they spared not the general purse; But to deal with the
Dutch, in a business of so great concernment, they were over-sparing, as glad
they had so good an excuse, as to fling the blame upon the King On whom they
flung all the blame in general Courts.
and Lords of his privy Council, in all general Courts, which, together with
their servants private trade in India, was always the burden of their
complaints to the general Adventurers (when as some of themselves had greater
Adventures in private, than in the general Stock;) with such false suggestions
as these did they abuse the honest minded Adventurers, who simply believed them
to be as honest, as rich, until woeful experience told them the contrary.

For can it be imagined, that so grave and wise men as they were in their own
way should (like little children from whom They wilfully lose one third part of
the Spices, which they might have kept.
if you take one of their play-games will fling all the rest away) altogether
decline that agreement of 1622. with the Dutch to have one third part of the
Spice, upon the Mollucca Islands, paying 1/3 part of the charge and cost,
because the said Dutch had over-reacht them in the contract, and over-bribed
them at Court, that they had not the satisfaction they required, or but easily
pursued, or was that a sufficient reason because the late Kings and Lords (for
some reason of State then moving thereunto) did not presently repair them for
the many injuries and great losses they had sustained, that therefore they
should abandon that agreement for Spices, which had they continued as they
ought in Policy or common reason to have done, this company had not only
prospered and flourished themselves, but had so hindered the Duchess designs,
as they had never risen to that height of insolency they are now at.

Add hereunto the long sufferance of the Duchess injurious proceedings which
has made them so insolent and peremptory in India, that they dared before
these times give Laws to our people in those Seas, yea, and exact Duties and
Customs in our passage thorough the Straights of Mollucca, never yet paid by
the English to any Nation; in requital whereof, your Highness may as well
exact a Toll or custom of all the Dutch-ships that pass through the Narrow
Seas, to pay a certain custom for their ships, and goods, with much more of
equity and right, and but justly pay them in their own kind, who spare us in
nothing, whereunto they can pretend any the least show of custom, how unjust
soever.

But before I pass any further, be pleased to observe the wilful weakness (or
rather neglect) of our Company, when The Companies wilful neglect of the
Spice-trade into India, it self made manifest.
they had the one third of all the Spices of the Mollucca Islands (as I said
before) notwithstanding they had been many, and oftentimes solicited by their
servants in Surrat and Muslapatan, to send a large proportion of those spices
into those Northern parts of India, Persia, etc. where they would have yielded
as much money, or more, than in England, which again reinvested in Indicoe and
other Commodities, would, after one years forbearance in India, have yielded
here at least three for one, and have excused the sending out 100 thousand
pounds a year, sometimes in treasure; yet they would never be persuaded
thereunto, as appears by the following estimate.

I sold of these Commodities at the said prices my self in Surrat, in An. 1627.
100 thousand pounds of Maces at 8 d. per pound amounts to 3333. 06. 08 100
thousand pounds of Nutmegs at 4 d. per pound is 1666. 13. 04 100 thousand
pounds of Cloves at 9 d. per pound amounts to 3750. 00. 00 300 thousand pounds
of Spices bought in the Molluccaes amounts to 8750. 00. 00 Which 300 thousand
pounds of Spices, if sold in India, would have yielded 100 thousand pounds of
Maces at 6 s. the l. 30000. 00. 00. 100 thousand pounds of Nutm. at 5 s. the l.
25000. 00. 00 100 thousand pounds of Cloves at 7 s. the l. 35000. 00. 00 300
thousand pounds of Spices sold in India for 90000. 00. 00

Which 90 thousand pound, reinvested in Indico, Callicoes, etc. would have made
in England at least three for one, which is 270 thousand pounds, from which
take 8750 l. their first price in the Mollucca Islands, there remains 261250 l
gains toward Charge, Freight, Custom, and one years forbearance etc. in
India.

A fair recompense, if wisely apprehended, yet would our Company never put the
same in practice, which to some men may seem a strange mystery. But when your
Highness shall consider, that that Court of Committees are the sole buyers and
sellers of the Companies Commodities at their own prices, and long time on
rebate, and the benefit they make of the Impost they receive back at home,
besides their gain abroad, will soon judge them to have been more intentive on
their own private profit, than the general good of the Adventures, though
bound by oath and conscience to act for the good of their Trustees.

For the managers of this action, being Aldermen and rich men overruling all
at their own pleasure, and to their own ends, being both Buyers and Sellers of
their own Commodities, did so combine together, as to have all these Spices
brought home, that so they might buy them up at their own The Committees
ingrosse all those Spices to their own private ends.
prizes, and long time of payment of five six Months, to rebate at five eight
months, to supply their own trades, into the Levant Seas and elsewhere, by
which Rebates and Imposts received back, they gained 48 one third, per 100. at
least, before ever the Commodities went out of England, besides what they
gained abroad.

It was heretofore observed, that so soon as the Muscovy The Muscovy trade and
stock ruined by the Turkey Merchants, being Governors thereof.
Company (which had raised (in Queen Elizabeth's time) a great joint Stock,
began to look into the trade for Silk of Persia, brought out of the Caspian
Sea, and down the River Volga; the Turkey Merchants cunningly made themselves
chief rulers of that Company, and so handled the business, that in a few
years, they not only wrought a stop of that trade of Silk, by the River
Volga, but even the ruin of the whole Stock, by their improvident way of
trade, and overgreat and unnecessary charges, both abroad and at home, yet has
that trade, since the dissolution of that joint Stock, been followed by
particular men, managing their own Estates, thrived and prospered, before the
late difference between the two States; and so may this trade of India, etc. if
laid open, and free for particular men, to trade upon their own Stocks,
managed by Agents or Consuls (as is that of the Turks and Muscovie trade)
prove very profitable and rich to this Commonwealth, unless it shall seem
good to your Highness to make it a State action, as that which is most likely
to be most honorable, profitable, and advantageous to this Nation, and
Commonwealth, being rightly managed, by a new and better way of Regulation,
and Government, than heretofore has been practiced at home.

But to leave the resetling of these trades to the wisdom of your Highness
and Council of State, I shall humbly present The Committees work the ruin of
India trade on purpose to buy off dishertned peoples adventures at half their
value.
unto your Highness some other dishonest proceedings, of those Grandees, and
managers of this action; who of purpose to undervalue the same, and dishearten
the Nobility, Gentry, Widows and Orphans, and other Adventurers, not able to
ride out of their Stocks any longer, so much, as to sell of their Adventures,
as they did some hundreds of thousand pounds, at 45. and 50. per cent. loss to
themselves; and to this end, they employ Mr. Thomas Smithwick, and others then
Brokers upon the Exchange; But the said Smithwicke, understanding their
designs and purposes, did serve himself and friends also by buying many
Adventures of the Nobility, Gentry, etc. in hopes that being now become
Adventurers, they might become also Committees, and have an eye over the
managing of that action in a better and more profitable way, than heretofore,
and which indeed he did labor with much earnestness and complaints, both to
the late King, and Lords of his privy Council, but all in vain, for they
having the General purse, at command, and a Lord Keeper fitting their own
humor, spared not as I said freely to bribe at Court, to stifle, and suppress
all complaints, and in the end, so ordered the business, as he, and others
were ruined and undone in the pursuit thereof.

Besides this design of buying up of Adventures at under values, a most unjust
and dishonest course, and breach of Oach and trust, they had a farther
intention, which was, that And gain the Composition with the Dutch, to
themselves, a most dishonest breach of trust.
having by this means, got all, or the greater part of the Stock into a few of
their own, and confederates hands; they would then press his Majesty and
Lords, in a more earnest and importunate way then hertofore, to conclude the
difference with the Dutch, and so gain that composition also to their own
advantage; all which will appear by their own accounts and papers, if duly
examined.

As to the trades of China and Japon, I can say little to the particular
Commodities either carried thither, or brought China and Japon have been to the
Protugals, and Dutch very rich Trades.
thence, more than in the General. I am ascertained the Portugalls heretofore,
and the Dutch now have, and do make extraordinary profit, first between India,
and China, but especially between China and Japon, and thence back to China,
and thence again into India; and if the Dutch themselves do not vainly boast,
they do carry many thousands of Broad-cloaths into China and Japon: it is
likely we also might have made use of those so rich trades, had the managers of
that Action heretofore been willing to advance that trade to its best of profit.

All which, notwithstanding those so rich trades of India, etc. are no way to
be esteemed the worst, because the managers thereof have not, made them so
profitable to this Commonwealth, as they have been to the Portugal heretofore,
and are now to the Dutch, and may yet be unto us, if well regulated under a
State-protection hereafter, as the other have been, and are to this day.

Having thus presented to your Highness, the evil affection, wilful
miscarriages, and improvident courses, to the ruining, if not utter suppressing
of these so rich and profitable trades of India, Persia, Arabia, China and
Japon, practiced by that Court of Committees, who have had the managing thereof
these many yeaers; I shall humbly leave these to your Highness's and Council of
States better judgments, for the future regulating thereof, in a more
profitable way than hitherto, either by making it a State-action, as the best,
and The best way to make the Trade of India profitable to this Nation, is, to
make it State-action.
most assured way of benefit and honor to the Nation, or by laying it open and
free for all men, that have a mind and means to prosecute those Trades, being
regulated, and ordered, as are the Turkey and Muscovy Trades, wherein every man
is Master of his own goods, both abroad and at home, aad has the ordering and
managing thereof at his pleasure, and not tied up to the many inconveniences of
Joint Stocks, and the dishonest ends of some particular overruling Committees,
whose private Interest, and surreptitious ways of Buying and Selling their
own goods, to themselves, break through all Oaths and breach of Trust, even to
the ruin of the Adventurers stock, though to their own particular profit
enough advantageous; experience having told us, that joint Stocks (as I said
before) are but the worst of Monopolies, and mere Cheats, both to the State,
and Adventurers, and of all others, this of the East Indies the greatest.

But if your Highness can renew the former Contracts made with the King of
Persia, 1622. and 1627. and enlarge that Trade, to the bringing all, or the
greater part of the Silk of Persia, by way of India, and compel the Dutch to
pay the one half of their Customs to your Highness, I dare be bold, as will
many others that have been in India, to Spice Islands, and the Contract renewed
with the King of Persia, for Silk, will make a rich trade.
lay down a course and way of Trade, that one Million of Stock and Shipping, to
be sent out in three years, shall return its first principal, with one
million of pounds advance, before the end of two years and a half, or three at
most, and then every year after, one million of pounds, all charges borne;
which Trade alone, in few years will increase your Highness Exchequer, and
the Stock of the Nation, to such a large proportion, as will enable it to carry
all Trades, and what else before them, in despite of all opposition.

I could say much more, in aggravation of the many and horrid injuries the
Nation have received from the Dutch, but much more of the heavy losses, and
wrongful abuses, which some of that Court of Committees have occasioned; who
overruling the more honest party by multiplicity of voices, and carrying all
things to their own ends, as professed enemies to that Trade of India, which so
long as managed by such, shall never thrive, nor be worthy the name of an A
joint stock by Turkey Merchants managed, never thrive.
East India Trade; such as the Portugalls heretofore, and now the Dutch make of
it, witness the large returns these latter have made thence every year, of
value at least 11. or 1200. thousand pounds, besides their large Stock
remaining in India, and their many and rich Plantations they have there, to be
valued at many Millions of pounds, all which they have obtained by the managers
of our Stocks wilful neglect, as much unwilling our State should have any
insight, command, or interest in any of their Plantations; as not willing the
action it self shoud thrive, and grow rich, for the reasons laid down in my
foregoing discourse, which I hope will satisfy your Highness and Council of
State, as to the reality of the things therein proposed, together with the
necessity of making it a State action, which will be the best, most safe, and
profitablest way, for the honor and welfare of the Nation, being strengthened
by your Highness Countenance and protection, will put such terror into all
people, both far and near, as they will not dare to molest, or trouble our
just and lawful proceedings, much less offer any real wrong or injuries to
the Nation as heretofore. When protection was wanting to the Company, against
the barbarous inhumanity of our false friends; as for the Portugale, a declared
enemy, we were able to right our selves on all occasions, had our Company
sought to plant themselves on the Molucca and Banda Islands, as they ought to
have done in the first place, as did the Dutch, and then to have beaten their
way for Trade, into the North parts of India. The maine (if not wilful) error
of our Company, in the Infancy of that Trade, so had we been Masters of all
those forementioned rich Trades, to the great advancement of this
Commonwealth, and Nation, which now may seem irrevocably lost, to the great
shame and dishonor of this Commonwealth.

To conclude, those rich Trades of India, Persia, Arabia, China, and Japon, did
never appear in their true luster and splendour, so much as in the time the
Portugals had the sole Command of those trades in their own hands, before
either we or the Dutch had made any discovery thereof, when they had every
year (if no Ships miscarryed) at least two Millions of pounds returned home on
register, which paid customs to the King at high rates, besides Pearls,
Diamonds, and other precious stones of great value, which came unregistred, and
paid no Customs. Of all which, the Dutch have endeavored to make themselves
Masters, and had accomplished, had not the English interposed a pedling trade
(for other I cannot call it) whom they durst not totally oppress and beat out
of those Seas, however labored by all the means they could invent, and the
more upon our Companies neglect of Trade, which gave them the advantage of
making them so rich, and powerful, as to dare to contest with your Highness
and State here at home, in hopes to have swallowed up the whole Nation in a
Conquest, and so have made themselves the absolutest Commanders by Sea, that
ever yet the world knew; and so have brought into subjection, not only the
East and West Indies, but even all other Trades throughtout the whole world;
but being beaten into better behavior by your Highness power by Sea, it is
hoped your Highness may in time work the same for our Nation, being vigilant
and careful, to keep those people under hatches, that they rise not again to
be able to hinder your Highnesses proceedings to that purpose; the true
interest of this Nation being at this time to increase its Trade, the only
means of making a Nation rich, and powerful, and able to give Law; by Sea to
all the world, as being so well seated, and fortified by Nature in the Seas,
that having a commanding Navy as your Highness has, and may have, able to
suppress all other neighboring Nations forces by Sea, before they grow
over-powerfull, and able to give another encounter to yours, by combining
together to its ruin. By other means (except from Heaven) it is impossible
the world can offend us, as not able to bring an Army into our Land, but by
wooden Horses, which are, and must be our chiefest care to maintain in their
full forces; and able, if not to destroy all others, yet to defend the Nation
it self in safety.

FINIS.

