THE PLAIN-DEALER. A COMEDY. As it is Acted at the Theater Royal.

Written by Mr WYCHERLEY.

HORAT. -- Ridiculum acre
Fortius and melius magnas plerumque secat res.
Licensed Ian. 9. 1676. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for James Magnes and Rich Bentleyin Russel street in
Covent Garden near the Piazza's. M.DC.LXXVII.

PROLOGUE, Spoken by the Plain-Dealer.
I The PLAIN-DEALER am to Act to Day:
And my rough Part begins before the Play.
First, you who Scrible, yet hate all that Write,
And keep each other Company in Spite,
As Rivals in your common Mistress, Fame,
And, with faint Praises, one another Damn;
It Is a good Play (we know) you cannot forgive,
But grudge your selves, the pleasure you receive:
Our Scribler therefore bluntly bid me say,
He would not have the Wits pleased here to Day.
Next, you, the fine, loud Gentlemen, of the Pit,
Who Damn all Plays; yet, if you have any Wit,
It Is but what here you sponge, and daily get;
Poets, like Friends to whom you are in Debt,
You hate: and so Rooks laugh, to see undone
Those Pushing Gamesters whom they live upon
Well, you are Sparks; and still will be in the fashion:
Rail then, at Plays, to hide your Obligation.
Now, you shrewd Judges who the Boxes sway,
Leading the Ladies hearts, and sense astray,
And, for their sakes, see all, and hear no Play;
Correct your Cravats, Foretops, Lock behind;
The Dress and Breeding of the Play never mind:
Plain-dealing is, you will say, quite out of fashion;
You Will hale it here, as in a Dedication.
And your fair Neighbors, in a Limning Poet,
No more than in a Painter will allow it.
Pictures too like, the Ladies will not please:
They must be drawn too here, like Goddesses.
You, as at Lely's too, would Truncheon wield,
And look like Heroes, in a painted Field;
But the course Dauber of the coming Scenes,
To follow Life, and Nature only means;
Displays you, as you are: makes his fine Woman
A mercenary Iilt, and true to no Man;
His Men of Wit, and Pleasure of the Age,
Are as dull Rogues, as ever cumber'd Stage:
He draws a Friend, only to Custom just;
And makes him naturally break his trust.
I, only, Act a Part like none of you;
And yet, you will say, it is a Fool's Part too:
An honest Man; who, like you, never winks
At faults; but, unlike you, speaks what he thinks:
The only Fool who never found Patron yet;
For Truth is now a fault, as well as Wit.
And where else, but on Stages, do we see
Truth pleasing; or rewarded Honesty?
Which our bold Poet does this day in me.
If not to the Honest, be to the Prosperous kind:
Some Friends at Court let the PLAIN-DEALER find.
EPILOGUE, Spoken by the Widow Blackacre.
TO you, the Judges learned in Stage Laws,
Our Poet now, by me, submits his Cause;
For with young Judges, such as most of you,
The Men by Women best their business do:
And, truth on it is, if you did not sit here,
To keep for us a Term throughout the Year,
We could not live by'r Tongues; nay, but for you,
Our Chamber-practice would be little too.
And it is not only the Stage Practiser
Who, by your meeting, gets her living here;
For, as in Hall of Westminster,
Sleek Sempstress vents, amidst the Courts, her Ware:
So, while we Baul, and you in Judgment sit,
The Visor-Mask sells Linen too in the Pit.
O many of your Friends, besides us here,
Do live, by putting off their several Ware.
Here Is daily done the great affair of the Nation:
Let Love, and Us then, never have Long-vacation.
But hold; like other Pleaders, I have done
Not my poor Client's business, but my own.
Spare me a word then, now, for him. First know,
Squires of the Long Robe, he does humbly show
He has a just Right in abusing you;
Because he is a Brother-Templer too:
For, at the Bar, you Railly one another;
And Fool, and Knave, is swallowed from a Brother:
If not the Poet here, the Templer spare;
And maul him, when you catch him at the Bar.
From you, our common modish Censurers,
Your Favor, not your Judgment, it is he fears:
Of all Loves begs you then to Rail, find fault;
For Plays, like Women, by the World are thought
(When you speak kindly of 'em) very naught.
THE PERSONS.
Manly Mr. Heart. Of an honest, surly, nice humor, supposed first, in the time
of the Dutch War, to have procured the Command of a Ship, out of Honor, not
Interest; and choosing a Sea-life, only to avoid the World. Freeman Mr.
Kynaston. Manly's Lieutenant, a Gentleman well Educated, but of a broken
Fortune, a Complyer with the Age. Vernish Mr. Griffin. Manly's Bosom, and
only Friend. Novell Mr. Clark. Apert railing Coxcomb, and an Admirer of
Novelties, makes love to Olivia. Major Oldfox Mr. Cartwright. An old
impertinent Fop, given to Scribbling, makes Love to the Widow Blackacre. My Lord
Plausible Mr. Haines. A Ceremonious Supple, Commending Coxcomb, in Love with
Olivia. Ierry-Blackacre Mr. Charlton. A true raw Squire under Age, and his
Mothers Government, bred to the Law. Olivia Mrs. Marshall. Manly's Mistress.
Fidelia Mrs. Boutell. In Love with Manly, and followed him to Sea in Man's
Clothes. Eliza Mrs. Knep. Cousin to Olivia. Letice Mrs. Knight. Olivia's Woman.
The Widow Blackacre Mrs. Cory. A petulant, litigious Widow, always in Law, and
Mother to Squire Ierry. Lawyers, Knights of the Post, Bailiffs, an Alderman, a
Booksellers Prentice, a Footboy, Sailors, Waiters, and Attendants.
THE SCENE, LONDON.

To my LADY B --
Madam,
THO I never had the Honor to receive a Favor from you, nay, or be known to
you, I take the confidence of an Author to write to you a Billiet doux
Dedicatory; which is no new thing, for by most Dedications it appears, that
Authors, though they praise their Patrons from top to toe, and seem to turn 'em
inside out, know 'em as little, as sometimes their Patrons their Books, tho
they read 'em out; and if the Poetical Daubers did not write the name of the
Man or Woman on top of the Picture, 'twere impossible to guess whose it were.
But you, Madam, without the help of a Poet, have made your self known and
famous in the World; and, because you do not want it, are therefore most worthy
of an Epistle Dedicatory. And this Play claims naturally your Protection, since
it has lost its Reputation with the Ladies of stricter lives in the Playhouse;
and (you know) when men's endeavors are discountenanced and refused, by the
nice coy Women of Honor, they come to you, To you the Great and Noble
Patroness of rejected and bashful men, of which number I profess my self to be
one, though a Poet, a Dedicating Poet; To you I say, Madam, who have as
discerning a judgment, in what is obscene or not, as any quick-sighted civil
Person of 'em all, and can make as much of a double meaning saying as the best
of 'em; yet would not, as some do, make nonsense of a Poet's jest, rather than
not make it baudy: by which they show they as little value Wit in a Play, as in
a Lover, provided they can bring the other thing about. Their sense indeed lies
all one way, and therefore are only for that in a Poet which is moving, as they
say; but what do they mean by that word moving? Well, I must not put 'em to the
blush, since I find I can do it. In short, Madam, you would not be one of those
who revish a Poet's innocent words, and make 'em guilty of their own
naughtiness (as it is termed) in spite of his teeth; nay, nothing is secure
from the power of their imaginations; no, not their Husbands, whom they Cuckold
with themselves, by thinking of other men, and so make the lawful matrimonial
embraces Adultery; wrong Husbands and Poets in thought and word, to keep their
own Reputations; but your Ladyship's justice, I know, would think a Woman's
Arraigning and Damning a Poet for her own obscenity, like her crying out a
Rape, and hanging a man for giving her pleasure, only that she might be thought
not to consent to it; and so to vindicate her honor forfeits her modesty. But
you, Madam, have too much modesty to pretend to it; tho you have as much to say
for your modesty as many a nicer she; for you never were seen at this Play, no,
not the first day; and it is no matter what Peoples lives have been, they are
unquestionably modest who frequent not this Play: For, as Mr. Bays says of his,
that it is the only Touchstone of Men's Wit and Understanding; mine is, it
seems, the only Touchstone of Women's Virtue and Modesty. But hold, that
Touchstone is equivocal, and, by the strength of a Lady's Imagination, may
become something that is not civil; but your Ladyship, I know, scorns to
misapply a Touchstone. And, Madam, tho you have not seen this Play, I hope
(like other nice Ladies) you will the rather read it; yet, lest the Chambermaid
or Page should not be trusted, and their indulgence could gain no further
admittance for it, than to their Ladies Lobbies or outward Rooms, take it into
your care and protection; for, by your recommendation and procurement, it may
have the honor to get into their Closets: For what they renounce in public
often entertains 'em there, with your help especially. In fine, Madam, for
these and many other reasons, you are the fittest Patroness or Judge of this
Play; for you show no partiality to this or that Author; for from some many
Ladies will take a broad jest as cheerfully as from the Watermen, and sit at
some downright filthy Plays (as they call 'em) as well satisfied, and as still,
as a Poet could wish 'em elsewhere; therefore it must be the doubtful obscenity
of my Plays alone they take exceptions at, because it is too bashful for 'em;
and indeed most Women hate men, for attempting to halves on their Chastity; and
Baudy I find, like Satyr, should be home, not to have it taken notice of. But,
now I mention Satyr, some there are who say, It Is the Plain-dealing of the
Play, not the obscenity; it is taking off the Ladies Masks, not offering at
their Pettycoats, which offends 'em: and generally they are not the handsomest,
or most innocent, who are the most angry at being discovered: -- Nihil est
audacius illis
Deprehensis; iram, atque animos a crimine sumunt.
Pardon, Madam, the Quotation, for a Dedication can no more be without ends of
Latin, than Flattery; and it is no matter whom it is writ to; for an Author can
as easily (I hope) suppose People to have more understanding and Languages than
they have, as well as more Virtues: But why, the Devil! should any of the few
modest and handsome be alarmed? (for some there are who as well as any deserve
those Attributes, yet refrain not from seeing this Play, nor think it any
addition to their Virtue to set up for it in a Playhouse, lest there it should
look too much like acting.) But why, I say, should any at all of the truly
virtuous be concerned, if those who are not so are distinguished from 'em? For
by that Mask of modesty which Women wear promiscuously in public, they are all
alike, and you can no more know a kept Wench from a Woman of Honor by her
looks than by her Dress; for those who are of Quality without Honor (if any
such there are) they have their Quality to set off their false Modesty, as well
as their false Jewels, and you must no more suspect their Countenances for
counterfeit than their Pendants, tho, as the Plain-dealer Montaigne says, Else
envoy leur conscience au Bordel, and teinnent leur contenance en regle: But
those who act as they look, ought not to be scandalized at the reprehension of
others faults, lest they tax themselves with 'em, and by too delicate and quick
an apprehension not only make that obscene which I meant innocent, but that
Satyr on all, which was intended only on those who deserved it. But, Madam, I
beg your pardon for this digression, to Civil Women and Ladies of Honor, since
you and I shall never be the better for 'em; for a Comic Poet, and a Lady of
your Profession, make most of the other sort, and the Stage and your Houses,
like our Plantations, are propagated by the least nice Women; and as with the
Ministers of Justice, the Vices of the Age are our best business. But, now I
mention Public Persons, I can no longer defer doing you the justice of a
Dedication, and telling you your own; who are, of all publick-spirited people,
the most necessary, most communicative, most generous and hospitable; your
house has been the house of the People, your sleep still disturbed for the
Public, and when you arose 'twas that others might lie down, and you waked
that others might rest; The good you have done is unspeakable; How many young
unexperienced Heirs have you kept from rash foolish Marriages? and from being
jilted for their lives by the worst sort of Iilts, Wives? How many unbewitched
Widowers Children have you preserved from the Tyranny of Stepmothers? How many
old Dotards from Cuckoldage, and keeping other men's Wenches and Children? How
many Adulteries and unnatural sins have you prevented? In fine, you have been a
constant scourge to the old Lecher, and often a terror to the young; you have
made concupiscence its own punishment, and extinguished Lust with Lust, like
blowing up of Houses to stop the fire.

Nimirum propter continentiam, incontinentia
Necessaria est, incendium ignibus extinguitur.
There Is Latin for you again, Madam; I protest to you, as I am an Author, I
cannot help it; nay, I can hardly keep my self from quoting Aristotle and
Horace, and talking to you of the Rules of Writing, (like the French Authors,)
to show you and my Readers I understand 'em, in my Epistle, lest neither of you
should find it out by the Play; and, according to the Rules of Dedications,
it is no matter whether you understand or no, what I quote or say to you, of
Writing; for an Author can as easily make any one a Judge or Critic, in an
Epistle, as an Hero in his Play: But, Madam, that this may prove to the end a
true Epistle Dedicatory, I Would have you know it is not without a design upon you,
which is in the behalf of the Fraternity of Parnassus, that Songs and Sonnets
may go at your Houses, and in your Liberties, for Guinneys and half Guinneys;
and that Wit, at least with you, as of old, may be the price of Beauty, and so
you will prove a true encourager of Poetry, for Love is a better help to it
than Wine; and Poets, like Painters, draw better after the Life, than by Fancy;
Nay, in justice, Madam, I think a Poet ought to be as free of your Houses, as
of the Play Houses; since he contributes to the support of both, and is as
necessary to such as you, as a Ballad-singer to the Pick-purse, in convening
the Cullies at the Theaters, to be picked up, and carried to Supper and Bed at
your houses. And, Madam, the reason of this motion of mine is, because poor
Poets can get no favor in the Tiring Rooms, for they are no Keepers, you know;
and Folly and Money, the old Enemies of Wit, are even too hard for it on its
own Dunghill: And for other Ladies, a Poet can least go to the price of them;
besides, his Wit, which ought to recommend him to 'em, is as much an
obstruction to his Love, as to his wealth or preferment; for most Women now
adays, apprehend Wit in a Lover, as much as in a Husband; they hate a Man that
knows 'em, they must have a blind easy Fool, whom they can lead by the Nose,
and as the Scythian Women of old, must baffle a Man, and put out his Eyes, ere
they will lie with him, and then too, like Thieves, when they have plundered
and stripped a Man, leave him But if there should be one of an hundred of those
Ladies, generous enough to give her self to a Man that has more Wit than Money,
(all things considered) he would think it cheaper coming to you for a Mistress,
though you made him pay his Guinney; as a Man in a Journey, (out of good
husbandry) had better pay for what he has in an Inn, than lie on freecost at a
Gentleman's House.

In fine, Madam, like a faithful Dedicator, I hope I have done my self right in
the first place, then you, and your Profession, which in the wisest and most
religious Government of the World, is honored with the public allowance; and
in those that are thought the most unciviliz'd and barbarous, is protected, and
supported by the Ministers of Justice; and of you, Madam, I ought to say no
more here, for your Virtues deserve a Poem rather than an Epistle, or a Volume
entire to give the World your Memoirs, or Life at large, and which (upon the
word of an Author that has a mind to make an end of his Dedication) I promise
to do, when I write the Annals of our British Love, which shall be Dedicated to
the Ladies concerned, if they will not think them something too obscene too;
when your Life, compared with many that are thought innocent, I doubt not may
vindicate you, and me, to the World, for the confidence I have taken in this
Address to you; which then may be thought neither impertinent, nor immodest;
and, whatsoever your Amorous misfortunes have been, none can charge you with
that heinous, and worst of Women's Crimes, Hypocrisy; nay, in spite of
misfortunes or age, you are the same Woman still; though most of your Sex grow
Magdalens at fifty, and as a solid French Author has it, Apres le plaisir,
vien't la peine,
Apres la peine la virtue;


But sure an old sinner's continency is much like a Gamester's forswearing
Play, when he has lost all his Money; and Modesty is a kind of a youthful
dress, which, as it makes a young Woman more amiable, makes an old one more
nauseous; a bashful old Woman is like an hopeful old man; and the affected
Chastity of antiquated Beauties, is rather a reproach than an honor to 'em,
for it shows the men's Virtue only, not theirs. But you, in fine, Madam, are no
more an Hypocrite than I am when I praise you; therefore I doubt not will be
thought (even by yours and the Play's Enemies, the nicest Ladies) to be the
fittest Patroness for,

Madam, Your Ladyship's most obedient, faithful, humble Servant, and The
Plain-Dealer.

Some Books Printed for James Magnes and Richard Bentley.
PLato's Apology of Socrates, or Phedo, two Dialogues concerning the
immortality of Man's Soul. A Natural History of the Passions. Country Wit.
Sophonisba. Nero. Augustus Caesar. Abdellazar. Sir Timothy Taudery. Madam
Fickle. All Mistaken. English Monsieur. Tartuff. Andromache. Calista. Forced
Marriage. The Fool turned Critic. In the Press. The second Part of the Happy
Slave. In the Press. Moral Essays, the second Part. In the Press.
English Novels, New.
Zelinda. Count Brion. Happy Slave.
French Novels.
Princess Monferat. L'Heureux Esclave. L'Heureux Esclave, second Part.
L'Heureux Esclave, troisieme Part. In the Press. A French Play Acted at
Whitehall, Entitled, Rare-en-tout.
THE Plain-Dealer. ACT. I. Scene 1.
Captain Manly's Lodging. Enter Captain Manly, surlily; and my Lord Plausible
following him: and two Sailors behind. Man. TEll not me (my good Lord
Plausible) of your Decorums, supercilious Forms, and slavish Ceremonies; your
little Tricks, which you the Spaniels of the World, do daily over and over,
for, and to one another; not out of love or duty, but your servile fear.


L. Plaus. Nay, in faith, in faith, you are too passionate, and I must humbly beg
your pardon and leave to tell you, they are the Arts, and Rules, the prudent of
the World walk by.


Man. Let 'em. But I Will have no Leading-strings, I can walk alone; I hate a
Harness, and will not tug on in a Faction, kissing my Leader behind, that
another Slave may do the like to me.


L. Plaus. What, will you be singular then, like no Body? follow Love, and
esteem no Body?


Man. Rather then be general, like you; follow every Body, Court and kiss every
Body; though, perhaps at the same time, you hate every Body.


L. Plaus. Why, seriously with your pardon, my dear Friend --


Man. With your pardon, my no Friend, I will not, as you do whisper my hatred,
or my scorn, call a man Fool or Knave, by signs, or mouths over his shoulder,
whilst you have him in your arms: for such as you, like common Whores and
Pickpockets, are only dangerous to those you embrace.


L. Plaus. Such as I! Heavens defend me -- upon my Honor --


Man. Upon your Title, my Lord, if you would have me believe you.


L. Plaus. Well then, as I am a Person of Honor, I never attempted to abuse,
or lessen any person, in my life.


Man. What, you were afraid?


L. Plaus. No; but seriously, I hate to do a rude thing: no, faith, I speak
well of all Mankind.


Man. I thought so; but know that speaking well of all Mankind, is the worst
kind of Detraction; for it takes away the Reputation of the few good men in the
World, by making all alike: now I speak ill of most men, because they deserve
it; I that can do a rude thing, rather than an unjust thing.


L. Plaus. Well, tell not me, my dear Friend, what people deserve, I never mind
that; I, like an Author in a Dedication, never speak well of a man for his
sake, but my own; I will not disparage any man, to disparage my self; for to
speak ill of people behind their backs, is not like a Person of Honor; and
truly to speak ill of 'em to their faces, is not like a complaisant person: But
if I did say, or do an ill thing to any Body, it should be sure to be behind
their backs, out of pure good manners.


Man. Very well; but I, that am an unmannerly Sea-fellow, if I ever speak well
of people, (which is very seldom indeed) it should be sure to be behind their
backs; and if I would say, or do ill to any, it should be to their faces: I
would justle a proud, strutting, over-looking Coxcomb, at the head of his
Sycophants, rather than put out my tongue at him, when he were past me; would
frown in the arrogant, big, dull face of an overgrown Knave of business, rather
than vent my spleen against him, when his back were turned; would give fauning
Slaves the Lie, whilst they embrace or commend me; Cowards, whilst they brag;
call a Rascal by no other title, though his Father had left him a Duke's; laugh
at Fools aloud, before their Mistresses: And must desire people to leave me,
when their visits grow at last as troublesome, as they were at first impertinent.


L. Plaus. I would not have my visits troublesome.


Man. The only way to be sure not to have 'em troublesome, is to make 'em when
people are not at home; for your visits, like other good turns, are most
obliging, when made, or done to a man, in his absence. A pox why should any
one, because he has nothing to do go and disturb another man's business?


L. Plaus. I beg your pardon, my dear Friend. What, you have business?


Man. If you have any, I would not detain your Lordship.


L. Plaus. Detain me, dear Sir! I can never have enough of your company.


Man. I Am afraid I should be tiresom: I know not what you think.


L. Plaus. Well, dear Sir, I see you would have me gone.


Man. But I see you will not.

[Aside.
L. Plaus. Your most faithful --


Man. God be w'ye, my Lord.


L. Plaus. Your most humble --


Man. Farewell.


L. Plaus. And eternally --


Man. And eternally Ceremony -- then the Devil take thee eternally.

[Aside.
L. Plaus. You shall use no Ceremony, by my life.


Man. I do not intend it.


L. Plaus. Why do you stir then?


Man. Only to see you out of doors, that I may shut 'em, against more welcomes.


L. Plaus. Nay, faith that shall not pass upon your most faithful, humble Servant.


Man. Nor this any more upon me.

[Aside.
L. Plaus. Well, you are too strong for me.


Man. I Would sooner be visited by the Plague; for that only would keep a man from
visits, and his doors shut.

[Aside.
[Ex. thrusting out my Lord Plausible: Manent Sailors. 1 Sail. Here Is a finical
Fellow Jack! What a brave fair weather Captain of a Ship he would make!


2 Sail. He a Captain of a Ship! it must be when she is in the Dock then; for he
looks like one of those that get the King's Commissions for Hulls to sell a
Kings Ship, when a brave Fellow has fought her almost to a Longboat.


1 Sail. On my conscience then, Jack, that is the reason our Bully Tar. sunk our
Ship: not only that the Dutch might not have her, but that the Courtiers, who
laugh at wooden Legs, might not make her Prize.


2 Sail. A pox of his sinking, Tom, we have made a base, broken, short Voyage
of it.


1 Sail. Ay, your brisk dealers in Honor, always make quick returns with
their Ship to the Dock, and their Men to the Hospitals; it is, let me see, just
a Month since we set out of the River, and the Wind was almost as cross to us,
as the Dutch.


2 Sail. Well, I forgive him sinking my own poor Truck, if he would but have
given me time and leave to have saved black Kate of Wapping's small Venture.


1 Sail. Faith I forgive him, since, as the Purser told me, he sunk the value
of five or six thousand pound of his own, with which he was to settle himself
somewhere in the Indies, for our merry Lieutenant was to succeed him in his
Commission for the Ship back, for he was resolved never to return again for
England.


2 Sail. So it seemed, by his Fighting.


1 Sail. No, but he was a weary of this side of the World here, they say.


2 Sail. Ay, or else he would not have bid so fair for a passage into the other.


1 Sail. Jack, thou think thy self in the Forecastle, you are so waggish;
but I tell you then, he had a mind to go live and bask himself on the sunny
side of the Globe.


2 Sail. What, out of any discontent? for he is always as dogged, as an old
Tarpaulin when hindered of a Voyage by a young Pantaloon Captain.


1 Sail. It Is true, I never saw him pleased but in the Fight, and then he
looked like one of us, coming from the Pay-table, with a new Lining to our Hats
under our Arms,


2 Sail. A pox he is like the Bay of Biscay, rough and angry, let the Wind blow
where 'twill.


1 Sail. Nay, there is no more dealing with him, than with the Land in a Storm,
No-near --


2 Sail. It Is a hurry-durry Blade; do thou remember after we had tug'd hard
the old leaky Longboat, to save his Life, when I welcomed him ashore, he gave
me a box on the ear, and called me fawning Water-dog?


Enter Manly, and Freeman. 1 Sail. Hold thy peace, Jack, and stand by, the foul
weather's coming.


Man. You Rascals, Dogs, how could this tame thing get through you?


1 Sail. Faith, to tell your Honor the truth, we were at Hob in the Hall, and
whilst my Brother and I were quarrelling about a Cast, he slunk by us.


2 Sail. He Is a sneaking Fellow I warrant for it.


Man. Have more care for the future, you Slaves; go, and with drawn Cutlaces,
stand at the Stair foot, and keep all that ask for me from coming up; suppose
you were guarding the Scuttle to the Powder room: let none enter here, at your
and their peril.


1 Sail. No, for the danger would be the same; you would blow them and us up,
if we should.


2 Sail. Must no one come to you, Sir?


Man. No man, Sir.


1 Sail. No man, Sir; but a Woman then, an't like your Honor --


Man. No Woman neither, you impertinent Dog. Would you be Pimping? A Sea Pimp
is the strangest Monster she has.


2 Sail. Indeed, an't like your Honor, 'twill be hard for us to deny a Woman
any thing, since we are so newly come on shore.


1 Sail. We'll let no old Woman come up, though it were our Trusting Landlady
at Wapping.


Man. Would you be witty, you Brandy Casks you? you become a jest as ill, as
you do a Horse. Be gone, you Dogs, I hear a noise on the Stairs.


[Ex. Sailors. Free. Faith, I am sorry you would let the Fop go, I intended to
have had some sport with him.


Man. Sport with him! A pox then why did you not stay? you should have enjoyed
your Coxcomb, and had him to your self for me.


Free. No, I should not have cared for him, without you neither; for the
pleasure which Fops afford, is like that of Drinking, only good when it is
shared; and a Fool, like a Bottle, which would make you merry in company, will
make you dull alone. But how the Devil could you turn a man of his Quality down
Stairs? You use a Lord with very little Ceremony, it seems.


Man. A Lord! What thou art one of those who esteem men only by the marks and
value Fortune has set upon 'em, and never consider intrinsic worth; but
counterfeit Honor will not be current with me, I weigh the man, not his title;
it is not the King's stamp can make the Metal better, or heavier: your Lord is a
Leaden shilling, which you may bend every way; and debases the stamp he bears,
instead of being raised by it: Here again, you Slaves?


Enter Sailors. 1 Sail. Only to receive farther instructions, an't like your
Honor: What if a man should bring you money, should we turn him back?


Man. All men, I say; must I be pestered with you too? you Dogs, away.


2 Sail. Nay, I know one man your Honor would not have us hinder coming to
you, I Am sure.


Man. Who Is that? speak quickly, Slaves.


2 Sail. Why a man that should bring you a Challenge; for though you refuse
Money, I^m sure you love Fighting too well to refuse that.


Man. Rogue, Rascal, Dog.


[Kicks the Sailors out. Free. Nay, let the poor Rogues have their Forecastle
jests; they cannot help 'em in a Fight, scarce when a Ship's sinking.


Man. Dam their untimely jests; a Servant's jest is more sauciness than his
counsel.


Free. But what, will you see no Body? not your Friends?


Man. Friends -- I have but one, and he, I hear, is not in Town; nay, can have
but one Friend, for a true heart admits b^t of one friendship, as of one love;
but in having that Friend, I have a thousand, for he has the courage of men in
despair, yet the diffidency and caution of Cowards; the secrecy of the
Revengeful, and the constancy of Martyrs: one fit to advise, to keep a secret:
to fight and dye for his Friend. Such I think him; for I have trusted him with
my Mistress in my absence: and the trust of Beauty, is sure the greatest we can
show.


Free. Well, but all your good thoughts are not for him alone? (I hope:) pray,
what do you think of me, for a Friend?


Man. Of thee! Why, thou art a Latitudinarian in Friendship, that is, no
Friend; thou do side with all Mankind, but wilt suffer for none. Thou art
indeed like your Lord Plausible, the Pink of Courtesy, therefore have no
Friendship; for Ceremony, and great Professing, renders Friendship as much
suspected, as it does Religion.


Free. And no Professing, no Ceremony at all in Friendship, were as unnatural
and as undecent as in Religion; and there is hardly such a thing as an honest
Hypocrite, who professes himself to be worse than he is, unless it be your
self; for, though I could never get you to say you were my Friend, I know
you will prove so.


Man. I must confess, I am so much your Friend, I would not deceive you,
therefore must tell you (not only because my heart is taken up) but according
to your rules of Friendship, I cannot be your Friend.


Free. Why pray?


Man. Because he that is (you will say) a true Friend to a man, is a Friend to
all his Friends; but you must pardon me, I cannot wish well to Pimps,
Flatterers, Detractors, and Cowards, stiff nodding Knaves, and supple pliant
kissing Fools: now, all these I have seen you use, like the dearest Friends in
the World.


Free. Hah, hah, hah -- What, you observed me, I warrant, in the Galleries at
Whitehall, doing the business of the place! Pshaw Court Professions, like Court
Promises, go for nothing, man. But, faith, could you think I was a Friend to
all those I hugged, kissed, flattered, bowed too? Hah, ha --


Man. You told 'em so, and swore it too; I heard you.


Free. Ay, but, when their backs were turned, did I not tell you they were
Rogues, Villains, Rascals, whom I despised, and hated?


Man. Very fine! But what reason had I to believe you spoke your heart to me,
since you professed deceiving so many?


Free. Why, don't you know, good Captain, that telling truth is a quality as
prejudicial, to a man that would thrive in the World, as square Play to a
Cheat, or true Love to a Whore! Would you have a man speak truth to his ruin?
You are severer than the Law, which requires no man to swear against himself;
you would have me speak truth against my self, I warrant, and tell my promising
Friend, the Courtier, he has a bad memory?


Man. Yes.


Free. And so make him remember to forget my business; and I should tell the
great Lawyer too, that he takes oftener Fees to hold his tongue, than to speak!


Man. No doubt on it.


Free. Ay, and have him hang, or ruin me, when he should come to be a Judge,
and I before him. And you would have me tell the new Officer, who bought his
Employment lately, that he is a Coward.


Man. Ay.


Free. And so get my self cashiered, not him, he having the better Friends,
though I the better Sword. And I should tell the Scribler of Honor, that
Heraldry were a prettier and fitter Study, for so fine a Gentleman, than Poetry!


Man. Certainly.


Free. And so find my self mauled in his next hired Lampoon. And you would have
me tell the holy Lady too, she lies with her Chaplain.


Man. No doubt on it.


Free. And so draw the Clergy upon my back, and want a good Table to Dine at
sometimes. And by the same reason too, I should tell you, that the World thinks
you a Madman, a Brutal and have you cut my throat, or worse, hate me! What
other good success of all my Plain-dealing could I have, than what I Have
mentioned?


Man. Why, first your promising Courtier would keep his word, out of fear of
more reproaches; or at least would give you no more vain hopes: your Lawyer
would serve you more faithfully; for he, having no Honor but his Interest, is
truest still to him he knows suspects him: The new Officer would provoke thee
to make him a Coward, and so be cashiered, that thou, or some other honest
Fellow, who had more courage than money, might get his place: the Noble
Sonneteer would trouble thee no more with his Madrigals: the praying Lady would
leave off railing at Wenching before thee, and not turn away her Chambermaid,
for her own known frailty with thee: and I, instead of hating thee, sheu'd love
thee, for thy Plain-dealing; and in lieu of being mortified, am proud that the
World and I think not well of one another.


Free. Well, Doctors differ. You are for Plain-dealing, I find; but against
your particular Notions, I have the practice of the whole World. Observe but
any Morning what people do when they get together on the Exchange, in
Westminster Hall, or the Galleries in Whitehall.


Man. I must confess, there they seem to rehearse Bays's grand Dance: here you
see a Bishop bowing low to a gaudy Atheist; a Judge, to a Doorkeeper; a great
Lord, to a Fishmonger, or a Scrivener with a Jack-chain about his neck; a
Lawyer, to a Sergeant at Arms; a velvet Physician, to a thredbare Chemist: and
a supple Gentleman Usher, to a surly Beef-eater; and so tread round in a
preposterous huddle of Ceremony to each other, whilst they can hardly hold
their solemn false countenances.


Free. Well, they understand the World.


Man. Which I do not, I confess.


Free. But, Sir, pray believe the Friendship I promise you, real, whatsoever I
have professed to others: try me, at least.


Man. Why, what would you do for me?


Free. I would fight for you.


Man. That you would do for your own Honor: but what else?


Free. I would lend you money, if I had it.


Man. To borrow more of me another time. That were but putting your money to
Interest, a Usurer would be as good a Friend. But what other piece of
Friendship?


Free. I would speak well of you to your Enemies.


Man. To encourage others to be your Friends, by a show of gratitude: but what
else?


Free. Nay, I would not hear you ill spoken of behind your back, by my Friend.


Man. Nay, then you are a Friend indeed; but it were unreasonable to expect it
from thee, as the World goes now: when new Friends, like new Mistresses, are
got by disparaging old ones. Enter Fidelia. But here comes another, will say as
much at least; do not thou love me devilishly too, my little Voluntier, as
well as he, or any man can?


Fid. Better than any man can love you, my dear Captain.


Man. Look you there, I told you so.


Fid. As well as you do Truth, or Honor, Sir; as well.


Man. Nay, good young Gentleman, enough, for shame; thou have been a Page, by
thy Flattering and Lying, to one of those praying Ladies, who love Flattery so
well, they are jealous of it, and were turned away for saying the same things
to the old Housekeeper for Sweetmeats, as you did to your Lady; for thou
flatterest every thing, and every Body alike


Fid. You, dear Sir, should not suspect the truth of what I say of you, though
to you; Fame, the old Liar, is believed, when she speaks Wonders of you; you
cannot be flattered, Sir, your Merit is unspeakable.


Man. Hold, hold, Sir, or I shall suspect worse of you, that you have been a
Cushion-bearer to some State Hypocrite, and turned away by the Chaplains, for
out flattering their Probation Sermons for a Benefice.


Fid. Suspect me for any thing, Sir, but the want of Love, Faith, and Duty to
you, the bravest, worthiest of Mankind; believe me, I could dye for you, Sir.


Man. Nay, there you lie, Sir; did I not see thee more afraid in the Fight,
than the Chaplain of the Ship, or the Purser that bought his place?


Fid. Can he be said to be afraid, that ventures to Sea with you?


Man. Fie, fie, no more, I shall hate thy Flattery worse than thy Cowardice,
my, than thy Bragging.


Fid. Well, I own then I was afraid, mightily afraid; yet for you I would be
afraid again, an hundred times afraid: dying is ceasing to be afraid; and that
I could do sure for you, and you will believe me one day.


[Weeps. Free. Poor Youth! believe his eyes, if not his tongue: he seems to
speak truth with them.


Man. What, does he cry? A pox on it, a Maudlin Flatterer is as nauseously
troublesome, as a Maudlin Drunkard; no more, you little Milksop, do not cry,
I Will never make thee afraid again; for of all men, if I had occasion, thou
should not be my Second; and, when I go to Sea again, thou shall venture thy
life no more with me.


Fid. Why, will you leave me behind then? (If you would preserve my life, I Am
sure you should not.)

Aside.
Man. Leave thee behind! Ay, ay, thou art a hopeful Youth for the shore only;
here thou will live to be cherished by Fortune, and the great ones; for thou
may easily come to out-flatter a dull Poet, out-lye a Coffee-house, or
Gazet-writer, out-swear a Knight of the Post, out-watch a Pimp, out-fawn a
Rook, out-promise a Lover, out-rail a Wit, and outbrag a Sea-Captain: All this
thou can do, because you are a Coward, a thing I hate, therefore thou wilt do
better with the World than with me; and these are the good courses you must
take in the World. There Is good advice, at least, at parting; go, and be happy
with it.


Fid. Parting, Sir! O let me not hear that dismal word.


Man. If my words frighten thee, be gone the sooner; for, to be plain with
thee, Cowardice and I cannot dwell together.


Fid. And Cruelty and Courage never dwelt together sure, Sir. Do not turn me
off to shame and misery; for I am helpless, and friendless.


Man. Friendless! there are half a score Friends for thee then; [Offers her
Gold.] I leave my self no more: they will help thee a little. Be gone, go, I must
be cruel to thee (if thou call'st it so) out of pity.


Fid. If you would be cruelly pitiful, Sir, let it be with your Sword, not Gold.

[Exit.
Enter first Sailor. 1 Sail. We have, with much ado, turned away two Gentlemen,
who told us forty times over, their names were Mr Novel, and Major Oldfox.


Man. Well, to your Post again. [Exit Sailor. But how come those Puppies
coupled always together?


Free. O, the Coxcombs keep each other company, to show each other, as Novel
calls it; or, as Oldfox says, like two Knives, to whet one another.


Man. And set other peoples teeth an edge.


Enter second Sailor. 2 Sail. Here is a Woman, an't like your Honor, scolds
and bustles with us, to come in, as much as a Seamans Widow at the Navy-Office:
her name is Mrs Blackacre.


Man. That Fiend too!


Free. The Widow Blackacre, is it not? that Litigious She-Pettyfogger, who is
at Law and difference with all the World; but I wish I could make her agree
with me in the Church: they say she has Fifteen hundred pounds a Year Jointure,
and the care of her Son, that is, the destruction of his Estate.


Man. Her Lawyers, Attorneys and Solicitors have Fifteen hundred pound a Year,
whil^st she is contented to be poor, to make other people so; for she is as
vexatious as her Father was, the great Attorney, nay, as a dozen Norfolk
Attorneys, and as implacable an Adversary, as a Wife suing for Alimony, or a
Parson for his Tithes; and she loves an Easter Term, or any Term, not as other
Country Ladies do, to come up to be fine, Cuckold their Husbands, and take
their pleasure; for she has no pleasure, but in vexing others, and is usually
clothed and dagled like a Baud in disguise, pursued through Alleys by
Sergeants. When she is in Town, she lodges in one of the Inns of Chancery,
where she breeds her Son, and is her self his Tutoress in Law-French; and for
her Country abode, though she has no Estate there, she chooses Norfolk. But, bid
her come in, with a pox to her, she is Olivia's Kinswoman, and may make me
amends for her visit, by some discourse of that dear Woman.


[Exit Sailor. Enter Widow Blackacre with a Mantle, and a green Bag, and
several Papers in the other hand: Jerry Blackacre her Son, in a Gown, laden
with green Bags, following her. Wid. I never had so much to do with a Judges
Door keeper, as with yours; but --


Man. But the incomparable Olivia, how does she since I went?


Wid. Since you went, my Suit --


Man. Olivia, I say, is she well?


Wid. My Suit, if you had not returned --


Man. Dam your Suit, how does your Cousin Olivia?


Wid. My Suit, I say, had been quite lost; but now --


Man. But now, where is Olivia? in Town? For --


Wid. For to morrow we are to have a Hearing.


Man. Would you would let me have a Hearing to day.


Wid. But why will not you hear me?


Man. I am no Judge, and you talk of nothing but Suits; but, pray tell me, when
did you see Olivia?


Wid. I am no Visiter, but a Woman of Business; or, if I ever visit, it is only
the Chancery Lane Ladies, Ladies toward the Law; and not any of your lazy,
good-for-nothing Flirts, who cannot read Law-French, though a Gallant writ it.
But, as I was telling you, my Suit --


Man. Dam these impertinent, vexatious people of Business, of all Sexes; they
are still troubling the World with the tedious recitals of their Lawsuits: and
one can no more stop their mouths, than a Wit's, when he talks of himself; or
an Intelligencer's, when he talks of other people.


Wid. And a pox of all vexatious, impertinent Lovers; they are still perplexing
the World with the tedious Narrations of their Love-Suits, and Discourses of
their Mistresses: You are as troublesome to a poor Widow of Business, as a young
Coxcombly Rithming Lover.


Man. And thou art as troublesome to me, as a Rook to a losing Gamester, or a
young putter of Cases to his Mistress and Sempstress, who has Love in her head
for another.


Wid. Nay, since you talk of putting of Cases, and will not hear me speak, hear
our Ierry a little; let him put our Case to you, for the Tryal's to morrow; and
since you are my chief Witness, I would have your memory refreshed, and your
judgment informed, that you may not give your evidence improperly. Speak out,
Child.


Ier. Yes, forsooth. Hemh! Hemh! Iohn-a-Stiles --


Man. You may talk, young Lawyer, but I shall no more mind you, than a hungry
Judge does a Cause, after the Clock has struck One.


Free. Nay, you will find him as peevish too.


Wid. No matter. Ierry, go on. Do you observe it then, Sir, for I think I have
seen you in a Gown once. Lord, I could hear our Ierry put Cases all day long!
Mark him, Sir.


Ier. Iohn-a-Stiles -- no -- There are first, Fitz, Pere, and Ayle; -- No, no,
Ayle, Pere, and Fitz; Ayle is seized in Fee of Blackacre; Iohn-a-Stiles
disseises Ayle; Ayle makes Claim, and the Disseisor dies; then the Ayle -- no
the Fitz.


Wid. No, the Pere, Sirrah.


Ier. O, the Pere: ay, the Pere, Sir, and the Fitz -- no the Ayle; no, the Pere
and the Fitz, Sir, and --


Man. Dam Pere, Mere and Fitz, Sir.


Wid. No, you are out, Child; hear me, Captain then; there are Ayle, Pere and
Fitz, Ayle is seized in Fee of Blackacre; and being so seized, Iohn-a-Stiles
disseises the Ayle, Ayle makes Claim, and the Disseisor dies; and then the Pere
reenters, the Pere Sirrah, the Pere -- [ To Jerry. And the Fitz enters upon
the Pere, and the Ayle brings his Writ of Disseizen, in the Post; and the Pere
brings his Writ of Disseizen, in the Pere, and --


Man. Can thou hear this stuff, Freeman? I could as soon suffer a whole noise
of Flatterers at a great man's Levy in a morning; but thou have servile
complacency enough to listen to a Quibling Statesman, in disgrace, nay, and be
before hand with him, in laughing at his dull No-jest; but I --


[Offering to go out. Wid. Nay, Sir, hold. Where Is the Sub-poena, Ierry? I must
serve you, Sir. You are required, by this, to give your testimony --


Man. I Will be forsworn, to be revenged on thee.


[Ex. Manly, throwing away the Subpoena. Wid. Get you gone, for a Lawless
companion. Come, Ierry, I had almost forgot we were to meet at the Masters at
three: let us mind our business still, Child.


Ier. I, forsooth, even so let us.


Free. Nay, Madam, now I would beg you to hear me a little, a little of my
business.


Wid. I have business of my own calls me away, Sir.


Free. My business would prove yours too, dear Madam.


Wid. Yours would be some sweet business, I warrant: What, it is no
Westminster Hall business? Would you have my advice?


Free. No, faith, it is a little Westminster-Abby business: I would have your
consent.


Wid. O fie, fie, Sir; to me such discourse, before my dear Minor there!


Ier. Ay, ay, Mother, he would be taking Livery and Seizen of your Jointure, by
digging the Turf; but I Will watch your waters, Bully, ifac. Come away, Mother.


[Ex. Jerry, haling away his Mother. Manet Freeman: Enter to him Fidelia. Fid.
Dear Sir, you have pity; beget but some in our Captain for me.


Free. Where is he?


Fid. Within; swearing, as much as he did in the great storm, and cursing you,
and sometimes sinks into calms and sighs, and talks of his Olivia.


Free. He would never trust me to see her: is she handsome?


Fid. No, if you will take my word; but I am not a proper Judge.


Free. What is she?


Fid. A Gentlewoman, I suppose, but of as mean a Fortune as Beauty; but her
Relations would not suffer her to go with him to the Indies: and his aversion
to this side of the World, together with the late opportunity of commanding the
Convoy, would not let him stay here longer, though to enjoy her.


Free. He loves her mightily then.


Fid. Yes, so well, that the remainder of his Fortune (I hear about five or six
thousand pounds) he has left her, in case he had died by the way, or before she
could prevail with her Friends to follow him, which he expected she should do;
and has left behind him his great bosom Friend to be her Convoy to him.


Free. What Charms has she for him, if she be not handsome?


Fid. He fancies her, I suppose, the only Woman of Truth and Sincerity in the
World.


Free. No common Beauty, I confess.


Fid. Or else sure he would not have trusted her with so great a share of his
Fortune, in his absence; I suppose (since his late loss) all he has.


Free. Why, has he left it in her own custody?


Fid. I am told so.


Free. Then he has showed Love to her indeed, in leaving her, like an old
Husband that dies as soon as he has made his Wife a good Jointure; but I Will go
in to him, and speak for you, and know more from him of his Olivia.

[Exit.
Manet Fidelia sola. Fid. His Olivia indeed, his happy Olivia,
Yet she was left behind, when I was with him;
But she was never out of his mind or heart.
She has told him she loved him; I have showed it,
And durst not tell him so, till I had done,
Under this habit, such convincing Acts
Of loving Friendship for him, that through it
He first might find out both my Sex and Love;
And, when I Would had him from his fair Olivia,
And this bright World of artful Beauties here,
Might then have hoped, he would have looked on me
Amongst the sooty Indians; and I could
To choose there live his Wife, where Wives are forced
To live no longer, when their Husbands dye:
Nay, what is yet worse, to share 'em whilst they live
With many Rival Wives. But here he comes,
And I must yet keep out of his sight, not
To lose it for ever.
[Exit.
Enter Manly and Freeman. Free. But pray what strange Charms has she that could
make you love?


Man. Strange Charms indeed! She has Beauty enough to call in question her Wit
or Virtue, and her Form would make a starved Hermit a Ravisher; yet her Virtue,
and Conduct, would preserve her from the subtle Lust of a pampered Prelate. She
is so perfect a Beauty, that Art could not better it, nor Affectation deform
it; yet all this is nothing. Her tongue as well as face, never knew artifice;
nor ever did her words or looks contradict her heart: She is all truth, and
hates the lying, masking, daubing World, as I do; for which I love her, and for
which I think she dislikes not me: for she has often shut out of her
conversation for mine, the gaudy fluttering Parrots of the Town, Apes, and
Echoes of men only, and refused their common place pert chat, flattery, and
submissions, to be entertained with my sullen bluntness, and honest love. And,
last of all, swore to me, since her Parents would not suffer her to go with me,
she would stay behind for no other man; but follow me, without their leave, if
not to be obtained. Which Oath --


Free. Did you think she would keep?


Man. Yes; for she is not (I tell you) like other Women, but can keep her
promise, though she has sworn to keep it; but, that she might the better keep it,
I left her the value of five or six thousand pound: for Women's wants are
generally their most importunate Solicitors to Love, or Marriage.


Free. And Money summons Lovers, more than Beauty, and augments but their
importunity, and their number; so makes it the harder for a Woman to deny 'em.
For my part, I am for the French Maxim, if you would have your Female Subjects
Loyal, keep 'em poor: but, in short, that your Mistress may not marry, you have
given her a Portion.


Man. She had given me her heart first, and I am satisfied with the security; I
can never doubt her truth and constancy.


Free. It seems you do, since you are fain to bribe it with Money. But how come
you to be so diffident of the Man that says he loves you, and not doubt the
Woman that says it?


Man. I should (I confess) doubt the Love of any other Woman but her, as I do
the friendship of any other Man but him I have trusted; but I have such proofs
of their faith, as cannot deceive me.


Free. Cannot!


Man. No but I know, that generally, no Man can be a great Enemy, but under the
name of Friend; and if you are a Cuckold, it is your Friend only that makes you
so; for your Enemy is not admitted to your house: if you are cheated in your
Fortune, it is your Friend that does it; for your Enemy is not made your
Trustee: if your Honor, or Good Name be injured, it is your Friend that does it
still, because your Enemy is not believed against you. Therefore I rather
choose to go where honest, downright Barbarity is professed; where men devour one
another like generous hungry Lions and Tigers, not like Crocodiles; where they
think the Devil white, of our complexion, and I am already so far an Indian:
but, if your weak faith doubts this miracle of a Woman, come along with me, and
believe, and thou will find her so handsome, that thou, who art so much my
Friend, wilt have a mind to lie with her, and so will not fail to discover what
her faith and thine is to me.


When we are in Love, the great Adversity,
Our Friends and Mistresses at once we try.
Finis Actus Primi.
ACT. II. Scene 1.
Olivia's Lodging. Enter Olivia, Eliza, Lettice. Oliv. AH, Cousin, what a World
it is we live in! I am so weary of it.


Eliz. Truly, Cousin, I can find no fault with it, but that we cannot always
live in it; for I can never be weary of it.


Oliv. O hideous! you cannot be in earnest sure, when you say you like the
filthy World.


Eliz. You cannot be in earnest sure, when you say you dislike it.


Oliv. You are a very censorious Creature, I find.


Eliz. I must confess I think we Women as often discover where we love, by
railing; as men when they lie, by their swearing; and the World is but a
constant Keeping Gallant, whom we fail not to quarrel with, when any thing
crosses us, yet cannot part with it for our hearts.


Let. A Gallant indeed, Madam, whom Ladies first make jealous, and then
quarrel with it for being so, for if, by her indiscretion, a Lady be talked of
for a Man, she cries presently, It Is a Censorious World; if, by her vanity, the
Intrigue be found out, It Is a prying, malicious World; if, by her
over-fondness, the Gallant proves unconstant, It Is a false World; and if, by
her nigardliness, the Chambermaid tells, It Is a perfidious World: but that, I Am
sure, your Ladyship cannot say of the World yet, as bad as it is.


Oliv. But I may say, It Is a very impertinent World. Hold your peace. And,
Cousin, if the World be a Gallant, it is such as one as is my aversion. Pray
name it no more.


Eliz. But is it possible the World, which has such variety of Charms for other
Women, can have none for you? Let Us see -- first, what do you think of Dressing,
and fine Clothes?


Oliv. Dressing! Fie, fie, it is my aversion. But, come hither, you Dowdy,
methinks you might have opened this Toure better: O hideous! I cannot suffer
it! do you see how't sits?


Eliz. Well enough, Cousin, if Dressing be your aversion.


Oliv. It Is so: and for variety of rich Clothes, they are more my aversion.


Let. Ay, it is because your Ladyship wears 'em too long; for indeed a Gown,
like a Gallant, grows one's aversion, by having too much of it.


Oliv. Insatiable Creature! I Will be sworn I have had this not above three
days, Cousin, and within this month have made some six more.


Eliz. Then your aversion to 'em is not altogether so great.


Oliv. Alas! it is for my Woman only I wear 'em, Cousin.


Let. If it be for me only, Madam pray do not wear 'em.


Eliz. But what do you think of Visits -- Balls --


Oliv. O, I detest 'em.


Eliz. Of Plays?


Oliv. I abominate 'em: filthy, obscene, hideous things?


Eliz. What say you to Masquerading in the Winter, and Hide-park in the Summer?


Oliv. Insipid pleasures I taste not.


Eliz. Nay, if you are for more solid pleasure, what think you of a rich, young
Husband?


Oliv. O horrid! Marriage! what a pleasure you have found out! I nauseate it of
all things.


Let. But what does your Ladyship think then of a liberal, handsome, young Lover?


Oliv. A handsome, young Fellow, you Impudent! Be gone, out of my sight; name a
handsome young Fellow to me! Foh, a hideous handsome young Fellow I abominate.


[Spits. Eliz. Indeed! But let us see -- will nothing please you? what do you
thing of the Court?


Oliv. How? the Court! the Court, Cousin! my aversion, my aversion, my aversion
of all aversions.


Eliz. How? the Court! where --


Oliv. Where Sincerity is a quality as out of fashion, and as unprosperous, as
Bashfulness; I could not laugh at a Quibble, though it were a fat Privy
Counsellor's; nor praise a Lord's ill Verses, though I were my self the Subject;
nor an old Lady's young looks, though I were her Woman; nor sit to a vain young
Simile-maker, though he flattered me: In short, I could not glote upon a man when
he comes into a Room, and laugh at him when he goes out; I cannot rail at the
absent, to flatter the standers by, I --


Eliz. Well, but Railing now is so common, that it is no more Malice, but the
fashion; and the absent think they are no more the worse for being railed at,
than the present think they are the better for being flattered: and for the
Court --


Oliv. Nay, do not defend the Court; for you will make me rail at it, like a
trusting Citizen's Widow.


Eliz. Or like a Holborn Lady, who could not get into the last Ball, or was out
of countenance in the Drawing Room the last Sunday of her appearance there; for
none rail at the Court, but those who cannot get into it, or else who are
ridiculous when they are there: and I shall suspect you were laughed at, when
you were last there, or would be a Maid of Honor.


Oliv. I a Maid of Honor! To be a Maid of Honor were yet of all things my
aversion.


Eliz. In what sense am I to understand you? But, in fine, by the word
Aversion, I Am sure you dissemble; for I never knew Woman yet that used it, who
did not. Come, our tongues belie our hearts, more than our Pocket-glasses do
our faces; but methinks we ought to leave off dissembling, since it is grown of
no use to us; for all wise observers understand us now adays, as they do
Dreams, Almanacks, and Dutch Gazets, by the contrary: And a Man no more
believes a Woman, when she says she has an Aversion for him, than when she
says she will Cry out.


Oliv. O filthy, hidous! Peace, Cousin, or your discourse will be my Aversion;
and you may believe me.


Eliz. Yes; for, if any thing be a Woman's Aversion, it is Plain-dealing from
another Woman: and perhaps that is your quarrel to the World; for that will
talk, as your Woman says.


Oliv. Talk not of me sure; for what Men do I converse with? what Visits do I
admit?


Enter Boy. Boy. Here Is the Gentleman to wait upon you, Madam.


Oliv. On me! you little, unthinking Fop, do you know what you say?


Boy. Yes, Madam, it is the Gentleman that comes every day to you, who --


Oliv. Hold your peace, you heedless little Animal, and get you gone. This
Country Boy, Cousin, takes my Dancing Master, Tailor, or the spruce Millener,
for Visiters.


[Exit Boy. Let. No, Madam it is Mr. Novel, I Am sure, by his talking so loud: I
know his voice too, Madam.


Oliv. You know nothing, you Buffle-headed, stupid Creature you; you would make
my Cousin believe I receive Visits: but if it be Mr. -- what did you call him?


Let. Mr. Novel, Madam, he that --


Oliv. Hold your peace, I Will hear no more of him; but if it be your Mr. -- (I
cannot think of his name again) I suppose he has followed my Cousin hither.


Eliz. No, Cousin, I will not rob you of the Honor of the Visit: it is to you,
Cousin, for I know him not.


Oliv. Nor did I ever hear of him before, upon my Honor, Cousin; besides,
ha'nt I told you, that Visits, and the business of Visits, Flattery, and
Detraction, are my Aversion? Do You think then I would admit such a Coxcomb as he
is? who, rather than not rail, will rail at the dead, whom none speak ill of;
and, rather than not flatter, will flatter the Poets of the Age, whom none will
flatter; who affects Novelty as much as the Fashion, and is as fantastical as
changeable, and as well known as the Fashion; who likes nothing, but what is
new; nay, would choose to have his Friend, or his Title, a new one. In fine, he
is my Aversion.


Eliz. I find you do know him, Cousin; at least, have heard of him.


Oliv. Yes, now I remember, I have heard of him.


Eliz. Well; but, since he is such a Coxcomb, for Heavens sake, let him not
come up: tell him, Mrs. Lettice, your Lady is not within.


Oliv. No, Lettice, tell him, my Cousin is here, and that he may come up; for,
notwithstanding I detest the fight of him, you may like his conversation; and
though I would use him scurvily, I will not be rude to you, in my own Lodging;
since he has followed you hither, let him come up, I say.


Eliz. Very fine! Pray let him go to the Devil, I say, for me: I know him not,
nor desire it. Send him away, Mrs. Lettice.


Oliv. Upon my word, she shall not: I must disobey your commands, to comply with
your desires. Call him up, Lettice.


Eliz. Nay, I Will swear she shall not stir no that Errand.


[Holds Lettice. Oliv. Well then, I Will call him my self for you, since you will
have it so. Mr. Novel, [Calls out at the door] Sir, Sir.


Enter Novel. Novel. Madam, I beg your pardon, perhaps you were busy: I did
not think you had company with you.


Eliz. Yet he comes to me, Cousin!

[Aside.
Oliv. -- Chairs there.


[They sit. Nov. Well, but Madam, do you know whence I come now?


Oliv. From some melancholy place I warrant, Sir, since they have lost your
good company.


Eliz. So.


Novel. From a place, where they have treated me, at dinner, with so much
civility and kindness, a pox on 'em, that I could hardly get away to you, dear
Madam.


Oliv. You have a way with you so new, and obliging, Sir.


Eliz. You hate Flattery, Cousin!


[Apart to Olivia. Nov. Nay faith, Madam, do you think my way new? then you are
obliging, Madam. I must confess, I hate imitation, to do any thing like other
people: all that know me, do me the Honor to say, I am an Original Faith; but
as I was saying, Madam, I have been treated to day, with all the ceremony and
kindness imaginable, at my Lady Autums; but the nauseous old Woman at the upper
end of her Table --


Oliv. Revives the old Grecian custom, of serving in a Deaths head with their
Banquets.


Nov. Hah, ha! fine, justifaith; nay, and new: it is like eating with the Ghost
in the Libertine; she would frighten a Man from her dinner, with her hollow
invitations, and spoil one's stomach --


Oliv. To Meat, or Women. I detest her hollow cherry cheeks; she looks like an
old Coach new painted: affecting an unseemly smugness, whilst she is ready to
drop in pieces.


Eliz. You hate Detraction I see, Cousin!


[Apart to Olivia. Nov. But the filly old Fury, whilst she affects to look
like a Woman of this Age, talks --


Oliv. Like one of the last; and as passionately as an old Courtier, who has
outlived his Office.


Nov. Yes, Madam, but pray let me give you her character. Then, she never
counts her age by the years, but --


Oliv. By the Masks she has lived to see.


Nov. Nay then, Madam, I see you think a little harmless railing too great a
pleasure for any but your self, and therefore I Have done.


Oliv. Nay, faith, you shall tell me who you had there at dinner.


Nov. If you would hear me, Madam.


Oliv. Most patiently: speak, Sir.


Nov. Then, we had her daughter --


Oliv. Ay, her daughter, the very disgrace to good clothes, which she always
wears, but to heighten her deformity, not mend it; for she is still most
splendidly, gallantly, ugly, and looks like an ill piece of daubing in a rich
Frame.


Nov. So! But have you done with her, Madam? And can you spare her to me a
little now?


Oliv. Ay, ay, Sir.


Nov. Then, she is like --


Oliv. She is, you would say, like a City Bride, the greater Fortune, but not the
greater Beauty, for her dress.


Nov. Well: yet have you done, Madam? Then, she --


Oliv. Then she bestows as unfortunately on her face all the graces in fashion,
as the languishing eye, the hanging or pouting lip; but as the Fool is never
more provoking than when he aims at Wit, the ill-favor^d of our Sex are never
more nauseous than when they would be Beauties, adding to their natural
deformity, the artificial ugliness of affectation.


Eliz. So, Cousin, I find one may have a collection of all ones acquaintances
Pictures as well at your house, as at Mr. Lely's; only the difference is, there
we find 'em much handsomer than they are, and like; here, much uglier, and
like: and you are the first of the profession of Picture-drawing I ever knew
without flattery.


Oliv. I draw after the Life; do no Body wrong, Cousin.


Eliz. No, you hate flattery and detraction!


Oliv. But, Mr. Novel, who had you besides at dinner?


Nov. Nay, the Devil take me if I tell you, unless you will allow me the
privilege of railing in my turn; but, now I think on it, the Women ought to be
your Province, as the Men are mine: and you must know, we had him whom --


Oliv. Him, whom --


Nov. What? Invading me already? And giving the character, before you know the
Man?


Eliz. No, that is not fair, though it be usual.


Oliv. I beg your pardon, Mr. Novel, pray, go on.


Nov. Then, I say, we had that familiar Coxcomb, who is at home wheresoever he
comes.


Oliv. Ay, that Fool --


Nov. Nay then, Madam, your Servant: I Am gone. Taking a Fool out of ones mouth,
is worse than taking the Bread out of ones mouth.


Oliv. I Have done, your pardon, Mr Novel, pray proceed.


Nov. I say, the Rogue, that he may be the only Wit in company, will let no
Body else talk, and --


Oliv. Ay, those Fops who love to talk all themselves, are of all things my
Aversion.


Nov. Then you will let me speak, Madam, sure. The Rogue, I say, will force his
Jest upon you; and I hate a Jest that is forced upon a Man, as much as a Glass.


Eliz. Why, I hope, Sir, he does not expect a Man of your temperance in jesting
should do him reason?


Nov. What, interruption from this side too! I must then --


[Offers to rise, Olivia holds him. Oliv. No, Sir -- You must know, Cousin,
that Fop he means, though he talks only to be commended, will not give you leave
to do it.


Nov. But, Madam --


Oliv. He a Wit! hang him, he is only an Adopter of straggling Jests, and
fatherless Lampoons; by the credit of which, he eats at good Tables, and so,
like the barren Beggar-woman, lives by borrowed Children.


Nov. Madam --


Oliv. And never was Author of any thing, but his News; but that is still all
his own.


Nov. Madam, pray --


Oliv. An eternal Babbler; and makes no more use of his ears, than a Man that
sits at a Play by his Mistress, or in Fop-corner: he is, in fine, a base
detracting Fellow, and is my Aversion. But who else pr'ythee, Mr. Novel, was
there with you? Nay, you shall not stir.


Nov. I beg your pardon, Madam, I cannot stay in any place, where I Am not
allowed a little Christian liberty of railing.


Oliv. Nay, pr'ythee, Mr. Novel, stay; and, though you should rail at me, I would
hear you with patience: pr'ythee who else was there with you?


Nov. Your Servant, Madam.


Oliv. Nay, pr'ythee tell us, Mr. Novel, pr'ythee do.


Nov. We had no Body else.


Oliv. Nay, faith I know you had. Come, my Lord Plausible was there too, who is
Cousin, a --


Eliz. You need not tell me what he is, Cousin; for I know him to be a civil,
good-natured, harmless Gentleman, that speaks well of all the World, and is
always in good humor, and --


Oliv. Hold, Cousin, hold, I hate Detraction; but I must tell you, Cousin, his
civility, is cowardice; his good nature, want of wit; and has neither courage,
or sense to rail: And for his being always in humor, it is because he is never
dissatisfied with himself. In fine, he is my Aversion; and I never admit his
Visits beyond my Hall.


Nov. No, he visit you! Dam him, cringing, grinning Rogue; if I should see him
coming up to you, I would make bold to kick him down again. Ha! -- Enter my
Lord Plausible. My dear Lord, your most humble Servant.


[Rises, and salutes Plausible, and kisses him. Eliz. So! I find kissing and
railing succeed each other with the angry Men, as well as with the angry Women;
and their quarrels are like Love-quarrels, since absence is the only cause of
them; for, as soon as the Man appears again, they are over.

[Aside.
L. Plaus. Your most faithful, humble Servant, generous Mr. Novel; and, Madam,
I am your eternal Slave, and kiss your fair hands; which I had done sooner,
according to your commands, but --


Oliv. No excuses, my Lord.


Eliz. What, you sent for him then, Cousin?


[Apart. Nov. Ha! invited!

[Aside.
Oliv. I know you must divide your self; for your good company is too general a
good, to be engrossed by any particular Friend.


L. Plaus. O Lord, Madam, my company! your most obliged, faithful, humble
Servant; but I could have brought you good company indeed, for I parted at your
door with two of the worthiest, bravest Men --


Oliv. Who were they, my Lord?


Nov. Who do you call the worthiest, braviest men, pray?


L. Plaus. O the wisest, bravest Gentlemen! Men of such Honor, and Virtue! of
such good qualities! ah --


Eliz. This is a Coxcomb, that speaks ill of all people a different way, and
Libels every body with dull praise, and commonly in the wrong place, so makes
his Panegyricks abusive Lampoons.

[Aside.
Oliv. But pray let me know who they were.


L. Plaus. Ah! such patterns of Heroic Virtue! such --


Nov. Well, but who the Devil were they?


L. Plaus. The honor of our Nation, the glory of our Age, ah! I could dwell a
Twelve month on their praise; which indeed I might spare by telling their
names: Sir John Current, and Sir Richard Court-Title.


Nov. Court-Title! Hah, ha.


Oliv. And Sir John Current! Why will you keep such a Wretch company, my Lord?


L. Plaus. Oh, Madam, seriously you are a little too severe; for he is a Man of
unquestioned reputation in every thing.


Oliv. Yes, because he endeavors only with the Women, to pass for a Man of
Courage; and with the Bullies, for a Wit; with the Wits, for a Man of Business;
and with the Men of Business, for a Favorite at Court; and at Court, for good
City security.


Nov. And, for Sir Richard, he --


L. Plaus. He loves your choice, picked company; persons that --


Oliv. He loves a Lord indeed; but --


Nov. Pray, dear Madam, let me have but a bold stroke or two at his Picture. He
loves a Lord, as you say, though --


Oliv. Though he borrowed his Money, and never paid him again.


Nov. And would bespeak a place three days before at the back-end of a Lords
Coach, to Hide-Park.


L. Plaus. Nay, in faith, in faith, you are both too severe.


Oliv. Then, to show yet more his passion for quality, he makes Love to that
fulsom Coach-load of Honor, my Lady Goodly; for he is always at her Lodging.


L. Plaus. Because it is the Conventickle-Gallant, the Meeting House of all the
fair Ladies, and glorious Superfine Beauties of the Town.


Nov. Very fine Ladies! there is first --


Oliv. Her Honor, as fat as an Hostess.


L. Plaus. She is something plump indeed, a goodly, comely, graceful person.


Nov. Then there is my Lady Frances, what do you call'er? as ugly --


Oliv. As a Citizens lawfully begotten daughter.


L. Plaus. She has wit in abundance; and the handsomest heel, elbow, and tip of
an ear, you ever saw.


Nov. Heel, and elbow! hah, ha! And there is my Lady Betty you know --


Oliv. As sluttish, and flatternly, as an Irish Woman bred in France.


L. Plaus. Ah, all she has hangs with a loose Air indeed, and becoming
negligence.


Eliz. You see all faults with Lovers eyes, I find, my Lord.


L. Plaus. Ah, Madam, your most obliged, faithful, humble Servant to command!
But you can say nothing sure against the Superfine Mistress --


Oliv. I know who you mean. She is as censorious and detracting a Jade, as a
superannuated Sinner.


L. Plaus. She has a smart way of Railery, it is confessed.


Nov. And then, for Mrs. Grideline.


L. Plaus. She I Am sure is --


Oliv. One that never spoke ill of any body, it is confessed; for she is as silent
in conversation as a Country Lover, and no better company than a Clock, or a
Weather-glass; for if she sounds, it is but once an hour, to put you in mind of
the time of day, or to tell you 'twill be cold or hot, rain or snow.


L. Plaus. Ah, poor creature! she is extremely good and modest.


Nov. And for Mrs. Bridlechin, she is --


Oliv. As proud, as a Churchman's Wife.


L. Plaus. She Is a Woman of great spirit and honor, and will not make her self
cheap, it is true.


Nov. Then Mrs. Hoyden, that calls all people by their Sirnames, and is --


Oliv. As familiar a Duck --


Nov. As an Actress in the Tyring-room. There I was once beforehand with you,
Madam.


L. Plaus. Mrs. Hoyden! A poor, affable, good-natured Soul! But the Divine Mrs.
Trifle comes thither too: sure her beauty, virtue and conduct, you can say
nothing too.


Oliv. No!


Nov. No! -- pray let me speak, Madam.


Oliv. First, can any one be called beautiful that squints?


L. Plaus. Her eyes languish a little, I own.


Nov. Languish! hah, ha.


Oliv. Languish! Then, for her conduct, she was seen at the Country Wife,
after the first day. There Is for you, my Lord.


L. Plaus. But, Madam, she was not seen to use her Fan all the Play long, turn
aside her head, or by a conscious blush, discover more guilt than modesty.


Oliv. Very fine! then you think a Woman modest, that sees the hideous Country
Wife, without blushing, or publishing her detestation of it? Do You hear him,
Cousin?


Eliz. Yes; and am, I must confess, something of his opinion, and think that as
an over-conscious Fool at a Play, by endeavoring to show the Author's want of
Wit, exposes his own to more censure: so may a Lady call her own modesty in
question, by publicly cavilling with the Poets; for all those grimaces of
honor, and artificial modesty, disparage a Woman's real Virtue, as much as the
use of white and red does the natural complexion; and you must use very, very
little, if you would have it thought your own.


Oliv. Then you would have a Woman of Honor with passive looks, ears, and
tongue, undergo all the hideous obscenity she hears at nasty Plays?


Eliz. Truly I think a Woman betrays her want of modesty, by showing it
publicly in a Playhouse, as much as a Man does his want of courage by a
quarrel there; for the truly modest and stout say least, and are least
exceptio^s, especially in public.


Oliv. O hideous! Cousin, this cannot be your opinion; but you are one of those
who have the confidence to pardon the filthy Play.


Eliz. Why, what is there of ill in it, say you?


Oliv. O fie, fie, fie, would you put me to the blush anew? call all the blood
into my face again? But, to satisfy you then, first, the clandestine obscenity
in the very name of Horner.


Eliz. Truly, it is so hidden, I cannot find it out, I confess.


Oliv. O horrid! does it not give you the rank conception, or image of a Goat,
a Town-bull, or a Satyr? nay, what is yet a filthier image than all the rest,
that of an Eunuch?


Eliz. What then? I can think of a Goat, a Bull, or Satyr, without any hurt.


Oliv. I, but, Cousin, one cannot stop there.


Eliz. I can, Cousin.


Oliv. O no; for when you have those filthy creatures in your head once, the
next thing you think, is what they do; as their defiling of honest Men's Beds
and Couches, Rapes upon sleeping and waking Country Virgins, under Hedges, and
on Haycocks: nay, farther --


Eliz. Nay, no farther, Cousin, we have enough of your Coment on the Play,
which will make me more ashamed than the Play it self.


Oliv. O, believe me, it is a filthy Play, and you may take my word for a filthy
Play, as soon as another; but the filthiest thing in that Play, or any other
Play, is --


Eliz. Pray keep it to your self, if it be so.


Oliv. No, faith, you shall know it, I Am resolved to make you out of love with
the Play: I say, the lewdest, filthiest thing, is his China; nay, I will never
forgive the beastly Author his China: he has quite taken away the reputation of
poor China it self, and sullied the most innocent and pretty Furniture of a
Ladies Chamber; insomuch, that I was fain to break all my defiled Vessels. You
see I have none left; nor you, I hope.


Eliz. You Will pardon me, I cannot think the worse of my China, for that of the
Playhouse.


Oliv. Why, you will not keep any now sure! it is now as unfit an ornament for a
Ladies Chamber, as the Pictures that come from Italy, and other hot Countries,
as appears by their nudities, which I always cover, or scratch out,
wheresoever I find 'em. But China! out upon it, filthy China, nasty, debauched
China!


Eliz. All this will not put me out of conceit with China, nor the Play, which
is Acted to day, or another of the same beastly Author's, as you call him,
which I Will go see.


Oliv. You will not sure! nay, you shall not venture your reputation by going,
and mine by leaving me alone with two Men here: nay, you will disoblige me for
ever, if --


[Pulls her back. Eliz. I stay! -- your Servant.

[Exit Eliza.
Oliv. Well -- but my Lord, though you justify every body, you cannot in earnest
uphold so beastly a Writer, whose Ink is so smutty, as one may say.


L. Plaus. Faith, I dare swear the poor Man did not think to disoblige the
Ladies, by any amorous, soft, passionate, luscious saying in his Play.


Oliv. Foy, my Lord; but what think you, Mr. Novel, of the Play? though I know
you are a Friend to all that are new.


Nov. Faith, Madam, I must confess, the new Plays would not be the worse for my
advice, but I could never get the silly Rogues, the Poets, to mind what I say;
but I Will tell you what counsel I gave the surly Fool you speak of.


Oliv. What was it?


Nov. Faith, to put his Play into Rithme; for Rithme, you know, often makes
mystical Nonsense pass with the Critics for Wit, and a double meaning saying
with the Ladies, for soft, tender, and moving passion. But, now I talk of
passion, I saw your old Lover this morning -- Captain --


[Whispers. Enter Captain Manly, Freeman and Fidelia standing behind. Oliv.
Whom? -- nay, you need not whisper.


Man. We are luckily got hither unobserved: -- How! in a close conversation
with these supple Rascals, the Outcasts of Sempstresses shops?


Free. Faith, pardon her, Captain, that, since she could no longer be
entertained with your manly bluntness, and honest love, she takes up with the
pert chat and common place flattery of these fluttering Parrots of the Town,
Apes and Echoes of Men only.


Man. Do not you, Sir, play the Echo too, mock me, dally with my own words, and
show your self as impertinent as they are.


Free. Nay, Captain --


Fid. Nay, Lieutenant, do not excuse her, methinks she looks very kindly upon
'em both, and seems to be pleased with what that Fool there says to her.


Man. You lie, Sir, and hold your peace, that I may not be provoked to give you
a worse reply.


Oliv. Manly returned, do you say! And is he safe?


Nov. My Lord saw him too. Hark you, my Lord.


[Whispers to Plausible. Man. She yet seems concerned for my safety, and
perhaps they are admitted now here but for their news of me; for Intelligence
indeed is the common Passport of nauseous Fools, when they go their round of
good Tables and Houses.

[Aside.
Oliv. I heard of his fighting only, without particulars, and confess I always
loved his Brutal courage, because it made me hope it might rid me of his more
Brutal love.


Man. What Is that?


[Apart. Oliv. But is he at last returned, do you say, unhurt?


Nov. Ay faith, without doing his business; for the Rogue has been these two
years pretending to a wooden Leg, which he would take from Fortune, as kindly,
as the Staff of a Marshal of France, and rather read his name in a Gazet --


Oliv. Than in the Entail of a good Estate.


Man. So! --

[Aside.
Nov. I have an Ambition, I must confess, of losing my heart, before such a
fair Enemy as your self, Madam; but that silly Rogues should be ambitious of
losing their Arms, and --


Oliv. Looking like a pair of Compasses.


Nov. But he has no use of his Arms, but to set 'em on Kimbow, for he never
pulls off his Hat, at least not to me, I Am sure; for you must know, Madam, he
has a fanatical hatred to good company: he cannot abide me.


L. Plaus. O, be not so severe to him, as to say he hates good company; for I
assure you he has a great respect, esteem and kindness for me.


Man. That kind, civil Rogue has spoken yet ten thousand times worse of me,
than the other.


Oliv. Well, if he be returned, Mr. Novel, then shall I be pestered again with
his boistrous Sea-love; have my Alcove smell like a Cabin, my Chamber perfumed
with his Tarpaulin Brandenburgh, and hear vollies of Brandy sighs, enough to
make a Fog in ones Room. Eoh! I hate a Lover that smells like Thames Street!


Man. I can bear no longer, and need hear no more. [Aside. But, since you have
these two Pulvillio Boxes, these Essence Bottles, this pair of Musk-Cats here,
I hope I may venture to come yet nearer you.


Oliv. Overheard us then?


Nov. I hope he heard me not.

[Aside.
L. Plaus. Most noble and heroic Captain, your most obliged, faithful, humble
Servant.


Nov. Dear Tar, thy humble Servant.


Man. Away -- Madam


Oliv. Nay, I think I have fitted you for listening.


[Thrusts Novel and Plausible on each side. Man. You have fitted me, for
believing you could not be fickle, though you were young; could not dissemble
Love, tho'twas your interest; nor be in vain, though you were handsome; nor break
your promise, though to a parting Lover; nor abuse your best Friend, though you had
Wit: but I take not your contempt of me worse, than your esteem, or civility
for these things here, though you know 'em.


Nov. Things!


L. Plaus. Let the Captain Railly a little.


Man. Yes, things: can thou be angry, thou thing?


[Coming up to Novel. Nov. No, since my Lord says you speak in Raillery; for,
though your Sea-raillery be something rough, yet I confess we use one another to
as bad every day, at Lockets, and never quarrel for the matter.


L. Plaus. Nay, noble Captain, be not angry with him: A word with you, I
beseech you. --


[Whispers to Manly. Oliv. Well, we Women, like the rest of the Cheats of the
World, when our Cullies or Creditors have found us out, and will, or can trust
no longer; pay Debts, and satisfy Obligations, with a quarrel, the kindest
Present a Man can make to his Mistress, when he can make no more Presents: for
oftentimes in Love, as at Cards, we are forced to play foul, only to give over
the game; and use our Lovers, like the Cards, when we can get no more by 'em,
throw 'em up in a pet, upon the first dispute.

[Aside.
Man. My Lord, all that you have made me know by your whispering, which I knew
not before, is, that you have a stinking breath: there is a secret, for your
secret.


L. Plaus. Pshaw! pshaw!


Man. But, Madam, tell me, pray, what was it, about this spark, could take you?
was it the merit of his fashionable impudence, the briskness of his noise, the
wit of his laugh, his judgment, or fancy in his garniture? or was it a
well-trim'd Glove, or the scent of it that charmed you?


Nov. Very well, Sir, 'gad^ these Sea-Captains make nothing of dressing: but
let me tell you, Sir, a man by his dress, as much as by any thing, shows his
wit and judgment, nay, and his courage too.


Free. How his courage, Mr. Novel?


Nov. Why, for example, by red Breeches, tucked up Hair or Perruke, a greasy
broad Belt, and now adays a short Sword.


Man. Thy courage will appear more by thy Belt than thy Sword, I dare swear.
Then, Madam, for this gentle piece of courtesy, this Man of tame honor, what
could you find in him? was it his languishing affected tone? his mannerly look?
his second-hand flattery, the refuse of the Play house tiring-rooms? or his
slavish obsequiousness, in watching at the door of your Box at the Playhouse,
for your hand to your Chair? or his janty way of playing with your Fan? or was
it the Gunpowder spot on his hand, or the Jewel in his ear, that purchased your
heart?


Oliv. Good jealous Captain, no more of your --


L. Plaus. No, let him go on, Madam, for perhaps he may make you laugh: and I
would contribute to your pleasure any way.


Man. Gentle Rogue!


Oliv. No, noble Captain, you cannot sure think any thing could take me more
than that heroic Title of yours, Captain; for you know we Women love honor
inordinately.


Nov. Hah, ha, faith she is with thee, Bully, for thy Raillery.


Man. Faith so shall I be with you, no Bully, for your grinning.


[Aside to Novel. Oliv. Then, that noble Lyon-like mien of yours, that
Soldier-like weather beaten complexion, and that manly roughness of your voice;
how can they otherwise than charm us Women, who hate Effeminacy!


Nov. Hah, ha! faith I cannot hold from laughing.


Man. Nor shall I from kicking anon.


[Aside to Novel. Oliv. And then, that Captain-like carelessness in your dress,
but especially your Scarf; 'twas just such another, only a little higher tied,
made me in love with my Tailor, as he past by my Window the last Training day;
for we Women adore a Martial Man, and you have nothing wanting to make you more
one, or more agreeable, but a wooden Leg.


L. Plaus. Nay, in faith there your Ladyship was a Wag, and it was fine, just,
and well Railly'd.


Nov. Ay, ay, Madam, with you Ladies too, Martial Men must needs be very
killing.


Man. Peace, you Bartholomew-Fair Buffoons; and be not you vain that these
laugh on your side, for they will laugh at their own dull jests: but no more of
'em, for I will only suffer now this Lady to be witty and merry.


Oliv. You would not have your Panegyric interrupted. I go on then to your
humor. Is there any thing more agreeable, than the pretty sullenness of that?
than the greatness of your courage? which most of all appears in your spirit of
contradiction, for you dare give all Mankind the Lie; and your Opinion is your
only Mistress, for you renounce that too, when it becomes another Man's.


Nov. Hah, ha! I cannot hold, I must laugh at thee Tar, faith!


L. Plaus. And in faith, dear Captain, I beg your pardon, and leave to laugh at
you too, though I protest I mean you no hurt; but, when a Lady Raillies, a
stander by must be complaisant, and do her reason in laughing: Hah, ha.


Man. Why, you impudent, p^tiful Wretches, you presume sure upon your
Effeminacy to urge me; for you are in all things so like Women, that you may
think it in me a kind of Cowardice to beat you.


Oliv. No Hectoring, good Captain.


Man. Or, perhaps, you think this Ladies presence secures you; but have a care,
she has talked her self out of all the respect I had for her; and by using me
ill before you, has given me a privilege of using you so before her: but if
you would preserve your respect to her, and not be beaten before her, go, be
gone immediately.


Nov. Be gone! what?


L. Plaus. Nay, worthy, noble, generous Captain.


Man. Be gone, I say.


Nov. Be gone again! to us be gone!


Man. No chattering, Baboons, instantly be gone. Or --


[Manly puts 'em out of the Room: Novel struts, Plausible cringes. Nov. Well,
Madam, we'll go make the Cards ready in your Bedchamber; sure you will not
stay long with him.


[ Ex. Plaus Nov. Oliv. Turn hither your rage, good Captain Swagger-huff, and
be saucy with your Mistress, like a true Captain; but be civil to your Rivals
and Betters, and do not threaten any thing but me here; no, not so much as my
Windows, nor do not think your self in the Lodgings of one of your Suburb
Mistresses beyond the Tower.


Man. Do not give me cause to think so, for those less infamous Women part with
their Lovers, just as you did from me, with unforced vows of constancy, and
floods of willing tears; but the same winds bear away their Lovers, and their
vows: And for their grief, if the credulous unexpected Fools return, they find
new Comforters, fresh Cullies, such as I found here. The mercenary love of
those Women too suffer shipwreck, with their Gallants fortunes; now you have
heard Chance has used me scurvily, therefore you do too. Well, persevere in
your ingratitude, falsehood, and disdain; have constancy in something, and I
promise you to be as just to your real scorn, as I was to your feigned love:
And henceforward will despise, contemn, hate, loath, and detest you, most
faithfully.


Enter Lettice. Oliv. Get the Hombre Cards ready in the next Room, Lettice, and
--


[Whispers to Lettice. Free. Bravely resolved, Captain.


Fid. And you will be sure to, keep your word, I hope, Sir.


Man. I hope so too.


Fid. Do you but hope it, Sir? if you are not as good as your word, 'twill be
the first time you ever bragged sure.


Man. She has restored my reason with my heart.


Free. But, now you talk of restoring Captain, there are other things which,
next to one's heart, one would not part with; I mean your Jewels and Money,
which it seems she has, Sir.


Man. What Is that to you, Sir?


Free. Pardon me, whatsoever is yours, I have a share in it, I Am sure, which I
will not lose for asking, though you may be too generous, or too angry now to
do it your self.


Fid. Nay, then I Will make bold to make my claim too.


[Both going toward Olivia. Man. Hold, you impertinent, officious Fops -- How
have I been deceived!

[Aside.
Free. Madam, there are certain Appurtenances to a Lover's heart, called
Jewels, which always go along with it.


Fid. And which, with Lovers, have no value in themselves, but from the heart
they come with; our Captain's, Madam, it seems you scorn to keep, and much more
will those worthless things without it, I am confident.


Oliv. A Gentleman, so well made as you are, may be confident -- us easy Women
could not deny you any thing you ask, if 'twere for your self; but, since it is
for another, I beg your leave to give him my Answer. (An agreeable young Fellow
this! -- And would not be my Aversion!) [Aside.] Captain, your young Friend
here has a very persuading Face, I confess; yet you might have asked me your
self, for those Trifles you left with me, which (hark you a little, for I dare
trust you with the secret: you are a Man of so much Honor I Am sure;) I say
then, not expecting your return, or hoping ever to see you again, I have
delivered your Jewels to --


[Aside to Man. Man. Whom?


Oliv. My Husband.


Man. Your Husband!


Oliv. Ay, my Husband; for, since you could leave me, I am lately, and
privately married to one, who is a Man of so much Honor and Experience in the
World, that I dare not ask him for your Jewels again, to restore 'em to you;
lest he should conclude you never would have parted with 'em to me, on any
other score, but the exchange of my Honor: which rather than you would let me
lose, you would lose I Am sure you self, those Trifles of yours.


Man. Triumphant Impudence! but married too!


Oliv. O, speak not so loud, my Servants know it not: I am married; there is no
resisting one's Destiny, or Love, you know.


Man. Why, did you love him too?


Oliv. Most passionately; nay, love him now, though I have married him, and he
me: which mutual love, I hope you are too good, too generous a Man to disturb,
by any future claim, or visits to me. It Is true, he is now absent in the
Country, but returns shortly; therefore I beg of you, for your own ease and
quiet, and my Honor, you will never see me more.


Man. I wish I never had seen you.


Oliv. But if you should ever have any thing to say to me hereafter, let that
young Gentleman there, be your Messenger.


Man. You would be kinder to him: I find he should be welcome.


Oliv. Alas, his Youth would keep my Husband from suspicions, and his visits
from scandal; for we Women may have pity for such as he, but no love: And I
already think you do not well to spirit him away to Sea; and the Sea is already
but too rich with the spoils of the shore.


Man. True perfect Woman! -- If I could say any thing more injurious to her
now, I would; for I could out-rail a bilk'd Whore, or a kicked Coward: but, now
I think on it, that were rather to discover my love, than hatred; and I must not
talk, for something I must do.

[Aside.
Oliv. I think I have given him enough of me now, never to be troubled with him
again. -- [Aside. Enter Lettice. Well, Lettice, are the Cards and all ready
within? I come then Captain, I beg your pardon: You will not make one at Hombre?


Man. No, Madam, but I Will wish you a little good luck before you go.


Oliv. No, if you would have me thrive, Curse me; for that you will do heartily,
I suppose.


Man. Then, if you will have it so, May all the Curses light upon you, Women
ought to fear, and you deserve; first may the Curse of loving Play attend your
sordid Covetousness, and Fortune cheat you, by trusting to her, as you have
cheated me; the Curse of Pride, or a good Reputation, fall on your Lust; the
Curse of Affectation on your Beauty; the Curse of your Husbands company on your
Pleasures; and the Curse of your Gallant's disappointments in his absence; and
the Curse of scorn, jealousy, or despair, on your love: and then the Curse of
loving on.


Oliv. And, to requite all your Curses, I will only return you your last; May
the Curse of loving me still, fall upon your proud hard heart, that could be so
cruel to me in these horrid Curses: but Heaven forgive you.


[ Ex. Oliv. Man. Hell, and the Devil, reward thee.


Free. Well, you see now, Mistresses, like Friends, are lost, by letting 'em
handle your Money; and most Women are such kind of Witches, who can have no
power over a Man, unless you give 'em Money; but when once they have got any
from you, they never leave you, till they have all: therefore I never dare give
a Woman a farthing.


Man. Well, there is yet this comfort by losing one's Money with one's
Mistress, a Man is out of danger of getting another; of being made prize again
by love; who, like a Pyrat, takes ^ou by spreading false Colors: but when once
you have run your Ship aground, the treacherous Picaroon looss, so by your
ruin you save your self from slavery at least.


Enter Boy. Boy. Mrs. Lettice, here is Madam Blackacre come to wait upon her
Honor.


Man. Do You hear that? let us be gone, before she comes; for hence forward I Will
avoid the whole damned Sex for ever, and Woman as a sinking Ship.


[Ex. Man. and Fid. Free. And I Will stay, to revenge on her your quarrel to the
Sex; for out of love to her Jointure, and hatred to business, I would marry
her, to make an end of her thousand Suits, and my thousand engagements, to the
comfort of two unfortunate sorts of people; my Plaintiffs, and her Defendants;
my Creditors, and her Adversaries.


Enter Widow Blackacre led in by Major Oldfox, and Jerry Blackacre following,
laden with green Bags. Wid. It Is an arrant Sea-Ruffian, but I am glad I met
with him at last, to serve him again, Major, for the last service was not good
in Law. Boy, Duck, Ierry, where is my Paper of Memorandums? give me Child: so.
Where is my Cousin Olivia, now, my kind Relation?


Free. Here is one that would be your kind Relation, Madam.


Wid. What mean you, Sir?


Free. Why, faith (to be short) to marry you, Widow.


Wid. Is not this the wild rude person we saw at Captain Manly's?


Ierr. Ay, forsooth, an't please.


Wid. What would you? what are you? Marry me!


Free. Ay faith, for I am a younger Brother, and you are a Widow.


Wid. You are an impertinent person, and go about your business.


Free. I have none, but to marry thee, Widow.


Wid. But I have other business, I Would have you to know.


Free. But you have no business anights, Widow; and I Will make you pleasanter
business than any you have: for anights, I assure you, I am a Man of great
business; for the business --


Wid. Go, I Am sure you're an idle Fellow.


Free. Try me but, Widow, and employ me as you find my abilities, and industry.


Old. Pray be civil to the Lady, Mr. -- she is a person of quality, a person
that is no person --


Free. Yes, but she is a person that is a Widow: be you mannerly to her, because
you are to pretend only to be her Squire, to arm her to her Lawyers Chambers;
but I will be impudent and baudy, for she must love and marry me.


Wid. Marry come up, you saucy familiar Jack! You think with us Widows, it is no
more than up, and ride. Gad forgive me, now adays, every idle, young,
hectoring, roaring Companion, with a pair of turned red Breeches, and a broad
Back, thinks to carry away any Widow, of the best degree; but I Would have you to
know, Sir, all Widows are not got, like places at Court, by Impudence and
Importunity only.


Old. No, no, soft, soft, you are a young Man, and not fit --


Free. For a Widow? Yes sure, old Man, the fitter.


Old. Go to, go to, if others had not laid in their claims before you --


Free. Not you, I hope.


Old. Why not I, Sir? Sure I am a much more proportionable match for her, than
you, Sir; I, who am an elder Brother, of a comfortable Fortune, and of equal
Years with her.


Wid. How Is that? You unmannerly person, I^d have you to know, I was born but
in Ann' undec' Caroli prim'.


Old. Your pardon, Lady, your pardon; be not offended with your very Servant.
-- But I say, Sir, you are a beggarly younger Brother, twenty Years younger
than her; without any Land or Stock, but your great stock of Impudence:
therefore what pretension can you have to her?


Free. You have made it for me; first, because I am a younger Brother.


Wid. Why, is that a sufficient Plea to a Relict? How appears it, Sir? by what
foolish custom?


Free. By custom, time out of mind only. Then, Sir, because I have nothing to
keep me after her death, I am the likelier to take care of her life. And, for
my being twenty Years younger than her, and having a sufficient stock of
Impudence, I leave it to her whether they will be valid exceptions to me, in
her Widow's Law or Equity.


Old. Well, she has been so long in Chancery, that I Will stand to her Equity and
Decree between us. Come, Lady, pray snap up this young Snap at first, or we
shall be troubled with him; give him a City Widow's Answer: (that is, with all
the ill breeding imaginable.) [Aside to the Wid. Come, Madam.


Wid. Well then, to make an end of this foolish Wooing, for nothing interrupts
business more; first, for you, Major --


Old. You declare in my favor then?


Free. What direct the Court? (Come, young Lawyer, thou shall be a Counsel for
me.)


[To Jerr. Ierr. Gad, I shall betray your Cause then, as well as an older
Lawyer, never stir


Wid. First, I say, for you Major, my walking Hospital of an ancient
Foundation, thou Bag of Mummy, that would fall asunder, if 'twere not for thy
Cere-cloaths --


Old. How, Lady?


Free. Hah, ha --


Ierr. Hey, brave Mother! use all Suitors thus, for my sake.


Wid. Thou withered, hobling, distorted Cripple; nay, thou art Cripple all
over; would thou make me the Staff of thy Age, the Crutch of thy
Decrepidness? Me --


Free. Well said Widow! faith, thou would make a Man love thee now, without
dissembling.


Wid. Thou senseless, impertinent, quibling, driveling, feeble, paralytic,
impotent, sumbling, frigid Nicompoop.


Ierr. Hey, brave Mother, for calling of names, ifac!


Wid. Would thou make a Caudlemaker, a Nurse of me? Cannot you be Bedridden,
without a Bedfellow? Will Not your Swan-skins Furrs, Flannels, and the scorched
Trencher keep you warm there? Would you have me your Scotch-warming Pan, with a
Pox to you? Me! --


Old. O Heavens!


Free. I told you I should be thought the fitter Man, Major.


Ierr. Ay, you old Fobus, and you would have been my Guardian, would you? to
have taken care of my Estate, that half often should never come to me, by
letting long Leases at Pepper-corn Rents.


Wid. If I would have married an old Man, it is well known I might have married
an Earl; nay, what is more, a Judge, and been covered the Winter-nights with the
Lamb-skins, which I prefer to the Ermins of Nobles: And do thou think I would
wrong my poor Minor there, for you?


Free. Your Minor is a chopping Minor, God bless him.


[Strokes Jerry on the head. Old. Your Minor may be a Major of Horse or Foot,
for his bigness; and, it seems, you will have the cheating of your Minor to
your self.


Wid. Pray, Sir, bear Witness; Cheat my Minor! I Will bring my Action of the Case
for the slander.


Free. Nay, I would bear false Witness for thee now, Widow, since you have done
me justice, and have thought me the fitter Man for you.


Wid. Fair, and softly Sir, it is my Minor's Case, more than my own: And I must
do him justice now on you.


Free. How?


Old. So then.


Wid. You are first, (I warrant) some Renegado from the Inns of Court, and the
Law; and thou wilt come to suffer for it, by the Law: that is, be hanged.


Ierr. Not about your neck, forsooth, I hope.


Free. But, Madam --


Old. Hear the Court.


Wid. Thou art some debauched, drunken, lewd, hectoring, gaming Companion, and
want some Widow's old Gold to nick upon; but, I thank you, Sir, that is for
my Lawyers.


Free. Faith, we should never quarrel about that; for Guineys would serve my
turn: but, Widow --


Wid. Thou art a foul-mouthed Boaster of thy Lust, a mere Bragadochio of thy
strength for Wine and Women, and wilt belie thy self more than thou do Women,
and art every way a base deceiver of Women: And would deceive me too, would you?


Free. Nay faith, Widow, this is Judging without seeing the Evidence.


Wid. I say, you are a worn-out Whoremaster, at five and twenty both in Body
and Fortune: And cannot be trusted by the common Wenches of the Town, lest you
should not pay 'em; nor by the Wives of the Town, lest you should pay 'em: so
you want Women, and would have me your Baud, to procure 'em for you.


Free. Faith, if you had any good Acquaintance, Widow, 'twou'd be civilly done
of thee; for I am just come from Sea.


Wid. I mean, you would have me keep you, that you might turn Keeper; for poor
Widows are only used like Bauds by you; you go to Church with us, but to get
other Women to lie with. In fine, you are a cheating, chousing Spendthrift:
And, having sold your own Annuity, would waste my Jointure.


Ierr. And make havoc of our Estate personal, and all our old gilt Plate; I
should soon be picking up all our mortgaged Apostle-Spoons, Bowls and Beakers,
out of most of the Alehouses, betwixt Hercules Pillars and the Boatswain in
Wapping: nay, and you would be scouring amongst my Trees, and make 'em knock down
one another, like routed reeling Watchmen at midnight. Would you so, Bully?


Free. Nay, pr'ythee, Widow, hear me.


Wid. No, Sir, I Would have you to know, thou pitiful, paltry, lath-back'd Fellow,
if I would have married a young Man, it is well known, I could have had any
young Heir in Norfolk; nay, the hopefull'st young Man this day at the
King's Bench Bar; I that am a Relict and Executrix of known plentiful Assits and
Parts, who understand my self and the Law: And would you have me under Covert
Baron again? No, Sir, no Covert Baron for me.


Free. But, dear Widow, hear me. I value you only, not your Jointure.


Wid. Nay, Sir, hold there, I know your love to a Widow, is covetousness of her
Jointure: And a Widow, a little stricken in Years, with a good Jointure, is
like an old Mansion House in a good Purchase, never valued; but take one, take
the other: And perhaps, when you are in possession, you would neglect it, let it drop
to the ground, for want of necessary repairs, or expenses upon it.


Free. No, Widow, one would be sure to keep all tight, when one is to forfeit
one's Lease by dilapidation.


Wid. Fie, fie, I neglect my Business, with this foolish discourse of love.
Ierry, Child, let me see the List of the Jury: I Am sure my Cousin Olivia has
some Relations amongst 'em. But where is she?


Free. Nay, Widow, but hear me one word only.


Wid. Nay, Sir, no more, pray; I will no more hearken again to your foolish
Love motions, than to offers of Arbitration.


[Ex. Wid. and Jerr. Free. Well, I Will follow thee yet; for he that has a
pretension at Court, or to a Widow, must never give over for a little ill usage.


Old. Therefore I Will get her by Assiduity, Patience, and Long-sufferings, which
you will not undergo; for you idle young Fellows leave off Love, when it comes
to be Business; and Industry gets more Women, than Love.


Free. Ay, Industry, the Fool's and old Man's merit; but I Will be industrious
too, and make a business on it, and get her by Law, Wrangling, and Contests, and
not by Sufferings: And, because you are no dangerous Rival, I Will give thee
counsel, Major.


If you Litigious Widow ever would gain,
Sigh not to her; but by the Law complain:
To her, as to a Baud, Defendant Sue
With Statutes, and make Justice Pimp for you.
[Exeunt. Finis Actus Secundi.
ACT. III. Scene 1.
Westminster Hall. Enter Manly and Freeman, two Sailors behind. Man. I Hate
this place, worse than a Man that has inherited a Chancery Suit: I wish I were
well out on it again.


Free. Why, you need not be afraid of this place: for a Man without Money,
needs no more fear a crowd of Lawyers, than a crowd of Pickpockets.


Man. This, the Reverend of the Law would have thought the Palace or Residence
of Justice; but, if it be, she lives here with the State of a Turkish Emperor,
rarely seen; and besieged, rather than defended, by her numerous black Guard
here.


Free. Methinks, it is like one of their own Halls, in Christmas time, whither,
from all parts, Fools bring their Money, to try, by the Dice, (not the worst
Judges) whether it shall be their own, or no: but, after a tedious fretting and
wrangling, they drop away all their Money, on both sides; and finding neither
the better, at last, go emptily and lovingly away together, to the Tavern,
joining their Curses against the young Lawyers Box, that sweeps all, like the
old ones.


Man. Spoken, like a Revelling Christmas Lawyer.


Free. Yes, I was one, I confess; but was fain to leave the Law, out of
Conscience, and fall to making false Musters; rather chose to Cheat the King,
than his Subjects; Plunder, rather than take Fees.


Man. Well, a Plague, and a Purse Famine, light on the Law; and that Female
limb of it, who dragged me hither to day: but pr'ythee go see if, in that crowd
of dagled Gowns there, thou can find her.

[Pointing to a crowd of Lawyers, at the end of the Stage. [ Exit Freem. Manet
Manly. How hard it is to be an Hypocrite!
At least to me, who am but newly so.
I thought it once a kind of Knavery,
Nay, Cowardice, to hide ones faults; but now
The common frailty, Love, becomes my shame.
He must not know I love the ungrateful still,
Lest he contemn me, more than she: for I,
It seems, can undergo a Woman's scorn,
But not a Man's --

Enter to him Fidelia. Fid. Sir, good Sir, generous Captain.


Man. Pr'ythee, kind Impertinence, leave me. Why should thou follow me,
flatter my Generosity now, since thou know I have no Money left? if I had
it, I Would give it thee, to buy my quiet.


Fid. I never followed yet, Sir, Reward or Fame, but you alone; nor do I now
beg any thing, but leave to share your miseries: You should not be a Niggard of
'em, since, methinks, you have enough to spare. Let me follow you now, because
you hate me, as you have often said.


Man. I ever hated a Coward's company, I must confess.


Fid. Let me follow you, till I am none then; for you, I Am sure, will through
such Worlds of dangers, that I shall be inured to 'em; nay, I shall be afraid
of your anger more than danger, and so turn valiant out of fear. Dear Captain,
do not cast me off, till you have tried me once more: do not, do not go to Sea
again without me.


Man. Thou to Sea! to Court, thou Fool; remember the advice I gave thee: thou
art a handsome Spaniel, and can faun naturally; go, busk about, and run thy
self into the next great Man's Lobby: first faun upon the Slaves without, and
then run into the Ladies Bedchamber; thou may be admitted, at last, to
tumble her Bed: go, seek, I say, and lose me; for I am not able to keep thee: I
have not Bread for my self.


Fid. Therefore I will not go, because then I may help and serve you.


Man. Thou!


Fid. I warrant you, Sir; for, at worst, I could beg or steal for you.


Man. Nay, more bragging! do thou not know there is venturing your life, in
stealing? Go, pr'ythee, away: thou art as hard to shake off, as that flattering
effeminating mischief, Love.


Fid. Love, did you name? Why, you are not so miserable as to be yet in Love,
sure!


Man. No^ no, pr'ythee away, be gone, or -- I had almost discovered my Love and
Shame; well, if I had? that thing could not think the worse of me: -- or if he
did? -- no -- yes, he shall know it -- he shall -- but then I must never leave
him, for they are such secrets, that make Parasites and Pimps Lords of their
Masters; for any slavery or tyranny is easier than Love's. [Aside. Come hither.
Since thou art so forward to serve me, have thou but resolution enough to
endure the torture of a secret? for such, to some, is insupportable.


Fid. I would keep it as safe, as if your dear precious life depended on it.


Man. Dam your dearness. It concerns more than my life, my honor.


Fid. Doubt it not, Sir.


Man. And do not discover it, by too much fear of discovering it; but have a
great care you let not Freeman find it out.


Fid. I warrant you, Sir. I am already all joy, with the hopes of your
commands; and shall be all wings, in the execution of 'em: speak quickly, Sir.


Man. You said you would beg for me.


Fid. I did, Sir.


Man. Then you shall beg for me.


Fid. With all my heart, Sir.


Man. That is, Pimp for me.


Fid. How, Sir?


Man. Do You start! think thou, thou could do me any other service? Come, no
dissembling honor: I know you can do it handsomely, thou were made for it: You
have lost your time with me at Sea, you must recover it.


Fid. Do not, Sir, beget your self more Reasons for your Aversion to me, and
make my obedience to you a fault: I am the unfittest in the World, to do you
such a service.


Man. Your cunning arguing against it, shows but how sit you are for it. No
more dissembling: here, (I say) you must go use it for me, to Olivia.


Fid. To her, Sir?


Man. Go flatter, lie, kneel, promise, any thing to get her for me: I cannot
live, unless I have her. Did thou not say thou would do any thing, to save
my life? And she said you had a persuading face.


Fid. But, did not you say, Sir, your honor was dearer to you, than your life?
And would you have me contribute to the loss of that, and carry love from you,
to the most infamous, most false, and --


Man. And most beautiful --

[Sighs aside.
Fid. Most ungrateful Woman, that ever lived; for sure she must be so, that
could desert you so soon, use you so basely, and so lately too: do not, do not
forget it, Sir, and think --


Man. No, I will not forget it, but think of revenge: I will lie with her, out
of revenge. Go, be gone, and prevail for me, or never see me more.


Fid. You scorned her last night.


Man. I know not what I did last night; I dissembled last night.


Fid. Heavens!


Man. Be gone, I say, and bring me love or compliance back, or hopes at least,
or I Will never see thy face again: by --


Fid. O do not swear, Sir, first hear me.


Man. I am impatient, away, you will find me here till twelve.


[Turns away. Fid. Sir --


Man. Not one word, no insinuating Argument more, or soothing persuasion;
you will have need of all your Rhetoric with her: go, strive to alter her, not
me; be gone.


[Ex. Man. at the end of the Stage. Manet Fidelia. Fid. Should I discover to
him now my Sex,
And lay before him his strange cruelty,
It Would but incense it more. -- No, it is not time.
For his Love, must I then betray my own?
Were ever Love or Chance, till now, severe?
Or shifting Woman posed with such a task?
Forced to beg that which kills her, if obtained;
And give away her Lover not to lose him.

[Ex. Fidel. Enter Widow Blackacre in the middle of half a dozen Lawyers,
whispered to by a Fellow in black, Jerry Blackacre following the crowd. Wid.
Offer me a Reference, you saucy Companion you! do you know who you speak to? Art
thou a Solicitor in Chancery, and offer a Reference? A pretty Fellow! Mr.
Sergeant Ploddon, here is a Fellow has the impudence to offer me a Reference.


Serj. Plod. Who Is that has the impudence to offer a Reference within these
Walls?


Wid. Nay, for a Splitter of Causes to do it!


Serj. Plod. No, Madam, to a Lady learned in the Law, as you are, the offer of
a Reference were to impose upon you.


Wid. No, no, never fear me for a Reference, Mr. Sergeant. But, come, have you
not forgot your Brief? Are you sure you shall not make the mistake of -- Hark you
-- [Whispers.] Go then, go to your Court of Common Pleas, and say one thing
over and over again: You do it so naturally, you will never be suspected for
protracting time.


Serj. Plod. Come, I know the course of the Court, and your business.


[Ex. Serj. Plod. Wid. Let Us see, Ierry, where are my Minutes? Come, Mr.
Quaint, pray go talk a great deal for me in Chancery; let your words be easy,
and your Sense hard, my Cause requires it: Branch it bravely, and deck my Cause
with flowers, that the Snake may lie hidden Go, go, and be sure you remember
the Decree of my Lord Chancellor Tricesimo quart' of the Queen.


Quaint. I will, as I see cause, extenuate, or examplifie Matter of Fact;
baffle Truth, with Impudence; answer Exceptions, with Questions, though never so
impertinent; for Reasons, give 'em Words; for Law and Equity, Tropes and
Figures: And so relax and enervate the sinews of their Argument, with the oil
of my Eloquence. But when my Lungs can reason no longer, and not being able to
say any thing more for our Cause, say every thing of our Adversary; whose
Reputation, though never so clear and evident in the eye of the World, yet with
sharp Invectives --


Wid. (Alias Belin'sgate.)


Quaint. With poinant and sour Invectives, I say, I will deface, wipe out, and
obliterate his fair Reputation, even as a Record with the juice of Lemons; and
tell such a Story, (for, the truth on it is, all that we can do for our Client,
in Chancery, is telling a Story) a fine Story, a long Story, such a Story.


Wid. Go, save thy breath for the Cause; talk at the Bar, Mr. Quaint: You are
so copiously fluent, you can weary any ones ears, sooner than your own tongue.
Go, weary our Adversaries Counsel, and the Court: Go, thou art a fine-spoken
person: Adad, I shall make thy Wife jealous of me: if you can but court the
Court into a Decree for us. Go, get you gone, and remember -- [Whispers] [ Exit
Quaint. Come, Mr. Blunder, pray baul foundly for me, at the King's Bench;
bluster, sputter, question, cavil; but be sure your Argument be intricate
enough, to confound the Court: And then you do my business. Talk what you will,
but be sure your tongue never stand still; for your own noise will secure your
Sense from Censure: it is like coughing or heming when one has got the
Belly-ake, which stifles the unmannerly noise. Go, dear Rogue, and succeed; and
I Will invite thee, ere it be long, to more souz'd Venison.


Blund. I Will warrant you, after your Verdict, your Judgment shall not be
Arrested, upon if's and and's.


Wid. Come, Mr. Petulant, let me give you some new instructions, for our Cause
in the Exchequer: Are the Barons sat?


Pet. Yes, no; may be they are, may be they are not: what know I? what care I?


Wid. Hey day! I wish you would but snap up the Counsel on the other side anon,
at the Bar, as much; and have a little more patience with me, that I might
instruct you a little better.


Pet. You instruct me! What is my Brief for, Mistress?


Wid. Ay, but you seldom read your Brief, but at the Bar, if you do it then.


Pet. Perhaps I do, perhaps I don't, and perhaps it is time enough: pray hold
your self contented, Mistress.


Wid. Nay, if you go there too, I will not be contented, Sir, though you, I see,
will lose my Cause for want of speaking, I wo'not: You shall hear me, and shall
be instructed. Let Us see your Brief.


Pet. Send your Solicitor to me, instructed by a Woman! I Would have you to know, I
do not wear a Bar-gown --


Wid. By a Woman! And I Would have you to know, I am no common Woman; but a Woman
conversant in the Laws of the Land, as well as your self, though I have no
Bar-gown.


Pet. Go to, go to, Mistress, you are impertinent, and there is your Brief for
you: instruct me!


[Flings her Breviate at her. Wid. Impertinent to me, you saucy Jack you! You
return my Breviate, but where is my Fee? You Will be sure to keep that, and scan
that so well, that if there chance to be but a brass Half-crown in it, one's
sure to hear on it again: would you would but look on your Breviate half so
narrowly. But pray give me my Fee too, as well as my Brief.


Pet. Mistress, that is without Precedent. When did a Counsel ever return his
Fee, pray? And you are impertinent, and ignorant, to demand it.


Wid. Impertinent again, and ignorant to me! Gadsbodikins, you puny Upstart in
the Law, to use me so, you Green Bag Carrier, you Murderer of unfortunate
Causes, the Clerks Ink is scarce off of your fingers, you that newly come from
Lamblacking the Judges shoes, and are not fit to wipe mine; you call me
impertinent and ignorant! I would give thee a Cuff on the ear, sitting the
Courts, if I were ignorant. Marry gep, if it had not been for me, thou had
been yet but a hearing Counsel at the Bar. [ Ex. Petulant. Enter Mr.
Buttongown, crossing the Stage in haste. Mr. Buttongown, Mr. Buttongown,
whither so fast? what, will not you stay till we are heard?


Butt. I cannot, Mrs. Blackacre, I must be at the Council, my Lord's Cause
stays there for me.


Wid. And mine suffers here.


Butt. I cannot help it.


Wid. I Am undone.


Butt. What Is that to me?


Wid. Consider the five pound Fee, if not my Cause: that was something to you.


Butt. Away, away, pray be not so troublesome, Mistress, I must be gone.


Wid. Nay, but consider a little, I am your old Client, my Lord but a new one;
or, let him be what he will, he will hardly be a better Client to you, than my
self: I hope you believe I shall be in Law as long as I live? therefore am no
despicable Client. Well, but go to your Lord, I know you expect he should make
you a Judge one day; but I hope his promise to you will prove a true Lord's
promise: But, that he might be sure to fail you, I wish you had his Bond for it.


Butt. But what will you yet be thus impertinent, Mistress?


Wid. Nay, I beseech you, Sir, stay; if it be but to tell me my Lord's Case:
come, in short.


Butt. Nay, then --


[ Ex. Buttongown. Wid. Well, Ierry, observe Child, and lay it up for
hereafter: These are those Lawyers who, by being in all Causes, are in none;
therefore if you would have 'em for you, let your Adversary fee 'em; for he may
chance to depend upon 'em: and so, in being against thee, they will be for thee.


Ierr. Ay, Mother, they put me in mind of the unconscionable Woers of Widows,
who undertake briskly their Matrimonial business for their money; but when they
have got it once, let who is will drudge for them; therefore have a care of 'em,
forsooth: there is Advice for your Advice.


Wid. Well said, Boy, come, Mr. Splitcause, pray go see when my Cause in
Chancery comes on; and go speak with Mr. Quillet in the King's Bench, and Mr.
Quirk in the Common Pleas, and see how our matters go there.


Enter Major Oldfox. Old. Lady, a good and propitious morning to you; and may
all your Causes go as well, as if I my self were Judge of 'em.


Wid. Sir, excuse me, I am busy, and cannot answer Complements in
Westminster Hall. Go, Mr. Splitcause, and come to me again, to that
Booksellers, there I Will stay for you, that you may be sure to find me.


Old. No, Sir, come to the other Booksellers, I Will attend your Ladyship thither.


[ Ex. Splitcause. Wid. Why to the other?


Old. Because he is my Bookseller, Lady.


Wid. What, to sell you Lozenges for your Catarrh? or Medicines for your Corns?
what else can a Major deal with a Bookseller for?


Old. Lady, he Prints for me.


Wid. Why, are you an Author?


Old. Of some few Essays; deign you, Lady, to peruse 'em. (She is a Woman of
parts, and I must win her by showing mine.)

[Aside.
The Bookseller's Boy. Boy. Will you see Culpepper, Mistress? Aristotle's
Problems? The Complete Midwife?


Wid. No, let us see Dalton, Hughs, Shepherd, Wingate.


Boy. We have no Law Books.


Wid. No? You are a pretty Bookseller then.


Old. Come, have you e're a one of my Essays left?


Boy. Yes, Sir, we have enough, and shall always have 'em.


Old. How so?


Boy. Why, they are good, steady, lasting Ware.


Old. Nay, I hope they will live, let us see. Be pleased, Madam, to peruse the
poor endeavors of my Pen; for I have a Pen, though I say it, that --


[Gives her a Book. Ierr. Pray let me see St. George for Christendom, or, The
Seven Champions of England.


Wid. No, no, give him, The Young Clerk's Guide. What, we shall have you read
your self into a humor of Rambling, and Fighting, and studying Military
Discipline, and wearing red Breeches!


Old. Nay, if you talk of Military Discipline, show him my Treatise of The Art
Military.


Wid. Hold, I would as willingly he should read a Play.


Ierr. O pray, forsooth Mother, let me have a Play.


Wid. No, Sirrah, there are young Students of the Law enough spoiled already,
by Plays; they would make you in love with your Landress, or what is worse,
some Queen of the Stage, that was a Landress; and so turn Keeper before you are
of age. [Several crossing the Stage. But stay, Ierry, is not that Mr. what-d'
y' call-him, that goes there: he that offered to sell me a Suit in Chancery for
five hundred pound, for a hundred down, and only paying the Clerks Fees?


Ierr. Ay, forsooth, it is he.


Wid. Then stay here, and have a care of the Bags, whilst I follow him: have a
care of the Bags, I say.


Ierr. And do you have a care, forsooth, of the Statute against Champer^ee, I
say.


[Ex. Widow. Enter Freeman to them. Free. So, there is a limb of my Widow, which
was wont to be inseparable from her: she cannot be far. [Aside. How now, my
pretty Son-in-law that shall be, where is my Widow?


Ierr. My Mother, but not your Widow, will be forthcoming presently.


Free. Your Servant, Major; what, are you buying Furniture for a little
sleeping Closet, which you miscall a Study? For you do only by your Books, as
by your Wenches, bind 'em up neatly, and make 'em fine, for other people to use
'em: And your Bookseller is properly your Upholster; for he furnishes your
Room, rather than your Head.


Old. Well, well, good Sea-Lieutenant, study you your Compass, that is more than
your head can deal with. (I will go find out the Widow, to keep her out of his
sight, or he will board her, whilst I am treating a Peace.)

[Aside. [ Ex. Oldfox.
Manent Freeman, Jerry. Ierr. Nay pr'ythee, Friend, now, let me have but the
Seven Champipions, you shall trust me no longer than till my Mothers Mr.
Splitcause comes; for I hope he will lend me wherewithal to pay for it.


Free. Lend thee! here, I Will pay him. Do you want Money, Squire? I Am sorry a
Man of your Estate should want Money.


Ierr. Nay, my Mother will never let me be at Age: And till then, she says --


Free. At Age! Why, you are at Age already, to have spent an Estate, Man; there
are younger than you, have kept their Women these three Years, have had half a
dozen Claps, and lost as many thousand pounds at Play.


Ierr. Ay, they are happy Sparks! nay, I know some of my School-Fellows, who,
when we were at School, were two Years younger than me; but now, I know not
how, are grown Men before me, and go where they will, and look to themselves:
but my Curmudgeonly Mother will not allow me where withal to be a Man of my self
with.


Free. Why there it is, I knew your Mother was in the fault: Ask but your
School-Fellows what they did, to be Men of themselves.


Ierr. Why, I know they went to Law with their Mothers; for they say, there is
no good to be done upon a Widow Mother, till one goes to Law with her: but mine
is as plaguey a Lawyer, as any's of our Inn. Then would she marry too, and cut
down my Trees: Now I should hate, Man, to have my Father's^ Wife kissed, and
slap'd, and the other thing too, (you know what I mean) by another Man; and our
Trees are the purest, tall, even, shady twigs by my fa --


Free. Come, Squire, let your Mother and your Trees fall as she pleases' rather
than wear this Gown, and carry green Bags all thy life; and be pointed at for a
Tony: But you shall be able to deal with her yet the common way; thou shall
make false Love to some Lawyer's daughter, whose Father, upon the hopes of thy
marrying her, shall lend thee Money, and Law, to preserve thy Estate and Trees;
and thy Mother is so ugly, no Body will have her, if she cannot cut down thy
Trees.


Ierr. Nay, if I had but any Body to stand by me, I am as stomachful as another


Free. That will I, I Will not see any hopeful young Gentleman abused.


Boy. By any but your self.

[Aside.
Ierr. The truth on it is, mine is as arrant a Widow-Mother, to her poor Child,
as any's in England: She will not so much as let one have sixpence in one's
Pocket, to see a Motion, or the Dancing of the Ropes, or --


Free. Come, you shall not want Money, there is Gold for you.


Ierr. O Lurd, Sir, two Guineys! do you lend me this? is there no trick in^t?
Well, Sir, I Will give you my Bond, for security.


Free. No, no, thou have given me thy face for security: Any Body would swear,
thou do not look like a Cheat. You shall have what you will of me; and, if
your Mother will not be kinder to you, come to me, who will.


Ierr. By my fa -- he is a curious fine Gentleman! -- [Aside. But, will you
stand by one?


Free. If you can be resolute.


Ierr. Can be resolved! Gad, if she gives me but a cross word, I Will leave her
to night, and come to you. But, now I have got Money, I Will go to Jack of All
Trades, at the other end of the Hall, and buy the neatest, purest things --


Free. And I Will follow the great Boy, and my blow at his Mother: steal way the
Calf, and the Cow will follow you.


[Exit Jerry, followed by Freeman. Enter, on the other side, Manly, Widow
Blackacre, and Oldfox. Man. Dam your Cause; cannot you lose it without me? which
you are like enough to do, if it be as you say, an honest one: I will suffer no
longer for it.


Wid. Nay, Captain, I tell you, you are my prime Witness, and the Cause is just
now coming on, Mr. Splitcause tells me. Lord, methinks you should take a
pleasure in walking here, as half you see now do; for they have no business
here, I assure you.


Man. Yes, but I Will assure you then, their business is to persecute me; but
do you think I Will stay any longer, to have a Rogue, because he knows my name,
pluck me aside, and whisper a Newsbook-secret to me, with a stinking breath? A
second come piping angry from the Court, and sputter in my face his tedious
complaints against it? A third Law-Coxcomb, because he saw me once at a
Reader's dinner, come and put me a long Law-Case, to make a discovery of his
indefatigable dullness, and my weari'd patience? A fourth, a most barbarous
civil Rogue, who will keep a Man half an hour in the crowd with a bowed body,
and a hat off, acting the reformed Sign of the Salutation Tavern, to hear his
bountiful professions of service and friendship; whilst he cares not if I were
damned, and I am wishing him hanged out of my way? I Would as soon run the Gantlet,
as walk the other turn.


Enter to them Jerry Blackacre without his Bags; but laden with Trinkets, which
he endeavors to hide from his Mother: and followed at a distance by Freeman.
Wid. O, are you come, Sir? But where have you been, you Ass? And how come you
thus laden?


Ierr. Look here, forsooth Mother, now here is a Duck, here is a Boarcat, and
here is an Owl.


[Making a noise with Cat-calls, and other such like Instruments. Wid. Yes,
there is an Owl, Sir.


Old. He Is an ungracious Bird, indeed.


Wid. But go, thou Trangame, and carry back those Trangames, which thou have
stolen or purloin'd; for no Body would trust a Minor in Westminster Hall sure.


Ierr. Hold your self contented, forsooth, I have these Commodities by a fair
Bargain and Sale; and there stands my Witness, and Creditor.


Wid. How Is that! What, Sir, do you think to get the Mother, by giving the Child
a Rattle? But where are my Bags, my Writings, you Rascal?


Ierr. O Law! Where are they indeed?

[Aside.
Wid. How, Sirrah? speak, come --


Man. You can tell her, Freeman, I suppose?


[Apart to him. Free. It Is true, I made one of your Salt Water Sharks steal
'em, whilst he was eagerly choosing his Commodities, as he calls 'em, in order
to my design upon his Mother.


[Apart to him. Wid. Will Not you speak? Where were you, I say, you Son of a -- an
unfortunate Woman? O, Major, I Am undone; they are all that concern my Estate,
my Jointure, my Husband's Deed of Gift, my Evidences for all my Suits now
depending! What will become of them?


Free. I Am glad to hear this. [Aside. They Will be safe, I warrant you, Madam.


Wid. O where? where? Come, you Villain, along with me, and show me where.


[ Exeunt Widow, Jerry, Oldfox. Manent Manly, Freeman. Man. Thou have taken the
right way to get a Widow, by making her great Boy Rebel; for, when nothing will
make a Widow marry, she will do it to cross her Children. But can thou in
earnest marry this Harpy, this Volume of shrivel'd blur'd Parchments and Law,
this Attorneys Desk?


Free. Ay, ay, I Will marry, and live honestly: that is, give my Creditors, not
her, due Benevolence, pay my Debts.


Man. Thy Creditors, you see, are not so barbarous, as to put thee in Prison,
and will thou commit thy self to a noisome Dungeon for thy life? which is the
only satisfaction thou can give thy Creditors, by this match.


Free. Why, is not she rich?


Man. Ay, but he that marries a Widow, for her Money, will find himself as much
mistaken, as the Widow, that marries a young Fellow for due Benevolence, as you
call it.


Free. Why, do you think I shall not deserve Wages? I Will drudge faithfully.


Man. I tell thee again, he that is the Slave in the Mine, has the least
propriety in the Ore: You may dig, and dig; but, if thou would have her
Money, rather get to be her Trustee, than her Husband, for a true Widow will
make over her Estate to any Body, and cheat her self, rather than be cheated by
her Children, or a second Husband.


Enter to them Jerry, running in a fright. Ierr. O Law! I Am undone, I Am undone,
my Mother will kill me: You said you would stand by one.


Free. So I will, my brave Squire, I warrant thee.


Ierr. Ay, but I dare not stay till she comes; for she is as furious, now she
has lost her Writings, as a Bitch when she has lost her Puppies.


Man. The comparison's handsome!


Ierr. O, she is here!


Enter Widow Blackacre, and Oldfox. Free. [To the Sailor.] Take him, Jack, and
make haste with him, to your Master's Lodging; and be sure you keep him up,
till I come.


[ Exit Jerry and Sailor. Wid. O my dear Writings! Where Is this Heathen Rogue,
my Minor?


Free. Gone to drown, or hang himself.


Wid. No, I know him too well, he will never be Felo de se that way, but he may go
and choose a Guardian of his own head, and so be Felo de ses beins: for he has
not yet chosen one.


Free. Say you so? And he shall not want one.

[Aside.
Wid. But, now I think on it, it is you, Sir, have put this Cheat upon me; for
there is a saying, Take hold of a Maid by her Smock, and a Widow by her
Writings, and they cannot get from you: But I Will play fast and loose with you
yet, if there be Law; and my Minor and Writings are not forthcoming, I Will bring
my Action of Detinue or Trover. But first, I Will try to find out this
Guardianless, graceless Villain. Will you jog, Major?


Man. If you have lost your Evidence, I hope your Causes cannot go on, and I
may be gone?


Wid. O no, stay but a making Water while, (as one may say) and I Will be with
you again.


[ Ex. Widow, and Oldfox. Manent Manly, Freeman. Free. Well, sure I am the
first Man that ever began a Love Intrigue, in Westminster Hall.


Man. No, sure; for the Love to a Widow generally begins here: And as the
Widow's Cause goes against the Heir or Executors, the Jointure Rivals commence
their Suit to the Widow.


Free. Well, but how, pray, have you past your time here, since I was forced to
leave you alone? You have had a great deal of patience.


Man. Is this a place to be alone, or have patience in? But I have had patience
indeed; for I have drawn upon me, since I came, but three Quarrels, and two
Lawsuits.


Free. Nay, faith, you are too cursed to be let loose in the World; you should
be tied up again, in your Sea-kennel, called a Ship. But how could you quarrel
here?


Man. How could I refrain? A Lawyer talked peremptorily and saucily to me, and
as good as gave me the Lie


Free. They do it so often to one another at the Bar, that they make no Bones
on it elsewhere.


Man. However, I gave him a Cuff on the Ear; whereupon he jogs two Men, whose
Backs were turned to us, (for they were reading at a Booksellers) to Witness I
struck him sitting the Courts; which office they so readily promised that I
called 'em Rascals and Knights of the Post: one of 'em presently calls two
other absent Witnesses, who were coming toward us at a distance; whilst the
other, with a Whisper, desires to know my name, that he might have satisfaction
by way of Challenge, as the other by way of Writ; but if it were not rather to
direct his Brother's Writ, than his own Challenge: there you see is one of my
Quarrels, and two of my Lawsuits.


Free. So: -- and the other two?


Man. For advising a Poet to leave off Writing, and turn Lawyer, because he is
dull, and impudent, and says or writes nothing now, but by Precedent.


Free. And the third Quarrel?


Man. For giving more sincere Advice, to a handsome, well-drest, young Fellow
(who asked it too) not to marry a Wench, that he loved, and I had lay'n with.


Free. Nay, if you will be giving your sincere advice to Lovers, and Poets, you
will not fail of Quarrels.


Man. Or, if I stay in this place; for I see more Quarrels crouding upon me:
let us be gone, and avoid 'em. Enter Novel, at a distance, coming toward them.
A Plague on him, that Sneer is ominous to us; he is coming upon us, and we
shall not be rid of him.


Nov. Dear Bully, don't look so grum upon me; you told me just now, you had
forgiven me a little harmless Raillery upon wooden legs last night.


Man. Yes, yes, pray be gone, I am talking of business.


Nov. Cannot I hear it? I love thee, and will be faithful, and always --


Man. Impertinent! It Is Business that concerns Freeman only.


Nov. Well, I love Freeman too, and would not divulge his secret: pr'ythee
speak, pr'ythee, I must --


Man. Pr'ythee let me be rid of thee, I must be rid of thee.


Nov. Faith, thou can hardly, I love thee so. Come, I must know the business.


Man. So, I have it now. [Aside. Why, if you needs will know it, he has a
quarrel, and his Adversary bids him bring two Friends with him: now, I am one;
and we are thinking who we shall have for a third.


Several crossing the Stage. Nov. A Pox, there goes a Fellow owes me an Hundred
pound, and goes out of Town to morrow: I Will speak with him, and come to you
preesently.

[Exit Novel.
Man. No but you wo' not.


Free. You are dexterously rid of him.


Enter Oldfox. Man. To what purpose, since here comes another, as impertinent?
I know, by his grin, he is bound hither.


Old. Your Servant, worthy, noble Captain: Well, I have left the Widow, because
she carried me from your company; for, faith Captain, I must needs tell thee,
thou art the only Officer in England, who was not an Edg-hill Officer, that I
care for.


Man. I Am sorry for it.


Old. Why, would thou have me love them?


Man. Any body, rather than me.


Old. What, you are modest I see! therefore too, I love thee.


Man. No, I am not modest, but love to brag my self, and cannot patiently hear
you fight over the last Civil War; therefore go look out the Fellow I saw just
now here, that walks with his Stockings and his Sword out at heels, and let him
tell you the History of that scar on his check, to give you occasion to show
yours, got in the field at Bloomsbury, not that of Edg-hill: go to him, poor
Fellow, he is fasting, and has not yet the happiness this morning to stink of
Brandy and Tobacco; go, give him some to hear you, I am busy.


Old. Well, ygad, I love thee now, Boy, for thy surliness: thou art no tame
Captain, I see, that will suffer --


Man. An old Fox.


Old. All that shall not make me angry: I consider thou art peevish, and fretting
at some ill success at Law. Pr'ythee tell me what ill luck you have met with
here.


Man. You.


Old. Do I look like the Picture of ill Luck? Gadsnouns, I love thee more and
more; and shall I tell thee what made me love thee first?


Man. Do: that I may be rid of that damned quality, and thee.


Old. 'Twas thy wearing that broad Sword there.


Man. Here, Freeman, let us change: I Will never wear it more.


Old. How! You wo' not sure. Pr'ythee don't look like one of our Holyday
Captains now adays, with a Bodkin by your side, your Martinet Rogues.


Man. (O, then there is hopes.) [Aside. What, do you find fault with Martinet? let
me tell you, Sir, it is the best exercise in the World; the most ready, most
easy, most graceful exercise that ever was used, and the most --


Old. Nay, nay, Sir, no more, Sir, your Servant, if you praise Martinet once, I
have done with you, Sir. Martinet! Martinet!

[ Exit Oldfox.
Free. Nay, you have made him leave you as willingly, as ever he did an Enemy;
for he was truly for the King and Parliament: for the Parliament, in their
List; and for the King, in cheating 'em of their Pay, and never hurting the
King's party in the Field.


Enter a Lawyer toward them. Man. A Pox! this way; here is a Lawyer I know
threatening us with another greeting.


Law. Sir, Sir, your very Servant; I was afraid you had forgotten me.


Man. I was not afraid you had forgotten me.


Law. No, Sir, we Lawyers have pretty good memories.


Man. You ought to have, by your Wits.


Law. O, you are a merry Gentleman, Sir; I remember you were merry, when I was
last in your company.


Man. I was never merry in thy company, Mr. Lawyer, sure.


Law. Why, I Am sure you jok'd upon me, and shamm'd me all night long.


Man. Shamm'd! pr'ythee what barbarous Law-term is that?


Law. Shamming! Why, don't you know that? it is all our way of Wit Sir.


Man. I am glad I do not know it then: Shamming! What does he mean by it,
Freeman?


Free. Shamming, is telling you an insipid, dull Lye^ with a dull Face, which
the sly Wag the Author only laughs at himself; and making himself believe it is
a good Jest, puts the Sham only upon himself.


Man. So, your Lawyers Jest, I find, like his Practice, has more Knavery than
Wit in it. I should make the worst Shammer in England; I must always deal
ingeniously, as I will with you, Mr. Lawyer, and advise you to be seen rather
with Attorneys and Solicitors, than such Fellows as I am; they will credit your
practice more.


Law. No, Sir, your company's an honor to me.


Man. No, faith, go this way, there goes an Attorney, leave me for him: let it
be never said, a Lawyers Civility did him hurt.


Law. No, worthy honored Sir, I Will not leave you for any Attorney sure.


Man. Unless he had a Fee in his hand.


Law. Have you any business here, Sir? try me: I Would serve you sooner than any
Attorney breathing.


Man. Business! -- So, I have thought of a sure way. [Aside. Yes, faith, I have
a little business.


Law. Have you so, Sir? in what Court, Sir? what is it, Sir? tell me but how I
may serve you, and I Will do it, Sir; and take it for as great an honor --


Man. Faith, it is for a poor Orphan of a Sea-Officer of mine, that has no
Money; but if it could be followed in Forma Pauperis; and when the Legacy's
recovered --


Law. Forma Pauperis, Sir!


Man. Ay, Sir.


Several crossing the Stage. Law. Mr. Bumblecase, Mr. Bumblecase, a word with
you; Sir, I beg your pardon at present, I have a little business. --


Man. Which is not in Forma Pauperis.


[Exit Lawyer. Free. So, you have now found a way to be rid of people without
quarrelling.


Enter Alderman. Man. But here is a City Rogue will stick as hard upon us, as if
I owed him Money.


Ald. Captain, noble Sir, I am yours heartily do you see: Why should you avoid
your old Friends?


Man. And why should you follow me? I owe you nothing.


Ald. Out of my hearty respects to you; for there is not a Man in England.


Man. Thou would save from hanging, with the expense of a shilling only.


Ald. Nay, nay, but Captain, you are like enough to tell me --


Man. Truth, which you will not care to hear; therefore you had better go talk
with some body else.


Ald. No, I know no body can inform me better, of some young Wit, or
Spendthrift, that has a good dipped Seat and Estate in Middlesex, Hartfordshire,
Essex, or Kent, any of these would serve my turn: now, if you knew of such an
one, and would but help --


Man. You to finish his ruin.


Ald. I faith, you should have a snip --


Man. Of your Nose; you thirty in the hundred Rascal, would you make me your
Squire Setter, your Baud for Manors?


[Takes him by the Nose. Ald. Oh!


Free. Hold, or here will be your third Lawsuit.


Ald. Gads precious, you hectoring person you, are you wild? I meant you no
hurt, Sir; I begin to think (as things go) Land security best, and have, for a
convenient Mortgage, some ten, fifteen, or twenty thousand pound by me.


Man. Then go lay it out upon an Hospital, and take a Mortgage of Heaven,
according to your City custom; for you think, by laying out a little Money, to
hook in that too hereafter: do, I say, and keep the Poor you have made, by taking
forfeitures, that Heaven may not take yours


Ald. No, to keep the Cripples you make this War; this War spoils our Trade.


Man. Dam your Trade, it is the better for it.


Ald. What, will you speak against our Trade?


Man. And dare you speak against the War, our Trade?


Ald. Well, he may be a Convoy of ships I am concerned in. [Aside. Come,
Captain, I will have a fair correspondency with you, say what you will.


Man. Then pr'ythee be gone.


Ald. No, faith; pr'ythee, Captain, let us go drink a Dish of Laced Coffee, and
talk of the Times: Come, I Will treat you; nay, you shall go, for I have no
business here.


Man. But I have.


Ald. To pick up a Man to give thee a Dinner? Come, I Will do thy business for
thee.


Man. Faith, now I think on it, so you may, as well as any Man; for it is to pick
up a Man, to be bound with me, to one who expects City security, for --


Ald. Nay, then your Servant, Captain; business must be done.


Man. Ay, if it can; but hark you, Alderman, without you --


Ald. Business Sir, I say, must be done; and there is an Officer of the Treasury
I have an Affair with --

[Several crossing the Stage. [Exit Alderman.
Man. You see now what the mighty friendship of the World is; what all
Ceremony, Embraces, and plentiful Professions come to: You are no more to
believe a professing Friend, than a threatening Enemy; and as no Man hurts you,
that tells you he will do you a mischief, no man, you see, is your Servant, who
says he is so. Why, the Devil, then should a Man be troubled with the flattery
of Knaves, if he be not a Fool, or Cully; or with the fondness of Fools, if he
be not a Knave, or Cheat?


Free. Only for his pleasure; for there is some in laughing at Fools, and
disappointing Knaves.


Man. That Is a pleasure, I think, would cost you too dear, as well as marrying
your Widow to disappoint her; but, for my part, I have no pleasure by 'em, but
in despising 'em, wheresoe'r I meet 'em; and then, the pleasure of hoping so to
be rid of 'em. But now my comfort is, I am not worth a shilling in the World,
which all the World shall know; and then I Am sure I shall have none of 'em come
near me.


Free. A very pretty comfort, which I think you pay too dear for: But is the
twenty pound gone since the morning?


Man. To my Boats Crew: Would you have the poor, honest, brave Fellows want?


Free. Rather than you, or I.


Man. Why, art thou without Money? thou who art a Friend to every Body?


Free. I ventured my last stake upon the Squire, to nick him of his Mother; and
cannot help you to a dinner, unless you will go dine with my Lord --


Man. No, no, the Ordinary is too dear for me, where flattery must pay for my
dinner: I am no Herald, or Poet.


Free. We'll go then to the Bishops --


Man. There you must flatter the old Philosophy: I cannot renounce my reason
for a dinner.


Free. Why, then let us go to your Aldermans.


Man. Hang him, Rogue! that were not to dine; for he makes you drunk with Lees
of Sack before dinner, to take away your stomach: and there you must call Usury
and Extortion, Gods blessings, or the honest turning of the Penny; hear him
brag of the leather Breeches in which he trotted first to Town; and make a
greater noise with his Money in his Parlor, than his Casheers do in his
Counting house, without hopes of borrowing a shilling.


Free. Ay, a pox on it, it is like dining with the great Gamesters; and, when
they fall to their common Dessert, see the heaps of Gold drawn on all hands,
without going to twelve. Let us go to my Lady Goodly's.


Man. There, to slatter her looks, you must mistake her Grandchildren for her
own; praise her Cook, that she may rail at him: and feed her Dogs, not your
self.


Free. What do you think of eating with your Lawyer then?


Man. Eat with him! Dam him; to hear him employ his barbarous eloquence in a
Reading upon the two and thirty good Bits in a shoulder of Veal; and be forced
your self to praise the cold Bribe pie, that stinks; and drink Law-French Wine,
as rough and harsh, as his Law-French. A pox on him, I Would rather dine in the
Temple Rounds, or Walks, with the Knights without Noses, or the Knights of the
Post; who are honester Fellows, and better company. But let us home, and try
our Fortune; for I Will stay no longer here, for your damned Widow.


Free. Well, let us go home then; for I must go for my damned Widow, and look
after my new damned Charge; three or four hundred Year ago, a Man might have
dined in this Hall.


Man. But now, the Lawyer only here is fed:
And, Bully-like, by Quarrels gets his Bread.

[Exeunt. Finis Actus Tertii.
ACT. IV. Scene 1.
Manly's Lodging. Enter Manly, and Fidelia. Man. WEll, there is success in thy
face; have thou prevailed? say.


Fid. As I could wish, Sir.


Man. So, I told thee what thou were fit for, and thou would not believe me.
Come, thank me for bringing thee acquainted with thy Genius. Well, thou have
mollifi'd her heart for me?


Fid. No, Sir, not so; but what is better.


Man. How? what is better!


Fid. I shall harden your heart against her.


Man. Have a care, Sir, my heart is too much in earnest to be fooled with, and
my desire at height, and needs no delays to incite it; what, you are too good
a Pimp already, and know how to endear pleasure, by withholding it? but leave
off your Pages, Baudy-house tricks, Sir, and tell me, will she be kind?


Fid. Kinder than you could wish, Sir.


Man. So then: well, pr'ythee what said she?


Fid. She said --


Man. What? you are so tedious; speak comfort to me: what?


Fid. That, of all things, you were her aversion.


Man. How?


Fid. That she would sooner take a Bedfellow out of an Hospital, and Diseases,
into her Arms, than you.


Man. What?


Fid. That she would rather trust her Honor with a dissolute, debauched
Hector; nay worse, with a finical baffled Coward, all over loathsome with
affectation of the fine Gentleman;


Man. What Is all this you say?


Fid. Nay, that my offers of your Love to her, were more offensive, than when
Parents woo their Virgin Daughters, to the enjoyment of Riches only; and that
you were, in all circumstances, as nauseous to her, as a Husband on compulsion.


Man. Hold; I understand you not.


Fid. So, 'twill work I see.

[Aside.
Man. Did not you tell me --


Fid. She called you ten thousand Ruffins.


Man. Hold, I say.


Fid. Brutes --


Man. Hold.


Fid. Sea Monsters --


Man. Dam your intelligence: hear me a little now.


Fid. Nay, surly Coward she called you too.


Man. Will Not you hold yet? hold, or --


Fid. Nay, Sir, pardon me; I could not but tell you she had the baseness, the
injustice, to call you Coward, Sir, Coward, Coward, Sir.


Man. Not yet? --


Fid. I Have done. Coward, Sir.


Man. Did not you say she was kinder than I could wish her?


Fid. Yes, Sir.


Man. How then? -- O -- I understand you now. At first, she appeared in rage,
and disdain, the truest sign of a coming Woman; but, at last, you prevailed it
seems: did you not?


Fid. Yes, Sir.


Man. So then, let us know that only; come, pr'ythee, without delays: I Will kiss
thee for that News before hand.


Fid. So; the Kiss, I Am sure, is welcome to me, whatsoever the News will be to
you.

[Aside.
Man. Come, speak, my dear Voluntier.


Fid. How welcome were that kind word too, if it were not for another Woman's
sake!

[Aside.
Man. What, will not you speak? You prevailed for me, at last, you say?


Fid. No, Sir.


Man. No more of your fooling, Sir; it will not agree with my impatience, or
temper.


Fid. Then, not to fool you, Sir, I spoke to her for you, but prevailed for my
self; she would not hear me when I spoke in your behalf; but bid me say what I
would in my own, though she gave me no occasion, she was so coming: and so was
kinder, Sir, than you could wish; which I was only afraid to let you know,
without some warning.


Man. How Is this? Young man, you are of a lying age; but I must hear you out,
and if --


Fid. I would not abuse you, and cannot wrong her by any report of her, she is
so wicked.


Man. How, wicked! had she the impudence, at the second sight of you only --


Fid. Impudence, Sir! Oh, she has impudence enough to put a Court out of
countenance, and debauch a Stews.


Man. Why, what said she?


Fid. Her tongue, I confess, was silent; but her speaking Eyes gloted such
things, more immodest, and lascivious, than Ravishers can act, or Women under a
confinement think.


Man. I know there are whose Eyes reflect more Obscenity, than the Glasses in
Alcoves; but there are others too who use a little Art with their looks, to
make 'em seem more beautiful, not more loving: which vain young Fellows, like
you, are apt to interpret in their own favor, and to the Lady's wrong.


Fid. Seldom, Sir; pray have you a care of gloting Eyes; for he that loves to
gaze upon 'em, will find, at last, a thousand Fools and Cuckolds in 'em,
instead of Cupids.


Man. Very well, Sir: but, what, you had only eye-kindness from Olivia?


Fid. I tell you again, Sir, no Woman sticks there: Eye-promises of Love they
only keep; nay, they are Contracts which make you sure of 'em. In short, Sir,
she, seeing me, with shame and amazement dumb, unactive, and resistless, threw
her twisting arms about my neck, and smothered me with a thousand tasteless
Kisses: believe me, Sir, they were so to me.


Man. Why did you not avoid 'em then?


Fid. I fenced with her eager Arms, as you did with the grapples of the Enemy's
Fireship; and nothing but cutting 'em off, could have freed me.


Man. Damned, damned Woman, that could be so false and infamous! And damned,
damned heart of mine, that cannot yet be false, though so infamous! What easy,
tame, suffering, trampled things does that little God of talking Cowards make
of us! but --


Fid. So! it works I find as I expected.

[Aside.
Man. But she was false to me before, she told me so her self, and yet I could
not quite believe it; but she was, so that her second falseness is a favor to
me, not an injury, in revenging me upon the Man that wronged me first of her
Love. Her Love! -- a Whores, a Witches Love! -- But, what, did she not kiss
well, Sir? I Am sure I thought her Lips -- but I must not think of 'em more --
but yet they are such I could still kiss, -- grow to and then tear off with my
teeth, grind 'em into mammocks, and spit 'em into her Cuckolds face.


Fid. Poor man, how uneasy he is! I have hardly the heart to give him so much
pain, though withal I give him a cure; and to my self new life.

[Aside.
Man. But, what, her Kisses sure could not but warm you into desire at last, or
a compliance with hers at least?


Fid. Nay more, I confess --


Man. What more? speak.


Fid. All you could fear had passed between us, if I could have been made to
wrong you; Sir, in that nature.


Man. Could have been made! you lie, you did.


Fid. Indeed, Sir, 'twas impossible for me; besides, we were interrupted by a
visit; but, I confess, she would not let me stir, till I promised to return to
her again, within this hour, as soon as it should be dark; by which time, she
would dispose of her visit, and her servants, and her self, for my reception:
which I was fain to promise to get from her.


Man. Ha!


Fid. But if ever I go near her again, may you, Sir, think me as false to you,
as she is; hate, and renounce me; as you ought to do her, and I hope will do
now.


Man. Well, but now I think on it, you shall keep your word with your Lady.
What, a young Fellow, and fail the first, nay, so tempting an assignation!


Fid. How, Sir?


Man. I say you shall go to her when it is dark, and shall not disappoint her.


Fid. I, Sir! I should disappoint her more by going; for --


Man. How so?


Fid. Her impudence, and injustice to you, will make me disappoint her Love;
loath her.


Man. Come, you have my leave; and if you disgust her, I Will go with you, and
act Love, whilst you shall talk it only.


Fid. You, Sir! nay, then I Will never go near her. You act Love, Sir! You must
but act it indeed, after all I have said to you. Think of your Honor, Sir,
Love --


Man. Well, call it Revenge, and that is Honorable: I Will be revenged on her;
and thou shall be my second.


Fid. Not in a base action, Sir, when you are your own Enemy: O go not near
her, Sir, for Heavens sake, for your own, think not of it.


Man. How concerned you are! I thought I should catch you. What, you are my
Rival at last, and are in Love with her your self; and have spoken ill of her,
out of your Love to her, not me; and therefore would not have me go to her!


Fid. Heaven witness for me, it is because I love you only, I would not have you
go to her.


Man. Come, come, the more I think on it, the more I Am satisfied you do love
her: those Kisses, young Man, I knew were irresistible; it is certain.


Fid. There is nothing certain in the World, Sir, but my Truth, and your
Courage.


Man. Your Servant, Sir. Besides false, and ungrateful, as she has been to me;
and though I may believe her hatred to me, great as you report it; yet I cannot
think you are so soon, and at that rate, beloved by her, though you may endeavor
it.


Fid. Nay, if that be all, and you doubt it still, Sir, I will conduct you to
her; and, unseen, your Ears shall judge of her falseness, and my Truth to you:
if that will satisfy you.


Man. Yes, there is some satisfaction in being quite out of doubt: because it is
that alone withholds us from the pleasure of Revenge.


Fid. Revenge! What Revenge can you have, Sir? Disdain is best revenged by
scorn; and faithless Love, by loving another, and making her happy with the
others losings: which, if I might advise --


Enter Freeman. Man. Not a word more.


Freem. What are you talking of Love yet, Captain? I thought you had done
with it.


Man. Why, what did you hear me say?


Freem. Something imperfectly of Love, I think.


Man. I was only wondering why Fools, Rascals, and desertless Wretches, should
still have the better of Men of Merit, with all Women; as much as with their
own common Mistress, Fortune!


Freem. Because most Women, like Fortune, are blind, seem to do all things in
jest, and take pleasure in extravagant actions; their love deserves neither
thanks, or blame, for they cannot help it: it is all sympathy; therefore the
noise, the finical, the talkative, the cowardly and effeminate, have the better
of the brave, the reasonable, and Man of Honor; for they have no more reason
in their love, or kindness, than Fortune her self.


Man. Yes, they have their reason. First, Honor in a Man they fear too much to
love; and Sense in a Lover, upbraids their want of it; and they hate any thing
that disturbs their admiration of themselves; but they are of that vain number,
who had rather show their false generosity, in giving away profusely to
worthless Flatterers, than in paying just Debts: And, in short, all Women, like
Fortune, (as you say) and Rewards, are lost, by too much meriting.


Fid. All Women, Sir! sure there are some, who have no other quarrel to a
Lovers merit, but that it begets their despair of him.


Man. Thou art young enough to be credulous; but we --


Enter 1. Sailor. 1. Sail. Here are now below, the scolding, daggled
Gentlewoman, and that Major Old -- old -- Fop, I think you call him.


Freem. Oldfox: pr'ythee bid 'em come up, with your leave, Captain, for now I
can talk with her upon the square; if I shall not disturb you.


Man. No; for I^ll be gone. Come, Voluntier,


Freem. Nay, pray stay; the Scene between us will not be so tedious to you, as
you think: besides, you shall see, how I have rigged my Squire out, with the
remains of my shipwrack'd Wardrobe; he is under your Sea-Valet de Chambre's
hands, and by this time dressed, and will be worth your seeing. Stay, and I Will
fetch my Fool.


Man. No; you know I cannot easily laugh: besides, my Voluntier and I have
business abroad.


[Ex. Manly, Fidelia on one side, Freeman on the other. Enter Major Oldfox, and
Widow Blackacre. Wid. What, no body here! Did not the Fellow say he was within?


Oldf. Yes, Lady; and he may be perhaps a little busy at present; but, if you
think the time long till he comes, [Vnfolding Papers] I Will read you here some
of the fruit of my leisure, the overflowings of my fancy and Pen. (To value me
right, she must know my parts.) [Aside. Come --


Wid. No, no; I have reading work enough of my own, in my Bag, I thank you.


Oldf. I, Law, Madam; but here is a Poem, in blank Verse, which I think a
handsome Declaration of one's Passion.


Wid. O! if you talk of Declarations, I Will show you one of the prettiest penned
things, which I mended too my self you must know;


Oldf. Nay, Lady, if you have used your self so much to the reading of harsh
Law, that you hate smooth Poetry; here is a Character for you, of --


Wid. A Character! Nay, then I Will show you my Bill in Chancery here, that gives
you such a Character of my Adversary, makes him as black --


Oldf. Pshaw; away, away, Lady. But if you think the Character too long, here
is an Epigram not above 20 Lines, upon a cruel Lady; who Decreed her Servant
should hang himself, to demonstrate his Passion.


Wid. Decreed! if you talk of Decreeing, I have such a Decree here, drawn by
the finest Clerk --


Old. O Lady, Lady, all interruption, and no sense between us, as if we were
^awyers at the Bar! But I had forgot, Apollo and Littleton never lodge in a
head together. If you hate Verses, I Will give you a cast of my Politics in
Prose: it is a Letter to a Friend in the Country; which is now the way of all
such sober, solid persons as my self, when they have a mind to publish their
disgust to the Times; though perhaps, between you and I, they have no Friend in
the Country. And sure a Politic, serious person may as well have a feigned
Friend in the Country to write to, as well as an idle Poet a feigned Mistress
to write to. And so here is my Letter to a Friend, or no Friend, in the
Country, concerning the late conjuncture of Affairs, in relation to
Coffee-houses: or the Coffee-man's Case.


Wid. Nay, if your Letter have a Case in it, it is something; but first I Will read
you a Letter of mine, to a Friend in the Country, called a Letter of Attorney.


Enter to them Freeman, and Jerry Blackacre, in an old gaudy Suit, and Red
Breeches of Freeman's. Oldf. What, Interruption still? O the plague of
Interruption! worse to an Author, than the plague of Critics!

[Aside.
Wid. What Is this I see, Ierry Blackacre, my Minor, in Red Breeches! What, have
thou left the modest seemly Garb of Gown and Cap, for this? And have I lost all
my good Inns of Chancery breeding upon thee then? And thou will go a breeding
thy self, from our Inn of Chancery and Westminster Hall, at Coffee-houses and
Ordinaries, Play Houses, Tennis-courts, and Baudy-houses.


Ierr. Ay, ay, what then? perhaps I will; but what is that to you? here is my
Guardian and Tutor now forsooth, that I am out of your Hucksters hands.


Wid. How? thou have not chosen him for thy Guardian yet?


Ierr. No, but he has chosen me for his Charge, and that is all one; and I Will do
any thing he will have me, and go all the World over with him; to Ordinaries, and
Baudy-houses, or any where else.


Wid. To Ordinaries and Baudy-houses I have a care, Minor, thou will infeeble
there thy Estate, and Body: do not go to Ordinaries and Baudy-houses, good
Ierry.


Ierr. Why, how come you to know any ill by Baudy-houses? You never had any
hurt by 'em, had you, forsooth? Pray hold your self contented; if I do go where
Money and Wenches are to be had, you may thank your self; for you used me so
unnaturally, you would never let me have a Penny to go abroad with; nor so much
as come near the Garret, where your Maidens lay; nay, you would not so much as
let me play at Hotcockles with 'em, nor have any Recreation with 'em, though one
should have kissed you behind, you were so unnatural a Mother, so you were.


Freem. Ay, a very unnatural Mother, faith, Squire.


Wid. But, Ierry, consider thou art yet but a Minor; however, if thou will go
home with me again, and be a good Child, thou shall see --


Freem. Madam, I must have a better care of my Heir under age, than so; I would
sooner trust him alone with a stale Waiting Woman and a Parson, than with his
Widow Mother and her Lover or Lawyer.


Wid. Why, thou Villain, part Mother and Minor! Rob me of my Child and my
Writings! but thou shall find there is Law; and as in the Case of Ravishment, of
Guard -- Westminster the Second.


Oldf. Young Gentleman, Squire, pray be ruled by your Mother, and your Friends.


Ierr. Yes, I Will be ruled by my Friends, therefore not by my Mother, so I
will not: I Will choose him for my Guardian till I am of age; nay, may be for as
long as I live.


Wid. Will thou so, thou Wretch? And when you are of age, thou will Sign, Seal,
and Deliver too, will thou?


Ierr. Yes marry will I, if you go there too.


Wid. O do not squeeze Wax, Son; rather go to Ordinaries, and Baudy-houses,
than squeeze Wax: if thou do that, farewell the goodly Manor of Blackacre,
with all its Woods, Underwoods, and Appurtenances whatever. Oh, oh!


[Weeps. Freem. Come, Madam, in short, you see I am resolved to have a share in
the Estate, yours or your Sons; if I cannot get you, I Will keep him, who is less
coy you find; but, if you would have your Son again, you must take me too.
Peace, or War? Love, or Law? You see my Hostage is in my hand: I Am in
possession.


Wid. Nay, if one of us must be ruined, even let it be him. By my Body, a good
one! Did you ever know yet a Widow marry or not marry for the sake of her
Child? I Would have you to know, Sir, I shall be hard enough for you both yet,
without marrying you: if Ierry will not be ruled by me, what say you, Booby, will
you be ruled? speak.


Ierr. Let one alone, cannot you?


Wid. Will thou choose him for Guardian, whom I refuse for Husband?


Ierr. Ay, to choose, I thank you.


Wid. And are all my hopes frustrated? Shall I never hear thee put Cases again
to John the Butler, or our Vicar? Never see thee amble the Circuit with the
Judges; and hear thee, in our Town Hall, louder than the Crier?


Ierr. No; for I have taken my leave of Lawyering, and Pettifogging.


Wid. Pettifogging! thou profane Villain, have thou so? Pettifogging! -- then
you shall take your leave of me, and your Estate too; thou shall be an Alien to
me and it for ever. Pettifogging!


Ierr. O, but if you go there too, Mother, we have the Deeds, and Settlements,
I thank you: Would you cheat me of my Estate, isac?


Wid. No, no, I will not cheat your little Brother Bob; for thou were not born
in Wedlock.


Freem. How Is that?


Ierr. How? What Quirk has she got in her head now?


Wid. I say thou can not, shall not inherit the Blackacres Estate.


Ierr. Why? Why, forsooth? What do you mean, if you go there to?


Wid. Thou art but my base Child; and, according to the Law, can not inherit
it: nay, thou art not so much as Bastard eigne.


Ierr. What, what? Am I then the Son of a Whore, Mother?


Wid. The Law says --


Freem. Madam, we know what the Law says; but have a care what you say: do not
let your Passion, to ruin your Son, ruin your Reputation.


Wid. Hang Reputation, Sir, am not I a Widow? Have no Husband, nor intend to
have any? Nor would you, I suppose, now have me for a Wife. So, I think now I Am
revenged on my Son and you, without marrying, as I told you.


Freem. But, consider, Madam.


Ierr. What, have you no shame left in you Mother?


Wid. Wonder not at it, Major, it is often the poor pressed Widows case, to give
up her Honor to save her Jointure; and seem to be a light Woman, rather than
marry: as some young men, they say, pretend to have the filthy Disease, and
lose their credit with most Women, to avoid the importunities of some.


[Aside, to Oldfox. Freem. But one word with you, Madam.


Wid. No, no, Sir. Come, Major, let us make haste, now to the Prerogative Court.


Oldf. But, Lady, if what you say be true, will you stigmatize your Reputation
on Record? And, if it be not true, how will you prove it?


Wid. Pshaw! I can prove any thing; and for my Reputation, know, Major, a wise
Woman will no more value her Reputation in disinheriting a Rebellious Son, of a
good Estate; than she would in getting him, to inherit an Estate.


[Ex. Wid. and Oldfox. Freem. Madam -- We must not let her go so, Squire.


Ierr. Nay, the Devil cannot stop her though if she has a mind to it. But come,
Bully Guardian, we'll go and advise with three Attorneys, two Proctors, two
Solicitors, and a shrewd man of White Friars, neither Attorney, Proctor, or
Solicitor, but as pure a Pimp to the Law as any of 'em; and sure all they will
be hard enough for her: for I fear, Bully Guardian, you are too good a Joker,
to have any Law in your head.


Freem. You Are in the right on it, Squire; I understand no Law: especially that
against Bastards, since I Am sure the Custom is against that Law; and more
people get Estates by being so, than lose 'em.


[Exeunt. The Scene changes to Olivia's Lodging. Enter Lord Plausible, and Boy
with a Candle. L. Plaus. Little Gentleman, your most obedient, faithful, humble
Servant: where, I beseech you, is that Divine person your Noble Lady?


Boy. Gone out, my Lord; but commanded me to give you this Letter.


[Gives him a Letter. Enter to him Novel. L. Plaus. Which he must not observe
[Aside.] Puts it up.


Nov. Hey, Boy, where is thy Lady?


Boy. Gone out, Sir; but I must beg a word with you.

[Gives him a Letter, and Exit.
Nov. For me? So. [Puts up the Letter. Servant, Servant, my Lord; you see the
Lady knew of your coming, for she is gone out.


L. Plaus. Sir, I humbly beseech you not to censure the Lady's good breeding:
she has reason to use more liberty with me, than with any other man.


Nov. How, Vicount, how?


L. Plaus. Nay, I humbly beseech you, be not in choler; where there is most
love, there may be most freedom.


Nov. Nay, then it is time to come to an eclercisment with you, and to tell you,
you must think no more of this Lady's love.


L. Plaus. Why, under correction, dear Sir?


Nov. There are Reasons, Reasons, Vicount.


L. Plaus. What, I beseech you, Noble Sir?


Nov. Pr'ythee, pr'ythee be not impertinent, my Lord; some of you Lords are
such conceited, well-assur'd, impertinent Rogues;


L. Plaus. And you noble Wits, are so full of shamming, and droling, one knows
not where to have you, seriously.


Nov. Well, you shall find me in Bed, with this Lady, one of these days.


L. Plaus. Nay, I beseech you, spare the Lady's Honor; for here is and mine will
be all one shortly.


Nov. Pr'ythee, my Lord, be not an Ass: do thou think to get her from me? I
have had such encouragements --


L. Plaus. ^^^ve not been thought unworthy of 'em.


Nov. W^^t not like mine! Come to an eclercisment, as I said.


L. Plaus. Why, seriously then, she has told me, Vicountess founded prettily.


Nov. And me, that Novel was a name she would sooner change here is for, than for
any Title in England.


L. Plaus. She has commended the softness, and respectfulness of my behavior.


Nov. She has praised the briskness of my Railery of all things, Man.


L. Plaus. The sleepiness of my Eyes she liked.


Nov. Sleepiness! dullness, dullness. But the fierceness of mine she adored.


L. Plaus. The brightness of my hair she liked.


Nov. The brightness! No, the greasiness, I warrant. But the blackness, and
luster of mine, she admires.


L. Plaus. The gentleness of my smile.


Nov. The subtilty of my leer.


L. Plaus. The clearness of my complexion.


Nov. The redness of my lips.


L. Plaus. The whiteness of my teeth.


Nov. My janty way of picking them.


L. Plaus. The sweetness of my breath.


Nov. Hah ha! -- Nay then she abused you, it is plain; for you know what Manly
said: the sweetness of your Pulvillio she might mean; but for your breath! ha,
ha, ha. Your breath is such, Man, that nothing but Tobacco can perfume: and
your Complexion nothing could mend, but the Small Pox.


L. Plaus. Well, Sir, you may please to be merry; but, to put you out of all
doubt, Sir, she has received some Jewels from me, of value.


Nov. And Presents from me; besides what I presented her jantily, by way of
'Ombre, of three or four hundred pound value, which I Am, sure are the earnest
Pence for our Love bargain.


L. Plaus. Nay then, Sir, with your favor, and to make an end of all your
hopes, look you there, Sir, she has writ to me. --


[Deliver to each other their Letters. Nov. How! how! Well, well, and so she
has to me look you there. --


L. Plaus. What Is here!


Nov. How Is this?

Reads out. My dear Lord,
You Will excuse me, for breaking my word with you, since 'twas to oblige, not
offend you; for I am only gone abroad but to disappoint Novel, and meet you in
the Drawing Room; where I expect you, with as much impatience, as when I used
to suffer Novel's Visits, the most impertinent Fop, that ever affected the name
of a Wit, therefore not capable, I hope, to give you jealousy; for, for your
sake alone, you saw, I renounced an old Lover, and will do all the World. Burn
the Letter, but lay up the kindness of it in your heart, with your

OLIVIA.




Very fine! but pray let us see mine.


L. Plaus. I understand it not; but sure she cannot think so of me.


Nov. Reads the other Letter. HVmh! ha! -- meet -- for your sake -- umh --
quitted an old Lover -- World -- Burn -- in your heart, with your

OLIVIA.




Just the same, the names only altered


L. Plaus. Surely there must be some mistake; or some body has abused her, and
us.


Nov. Yes, you are abused, no doubt on it, my Lord; but I Will to White Hall, and
see.


L. Plaus. And I, where I shall find you are abused.


Nov. Where, if it be so, for our comfort, we cannot fail of meeting with
Fellow Sufferers enough; for, as Freeman said of another, she stands in the
Drawing Room, like the Glass, ready for all Comers to set their Gallantry by
her: and, like the Glass too, lets no man go from her, unsatisfi'd with himself.


[Ex. Ambo. Enter Olivia and Boy. Oliv. Both here, and just gone?


Boy. Yes, Madam.


Oliv. But are you sure neither saw you deliver the other a Letter?


Boy. Yes, yes, Madam, I am very sure.


Oliv. Go then to the Old Exchange, to Westminster, Holbourn, and all the other
places I told you of; I shall not need you these two hours: Be gone, and take
the Candle with you, and be sure you leave word again below, I am gone out, to
all that ask.


Boy. Yes, Madam.

[Exit.
Oliv. And my new Lover will not ask I Am sure; he has his Lesson, and cannot
miss me here, though in the dark: which I have purposely designed, as a remedy
against my blushing Gallant's modesty; for young Lovers, like game Cocks, are
made bolder, by being kept without light.


Enter her husband Vernish, as from a Journey. Ver. Where is she? Darkness
everywhere!


[Softly. Oliv. What, come before your time? my Soul! my Life! your haste has
augmented your kindness; and let me thank you for it thus, and thus --
[Embracing and kissing him.] And though (my Soul) the little time since you left
me, has seemed an Age to my impatience, sure it is yet but seven --


Ver. How! who is that you expected after seven?


Oliv Ha! my Husband returned! and have I been throwing away so many kind
Kisses on my Husband, and wronged my Lover already?


Ver. Speak, I say, who was it you expected after seven?


Oliv. What shall I say? -- oh -- [Aside. Why, it is but seven days, is it,
dearest, since you went out of Town? and I expected you not so soon.


Ver. No, sure, it is but five days since I left you.


Oliv. Pardon my impatience, dearest, I thought 'em seven at least.


Ver. Nay then --


Oliv. But, my life, you shall never stay half so long from me again; you
shall not, indeed, by this kiss, you shall not.


Ver. No, no; but why alone in the dark?


Oliv. Blame not my melancholy in your absence -- But, my Soul, since you went,
I have strange News to tell you: Manly is returned.


Ver. Manly returned! Fortune forbid.


Oliv. Met with the Dutch in the Channel, fought, sunk his ship, and all he
carried with him: he was here with me yesterday.


Ver. And did you own our Marriage to him?


Oliv. I told him I was married, to put an end to his love, and my trouble; but
to whom, is yet a secret kept from him, and all the World: And I have used him
so scurvily, his great spirit will never return, to reason it farther with me; I
have sent him to Sea again, I warrant.


Ver. 'Twas bravely done. And sure he will now hate the shore more than ever,
after so great a disappointment. Be you sure only to keep awhile our great
secret, till he be gone: in the mean time, I Will lead the easy honest Fool by
the Nose, as I used to do; and, whilst he stays, rail with him at thee; and,
when he is gone, laugh with thee at him. But have you his Cabinet of Jewels
safe? Part not with a Seed Pearl to him, to keep him from starving.


Oliv. Nor from hanging.


Ver. He cannot recover 'em, and, I think, will scorn to beg 'em again.


Oliv. But, my life, have you taken the thousand Guineys he left in my name,
out of the Goldsmiths hands?


Ver. Ay, ay, they are removed to another Goldsmiths.


Oliv. Ay but, my Soul, you had best have a care he find not where the money
is; for his present wants (as I Am informed) are such, as will make him
inquisitive enough.


Ver. You say true, and he knows the man too: but I Will remove it to morrow.


Oliv. To morrow! O do not stay till to morrow: go to night, immediately.


Ver. Now I think on it, you advise well, and I will go presently.


Oliv. Presently! instantly: I will not let you stay a jot.


Ver. I will then, though I return not home till twelve.


Oliv. Nay, though not till morning, with all my heart: go, dearest, I am
impatient till you are gone -- [Thrusts him out. So, I have at once now brought
about those two grateful businesses, which all prudent Women do together,
secured money and pleasure; and now all interruptions of the last are removed.
Go Husband, and come up Friend; just the Bucket's in the Well: the absence of
one brings the other; but I hope, like them too, they will not meet in the way,
justle, and clash together. Enter Fidelia, and Manly treading softly, and
staying behind at some distance. So, are you come? (but not the Husband-bucket,
I hope, again.) Who Is there? my dearest?


[Softly. Fid. My life --


Oliv. Right, right: where are thy lips? here, take the dumb, and best
Welcomes, Kisses and Embraces; it is not a time for idle words. In a a Duel of
Love, as in others, Parlying shows basely. Come, we are alone; and now the Word
is only Satisfaction, and defend not thy self.


Man. How Is this? Wuh, she makes Love like a Devil in a Play; and in this
darkness, which conceals her Angels face; if I were apt to be afraid, I should
think her a Devil.


[Aside. Oliv. What, you traverse ground, young Gentleman.


[ Fidelia avoiding her. Fid. I take breath only.


Man. Good Heavens! how was I deceived!


[Aside. Oliv. Nay, you are a Coward; what are you afraid of the fierceness of
my Love?


Fid. Yes, Madam, lest its violence might presage its change; and I must needs
be afraid you would leave me quickly, who could desert so brave a Gentleman as
Manly.


Oliv. O! name not his Name; for in a time of stolen joys, as this is, the
filthy name of Husband were not a more alaying sound.


Man. There Is some comfort yet.

[Aside.
Fid. But did you not love him?


Oliv. Never. How could you think it?


Fid. Because he thought it, who is a Man of that sense, nice discerning, and
diffidency, that I should think it hard to deceive him.


Oliv. No; he that distrusts most the World, trusts most to himself, and is but
the more easily deceived, because he thinks he cannot be deceived: his cunning
is like the Coward's Sword, by which he is oftener worsted, than defended.


Fid. Yet, sure, you used no common Art, to deceive him.


Oliv. I knew he loved his own singular moroseness so well, as to dote upon any
Copy of it; wherefore I feigned an hatred to the World too, that he might love
me in earnest: but, if it had been hard to deceive him, I Am sure 'twere much
harder to love him. A dogged, ill-manner'd --


Fid. Do You hear her, Sir? pray hear her.


[Aside, to Manly. Oliv. Surly, untractable, snarling Brute! he! a Masty Dog
were as fit a thing to make a Gallant of.


Man. Ay, a Goat, or Monky were fitter for thee.


[Aside. Fid. I must confess, for my part, (though my Rival) I cannot but say, he
has a Manly handsomness in's face and mien.


Oliv. So has a Saracen in the sign.


Fid. Is proper, and well made,


Oliv. As a Drayman.


Fid. Has Wit,


Oliv. He rails at all Mankind.


Fid. And undoubted Courage,


Oliv. Like the Hangman's, can murder a Man when his hands are tied. He has
Cruelty indeed; which is no more Courage, than his Railing is Wit.


Man. Thus Women, and Men like Women, are too hard for us, when they think we
do not hear 'em; and Reputation, like other Mistresses, is never true to a Man
in his absence.

[Aside.
Fid. He is --


Oliv. Pr'ythee no more of him; I thought I had satisfied you enough before,
that he could never be a Rival for you to apprehend; and you need not be more
assured of my aversion to him, but by the last testimony of my love to you:
which I am ready to give you. Come, my Soul, this way --


[ Pulls Fidelia. Fid. But, Madam, what could make you dissemble Love to him,
when 'twas so hard a thing for you, and flatter his Love to you?


Oliv. That which makes all the World flatter and dissemble, 'twas his Money: I
had a real passion for that. Yet I loved not that so well, as for it to take
him; for, as soon as I had his Money, I hastened his departure: like a Wife,
who, when she has made the most of a dying Husband's breath, pulls away the
Pillow.


Man. Damned Money! it is Master's potent Rival still; and, like a fancy Pimp,
corrupts, it self, the Mistress it procures for us.


Oliv. But I did not think with you, my life, to pass my time in talking. Come
hither, come; yet stay, till I have locked a door in the other Room, that might
chance to let us in some interruption; which reciting Poets, or losing
Gamesters, fear not more than I at this time do.

[Exit Oliv.
Fid. Well, I hope you are now satisfied, Sir, and will be gone, to think of
your Revenge.


Man. No, I am not satisfied, and must stay to be Revenged.


Fid. How, Sir? You Will use no violence to her, I hope, and forfeit your own
life, to take away hers? That were no Revenge.


Man. No, no, you need not fear: my Revenge shall only be upon her honor, not
her life.


Fid. How, Sir? her honor? O Heavens! Consider, Sir, she has no honor. Do You
call that Revenge? Can you think of such a thing? But reflect, Sir, how she
hates and loathes you.


Man. Yes, so much she hates me, that it would be a Revenge sufficient, to make
her accessory to my pleasure, and then let her know it.


Fid. No, Sir, no; to be Revenged on her now, were to disappoint her. Pray,
Sir, let us be gone.


[ Pulls Manly. Man. Hold off. What, you are my Rival then; and therefore you
shall stay, and keep the door for me, whilst I go in for you: but, when I Am
gone, if you dare to stir off from this very Board, or breathe the least
murmuring Accent, I Will cut her Throat first, and if you love her, you will not
venture her life; nay, then I Will cut your Throat too; and I know you love your
own life at least.


Fid. But, Sir, good Sir.


Man. Not a word more, lest I begin my Revenge on her, by killing you.


Fid. But are you sure it is Revenge, that makes you do this? how can it be?


Man. Whist.


Fid. It Is a strange Revenge indeed.


Man. If you make me stay, I shall keep my word, and begin with you: no more.


[Exit Manly, at the same door Olivia went. Manet Fidelia. Fid. O Heavens! is
there not punishment enough
In loving well, if you will have't a Crime;
But you must add fresh Torments daily to it,
And punish us like peevish Rivals still,
Because we fain would find a Heaven here?
But did there never any love like me,
That, untried Tortures, you must find me out?
Others, at worst, you force to kill themselves;
But I must be Self-murd'ress of my love,
Yet will not grant me power to end my life,
My cruel life; for when a Lover's hopes
Are dead, and gone, life is unmerciful.
[Sits down and weeps.
Enter Manly to her. Man. I have thought better on it, I must not discover my
self now, I am without Witnesses; for if I barely should publish it, she would
deny it with as much impudence, as she would act it again with this young
Fellow here. Where are you?


Fid. Here -- oh -- now I suppose we may be gone.


Man. I will, but not you; you must stay, and act the second part of a Lover:
that is, talk kindness to her.


Fid. Not I, Sir.


Man. No disputing, Sir, you must: it is necessary to my design, of coming again
to morrow night.


Fid. What, can you come again then hither?


Man. Yes, and you must make the appointment, and an Apology for your leaving
her so soon; for I have said not a word to her, but have kept your counsel, as
I expect you should do mine: do this faithfully, and I promise you here, you
shall run my Fortune still, and we will never part as long as we live; but, if
you do not do it, expect not to live.


Fid. It Is hard, Sir; but such a consideration will make it easier: you will not
forget your promise, Sir?


Man. No, by Heavens. But I hear her coming.

[Exit.
Enter Olivia to Fidelia. Oliv. Where is my life? run from me already! you do
not love me, dearest; nay, you are angry with me; for you would not so much as
speak a kind word to me within: What was the reason?


Fid. I was transported too much.


Oliv. That Is kind; but come, my Soul, what make you here? let us go in again;
we may be surpised in this Room, it is so near the stairs.


Fid. No, we shall hear the better here, if any body should come up.


Oliv. Nay, I assure you, we shall be secure enough within: Come, come --


Fid. I am sick, and troubled with a sudden diziness; cannot stir yet.


Oliv. Come, I have spirits within.


Fid. Oh! -- don't you hear a noise, Madam?


Oliv. No, no, there is none: Come, come.


[Pulls her. Fid. Indeed there is; and I love you so much, I must have a care
of your Honor, if you wo' not, and go; but to come to you to morrow night, if
you please.


Oliv. With all my Soul; but you must not go yet: Come, pr'ythee.


Fid. Oh! -- I am now sicker, and am afraid of one of my Fits.


Oliv. What Fits?


Fid. Of the Falling Sickness: and I lie generally an hour in a trance;
therefore pray consider your honor, for the sake of my love, and let me go,
that I may return to you often.


Oliv. But will you be sure then to come to morrow night?


Fid. Yes.


Oliv. Swear.


Fid. By our past kindness.


Oliv. Well, go your ways then, if you will, you naughty Creature you. [ Ex.
Fidel. These young Lovers, with their fears and modesty, make themselves as bad
as old ones to us; and I apprehend their bashfulness, more than their tatling.


Fidelia returns. Fid. O, Madam, we are undone! there was a Gentleman upon the
stairs, coming up, with a Candle; which made me retire. Look you, here he comes!


Enter Vernish, and his Man with a Light. Oliv. How! my Husband! Oh, undone
indeed! This way.

[Ex.
Ver. Ha! You shall not escape me so, Sir.


[ Stops Fidelia. Fid. O Heavens! more fears, plagues and torments yet in store!


[Aside. Ver. Come, Sir, I guess what your business was here; but this must be
your business now. Draw.


[Draws. Fid. Sir --


Ver. No Expostulations: I shall not care to hear often. Draw.


Fid. Good Sir.


Ver. How, you Rascal! not Courage to draw, yet durst do me the greatest injury
in the World? Thy Cowardice shall not save thy life.


[Offers to run at Fidelia. Fid. O hold, Sir, and send but your Servant down,
and I Will satisfy you, Sir, I could not injure you, as you imagine.


Ver. Leave the light, and be gone. [Ex. Serve. Now quickly, Sir, what you have to
say, or --


Fid. I am a Woman, Sir, a very unfortunate Woman.


Ver. How! A very handsome Woman I Am sure then: here are Witnesses often too, I
confess -- [Pulls off her Peruke, and feels her breasts. (Well, I Am glad to
find the Tables turned, my Wife in more danger of Cuckolding, than I was.

[Aside.
Fid. Now, Sir, I hope you are so much a Man of Honor, as to let me go, now I
have satisfied you, Sir.


Ver. When you have satisfied me, Madam, I will.


Fid. I hope, Sir, you are too much a Gentleman, to urge those secrets from a
Woman, which concern her Honor: You may guess my misfortune to be Love, by my
disguise; but a pair of Breeches could not wrong you, Sir.


Ver. I may believe Love has changed your outside, which could not wrong me;
but why did my Wife run away?


Fid. I know not, Sir; perhaps because she would not be forced to discover me
to you, or to guide me from your suspicions, that you might not discover me
your self: which ungentleman-like curiosity I hope you will cease to have, and
let me go.


Ver. Well, Madam, if I must not know who you are, 'twill suffice for me only
to know certainly what you are: which you must not deny me. Come, there is a
Bed within, the proper Rack for Lovers; and if you are a Woman, there you can
keep no secrets, you will tell me there all unasked. Come.


[Pulls her. Fid. Oh! what do you mean? Help, oh --


Ver. I Will show you; but it is in vain to cry out: no one dares help you, for I
am Lord here.


Fid. Tyrant here; but if you are Master of this House, which I have taken for
a Sanctuary, do not violate it your self.


Ver. No, I Will preserve you here, and nothing shall hurt you, and will be as
true to you, as your disguise; but you must trust me then. Come, come.


Fid. Oh^ oh! rather than you shall drag me to a death so horrid, and so
shameful, I ll die here a thousand deaths: but you do not look like a Ravisher,
Sir.


Ver. Nor you like one would put me to it, but if you will --


Fid. Oh! oh! help, help --


Enter Servant. Ver. You saucy Rascal, how durst you come in, when you heard a
Woman squeak? that should have been your Cue to shut the door.


Ser. I come, Sir, to let you know, the Alderman coming home immediately after
you were at his house, has sent his Casheer with the money, according to your
Note.


Ver. Dam his money! money never came to any sure unseasonably, till now. Bid
him stay.


Ser. He says, he cannot a moment.


Ver. Receive it you then.


Ser. He says, he must have your Receipt for it: he is in haste, for I hear him
coming up, Sir.


Ver. Dam him. Help me in here then with this dishonorer of my Family.


Fid. Oh! oh!


Ser. You say she is a Woman, Sir.


Ver. No matter, Sir: must you prate?


Fid. Oh Heavens! is there --


[They thrust her in, and lock the door. Ver. Stay there, my Prisoner; you have
a short Reprieve.


I Will fetch the Gold, and that she cannot resist;
For with a full hand it is we Ravish best.
[Ex. Finis Actus quarti.
ACT. V. Scene I.
Eliza's Lodging. Enter Olivia, and Eliza. Oliv. AH, Cousin, nothing troubles
me, but that I have given the malicious World its Revenge, and Reason now to
talk as freely of me, as I used to do of it.


Eli. Faith, then, let not that trouble you; for, to be plain, Cousin, the
World cannot talk worse of you, than it did before.


Oliv. How, Cousin? I Would have you to know, before this faux pas, this trip of
mine, the World could not talk of me.


Eli. Only, that you mind other peoples actions so much, that you take no care
of your own, but to hide 'em; that, like a Thief, because you know your self
most guilty, you impeach your Fellow Criminals first, to clear your self.


Oliv. O wicked World!


Eli. That you pretend an aversion to all Mankind, in public, only that their
Wives and Mistresses may not be jealous, and hinder you of their conversation,
in private.


Oliv. Base World!


Eli. That, abroad, you fasten quarrels upon innocent men, for talking of you,
only to bring 'em to ask you pardon at home, and to become dear Friends with
'em, who were hardly your acquaintance before.


Oliv. Abominable World!


Eli. That you condemn the obscenity of modern Plays, only that you may not be
censured for never missing the most obscene of the old ones.


Oliv. Damned World!


Eli. That you deface the nudities of Pictures, and little Statues, only
because they are not real.


Oliv. O fie, fie, fie; hideous, hideous, Cousin! the obscenity of their
Censures makes me blush.


Eli. The truth of 'em, the naughty World would say now.


Enter Lettice hastily. Let. O! Madam, here is that Gentleman coming up, who
now you say is my Master.


Oliv. O! Cousin, whither shall I run? protect me, or --


[ Olivia runs away, and stands at a distance. Enter Vernish. Ver. Nay, nay,
come --


Oliv. O, Sir, forgive me.


Ver. Yes, yes, I can forgive you being alone in the dark with a Woman in Man's
clothes; but have a care of a Man in Woman's clothes.


Oliv. What does he mean? he dissembles, only to get me into his power: Or has
my dear Friend made him believe he was a Woman? My Husband may be deceived by
him, but I Am sure I was not.


[Aside. Ver. Come, come, you need not have lay'n out of your House for this;
but perhaps you were afraid, when I was warm with suspicions, you must have
discovered who she was: And pr'ythee, may I not know it?


Oliv. She was -- (I hope he has been deceived: and, since my Lover has played
the Card, I must not renounce.)


[Aside. Ver. Come, what is the matter with thee? If I must not know who she is,
I Am satisfied without. Come hither.


Oliv. Sure you do know her; she has told you her self, I suppose.


Ver. No, I might have known her better, but that I was interrupted, by the
Goldsmith you know, and was forced to lock her into your Chamber, to keep her
from his sight; but, when I returned, I found she was got away, by tying the
Window-curtains to the Balcony, by which she slid down into the street: for,
you must know, I jested with her, and made her believe I Would ravish her; which
she apprehended, it seems, in earnest.


Oliv. Then she got from you?


Ver. Yes.


Oliv. And is quite gone?


Ver. Yes.


Oliv. I Am glad on it -- otherwise you had ravished her, Sir? but how dare you
go so far, as to make her believe you would ravish her? let me understand that,
Sir. What! there is guilt in your face, you blush too: nay, then you did ravish
her, you did, you base Fellow. What, ravish a Woman in the first Month of our
Marriage! It Is a double injury to me, thou base ungrateful Man; wrong my Bed
already, Villain! I could tear out those false Eyes, barbarous unworthy Wretch.


Eli. So, so! --


Ver. Pr^ythee hear, my Dear.


Oliv. I will never hear you, my plague, my torment.


Ver. I swear -- pr^ythee hear me.


Oliv I have heard already too many of your false Oaths and Vows, especially
your last in the Church. O wicked Man! And wretched Woman that I was! I wish I
had then sunk down into a Grave, rather than to have given you my hand, to be
led to your loathsome Bed. Oh-oh-


[Seems to weep. Ver. So, very fine! just a Marriage quarrel! which, though it
generally begins by the Wives fault, yet, in the conclusion, it becomes the
Husbands; and whosoever offends at first, he only is sure to ask pardon at
last. My Dear --


Oliv. My Devil --


Ver. Come, pr'ythee be appeased, and go home; I have bespoken our Supper
betimes: for I could not eat, till I found you. Go, I Will give you all kind of
satisfactions; and one, which uses to be a reconciling one, Two hundred of
those Guineys I received last Night, to do what you will with.


Oliv. What, would you pay me for being your Baud?


Ver. Nay, pr'ythee no more; go, and I Will thoroughly satisfy you, when I come
home; and then, too, we will have a fit of laughter, at Manly, whom I am going
to find at the Cock in Bow-street, where, I hear, he dined. Go, dearest, go
home.


Eli. A very pretty turn, indeed, this!

[Aside.
Ver. Now, Cousin, since by my Wife I have that honor, and privilege of
calling you so, I have something to beg of you too; which is, not to take
notice of our Marriage, to any whatever, yet awhile, for some reasons very
important to me: and next; that you will do my Wife the honor to go home with
her, and me the favor, to use that power you have with her, in our
reconcilement.


Eli. That, I dare promise, Sir, will be no hard matter. Your Servant. [ Ex.
Vernish. Well, Cousin, this I confess was reasonable hypocrisy; you were the
better for it.


Oliv. What hypocrisy?


Eli. Why, this last deceit of your Husband was lawful, since in your own
defense.


Oliv. What deceit? I Would have you to know, I never deceived my Husband.


Eli. You do not understand me, sure; I say, this was an honest come-off, and a
good one: but 'twas a sign your Gallant had had enough of your conversation,
since he could so dexterously cheat your Husband, in passing for a Woman?


Oliv. What do you mean, once more, with my Gallant, and passing for a Woman?


Eli. What do you mean? You see your Husband took him for a Woman.


Oliv. Whom?


Eli. Hey-day! Why, the Man he found you with, for whom last Night you were so
much afraid; and who you told me --


Oliv. Lord, you rave sure!


Eli. Why, did not you tell me last night --


Oliv. I know not what I might tell you last night, in a fright.


Eli. Ay, what was that fright for? for a Woman? besides, were you not afraid
to see your Husband just now? I warrant, only for having been found with a
Woman! nay, did you not just now too own your false step, or trip, as you
called it? which was with a Woman too! Fie, this fooling is so insipid, it is
offensive.


Oliv. And fooling with my Honor will be more offensive. Did you not hear my
Husband say, he found me with a Woman, in Man's clothes? And do you think he does
not know a Man from a Woman?


Eli. Not so well, I Am sure, as you do; therefore I Would rather take your word.


Oliv. What, you grow scurrilous, and are I find more censorious, than the
World! I must have a care of you, I see.


Eli. No, you need not fear yet, I Will keep your secret.


Oliv. My secret! I Would have you to know, I have no need of Confidents, though you
value your self upon being a good one.


Eli. O admirable confidence! You show more in denying your wickedness, than
other people in glorying in it.


Oliv. Confidence, to me! to me such language! nay, then I Will never see your
face again. (I Will quarrel with her, that people may never believe I was in her
power; but take for malice all the truth she may speak against me. [Aside.]
Lettice, where are you? let us be gone from this censorious, ill Woman.


Eli. Nay, thou shall stay a little, to damn thy self quite. [Aside. One word
first, pray Madam; can you swear that whom your Husband found you with --


Oliv. Swear! ay, that whosoever 'twas that stole up, unknown, into my Room,
when 'twas dark, I know not whether Man or Woman, by Heavens, by all that is
good; or, may I never more have joys here, or in the other World: nay, may I
eternally --


Eli. Be damned. So, so, you are damned enough already, by your Oaths; and I
enough confirmed: and now you may please to be gone. Yet take this advice with
you, in this Plain-dealing Age, to leave off forswearing your self; for when
people hardly think the better of a Woman for her real modesty, why should you
put that great constraint upon your self to feign it?


Oliv. O hideous! hideous advice! Let us go out of the hearing of it: She will
spoil us, Lettice.


[Ex. Oliv. and Let. at one door, Eli at the other. The Scene changes to the
Cock in Bow-street. A Table, and Bottles. Manly and Fidelia. Man. How! saved
her Honor, by making her Husband believe you were a Woman! 'twas well, but
hard enough to do sure.


Fid. We were interrupted, before he could contradict me.


Man. But cannot you tell me, do you say, what kind of man he was?


Fid. I was so frightened, I confess, I can give no other account of him, but
that he was pretty tall, round faced, and one I Am sure I never had seen before.


Man. But she, you say, made you swear to return to night?


Fid. But I have since sworn, never to go near her again; for the Husband would
murder me, or worse, if he caught me again.


Man. No, I Will go with you, and defend you to night, and then I Will swear too,
never to go near her again.


Fid. Nay, indeed Sir, I will not go, to be accessory to your death too:
besides, what should you go again, Sir, for?


Man. No disputing, or advice, Sir; you have reason to know I am unalterable.
Go, therefore, presently, and write her a Note to enquire if her assignation
with you holds; and if not to be at her own house, where else? and be
importunate to gain admittance to her to night: let your Messenger, ere he
deliver your Letter, enquire first, if her Husband be gone out. Go, it is now
almost six of the clock; I expect you back here before seven, with leave to see
her then. Go, do this dext'rously, and expect the performance of my last nights
promise, never to part with you.


Fid. Ay, Sir: but will you be sure to remember that?


Man. Did I ever break my word? go, no more replies, or doubts. [ Ex. Fidel.
Enter Freeman, to Manly. Where have thou been?


Free. In the next Room, with my Lord Plausible and Novel.


Man. Ay, we came hither, because 'twas a private house; but with thee indeed
no house can be private, for thou have that pretty quality of the familiar Fops
of the Town, who, in an eating house, always keep company with all people
in it, but those they came with.


Free. I went into their Room, but to keep them, and my own Fool the Squire,
out of your Room; but you shall be peevish now, because you have no Money: but
why the Devil will not you write to those we were speaking of? since your modesty,
or your spirit, will not suffer you to speak to 'em, to lend you Money, why
will not you try 'em at last, that way?


Man. Because I know 'em already, and can bear Want, better than Denials; nay,
than Obligations.


Free. Deny you! they cannot: all of 'em have been your intimate Friends.


Man. No, they have been people only I have obliged particularly.


Free. Very well; therefore you ought to go to 'em the rather sure.


Man. No, no: those you have obliged most, most certainly avoid you, when you
can oblige 'em no longer; and they take your Visits like so many Duns: Friends,
like Mistresses, are avoided, for Obligations past.


Free. Pshaw! but most of 'em are your Relations; Men of great Fortune, and
Honor.


Man. Yes; but Relations have so much Honor, as to think Poverty taints the
blood; and disown their wanting Kindred: believing, I suppose, that, as Riches
at first makes a Gentleman, the want of 'em degrades him. But, damn 'em, now
I Am poor, I Will anticipate their contempt, and disown them.


Free. But you have many a Female acquaintance, whom you have been liberal to,
who may have a heart to refund to you a little, if you would ask it: they are
not all Olivia's.


Man. Dam thee! how could thou think of such a thing? I would as soon rob my
Footman of his Wages: Besides, 'twere in vain too; for a Wench is like a Box in
an Ordinary, receives all peoples Money easily; but there is no getting, nay
shaking any out again: and he that fills it, is sure never to keep the Key.


Free. Well, but noble Captain, would you make me believe that you, who know
half the Town, have so many Friends, and have obliged so many, cannot borrow
fifty or an hundred pound?


Man. Why noble Lieutenant, you who know all the Town, and call all you know
Friends, methinks should not wonder at it; since you find Ingratitude too: for
how many Lords Families (though descended from Blacksmiths, or Tinkers) have thou
called Great, and Illustrious? how many ill Tables call good eating? how many
noisie Coxcombs, Wits? how many pert Coaching Cowards, stout? how many taudry
affected Rogues, well dressed? how many Perukes admired? and how many ill Verses
applauded? and yet can not borrow a shilling; do thou expect I, who always
spoke truth, should?


Free. Nay, now you think you have paid me; but hark you, Captain, I have heard
of a thing called grinning Honor, but never of starving Honor.


Man. Well, but it has been the fate of some brave Men: and if they wo' not
give me a Ship again, I can go starve any where, with a Musket on my shoulder.


Free. Give you a Ship! why, you will not solicit it.


Man. If I have not solicited it by my services, I know no other way.


Free. Your Servant, Sir: nay then I Am satisfied, I must solicit my Widow the
closer, and run the desperate fortune of Matrimony on shore.

[Exit.
Enter, to Manly, Vernish. Man. How! -- Nay, here is a Friend indeed; and he
that has him in his arms, can know no wants.


[Embraces Vernish. Ver. Dear Sir! and he that is in your arms, is secure from
all fears whatever; nay, our Nation is secure by your defeat at Sea, and the
Dutch that fought against you, have proved enemies to themselves only, in
bringing you back to us.


Man. Fie, fie; this from a Friend? and yet from any other 'twere unsufferable:
I thought I should never have taken any thing ill from you.


Ver. A Friends privilege is to speak his mind, though it be taken ill.


Man. But your tongue need not tell me you think too well of me; I have found
it from your heart, which spoke in actions, your unalterable heart: but Olivia
is false, my Friend, which I suppose is no News to you.


Ver. He Is in the right on it.

[Aside.
Man. But could thou not keep her true to me?


Ver. Not for my heart, Sir.


Man. But could you not perceive it at all, before I went? could she so deceive
us both?


Ver. I must confess, the first time I knew it, was three days after your
departure, when she received the Money you had left in Lombard Street, in her
name; and her tears did not hinder her it seems from counting that. You would
trust her with all, like a true generous Lover!


Man. And she, like a mean Jilting --


Ver. Traytrous --


Man. Base --


Ver. Damned --


Man. Covetous --


Ver. Mercenary Whore -- (I can hardly hold from laughing)

[Aside.
Man. Ay, a Mercenary Whore indeed; for she made me pay her, before I lay with
her.


Ver. How! -- Why, have you lay'n with her?


Man. Ay, ay.


Ver. Nay, she deserves you should report it at least, though you have not.


Man. Report it! by Heaven, it is true.


Ver. How! sure not.


Man. I do not use to lie, nor you to doubt me.


Ver. When?


Man. Last night, about seven or eight of the clock.


Ver. Ha! -- Now I remember, I thought she spoke as if she expected some other,
rather than me: a confounded Whore indeed!

[Aside.
Man. But, what, thou wonder'st at it! nay, you seem to be angry too.


Ver. I cannot but be enraged against her, for her usage of you: damned,
infamous, common Jade.


Man. Nay, her Cuckold, who first Cuckolded me in my Money, shall not laugh all
himself; we will do him reason, shall not we?


Ver. Ay, ay.


Man. But thou do not, for so great a Friend, take pleasure enough in your
Friends Revenge, methinks.


Ver. Yes, yes; I Am glad to know it, since you have lay'n with her.


Man. Thou can not tell me who that Rascal, her Cuckold, is?


Ver. No


Man. She would keep it from you, I suppose.


Ver. Yes, yes --


Man. Thou would laugh, if thou knewst but all the circumstances of my having
her. Come, I ll tell thee.


Ver. Dam her; I care not to hear any more of her.


Man. Faith, thou shall. You must know --


Enter Freeman backwards, endeavoring to keep out Novel, Lord Plausible, Jerry
and Oldfox, who all press in upon him. Free. I tell you, he has a Wench with
him, and would be private.


Man. Dam 'em! a Man cannot open a Bottle, in these eating houses, but presently
you have these impudent, intruding, buzzing Flies and Insects, in your Glass.
-- Well, I ll tell thee all anon. In the mean time, pr'ythee go to her, but not
from me, and try if you can get her to lend me but an hundred pound of my
Money, to supply my present wants; for I suppose there is no recovering any of
it by Law.


Ver Not any; think not of it: nor by this way neither.


Man. Go, try, at least.


Ver. I Will go; but I can satisfy you before hand, 'twill be to no purpose:
You Will no more find a refunding Wench --


Man. Than a refunding Lawyer; indeed their Fees alike scarce ever return:
however, try her, put it to her.


Ver. Ay, ay, I ll try her, put it to her home, with a vengeance.

[Exit Vernish.
Manent caeteri. Nov Nay, you shall be our Judge, Manly. Come, Major, I Will
speak it to your teeth: if people provoke me to say bitter things, to their
faces, they must take what follows; though, like my Lord Plausible, I Would rather
do it civilly behind their backs.


Man. Nay, thou art a dangerous Rogue, I Have heard, behind a Man's back.


L. Plaus. You wrong him sure, noble Captain; he would do a Man no more harm
behind his back, than to his face.


Free. I am of my Lord's mind.


Man. Yes, a Fool, like a Coward, is the more to be feared behind a Man's back,
more than a witty Man: for, as a Coward is more bloody than a brave Man, a Fool
is more malicious than a Man of Wit.


Nov. A Fool, Tar -- a Fool! nay, thou art a brave Sea-judge of Wit! a Fool!
pr'ythee when did you ever find me want something to say, as you do often?


Man. Nay, I confess, thou art always talking, roaring, or making a noise;
that I Will say for thee.


Nov. Well, and is talking sign of a Fool?


Man. Yes, always talking; especially too if it be loud and fast, is the sign
of a Fool.


Nov. Pshaw! Talking is like Fencing, the quicker the better; run 'em down, run
'em down; no matter for parrying; push on still, sa, sa, sa: no matter whether
you argue in form, push in guard, or no.


Man. Or hit, or no; I think thou always talk without thinking; Novel.


Nov. Ay, ay; studied Play's the worse, to follow the Allegory, as the old
Pedant says.


Old. A young Fop!


Man. I ever thought the Man of most Wit, had been, like him of most Money, who
has no vanity in showing it everywhere; whilst the beggarly pusher of his
Fortune, has all he has about him still, only to show.


Nov. Well, Sir, and makes a very pretty show in the World, let me tell you;
nay, a better than your close Hunks: A Pox, give me ready Money in Play; what
care I for a Man's reputation? what are we the better for your substantial
thrifty Curmudgeon in Wit, Sir?


Old. Thou art a profuse young Rogue indeed.


Nov. So much for talking; which I think I have proved a mark of Wit; and so is
Railing, Roaring, and making a noise: for, Railing is Satyr, you know; and
Roaring, and making a noise, Humor.


Enter to them, Fidelia, taking Manly aside, and showing him a paper. Fid. The
hour is betwixt seven and eight exactly: it is now half an hour after six.


Man. Well, go then to the Piazza, and wait for me; as soon as it is quite
dark, I Will be with you: I must stay here yet a while, for my Friend. But is
Railing Satyr, Novel?


[Ex. Fidel. Free. And Roaring, and making a noise, Humor?


Nov. What, will not you confess there is Humor in Roaring, and making a noise?


Free. No.


Nov. Nor in cutting Napkins, and Hangings?


Man. No, sure.


Nov. Dull Fops!


Old. O Rogue, Rogue, insipid Rogue! Nay, Gentlemen, allow him those things for
Wit; for his parts lie only that way.


Nov. Peace, old Fool, I wonder not at thee; but that young Fellows should be
so dull, as to say, there is no Humor in making a noise, and breaking Windows! I
tell you, there is Wit and Humor too, in both: And a Wit is as well known by his
Frolic, as by his Simile.


Old. Pure Rogue! there is your modern Wit for you! Wit, and Humor, in breaking
of Windows! There Is Mischief, if you will; but no Wit, or Humor.


Nov. Pry'thee, pr'ythee peace, old Fool. I tell you, where there is Mischief,
there is Wit. Don't we esteem the Monky a Wit amongst Beasts, only because he is
mischievous? And let me tell you, as good Nature is a sign of a Fool, being
Mischievous is a sign of Wit.


Old. O Rogue, Rogue! pretend to be a Wit, by doing Mischief and Railing!


Nov. Why, thou, old Fool, have no other pretense to the name of a Wit, but by
Railing at new Plays.


Old. Thou, by Railing at that facetious, noble way of Wit, quibling.


Nov. Thou call'st thy dullness, gravity; and thy dozing, thinking.


Old. You, Sir, your dullness, spleen: And you talk much, and say nothing.


Nov. Thou read'st much, and understand'st nothing, Sir.


Old. You laugh loud, and break no Jest.


Nov. You rail, and no body hangs himself: And thou have nothing of the Satyr,
but in thy face.


Old. And you have no jest, but your face, Sir.


Nov. Thou art an illiterate Pedant.


Old. Thou art a Fool, with a bad Memory.


Man. Come, a Pox on you both, you have done like Wits now; for you Wits, when
you quarrel, never give over, till you prove one another Fools.


Nov. And you Fools have never any occasion of laughing at us Wits, but when we
quarrel: therefore, let us be Friends, Oldfox.


Man. They are such Wits as thou art, who make the name of a Wit as scandalous,
as that of Bully; and signify a loud-laughing, talking, incorrigible Coxcomb;
as Bully, a roaring, hardened Coward.


Free. And would have his noise and laughter pass for Wit; as the other his
huffing and blustering, for Courage.


Enter Vernish. Man. Gentlemen, with your leave, here is one I would speak
with, and I have nothing to say to you.


[Puts 'em out of the Room. Manent Manly, Vernish. Ver. I told you 'twas in
vain, to think of getting Money out of her: she says, if a shilling would
do it, she would not save you from starving, or hanging, or what you would think
worse, begging or flattering; and rails so at you, one would not think you had
lay'n with her,


Man. O, Friend, never trust, for that matter, a Woman's railing; for she is no
less a dissembler in her hatred, than her love: And as her fondness of her
Husband is a sign he is a Cuckold, her railing at another Man is a sign she lies
with him.


Ver. He Is in the right on it: I know not what to trust to.

[Aside.
Man. But you did not take any notice of it to her, I hope?


Ver. So! -- Sure he is afraid I should have disproved him, by an enquiry of
her: all may be well yet.

[Aside.
Man. What have thou in thy head, that makes thee seem so unquiet?


Ver. Only this base, impudent Woman's falsness: I cannot put her out of my head.


Man. O my dear Friend, be not you too sensible of my wrongs, for then I shall
feel 'em too, with more pain, and think 'em unsufferable. Dam her, her Money,
and that ill-natured Whore too, Fortune her self; but if thou would ease a
little my present trouble, pr'ythee go borrow me somewhere else, some Money: I
can trouble thee.


Ver. You trouble me indeed, most sensibly, when you command me any thing I
cannot do: I have lately lost a great deal of Money at Play, more than I can
yet pay; so that not only my Money, but my Credit too is gone, and know not
where to borrow; but could rob a Church for you. (Yet would rather end your
wants, by cutting your throat.)


[Aside. Man. Nay, then I doubly feel my poverty, since I Am incapable of
supplying thee.


[ Embraces Vernish. Ver. But, methinks, she that granted you the last favor,
(as they call it) should not deny you any thing --


Nov. Hey, Tarpaulin, have you done?


[ Novel looks in, and retires again. Ver. I understand not that point of
kindness, I confess.


Man. No, thou do not understand it, and I have not time to let you know all
now, for these Fools, you see, will interrupt us; but anon, at Supper, we'll
laugh at leisure together, at Olivia's Cuckold; who took a young Fellow, that
goes between his Wife and me, for a Woman.


Ver. Ha!


Man. Senseless, easy Rascal! 'twas no wonder she chose him for a Husband; but
she thought him, I thank her, fittter than me, for that blind, bearing Office.


Ver. I could not be deceived in that long Woman's hair tied up behind; nor
those infallible proofs, her pouting, swelling breasts: I have handled too many
sure not to know 'em.

[Aside.
Man. What, you wonder the Fellow could be such a blind Coxcomb!


Ver. Yes, yes --


[ Novel looks in again, and retires. Nov. Nay, pr'ythee come to us, Manly;
Gad, all the fine things one says, in their company, are lost, without thee.


Man. Away, Fop; I Am busy yet. You see we cannot talk here at our ease;
besides, I must be gone immediately, in order to meeting with Olivia again to
night.


Ver. To night! it cannot be sure --


Man. I had an appointment just now from her.


Ver. For what time?


Man. At half an hour after seven precisely.


Ver. Don't you apprehend the Husband?


Man. He! sniveling Gull! he a thing to be feared! a Husband, the tamest of
creatures!


Ver. Very fine!

[Aside.
Man. But, pr'ythee, in the mean time, go try to get me some Money. Though thou
art too modest to borrow for thy self, thou can do any thing for me I know.
Go; for I must be gone to Olivia: go, and meet me here anon. -- Freeman, where
are you!

[ Ex. Manly.
Manet Vernish. Ver. Ay, I Will meet with you, I warrant; but it shall be at
Olivia's. Sure it cannot be; she denies it so calmly, and with that honest,
modest assurance, it cannot be true -- and he does not use to lie -- but belying
a Woman, when she will not be kind, is the only lie a brave Man will least
scruple. But then the Woman in Man's clothes, whom he calls a Man! - Well, but,
by her Breasts, I know her to be a Woman: -- But then, again, his appointment
from her, to meet with him to night! I am distracted more with doubt, than
jealousy. Well, I have no way to disabuse or revenge my self, but by going
home immediately, putting on a riding Suit, and pretending to my Wife the same
business which carry^d me out of Town last, requires me again to go Post to
Oxford to night; then, if the appointment he boasts of be true, it is sure to
hold; and I shall have an opportunity either of clearing her, or revenging my
self on both. Perhaps, she is his Wench, of an old date, and I am his Cully,
whilst I think him mine; and he has seemed to make his Wench rich, only that I
might take her off of his hands: or if he has but lately lay'n with her, he
must needs discover, by her, my treachery to him; which I Am sure he will
revenge with my death, and which I must prevent with his, if it were only but
for fear of his too just reproaches; for, I must confess, I never had till now
any excuse, but that of interest, for doing ill to him.


[ Ex. Vernish. Re-enter Manly and Freeman. Man. Come hither, only I say be
sure you mistake not the time; you know the house exactly where Olivia lodges:
it is just hard by.


Free. Yes, yes.


Man. Well then, bring 'em all, I say, thither, and all you know that may be
then in the house; for the more Witnesses I have of her infamy, the greater
will be my revenge: and be sure you come strait up to her Chamber, without more
ado. Here, take the Watch: you see it is above a quarter past seven; be there in
half an hour exactly.


Free. You need not doubt my diligence, or dexterity; I am an old Scowrer, and
can naturally beat up a Wenches quarters that will not be civil. Shall Not we break
her Windows too?


Man. No, no: be punctual only.


[Ex. Ambo. Enter Widow Blackacre, and two Knights of the Post: a Waiter with
Wine. Wid. Sweetheart, are you sure the door was shut close, that none of those
Roysters saw us come in?


Wait. Yes, Mistress; and you shall have a privater Room above, instantly.

[Ex Wait.
Wid. You are safe enough, Gentlemen, for I have been private in this house ere
now, upon other occasions, when I was something younger. Come, Gentlemen, in
short, I leave my business to your care and fidelity: and so, here is to you.


1. Knight. We were ungrateful Rogues, if we should not be honest to you; for
we have had a great deal of your Money.


Wid. And you have done me many a good job for it: and so, here is to you again.


2. Knight. Why, we have been perjured, but six times for you.


1. Knight. Forged but four Deeds, with your Husband's last Deed of Gift.


2. Knight. And but three Wills.


1. Knight. And counterfeited Hands and Seals to some six Bonds; I think that is
all, Brother.


Wid. Ay, that is all, Gentlemen; and so, here is to you again.


2. Knight. Nay, 'twou'd do one's heart good to be forsworn for you: you have a
conscience in your ways, and pay us well.


1. Knight. You are in the right on it, Brother; one would be damned for her,
with all ones heart.


2. Knight. But there are Rogues, who make us forsworn for 'em; and when we
come to be paid, they will be forsworn too, and not pay us our wages which they
promised with Oaths sufficient.


1. Knight. Ay, a great Lawyer, that shall be nameless Bilkt me too.


Wid. That was hard, methinks, that a Lawyer should use Gentlemen Witnesses no
better.


2. Knight. A Lawyer! do you wonder a Lawyer should do it? I was Bilk'd by a
Reverend Divine, that preaches twice on Sundays, and prays half an hour still
before dinner.


Wid. How? a Conscientious Divine, and not pay people for damning themselves!
Sure then, for all his talking, he does not believe damnation. But come, to our
business: pray be sure to imitate exactly the flourish at the end of this name.


[Pulls out a Deed or two. 1. Knight. O he is the best in England at untangling
a flourish, Madam.


Wid. And let not the Seal be a jot bigger: observe well the dash too, at the
end of this name.


2. Knight. I warrant you, Madam.


Wid. Well, these, and many other shifts, poor Widows are put to sometimes; for
every body would be riding a Widow, as they say, and breaking into her
Jointure: they think marrying a Widow an easy business, like leaping the
Hedge, where another has gone over before; a Widow is a mere gap, a gap with
them. Enter to them Major Oldfox, with two Waiters. [The Knights of the Post
^uddle up the Writings. What, he here! go then, go, my hearts, you have your
instructions.


[Ex. Knights of the Post. Old. Come, Madam, to be plain with you, I Will be
fob'd off no longer. I Will bind her and gag her, but she shall hear me. [Aside.
Look you, Friends, there is the Money I promised you; and now do you what you
promised me: here are my Garters, and here is a Gag: you shall be acquainted
with my parts, Lady, you shall.


Wid. Acquainted with your parts! A Rape, a Rape -- What, will you ravish me?


[The Waiters tie her to the Chair, and gag her; and Ex. Old. Yes, Lady, I will
ravish you; but it shall be through the ear, Lady, the ear only, with my
well-pen'd Acrostics. Enter to-them, Freeman, Jerry Blackacre, three Bailiffs,
a Constable and his Assistants, with the two Knights of the Post. What, shall I
never read my things undisturbed again?


Ierr. O Law! my Mother bound hand and foot, and gaping, as if she rose before
her time to day!


Free. What means this, Oldfox? But I Will release you from him: you shall be no
Man's Prisoner, but mine. Bailiffs, execute your Writ.


[ Freeman untyes her. Old Nay, then I Will be gone, for fear of being Bayl, and
paying her Debts, without being her Husband.

[ Ex. Oldfox.
1. Bay. We Arrest you, in the King's Name, at the Suit of Mr. Freeman,
Guardian to Jeremiah Blackacre Esquire in an Action of Ten thousand pounds.


Wid. How! how! in a Choak-Bayl Action! What, and the Pen and Ink Gentlemen
taken too! Have you confessed, you Rogues?


1. Knight. We needed not to confess; for the Bailiffs dogged us hither to the
very door, and overheard all that you and we said


Wid. Undone, undone then! no Man was ever too hard for me, till now. O, Ierry,
Child, will thou vex again the womb that bore thee?


Ierr. Ay, for bearing me before Wedlock, as you say: But I Will teach you to
call a Blackacre a Bastard, though you were never so much my Mother.


Wid. Well, I Am undone: not one trick left? no Law-Meush imaginable? [Aside.
Cruel Sir, a word with you I pray.


Free. In vain, Madam; for you have no other way to release your self, but by
the Londs of Matrimony.


Wid. How, Sir, how! that were but to sue out an Habeas Corpus, for a removal
from one Prison to another. Matrimony!


Free. Well, Bailiffs, away with her.


Wid. O stay, Sir, can you be so cruel as to bring me under Covert Baron again?
and put it out of my power to sue in my own name. Matrimony, to a Woman, worse
than Excommunication, in depriving her of the benefit of the Law: and I would
rather be deprived of life. But hark you, Sir, I am contented you should hold
and enjoy my person by Lease or Patent; but not by the spiritual Patent, called
a License; that is, to have the privileges of a Husband without the dominion;
that is, Durante beneplacito: in confideration of which, I will, out of my
Jointure, secure you an Annuity of Three hundred pounds a Year, and pay your
debts; and that is all you younger Brothers desire to marry a Widow for, I Am
sure.


Free. Well, Widow, if --


Ierr. What, I hope, Bully Guardian, you are not making Agreements, without me?


Free. No, no. First, Widow, you must say no more that he is the Son of a
Whore; have a care of that: And then, he must have a settled Exhibition of Forty
pounds a Year, and a Nag of Assizes, kept by you, but not upon the Common; and
have free ingress, egress, and regress to and from your Maids Garret.


Wid. Well, I can grant all that too.


Ierr. Ay, ay, fair words butter no Cabage; but, Guardian, make her Sign, Sign
and Seal: for, otherwise, if you knew her as well as I, you would not trust her
word for a farthing.


Free. I warrant thee, Squire. Well, Widow, since thou art so generous, I will
be generous too; and if you will secure me Four hundred pound a Year, but during
your life, and pay my debts, not above a thousand pound; I Will bate you your
person, to dispose of as you please


Wid. Have a care, Sir, a Settlement without a Consideration, is void in Law:
you must do something for it.


Free Pr'ythee then let the Settlement on me be called Alimony; and the
Consideration our Separation: Come, my Lawyer, with Writings ready drawn, is
within, and in haste. Come.


Wid. But, what, no other kind of Consideration, Mr. Freeman? Well, a Widow, I
see, is a kind of a sine cure, by custom of which the unconscionable Incumbent
enjoyes the profits, without any duty, but does that ^ull (...) where.


[Ex. Omn. The Scene changes to Olivia's Lodging. Enter Olivia, with a Candle
in her hand. Oliv. So, I am now prepared once more for my timorous young
Lover's reception: my Husband is gone; and go thou out too, thou next
interrupter of Love: -- [Puts out the Candle.] Kind darkness, that frees us
Lovers from scandal and bashfulness, from the censure of our Gallants and the
World. So, are you there? Enter to Olivia, Fidelia, followed softly by Manly.
Come, my dear punctual Lover, there is not such another in the World; thou have
Beauty and Youth to please a Wife; Address and Wit, to amuse and fool a
Husband; nay, thou have all things to be wished in a Lover, but your Fits: I
hope, my Dear, you will not have one to night; and, that you may not, I^ll lock
the door, though there be no need of it, but to lock out your Fits; for my
Husband is just gone out of Town again. Come, where are you?

[Goes to the door, and locks it.
Man. Well, thou have impudence enough to give me Fits too, and make Revenge it
self impotent, hinder me from making thee yet more infamous, if it can be.

[Aside.
Oliv. Come, come, my Soul, come.


Fid. Presently, my Dear: we have time enough sure.


Oliv. How! time enough! True Lovers can no more think they ever have time
enough, than love enough: You shall stay with me all night; but that is but a
Lover's moment. Come.


Fid. But will not you let me give you and my self the satisfaction of telling
you, how I abused your Husband last night?


Oliv. Not when you can give me, and your self too, the satisfaction of abusing
him again, to night. Come.


Fid. Let me but tell you how your Husband --


Oliv. O name not his, or Manly's more loathsome name, if you love me; I forbid
'em last night: and you know I mentioned my Husband but once, and he came. No
talking pray; 'twas ominous to us. You make me fancy a noise at the door
already, but I Am resolved not to be interrupted. [A noise at the door.] Where
are you? Come; for, rather than lose my dear expectation now, though my Husband
were at the door, and the bloody Ruffian Manly here in the room, with all his
awful insolence; I would give my self to this dear hand, to be led away, to
Heavens of joys, which none but thou can give. But, what is this noise at the
door? So, I told you what talking would come to. [The noise at the door
increases. Ha! -- O Heavens my Husbands voice! --

[ Olivia listens at the door.
Man. Freeman is come too soon.

[Aside.
Oliv. O it is he! -- Then here is the happiest minute lost, that ever bashful
Boy, or trifling Woman fooled away! I Am undone! my Husbands reconcilement too
was false, as my joy, all delusion: but, come this way, here is a Backdoor.
[Exit, and returns. The officious Jade has locked us in, instead of locking
others out; but let us then escape your way, by the Balcony; and, whilst you
pull down the Curtains, I Will fetch, from my Closet, what next will best secure
our escape: I have left my Key in the door, and 'twill not suddenly be broke
open.


[Exit.] A noise as it were, people forcing the door. Man. Stir not, yet fear
nothing.


Fid. Nothing, but your life, Sir.


Man. We shall now know this happy Man she calls Husband.


Olivia Reenters. Oliv. Oh, where are you? What, idle with fear? Come, I ll
tie the Curtains, if you will hold. Here, take this Cabinet and Purse, for it
is thine, if we escape; [ Manly takes from her the Cabinet and Purse. therefore
let us make haste.

[ Ex Oliv.
Man. It Is mine indeed now again, and it shall never escape more from me: to
you at least.


[The door broken open, Enter Vernish alone, with a dark Lanthorn and a Sword,
running at Manly; who draws, puts by the thrust, and defends himself, whilst
Fidelia runs at Vernish behind. Ver. So, there I Am right sure --


[With a low voice. Man. Softly. Sword and dark Lanthorn, Villain, are some
odds; but --


Ver. Odds! I Am sure I find more odds than I expected: What, has my insatiable
two Seconds at once? but --


[With a low voice. [Whil'st they fight, Olivia reenters, tying two Curtains
together. Oliv. Where are you now? -- What, is he entered then, and are they
fighting! O do not kill one that can make no defense. -- [ Manly throws Vernish
down, and disarms him.] How! but I think he has the better on it: here is his
Scarf, it is he. So, keep him down still: I hope thou have no hurt, my dearest?
[Embracing Manly. Enter to them Freeman, Lord Plausible, Novel, Jerry
Blackacre, and the Widow Blackacre, lighted in by the two Sailors with Torches.
Ha! -- What? -- Manly! And have I been thus concerned for him, embracing him?
And has he his Jewels again too? What means this? O it is too sure, as well as
my shame! which I ll go hide for ever.


[Offers to go out, Manly stops her. Man. No, my dearest, after so much
kindness as has past between us, I cannot part with you yet. Freeman, let no
body stir out of the Room; for, notwithstanding your lights, we are yet in the
dark, till this Gentleman please to turn his face. -- [Pulls Vernish by the
sleeve. How! Vernish! Art thou the happy Man then? Thou! Thou! Speak, I say;
but thy guilty silence tells me all. -- Well, I shall not upbraid thee; for my
wonder is striking me as dumb, as thy shame has made thee. But, what? my little
Volunteer hurt, and fainting!


Fid. My wound, Sir, is but a slight one, in my Arm: it is only my fear of your
danger, Sir, not yet well over.


Man. But what is here? more strange things! [Observing Fidelia's hair untied
behind, and without a Peruke, which she lost in the scuffle. What means this
long Woman's hair? and face, now all of it appears, too beautiful for a Man;
which I still thought Womanish indeed! What, you have not deceived me too, my
little Volunteer?

[Aside.
Oliv. Me she has I Am sure.


Man. Speak.


Enter Eliza, and Lettice. Eli. What, Cousin, I am brought hither by your
Woman, I suppose, to be a witness of the second vindication of your Honor?


Oliv. Insulting is not generous: You might spare me, I have you.


Eli. Have a care, Cousin, you will confess anon too much; and I would not have
your secrets.


Man. Come, your blushes answer me sufficiently, and you have been my Volunteer
in love.


[ To Fidelia. Fid. I must confess I needed no compulsion to follow you all the
world over; which I attempted in this habit, partly out of shame to own my love
to you, and fear of a greater shame, your refusal of it: for I knew of your
engagement to this Lady, and the constancy of your nature; which nothing could
have altered, but her self.


Man. Dear Madam, I desired you to bring me out of confusion, and you have
given me more: I know not what to speak to you, or how to look upon you; the
sense of my rough, hard, and ill usage of you, (though chiefly your own fault)
gives me more pain now it is over, than you had, when you suffered it: and if my
heart, the refusal of such a Woman, [Pointing to Olivia] were not a Sacrifice
to profane your love, and a greater wrong to you than ever yet I did you; I
would beg of you to receive it, though you used it, as she had done; for though it
deserved not from her the treatment she gave it, it does from you.


Fid. Then it has had punishment sufficient from her already, and needs no more
from me; and, I must confess, I would not be the only cause of making you
break your last nights Oath to me, of never parting with me: if you do not
forget, or repent it.


Man. Then, take for ever my heart, and this with it; [Gives her the Cabinet]
for 'twas given to you before, and my heart was before your due; I only beg
leave to dispose of these few -- Here, Madam, I never yet left my Wench unpaid.


[Takes some of the Jewels, and offers 'em to Olivia; she strikes 'em down:
Plausible and Novel take 'em up. Oliv. So it seems, by giving her the Cabinet.


L. Plaus. These Pendents appertain to your most faithful humble Servant.


Nov. And this Locket is mine; my earnest for love, which she never paid:
therefore my own again.


Wid. By what Law, Sir, pray? Cousin Olivia, a word: What, do they make a
seizure on your Goods and Chattels, vi and armis? Make your demand, I say, and
bring your Trover, bring your Trover: I Will follow the Law for you.


Oliv. And I my revenge.

[Exit Oliv.
Man. to Ver. But it is, my Friend, in your consideration most, that I would
have returned part of your Wives portion; for 'twere hard to take all from
thee, since thou have paid so dear for it, in being such a Rascal: yet thy Wife
is a Fortune without a Portion; and thou art a man of that extraordinary merit
in Vilany, the World and Fortune can never desert thee, though I do; therefore be
not melancholy. Fare you well, Sir. [Ex. Vernish, doggedly. Now, Madam, I beg
your pardon, [Turning to Fidelia] for lessening the Present I made you; but my
heart can never be lessened: this, I confess, was too small for you before; for
you deserve the Indian World; and I would now go thither out of covetousness
for your sake only.


Fid. Your heart, Sir, is a Present of that value. I can never make any return
to it; [Pulling Manly (...) company.] but I can give you back such a Present as
this, which I go^ by the loss of my Father, a Gentleman of the North, of no
mean Extraction, whose only Child I was, therefore left me in the present
possession of Two thousand pounds a Year; which I left, with multitudes of
Pretenders, to follow you, Sir; having in several public places seen you, and
observed your actions thoroughly, with admiration, when you were too much in
love to take notice of mine, which yet was but too visible. The name of my
Family is Gray; my other, Fidelia: the rest of my Story you shall know, when I
have fewer Auditors.


Man. Nay, now, Madam, you have taken from me all power of making you any
Complement on my part; for I was going to tell you, that for your sake only, I
would quit the unknown pleasure of a retirement; and rather stay in this ill
World of ours still, tho odious to me, than give you more frights again at Sea,
and make again too great a venture there, in you alone. But if I should tell
you now all this, and that your virtue (since greater than I thought any was in
the World) had now reconciled me to it, my Friend here would say, it is your
Estate that has made me Friends with the World.


Free. I must confefs I should; for I think most of our quarrels to the World,
are just such as we have to a handsome Woman: only because we cannot enjoy her,
as we would do.


Man. Nay, if thou art a Plain-dealer too, give me thy hand; for now I Will say I
am thy Friend indeed: And, for your two sakes, though I have been so lately
deceived in Friends of both Sexes;

I will believe, there are now in the World
Good-natured Friends, who are not Prostitutes,
And handsome Women worthy to be Friends:
Yet, for my sake, let no one e're confide
In Tears, or Oaths, in Love, or Friend untried.

[ Ex. Omnes. FINIS.

