THE PRELATES PRIDE: OR THE MANIFESTATION, THAT THE BISHOPS LORDLY Government
from the original institution, is not De Iure divino, by divine right; but
merely humane and contrary both to the holy word of God, the practice of the
Apostles, and of the primitive Churches in the purest times.

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED THE Bishop of Lincolnes Prophecy concerning the Prelates.



Printed in the Year. M. DC. XLI.

To the Bishops of ENGLAND.
OH, that your visards were unmasked, that your ways might be discovered, that
the state might see your aim, whereas now it is so much disturbed to rove to
find out your seducements by conjectures! Now you are a great advancer of the
Chair of Rome, and by and by a child of our Church, and in difficult and
unsettled times betwixt both, and stand out for neither. And sure Rome scarce
dare trust you, lest you will not leave us, and we are fearful, lest you will
fly to them, your own consciences can testify that you affect both, yet are
you entire to neither, give me leave to speak plainly, because you are firm
to neither, you are troublesome to both. To be too zealous in a pretended good
work is ill, and so is it to sit still and be satisfied with ignorance, but
worst of all to know both, and he firm to neither, will you still abide
amongst us, and yet not be of us, and will you still cast your eyes on Rome,
and yet ahide with us, are you ignorant, or unconstant; that you still stand on
doubts, know your selves, that we may know you: either abide with us with whom
you speak, and cut your wings, or else betake you to your wings, and speak at
Rome, and not so trouble us both. Either speak to us in the light, or abide
with them who work in the dark. Remember death, and let the thought thereof
cause your wavering to cease, and be firm in your resolutions. Will you not
yet resolve? If you mean to choose, when shall it be, why not now, let your
learning discover to you the dangers of delay, it makes you miserable in what
you want, and doubtful in what you have, and trouble us to know what you are:
why will you look to heaven with one eye, and on Romes pomp with the other?
God calls you if you will stand for him: then take a resolution, to cast this
Iezebell out of the Windows of our Churches, this Whore of Rome that has thus
adva^ced her pride, and bewitched you, is their not just cause for what I cry?
Yet if you will still remain unconstant, who shall make you firm? If you love
to stagger, yet aquaint us why you wi^ thus be unconstant? Surely you waver,
because you speak not plainly to us, your words are one thing and your aim
another. Methinkes I see your silence with a blush to answer this conjecture,
as if thereby you granted, this to be the cause? Are you offended? I am
grieved, and have I not cause, since civil jarres have been by you so
lamentable: will nothing please you but the glory of your own partaking, and
the quietness of your own ful-bellied peace? Think you to find more glory
in them then in our Churches, we have one Christ; labor not then for those
who divide his Garments: nay, his very body and blood. If you will be to us
like Barnabas to Paul, yet be not to us like Simon Magus to Peter. Other
Churches have complained of these distractions as well as we; yet our greatest
greevance is in your unsettledness. Think you the glory of Rome to be so
famous for you, amongst whom are several hundreds of Contrarieties amongst her
self, which will distract you more then you expect, though their Dissentions
are smothered by their subtleties; have not you learned of them to fight closly
within doors, without noise, which endangered, I had almost said begun frayes
in the field? Surely the more you labor for their policy, the more you run
with them into want of Peace, and if you be not either partial, or
incredulous, you may easily perceive the mischief of their secret Differences.
Will you Rule the Church alone? alas! how full is such rule of contradiction
and purposes repugnant to Christ her head! If you alone lay claim to the
Church as yours; why do you chide with her best members, and disturb them;
why do you fight with your self; will you look for Peace, and not from GOD;
indeed much pomp, and glory Romes Churches sons receive, but it is better to
be content with what estate Christ bequeaths to his Church. Will you rather let
your Soul, and the Souls of all your Flocks want their food, then you be
taken from your Palaces? Is nothing worth your respect but earthly peace? But
if you love your peace and glory so dearly that you will not leave it; take
your peace and pomp to your selves; let us have truth: yet if it may be Peace
too; If you love your safety, and the Churches, seek rather grounds whereon to
rest, then excuses for your abode in trouble, seek Peace and follow Truth,
forsake Rome, and follow CHRIST: except you will rather abide in earthly pomp
then come to Christ.

Yours, if you Christ's, H. W.

THE PRELATES PRIDE, OR, The manifestation that the Bishops Lordly government,
from the original institution is not de jure divine, by divine right, but
merely Humane.
This is a token, that they hate the Lord, for that they will have themselves
to be called by the name of Lords, says Eusebius, in his 7. book of
Preparation.
THe Lordly institution of Bishops is not from divine right, but merely humane.

The Argument.
THat institution which is from men, and The Argument
not from the Word of God, is not of divine right, but humane. But the
institution of Lordly Bishops is not from God, but of men; therefore such
Lordly predominancy of the Conclusion.
Bishops, is not de jure divino, by divine right, but merely humane.

I. To prove that such institution as is from men, and not from the word of
God, is not of divine right, but human which I shall clear briefly 3. ways,
by Reason, by Scripture, and by the testimony of former Ages*

I. Reason it self is forced to confess that such institutions, as there is
no warrant for in GODS Word, but are only forged by the inventions of men, can
no ways be said to be from God, seeing the word of God expresses not the
same, except we will go about to make humane mortals divine, or exalt them as
Gods, or else add to those things which God has written, and so bring those
heavy plagues upon us, Revel. 22. 18. that which is from God is divine, but
what is only from man, must needs be humane.

If the glory of all the wisdoms in the world, were in one assembly, and
should conclude of some particular not expressed in holy writ, such institution,
though never so approved by men, yet is it notwithstanding humane, because
instituted by men only, and having no warrant from Gods holy word.

2. The holy Scripture so expresses it; which, as the Prophet Jeremiah says,
is vanity, to speak the visions of a man's own heart, and not out of the mouth
of the Lord. Ier. 23. 16.

3. St. Hillar. says, that the tradition of man shall ^^ Mat. ^^ 12.
be taken away (says he) for it is humane.

Surely by this time I hope any reasonableman may be well satisfied concerning
the first proposition, for the eyes of any may here behold how clear this is
laid down, and proved, that such institution as is from men, and not from the
Word of God, is not of divine right, but merely humane.

II. That institution only which is from the word of God, that alone is of
divine right, and not the institutions or acts of the inventions of after Ages,
being from themselves alone. Does the scripture confirm it, then it must
needs be divine; Is it only from man? Oh fond Age, will thou maintain such
things as divine, which the holy writ does not: then may many Caterpillars more
plead free privileges in Gods garden, and many wolves nest themselves amongst
Gods sheep. Have not some preferred plays before the Word of God, who have
protested that the spirit of GOD has more wrought upon their hearts at the
conceit of some shadowed Tragedy, then being present at a Sermon? The Usurer
can plead that God is honored by his doing good. The Papists can pretend
their Zeal before their Crosses, and Crucifixes, and all these, and many more
can claim Antiquity, and plead as much for themselves as any Prelate: but all
this while they are but humane, and permitted by men, as the Prelates are; they
are not permitted by Gods holy word: nor no such vain inventions, which caused
holy David to take up this resolution, I hate, says he, vain inventions, but
thy Law do I love. Psalm. 119. 113. And though our Lordly Bishops would prove
themselves to be the Lords Bishops from divine right, yet let them but consider
that saying of St. AUSTIN, for as much (says he) as Christ has not revealed
these in his 49 trea^^s on John.
things, who dare be so vain or rash amongst us, as to affirm, without any
testimony of the scriptures, that such things are divine, which the Lord has
not so declared of them.

III. To prove that the Lordly government of Bishops is from men and not from
God, and that shall be first from a brief survey of history how they have
received their institution from men; and secondly by a brief Catalogue of some
particular places of Scripture, in every book through the whole Bible, to
prove that they are not permitted thus to stand by the word of God.

1. To prove that their institution is from men, and that to be brief, I will
give you a little glimps of Linus (in the first place) by the way, because
Eusebius. lib. 3 ch, 2.
he was the first Bishop of Rome, that we read of from the time of the
Apostles suffering; who never was recorded to be exalted to the prelasie, or
Lordly government, who^ St. Paul styles a brother and not a Lord, amongst those
other brethren Eubulus, and P^dence, and Claudia, and the rest of the brethren,
whom, as I take it, St. PAVL aims. 2 Timoth. 4. 21.

In those days also was Clement Bishop of in Eusebius.
Rome, and the text of Scripture by St. Paul calls him no Lord. Lord Bishop was
a strange language with him; no it was faithful yoak-fellow, it was Clement
and other fellow laborers, with the rest of the Preachers of the Gospel,
these were the styles of the Ministers, after the Apostles Custom, as it is.
Philip. 4. 3.

There were then also many Christian preachers Idem lib. 5; chapter 12
in Jerusalem, as Marcus, Crassianus, Publius, Maximus, Valen^e, these and
other Bishops in those days, we never read of any of them that were made
Lords: or that were exalted to temporal dignities, except only such as Demas,
who fell in love, indeed with the glory of the world; but the Apostle brands
him for a forsaker of his calling, for his labor. 2 Timoth. 4. 10.

Indeed some decretall Epistles have been forged Sym. 3 cen. of B.
on Zephyrinus the 14. Bishop of Rome, but they are very foolish, and
ridiculous; only forged of late, as many judicious Readers judge. As to
consecrate the holy Cup, to be in a vessel of glass.

That a Bishop being accused shall choose his own Judges; and that no
diffinitive sentence shall be denounced against a Bishop; until the time that
his cause were heard of the Patriarch of Rome, etc. But alas! this is but a
mocking of the Church of God, to attribute such swelling pride, such
unaccustomed forms of judicature, such fencing, and guarding of unrighteous
men against just deserved punishment, which being falsely forged upon the
fathers, were, without all doubt, altogether unknown unto them in those days.

And so also some decretall Epistles ascribed unto Pontianus, as Pontianus
sanctae and vniversalis Ecclesiae Episcopus, etc. how palpable does this seem
to be false and forged, for such magnificent styles as these were not as yet in
use. And afterward Tom. 1. council.
when they crept into the Church, they were only at the first ascribed to them
by such as admired the virtues of some singular and rare men, such as Cyprian
and Athanasius, but no church man of any degree whatsoever, did in those times
usurp such proud and arrogant titles of dignity in his own writings directed
to other Christians, Sym. 3. cen. of B.
and therefore the learned reject this Epistle, as composed by some late
unlearned, and flattering fellow.

Some have bin so bold, not only to attribute to Cajus the 27. Bishop of Rome,
the constitution of Plat, in decret la^^ex lib pont. Damasi.
these Ecclesiastical orders, but to attribute it even to the Apostles
themselves, but I say, beatus qui non credit, they father the institution of
these degrees upon them, as first to be Ostiarius, 2. to be Lector, 3.
Exorcista, 4. Acoluthus, 5. Subdiaconus, 6. Diaconus, 7. Presbetor, 8.
Episcopus, but happy is he who believes no such lies. As for Cajus the time
wherein he lived, was a time of persecution and Cajus, he was fain to hide
himself a long time in a Sym. 3 cen. of B.
Cave. Had this bin attributed to Bonifacius the 8. Gregory the 7. or to
Alexander the 3. it might have bin more probable: And as for the Apostles,
indeed we find allowed 2 orders of Ministers, a By. and a Deacon, or an Elder
and a Deacon, 1 Timothy 3. 1. but surely with them, a Bishop, Elder, Pastor,
Shepherd, was all one, and not two distinct degrees, Acts 15. Titus 1. 5, 6,
7. Gordius, 8. Narcissus, Hierom catal. script. eccl.
and a worthy man called Alexander, were Bishops in Jerusalem all at once, yet
none of them desired pre-eminence, or any Lordly title, or rule over other
Ministes.

But to come to after times, some there are who have gone about to prove that
Constantine did confirm the Bishop of Rome in his glory; but how can that be
since the purple garment, the Palace of Lateran, the Superiority of Rome, and
government of the West, all these honors, the Socra. lib. 5, chapter 2. Sym. 4.
cen. of B.
Emperors successors to Constantine possessed and not the Bishops, for many
hundred Years after.

Let us view the days of Innocentius the 1. about the time of St. Ambros. St.
Cipriau.
And we shall find that at his first beginning, about the year of our Lord,
400. About the reign of Theodosius ye Emperor, who fighting with Eugenius the
tyrant, was so miraculously delivered, who having recourse to God by prayer,
his cause being holyer, in the battle by a tempest of wind, Ruffin. lib. 2.
cap. 17
GOD hearing his so often recourse to him by prayer, in the battle the Lord
sent a wind which blew so vehemently, that the darts were turned back by the
violence of the wind, in the faces of the Tyrants Army, of whom the Poet
Claudian writes. Sure God does love thee well, from heaven to send Claudian de
3, Consul. Honorii.

his tempest for thine end, For from the Air
By blasts courageously, its force does lend
thou prayest, God hears, fierce winds to thee repair.


The power which the Bishop of Rome now possesses, did appertain to the
Emperor, yet Ambros St Cipriau. Theodo, lib. 5 ch, 10.
nevertheless in this Bishops time, at the Emperors death were plays and
enterludes practiced, and many vain things invented, and this man also brought
Sozom. lib. 8, chapter 28.
ambition to the Chair of Rome, who swelling in pride, usurped jurisdiction
over other Churches: but the greater he grew in Lordly predominancy, Sym. 5.
cen. of B.
the more ignorantly were those ensuing Emperors led to their own misery, and
the Saints of God cruelly persecuted. Socra. lib 6. chapter 23.


Pope Bonifacius coming into the Chair of Rome, about the space of a year
after Innocentius prevailed with the Emperor Phocas, in whose days Antichrist
sprang, and flourished in greater abundance, these were the days for which a
proverb was used long time after, saying, the time of Phocas was the calamity
of the Roman Emperor, but where was the great Bishop to help him afterward,
when his Head, Feet, and secret Members were cut off, and burnt? Oh the misery
that Princes, Churches, and Kingdoms have bin brought to by the usurping,
tyranizing Prelates, who glory in their usurped Dominions.

The Bishops of Rome are then successors you The Council of Ser^ica.
see to Innocentius; who for the great See, have no warrant from God, and stand
upon no better grounds then on a temporal, and personal act; merely humane.

And what has been the practice of other Prelates since this usurpation of
the Sea of Rome, what do all other Lordly Bishops, but by degrees even as they
are able tread the same steps; are they not a nest of ambitious Prelates,
hunting for the supremacy foretold of Antichrist, 1 Ioh. 2. 22. and 4. 3. 2
These. 2. 3. but oh how has this supremacy Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 32.
ever bin detested of the ancient primitive Churches, who with Gregory have
been compelled to cry out as well as we? Oh times! oh manners! behold in all
the parts of Europe, all things cry under them. Towns are destroyed, Castles
are overthrown, Provinces are spoiled, because the Priests who should lie in
ashes upon the ground weeping, they are seeking unto themselves names of
vanity, and they do glory in profane styles.

Truly, says Claudius Thurinensis, he is not to Opt triparti, tum.
be counted an apostolical bishop who sits in a chair of glory, but he
who fulfilleth an Apostolic office. Oh it is a miserable thing to hear of
those inormities, and abuses, commanded and committed by the Prelates from time
to time, as the number of their holidayes, and all lusts of uncleanness
according to the sayings of Whores, and naughty women, who have bragged that
they have gained more in one such day, then in 50. other days, and also their
idleness, and uncomely behavior proceeding from them, who have so defiled
other men's houses, that the stink of their uncleanesse, is known to the whole
world.

Oh then seeing so many Nations have from time to time received such corruption
from the Prelates, Oh then where should reformation begin, but even at the
Sanctuary, Ezekiel, 9.

We may say of England as a Bishop once said of Rome. that Heldeber, tus
England was blessed if Bishops were not rulers of her state,
Or if her Bishops scorned not, their faith to violate.


Eugenius the 1. being Bishop of Rome, found out yet more for the Chair of
Bishops sees then before, he was the first that made an ordinance that Bishops
should have prison houses; nay, what glory would the prelates in all ages let
pass, if they could obtain it.

Let all men but consider how not only the Bishop of Rome, the Metropolitan
Prelate, has from time to time advanced his Chair, but even those lesser
Prelates, but too great pastors, (too great said I) indeed the proverb is, too
good is stark naught, I pray God that their too greatness make not them
stark naught, for I am sure it makes most, if not all worse then they were
before, a good Minister may make a bad Lord Bishop, but I could never hear of
a bad Minister that was made good by such advancement, yet they have also to
their endeavor labored to advance their Sees, as time, and opportunity would
permit them.

Bonifacius, a man borne in England not far Consta^ius 1. Gregorius, 1. and
2. Zacharius Stephanus.
from Exeter, he was familiarly acquainted with five Popes, and by them he was
advanced to many honors, as to be the Popes Legate in England, Germany and
France, and afterward Archbishop of Mentz, and all his travells was to bring
those Nations to subjection under the Bishop of Rome, who by his treachery to
the King of France (then reigning called Childericus, caused him to be
disthroned, and thrust out, and another to be set in his place, but in the end
he was justly rewarded and slain by the Pagans for his labor.

But when Rhotardus Bishop of Soisan was commanded by Hadrian the Bishop of
Rome to excommunicate the King of France his sovereign Char. Calvas
Lord, he denied, and refusing so to do, returned an answer, advising him to
be circumspect, and not rash, in pronouncing sentence of excommunication; This
Bishop was a very proud man, and very serious in inquiry concerning titles of
land, and other temporal affairs of the Kingdom, but the Nobles of that
Country reproved him for it, and told him that it was a strange and
unaccustomed thing, that a Bishop should take-upon him, Sym. 10 cen. of B.
to be judge in a Controversy of civil affairs, or about titles and rights
of Kingdoms, because (as they told him) he could not be both a Bishop and a
Judge.

I can not here over-passe that defense of Marsilinus Patavinus, concerning
Bishops. In his Book Defensor pacis:


He says:
1 That one Bishop has not authority over another, much less over Kings and
Emperors. 2 That the word of God ought only to be Judge in all causes as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal matters. 3 That the Bishops should be subject to
the Magistrates. 4 That the head of the Church is Christ, and that he never
appointed any Bishop to be Vickar, over the universal Church. 5 That Bishops
ought to be chosen by their own Church and Clergy. 6 That the Clergy after
Romes institution, are a den of Thieves. 7 That the Doctrine of the Pope is
not to be followed, because it leads to eternal death.
But to come to latter times: Let us look a little on Mr. Wicklisse, what he
says concerning Church government; he declares,

1 That in the time of the Apostles there were only two Orders, Elders, and
Deacons, and no distinction of Patriarch, Archbishop, etc. and that such were
only found out by Pride, and humane institution.

2 That he who is most serviceable, and humble in the Church, and most inamored
with the love of Christ, the same is the nearest by Divine institution, unto
Christ in the militant Church.

3 That whatsoever the Bishops command, which cannot be deduced clearly out of
the Scriptures, is to be accounted Heretical, and not to be obeyed.

4 That the Emperors, and secular Lords, are Sym. 15. cen. of B.
seduced, who so extol the Prelates, which work so much iniquity amongst
them, by Simony, Covetousness, Whoring, and Pride, etc. yet pretend
reformation in the Church.

How did the people cry out thus in the days of John Husse, for working so
much iniquity amongst them, and being accused before the King for such their
wickedness, were severally punished.

All Ecclesiastical persons should in the places of cure of souls, use to
their own people only the sword of the spirit by exhortation, reproof,
direction, consolation, by faithful preaching, and instructing, which are the
offices of the Church, and to leave the Temporal sword to the temporal
Magistrate, which was the rule of the Apostles, and their true successors, Act.
15. Such also was the custom here in England, until In the ^^ year of his
reign.
King Henry the 4. at which time the popish prelates following the example of
the man of sin at Rome, obtained a statute, and that without the free consent
of the subjects, by which statute they got the Temporal Sword into their
hands, In the Record of the Tower.
and have since used both at once, to the great grief and trouble both of
Church and state, yet have they often gone about to prove their calling to be
de jure divino, whereas you see it is from man's institution, and not from the
Lord.

II. To prove that the Bishops have not their Lordly government from God, and
that it is not warrantable by the holy word so to be lifted up, that such a
calling for a Bishop is not de jure divino, by divine ^ight.

By the way, I shall give you a brief relation concerning the name Bishop, the
signification whereof gives no way at all to Lordly predominancy, it signifies
an overseer which has a charge to look to, and thus it may signify.

1 One that is a surveyer to see and provide things necessary, for the life of
man, It was at the first given Says M, Dove.
to Clarcks of the Market, whose office was to see things bought and sold. 2
One that is a spiritual overseer, an Instructor, one that has a charge over
souls, as it is Acts 20. 28. 1 Timothy 3. 1. 3 A Pastor teacher, or Elder of a
Church, Phil. 1. 1. Luke 2. 8. Genesis 4. 7. 3. 4 The Mediatorship of Christ, in
the salvation of the souls of his Elect, 1 Peter 2. last.
Having now showed you that from the name bishop they can lay no right to their
institutions of Prelacy, so neither have they any example from the Apostles to
allow the institution thereof, for it is contrary to the Apostles practices as
may appear.

1 The Apostles were messengers of God for the good of the Church, Phil. 2. 28.
and 4. 18. and 2 Cor. 8. Romans 16. 7. the Prelates send messengers to hurt the
Church.

2 The Apostles preached the Gospel constantly, Matthew. 10. 1. Matthew. 28. 19.
Gal. 1. 1. the Prelates plead more to get to themselves the glory of the world,
then preach to their flock.

The Apostles preached the truth from the grace of ^^d, Romans 1. 5. the Prelates
plead for Romish Ceremonies, and superstitions.

4 The Apostles labored for the enriching of the Church, and Congregation of
Gods Saints, 2 Cor. 6. 10. but the Prelates labor for themselves.

5 The Apostles suffered rebuke, and crosses patiently, 1 Cor. 4. 10. and 2
Cor. 6. 5. and 2 cor. 11. 23. but Prelates cannot endure to be meddled with.

6 The Apostles were satisfied with any dwellings; nay none at all, and they
took great pains laboring with their hands, 1 cor. 4. 11. Acts 20. 23. and 1
These. 2. 9. 2 These. 2. 8. but the Prelates though they dwell in their stately
Palaces, and live idely, and labor not at all, except it may be for two or
three sermons in a year, etc. yet are they not satisfied.

7 The Apostles never used to sit in Courts of Judicature, after the charge was
given them to preach, they meddled not with states matters, they busied not
themselves with such secular employments, Matthew. 4. 18. Matthew. 9. 9. Mark. 10.
28. Romans 11. Acts 13. 2. But the Prelates intrude themselves into such offices,
and employ themselves more concerning states matters (I fear me) then they do
in their studies most of them, if not all.

8 There were none amongst them that had dominion, one over another, but were
all equal, as loving, and dear brethren, Matthew. 20. 25. Luke 22. 25. 2 Cor.
1. 24. 1 Pet. 5. 1. But Lordly Prelates are exalted in their provinces over all
the (...) of the Clergy.

In a word our Lordly Bishops follow not the Apostles in their humble sincere,
and pure lives, but in a proud, sinful, and contrary course of life, to the
misery of all those over whom they rule.

Their Lordly predominancie is directly contrary to the word of God; as may
appear in diverse places of the Scripture, Genesis 2. 7. Exodus 21. 14. Levit. 10.
1. Number. 1. 53. Deutr. 18. 2. Iosu. 3. 8. Judges 2. 7. 1 Samuel 25. 2 Samuel 15. 27.
1 Kings 1. 52. 2 Kings 22. 13. 1. Chron. 24. 5. 2 Cron. 29. 6. Ezra 7. 24.
Nehem. 13. 29. Ester 3. 6. Job. 36. 9. Psalm. 132 9. Prove. 16. 5. Eccles. 2. 8.
Cant. 6. 8. Esaias. 14. 13. Ier. 23. 1. Lament. 2. 14. Ezekiel. 34. 2. Dan. 5. 17.
Hosea 4. Amos. 4. 3. Obad. 2. 3. Jonah. 3. 2. Micha 3. 11. Nahum. 3. 18. Haba.
2. 5. Zepha. 3. 4. H^^ga. 1. 9. Zachar. 3. 8. Mal. 2.

Let no man think to find any warrant in the word of God for Lordly
predominasie of church men, a Minister of Christ, must not there expect to find
a warrant for prelasie, for it is not of divine institution, no it is no
custom of the church of Christ, it is the custom of the Gentiles to have
dominion, and to exercise authority over their brethren, but says Christ to
the Apostles: It shall not be so amongst you says he. Mat. 20. 25, 26. Mark.
10. 42, 43. Luke 22. 25, 26. Christ gave them charge from time to time, to take
heed of lifting themselves up by pride, warning them to take heed of Lordly
predominasie: Christ sends them to be his servants, and to preach to the people
in humility, and that by the example of himself, he sends them forth as
Embassidours of his word, preaching it humbly, as he did, and warning them not
to look for greater glory and pomp in the world, then he himself received,
John 13. 15, 16.

St. Peter he practices this lesson, who spoke before not my Lord or right
reverend father, etc
the rest of the Apostles, and Elders, men and brethren, says he, know that
God chose out me to preach the Gospel, that the Gentiles might hear the word
out of my mouth, and he preached to them and the people believed, and received
the holy Ghost, says be, and there was no difference betwixt us etc. as it is
Acts 15.

And St. Paul teaches them not to be high minded, but to make themselves
equal to them of the lower sort, Romans 12. 16.

And let the lofty Prelates blush at that his modest taunt, now ye are full
(says he) now ye are made rich, ye reign as Kings, but we are made a gasing
stock, ye are honorable, but we are despised, but says he afterward, I pray
you be followers of me, 1. Cor. 4. Oh! ye Prelates will not these so plain
testimonies of your pride convince you!

Look upon Paul a little further, and you shall see that he was so far from
being a Lordly Prelate, that he gloried in being a servant to preach Jesus
Christ, as it is 2 Cor. 4. 5. who never expected to receive titles of temporal
honor, but as James Cephas, and John, the right hand of fellow-ship with the
rest. Gal. 2. 9. Ephe. 6. 21.

And those Bishops and Deacons, which were amongst the Saints at Philippi, as
it is Phil. 1. 1. there were no prelasie amongst them, because of the
fellowship which they had in the Gospel, verse 5. Col. 1. 1. These. 3. 2.

Oh! how great and greevous a sin is it for the Ministers of the Church of
God, to sit in glory as Lords of the Temple of God! 2. These. 2. 4.

In all the whole Bible we can find no warrant for prelasie, or Lordly
government for Pastors of the Church to lay claim to, only a Bishop or
Pastor, or Elder, which you will, for they are all one, and a Deacon, the next
degree immediately after them; and that only in ordination, etc. Not in Lordly
predominasie. 1 Timothy 3. 2.

And when there were any such amongst them, as had betaken themselves to
worldly honor, and glory, the Apostles did reckon them forsaken, 2. Tim. 4. 3.

And we may so plainly in that place, where St. Paul writes to Titus concerning
the ordaining of Elders, as he first calls them, Titus 1. 5. to be so, and so
qualified, he gives the reason of it in the 7. v. for says he, a Bishop must
be unreproveable, so that the very same which he first calls Elder, he
afterward calls Bishop, as it is plain to be understood in that place.

They were all brethren, there were none of them set up or appointed by them to
Lord it over the rest, as the Prelates do over the rest of the Clergy, but
taught as brethren. Philemon v. 1. Nay the high Priests themselves, are taken
from amongst men, from causes of temporal matters, and are ordained for men,
only in things pertaining to God, Heb. 5, i. And then surely for such as
profess themselves to be the Ministers of Christ, they ought not to be made
temporal Lords, and to sit in places of Judicature, and to judge of Civil
matters, but their office is to draw nigh to God, Iam. 4* 8. 1 Pet. 1. 12. 2
Pet. 1. 21. 1 Ioh. 4. 3. 2 Ioh. v. 2. 3 Ioh. v. 11. Jude v. 1. what shall I say
more, if our lordly Bishops will not take examples from the Apostles, let them
take examples from the Angel, who would not suffer John to fall down before
him, no (says he) I am they fellow servants, and of thy brethren the Prophets,
Revel. 22. 9.

Thus you s^e that if our Lordly Bishops stand upon their guard to defend
Episcopal predominacie, they can neither father it upon God, or any title of
his holy word, nor upon the Prophets, nor Apostles of GOD, nor upon pure times,
who though they wrong the fathers of the primitive Church, to say that they had
the same honor, yet you see it is not so, no, no, alas should the godly,
humble, poor, unlordly Bishops of the primitive Orig. Hom. 6, in ^s.
Churches, (who had no such wordly honor, offices, state, pomp, and secular
power, as ours now enjoy) arise out of their graves, and behold the dominions,
wealth, habit, and employment of our present Prelates, they would rather deem
them Monsters, then Ministers, Pilates, then Prelates, Lucifers, then
Preachers, Tyrants, then Overseers of Christ's flock, yea Princes, rather then
Bishops of divine institution.

An old Prophecy of Gostred, Bishop of Lincoln concerning the Prelates.
IT is reported of the Bishop of Lincoln that he should prophecy, that the
Church shall not be delivered from the servitude of Egypt, but by violence and
force, and with the bloody sword, and albeit their government be esteemed but a
light matter, yet shortly more great and greevous things shall be seen. How
happens it (says father Latimer) that we have had so many cares many
unpreaching Prelates, Lordly Loiterrers, and idle Ministers: This land is not
(says he) (...) to plough, it is to stoney, too thorney, too hard for me to
plough. They have so many things that make for them, so many things to say for
themselves, that it is not for my weak teame to plough them. They have to say
for themselves, long Customs, Ceremonies, (...) authority, placing in
Parliament, and many things more, and I fear me this Land is not yet ripe to
be ploughed, for as the saying is, it lackes withering, this Land lackes
withering, at least ways it is not for me for to plough; for what shall I
look for among thorns, but pricking and scratching, what amongst stones, but
stumbling, (I had almost said) what amongst Serpents but stinging; but thus
much I dare say, that since Lording and Loytering has come up, Preaching has
gone down, contrary to the Apostles times; for they Preached, and Lorded not,
but now they Lord and Preach not: for they that be Lords, will ill go to
plough. And if the Plough-men in the Country, were as negligent in their
Office, as Prelates be, we should not long live, for lack of sustenance.

FINIS.

