Good and Bad Nevves From IRELAND, GOOD, In the recovery of the Fort and Town
of Kinsale from the Rebels, by the valor of diverse Noblemen, with other
Commanders of great note and courage.

BAD, In the relation of a most detestable and unheard of massacre, perpetrated
in Vantry, upon the bodies of Mr. John Davenant, his wife, children, and whole
family, by Odonnel Mac Hiwel an Arch-Rebell, and neighbor to the foresaid
Gentleman.

Written By I. VV. a Factor in Dublin, to an Alderman of this City.

Also the contents of a Letter lately sent to a noble Gentleman of this
Kingdom, and read in the Honorable House of Commons.

(...)

Good and bad News from IRELAND.
MY being at Limbricke so long, must excuse my silence in the affairs of
Dublia; in my departure thence, and return to Cork, news came suddenly
thither that present morning being Twelfth even; Iannuary eleventh, 1641. both
the Town and Castle of Kingsale were taken from the Rebels, and a most
glorious victory obtained over them; all Cork ecchoing of this news, and the
poor English I am sure rejoicing seriously, as some Irish I am sure hung down
their heads apparently; I and John Birges with two more took horse that
afternoon, and went forthwith to Kingsale twelve miles distant from Cork, the
rather because of my business with Mr. Beklow my Uncle, dwelling over the
harbor three miles from that Town, a right worthy and religious Gentleman, of
whose welfare in these times I was desirous to be informed; when we came to
Kingsale we found the Town already in the power of the English and reduced by
the noble and courageous attempt of Sir Simon Harcourt, and Sir Thomas Temple,
whose two Regiments had not made an end of their execution upon the Rebels in
the Church yard, at what time we entered the Town, and I also assure you, the
execution was exceeding hot, these two great Commanders giving command to their
soldiers, and crying to their hearers, Soldiers, cut off all males, which I
assure you was done to the purpose; such pitiful clamours and mortal
groanings I never heard before, and desire never to see or hear the like
again, though of Rebel, whose former demeanor I am sure had deserved it,
could it have been worse, but these two courageous cavalleers have fully as I
suppose paid some of their old scores; in the mean time was the Earls of
Kildare and Barrimore, with my Lord of Castlelions busied with taking in of the
fort, having three thousand 500. men in their company, their Lordsh. had five
good pieces with them, yet the fort stands so strongly mounted, and so
unapproachable either by far or near assaults, that their pieces could do
them little good, save that by the advice of one John Simons a very skillful
gunner, the artillery was drawn up a very steep narrow and broken passage in
the rereward just before the mouth of the forts gate, upon signal given the
said rereward very speedily, and in as good order as for the straitness and
inconveniency of the place could be expected, retired behind the artilleries,
and caused the carriages to advance even to the very gates; the Rebels whether
out of misprision of our forces that they were not so great as indeed to their
cost they afterward found them, or thinking that our rereward did indeed fly
because they cried at their retreat, emine, emine, the Rebels hearing emine,
forthwith issued out of the fort crying Saint Patrick and the cross, they
fly; but the Cannoneers, and especially John Simous did their duty so well,
that neither Saint Patricke nor the cross brought them very far, for the
Gunnes with such dexterity let fly amongst them, with their five pieces that
were laden in such a manner, and such stuff, that forthwith fourscore and
eleven of them were upon the ground, some with more members, some with less,
and the fort wicket not only beat open, but sent fifteen yards in; our
companies forthwith advanced, and with the loss only of Mr. Freane an Irish
man, but an honest man, recovered the outward court, but at the gaining of the
inward our losses were more heavy, for there my Lord of Castlelions was brained
with a stone from one of the battlements, and Mr. Edward Speneer shot with a
collever: to speak truth, the rogues showed great stoutnesse, and resolution
before we could master them within the second court, and never was quarter
once demanded by them, nor offered by us, at the last seeing themselves no way
able to hold out against us, either answerable to us in number or ammunition,
they desperately carried their powder and other combustible stuff into a kind
of cellar or vault under the Fort hall, and as we were furious in forcing the
inward gate of the Fort, upon a sudden it flew open, our men following hot,
followed the villains unadvisedly into the said cellar, where the cursed
captives blew up themselves, and some of our men; and thus God be thanked is
that strong Fort recovered, and I trust will be for hereafter better looked
unto, commanding not only that Town, but all the Country thereabouts and all
the whole harbor, and by a little cost might be made invincible; let us be
wise at least after we have smarted.

But all the rest is not so pleasant, God tempereth our sweet with bitter, lest
perhaps we should be too frolic. December. 20. being Thursday, was as execrable
and dreadful a murder acted upon the bodies of a worthy Gentleman, his wife
and children, and whole family in the Vantry as ever I think was heard tell of
in the memory of man; this Gentleman's name war Mr. John Davenant, Nephew unto
the late Bishop of Sarum, he was a great Spilchard fisher in the Vantry, there
dwelt by him one Odonnel Swillevan an incarnat Devil, who came into the house
of the said Mr. Davenant with all his savage rebellious crew, who seazing the
Gentleman and his wife, first bound them in^o chair, set them to the fire,
then took their eldest son and spitted him before their face, laid him down
to the fire, then caused the servant maid to turn him, after him the second,
then a young tender daughter, next they abused his wife, after that roasted her
before the poor Gentleman's face, who all the while provoked them all he could,
that so by that means he might have his death hastened rather then to be thus
tormented in the tortures of his dearest and nearest, the sight of whose
miseries was to him a thousand deaths, at length they cut out his tongue, then
his members, his legs likewise, and then roasted him; was ever such cruelty
heard of amongst the very Canniballs! God grant the Kingdom of England may
take some speedy course, not only for prevention, but likewise for redress
and revenge of such unparalleled blood suckers. This I thought good to intimate
unto you being as certain as lamentable, desiring you, and all true Christians
there' with you, first to commend our case to God in your religious prayers,
then to the King and Parliament how much you think it concerns.

The extract of a Letter sent from Ireland, and read in the House of Commons.
That the Rebels are lately marched within five miles of Dublin and that the
great Council of England would be pleased to consider of their estate, and
that present aid might be sent, or else Dublin is in danger of surprisall: Also
that a thousand Spaniards and others that preserved themselves by swimming were
in Ireland arrived in defense of the Rebels.

FINIS.

