SOME IMPROVEMENTS TO THE ART of TEACHING Especially in the FIRST GROUNDING OF
A YOUNG SCHOLAR in Grammar Learning.

Showing a Short, Sure, and Easy way to bring a Scholar to Variety and
Elegancy in Writing Latin.

Written for the Help and Ease of all Vshers of Schools, and Country
Schoolmasters, and for the Use and Profit of all Younger Scholars.

The Second Edition with many Additions.

By WILLIAM WALKER, B. D. Author of the Treatise of English Particles.

Fundamento tota domus nititur, Cic. LONDON, Printed by J. M. and are to be
sold by Tho. Sawbridge at the Three Flower-de-luces in Little Britain. 1676.

IMPRIMATUR,

Tho Tomkyns, RRimo in Christo Patriac Domino Dom. Gilberto Divina Providentia
Archi-Episcopo Cantuariensi a Sacris Domesticis.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD WILLIAM By Divine Providence Lord Bishop
OF LINCOLN, My very good Lord and Diocesan, WILLIAM WALKER Rector of
Colsterworth, wishes all happiness both temporal and eternal.
My Lord,
THis is an Age of Projects and Experiments, much is done both ways, as well in
Speculative as Practical Arts and Sciences. No wonder therefore, if amongst the
rest of the busie-headed, and busie-handed ones, I also have busied both my
head and hand to be doing something, though all I could do, were but like
Diogenes, to rumble my Tub up and down the streets, and keep others from
sleeping at noon day. Example, though it be no irresistible Compeller unto
action, yet is a very powerful Perswader unto imitation. Here I do with all
humility offer to your Lordships hand, and by that (as that which will be its
best recommendation) unto the World something both of Project and of
Experiment, in that part of Literature, wherein my self have for the most of my
time been more or less conversant, which is The Grounding of a young Scholar in
Grammar Learning. That I dedicate it to your Lordships Name many are the
inducements that draw me to it. To say I do it to welcome your Lordship into
this your Diocese, by an honourary testification to the World of my joy for the
coming of a Bishop among us, from whose Presidency over us, so many good things
do promise themselves to us, and do seem, like golden Apples from a laden bough
to bend down toward us, and court their acceptance from us, and even ready to
drop themselves upon us, this alone were a competently fair account thereof.
Those Primitive Episcopal Virtues in your Lordship, whose bright emanations
from you, like beams from the Sun, do irradiate your Diocese, to the chearing
and comforting of the hearts of all the Sons of true Piety and Honor in it,
and to the obliging of all persons who have in themselves any sense of, and are
capable of being obliged by, another Goodness, both are of worth to deserve,
and of power to command a much more noble Gratulation, than this Dedication can
possibly amount, or dares indeed aspire unto. Honor to your Lordship, it is a
debt which all men owe to your Virtue, and which I this way choose to pay,
because it is not only the best, but the properest, if not the onliest way that
I have to pay it.

But though this be the first, and my most noble inducement, yet there are
others, which do sway very much with me also. This is one, that as your
Lordship does excel in the highest, and most noble parts of Literature, so you
have great skill in this also, though less noble and less honored, yet no less
useful, no less necessary part of it, and so are the better able to take the
true measure of, and to give the right judgment upon my design in this Manual.
It is a comfort to a Writer to have a judicious Patron to countenance his Work,
that being the first thing that bespeaks his entertainment as an Author into
the World. Another (and I shall trouble your Lordship with no more) is this,
that it seemed a most suitable thing in me then to dedicate a Book of the
Grounding of a young Scholar in Grammar Learning to your Lordship, when your
Lordship was just a designing the setting up of a Grammar School in the City of
Lincoln (the place of my Nativity and Education) for the Grounding of young
Scholars therein. Wherein you show your self a right Wise Master Builder, and
so the fitter to be ordained a Repairer to the ruins of this decayed Church:
for to see that the Churches foundation be rightly laid, is the way to have its
Superstructures long to hold; and the School is the properest place for the
laying of the first stones of the Churches foundation in. Toward which, as it
is my desire so it will be my honor, and shall be my happiness to be
serviceable in any way in any measure, and under any capacity, though it be but
that of the meanest under-server. If I may but fetch, though I cannot fit
materials for the work, or if I may but hew stones, and temper mortar; though I
be not able yet to lay a stone in the building, it will be a very great
satisfaction, and no less a contentment to me. And now, that I be not
unpardonably tedious in the address of so little a Present to so great a
Patron, I shall beg your Lordships pardon for the boldness of this attempt, and
beg of God for your Lordship length to your days, health to your person,
success to your designs, and a blessing upon your labors, that the work of the
Lord may prosper in your hands, to his glory, your honor, and the good of this
Church both in this present and in the future ages of it. And so rests

Colsterworth, December. 1. 1668. Your Lordships most humble Servant WILL. WALKER.

THE Preface to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
HAving spent many years of my Life in the exercise of Teaching Scholars; and
having in that time traveled much to find out, by what means I might improve
the Art of Teaching, especially in that part of it, which is most necessary to
be well minded, and yet of all other the most neglected, which is the very
First Grounding of the Scholar, and laying the Foundation of all his future
seize; and having by searching found out something conducible to that
end, and seen the usefulness thereof in the experiencing of it, to the intent I
might save others somewhat of the labor, which that search had cost me, and
help them in that way, from which I was called off by my Ministerial Employment
to other Studies, I did, after I had left off to be a Public Schoolmaster,
throw into these Papers those advices and counsels to the industrious Teacher,
those helps and furtherances to the studious Learner, which now I expose to
public view; and which, if diligently perused and made use of, will (by the
blessing of God) very much ease the trouble of the one, and not a little
promote the profiting of the other, so as that the one shall follow his
Teaching with delight, and the other proceed in his Learning with comfort, and
both come off from their several employments with reputation and credit. And
now having acquainted thee with thus much, I shall beg thy prayers for Gods
blessing on this design, that it may turn to his honor and his Churches good,
and so, without further trouble to my self or thee, for the present rest

Thy Servant for the Common good W. W.

A Summary Account of the ensuing Treatise.
CHAP. I.
Of the Forming of Nouns Page 1 The English Signs of Cases to be well known 2
The manner of Forming Nouns through every Case of every Declension 3 Of the
various Terminations of sundry Cases 4 Of the Dative and Ablative Case Plural
of the First Declension ibid. Of the Vocative Singular of the Second Declension
5 Of Nouns ending in us in the Vocative Singular of the Second Declension ibid.
Of [i] in the Vocative from Nominatives in us 6 Of ai and ei in the Vocative
Singular 7 Of the Accusative Singular of the Third Declension ibid. Nouns
ending in im ibid. Nouns ending in em and im 8 Of the Ablative Singular of the
Third Declension ibid. Nouns having [i] in their Abl. Singul. ibid. The
Ablative of Neuters in all ibid. In ar ibid. Or e ibid. The Abl. of Adject. in
is or er 9 The Ablative of Adjectives derived of proper Names 10 The Ablative
of Words having only im in the Accusative Case ibid. Nouns having both e and i
in the Abl. Sing. 11 The Ablative Singular of Substantives having em and im in
their Accusative ibid. The Abl. of Adjectives of one Termination 12 Of par and
his Compounds 13 The Ablative of Adjectives of the Comparative Degree ibid. Of
the Terminations eis and is in the Nom. and Accus. Plural of the Third Declens.
ibid. Of the Nom. and Accus. Plu. of the Third Declens. in the Neuter Gender 14
What Words of the Third Declens. end in a, and what in ia ibid. Of the Genesis
Plur. of the third Declens. 15 What words have ium in the Genesis Plur. ibid. The
Genitive of words having i in their Ablative Singular ibid. The Genitive Plural
of words of two or more Syllables ending with two Consonants 16 The Genitive
Plural of Nouns in er, es, and is not increasing 17 The Genitive Plural of
Polysyllables increasing in the Genitive Singular ibid. The Genitive Plural of
several sorts of Monosyllables 18 The Genitive Plural in ium syncopated 19 Some
in ium have also orum 20 Greek words in ma having both um and orum in their
Genitive Plural ibid. Of on in the Genitive Plural 21 Of the Dat. Plur. of the
third Declens. ibid. Neuter Greek words having both ibus and is in the Dat. and
Abl. Plur. ibid. Of the Genesis Sing. of the fourth Declens. 22 Of words of the
fourth Declens. having i in the Genesis Case ibid. and is and uis ibid. Of the
Dat. Sing. of the fourth Declens. ibid. Of words having u in the Dative
Singular of the fourth Declens. 23 Of the Abl. Sing. of the fourth Declens.
ibid. Of the Genesis Plur. of the fourth Declens. ibid. Of the Dat. Plur. of the
fourth Declens. ibid. Of words ending in ubus ibid. -- and both ubus and ibus
24 Of the Genesis Sing. of the fifth Declens. ibid. Of es in the Genesis Sing. of the
fifth Declens. ib. -- and i ibid. and e 25 Of e in the Dat. Sing. of the fifth
Declens. ibid.
CHAP. II.
Of the Comparing of Adjectives The way to learn it 26 Of Irregular Comparisons
27 Comparatives and Superlatives formed from Positives having a Vowel before us
28 Of Defective Comparisons 29 Adjectives wanting the Positive degree ibid.
Adjectives wanting the Comparative degree ib. Adjectives wanting the
Superlative degree 30 Adjectives wanting both the Positive and Superlative
degree ibid. Of redundant Comparisons ibid. Two Superlatives from one Positive
31 A Comparative formed from a Superlative ibid. Adjectives not compared 31, 32
CHAP. III.
Of the Forming of Verbs 32 The Tenses formed one from another 33 The way to
learn to form Verbs 34 The benefit of forming Verbs 35 Of Verbs Defective 36,
etc.
CHAP. IV.
Of Translating English into Latin 40 The time for a Scholar to begin to make
Lat. ib. Of Pointing and Rules for it. ibid. Making Latin best begun with
translating 51 In translating the Natural Order of Words to be observed 52
General Rules touching the Natural Order of Words ibid. Special Rules for the
Natural Order of Words 53 The way to teach the Natural Order of Words 56 The
first entering of a Scholar into translating ibid. Directions for making plain
Latin 57 Directions to bring Children to understand the difficulties about the
Relative 70 Of the Ablative Case Absolute 73 What the Teacher is to do with and
at his Scholars translation 74 Parsing to be performed by the Scholar alone 75
Englishes for translation to be contrived suitable to the Grammar Rules 76
Examples of such Englishes in the first Concord ibid. in the second Concord 98
in the third Concord 109 in the Government of Substantives 133 and Adjectives
140
CHAP. V.
Of the Artificial Order and Elegant placing of words 167. and clauses 176
CHAP. VI.
Of the Use of Phrases 178 How to store a Scholar with Phrases ibid. A
Collection of Phrases out of Godwins Antiquities 180 A Collection of Phrases
out of Hermes Anglo-Latinus 198 How to show the use of Phrases 215
CHAP. VII.
Of Variation of Phrases 217 Rules of Variation ibid. How to Vary a Verb Active
ibid. Passive 218 Abl. Case Absolute ibid. Adject. with res 219 Adjective of
the Neuter Gender ibid. Latter of two Substantives ibid. Adjective Absolute in
the Neuter with his Genesis Case 220 Adjective with his Substantive wherewith he
agrees ibid. Accusative Case before an Infinitive Mood ibid. Nominative case
with his Verb, and quod or ut 221. Habeo ibid. Genesis case with his own partitive
ibid. Genesis case after Superlative degree 222 Infinitive Mood Active ibid.
Infinitive passive after an Adjective ibid. Comparative degree 223 Superlative
degree ibid. Single words 224 Sentences 226
CHAP. VIII.
Of the Elegancies of the Particles. 230 Particles elegantly used, where others
are unelegant 232 Particles elegantly used for others, which are not unelegant
235 Particles elegantly used in contexture together with others 241
CHAP. IX.
Of the Idioms of English and Latin 249 How to bring a Scholar to render
English Proprieties according to the Propriety of the Latin ibid. Ten English
Dialogues consisting of Idiomatical expressions contrived on purpose for
translation, and to bring Children off from the baldness of a verbal
translation to a more elegant way of writing 254 One English Dialogue, with a
threefold Latin translation of it, to exemplify variety of elegant
translatings of the same English Idiom. 266
THE ART OF TEACHING, Improved in the grounding of a young Scholar in the
Latin TONGUE.
CHAP. I. Of the Forming of Nouns.
INtending to write, not upon every thing, that is to be performed by the
Teacher, or prescribed to the Learner, of the Latin Tongue, but only on some
particular observables, conducing Non utomnia dicerem, sectatus, quod infinitum
erat; sed ut maxim necessaria. Quintil. l. 1. c. 9.
to the Grounding of a young Scholar therein, I begin with that which is both
most necessary, and most useful, the Declining, or Forming of Nouns: touching
which the Directions to the Teacher are as follows.

First, In the learning of the Declensions of Nouns make your Scholars to
attend unto, and be expert in the English signs of every several Case, by
making them together with the Latin Nouns, which they decline, to give the
English: thus, Nom. Musa, a song, G. Musae, of a song, D. Musae, to a song, A.
Musam, a, or the song, etc. This initiates them in the Practice of rendering
Latin into English.

Secondly, Use them not only to give the English for the Latin, but also,
vice versa, the Latin for the English: thus, N. A song, Musa, G. Of a song,
Musae, D. To a song, Musae, etc. This initiates them in the skill of turning
English into Latin.

Thirdly, Practice them in declining forwards and backwards (i. e. Latin
before English, and English before Latin) Substantives and Adjectives, first
of like Termination in all Cases: as, Musa jucunda: then of unlike Termination;
first in fewer Cases, as, dies splendens; then in more, as, Poeta doctus, lapis
pre^iosus, ficus pulla, etc. and so far as may be done in all Declensions. This
Exercise, as being directly the practice of all the second concord, will be of
very great use to them in making of Latin.

It will be of great use to the purposes aforesaid, to put them to the forming
of English Substantives, first alone without Adjectives; thus, N. a house, G.
of a house, etc. then together with Adjectives; thus, N. a fair house, G. of a
fair house, etc.

Fourthly, When they are perfect in the Terminations of the Cases of every
Declension severally, then exercise then in giving the Terminations of every
Case throughout all the Declensions together: after this manner.

The Terminations of all the Cases in every Declension.
The Genitive Case singular of the First Declension ends in ae, as Musae; of
the Second in i, as Magistri; of the Third in is, as Lapidis; of the Fourth in
us, as Manus; of the Fifth in ei, as Diei.

The Dative Case Singular of the First Declension ends in ae, as Masae; of the
Second in o, as Magistro; of the Third in i, as Lapidi; of the Fourth in ui, as
Manui; of the Fifth in ei, as Diei.

The Accusative Case Singular of the First Declension ends in am, as Musam; of
the Second in um, as Magistrum; of the Third in em, as Lapidem, or in im, as
Sitim, or in both em and im, as Febrem and Febrim; of the Fourth in um, as
Manum; of the Fifth in em, as Diem.

The Vocative is like the Nominative: except in Some Nouns of the Second
Declension ending in us or ius, whose Vocative respectively ends in e, or i; as
Nom. Dominus, Voc. Domine. N. Filius, V. Fili.

The Ablative Case Singular of the First Declension ends in a, as Musa; of the
Second in o, as Magistro; of the Third in e, as Lapide, or in i, as Siti, or in
both e and i, as Febre and Febri; of the Fourth in u, as Manu; of the Fifth in
e, as Die.

The Nominative Case Plural of the First Declension ends in ae, as Musae; of
the Second in i, as Magistri; of the Third in es, as Lapides; of the Fourth in
us, as Manus; of the Fifth in es, as Dies.

The Genitive Case Pural of the First Declension ends in arum, as Musarum; of
the Second in orum, as Magistrorum; of the Third in um, as Lapidum, or in ium,
as Febrium; of the Fourth in uum, as Manuum; of the Fifth in erum, as Dierum.

The Dative Case Plural of the First Declension ends in is, as Musis, or in
abus, as Mulabus, or in both is and abus, as Filiis and Filiabus; of the Second
in is, as Magistris; of the Third in ibus, as Lapidibus; of the Fourth either
in ibus, as Manibus, or in ubus, as Artubus, or in both ibus and ubus, as
Veribus and Verubus; of the Fifth in ebus, as Diebus.

The Accusative Case Plural of the First Declension ends in as, as Musas; of
the Second in os, as Magistros; of the Third in es, as Lapides; of the Fourth
in us, as Manus; of the Fifth in es, as Dies.

The Vocative Case Plural is like the Nominative; and the Ablative is like the
Dative in all Declensions.

Note, that all Nouns of the Neuter Gender of what Declension soever, and in
what Termination soever, have their Nominative, Accusative, and Vocative alike
in both Numbers: and in the Plural Number do end all in a: except ambo and duo,
and words undeclinable, as centum, viginti, mill, tot, etc.

Of the various Terminations of Cases in several Declensions.
In the Declensions it is visible, that there be several Cases, which admit of
a variety of Terminations. Now for as much as it may be very useful to Learners
to know something of Certainty in that Variety, I shall here for that cause
give the Reader some account thereof.

Some Nouns of the First Declension do end in abus in the Dative and Ablative
Case Plural. Of the Dative and Ablative Plur. of the First Declension.


The Examples hereof producible would, if doubted, clearly, evince it. The
Ground of adding this Termination in abus to that in is, was to distinguish the
words that are so declined, from other words of a near signification, whose
Dative and Ablative Plur. end in is.

The words that have abus in the Dative and Ablative Plural are Filia, nata,
Dea, liberta, equa, mula, serva, conserva, asina, socia, anima. Of which Mula
and Liberta are hardly, if ever, read in any other Termination but abus: the
rest are found to have both is and abus.

Justin lib. 7. has, Adhibitis in convivium suum filiis, and uxoribus, and
filiabus. Plaut. Stich. ac. 4. Sed ego ibo intro, and gratulabor vestrum
adventum filiis. Cic. pro Rabir. Ab Jove Optimo Maximo caeterisque Diis,
Deabusque immortalibus pacem ac veniam peto. Varro de R. R. l. 3. c. 16.
(speaking of the Muses, whose Birds the Bees were said to be, says) His Diis
Helicona atque Olympum attribuerunt homines. Palladius speaking of the month of
March says, Hoc mense saginati ac pasti ante admissarii generosis equabus
admittendi sunt. Varro de R. R. l. 2. c. 1. speaking of the Mares in Lusitania,
which are said to conceive by the wind, says, Sed ex his equis qui nati pulli,
non plus triennium vivunt. See more in Voss. de Analog. l. 2. c. 4. Alvar.
Instit. Gram. p. 196. Voss. Etymolog. Lat. p. 31. Rhen. Gram. Lat. p. 47. Hayne
Lat. Gram. p. 15. Ram. Lat. Gram. l. 1. c. 7. Farnab. Lat. Gram. p. 7.

Nouns of the Second Declension ending in us in Of the Vocative Case of the
Second Declension.
the Nom. Case, do end in e in the Vocative.

This is too apparent to be doubted. Even in other Terminations anciently the
Vocative Case was distinguished from the Nominative. Whence puere for puer is
cited by Priscian. l. 7. out of Caecilius and Afranius. Age, age puere, Duce me
ad patrios fines decoratum opipare. And O puere, puere, sine me prospicere mihi.

But whether any Nouns ending in us in the Nominative do end also in us in the
Vocative, may be a doubt.

In Sidonius Carm. 22. we may read -- Naiadas istic Nereidum chorus alme doce.
In Live. l. 1. ann. V. C. is read, Audi Jupiter, audi pater patrate populi
Alba^i, audi tu populus Albanus. But in these, and the like examples, either
there is a Grecism: (for in the Attic Dialect the Nom. and Voc. end both alike)
or an Enallage of the Case, the Nom. being put for the Voc. whereof there be
many Examples, both in Substantives and Adjectives, which yet are not therefore
said to have a Voc. in e and in us. As Virg. 1. Aea. Adsis laetitiae Bacchus
dator. -- Pers. 1. Sat. Vos o patricius sanguis. -- Insomuch that even Deus in
the Voc. Case is an Atticism. As (...) in Greek is used for (...), which is
also read: so is Deus in Latin used for Dee, which is read also in
Ecclesiastical Writers. Tertul. l. 1. advers. Marcion. Gratus esses, O Dee
haeretice, si isses in dispositionem Creatoris. So Prudent. in Hamartigenia, O
Dee cunctiparens, animae dator, O Dee Christ. So that the proper Termination
of Nouns in us of the Second Declension in their Voc. is e: the other in us is
figurative. Only vulgus has both e and us: but e as a Masculine, us as a
Neuter: unless the Voc. in us be remaining of the old declining of this word of
the Fourth Declension: whence Charisius cites from Varro, A vulgu condemnaretur.

The same may be said touching those in ius with a Vowel or simple i before us,
whether Proper or Common, which now end in i in the Voc. Case: their proper
Termination is e; which being cut off by an Apocope, so they come to end in i.

As fluvie and socie is read, so was also filie, and Genie, Antonie, and
Virgilie: of which the e being by an Apocope cut off, there is now remaining in
use only fili, Geni, etc. But Personal Adjectives still retain the proper
Termination in e: as Cynthius, Cynthie, Delius, Delie, etc. See Voss. de
Analog. lib. 2. cap. 5.

As for those that end in ius with a Consonant j, or a Diphthong ai or ei
before us, such as Cajus, Majus, Pompejus, Vultejus, their Termination is i.

This Voc. is formed of the Nom. by purting away us, and either resolving the
Diphthong into its Vowels, or turning the Consonant j into i Vowel. Unless any,
supposing it to be a Diphthong that in these words precedes us, will have the
Voc. Case to end in that Diphthong: as indeed Pompei and Vultei of two
Syllables may be read. Hor. Od. 7. l. 2. Pompei meorum prime sodalium: and Ep.
7. l. 1. Duvus ait, Vultei, nimis attentusque videris. However now use resolves
the Diphthong. Hence Martial. l. 10. Ep. 16. Si donare vocas promittere, nec
dare, Cai. And Auson. de Mensib. Maja Dea, an major, May, te fecerit aetas,
Ambigo. See Voss. de Analog. l. 2. c. 5, and 20.

Of the Accusative Case Singular of the Third Declension Of the Accusat. Sing.
of the Third Declens.
the ordinary Termination is em: yet there are some that end only in im: and
some that end both in em and im.

These end only in im. Vis, ravis, sitis, charybdis, tussis, Mephitis,
canuabis, magudaris, and amussis, Praesepis, Syrtis, Opis, pelvis, buris.
Sinapis, cucumis, Leucaspis, and securis. Albis, Fabaris, Boetis, Tanais, and
Tigris, Araris, Athesis, Ligeris, Tiberis, and Tibris. So Halys has Halym and
Halyn.


These end both in em and im. Aqualis, cutis, turris, restis, navis, Sementis,
puppis, bipennis, febris, clavis.


But in these febris, navis, aqualis and clavis, em is the more usual
Termination: as is also im in these three, puppis, restis, and turris: to which
may be added strigilis.

This is reckoned by Danesius amongst them that have, and is acknowledged by
Vossius to have had, em, as well as im. Danes. Schol. p. 47. Voss. de Analog.
l. 2. p. 302.

Of the Ablative Case Singular of the Third Declension Of the Abl. Case Sing.
of the Third De lension. Nouns ending only in i in their Abl. Sing.
e is the Ordinary and regular Termination: yet there are some that end in i;
and some that have both e and i in the Ablative Case.

Of Nouns that make their Ablative in i only there are these sorts.

1. Neuters in all increasing long in their Genitive Case, have only i in their
Ablative; as Animal, Genesis animalis, Abl. animali.

Yet hoc Sal has Sale: but that may be the Ablat. of hic Sal, which is far the
more usual, besides that the penultima of it is short.

2. Neuters in ar, if their last Syllable but one in their Genesis Case be by
Nature long, do in their Ablat. end only in i: as Calcar, G. calcaris, Abl.
calcari. But if the last Syllable but one of their Genesis Case be either short,
as hepar, G. hepatis; or but long by Position, as far, G. farris, then the
Ablat. ends in e, as hepate, far.

Yet Poets sometimes form an Ablat. in e, of Nouns producing their last
Syllable save one: as Virg. in Culice. -- Si nitor auri Sub laqueare domus
animum non tangit avarum.

3. Declinable Neuter Appellatives in e, have their Ablat. ending in i; as
cubile, Abl. cubili; so aplustre, Abl. aplustri.

Gausape is read in the Ablat. Case, but that is because gausape in the
Nominative is an undeclinable Word. Hence Plin. l. 8. c. 48. Nam tunica
laticlavi in modum gausape texi nunc primum incipit: who a little before had
used the same word in the Nomin. Antiquis enim torus e stramento erat, qualiter
etiam nunc in castris gausape. Or if it be the Ablative Case, here also, yet in
that of Pers. 4. Sat. it is not, Tu cum maxillis balanatum gausape pectas. So
praesepe in the Abl. is from the undeclinable praesepe in the Nominat. Ovid
has mare in the Ablat. Case l. 5. Trist. El. 2. Exiguum pleno de mare demat
aquae. and de Pont. l. 4. El. 6. Euxino de mare vertet iter. So Plaut. Nam si a
mare abstinuissem, as some Copies read it. It would be very sparingly, if at
all, used. Rete is read in the Ablat. but that is from the old Nom. retis.
These proper Neuters in e are said to have e in the Abl. viz. Praeneste, Caere,
Bibracte, Nepete, Reate, Soracte. See Voss. de Analog. l. 2. c. 11. But
Danesius thinks them not to appertain to the present consideration, as being
undeclinable words, as Alvar. also says, Gram. Instit. p. 211. Though Soracte
may come of Soractis: for Plin. has Sacrificio annuo, quod fit ad montem
Soractem. l. 7. c. 2. See Danes. Schol. l. 1. c. 13.

4. Adjectives in is and er having their Neuters in the Nom. Case ending in e,
do in their Abl. end in i: as Nom. fortis, forte: Abl. forti. So Nom. acer,
acre: Abl. acri.

Hither refer names of Months, as Aprilis Aprili, December Decembri, as being
in their nature Adjectives. Hither refer also memor memori, and immemor
immemori, as coming from memoris, immemoris. Yet Ovid has used coeleste and
bimestre in the Abl. Case. See Alvar. p. 211. Danes. Schol. l. 1. c. 13. and
Voss. de Analog. l. 2. c. 11. which last, out of Charisius cites in the Abl.
Case (from Pomponius) humile rege; and incolume illo; and cum contubernale
pugnavi; and from Cicero, Quo stante and incolume: and aliquo excellent and
nobile viro; from Nepos, virgin Vestale; and from Salust, agreste.

But proper Names derived of Adjectives in is have e in their Ablat.

So Martial. l. 7. Ep. 23. Cum Juvenale meo -- Cic pro Planc. Confiteor summa
in Laterense ornamenta esse. So Annalis, Cerealis, Vitalis, Natalis, Nobilis,
Celeris, Apollinaris. See Voss. de Analog. lib. 2. cap. 11.

Affinis, rivalis, familiaris, contubernalis, popularis, sodalis, aedilis,
annalis, biremis, natalis, and bipennis, have their Ablatives properly in i, as
being originally Adjectives: though again being used Substantively, they have
sometimes an Abl. in e. Volucris the Substantive has e, the Adjective i. Rudis
the Substantive has e, the Adjective i. See Danes. and Voss. loc. sup. cit.

5. Words ending only in im in the Accusat. Case end only in i in their Abl.
Case: as Accusat. vim, Abl. vi. So Accus. ravim, Abl. ravi.

Yet Live. has Superato Boete amne, from Boetim. Boeth. l. 3 de Cons. Phil.
Carm. 12. has longa site perditus, from sitim: but by Poetical License, as
says Murmelius. Pers. Sat. 5. has, Tibi torta cannabe fulto Coena fit in
transtro; from cannabim.

Words of a Greek Original increasing in the Genesis Case, and having two
Terminations in the Accus. one in em, and another in im, (as Thetis, Genesis
Thetidos, Yet Plaut. Epid. 1. 1. has Theti in the Abl. Tum ille prognatus
Theti, etc.
Acc. Thetidem and Thetim) rather have e than i (as Thetide, rather than
Theti.) So Daphnide, not Daphni, etc. Because the Ablat. follows the Dat. (not
the Accus.) which in Greek words are the same: the Dative standing for both.

Arare in Caes. l. 1. Bell. Gal. is not from Araris, which makes Arari: but from
Arar, which he in the same book uses. Flumen est Arar, quod per fines Aeduorum
in Rhodanum influit.

Vossius to those that end in i only adds canalis and strigilis, l. 2. de
Analog. c. 11. p. 297. proving, their Termination from Quintil. Plin. Hor. and
adding as his Reason, Quid mirum, quando accusativum, uti ostensum, per im
efferunt? Yet afterward (see c. 12. p. 302.) having from Hor. and Cic. proved,
that there is nave and navi, as navem and navim, he adds, etiam ut strigilem
and strigilim dixere, sic strigile and strigili; citing for strigile, Plin.
Secund. out of Charis. as Horace for strigili. I suppose he means that strigili
is now only in use, though strigile were formerly used: or that it may be more
safely used, as indeed he explicates himself, p. 303. saying, Interim tutius
strigili per i usurpatur.

Of Nouns that have both e and i in their Abl. Case Nouns endind both in e and
i in their Ablat. Sing.
there are these sorts.

1. Substantives, which have in their Accus. both em and im, have in their
Ablat. both e and i: as Acc. puppem and puppim, Abl. puppe and puppi.

There are also found sometimes these Ablatives in i of words that have also a
more usual Ablat. in e, viz. Classi, colli, fini, fusti, Igni, imbri, vecti,
posti, Orbi, ovi, civi, avi, Vngui, parti, furfuri, navi, Supellectili and
sordi, With occipiti and sorti.


Of these there be Examples in Voss. de Analog. c. 12. Danes. Schol. lib. 1.
cup. 13. and Alvar. Inst. Gram. page 211.

Others beside are named, viz. Affinitati, alipedi, angui, assi, cani, labi,
luci, mani, mugili, nepti, stercori, tempori, vesperi, but not with like
Authentickness either for Author or Edition.

Those Proper names of Places, Carthagini, Sidoni, Lacedaemoni, Tiburi,
Sicyoni, Anxuri, etc. as also the Appellative ruri, mistaken to be Datives, are
old Ablatives in i, of words that have other usual Ablatives in e. See Voss. de
Construct. c. 46.

2. Adjectives of one Termination in the Nominat. have e and i in their
Ablative: as Nom. felix, Abl. felice vel felici. Nom. vetus, Abl. vetere vel
veteri. Nom. recens, Abl. recente vel recenti. Nom. Arpinas, Abl. Arpinate vel
Arpinati. Though in this last sort e is most usual.

Hither refer Participles and Participials in ns: as Nom. excellens, Abl.
excellent and excellenti. Nom. ardens, Abl. ardente and ardenti: unless they
be put Absolute, for then the Termination e is to be used, not i: as Imper ante
Augusto, not Imperanti.

Hither also refer vigil and artifex used Adjectively, as being then found to
have an Ablative also in i.

So Stat. Achill. Aspicit intentum vigilique haec aure trahentem. Ib. Qualiter
artifici victurae pollice cerae Accipiunt formas.

So also uber and degener, dives and locuples.

For Curtius l. 3. has uberi and pingui solo. And Lucan. l. 4. Si me degeneri
stravissent facta sub host. Plin. l. 3. c. 1. Diviti cultu. And Cic. 3. de
Orat. Locupleti oratione.

Lastly hither refer victrix and ultrix, which have e and i.

Ovid. 1. Fast. Dextra cecidit victrice. Lucan: l. 1: In sua victrici conversum
viscera ferro. And says Vossius, Par ratio in ultrix, Prisciano test.

But par the Adjective (as being anciently paris) has only pari, as par the
Substantive (for a mate or fellow) has pare: and yet the compounds compar and
impar have both e and i.

And so Verbals in trix taken Substantively have only ce as Nutrix, netrix,
obstetrix, ce. See Alvar. p. 211. Danes. Schol. p. 50, 51. Voss. Etym. Lat. p.
47, 48. and de Analog. l. 2. c. 12.

3. Adjectives of the Comparative Degree, as well masculines and feminines, as
neuters, have their Abl. in e and i; as Nom. major and majus, Abl. majore and
majori.

Hence Caes. l. 2. de Bell. civ. Majori cum fiducia^ pugnaverunt. And Sen. Ep.
108. Quantum majori impetu ad philosophiam juvenis accesserim, quam. -- Indeed
Mascul. and Neut. anciently were both of one Termination in the Nom. whence
Priscian l. 7. cites Senatusconsultum prior; and bellum posterior, from the
Ancients.

Though e is the more usual Termination, especially in the Masc. and Fem.
Gender, unless in Poets.

The Nominative and Accusative Plural of the Of the Nom. and Accus. Plural of
the Third Declension in the Mas and Fem. Gennder.
Third Declension in the Masc. and Fem. Gender do end in es, as Lapides,
Virtutes.

Anciently they did use a Termination in eis, as omneis, Sardeis, which again
they contracted into is, as omnis and Sardis.

Hence Cic. de Opt. Genesis Orat. Qualeis Asia multos tulit. ib. Vircis, Lacertos,
sanguinem quarunt. Plaut. Amph. 5. 1. Facit recta in anguis impetum. and Epid.
2. Ipsum ante aedis conspicor. ib. 3. 4. Promerui, ut mihi omnes mortalis
deceat agere gratias.

Touching which it is exceeding difficult and operous, if possible, to give
certain Rules; Authors following rather the judgment of the Sound by their ear,
than any Rule. See Gell. l. 13. c. 19. Yet Priscian attempts it, and gives four
Canons about it, repeated by Vossius and Danesius, viz. Voss. de Anal. l. c.
10. Danes. Schol. p. 55.
That they end in is.

(1) Whose Genitive is like their Nominative, as omnis, and naris. (2) Which
are only Plurals, as manes and tres. (3) Whose Nom. Sing. ends in er, and Abl
in i, as acer and imber. (4) Which end in ns, or rs, as mons and pars.
Let the particular words be well marked, as they are met with. Such as these
in cis, Ardenteis, aurcis, tereteis, Forenscis, vireis, qualeis, treis, etc.


And these in is, Acris, aedis, anguis, bidentis, Manis, omnis, mortalis,
parentis, Geleris, dulcis, fontis, pluris, Salubris, litis, with compluris,
Tris, tenacis, urbis, imbris, Summatis, partis, and Decembris, etc.


The Nominative and Accusative Plural of the Of the Nom. and Accus. Plur. of
the Third Decl. in the Neut. Gend.
Third Declension in the Neuter Gender end sometimes in a, and sometimes in ia.

They end in a, whose Abl. sing. ends only in e, as capita of capite; onera of
onere; gausapa of gausape. So hospita, sospita, paupera, of hospite, sospite,
paupere.

They end in ia, whose Abl. Sign. ends only in i, as animalia of animali;
fortia of forti; or else in e and i, as felicia of felice vel felici. So
locupletia, divitia, from locuplete vel locupleti, divite vol diviti.

Yet from this Rule there be some Exceptions.

(1) Vetus makes only vetera, and uber ubera, though they have i as well as e,
in their Abl. Sign.

(2) Bicorpor, tricorpor, unicolor, and versicolor have only a in the Nom.
Plur. though they have i in their Abl. Sing.

This termination in a comes from a termination in us in the Nom. Sing.
bicorporus, versicolorus, etc.

(3) Comparatives have only a in their Nom. Plur: though they have both c and i
in their Abl. Sing. as majora, minora.

The Ablative of these in e being the more usual they follow that Termination.

Yet plus has plura and pluria, and thence are complura and compluria.

Aplustre whose Abl. is aplustri, is also said to have both aplustra, and
aplustria; but aplustra comes not of aplustre, but of aplustrum anciently ^^ed.
See Voss. de Analog. l. 2. c. 13. Danes. Schol. p. 52.

The Genitive Case Plural of the Third Declension Of the Genesis C^s^ Plur. of the
third Declension.
ends generally in um, as Lapidum.

Yet there are sundry Words, and Kinds of words, that do end in ium* for which
there are these Rules.

Rule First, Such as have i, or both e and i, in the Abl. Sing. have ium in
their Genesis Plur. as Turris, turri, turrium, Animal, animali, animalium. Fortis
and forte, forti, fortium. So felix, felice vel felici, felicium. Imber, imbre
and imbri, imbrium. Prudens, prudente and prudenti, prudentium. Concors,
concord and concordi, concordium.

So Gentiles in as, as Arpinas, Fidenas, Gapenas, nostras, vestras, and, like
them, optimas and summas, which from an old Nom. in it is form an Abl. in ti, and
thence a Genesis Plur. in tium, as Arpinatium, nostratium, optimatium, etc.

Yet from this Rule there are Exceptions.

1. Except. All Comparatives have their Genesis Plur. ending in um, as major and
majus, majorum; except plus plurium, and compluria complurium.

Yet Pliny prefers complurum before complurium (as Vossius says from
Charisius) against the use of the Ancients.

2. Except. Words ending in fex, compounded of facio have their Genesis Plur.
ending in um, as Artifex, artificum; opifex, opificum; carnifex, carnificum.

These, when taken Adjectively, have their Abl. in e and i; yet their Genesis
Plur. ends only in um; probably that their Genesis Cases might not be confounded
with Artificium, opificium, etc. Substantives Singular of the Neut. Gender.

3. Except. These Particular words in their Genesis Plur. end in um, Memor,
immemor, inop^, uber, Compos, impos, impuber, puber, Dives, degener, congener,
bicorpor, Vetus, strigilis, mugilis, tricorpor.


Vigilum is of vigil the Substantive, whose Abl. Sing. is vigile. Of vigili,
the Abl. of vigil the Adjective is rather formed vigilium. See Voss. de Analog.
l. 2. c. 14. p. 312.

Rule Second. Substantives of two or more Syllables Dos est magna parentium
Virtus. Hor. l. 3 Od. 24.
ending with two Consonants, have their Genesis Plur. ending in ium, as Cohors,
cohortium; parens, parentium

Likewise many Adjectives used Substantively, as Serpens, serpentium; bidens,
bidentium; So infans, infantium; adolescens adolescentium; rudens, rudentium;
which taken Substantively have their Abl. in e.

Yet from this Rule there are Exceptions.

1. Except. These Particular words, coelebs, consors, hyems, judex, senex, have
their Genesis Plur. ending in um. Yet Justin, l. 1. from princeps forms
principium.


2. Except. Words derived of capio, as auceps, forceps, manceps, municeps,
particeps, princeps, have their Gen, Plur. ending in um.

In the most the reason may be to distinguish them from Substantives Singul.
ending in ium: as aucupium, mancipium, etc.

3. Except. Latin words formed of Greek ones ending in (...) in Greek, have
their Genesis Plur. ending in um in Latin: as Arabs, Arabum, Aethiops, Aethiopum.
So Chalybs, Cyclops, Phalanx; to which add these Monosyllables, gryps, lynx,
sphynx.

Rule Third. Nouns ending in er, es, and is not increasing in the Genesis Case
Singul. have their Genesis Pisces attritu ventrium coeunt. Plin. l. 9. c. 20.
Plur. ending in ium: as venture, ventrium; nubes, nubium; piscis, piscium.

So Greek words of the Second Declens. of the Contracts: as Syrtis, Syrtium;
dioecesis, dioecesium.

Hither refer caro, carnium: there having been anciently haec carnis, hujus
carnis.

Except. Yet from this Rule are excepted juvenis, juvenum; canis, canum; and
panis, panum, if it be read in the Plur. Numb. in that Case.

Rule Fourth. Sundry Words of more Syllables than one increasing in the Genesis
Case Singul. have ium in their Genesis Case Plural. viz. civitas, utilitas,
haereditas. So Samnis and Quiris. Also palus and fornax.

Civitatium is in Just. l. 9. utilitatium in Live. l. 45. haereditatium in the
Pandects. Notwithstanding the Syncopated Termination in um is in these much the
more usual. So Samnitium is in Live. l. 7. Quiritium in Hor. lib. 1. Od. 1. But
their Nom. Case formerly was Samnitis and Quiritis: so that these words may be
reduced to the Third Rule. Paludium is in Colum. l. 3. c. 9. fornacium in Plin.
l. 35. c. 14. Though paludum is also read in Mela. l. 3. c. 3. and fornacum in
Plin. l. 34. c. 10.

Rule Fifth. Some words that are only Plurals have their Genitive ending in
ium: as manes, manium; penates, penatium; tres, trium; and moenia, moenium.
Also these two Singulars Sal (wit) and vis, have in their Genesis Plur. salium and
virium.

Tres has trium from the Greek (...). Sales (for jests or conceits) is so
rarely found (though it be found, and in Cicero) in that sense in the Sing.
Number, that it has been taken for an only Plural. The Nom. Sing. of vires is
vis: but that being made of viris by a Syncope and a Crasis, thence comes the
Genesis Plur. virium Of moenia, moenium see Danes. Schol. p. 53.

On the other side opes, primores, lemures, coelites, celeres, Luceres, and
proceres have um in the Genesis Plural.

These words are taken to be Plurals only: but are, all, or most, found to have
Singulars. See my Explanations of Quae genus on Mascula sunt tantum, etc.

Celeres, Luceres, and Proceres come of celer, Lucer, and procer, out of use.

Rule Sixth. Several sorts of words of one Syllable have their Genesis Plur.
ending in ium: viz.

(1) Such Latin words in x as have a Consonant before x, have their Genesis Plur.
ending in ium: as arx, calx, falx, lanx, merx. Genesis arcium, etc.

(2) Some words of one Syllable that have a Vowel before x have their Genesis
Plur. ending in ium: Faucium is read in Plin. l. 21. c. 21. crucium in Terrul.
^^^cum. is read in Plin. l. 15. c. 22.
as nix, nox, faux, crux, trux. Genesis nivium, noctium, etc.

The rest make um: as grex, lex, rex, strix, vox, dux, nux, Ph^yx, and Thrax.
Also prex and frux (out of use) have precum and frugum.

(3) Some words of one Syllable that end in a liquid Consonant, have their Genesis
Plur. ending in ium: as par, parium; lar, larium; cor cordium.

Part has parium as coming from paris: and thence compar has comparium.

The rest end in um: as ren, renum; splen, splenum; fur, furum.

But mel, fell, and sol have no Genesis Case Plur.

(4) Some that end in ^ pure (with a Vowel before it) have their Genesis Plur.
ending in ium: as As, assium; mas, marium; vas, vadium; bes, bessium; lis,
litium; glis, glirium; dis, ditium; vis, virium; cos, cotium; dos dotium; os,
And by Analogy os, ^r^s, orium, if it were to be used.
ossis, ossium; and mus, murium.

The rest have um, viz. pes, pedum (whence bipes; bipedum) praes, praedum; mos,
morum; flos, florum; thus, thurum; crus, crurum; sus, suum; grus, gruum; Mr.
Farnaby says pus, purunis
laus, laudum; fraus, fraudum; bos, boum (by a Syncope for bovium.)

Of jus Cato has jurum, Plautus jurium: of which, utrumque insolens, says
Vossius. If aes and rus were to form a Genesis Plur. it should be aerum and rurum,
rather than aerium and rurium.

(5) All words that end in s impure (or having a Consonant before it) have
their Genesis Plur. in ium: as ars, artium; pars, partium; mons, montium; fons,
fontium; pons, pontium; dens, dentium; trabs, trabium; urbs, urbium.

Except gryps, grypum; seps, sepum, which are originally Greek words. To which
may be added Sphynx, Sphyngum.

1. Note. Many words in ium are found by a Syncope to have a Termination in um:
as Optimatum for optimatium used by Cornel. Nepos. Summatum for summatium by
Plaut. Sontum for sontium by Stat. Agrestum for agrestium: and coelestum for
coelestium by Virg. Volucrum for volucrium by Plin. Caedum for caedium by
Silius. Sedum for sedium by Cic. Mensum for mensium by Paul. J. C. Paludum for
paludium by Mela. Fornacum for fornacium by Plin. Forum for forium by Plaut.
Larum for larium by Varro. Ossum for ossium by Apul. Murum for murium by Cic.

Vtilitatum, Civitatum, haereditatum are ordinary So are the Syncopated Cases
of Participles: suci as cadentum, faventum, furentum, loquentum, loquentum,
manentum* natantum, potentum, precantum, regnantum, rudentum, sequentum,
silentum, venientum, all in Virgil: and the l^ke in others: and like these,
parentum and quad^upedantum.

2. Note. Many words have in the Genesis Plur one Termination in ium, and another
in orum: a^ the names of Feasts, Floralia, Floralium and Floraliorum; Agonalia,
Agonalium and Agonaliorum; Saturnalia, Saturnalium and Saturnaliorum, etc.

Of these the Termination in um is formed from a Nom. Case in e; v. g. Florale,
etc. That in orum is formed from a Nom. Case Sing. in ium; v. g. Floralium, etc.

The like may be said of alvearium and alveariorum; the first from alvear and
alveare, the second from alvearium. So of exemplarium from exemplar, and
exemplariorum from exemplarium (turned by Ignatius Epist. ad Tr^ll.
into (...).) So of Vectigalium and vectigaliorum; ancilium and anciliorum;
sponsalium and sponsaliorum; viridium and viridiorum; conclaevium and
conclaviorum, it may be said, the several Terminations in the Genesis Plur. are
formed from several Terminations in the Nom. Singular: it being not unusual for
words to have such variety of Terminations. For example, Milliare and
milliarium are both in Cic. Torcular and torcularium in Cato; and Lupanar and
lupanarium. So A. Gell. has vulgaris and vulgarius. Turpilius has both
singularis and singularius, as Vossius from Nonius tells us.

So again Greek words in ma have two Genitives, one in um, from the Nom. Sing.
in ma, of the Greek Termination; and one in orum, from a Nom. Sing. in um, of a
Latin Termination: as Poematum from hoc poema, and poematorum from hoc
poematum, etc.

Sometimes Greek words have their Greek Termination written in Latin letters:
as Haereseon, Ep^grammaton, Metamorphoseon.

The Dative Case Plural of the Third Declension Of the Dat Case Plur. of the
Third Declension.
regularly ends in ibus, as lapidibus.

By this Termination ibus the Dative Case Plur. of the Third Declension is
distinguished from the Dat. Plur. of the Fifth, which ends in ebus; and of the
Fourth too, which thought it has ibus (as being derived from this Declension)
yet it has not ibus only, as this has. Bus, which is ordinarily given for the
Termination of this Case, is common to all the Three Declensions; and to those
also of the First that end in abus. For abus, ebus, ibus, obus, ubus, all end
in bus.

Bobus and bubus, which differ from this Termination are contracted of bovibus.
Voss de Art Gram. l. 2. c. 15. So Subus is said for Suibus, which Cicero has
l. 5. de Fin.

Quinquatriis is from quinquatria, quinquatriorum: Quinquatribus is from
quinquatria, quinquatrium, or from quinquatrus, as fructibus from fructus.

Neuter Greek words in ma, besides their Dative in ibus, have another in is:
but that is formed as from a Nom. in um.

For example, Poematis is formed from hoc poematum, as poematibus from hoc
poema. And so it is in the rest. Not to note, that these kind of words have a
formation of the First Declension. Whence we read of Diademam dedit, in Pompon.
Cum servili Schema, in Plaut. and exemplar impetratae Schemae, in Sueton: of
which way of forming, those Terminations in is may be some remains. See Danes.
Schol. l. 1. c. 13.

Sometimes amongst the Ancients there is met withal a Dative of a Greek
Termination in sin (i. e. s ^ with n added to it): as in Dryasin, Hamadryasi^,
Ethesin, Schemasin. But these, as being not Latin words, cross not our Rule:
and as being rare, are only to be observed, not followed. Of the Genesis Case
Sing. of the Fourth Declension.


The Genitive Case Singular of the Fourth Declension regularly ends in us: as
manus.

Yet some words now of the Fourth Declension anciently were also of the Second
Declension; and of them remains a Genesis Case in i: as ornati of ornatus, tumulti
of tumultus.

Hence Ter. Eun. 2. 2. Quid istuc inquam ornati est? And Phorm. 1. 3. Vbi ejus
adventi venit in mentem. And Adelph. 5. 4. Hoc fructi pro labor ab his fero.
And And. 2. 2. In aedibus nihil ornati, nihil tumulti. Of the same stamp are
these cited by V^ssius from Nonius. Senati, sumti, exerciti, aesti, Aspecti,
gemiti, piscati, quaesti, Geli with victi, strepiti, and lucti, Salti, parti,
porti, soni, flucti.


Again, some words now of the Fourth Declension anciently were of the Third;
and of them remains a Genesis Case in is: as anuis of anus.

Hence Ter. He. 2. 3. Ejus anuis causa opinor, quae erat mortua. Of the same
stamp are Senatuis for Senatui; domuis for domus; fluctuis for fluctus, which
A. Gell. says M. Varro, and P. Nigidius, learned Romans did use. So also
rituis for ritus; fruetuis for fruetus; victuis for victus; and graduis for
gradus; which Vos^ius cites from their Authors, De Analog. l. 2. c. 17. See
also Danes. Schol. l. 1. c. 19.

Of the Genitive Case in uis is made the Regular Genitive in us by a Crasis,
whence the Termination is long. Of the Dat. Case Sing of the Fourth Declension.


The Dative Case Singular of the Fourth Declension regularly ends in ui, as
manni.

Yet by an Apocope i is cut off from many Datives of this Declension, and for
ui is read u: as ornatu for ornatui.

So Ter. Ad. 1. 1. Vestitu nimio indulges. Virg Aen. 1. If vestitu be not there
the Abl. Case, as some think
Parce metu Cythereaea. Caes. in Dolab. act. 3. In aedibus fanisque posita, and
honori erant and ornatu. Tacit. Annal. 14. Cruciatu, aut praemio cuncta pervia
esse. Yea, quibus subito impetu, ac latrocinio parricidarum resistat, is
Cicero's, says Vossius. Of the same stamp is victu, concubitu, adspectu, for
victui, concubitui, adspectui in Virg. Exercitu for exercitui in Varro. Cursu
for cursui in Veget. Anu and victu for anui and victui in Lucil. Vsu for usui
in Lucret. Dominatu for dominatui in Caes. Luxu for luxui in Sallust. and
Tacit. Venatu for venatui in Virg. Quaestu and cultu for quaestui and cultui in
Plaut. Delectu for delectui in Live. See Schrevel. in Ter. Ad. 1. 1. Farnab.
Gram. p. 14. Alvar. Instit. Gram. p. 217. A. Gell. l. 14. c. 16. Voss. de
Analog. l. 2. c. 18.

The Ablative Case Singular of the Fourth Declension Of the Abl. Case Sing. of
the Fourth Declension.
regularly ends in u: as manu.

Impete is not, as some would have it, the Ablat. Case of impetus, but of
impes, whose Genesis impetis is in Lucret. l. 6. and Abl. impete is in Ovid. Met.
3. See my Explanations of Quae genus, on Sunt Diptota, etc.

The Genitive Case Plural of the Fourth Declension Of the Genesis Case Plur. of
the Fourth Declension.
regularly ends in uum: as manuum.

Of uum in this Case by a Syncope is made um.

Hence currum for curruum, in Virg. Aen. 6. nurum for nuruum, in Virg. Aen. 12.
and passum for passuum, in Martial. l. 2. ep. 5.

The Dative Case Plural of the Fourth Declension Of the Dat. Case Plur of the
Fourth Declension.
most usually ends in ibus: as manibus.

Yet (1) some words of this Declension end in ubus: as specus, arcus, artus,
lacus, tribus, partus.

Hence Hor. 5. Epod. Per liberos te, si vocata partubus. Ovid. 4 Fast. Praemia
de lacubus proxima musta tuis. Virg. Ep. de Livore. Et totum bibit artubus
cruorem.

Some add acubus, quercubus, ficubus, which yet Alvarus thinks to be no where
found: no nor acibus, quercibus, ficibus: for the last of which ficis of the
Second Declension is in use, and praeplacet Plinio, as Mr. Farnaby says,
System. Gram. p. 15.

2. Some words of this Declension end both in ibus and ubus; as quaestus and
genu, portus and veru.

Quaestibus and quaestubus, genibus and genubus are read in Ovid and Seneca:
portibus and portubus in Caes. Bell. Civ. where yet, says Vossius, for
portibus, the Manuscripts read portubus. Veribus is read in Virg. 1. Aen. Pars
in frusta secant, Veribusque trementia figunt. Verubus is read in Ovid. 6. Met.
Pars verubus stridet. See Danes Schol. l. 1. c. 14. Of the Genesis Case Sing. of
the Fif^h Declension.


The Genitive Case Singular of the Fifth Declension now regularly ends in ei:
as diei.

Anciently there were other Terminations of it.

First, Sometimes the Termination of the Genitive was the same with that of the
Nominative, namely es.

In this respect it was so with Nouns of this Declension, as with
Parisyllabical Nouns in is of the Third Declension, from whence probably this
Declension was formed.

Hence that of Cicero pro Sextio relating the words Consulis (...), as H.
Stephanus thinks, Equites vero daturos illius dies poenas. So Lucret. l. 4 --
Rabies unde illae haec germina surgunt.

Secondly, Sometimes ei was first contracted into ei, and then into i.

As Vlyssei of Vlysseus is first contracted into Vlyssei (trisyllab.) and then
into Vlyssi.

Hence that of Virg. 1. Aen. as some read it, Munera, laetitiamque dii. And
that of Corn Nepos, Quae quidem res and illis contemnentibus pernicii, and huic
despecto saluti fuit. And so the rest which are read in the same Termination in
ancient Authors and Manuscripts, viz. progenii, acii, luxurii, specii, fidii,
famii for famei of fames, sometimes of the F^fth Declension. See Gell. l. 9. c.
19.

Thirdly, Sometimes i was by an Apocope cut off from ei in the Genitive Case.

Hence that of Sallust. Vix decima part die reliqua; and dubitavit acie pars;
and Et jam die vesper erat; and At inde nulla munitionis aut requie mora
processit ad oppidum. And that of Auson. Carm. de Rosa. Ad primos radios
interitura die. And that of Ovid 3. Met. Prima fide vocisque ratae tentamina
sumpsit; and lib. 7. Meditataque pene reliqui Tentamenta fide. And ib. ver.
742. Cui non ista fide satis experientia sano Magna foret satis? And l. 6.
Vtque fide pignus dextras utrasque poposcit. And that of H^race, 1. Carm. 2.
Od. Libra die somnique pares ubi fecerit umbras.

The Dative Case Singular of the Fifth Declension Of the Dat. Case Sing. of the
Fifth Declension.
regularly ends in ei.

Yet this Dative is sometimes found to end in e, the i being cut off by an
Apocope.

Hence Lucil l. 1. Aetati facieque tuae. Hor. l. 1. Sat. 3. Prodiderit commissa
fide. And this Dative in e was used by those, qui purissime locuti sunt, says
Gell. Noct. At. l. 9. c. 14. See Danes. Schol. p. 62. Voss de Analog. l. 2. c.
19.

CHAP. II. Of the Comparing of Adjectives.
AFter the Learner is perfected in the formings of Nouns Substantives, then let
him be made skilful in the forming of Regular Comparisons of Adjectives; so as
that hearing one Positive Degree of any compared Adjective, he can instantly
form thereof a Comparative and a Superlative in any Case, Gender, or Number: as
Doctus, doctior, doctissimus. Docta, doctior, doctissima. Doctum, doctius,
doctissimum, etc.

That he may do this with greatest ease and readiness, (having first taught him
to decline the Positive alone, so as that he can either decline it in both
Numbers through all Terminations, viz. Doctus, docta, doctum; Docti, doctae,
docti, etc. or (which is the harder work) in one singular Termination, viz.
Doctus. docti, docto, etc. docta, doctae, doctae, etc. Doctum, docti, docto,
etc.) practice him first to decline only the Comparative together with the
Positive according to the several Terminations of it; thus, Nom Doctus,
doctior; Genesis docti, doctioris; Dat. Docto, doctiori, etc. Nom. Docta, doctior;
Genesis Doctae, doctioris; Dat. Doctae, doctiori, etc. Nom. Doctum, doctius; Genesis
Docti, doctioris; Dat. Docto, doctiori, etc. then all the three degrees
together, first in the masculine, then in the feminine, and so in the neuter
Gender throughout all Cases of both Numbers; thus, Doctus, doctior,
doctissimus, Docti, doctioris, doctissimi, etc. Docta, doctior, doctissima.
Doctae, doctioris, doctissimae, etc. Doctum, doctius, doctissimum, Docti,
doctioris, doctissimi, etc. and last of all, all the three Degrees together in
all Cases of both Numbers, and through all the Genders of every Case together;
thus, Nom. Doctus, doctior, doctissimus; Docta, doctior, doctissima; Doctum,
doctius, doctissimum. Genesis Docti, doctioris, doctissimi; doctae, doctioris,
doctissimae; docti, doctioris, doctissimi, etc. And so let him go on to do
Adjectives of other Terminations, as ^ener, felix prudens, vetus, etc.

When the Scholar has attained to a competent readiness in the forming of
Regular and Perfect Comparisons, let him then proceed to, and be made
acquainted with those Comparisons that are Irregular, and Defective or
Redundant. Touching which, because it may be Useful both to Teachers and
Learners, I will here set down such a Collection of Rules and Observations, as
I gathered for my private use, beginning first with the Irregular Comparisons.

Of Irregular Comparisons.
Irregular Comparison is, when Degrees are formed Celerissimus found in Manlius
and Ennius is from celeris.
not according to Rule.

1. Positives in er, form a superlative Degree, by assurning unto them rimus,
as Pulcher, pulcherrimus.

2. These three facilis, similis, and humilis form their Superlative by
changing is into limus; as facilis, facillimus; similis, simillimus; humilis,
humillimus. So the Compounds of facilis and similis; defficilis, difficillimus;
dissimilis, dissimillimus. Of imbecillis is formed imbecillimus; though there
be also imbecillissimus of imbecillus.

3. Adjectives derived of dico, loquor, volo, facio, form their Comparative and
Superlative Degrees as of Positives in ens, as Maledicus, maledicentior,
maledicentissimus. Magniloquus, magniloquentior, magnilonuentissimus.
Benevolus, benevolentior, benevolentissimus. Magnificus, magnificentior,
magnificentissimus. But mirificus has mirificissimus.

4. Adjectives ending in us pure, form a Periphrastical Comparative and
Superlative, by adding magis or maxim, and minus or minime, to their Positive
degree, as Pius; magis pius; maxim pius; Assi^uus; magis assiduus; maxim
assi^uus Idoneus; minus idoneus; minime idoneus. Reus; minus reus; minime reus.

Note, other Adjectives are in Authors compared according to this
Periphrastical way: but these Adjectives are not ordinarily compared any other
way.

Yet, though it be not ordinary, there may be found Comparatives and
Superlatives regularly formed of this sort of Adjectives: as Idoncior of
idoneus Arduior of arduus Innoxior of innoxius Industrior of industrius. So
Egregiissimus of egregius. Perpetuissimus of perpetuus. Exiguissimus of
exiguus. Vacuissimus of vacuus Also Strenu^or and strenuissimus of strenuus.
Assiduior and assiduissimus of assiduus. Piissimus of pius, which are not but
with great wariness to be used. See Voss. de Analog. l. 2. c. 27.

5. These singular words are also irregularly compared.

Bonus, melior, optimus, Malus, pejor, pessimus, Magnus, major, maximus,
Parvus, minor, minimus, Multus, plus, plurimus, Multa, plurima, Multum,
plurimum, Vetus, veterior, veterrimus, of veter. citer, Vossius, says Cato,
used it: but that now it is almost grown obsc^ete.
citerior, citimus, inferus, inferior, infimus, and imus, Exterus, and Exter,
exterior Extremus, and extimus, superus, superior, supremus and summus,
posterus, posterior, postremus, and postumus, nequam, nequior, nequissimus.

And thus far of Comparisons Irregular. Now follow Comparisons Defective.

Of Defective Comparisons.
Defective Comparison, is, when any one of the three Degrees is wanting.

These are said to want the Positive Degree. Prior, primus, from the obsolete
pris. Ocior, ocissimus, from (...). Potior, potissimus, from potis, deter,
ulter grown out of use. Deterior, deterrimus, from potis, deter, ulter grown
out of use. Vlterior, ultimus, from potis, deter, ulter grown out of use.
Penitior, penitissimus. Interior, intimus, from inter. Propior, proximus, from
propis or propus. Diutior, diutissimus. Of which word yet Vossius says he
remembers not that he ever read it.


These are said to want the Comparative Degree. Apricus apricissimus. Bellus,
bellissimus. Consultus, consultissimus. Meritus, meritissimus. Novus,
novissimus. Nuperus, nuperrimus. Diversus, diversissimus. Falsus, falfissimus.
Fidus, fidissimus. Inclytus, inclytissimus. Invitus, invitissimus. Persuasus,
persuasissimus. Sacer, sacerrimus.


Yet there may be found in Gellius both novius and diversius. Hence Plin. l.
12. c. 9. Pretia nulli diversiora. Our Dunaeus in his Praelect, ad Lysiam has
bellius an Adverb. And Petron. Nihil est hominum in^pta persuasione falsius.

Hither may be referred these Nouns of which there are Superlatives read,
Exclusus, exclusis^imus, Which yet I do not recommend to be used. Used by
Plaut. in Tri^. in imitation of Aristophane^, saying (...) from (...).
o^clusus occ^usissimus. (Plaut. Cist. 1. 1.) par, parissimus and also these
Pronouns, tuus, tuissimus, ipse, ipsissimus.

These are said to want the Superlative Degree. Adolescens, adolescentior.
Communis, communior. Dives, divitior. Declivis, decli^ior. Dexter, dexterior.
Dextimus and Sinistimus signify no more, than Dexter and sinister. See Alvar.
Grandis, grandior. Ingens, ingentior. Salutaris, salutarior. Sinister,
sinisterior. Supinus, supinior. Infinitus, infinitior. Ju^^nis junior.
Longinquus, longinquior; Opimus, opimior. Gell. l. 5. c. 14.
Proclivis, proclivior. Propinquu^, propinquior. Remissus, remissior. Satur,
saturior. Senex, senior. Taciturnus, taciturnior.


Yet Plaut. Curc. 1. 1. has taciturnissimus.

These want both the Positive and the Superlative Degrees.

Viz. Satior, anterior, licentior, sequior. Whither may be referred Paenior,
Neronior, Cinaedior, of which as there is no Superlative read, so no Positive,
but a Noun Substantive, viz Paenus, Nero, Cinaedus.

Some want both Positive and Comparative; as Victorissimus Patruissimus, and
Plautinissimus, etc. which are not mutable.

And thus far of Comparison Defective, now follows Comparison Redundant.

Of Redundant Comparisons.
Redundant Comparison is, when any one degree has various formations, which
happens mostly in the Superlative degree.

Sometimes there are two Superlatives of one Positive, as Extremus and extimus
of exterus. Infimus and imus of Inferus. Maturissimus and maturrimus of
maturus. See Voss. de Analog. l. 2. c. 25. Piissimus and pientissimus of pius.
Postremus and postumus of posterus, Supremus and summus of superus.

Sometimes of a Superlative Degree there is formed a new Comparative or
Superlative: as Proximior of proximus. Extremius and extremissimus
Extremissimus is used by Lipsius l. 2. de Cruce c. 12.
of extremus. Minimissimus Minimissimus by Jan. D^usa Plautin. Explic. l. 3. c.
23.
of minimus. Postremus and postremissimus of postremus. Pessimissimus of
pessimus.

In these, whereof there are Examples in Voss. de Analog. l. 2. c. 26. some
later Latins have imitated some Greeks. For in Ephesians. 3. 8. we read (...) from
(...); and so in Xenoph. (...) from (...), who yet are not without great
wariness to be followed therein.

After this Account of Defective and Redundant, as well as Irregular
Comparisons, it may perhaps not be ungrateful to the learning Reader to have
some account of Adjectives that are not compared at all, unless
Periphrastically by magis and maxim, or minus and minime.

Adjectives not compared are Cicur, claudus, canus, calvus, Degener, dispar,
almus, salvus, Egenus, memor, magnanimus, mirus, Jejunus, crispus, unicus,
delirus, Canorus, balbus, ferus, and vetulus, Sylvestris, mediocris, and
edentulus.


Voss. de Analog. l. 2. c. 22. says, Opimus has no Comparative or
Superlative: but Gell. l. 5. c. 14. has membra opimiora.

Besides these particular words, there be many sorts of Adjectives, which
Grammarians say are not compared.

1. Gentiles, as Romanus, Graecus, Atheniensis. 2. Poss^ssives, as Fraternus,
herilis, muliebris, castrersis. 3. Numerals, as septem, septimus, ternarius,
terti^nus. 4. Diminutives, as tenellus, tantillus, tantulus. 5. Materials, as
Aureus, aereus, lapideus, ligneus. 6. Temporals, as Matutinus, hesternus,
biennis. 7. Compounds of fero and gero, as Salutifer, corniger. 8. Words ending
in the Terminations following.
1. bundus, as moribundus, cunctabundus. 2. imus, as bimus, trimus, maritimus.
3. ivus, as deliberativus. 4. plex, as duplex, triplex. 5. ster, as campester,
sylvester.
Yet Ramus ownes festivior, and festivissimus of festivus, and simplicius of
simplex, which he says Quintilian thought well of; And Vossius also excepts
multiplex, l. 2. de Anal. c. 27. And others may find other Exceptions, which
whether in this, or in any thing else, so they be upon good authority, I shall
not gainsay.

CHAP. III. Of the Forming of Verbs.
THE Scholar being perfected in the forming of Nouns and comparing of
Adjectives, the next thing that I would have him well grounded in, is the
Forming of Verbs; in the performing of which work several Teachers have several
ways. That which I practiced with no ill success, is as follows.

First, make the Scholar understand what Tenses in all Moods are formed of the
Present Tense, and what of the Preterperfect Tense: namely that of the Present
Tense of the Indicative Mood are formed the Preterimperfect and Future Tense of
the same Mood; the Present and Preterimperfect Tenses of all other Moods; the
Gerunds and Participles of the Present Tense and of the Future in dus. And of
the Preterperfect Tense of the Indicative Mood are formed the Preterpluperfect
Tense of the same Mood; The Preterperfect; Preterpluperfect, and Future Tenses
of all other Moods; The Supines and Participles of the Preter Tense, and Future
in rus. As the Present Tense Active. Amo, amabam, amabo; ama, amato; amem,
amarem, amare, amandi, amando, amandum, amans. Preterperfect. Amavi, amaveram,
amaverim, amavissem, amavero, amavisse, amaturum esse, amatum, amatu, amaturus.
So Pres. Passive. Amor, amabar, amabor; amare, amator; ameris, amareris, amari,
amandus. Preterperf. Amatus sum vel fui, amatus eram vel fueram, amatus sim vel
fuerim, amatus essem vel fuissem, amatus ero vel fuero, amatum esse vel fuisse,
amatum iri, vel amandum esse, amatus.

When the Learner knows in what order the Verb is to be formed, and what Tenses
each of other, then let him begin the Forming of it with the Latin before the
English; and together with the Verb naming also the Nominative Case, of the
Personal Pronoun, wherewith it agrees, thus: Ego amo, I love; tu amas, thou
love; ille amat, he loves; nos amamus, we love; vos amatis, ye love; illi
amant, they love: and so throughout all Moods and Tenses of the Active Voice.

To prepare him for this, and for other purpose, it will be highly beneficial
to teach him to form English Verbs alone throughout all Moods and Tenses,
Numbers and Persons thus: Ind. Pres. Sing. Number. and first Pers. I love, or do
love. Pr. Imp. I loved, or did love. Fut. I shall, or will love.

Then let him go over the Active Voice again in the same order, with the Latin
still before the English, but naming only one Person of a Tense at a time, and
then proceeding to the next, thus: Ego amo, I love; ego amabam, I loved, or did
love, etc.

When he has in this order gone over all the Persons of all the Examples of
the four Conjugations, giving the English for the Latin, then let him in the
same order go over them all again, only giving now the Latin for the English,
or setting the English before the Latin: thus, I love, ego amo; thou love,
tu amas, etc. and, I love, ego amo; I loved or did love, ego amabam: and so
through all Moods and Tenses, Numbers and Persons. And let not this exercise be
left off, till he be exact in it.

When the Active Voice is gained, then proceed to the Passive, and let that be
got in the same manner and order, first Latin before English, then English
before Latin; first all the Persons of each Tense; then one Person only of a
Tense at once; first the Present Tense, and all that come of it, then the
Preterperfect Tense, and all that come of it likewise.

And when the Passive Voice is also thus gained, then go again to work to the
getting of both Active and Passive together in the same manner and order,
Latin before English, and English before Latin, beginning first with the
Present Tense, and those that come of it, and going on to the Preterperfect
Tense, and those that come of that.

When the Scholar is perfect in doing thus all the four Examples of this
Grammar, then put him to other Examples, which he will within a while readily
do, and extempore, being made thus perfect in these.

It will be very useful, after this practice, to put other Substantives,
besides the Pronouns, before the Verbs, and form them together with the Verbs:
thus, Ego pater amo, etc. Ego matter amor, etc. Tu magister doces, etc. Tu
puella doceris, etc. Ille vir legit, etc. Illa dictio legitur, etc. Nos pueri
audimus; Vos virgins ploratis; Illa regna perduntur; or the like.

If the Teacher please, he may yet go on to put his Scholar to the adding of a
casual word after his Verb, choosing sometimes a Verb, that governs an
Accusative, sometimes one that governs a Dative, and sometimes one that
governs a Nominative after it; as, Ego amo te; Tu places mihi; Horatius
salutatur Poeta; Virgilius legitur a me.

How great will be the benefit of this exercise, is so visible, that I need not
expatiate in the commendation of it. Briefly therein there is laid the main
groundwork of the Latin Tongue. For in this exercise all the Three Concords
are practically learned. That of the Nominative Case and the Verb, in the
declining of the Verb with his Personal Pronoun. That of the Substantive with
the Substantive, in declining together with the Pronoun Substantive another
Noun Substantive. Ego pater amo. And that of the Substantive and Adjective, in
the declining of the Perterperfect Tenses of the Verbs Passives with Nominative
Cases of diverse Genders; Ego pater amatus sum; tu matter amataes vel fuisti;
illud regnum eversum est vel fuit, etc. And I need not say how great an insight
is given into the Government of Verbs, by adding a casual word to the Verb,
accordingly as I have shown.

This exercise need not be done continuedly, and altogether, but one part of it
at once, and that every morning after the saying of the mornings part. And in
about a quarter of a years time it will, if well followed, be well learned.

After the Scholar is grown exact in the forming of Verbs Perfect and Regular,
then let him be thoroughly instructed in the Verbs Defective and Irregular. The
Irregular Verbs are competently done already in the Accidence. Of that which
Grammarians deliver touching Verbs Defective, I shall here for the Use of the
Learner, subjoyn this Collectio^ with Notes upon it.

Of Verbs Defective.
Indicat. Pres. Sing. Aio, ais, ait. Plur. aiu^^ Preterimperf. aiebam, aiebas,
aiebat; aiebamu^ Aio.
aiebatis, aiebant. Imperat. ai. Potent. Pres. Sin^ aias, aiat. Plur. aiamus,
aiant. Particip. aiens.

For aiebant the Ancients said aibant. Prob^ owns in the Preterperf. ai, aisti,
ait. And it is ce^tain, that in Tertullian is read aierunt. Vossius thin^ the
Ancients used yet more, such as aitis, aite, ar^ some others. See Voss.
Etymolog. Lat. p. 132. ar^ Analog. l. 3. p. 140.

Potent. Pres. and Preterperf. Sing. Ausim, ausis, ^sit. Ausim.
Plur. ausint.

Ausim is used for audeam and ausus sim. It made by a Syncope of auserim formed
from a^ which anciently was the Preterperf. of audeo, as well as ausus sum,
which only is in use.

Indicat. Fut. Salvebis. Imperat. Sing Salve, salveto. Salve.
Plur. Salvete, salvetote. Infin. Salvere.

Plautus uses Salveo, but in the Person of a Rustic; and in that is not to be
followed.

Imperat. Sing. Ave, aveto. Plur. avete, avetote. Ave.
Infinite avere.

Ave considered as a word of Salutation, is a Defective, according to what is
here delivered of it: but aveo to covet or desire, has more Tenses.

Imperat. Sing. Cedo. Plur. cedite. Cedo.


Cedo is used for dic or porrige. Nomen Mulieris cedo quod sit. Ter. Heaut. 4.
2. Puerum mihi cedo. Ter. Hec. 4. 4. For cedite anciently was said cette. Cette
manus vestras. Enn. in Medea.

Potent. Preterperf. Faxim, faxis, faxit. Plur. Faxint. Faxim.
Fut. Faxo, faxis, faxit. Plur. faxint.

Faxim is made of facerim, for fecerim, says Vossius, and so faxo of facero,
for fecero: for the Ancients did often retain the Vowel of the Present tense in
the Preterperf. tense. Hence canuere in Salust. for cecinere. Of the same
nature and formation is axim, adaxim, and axo. There is read also faximus and
faxitis in the Plural Number: and faxem for fecissem, says Voss. (de Analog.
l. 3. c. 41.) and faxere for facturum esse, says Mr. Shirly. Via ad Lat. Ling.
p. 99.

Potent. Preterimperf. Sing. Forem, fores, foret. Forem.
Plur. forent. Infinite. fore.

Forem is made by a Syncope of fuerem, and fore of fuere of the old Verb fuo.
There is also read in Virgil. afforet; in Terence, confore. Vossius in
Etymolog. Lat. p. 133. names deforem.

Indicat. Pres. Quaeso. Plur. Quaesumus. Quaeso.


In Lucret. there is read quaesit; in Plaut. quaesere; in Apuleius, quaesens;
in Ennius, quaesendum. See Voss. de Analog. l. 3. c. 41.

Indicat. Pres. Infit. Infit.


Infit comes of infio used by Varro, as Priscian testifies l. 8. It signifies
the same that Incipit. Infit ibi postulare. Plaut. Aulul. 2. 4. Hither may be
referred defit for deest, defiunt; defiet, defiat, defieri. Also confit and
confieri. Aliis quia defit quod amant, aegre est. Ter. Quae crescente luna
gliscunt, deficiente contra luna defiunt. Gell. Verum quid ego dicam? hoc
confit, quod volo. Ter. Nunc qua ratione quod instat Confieri possit, paucis,
adverte, docebo. Virg.

Indicat. Pres. Inquam, inquis, inquit. Plur. Inquimus, Inquam.
inquitis, inquiunt. Preterimperf. inquiebat, inquiebant. Preterperf. inquisti.
Futur. inquies, inquiet. Imperat. inque, inquito.

Grammarians name more, but till what they name be confirmed by good authority,
it may do well to forbear them. These here named, may be confirmed by
authority. Inquam, inquis, inquit, inquiunt, inquiebat, inquiebant, inquisti,
inquies and inquiet are read in Cicero; inquimus in Horace; inque in Terence;
inquito in Plautus. See Voss. Etymolog. Lat. p. 133. and de Analog. l. 3. c.
40. Inquibat is in Cicero's Topics, unless it be a misprint.

Indicat. Fut. Valebis. Imperat. vale, valeto; valete, valetote. Infin. valere.
Vale.


Valeo, to be strong or able, is a perfect Verb; but valebis, being a form of
valediction, or bidding adieu or farewell, is a Verb defective.

Imperat. Apage. Plur. apagite. Apage.


Vossius deriveth apage and apagite from the Greek (...) and (...) of (...) to
drive away. Apage is read in Plaut. apagite in Cic.

Indicat. Pres. Ovat. Particip. Ovans. Ovat.


Mr. Shirly adds Ovarent and ovandi; his authority he names not. From a Supine
of this Verb Vossius derives the Verbals Ovatus and Ovatio.

Indicat. Pres. Explicit. Plur. expliciunt. Sherly Explicit.
Gram. Lat. p. 39.

Explicit signifies the same with desinit.

Scio in the Imperative Mood has not sci. Scio.


Soleo in the Future tense has not solebo. Soleo.


Furo has not in the Imperative Mood fure. Furo.


Neither dor nor for are read in the Indicative Daris.
Mood; nor der and fer in the Subjunctive Mood; Faris.
yet daris and faris, etc. are used. Diomedes own^ effor. Fans is in Plaut.
Pers. 2. 1. Tu meum ingenium fans non didicisti, atque infans.

These three odi, coepi, memini want the Tenses formed of the Present tense:
but have those that come of the Preterperfect tense, as odi, odisti, odit, Odi.
etc. oderam, oderim, od'ssem, odero, odisse. Part. Osurus. So coepi, coeperim,
coepissem, coepero, coepisse. Sup. Coepi.
coeptum* coeptu. Particip. coepturus. So Memini, memineram, Memini.
meminerim, meminissem, meminero, meminisse.

These three Verbs in the Preterperfect tense have the signification of the
Present tense; and in the Future tense of the Potential Mood have the
signification of the Future tense of the Indicative Mood, Odi has also osus
sum, and coepi, coeptus sum in the Preterperfect tense. And memini has memento
and mementote in the Imperative Mood. Anciently there was odio, whence were
formed Odivi, odivit, odite, odiet, odient, odibunt, odientes, oditur, odiaris.
So also coepio, whence coepiam, coepiat, coeperet, which are sometimes read,
but are now disused. It is ordinary to add to these Novi, because Novi.
this like the rest has in the Preterperfect tense the signification of the
Present tense. But the Verb is a perfect Verb, formed of nosco. See Voss. de
Analog. l. 3. c. 39.

And thus far of Forming of Verbs.

CHAP. IV. Of Translating English into Latin.
BY that time the Scholar is made perfect in Forming Nouns and Verbs, it will
be time to put him not only to learn an Author, but also to make Latin;
supposing he has in the mean time attained to some competency of knowledge of
the Rules for the Genders of Nouns and Preterperfect Tenses, and Supines of
Verbs, and for the Agreement and Government of Words, in English at least, and
however so far, that he knows where to find, by turning thereto, such Rules as
will be needful for him to consult withal for the true making of his Latin.
And supposing also that he knows the several Characters, Marks, or Notes of
Points, Pauses, or Stops used in speaking or writing, and something also of the
meaning, use, and force of them.

And because a taste at least of this knowledge of Points and Pointing, is
highly necessary toward the Scholars both right reading and understanding, and
also to his right construing and translating, therefore I will here add
somewhat of it.

Of Points.
The Points are five: a Period, a Colon, a Comma, a Note of Interrogation, and
a Note of Admiration.

A Period is a single prick set at the foot of a word, thus (,)

A Colon is two pricks set one over the other after a word, thus (:)

A Comma is a small semicircle set after a word at the foot of it, thus (,)

A Note of Interrogation is a prick set after a word with a semicircle above
it, thus (?)

A Note of Admiration is a prick set after a word with a short straight line
over it, thus (!)

To these by some are added a Semi-Period, a Semi-Colon, and a Semi-Comma.

A Semi-Period is marked thus (.) a Semi-Colon thus (;) and a Semi-Comma thus
(,)

And with these are usually taught a Parenthesis marked with two Semicircles,
thus (); and a Parathesis marked with two Semiquadrats, thus []

Of Pointing.
The Rules of Pointing are either General or Particular.

The General Rule, which concerns all the Points, is this, That so many finite
Verbs as are either expressed or implied in any sentence, so many Points do
belong to that sentence.

The Particular Rules, which concern the several Points, are these.

1. Of a Period.
A Period is set, after a sentence containing a full and absolute sense, is
completely ended; whether it be a simple or compounded sentence; consisting of
one, or more Propositions: as Sera nunquam est ad bonos mores via. Sen. Nihil
enim honestum esse potest, quod justitia vacat. Cic. Post amicitiam credendum
est, ante amicitiam judicandum. Sen. Non qui parum habet, sed qui plus cupit,
pauper est. Sen. Saepe utile est non scire, quid futurum sit: miserum est enim,
nihil proficientem angi. Cic.


2. Of a Colon.
A Colon is set between the dividing members of a sentence compounded of sundry
Propositions.

Such as are,

(1) An Enunciation and its Reason: as,

Viligandum est semper: multae insidiae sunt bonis. Cic.

Aetate fruere: mobili cursu fugit. Sen.

(2) A Proposition and its Reddition in a Similitude: as.

Vt major est vis animi, quam corporis: sic sunt graviora ea, quae concipiuntur
animo, quam illa, quae corpore. Cic.

(3) A Concessive and its Adversative Conjunction: as,

Quanquam ipsa consolatio literarum tuarum mihi gratissima est: tamen illum
fructum ex literis tuis cepi, etc. Cic. Fam. l. 5.

Itaque etsi domum been potus, seroque redieram: tamen id caput, ubi haec
controversia est, notavi, etc. Cic. Fam. 7. 22.

Est invidiosa lex, sicut dixi: Veruntamen habet excusationem: non enim videtur
hominis lex esse, sed temporis. Cic. 2. de Leg. Agr.

(4) A Totum and its Parts in a Distinction: as, Cujus parts duae sunt:
Justitia, in qua virtutis splendour est maximus, and huic conjuncta
Beneficentia, etc. Cic. 1. Off. c. 8.

Animum in duas parts dividunt: alteram rationis participem faciunt, alteram
expertem. Cic. 4. Tusc.

(5) Distinguishing Branches in a Partition: as, Primum mihi videtur de genere
belli: deinde de magnitudine: tum de imperatore deligendo esse dicendum. Cic.
pro Leg. Manil.

Primum docent deos esse: deinde quales sint: tunc mundum ab iis administrari:
postremo consulere eos rebus humanis. Cic. de Not. Deor.

(6) Clause and Clause in a Transition: as,

Causa, quae sit, videtis: nunc quid agendum sit, considerate. Cic. pro Leg.
Manil.

3. Of a Comma.
(1) A Comma is set betwixt the Parts of a compounded Proposition, whether it
be Conditional, Causal, or Relative: and whether it be Copulative, Discretive,
or Disjunctive.

1. Conditional: as, Si dives est, bonus est. Non si bonus est, dives est.


2. Causal: as, Quia sursum tendit, leve est. Remissa sunt ei peccata, quia
dilexit multum.


3. Relative: as, Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit. Quantum quisque sua
nummorum servat in arca, Tantum habet and fidei. Juv. Quanto perditior quisque
est, tanto acrius urget. Hor. Quot vulnera, tot ora. Qualis Princeps, talis
populus. Vnde oriuntur omnia, eo redeunt. Non ubi quisque erit, ejus loci jus
tenebit. Cic. Donec eris foelix, multos numerabis amicos. Ovid. Quoties
dicimus, toties de nobis judicatur. Cic. Antequam incipias, consulto: postquam
consulueris, mature facto opus est. Sall.


4. Copulative: as, Et homo, and brut um sentit. Neque metuam quicquam, and
cavebo omnia. Neque bonis, neque malis invidendum est. Non and amicus, and
adulator est. Hic and pauper, and pius, and doctus est.


5. Discretive: as, Non qui patitur, sed qui facit injuriam, miser est.
Faelicitas non in habitu, sed in actu virtutis consistit. Quanquam robustus
est, tamen ignavus est. Quanquam planta non sentit, tamen vivit. Non quanquam
avarus est, tamen vir bonus est.


6 Disjunctive: as, Aut dies est, aut nox. Non aut homo est, aut animal non
est. Aut album, aut nigrum, aut medii coloris est, aut omnino coloratum non
est. Non aut hoc, aut illud, aut istud est.


(2) A Comma is set betwixt the Parts of a simple Proposition, where the order
of the Parts is inverted; or the words ungrammatically placed: as, Animal est,
omnis homo. Non est delineata res, vivere. Sen. ep. 107.


(3) A Comma is set before a Substantive with his dependents added to another
Substantive by Apposition: as, Nunc autem studetis me interficere, hominem qui
veritatem vobis locutus sum. Deliciae vero tuae, noster Aesopus, ejusmodi fuit,
ut -- Cic. Provocare ausus Albanos, gravem and diu principem populum. Flor.


(4) A Comma is set before an Exegetical Expression added to something going
before for explication, restriction, or amplification; especially if brought in
by a Participle, or other Adjective: as, Rheginos credo, quod Scenicis artibus
largiri solebant, id huic, summa ingenii praedito gloria, noluisse? Cic. Sit
igitur, Judices, sanctum apud vos, humanissimos homines, hoc P^etae nomen, quod
nulla unquam barbaria violavit. Cic. Themistoclem illum, summum Athenis virum,
dixisse aiunt -- Cic.


(5) A Comma is set before and after an Icon or Assimilation, inserted within a
sentence for illustration: as, Eloquentiae magister, nisi, tanquam piscator,
eam imposuerit hamis escam, quam scierit appetituros esse pisciculos, sine spe
praedae moratur in scopulo. Petron.


(6) A Comma is set before and after a word or clause, inserted within another
sentence for elegancy of composition: as, Pacem, etiam qui vincere possunt,
volunt. Live. Difficile est dictu, Quirites, quanto in odio sinus apud exteras
nationes, propter eorum, quos ad eas hoc anno cum imperio misimus, injurias, ac
libidines. Cic.


(7) A Comma is set after a Vocative Case in the beginning of a clause, and
both before and after it in the middle of a clause: as, Sexte noster, bona
venia dic, quoniam, etc. Cic. pro Dom. Marce Tulli, quid agis? Cic. 1. Cat. O
noster Demea, ad omnia alia aetate sapimus rectius. Ter. Quousque tandem
abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? Cic. Omnia, mi Lucili, aliena sunt: tempus
tantum nostrum est. Sen. ep. 1.


N. The Point after a Vocative Case in the end of a clause is such as the
nature of the clause requires: whether Period, Colon, Comma, Interrogation, or
Admiration: as, Ausculta paucis, nisi molestum est, Demea. Ter. Ad. It a fac,
mi Lucili: vindica te tibi. Sen. ep. 1. Dis quidem esses, Demea, ac tuam rem
constabilisses. Ter. Ad. Quid fit, Ctesipho? Ter. O mi Aeschine! O mi germane!
Ter. Ad.


(8) A Comma is set before or after an Adjective standing between two
Substantives, and capable of being construed with either, to declare to which
it belongs: as, Summa quidem auctoritate Philosophi, severe sane at que
honest, haec triae genera confusa, cogitatione distinguunt. Cic. 2. Off. Where
the Comma is set after confusa, to prevent its being thought to agree with
cogitatione.


(9) A Comma is set before a Relative in a latter clause of a sentence, or
before the word beginning that clause in which the Relative is: as, Causa mea
est melior, qui non contraria fovi Arma. Ovid. Lego Virgilium, prae quo caetori
Poetae sordent.


(10) A Comma is set betwixt quam in one clause, and his corresponding
Particle, tam, aeque, non minus, ante, prius, post, etc. in another: as, Tam te
diligo, quam meipsum. Ter. Nihil a que facere ad viperae morsum, quam taxi
arboris succu^. Suet. Haecres non minus me male habet, quam te. Ter. Si quam
audax est ad conandum, tam esset obscuru^ in agendo. Cic. Quae causa ante
mortua est, quam tu natus esses. Cic. Multo prius scivi, quam tu, illum amicum
habere. Ter. Annibal tertio post die, quam venit, copias in aciem eduxit. Live.
Postridie intellexi, quam a vobis discessi. Cic. Vicinum citius adjuveris in
fructibus percipiendis, quam aut fratrem, aut familiarem. Cic.


(11) A Comma is set before an Adverb having the force of a Connexive
Conjunction: and generally when any connexive Particle is expressed or implied:
as, Non arbor erat relicta, non gubernaculum, non funis, aut remus. Petron.
Curris, stupes, satagis, tanquam mu^ in matella. Petron. Rumorem, fabulam
fictam, falsam perhorrescimu^. Cic. Cujus omnis actio, ratio, cogitatio, totus
denique tribunatus, nihil aliud fuit, nisi constans, perpetua, fortis, invicta
defensio salutis meae. Cic.


(12) A Comma is set before an Infinitive Verb with his Accusative Case, which
may be resolved into a Finite Verb and a Nominative Case: as, Non possum
dicere, me nihil perdere. Sen. ep. 1. Sed oftendere, me aegre pati, illi nolui.
Ter. Ad. 1, 2.


(13) A Comma is set after an Interjection with his dependents, if he have any;
unless it be such an Interjection as properly requires another Point, as
Interjections of Admiration or Exclamation: as, Oh, tibi ego ut credam,
furcifer? Ter. And. 3. 5. Hei mihi, cur non habeo spatium, ut -- Ter. And. 4.
1. Heus, proximus sum egomet mihi. Ter. And. 4. 1. Hem! st, mane. Ib. Hem,
Pamphile, optime te mihi offers. Ib. 4. 2.


(14) A Comma is set after an Ablative Case Absolute with its dependents, and
before it too, if it be in the middle of a sentence: as, Sed expositis
adolescentium officiis, deinceps de beneficentia dicendum est. Cic. 2. Off.
Credo pudicitiam, Saturnorege, moratam In terris. Juv. Deum, quo auctore cuncta
proveniunt, sinc murmur atione comitari. Sen. ep. 107.


Of a Semi-Period.
A Semi-Period (.) though it differ not in figure from a full Period, yet is
distinguished from it by this, that when a Great Letter follows, it is called
Periodus supina, or absolutely a Period: but when a Small Letter follows, it is
called Periodus pendens, or a Semi-Period.

A Semi-Period is set betwixt Periods, whereof the latter has a near
dependence on the former for sense of matter, though not for construction of
words; the latter beginning with a new principal Verb, as well as the former:
as,

Cum rerum natura delibera. illa dicet tibi, se and diem fecisse, and noctem.
Sen. ep. 3.

Hodiernus dies solidus est. nemo ex illo quidquam mihi eripuit: totus inter
stratum lectionemque divisus est Sen. ep. 83.

The proper place for a Semi-Period (might it be so far admitted) were betwixt
the former and latter part of a Period consisting of a Protasis and its
Apodosis, or an Enunciation and its Reason: also betwixt a Totum and his Parts
in a Division; and betwixt Clause and Clause in a Transition.

Of a Semi-Colon.
A Semi-Colon (;) is set where the Pause seems lesser than that of a Colon, and
yet greater than that of a Comma: as,

Tu, quid divitiae possint, consideras; quid virtus, non item.

The proper place for a Semi-Colon seems to be between member and member in a
Division (if the Parts be separated from the Totum by a Semi-Period) or in a
Subdivision (if the Parts be separated from the Totum by a Colon): also between
branch and branch in a Partition; and generally betwixt Opposits in a
Distinction.

Of a Semi-Comma.
A Semi-Commae (,) is set where a less Pause or distinction is needful than
that of a Comma.

And its proper place, if it may be admitted so far, will be: where the Words
of a simple Proposition are ungrammatically (or, the Parts illogically) placed,
(viz. the Predicate before the Subject); where the words of one clause are, for
elegancy of Composition, inserted within the words of another; where an
Exegetical addition is made to a foregoing Substantive, by the Apposition of
another Substantive to it, or of an Adjective, or Participle, with its
dependents on it; where a Word so stands between two Clauses, as that it may be
taken to belong to either; and generally, where there is need of more pauses in
pronunciation, than there are distinct parts of the construction: as, where the
circumstances of actions [viz. time, place, manner, means, etc.] are expressed
together with them.

This Period of Cicero's, pointed as follows, may, in part, be an
exemplification of the foregoing Rules.

Denique, Quirites, quoniam me quatuor omnino genera hominum violarunt. Vnum
eorum, qui odio reipublicae, quod eam, ipsis invitis, conservaram, mihi
inimicissimi fuerunt: alterum, qui, per simulationem amicitiae, nefarie
prodiderunt: tertium, qui, cum, propter inertiam suam, eadem assequi non
possent, inviderunt laudi, and dignitati meae: quartum, qui, cum custodes
reipub. esse debuerunt, salutem meam, statum civitatis, dignitatem ejus
imperii, quod erat penes ipsos, vendiderunt: Sic ulciscar genera singula,
quemadmodum a quibusque sum provocatus: malos cives, rempub. been gerendo;
perfidos amicos, nihil credendo, atque omnia cavendo; invidos, virtuti, and
gloriae serviendo; mercatores provinciarum, revocando domum, atque ab iis
provinciarum rationem repetendo. Cic. ad Quirit. post redit.

Of a Note of Interrogation.
A Note of Interrogation (?) is set at the end of a question: as,

Quae nota domesticae turpitudinis non inusta vitae tuae est?
This Note is sometimes continued through many clauses of a Period: as,

Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor
iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia?
Sometimes it is omitted, though the speech be Interrogative; namely, when the
sentence is lengthned so far, that the Interrogative force, wherewith it began,
is by little and little wasted and lost: as,

An tu putas esse honos viros, qui amicitias utilitate colunt; nihil ad
humanitatem, nihil ad honestum referunt; nec libenter ea curant, quae ego nisi
curarem praeter caetera, prorsus me tua benevolentia, in qua magnam
foelicitatis meae partem soleo ponere, indignum putarem.
Of a Note of Admiration.
A Note of Admiration (!) is set after words of Admiring, Exclaiming, or
Deploring: as, O vir fortis atque amicus! Ter. Phor. Proh Deum atque hominum
fidem! Cic. 5. Verr. Ah virgo infoelix! Virg. 6. Eclog Vah inconstantiam! Vah
mea Antiphila! Vah homo impudens! Heu stirpem invisam! Virg. 2. Aen. Heu
pietas! heu prisca fides! Virg. 6. Aen.


Of a Parenthesis.
A Parenthesis () incloses within one sentenc^ another sentence which is no
part of it: as,

Deus ad homines ve^it, imo (quod propius est) i^ homines venit. Sen. ep. 73.
Of a Parathesis.
A Parathesis [] incloses Synonymous words and Aequipollent Phrases added to
former, etc. as, Aliud nihil, quam [nisi] flere potui. Non dubium est mihi,
quin [nihil vereor, ne non] and auctior in dies, and illustrior futura sit.
Pertusum quicquid in dolium infunditur [i. e. quicquid ingrato feceris] perit.


These few plain Rules and easy Directions may be sufficient for a young
Learner. For fullness and accurateness of skill in Pointing, recourse must be
had to Grammarians and Rhetoricians that have written of it: though I know none
that has written so fully and accurately, as to be exactly followed by all
others; most differing both from others, and from themselves herein. He that to
me seems to have gone the furthest, and come the nearest to the setting of a
Standard for others, is that ingenious Grammarian, Mr. Lewis of Tottenham, in
his Engl. Gram. p. 1, 2, 3. and Plain and short Rules for Pointing Periods, p.
1, 2, 3.

It is the usual (and indeed the best) way to begin with Translating. To render
this work easy and successful, it will be good to contrive Englishes, wherein
the first things, and those that are most easy, yet necessary to make way for
what is to follow, shall be proposed. Such will be little Sentences containing
the Agreement of the Verb personal with his Nominative Case; Adjective with his
Substantive; or Substantive with his Substantive belonging to the same thing.
Or the Government of an Accusative Case by a Verb; or a Genitive Case by a
former Substantive, and the like. After some time spent in these kind of
Englishes, more difficult may be proceeded unto, namely such as contain in them
the Agreement and Government of the Relative, etc. A Pattern whereof follows
afterward in this Chapter, in little Englishes framed according to the Rules of
the Grammar for the Three Concords, which the Teacher may first make use of,
and then, if he find not them enough, he may do more, and go on with the rest of
the Rules of the Grammar, after that manner that I have begun with: or else put
his Scholars to the Translating of some English Book, proper for that purpose:
such as Mr. Wases Essay of a Practical Grammar, Wits Commonwealth, Moral
Philosophy, etc. unless he please to translate for them himself, Tully's
Sentences, or some Epistle of Seneca, or Oration of Cicero, etc.

Let the Teacher in the first place teach his Scholar to know, and then cause
him to put the English words out of the Artificial into the Natural order, and
so read them, not suffering him, (as it is the use with some) just to fall to
translating them, as he finds them lying in the English book. The natural order
being found, the work is half done: all will then run of it self almost.

The Scholar will be taught the Natural Order of the English by Precept and by
Practice.

For Precept, the Teacher may be pleased to go according to his own judgment,
and his Scholar's need. In the mean time he may instill into his Learner these
General Rules.

General Rules touching the Natural Order of Words.
The Person spoken to, comes before the words spoken to him

Words of Connection come before the words o clauses connexed by them.

Words governing others, go before those that are governed of them.

Words agreeing with others, follow those that they agree with.

Words declaring others, follow those that they declare.

Words depending on others, follow those that they depend upon.

These general Rules have some Exceptions, as most general Rules have: for the
Relative, if it be not the Nominative Case, comes before the word that governs
it; so does the Interrogative, etc. and in English the Adjective often comes
before the Substantive, that it agrees with. But it is a sure way ever to make
the Substantive before the Adjective. But if the Teacher shall think these
Rules too General, he may be pleased to give his Scholar these following, which
are more Particular.

Particular Rules for the Natural or Grammatical Order of Words.
R. 1. In the first place stand Words of Excitation or stirring up to attention.

Such as are,

(1) Interjections and Adverbs of Exhorting, Wishing, Calling, Showing, Asking:
as, O, ohe, heu, age, agite, ut, utinam, heus, eho, ehodum, en, ecce, an,
quomodo, etc.

And with these go their Cases depending on them.

(2) Vocative Cases of Nouns or Pronouns.

If there be none of these in the sentence, then in the first place stand
Adverbs of Forbidding, Likeness, or Relation: or Conjunctions Causals or
Rationals: as, Ne, nequaquam; quemadmodum, sicut; cum, quando, donec;
quandoquidem, quare, etc.

R. 2. In the second place (if any of the former sort of words go before, else
in the first place) stands that Substantive, which is the Nominative Case to
the principal Verb Personal, or that which stands instead of the Nominative
Case to it.

And together with the Substantive goes the Adjective that agrees with it.

And if either the Substantive or Adjective do govern a casual word, then
together with the Substantive or Adjective goes the Casual word governed of it:
as also any other word depending on it.

R. 3. Next to the Nominative Case and his Dependents stands the Verb Personal
that agrees with it.

But if the Verb be an Impersonal, or a Verb put Impersonally, then that, not
having any Nominative Case before it, begins the sentence: as, Taedet me vitae.
Haec olim meminisse juvabit. Virg.

And as the Nominative Case stands before the Verb of a Finite Mood, so the
Accusative stands before a Verb of the Infinitive Mood: as, Te rediisse
incolumem gaudeo.

R. 4. Next to the Verb stands the Adverb (if there be any) of Place, Time,
Quantity, Quality, or the like.

But if there be no Adverb coming with the Verb for the explaining of it, then
next to the Verb stands the Casual word governed of the Verb; or the Infinitive
Mood, if there be one, with his dependents.

And if the Verb have several Casual words after it, which are governed of it,
then the Dative goes before the Accusative, and the Accusative before the
Genitive and Ablative: as,

Dono tibi hoc munus. Dono te hoc munere. Admoneto illum pristinae fortunaes
Lupum auribus teneo.

R. 5. After the Verb with his dependents follows the Preposition, together
with the Casual word governed of him, and his dependents: as, Accipit in
Teucros animum, mentemque benignam. Virg. Initia in potestate nostra sunt, de
eventu fortuna judicat. Sen.

R. 6. After the Verb also with his dependents follows the Ablative Case
Absolute, and what depends on it: as, Imperante Augusto natus est Christus.

Though the Ablative Case Absolute, as virtually containing a Verb in its
clause, may be set before the Verb too, as it may stand with most convenience.

Note 1. Interrogatives and Relatives governed of a Verb come before the Verb
that governs them.

Also they come before any other word that governs them, except a Preposition.

And together with the Interrogative and Relative comes the Casual word, if it
be expressed, that they agree with.

Also, if they be not governed of the Verb, then both they and the word that
they are governed of, mostly come before the Verb: as,

Cujus numen adoro. Quibus rebus adductus fecisti?

Note 2. If any thing be wanting, necessary to complete the construction, it is
to be supplied: as, Ventum erat ad Vestae, i. e. templum.

Note 3. Figurative Construction is to be resolved into Proper: as, Velle suum,
i. e. Volunt as sua. Id genus alia, i. e. ejus generis.

If the Teacher think not these Rules to be enough, or not plain enough, he may
be pleased to frame Rules of himself more plain and full: or else consult
Rhenius De Nature ali Ordine Constructionis in his Gram. Lat. p. 540. and Voss.
De Ordine Grammatico in his Gram. Lat. p. 107. Or Mr. Brinsly in his Ludus
Literarius, and Posing of the Accidence; or Mr. Lewis in his Grammar, and Rules
of Pointing, etc.

For Practice, which superadded to the knowledge of these few general Rules
will in a manner do the whole work, I advise, that the Teacher do contrive, or
choose out some sentences, wherein the words are Artificially placed, and cause
his Scholars (himself looking on) to reduce those into the Natural Order. For
instance; Suppose the Scholars had this English to translate into Latin, Of
this glory, O Cajus Caesar, which thou have lately gotten, thou have no
partner; the way to do it right and surely, were to cast it into the Natural
Order, O Cajus Caesar, thou have no partner of this glory, which thou have
gotten lately. To reduce Verses into Prose after this manner, will be an useful
practice to this end. And the labor will not be great. Three or four trials to
an ordinary capacity will be sufficient.

When the Natural Order of the words of the English is found, then let the
Scholar seek out Latin words for the English, and consider how to put them
into good Syntax. Which when he has a while studied upon, let him come before
the Teacher, and do it viva voce, as well as he can, the Teacher rectifying him
where he is amiss, and helping him on with that, which he cannot do of himself.
And still as the Learner goes on from word to word, let the Teacher require a
reason for his doing that word next: and be often asking, what is next to be
done, and why: and when done, ask why it is, or ought to be thus done; and make
the Learner understand a Reason, and know a Rule for what he does. And for the
ease of the one, and help of the other, I shall here set down some directions
to be used as need shall be.

Directions for making plain Latin.
First, Read the Sentence carefully over, and

Secondly, Observe whether there be in it any Connexive Particles, which are to
be made in the order that they stand in; viz. in the beginning of the Sentence.
Yet where enim is made for for, some word would be placed before it in the
Latin; it not being usual to begin Sentences with that word

Thirdly, Observe whether there be in the Sentence Vocative Case; for next
after the Connexive Particles, if there be any, that is to be made; and if
there be none, it is to be made first.

Fourthly, Seek out the principal Verb; that usually

But if the first Verb have coming immediately before it a Relative, as that,
who, whom, which, andC. or a Conjunction, as that, if, etc. or, if it be the
Infinitive Mood, then seek further for another Verb.

1. Note. The Relative that may be distinguished from that the Conjunction, by
this, that the Conjunction has ever a Nominative Case betwixt it and the
following Verb; but the Relative has none, unless when it self is not the
Nominative Case to the Verb. Also the Relative that may be varied by who,
which, or whom: but the Conjunction that cannot.

2. Note. Sometimes a Verb of the Infinitive Mood begins a Sentence, and then
stands instead of the Nominative Case to the following Verb: as, To rise
betimes in the morning is a very wholesome thing; Diluculo surgere saluberrimum
est.

Fifthly, When the principal Verb is found out, Nominative Case to it; and,
unless there be any Adverbs, or Conjunctions, or Vocative Case to be set down
first, begin with that.

Note. That word is the Nominative Case to the Verb, which with good sense
answers to the question who or what, made by the Verb. As in this Sentence, A
clear conscience which needs no excuse, fears no accusation; to know what
is the Nominative Case to the Verb fears, the way is to put the word what to
the V^rb fears, saying, what fears no accusation? to which question, by
reading the Sentence over again, it will appear what is to be answered, namely
that A clear conscience fears no accusation; so the word Conscience is the
Nominative Case to that Verb.

Sixthly, Having found out the Nominative Case Gender and the Number of it.

Seventhly, Having set down the Nominative

If none come betwixt, then proceed to find out a Latin word proper for the
English Verb: and when you have considered what Mood and Tense it should be of,
then make it agree with its Nominative Case in Number and Person: that is, if
the Nominative Case (for example) be of the Singular Number and third Person,
then make your Verb to be of that Number and Person; and so what Number or
Person soever your Nominative Case be, let your Verb be of the same Number and
Person.

Yet, if the Nominative Case be a Collective Noun, or a Noun of multitude, the
Verb may be of the Plural Number, though the Nominative Case be but of the
Singular; as, Pars in frusta secant. Virg. In me turba ruunt. Ovid.

If any words come between the Nominative Case and the Principal Verb, then
make into Latin whatsoever has dependence on the Nominative Case, namely,

1. That Substantive, if there be any, that, as belonging to the same thing,
agrees with it: and together with that, or rather immediately after that, make
all those words, if there be any, which depend on, or are governed of it. As in
this Sentence, Brennus the Captain of the French entering the Temple of Apollo,
and spoiling it, was stricken with madness, and slew himself; after [Brennus]
the Nominative Case to the principal Verb [was stricken] is set down, must be
made into Latin the Substantive [Captain] agreeing in Case with [Brennus] and
next to that the word [French] of the Genitive Case, governed of the foregoing
word [Captain.]

2. That Adjective, whether Noun, Pronoun, or Participle, that agrees with it,
if there be one. As in this Sentence; A clear conscience, which needs no
excuse, fears no accusation; the word [Conscience] which is the Nominative
Case to the Verb [feareth] being made into Latin, and set down, the next word
to be made is the Adjective [clear] which agrees with that Nominative Case.

Note. What is the Substantive to any Adjective, may be known, by adding the
word [who] or [what] to the Adjective: for the word answering to the question
so made by the Adjective, will be the Substantive to it. As in the foregoing
Sentence; by adding [what] to the Adjective [clear], and saying by way of
question [A clear what fears no accusation?] it will by reading the Sentence
over again, be found, that the word [Conscience] is the Substantive to the
Adjective [clear.]

Having found what is the Substantive to the Adjective, consider what Gender
and Number, as well as what Case it is, and put the Adjective into the same
Gender, Number, and Case that the Substantive is of. And this is to be observed
in all parts of a Sentence, and not only in the beginning of it.

After the Abjective is made to agree with his Substantive, then consider
whether there do any words come betwixt it and the Principal Verb, which depend
on it, or are governed of it, and if there do come any, then next after it make
them. As in this Sentence, Mordorus spoiling Circes Temple, was stricken mad
with all his Soldiers; after that the Participle [spoiling] which agrees with
the Substantive [Mordorus], is made, then must be made the word [Temple]
governed of [spoiling]; and the word [Circes] which is the Genitive Case
governed of [Temple] the former of the two Substantives.

Note. When two Substantives come together, if the former end in [s] then it is
very like that the former is the Genitive Case governed of the latter. And
whether it be so or no, may be known, by putting away [s] from the end of the
word, and setting [of] before it, and reading before both, the Substantive that
follows it. Thus, if instead of [Circes Temple] it be read [the Temple of
Circe] it is visible, that [Circe] is the Genitive Case governed of [Temple]
and that [Circes] is put for [of Circe.]

3. That Substantive (if there be any) that is governed of the foregoing
Substantive in the Genitive or Ablative Case. As in this Sentence, A man of no
honesty is worthy of no trust; after the Nominative Case [A man] is made into
Latin, the words [of no honesty] are next to be made into Latin; whereof the
first [of] is but a sign of the Case, and so is included in the Latin of the
word [honesty]; the second word [no] is an Adjective agreeing with the
following Substantive [honesty], and therefore not to be made into Latin, till
the word [honesty], wherewith it agrees, be first made (for Substantives are
always to be made into Latin before their Adjectives, unless in Interrogative
or Indefinite speeches) so that the third word [honesty] governed of the
foregoing Substantive [man] is to be made into Latin, thus, Vir probitatis
nullius; or, Vir probitate nulla.

4. That Relative (if there be any) which has reference to the foregoing
Nominative Case and what depends on it, which is a particular clause, branch or
member of the Sentence. As in this Sentence, A clear conscience which needs
no excuse, fears no accusation, the Relative [which] with the rest of that
clause depending thereon, viz. the words [needeth no excuse] is to be made into
Latin, next after the Nominative Case to the principal Verb, viz. the word
[conscience] and his Adjective [clear]: thus, conscientia pura, quae
excusatione non eget, accusationem non timet.

Eighthly, When you have made into Latin, not Principal Verb. And, as was said
before, after you have by the Form of the Speech, and by the Signs of the
Tenses, found out, what Mood and Tense the Verb is to be of, then make it
accordingly of that Mood and Tense; and also of that Number and Person, that
the Nominative Case, wherewith it agrees, is of.

The Number of the Nominative Case is known by its signifying one, or more of
the things, or persons that it is the name of.

The Person of the Nominative Case, if it have a Pronoun joined with it, namely
one of these [Ego, tu, ille; nos, vos, illi] is known by the Person of the
Pronoun joined with it. Ego and Nos, or I and We, being of the First Person,
and so that Noun that is joined with them; Tu and Vos, or Thou and Ye, being of
the Second Person, and so that Noun that is joined with them; Ille and Illi, or
He and They (and so all other Pronouns) being of the Third Person, and so those
Nouns that they are joined unto.

If the Noun, which is of the Nominative Case, have no Pronoun expressly joined
with it, it is to be considered, what Pronoun it may have joined with it, or
put to stand for it; and such Person, as that pronoun is, (which generally is
of the third Person) such Person is the Nominative Case to be conceived to be
of, and in such Person the Verb to agree with it.

Generally the Nominative Case comes before the Verb. Yet sometimes the Verb,
or at least the Sign of the Verb, is set before the Nominative Case, viz.

1. In Interrogative speeches, wherein a question is asked; as, Love thou the
King? Does he love the King?

2. In Verbs of the Imperative Mood, where something is commanded or permitted;
as, Love thou the King. Do thou love the King. Let us love the King

3. In certain Phrases or Forms of speaking, where these Particles [it] or
[there] are joined with the Verb; as, It is my book; There came one to me.
Where [book] the Nominative Case to [is] in the former Sentence, and [one] the
Nominative Case to [came] in the latter Sentence, is set after the Verb, whose
Nominative Case it is, and with which it is to agree.

When [it] or [there] come with a Verb before a Noun, then mind, whether that
Verb be not a Verb Impersonal (i. e. one of those Verbs commonly so called, and
usually set without any Nominative Case before them), for [it] and [there] are
Signs of an Impersonal Verb; and if it be, then the word that seems to be the
Nom. must be such Case as the Verb Impersonal does govern; as, There must be
some body; Oportet esse aliquem.

If the Nominative Case come after the Verb, or after the Sign of the Verb,
then in writing down or reading (viva voce) the English into Latin, write or
read the words in the order they stand in, viz. First the Verb, then the
Nominative Case; as, Love thou the King? Amas tu Regem? Do thou love the
King, Ama tu Regem. It is my book, Est liber meus. There came one to me, Venit
ad me quidam.

Yet this order is not always necessarily to be observed, but may sometimes be
altered; as, Tune amas Regem? or, Tu amas Regem? Liber meus est. Quidam ad me
venit, may well enough be said.

Ninthly, When the Principal Verb is made, then

1. If an Adjective come after it without any Substantive, then most likely
that Adjective has reference to that Substantive, which is the Nominative Case
to the Verb: and if so, it is to be made also in the Nominative Case, (what
Case soever the Verb do govern after him): as, Peter sleeps void of care;
Petrus dormit securus. And however, it must, by putting the word [who or what,
etc.] to the English Adjective be found out, what Substantive the Adjective
refers unto, with which when found, the Adjective (as was said before) must be
made to agree.

2. If a Substantive come after the principal Verb, (whether with, or without
an Adjective) in the same clause or member of the Period or Sentence, it is
then governed of the Verb, and is to be put in such Case as the Verb, by virtue
of its own signification, or use in Authors, or Rule in Grammar, requires to
have after it, whether Genitive, Dative, Accusative, or Ablative.

And the same thing is to be considered and observed touching all casual words
coming after all other Verbs, though they be not the Principal in the Sentence.

3. If there come betwixt the Verb and the Substantive any casual Particle or
Preposition, then it is to be considered, what Case words are to be of which
have those Particles or Prepositions coming before them; or what Case of a
Noun, that Verb having this or that Particle, Sign, or Token after it, is by
Grammar Rule to govern: and accordingly the English is to be made into Latin.

Casual Particles are, of, to, for, in, into, with, through, from, by, etc.

Grammar Rules guiding to the Case of the Verb by the token or sign going
before the Noun, are these. All manner of Verbs put acquisitively, that is to
say, with these tokens to or for after them, will have a Dative Case. All Verb
require an Ablative Case of the Instrument with this Sign with before it, etc.

4 If there come more Substantives than one after the Verb, then it is to be
considered, whether those Substantives do belong to the same, or to diverse
things.

If they belong to the same thing, then they are to be put in the same Case:
as, They drive away the drones a sluggish cattle from the hives; Ignavum fucos
pecus a praesepibus arcent. This is as well to be observed concerning
Substantives coming before the Verb.

If the Substantives belong to the same thing, there may be with good sense and
English, set between them, these words, who is, or which is, or which are: as
here, sluggish cattle, the drones, which are, a sluggish cattle.

If they belong to diverse things, then it is to be considered what respect each
Substantive has to the Verb (for one and the same Verb may, upon diverse
considerations, govern many and diverse Cases, viz. one of the Thing; another of
the Person; another of the Cause, Manner, Adjunct, Instrument, etc. (as, Dedit
mihi vestem pignori, te praesente, propria manu) and accordingly each Noun is
to be put into such Case, as the Verb according to that respect that the Noun
has to the Verb, does require of the Noun.

If any Casual Particle come betwixt the Nouns, then they belong to diverse
things, and have different respects to the Verb. But if there come no Casual
Particle betwixt them, nor any Comma or other Point, then they belong to the
same thing, and have the same respect to the Verb, and are to be made by the
same Case, as was said before.

5. If there be any Substantive following the Verb, that has no respect to the
Verb, then it is governed of some other Substantive, or Adjective, or other
Word, coming betwixt the Verb and it; and such Case as the Substantive, or
Adjective, or other Word governs, such Case is that Noun to be of.

This is to be observed also in all parts of the Sentence, as well before, as
after the Verb. For in all parts of the Sentence, the following word is
governed of that governing word that in the Natural Order of the Words goes
next before it, in the same clause, or part of the Sentence; except it be a
Relative, or Interrogative etc. which if they be not the Nominative Case, nor
have a Preposition coming before them, are ever governed of some word coming
after them, what Case soever they be of.

The Natural Order of Words is that, according to which, The words are placed
so, that words depending on others for their Gender, Number, Case, Person,
Mood, etc. are set after those whereon they depend (as has been shown) which
is not observed, but much gone contrary unto in that order of words, which is
called Artificial.

6. If any other Verb come after the Principal Verb, it is to be considered,
whether there do any casual word expressly, or implicitly come betwixt the
foregoing and following Verb; and if no casual word come betwixt, then the
latter Verb is to be of the Infinitive Mood: as, I desire to learn.

But if any casual word, though but a Pronoun, come between the two Verbs, then
though the latter Verb may be the Infinitive Mood, (which if it be, then the
casual word foregoing is generally to be the Accusative case) as, I bid thee be
gone, or I bid that thou be gone, Jubeo te abire; I am glad that you are in
health, Gaudeo te valere; yet it may also be the Subjunctive Mood with ut,
either expressed, or understood together with it; (but then the Casual word
foregoing must be the Nominative case) as, I bid thee be gone, Jubeo ut tu
abeas; See that you have a good heart, Fac habeas animam fortem; or with quod
(accordingly as the nature of the Verb shall require) as, Quod tu valeas
gaudeo. See Treat. of Eng. Partic. chapter 75. r. 3, 4, 8.

And if the foregoing Verb do govern a Dative case, then the casual word coming
before the latter Verb (if it be made by the Infinitive Mood) may indifferently
be put either in the Dative, as governed of the foregoing Verb; or in the
Accusative by reason of the Infinitve Mood following. So we may indifferently
say, Non licet homini -- or Non licet hominem esse, ut vult. See Treat. of Eng.
Partic. c. 34. r. 21.

7. If there come more Verbs than one, after the Principal Verb, it is to be
considered, whether the latter also of them, as well as the former, be governed
of the Principal Verb, or of some former that goes before it self, yet comes
after the Principal Verb.

If it be governed of the Principal Verb, then some copulative Conjunction
expressly, or implicitly comes betwixt it and the Former Verb: and it is so to
be made, as the former was, for Mood.

If it be not governed of the Principal Verb, then it is governed either of
some foregoing Verb, or Noun Substantive, or Adjective, and is the Infinitive
Mood, which may be varied by a Subjunctive Mood with a Conjunction, or
Relative. See Treat. of Eng. Partic. c. 83. r. 11. n. 7.

Note. Verbs are governed of Substantives, and Adjectives, as well as of Verbs:
as, Sed jam tempus est ad id, quod instituimus, accedere. Cic. Itane eo paratus
facere omnia? Ter.

And this is to be observed also in all parts of a Sentence or Period, and not
only in the body, or latter end of it, or after the Principal Verb. Audax omnia
perpeti Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas. Hor. Sed si tantus amor casus
cognoscere nostros, etc. Virg.

If there be any Relatives in the Sentence, then of agrees with, and (if it be
not the Nominative case) what it is governed of.

The Agreement of the Relative is with its Antecedent; that is a Substantive
going before, which may again, without interruption or disturbance to the
sense, be repeated together with the Relative: as, Wretched is that man which
is in love with money; or wretched is that man, which [man] is in love with
money. Here [man] goes before [which] and is, or may be repeated together with
it.

To know what word is the Antecedent to the Relative, add the word [who, what,
whose, or whom, etc.] to the Relative by way of question, and the word that,
upon reading the Sentence over again, with good sense answers to that question,
is that Substantive Antecedent, with which it agrees. As in this Example, The
man is wise which speaks few things; to know what is the Antecedent to the
Relative [which], add the word [what] to the word [which] and then make a
question with those two words, and the following Verb, saying, which what
speaks? The answer whereto will be visibly this (upon reading the Sentence
over again) which man speaks: so that [man] is the Antecedent to the Relative
[which]. For upon every such question the Antecedent will be repeated in the
answer together with the Relative.

If the word [that] be the Relative, turn it into [who] or [which] etc. and
then it will be the easilier found out, that is the Antecedent Substantive,
wherewith it is to agree: as, Wretched is the man that [i. e. which] is in love
with money.

Having sound what word is the Antecedent to the Rel^ti^e m^ke it agree with i^
in Gender, Number, and Person, that is, set it down of the same Number and
Gender, and suppose it to be of the same Person with its Antecedent: and let
the Person of the Relative appear by the Person of the Verb, to which the
Relative is the Nominative case, in making the Verb, that has the Relative for
his Nominative case, to be of that Person, which that Substantive is of, that
the Relative refers unto, and agrees with. If the Relative be not the
Nominative case, then the Person of it is not to be heeded. The Relative is the
Nominative case to the Verb, when there comes no other Nominative case betwixt
the Relative and the Verb.

If the Relative be not the Nominative case to the following Verb, nor have a
Preposition coming with it, nor be together with his Substantive put absolute,
then it is governed generally of the Verb that follows it, though sometimes of
other words; as may be seen in the Accidence Rules for the Case of the Relative.

The Relative that is governed of the Verb, must be such Case, as any other
Substantive were to be of, if it followed the Verb.

If the Relative be not governed of the Verb; then, if it be a casual word,
that the Relative is governed of, such Case as that word would govern after it,
such Case must the Relative be of, that comes before it. And that casual word,
of which the Relative is governed, must be such Case as the Verb will govern
after him: as, Cujus numen adoro; Cui similem non vidi; Quorum optimum ego
habeo. Unless there be some other word in the Sentence governing that word of
which the Relative is governed: as, Quae nunc non est narrandi locus. Which
word yet is to be such Case as the Verb governs after it.

To know what word the Relative is governed of (whether it be the Verb, or
other word that governs it) the way is, to put a Demonstrative in the stead of
it, and then read that clause in which it stands according to the Natural Order
of the words: for then the word that governs the Demonstrative that is put in
instead of the Relative, will go before it: and that word that governs the
Demonstrative following it, is the word that governs the Relative going before
it.

For Example. In English, in this Sentence, [you dispraise him, whom all men
commend] if we take out the Relative [whom], and in the stead of it put in the
Demonstrative [him], and then read that clause in which it stands, according to
the Natural Order of the words, thus, All men commend him, it is plain that the
Demonstrative [him] is governed of the Verb [commend]. And so by that it is
known, that it is of that Verb, that the Relative [whom] is governed. Thus also
in Latin, in this Sentence, Vir est, cui similem non vidi, if instead of the
Relative [cui], we do put in the Demonstrative [huic], and then read that
clause into which it is put, in the Natural Order of the words, thus -- Non
vidi similem huic, it is plain that [huic] is governed of the Adjective
[similem] going next before it. And by that it appears, that of that Adjective
[similem] is the Relative [cui] governed.

Yet further to bring Children by easy steps to the understanding of that
great difficulty, which lies in putting the Relative into its right Case,
Gender, and Number, wherein most usually they fail, the Teacher may be pleased
to take this course with them.

1. Give them Englishes wherein the Antecedent Substantive, to which the
Relative refers, shall not only go before the Relative, but be also repeated
together with it: as, He had a knife, with which knife he would have slain
himself.

2. Cause them in their daily Translations to enclose within two square
brackets [] the repeated Substantive, wherewith the Relative, as being a
perfect Adjective, must agree in Case, Gender* and Number; after this form,
Ferrum habuit quo [ferro] se occideret.

3. Cause them in the fair writing of their whole weeks Exercises to omit the
repetition of the Antecedent Substantive, yet in the construing thereof (as
also of their daily Lectures) to express it, as if it were written. As if, for
example, having written Ferrum habuit quo se occideret, they should in
construing express ferro with quo, saying, quo ferro, with which knife.

4. After they have been practiced for some time in this kind of exercise, then
give them Englishes to translate, where in the Antecedent Substantive shall
only be expressed in the clause going before the Relative, and not repeated
together, with the Relative in the same clause where it is: as, He had a knife,
with which he would have slain himself. Yet in the Translating them, cause them
still to express the Substantive together with the Relative; Ferrum habuit quo
[ferro] se occideret. This will haunt them, wherever they meet with a
Relative, even of course to seek out a Substantive for it, to express together
with it. Of which repetition of the Substantive together with the Relative,
there be abundant examples in Classick Authors. Such is that of Cicero's, Cum
viderem ex ea part homines, cujus partis nos vel principes numer abamur, pro
Quint. And that of Caesar's, Legem promulgaverat, qua lege regnum Jubae
publicaver at, 2. Bell. Civ. That of Terentius, Habet bonorum exemplum, quo
exemplo sibi licere id facere, quod illi fecerunt, put at, Heaut. Prol. And
that of Plautus, Est causa, qua causa simul mecum ire veritus est, Epid. 1. 1.
Yet this Repetition, it will be the Masters discretion to order his Scholars to
omit, as he shall see cause.

5. Teach them to fill up such Elliptical passages as have only that Case of
the Substantive expressed, in which the Relative coming together with it, does
agree; that, wherein it might, or ought to differ from it, being omitted. Thus,
Vrbem quam statuo vestra est, i. e. Vrbs vestra est, quam urbem statuo, or,
Quam urbem statuo, vestra urbs est. So, Eunuchum, quem ded^sti nobis, quas
turbas dedit? Quas dedit Eunuchus turbas, quem nobis dedisti Eunuchum? or, Quas
turbas dedit Eunuchus, quem Eunuchum dedisti nobis? So, Quis non malarum, quas
amor curas habet, haec inter obliviscitur? i. e. Inter haec quis non
obliviscitur curarum malarum, quas cur as amor habet? So, Ad Coesarem quam misi
epistolam, ejus exemplum fugit me tum tibi mittere. i. e. Fugit me tum tibi
mittere ejus epistolae exemplum, quam ad Caesarem misi epistolam. So, Quos
pueros cum Mario miserunt, epistolam mihi attulerunt hoc exemplo i. e. Pueri
illi hoc exemplo mihi attulerunt epistolam, quos pueros cum Mario miserunt.

6. Give them such Englishes for translation, as shall have in them man, or
thing, (either expressed, or understood in the Pronoun put for them,) to be the
Substantive wherewith the Relative must agree. As, Wretched is he [i. e. the
man] that is in love with money, Miser est [homo] qui [homo] nummos admiratur.
That [i. e. that thing] is good, which [i. e. which thing] all [things] desire.
Bonum illud est, quod omnia appetunt.

Thus by easy steps will Children be brought, not only to understand how to
render those Relative Particles that, who, which, whose, whereof, whom, etc. in
right Case, Gender, or Number (than the doing of which there is scarce any
thing more hard to them) but also to overcome the greatest difficulties, that
lie in the Regiment of the Relative. And now I return to go on with those
Directions for Plain Latin making which yet remain.

If the Speech be Negative, then observe to set the

The Negative Particle usually comes betwixt the Verb and the Sign of the Verb,
if any Sign of the Verb be expressed. As, I do not perceive, what your intent
is. But if no Sign of the Verb be expressed, then it comes after the Verb: as,
I perceive not, what your intent is, Ego, quid agas, nihil intelligo.

Interrogative Speeches have the same Observations Assertive Speeches. The
Interrogative Pronominal Particles being Nominative cases to Verbs, and being
governed of a Preposition before them, or else of a Verb, or some other word
coming after them. As, Quis enim er at, qui non sciret? Quid hoc impudentius
dici, aut fingi potest? Quae civitati facta est injuria? Quantos fluctus
excitari concionum videtis? Cui quaeso tandem probasti? Cui novae calamit ati
locus ullus relictus esset?

In Admirative or Exclamative Speeches, Casual Admiring, or Exclaiming,
accordingly as use has subjoyned such and such Cases unto such and such
Particles.

Of the Ablative absolute.
When a Substantive comes together with a Participle and neither is the
Nominative case to any following Verb, nor has before it any other word of
which it is governed, then it is put Absolute, and so is to be made by the
Ablative Case. As, The King coming, the enemies fled; Rege veniente hosts
fugerunt.

Note. If any other Nominative Case, though but of a Pronoun, come between the
Substantive that has the Participle joined to it, and the Verb, then that
Substantive is not the Nominative case to the Verb. But if no Nominative case
come betwixt, then it is (not put absolute, but) the Nominative case to the
Verb. As, The King coming made the enemies fly; Rex veniens hosts fugavit.

In speaking of this Ablative Case I follow the received way; not being
ignorant what is thought by Learned Persons of that Construction, namely that
it is governed of some Preposition understood, viz. a, ab, sub, cum, or in. See
Treat. of Eng. Particles c. 20. r. 1. n. 3.

Well now, when the Learner is able, what by his own study, and what by these
Directions, and what by his Teachers further Instruction, where it is needful,
to read the English into Latin viva voce, then let him go, and write it down
in a loose Paper, and bring it to his Teacher, to consider of his manner of
writing, and pointing it; who is accordingly to inform him of what he knows
not, and rectify him in what he sees amiss.

That being done, let the Master cast the words out of the Natural into the
Artificial Order, and mend the Phrase, if need be, and then cause the Scholar
to transcribe the exercise so done into his fair book, and after that get it to
construe, and parse, and say by heart.

As in Translating it out of English into Latin he observed the Natural Order
of the words, so in construing (as it is called) out of Latin into English,
let him exactly, as far as the Idiom of the Languages will permit, observe the
Natural Order of the words.

Of the Natural Order of Latin words there be precepts to be found in
Vossius's Latin Grammar at the end of the Syntaxis; also in Brinsly's Gram.
School. chapter 8. in Mr. Clarks Dux Grammaticus p. 259. and in the end of Phrases
Wintonienses, which I forbear to transcribe.

Let the Scholars parsing be performed all by himself alone, taking the words
in the Natural Order,
and going of himself (without being asked any thing by his Teacher, save where
he omits any thing necessary) from word to word, till he have gone over the
whole; declining Nouns and Verbs, and giving Rules for the Genders of the one,
and Preterperfect Tense and Supines of the other: and so of the other parts of
Speech let him say, what is fit to be said. But especially let him give account
of the Syntax of every word; why this Substantive is of the Nominative case;
that of the Genitive; the other the Dative, Accusative, or Ablative. Why this
Adjective is of this, that, or the other Case, Gender, Number; why this
Relative is of this, or that Number, or Person; and why of this, or the other
Case, and what governs it; and why this Verb is of this Mood, Number, Person,
etc. maintaining and justifying every thing by Grammar Rule, or Example from
Classick Authors.

And here by the way let me take occasion to advise, that the same course be
observed in his Authors, that he learns, construing his Lectures therein, in
the Natural Order, and parsing them all by himself alone in that order. It is
scarce imaginable how much more beneficial this way of parsing alone is, beyond
the other more usual way of asking questions skippingly, here a word, and there
a word, according to the Masters fancy, list, or leisure. And if there be more
than one together, one may take one piece, and another another piece by
courses, till all be done. If one by agreement do ger one piece, and another
another, it will not be much amiss to wink at it for a while, till they be a
little perfect at it; that plot is quickly broke, by putting them but once or
twice out of their road.

Lastly, To return, on the Repetition-day, let the Scholar say all his weeks
work by heart, and both read it out of English into Latin, and out of Latin
into English: and where the Teacher thinks needful, let him ask him a Rule for,
or a Reason of the Construction, or the like.

English Examples framed according to the Rules of the Three Latin Concords.
THE FIRST CONCORD. Concordantia Nominativi and Verbi.
Verbum Personale cohaeret cum Nominativo numero and persona: ut, Nunquam sera
est ad bonos mores via.

Fortuna nunquam perpetu^ est bona.

* A Verb Personal a greeth with his Nominative case in Number and Person: as,
Praeceptor legit, vos vero negligitis, The Master reads and ye regard not.

* And the Nominative shall in making and construing Latin, be set before the
Verb.

Examples, where Personal Pronouns are only Nominative Cases.

Indicat. Mood Present Tense Active with a Sign.

I do fear, thou do laugh, he does strike, we do cry, ye do call, they do
answer.

Without a Sign.

I love, thou teach, he reads, we hear, ye learn, they play.

Indic. Pres. Pass.

I am loved, thou art taught, he is read, we are called, ye are stricken, they
are frighted.

I am bought, thou art sold, he is beaten, we be blamed, ye be wounded, they be
healed.

Preterimperfect Tense Active.

I did lose, thou did seek, he did find, we did sit, ye did stand, they did
walk.

I mourned, thou weptest, he laughed, we sung, ye leap't, they danced.

Passive.

I was named, thou wast called, he was reproved, we were warned, ye were
scourged, they were killed.

I was girded, thou were armed, he was cut, we were hurt, ye were lead, they
were drawn.

Preterperf. Active.

I have fought, thou have overcome, he has washed, we have wiped, ye have
scratched, they have bitten.

I have mown, thou have reaped, she has scattered, we have gathered, ye have
laid up, they have carried out.

Passive.

I have been carried, thou have been bound, he has been blamed, we have been
praised, ye have been healed, they have been saved.

I have been honored, thou have been crowned, she has been decked, we have
been painted, ye have been nursed, they have been clothed.

Preterpluperf. Active.

I had tried, thou had consented, he had said, we had believed, ye had held,
they had escaped.

I had written, thou had received, she had read, we had recalled, ye had
replied, they had granted.

Passive.

I had been seen, thou had been heard, he bad been accused, we had been
condemned, ye had been saved, they had been killed.

I had been baptized, thou had been confirmed, she had been instructed, we
had been corrected, ye had been admonished, they had been commended.

Future Tense Active.

I will ask thou will answer, he will have, we will hold, ye will command, they
will obey.

I shall touch, thou shall perceive, she shall crave, we shall give, ye shall
feign, they shall frame.

Passive.

I will be sought, thou will be found, he will be taken, we will be freed ye
will be detained, they will be dismissed.

I shall be cased, thou shall be burdened, she shall be received, we shall be
rejected, ye shall be commended, they shall be lamented.

* Except a question be asked, and then the Nominative is set after the Verb --

Love I? teach thou? reads he? hear we? learn ye? play they?

Feared I? laughest thou? strikes he? Cry we? called ye? answered they?

* Or after the Sign of the Verb, as,

Amas tu? Love thou? Venitne Rex? Does the King come?

Do I play? do thou learn? does he profit? Do we see? do ye hear? do they
feel?

Did I lose? did thou seek? did he find? did we sit? did ye stand? did they
walk?

Have I fought? have thou overcome? has he read? have we heard? have ye sung?
have they danced?

Had I tried? had thou consented? had he said? had we believed? had ye
stayed? had they departed?

Shall I ask? will thou answer? will he have? shall we hold? shall ye command?
will they obey?

Am I loved? art thou feared? is he called? are we heard? Be ye stricken? be
they frighted?

Was I touched? were thou named? was he warned? were we blamed? were ye
scourged? were they killed?

Have I been honored? have thou been fed? has she been nursed? have we been
decked? have ye been clothed? have they been spoiled?

Had I been heard? had thou been seen? had she been condemned? had we been
saved? had ye been killed? had they been buried?

Shall I be touched? will thou be perceived? shall he be sought? shall we be
found? will ye be lead? will they be drawn?

* Likewise if the Verb b of the Imperative Mood; as, Amaro ille, Let him love.

Write thou, fight he, eat ye, drink they, sing thou, dance he, write ye, read
they, do thou go, let him stay, run we, do ye sit, let them stand.

Laugh thou, shout he, let us sleep, walk ye, let them ride.

Passive.

Be thou ruled, let him be broken, be w^ held, be ye bound, let them be
scourged.

Be thou loved, be he feared, let us be tamed, be ye enriched, be they
advanced.

* And sometime when this Sign it, or there comes before the English of the
Verb; as, Est liber meus, It is my book; Venit ad me quidam, There came one to
me.

It is a horse; there was a mare; it is night; it was day. There blows wind;
there falls rain; there comes a man; there went a woman. It is I: it was thou.
It had been he; it may be we; it might be ye, it shall be they.

Yet it is not necessary, that in all these Cases the Nominative be always set
after the Verb: for tu eras? may as well be said, as Eras tu? Liber est; as,
Est liber.

Potential Mood Present Tense.

I may command, thou may entreat, he may weep, we may laugh, ye may fight,
they may overcome.

I may be touched, thou may be tickled, he may be burned, we may be buried,
ye may be covered, they may be concealed.

Preterimperfect Tense.

I might say, would thou believe? should he read? we ought to learn. Could ye
see? they should think. Should I be commended? thou would be dispraised.
Ought he to be despised? we should be blamed. Ye would be condemned, ought they
to be punished?

Preterperfect Tense.

I might have thought, thou would have believed, he should have said, we
ought to have understood, ye should have perceived, they would have pronounced.

I should have been afflicted, thou would have been bewailed, he ought to
have been vexed, we should have been freed, ye would have been oppressed, they
ought to have been warned.

Preterpluperfect Tense.

I had felt, thou had feared, he had needed, we had believed, ye had come,
they had gone.

I had been compared, thou had been preferred, he had been refused, we had
been chosen, ye had been accepted, they had been rejected.

Future Tense.

I shall have eaten, you will have drunk, he will have spoken, we shall have
sinned, ye will have sorrowed, they shall have repented.

I shall have been said, thou shall have been seen, he shall have been fed, we
shall have been filled, ye shall have been honored, they shall have been
feared.

Examples where Nouns are the Nominative Cases; and first Nouns Substantives
Proper.

Peter sleeps, Paul prays, Joseph arises, Mary runs, Thomas doubts,
John believes.

Elizabeth rejoiced, Lydia did hearken. Caesar fought, Pompey fled.

Cicero has entreated, Cato had resisted, Antony shall drink, Ovid will write.

The Horaces kill. The Curiaces are killed. The Decius's died. The Fabius's
were slain. The Romans have conquered. The Parthians have been vanquished.

The Persians will fly. The Macedonians shall pursue. The Arabians shall be
affrighted. The Egyptians will be destroyed.

Does George speak? Did Thomas hear? Has Edward taught? Had Richard learned?
Will Robert profit?

Weeps Cleopatra? Sighs Helena? Do the Trojans mourn? Did the Grecians sing?
Have the Athenians fought? Had the Lacedaemonians fled? Will the Gauls be
beaten? Shall the Spaniards be quieted?

Would the Hunns have been drowned? Might the Scythians have been tamed? Could
the Carthaginians have been destroyed? Should the Italians have been enriched?
Ought the Brittons to have been robbed?

Secondly Nouns Substantives Common.

And first without any Particle annexed.

Fire burns, wood is burned, night hides, day discloseth, winter wastes,
spring draws on, summer approaches, harvest is ended.

Wine is drunk, bread is baked, meat is eaten, flesh is roasted, corn is sown,
hay is mown.

Does gold glister? Did silver ting? has brass rusted? will glass break? Is
Iron heated? was lead melted? has copper been beaten? had tin been run? shall
pewter be scoured? Milk is curded, cream is strained, butter is churned, cheese
is pressed, curds are sweetened, cheese-cakes are baked, trees grow, flowers
smell, leaves shoot, apples ripen, pears hang, plums fall, berries rot.

Bought are shaken, cherries are picked, walnuts are dashed, small nuts are
gathered, shells are cracked, kernels are eaten.

Swans sung, cocks crowed, hens cackled, chickens cheaped, pies chattered.

Men fought, women scolded, boys wrastled, girls scratched, children cried,
servants laughed.

Let Knaves be cudgelled, let Rogues be scourged, let beggars be whipped, let
drunkards be fined, let thieves be hanged, let rebels be beheaded. Should
scolds be ducked? would whores be shamed? ought whore masters to be gelded?
could adulterers be branded?

Travelers will talk, Soldiers will brag, Lawyers will wrangle, Merchants
shall complain, Scholars will dispute, fools will prate.

Have eyes seen? have ears heard? have noses smelt? have tongues tasted? have
hands felt?

Has music pleased? had learning flourished? will honor be sought? shall
virtue be honored? will vice be punished?

Arts are learned, ignorance is banished, servants are beaten, slaves are sold,
much is spoken, little is minded, nothing is done, all is lost.

Secondly with the Particle [a] annexed.

A dog barketh, a thief trembles, a lion roared, a hare started, a partridg
flew, a hawk pursued, a sword has cut, a spear has pierced, a mouse had
slept, a cat had watched, a bird will fly, a fish will swim.

Is a pen made? was a book written? has a penknife been whetted? had a line
been drawn? will a blot be wiped out? shall a whetstone be rubbed? may a sponge
be squeezed?

Thirdly with the Particle [the] annexed.

The Father does sing, the mother laugheth, the child plays.

The young man leaped, the old man danced.

The Lamb does frisk, the Ew did bleat, the Bull has lowed, the Ox had
labored, the Sow shall farrow, the Pig will squeak.

The Hog is fatted, the Heifer was killed, the Deer has been hunted, the Horn
had been winded, the huntsman will be wearied, the hunting shall be ended.

Is the King crowned? were the Rebels vanquished? have the Soldiers been
honored? had the Rebels been subdued? will the Citizens be oppressed? shall
the Country men be burdened?

Let the Fathers command, let the Children obey, let the Commanders direct, let
the Soldiers fight.

The Husbands may labor, the Wives should care, the Servants should work, the
Children could play.

The Swall ws may have come, the Woodcocks might have staid, the Cranes shall
have departed.

Examples where a Noun and a Pronoun come together, which is called in Grammar
Evocatio.

Cum prima vel secunda persona immediate ad se evocat tertiam, ambae fiunt
primae, vel secundae personae: ut, Ego pauper laboro, Tu dives ludis.

I John see. Thou Peter talkest We Edwards run. Ye Richards stand.

I a Father speak. Do thou a Child hear? We Shouldiers fight. Do ye Citizens
fly?

I the Man will go. Do thou the Woman stay. We the poor labor. Ye the rich
laugh.

We Apples swim. Ye Stones do sink Let us Cocks crow. Do ye Hens cackle. We
loaves be cut. Ye Eggs be broken.

We Old men do talk. Ye Young men do work Do we young men work? Do ye young men
work?

I Sun do shine: Thou Moon did blush: We Stars sang: Ye Heavens did rejoice.

I a Master have taught. Have ye Scholars regarded?

Note that the Verb must always be of that Number and Person that the Pronoun
(whether it be expressed, or understood) is of.

Ego tuae deliciae isthuc veniam. Magna pars studiosorum amoenitates quaerimus.
sub. nos.

Aeneas adsum. sub. ego.

Populus superamur ab uno. sub. nos.

Nominativus primae vel secundae Personae rarissime exprimitur, nisi Causa
Discretionis; ut, Vos damnastis, quasi dicat, praeterea nemo: aut Emphasis
gratia: ut, Tues patronus, tu pater, si deseris tu perimus; quasi dicat
praecipue, and prae aliis tu patronus es. Ovid. Tu dominus, tu vir, tu mihi
frater eris.

I shouted, thou whisperedst, we walked, ye ran, I entreated, thou command,
we were praised, ye were discommended, I gave, thou did receive, we came, ye
went.

I shall be scourged, thou will be hanged, we shall be enriched, ye will be
spoiled.

I will be a friend, I will be a Father, I will be a Husband.

Thou savest, thou defendest, thou feedest, thou clothest.

We went, we sought, we found; ye were mocked, ye were scourged, ye were
tormented.

In verbis quorum significatio ad homines tantum pertinet, tertiae Personae
Nominativus saepe subauditur: ut est, fertur, dicunt, ferunt, aiunt,
praedicant, clamitant, and in similibus; ut,

Ter. Fertur atrocia slagitia designasse.

Ovid. Teque ferunt irae poenituisse tuae.

How this should be imitated in English I see not; and so pass it over.

* And that casual word that comes next after the Verb, and answers to the
question whom, or what, made by the Verb, shall commonly be the Accusative
Case; as, Amo magistrum, I love the master.

Use makes perfect. I know him well. Truth gets hatred. Love covers offenses.
Honor nourishes arts. Virtue deserves praise.

Do thou hear me? will I leave thee? shall he teach me?

Fear thou God, honor ye the King.

* Except the Verb do properly govern another Case after him to be construed
withal; as, Si cupis placere magistro, utere diligentia, nec sis tantus
cessator ut calcaribus indigeas, If thou covet to please thy master, use
diligence, and be not so slack, that thou shall need spurs.

Nominative.

Love is a Loadstone. Fire is hot. I am called John. I am thought rich. I lie
dreaming. He runs eating. Thou drinkest standing.

Genitive.

He is accused of theft. He is acquitted of bribery. He is condemned of
covetousness. Pity thy Father. Have compassion on thy Mother. Forget not thy
Brother.

Dative:

Succor me. Profit thy self. Disprofit none. Please God. Obey the King; resist
sin. Tell me quickly. Answer him readily. Give to the poor. Lend to the rich.

Ablative.

Use exercise. Enjoy comfort. I want money; and yet I have discharged my duty.
Rely on virtue, but brag not of victory Change flesh for bread, but eat bread
sparingly. Be glad of a little.

Non semper vox casualis est Verbo Nominativus, sed aliquando Verbum infinitum:
ut Plaut. Mentiri non est meum.

To fight is manly, to cry is childish, to fly is cowardly.

To lie is base, to steal is dangerous, to rob is deadly, to counter feit is
common.

To delay breeds danger to make haste is safe.

Aliquando oration, ut Ovid.

Add quod ingenuas di dicisse fideliter arts

Emollit mores, Nec finit esse feros.

To love his Parents is the duty of a child.

To honor the King is the duty of Subjects.

To fear God is the property of Christians.

To do well and be ill spoken of, is the part of Kings.

To laugh much, bewrays folly.

To speak much, brings sin.

To grow rich makes proud.

To live a good life, gives hope of dying a happy death.

To love idleness brings to disgrace

To delight in riot, tends to beggary.

To strive with a mighty man, is folly in a mean man.

For a wife to be chaste, is a virtue.

For a husband to be kind, is a praise.

For a Prince to be humble, is an honor.

For a Subject to be proud, is a shame.

Columbus 's discovering America, rendered him famous.

Alexander 's conquering Darius, won him glory.

Caesar 's beating Pompey procured him an Empire.

That he took Carthage, got Scipio honor.

That he forgave his enemies, turned to Caesar 's glory.

That he fought against his Country, proved Catiline 's ruin.

His killing Hector, made Achilles dreadful.

Her relieving the Trojans, won Dido praise.

Their being at odds amongst themselves was the cause of the Grecians overthrow.

Aliquando Adverbium cum Genitivo: ut, Partim virorum ceciderunt in bello.
Partim signorum sunt combusta.

This cannot be exemplified in English. But an Adverb being a Nominative to a
Verb without a Genitive Case may be exemplified.

That to morrow when comes it?

I wish that before had been afterward.

That now will never be.

That hey brave quite undid him

Examples of Construction where many Nominative Cases come before a Verb, which
is called in Latin Syllepsis.

Syllepsis seu conceptio, est comprehensio indignioris sub digniore.

Copulatum per Conjunctionem, Et, nec, neque, and Cum pro Et acceptum, est
pluralis numeri; ac proinde Verbum exigit plurale; quod quidem Verbum persona
cum digniore supposito quadrabit: ut, Quid tu and soror facitis? Ego and matter
perimus. Tu and uxor testes estote.

* Many Nominative Cases Singular with a Conjunction Copulative coming between
them, will have a Verb plural, which Verb plural shall agree with the
Nominative Case of the most worthy person; as, Ego and tu sumus in tuto, I and
thou be in safeguard Tu and pater periclitamini, Thou and thy father are in
jeopardy. Pater and praeceptor accersunt te, Thy father and thy master have
sent for thee.

Dignior autem est persona prima quam secunda; and dignior secunda quam tertia.

* Where note, that the first person is more worthy than the second, and the
second more worthy than the third; as, Ego and matter sumus in tuto. Tu atque
frater est is in periculo. Neque ego, neque tu sapimus.

English Examples where the Nominative Cases are of the same Person.

Com^ hither to me, thou and thou.

The Father and the Son walk together.

The Mother and the Daughter talk together.

Love and Majesty dw^ll not together.

A Wife and a Where shall be together in one house.

The King and Queen wish him to their Son inlaw.

Strength and Beauty are much desired by every one.

The wind and the rain fight one with another.

The Hare and the Dog run apace.

War, and Famine, and Pestilence, do ruinate Countries.

Righteousness, and Peace, and Truth, do make Kingdoms happy.

Examples where one Nominative Case is of the first person, and another of the
second. I and thou will go home together.

Thou and I will seek him out.

Let thee and me love out Father.

Thou and I shall be safe what ever come of it.

Neither thou, nor I, have either luck or money.

Both thou, and I, must give an account of our selves unto God.

No^ thou, nor I, did any such thing.

Examples where one Nominative Case is of the first person, and another of the
third.

I and my Son are in health.

My Mother and I, persuaded my Father.

I and my man, kept the house.

My Father and I, dr^ve the Sheep.

I and my house, will serve the Lord.

My Brother and I, go to the same School.

He and I, are disputing here.

Examples where one Nominative Case, is of the second person, and another of
the third.

Thou and thy Mother miss thy Father.

Thy Brother and thou are idle Boys.

Art thou and Mary well?

Thy Boy and thou will get great booties.

Come thou and thy wife to my house.

Thy man and thou do plough in one field.

Thou and thy Master do ride in the same Coach togeth^r.

Thy Dog and thou, lie in the same bed.

Yea, though to Conjunction Copulative be expressed between the foregoing
Nommative Cases, yet may the Verb be plural: as, Ter. Dum ^tas, me^^^, magister
prohibebant.

Wealth, (...), power, bewitch many men

Virtue, ^^^dness, ^h^rity, are much d^spised in these days.

Beauty, hea^th strength are wished for by ^^st men.

Folly, sin, wi^k^^ness, are committed by all men.

Yet this making the Verb to be plural when many Nominative Cases singular go
before the Verb, is not always observed in Authors, who sometimes set a Verb
singular with diverse Nominative Cases going before or after it, which Verb
agrees in person with that Nominative Case that stands next it, whether before
or after it, that is, in the same Comma with it. And this Construction is that
which the Latins call Zeugma.

Zeugma est unius verbi viciniori respondentis, ad diversa supposita reductio;
ad unum quidem express; ad alterum vero per supplementum; ut, Cic. Nihil te
nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi nihil
concursus bonorum omnium, nihil hic minutissimus habendi Senatus locus, nihil
horum ora vultusque moverunt.

Men's and ratio and consilium in senibus est. Cic. Ego and Cicero meus
flagitabat. Cic. Mihi and res and conditio p^acet. Cic. Egit pater and filius
ut tibi spo^derem. Ego, and tu studes. Ego dormio, and tu. Do^mio ego, and tu.
Siudes tu, and ego. Quid ego, and populus desideret, audi. Hor. Persuasit nox,
amor, vinum Ter. Et eodem accedit servitus, sudor, sitis. Plaut. me^^, 4 1.

If it so fall out, that the Nominative Case that stands next the Verb is
plural, then the Verb shall be plural: as in the example of Zeugma above: as it
shall be singular, if the Nominative, that stands next it, be of the Singular
Number, as in that of Virg. Aen. 1. v. 403, 404. Hand aliter puppesque tuae
pubesque tuorum aut portum tenet, aut pleno subit ostia velo.

This kind of Construction seems to be nothing but an Ellipsis, or a not
expressing of a Verb so many times understood as there are Nominative Cases
expressed. As in the above named example, with prasidium is to be understood
movit; with vigiliae m^verunt; with timor, movit; with concursuo, movit; with
locus, movit; with ora, moverunt; and with vultus, moverunt So in Ego and tu
studes, with ego is understood studeo, and in Dormio ego, and tu: with Tu is
understood dormis, etc.

Sometimes when a Nominative Case has another casual word of the Ablative Case
coupled to it by the Preposition cum in Latin, the following Verb is of the
Plural Number, as if it had two Nominative Cases, with a Conjunction
Copulative, between them, going before it: as, Virg. Rhemus cum fratre Quirino
Jura dabant. Ego cum fratr. sumus candidi. Littora cum plausu clamor superasque
deorum Implevere domos. Ovid.

This Construction is mostly Poetical: but it may be exemplified in English.

The needle with the thread are lost.

A Sword with a belt become a Soldier.

A Cow with a Calf went to the Market.

The man with his wife came to my House.

The Ew with her Lamb play together.

The father with his son were beheaded on the same day.

But this is not perpetual neither: for where a Nominative Case has had
another word coupled to it with cum, yet the Verb has been of the Singular
Number: as, Tu, quid ego and populus mecum desi eret, audi. Hor. Occisus est
cum liberis M. Fulvius Consularis. Cic. 1. Cat. Quod miraretur cum Cocl^te
Mucius. Juv. Sat. 8. v. 264.

Sometimes diverse Nominative Cases come together without a Conjunction
Copulative either expressed or understood betwixt them, as belonging both, (or
all, if they be more than two) to the same thing; and then, if the Nominative
Cases be all of the Singular Number, the Verb shall be of the Singular Number
also: as, Herodotus homo fabulator scripsit -- A. Gell. lib. 3. cap. 10.

This kind of Construction is called by Modern Grammarians Apposition. And the
Substantives so put together, sometimes are of diverse Numbers; as, Urbs
Athenae; Turba luxuriosaproci.

In this Construction, if the name of a man, or any living creature be the
first Substantive in the Grammatical order of the words, and the other be the
name of some lifeless thing, then the Verb is to agree with the first
Nominative Case; as, Tulliola deliciae nestrae tuum munusculum flagitat. Cic.
Deliciae vero tuae noster Aesopus ejusmodi fuit, ut -- i. e. Aesopus deliciae
tuae. Cic. In me turba ruunt luxuriosa proci, i. e. proci luxuriosa turba
rurunt. Ovid.

But if the former Nominative Case be the name of a thing without life, then
will the Verb agree with that Nominative Case, which comes after in the
Grammatical order: as, Tu^gri Civitas Gall^ae fontem habet insi^nem. Plin.
Oppidum Latinorum Apiolae [i. e Apio^ae oppidum Latinorum] captum a Tarquinio
rege. Id.

In this kind of Construction between the Substantives so put together, there
is understood the Participle ens, or a Relative with a Verb Substantive:
Herodotus ens, or qui est homo fabulator; Proci^entes, or existentes, or qui
sunt turba luxuriosa.

Cicero a man of great eloquence made Orations against Antonius.

Alexander King of Macedonia subdued the Eastern Countries of the World.

Bucephalus the Horse of King Alexander, would suffer no rider but his Master.

The Five Churches a Town in Hungary, was taken by the Turks the same year.

The City Hundred-hills is one of the chief Towns in Transylvania.

The Three Taverns, a Town in Italy, is thirty three miles off from Rome.

Verba Infiniti Modi pro Nominativo Accusativum ante se statuunt; ut. Te
rediisse incolumem g^u^eo. Te fabul m^gere volo.

When a Casual word comes between two Verbs whereof the latter is the
Infinitive Mood, the Casual word is to be made by the Accusative Case; as in
Example.

I bid thee go. I pray thee come. I entreated him to stay. I desired them to
remember. I will cause you to he whipped. He forced us to run. You make me to
be exceeding angry. They know me to be an honest man. I know them to be very
knaves. They report the Romans to have gotten the upper hand. I know my Son to
be in love.

But if the foregoing Verb be such a Verb as governs a Dative Case, then may
that word which comes betwixt the two Verbs, be either the Dative Case as
governed of the foregoing Verb, or the Accusative as governed of the following
Infinitive Mood; as, Licitum est tibi ex hac juventute generum deligere. Cic.
Domino non licet ire tuo. Ovid. Non licet hominem esse saepe ita ut vult. Ter.
Neque servitio me exire licebat. Virg. See the Treatise of English Particles c.
34. r. 21. n. 1.

Resolvi potest hic modus per quod and ut, ad hunc modum: Quod tu rediisti
incolumis gaudeo. Ut tu fabulam agas volo.

The Infinitive Mood with his Accusative Case before it may be expressed by a
Finite Mood with a Nominative Case before that, and quod or ut with it,
accordingly as the Construction requires: as,

I bid that thou be gone. I pray that thou would come. I entreated that he
would stay. I desired that they would remember. I will cause that you be
whipped. He forced that we ran. You do cause that I am exceeding angry. They
know that I am an honest man. I know that they are very knaves. They report
that the Romans have got the upper hand. I know that my Son is in love.

When the Variation is to be made by quod, and when by ut: See the Treatise of
English Particles c. 75 r 3, 4. 8.

Verbum inter duos Nominativos diversorum numerorum positum cum alterutro
convenire potest: ut, Ter. Ama tium irae amo^is re^integratio est. Ovid. Quid
enim nisi vota supersu^t? ^d. Pectora percussit, pectus quoque robora fiunt.
Virg -- Nihil hic nisi carmina desunt.

* When a Verb comes between two Nominative Cases of diverse Numbers, the Verb
may indifferently accord with either of them, so that they be both of one
person: as, Amantium irae, etc.

There is a twofold order of words, the one Natural or Grammatical, the other
Artificial or Oratorial.

Of the Natural order this may be an Example; Nuptiae sunt res honesta.

Of the Artificial order this may be an Example; Honesta res nuptiae sunt.

A Verb placed between two Nominative Cases set according to Natural Order most
usually agrees with the Former: as, Nuptiae sunt res honesta.

But a Verb placed between two Nominative Cases set according to Artificial
Order more usually agrees with the latter: as, Sanguis erant lachry nae.

Yet sometimes when the words are set in the Natural Order, the Verb agrees with
the latter: as, Pecunia, imperiique libido, sunt quasi materia omnium malorum.
Sall.

This I set down because I see it alleged as an instance of this Construction:
but to me, two Nominatives Singular seem equal to one Plural, and so the Verb
may be said to agree even here with the former.

Sometimes when the words are set in the Artificial Order, the Verb agrees with
the former: as, Divitiae sunt lege naturae composita paupertas.

If both the Nominative Cases be placed before the Verb, then the Verb more
usually agrees with the latter: as, Amantium irae amoris redintegratio est.
Pectus robora fiunt. Omnia pontus erat.

Yet when they are so set, sometimes the Verb is made to agree with the former:
as, Captivi praeda militum fuerunt. Ossa lapis fiunt. Gaudia principium nostri
sunt Phoce doloris.

If both the Nominative Cases be set after the Verb, then the Verb usually
agrees with that which stands next it. Cic. in Pison. Aude nunc O furia, de tuo
dicere, cujus fuit initium ludi compitales.

* Those Examples, Quid enim, nisi vota supersunt? Quid nisi secretae laeserunt
Phyllidia Sylvae? Nihil hic nisi carmina desunt, etc. seem not to me to be
proper examples to be alleged in this matter, though usually they be so.
Because the Rule proceeds of one Verb between two Nominative Cases; and in them
there are belonging to each Nominative Case his particular Verb, whereof one
indeed by an Ellipsis is understood only, and the other expressed: as, Quid
enim superest, nisi vota supersunt. Quid enim laesit Phyllida, nisi secretae
Sylvae laeserunt? Nihil hic deest, nisi carmina desunt. But he that will think
otherwise shall not have me to contend with him about it.

This kind of Construction is hardly imitable in English, in which in the
Natural Order the Verb usually, if not always, agrees with the foregoing
Nominative Case.

But in the Order Artificial we may make some exemplification of it: as, The
cause of woes are wars.

Blood were her tears.

The Soldiers booty are the Captives.

Impersonalia praecedentem Nominativum non habent: ut, Taedet me vitae.
Pertaesum est conjugii.

That is, when Verbs are put impersonally, there is no Nominative Case
expressed wherewith they agree. But yet there is one understood, which is not
easic for every one to conceive of: As, when it is said, Taedet me vitae.
Pertaesum est conjugii. Yet this may be supplied thus: Vitae taedium tae^et me.
Taedium conjugii pertaesum est a me.

The not understanding what Nominative Case to put to these Verbs, made them
call them Impersonals: though there be no such Verbs as Impersonals, unless in
the Infinitive Mood, where all are Impersonals. But this by the by.

As to the translating of those Englishes for which the Verbs accounted such
are the Latins, these Directions may be taken notice of.

If the English of a Verb Impersonal have nothing but the ordinary sign of its
Impersonality [it] or [there] before it, then no further care need be taken,
but to translate according to rule that which follows it, and as it follows:
as, It irks me of life, Taedet me vitae. There began to be no agreement,
Coeperat non convenire. It behooves me to depart. It concerns me to speak. There
can be no pleasant living there.

If the English of a Verb Impersonal have a Casual word before it, it is to be
considered, what Case the Latin Impersonal governs after it, and into that
Case is the Casual word that comes before it to be put: as, I must write, Me
oportet scribere. Thou may read, Tibi licet legere. They ought to be thankful.

Travelers (they say) may lie by authority.

When Kings command, Subjects must obey.

Scholars ought to remember and requite their Teachers.

But for the translating of Must or Ought, see the Treatise of English
Particles, chapter 55. and 68.

Nomen multitudinis singular quandoque verbo plurali jungitur; ut, Pars abiere.

A Noun of multitude is such a word, as in the Singular Number signifies many
things collected into one; as a heap, etc. Whence it is also called a Noun
Collective.

To such Nouns, though of the Singular Number, Authors have sometimes joined a
Verb Plural; as, Pars abiere.

And sometimes a Verb Singular: as, Pars stupet. Virg.

In the Singular Verb they had respect unto the word: in the Plural they had
respect unto the things signified by that word.

We may exemplify that kind of Construction perhaps thus.

Part became birds, part were turned into beasts, part held the Boat when they
were ducked into the water, part cut them into Cantels.

Abundance of men are destroyed with gluttony. A Power of Soldiers rushed into
the Town. A multitude of fishes are daily taken in that River.

The Parliament have taken it into consideration. The Council stay for the
coming of the King. The people are mad when Taxes are laid.

Let all the Company of us go.

But in these it will not be good to dare in our use beyond the warranty of
Example.

A Partitive sometimes has the Construction of a Collective, and being of the
Singular Number has a Verb Plural joined to it: as, Uterque deluduntur dolis.
Plaut. Aperite aliquis ostium. Ter In suas quisque aedes regressi. Ter.

Bring me some Beer, some body. They got every man upon his own horse. They
were both sore scared at the sight.

Some body make me a fire here quickly. We suffer every one his misfortunes.
They died both on one and the same day.

Run some body and fetch the Nurse. Every man take your swords in your hands
Both of them have the same thoughts of you.

THE SECOND CONCORD. Concordantia Substantivi and Verbi.
Adjectivum cum Substantivo, Genere, Nu mero and Casu consentit: ut Juven. Rara
avis in terris, nigroque simillima Cygno.

Ad eundem modum Participia and Pronomina Substantivis adnectuntur: Ovid. Donec
eris felix multos numerabis amicos. Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes. Senec.
Non hoc primum pectora vulnus mea senserunt; graviora tuli.

* The Adjective, whether it be Noun, Pronoun, or Participle, agrees with his
Substantive in Case, Gender, and Number: as Amicus certus in re incerta
cernitur, A sure friend is tried in a doubtful matter. Homo armatus, A man
armed. Ager colendus, A field to be tilled. Hic vir, This man. Meus herus est,
It is my Master.

English Examples.

(I) Where the Adjective comes together with the Substantive set next after it:

A good man is a wise man; and an evil man is a foolish man.

A black Swan is a rare bird; and a white Crow is a strange sight.

The evil life of a good Preacher brings great disgrace to sound doctrine.

Evil words corrupt good manners: and evil manners destroy great Kingdoms.

Soft fire makes sweet malt: and sweet malt makes sweet Ale.

A tall man with a long neck in a white doublet, killed two Sparrows sitting on
a high house with one stone.

The untimely death of a loving Husband is a bitter fountain of much grief to a
kind Wife.

The eager contention of disagreeing Princes, is the sad destruction of
flourishing States.

My son loves thy daughter: and thy daughter is in love with my son.

Our Lad is gone to your house: and your house is quite gone to decay

Your Master is gone with his Wife to his garden; and our Children with their
hands pluck up fine flowers.

She views her wrinkled face in a broken glass, and washes her yellow teeth
with red wine.

He holds three Eggs in one hand: and reads a long letter in a little space.

When Civil Wars cease, then expect happy times: and when happy times return,
then expect Civil Wars.

(II.) Where the Adjective comes together with the Substantive set next before
it.

A house full of gold coined, would not make a miser rich.

A Temple adorned with Pictures innumerable, was to be seen on a hills top.

A tongue speaking things shameful, brings to the speaker things harmful.

Water flowing from a Fountain enclosed, ran in a chanel newly dug.

A wife bemoaning a husband dead, sat besides children weeping.

A Traitor ready to shed blood Royal, deserves to be cut off by a death
untimely.

A Conscience wounded is a burden insupportable.

Land fruitful and well tilled, brings a crop plentiful in a year seasonable.

(III.) Where the Adject^ve is parted from his Substantive coming before it.

A Kingdom is happy when peace is preserved carefully, and justice administered
duly.

The man went away sorrowful, when he saw that a woman lay weeping upon the
ground.

Wisdom is accounted vain, where vice is found to be gainful.

The Shepherd is said to be diligent, when the flock is thriving.

Where the Teacher is skilful and painful, there the profiting of the Learner
is hopeful.

(IV.) Where the Adjective is parted from his Substantive coming after it.

Happy are the times, when truth and peace do flourish.

Glorious in all Ages will be a wife, righteous, and valiant King.

Hateful is the name, woeful is the life, and fearful is the death of a Traitor.

Fair is thought the child by the fond mother.

Terrible, men say, will be the Sentence of the last Judgment.

Unquenchable, it is believed, shall the fire of Hell be.

Great is the peace of an undefiled Conscience.

Mine is the comfort, thine will be the glory of deeds well done.

Adjectives of the Comparative Degree with their Substantives.

Yellow gold is more precious than white silver.

Despised virtue is more chuseable than honored vice.

Cicero was eloquenter than Cato: but Cato was constanter than Cicero.

Of the two Kingdoms Spain is the larger, but France is the richer.

Unjust Peace is better than a just War: and war abroad is more desirable than
war at home.

A little with quietness is more wishable than a great deal with vexation.

The Sea is deeper than a Bucket, and Eternity is longer than Time.

Adjectives of the Superlative Degree with their Substantives.

The shortest day has the longest night.

The holiest life may expect the happiest death: and the best work hope for the
biggest reward.

The learnedest Clerks are not always the wisest men: nor are the best
Preachers evermore the holiest Christians.

Cicero was the most eloquent of Pleaders: but Caesar was the most prudent of
Commanders.

Solomon was the wisest of Kings; and Hercules was the strongest of men.

Socrates was accounted the wisest of Philosophers; and Alexander the most
fortunate of Conquerors.

Aristides was the justest among the Grecians; and Crassus the richest among
the Romans.

Examples where several Substantives Singular with a Conjunction Copulative
expressed or understood coming between them have an Adjective Plural: which
kind of Construction is called Syllepsis.

Copulatum per conjunctionem Et, nec, neque, and cum pro Et acceptum, est
pluralis numeri: ac proinde Adjectivum exigit plurale. Quod quidem Adjectivum
cum digniore Substantivo genere quadrabit: ut, Ego and matter miseri perimus.

Dignius autem est Masculinum quam Foemininum aut Neutrum: and dignius
Foemininum quam Neutrum; ut, Rex and Regina beati. Chalybs and aurum sunt in
furnace probati. Hinc per vim leges and plebiscita coactae.

* Many Substantives Singular with a Conjunction Copulative coming between
them, will have an Adjective Plural, which Adjective shall agree with the
Substantive of the most worthy Gender: as, Rex and Regina beati, The King and
the Queen are blessed.

* Where note, that the Masculine Gender is more worthy than the Feminine, and
the Feminine more worthy than the Neuter.

Your Father and Mother are dead.

Mars and Venus were taken naked by Vulcan in a net.

My Brother and Sister were brought alive and safe to shore.

The King and Queen are walked abroad arrayed in Royal Robes.

He has made his wife and child miserable by his naughtiness.

Both my horse and mare are white.

There lay Antony and Cleopatra drunk. Pyramus and Thishe lie here buried in
one Tomb.

So it is when one Substantive is coupled to another by the Preposition with
noting company or consociation: ut, Ego cum matre sumus candidi.

He thrust the mother with the son into the prison to be killed with hunger.

The King with the Queen rode crowned through the City.

He found the man with the woman naked in bed.

He took the dam with her young alive in the nest.

There goes wife with husband clothed in Scarlet.

Venus and Mars ran away ashamed.

Yet sometimes in this kind of Construction the Adjective, as well as the Verb,
is of the Singular Number: Cic. i Catil. Occisus est cum liberis M. Fulvius
consularis.

At cum Substantiva res inanimatas significant, Adjectivum in Neutro genere
usitatius ponitur: ut Sal. Ira and aegritudo permista sunt. Virga tua and
baculus tuus ipsa me consolata sunt.

* But in things not apt to have life the Neuter Gender is most worthy.

Honor [decus] and glory [gloria] are placed before our eyes.

Nor Kingdom nor Crown are to be compared to a good Conscience.

Neither peace nor right [jus] are lovely in the eyes of evil men.

Both Law and Gospel are contrary unto evil doings.

Counsel and Reason are to be heard before we proceed to Action.

War and bloodshed [caedes] are hateful to good men.

* Yea in such Case, though the Substantives be of the Masculine or Feminine
Gender, and none of them of the Neuter, yet may the Adjective be put in the
Neuter Gender: as Cic. 1. Off. Pulchritudinem, constantiam, ordinem in
consiliis factisque conservanda putat.

See Saturn. Mercur. major l. 5. c. 7.

Righteousness and peace have kissed each other.

Death and life are placed in the power of the Tongue.

Wind and Tide are contrary to our journey.

Bread and drink are more necessary unto life than gold or silver.

Wind and rain are hurtful unto ripe fruits.

Fire and snow are contrary to each other.

Yet this is not always observed in Authors: for Quintilian lib. 1. cap. 10.
Grammatice quondam ac Musice junctae fuerunt.

No more than the former exception was by Lucan: who said, Hinc leges and
plebiscita coactae. Which expression Mr. Farnaby calls Praeposterum Zeugma. So
nor by Cicero, when pro Planc. he said, Amor tuus and judicium tuum de me,
multum mihi dignitatis est allaturus.

But if one of the Substantives signify a thing with life, and the other
signify a thing without life, the Adjective shall agree with the Substantive
that signifies the thing with life.

Jane fac aeternos pacem pacisque ministros. Ovid.

Omnia tuta vides: classem sociosque receptos. Virg. 1. Aen.

Our Founder and foundation are honorable in the sight of all wise men.

The Author and work were both condemned to the flames.

The Land and the Inhabitants are alike unmanured, and barbarous, and
inhospitable.

Both the Orator and his Oration were to be commended.

Both the Hen and Egg were white.

The Sheep and sheepfold are both safe.

And yet Statius Theb. 7. said, Jura fidem and superos una calcata ruina.

Sometimes in Latin he Adjective, that has relation unto two Substantives,
agrees with that Substantive both for Gender, Number, and Case that stands next
to it, whether before or after it. And this kind of construction is called
Zeugma.

Zeugma est unius Adjectivi viciniori respondentis ad diversa supposita
reductio, ad unum quidem express, ad alterum vero per supplementum.

Sometimes the Adjective agrees with that Substantive that stands next before
it: as, Et genus and virtus, nisi cum re vilior alga est. Locus and tempus
constitutum est. Maritus and uxor irata est.

Sometimes with that that stands next after it: as, Caper tibi salvus and
hoedi. I^atus est maritus and uxor.

Sometimes that Adjective, which should be placed between two Substantives
(which are not coupled together by any Conjunction) in the Natural Order, is in
the Artificial Order set after them both, and made to agree with the latter of
them, though it were, if set in the Natural Order, to agree with the former of
them: as, Non omnis error stultitia dicenda est. Paupertas mihi onus visum est
grave. Gens universa Veneti appellati.

Sometimes in Latin the Adjective agrees not with the Substantive, that is
expressed, but with some other that is understood by it, or with it. And this
kind of Construction is called by some Synthesis.

Synthesis est oration, congrua sensu, non voce: ut, Gens armati.

The disagreement betwixt the Substantive and the Adjective is sometimes only
in Gender; as, Anser foeta, i. e. avis. Elephantus gravida, i. e. bestia.
Centauro in magna, i. e. navi. Transtulit in Eunuchum suam, i. e. fabulam.
Illum senium [i. e. senem] dii perdant. Nuper honoratos summo mea vulnera [i.
e. homines qui me vulnerant] Coelo videritis. Capita conjurationis trucidati,
i. e. homines qui fuerunt capita conjurationis. Duo millia eru^ibus affixi, i.
e. homines ad duo millia sunt affixi.

Sometimes the disagreement betwixt the Substantive and the Adjective is both
in Gender and Number: as, Gens armati, i. e. homines. Pars mersi (i. e. nautae)
tenuere ratem. Pars and certare parati, i. e homines. Hic manus ob patriam
pugnando vulnera passi, i. e. milites. Maxima pars vulnerati, i. e. homines.

These and the like irregularities we cannot exemplify in English, because our
Adjectives vary neither in Gender, nor Termination. The only way that I
apprehend of exemplifying, is to frame Latin Examples, and then to English
them, and by the Englishes of the Substantive and Adjective, that are to
disagree, to set in brackets [] the Latin words for them: as,

Part [pars] were ready [paratus] to yield, though part were still fighting
stoutly.

More than forty names [nomen] were assembled [congregatus] unto that place.

Though it matters not much if they be not imitated at all, their being set and
taught in Grammar being only that they may be known, not that they may be
followed.

Aliquando oration supplet locum Substantivi; ut, Audito regem Doroberniam
proficisci.

To rise betime in the morning is very wholesome: and to go to bed early is very
profitable; as to sit up late at night is exceeding wasteful.

To sleep too much is hurtful to the brain: and to drink too often is unhealthful
for the body.

That he comes so often to my house is delightful to me: and that I walk so
much abroad is healthful for me.

That I live so long is troublesome to them: and that you live so well is
pleasant to me.

That good men serve God is hateful to evil men: and that evil men serve the
Devil is troublesome to good men.

It is sweet to see a young man do as he should.

It is profitable to spare needless cost.

It is easy to find a fault in another man's life.

It is Christian to pardon a repenting offender.

To do well and be evil spoken of is Kinglike.

To be always beginning to live, is foolish.

To fear to touch the Lords Anointed is safe.

Note, when a speech, clause, part of, or word in a speech, which is not a Noun
or Pronoun, but some word used ((...), as they speak) to signify it self only,
and not some other thing by it; or an Infinitive Mood of a Verb, or an Adverb,
or the like, answers to the question who or what, made by an Adjective, and so
stands in the stead of a Substantive to it, then the Adjective referring to it
shall be the Neuter Gender; as,

Audito regem Doroberniam proficisci. Finire laborem incipias, parto quod
avebas. Hor. Scire tuum nihil est. Pers. Et nostrum illud vivere triste Aspexi.
Velle suum cuique est. Id. Saepe vale dicto. Ovid. Quando erit illud cras?

Take your last farewell of him.

You have a long come with you.

And if two clauses, etc. be referred to in one Adjective, then that Adjective
shall be the Plural Number, as if they were two Nouns of the Neuter Gender,
that were referred unto: as,

To sleep much and drink often are hurtful to the body.

Building of houses, and marrying of children are wasteful to the Estate.

To rise betime and study hard, are conducible unto your profiting in learning.

To ly long before you rise, and to loiter much when you are up, are ill for
you.

Sometimes in Latin an Adjective is found in a sentence having no Substantive
at all expressed for it, to agree withal, yet put in that Gender, that the
Substantive is of, which it refers unto, being understood, though it be not
expressed; as, Vesci ferina, i. e. carne. Laborare tertiana, i. e. febre. Reus
repetundarum, sc. pecuniarum Lavari calida, sc aqua. Donari civica, sc. Corona.
In Tusculano, sc. praedio. Tenere primas, sc. parts. Eadem feceris, sc. opera.

And so we speak sometimes in English.

You may do it all under one [sc. labor.] And then shall that wicked [sc man]
be destroyed, 2 Thessalonians 2. 8. The wise [sc. man] shall inherit glory, Prove. 3.
35. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous [i. e. men] Psalm. 33. 1.

He went away the fourth of June.

I rose at four in the morning.

I will be here again by twelve at noon.

There were five against four.

The gray beat the black twelve score at least.

Let the dead bury their dead.

The wise and good are to be preferred before the rich and fair.

Note, when Man in English, or Hom^ in Latin is the word referred to, then the
Adject^ve is to be of the Masculine Gender: as, Fortes ereantur fortibus, and
bont bonis. Doctus indocto quid praestat? quod caeco videns.

But when Thing in English, or Negotium, Opus, Quid, or Quiddam, or some such
like word in Latin is the word referred unto, then the Adjective is to be of
the Neuter Gender: as, Triste Iupus stabilis, i. e. quid triste. Mors omnium
extremum est, i. e. res extrema. Est vindicta bonum vita jucundius ipsa. Dulce
satis hum^r. Varium and mutabile semper foemina.

So we say in English.

To hit the white, i. e. white thing.

Life is a good to be desired.

Siu is an evil to be feared.

Sometimes in Latin an Adjective put substantively becomes the Substantive to
an Adjective; as, Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur. Fortunate senex. Virg.
Crudelem medicum intemperans aeger fecit. Tempus erat quo prima quies
mortalibus aegris Incipit. Virg.

Fallax serenum. Quantum est in rebus inane. Pers. Magnum per inane. Virg.
Bonum vita jucundius ipsa. Juven.

So we say in English.

A deep hollow. My dear.

The least evil is not to be done for the obtaining of the greatest good.

Sometimes in Latin the Substantive is of the Genitive Case, when the
Adjective is of another Case. But that is either,

1. First, when the Adjective is put substantively in the Neuter Gender, and
then the Genitive case is the Genitive case of possession: as,

Paululum pecuniae. Hoc noctis. Id manticae. Quantum nummorum, tantum fidei.
Libyae extrema. Ne id quidem leporis habuerunt. Huic aliud mercedis erit. Hoc
est signi. Non minus auxilii. Proponit mihi inania nobilitatis. Per diversa
gentium terrarumque volitabat. Incerta belli, Telluris operta. Strata viarum.

So we say in English.

The white of hens dung.

The black of an eye, or bean.

The gray of the morning.

In the dead of the night.

The cool of the day.

2. Or Secondly, when the Adjective refers to another case of the same word
which is expressed with it in the Genitive case, and to be supplied in the case
of the Adjective: and then the Genitive is the case of Partition: as,

Nigrae lanarum nullum colorem bibunt. Plin. i. e. e numero lanarum lanae
nigrae nullum bibunt colorem. Canum degeneres, [i. e. e numero canum canes
degeneres] caudam sub alvum retrahunt.

Of the hands the right is the stronger.

Of the fingers the middlemost is the longest.

Of wines the old is best.

Of friends the old are most to be esteemed of.

Of books new are most inquired after.

Of eggs the long bring cocks, the round hens.

Of Scholars the learnedest are not always the wisest.

THE THIRD CONCORD. Concordantia Relativi and Antecedentis.
* When ye have a Relative, ask the question who or what? and the word that
answers to the question shall be the Antecedent to it.

The Antecedent most commonly is a word that goes before the Relative, and is
rehearsed again of the Relative.

The Antecedent is sometimes rehearsed again expressly with the Relative in the
same clause that it is in: as,

Cum viderem ex ea part homines, cujus partis nos vel principes numer abamur.
Cic.

Diem scito esse nullum, quo die non dico pro reo. Cic.

Legem promulgaverat, qua lege regnum Jubae publicaverat. Caes.

So in English.

I have a horse, which horse is twenty years old.

He bought a house, of which house his Grandfather had been the owner.

Thou have a friend, to which friend thou may commit all thy secrets.

A certain bird was sitting on a tree, which bird one felled thence with a
stone.

I have a dog, than which Dog no Lion is more fierce.

And when the Antecedent is rehearsed together with the Relative, it is of the
same Case also, as well as of the same Gender, and Number, and Person that the
Antecedent is of: as in the forenamed Examples.

But mostly the Antecedent is not set together in the same clause with the
Relative, but in another clause before it distant from it: and then as it
sometimes happens to be of the same Case with it, so many times it differs in
case from it.

Relativum cum Antecedente concordat genere, numero, and persona: ut, Vir bonus
est quis? Qui consulta patrum, qui leges jur aque servat.

* The Relative agrees with his Antecedent in Gender, Number, and Person: as,
Vir sapit qui pauca loquitur, That man is wise that speaks few things or
words.

English Examples.

Thou hate me without a cause, who am thy best friend in the world.

I love thee dearly, who yet art most unkind to me.

Despisest thou me, who am the Queen of Beauties?

He married his daughter, whom he had so dearly loved, to an unworthy person.

They persecute us innocent men, who have done good to them.

We Fathers love you children, who are obedient unto us.

Husbands love us wives, who are kind to them.

We men honor you women, who adorn your selves with virtue and modesty.

I cannot but love that man dearly, who has been kind to me in my adversity.

I cannot but keep that Mare well, which has saved me in time of danger.

I cannot but think that Kingdom happy, which is governed by a just and
merciful King.

Happy are those Kings whom Subjects love, and enemies fear.

Miserable are these Countries, which War and Famine do vex and waste.

Glorious are those times in which Peace and Truth do flourish.

Synthesis.

Yet in Latin Authors some disagreements are betwixt the Relative and his
Antecedent.

(1) In Person: as, Quanquam quicum loquor? Cum uno fortissimo viro, qui
posteaquam forum attigisti, nihil fecisti, etc. Cic. Fam. l. 15. Ep. 16.

But here the Relative Qui is referred for the person of it, unto Tu understood
by a Synthesis, as if it had been said, Cum te uno fortissimo viro, qui.

(2) In Gender: as, Vbi illic scelus est, qui me perdidit? Ter. And. Here also
the Relative qui refers for Gender unto homo by a Synthesis understood in
Scelus, as if it had been said, Vbi ille scelestus homo est, qui -- Qui habet
salem, quod in te est. Ter. Eun. Where quod refers for Gender, not to salem the
Masculine Gender, but unto sal, or rather sale of the Neuter Gender signifying
the same thing with sal of the Masculine.

Unless the clause habere salem may be conceived to be the Antecedent to quod;
which perhaps is the more probable.

Festivum caput, qui omnia sibi posthabenda putavit esse prae meo commodo. Ter.
Ad.

(3) In Number; as, Si tempus est ullum jure hominis necandi, quae multa sunt
(here quae refers to tempora understood) Cic. pro Mil. Quo uno vincebamur a
victa Graecia, id creptum est illis. Cic. in Brut. Here also illis refers unto
Graecis understood. Boeth. de Cons. l 2. Pros. 6. Quid v^ro, si corpus spectes,
imb^cillius homine re^erire queas, quos saepe muscularum quoque vel mors^s, vel
in secreta quaeque reptantium necat introitus? Here quos refers to homines.
Catul. Tum jam nulla viro juranti foemina credat, Nulla viri speret sermones
esse fideles, Qui dum aliquid cupiens animus praegestit apisci, Nil metuunt
jurare, nihil promittere parcunt. Here qui agrees with viri of the Plural
Number understood.

Nec unica vox solum, sed interdum etiam oration ponitur pro Antecedente.

* Sometimes the Relative has for his Antecedent the whole reason, that goes
before him, and then he shall be put in the Neuter Gender and Singular Number:
as, In tempore ad eam veni, quod omnium rerum est primum, I came to her in
season, which is the chiefest thing of all.

English Examples.

Now adays one neighbor envyeth another, which is an ugly thing.

The two brothers love one another very dearly, which is very rare.

You love to lie long in bed in the morning, which is ill for your health.

I read much by candlelight, which is hurtful to my eyes.

It is my care to keep a good conscience, and that is comfortable to me.

They pamper their bellies too much, and that wastes their estate.

I am commanded not to stir from hence, and that keeps me here still

I am busy in writing a book, and that keeps me from going abroad.

SYLLEPSIS.

Copulatum per conjunctionem Et, nec, neque, and cum, pro and acceptum, est
pluralis numeri: ac proinde relativum exigit plurale.

* Many Antecedents Singular having a Conjunction Copulative between them, will
have a Relative Plural.

If the two or more Antecedents singular that come with a Conjunction
Copulative betwixt them before the Relative, be both of the Neuter Gender, then
shall the Relative be of the Neuter Gender also, as well as of the Plural
Number; as, Sceptrum and diadema quae tu mihi praedicas, inania sunt.

* Also if the Relative be referred to two clauses or more, then shall the
Relative be put in the Plural Number, and Neuter Gender: as, Tu multum dormis
and saepe petas, quae ambo sunt corpori inimica, Thou sleep much and
drinkest often, both which things are naught for the body. Thou playest often and
studiest seldom, which both things are ill for the wit. He is long from home
and idle at home, both which things are bad for the estate. We talk much and
work little, both which things are unprofitable to Husbandmen?

But if there be any difference in the Gender of the Antecedents, then in
things apt to have life the Relative shall agree with the Antecedent of the
most worthy Gender: as, Rex and regina, quos tu immortales praedicas, mortales
sunt.

Your brother and sister, whom some reported to be dead, are alive and in
health.

Is his man and his maid come again, who were gone away?

The cock and hen, which you gave me, are stolen from me.

That Lord and Lady whom you so much honor, are much my friends.

Did you know that Tinker and his Trull, which were hanged the other day for
murder?

I have that horse and mare still, which my father left me when he died.

The man with the woman, which you saw alive yesterday, are dead to day.

The boy with the girl, which had lost their father, have found him now

The wench with the fellow, that were run away, are come again.

The Cow with the Calf, which w^nt to the Fair, were sold for little when they
came there.

But in things not apt to have life, the Neuter Gender is most worthy: so that
if either of the Antecedents be of the Neuter Gender, the Relative shall be of
the Neuter Gender: as, Imperium and dignitas quae petiisti.

That Civil War and homebred discord, which were so pleasing to evil men, now
(thanks be to God) are at an end.

In one year he ruined a Kingdom and Country, which his Ancestors had many
years preserved in a flourishing condition.

Have you brought the milk and cheese, which I bad you bring?

Show me the ink and paper, which you bought you yesterday.

* Yea and in such case (that is, when the Antecedents signify things without
life) though the Antecedents be all of the Masculine, or of the Feminine
Gender, and none of them of the Neuter, yet may the Relative be put in the
Neuter Gender: as, Cic. Quid est inconstantia, mobilitate, atque levitate, quae
vitae nostrae mala solent infer maxima, turpius? Virga tua and baculus tuus
ipsa me consolata sunt.

Hence probably, Gel. l. 1. c. 14. Et memoratis multis magnisque rebus, quae
been ac benevole fecisset, because the Relative referred to things without life
spoken of before, or perhaps to the word res not as expressed before the
Relative, but as understood with the Relative.

When night and darkness, which had hindered the fight, were ended.

He patiently endured thirst, and rest, and abstinence, from meat [inedia]
which were commanded him.

He despised the honor, and glory, and money, which were offered to him to
temps him to revolt from the King.

But it is not necessary that the Relative always must be of the Neuter Gender,
when the Substantives going before signify things without life; for Cic. 2.
Offic. 1. said, Aut haec ars est aut nulla omnino per quam eas assequamur. The
Antecedents were oblectatio animi and ratio constantiae.

If one of the Antecedents signify a thing with life, and the other a thing
without life, the Relative shall rather agree with that Substantive that
signifies the thing with life.

Have you found your horse and saddle, which you had lost?

I brought you both bird and egg, which I found in the nest.

I have seen both the work and workman, whom you so commend.

War will destroy that Kingdom and People which peace would have preserved.

Yet this is not necessary always: for Ovid. said, Closse virisque potens per
quae nova bella geruntur, i. e. per quas res.

Yea, when things with life are considered, ut res possessa (says Rhenius)
sometimes the Relative shall be the Neuter Gender: as, Ter. Eun. 3. 2. 27.
Atque haec qui misit non sibi soli postulat te vivere. The Substantives
referred to in the Relative haec, are Eunuchus, and ancilla; unless it be said,
that munera or dona is referred to therein.

Relativum inter duo Antecedentia diversorum generum collocatum, nunc cum
priore convenit: ut, Val. Max. Senatus assiduam stationem eo loci peragebat,
qui hodie senaculum appellatur. Non procul ab eo flumine, quod Saliam vocant.
Cic. Propius a terra Jovis stella fertur, quae Phaeten dicitur.

Ovid. Unus erat toto naturae vultus in orb quem dixere Chaos. Caes. 1. B. G.
Nacti portum, qui appellatur Nimphaeum. Plin. l. 18. Sidere illo, quod Ca
niculam appellamus. Suet. in Aug. Locum quem Syracusas vocabat. Live. 6. l 8.
Mac. Sacrificium fecit in co loco, quem Pyram appellant.

Nunc cum posteriore: ut, Homines tuentur illum globum, quae terra dicitur. Est
locus in carcere quod Tullianum appellatur. In coitu lunae, quod interlunium
vocant. Hisque animus datus est ex illis sempiternis ignibus, quae sidera and
stellas vocatis. Cic. Some Scip. Animal plenum corsilii, quem hominem vocamus.
Cic. Ad cum locum, quae Pharsalia appellatur. Caes. 3. bell. c. Tunc consilia
conjuncta, quas urbes dicemus. Cic. pro Sextio.

* When a Relative comes between two Substantives of diverse Gender it may
indifferently accord with either of them; as, Avis quae passer appellatur. The
bird which is called a Sparrow. Yea though the Substantives be of diverse
Numbers also: as, Estne ea Lutetia, quam nos Parisios dicimus? Is not that
called Lutetia, that we call Paris? Or else, Estne ea Lutetia, quos nos
Parisios dicimus?

This Construction we cannot exemplify in English, because our Relatives do
not vary their Genders and Terminations: yet I set these Examples for
Translation, in which the Relative may be made as agreeing either with the
former, or latter Substantive.

That sometimes flourishing Kingdom, which ye call England, has of late been
much spoiled by Civil Wars.

That reasonable creature, whom we call man, does many an unreasonable thing.

The Battle was fought is that place which they call the Pharsalian fields.

He was born in the Town, which is called Sulmo.

Those Heavenly Fires, which men call Stars, do shine brightest, when the night
is darkest.

Aliquando Relativum, (aliquando and nomen Adjectivum) respondet Primitivo quod
in Possessivo subintelligitur: ut, Ter. Omnes omnia bona dicere and landare
fortunas meas, qui filium haberem, tali ingenio praeditum.

Ovid. Nostros vidisti flentis ocellos. Cic. 1. Cat. Nostra, qui remansissemus,
caede contentum te esse dicebas. Ter. Id mea minime ref^rt, qui sum natu
maximus. Cic. Vestra enim qui cum summa elegantia and integritate vixistis, hoc
maxim interest Cic. Tuum hominis simplicis pectus vidimus.

English Examples.

Hear my voice, who cry to thee.

Mine is the better cause, who have not taken up contrary arms.

Nor do thou read my words, who am removed far off.

It is no concernment of thine, who art the youngest.

I love not to see t^y face, who have slandered me behind my back.

Heavy will be thy damnation, that pretendest godliness, and practisest
wickedness.

I much commend his wit, who first invented clocks.

There is no trust to be given to his words that thinks one thing, and
speaks another.

Grant our request, who fly to thee for succor.

Take pi^y on our condition, who suffer most base things.

I admire at your folly, who wash a Blackmore.

This is your great concernment, who have lived with much handsomeness and
uprightness.

No body regarded my word^ calling for help.

Every one lamented his death circumvented by treacherous R^bels.

He washed our stripes miserably torn with scourges.

You are of the Sisyphian breed, as very a thief and cheat as he.

Quoties nullus Nominativus interseritur inter Relativum and Verbum, Relativum
erit Verbo Nominativus: ut, Boet. Foelix qui potuit boni fontem visere lucidum.

* When there comes no Nominative Case between the Relative and the Verb, the
Relative shall be the Nominative Case to the Verb: as, Miser est qui nummos
admiratur, Wretched is that person which is in love with money.

English Examples.

Wise is the child, which knows his own father.

Rich is the man, that is content with his Estate.

Not he who has little, but be who coveteth more, is a poor man.

Will you contend with me, who have overthrown all that have opposed me?

He is to blame to despise thee, who art a better man than himself.

Do no wrong to him, that offers none to thee.

It is a folly for them to flatter us, who know them to be Knaves.

They cannot but dearly love you, who are so kind to them.

We ought to be grateful to them, who are bountif^^ to us.

I found by them, who are intimate with him, what his design was.

It is not fit that I, who have forced him to labor, should be idle my self.

What young man is that, that looks on us so earnestly?

Is the house built up again, that was lately burned down?

Is that Kingdom now destroyed, which a while ago was in so flourishing a
condition?

Are the Soldiers gone away that quartered at your house?

Have you found your Mares, that were gone astray?

The Wars, that are not just, should not be waged.

The Peace, that is just, ought not to be broken.

At si Nominativus Relativo and Verbo interponatur, Relativum regitur a Verbo,
aut ab alia dictione quae cum Verbo in Oratione locatur.

(I.) A Verbo.

* But when there comes a Nominative Case between the Relative and the Verb,
the Relative shall be such Case as the Verb will have after him: as, Gratia ab
officio, quod mora tardat, abest. Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum,
Happy is he, whom other men's harms do make to beware.

English Examples.

Do you dispraise him, whom all men do commend?

You love that, which I do hate: and I hate that, which you do love.

It becomes us to raise up those, whom Fortune has cast down.

I fear that I shall never be able to repay the courtesies, which you have
showed me.

Old men remember all things, which they regard: and Young men long for those
things, which they like.

Is he acquitted of the theft, of which he was accused?

He has spent the money, which he esteemed so little of.

Has he cleared himself of the crime of covetousness, whereof many did accuse
him?

It is fit, we amend those faults, whereof we have been admonished.

Have you received my Letters from the man, to whom I gave them?

The man told me it, whom you said it to.

I have paid the money to the man, to whom I owed it.

Take heed what you say, and whom you say it to.

I have one to commend me, and him one whom all do not please.

2. Aut ab alia dictione, quae cum Verbo in Oratione locatur.

* Yet here is to be understood and noted, that the Relative is not always
governed of the Verb, that he comes [next] before, but sometimes of the
Infinitive Mood [of another Verb], that comes after the Verb: as, Quibus
voluisti me gratias agere, egi, What persons thou willedst me to thank, I have
thanked.

I have bidden those persons to dinner, whom you bad me bid.

I have sent the Letter to him, whom you wished me to send it to.

He is acquitted of those crimes, which you affirmed him to be accused of.

It is no shame to teach that, which it is fit to learn,

Some spare times do fall out to be, which I do not suffer to be lost.

With expectation of the future, he loses things present, which he might enjoy.

Sometimes of a Participle: as, Quibus rebus adductus fecisti? With what things
moved did thou it?

I cannot well discern with what things he being offended, should speak against
us.

These are the questions, whereto I am about to give answer.

There are found out crimes enough, whereof he is to be accused.

I had not heard of any thing, that had happened, with which he being
affrighted, should run away.

* Sometimes of a Gerund: as, Quem videndo obstupui. Quae nunc non est narrandi
locus, Which things at this present is no time to tell.

There stood an ignorant fellow prating three hours together, with hearing of
whom I was tired to the heart.

Eggs are put under hens to sit on, in putting under which eggs, it must be
minded, that they be of an odd number.

I am now going to see my father and mother, of seeing whom I have a long time
had a great desire.

We have need of many things, which we now have no opportunity to buy.

You have been taught your duty toward God and the King, of the forsaking
which there can never be any just cause.

* Sometimes of a Preposition set before him: as, Lego Virgilium prae quo
caeteri Poetae sordent. Quem in locum deducta res sit vides, Unto what state
the matter is now brought thou see.

He spoke many things quaintly, amongst which this also.

Now I return to Ortho, from whom I had digressed somewhat too far.

That wound comes not to a scar, in which medicaments are tried.

He that is disinherited may say many things, for which he would not go to law.

Those matches which you unwisely rush into, are they joys or burdens?

They fit themselves for the Court, and for honors, in which those very things
are to be feared, which are hoped for.

* Sometimes with the Substantive that it does accord with, it is put in the
Nominative Case by reason that the Verb that it comes before requires a
Nominative Case with it: as, Senties qui vir siem, Thou shall perceive what a
Fellow I am. Albeit in this manner of speaking, qui is an Indefinite, and not a
Relative.

Make trial when you please, and you shall find what a Friend I am.

I cannot but wonder, when I see what madness there is in most men.

Do you not wonder what apparel this should be.

It will quickly be seen what Soldiers we are, when once we come into the
field.

* Sometimes of a Noun Partitive or Distributive: as, Quorum optimum ego habeo.
Quarum rerum utram minus velim, non facile possum ex^stimate. Of the which two
thing* whether I would with less will have, I cannot easily esteem

The woman fell into two dangers, whereof she had tried neither.

Whether of these two Books had you rather read?

I will now let you see trees, of which many were set with mine own hand.

I saw a company of Bullocks in a valley, whereof one began to bellow aloud.

Man is by nature furnished with two hands, whereof the right hand is the
stronger.

Many Philosophers flourished once in Greece, whereof Socrates was even by the
Oracle judged the wisest.

The Macedonians that day had the better of the Persians, of whom many
thousands were slain in the Battle.

Sometimes it is put in the Genitive Case by reason of a Substantive coming
next after him: as, Cujus numen adoro. Ego illum non novi cujus causa hoc
incipis, I knew him not for whose cause thou beginnest this matter.

Is this the Boy whose father and mother died of the plague?

He is truly happy, from whose safety no less j^y shall come almost unto all
men, than to himself.

Blessed is the man, whose Conscience has no sin to accuse him of.

That Conqueror, whose valor and wisdom all admired, dwelt in a Cottage.

Cicero was a great lover of Terence, whose words he willingly made use of.

* Sometimes is is otherwise [i. e. in some other than the Genitive Case]
governed of a Substantive: as, Omnia tibi dabuntur, quibus opus habes, All
things shall be given thee, which thou have need of.

He is not a man of that credit [ea fide] that you are of.

Were he a Boy of that wit, which he is said to be of, none could excel him.

Scholars many times have many Books in their studies, whereof they have small
use.

How many things are there in the world, whereof a wise man has no need.

Sometimes of an Adjective: as, Cui similem non vidi. Quo dignum te judicavi.

What color is that, whereunto white is contrary?

My friends, whom I have been kind unto, are become mine enemies.

You may expect thanks from the Husband men, to whom your work is useful and
acceptable.

I never lived unquietly with any man, to whom my habitation was near.

It is not thank worthy to give a thing to a man, whom it is unprofitable unto.

You tell me of a man, whom there is nothing equal, or second to.

You attribute that wit unto me, which I am not endued withal.

You put that honor upon me, which I am not worthy of.

Sometimes of an Adverb: as, Cui utrum obviam procedam nondum statui, Whom
whether I will go to meet with I have not yet determined.

I have seen a man before n^w, whom you do dance exceedingly like unto.

I seldom go to see men, whom I live much nearer to than you.

My Father, whom I hoped to meet by the way, brought me home again with him.

* Sometimes it is put in the Ablative Case with this sign than, and is
governed of the Comparative Degree coming after him: as, Vtere virtute qua
nihil est melius, Use virtue, than the which nothing is better.

He rises betimes in the morning, than which nothing in the world is more
wholesome.

You give your self to idleness, than which nothing is worse.

This was the opinion of Socrates, than whom in all Greece none was more wise.

I am much taken with Seneca's sayings, than whom none of the Philosophers
speaks more gravely.

You and your Father are persons, than whom I love and honor none more.

Beauty is a thing, than which nothing is more frail.

* Sometimes it is not governed at all, but is put in the Ablative Case
absolute: as, Quantus crat Julius Caesar, quo Imperatore Romani primum
Britanniam ingressi sunt? How worthy a man was Julius Caesar under whose
conduct, the Romans first entered Britain?

How brave an Orator was Marcus Tullius, under whose patronage the Innocent
ever found safety?

I will commit my self unto God, who being my guide and guard, I shall not fail.

It was good living in the days of Saturn, who being King, chastity had its
abiding in the earth.

Sad was the end of Pompey the Great, who being dead, his body was cast upon
the strand.

Great was the glory of the King that day, who coming into the army, the
enemies fled out of the field.

How great is the power of money we may see by this, that it failing, all things
else go to decaey.

* Also when it signifies [i. e. refers unto] an instrument wherewith a
thing is to be done, it is put in the Ablative Case: as, Ferrum habuit, quo se
occideret, He had a knife, wherewith he would have slain himself.

I took away from that madman the sword, with which he would have killed me.

Had I a pen wherewith to write, I should quickly write out that Book.

I want a staff to beat that Dog withal [i. e. with which I may beat that Dog].

If I must buy victuals you must find me money to buy them with.

Who lent that Traiter an balter to hang himself withal?

If you will make me a pen I will get you a Penknife to make it with, i e. with
which to make it.

Also when it refers to the Means whereby a thing is to done: as, Non mehercle
habeo quo tibi irato satisfaciam. Sen.

He is full of care, that those things wherewith he is delighted, may hold out
to the last.

Let us take some course, by which it may be decided, whether shall rule over
whether.

He said he might be corrupted with riches, with which an army might be
corrupted.

There is to be no obeying of a Father in that, by which it is brought to pass,
that he shall not be a Father.

And also when it refers to the Manner of the doing of a thing: as, Nemo vivit
eo more, quo cupit vivere.

We marshalled our army that day after the same manner, that we had done the
day before.

He is to be punished after that manner, that slaves were wont to be punished
in our sorefathers days.

He looks upon his own end with that mind that a man who is secure, lo^ks upon
the end of another man withal [i. e. with which].

The Sea has cast up those, whom it had swallowed, with the same force that it
had swallowed them up withal.

* Nouns Interrogatives and Indefinites follow the Rule of the Relative: as,
Quis, uter, qualis, quantus, quotus, quisquis, quicunque, cujus, cujusmodi,
cuimo ^i, cuicuimodi, utercunque, qualiscunque, quantuscunque, quotusquisque,
etc. which evermore come before the Verb like as the Relative does: as, Hei
mihi, qualis erat? Talis erat, qualem nunquam vidi.

Si quis me audit. Sen.

Quis sit divitiarum modus, quaeris? Sen.

Si carum tibi servum venderes, quaereres, quis emptor esset? Sen.

Quae tanta vos fert ira? Sen.

Si quaesierit aliquis, quae causa hominem adversus hominem in facinus coegit?
Sen.

Quid faciam adoptatus? Sen.

Dic quid in domo tua peccaverim? Sen.

Quid est, quod aut negandum mihi, aut excusandum sit? Sen.

Illic si quid commiscro, me nec meus recipiet pater. Sen.

Quod tantum malum humano generi vel sort vel fato invectum? Sen.

Uter tandem nostrum popularis est? Cic.

Ut neque dijudicari posset, uter utri anteferendus videretur. Caes.

Ab utro insidiae factae sint, incertum est. Cic.

Hodie utro frui malis, optio sit tua. Cic.

Horun utro uti volumus, altero carendum est. Cic.

Dicis utrum mavis, elige. Mart.

Si quis est talis, quales esse omnes oportebat. Cic.

Qualis oratoris putas esse scribere historiam? Cic.

Nihil interest ad beat vivendum, quali utaris cibo. Cic.

Annon intelligis quales viros mortuos summi sceleris arguas? Cic.

Te magnopere quaeso, ut qualem te jam antea populo Romano praebuisti, talem te
nobis hoc tempore impertias. Cic.

Omnino quale sit quaeritur. Cic.

Qualia Ledaei fata Lacones habent. Mart.

Quanti hominis in dicendo putas esse scribere historiam? Cic.

Quanta innocentia debent esse Imperatores? quanta temperantia? Cic.

Qui adolescens admodum tantae opinionis in declamando, quantae postea in
disputando fuit. Sen.

Quantum, and cujusmodi, and quale sit quaeritur. Cic.

Quotus crit iste denarius, qui non sit deferendus? Cic. 5. Ver.

Ex illis occidere me volet, quisquis frugatissimus fuerit. Sen. Quoquo
consilio fecerit, fecit certe suo. Quoquo alio modo ceciderit, quaecunque sit
fortuna. Durrer.

Quicunque is est, ei me profiteor inimicum. Cic.

Quemcunque casum fortuna dederit, and quaecunque fortuna erit oblata. Cic.

Quamcunque assequi potuerit in dicendo mediocritatem. Cic. de Orat.

Non omnia quaecunque loquimur, ad artem and ad praecepta esse revocanda. Cic.

Cujum pecus? an Meliboei? Virg.

Cujum puerum hic apposuisti? Ter.

Suamne esse aiebat? Non. Cujam igitur? Fratris filiam? Ter.

Quantum and cujusmodi, and omnino quale sit quaetitur. Cic.

Si intererit, cujusmodi mors ejus fuerit, cujusmodi res mortem ejus sit
consecuta. Cic.

Ego veteri amico munusculum mittere volui, cujusmodi ipsius solent esse
munera. Cic.

Consideres gravius cuimodi sint ea, quae reprehendisti. Gell.

Vereor enim cuicuimodi est, ne ita hunc videar servare, ut tibi omnino non
pepercerim. Cic.

Demus huic aliquid aeris, cuicuimodi est. Gell.

Ubi enim melius uti possumus, hoc cuicuimodi est otio? Cic.

Utercunque vicerit, non crit mirum futurum Cic.

Totum hoc leve est, qualecunque est. Cic.

Qualescunque summi civitatls viri sunt, talis est civitas. Cic.

Quantumcunque est, mihi satis est. Sen.

Quicunque eramus, and quantulumcunque dicebamus. Cic.

Ut in quamlibet partem quotoquoque loco libebit, possimus. Cic.

Quotocuique lorica est? quis equum habet? Curt. lib. 9.

* Not only the Relative, etc. when it is not the Nominative Case to the Verb,
is set before the Verb, that governs it, but also the Substantive, that the
Relative, etc. agrees with, if it be expressed: and that other word also that
governs it, or its Substantive, (if it be not governed of the Verb) sometimes
may, and sometimes must be construed before the Verb: as,

Quibus rebus adductus fecisti?

Quae nunc non est nar randi locus.

Quem in locum deducta res sit vides.

Lego Virgilium, prae quo caeteri Poetae sordent.

Senties qui vir siem.

Quarum verum utram minus velim, non facile possum existimare.

Cujus numen adoro.

Quorum optimum ego babeo.

Ego illum non vidi, cujus causa hoc incipis.

Quem videndo obstupuit,

Cui similem non vidi.

Ab utro insidiae factae sint, incertum est.

Horum utro uti volumus, altero carendum est.

Qualis oratoris, and quanti hominis in dicendo put as esse scribere historiam?

Nihil interest ad beat vivendum quali utaris cibo.

Annon intelligis quales viros mortuos summi sceleris arguas.

Qualia Ledaei fata Lacones habent.

Quanta innocentia debent esse Imperatores?

Quoquo consilio fecerit, fecit certe suo.

Quamcunque assequi potuerit in dicendo mediocritatem. Cic.

Quemcunque casum fortuna dederit, and quaecunque fortuna erit oblata.

Cujum puerum hic apposuisti?

Si intererit cujusmodi mors ejus fuerit, cujusmodi res mortem ejus sit
consecuta.

Vt in quamlibet partem quotoquoque libebit loco, possimus.

English Examples of these two last Rules.

If any body ask for me, say I am gone abroad.

Who can count the sands on the shore? or who can number the hairs of his head?

I never met with any man that could tell, what was the measure of the water in
the Sea.

What so great boldness thrusts you on to this talkativeness?

If any body admire what reason induced me to believe this, I my self shall
wonder.

What said he in his anger?

Can you say what I did amiss all that time?

What is there in this World, that may be to be feared, or loved by a wise man?

If I lose or mar ought, my mother will chide me.

What so great good has befallen to our kindred by your advancement?

Whether of us is the better Scholar?

It is hard to say, which is to be preferred before which.

It cannot be told by whether the victory was got.

You may take your choice, whether of them you had rather use.

I know not whether of them I shall enjoy with more delight.

You may have whether you will.

It is a marvel if any man be such as all men should be.

I have bought you such a horse, as you desired.

What kind of Preacher must he be, that shall convert all his hearers?

What kind of Artists work do you think it to be, to build a Castle in the Air?

It matters not to eternal life, what sort of garment you have on, when you are
buried.

One would hardly think, what kind of book^ some men will read, and commend.

Do not doubt, but that I shall show my self such in the herght of honor, as I
have heretofore showed my self in a low estate.

Few Countries breed dogs, such as England does.

Such horses as we sell here, you will hardly buy elsewhere.

Of how great a man at fighting, do you think it to be the work, to conquer the
World in three years?

Of how great wisdom ought Preachers to be men! of how great diligence also!
and of how great patience!

Though he be but a very Youth, yet he is one of as great ability in speaking,
as his Father was in writing.

So much money as a man has in his purse, so much credit shall he have in the
World.

I have given my daughter to her portion, as much as I was well able to spare.

Know you what part of your Fathers estate will fall to your share?

You cannot tell, in what year of your life, you must die, much less on what
day of the year.

Whosoever he be that shall honor God, him God will honor.

Which way soever he take to live, I am not much concerned in it.

Which way soever it happens, I shall be contented.

Whosoever he be that is an Enemy to virtue, I am no Friend to him.

What kindness soever you show to my Brother, I shall take it as done to my
self.

Not all things whatsoever wise men do, are wisely done.

Whatsoever we have we doow it all to the goodnes^ of God.

Whose Book is this? George's or Peter's.

Whose Horse have you brought here?

If this be not your Mare, whose then do you say that she is?

Inquire about the Corn, how much there is of it, and of what sort it is.

It is a matter what a kind of life yours is, and of what sort your death shall
be, and what kind of condition shall follow after your death.

I will send within this day or two some Apples, such as use to grow in our
Orch^^d.

In commending you should consider well, what kind of things those be which you
do commend.

Be he as he will, it may not be amiss to give something to him that is poor.

Such as it was, my Patron took my present kindly.

Whethersoever die first, the survivor is to be his heir.

Whomsoever you shall send thither, he will lose his labor.

This work, whatever it be, is all easy enough to be done.

Of whatsoever sort you see the Governors of a State to be, of that sort will
be the people.

How much soever it be that you give to an unthankful man, it is all lost.

How little soever you give to a thankful man, he will thank you for it.

Be the men who they will be, and how much or how little soever it be that they
give you, you are beholden to them.

You have liberty to go into any Country whatsoeever you list, and to dwell in
whatsoever Kingdom you please.

Of all the Philosophers that ever were, what one had an infallible judgment?

Of all men living what one know you, that is free from all faults?

In all the Army what one Soldier had a Helmet? What one a Gauntlet? or even a
good Sword.

Examples of the latter Rule.

With what Arguments were you brought to believe so absurd an Opinion?

Which sayings of the Ancients we have not time now to rehearse.

Which Writings of the Poets I have not leisure now to read.

Into what place of danger we now are brought, who sees not?

Into which estate of misery we foolishly fell by our own fault.

I love Beef, in comparison of which all other meats are worth little.

If I come to you to dinner, you shall see what a stomach I have to my meat.

Of the which two Books whether I have the more mind to read, I cannot easily
say.

Whose pen have you got to write with?

Do you know whose book I am reading?

There are several Opinions of Philosophers, whereof Epicurus held none of the
best.

For whose cause do you undertake so great a journey?

If you knew for whose sake I take all this pains, you would not blame me so.

There preached a Minister at our Church to day, in hearing of whom I was
amazed: the like to whom I have not heard.

Whether of the two knives you like best, take that.

It is considerable unto health, what kind of diet you keep.

How great labor of brain and body must a Schoolmaster endure to make good
Scholars.

By what advice soever you do it, to be sure, you shall not do it by mine.

Whatsoever portion God gives us in this world, let us receive it with
thankfulness.

Of our life, whatsoever sort it be of, we must render an account unto God.

Let us so live, that at what time soever, and i^ whatsoever place death shall
seize upon us, it may find us prepared.

English Examples framed according to the Rules of the Syntaxis of Substantives
and Adjectives.
Substantivorum Constructio.
Quum duo Substantiva diversae significationis sic concurrunt, ut posterius a
priore possideri quodammodo videatur, tum posterius in Genitivo ponitur: ut,
Ju. Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit. Rex pater patriae. Arma
Achillis. Cultor agri.

When two Substantives come together betokening diverse things, the latter shall
be the Genitive Case: as, Facundia Ciceronis, the eloquence of Cicero. Opus
Virgilii, the work of Virgil. Amator studiorum, a lover of studies. Dogma
Platonis, the opinion of Plato.

Note 1. When a Substantive is governed of a Substantive in the Genitive Case,
then generally the Particle [of] comes in the English between the Substantives.

Immoderate desire of wealth, is the destruction of many a man.

The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom: and a Crown of glory is the end of
a religious life.

Hope of impunity is a cause of sin: and rewards of virtue are encouragements
unto well-doing.

The wrath of a King is as the roaring of a Lion: and the rebellion of Subjects
is as the sin of witchcraft.

Peace of mind, and tranquillity of spirit, is in the heart of the righteous:
but horror of soul, and terror of conscience is in the breast of the wicked.

Prayer is the key of the day, and the lock of the night: it opens the one, it
shuts the other.

Note 2. Sometimes the two Substantives have not [of] between them, but the
former has [s] added to the end of it, which (if the word be not of the Plural
Number) is a termination or sign of a Genitive Case.

When the former of the two Substantives has [s] added to it, then the latter
is to be made into Latin first, and the former, which has [s] added to it, is
to be of the Genitive Case: as,

The Kings heart is in the Lords hand, who guide eth it to his own glory, and
the peoples good.

Gods commands are to be kept by men: and man's promises are to be performed to
God.

A woman's mind, like the wind and tide, is often changing: and seldom continues
the same long.

Cato 's wisdom is to be preferred before Caesar 's power, and Pomponius 's go
dness before Pompey 's greatness.

Diana 's anger was Actaeon 's death: and Helen 's beauty was Troy 's
destruction.

Rome 's greatness was the worlds burden, and its own ruin.

Genitives Plural as well as Singular have sometimes [s] added to them: as,

Winters Thunder is old men's wonder.

It is Carters luck sometimes to overthrow, and Gamesters fortune sometimes to
lose.

The Fisher-mens trading is better than the Butchers in time of Lent: but the
Butchers better than the Fishers all the year beside.

Sometimes instead of [s] added to one of the two Substantives that govern one
another, the Particle [his or [her] is set between them; especially after
Proper names: as,

Charles Rushworth his Book, and Henry Hall his Inkhorn, and Edmund Ellis his
Pen, are all together in my Study.

Martha Hubbard her Cow, and Anne Hacket her Ew, and Jane Marshall her Lamb,
feed-all together in one Close.

When this happens to be, there is nothing to be made in Latin for [his] or
[her]; for if any thing be, it will be barbarous: but the former Substantive is
to be of the Genitive Case: as,

Socrates his wisdom, and Ulysses his cunning, and Achilles his valor, are
famous in Poets Works, and Historians Writings.

All Dido her entreating could not hinder Aeneas his going away.

Sometimes to Substantives of the Genitive Case ending in [s] there is added
[es], or the [s] in the end is doubled, and this mark ['] set over the two
[s's], and then it is a sign that the foregoing Substantive is the Genitive
Case governed of one that follows it: as,

Moses 's rod was turned into a Serpent.

Croesus 's wealth was his overthrow.

Sometimes the former of two Substantives has no [es] or [s] added to it, and
yet is the Genitive Case governed of the latter: as,

The Silver-Tankard is in the Hall-window, or on the Parlor-table.

When the Steed is stolen shut the Stable-door.

Sometimes in Latin one Substantive goveros two, or more Substantives, in the
Genitive Case: as, Jamne sentis bellua, quae sit hominum querela frontis tuae?
Cic. Where querela governs both hominum and frontis. So, Quae naturae principia
sint societatis humanae repetendum altius videtur. Cic. Inexplehilis honorum
Marii fames. Flor. 3. 21. Quare L. Syllae andC. Caesaris pecuniarum translatio
a justis dom 'nis ad alienos non debet liber alitas videri. Cic. 1. Off.

This is imitable in English: yet so that the governing Substantive do come
betwixt the two governed Substantives, and that the former of them do end in
[s]: as,

Christ's redemption of the World cost him his blood.

Paul's preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles was an offense to the Jew^.

Sometimes two, three, or more Substantives come together, which are all of the
Genitive Case, but the last, which governs that next before him, and that him
next before it, and so backward to the first: as,

Peter's wifes mother was sick of a fever.

My man's Uncles sons wife is a very pretty woman.

My Masters brothers wifes fathers man's horses hairs color was white.

Proinde hic Genitivus saepissime in Adjectivum possessivum mutatur: ut, Patris
domus, paterna domus. Heri filius, herilis filius.

I am troubled with stomach worms, i. e. worms of the stomach.

Write this in your Paper book, i. e. book of paper.

Land Cattle are better than Sea fish, or Water fowl, i. e. Cattle of the Land,
etc.

Will my father and your mother make a Wedding of it? i. e. the father of me,
and the mother of you.

Est etiam ubi in Dativum vertitur: ut, Luc. de Cat. Urbi pater est, urbique
maritus. Herus tibi, mihi pater.

All acknowledge Cicero to have been a Father to his Country.

In taking such care of me, you show your self to be a brother indeed to me.

Now that your Sisters Husband is dead, you must be a Husband to her.

Exceptio.

Excipiuntur quae in codem casu per appositionem connectuntur: ut, Ovid.
Effodiuntur opes irritamenta malorum. Virg. Ignavum fucos pecus a praesepibus
arcent.

But if they belong both to one thing, they shall be put both in one Case: as,
Pater meus vir amat me puerum, My Father being a man loves me a child.

But now ye seek to kill me, a man that has told you the truth.

Erasmus, a man of very exact judgment, so speaks.

He was glad of the yellow covering of a she*wolf his Nurse.

Within saw he Envy Eating Vipers flesh, the food of her vices.

This Construction may be called the Fourth Concord.

Adjectivum in Neutro genere absolute, hoc est, absque Substantivo positum,
aliquando Genitivum postulat: ut, Paululum pecuniae. Hoc noctis. Catul. Non
videmus id manticae, quod in tergo est. Juv. Quantum quisque sua nummorum
servat in arca, Tantum habet and fidei.

An Adjective in the Neuter Gender put alone without a Substantive, stands
for a Substantive, and may have a Genitive Case after him, as if it were a
Substantive: as, Multum lucri, Much gain. Quantum negotii? How much business?
Id operis, That work.

Truly I have not much of money, yet somewhat of pleasure.

That little of quiet, which I here enjoy, do I value at a great rate.

There is not over much of ease in that kind of life, that Schoolmasters lead.

I never saw so much money together in all my life before.

Do you think me to have so little wit, as to trust you with my money?

Ponitur interdum Genitivus tantum, nempe pr^ori Substantivo per Eclipsim
subaudito; ut in hujusmodi locutionibus. Ter. Ubi ad Dianae veneris, ito ad
dextram. Ventum erat ad Vestae: Utrobique subauditur Templum. Virg. Hectoris
Andromache: subauditur uxor. Idem, Deiphobe Glauci: subauditur filia. Ter.
Hujus video Byrrhyiam: subaudi servum.

Where were you to hear a Sermon yesterday? At St. Peter's.

Who preaches this morning at St. Margarets? He that preached the other day at
St. Mary's.

Whose man are you? Brian Talbots.

Whose son is he? John Carters.

Here, take my book, and bring my wifes along with you.

This is my boys picture, and that is my girls.

Laus and Vituperium.

Laus and Vituperium rei variis modis effertur, at srequentius in Ablativo vel
Genitivo; ut, Vir nulla fide. Ovid. Ingenui vultus puer, ingenuique pudoris.

Words importing indument of any quality or property, to the praise or
dispraise of a thing, coming after a Noun Substantive, or a Verb Substantive,
may be put in the Ablative, or in the Genitive: as, Puer bona indole; or Puer
bonae indolis, A child of a good towardness. Puer boni ingenii; or, Puer bono
ingenio, A child of a good wit.

Ablative.

A man of the old Religion, faith, and fashion is the man that I like.

She is a woman of excellent features, and of age fit for marriage.

He was one of a very crazy temper, and sickly constitution.

He is a boy of a good wit and great memory, and ready utterance.

I am not of so morose an humor, and currish disposition as you imagine.

He is one of a crack^ credit, and brok^n estate; of no truth, nor honesty in
the world.

Genitive.

He was a man of small meat, and mostly very ordinary.

You shall entertain a guest of no great stomach, but of a pleasant humor.

He is a man of a huge stature, and strong limbs.

She is a woman of a lovely countenance, and of a good nature.

It is an herb of a sweet smell: and a thing of great value.

I am now of better health, and chearfuller look, than I was a while ago.

Opus and Usus.

Opus and Usus Ablativum exigunt: ut, Cic. Authoritate tua nobis opus est.
Gell. Pecuniam, qua sibi nihil esset usus, ab iis, quibus eam sciret usui esse,
non accepit.

Opus and Usus, when they be Latin for need, require an Ablative Case: as,
Opus est mihi tuo judicio, I have need of thy judgment. Viginti minis usus est
filio, My son has need of twenty pounds.

Neither have I need of a husband, nor you of a wife.

As the case stands with us, we have more need of peace, than of war.

He has need of such an Advocate, as you are, to p^e^d for him.

To secure our selves on land, we have need of ships at Sea

Keep the money I lent you still in your hand, for at present I have no use for
it

In time of danger we have use for our strength and courage, skill and
diligence.

My father desires you to lend him three hundred pounds: for he has use for
one hundred to day, and he will have need of two hundred more to morrow.

Yet Opus is found construed sometimes with a Genitive Case: as in that of
Cicero Fam 10. 8. Nobis and magni laboris and multae impensae opus fuit ut --
And in that of Quintil. l. 12. c. 3. Si nosse quid quisque senserit, volet,
le^^io^is op^^ est. But this is rare!

Though of its being construed with both Nominative and Accusative Cases in the
sense of [needful] there are many Examples. Hence our Grammar --

Opus autem Adjective pro necessarius quandoque poni videtur, varieque
construitur: ut, Cic. Dux nobis, and author opus est. Dicis nummos mihi opus
esse ad apparatum triumphi. Ter. Alia quae opus sunt para. Cic. Sulpitii operam
intelligo ex tuis literis tibi multum opus non fuisse. To which add, Ter. Phor.
3. 3. Quantum argenti opus est tibi? Plaut. Curc. 2. 2. Quin depromantur mihi
quae opus sunt. Gell l. 17. c. 2. Nihil sibi divitias opus esse recte dici ait.
Plaut. Mihi quidem minam argenti opus est.

What hay will you need [or, be needful for you] against winter?

To him that asks of thee give such things as he has need of.

If he say he has no need of wealth, tell him that honesty however is needful
for him.

If he have little need of my help, I have not much need of his skill.

Adjectivorum Constructio.
GENITIVUS.
Adjectiva, quae desiderium, notitiam, memoriam, atque iis contraria
significant, Genitivum adsciscunt; ut, Plin. Est natura hominum novitatis
avida. Virg. Men's futuri praescia. Idem. Memor esto brevis aevi. Ter. Imperitos
rerum, eductos libere, in fraudem illicis. Silius, N^n sum animi dubious, sed
devius aequi. Cic. Graecarum literarum rudis.

Adjectives that signify desire, knowledge, remembrance, ignorance, or
forgetting, and such other like, require a Genitive Case: as, Cupidus auri,
Covetous of money. Peritus belli, Expert of warfare. Ignarus omnium, Ignorant
of all things. Fidens animi, Bold of heart. Dubious mentis, Doubtful of mind.
Memor praeteriti, Mindful of that is past Reus furti, Accused of theft.

He that is desirous of honor, should be mindful of virtue.

He that is greedy of much wealth, will be guilty of great sin.

He that is conscious of evi committed by him, and foreknowing of punishment to
be inflicted on him, should not be careless of his own safety, but studious of
his preservation.

He that is unskilful of business, ignorant of Laws, doubtful of judgment, and
not confident of spirit, will never make a good Ruler of a Commonwealth.

You are very liberal of your praise, but not at all prodigal of your gold.

No marvel if he be devious of [i. e. a swarver from] Justice, that is ignorant
of Religion.

Be mindful of God, and he will not be unmindful of thee.

It is a strange thing, that he that is covetous of what is another, should be
lavish of his own.

He can never be happy of life, that is wavering of mind; nor he expert of
letters, that is regardless of learning.

He must not go to Sea, that is fearful of a storm: nor he to War, that is
careful of his life.

A mind sensible of evil before it come, makes the life unquiet: and a mind not
knowing of future hap, renders it secure.

A wise man foresighted of danger to come, takes care for his safety in time.

It is said, these Genitives are not governed of the Adjectives, but of causa,
gratia, ratione, or ergo understood: and it is true in some, if not in all: and
is an imitation of Greek Construction. Hence (...) in Thucyd. (...) in Aristot.

Adjectiva Verbalia in ax etiam in Genitivum feruntur; ut, Audax ingenii. Ovid.
Tempus edax rerum. Sen. Virtus est vitiorum fugax. Horar. Vtilium sagax Id
Propositi tenax. Virg. Tam ficti pravique tenax, quam nuncia very. Plaut.
Pecuniarum petax, etc.

He that is over tenacious of his own money, cannot hope, that others will be
liberal to him.

Gluttony is consumptive [edax] of the estate, whereas temperance is
preservative [conservatrix] of it.

He that is audacious of nature, and fierce of mind, seldom judges wisely, or
acts prudently.

When God created man, he endued him with a mind capable of divine perfections.

The Land you live in is very fruitful [ferax] of corn, and wine, and oil.

He that is pertinacious of opinion, had need be of right judgment.

Nomina partitiva, aut partitive posita, interrogativa quaedam, and cerra
numeralia, Genitivo, a quo and genus mutuantur, gaudent; ut Cic. Quanquam te,
Marce sili, annum jam audientem Cratippum, idque Athenis, abundare oportet
praeceptis, institutisque philosophiae, propter summam doctoris authoritatem
and urbis, quorum alter te scientia augere potest, altera exemplis, etc. Ovid.
Quisquis fuit ille deorum. Terent. An quisquam hominum est aeque miser, ut ego?
Virgil. Divum promittere nemo Auderet. Tres fratrum. Quatuor judicum. Sapientum
octavus quis fuerit, nondum constat. Primus regum Romanorum fuit Romulus.

Nouns partitives, and certain Interrogatives with certain Nouns of Number,
require a Genitive Case: as, Aliquis, uter, neuter, nemo, nullus, solus, unus,
medius, quisque, quisquis, quicunque, quidam, quis for aliquis, or quis an
Interrogative: also, Vnus, duo, tres, primus, secundus, tertius, etc. as
Aliquis nostrum, primus omnium.

Which of us think thou is ignorant of thy folly?

Let it not seem a wonder to any of you, that Old men love money.

Of my two brothers the one is dead, and the other like to die.

Of my two daughters choose whether you have more mind to for your wife.

Of your two sons, though either would serve my daughter, yet will she accept
of neither for her husband.

Whosoever of the Philosophers it was that said it, he was out in his opinion.

Yea, say I, what one [quotusquisque] of the Philosophers is in all things
right in his opinion?

The wisest of them all is not much wiser than any of us.

Some of you said it, else I had not believed it.

Of those causes let us see of what force each [every one] may be

Of the Soldiers every one received from the Captain ten Crowns.

The Master gave to every one of his Scholars ten Apples.

Some of us are rich, and some of us are poor, as it pleases God.

Whosoever of us pleases God in this world, shall be happy in the world to come.

Of all men living there is none whom I love more than you.

None of your Sisters is a fit wife for my Brother.

He alone of all the Philosophers was by the Oracle judged to be a wise man.

It was ill done of the father to leave his son behind him in the middle of the
Mountains.

Of all these things my father knew nothing at all.

Many of those pages were written with mine own hand.

He came to Rome attended with but very few of his friends.

Of Wools the black will take no other hue.

Of Fleshes the white are the most tender, most sweet, and most wholesome.

One of my Sisters is deeply in love with your Brother.

Of the three Elephants two were old ones, the third younger.

Of the ten Virgins five were wise, and five were foolish.

Of the men slain that day in the Battle a thousand were Romans, the rest
Barbarians.

I will visit you to morrow with three of my brethren, and four of my servants
attending on me.

Of the Judges six gave it for me, one against me.

You had better be the last of the Gentlemen, than the first of the Clowns.

Of the Sons of Adam Cain was the first, Abel the second, Seth the third.

In alio tamen sensu Ablativum exigunt cum Praepositione: ut, Primus ab
Hercule. Tertius ab Aen^^.

^^is Exceptive Rule concerns Ordinal Numerals not taken Partitively, but only
denoting order of succession, or place.

Enoch also the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, Jude 14.

I am the third from John, and Thomas is the fourth from me.

In alio vero sensu Dativum: ut, Virg. Nulli pietate secundus.

The sense of this Exception seems to be, that Ordinal Numerals, and however
this particular one [secundus], as it signifies inferior unto, or short of, is
construed with a Dative Case.

I shall scorn to be second to you in any Christian virtue, or Scholar-like
praise.

Your beauty is so far from being inferior to all, that it is second to none.

Usurpantur autem and cum his Praepositionibus E, de, ex, inter, ante; ut,
Ovid. Est Deus e vobis alter. Id. Solus de superis. Virg. Primus inter omnes.
Id. Primus ibi ante omnes magna comitante caterva, Laocoon ardens summa
decurrit ab arce.

Which of you convinces me of sin?

That sour Philosopher is one of the Stoics.

Of the three things that was the second.

Of my two sons the elder is well, the younger sick.

In prosperity he seemed one of the fortunatest men, in adversity one of the
gallantest men.

That proud Peacock that stalks so majestically now, but a while ago was one of
the Commonalty.

Of those wise men the one was always laughing, and the other crying.

Of the other Bees the little one is the best.

It is not well that of Divines you alone should be of this opinion.

You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore will I
punish you for all your iniquities.

That is a good Boy indeed, that is first at School every morning before all
his School fellows.

Among all the Greek Poets Homer is the chief; as Virgil is among the Latin:
and among the Latin Orators Cicero is the prime, as Demosthenes is among the
Greek.

Interrogativum and ejus redditivum ejusdem casus and temporis erunt: ut,
Quarum rerum nulla est satietas? Divitiarum. Quid rerum nunc geritur in Anglia?
Consulitur de religione.

When a question is asked, the answer in Latin must be made by the same Case
of a Noun, Pronoun, or Participle, and by the same Tense of a Verb that the
question is asked by: as, Cujus est fundus? Vicini. Quid agitur in ludo
literario? Studetur.

Who loves God most? He that serves him best.

Who subdued the greatest part of the world in twelve years time? Alexander,
King of Macedony.

Whose is this book? William Lowthers.

To whom are you to give that book? To my Master.

Whom do you love above all? God.

Whose workmanship are you? Gods.

With what a mind are you to serve God? With a pure one

In what does true piety consist? In holiness and righteousness.

What things is there no either pleasure or profit in? In iniquity and sin.

What do the blessed Saints in Heaven do? They admire and adere God, and live
happy in the enjoyment of him.

What did Jesus Christ to redeem the World? He laid down his life for it, and
suff^red the painful, shameful, and accursed death of the Cros^.

Have you learned the holy Bible all by heart yet? I have not yet learned it
all, but yet I have got a good deal of it without book.

Which part of the Bible do you think most necessary for a Child to learn
first? Christ's Sermon upon the Mount.

What had you suffered, if Christ had not redeemed you? Had not Christ redeemed
me, I had suffered eternal death.

What will you do for him, that has so loved you, as to lay down his life for
you? I will love him with all my heart, and I will serve him with all my might,
and I will honor him with all my estate.

This Construction may be called the Fifth Concord.

Fallit haec regula, quoties Interrogatio fit per Cujus ja, jum: ut, Cujum
pecu^? Laniorum.

Except a question be asked by Cujus, ja, jum: as, Cuja est sententia?
Ciceronis.

Whose is that Sheep? Aegons.

Whose daughter did your brother marry? A Merchants.

Whose opi^ion is most followed in the Schools? Aristotle's.

Whose doctrine do you like best in the Church? Christ's.

Aut per dictionem variae Syntaxeo^: ut, Furtine accusas? an h^micidii? Utroque.

Or by a word that may govern diverse Cases: as, Quanti emisti librum? Parvo.

What does Cicero accuse. Verres of? Of many and grievous crimes.

What crime are you condemned for? The same that you are.

Was he acquitted of felony? or manslaughter? Of neither.

What sold you your horse for? For five pound.

What did your hat stand you in? Small.

How much is virtue esteemed now adays? Very much.

Fallit denique cum per possessiva meus, tuus, suus, etc. respondendum est: ut,
Cujus est hic codex? Meus.

Or except I must answer [viz. to a question made by an Interrogative in the
Genitive Case] by one of these Possessives Meus, tuus, suus, noster, v^ster:
as, Cujus est domus? Non vestra, sed nostra.

Whose horse do you ride on? Mine own

Whose ground do these hu^bandmen plow up? Their own.

Whose man was that, that was here even now? Ours.

Whose Orchard fruit is best liked in the Town? ^^urs.

Whose money does he so liberally give to the poor? His own.

Whose company do thou love above any? Thine.

Comparativa and Superlativa accepta partitive Genitivum unde and genus
sortiuntur exigunt.

Nouns of the Comparative and the Superlative Degree b^ing put partitively,
that is to say, having after them this English of or among, require a Genitive
Case: as, Aurium mollior est sinistra, Of the ears the left is the softer.
Cicero Oratorum eloquentissimus, Cicero the most eloquent of Orators.

The elder of the young men is like to come to a good estate: and the younger
is like to prove a good Scholar.

The taller and thicker of the Oaks, as b^ing fitter for work, must be out down.

Kill the fatter of the Capons to supper, and let the other alone till he be
fatter.

Of all the Philosophers Plato is esteemed the most elegant: as of all Or^tors
Cicero is judged the most eloquent.

He is the best of friends that flatters least in prosperity, and comforts most
in adversity.

Of smells the strongest is not always the wholesomest; of flowers the fairest
is not always the sweetest: and of men the richest is not aways the happiest;
nor of ^cholars are the most learned always the most wise.

Note 1. The Genitive Case after a Superlative put Partitively, is supposed to
be governed of e numero understood by an Ellipsis.

Note 2. The Superlative does not always agree in Gender with the Genitive Case
that he governs: but often with the Substantive foregoing, whereof the speech
is. Hence Cic. Indus, qui est omnium fluminum maximus. Plin Modus rerum omnium
utilisstmus: and, Hor^eum frugum omnium mollissimum est.

Comparativum autem ad duo, Superlativum ad plura refertur: ut, Manuum fortior
est dextra. Digitorum medius est longissimus.

Of my fe^t the left is the weaker: and of my arms the right is the stronger.
Of my eyes the right is the clearer: and of my cheeks the left is the fairer.

Of two goods the bigger is the better: and of two evils the lesser is the
better.

Of Latin Orators Cicero is the most eloquent: as of Greek Poets Homer is the
most excellent.

Of the three most noble Gr^ces (which are Faith, Hope, and Charity) the
greatest is Charity.

Of the Senses Seeing is the most useful and Touching the most necessary.

Some will not allow this distinction, and bring examples to disprove it: Such
as that of Plaut. Regum rex regalior; and that of Plin. Adolescentiores apum ad
opera exeunt. The point is disputable: but I shall not dispute it, Only I say,
that in Plaut. Regum may mean but two Kings; and in Plin Apum may mean two
sorts of Bees, the elder, and the younger.

Accipiuntur autem Partitive cum per E, Ex, aut Inter exponuntur: ut, Virgilius
Poetarum doctissimus: id est, ex Poetis, vel inter Poetas.

-- Being put Partitively, that is to say, having after them this English of,
or among --

Of [or, among] praises that of virtue is the greatest.

Of Scholars [or, among Scholars] the most humble, the most diligent, and the
most quiet is the most commendable.

Of [or, among] all books the Book of God is the best for a young man to read.

Of all University studies the study of Ethics is the most excellent.

Among colors green is the most pleasing to a weak eye.

Rainy weather is, in my thoughts, the worst of all to travel in.

A good conscience is the most valuable possession of all others.

Comparativa cum exponuntur per quam Ablativum adsciscunt: ut, Horat. Vilius
argentum est auro, virtutibus aurum, id est, quam aurum, quam virtutes.

Nouns of the Comparative Degree having than after them do cause the word
following to be the Ablative Case: as, Frigidior glacie, More cold than Ice.

Health is better than silver, and Grace more precious than gold.

Better is the rebuke of a friend, than the flattering of an enemy.

What is swee^er than honey? or what is stronger than a Lion? what whiter than
snow? or what hotter than fire?

Note If quam be made in Latin for than, then the Substantive following is to
be of the same Case with the foregoing: as, Vilius agrentum est, quam aurum:
vilius est aurum, quam virtutes.

Adsciscunt and alterum Ablativum qui mensuram excessus significat: ut, Cic.
Quanto doctior es, tanto te geras submissius.

Nouns of the Compatative Degree having by after them, do cause the word
following to be the Ablative Case: as, Doctior multo, Better learned by a great
deal. Uno pede altior, Higher by a foot.

You are t^ller than I by the head and shoulders.

I am older than you by seven years.

In your Poem one Verse is shorter than another by one syllable

My staff is an inch longer than yours.

Your Sister is two years younger than you.

I am much more quiet in mind than I was

Goodness is a great deal more d^sirable than greatness.

By how the more advantag^ous your kindness is, by so much the more acceptable
ought it to be unto us.

By how much the greater any pleasure is, by so much the more does it
discompose the mind.

The higher you are in place, the holier be you in life.

The richer you are in goods, the more bountiful be you in gifts.

Note. Adjectives of the Comparative Degree do not only govern an Ablative Case
of the Thing exceeded, or of the Measure of the excess, but also of the Matter
wherein the Exceeding is: as, Major aetate. Major n^tu

Cicero was more excellent for speaking than Caesar: and Caesar was more
excellent than Cicero for fighting.

Ajax was stronger in body than Ulysses: but Ulysses was much wise in counsel
than Ajax.

If you be nimbler than I in wit, I am steadier than you in judgment.

You are not so much better than I at wrestling, as I am better than you at
running.

Tanto, quanto, multo, long, aetate, natu, utrique gradui appo^u^tur: ut,
Catul Tanto tu possimus omnium Poeta, Quanto tu optimus omnium patronus. Eras.
Nocturnae lucubrationes long periculosissimae habentur. Long caeteris
peritio^es. sed non multo melior tamen. Juv. Omne animi vitium tanto
conspectius in se Crimen habet, quanto major qui peccat habetur. Major and
maximus aetate. Major and maximus n^tu

'Twas the glory of King Edward the Sixth, that he was by so much holier than
others, as he was higher than others.

You are learneder than I, by what you are older than I.

It is strange, that being much fatter than you, I should be much nimbler than
you.

The reading of the Gospel is far a more profitable study, than of any other
History.

It were a great shame for a Minister to be so much the worse doer of all, as
he is the best speaker of all.

He that has got the grace of God in truth, may ac^oun^ himself by much the
happiest man of all.

Solomon was far the wisest man of all, that lived before him.

He is most honorable for age, that is eldest for birth.

DATIVUS.
Adjectiva quibus commodum, incommodum, similitudo, dissimilitudo, voluptas,
submissio, aut relatio ad aliquid significatur, in Dativum transeunt: ut, Virg.
Sis bonus O felixque tuis. Mart. Turba gravis paci, placidaque inimica quieti.
Est fi^itimus oratori poeta. Ovid. Qui coloralbus erat, nunc est contrarius
albo. Mart. Jucundus amicis. Omnibus supplex. Hor. Si facis ut patriae sit
idoneus, utilis agro.

Adjectives that betoken profit or disprofit, likeness or unlikeness, pleasure,
submitting, or belonging to any thing, require a Dative Case: as, Labor est
utilis corpori, Labor is profitable to the body. Aequalis Hectori, Equal to
Hector. Idoneus bello, Fit for war. Jucundus omnibus, Pleasant to all persons.
Parenti supplex, Suppliant to his father. Mihi proprium, Proper to me.

A Heathen is good [bonus] to his friend^, a Christian to his enemies.

That Land will be very profitable [foelix] to the owner of it, that is fat,
and w^ll tilled.

I would say more, but that I fear I should be burdensome [gravis] to you.

It is grievous [gravis] to a modest person to a^k any great matter of one,
whom he may think himself to have deserved well of.

An evil man is a friend to none, and an enemy [inimicus] to himself.

Vomitings are hurtful [inimicus] to the eyes and teeth.

Falsehoods are many times like [finitimus] to truths.

The Scots are borderers [finitimus] on the English.

Cowardice is contrary [contrarius] unto couragiousness, and justice to
injustice.

Your affection toward me is pleasant [jucundus] to me in troubles, and
grateful in sorrow.

It becomes a Master to b^ courteous to his Scholar, and a Scholar to be
suppliant [supplex] to his Master.

That new built house is meet [idoneus] for an Inn.

A weak Stripling is not fit [idoneus] for War.

It can never be profitable [utilis] to any one to sin, because it is always
filthy.

My meat is equal [aequalis] to my hunger, and my drink to my thi^st.

Change is proper [proprius] to chance, and variety to fortune.

To be told of his faults in a friendly manner, is a thing very pleasant
[gratus] to a good man.

By the rule of Justice punishment should be equal [par] to the fault.

It is very conducible unto health, that the meat be fit [aptus] for the
stomach.

One good man loves to have another neighboring to him.

When Hector died, he denounced death to be near [propinquus] to Achilles.

You have never a body nearer [propior] to you, than my self am.

Morning and evening are convenient [opportunus] times for prayer.

Youth is an age most fit [opportunus] for honest labor, and profitable
studies.

Some men are very unlike [dispar] others in their judgment and behavior.

He is an evil man that is profitable [commodus] to none but himself.

A good child will be gentle [commodus] to his School-fellows.

An unprofitable [inutilis] member to the Commonwealth is fitter to be cut off,
than continued.

I shall be very glad to have you come to my house to morrow, if it be not
troublesome [incommodus] to you.

He is unlike [dissimilis] to his father in every thing.

Huc referuntur nomina ex con Praepositione composita: ut contubernalis,
commilito, conservus, cognatus, etc.

He reported he was Chamber-fellow [contubernalis] to him in the time of his
Consulship.

That man was Comrade [commilito] to my Grandfather in the time of the ^panish
War.

F^llow-servants [conservus] to the same Lord should be kind each to other.

I love you much because you are of kin [cognatus] to me: but more because you
delight in that which is good.

He that is conscious [conscius] to himself to have done no evil in his life,
cannot but have great comfort in his soul at his death.

Neither put another upon evil doing, nor if you can shun it, be privy
[conscius] to anies evil deed

Be courteous [concinnus] to your friends, gentle to your enemies, and just to
all.

The French are borderers [confinis] upon both the Germans, the Spaniards, and
the Italians.

The tops of the houses, and Steeples of the Churches are conspicuous
[conspicuus] to the fight of any one a great way off.

Your house, I think, is contiguous [contiguus] to the Theater.

A people that are flubborn [contumax] to their King may justly fear the
displeasure of their God.

When ever you go about any weighty matter, take a time that is convenient for
it.

Quaedam ex his, quae fimilitudinem significant etiam Genitivo gaudent: ut,
Lucan. Quem metuis par hujus erat. Ter. Patres aequum esse censent, nos jam jam
a pueris illico nasci senes, neque illarum affines esse rerum, quas fe^^
adolescentia. Id. Domini similis es. Auson. Men's conscia recti. Virg. Praeterea
regina tui fidissima dextra, Occidit ipsa sua.

Hugo Grot^us was a man like [par] whom this last Age has produced few

There is hardly any one so good, but one time or other his like [par] may be
met withal.

It is a gallant thing when a young man that is well descended, is like
[similis] his Ancestors in virtue and honor.

If you would live a quiet life, be careful so to carry your self, that you
neither be guilty [affinis] of any crime, nor of any suspicion.

It is fit that those that have spent many years in virtuous exercises, should
be partakers [affinis] of these honors, which age bestows.

A wicked man is as much unlike [dissimilis] God, as he is like [similis] the
Devil.

He can never be truly valiant, who is conscious [conscius] of foul crimes
committed by himself.

Thoroughout our whole life both God our Judge, and the Devil our Accuser, are
privy [conscius] to our actions.

It was a great grief to that good Old man to bury a wife, that had been most
faithful [fidus] to him all her days.

It is well, when the mind is simple, and has no mixed thing in it, that is
odd [dispar] and unlike.

Vices are the contraries [contrarius] of virtues.

I do not love that any, who is but my equal [aequalis] in age, should be above
me in learning.

A searching out of the truth is proper [proprius] to man.

It is proper [proprius] to living Creatures to have a desire to something.

Communis, alienus, immunis, variis casibus serviunt: ut, Cic. Communis
animantium omnium est conjunctionis appetitus procreandi causa. Mors omnibus
communis. Hoc mihi tecum commune est. Sall. Non aliena consilii. Sen. Alienus
ambitioni. Cic. Non alienus a Scaevolae studiis. Ovid. Vobis immunibus hujus
Esse mali dabitur. Plin. Caprificus omnibus immunis est. Immunes ab illis malis
sumus.

Communis.

Genesis It is common to all Republiques to defend their Liberties with their
lives and fortunes.

Dat. Universal experience shows, that death is common to every age.

Ablat. Many times that which one Art professes, is common with another Art.

Dat. and Ablat To move and breathe, to sleep and wake, to laugh and cry, to
hunger and thi^st, to live and die, these things are common to rich with poor.

To mistake, to slip, to be deceived, is common to a wise man with other men.

Accus and Prep. No one person should usurp to himself that, which his
neighbors have common among them.

Alienus.

For a Gentleman to be drunk, is disagreeing with his dignity: and for a
Clergie-man to be idle, is disagreeing with his duty.

For a Tailor, a Cobbler, or a Weaver to turn Preacher is not agreeing with his
Profession.

For persons troubled with the Gout it is noisome to ride.

To write of Mathematics is not agreeable with the Art of Grammar.

I admired you should believe any thing had been done by me, which was
unagreeable with our friendship

With a man that is disaffected from me, my Letters will do no good.

Not Kings should think it unbecoming their Majesty to serve the Lord Christ.

Immunis.

Neither should servants think themselves free from labors, nor Scholars from
studies.

He that is not exempt from instruction is not exempt from correction.

Free from faults, free from punishments.

It is a great matter to be free from warfare: for he that is free from war, is
free from fear.

Pious persons are free from those inward torments of mind, which wicked ones
are tormented withal.

Natus, commodus, incommodus, utilis, inutilis, vehemens, aptus, etiam
Accusativo cum Praepositione adjunguntur: ut, Cic. Natus al gloriam.

Man is born to labor, as the sparks fly upwards.

He is born to his own sorrow, that is born to the destruction of others.

If you intend to give a reproof to any one, it will be wisdom to take a time
convenient for it.

A garment convenient to run in, may be inconvenient to ride in.

It is a sad thing for a man to live in this world, and be good for nothing.

I have bought wood hardly good for any thing, but Wheel-spokes.

Many things are through ignorance cast away, which yet are not unuseful for
meat or medicine.

Not the meanest things that God made, are unprofitable for the uses of men.

A dutiful son will never give his father very great [vehemens] cause to chide.

He that is sensible of his own failings, will not be vehement against others
that fail.

He that brings up a child should beforehand consider, what he will be most
fit for afterward.

It is convenient that he that is apt to learning, should be brought up a
Scholar: and that he that is unapt to it, should be put to a Mechanic Trade.

Verbalia in bilis accepta passive, ut and Participia, seu potius Participialia
in dus, Dativo adjecto gaudent: ut, Mart. O mihi post nullos Juli memorande
sodales. Stat. -- nulli penetrabilis astro Lucus erat.

Likewise Nouns Adjectives of the Passive signification in bilis, and
Participials in dus: as, Flebilis [flendus] omnibus, To be lamented of all men.
Formidabilis [formidandus] hosti, To be feared of his enemies.

Love is a disease that is healable with no herbs.

Inward wounds made in the mind, are not curable by outward Salves applied to
the body.

The Armor of Achilles was so strong, as to be penetrable with no weapon.

All will be to be feared by him, who will be to be feared by all.

God, as being a pure being, is to be worshipped by man with a pure mind.

An offended father is with all submissiveness to be entreated by an offending
son.

ACCUSATIVUS.
Magnitudinis mensura subjicitur Adjectivis in Accusativo: ut, Gnomon septem
pedes longus, umbram non amplius quatuor pedes longam reddit.

The measure of length, breadth, or thickness of any thing, is put after
Adjectives in the Accusative Case: as, Turris al^a centum pedes, A Tower an
hundred foot high. A^bor lata tres digitos, A Tree three fingers broad. Liber
crassus tres pollices, A Book three inches thick.

It is rare to see a Fir plank, that is twelve yards long, ten foot broad, and
eight inches thick.

Those are stately Walks indeed, which are two hundred and fifty paces long,
and twelve apiece wide.

A Wall that is an hundred foot high, and thirty foot thick, will defend a Town
well.

This Accusative is said to be governed of the Preposition ad.

Interdum and in Ablativo: ut, Columel. Fons latus pedibus tribus, altus
triginta.

And sometimes in the Ablative Case: as, Liber crassus tribus pollicibus, A
book three inches thick.

A River six foot deep i^ not easy to be passed by Footmen, unless they swim.

It is hard to run a course eight furlongs long with full speed, and not slack
ones pace before he come to the end of it.

I have seen many a thick Tree, yet never saw I yet one that was three ell^
thick.

He sits upon a foursquare stone that is twelve inches long, and twelve inches
broach, and twelve inches thick.

This Ablative is said to be governed of Ad.

Interdum and in Genitivo: ut, Colum. In m^rem horti are as latas pedum denum,
longas pedum quinqu agenum facito.

The Court of the Kings house was two hundred foot wide, and three hundred foot
long.

That must needs be a strong Ship, which is made of plank^ six and thirty
inches broad, and twelve inches thick.

He dwells in a f^^e house, seated on an Hill an hundred yards high, with a
Well in it, which is fifty fathom deep.

This Genitive is said to be governed of longitudine, latitudine, or
profunditate understood.

ABLATIVUS.
Adjectiva, quae ad copiam egestatemve pertinent, interdum Ablativo, interdum
and Genitivo gaudent: ut, Plaut. Amor and melle, and fell est foecundissimus.
Horat. Dives agris, dives positis in foenore nummis. Virg. At fessae multa
referunt se nocte minores, Crura thymo plenae. Id. Quae regio in terris nostri
non plena laboris? Id. Dives opum, dives pictai vestis and auri. Pers. O curvae
in terras animae, and coelestium inanes! Expers fraudis. Gratia beatus.

Adjectives signifying fullness, emptiness, plenty, or wanting, require an
Ablative Case, and sometimes a Genitive: as, Copiis abundans. Crura thymo
plena. Vacuus ira [irae, ab ira] Nulla epistola inanis re aliqua. Ditissimus
agri. Stultorum plena sunt omnia. Quis nisi mentis inops oblatum respuat aurum?
Integer vitae, scelerisque purus Non eget Mauri jaculis nec arcu Expers omnium
corpus inane animae.

Ablative.

A City naked [nudus] of Garrison, is easily taken.

No Castle is impregnable, whose gates a Mule laden [onustus] with gold may
enter.

When the belly is laden [gravis] with meat, the brain does not use to be
quick of conceit.

Great care is to be taken, that no hurt be done to a woman big with child
[gravidus].

It is good living in a Country fruitful [coerus] of corn, and necessary
provisions for man's life.

It is no pleasant walking abroad, when the fields are destitute [viduus] of
corn, the pastures of cattle, and the trees of leaves.

A Maid that is wanting [cassus] of Dowry, should not be despised, if she be
endued with virtue.

In a plentiful [locuples] year of corn provision should be laid up against a
dear year.

Their bodies are seldom healthful, who have bellies stronting out [distentus]
with meat.

Genitive.

I should always wish to be poor [pauper] of those goods, which make the owner
of them unhappy.

He that can live of a little, will not be much needful [indigus] of the help
of another.

It matters not much if a man be lacking [egenus] of goods, so he be not
lacking of grace.

A Soul that is pure [purus] from sin, is a Spouse meet for her Savior.

He that is much given to [benignus] wine and sleep, shall hardly have much
either of wealth or health.

France being a Country fruitful [fertilis] of men and corn, is the better able
to raise and maintain an Army for the Wars.

Be not prodigal [prodigus] either of thy money or blood: yet spend both freely
upon good occasion, for God and for thy Country.

He that lives at Court, and is wanting [inops] in friends, had need have his
purse be full of money.

Happy is he that lives free [expers] from all fear: but happier he that lives
free from all sin.

He that is liberal [l^rgus] of promising, should be just in performing.

Genitive and Ablative.

Genesis In times of war all places are full [plenus] of fear; but the safest is a
City full of warlike provisions.

Ablat. A good man will be full [plenus] of good works, and not full of good
words only.

Genesis He that is rich [dives] only in goods, and not rich in grace too, i^ but
a poor man for all his wealth.

Ablat. A man sometimes is rich [dives] in land and cattle, and yet poor enough
in money for all that.

Genesis Men, that are full [satur] of all good things, should not forget to bless
God the giver of all goodness.

Accus. When the belly is full [satur] of drink, then the brain is empty of wit.

Genesis It is no poor Country that is full [soecundus] of corn and cattle.

Accus. Where the fields are full [soecundus] of flowers, and the Orchards are
full of fruits, there the Be hives will be full of honey and wax.

Genesis It is but a little time, which a Schoolmaster has that is void [vacuus]
of labor.

Accus. They are deceived, that think in this world to lead their lives void of
[care].

Genesis He whose head is empty [inanis] of wit, and heart of courage, will never
make either good Scholar, or good Soldier.

Accus. Who can delight ^o read a play that is void [inanis] both of ^rit and
language.

Genesis He that is destitute [orbus] of help of man, has yet the help of God to
betake himself to.

Accus. In a sad case is a mother bereft [orbus] of her children: but in a
sadder are children bereft of their mother.

Genesis It can hardly be that he that lives a Country life, should be free
[liber] from labors, or he that lives a City life should be free from
temptations.

Accus. Happy is he, who free [liber] from worldly care and fear enjoys in
private the society of God.

Genesis When the Land is full [refertus] of Robbers, and the Sea of Pirates, there
is no safe living either by Sea or Land.

Accus. When a Scholar writes a letter to his father, he should see that it be
full [refertus] of all civility and respect.

Some of these have after them an Ablative and his Preposition: as, Ab omni
perturbatione liber. Ci^^ A suspicione vacuus. Cic. Respublica nuda a
Magistratibus. Cic. Inops ab amicis. Cic. Vsque eo orba fuit ab Optimatibus
illa concio, ut -- Cic. Purus ab humano cultu locus. Live.

Nomina diversitatis Ablativum sibi cum Praepositione optant; ut, Virg. Alter
ab illo. Aliud ab hoc. Diversus ab isto.

A man that is truly converted, becomes another man [alter] from what he was
before.

I am another man [alter] from what I was the other day, had you seen me then.

This is quite another thing [alius] from what you said even now.

A good man will not speak a thing that is other from what he thinks.

Epicurus is wholly different [diversus] from Aristotle: the one placed
happiness in pleasure, the other in virtue.

He had need be upon good ground, who propounds an opinion differing [diversus]
from all that have been held before.

Nonnunquam etiam Dativum; ut, Huic diversum.

Nothing in the world is so unlike [diversus] Lysias, as Isocrates: the one
uses few ornaments of speech, the other many.

This is as much differing [diversus] from that, as black is from white.

A good man is much different [diversus] from a bad man in his work now; and he
shall be as much different from him in his reward hereafter: the one shall be
saved, and the other damned.

Adjectiva regunt Ablativum significantem causam: ut, Pallidus ira* Incurvus
senectute. Livida armis brachia. Trepidus morte futura.

He that is hot with labor, should take heed of drinking cold Beer, and of
going into cold water.

Scholars are often weary with study: but seldom weary with play.

Have a care of a man that is red with anger, or pale with envy: the one will
mischieve you suddenly, the other secretly.

Live a good life: and you will be so far from being amated at, that you will
be joyful for approaching death.

It is good being on land, when the Sea is rough with storms.

He deserves to be beaten, till he be black with blows, that, do you what you
can, with fair words, will still be nasty with sloth.

He is to be pitied, not scoffed at, that is weak with age, and deformed with
sickness, or lame with diseases.

Be not proud either of wealth or honor: for you know not how soon you may
fall into poverty and disgrace.

Forma vel Modus rei adjicitur nominibus in Ablativo: ut, Facies miris modis
pallida. Nomine Grammaticus, re barharus. Cic. Sum tibi natura parens,
praeceptor consiliis, Virg. -- Trojanus origin Caesar. Spe dives, repauper.
Syrus natione.

Though you be comely with black eyes, and black hair, yet be not proud of your
beauty: for nothing is more fading than that.

Many times he that is wise in words, is foolish in deeds.

A Christian for profession, should not be a Heathen for conversation.

He that is a Gentleman by birth, should not be a Clown in behavior.

To be cleanly in your apparel, and neat in your trimming, will be no discredit
to you.

To whom you are a father by nature, be a father to him also for advice.

If you be famous any way, have a care to be infamous no way: for more will
attend to your disgrace, than to your honor.

Though he be a Scotch man for Country, and a French man for breeding, yet he
is an English man for honesty.

Many times he that is rich for goods, is poor for grace.

These Ablatives of the Cause and Manner are said to be governed of some
Preposition understood. For Ter. has Laetus de amica; and Cic. Fessus de via.

Dignus, indignus, praeditus, captus, contentus, extorris auferendi casum
adjectum volunt: ut, Terent. Dignus es odio. Qui filium haberem tali ingenio
praeditum. Virgil. Atque oculis capti fodere cubilia talpae. Id. Sort tua
contentus abi.

These Adjectives dignus, indignus, praeditus, captus, contentus, with such
others will have an Ablative Case: as, Dignus honor. Captus oculis. Virtute
praeditus. Paucis contentus. Profugus patria sua Cinna confugit ad parts.
Flor. Hujus consilio fretus. Ter. Qui te indignum aedilitate judicaverunt. Cic.

He that challenges the honor of his Ancestors, should so carry himself, as to
be worthy the name of his Ancestors.

A good work is worthy of a good reward: and God will give to every one at the
last day that reward, whereof his work is worthy.

He is unworthy of a kindness to be done for him, who has not been grateful
for a kindness already done him.

A Gentleman should be careful to do nothing, that is unworthy of his name and
dignity.

It is pity but he that is endued with virtue, should be graced with honor.

It is not fit that manendued with a heavenly soul, should wholly implunge
himself into earthly concerns.

It is fit that he who is taken lame [captus] of his hands, so that he cannot
work for himself, should be provided for by others.

He that cannot advise himself, is like one that is taken blind: and he that
will not be advised by others, is like one that is taken deaf.

A child taken with the love of learning will do, or suffer any thing for the
obtaining of it.

He is never happy, how much soever he has, that i^ not content [contentus]
with what he has.

He that can be content with a little, will live happy, though he never p^ssess
much.

To be content with ones own estate, is the greatest and most assured riches.

A wise man is always at home, even when banished [extorris] his own Country:
because to him all the world is but one City, and every place in it his house.

It is no great matter to be banished an earthly Kingdom, so one be not
banished the Kingdom of Heaven.

Sad are those times, which yet both have been, and may be again, when good men
flying [profugus] their own Country, shall betake themselves for safety unto
strangers.

One had better live banished from his own Country, with a good conscience, than
continue a Citizen in it, with an evil conscience.

He dies safe, that dies relying on the mercy of God, rather than trusting to
his own merits.

One had need be well assured of his wisdom and integrity, on whose counsel and
authority he relies in any matter of great moment.

The Ablatives after these Adjectives are supposed to be governed of a
Preposition understood, because after some of them there is one expressed: as,
Libenter a domino agresti ac furi so profugi. Cic. Exul atque extorris ab solo
patrio. Live.

Horum nonnulla Genitivum interdum vendicant: ut, Ovid. Militia est operis
altera digna tui. Virg. Descendam magnorum haud quaquam ind^gnus avorum.

An honorable person should entertain no thoughts in his mind, bu^ such as are
worthy of his honor.

That Prince is worthy of the succession of his Fathers Kingdom, who is the
Heir of his Fathers Virtue, as well as of his Crown.

He is unworthy of his Ancestors, who does not propagate their Honor and
Estate, as well as name and family, unto posterity.

He is unworthy of his place, who does not as well discharge the duties, as
enjoy the profits of it.

They say this Construction is Elliptical: the Genitive being governed, not of
the Adjective expressed, but of a Substantive understood.

Where note, that dignus, indignus, and contentus, may instead of the Ablative
Case have an Infinitive Mood of a Verb: as, Dignus laudari, Worthy to be
praised. Contentus in pace vivere, Content to live in peace.

He is worthy to be commended, that does things worthy of commendation.

He is worthy to be believed, that speaks true, when it might be for his
advantage to lie.

He that loves, is worthy to be beloved.

He is unworthy to live, that by evil living dishonours that God that gave him
life.

He is unworthy to receive new gifts, who has not been thankful for the gifts
he formerly received.

He is unworthy to be believed, when he speaks true who, when he should have
spoken truth, told a lie.

A good man is contented either to depart this world, or to stay in it, at the
pleasure of God.

He that has done things worthy of reproof and punishment, should he content
to be reproved and punished.

Be content to do, and suffer the will of God, whatsoever he will have thee to
do, and suffer.

I might perhaps have enricht these Rules of Grammar with more Examples, and
illustrated them with Critical Annotations: but I have forborne, partly because
I would not overcharge this Work with extraneous matter, and partly because it
is not impossible but I may, though it be very improbable that I shall, live to
do, what might be desired of that nature in a peculiar Work. Haec hactenus.

Now when the Teacher discerns his Scholar by this Practice to be any thing
perfect at understanding and finding out the Natural Order of words; and that
he can make a piece of ordinary English into plain and true Latin in that way,
then let him put him forward to make his Latin good, as well as true. Now that
will be done by teaching him some competency of skill in these Five things,
viz. (1) The Artificial Order of Words. (2) The Use of Phrases. (3) The
Variation of Phrases. (4) The Elegancies of the Particles. (5) The Idioms of
both the Languages English and Latin. Of all which I shall speak something in
Order.

CHAP. V. Of the Artificial Order and Elegant placing of Words.
THE Artificial Ordering and Elegant placing of Words conduces very much to
the mating of Latin Good. To evince this, if there were need, it might suffice
to say, that of the very same words, according to the different Placing of
them, may be made Latin very Elegant, or very Unelegant. For instance, the
words Rogo, ut venias ad me, will be very Elegant, if placed thus, Rogo, ut ad
me venias; or thus, Ad me, ut venias, rogo; or thus, Ut ad me venias, rogo; or
thus, Ad me, rogo, ut venias. But very Unelegant, if placed thus: Rogo ut me
venias ad; or Rogo ad me venias ut; or Rogo me venias ut ad; or Rogo me venias
ad ut; or thus, Ut me venias, rogo ad; or Ut venias me rogo ad: or indeed
almost, if not altogether, any other way. That the Learner therefore may have
some skill in that Art, let the Teacher give him some Rules. And when he has
made his English into plain true Latin, according to the Natural Order, let
him then according to his Rules, transpose and place it in the Artificial
Order; and when he has done, show it to his Master: who is to show him where
he fails; and to amend what he mistakes in: and this done, let him again
transcribe it into his fair Book, and then commit it to memory, as before.

For the Ease of the Teacher, and Use of the Learner, I shall here set down a
Collection of Rules for Artificial Ordering and Elegant Placing of Words.

Rules of Placing Words.
And first of the Parts of a Compounded Word. The Parts of a Compounded Word
may be Elegantly divided by some other Word coming betwixt the Parts, as Rem
vero publicam amisimus. Cic. De juris quoque Consultis Suet. Quod judicium
cunque. Cic. Me certe in omnibus rerum satis nostraeque conjunctioni amorique
facturum -- Cic. Prius inquit quam hoc circulo excedas. Val. Max. Coturnices
ante veniunt quam grues. Plin Cum multis annis post peti^ssem, quam Praetores
fuissent. Cic.


Secondly of Words in a Sentence.
1. First, The Words that go together in the Natural Order, are parted asunder
in the Order Artificial, and the Gov^rned come before those that govern; viz.
the Oblique Cases in the beginning, the Verb in the end, and the Nominative
Case in the middle betwixt both, as

Muni^issimam hostium civitatem Caesar occupavit.

Petulanti bonos lingua consectari desine.

2. Secondly, The Substantive of the Genitive Case is elegantly set before the
Substantive that governs it, as

Immortatitatis amore flagravit. Cic.

Cum ipsius victoriae condition jure omnes victi occidissemus, clementiae tuae
judicio conservati sumus Cic.

3. Thirdly, The Adjective is usually set before the Substantive, as

Ampla domus dedecori domino saepe fit. Cic.

Tenacissimi sumus eorum, quae rudibus annis percepimus. Quintil.

Exceptions.

Yet several sorts of Adjectives are sometimes elegantly set after their
Substantives.

(1.) Partitives; as omnis and nullus.

Virtutis law omnis in action consistit. Cic.

Ut ad te ^cribendi meo arbitratu facultas nulla detur. Cic.

Majus mihi dare beneficium nullum potes. Cic.

So Nemo

At vero hujus gloriae, C. Caesar, quam es pa^lo ante adeptus, socium habes
nominem. Cic.

(2.) Numerals, as

Dies c^rciter quindecim iter secerunt. Caes.

Ad hominum millia december undique coegit. Caes.

Omnes omnium charitates patria una complexa est. Cic.

(3) Comparatives and Superlatives, especially in the end of a Sentence, where
they many times stand very gracefully: as,

Nihil illo regno spoliatius, nihil rege egentius. Cic.

Imperatorem liberalissimum, atatem opportunissimam, commendationem certe
singularem habes. Cic.

(4.) Pronominals, as Ardeo cupiditate incredibili, neque ut ego arbitro^
reprehendenda, nomen ut nostrum scriptis illustretut and celebretur tuis. Cic.

Sunt ingeniis nostris semina innata virtutum. Cic.

(5.) Adjectives of two Syllables, if their Substantives be of more Syllables;
as,

Quis animo aequo videt eum, quem impure ac flagitiose putet vivere? Cic.

Quae res habet inflationem magnam. Cic.

4. Fourthly, Betwixt the Adjective and the Substantive several things are
elegantly inserted.

(1.) If the Substantive and Adjective be of the Genitive Case, then the former
Substantive will come elegantly between them: as,

Quid credas aliud, quam divinae partem mentis his inesse? Quint. de Apib.

Caesareae clementia Majestatls pacem and tranquillitatem Provinciis dedit.

Philosophia omnium matter Artium -- Cic.

(2.) If the Substantive and Adjective be not of the Genitive Case, then the
Substantive of the Genitive Case will come elegantly betwixt them: as,

Haec est vera justitiae laus --

Ob inclytam viri religionem. Flor.

(3.) If the Substantive be governed of any Preposition, the Preposition will
come elegantly between the Substantive and the Adjective: as,

Certa de causa nondum adducor ut faciam. Cic.

Hoc assequere, ut quam in partem accipias minus laborem. Cic.

Quam ob rem venerim, dicam. Plaut.

(4.) If the Substantive be not governed of any Preposition, yet a Preposition
with his Casual word may elegantly come between the Adjective and his
Substantive: as,

Casta ad vi^^m matrona parendo imperat. Publ.

(5.) Between the Adjective and the Substantive, may elegantly be set not only
Nouns, and Prepositions alone, or with their Cases; but single words of any
sort almost: as,

Pronoun. Quamcunque ei fidem dederis, praestabo. Cic.

Ego post supplicationes mihi decretas in Dalmatiam profectus sum. Cic.
Subcisiva quaedam tempora incurrunt, quae ego perire non patior. Cic.

Verb. Hoc affirmo, and hoc pace dicam tua. Cic.

Adverb. Maximam vero partem quasi suo jure fortuna sibi vendicat. Cic.

Neque ullo unquam aetas de tuis laudibus conticesset. Cic.

Yea Clauses: as, Magnum profecto^ laborem Caesar assumpsit, quem ferme ab
ipsis ad nos venisse Gadibus aiunt, ut hosts suae quidem Majestati rebels,
nostrk autem supra modum rebus infestos armis subigeret. Quam ob causam
perpetuum illi amorem and gratiaus debemus immortalem.

Note. If any thing come between the Substantive and the Adjective, then may
either indifferently be set before other.

5. Fifthly, The Relative qui is elegantly set before the expressed
Substantive, to which it refers, especially if any other words come between: as,

Quem cum isto sermonem habueris, procul stan^ accepi.

Propter eum, quem sibi ipse finxerat, principatum. Cic.

Note. If qui in one clause of a Sentence answer to hic, is, or idem in another
clause; that clause in which qui is, will very elegantly come first.

Qu^m puerum vidisti formosum, hunc vide^ deformem in senecta. Varro.

Qui semel verecundiae fines transi^^ it; eum been and na^iter oportet esse
impudentem. Cic.

Qui dolet rebus alicujus adversis, idem alicujus etiam secundis dolet. Cic.

6. S^xthly, A Pronoun Primitive comes elegantly between a Pronoun Possessive,
and the Substantive that it agrees with: as,

Familiaritas mihi tua non injucunda ^st.

Tuo tibi judicio est utendum. Cic.

Gravi test privatus sum amoris summi erga te mei. Cic.

7. Seventhly, The Pronoun ipse being to be set after any Pronoun Primitive in
an Oblique Case, may elegantly come either before, or after it, in the
Nominative Case: as,

Qui ipse sibi sapiens prodesse nequit, nequicquam sapit. Cic.

Odi sapientem qui sibi ipse sapiens non est. Cic.

Haec scripsi; non ut de me ipse dicerem, sed ut -- Cic.

Non egeo medicina, me ipse consolor. Cic.

Tibi unum timendum sit, ne ipse tibi defuisse vide^re. Cic.

Qui me violare volent, se ipsi judicabunt. Cic.

8 Eighthly, Prepositions mostly come before their Casual words: as,

Illa p^aesidia, quae pro templis omnibus cernitis. Cic.

Qua in vita tantum abest ut voluptates sectentur, etiam curas, sollicitudines,
vigilias perferunt. Cic.

Ego ipsi, quod de sua sententia decesserit, poenitendum puto. Cic.

Accepi a te literas, quibus videris vereri, ut epistolas illas acceperim. Cic.

Yet some Prepositions are not unelegantly set after their Case, not only in
Poets, but in Orators; as,

Neminem posse dare alteri matrimonium, nisi quem penes sit patrimonium.
Quintil.

Cordi mihi fuit, priusquam ad te irem, quaerere explorareque, quonam modo
veteres nostri particula ista, qua de agitur, usi sunt. A Gell.

Quos adversum multi ex Bithynia volentes occurrere falsum filium arguituri --
Sal.

Quae si quis inter societas aut est, aut fuit, aut futura est, eorum est
habendus ad summum naturae bonum optimus beatissimusque comitatus. Cic.

Consequeris tamen, ut eos ipsos, quos contra statuas aequos placatosque
dimittas. Cic.

Perturbari animos necesse esse dicunt, sed adhibent modum, quem ultra progredi
non oporteat. Cic.

Quem locum Aegyptum versus finem imperii habuere Carthaginienses. Sal.

Postulavit ut aliquem populus daret, quicum communicaret. Cic.

Qu. Suffidium, quocum mihi omnes necessitudines sunt, diligentius commendo.
Cic.

Note. Cum is always set after me, te, se, nobis, and Vid. Eng. Partic. c. 100.
r. 7. n.
vobis; and tenus after his Casual word.

And between the Preposition and his Case may other words be elegantly set,
especially the Genitive Case governed of that Substantive, which the
Preposition comes before: as,

Per ego te Deos oro, ut ne illis animum inducas credere. Ter.

Ex animi sententia. Ter.

Pro rerum magnitudine. Cic.

9. Ninthly, Betwixt the Participle and that Person of the Verb Sum, whereof
the Preterperfect Tense of a Verb Passive or Deponent is made up; there may
some word be elegantly placed: as,

Diu sum equidem reluctatus.

Decretum a Senatu est.

Hujus gloriae, quam es paulo ante adeptus, socium habes neminem. Cic.

10. Tenthly, The Vocative Case; the Verbs inquit and ait, and the Particles
enim and autem, have usually something placed in the beginning of a Sentence
before them: as,

Quanquam te Marce fili, annum jam audientem Cratippum, idque Athenis -- Cic.

Ennio delector, ait, -- Cic.

Quam inquit, vellem nescire literas. Suet. Ner. c. 10.

Nec enim is es quem forma ista declarat. Cic.

Inanimatum est enim omne, quod impulsu agitur externo. Cic.

Erat autem difficile rem tantam inchoatam relinquere. Cic.

In quo autem desiderare te significabis. Cic.

11. Eleventhly, Words of Near and of Contrary signification, are elegantly
placed together in a Sentence: as,

Eveniunt digna dignis. Sal.

Doctus indocto quid praestat? quod caeco videns. Plaut.

Casta ad virum matrona parendo imperat. Publ.

12. Twelfthly, In a Contexture of things related each to other what is the
more worthy, or before the other in nature, is elegantly placed foremost in
order: as,

Mors in claris viris and foeminis dux in coelum solet esse. Cic.

Dies, noctesque torqueor. Cic. Tu, si dies noctesque memineris. Cic. Fam. 11.
5.

13. Thirteenthly, In extenuating, the more weighty things ought to go before,
in aggravating, to follow the less or lighter; as, Civem Romanum vincire,
verberare, in crucem tollere.

Nulla crux ibi fuit, nulla nex, nulla verberatio, imo ne custodia quidem.

14. Fourteenthly, In the placing of words, avoid all such setting of them, as
may beget Obscurity, Ambiguity, or Ill sound.

(1.) Obscurity, as in that Sentence.

Fuit in hac virtus ista quondam republica, for

Fuit ista quondam in hac republica virtus. Cic.

(2.) Ambiguity; as in those Da temetum: which Ambiguity; as in those Date
metum: which because they may be mistaken either for other; therefore it is
better to say Temetum da; or Metum date. So rather say Atria summa, than Summa
atria, because this last way the words may be mistaken for Summa tria, or
Sumatria, an Isle. Rather say Scivine ego, than egone scivi: because this last
may be mistaken for ego nescivi.

(3.) Ill sound either --

1. By the meeting together of many either Vowels; as, Postea eo itum est, for
which rather say eo post itum est: or harsh Consonants; as, Ingens strepitus;
for which rather say strepitus ingens. So, Si puer ingenio eo esset: for which
rather say eo si puer esset ingenio, quo esse dicitur, etc.

2. By the coming together of many either Monosyllables; as, Collocutus sum cum
illo; for which rather say Collocutus cum illo sum Or words of many syllables
of like sound, as Harum scribendarum literarum occasio haec est; for which
rather say, Hurum scribendi literarum haec occasio est.

A prudent intermixture of words long and short, of like and of different
sound, beginning and ending interchangeably with Vowels and Consonants, is the
one remedy of these faults.

The greatest care for the well running of words, is to be liad in the
beginning and end, especially in the four or five last Syllables.

Those Sentences are thought to be closed sweetly, that end in words of like
Syllables with these; videatur; cariorem; parabat; tuum: Coepisse; tribueretur;
miserim; conservassem; or any Tense of Sum after a Participle of the Praeter
Tense, or Future in dus.

But in these things liberty is very great, all things being to be measured by
the ear; in the judgment of which, if a Sentence sound well, it matters not
much what Syllables it consists of.

Thirdly of Clauses in a Period.
As Words and Phrases in a simple Sentence, so the several Clauses of a
compounded Sentence, may be placed with more or less Elegancy: touching which
the only Rule is, That the more frequent the Transposition is, the more Elegant
is the Sentence, so no disorder or obscurity follow thereon: as for Example.

Nihil allatum est, ne rumoris quidem.
Nihil, ne rumoris quidem allatum est.
Si a nobis deficis, moleste fero.
Moleste fero, si a nobis deficis.
Moleste, si a nobis deficis, fero.
Rogo, ut ad me venias.
Vt ad the venias, rogo.
Ad me ut venias, rogo.
Ad me, rogo, ut venias.
Gratum est mihi. quod ad me scribis.
Quod ad me scribis, gratum mihi est.
Mihi, quod ad me scribis, gratum est.
The main thing here to be avoided is the Hyperbaton, or confused intermixture
of Words, belonging to one clause with the words that belong to another, which
either alters the Sense, or renders the Sentence extremely difficult: as if one
should say

Quem cum isto sermonem audivi, habuisti; for
Quem cum isto habuisti sermonem, audivi.
Is amicior mihi vivit, atque nullus est; for
Amicior mihi nullus vivit, atque i^ est; or
Nullus mihi amicior, atque is est, vivit.
Sunt oculos clari, qui cernis sydera tanquam: for
Cernis oculos, qui clari sunt tanquam sydera.
Pene macros arsit, dum turdos versat in igne; for
Pene arsit, dum macros in igne turdos versat.
And these few Rules or Observations may suffice to be instilled into a
Learner, till Time and Reading do perfect his Style. He that would see more
Observations of this Nature, may consult Mr. Brinstie's Gram. School, chapter 11.
Mr. Clark's Dux Grammaticus p. 267. and Formulae Oratoriae page 335. Edit. anno
1659. Horn de Vsu Authoris, p. 89.
But especially Butchler's Elegancies; Franciscus Sylvius's Progymnasmata; and
Comenius*s Ars Ornatoria, sive Grammatica Elegans, especially chapter 4. The
perusal of which Books cannot but be hugely improving to any mgemous Learner,
as contaning in them a world of the choicest and most elegant passages, that
are to be sound in the best extant Authors, brought as instances of their
Observations and Examples of their Rules. And thus much touching the Artificial
Ordering and Elegant Placing of Words in Sentences.

CHAP. VI. Of the Use of Phrases.
IF the Artifical Ordering of plain words conduce much to the making of the
Learner's Latin good, much more will a handsome contexture of Elegant R^man
Phrases, or Forms of speaking, used by the best and purest Writers of the
Latin Tongue. Of those therefore the Learner is to be exhorted to get into his
head what store his memory shall be able to bear; and to be taught how to use
them in his own Compositions. For the first of these, the getting of his Memory
well stored with Phrases, which is a work of some difficulty, requiring time,
and diligence, and observation, the Teacher may be pleased to put his Learner
upon some of these or the like practices: As first to have a fair Paper Book on
purpose to write down Latin Phrases and Elegant Forms of speaking in, as he
shall occasionally meet with them in his Lessons; and to write them daily down
therein; and give a weekly account of them without Book unto his Master Next to
make an Abstract of all the Forms of speaking, and Phrases contained in Godwins
Latin Antiquities, and to repeat them to the Master by heart three or four
times over, in parts, by ten, or twenty, or a greater number in a morning,
according as his capacity shall be; and then by double that number, and still
in larger proportion till all be well imprinted into the memory Where that they
may be the better retained, let the Learner thoroughly read and digest that
Book, till he be so well acquainted with the ground and rise of every Form or
Phrase, that he can read^ly upon hearing the Phrase, give the true account of
the rise and occasion thereof. After this to make an Abstract of all the Forms
and Phrases contained in that excellent little Book c^lled Hermes Anglo Latinus
where are so many excellent Forms and Phra^es as well nigh comprehend all the
Regular Constructions of Grammar, yea and the Figurative ones too: and let them
also in the same Method and manner be gotten by heart, and repeated. He may be
much improved also in this way by what may be found of this nature in my own
Treatises of English Particles and Idioms. Lastly, the Teacher may make an
Abstract of some one Phrase-book of best note and account (such as Winchester^
Phrases, Mr. Huises Phrases, or the like) taking only two or three of the best
Phrases of every Head, and give his Scholar that to transcribe and get by
heart. These Practices may be some present trouble to the doer: yet done for
once, they are done for always; and the benefit is such as will vastly
recompense the time and trouble. And because it is my design to save both the
Teacher and Learner all the time and labor that I can, therefore having two
such Abstracts out of Godwins A^tiquities, and Hermes Anglo Latinus as I spoke
of, lying by me many years ago made for my private use. I have thought good
here to communicate them. The Teacher may, I know, make much better of his own,
especially being that I had not one of the Books by me, to compare my old
Collection withal: but in the mean time he may be pleased to make use of these,
which I do the more earnestly recommend to use, in regard the One, besides the
many choice Phrases that it contains, gives a great insight into the Roman
Customs, especially if recourse be had occasionally unto the Author for the
understanding of the Phrases, and so may prove a successful key for the opening
of many difficulties in the best of Latin Authors, Cicero especially: The
Other, besides the many Elegant Idioms or Proprieties of English and Latin
that it comprehends, gives a good i^ let into the knowledge of the Ornate
Grammatical Construction, for the most, if not all, of whose Rules it furnishes
the Reader with very proper and pertinent Examples.

A Collection of Phrases out of Dr. Godwins Roman Antiquities.
Lib. 1.
Sect. 1. Chapter 1.
To build a new Town. To set out where the Walls of a Town should be.

Chap. 2. We fly to thee as to our only refuge.

C. 10. To keep the Assizes.

To appoint where Assizes shall be kept.

C. 15. Huge Books.

C. 17. An unconstant, unsettled mind.

Led horses, spare horses.

He is to be barred from giving his voice.

C. 18. From the beginning to the ending

C. 19 An ignoble Person; one of the Hinds.

To go into the Field; enter the Lists.

C. 20. To appoint where a Temple should be built. Lib. ^. Sect. 2.

Chap. 1. Vnfeig^edly; like a Roman; from the heart.

Free Denisons of Rome made such by cooptation.

To make free of Rome; of any City.

C. 2. Cursed to Hell.

Senators of Rome.

Senators of the Lower House; Members of the House of Commons.

C. 3. A Troop Horse; a Horse for the Service of the War.

Men of no account; inferior, base persons.

C. 4. An upstart Citizen.

A Gentleman; a Knight of the first head.

C. 6. Freeborn Citizens.

Free-made Citizens.

To make one free; to set at liberty.

I have a mind to give him his steedom

He is a Free man

He is a Noble man

To pay ones debt.

To run into debt.

To sue for payment.

URbem novam condere.

Urbem designare aratro.

Moenia designare aratro.

Ad te tanquam ad asylum, aram confugimus.

Forum agere.

Forum indicere.

Libri Elephantini.

Ingenium volaticum, desultotium.

Equi desultorii.

De ponte dejiciendus est.

A carceribus ad metam; ab ovo ad mala.

Inter cuneo^ residet.

In arenam descendere.

Effari Templa; sistere fana.

More Romano.

Civitate donati.

Civitate donare.

Diis inferis devoti.

Patres conscripti.

Senatores minorum gentium.

Equus publicus, militaris.

Ignota capita; sine nomine turba. Poet.

Novus and reptitius civis. Sal.

Novus homo.

Cives originarii; ingenui.

Liberti, libertini, Civitate donati.

Emanu aliquem emittere; ad pileum vocare; vindicta liberare.

Hunc liberum esse volo.

Habet tria nomina.

Nomina liberare.

Nomina facere.

Nomina exigere.

LIB. II.
Sect. 1. Chapter 1.
A good cudgelling.

Gods of the greater Nations.

Gods of the lesser Nations.

Country Gods, Tutelar Gods

Indifferent, neuter, common Gods.

The Good Angel, the Evil Angel.

The Women's Guardian Angels.

It fell out ill.

No man without his misfortune.

He makes much of himself, he pampers his kite, carcass.

A very pinch belly, a thief to his own belly, carcass

The Grace-cup.

In a little Cottage.

A man that has no certain abiding place, settled dwelling.

A very Eat all, one that plays the glutton, greedy gut, leaves not so much as
manners in the d^sh.

Sect. 2.
Chapter 2. It is seed time.

He makes a feast without wine.

Chapter 6. With good luck, luckily.

With ill luck.

To begin a thing.

A good sign, we shall speed well.

Protectors of the Commons.

C. 9. He gave over being Priest, left his Priesthood.

C. 10. The Battle was doubtful, fought with various success, now one side had
the better, now the other.

By ones own strength.

Dainty cheer.

C. 11. He has sent him a challenge -- challenged him into the field.

A denunciation of war.

C. 12. It is undoubtedly true, true as Gospel.

An hard task.

C 13. One thief accuses another, the pot calls the pan burnt-arse.

C. 14. A rude fellow, a lewd person, a very rascal.

C. 15. A costly supper, a sumptuous feast, a feast for an Abbot, a
commencement-supper, an installation supper.

C 19. To enterprise a thing without due reverence, or preparation.

Must I be whipped for your faults? -- suffer for your rogueries?

Mind what you are about.

To take a light taste of a thing.

He grows in grace.

To stay the sacrifice.

He cannot stay till grace be said.

The first offerings.

C. 20. Witnesses to a contract.

To marry a wife.

The marriage bed.

Where you are Lord I am Lady; where you are Jack, I am Gill

I have as good right in the estate as you.

I will have nothing to do -- no dealing with you.

Caesar has divorced Pompeia.

He has cast off all goodness

C 21. It is past help, -- cure, all^s in vain, to no purpose, there is no hope
we have done what we can, and can do no good.

You have your leave, you may be packing, be gone, have leave to depart.

To make a Funeral Sermon, -- Oration for one.

It is time now, now is the time.

An old carle, a down man, one that has one foot already in the grave.

Sect. 3.
C. 1. The fourth day of April.

Holy Day clothes.

C. 2. It is a secret, no body knows the reason of it.

C. 5. Worse scared than hurt, better than we looked for, not so ill as we
feared all will be well, the old Father dances.

He has lost both his labor and cost.

C. 6. Having a mind to make bets, -- to lay wagers.

To fight at whorlebats.

C. 7. He was hummed extraordinari^y* highly applauded for his verses, --
sermon, cried up mightily.

C. 9. To make a solemn vow unto God.

To make a vow to build a Church.

To bind ones self to make good his vow.

Liable to make good his vow.

Bound to performance of his vow.

To have ones desire accomplished.

C. 10. Hirelings, persons hired to play prizes.

A flourish before the fight.

It is one thing to flourish, another to fight.

Weapons for show.

Weapons for fight.

To fight at sharps, with naked weapons.

To piss backward, change ones purpose, go back with his word.

He is in a maze, driven to change his mind, put to a puzzle.

A conquest after a combat

He has won many a prize

Discharged from his pains.

He has a mind to put a trick upon you.

To play at blindmans buffet, to wink and strike.

He gives him a challenge, -- dares him to fight.

C. 11. The end of a man's life.

A man fit for all parts, -- good at any thing.

Recreatory diversions.

A lofty style.

C. 13 He has b^oken the league of Hospitality

Size ace, a goose to a chicken, a very unequal comparison.

A winning cast, a luckie cast

A losing cast, an ill chance, an unluckie throw.

I will win the horse or lose the saddle, win all or lose all.

To whip a top.

To play at even or odd.

To leave boys play, to be past a child.

Cross or pi^e.

C. 14. He did invite me very earnestly, -- was very earnest with me to come.

Unbidden guests.

He needed but small invitation.

From the beginning to the ending

The first dish at the Feast.

The last dish at the Feast.

The prime, chief dish.

A Light Supper.

A Dole in meat or money.

A well furnished Table, -- great varieties, a plentiful Supper, great cheer.

A thin Supper, slender Table, small Cheer, scanty Provisions.

Argumentum bacillinum.

Dii majorum Gentium, nobiles, consentes.

Dii minorum Gentium, Dii indigetes, Semidei.

Dii patrii, Dii tutelares.

Dii communes.

Bonus genius, Malus genius.

Junones.

Diis iratis factum Plaut. Poen.

Quisque suos patimur manes.

Genio indulget.

Genium defraudat.

Poculum charitatis, boni genii.

Parvo sub lare. Hor.

Homo incerti laris.

Lari sacrificat.

Credenda Ceres arvis, Ov.

Cereri sacrificat.

Bonis avibus, auspiciis, ave sinistra, cornice sinistra.

Malis avibus.

Auspicari rem:

Intonuit laevum.

Tribuni plebis.

Sacerdotio abibat.

Vario Mart pugnatum est.

Proprio Mart.

Saliares dapes.

Arietem emisit.

Clarigatio.

Sibyllae folium est.

Laboriosius est quam Sibyllae folia colligere.

Clodius accusat moechos.

Circulator Cybeleius.

Coena pontificia, aditialis.

Accedere ad rem illotis manibus.

Accedere ad rem illotis pedibus.

Meum tergum stultitiae tuae subdes succedaneum?

Hoc age.

Libare.

Mactus est virtute.

Hostiare victimam, mactare, ferire hostiam.

Sacra haud immolata devorat.

Prima libamina.

Signatores.

Ducere uxorem.

Genialis lectus.

Ubi tu Cajus, ibi ego Caja.

Condition tua non utar, Res tuas tibi habeto, agito.

Caesar Pompeiae nuncium remisit.

Virtuti nuncium remisit.

Conclamatum est,

Ilicet.

Defunctum pro rostris laudare.

Jam tempus est.

Silicernium.

Pridie nonas Aprilis.

Purpura Megalensis.

Est inter arcana Cereris.

Salva res est, saltat senex.

Operam and oleum perdidit, opera and impen^a periit.

Sponsionibus concitatus.

B^llare cestu.

Fregit subsellia versu, oratione, clamatum recte, been, pulchre, Grande sophos.

Vota nuncupare, facere,

Vovere templum.

Signare votum.

Voti reus.

Damnatus voti, voto.

Damnari voti, voto.

Auctorati.

Praeludium.

Aliud est ventilare, aliud pugnare.

Lusoria, exercitoria tela.

Decretoria arma.

Dimicare ad certum, versis armis pugnare.

Cedere, demigrare de gradu.

De mentis statu dejicitur, deturbatur.

Palma lemuiseata.

Plurimarum palmarum homo.

Rude donatus.

Tragulam in te injicere adornat. Plaut

And abata^um more pugnare.

Minimo provocat.

Virae humanae Catastrophe.

Omnium scenarum homo.

Diludia.

Sophocleus cothurnus.

T^sseram hospitii confregit.

(...): Cous ad chium.

Jactus pronus, plenus senio, Venus, Cous.

Jactus supinus, inanis, canis, canicula, chius.

Aut ter sex, aut tres tesserae.

Buxum torquere flagello.

Ludere par impar.

Nuces relinquere.

Vel capita, vel navim.

Penulam mihi scidit.

Muscae, umbrae.

Illius ego vix tetigi penulam, tamen remansi^.

Ab ovo ad mala.

Prooemium Coenae.

Epilogus Coenae.

Caput Coenae, fundus and fundamentum Coenae ^ips.

Sportula.

Coena recta, dubia.

Coena ambulatoria.

LIB. III.
Sect. 1.
Chap. 1. At latter Lammas, at Nevermass.

The fifth of January.

The fourth of January.

The thirteenth day of January.

The twelfth day of January.

The first day of January.

The last day of December.

Fortunate days.

Unfortunate days.

Holy days.

Working days.

Half Holy days.

A Law-day.

Whole Court or Leet days.

Half Court days.

Non Leet days.

A Common Barreter, wrangling fellow.

C. 2. An Old man.

Old men have a Writ of Ease given them, i. e. are exempted from giving their
voices in the Assemblies.

By word of mouth.

I am for the old way, love no changing.

He had not seven voices for him.

He had not a man against him, every body stood for him.

A chief heir, heir to the main inheritance.

A Legatee, one that has a legacy given him.

Confused notes, foul papers.

Books of Account.

Statute Books or Books of Record.

Letters of Protection.

Bills of Sale.

A letter, a Letter-carrier.

We opened, broke up the letter.

To turn Cat in the pan, say and unsay, make a recantation.

He knew his own hand and seal.

To read over a Book.

To bring to an end.

To publish a Law to be made.

To move that a Law be made.

To record a Law.

To proclaim or publish a Law after it be made.

To cancel a Law.

The falling sickness.

C. 3. To forbid the proceedings.

C. 4. Authors of best Account, Classical Authors.

Men of small means.

To sound the Alarm.

To sound the Retreat.

C. 6. To sue for an Office.

To enter into an Office.

To depart out of an Office.

To have as many voices as the Law does require.

To have the most voi^es, yet not so many as the Law requires.

C. 7. He is ready, in a readiness.

A loose Woman, lewd S^rumpet.

To buckle, make ready for War.

Peace is to be preferred before War.

He is past a Stripling, grown up to years of discretion.

He is past a Child, grown to a man's estate.

A Suitor for an Office.

A young Student.

To change his apparel, put on mourning Weeds.

His Majesty's principal Secretary.

Childhood

An embroidered Gown.

C. 8. Near is my shirt, but nearer my skin.

He has lost his money.

To arm himself.

To deflour a Virgin.

Lib. 3. Sect. 2.
Chap. 2 To discharge one of his Office.

To give place yield unto.

C. 3. Toe Decree of the Senate.

To propound a matter to the Senate.

I am fully persuaded of his opinion.

He was favorably heard in the Senate.

The Senate neglected, condemned him.

To strain, or seize on a man's goods.

C. 4. The Consul, Major Elect.

C. 5. The Authority of Magistrates to inquire into and reform manners.

To depose a Senator.

To pull one down a peg.

Five, ten, fifteen years space.

To purge, to muster an Army.

C. 6. To grant out a Writ or Action against a man.

To pass judgment on one.

To see and allow the delivery of the thing, or person whereon judgment is
passed.

To sell a man's life.

C. 7. Within an hundred miles.

C. 16. An Excommunicate person.

C. 22. To take Provinces by agreement.

To have the Provinces by lot.

Lib. 3. Sect. 3.
Chap. 2. Loss of life.

Disfranchisement.

To banish one out of the City.

To set a man's goods to sale that will not appear in Court.

C. 4. To prick, egg a man on.

C. 5. Little Ease.

C. 8. Saved from the Gallows.

C. 9. To be condemned to the drawing of water.

I will send you to Bridewel, to the House of Correction.

To be condemned to the Mines.

A Rogue that is burnt in the hand, brow, shoulder.

Lib. 3. Sect. 4.
Chap. 1. To cite one into the Court.

C. 2. To judge in person.

To judge by proxy.

They are acquitted.

To be cast in ones Suit.

C. 4. Condemned unheard, without being heard speak for himself.

To work underhand, conspire against one.

To circumvent, deceive, cheat, oppress with false judgment procured by bribery
or confederacy.

Citizens by birth.

Citizens by donation.

To render ones name to the Magistrate.

C. 5. To make a speech to the people.

To assemble the people to give their voices.

C. 9. To be in chief command, Commander in chief in the Army.

To be set to sale.

To buy of one that has no power, no right, nothing to do to sell.

The sale of Caesar's goods.

Goods set at sale.

To put in bands to answer.

To show he has a mind to buy.

C. 12. A Pig with a pudding in the belly.

C. 14. Let him be begged for a fool.

He is made sole heir.

An heir to some part of the wh^le.

To forge a crime.

To enter an action.

To choose Judges by lot.

To play the false Proctor.

To desist in his accusation, let his suit fall.

A mortgaging of land to pay money.

To receive a mortgage, take land for security.

To pay, repay.

C. 19. To plead sickness for nonappearance.

C. 20. To put money to use.

To produce witnesses on both sides.

To put in sureties.

To pay his Fine.

To stand to the Verdict of the Court.

To make an end --, an agreement betwixt themselves.

To tax the costs and charges of the suit.

A citation of one into the Court.

To accuse one of a crime.

To enter an action against one.

To demand bail, sureties for appearance.

To enter into Bond for appearance.

Sentence is put off till the third day.

To swear he does not accuse falsely, or maliciously.

An execution to seize on ones goods.

He made his appearance in the Court.

We must have longer time to consider.

To sit upon Life and Death on a man.

C. 21. To argue the case pro and con, to fight hand to hand.

To offer to lay a wager with one.

To lay a wager with one.

To bind himself to pay what shall be adjudged.

To bind himself to stand to the judgment of the Court.

Ad Calendas Graecas.

Nonae Januariae, Januarii.

Pridie nonarum or non^^ Jan.

Idus Januarii.

Pridie Iduum, vel Id^^ Januarii.

Kalendae Januariae.

Pridie Calend. Jan.

Dies albi.

Dies atri, postriduani, Aegyptiaci, nefasti.

Dies Festi, feriati, feriae.

Dies profesti.

Dies intercisi.

Dies comitialis.

Dies Fasti

Dies ex part Fasti.

Dies nefasti.

Homo comitialis.

Depontanus.

Sexagenarii de ponte dejiciendi.

Viva voce.

Antiquum volo.

Suffragiorum puncta non tulit septem.

Omne tulit punctum.

Haeres primae cerae, in primo gradu institutus, ex toto ass.

Haeres est in ima cera, legatarius.

Adversaria.

Tabulae accepti and expensi.

Tabulae publicae.

Tabulae novae.

Tabulae auctionariae.

Tab^llae, Tabellarius.

Linum incidimus.

Stylum invertere.

Cognovit manum and signum suum.

Evolvere librum.

Ad umbilicum ducere.

Promulgare legem.

Rogare legem.

Far legem.

Figere legem, tabulam.

Refigere legem.

Morbus comitialis.

Obnunciare, intercedere.

Classici scriptores.

Tenuis census homines, proletarii.

Classicu^ ^anere.

Receptu^ ^anere.

Ambire magistratum.

Inire magistratum.

Abire magistratu.

Conficere legitima suffragia

Explere suffragia.

Alte praecinctus est.

Mulier togata.

Ad saga ire, ad certamen se accingere.

Cedant saga, arma togae.

Excessit ex ephebis.

Virilem togam sumpsit.

Candidatus.

Eloquentiae Candidatus.

Mutare vestem.

Candidatus Principis, Quaestor candidatus.

Ae^as praetexta.

Toga p^cta, palmata, triumphalis.

Tunica pallio propior est.

Zonam perdidit.

Arma induere.

Zonam solvere.

Fasces abrogare.

Fasces submittere.

Senatus consultum.

Refer ad Senatum.

In illius sententiam iturus sum, manibus pedibusque discessurus.

Senatus ei dabatur, ste^it in Senatu.

Jacuit in Senatu.

Caedere pignora.

Concidere pignora.

Capere pignora.

Auferre pignora.

Ad consulatum designatus.

Virgula censoria.

Senatu movere.

Tribu movere.

Lustrum, duo, tria lustra.

Condere lustrum.

Dare actionem.

Dicere jus.

Rem, hominem addicere.

Addicere sanguinem allcujus.

Intra centesimum Lapidem.

Homo sacer.

Comparare Provincias.

Sortiri Provincias.

Ultimum supplicium.

Capitis diminutio.

Alicui aqua and igni interdicere, hominem proscribere.

Bona alicujus proscribere.

Stimulo fodere.

Mala mansio.

De Lapide empti, a furca redempti.

In Antliam damnari.

In pistrinum te dedam.

Damnari in metallum, in opus metalli.

Nebulo stigmaticus, literatus.

In jus vocare.

Judicare.

Judicicum dare.

Secundum eos lis datur:

Lite, causa cadere.

Indicta causa damnatus.

Coire.

Circumvenire, circumscribere.

Cives Nati.

Cives Adscripti, civitate donati.

Apud Praetorem profiteri, nomen profiteri.

Agere ad populum.

Agere cum populo.

Esse cum imperio.

Publico praeconi, hastae subjici.

A malo auctore emere.

Hasta Caesaris.

Bona suspensa.

Dejicere libellos.

Digitum tollere.

Porcellus Trojanus.

Ad agnatos and gentiles deducendus est.

Haeres in totum assem institutus est.

Haeres ex toto ass.

Calumniari.

Dicam scribere.

Dicam sortiri.

Praevaricari.

Tergiversari.

Manc patio fiduciaria.

Accipere fiduciam.

Pendo, rependo.

Morbum excusare.

Pecuniam occupare, foenerari, foenori dare, collocare.

Litem contestari.

Satisdationes facere.

Judicatum solvere.

Rem ratam habere.

Lites redimere, pactionem facere.

Litem aestimare. Arbitros inter civitates dat, qui litem aestiment, atque
poenam constituant, Caes.

In jus vocatio.

Postulare aliquem de crimine.

Alicui actionem, litem intendere, diem dicere.

Vadari reum.

Promittere vadimonium.

Lis, reus comperendinatur.

Calumniam jurare, dejurare, in litem jurare.

Edictum peremptorium.

Se stitit.

Amplius cognoscendum,

De Capite alicujus quaerere.

Manum manu conserere,

Sponsione provocare,

Contendere ex provocatione.

Satisdare judicatum solvi.

Satisdare rem ratam habere.

LIB. IV.
Chap. 1. To take a solemn Oath.

To serve under a Captain in War.

An old Soldier, that has served out his time, and is discharged of his
service.

He has served out his time in the Wars.

To sound a Call.

To join Battle.

To make a great shout.

To clash or rustle with their Armor.

To give a great shout in token the Soldiers should truss up their bag and
baggage.

Readily.

To be in a readiness continually.

C. 2. A fresh water Soldier.

The initiation into any Art, Science, War.

An old beaten Soldier.

To leap, skip, run from one thing to another.

I will save one, keep as far out of danger as I can.

It is come to the last push.

C. 3. His great friend has forsaken him.

To assail by covert ways.

To assault by open force.

C. 4. Thou have undertaken a hard task.

To cast account with the pen.

C. 5. The cashiering of a Soldier.

The stopping of a Soldiers pay.

He has lost his pay.

He deserves a good cudgelling.

To be scou^ged with rods.

C. 6. T^ yield the victory, to give one the better of it.

Jurare Jovem lapidem, per Jovem lapidem.

Mereri sub duce.

Miles emeritus.

Stipendia confecit.

Classicum canere.

Confer signa, collatis signis pugnare.

Barritum tollere.

Arma concutere.

Conclamare vasa.

Colligatis vasis, parate, expedite.

In procinctu stare, vivere.

Tyro.

Tyrocinium.

Veteranus.

Agere velitatim.

Ego ero post principia.

Ad Triarios ventum est.

Vallus vitem decepit.

Cuniculis oppugnare.

Machinis oppugnare.

Provinciam cepisti duram.

Scribendo conficere rations.

Ignominiosa dimissio.

Fraudatio stipendii.

Aere dirutus est.

Fustuarium meretur.

Virgis caedi.

Herbam dare.

A Collection of Phrases out of Hermes Anglo-Latinus.
I Will make thee do it, i. e. constrain.

Make [i. e. turn] this into Latin.

He made [i. e. feigned] as though he wept.

I will make them friends [i. e. reconcile.

I would be loath to make thee be beaten [i. e. give cause --

He makes a mouth [i. e. writhes.

I will make good [i. e. fill up or supply.

He made much of me.

What did you make of this years crop?

Make a Leg.

Make the B^d.

To make War.

Make haste.

To make a Verse.

To make Water.

He made a Law.

Make ready Supper.

Make a Fire.

You shall never make me believe this tale.

You make a fool of me.

He made him a King.

He makes a stir about nothing.

I will make an end.

He being weary lay down, he laid him down when he was weary.

He cracks of his exploits, wealth.

He says nothing for fear, he is in such a fear that he is not able to say a
word.

I bought it for neither more nor less, I paid just so much for it.

It is I, it was thou.

It is not thou can scare me.

I am sound.

He is pale, palish, or somewhat pale.

What is he good for?

Who will go with me? I will.

My poor help.

A petty King.

A pedling Poet.

A little Fellow.

A poor gain.

Dear heart.

A small field.

Pretty well, somewhat better.

Somewhat fearful.

A poor pittance.

A brick Wall.

A Summer Apple.

Household affairs.

En eyewitness.

In the top of the house.

In the bottom of Hell.

The furthest part of the world.

At the end of the Town.

About the lower end of the side.

At break of day.

The rest of the money.

In the midst of the City.

Born the fourth day of the Moon, in an unluckie hour.

I am here that did it.

This house of yours is like to fall.

This pride of hers will come down.

Your own Knavery will bewray you.

I saw him my self with my own eyes.

They their own selves did it with their own hand.

Thou thy own self.

Here is the man his own self.

He himself, or his own self.

I inquired of a friend of mine and he told me.

He has not wherewithal to buy a halter to hang himself.

Astorm will sink a Ship.

The Ship sinketh.

Look hither.

He looks like a sloven.

It will break before it will bow.

What have thou been doing?

I have been writing.

The money is in the coining.

Speak out thy words.

I care not for thee.

I will tarry abroad out of doors.

He is followed by many, overtaken by few.

Winter was well nigh spent and the Spring drew on.

Thou art doing, but make no riddance.

He cannot forbear doing mischief, -- keep out of ill turns.

He is broken, bankrupt.

Good lu^k have the business G^d speed it.

It waxes night, ripe.

I am to go.

He is gone a hunting, to hunt.

Thou have no cause to complain, -- of complai^ing.

Very desirous to go (of going) ba^k.

The greatest allurement to sin, is hope of sparing.

Take time to advise.

He rose very early to study.

I have my Brother to entreat yet.

What do thou appoint me to do?

I commend my Son to you to be taught.

I am come to entreat that I might

I desire thee to be (or that thou would be) gone.

I know not what to do.

Send thy man before to inquire.

Art thou a fit man to teach me?

He gave me a Book to read, but not worth reading, not worthy to be read.

Here is a Penknife for you to make a pen withal.

He was not come back in the morning, but now he is come back.

Thou art come sooner than I looked.

I was gone abroad before thou were up.

I am undone, if he be gone away.

I am run out of breath.

The Apple is ripe.

You are a fool to believe -, -- for believing him.

You know what account I make of him.

About (ready) to fall.

He deserves to be praised.

He should have been punished.

The better Gamester at Dice, the worse man.

They differ but about one thing.

But for this one time.

There is not a day but he comes to me.

You can relish nothing but roast-meat.

What else is it to dance, but to play the fool?

He does nothing but play.

I sent no Letters but to you.

Nothing but what was well advised went from him.

I cannot but weep.

One by one.

From door to door.

Word for word.

Take heed thou do it not.

See thou come back.

Thou may be gone.

He is above three miles off.

Why rise you not? Rise.

I am sore afraid.

Without pains.

I am obliged, engaged to thee.

You can do much with him.

At his Masters beck.

Till broad daylight.

For this cause.

Thou may be gone for all me.

Out of gunshot.

It will not be for thy profit.

Considering his worth, he is not used with respect enough.

According to the sudden accident, as the case stood.

Not amiss.

He is on our side.

He is one of Plato's Sect.

He is the Kings Counselor.

He was thy Footman.

Before and behind.

At supper time.

About ten talents.

Word for word.

At my house.

In his right mind.

It is to be found in Virgil.

In the days of yore, among our Ancestors.

In jest, sport.

For this present.

Every hour.

One with another.

What employment is he fit for?

Here Is a pen for thee to write with.

This is the man I told you of.

You should have told me this before.

Lay the burden upon me.

I will go presently to the man.

He goes to bed supperless, without his supper.

Show thy self a man.

He will prove a Scholar.

He is held an excellent Divine.

He is reported to be (has the report of) a spendthrift.

I ha^ rather go on foot, than on horseback.

He is sick of a quartan (fever).

To give him a Civick Crown.

To pour on cold water.

To hold the first parts, to be the chief

Which way? that way.

At my charge.

There is a thing that I would tell thee.

There are some, that say so.

There is a thing that troubles me.

There is no room for me to sit.

You have cause to be glad.

We are most destrous of those things that are most hurtful to us.

I will not hinder you from studying.

Nothing hindered you from writing.

Businesses hindered me from writing back.

What trade art thou of?

Let your hook be always hanging.

They were two days journey off.

What Is the matter?

You see what a kind of man he is.

If any matter of money remain.

I went not a wenching at that age, at those years.

A poor deal of wine.

At this time of the day.

What s^^kness is this?

So much money, so much credit.

This poor piece of a letter.

The way is much of the same length.

He has just his Masters conditions.

He is not able to pay.

They carry things fit to put out the fire.

He endures cold the best of any man living.

I am the nearest to you of any man.

Ask his advice about this.

I can eat Beef heartily.

I will take the same course that thou do.

I imitate thee.

I envy thee.

No man understands me.

Cicero salutes you.

I shall beware of him that he hurt me not.

He is in a gross error.

You will be heartily glad.

What pranks would he play?

This is a secret to us, we are ignorant of it.

He came to the relief of the Townsmen.

It casts an ugly smell.

What had thou to supper?

They know not the way.

It smells of Saffron.

I am sorry for you.

I deny it.

The day will fail me.

You are sure to be punished.

To die.

Hands off, forbear.

I wrestle with, out of troubles.

I mind only this, this is all I mind.

To quicken his speed, flight.

He is seven years old.

It is for Subjects to obey.

It is for Kings to command.

It came into my mind, head.

He studies Physic.

There is room for you.

He minds Philosophy.

Be ruled by me.

What troubles you?

I yield to thee.

Come into the house.

I was by when he preached, -- present at the Sermon.

I had a mind, desire.

I am not in fault,

He is convicted of theft.

To condemn to death.

He sued him in an Action of Trespass.

To accuse of Treason.

He is accused of Bribery.

He accuses him of a crime.

He set fire on the house, the house on fire.

I bought this for you.

Set pen to paper.

He deceived, cousened me, put a trick upon me.

He committed this to my trust.

He forbad me his house, -- discharged me of his house.

I Will have nothing to do with your friendship, entertainment, etc.

I will take a course, provide for thee.

I promise thee this.

Answer me this.

He will not let me have my Book.

I will put thee by all thy shifts.

He gave me a box on the ear.

Forgive me this fault.

Will you command me any service?

I suppose they have no money

I Will look to that.

Put him in mind of his duty.

We are warned of many things.

He kept these things from his father.

I entreat this of you.

They are asked their opinion.

Let me prevail with you.

He has his gown on.

Skilful in Greek.

Well skilled in Martial Discipline.

He stripped him of his goods, of all.

Let him loose, be made to go without his supper.

I have wiped the old man of his money.

He is of, has a lowering look.

When he had spoken these words.

He is gone a hunting.

Your letting him do as he lists, makes him grow every day worse than other.

He is busy a writing.

Leave off, leave your prating.

I set it a sunning.

I am to write letters.

I must write out this Book.

In writing letters.

I have no leisure to write a letter.

I am not at leisure.

Thou may for all me.

Besides my purpose.

What will become of me?

To swear by Jove.

A child of that age.

Many things of like sort.

The last day of January.

The third day of January.

Hard by.

In safety.

In readiness.

By Sea and Land.

He is ^f no account with us

B^ of good courage.

A man of great age.

Lame of his feet.

Red haired.

On that condition.

For thy sake.

Of a good age

He i^ sick of a disease fever. went.

I sa^ute you, greet you well.

In confidence of your courtesy.

He is not able to speak for g^ief.

Of the same mould, temper.

To be ang^y for nothing

She has ha^ a child by Pamphilns.

You shall not buy i^ but ^ a dear rate.

Y^u ask too much for you wares.

You offer a penny for it.

To set at naught.

How do thou prize this house?

Not under ten pounds.

It is not worth so much.

One eye witness is worth a thousand ear witnesses.

I care not a straw for thee

I take it in good part.

I weight it not thus much.

It weighs three d^ams

Go not a nails breadth from the truth.

Two days journey off.

L^ss by the half.

A City unguarded.

To stand to the bargain.

T^ rely upon virtue.

Well born.

Come of a great house.

I am a Lou^h man, but my Ancestors were of York shire.

He went out at three a clock.

Within this two days we shall know.

In sl^ep time.

Y^u sl^ep till broad day.

For this three years full.

By night.

For a year, month.

For many years past.

A^ this time of the night.

Till late at night.

You sleep till fair day.

Eight days hence.

For the space of some years.

Day after day

Six years ago, since.

Since when, since then.

It is a twelve month since I saw him.

I being his Author, setter on.

In Ireland.

At Dublin, Carthage, Venice.

He came from about Rome, from the parts about Rome.

These things were done before or near Ilerda.

He departed from before Mutina.

I fit next Pompey.

I shall rise, be up, get out of bed sooner than I was wont.

Above half a mile.

What do you touching of us?

To gape after an inheritance.

I had a desire, mind.

I know not which way to take.

I will give over my enterprise.

I forbear to speak of many things.

Born to glory.

He spoke not a word of thee.

He came to that height of pride.

As far as it is possible to be done.

COgam te hoc facere.

Verte hoc Latin.

Simulavit quasi fleret, -sc flere.

Redigam eos in gratiam.

Non lubens committerem, ut vapules.

Os intorquet.

Supplebo.

Comiter me tractavit.

Quanti vendidisti istius anni proventum?

Flecte poplitem.

Stern lectum.

Bellum gerere.

Festina, propera.

Carmen componere.

Urinam reddere.

Legem tulit.

Para, adorna coenam.

Exstrue ignem.

Nunquam mihi fidem facies hujus fabulae.

Ludis me, pro ludibrio habes.

Regem cum creavit.

Tumultuatur in re nihili.

Absolvam, finiam, finem faciam.

Ille defessus decubuit.

Crepat facinora, divitias.

Tacet metu.

Nec pluris, nec minoris emi.

Ego sum, tu eras.

Non tu is ^s qui me terrere po^^s,

Valeo.

Pallet, pallidior est.

Cui rei utilis est?

Quis mecum ibit? Ego ibo.

Opella mea.

Regulus.

Poetaster.

Homunculus.

Lucellum.

Corculum.

Agellus.

Meliuscule.

Timidiusculus, timidior, subtimidus.

Particula, portiuncula.

Murus coctilis.

Praecox pomum.

Res domesticae.

Oculatus testis.

In summis aedibus.

In imo Tartaro.

Ultima terra.

Ad extremum oppidum.

Quasi in extrema pagina.

Prima luce.

Reliqua pecunia.

In urbe media.

Quarta Luna natus.

Adsum qui feci.

Haec tua domus est ruitura.

Ejus superbia detumescet, se.

Tua ipsius nequitia te prodet.

Egomet ipse vidi meis ipsius oculis.

Illi ipsi fecerunt sua ipsorum manu.

Tu ipse.

Adest ipse homo.

Ille ipse.

Sciscitabar a quodam familiari meo, qui nunciavit mihi.

Non habet, quo restim emat ad suspendium.

Procella submerget navim.

Navis subsidit.

Respice huc.

Videtur sordidus.

Prius frangitur, quam flectitur.

Quid fecisti?

Scripsi.

Argentum cuditur.

Eloquere verba.

Nihil moror te.

Morabor sub dio.

Multi sequuntur eum, pauci ass^quuntur.

Praecipitaverat hyems, and appetebat ver.

Moves, sed non promoves.

A maleficio non tempe rabit.

Decoxit.

Vertat haec res been.

Vesperascit, maturescit.

Sum abiturus.

Ivit venatum.

Nullam habes causam querendi.

Cupidissimus redeundi.

Maxima peccandi illecebra, spes est impunitatis.

Sum diem ad deliberandum.

Surrexit admodum diluculo ad studendum, studendi gratia.

Restat mihi frater adhuc exorandus.

Quid mihi praescribis faciendum?

Commendo tibi fillum docendum.

Veni ut rogarem, ut liceret mihi.

Oro te, ut abeas:

Nescio quid faciam.

Praemitte famulum, qui quaerat.

Tune es idoneus, qui me doceas?

Dedit mihi librum legendum (qu^m leger^m) at indignum qui legatur.

Hem tibi sc^lpellum, quo penn^m ax^^nas.

Mane non redierat, sed nunc rediit.

Venisti celerius opinione.

Prodieram for as prius, quam tu surrexeras.

Si ille abiit, perii.

Cucurri usque dum fatiscit spiritus

Pomum ma^^^^it

Stultus es, qu^ huic credas.

Scis quanti eum faciam.

R^iturus.

L^^dandus est.

Plectendus esset.

Aleator quanto doctior, tanto nequior.

De u^a solum re dissident.

Hac can^um vice.

Nullus est dies quin (quo non) ad me ventitet.

Nihil tibi sapit praeter assa.

Quid aliud est saltare, nisi ineptire.

Nil nisi ludit.

Nullas dedi Literas praeterquam ad te.

Nil nisi consideratum prodibat ex ejus ore.

Non possum non flere, quin fleam.

Sigillatim.

Ostiatim.

Verbatim.

Cave feceris.

Fac redeas.

Licet abeas.

Amplius tria millia passuum abest.

Quin surgis?

Admodum timeo.

Citra pulverem.

Sum in tuo aere.

Tu multum, plurimum potes apud eum.

Ad domini nutum.

Ad clarum diem.

Hac de causa.

Licet abeas per me.

Extra telum, teli jactum.

Non erit ex re tua, in rem tuam.

Pro ejus dignitate minus honorifice tractatur.

E^re nata.

Non abs re.

A nobis stat.

Est a Platone.

Regi est a consiliis.

Erat tibi a pedibus.

A front and a tergo.

Super, inter coenam.

Ad december talenta.

Ad verbum, verbum de verbo.

Apud me, domi meae.

Apud se, compos mentis.

Habetur apud Virgilium.

Apud majores.

Per jocum, Iudum.

In praesentia, in praesens, in praesenti.

In horas.

Inter se.

Quas ad res aptus est?

Hem tibi pennam qua scribas.

Hic est de quo locutus sum tibi.

Debuisti praedicere.

Impone mihi hoc onus.

Illico adibo hominem.

It cubitum incoenatus.

Praesta te virum.

Evadet doctus.

Theologiae peritissimus habetur.

Audit Nepos.

Mallem ire pedes, quam eques

Laborat quartana, sc, febre.

Donare civica, sc. corona.

Frigidam suffundere, sc. aquam.

Primas tenere, sc. parts.

Qua? illac, sc. via.

De meo, sc. aere, vel sumptu.

Est quod tibi indicarem.

Sunt qui affirmant.

Est quod me male habet.

Non est ubi sedeam.

Est quod gaudeas.

Quae maxim nobis nocent, ea maxim appetimus.

Per me non stabit quo minus studeas.

Nihil obstitit quo minus scriberes.

Negotia me impedierunt quo minus scriberem.

Quam artem factitas?

Semper tibi pendeat hamus.

Aberant bidui, sc. viam.

Quid rei est?

Vides quid sit hominis.

Si quid nummorum erit reliquum.

Ego istuc aetatis non amori operam dabam.

Minimum vini.

Hoc diei.

Quid hoc morbi est?

Quantum pecuniae, tantum fidei.

Hoc literularum.

Tantundem viae est.

Domini est simillimus.

Non est solvendo, sub. idoneus.

Ea portant quae restinguendo igni forent, sc. idonea.

Est omnium qui vivunt, algoris patientissimus.

Tibi me propior nemo est.

Consule illum hoc.

Vescor bubula lubentissime, sc. carne.

Eodem tecum utar consilio.

Aemulor te. tibi.

Non intelligor ulli.

Salvebis a Cicerone.

Cavebo ab illo ne mihi noceat.

Errorem erravit spissum.

Solidum gaudebis gaudium.

Quos ludos luderet?

Hoc nos latet.

Oppidanis suppetias venit.

Tetrum odorem spirat.

Quid coenasti?

Semitam non sapiunt.

Olet crocum.

Doleo tuam vicem.

Eo inficias.

Deficiet me dies.

Poena vos manner.

Mortem occumbere.

Abstine manum.

Eluctor difficultates.

Studeo hoc unum, in hoc unum.

Celerare fugam.

Est annorum septem.

Est Subditi parere. sc. officium.

Est Regis imperare. sc. officium.

Venit mihi in mentem.

Studet Medicinae.

Locus vacat tibi.

Vacat Philosophiae.

Ausculta mihi.

Quid tibi dolet?

Accedo tibi.

Succeed aedibus.

Interfui concioni.

Incessit mihi cupiditas.

Vaco culpa.

Tenetur furti.

Damnare capitis.

Egit injuriarum cum illo.

Laesae majestatis arcessere, insimulare.

Postulatur de repetundis, sc. pecuniis.

Arguit eum crimine.

Arcessit eum crimine.

Injecit ignem aedibus.

Hoc mercatus sum tibi.

Inprime pennam chartae.

Imposuit mihi.

Credidit hoc meae fidei.

Interdixit, prohibuit mihi domum.

Renuncio amicitiae, hospitio, muneri, etc.

Prospiciam, consulam, cavebo tibi.

Hoc tibi recipio.

Hoc mihi responde.

Prohibet mihi librum.

Praecludam tibi omnia subterfugia.

Impegit mihi colaphum.

Condona mihi hoc delictum.

Ecquid mihi imperabis?

Suspicor nihil argenti esse illis.

Hoc mihi curae erit.

Admone illum officii.

Multa admonemur.

Haec patrem celavit.

Te hoc obsecro.

Rogantur sententiam.

Sine te exorem.

Induitur togam.

Literas Graecas eruditus.

Edoctus belli arts.

Exuit cum bonis.

Multetur coena.

Emunxi argento senem.

Front est caperata.

His verbis dictis.

Abiit venatum.

Usque ad eo permittis eum quid vis pro libitu facere, ut quotidie fiat seipso
deterior.

Occupatus est scribendo.

Desiste garriendo.

Posui ad insolandum.

Scribendae sunt mihi literae.

Exscribendus est mihi hic liber.

In scriben do literas.

In scriben dis literis.

Non est mihi otium scriben dae epistolae.

Non est mihi otium scriben di epistolam.

Non vacat mihi.

Licet tibi per me.

Alienum institutis meis.

Quid mihi, de me fiet?

Jovem jurare per.

Puer id aetatis ad.

Id genus multa secundum.

Pridie calendas Februarii ante.

Tertio nonas Januarii ante.

In proximo. loco.

In tuto. loco.

In promptu.

Terra marique.

Nullo est numero apudnos.

Bono ^is animo.

Homo prov^cta aetate.

Claudus pedibus.

^ri^e ruber.

Ea lege sub.

Tua ca^^a. pro.

Grand^ na^u

Laborat morbo, febri, penu^ia.

Impertio^^e salute.

F^etus tua humanitate.

Prae moerore fari nequit.

De ^adem fidelia.

De ni^ilo irasci.

^^perit e Pamphilo.

Non parabis nisi immenso pret^o

^^ce^is nimio merces.

Licitaris denario.

Pro nihilo putare, ducere.

Quanti indicas has aedes?

Non minoris quam december m^nis.

Non est tanti.

Pluris oculatus testis unus, quam mill auriti.

Non pili re facio.

Boni consulo.

Hujus non pendo.

Pendet tres drachmas.

Ne transversum unguem discedas a recto.

A best bidui iter.

Dimidio minor.

Urbs praesid^o nuda.

Stare pactis.

Virtute niti.

Honesto loco natus.

Genere clarissimo, splendina familia ortus.

Sum Ludensis, at or^undus ex agro E^o^acensi.

Prodiit te^^a hora.

Biduo, intra biduum sciemus.

Per quietem.

Stertis ad multum diem.

Per totum ^riennium.

De nocte

In annum, mensem.

Multis retro annis.

Hoc noctis.

Ad multam noctem.

Ad clarum diem dormis.

Ad octavum hine diem.

Aliquot per annos.

Diem ex die.

Ante sex annos, sex ab hinc annis.

Ex quo, ex illo.

Annus est ex quo cum vidi, quod cum non vidi.

Me authore.

In Hibernia.

Dublinii, Carthagine, Venetiis.

Venit a Roma.

Haec ad Ilerdam geruntur.

Discessit a Mutina.

Proxime Pompeium sedeo

Surgam maturius solito.

Amplius quingentis passibus.

Quid tibi nos est tactio?

Inhiare haereditatem.

Incessit me cupido.

Nescio quam viam insistam.

Desistam incoepto.

Pluribus supersedeo.

Natus gloriae, ad gloriam.

De te nihil meminit.

Eo insolentiae processit.

Quoad ejus fieri potest.

This for the first storing of the Learners Head and Memory with Phrases. Then
for the second, the Teaching him how to use them. This is easily shown him, by
but composing three or four Englishes (Epistles or the like) of some pretty
length, all, or most, of words capable of amplification by Periphrases, and
causing the Scholar first to translate them according to the Verbal, and then
out of his memory, and by the help of his Phrase-Books, according to the
Periphrastical way of Translating. This may be an Example.

Loving Friend,
It is commonly reported, that you are sick. Truly I am very sorry for that.
But I am much more sorry, that you got your sickness (for that they say too) by
drinking too much. I earnestly desire you first to repent of your having been
drunk, and then to seek to recover your health. And if it please God that you
ever be well again, then have a care to live healthfully and soberly for time
to come. This will be very pleasing to all your friends, and especially to

Your very Loving Friend, T. A.


Aegrotare te, Amice, vulgo dictum est. Ea profecto re multum doleo. Atqui hanc
te (quod item ferunt) aegritudinem largius bibendo contraxisse, id vero mihi
multo magis dolet. Vehementer te oro, primum ut ebrietatis te tuae poeniteat,
deinde uti des operam, quo convalescas. Quod si Deo erit visum, ut aliquando e
morbo revaleas, id tibi curae sit, cum ut sanus, tum ut sobrius deinceps vivas:
Hoc tuis omnibus valde erit gratum, inprimis autem

Tui Studiosissimo, T. A.


Valetudine te iniqua, Amice praecharissime, tentari, in ore omnium versatur.
Ea sane res gravissimo me dolor afficit. Quod autem minimum indulgendo poculis
(nam id quoque omnium sermon percrebuit) istum in morbum incideris, long
graviori moerore animi afflictus sum. Majorem in modum a te peto, primum, ut
poenitenti velis esse animo, quod immodicum ingurgitando potum ebrietatem
contraxeris, deinde ut amissae recuperandae sanitati operam sedulam naves. Si
vero Divina inspirante gratia, futurum id unquam sit, ut pristinam ad
valetudinem restituaris, toto tum pectore hanc incumbe in curam, ut and
illaesam corporis sanitatem conserves; and ad normam sobrietatis te in posterum
conformes. Hac tu ratione es illud facturus, quod cum universis amicis tuis
erit gratissimum, tum multo gratius

Tui Amantissimo, T. A.


By a few exercises, after this manner performed, the Scholar will quickly
discern the Use, as well as the Elegancy of Latin Phrases; and delight and
labor, that all his Latins may swell and shine with such like Enlargements
and Adornments. For his Use to this purpose, amongst the many extant I
recommend the little Phrase-Book put forth by Mr. Farnaby; as also that larger
by Mr. Huise; but especially that Book of Phrases compiled by Dr. Robinson
going under the name of the Latin Phrases of Winchester School. And thus much
of this matter.

CHAP. VII. Of Variation of Phrases.
TO enable the Scholar the better to make use of his Phrases, as also to enrich
him with the greater store of them, Variation of the Phrases will be very
conducing. Of this therefore let the Teacher first give him some Rules, and
then put him upon the practice.

For Rules, he may furnish him with them according to his discretion out of his
own Observation: Or if he think good, he may make use of this Collection.

Rules of Variation.
First, a Verb Active may be varied by a Verb Passive, by putting the
Nominative Case of the Active Verb into the Ablative with a or ab; and the
Accusative into the Nominative, making the Verb agree with it in Number and
Person: as,

Ego lego Virgilium.
Virgilius legitur a me.
Sometimes the Nominative before the Verb Active, may be the Dative after the
Passive: as,

Non me ullus intelligit. Non intelligor ulli. Id vitium nullus not aver at. Id
vitium nulli not atum er at.
But this is most used in Poets.

If the Verb Active govern a Dative Case of the Person, then it will not be
convenient to vary the Nominative Case before it by a Dative Case after the
Verb Passive; because then there will be two Datives together: And therefore we
vary not, Referam tibi gratiam by Referetur mihi tibi gratia, but by Referetur
tibi a me gratia.

The Dative Case after videor [I seem] is not variable by an Ablative Case with
a Preposition. Vide Voss. Lat. Gram. p. 51.

2. A Verb Passive may be varied by a Verb Active, by putting the Nominative
Case into the Accusative, and the Dative or Ablative into the Nominative* and
making the Verb agree with it in Number and Person: as,

Viris bonis honesta petuntur. Viri boni honesta petunt. Ab hostibus constanter
pugnatur. Hosts constanter pugnant. Ille ab his laudatur. Hi illum laudant.
Occurritur nobis a doctis. Docti nobis occurrunt.
3. The Ablative Case Absolute may be varied by putting the Ablative into the
Nominative, and turning the Participle into a Verb with some of these
Particles, dum, cum, quando, si, in such Mood as the Particle used therewith,
requires: as,

Rege veniente hosts fugerunt.

Dum veniret Rex hosts fugerunt.

Imperante Augusto natus est Christus.

Cum imperabat Augustus natus est Christus.

Superbo regnante in Italiam venit.

Quando Superbus regnabat in Italiam venit.

Note, if there be no Participle expressed together with the Ablative Case
Absolute, then the Participle ente or existente is understood, and the
variation will be made by sum, fui, etc. as,

Me [existente] duce vinces.

Si ego dux fuero vinces.

Credo pudicitiam Saturno [ente] rege moratam in terris.

Credo pudicitiam Quando Saturnus rex erat moratam in terris.

4. The Nominative Case with his Verb and Participle may be varied by turning
the Nominative Case into the Ablative; and (the Participle being put away) the
Verb into a Participle agreeing with it: as,

Postquam arbor dejicitur.

Arbore dejecta.

5. An Adjective that has re^ expressed with it, may be varied by putting away
res, and putting the Adjective into the Neuter Gender: as,

Deus res omnes ex nihilo creavit.

Deus omnia ex nihilo creavit.

6. An Adjective of the Neuter Gender whose Substantive is res understood, may
be varied by expressing res, and putting the Adjective into the Gender agreeing
with it: as,

Vnum quodque suo designare nomine.

Rem unam quamque suo designare nomine.

Id forsan difficile est.

Forsan res ea difficilis est.

7. The latter of two Substantives being a Genitive Case of Possession, may be
varied by an Adjective Possessive agreeing in Case with the former Substantive;
and vice versa: as,

Domus patris, paterna domus.

Herilis fi^ius, fi^ius heri.

See Treat of Partic. Chapter of Rule 1. of Note 4.

8. An Adjective Absolute in the Neuter Gender with his Genitive Case, may be
varied by putting the Substantive of the G^nitive Case into the Case of the
Adjective; and the Adjective of the Neuter Gender into the Gender of the
Substantive: as,

Hoc noctis; Hac nocte

Per diversa terrarum distractus est.

Per terras diversas distractus est.

9. An Adjective with his Substantive wherewith he agrees in Case, may many
times be elegantly varied by putting the Adjective into the N^uter Gender (if
it already be not) and the Substantive into the Genitive Case: as,

Ne eum quidem leporem habuerunt. Cic.

Ne id quidem leporis habuerunt. Cic.

Mihi hoc negotium dedere. Ter.

Mihi hoc negotii dedere. Ter.

Quis hic h^mo? Quid hoc hominis? Ter.

Huic alia merces erit. Virg.

Huic aliud mercedis erit. Virg.

Per gentes terrasque diversas volitabant.

Per diversa gentium terra umq, Flor.

10. The Accusative Case before the Infinitive Mood may be varied by turning
the Accusative into the Nominative, and the Infinitive Mood into the Indicative
or Subju^ctive with quod or ut, accordingly as those Particles ^equire: as,

Te incolumem rediisse gaudeo.

Quod tu redieris incolumis gaudeo.

Te abire jubeo.

Vt tu abeas jubeo.

Note, The Infinitive Mood may not be resolved into another Mood with quod or
ut indifferently: but sometimes by quod, sometimes by ut. Directions in this
Case you have in the Treatise of English Particles, in the Chapter of the
Particle That.

11. The Nominative Case with his Verb having quod or ut with it, may be varied
by putting away quod and ut; and turning the Nominative Case into the
Accusative, and the Verb into the Infinitive Mood: as,

Quod tu been vales gaudeo.

Te been valere gaudeo.

Vt tu fabulam agas volo.

Te agere fabulam volo.

12. The Verb habeo may be varied by the Verb sum, by putting that word into
the Dative Case, which was the Nom native before habeo: and that into the
Nominative, which after habeo was the Accusative: as,

Ego habeo domi patrem.
Est mihi domi pater.
Non habeo ego argentum.
Non est mihi argentum.
13. The Genitive Case governed of a Noun Partitive, may be varied by a
Preposition, and such Case as he governs; and vice versa: as,

Quorum alter te scientia augere potest. Cic.

Equibus alter te scientia augere potest. Cic.

Major juvenum; De juvenibus major. Hor.

Multae istarum arborum manu mea satae sunt, Cic.

Ex arboribus istis multa manu mea satae sunt, Cic.

14. The Genitive Case after the Superlative Degree may be varied by e, ex,
with an Ablative; or inter with an Accusative Case: as, Virgilius doctissimus
Poetarum. ex Poetis. inter Poetas.



15. The Infinitive Mood Active after a Verb of Motion, or denoting any
Intention, may be varied several ways. For instance, Venio salutare matrem may
be varied, (1) By the first Supine; as, Venio salutatum matrem. (2) By a
Participle in rus; as, Venio salutaturus matrem. (3) Thirdly, by a Gerund in di
with ergo, gratia, causa; as, Matrem salutandi causa venio. (4) By a Gerund in
dum with a Preposition; as, Venio ad salutandum matrem. (5) By a Gerundive with
ergo, gratia, causa; as, Matris salutandae gratia venio. (6) By a Gerundive
with a Preposition; as, Ad matrem salutandam venio. (7) By a Subjunctive Mood
with ut; as, Matrem ut salutem venio.

Note, Every one of these ways of varying may be varied by all, or the most of
the other ways: as the first Supine by the Infinitive Mood; Participle in rus;
Gerund, Gerundive; Verb. So the Participle in rus may be varied by the
Infinitive Mood; first Supine, Gerund, Gerundive, Verb. So the Gerund in dum by
the Infinitive Mood; first Supine; Participle in rus; Gerund in di with causa,
etc. Gerundive with Preposition; Verb with ut, So Gerundive by Infinitive Mood,
etc. So Verb of Subjunctive Mood with ut, by Infinitive Mood, etc.

16. The Infinitive Mood Passive after an Adjective may be varied several ways;
for instance, dignus est amari, may be varied, (1) By the latter Supine; as,
Dignus est amatu. (2) By a Verb of the Subjunctive Mood with ut; as, Dignus
est, ut ametur: or qui, as, dignus est qui ametur, quem ames. (3) By a Noun of
a cognate original and signification; as, Dignus est amore.

Note, Every one of these ways of varying may be varied by the other. The
Supine by the Infinitive Mood, the Subjunctive Mood with his Particles, and the
Noun. The Subjunctive with his Particle by the Infinitive Mood and the Supine.
And the Noun by the other ways of varying before mentioned.

Note also, That the using of the Infinitive Mood after the Adjective, is
Poetical or Historical.

17. The Comparative Degree may be varied.

(1.) By his Positive with magis and quam: as, Vilius argentum est auro.

Magis vile est argentum, quam aurum.

(2.) By his Positive with Comparative Particles, tam-quam, perinde-atque, and
ac having a Negative Adverb non or haud before the former of them: as,

Virtus est auro preciosior.

Non tam pretiosum est aurum quam atque ac virtus.

Haud perinde pretiosum est aurum quam atque ac virtus.

Non aeque pretiosum est aurum quam atque ac virtus.

18. The Superlative Degree may be varied,

(1.) By the Comparative Degree: as,

Elegantissimus omnium Philosophorum.

Philosophis omnibus elegantior.

Quam Philosophi omnes elegantior.

(2.) By the Positive with Nemo tam, or ita, ut, or quisquam

(2.)By the Positive with Nihil tam, or ita, ut, or quicquam with non, or haud,
perinde, or aeque ac, ut, atque: as,

Tam elegans, ut nemo Philosophorum.

Ita elegans, ut e Philosophis nemo.

Inter omnes Philosophos non est quisquam perinde elegans ac; or haud quisquam
aeque est elegans atque.

19. Single words may be varied several ways,

1. By their own several Cases, and that --

(1.) Without any variation of the whole sentence according to several Grammar
Rules in part already touched upon, and yet further observable by the heeding
Reader.

Est ubi in Dativum vertitur, etc. Opus autem adjective, etc. Communis,
alienus, etc. Magnitudinis mensura, etc. Nomina diversitatis, etc. Infinitum
quoque utrinque, etc. Vertitur hic Genitivus, etc. Aestimo vel Genitivum, etc.
At misereor and miseresco, etc. Reminiscor, obliviscor, etc. Potior aut
Genitivo, etc. Ex his quaedam efferuntur, etc. Verba comparandi, etc. Haec
variam habent, etc. Dicimus, tempero, moderor tibi, etc. At ex his quaedam cum
aliis casibus, etc. Laus and vituperium, etc. Quaedam ex his quae
similitudidinem, etc. Natus, commodus, etc. Adjectiva quae ad copiam, etc.
Horum nonnulla, etc. Pauca ex his mutant, etc. Hunc Accusativum mutant, etc.
Rogandi verba interdum, etc. Vestiendi verba interdum, etc. Valeo etiam
interdum, etc. Ex quibus quaedam, etc. Vertitur hic Ablativus, etc. Verbis
quibusdam additur, etc. Passivis additur Ablat. etc. Poetice Infinitivus Modus,
etc. Vertuntur Gerundis voces, etc. Quae signific. partem temp. etc. Dicimus
etiam in paucis, etc.
(2.) With some light variation of the whole Sentence: as,

Sapientia rerum omnium praestantissima est.

Sapientiae praerebus omnibus summa est praestantia.

Sapientiae non omnes praeterea in universo res praestant.

Sapientiam non omnes praeterea in universo res praestant.

O sapientia! quaenam e rebus omnibus aeque ac tu praestans est?

Sapientia inter omnes uspiam in orb toto res nihil est praestantius.

2. By their Synonymas: as,

Ensis, gladius. Amo, diligo. Saepe, frequenter.

3. By their Equipollents; nullus, non ullus.

Aliquis, non nemo, aliquando, nonnunquam, raro, non saepe, doctus, non
indoctus, bonus, minime malus.

4. By their Periphrases: as,

Philosophus: Vir sapientiae studiosus.

Ovidius: Sulmonensis Vates.

Occidere; Vita privare.

Rhetorica; Ars ornate dicendi.

5. By an Enallage.

(1.) Of a Noun.

1. For a Verb: as, Judicent alii; Aliorum esto judicium.

2. For a Participle; as, Hoc te impellente fecit.

2. For a Participle; as, Hoc tuo impulsu fecit.

3. For an Adverb: as, Laete istuc audio.

3. For an Adverb: as, Laetus istuc audio.

(2.) Of a Verb for a Noun: as,

Scientia tua nihil est.

Scire tuum nihil est.

(3.) Of a Participle for a Verb: as,

Consuli opus est.

Consulto opus est.

(4.) Of an Infinitive Mood for the Indicative: as,

Ex illo fluebant res Danaum.

Ex illo fluere res Danaum.

(5.) Of a Present Tense for a Preterimperfect Tense: as,

Tu si hic esses aliter sentires.

Tu si hic sis aliter sentias.

(6.) Of the Plural Number for the Singular: as,

Ego popuso imposui.

Nos populo imposuimus.

(7.) Of the Second Person for the third with his Nominative Case: as,

Qui unum norit, omnes rorit.

Vnum noris, omnes noris.

6. By Tropes of Rhetoric.

(1.) A Metonymie of the Efficient: as, Eos, Belli vis perculit.

(1.) A Metonymie of the Efficient: as, Eos, Martis vis perculit.

Or of the Subject: as, Sunt Itali testes.

Or of the Subject: as, Testis est Italia.

Or of the Adjunct: as, Cedat paci bellum.

Or of the Adjunct: as, Cedant arma togae.

(2.) An Irony of the contrary: as,

Vir male rem negligenter gessisti.

Bone vir curasti probe.

(3.) A Metaphor: as,

Omnes excitantur ad studia gloria.

Omnes incenduntur ad studia gloria.

(4.) A Senedoche of the Member: as,

In magno periculo eram, quod eadem urbe contineremur:

In magno periculo eram, quod iisdem moenibus contineremur:

Or of the Whole: as, Imperium Romanum ardet bello.

Or of the Whole: as, Orbis terrarum ardet bello.

Or of the Species: as, Interfector civium interficitur.

Or of the Species: as, Parricida civium interficitur.

Orator eloquentissimus; Alter Cicero.

Or of the Genus: as, Perdidimus Catilinam.

Or of the Genus: as, Perdidimus hominem.

Venientibus malis obstat Fortitudo.

Venientibus malis obstat Virtus.

20. Sentences may be also varied by several ways.

1: By turning the Affirmative Speech into a Negative, and contrariwise a
Negative into an Affirmative: as,

Avaritia vitiorum omnium est teterrimum. Nullum est vitium tetrius quam
avaritia. Est vir prudentia singulari. Non vulgaris est viri prudentia.
Non parva est peccandi illecebra impunitas. Impunitas peccandi maxima est
illecebra. Nihil meum est, quod auferri potest. Meum id omne est, quod auferri
non potest.
2. By turning the Assertive Speech into an Interrogative, and contrariwise
Interrogative into Assertive: as,

Avaritia vitium est foedissimum. Quod vitium foedius est avaritia? Nihil est
absurdius, quam, quo minus viae restat, eo plus viatici quaerere. Potest
quicquam esse absurdius, quam quo minus, -- Acerba audire tolerabilius est,
quam videre? Annon est tolerabilius acerba audire, quam videre.
Annon sunt incerti bellorum omnium exitus? Omnium bellorum exitus incerti
sunt. Id ne appellandum est onus, quod cum laetitia feras? Onus non est
appellandum, quod cum laetitia feras.
3. By turning Assertive Speeches into Admirative, and contrariwise Admirative
into Assertive Speeches: as,

Omnia sunt misera in bellis civilibus. Quam misera sunt omnia in bellis
civilibus!
Quam timeo quorsum evades? Quorsum evadas magnopere timeo.
4. By turning Assertive Speeches into Exclamations, and contrariwise
Exclamatory into Assertory Speeches: as,

Homo est admiranda scientia. O admirandam hominis scientiam!
O fortunatos nimium agricolas, si -- Fortunati nimium forent agricolae, si --
The better to enable him to make use of these Rules, and perform his Variation
in Latin, it will be convenient to begin his Variation of Phrase in English,
rendering one English into another, of the same sense in other words. For
instance.

In Affirmative Speeches. I affect thee very much. I love thee very much. Thou
art very much beloved of me. I have a very great affection toward thee. I have
a very great love for thee. My love to thee is very great. My affection toward
thee is very great. My love is very much set on thee. Thou art very far in my
favor. Oh how I love thee! What an affection have I for thee?

In Negative Speeches. It was not long of me that you were beaten. It came not
through me that you were beaten. It was not through me that you were beaten. It
was not because of me that you were beaten. It is not my fault that you were
beaten. It is no fault of mine that you were beaten. I am not to be blamed for
your being beaten. I was not the cause of your beating. I was not the cause of
your being beaten. I did not cause you to be beaten. I did not cause your
beating Your beating was not caused by me. Your beating came not by the means
of me. Your beating came not through my means. I occasioned not --, or I was no
occasion of your beating. Did I occasion your beating? Was I any cause of your
being beaten?

In Interrogative Speeches. What a clock is it? How goes the clock? H^w goes
the day? What time of the day is it? How spends the day? What h^ur of the day
is it?

In Epiphonematical Speeches. Such truth is there in that old saying. Such
truth there is in what was said of old. So much truth there is in that old
saying. So true is that old saying. So true is that which was said of old. So
truly was it said of old. So truly did they of old say. That truth there is in
that old saying. With that truth was it said by them of old.

And once for all; if any desire any further insight into this most profitable
exercise, he may consult Mr. Clark's Dux Oratorius, written chiefly on that
Subject, wherein besides Rules of Variation, there are almost infinite of
varied Examples: Erasmus Colloquies, p. 82. and Edit. Londini 1631. Buchler's
Elegancies. p. 111. Dr. Robinson's Phrases, in the end: and the most
accomplished Comenius's Artis Oratoriae sive Grammaticae Elegantis, c. 5. which
most choice piece I owe to the kindness of the worthy Mr. Henry Edmonson, then
one of the Masters in the School of Tunbridge, and do recommend to the perusal
of all young both Teachers and Learners. And thus much for Rules.

Now for Practice. The usual way, I presume, is to give the Learner sentences
of several forms, and put him to the varying of them. I condemn it not; it has
its use, its profit. But the Practice, that I would recommend, should be upon
his daily Lessons: the Master first, by a line drawn underneath, noting to him
what words and phrases are capable of such variation, as he has Rules for, and
then causing him to vary those words and phrases, according to his Rules, still
informing and helping him in what he fails through want of memory or
understanding. After he is a little experienced, he is to be put to find out of
himself what words or phrases in his Lesson, are variable, and accordingly to
vary them. This exercise with a competent understanding, will in a short space
produce a strange alteration to the better in all the Latins of the Scholar.
This may be done on the Repetiton-day; but the oftener the better. Experto creed.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Elegancies of the Particles.
A Fresh variety of choice Phrases goes far in the Elegancy of a Latin
Exercise: but nothing better sets it off, than the inter weavings of the
Particles. These, like those gold and silver filings, wherewith Bassianus
strewn the Roman pavements make a Latin smooth and radiant: or, as those
upper Constellations do the Firmament, they bespangle an Oration, rendering it
illustrious and glorious. One shall often be ravished with admiration at the
delicacy of a Ciceronian Period, and yet, when all comes to all, not be able to
say, what more charmed, and took his fancy, than the orient sparklings of
some interwoven elegant Particles. This has drawn so many Persons of excellent
Learning not only to take especial notice, but writ particular Tracts of the
Elegancies of these. Not to insist on what Robertus Stephanus has done in his
Thesaurus Linguae Latinae: or Laurentius Valla in his Elegancies: or Johannes
Buchle^us in his Elegancies: or Jacobus Omphalius in his Elocutionis Imitatio
and Apparatus: or Hadrianus Cardinalis in his de Modis Latin loquendi: or
Franciscus Sylvius in his Progymnasmata: or Edmundus Richerius in his
Rhetoric: Godschalcus Stewichius; Horatius Turselinus; Adamus Durrerus, and
Philippus Pareus, have all written justs Tracts particularly of these. A
competency therefore of knowledge of the Elegancies of the Particles, and of
skill to use them elegantly, cannot but be yielded by reason; and by experience
will be found to be hugely conducing to the rendering of the Learners Latin
elegant. With this knowledge and skill I advise the Teacher by all ways and
means upon all occasions to furnish his Scholar, what he may. And every
Lecture, every Exercise will afford him matter for Observation. But the ready
way, I conceive, is to furnish him with, and at convenient times read to him
some one or two Tracts of the Particles both of the English and Latin Tongue.
For English though I may not commend, yet I may mention mine own Treatise on
that Subject. And for Latin I recommend unto him Horatius Turselinus; or
rather, as being later and better, Philippus Pareus, de Particulis Latinae
Orationis: which I wish were as common as it is good. And if the reading of
these whole Authors, seem too laborious, and be like to take up too much time
(though no time almost can be too much to be spent in so elegant a study) the
Teacher may out of them, and his own Observation, make a short Collection, and
give to his Scholar for his Use. And till he shall have made a better of his
own, he may use this following.

Some Particles are elegantly used for others, and some are elegantly used with
others. I shall speak first of those that are elegantly used for others. And of
these some are elegant where other expressions are not elegant: and some are
elegantly used for others, which also may in the same sense be used almost, if
not all out, as elegantly as they. I begin with the former.

Of Particles elegantly used where other Expressions are not Elegant.
Rather say, ad verbum, than de verbo ad verbum: as, Tabellas Latinas ad verbum
de Graecis expressas. Cic. 1. de Fin.

Rather repeat alius in diverse Cases, than say, Vnus, uno, or aliqui uno, alii
alio modo: as, Alius alio dicendi genere gaudet. Aliis alius vivendi mos est.
So repeat aliud, or aliter, rather than say aliud, or aliter quam; as, Aliud
dicis, aliud cogitas. Aliter dicit, aliter facit.

Rather say alius ex alio, than unus post alium; as, Aliud ex alio me quotidie
impedit. Cic.

Rather say quis quid, than quis aliquid: as, Si quis quid reddit, magna
habenda est gratia. Ter. At vero gravitate membrorum, and cruciatu dolorum si
quis quem levet, magnam ineat gratiam. Cic. de Fin. l. 9. So rather say quo
quis, than quo aliquis: as, Quo enim quis versutior and callidior est, hoc
invisior and suspectior detracta opinione probitatis. Cic. So rather say cum
quis, than cum aliquis: as, Cum quis invitus laborem suscipit, tum sentit
graviorem. So immediately after ne, number, nisi, seu, sive, use quis, rather than
aliquis: as, Ne quam patiar injuriam, opera mihi danda est. Number quas mihi
affers literas? Nisi quae me forte fugiunt. Cic. Nisi quid aliud vobis placet.
Cic. Si verum est Fabium Labeonem, seu quem alium id tenuisse. Cic.

And lastly after sine rather use ullus, quispiam, or quisquam, than aliquis:
as, Sine cuj^spiam opera; sine cujusquam auxilio; sine ^lla pecu^^a

Rather say unus and alter than unus and duo: as, Venit unus and item alter.
Ter. Quid est tantum in uno, aut altero die? Cic.

Rather say etiam number, or etiam nunc, than usque nunc: as, Quaeritur etiam number
quis eum nuncium miserit. Cic. Etiam nunc hic stas, Parmenio? Ter. So rather
say etiam tum than usque tunc; as, Cum etiam tum in lecto Crassus esset. Cic.

Rather say hinc and illinc than hinc and inde: as, Hinc and illinc exhibent
mihi negotium. Plaut.

Rather use in dies, or in horas after a Comparative degree, than magis, ac
magis: as, Fit doctior in dies.

Rather say maxim omnium, than plus quam omnes: as, Qui maxim omnium nobilium
Graecis literis studuit. Cic. So rather say minime omnium, than minus quam
omnes: as, Quod quidem tu minime omnium ignoras. Cic.

Rather say minimum, than ut minimum, or ad minus: as, Ita fiunt omnes parts
minimum octoginta una. Cic.

Rather say non ita pridem, than non multo tempore ante: as, Nostra autem
civitate non ita pridem dominatu regio liberata. Cic.

Rather say non idem tibi and mihi, than non idem tibi sicut mihi: as, Non
eadem vobis, and il^i^ necessitudo impendet. Sal.

To express a little time rather say parumper, or paulisper, than parum, or
paulum: ^s, Dum exiero, parumper opperire hic. Ter. Paulisper, dum se uxor, ut
fit, comparat, moratus est. Cic.

Rather say per hos dies, than durantibus his diebus: as, Nulla abs te per hos
dies epistola inanis aliqua re utili and suavi venerat. Cic Quam provinciam
tenuistis a praedonibus liberam per hosce annos? Cic.

Rather say pridie quam, than pridie quo: as, Pridie quam excessit e vita. Cic.
So use quam, not quo, after postridie: as, Postridie intellexi, quam a vobis
discessi. Cic.

Rather say prae ut, than in comparatione: as, Parum etiam, prae ut futurum
est, praedicas. Plaut.

Rather say pro virili part, than quantum unus vir potest: as, Haec qui pro
sua virili part defendunt.

After a Verb of doubting rather say quin, than quod non: as, Quod si
acciderit, non dubitat, quin brevi Troja sit peritura. Cic.

Rather say quoties, than quot vicibus: as, Quoties tibi extorta est sica ista
de manibus?

Rather say ut quisque, than secundum quod quisque: as, Vt quisaue est vir
optimus, it a difficillime alios esse improbos suspicatur. Cic.

Rather say semel and iterum, than semel and bis: as, Vt re semel atque iterum
praejudicata condemnatus in judicium venerit. Cic.

Rather say non temere est, than non sine qua re est: as, Non temere est, quod
tu tam times. Ter.

Rather use ultra, than ulterius: as, Si probabiliter dicentur, ne quid ultra
requiratis. Cic.

Rather say paucis diebus post, or paucis post diebus, than post paucis diebus:
as, Paucis post diebus quam Luca discesserat. Cic.

Rather say uspiam, than in aliquo loco: as, Inde utrum consistere uspiam
velit, an mare transire, nescit. Cic.

And thus much of Particles elegantly used where other Expressions are not
elegant. I now proceed to the Second sort.

Of Particles elegantly used where others also may be used elegantly.
A is elegantly used for pro: as, Vide ne hoc totum, Scaevola, sit a me. Cic.
Also for post: as, Quid antepones Veneri a jentaculo? Plaut. Also for contra:
as, A quo periculo defendite, Judices, civem Fonteium. Cic.

Ad is elegantly used for usque ad: as, Sophocles ad summam senectutem
tragoedias fecit. Cic. Inermes ad satietatem trucidabitis. Live. Quod iis ad
denarium solveretur. Cic. Also for circiter and circa: as, Homines ad quindecim
Curioni assenserunt. Cic. Ad quae tempora te expectem, facias me certiorem
velim. Cic. Also for apud: as, Signa quae nobis curasti, ea sunt ad Cajetam
exposita. Cic. Also for ante: as, Clodius abjecta toga se ad generi pedes
abjecit. Cic. Also for secundum: as, Ad arbitrium and nutum auditorum totum se
fingit and accommodat. Cic. Also for prae in Comparison: as, At nihil ad
nostram hanc Ter. Also for post: as, Nescio quid in^ersit, utrum nunc v^^iam,
an ad december annos. Cic. Also for de: as, Posquam vos ad virtutem verba
fecistis. Symmach.

Adeo is elegantly put for ita, tam, or tantum: as, Adeone hospes hujus urbis,
adeo ignarus es, ut haec nescias? Cic. So adeo non is elegantly used for tantum
abest ut: as, Adeo ipse non violavit ut summam curam adhibuerit, ne quis
captivo corpori illuderet. Curt.

Adhuc is elegantly used for praeterea: as, Nisi si quid adhuc forte vultis.
Cic.

Admodum is elegantly used for omnino: as, Curio literarum admodum nihil
sciebat. Cic.

At is elegantly used for saltem: as, Si mihi republica bona frui non licebit,
at careho mala. Cic.

Certe is elegantly used for saltem: as, H^mines mortem optare incipiant, vel
certo timere desinant. Cic.

Citius is elegantly used for prius; as, Vox me citius defecerit, quam nomina.
Cic.

Cum is elegantly used. for etsi; as, Cum plus etiam contenderimus; quam
possumus; minus tamen faciemus, quam debemus. Cic.

De is elegantly put for in or per before words of Time: as, In comitium de
nocte venit. Cic. Also for super; as, Regulus de captivis commutandis Romam
missus. Cic. Also for ob or propter; as, Flebat uterque non de suo supplicio:
sed pater de filii morte, de patris filius. Cic. Also for quod attinet; as, De
pace, sentio simulationem esse apertam. Cic Also for secundum; as, De amicorum
sententia Rossius Romam confugit. Cic. Also for pro; as, De imperio decertare.
Cic.

Deinceps is elegantly put for deinde; as, De justitia dictum est; deinceps, ut
erat propositum, de liberate dicendum. Cic.

Ea re is elegantly used for propterea; Is metuit, and ea re fugit. Cic.

E^ is elegantly used for ad id, or usque ad id; as, Eo redactae res erant, ut
nulla amplius spes esset. Cic. Also for ideo; as, Illic homo aurum me scit
habere, eo me salutat blandiu^. Plaut.

Ergo is elegantly used for causa; as, Si quid contra alias leges ejus legis
ergo factum sit. Cic.

Ex is elegantly used for secundum; as, Ex praeceptis philosophiae vita acta.
Cic. Vt spero, statues ex dignitate nostra. Cic. Also for post; as, Ex
consulatu profectus est in Galliam. Cic.

Extra is elegantly used for praeter; as, Extra ducem, paucosque praeterea. Cic.

Hoc with quo is elegantly used for tanto quanto; as, Hoc audio libentius, quo
saepius. Cic. Quo difficilius, hoc praeclarius. Cic.

In is elegantly used for inter; as, Hic in magnis viris non est habendus. Cic.

Is with qui is elegantly used for talis qualis; as, Itaque ego is in illum
sum, quem me esse vis. Cic.

Id quod is elegantly put for quae res; as, Secedant improbi, secernant se a
bonis, unum in locum congregentur, muro denique id quod saepe jam dixi,
secernantur a bonis. Cic.

Ita is elegantly put for hac condition; as, Nam hoc ipsum ita justum est si
est voluntarium. Cic.

Iterum is elegantly put for secundo; as, Fabulae vix dignae quae iterum
legantur. Cic. Iterum hoc tertio nominati. Cic.

Juxta is elegantly put for secundum; as, Juxta deos in tua manu est. Tacit.

Licet is elegantly put for etiamsi; as, Licet corpus abesset meum, dignitas
jam in patriam redierat. Cic.

Long is elegantly used for procul; as, Isti nuncii quam long sint, nescio.
Cic. Also for valde; as, Long mihi alia men's. Sal.

Minus is elegantly used for non; as, At non nunquam quae praedicta sunt, minus
eveniunt. Cic.

Nae is elegantly used for vere; as, Nae illi vehementer errant. Cic.

Nec is elegantly used for non; as, Quo mortuo nec ita multo post, in Galliam
proficiscitur. Cic. Nec enim illa prima vera est. Cic.

Nihil is elegantly used for non; as, Hoc tamen opus in apertum ut proferas,
nihil postulo. Cic.

Nisi is elegantly used for veruntamen; as, De re nihil possum judicare, nisi
illud mihi persuadeo. Cic.

Nullus is elegantly used for non; as, Memini tametsi nullus moneas. Ter.

Nusquam is elegantly used for nullo in loco; as, Ego vero nusquam esse illos
puto. Cic.

Ob is elegantly used for ante; as, Mihi ob oculos exilium versatur. Cic.

Omnino is elegantly used for tantummodo and prorsus; as, Quinque omnino
fuerunt, qui illum absolverunt. Cic. Epulabar cum sodalibus omnino modice. Cic.

Parum is elegantly used for non satis; as, Duas dabo, una si parum est. Plaut.

Per is elegantly used for ob; as, Neque sciebat, neque per aetatem etiam
poterat. Ter.

Perinde is elegantly used for aeque or ita; as, Philosophia non perinde ac de
hominum est vita merita, laudatur. Cic. Quae perdifficilia sunt, perinde
habenda sunt, ac si effici non possint. Cic.

Prae is elegantly used for ante; as, Stillantem prae se pugionem tulit. Cic.
Also for ob or propter; as, Solemn, p^ae sagittarum multitudine, non videbitis.
Cic.

Praeter is elegantly used for extra; as, Amicum sibi ex Consularibus neminem
esse video, praeter Lucullum. Cic. Also for supra; as, Attici in eo genere
praeter caeteros excellunt. Cic.

Praeterquam is used for nisi; as, Nullum a vobis praemium postulo, praeterquam
hujus diei memoriam sempiternam. Cic.

Pro is used for ante; as, Illa praesidia, quae pro templis omnibus cernitis.
Cic. Also for in; as, Laudati quoque pro concione omnes sunt. Live. Also for
vice or loco; as, Tibi Marcelli statua pro patibulo fuit. Cic. Also for
secundum; as, Civitatibus pro numero militum pecuniae summas describere. Cic.
Also for ob or propter; as, Pro hujus peccatis ego supplicium sufferam. Plaut.

Prope is used for juxta; as, Cum plebs prope ripam Anienis consedisset. Cic.

Propter is used for prope; as, In pratulo propter Platonis statuam consedimus.
Cic. Ipse cum liberis and colonis propter Aquilam adsistit. Sal.

Qua repeated is elegantly used for tum tum; as, Topiarium laudavi, ita omnia
convestivit hedera, qua basim villae, qua intercolumnia ambusationis. Cic.

Quando is elegantly used for quoniam; as, Quam quando complexus es, and tenes.
Cic. So quandoquidem; as, Quandoquidem tu istos oratores tantopere laudas. Cic.

Quamvis is elegantly used for quantumvis; as, Quasi vero mihi difficile sit,
quamvis multos nominatim proferre. Cic.

Quasi is elegantly used for tanquam; as, Sic eas exponam, quasi ageretur res,
non quasi narretur Cic. Also for sicut, or non secus ac; as, Quasi tua res aut
honos agatur, ita laboras. Cic. Also for fere; as, Quantulus vobis videtur?
mihi quasi pedalis. Cic.

Qui is elegantly used for ut; as, Nec tam sum insolens, qui me Jovem esse
dicam. Cic. Also for qualis; as, Sed illum eum esse puto, qui esse debeat. Cic.

Quid is elegantly used for cur; as, Sed quid ego argumentor? quid plura
disputo? Cic.

Quod is elegantly used for quantum; as, Ipse (quod commod tuo fiat) cum eo
colloquere. Cic. Also for quantum ad id quod; as, Quod ad me scribis de
Hermathena, mihi gratissimum est. Cic. Also for quia; as, Qui enim beatior
Epicurus, quod in patria vivebat; quam Metrodorus, quod Athenis? Cic.

Quo is elegantly used for quanto; as, Sed quo erant suaviores, eo majorem
dolorem ille casus afferebat. Cic. Quo gratior tua liberalitas C. Caesar, nobis
qui illa videmus, debet esse. Cic. Also for ut; as, Quo facilius probaret illa
Romani esse hominis, idcirco -- Cic.

Quomodo is elegantly used for ut or sicut; as, Postulatio brevis, and quomodo
mihi persuadeo, aliquanto aequior. Cic.

Quocirca is elegantly used for quamobrem; as, Quocirca been apud majores
nostros Senatus decrevit. Cic.

Quippe is elegantly used for utpote; as, Sol Democrito magnus videtur, quippe
homini erudito. Cic. Convivia cum fratre non inibat, quippe qui ne in oppidum
nisi perraro veniret. Cic.

Secundum is elegantly used for pro; as, Secundum nos judicari volumus. Cic.

Si is elegantly used for an; as, Dicito, si pascuntur aves. Cic. Also for
etiamsi; as, Et mehercule, si nihil diceret, tanto officio me moveret. Cic.

Sin is elegantly put for sed si; as, Si ita est, omnia faciliora: sin aliter,
magnum negotium. Cic.

Sub is elegantly used for statim post: as, Sub equestris finem certaminis,
coorta est pugna peditum. Live.

Super is elegantly used for de; as, Simulque cogites, quid nobis agendum sit
super legatione. Cic.

Supra is elegantly used for ante; as, Illa, quam supra dixi. Cic.

Tantum is elegantly used for solum; as, Nomen tantum virtutis usurpas: quid
ipsa valeat, ignoras. Cic. So tantummodo.

Tum is elegantly used for deinde; as, Tum retiones in ea disputatione a te
collectae vetabant me reipublicae penitus diffidere. Cic.

Vbi is elegantly used for in quo, etc. as, Vt is cuique locus, ubi ipse sit,
miserrimus esse videatur. Cic. Also for postquam; as, Vbi semel quis
pejeraverit, ei credi postea, non oportet. Cic.

Vel is elegantly used for saltem; as, Postremo, si nullo alio pacto vel
foenore. Ter. Also for etiam; as, Per me vel stertas licet, non modo quiescas.
Cic. Hoc in genere nervorum vel minimum, suavitatis autem vel plurimum. Cic.

Velut is used for exempli causa: as, Bestiae, quae e terra gignuntur, velut
Crocodili. Cic.

Vltra is elegantly used for praeterea: as, Si probabiliter dicentur, ne quid
ultra a requiratis. Cic.

Vnde is elegantly used for ex quo, etc. as, Equidem vobis fontes unde
hauriretis, atque itinera ipsa putavit esse demonstranda. Cic.

Vnus is elegantly put for solus: as, In tuis summis laudibus excipiunt unam
iracundiam. Cic.

Vt is elegantly put for quomodo: as, Quid agit tua uxor? Vt valet? Plaut. So
utcunque for quomodocunque. Also for sicut; as, Erat cum literis Latinis tum
Graecis, ut temporibus illis, eruditus. Cic. Also for utpote qui: as, Ille, ut
fuit semper apertissimus, non purgavit, sed indicavit. Cic. Also for licet: as,
Verum, ut hoc non sit, tamen servet rempublicam. Cic. Also for postquam: as, Vt
ab urbe discessi, nullum praetermisi diem, quin aliquid ad te literarum darem.
Cic.

Vt ut is elegantly put for utcunque: as, Vt ut haec sunt, tamen hoc faciam.
Ter.

And thus far of the Particles that are used elegantly for others. I now
proceed to those that remain.

Of Particles which are elegantly used together with others.
Ab has usque elegantly joined to it: as, Sed ab usque Tmolo petivit Cic.

Absque has te or eo esset elegantly joined to it: as, Nam absque te esset,
recte ego mihi vidissem. Ter.

Ad has summam elegantly joined with it: as, Ad summam animo forti sitis. Cic.

Aeque has ac, atque, and, and ut elegantly joined with it: as, Quis esset
tantus fructus in prosperis rebus, nisi haberes, qui illis aeque ac tu ipse,
gauderet? Cic. Sed me colit and observat, aeque atque illum ipsum patronum
suum. Cic. Neque ipsam amicitiam tueri possumus, nisi aeque amicos and nos
ipsos diligamus. Cic. Itaque libentissime praedicabo Cn. Pompeium studio and
authoritate, aeque ut unumquemque vestrum pro salute mea laborasse. Cic.

Alius and aliter have ac and atque elegantly after them: as, Irrepit in
hominum mentes alia dicentis, ac significantis dissimulatio. Cic. Non alius
essem atque nunc sum. Cic. Ne sim salvus si aliter scribo, ac sentio. Cic.
Aliter, atque ostenderam, facio. Cic.

Contra has ac, atque, and quam elegantly joined to it: as, Vt contra, ac
dicat, accipi and sentiri velit. Cic. Contra atque apud nos fieri solet. Varro.
Contra, quam nos supra scripsimus. Gell.

Eo has elegantly quo, quod, and quia answering to it: as, Non eo dico, quo
mihi veniat in dubium tua fides. Cic. Eoque tardius scripsi ad te, quod
quotidie ^eipsum expectabam. Cic. Id autem eo facilius credebatur, quia simile
vero videbatur. Cic.

Facile is elegantly joined with primus or princeps: as, Non solum sui
municipii, sed illius vicinitatis facile primus. Cic. Eudemus, Platonis
auditor, in Astrologia, judicio doctissimorum hominum, facile princeps. Cic.

Jam has elegantly joined with it inde, a, and usque, ab: as, Jam inde a
Consulatu meo. Cic. Jam inde ab Aristotele. Cic. Vetus opinio est jam usque ab
Heroicis ducta temporibus. Cic.

Interea has elegantly dum and quoad joined with it: as, Interea dum haec,
quae dispersa sunt, coguntur. Cic. Interea quoad fides esset data, Caesarem
facturum, quae polliceretur. Caes.

Is has ut elegantly joined with it: as, Nec tamen is sum, ut mea me maxim
delectent. Cic.

Id has aetatis or temporis elegantly joined with it: as, Duo filii id
aetatis. Cic. Id aetatis jam sumus, ut omnia fortiter far debeamus. Cic.
Maxim quod is locus ab omni turba id temporis vacuus esset. Cic. Venit enim ad
me, and quidem id temporis, ut retinendus esset. Cic.

Ita is elegantly joined with non or nec: as, Simulachra praeclara, sed non ita
antiqua. Cic. Nec ita multum provectus, rejectus Austro sum in eum ipsum locum
unde conscenderam. Cic.

Juxta has ac si elegantly joined with it: as, Tum reliquis officiis, juxta ac
si meus frater esset, sustentavit. Cic.

Licet has per with his Accusative Case elegantly joined to it: as, Per me vel
stertas licet, non modo quiescas. Cic. Sinatis hunc facere, dum per aetatem
licet. Ter.

Long is elegantly joined with words of Difference, Dissimilitude, or
Excellence: as, Long aliter, atque a me dicta erant detulerunt. Cic. Quod est
long secus. Cic. Vir long post homines natos improbissimus. Cic. Paetus long
princeps municipii Lucensis. Cic.

Magis has quam and si elegantly joined with it: as, Jus bonumque apud eos non
legibus magis, quam natura valebat. Sal. Magis dicas, si scias, quod ego scio.
Plaut. It is also elegantly joined unto Substantives, as well as to uncompared
Adjectives: as, Nisi forte magis erit parricida, qui consularem patrem, quam si
quis humilem necaverit. Cic.

Maxim has elegantly joined with it quam, vel, quam qui, ut quisque: as,
Dicere quam maxim ad veritatem accommoda. Cic. Quae quidem vel maxim
suspicionem movent. Cic. Tam sum amicus reipublicae, quam qui maxim. Cic. Vt
quisque maxim opis indigeat, it a ei potissimum opitulari. Cic.

Minus has si elegantly joined with it: as, Si minus necari, at custodiri
oportebat. Cic.

Mox has quam elegantly joined with it: as, Quam mox navigo? Plaut. Expecto
quam mox Chaerea hac ratione utatur. Cic.

Ne has quidem and nunc elegantly going with it: as, Nunquam illum ne minima
quidem re, offendi. Cic. Ne nunc senum convivio delector. Cic.

Nec and neque are elegantly joined with dum: as, Cassius ineptas literas
misit, nec dum Bibuli erant allatae. Cic. Neque dum Roma es profectus. Cic.

Nemo is elegantly joined with homo and quisquam: as, Neminem hominem pluris
facio. Cic. Nemo quisquam illorum ad te venit. Ter.

Nihil has ne quidem divided by another word elegantly after it: as, Ad eas
ego literas nihil scripsi, ne gratulandi quidem causa. Cic.

Nimio has plus elegantly joined to it: as, Sed quia nimio plus te diligo. Cic.

Nisi has si, quis, and siquis elegantly joined with it: as, Nisi si id est,
quod suspicor, aliquid monstri alunt. Ter. Nisi quis Deus nos respexerit. Cic.
Nisi vero si quis est, qui Catilinae similes cum Catilina sentire non putet.
Cic.

Non has elegantly joined with it quin, quo, and modo non: as, Non quin rectum
esset, sed quia multo rectius fuit. Cic. Non quo ea sit mihi quicquam carius,
aut esse debeat. Cic. Tu id non modo non prohibebas, verum etiam approbabas.
Cic.

Nullus has quin elegantly after it: as, Dies fere nullus est, quin domum meam
ventitet. Cic.

Nunquam has ullus and quin coming elegantly after it: as, Nunquam ex tuis
ullae mihi literae redditae sunt. Nunquam unum intermittit diem quin semper
veniat. Ter.

Par has ac and atque elegantly joined to it: as, Nec mihi par cum Lucio ratio
est, ac tecum fuit. Cic. Si par in nobis hujus artis, atque in illo Pictore
sci^nti^ fuisset. Cic.

Perinde has elegantly after it ac, ut, acsi, quasi; as, Non perinde, ac est
merita, laudatur. Cic. Perinde erit, ut acceperis. Cic. Perinde, ac si virtute
vicissent. Cic. Perinde quasi certi quicquam sit in rebus humanis. Cic.

Prae has ut, quod, and quam elegantly with it, when comparison is noted: as,
Parum etiam, prae ut futurum est, praedicas. Plaut. Omnes res relictas habeo,
prae quod tu velis. Plaut. Prae quam quod molestum est. Plaut.

Primum has cum, nunc, ut, simulac, and omnium elegantly joined with it: as,
Cum primum in eam insulam veni. Cic. Equidem qui nunc primum huc vene^im,
satiari non queo. Cic. Vt primum potestas data est. Cic. Simulac primum niti
possunt. Cic. Primum omnium non te fugit. Cic.

Pro has elegantly joined with it ut, eo ac, eo ut, eo quod, eo quantum; as,
Prout hominis facultates ferebant. Cic. Spero deos, pro eo ac mereor, relaturos
esse gratiam. Cic. Pro eo ut temporis difficultas, aratorumque penuria tulit.
Cic. Vereor ne parum tibi, pro eo quod a te habeo, reddiderim. Cic. Pro eo,
quantum in quibusque sit ponderis, aestimanda sunt. Cic.

Prope has a elegantly joined with it: as, Prope a meis aedibus sedebas. Cic.
Also ut: as, Prope fuit, ut Dictator crearetur. Live.

Quam has ut and quomodo elegantly after it: as, Haec sunt dicta subtiliu^,
quam ut quivis ea possit agnoscere. Cic. Multa praeclara in eo viro cognovi:
sed nihil est admirabilius, quam quomodo ille mortem Marci filii tulit. Cic. It
is also set with great elegancy before a Superlative Degree: as, Sed peto a te,
ut quam celerrime mihi librarius mittatur. Cic. Exposui quam brevissime potui,
oracula. Cic.

Quisquam has omnium and unus elegantly joined with it: as, An hoc dubit avit
quisquam omnium, quin is venalem in Sicilia jurisdictionem habuerit? Cic. Ne
quisquam unus malis artibus postea taem popularis esset. Live.

Quo is elegantly joined with minus: as, Nihil impedit, quo minus id, quod
maxim placeat, facere possimus. Cic. Quo minus familiaris sum, hoc sum ad
investigandum curiosior. Cic. Also with non: as, Non quo de tua constantia
dubitem, sed quia mos est ita rogandi, rogo. Cic.

Quin is elegantly used after Negative Particles, Nemo, nullus, nihil, non: as,
Nemo Lilybaei fuit, quin viderit; in Sicilia, quin audierit. Cic. Dies sere
nullus est, quin hic Satyrus domum meam ventitet. Cic. Causae nihil dico, quin
ita sit. Cic. Non quin dissentiam sed quod -- Cic.

Quisque is elegantly used after se, suus, qui; an Adjective Numeral; or a
Superlative Degree: also betwixt two Superlatives: as, Se quisque diligit. Suae
quemque fortunae maxim poeniteat. Cic. In quo quisque artificio excellit, is
in suo genere Rose us dicitur. Cic. Quinto quoque anno Sicilia censetur Cic.
Certe enim recentissima quaeque sunt correcta and emendata maxim, Cic. Optimum
quodque rarissimum est. Cic.

Quotus has quisque elegantly joined to it: as, Quotus enim quisque
Philosophorum invenitur, qui sit ita moratus? Cic.

Secus has ac, atque, and quam elegantly after it: as, Non secus acsi meus
esset frater. Cic. Sed si aliquanto secus, atque in tradenda art dici solet.
Cic. Mihi autem erit maximae curae, nequid fiat secus quam volumus. Cic.

Sin has minus elegantly joined to it: as, Si perficiunt, optime: sin minus,
ad nostrum Jovem revertamur. Cic.

Similiter has ac, atque, and utsi elegantly after it: as, Similiter facis, ac
si me roges, cur te duobus contuear oculis. Cic. Neque vero illum similiter,
atque ipse eram, commotum esse vidi. Cic. Similiter facere eos, qui inter se
contenderent, ut si nautae inter se certarent. Cic. The Adjective Similis has
the same Particles elegantly after it: as, Nec similem habeat vultum ac si
ampullam perdidisset. Cic. 4. de Fin.

Simul has elegantly after it ac, atque, and ut: as, Simul ac mihi collibitum
est. Cic. Quod is simul atque sensit -- Cic. Simul ut videro Curionem. Cic.

Supra has quam and nihil elegantly joined with it: as, Corpus patiens inediae
supra quam cuique credibile est. Sal. Ita accurate ut nihil supra. Cic.

Talis has elegantly after it ac, or atque, ut, and qui: as, Honos talis
paucis est datus, ac mihi Cic. Tali atque hic est infortunio. Ter. Vita quidem
talis fuit ut nihil posset accedere. Cic. Talem igitur te esse oportet, qui
primum te ab impiorum civium societate sejungas. Cic.

Tam has elegantly after it quam, ut, qui, and quam, qui: as, Tam te diligit
quam si vixerit tecum. Cic. Non essem tam inurbanus, ut eo gravarer, quod vos
cupere sentirem. Cic. Quis est tam Lynceus, qui in tantis tenebris nihil
offendat? Cic. Tam levis, quam qui levissimus. Cic. Tam mihi gratum id erit,
quam quod gratissimum. Cic.

Tantisper has dum elegantly after it: as, Ego hic tantisper dum exit, te
opperiar foris. Ter.

Tantum has non elegantly after it: as, Tantum non statim a funere ad
negotiorum consuetudinem redit. Sueton.

Tum has demum and denique elegantly after it: as, Tum demum sciam recte
monuisse, si tu recte caveris. Plaut. Tum denique fore beatas respub. putavit,
si aut docti, aut sapientes homines eas regere coepissent. Cic.

Vbi has primum elegantly joined with it: as, Vbi primum est licitum, illico
properavi abire de foro: Plaut.

Vel has maxim and optime joined elegantly to it: as, Hoc uno praestamus vel
maxim feris -- Cic. Cum Sophocles vel optime scripserit, tamen -- Cic. 2. de
Fin.

Vix has dum elegantly joined to it: as, Vix dum epistolam tuam legeram, cum
ad me Posthumous Curious venit. Cic. Also aut ne with it self repeated: as, Quae
propter exiguitatem vix, aut ne vix quidem appareant. Cic. 4. de Fin.

Vltra has quam elegantly joined to it: as, Exordium, ultra quam satis est,
producitur. Cic. Servum gravissime de se opinantem, non ultra quam compedibus
coercuit. Sueton.

Vsque has a, a^, c, ex, ad, in elegantly joined to it: as, Vsque a mari
supero Romam proficisci. Cic. Siculo prospexit ab usque Pachyno. Virg. Vsque e
Persia Durr. Qui ex ultima Syria navigarent. Cic. 7. Verr. Fugientes usque ad
flumen persequuntur. Caes. 7. B. Gall. Legatum usque in Hispaniam misit. Cic
pro Leg. Manil.

Vt has statim elegantly coming with it: as, Philippus, ut heri me salutavit,
statim Romam profectus est. Cic. So primum and confestim.

And thus much of the Particles which are elegantly used together with others.

Now, as these are not all the Particles, whereof there be Elegant uses; so
neither are these all the Elegant uses, that are made of these Particles: there
being, as, many more besides these, so, very much more observable (and nothing
less elegant than what is here said) of these. All I intended herein, was to
give the Learner such a taste of these Delicacies, as might where his Fancy to
a mo^e eager desire after a fuller knowledge of them. Notwithstanding, even
these few well digested, will have such influence upon all his Exercises, as
that no one of them will be without some savoury relish of pure Roman
Eloquence. Only I must caution the Teacher, that he patiently bear with, and
gently correct his Scholars mistakes in these things; which, until he be well
versed in them, he will, for want of judgment and experience, be apt to fall
into* And this is all I shall say for the present of the Elegancies of the
Particles.

CHAP. IX. Of the Idioms of English and Latin.
EVery Language has its Idiotis^s and Proprieties, Phrases and Forms of
speaking, peculiar to it self, which cannot be rendered word for word into any
other Language but with much barbarity and baldness of expression. Thus however
it is in English and Latin: insomuch that either way to be nimium fidus
interpres, to stick too close to the Verbal Translation will betray a man into
ridiculous absurdities. Therefore to take the Learner off again from his nice
insisting on Verbal Translating, and remedy those inconveniences that come by
his sticking too close thereto, it will be necessary to acquaint him with the
Idiotisms of both the English and Latin, and show him how to express himself
in either Language according to the respective Proprieties thereof.

The one Precept in order to this, is, To heed the Sense more than the Words,
and to fit the expression thereunto: That being well rendered, whether into
English or Latin, whose sense is clearly and fully expressed in the Language
whereby it is rendered, though the words be more or fewer than were in that,
whence the Translation was made. Observation indeed has the main stroke in
this business. Yet sundry Helps may be administered. And for the ease of the
Master, and profit of the Scholar, I shall set down such as I either conceive,
or have found beneficial in this case.

One may be for the Teacher to observe unto him all the elegant Idiotisms, that
accidentally occur in his Lectures and Exercises; and cause him to set them
down in a Book, and often to review them, and repeat them.

Another may be, to put him to learn such Latin Authors, as are so translated
into English, as that the propriety of both Languages is heeded unto and
observed by the Translator, allowing him the use of the Translation. Such are
Tully's Offices translated by Mr. Brinslie, Terence's Comedies by Mr. Bernard,
Corderius's Colloquies by Mr. Hoole, etc. and Janua Linguarum by Mr. Robotham.

A third may be to give him a Catalogue of English Idiotisms barbarously
translated, and together with them, by way of correction, the elegant
translation of them; and labor to make him understand the ridiculous barbarity
of the one, and propriety and elegancy of the other, after this manner.

Send me word Bar. Mitte mihi verbum.

Send me word Eleg. Fac me per literas certiorem.

I am short of money Bar. Brevis sum pecuniae.

I am short of money Eleg. Deficit me pecunia.

Of this nature Corderius composed a whole Book, styled, De corrupti sermonis
emendatione. which may be usefully perused by any Learner, or young Teacher of
the Latin Tongue.

A fourth may be for the Teacher, first, to read over himself every English,
that his Scholar is to make into Latin, and to observe what Idiotisms occur in
that, and advertise the Learner of them, and show him how to vary the English
Phrase into such other expression, as is capable of an Elegant Verbal
Translation.

But the fifth, (and that which I ever found most beneficial) is to give the
Learner to Translate some Englishes composed all, or most of Idiomatical
expressions, such as cannot, without most ridiculous barbarity, be translated
word for word into Latin: and to show him, and make him understand the
ridiculous barbarousness of his own verbal Translations, and to furnish him
instead thereof with the proper and elegant expressions. When he has gone over
in translating any one such English, which would be of some pretty length, then
cause him to be very exact in giving readily without book, phrase by phrase,
the corrected Latin for the English, and the English for the Latin. Also make
him construe the Latin verbatim, so far as it may with good sense be done (it
were not amiss to make him translate it word for word, as far as may be) for
this will help him still more to the understanding of the English Phrase, and
teach him how to resolve such English Phrases, into other words and expressions
of like import, and much facilitate the whole work. After that, cause him to
translate it over again, getting new Phrases for every expression; and if there
be no new supply (which it is rare but there will be) let him vary what he
has, so as that it may seem new. And let him do again all the same with this
second Translation, which he did with the former. And last of all, cause him
(looking upon and reading his English, unless, (which is better) he can say it
without book) to give for every English expression both several Latin
Translations. Then proceed to another; and still to another of the same nature,
so long as there shall be need or reason.

This Exercise, as it is of all others the most difficult, so also the most
profitable. It is not imaginable what a strange alteration to the better it
will in short time produce in all the Scholars performances. And therefore I do
most seriously above all others recommend it from my own experience unto the
practice of others.

For the help of the Scholar in this work, there are of late sundry Books come
forth, viz. Mr. Clarks Phraseologia Puerilis, Mr. Willis's Anglicisms
Latinized; and last of all, my own Idiomatologia Anglo-Latina, or English
Latin Phraseologie, in which, if the Learner should be put to get every day
one Head of Phrases so perfectly at least, as that looking only on the English,
he can give the Latin for it; and looking only on the Latin, can for it give
the English, I say not how much his profiting would be in a short time, but
leave it to trial.

And for the ease of the Master, there are extant in Mr. Clarks Dux Grammaticus
(page 246. etc.) several English Dialogues, of such composition as I spoke,
ready for Translation; which, by that time the Scholar has well gone through
with, according to the way that I speak of, he will (by Gods blessing on his
pains and industry) have attained such a dexterity in Translating, that he will
now be fit to be put to any performance, where his Invention shall be exercised
henceforward for Matter, as his Memory all this while has been for Words,
being able to cloth his thoughts in proper Language, and so fit for the Higher
School, where I shall leave him to the Masters skill and care.

But because that Book may not be to be had at every hand to be consulted with,
therefore that the Reader may not go without an exemplification of the thing I
pr^^ound; and withal, that I may contribute still somewhat more toward the ease
of the Teacher, and use of the Learner, I have here add I some new Dialogues
of mine own contriving for that purpose: The Translation whereof, if performed
according to the Idiome of the Latin, will be no unelegant Composition (as the
Latins of them lying by me, if occasion were, would show, which I forbear to
publish, because the design of these is only to be Englishes for others to
translate into Latin:) But if the Idiome of the Latin be not observed in the
rendering, then the Translation will be bald and unelegant, and indeed not
Latin, but a kind of barbarous and ridiculous Gibberish, like that which
Petties and Puisnees are used to speak.

Certain Idiomatical Dialogues, contrived on purpose by the Translation of them
to bring off Children from the baldness of a Verbal Translating.
DIALOGUE I.
Francis and John. F. WHat says the World of me?


J. It Is the common speech of the world, that you are too much given to the
world.


F. This is the fashion of the world, to say any thing of any man.


J. I believe you cannot tell which way in the world to help it.


F. Could I do it, it would be as acceptable to me as any thing in the world.


J. It is to no end in the world to go about it.


F. I had as lieve as any thing in the world, I could tell who were the Author
of that slander. Let him go to the worlds end, I will resolve to follow him.


J. Ah by no means in the world, you shall not do so: that would be a piece of
the greatest folly in the world.


F. I should be the maddest man in the world, if I should let such a one as him
escape scot free.


J. There is nothing in the world more foolish than an angry man, who minds
nothing in the world, but how to revenge himself of those, that have done him
wrong.


F. It makes me so mad to have such a thing talked of me, that I neither know
whereabouts in the world I am, nor what in the world to do, nor which way in
the world to turn me.


J. It is one of the strangest things in the world, that you should be so angry
for a thing of nothing.


F. I had as good be out of the world, as live to be so slandered in it.


J. You talk just for all the world, as if there were no where in the world any
to be found, who were as ill talked of as you.


F. Go any whither in the world, and all the world over, you will find none who
deserves less than I do, to be so ill talked of.


J. As the world rules, you shall find few, but suffer as ill as you do. And
this is no new complaint but now come up. In elder times Socrates and a world
more, who are many years since gone to the other world, who yet will be well
spoken of to the worlds end, were in every whit as bad a case as you. And he
were the maddest man in the world, that should think not to fare as others do.


F. It is a world of wrongs that I have suffered in this respect: but there
seems to be somewhat of reason in what you say; and therefore let the world go
which way it will, I will resolve to take all well.


J. It Is Christian-like done of you: and when the world, and all things in the
world shall come to nothing, then shall the benefit of this so great
contentedness of yours be in being.


DIALOGUE II.
Charles. Anthony. C. HOw do Horses sell here, Anthony?


A. They are things that a while ago would have given money, but now a days
they hardly give any thing.


C. But Bullocks surely bear a price.


A. Truly within this few years they would have given something, but now they
too are much fallen of price: Horses will give more than they yet. You may buy
a good pair of Bullocks for eight pound.


C. And are Forms down of price too?


A. How should they be otherwise, when Corn gives so little? I have a piece of
Land to sell; I am confiden^ there is no better in all this Country, and that
will give more, and yet I may go seek my Chapman.


C. How do you value it? set a price on it: I Will be your Chapman, ^f we can
agree of price.


A. Take it for an hundred pound.


C. You are over dear of it; it is not worth so much. Give me your hand, here is
fifty for you.


A. It is worth as much more, if a man might have to the worth o^ it.


C. Choose it, I will not give a penny more for it.


A. And I will not take a penny less for it.


C. Then I do not believe we shall agree.


A. I cannot help that, unless I mean to undo my self, as God forbid I should.
I stand not in so great need yet, I thank God. No doubt but within a while Land
will rise of price again.


C. Will you take my money before I go? I will pay you down ready money.


A. I have told you my price. I cannot abate a penny of it. If you like it so,
I will be my words-master.


C. If that be your mind, I shall give over, and not give you one word more.


A. As you have a mind. I have told you my mind.


C. Then farewell, Anthony.


A. Farewell to you, Charles.


DIALOGUE III.
Edward. Andrew. E. ANdrew, it gave me in my mind, there would be somewhat to
do betwixt George and Thomas, before they had done and parted.


A. What Is the matter, Ned?


E. It so fell out, that they fell out so, that it came at last to handy
strokes.


A. That Is a bad matter; but who, I pray thee, got the better of it?


E. Though Thomas were the better cuffer, and for a while had the better of it,
yet at last they parted even hands. For if Thomas gave George a dash on the
teeth, and made him give back, George had a good heart, and well knowing what a
stout man he had to do withal, behaved himself like a man, and would not give
out, but gave him like for like.


A. What was the matter, that they fell together by the ears?


E. George making his boast, that he was descended from a Knight, gave out,
that he was come of as good a house as Thomas was. Whereupon Thomas took George
a box on the ear: and withal gave him warning to give over his comparing
himself with him, who was of noble blood; and said moreover he would give him
as much more, if he took not heed.


A. What answer did George give him to this?


E. He only gave him a Challenge into the field, and then gave him never a word
more.


A. In my mind they are both to blame.


E. And I am of your mind too: for they should not have given way to their
anger, but have given satisfaction to one another, as reason was; in as much as
Christ in the Laws that he has given the Church, has given us in charge not
to do, but as we would be done unto: but they that wholly give themselves to
pleasure, as most young men do, little mind the Laws of Christ, or give their
minds to the keeping of them.


A. I hope, they were made friends again.


E. Yes, that they were, and they are now as great friends as ever.


A. I pray you, who made them friends?


E. One that is a very great friend to them both, as they give out, came upon
them, as they were fighting, and parted the fray betwixt them, and prevailed so
far with them, that he made them friends. And from henceforth I hope they will
be always friends.


A. In truth it was kindly done of him, and like a friend, to set them at one
again.


E. Indeed it was done of him like a Christian: and no doubt but in time he
shall get that blessing, which Christ in his Gospel has promised to give unto
the Peacemakers for it.


A. I give God thanks for it, that the matter ended so: for I was a little
fearful what the end of it would be.


DIALOGUE IV.
Matthew. Adrian. M. ADrian, how came that into Williams head to marry a Wife,
that is so old, she is past childbearing?


A. In truth, Matthew, that cannot I tell now: but this I Will pass you my word
for, that all i^ past and done between them, and that without many words
passing on either side. And to say truth, so pretty a Woman she was, and so
young to see to, that she might have passed for a childbearing Woman.


M. I believe then, as matters pass, he hardly has a Wife to his mind.


A. There is no day almost passes him, but he wishes him unmarried again a
hundred times over. But now it is past cure, he is undone: and though in times
past he did ever pass his time in pleasure, yet must he now pass the rest of
his life in trouble.


M. I am sorry the matter is brought to that pass. Though there were that said
it would so come to pass, that he would repent him of his marrying, before
three days were passed and come to an end.


A. For the most part it so comes to pass, as indeed it needs must come to
pass, when men that are scarce past children, rashly run on their own heads,
and pass not for the advice of their friends, who far pass them in wisdom and
experience, by which they might more happily bring their purposes to pass.


M. I believe it is come to pass as some men wished, whom I think good to pass
over without mentioning. For my self, I am past marrying, and so pass not for
my self. Only I wish that some would take warning by others harms.


A. Let us let these things pass, as things of no concernment unto us, and pass
away the time in other talk.


M. At present I am a little busy, so that I cannot tarry any longer with
thee: to morrow, and you please, we will meet again, and talk our bellyfuls.


A. Agreed. And in the mean time fare you well.


DIALOGUE V.
Mark and Paul. M. I Wonder, Paul, what should be the reason, that there was
such a quarter kept at Geneva.


P. Caesar hearing, that the Enemy had broke out from all quarters, though
sooner than ordinary, drew his Soldiers out of their Winter quarters into the
field.


M. There was some reason for it. But where did they quarter?


P. About that time they had taken up their quarters about Marseil.


M. What became of that stir?


P. Caesar beating up their quarters all on a sudden, put them into such
disorder, that they presently forsook their Arms, and took their heels, and ran
away. Nevertheless a quarter of the Enemies Army was slain.


M. What became of the rest?


P. Some escaped by flight: others were taken alive, and had quarter given them.


M. He played his part finely. But I had heard, there was no quarter given.


P. Nay, they that asked for quarter, had it: they only being killed that would
not take quarter.


M. 'Twas Prince like done: for as the Poet long since said, It is the part of
a Prince to spare them that submit, but to bring down those that stand it out.


DIALOGUE VI.
Richard and Peter. R. LEt us consider, Peter, how far it may be fit for us to
make our selves to do in this affair.


P. In truth I do not think it fit, that we our selves should be at the doing
of it.


R. What else then do you think fit to be done then?


P. I think we must think of, and at a fit time send over thither a man fit for
that employment.


R. Money is fit: and I desire by all means that what is fit should be done:
but I cannot think of a man fit to send: and this business is not fit to be put
to every one, but one that is fit for the turn, and will do no more but what is
fit.


P. You do as it is fit you should. But what think you of Giles, a man fit for
any thing, and that can fit his speech to any turn; and who has now got shoes
so fit for his feet, that though a while ago he had a fit of the Gout, yet now
it is completely fitted for going; may not he fit our turn?


R. He will do well for a fit: but sometimes he falls into a fit of talking,
and then talks more than is fit, and so marrs all.


P. If his wit do but come and go by fits, it were more fit that lame Giles
were let alone, and not sent at this fit.


R. It Is as I tell you.


DIALOGUE VII.
Thomas and George. T GEorge, have you heard the news of Robert?


G. What? that he is over head and ears love?


T. I mar'l who put it into his head to love that Wench. This mischief will
fall on his pate, be he who he will be.


G. I imagine he went to her of his own head.


T. But do not he and Richard lay their heads together sometimes?


G. You have hit the nail on the head.


T. Some mischief or other will light on their heads. But this it is to give
young men their heads, who do things of greatest concernment, they ca^e not
how, and hand over head.


G. But, if it should come into his Fathers head, who is one of the heads of
the people, that he had any such mind, he would go near to break his head with
his staff next time he met him, though he were sure to have a smart fine set on
his own head for it afterward.


T. 'Twere more fit he were bravely leading Soldiers in the head of an Army,
than so basely lying in a Ladies lap.


G. In truth it is just as you say. But thus you see, the world rules. Farewell.


DIALOGUE VIII.
Cornelius and Tiberius. C. LIst to, Tiberius, have you read the List of the
Sword-players?


T. Yes, Cornelius, I have read it all over.


C. Has Sisennius listed himself among them?


T He was not in that List, that I saw.


C. It Is like he has no list, either to enter the Lists with any man, or so
much as to run from the Lists to the Goal.


T. Why should a man undertake what he has no list to? Let every man do as he
lists.


C. It Is a fine thing indeed for a man to live as he lists: but that is not as
every man lists.


T. He may do what he lists, that lists to do but what he may.


DIALOGUE IX.
Giles and Humphry. G. HOw now, Humphry? what makes you so sad? is all well at
home?


H. I would it were. For to tell you truly we are in an ill taking for my
Brother Harry.


G. What Is the matter?


H. Woe is me! three days ago, without making any body acquainted with his
purpose, he took Boat, and went over Sea; and what is become of him we cannot
tell.


G. How can you tell that he is gone over Sea?


H. We were told it by one, whose word may be taken: and who came to us on
purpose to tell us.


G. Is your Father made acquainted with it yet?


H. Yes, we told him of all.


G. And what said he to it? how did he take it? did he not take on, when he was
told it?


H. We are somewhat afraid he should take some harm by it, if we should tell
him: but he seemed to take it very patiently. He only said, Since folly has
taken so deep root in him, that he will neither take my counsel, nor take
example by others to do well, but still takes bad courses, let him take his
swing for me, and take his course.


G. I was afraid he should have taken it mightily to heart: but it seems he
never takes thought, what becomes of him.


H. You are mightily mistaken, Giles; for though he makes as though he did not
grieve, yet it grieves him to the heart: and you may see it by his words,
which, if you take them not in the wrong meaning, do plainly enough show that
he is ill vexed. Take my word for this, he is so troubled in mind, how closely
soever he carry it, that he is quite taken off from business, and lets all be
at sixes and sevens.


G. What course do you think your Brother will take now?


H. I suppose he will take his pleasure as long as his money lasts, which he
took up at use before he went, and took away with him, when he went. After, he
must take his fortune.


G. While he takes these so wrong courses, he hardly takes after his Father.


H. No, no; he takes not at all after him. He took a wiser course.


G. But has he not been used to take pains? or is he unable to take any pains?


H. He has taken some pains in some kind of studies, which some people are
mightily taken with. And he must shortly take his choice, whether he will take
pains or starve. For he has before now spent more money, than he took with him
now, in less than a years time.


G. In my mind, it will be the best course he can take, to come back: and if he
do, no doubt his Father will be glad to see him, and within a while take to him
again.


H. God forbid else. Yet this I assure my self of, that when time serves he
will take him aside, and take him up sharply for his going away.


G. There is no doubt of this: and it will be but sit for him so to do.


H. God send he but come well home; and for the rest I take no great care.


DIALOGUE X.
Orbilius and Davus. O. YOu, Boy, loose this arrant Knave's points, and down
with his breeches. I Will pay him soundly, and I live. Why don't you stir? Give
me a rod, some body, quickly. Go to, take him upon your back; up with him, I
say, aloft.


D. Sir, will you punish me before you have heard me speak for my self? Do me
right, or be no Master.


O. So I will: for I will serve you as you deserve.


D. But that you may not abuse me, hear me I pray you first, what I have to say
for my self.


O. As if you could say any thing for your self, that were worth the hearing! a
likely matter.


D. Truly, Sir, you cannot tell, until you have heard.


O. Say then quickly, what you have to say.


D. This I say then, that you are too much in passion at present to do but
right in punishing. For it cannot be, that he should observe a measure in
punishing, that keeps anger while he punishes. And therefore do as Plato did,
who, as they report, said to his servant, that had done a fault, But that I am
angry, I would beat thee: and let the punishing of me alone till another time.
And do not go to beat me now in your anger; lest you anger it afterward when
it will be too late.


O. How finely the Knave plays the Philosopher! Well, that you may not
hereafter say, you had to do with an unreasonable beast, and not with a man of
reason, I will let you alone for the present, and call you to an account
hereafter, for what you have done amiss to day. Let him down.


D. Thus far well, I have gained time; I may perhaps too get my pardon at last.
In the mean time I Will have a care to offend no more.


DIALOGUE.
Henry. Robert. H. WHat a world is this! What should a man say to it? when
every body falls thus foul upon poor and most harmless innocents: it is all one,
as the world rules, to be a knave and an honest man, now adays.


R. Indeed for the most part they fare alike: or rather the better a man is,
the worse is he dealt withal for the most part.


H. What wonder? when men are so given to lying, and to follow wickedness, and
give their mind^ to nothing, but to devise mischief.


R. Men take such bad courses, that one knows not whom to trust.


H. Before I take this at their hands, and put up so gross wrongs, I Will do any
thing.


R. You are as much to blame, in that you look to fare better. Ill will never
spoke well. Never take it to heart, man.


H. Why what must I do then?


R. I would have you to follow my counsel, please God and your own Conscience,
and do your duty in your place.


H. If a man be taken tardy, and do amiss but once, he is sure to hear of it at
every hand.


R. Be ruled by me, and never take that to heart, that they set at their heels,
and care not a pin for them all.


H. It Is not so easy a matter as you think, to take these things well, God
give us patience, for we stand in great need thereof.


R. Indeed they had as good take a man's purse by the high way side, as to rob
him of his good name; and they might even as well hang him outright, as thus to
use him.


H. It Is as dishonorable, for they must answer at Gods Judgment Seat for the
one, as well as at earthly Bars for the other.


R. It Is no very strange thing, for thus have they done with the best men ever
since the Apostles times.


H. And for any thing I see, there is small hope of mends, men rather grow
worse and worse.


R. Be you content therefore, mind your calling, look to your book, study hard,
and follow learning for all that men say or do of you.


H. I see now he must rise betimes that pleases all. Farewell.


Henry. Robert. H. HEm, quid hic rerum status est! quid dicas? cum nemo non tam
indigne in pauperculos summeque innoxios homunculos impetum faciat; perinde
est, ut nunc fit, utrum ncbulo sis, an vir bonus, hoc tempore.


R. Revera utrisque eadem, magnam partem usu-veniunt: vel potius quanto
sanctioribus quis moribus vixerit, tanto fere modis indignioribus tractatur.


H. Quid mirum? cum ita sint plerique proclives ad mentiendum, and ad flagitium
quodvis perpetrandum, nec ad aliud quicquam adjiciant animum, quam ad malum
moliendum.


R. Ita pravis vivitur moribus, ut parum constet cui quis fide^ habeat.


H. Potius quam isthuc ab iis accipiam, atque impune fieri mihi tam insignite
injuriam patiar, omnia agam [omnem movebo lapidem.]


R. Simili ipse in culpa versaris, meliore qui loco tuas fore res exspectes.
Mala men's, mala lingua. Ne te propterea afflictes [animi angas.]


H. Quid itaque mihi agendum est?


R. Meo de consilio velim facias. Deo, animique tui conscientiae placeas, and
quam es nactus, hanc provinciam ornes.


H. Si quis oscitans opprimatur, unicaque vel vice titubaverit, non dubium est
quin magno ei passim probro futurum sit.


R. Ausculta mihi, nec sit ea tibi res solicitudini, quam illi susque deque
habent, quin eos omnes non tanti aestimes.


H. Haud ita est facile, ac tibi videtur, aequo ista animo tolerare. Donet
nobis Deus patientiam; nam illa multum nobis opus est.


R. Unum sane and idem hoc est, regia eunti via marsupium auferre, atque bonam
ejus existimationem laedere, quin aeque eum vel patibulo suspendant, atque
modis ita indignis accipiant.


H. Aeque inhonestum est, ta^ enim alterius reddenda est ab iis ratio pro
tribunali divino, quam alterius in foro humano.


R. Non magnopere mirandum est, hoc enim pacto cum virorum optimis ab
Apostolicis jam usque temporibus egerunt.


H. Et quantum ego perspicio, quam exigua illorum corrigendi spes est, potius
indies in pejus proficiunt.


R. Quin tu ergo acquiesce, res tuas sedulo age, summam in libros curam
impende, animum ad rei literariae studium diligenter adjunge, plurimumque
confer operae ad consequendam eruditionem, ut ut de te populi sermo sit.


H. Experior jam perquam esse difficile placere omnibus. Vale.


Henricus. Robertus. H. QUae hujus mundi conditio est! quid sentias? cum tantis
illi passim injuriis afficiantur pauperum qui maxim sunt innocui; codem
reoidit, quomodo nune est, frugine quis, an nequam homo sit, his temporibus.


R. Similia sane uterque eorum magna ex part patiuntur; seu potius quo quis
vir praestantior fuerit, hoc plurimum deterius cum illo agitur.


H. Quid hoc monstri est? cum adeo strenua detur a plerisque opera mendaciis
confingendis omnibusque vitae turpitudinibus in se admittendis, neque
adjungatur ad aliud quicquam animus nisi ad pernicie^ comminiscenda^.


R. Sic flagitiosa a plerisque omnibus vita agitur, ut incertum sit in quo
fiducia reponatur.


H. Prius quam aequo istuc animo feram, adeoque insigni me injuria affici
inultus perpetiar, nihil non experiar [coelo terram miscebo]


R. Tam in vitio ipse es, quod melius actum iri tecum speras. Malevoli,
maledici. Ea noli ^e re macerare [aegritudini dedere.]


H. Quid me ergo facere oportet?


R. Quod ego tibi de dero consilium, id exsequere, Divino numini mentique tuae
recti consciae obsecunda, tuumque pro loci tui ratione officiu^ cole


H. Si quis delictum in se admisisse offendatur, semelque unquam perperam
egerit, non deerunt, qui id ei prima quaque occasion exprobrent.


R. Me audi, neque ulla sis de eo solicitudine quod hi pro nihilo ducunt, atque
universos illos flocci facias.


H. Majoris est res negotii quam tu opinaris, aequi bonique haec consulere.
Patientia donet nos Deus, hac enim nos quam maxim egemus.


R. Una profecto res est sive cui nummos regiam secus viam adimant, sive
existimationi ejus infamiae maculam inurant, imo satius esset, ut e vestigio
eum suspendio strangulent, quam tanta contumelia excipiant.


H. Perinde est inglorium; aeque enim respondendum est illis de altero ad Dei
tribunal, atque de altero ad cancellos fore^ses.


R. Minime mirum est, nam ad hunc modum spectatissimos quosque viros jam inde
ab ipsis Apostolis tractarunt.


H. Quantum vero ego intelligere possum, fore ut in meliores evadant vix est
sperandum, magis in deterius quotidie a plerisque degeneratur.


R. Tu itaque contentus sort tua abi, munus tuum digne administra, strenua^ in
libris operam pone, in studia tua diligenter incumbe, omneque in doctrina
consequenda tempus tuum colloca, quicquid de te ab aliis dicatur, agaturve.


H. Nunc perspicio multi esse rem laboris nemini displicere.


Henricus. Robertus. H. O Qualis est haec rerum facies! quid cui possit in
mentem venire? quando in pauperiorum quosque innocentiores tam foede undique a
quibusque incurritur; tantunde^ est, ut mores sunt, sive quis probus sive
improbus fuerit, nunc dieru^.


R. Profecto pariter cum utroque maximam partem agitur; sive potius quo quis
homo melior audit, eo plerunque pejora patitur.


H. Haud mirabile est: quando tam sunt homines proni ad mendacia excogitanda,
and improbissima quaeque facinora facienda, atque ad nihil applicant animum
praeterquam machinandum aliis pestem.


R. Adeo pravis plerique utuntur consiliis ut nescias cui fidem habeas.


H. Citius quam ego isthuc boni consulam, tantamque factam mihi injuriam
impunitam dimittam, nihil intactum relinquam [Acheronta movebo.]


R. Tua non minor culpa est, cum rect^u^ i^^ tibi consultum ^^s M^^e^olorum
nunquam non malus fermo. Haec te^es ne male habeat [cave cordi tuo doleat.]


H. Quid igitur debebo ego facere?


R. Meam velim auctoritatem and consilium sequare. Deo propriaeque mentis
conscientiae more^ geras, ac tuum quo es loco munus sedulus praestes.


H. Facinore si in ullo deprehendaris, atque omnino semel lapsus fueris, id
tibi ab omnibus, prout res se tulerit, vitio vertetur.


R. Mihi obtempera, nolique ob illud tuum solicitare animum, quod isti sibi
despicatui habent, sed illos cunctos nec pili pendas.


H. Non adeo expedita res est atque tu existimas, haec humaniter far.
Impertiat nobis Deus patientiam, etenim nos hujus vehementer indigemus.


R. Revera nihil interest utrum aliquem regiam juxta viam pecuniis exuant, an
ignominiae sordibus ejus famam deturpent, quinetiam eadem opera ei laqueo gulam
frangant, qua illum tam indigne tractant.


H. Nihilo minus est infame, nam tam debebunt Deo reddere rationem de altero,
quam de altero hominibus.


R. Non est hoc adeo monstri simile, quandoquidem ipsis jam inde usque ab
Apostolis ita cum optimis quibusque viris agi solitum est.


H. Atque ut mea perspicientia est, vix est ut speres futurum, ut unquam
corrigantur, potius in pejus magis magisque prolabuntur.


R. Aequi igitur bonique tu isthaec consule, tuum quod tibi datum est pensum
confice, libris tuis animum intend, in studiis tuis omnes industriae tuae
nervos contend, bonisque te totum literis deed, quocunque te homines loco,
numerove habeant.


H. Compertu^ habeo jam maximo esse illi opere annite^du^ cui in animo est omne
ut punctum ferat.


BEcause I mentioned above the Translating of the same Dialogue two or three
times over, and am loath to prescribe any thing without an example, I have
therefore thought good to add here the foregoing threefold Translation of the
first of those of Mr. Clark my ever to be honored Master's Dialogues, which I
spoke of before. I presume himself would he have done it, as he has expressed
his mind to the contrary, could have done it hugely better, not only as being
infinitely more able at every thing than I am, but also as being better
acquainted with the meaning of his own words, than I can be. Yet what is done,
such as it is, may serve for an Exemplisication of what is to do; and that is
enough for my design at present. He that likes it not as it is, may be pleased
to do it of himself to his own better liking. There are many lucky hits at
Translating such kind of Language as this, which a man cannot at all times hit
of, and when he pleases.

FINIS.

