TAILORS Physic has purged the DEVIL. OR, The Devil has got a squirt, and
the simple, seame-rent, thredbare Tailor translates it into railing Poetry, and
is now soundly cudgelled for it.

By Voluntas Ambulatoria.

Such is the language of a beastly railor, The Devils privi-house most fit for
Tailor.


Printed in the year 1641.

1. A view of the transformed Devil which rose up to John Tailor when he
viewed the Answer of his Book.
OH! the wonders of our age; wherein Poets turn Devils; not only incarnate to
themselves, but in horrid, hellish shapes, to seduce the simple, (Am I
sleeping, or am I waking?) What a sudden change is here wrought? even now, he
that was presented to mine eyes in a tub of Lees: an infernal spirit, a Poet
of Bacchus, drowned in his own element, is now, by his distempered quill
become a sad spectacle: The monster appearing to him distracts his thoughts
with fears; andirons, pots, platters, all are thrown about. And in this deep
passion, after some sad hours, he falls down as one dead: Satan in a
transformed shape sits upon him, shakes him with his claws, and bids him rise
up, for he had employment for him, and he would furnish him with help enough
to aid him against the truth, and true professors. Oh! how may I call him, and
recall him to view his Anagram, justly drawn from his own name? ( John Talour
the Poet.
ART THOU IN HELL, O POET?) If the Devil use such tricks, he will soon crush
his bones. But why dwell I so long on such discourse? let him (and such who
like it) have recourse to these infernal furies, raising up such misshapen,
diobolicall inventions, which I defy, yet I pity him.

2. His pedigree, far inferior to mine.
Let him acquaint his Hags, their power cannot blot out my fame: let him
repair to his dunghill-parentage, and view that unfortunate breast that gave
him suck: let him look back to his swinish breeding. What will all these
do? let him look on me, or let his silly coxcombe search the Heralds office
for my Predecessors, where he may easily find We have three golden wheat
sheaves from our progenitor John Walker of Bredsall in Derbyshire, an ancient
famous house.
the golden Wheatsheaves, from which I sprung; even those who were the
succourers of their Countries poor, and scourgers of such sturdy froth and
trash as his behavior does express to us.

3. His disposition.
What disposition can be more vain, then to study; talk of, and be employed
in lascivious, wanton, whorish baudry? And the heathenish simple sot cried out
once, that his Poetry would not bring in enough to feed a Cat, which drove him
to be beholding to the Westminster lasses, both for bed and board. And such was
his case also, when the sign was so high in Virgo, that his troubled thoughts
made him to resolve to suffer both his horse and cloak to lie in lavender,
instead of litter.

But his courage was afterward cooled, when being almost famished, he eat two
loaves of bread before he once said grace, and falling aboard upon the third,
slipped away with a whole dozen in his breeches; I could never hear that he paid
for them since.

What a vain office did he bear to be the Bawdes Poet, though he did her
such Because it induced to the greater pay.
profitable service, by scurrilous, oylye sonetting, and pandrall Poetry, to
stir up luxury in the clients; yet sure he was mightily out of favor with
Mistress Wagtayle, when she grew so pockie proud, that she would not let such
scabs as he come near her, though he was so careful of her, that he
provided her a After he was tired with her.
thief to wait upon her.

4. The Encounter.
It is not my custom to fill the peoples ears with lying fancies of my own
invention; I want not truths to beleaguer a corrupted Poet; like the host of
fleas that turned his skin to a motly dye, where being forced to stay till the
next morning, his heels delivered him out of the Constables hands; and I do
verily believe, if his heels do not now help him, he will scarce escape with
a Pillory recantation, confessing this abuse, as openly, as he did to Master
Hilton of Daintry, promising endeavor to make (...)
amends. Such an encounter he had when the Scotch lice would not let him sleep.

Well, he is now become a student of the (...)
lubberly sciences, but he sold his Boat first; need breaks through stone
walls; he was ashamed to look his friends in the face -- after. I take not
seven days, nor scarce half seven hours to bring forth my Ante-Reply for the
press; wherein I do defy such divellish anointed language as he uses,
though Or rather his brother for him.
he only turned B^tes instruction into his own infernal language; and
therefore, as once he said, he may justly fear, that no wise man would be his
Patron to such Books which are usually stuffed either with hellish language,
or whorish baudry.

5. His Religion.
I must confess I do not take him for a substantial Papist, but rather like
Ps^phos birds to prattle any thing that he is taught. Something he would say of
Christianity, and he buzzes in our ears, like a humble Be, as if he thought
of Charity, but falls so deep into Ethnicall and diabolical language, more
expert then any scould or fishwoman at Billingsgate. Had he showed either wit
or learning in his railing lines, either good-manners, or humanity, I would
have graced him in this ante-Reply with my name; but since his message was from
Satan, I send him only the whip, without the balm; yet let him be convinced,
and For I bear no ill will to the man, but against his (...).
I will perform to him any office of charity. How many are those ecchoing
voices, crying shame with me against him and his Zoilous language, who Hidra
like, has doubled his hellish venom, in raising of horrid monsters!

He would seduce us to believe that Popish Rites are but good manners;
despising those that labor for Reformation: and such is his devotion, as if
hell were mingled with his ink. And his Master Bates.
Informer, according to Satan's promise, wrought a project for him, who being
with me in prison, stole away my Bible, my only companion, and most
irreligiously pawned it for A quart of Me^h^gl^^ and a 2 d. cake.
ten pence, and deprived me of it about two days, before I knew where it was.

6. His Hypocrisy.
How full of Hypocrisy his lines are stuffed, are by clear judgments easily
discerned; and such is his custom, to mask his own deformities with
hypocrisy, as if he were an Essen amongst the Nazarites, and an Essidon
amongst the Lascivious: he can lie in Canterburies bosom in the Tower, and
defy him when he is scourged for it.

7. The Church persecuted by water.
As the great Archbishop of Canterbury is justly imprisoned, for tormenting and
corrupting the Church in this our Island; so I doubt not, but ere long, the same
noble Senators, will serve this furious water-Rat, for vexing the Church upon
the water.

8. His weakness in judgment.
The Pitho^ist terms me a Cerberus; he would have said a Capareus, who
bewrayed the thief that robbed the Temple. Indeed he had need to go to School
again, to learn to spell; he writes an Anagram of my name, but he puts in
That is no news with him.
LIE, and leaves out y, and so makes a simple compound of his own nature: if
he will see a true Anagram of my name, he may find it ^^.^. heavenly K.R.
the last line of my book, which is a riddle to him and his infernal study: he
takes upon him to censure and reprove what I have writ; but poor idiot, he
cannot understand it, he dare not encounter with any particular therein
expressed, only like a Judge in the Prelates Court, condemns all before either
trial or examination: his Informer furnished him with all my books, and
helped his simple coxcombe to understand as he was able; and after all, he
makes an exclamation against that in general, which he does not understand at
all in particular.

I am not ignorant what honor I should do him, should I grace him with my name
to an answer to one so ignoble; but I scorn it, to show my guilt-spurs to such
a dunghill-cocke.

9. His horrible lies.
This raged Tailor, audacious railour, would make us believe that his lying
Pamphlet was writ three years ago, which was twelve months before Samuel
Which is the great part of his book.
How preached that Sermon: did the Devil tell him a year before that such a
thing should be; he knew not of it himself. So he tells us of a base lie of the
Maid looking at a lion in the Church, a most abominable lie, invented of hell;
not like those truths which Fenn^r will prove in my answer, and himself cannot
deny. And if I should lay open all the abominable, hellish lies, and Ethnicall
inventions of his noddle, I should strike the world into too great amazement.

I only do desire that he may stay
Until his cause be ended, and not run away.
10. My sincerity to England.
My allegiance to my royal King; my sincerity and real submission to that
honorable Assembly, to the godly Laws of this Land, and my love to the Church
and State, is well known to those that ^now me; (I pray God make me faithful
in his service and worship): Do not those several books pre^ented to the
members of that Honorable Assembly express the same, whose favors I have
tasted of; and ^he God of heaven look upon them and bless them.

11. My humble Petition to (...) P^liament.
Most noble Senators; my humble Petition to your Honors is to cast your eyes
on this saucy fellows audacious lines, and take into your Lordships
considerations these four particulars;

1. Whereas your Lordships petitioner expressed (long since) in a book, the just
censure of the Earl of Straford, this Poet answers it with railing lines,
thus: For though unhappy Strafford be struck dead,
They mount him up a cock-horse sans a head.
And this most precious youth, with tongu and pen
Is chief amongst the Devils serving-men.


2. That your Lordships would be pleased to make this impudent fellow to
explain himself, what he means by the tongue of Say, (the Lord Say is my
honorable It is easliy perceived that this rascail does strike at religion,
abusing such Pillars.
Lord and noble friend, whom I pray to the God of heaven ever to prosper and
bless.

His words are these, And with mock^^^ mouth and judgment Rash,
And tongue of Say, thou wilt say all is but trash.


3. What alteration of these swaying times he (...), which he said he hopes to
see, then he will write in the behalf of that part which now he dare not, as
he would.

4. Who he aims at in those scurrilous lines he sent to the Basketmaker,
tearming men puritans and crapeard-slaves, etc.

12. An Exhortation to John Tailor to repent and call to mind the example of
his dead wife.
Sudden death is a fearful execution to unrepentant sinners; therefore in all
humble manner, I do heartily desire John Tailor to call to mind the sad
spectacle of that black tragedy; whilst his wife was carousing in the
Tavern goblits; and let him but consider (if the like should befall him) what
would become of his soul, if he repent not. Oh how do people flock to my
shop, exclaiming against his wicked, unsanctified, disorderly, ungodly life and
conversation; but I wish him grace to repent: and thus I tell him as I did
before, John Tailor if thou will serve God, then assure thy self I am and ever
will be

V.R. heavenly K. R.

After this preparative, expect a A serious Zoilus quill mixed with Pluto's
excrement.
bitter pill if thou be not well.

FINIS.

