Some Instructions In the Art of GRAMMAR; Writ to assist a Young Gentleman, in
the speedy understanding of the LATIN TONGUE.

Licensed, and Entered According to Order.

LONDON. Printed by I. B. for William Miller, at the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard, where Gentlemen and others may be furnished with School-Books, and
most sorts of Acts of Parliament, Kings, Lords Chancellors, Lord Keepers, and
Speakers Speeches; and other sorts of discourses, and State-matters; as also
Books of Divinity, Church Government, Humanity, Sermons on most Occasions etc.
MDCLXXXXI.

The PREFACE.
Though Speech be Natural, yet Languages are Artificial; some also much more than
others, and far different in their particular Rules, though in the Essential
Parts they mostwhat agree. These Notes were many years ago drawn together as a
short Scheme of the Artifice of the Latin Tongue, as also the causes or
reasonableness of it; which (as was conceived) would very much conduce to both
its perfecter learning and easilier remembering; since we much better both
apprehend and retain what we understand than what we acquire only by rote. But
it could not be made intelligible except compared with some other Language
already known, as to us is the English. Now though both these Languages agree in
brevity, yet there are many differences betwixt them, and in some things of
very frequent use; (As, that the Latin wants the exact distinction betwixt
definite and indefinite Articles etc.) Yet here is no more taken notice of,
than what was necessary for the understanding of them: As chiefly that what the
English mostwhat expresses by Particles, and Auxiliaries, the Latin uses
variety of Cases and Terminations.

This design must Apologize for the brevity of the whole discourse, i. e. for
the omission of very many Rules, and more exceptions. For as the more general
Rules need the fewer exceptions, so the exceptions (many times but few in
number*) are mo^e easily learned, and better retained by the seasonable
industry of the Instructor.

The Schemes of the Declensions and Conjugations were designed to be in one
Table, because the Learner having them all in his eye at once, might easily
find out his own Termination, and by that* the most of the Accidents of his
word. Thence also would he draw several Observations, which might give him a
great insight into his work. As, that all Declinables (the others are very few*
ending in ae are either Substantives of the first, or feminine Adjestives after
the first, Declension. All ending in orum of the second; In ei of the fifth; In
ubus of the fourth; in ebus of the fifth, etc.

There are also some few references to Rhetoric and Logic. For the Learner, who
intends to advance further into Arts and Sciences (and such only need to learn
Grammar) will joyfully apprehend, that all these three Arts are concerning
words and speech, though the manner of considering them be in each, diverse.

Somewhat also is done toward rendering the English correspondent to the Latin
in Syntax; though in truth, the English, using most particles and prepositions,
has not much need of such Rules. By which it has the advantage of properly
expressing the coherence of the words in other Languages. So that I think it
hardly to be showed where good and proper Latin may not be also expressed in
proper English: As, v. g. induo tibi tunicam, I put a coat on thee. Induo te
tunica, I cloth thee with a coat. But induor fortitudinem being not
expressible in English, is scarcely to be read, except in the most ancient
Translation of the Holy Scripture, and some Ecclesiastical Authors, or perhaps
also once in Plinies Natural History. But in these I suppose induor is taken
for a Depoponent. Vescor Caseum, I eat cheese, vescor caseo, I feed upon
cheese. Potior urbem, I obtain the City, which I had not; sine labor patria
potitur, he makes-use- of or enjoys his Country. Me gravissime nocere posset,
he could hurt me: nocet mihi, he is hurtful to me. But in the former sense
laedo is more frequently used than noceo.

Lastly, for the Prosodia; there is an endeavor (whether successful the
Learned will judge) to fix pronunciation upon some certain Rules, partly
natural, and partly from custom. For were there not somewhat of reason in it,
it would be hardly credible what Tully, Quintilian, and others observe of the
exact judgment of the ordinary People in their pronunciation. Whether these
Rules be critically true, I know not; At least I hope what is here done may
excite some others of greater experience and leisure to add, amend, and perfect.

Corrigenda and addenda.
PAge 14. line 14. for D, read D. l. 15. for M. read M. p. 16. l. ult. for
cujus. r. cujas. p. 20 l. 30. for pacaruat. r. pacarunt. p. 25. l. 13. The
Imperative etc. plainer thus. The Imperative has in pro^er speaking only the
Second Person; Though the Latins use sometimes amato and amanto in the Third. But
these not properly commands, but permission^, or the like^: The Subjunctive is
also a distinct Mode, but the Optative, Potentiall (many others the like may be
used) are not diverse manners of speaking, but serve instead of Auxiliary words,
as, possum, volo, opto, utinam, etc. which are to be distinguished only by the
sense. p. 28. l. 2. for did, r. do. p. 40. l. 25. for vere, r. vero. p. 51.
Dative case. The Rule for the Dat. Case is better thus expres^ed.

Whatever Substantive, Adjective, Verb, or Participle signifies good or bad to
or for any one, requires that to whom or which it is good or bad to be of the
Dat. Case. p. 52. l. 10. as they say commonly. p. 57. l. 20. for asuescimus, r.
assuescimus. p. 61. l. 35. Academia -- part of this Paragraph is misplaced,
belonging to Reg. I. p. 63. l. 10. for c^go, r. cogo. p. 64 l. 4. for
veravolucris, r. ver^ volucris. p. 66. l. 13. for Str^jis and Phr^jis, r.
Strygis, Phrygis. l. 14. r. Chalybis. p. 68. l. 17. for Grammatices, r.
Grammatici* p. 69. l. 8. dele, vel altum, dele etiam lin. ult.

In the Schemes of the Declensions*
p. 4. l. ult. for Manis, r. Manu.

In the Schemes of the Verbs.
p. 2. l. 13. for ianto, r. iunto. All false-pointings it is hoped the Reader
will correct.

IN Latin Speech there be Eight parts.

Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Participle,
Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition, Interjection.
WE cannot speak nor discourse except i^ be of somewhat, i. e. of some Subject*
and something also we must say (affirm or deny) of that Subject; for either it
is, or has, or does, or suffers something of another. So that these two are
so necessary, that without them we cannot express our minds. The rest are
Auxiliaries for the more easy, short and convenient expression: As Pronouns
instead of Nouns. Participles partake both of Nouns and Verbs. Adverbs more
fully express the signification of Verbs; sometimes also of Nouns. Prepositions
and Conjunctions belong to Sentences.

A Noun Noun.
is the Name of Thing, or Subject, and every thing must be Signified by a Noun,
which is its Name.

Of Nouns some be Substantives, Substantive.
which signify such things as subsist of themselves, and without the Addition
of any other Noun may be the Subject of our Speech or discourse. In English
also they may have, [ a, an] or [ the] applied to them, as Homo, a Man,
Dominus, the Lord. A, or an, is used when we speak of a thing without
determining which we mean. The, when we speak of one certain and determinate
thing.

Others be Adjectives, ^djective.
or Adjuncts, which require to be joined to some Substantive to make their
Signification distinct and Intelligible, and in English they may have [ thing]
or [ person] joined to them. And Note, that Adjectives are sometimes placed
without Substantives expressed; and then, if they be of the Masculine or
Feminine Gender [ a Preson] He or She, Man or Woman, is understood, as Doctus
est, [ He,] or [ the Man] is learned. But if of the Neuter Gender [ thing] is
understood, as hoc album, this white [ thing.]

Adjectives, (in Rhetoric called Epithetes, and in Logic Concretes,) frequently
signify Accidents, or somewhat joined or belonging to the Subject, as Quantity,
Quality, Place, or the like.

Of Substantives some are the Names of one Single thing, or person, and are all
called Proper Names (in Logic Singulars, Particulars, or Individuals) as
Socrates, Ioannes, Bucephalus, Laelaps, etc. Some are Common Names, or the
Names of whole kinds of things (and in Logic are called Universals) as Homo,
Equus, Arbor, Virtus, etc. Some also are Collectives, signifying many things
together, as Plebs the People; Exercitus an Army; Grex a flock or herd.

Of Numbers.
Nouns, Pronouns, Verbs and Participles are declined into Two Numbers, Numbers
2. Singular and Plural.
the Singular, when we speak of one, the Plural when of more. Greeks have a
Dual Number when they speak of two or both, it is not very necessary, and
therefore in our Language given over.

Regularly in English the Plural Number is made by adding s to the Nominative
Singular, as King Kings, House Houses, Table Tables, But there are many
Irregulars; as when the old Saxon termination en is reserved, as Ox, Oxen, Man,
Men for Manen.

Of Cases.
Nouns have diverse Relations to Nouns, Cases 6.
and other parts of Speech, the which are in diverse Languages diversely
expressed: Sometimes by Prepositions, as in English, though we have a Genitive
Case by adding s to the Nominative, as Man, Genitive, Man's, as Man's wit.
Sometimes by various terminations of the word it self, which are called Cases,
of which in Latin there be Six. The Nominative Genitive Dative Accusative
Vocati^e Ablative
Case.

Note, the Nominative is not properly a Case, [and Aptotes are not so called
because they have no Case, but none proceeding from the Nominative] for

The Noun or Name it self is said to be the Nominative Case, ^omina^^^e.
it is the Foundation or Subject of Speech, i. e. when we speak it comes
before the Verb, and answers to the Questions [ Who?] or [What?] as Venit
Rex, the King comes.

If in English two Nouns come together, and the Particle [ of] be applied to
the later of them, that later in Latin is to be in the Genitive ^enitive.
Case; as the Sword of Caesar, Caesaris gladius, the praise of Virtue, laus
Virtutis, giving of thanks gratiarum actio: The same reason is if s be added to
the Nominative Case of the Noun precedent, as Cesars Sword, Thanksgiving.

If a Verb signify doing or giving to any Person or thing, the Name of such
Person or thing is in Latin expressed by the 3d. or Dative Dative.
Case. As, I do hurt to thee, Noceo tibi: it pro^iteth the Commonwealth,
prodest Reipublicae: I, give thee Counsel, do tibi Consilium.

If a Verb signifying doing or making precede a Noun signifying the object or
effect of such action or making, that Noun is to be put in the 4th. or
Accusative Accusative.
Case, and it answers to a question made by [ Whom?] or [ What?] as, Lego
Virgilium, I read Virgil.

If a Noun signify a Person or thing spoken-or called-to, it is to be put in
the Vocative Vocative.
Case, and it is mostwhat the same with the Nominative.

If any of these Prepositions, in, with, through, for, from, by, or than, or such
others as are named in the Chapter of Prepositions come before a Noun, that
Noun in Latin is to be put in the 6th or Ablative Ablative*
Case. Instead, or place, vice, loco; with art, art; Learneder than Plato,
doclior Platone.

Note, that our English Language is in expressing these Relations more
accurate, and distinct then the Latin; But the Latin more Elegant then the
English, as avoiding the so frequent repetition of the same Monosyllables.

Note, that in Construing Latin into English, you add always the sign of the
Case, because it serves instead of the termination.

Of Genders.
Some Languages have no Genders, Genders ^* Masculine Feminine Neuter.
but express Sexes some other way, as the English does the Male by [ He,] the
Female by [ She;] these for Persons: All Things by [ it.] But the Latin has
three Genders, the Masculine, the Feminine, and the Neuter; to which three they
commonly apply the like Genders of the Pronoun Hic, Haec, Hoc. Some Nouns
accordingly are declined with one Article, as hic vir: Some with two, and that
two ways; first, if the word include both Sexes, as Homo, a Man or Woman,
Conjux a Husband or Wife; and then that Gender must be used of which Sex you
speak; these words are said to be common. 2ly. If you may use either of them
indifferently, as, hic or haec Dies, a Day. Hic or ^oc Vulgus, the Common
People; And this is called the Doubtful, and uncertain Gender. Some as
Adjectives, are of all three, if they be applicable to Things, as well as
Persons: but if to Persons only, they are not used but in two,(except
improperly) as Pauper, Dives, etc. And so these at any time may be applied to a
Neuter also, as Pauper tugurium, a poor Cottage.

General Rules to know the Genders of Nouns.
Genders being framed to express the several Sexes

All He Is are Masculine, all She Is Feminine; And the English for all others use
[ it.]

Things that have no Sexes, though it matter not of what Gender their names be,
yet have the Ancient Languages, and some of the Modern been diligent in
assigning them Genders, and thereby have brought an unnecessary obligation upon
themselves, and difficulty upon the Learners: Lapis, Petra, Saxum, the same
signification of different Genders: Baculus, and Baculum, the termination only
changed, both Masculine and Neuter. And genders of things having no foundation
in signification are very difficultly comprehended in Rules, those of the
Terminations are the best.

When the Sexes are not easily distinguished, sometimes the word is of both
Genders, as hic and haec Anguis, an he or she Snake, hic or h^c anas a duck or
drake; Bubo, bos, canis, grus, halcyon, histrix, limax, linx, python, perdix,
sus, talpa, dama, and the like.

Many times the same Gender serves both Sexes, as, hic Passer a Sparrow, haec
Aquila an Eagle, both he and she, haec Vulpes a Fox: These follow the Rules of
the Declensions, and when they would express an he-fox they say Vulpes mas, if
a she, Vulpes foemina.

Those words which signify what belongs to either Sex, are both Masculines and
Feminines, as Civis a Citizen, whether. Man or Woman, Sacerdos a Priest or
Priestess, Parens a father or mother, infans, adolescens, a young Person, Comes
a Companion, dux a Captain, host is an enemy, Iuvenis a young Person, Miles a
Soldier, Princeps a Prince or Princess, Serpens a Serpent, Sodalis a companion,
vates a Prophet, or Prophetess.

Yet many Substantives which in signification agree to both Sexes, admit an
Adjective of one only, as we say not, sur magna, but foemina furax; Many also
have Feminines besides the Masculines, as Propheta, Prophetissa, Antistes,
Antistita, Cantator, Cantatrix, -- trix being the termination of the Feminine
Gender, and is changed into -- tress in English, as a Singstress. Yet Natrix a
swimming or water-Serpent is of both Genders, as Serpens is,

Also, Homo, latro, exul, praesul, pugil, eques, haeres, and the like, which
are commonly applied to Males, are rarely, if at all, used in the Feminine
Gender.

Other Rules for the Genders.
1. All Nouns ending in- um are Neuters, and of the second Declension; so are
those that have no more syllables in the Genitive then in the Nominative Case,
ending in -- on and are Greek words; and in -- e, making -- is in the Genitive,
so are Nouns ending in -- le, -- al, -- ut.

2. All indeclinable Verbs made Nouns, Nouns in -- i, and -- n indeclinable in
the Singular number, are Neuters; so are words that signify materially, the
word nomen being understood.

3. Nouns of the 1st. and 5th. Declension generally are Feminine.

4. Nouns of the 4th. Declension coming from Verbs, are Masculine, others (not
coming from Verbs) are most Feminine.

5. Most Nouns follow the Gender of their common Names, as Winds, Rivers,
Mountains, Months, are Masculine, because Ventus, Fluvius, Mons, and Mensis
are so, (though the names of Winds and Months are Adjectives.) So also Lands,
Countries, Isles, Cities, Virtues, Trees, Herbs, Ships, and generally whatever
bears, are Feminine. Yet these Rules are not so universal, but that sometimes
they follow the Rules of the terminations, as those ending in -- us, and -- er,
are Masculines, as Pontus, Spinus, Oleas^er: In -- a, Feminines,

tween Page 10 and 11.

I. The First Declension has the same number of Syllables in the Nom. and Genesis
Cases; the Terminations are of Latin Nouns in a which are Feminine. Of Greek
Nouns in (...) and es (most Masculine, and so are Latin Nouns derived from
them) and e Feminines*

Singulariter. N. haec Musa Pluraliter. hae Musae Sing. N. Aene^^ G. hujus
Musae harum Musarum G. -- ae D. huic Musae his Musis D. -- ^e A. hanc Musam has
Musas A. -- am vel an V. o Musa o Musae V. -- a A. hac Musa his Musis. A. -- a

II. The Second Declension has 7 Terminations, whereof ir, ur, er, us, have
^ometimes more Syllables in the Genesis then Nom. and are always Masc. So are
those ^nding in o^, (Greek Nouns.) But humus, alvus, colus, vannus, are
Feminines.

Sing. N. hic Dominus hoc Regnum Plur. hi Domini haec Regna G. hujus Domin^
hujus Regni horum Dominorum horum Regnorum D. huic Domino huic Regno his
Dominis his Regnis A. hunc Dominum hoc Regnum hos Dominos haec Regna V. o
Domine o Regnum o Domini o Regna A. hoc Domin^. hoc Regno his Dominis his
Regnis

III. The Third Declension has many Terminations: Those words that have the
same Number of Syllables in the Nom. and Genesis Cases, are for the most part
Feminine.

Nouns whose Genesis increasing has the last Syllable but one long, together with
Verbals ending in ti^ are Feminine, except such as end in n, o, or, os, ns,
Compounds of Dens, as assis, and uncia, which are Masculine, as are also most
Monosyllables.

Nouns of many Syllables ending in all, and a^, are Neuters. Compounds of Frons
are of the Common of two.

Nouns whose Genesis increasing has the last Syllable save one short, are Masc.
But those ending in do and go; as also Greek words ending in as, o^, is* are
Feminines: and Latin Nouns ending in en, c, el, put, ur, and us, are Neuter;
as also Greek Nouns in ma. Halec signifying the Pickle is Neuter, but
signifying the Fish it self is Feminine.

Neuters in all, ar, and e, have for the most part the Abl. in i.

The Accus. ends sometimes in em, sometimes in im, accordingly the Abl. in e,
or i, and then the Nom. Plur. (of Neuters) ends in ia, the Genesis in ium; As do
all Nouns whose Nom. Sing. is terminated with 2 Consonants, as Urbium, Montium.
^xcept Hyemum, and those whose Nom. ends in ps.

Sing. N. haec Cuspis Rete Plur. hae Cuspides Reti^ G. hujus Cuspidis -- is
harum Cuspidum -- ium D. huic Cuspidi -- i his Cuspidibus -- ibus A. hanc
Cuspidem -- e has Cuspides -- ia V. o Cuspis -- e o Cuspides -- ia

IV. The Fourth Declension has the same number of Syllables in the Nom. and
Genesis Cases: The Terminations are us and u; Neuters in u in the singular Number
have all Cases a like, and in the Plur. the Nom. Acc. and Voc. end all in (...).

Nouns of this Decl^^sion, (especially those derived from Supines of the fourth
Conjugations) are Masculine: Acus, domus, idus, socrus, colus, manus, porticus,
tribus, are Feminines; specus, and penus, doubtfulls.

Acus, la^us, artus, arcus, tribus, ficus, specus, quercus, partus, ver^, make
the Dat. and Abl. Plur. in ubus only: quae^tus, portus, genu in ubus, or ibus,
all the res^ in ibus.

anciently
Sing. N. haec Manus Manus Plur. hae Manus Manues us G. hujus Manus Manuis
harum Manuum Manuium uum; D. huic Manui Manui his Manibus Manuibus ibus A. hanc
Manum Manuem has Manus Manues us V. ^ Manus Manus o Manus Manues us A. hac
Manis Manue his Manibus Manubus ibus

V. The Fifth Declension has but one Termination, and all words of this
Declension are Feminines; except Meridies, which is Masculine, and Dies, which
is doubtful in the Singular, and Masculine in the Plural: And all have more
Syllables in the Genesis then in the Nom. Case. Most Nouns ending in ies are of
this Declension.

Sing. N. haec Species Plur. hae Species G hujus Speciei harum (...) D. huic
Speciei his Speciebus A. hanc Speciem has Species V. o Species o Species A. hac
Speci^ his Speciebus



as if Aq^a were understood, in names o^ Rivers, Matro^a the Marne: In -- um,
Neuter, as Eboracum, York; Crustumium, a river so called; as if Oppidumor
Flumen were understood: In -e, also Neuter, as Reate, Praeneste, Caere; Some in
-ur also are Neuter, as Tybur; but Robur, Acer, signify more properly the wood
or timber; Siler, the Cork or excrescence upon the bark; and Thus, the Gum
rather then the Tree it self. And it is very frequent to have the fruit,
product; or the part destined to use, of one gender, and the Tree of another,
as, Malus, malum; Spinus, spina; Buxus, buxum.

6. Primitives, and their Derivatives, and Diminutives, the Compounded, and
that whereof it is compounded, as Centussis, are of the same gender.

7. All Greek Nouns made Latin retain their Gender, as all the Compounds ending
in -- odus, are Feminine, because of (...).

These Rules are to be first observed, then those that follow in the particular
Declensions.

Rules for the Declensions.
All Neuters have the Nom. Acc. and Voc. alike, and in the Plural number these
Cases end all in -- a: Those that end in -- ^, have no Variation of Cases in
the Singular Number.

The Nom. and Voc. are the same; except in the Singular Number of the 2d.
Declension, where when the Nom. ends in -- us, the Voc. ends in -- ^, and
when the Nom. in -- ius, the Voc. sometimes in -- i, to hinder the ungrateful
sound of 2 Vowells coming together, as Virgili, instead of Virgilie.

The Abla. and Dat. Plural are always the same, and end always in -- is or --
bus.

The Genesis Plural always ends in -- um, and many times there is a Syllable cut
off in the midst of the word, as virum for virorum.

Nouns compounded of a Nom. and Genesis have only the Nom. declined, as
Tribunus-plebis; but of two Nom. both are declined, as Ius-jurandum.

Many words being derived of the Greek do retain much of their Greek manner of
Variations of Cases. And this manner of expressing Cases in diverse Declensions
came from the Greek, nor is it necessary to a Language, but it is more Elegant,
by avoiding the same termination, which many times also would be harsh and
unpleasant.

Note, the Ancients never used Diphthongs, but pronounced, ae, as a ^, which is
the reason of changing the later Vowel, as in the 1st. Declension ae is often
changed into ai, (of a sound like unto it) as picta^i.

Of Adjectives.
Because Adjectives Adjectives
must belong to Substantives of all Genders, they must be of all Genders; And
sometimes the Genders also vary in Terminations, then the Masculine ends in --
us, or -- er, the Neuter always in -- um; and both these are of the 2d.
Declension, the Feminine always in -- a, and of the 1st. Declension, as Bonus,
bona, bonum. Genesis Boni, bonae, boni, etc. Some Adjectives have two
Terminations, then the 1st. is Masc. and Femin. as Tristis, the 2d. is Neuter,
as Triste.

And these, as also those of one Termination and all Genders as Foelix, follow
the 3d. Declension, as hic and haec Tristis, and hoc triste, Genesis Tristis* Hic,
haec, and hoc Foelix. Genesis Foelicis, of all Genders.

Some few Irregulars there are as, Ambo and Duo, which are of a peculiar
number, called the Dual, because they are never used but when we speak of two
and no more: their declining is irregular. Also Vnus, Solus, hic, ille, iste,
ipse, is, alius, alter, uter, neuter, qui, etc. make the Genesis in -- ius, the
Dat. in -- i, as Vnius, Solius, etc. in other Cases they are like other
Adjectives.

Most Adjectives signify such things as are capable of more and less, as more
white or whiter, less white (which the Philosophers call Intension and
Remission) and may have magis and mini^s applied to them, as magis albus, minus
albus; to express this there are two degrees of Comparison. Degrees of
Comparison ^.


(That which Signifies the thing it self is called the Positive, and is no
degree.)

1st. The Comparative Comparative.
which Signifies [ more] and has after it [ than] with an Abl. Case, as
Pulchrior Helena, more fair than Helena; and it is formed of the 1st. case of
the Positive that ends in -- i, by putting to it -- or for the Masculine and
Feminine, and -- us for the Neuter, Gender; as of Casti, castio^ and castius.
All these follow the 3d. Declension.

2d. The Superlative, Superlative.
which Signifies [ most] and has after it [ of] or a Genesis Case of the Plural
Number, as Sapientissimus omnium, the most wise or wisest of all: And is formed
of the 1st. Case of the Positive that ends in -- i, by putting to it -ssimus,
as of Casti, castissimus. Yet if the Adjective end in -er, it is made by adding
-rimus, as ^ener, tenerrimus. And some in -lis make -llimus, as Facilis,
facillimus. All these are declined of the 1st and 2d. Declension. Some other
Irregulars there are, as also many Nouns, which do vary from the ordinary
regula^ De^lensions, some because of a more graceful Sound: Some because their
Primitives are disused, and new ones succeeded: Some also because of their
derivations, of all which particulars other Grammarians must be consulted.

Of Nouns some are (1) Primitives, some Derivatives, that are made from them,
such are those called Patronymi^s, which are words derived from the Names of
Parents, or some Relations, or their Country, City, or the like. The Masculines
end in -- des, or -- on, as Anchisiades, Iapetion; Feminines in -as, -is, -ne,
as Ilias, Priamis, Adrastine, Acrisione, those from the Stock or Country in
-us, as Anglus, Romanus, or ensis, as Ox^niensis.

2. Possessives, which signify some propriety or possession, and may be
expounded for the Genesis Case of their Primitives, as Paternus, Patrius, Patris:
Regalis, Regius, Regis; And end mostly in -- aris, -oris, eus, e^us, -- icus,
^us, -- lis, -nus, -vas.

Diminutives, ordinarily retaining the Gender of their Primitives. There is
great variety of their Terminations, as -cio, -sio, -aster, ^ulius, -ellus,
-ella, -ellum, -illus, -illum, -olus, -ola, -olum, -ulus, -ula, -ulum, -culus,
-cula, -culum, -inulus, -unculus, -iscus.

4. Denominatives, as, ferreus from ferrum, pietas from pius, some of th^se are
Substantives, some Adjectives, some Masculines, some Feminines, some Neuters;
and of all Terminations.

5. Numerals, whereof some are called Cardinals or Principals, as, unus, duo,
etc. and Answer to the Question made by Quot; These from tres to Centum are not
declined. Others are called Ordinals, that signify Order, and answer to the
question made by Quotus, as Primus, Secundus, etc. Others Distributives, which
answer to Quoteni, as Bini, by two's, or two by two, Terni, by three and three.
Others Multiplicatives, answering to Quotuplex, as Duplex, double, Triplex,
triple. Others imply weight or time, as Lapis Centenarius, of an hundred pound
weight, Bimus, of two years old.

The Romans had a manner of counting, which was used also by our Forefathers
the Saxons, and is by some Nations at this day: As for 2 and, they said
Sestertius, a, um; i. e. Semistertius, the 3d. is an half, and it is thus
marked IIS, or HS, for the usual Characters for Numerals were --

I. the most obvious and easy to be written. V. quinque, five, the half of X.
december, ten. But why noted by this Crux decussata, I know not. L. quinquaginta,
fifty, half of C. Centum, one hundred. D. quingenti, five hundred, half of M.
Mill, one thousand. Millia many thousands.
1. Such Substantives as end in -tio, changed in English into -tion, as
temptation, and -- itus, the English whereof ends in -ing, as hearing, are
derived from Verbs, and signify either the Action it self, or the thing
produced by the Action, as Lectio a reading, or a Lesson read; Sectio, a
cutting, or a cut; Auditus a hearing or a thing heard.

2. Those that end in -bilis come from Verbs, and augment the signification, as
Laudabilis worthy to be praised, Flexibilis easy to be bent; And we express
them by an Adjective ending in -ble, as Laudable, Flexible.

3. Those that end in -tor, Masculines, and -trix, Feminines, augment the
signification, as Cantator one that uses, or makes it his trade, to Sing,
Amator, a Lover.

4. Those that end in -bundus signify so also, as Ludibundus gamesome.

5. Also Substantives and Adjectives are much alike in their signification, and
therefore derived one of another, as Pius, godly, Pietas, godliness: Beatus,
blessed, beatitudo blessedness. Those Substantives that end in -- t^s, -tudo,
we English by a word ending in -ness, Feritas fierceness, pietas godliness,
magnitudo greatness.

Because that a Noun and Verb signify the same thing, it must needs be that
there is great affinity between Nouns and Verbs, and that Nouns may be changed
into Verbs, and Verbs into Nouns, as Amor, Amo; And again Substantives into
Adjectives, and Adjectives into Substantives, as Amor, Amabilis, Albedo, Albeo,
Albus and such like.

Of Pronouns.
They are called Pronouns because used for, or instead of Nouns, for they are
not the Names of any things, and therefore not Nouns, yet are they Subjects in
a Sentence; They regulate Verbs and Actjectives, and therefore have the same
use as Nouns.

They are not of absolute necessity to speak, (for instead of I and My, may be
used my proper name) but of very great convenience for brevity, Elegance, and
Perspicuity. They are used for and instead of Nouns which signify Persons, or
appertaining to Persons; for

As Things are signified by Nouns, so are Persons by Pronouns [in Logic a
Person is nothing else, but one single or intellectual Man or Angel, but in
Grammar it is otherwise, for] persons are either in speaking the Speaker,
called the first person; or the spoken to, called the second; or the spoken of,
called the third Person* And of this Person are all Things, except by some
figure we either speak to them, or feig^ them speaking; and then we understand
T^ or Ego.

Of Pronouns, some are called Demonstratives, as Ego I, Tu thou, Sui of
himself, Ille, Ipse, is, he, Hic this.

Some Relatives, which referr to some Substantives spoken of before, ille,
ipse, iste, hic, is; but not properly qui, which sometimes includes both the
Antecedent and Relative, as* Qui male agit, odit lucem, He or that Man* who
does evil, hates the light; Yea, though of diverse Cases, as [ Ei] Qui Simulat
Verbis, nec cord est fidus amicus, Tu quoque fac simile. Do thou the like to
him, who --

Some Possessives, which Signify possession, as Meus mine, tuus thine, suus
his, noster ours, vester yours, nostras of our Family or house, Vestras of
yours.

Quis is an Interrogative, Who? And is used both in the Masculine and Feminine
Gender, Quid? What? of the Neuter. So Cujus, cuja, cujum, and Cujus whose is it?

Singul.
Nom. Ego, I. Tu, thou.

Genesis Mei, of me. Tui, of thee. Sui, of him.

Dat. Mihi, to me. Tibi, to thee. Sibi, to him.

Accu. Me, me. Te, thee. Se him.

Abla. Me, in, for me. Te, in, for thee. Se for him.

Plural.
Nom. Nos, we. Vos, ye.

Genesis Nostrum, of us. Vestrum, of you.

Dat. Nobis, to us. Vobis, to you.

Acc. Nos, us. Vos, you.

Abl. Nobis, with us. Vobis, in, with, for, from etc. you.

Sing
No. Ille, he, illa, she, illud, it,

Ge. Illius, of him, her, it,

Da. Illi, to him, her, it,

Ac. Illum, him, illam, her, illud it,

Ab. Illo, with him, illa, with her, illo, with it.

Plur.
No. Illi, they ( men) illae, they ( women) illa, those ( things)

Ge. Illorum, of them ( men) illarum, of them ( women) illorum, of those (
things)

Da. Illis, to them ( men or women) to those ( things)

Ac. Illos, them (men) illas, them (women) illa, those ( things)

Ab. Illis with them ( men or women) with those (things.)

In like manner is declined is, ea, id, the signi^ication is the same as ille.
Hic, haec, hoc, etc. idem, eadem, idem, etc.

Sing.
No. Iste, he this, ista, she this, istud, this thing.

Ge. Istius of this him, her, or it.

Da. Isti, to this him, her, or it.

Ac. Istum, this him, istam, this her, istud, this it.

Ab. Isto, in this him, ista, in this her, isto, in this it.

Plur.
No. Isti, these he is, istae, these she is, ista, these things.

Ge. Istorum, of these he is, istarum, of these She Is, istorum, of these things.

Da. Istis, to these he is, she is, or things.

Ac. Istos, these he is, istas, these she is, ista, these things.

Ab. Istis with these he is, she is, or things.

Ipse (and anciently ipsus) ipsa, ipsum, etc.

Sing.
No. Qui, who. Quis, who? quae, quod, what,

Ge. Cujus, of whom, of what.

Da. Cui, to whom, to what.

Ac. Quem, quam, quod, whom, or what.

Ab. Quo, qua quo, with whom or what

Plural.
No. Qui, quae, quae, who or what.

Ge. Quorum, quarum, quorum, of whom or what.

Da. Quibus vel queis, to whom or what.

Ac. Quos, quas, quae, whom or what.

Ab. Quibus vel queis, from whom or what.

Quis is only used in asking a Question in the Nom. Case, concerning Persons,
all other questions are asked by the other Cases.

Pronouns are also variously compounded.
With Pronouns, as, Egoipse, tuipse, tute, su^^psius, I my self, thou thy self,
of himself, istic, illic, for iste hic, ille hic, this very same, sese,
quisquis. With Nouns, as, Aliquis, i. e. alius quis, some other, quomodo, after
what manner, hujusmodi, of this manner, etc. With Verbs, Quivis, who thou will,
quilibet, who thou please, quisputas? With Adverbs, Numquis, whether any,
nequis, least any, eccum, behold him, i. e. ecce eum, ellum, i. e. ecce illum.
With a Conjunction, Ecquis, i. e. et quis, and who, siquis, if any, quisnam,
for who? quisquam, quisque, nequis. With other Particles, Meapte, tuapte
hujusce, Ejusce* huncce, huccine, hoccine, quidam, quispiam, quicunque, egomet,
m^imet, I my self, of me my self, tuimet, of thy self, sibimet, to himself,
etc.

Of Verbs.
Verbs signify the same thing as Nouns, Verbs.
but after another manner, for, as Things are named, i. e. expressed or
represented by their Names, i. e. by Nouns, so are their Actions, doing and
suffering one from or by another, (without Action, Motion, and Power, there is
no Entity) by Verbs. As the manner, time, place, and such other circumstances
of action, are by Adverbs, and the relation of cause, effect, and such like, by
Prepositio^s.

A Verb then is a part of Speech, signifying doing or suffering, and has
always adjoined to his signification some difference of time, past, present, or
to come. In all action either the agent and patient are several, i. e. the
action passes from one Subject to another (which actions are called by
Philosophers Actiones transeuntes) and such Verbs are called Transitives:
^ransitiv^.
and then that, which is applied to the agent is a Verb Active, ^ctive.
and it ends commonly in o; and that which is applied to the patient, is a
Verb Passive, ^assive.
and ends commonly in or: Or else the same Subject is both agent and patient,
or the action, or rather motion, remains in its agent, (such are called by
Philosophers Actiones immanentes) and then the action is signified by a Verb
Neuter, Neuter.
as ardeo, I burn, glorior, I boast. And these Verbs are known because they are
not changed into Passives by taking -r to them, as all Actives are. Some Verbs
called Neuters include an Accusative Case in their signification, and such are
properly Actives, as Curro cursum, cursus curritur. This is more frequent
amongst Poets, as Omnes se for as proruunt. Et mutata suos requierunt flumina
cursus. But then they give such Verbs an Active sense, as if it were,
proripiunt or pacaruat. Note, in general that some Neuters signify Action
either transitive, as faveo, noceo, and these indeed are actives, but govern
not an Accus. Case; or intransitive, as curro, ambulo; though curro be properly
Active, and has its Passive, at least in the 3d. Person, as curritur
(Subauditur cursus, or Stadium.) Sum, Volo, and some others are properly Verbs
auxiliary. So that according to the signification there are no more then two
sorts of Verbs (besides the auxiliaries) Active and Passive; for Neuters are
sometimes Active sometimes Passive, but they are called Neuters because their
form and termination does not correspond to their signification, as ardeo I am
burning, ga^deo I am rejoicing, nor can they be made Passives. The Auxiliaries
in Latin are but few (except you will so call those that require an Infinitive
Mode always after them, as juvat, oportet and the like.)

Sum, forem from fuo anciently of the same signification as sum, which also
retains some of its Cases, as sui, and those derived of it, forem anciently was
fuerem; existo; possum; Su^, or its Cases are understood in every Verb, as well
Active as Passive, and its meaning is, that what is signified by the verb, of
predicate agrees to that which is signified by the Subject.

Some Irregular Verbs there are ending in -or, which retain both Active and
Passive signification, and are called Common, Common.
and have both Active and Passive Participles, their Participles in -ns, and
-rus, are always Active, loquens, loquuturus; those in -^us, are both Active
and Passive, as Veneratus is both worshipping and worshipped, in -dus as
Venerandus, always Passive. But most of them have laid aside their Passive
signification, and retain only their Active (and are therefore called Deponents
Deponent.
) as loquor I speak* amplector I embrace.

All Actives require before them a Nom. Case signifying the agent, doer, or
maker, i. e. if they signify to do, as lego libros, dormio somnum; and these
have an Acc. Case after them signifying the Patient. Or if to make, as aedifico
domum, scribo literas, the Acc. Case after these is the effect: And if the
Active be changed into a Verb Passive, the Acc. becomes the Nom. and the Nom.
(that from which it suffers or the doer) the Abla. as, Amo te, I love thee, is
changed into, Tu amaris a me, thou art loved of me.

And therefore many times the verb-Passive is used, the Nominative Case of
Patient not expressed, (which some mistakingly call Impersonals) especially if
the sense of the Nominative Case be included in the Verb, as curritur ab illis,
i. e. cursus.

Every Action is performed in some time, and therefore every Verb implies,
above that which it signifies, Time either Present, Future, or Past; past
either in passing, perfectly past, or a good while ago past. So there be five
Tenses T^nses. 5.
or Times; the Present. Imperfect. Pluperfect, or more then Future. Perfect.
perfect, preterit.

Pluperfect. ^ueram, ras, rat, Plur. ramus, r^tis, (...). Potueram, Volueram,
etc. Tuleram, Future. Ero, ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, runt. Potero, Volam,
etc. es, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent. Ibo, bis, bit. Plur. bimus, bitis, bunt.
Quibo, Feram, es, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent. Ferar, reris, rere, retur. Plur.
remur, remi^i, rentur. Imperative Mode.
Possum, Volo, Malo have no Imperative Mode. Es, esto, esto, este, estote,
sunto. Noli, ito nolito, nolite, itote, I, ito, ito, ite, itote, eunto, Es,
esto, esto, este, estote. Fer, ferto, fer^o, ferte, fertote, ferunto. Fere,
fertor, fertor, feruntor.
ferimini feriminor
Subjunctive Mode*
Present. Sim, sis, sit, fuat, simus, suis, sint. Fuam, Possim, Velim, etc. is,
it, Plur. imus, itis, int. Feram, as. at, Plur. amus, atis, ant. Fiam, Ferar,
raris rare, ratur, Plur. ramur, ramini, rantur. Imperfect. Essem, es, et, Plur.
emus, etis, ent. Forem, Possem, Vellem, etc. Essem, Ferrem, Fierem, Ferrer,
reris rere, retur Plur, remur. remini, rentur. Perferct. Fuerim, ris, rit, Plur
rimus, ritis, rint. Potu^rim, Voluerim, etc. Tulerim, Pluperfe and Fuissem,
ses, set, Plur. semus, setis, sent. Pot^issem, Voluissem, etc. Tulissem.
Future. F^ero, ris, ris, Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. Potuero, Voluero, etc.
Tulero. Infinitive Mode.
Present and Imperfect. Esse. Perfect and Pluperfect Fuisse. Fore vel futurum
esse. Posse. Potuisse. Future Velle. Voluisse. Nolle Noluisse. Malle. Maluisse.
Esse. Edisse Esurum esse. Far. Tulisse. Laturum esse. Fieri. Facitum esse
velfuisse. Factum La^um iri vel faciendum ferendum (...) Ferri. La^ium Present.
Participles. Ens. Future. Potens. Volens. Malens. Ferens. Laturus. Factus.
Faciendus. Latus. Ferendus.

Note, that Fui, and its Cases come from the Ancient Verb Fuo; Forem being
contracted from Fuerem, and fore from fuere, now mostly used in a Future sense.

Note, only the Anomalous T^nses of diverse of these Verbs are expressed.



In English they have these Signs,

Do Did Had done. Shall or will. Have done.

In the English Language we use very many Verbs Auxiliaries.

For Actives, do, have, may, can, shall, will, ow.

For Passives, am, are, art, etc. and Verbs Passive also instead of the
Preter-perfect, Preterpluperfect, and in the oblique Modes the Future, use the
like Tenses of the auxiliary sum and the Participle.

Note, also that our English Language changes not the ^ermination in any Tense
besides the Imperfect, and Singular number; for all the rest we use auxiliary
Verbs, whereof we have diverse according to our intention; which expresses our
meaning very distinctly: as I love, or do love: thon lo est, or do love: he
loves or does love. The Plural Number has only love.

The Imperfect. I loved or did love: thou lovedst or did love: he loved or
did love. The Plural has only loved.

The passive is formed of the active, by adding r to -o, as am-o, amo-r,
amab-o, amabo-r, amat-o, amato-r.

By changing m into r. Amaba-m, amaba^r.

By changing s into ris or re. Ama-s, ama-ris, ama-re, amaba-s, ba-ris.

By changing t into tur, ama-t, amat-ur, amaba-t, amaba-tur.

By changing^ mus into mur, ama-mus, ama-mur, amaba-mus, amaba-mur.

Hence we have two present Present.
Tenses, the one more emphatical, as I love, I do love; two Imperfects, I
loved, I did love; two Futures I shall, and I will, love; The one signifying
somewhat of force, the other Voluntary.

We have but one Preterperfect, Preterper^ect.
which is by the Auxiliary have, and the Participle, loved; one also
Preterpluperfect ^pluperfect.
by the Imperfect Tense of have, as I had loved.

The true importance of that called the Preterimperfect Preterimperfect.
Tense, is that it signifies a thing beginning to be done, or suffered,
wherefore many times the In^initive Mood is used for it, coeperam, or some such
like Verb being then understood. ^pluperfect.
The Preterpluperfect Tense is properly used to make up the later Clause of an
Hypothetical proposition; as, cum venit (v^l veniebat) ad me Tabellarius, jam
literas absolveram; and this may be the reason why it is called
^lus-quam-perfectum, because it signifies a thing done before the other
preterits: and therefore both these do properly belong to the Subjunctive Mode.

The Future Future.
Tense of the oblique Modes has a signi^ication many times mixed of past and
future, as Dixeris egregie, thou shall have spoken excellently.

There be also several manners of applying or using Verbs, Modes 6.
for either we declare a thing to be, or, not to be; do, or, not to do; suffer,
or, not to suffer. This manner or mode of speaking (making in Logic a
Categorical Proposition) as also asking a question is called the Indicative
Indicative.
Mode. Or if we command a thing to be done, called the Imperative, Imperative.
(and therefore the Imperative has no first person Singular but the Future
Tense is used for it:) The Imperative, Optative. etc. all speak of that which
is to do, to be, or to suffer, and therefore they dep^nd upon the Future Tense,
to which they are like, and into which they are resolved.

The Imperative has properly neither First nor Third Person Amemus v. g. is
properly the Optative. Both that and Amanto are properly Permissions not
Commands: As let us -- let him -- let them-love. Amet also is the other Mode.
For this called the Imperative, is used also to express forbidding, exhorting,
deprecating, and the like.

If we wish a thing might be done, Optative.
it is called the Optative, it is therefore like the Imperative, and used instead
of it.

Or if we say a thing may be done, it is called the Potential. Potential.


Or imply the thing may be done upon some condition, called the Subjunctive,
Subjunctive.
or Conjunctive Mode, which is never used but with a Conjunction, i. e. when it
serves to one part of an Hypothetical Proposition.

But there may be as well other Modes named, as Optative and Potential, as the
Volitive for will, would, so another for shall, should, etc. It is therefore
much more Regular to name only the Subjunctive introduced by a Conjunction, and
to say that the same terminations serve to the other Auxiliaries.

The Potential is also called the Permissive, when it signifies a thing to be
permitted or granted, as Habeat, Valeat, Vivat cum illa: but this is no other
then possit understood, Possit habere he may have her.

The Optative and Potential are expressed in English by diverse Verbs
Auxiliaries, as can, could, will, would, shall, should, ow, ought, may, migh:
Whereby it appears that our Language is more distinct then the Latin.

The Infinitive, Infinitive.
Infinite, Indefinite Mode has only the bare signification of the Verb,
without cosignifying Person, Number or Time, for though it seems to have diverse
Tenses, yet are they used promiscuously; It serves very well for distinguishing
the Conjugations, which are four. Conjugations four.


The First has a, before -re, and -ris, and the second Person pers^nt ends in
-as, and a runs through the Tenses, Amo, amas, amare, amavi, amatum.

The second has e^ long, before -re, and -ris, and the second Person ends in
es, which e runs through the Tenses, Doceo, doces, doce^re.

The Third has short, before -re and -ris, and the second person ends in -is,
Lego, legis, legere, legi, lectum.

The Fourth has i^ long, before -re, and -ris, and the second person ends in
is, and i runs through the Tenses, as Audio, audis audi^re, audi^vi, audi^tum.

There is no reason for them in Nature, but the variety of them conduces
somewhat to the Ornament of Speech, and ease of pronunciation.

Verbs Active are said to have three Gerunds Gerunds 3
ending in, di, do, dum, but they seem to be Participles or Nouns, and the
Rules for the Constructions of Nouns serve them: For those in -di, are
Participles or Adjectives of the Genesis Case, as Amandi of Amandus; in -do, of
the Ablative (rarely of the Dat.) in -dum of the Nom. and Accus. Gerunds also
are sometimes taken passively, as Vritque videndo Foemina, i. e. by being seen:
Memoria excolendo augetur, by being husbanded.

As also two Supines, Supines*
the one of an Active signification, ending in -um (which is no other then a
Participle) the other in -u of a Passive signification; and therefore Verbs
Neuter have none of that Supine, the first Supine having that signification as
Vapulatum, to be beaten: This later Supine is the Abla. Case of a Noun of the
fourth Declension.

Whatsoever does or suffers is supposed to be a Person, so there be three
Persons, Persons 3.
and two Numbers. Number. 2.


Indicative Mode.
Amo, Present Tense.
I love, or, I did love.

-as, thou love, or do love, etc.

Amabam, Imperfect.
I loved, or, did love.

-bas, thou love, or, did love, etc.

Amavi, Perfect.
I have loved.

-visti, thou have loved, etc.

Amaveram, Pl^perfect.
I had loved,

-ras, thou had loved, etc.

Amabo, F^^re.
I shall love, I will love.

-bis, tho^ shall or wilt love, etc.

Imperative Mode
Has no distinction of time because it is only Future, nor first Person
Singular, because no Person Commands himself, b^t instead of that is he will.

Ama love thou. Amato let him love. Amato do thou love.

Ame^^us. Let us love. It is the Optative Mode.

The Forming through their Modes and Tenses of
Verbs Active. Indicative Mode.
1. 2. 3. 1. 2. 3. Present Tense Singular. Amo as at Plural. amus atis ant
Doceo es et emus etis ent Lego is it imus itis unt Audio is it imus itis unt
Preter-Imperfect. Amabam abas abat abamus abatis abant Docebam ebas ebat ebamus
ebatis ebant Legebam ebas ebat ebamus ebatis ebant Audiebam iebas iebat iebamus
iebatis iebant Perfect. Amavi avisti, avit avimus avistis averunt, vel, avere
Docui uisti uit uimus uistis uerunt, vel, uere Legi isti it imus istis er^nt,
vel, ere Audivi ivisti ivit vimus ivistis iverunt, vel, ivere Preter-pl^perfect
Amaveram averas averat av^ramus averatis aver^nt Docueram ueras uerat ueramus,
ueratis uerant Legeram eras erat eramus eratis erant Audiveram iveras iverat
iveramus iveratis iverant Future. Amabo abis abit a^im^s abitis abunt Docebo
ebis ebit ebimus ebitis ebunt Legam es et emus etis ent Audiam ies iet iem^s
ietis ient

Imperative Mode.
Singular. Am^, (...), ato Plur. ate, atote anto Doce, eto, eto ete, etote ento
Lege, ito, ito ite, itote unto Audi, ito, ito ite, itote ianto

Subjunctive with Cum, Si, or other Conjunction.
P^esent. Sing. Amem es et Plur. emus etis ent Doceam eas eat eamus eatis ea^t
Leg^m as at amus atis ant (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)



The Optative and Potential Mode are the same.

Amem, I may, Present.
I can, I shall, I will, I ow to love, etc.

Amarem, I might, Imperfect.
I could, I should, I would, ought to love, etc.

Amaverim, Amavissem I might etc. Perfect. Pluperfect.
I ought to have loved, etc.

Amavero, Future.
I shall etc. have loved, etc.

The Subjunctive Mode has always a Conjunction joined with it. Si if, eum
when, quamvis although, or the like.

Si amem, Present.
if I may love.

Si amarem, Imperfect.
if I might love.

Si amaverim, Perfect.
if I might have loved.

Si amavissem, Pluperfect.
if I had loved.

Si amavero, Future.
if I shall have loved.

The Preter- and Preterpluperfect-Tenses in these Modes are not distinguished
in our Language, nor is it necessary they should; In the Latin there is either
no difference, or very hard to be expressed.

General Rules.
The Preterperfect Tense ends in -i, and o^dinarily is framed of the second
Person of the present Tense by changing -s, into vi, as amd^* amavi, Audis
audivi, Fles flevi: But the u is no always a Consonant, but sometimes a vowel
and then the former vowel is omitted, to avoi^ the concourse of so many Vowels
(as it fall^ out frequently in the second Conjugation) ^ Domas domui, doces
docui, mones monui.

Also for better sound sometimes a Letter o^ Syllable is cut off, as Iuvas
juvi, for juvavi (...) cavi: This is frequent in the third Conjugation, where
the Preterperfect Tense man^ times follows the Consonants of the Present, ^^
-bo makes by, bibo, bibi, and psi, scribo, scripsi.

co, ci. vinco, vici. no, vi. sino, sivi. xi. dico, dixi. ui. gigno, genui. do,
di. edo* edi. ni. cano, cecini. si. ludo, lusi. psi. temno, tempsi. go, gi.
lego, legi. po, psi. repo, repsi. xi. rego, rexi. pi. rumpo, rupi. si. spargo,
sparsi. ^i. strepo, strepui. guo, xi. distinguo, distinxi. quo, qui. linquo,
liqui. ho, xi. veho, vexi. xi. coquo, coxi. jo, xi. mejo, minxi. to, vi, sero,
sevi, and serui. lo, ^^i. colo, colui. ^^i. li. vello, velli. ssi. uro, ussi.
mo, mi. emo, emi. ri. verro, verri. ^ii. tremo, tremui. so, vi. lacesso,
lacessivi. psi. sumo, sumpsi. si. facesso, facessi. ssi. premo, pressi. ^^i.
pinso, pinsui. to, vi. peto, petivi. dio, di. fodio, fodi. ti. verto, verti.
gio, gi. fugio, fugi. ^^i. sterto, stertui. pio, pi. capio, cepi. si. mitto,
misi. pui. rapio, rapui. vo, vi. volvo, volvi. pivi. cupio, cupivi. xi. vivo,
vixi. rio, ri. pario, peperi. uo, ^i. arguo, argui. tio, ssi. quatio, quassi
(obsolete) x^^. struo, struxi. xo, ^^i. nexo, nexui. sco, vi. pasco, pavi
Composita (...). cto, xi. pecto, pexi. xui. pexui. dispesco, dispecui. cio, ci.
facio, feci. ci. disco, didici. cui. elicio, elicui. sci. posco, poposci.

These Rules hold in all Verbs of this Conjugation; But they are most what
Regulated by the sound, or sometimes by the Original in words borrowed from the
Greeks; sometimes also they borrow Tenses of Verbs of the same or like
signification, which are out of use.

There be certain Irregular Verbs in all or many of their Tenses, such as these
that follow, whose Irregularities only are set down.

Sum, and its Compound Possum(or potis sum.)

Where any Person of Sum begineth with ( s) pos- is added, and where with a
vowel pot- or potis, as pot-es, pos-sim, possem for potessem.

Nolo, is as much as non volo.
Malo, as magis volo.
There are also Verbs derived from other Verbs, and their Terminations are used
instead of Verbs Auxiliaries; as those ending in -urio (called commonly
Frequentatives) signify a desire to, as Esurio, from Edo, is, sum, I desire to
eat; Mi^^urio, from Mingo, nxi, mictum, I desire to piss.

In -^sco, (called Inceptives) signify entering upon a thing or action, as
Adolesco, I ent^r upon my growing Age; Quinisco, I am taking a napp or nod.

As Adjectives are Adjuncts to Nouns, or Subjects, so are Participles
Participles
to Action and Passion, or Verbs; And they are half Adjectives, taking from
them form and part of their signification, or signifying Verbally as
Ad^ectives, and therefore are declined as Adjectives; and yet they partake
(though Nouns) of Verbs, Tense, Signification and Derivation.

Participles
Are not a necessary part of Speech, for Adjectives may supply all their use,
but are chiefly invented for short and elegant speaking.

There are four sorts of Participles, two come from Verbs Active, i. e. such as
end in -ans, from Verbs of the first Conjugation, and -em, from those of the
thr^e other: and in -urus.

Two also come from Verbs Passive, those in -tus, -sus, -xus, and others in
-ndus.

-- ans Amans loving. Are declined lik^ Faelix. Actives in -- ens Docens
teaching. -- urus Amaturus, about to love. All these are declined like bonus,
and in Syntax follow the Rules of Adjectives. Docturus, about to teach. -- tus
Amatus, loved. Passives in -- s^s Visus, seen. -- xus Flexus, bent. -- ndus
Amandus, to be loved. Docendus, to be taught.

The two ending in -ans, or -ens, signify the Subject actually doing, being, or
having, such a thing.

Those ending in -urus signify the Subject inclined to be, do, or have, though
not actually doing; and those are called Actives, because agreeing with, or
belonging to, the Subject or Agent.

Those in -tus, -sus, -xus, signify the object actually done, been, or had, as
Amatus, actually l^ved.

Those in -- ndus signify the object or thing ^it or worthy to be done, not
expressing whether actually done or no; And these two last are called Passives*
because they signify the object or Nominative Case of the Verb Passive.

Of Adverbs.
Adverb* are joined to Verbs and sometimes to Nouns, for the expressing of some
circumstances or Modes of being or acting, as,

1. In a Place, answering to the question, Vbi? as, Hic, istic, illic, (iste
hic) (ille hic locus,) alibi, nusquam, intus, for as, ubicunque, ubivis, sicubi,
superius, inferius, ubiubi* alicubi, inibi, necubi.

2. To a Place, answering to the question, Quo? as, Huc, istuc, illuc, alio,
aliquo, siquo, eodem, quolibet, quovis, neutro, quocunque.

3. From a Place, answering to the question, Vnde? as, Hinc, istinc, illinc,
inde, alicunde, aliunde, sicunde, necunde, indidem, undelibet.

4. By a Place, answering to the question Qua? as, Hac, illac, istac, alia,
etc. as if via were understood.

5. Toward a Place, answering to the question, Quorsum? as Horsum, istorsum,
illorsum, dext^rorsum, sinistrorsum, etc.

1. In Time, answering to the question Quando? as, Cras, heri, hodie, pridie,
etc.

2. How long, answering to the question, Quamdiu? as Diu, etc.

3. How often, answering to the question, Quoties? as, Saepe, raro, etc.

Of Quantity, answering, etc. to quantum? as, Multum, parum, satis, nimium, etc.

Of Number, semel, bis, ter, quater, centies, millies, etc.

This comes in Page 34.

Irregulars.
Indicative Mode.
^^^sent Tense Sing. S^m, es, est, Plur. sumus, estis, su^t. Possum, potes,
potest, possum^s, potestis, possunt. Volo, vis, vul^, volumus, vultis, volunt.
Nolo, nonvis, nonvult, nolumus, nonvultis, nolunt. Malo, mavis, ^avult,
malumus, mavultis, malunt. Eo, i^, it, imus, itis, eunt. Q^eo, quis, quit,
qui^us, quitis, queunt. Edo, es est, estis, Fero, fers, fert, ferimus, fertis,
feru^^. Fio, fis, fit, fimus, fitis, fiunt. Feror, ferris, re, fertur, ferimur,
ferimini, (...). ^^perfect. Eram, ras, rat, Plur. ramus, ratis, ra^^. Poteram.
Volebam, Nolebam, Malebam, bas, bat, Plur. (...), batis, (...) Ibam, Quibam,
Ferebam, Fiebam, Ferebar, baris, bare, ba^ur, Plur. ba^ur, bamini, bantur.

Perfect. Fui, isti, it, Plur. imus, i^ti^s, erunt, ere. Po^ui, Volui, N^lui,
Malui, Ivi, Quivi, Edi, Tuli, Preter. Imperfect. Sing. Amarem, ares are^ Plur.
aremus aretis arent Docerem eres eret eremus eretis erent Legerem eres eret
eremus eretis erent Audirem ires iret iremus iretis irent Perfect Amaverim
averis averit averimus averitis averint Docuerim ueris uerit ^erimus ^eritis
^erint Legerim eris erit erimus eritis erint Audiverim iveris iverit iverimus
i^eritis iverint Pluperfect. Amavissem avisses avisset avissemus avissetis
avissent Docuissem uisses uisset uissemus uissetis uissent Legissem isses isset
issemus issetis issent Audivissem ivisses ivisset ivissemus ivissetis ivissent
Future. Amavero averis averit averimus averitis averint Docuero ueris uerit
uerimus ueritis uerint Legero eris erit erimus eritis erint Audivero iveris
iverit iverimus iveritis iverint* Infinitive Mode.
Present and Imperfect. Amare Perfect and Pluperfect Amavisse Docere Docuisse
Legere Legisse A^dire A^divisse

Participles.
Present. Amans Future. Amaturus Docens Docturus Legens Lecturus Audiens
Auditurus

Gerunds 3, Supines 2. Amandi, ando, andum. Am^tum, Amatu Doce^di, endo, endum.
Doctum, Doctu Legendi, endo, endum. Lectum, Lectu Audiendi iendo, iendum.
Auditum, Auditu. Verbs Passive. Indicative Mode.
Present Tense Sing. Amor aris, vel, are atur Plur. amur amini antur Doceor
eris, vel, ere etur emur emini entur Legor eris, vel, ere itur imur imini untur
Audior iris, vel, ire itur imur imini iuntur Preter-Imperfect. Amabar abari^,
vel, abare abatur abamur abamini abant^^ Docebar ebaris, vel, ebare ebatur
eba^ur ebamini ^bantur Legebar (...) (...) (...) Aud^^bar iebaris, vel, iebare
iebatur Future. Amabor aberis, vel, abere abitur abi^ur abimini abuntur Docebor
eberis, vel, ebere ebitur ebimur ebimini ebuntur Legar eris, vel, ere etur emur
emin^ entur Audiar ieris, vel, iere ietur i^mur iemini ientu^

Imperative Mode.
Sing. Amare, ator Plur. aminor antor Docere, etor emi^or entor Logere, itor
iminor untor Audire, itor iminor ^ntor Subjunctive.
Present. Sing. Amer eris, vel, ere etur Plur. emur emini entur Docear earis,
vel, ear eatur eamur eamini eantu^ Legar aris, vel, are atur amur amini antur
Audiar iaris, vel, i^are iatur iamur iamini iantur Preter-Imperfect. A^arer
areris, vel, arere aretur aremur aremini arentur Docere^ ereris, vel, erer^
eretur eremur eremini erentu^ Legerer Audirer ireris, vel, ^ere iretur (...)
(...) (...)

Infinitive Mode.
Pr^sent and Imperfect Amari Doceri Legi Audiri

Participles.
Present Amatu^ Future (...) Doctus Docendus Lectus Legeudus Audit^^
A^diendut^^



Of Order, inde, deinde, deinceps, praeterea, etc.

Of Quality, docte, pulchre, been, male, fortiter, etc. many of these admit
Comparison.

Of Separating, seorsum, separatim, singulatim, etc.

Of Gathering together, simul, una, pariter, etc.

Of Doubting, forsan, forsitan, fortassis, etc.

Of Calling to, O, heus, eho;

Of Affirming, profecto, cert^, nae, ita, quidni, etc*

Of Denying, non, hand n^quaquam, minime, etc.

Of Forbidding, ne.

Of Confirming, certe, sane, plane, nempe, utique, etc.

Of Swearing, hercule, pol, aedipol, mehercules, etc.

Of Choosing, potius, satius, potissimum, imo, etc.

Of Exhorting, eja, age, agite, agedum, ehodum, etc.

Of Wishing, utinam* o, osi, si, ut.

Of Showing, en, ecce.

Of Comparing, magis, minus, maxim, etc.

Of Likeness, ita, itidem, tanquam, etc.

Of Happening, forte, fortuito, casu, fortuna.

Of Intension, valde, magnopere, impense, etc.

Of Remission, sensim, paulatim, pededentim, vix, aegre.

Of Excluding, tantu^, solum, tantu^modo, solummodo, etc.

Of Diversity, aliter, secus.

Of Granting, Licet, esto, sit it^, sit sane.

Of a thing not finished, ferm^, fere, prope, propemodum, etc.

Of Explaining, puta, utpote, utput^.

Of Prepositions.
Adverbs signify the manner, time, place, or some other circumstance of doing,
and therefore are joined unto Verbs.

Prepositions signify some Relation of one thing of Person to another, either
as Distance, Situation, Cau^ality, or the like. As Of distanc^ and ^ Situation.
Though these that signify local distance or Situation are ^orrowed to signi^y
things of lik^ Nature.
Cause, act, or dependence.
Ad, to. * Apud, at. Adversus, against. Adversum, Contra Ante, before. * Cis,
on this side. Citra, Circum, about. Circa, Erga, toward. Extra, without. In,
into. Int^re between. * Infra, below. I^tra, within. Iuxta, by. Pone, behind.
Praeter, besides. Super, above. Supra, Trans, beyond. Vltra, Versus, toward.
Ob, * for. Propter, Per, by. Penes, in the power. Post after. * Secundum,
according to. Vsque, until. A, from. Ab, Abs, De, of, or concerning. E. of,
out of. Ex. Pro, for, or instead of. Absque, without. Sine, In, in. * Cum, with
(in composition, con) * Prae, before.* Coram, before. Sub, under. * Cl^m,
privily. Palam, openly. Tenus, until, up to.
Accus. Case. Those marked * in composition with Verbs go vern mostwhat Da^.
Case. Abla. Case.


Note, Tenus, if the Substantive be of the Plural Number, governs a Genitive
Case, Aurium t^nus, genuum tenus, (altitudini,) or some such word being
understood, as up to the (height of the) ears, knees. Super, Gov^rn both Cases.
Sub, Subt^r, Cum, tenus, Versus, usque, are often set after the Noun, Nobiscum,
c^pulo te^^s, Londinum versus, ad Occidentem usque.

Am, di, dis, re, se, con, are Prepositions never used but in composition.
These Prepositions are also compared.

Citra, citerior, citimus. Citer is also Read.

I^tra, interior, intimus.

Infra, inferior, in^imus.

Ante, anterior.

Vltra, ulterior, ultimus.

Extra, exterior, extremus. Exter also. extimus. Supra, superior, supremus.
Superi and Posteri still in use. summus. Post, posterior, postremus.

Prope, propior, proximus, and hence proximior, Ovid.

Of Conjunctions.
Conjunctions are principally used to join Sentences together, and therefore
they make those, which by the Logicians are called Hypothetical Propositions, a
great force of Speech depends upon them.

Sentences, I say, for when they seem to join only Nouns(no Sentence can be
without a Verb) yet they intimate the Verb, or other Regiment expressed, which
is to be repeated to every one of these Nou^s, though for brevity it be omit^ed;
as, Emi (...) centum aurei^ and pluris, i. e. and emi pluris. Pater and Matter
abijt oratum. And therefore many times the Verb is put in the Plural Number, as
if ( illi) or ( nos) or ( vos) were understood; as, Ego and tu (nos) sumus in
tuto. Xenophon and Plato (illi) fuere aequales.

Copulatives, join the Sentences together, without showing any other dependence
one upon another. First affirmatively, Et, que, quoque* ac, atque; Deinde,
porro, insuper, which intimate the order. Cum, tum, vel, which are doubled or
corresponding one to another. Secondly, or Negatively, Ne, neque.

Disjunctives, Aut, ve, vel, seu, sive.

Causals, which infer the reason of what was said before, Nam enim, etenim,
na^^que, quia, quod, quippe, quoniam, quandoquidem.

Illatives, which infer the Conclusion, upon somewhat preceding. Ergo, ideo,
igitur, itaque, proinde, ideirco, etc.

Conditionals argue such dependence of the Antecedent and Consequent Sentences,
that if the first be true, the other is also true, but if the other be false,
the former is also false; as, si, sin, dum, tum, modo, dummodo, ni, nisi.

Discretives, which make a difference of the Consequent from the Antecedent,
sed, vere, at, ast, atqui verum etc. Saltem, certe, etc.

Dubitatives and Interrogatives, An, anne, number, utrum, nu^quid, ne^ne.

Exceptives, which except the Consequent from the Antecedent, and their
Redditives, deny the Consequent, as, Et si, tame^si, (...) etiamsi, quanquam,
quamvis, etc. to which correspond, Tamen, attamen, veruntamen.

Declaratives, as, Vti, veluti, sicut, sicuti, seu tanquam.

Of Interjections,
Interjections are questioned by some, whether they are to be accounted Parts
of Speech, because they signifying sudden motions, or expressions of the
Passions of the Soul, are rather sounds only then words; As are those of
Beasts, which, having no Language, yet have cer^ain noises or sounds to express
their wants, and other affections. In some Languages they are accounted
Adverbs. There Is no need of any discourse concerning them, since they are known
sufficiently by their Pronunciation.

Of Syntax.
HItherto we have spoken only of single words, it follows that we speak of them
as united into Sentences.

WOrds are joined together in a Sentence, either

By Concord. or, Rection. 1. Between the Subject and the Verb. 2. Between the
Subject (or Substantive) and the Adjective.


To every Sentence are necessarily required

First, a Suppositum, (most p^operly so called which comes before a
Verb-Active) Subject, or Noun of the Nom. Case, of which the Speech is made, or
something instead of it, to come before the Verb.

2dly. A Verb, to agree with the Nom. Case, or Subject, showing the Relation of
being, doing, or suffering, betwixt the Subject and the predica^e, which is
that spoken of the Subject.

3dl^. Somewhat to follow the Verb, which they call a Predicate, and is spoken
of the other, and is many times included in the Verb, as Rex Venit, i. e. Rex
est Veniens.

Note, that there are diverse sorts of Sentences. 1. That which has no more
then one Verb, and the dependents upon it, which some Authors call Periodus
Supina; as Prosperum s^elus vulgo virtus vocatur. 2. Which consists of more
then one Member, and of more then one Verb, but so that each Member stands by
it self; as Christus e coelo, glorificate: Christus in terram, obviam prodite.
Which period consists of four Members, the two later corresponding elegantly to
the two former, separated by an half-period or colon* 3. Which consists of
diverse Sentences, but some interposed between the parts of another; which
interposition is either by a Conjunction; as Fortuna, cum blanditur, captatum,
venit. Quae nocitura tibi, quamvis sint chara, relinque. Or by a Relative; as
Deforme est, quos dignitate praestas, ab ijs virtute superari. Quem s^pe
transit, casus aliquando invenit. Or by a Participle, or by an Ablative Case
put absolutely, or by a Parenthesis.

And therefore in Construing, it is best for a young Scholar to dispose the
words after the natural order, separating the Sentences one from another;
beginning with the Voc. Case, then the Nom. and what depends upon it, then the
Verb with the Adverb joined to it, next the Accusative with its dependents,
then the Abla. or Dative, as they follow* It is necessary also to supply all
Ellipsis's, Antec^dents, Defective Cases, one Verb applied to diverse Nom.
Cases, or the same Nom. Case to diverse Verbs, Subauditur's, etc.

Ellipsis, or omission of a word is very frequent in the Latin, as it is in all
Languages that affect brevity. Such words are of Nouns Substantive^ which
signify a thing common or well known; Areola longa denum pedum [mensura.] Verbs
also* especially Substantives, and Prepositions; Vacu^^ [a] curis. The
particulars see in the Rule^ following.

Note, also that the Latins seem to speak many times rather according to the
matter and signification, then the words and ordinary Construction, as, Omnium
rerum mors est extremum. Du^^millia viri. Abundantia earum rerum quae prima
mortales ducunt. Salust. Post quam cremata est Ilion. Ovid. Decipimur specie
recti pars maxima vatum. Populus super^mur ab uno. Ego Petrus and Paulus
currimus. Tu mecum gaudemus. Alter alterius onera portate. Scelus ludificatus
e^t Virginem. Infinite are there examples, which Grammarians reduce to
Figurative and Anomalous expressions.

The First Concord.
The Verb agrees with its Nom. Case (Subject, Suppositum) in number and
person, i. e. the Verb is the same number and person, as its Suppositum, as,
Magister legit. But an Infinitive Mode requires an Accus. Case before it, which
is resolved by quod, ut, ne, quin; as, Non dubito Christum dixisse, i. e. quin
Christus dixerit. Yet In^initive Modes also sometimes have Persons going before
them, i. e. when they are used for the Imperfect Tense, for then coepit, or the
like is understood, as omnes omnia bona dicere [coeperunt.]

Ordinarily the Person is the Nom. Case coming before the Verb, but in Verbs
called Impersonals, the Thing comes before the Verb, as, Oportet me ire
Oxonium, ire Oxonium comes before Oportet. And commonly the whole Sentence is
the Subject. And indeed there are no Verbs Impersonals, but all have Persons
(except Infinitive Modes) the most used in the third person Singular, when the
Subject is well known, as, Pluit, i. e. Aqua pluit. But if there be an
Extraordinary Subject, it is expressed, as Saxa pluunt. This is if Pluit be
taken as a Verb-Neuter, But if as a Verb-Active, then Deus, or Jupiter ^luvius
is understood.

So the third Persons of Verbs-Passive are many times used, as if they were
Impersonals, especially when the Subject or Nom. Case, is included in the
Signification of the Verb, as [ potus] bibitur; vivitur [vita] exiguo melius;
for vivitur is the same with vita ducitur, and is therefore used, as it were,
impersonally.

And for those generally called Impersonals, Oportet, libet, licet, (...),
poenitet, piget, miseret. Some of them, as d^cet, poenitet, licet, are
Personals, and have oftentimes their Suppositum expressed; the other also (
oportet, piget, libet, licet) have always an Infinitive instead of a Noun to
com^ before them: In the others their Subject is included in their
signification; as [ taedium] tui me taedet, taedet being taedium capit, in
poenitet, poena is included, in miseret, miseriae, and perhaps opus, in
oportet. But because the matter requires ordinarily no other then a third
person, they are improperly called Impersonals; wherefore if there be occasion
to signify another person, these Verbs are so used. Si no^ dedecui tua jussa.
Stat.

The Second Concord.
The Adjective, whether Noun, Pronoun, Participle, or Relative, is of the same
Case, Gender and Number, with its Substantive, (suppositum or Subject:) But in
Relatives the Substantive is to be repeated over again in the Case of the
Relative, and therefore sometimes that Case of the Substantive only is
expressed, as Bellum crudelissimum, qu^ [bello] omnes premebantur. Vltra eum
locum qu^ [loco] Germani frequentes consederant. Popu^o ut placerent [fabulae]
quas fecisset, fabulas.

If a Verb has two Nom. Cases, Reg. I.
or an Adjective two substantives joined together with a Conjunction, or in
Poetry with [ cum] (as Remus cum fratre Quirino Iura dabant.) they agree with
the more worthy person and gender; Ili^ cum Lauso de Numitore sati. But change
many times the number, (the person being understood) two Singulars being equal
to one Plural, as, Ego and Lelia sumus amici. Tu sororque boni estis. So Nouns
of Number, and Collectives, many times have an Adjective or Verb Plural: Turba
ruunt, i. e. Turba [ruit, hi and illi] ruunt. Pars in frusta secant.

Many times the Verb (especially Substantive) is understood, Reg. II.
and many times the Suppositum both to the Verb and Adjective; And if the
Adjective without Substantive be of the Masculine gender, or Feminine, a person
[ viz. vir or foemina,] if of the Neuter a thing [ negotium] is understood, as
Triste [negotium] lupus [est] stabulis. Sunt [homines] quibus [hominibus] in
Satyra videor [ego] nimis acer. Est [homo] qui nec Spernit. Sunt [aliqui
homines] quos notaverat. Si ^d te mordet, sumptum filij quem faciunt, i. e. Si
id [negotium scil. sumptus] t^ mordet, quem sumptum filij faciunt. Vrbem quam
statuo vestra, i. e. Ea urbs quam Vrbem statuo. Eunuchum quem dedisti nobis
quas turbas dedit, i. e. iste Eunuchus quem Eunuchum dedisti. Quam quisque
norit artem in hac [arte] se exerceat.

Many times a whole, Reg. III.
or some part of Sentence is the Suppositum, as Ingenuas didicisse fideliter
arts Emollit mores. In tempore veni quod primum est.

If an Adjective or Verb be placed between two Suppositum's it may agree with
either of them, Reg. IV.
as Amantium irae amoris redintegratio est, sive, sunt. Avis quae (or qui)
passer appellatur. Lutetia quam (or quos) Parisios dicimus: Tho it is better it
should agree with that which is the Fonndation of the Sentence.

Of Rection.
I. Nominative Case.
The Copula or bond of all Speech (as the Logicians observe) is Sum with its
Cases: which in truth denotes nothing else but that the Subject and Predicate
signify the same, as Homo est animal, the meaning is what is signified by Homo,
is also signified by Animal. Wherefore it is necessary that Sum, and such like
Verbs should have such a Case after them, as they have before them, which is
the Nom. except in the Infinitive Mode, for then it is the Accus. both before
and after.

Such like Verbs they call. 1. Verbs Substantive. 2. Many Verbs Passive, as
dicor, vocor, etc. 3. Many Neuters, as Maneo, dormio. Vt hoc Latr^cinium potius
quam bellum nominaretur. Terra manet immobilis.

Many times the Precedent Case is understood, and not expressed, as, Licet
nobis [nos] esse bonos: Cupio [me] dici doctum: Fuit magni animi non esse
Supplicem, Hoc, [nempe eum] non esse supplicem [signum] magni animi.

En, ecce, and diverse Interjections govern not a Nom. Case, but a Verb is
understood, or Voc. Case, and sometimes an Accus. Ecce homo i. e. [ hic est]
homo. Ecce hominem, i. e. vide hunc hominem.

II. Genitive Case.
The General Rule is this that ( of) which cannot be changed into ( concerning)
or ( from) before a Noun Substantive, requires that Substantive to be of the
Genesis Case; And this happens generally when two Nouns, not signifying the same
thing, come together: for then the later is of the Genesis Case. Dei misericordia,
Gods mercy, or, the mercy of God; the Genesis Case in Englis^ being made by adding
( s) to the Nom. Puer bonae indolis, a Youth of good towardliness. Instar
Montis* for, Note that Instar is a Substantive undeclinable, and ad is commonly
understood, as, ad instar [similitudinem] montis.

Note, that many Adjectives, Participles, and Adverbs stand also instead of
Substantives; and therefore govern a Genesis Case, as, Cupidus [cupitor] auri:
Amans [amator] virtutis: Tenax [tentor] pecuniae: And many of such Substantives
being disused, the Adjectives themselves, and Participles, stand for the
Substantives, as, Conscius furti. Impatiens irae.

For Adverbs, as, abunde fabularum; affatim pecuniae, i. e. abundantia sive
copia. Tunc temporis; ubi gentium, or the like; for tunc signifies time, as ubi
does place. Tunc, i. e. illa hora, vel part, temporis. Vbi, i e. in quo loco,
gentium.

Sometimes also the precedent Noun is understood, and not expressed as, Boni
viri [officium] est.

Verbs of esteeming, accusing, condemning, admonishing, acqui^ting, pietying,
and such as are like the Adjectives of the Rule precedent, as of Possession:
Sum, interest, refert, etc. govern a Genesis Case, because the general word is
understood. Parvi [pretio] penditur pro^itas. Accusat eum [crimine] furti.
Damnatur [crimine] repetundarum. Miseret me [miseria] tui. Hic animi [dubio]
pendet. In these also more general some Substantive is implied in the Verb, or
understood, as, Cura, causa, crimine, pretio, dubio, etc. and therefore most of
these Verbs also do govern a Noun in the Abla. Case. Magno virtus aestimatur.
Condemnabo te eodem crimine. Mea [causa, vel gratia] refert, interest,etc.

So Memini, and the like, govern a Genesis Case, by an Ellipsis of a Noun. Meminit
[memoriam] mei. Satagit [agit Sat] rerum suarum. Venit in mentem [recordatio]
illius diei. And therefore many times they govern an Accus. of the Person, in
whom is the Action or Passion, as taedet [taedium habet] me tui.

So Miseret, misereor, pudet, piget, poenitet, etc. have a Genesis Case by an
Ellipsis. [Ipse] miseret sui. [^udor] peccati pudet me.

The Names of ^laces with the English ( at) are in the Genesis Case, where, (
Vrbe, oppido,) or such like is understood, as, Vixit [in urbe] Londini. He
lived at London.

(...) govern a Genesis Case, a Noun being understood. Romanorum [Romanus] fortior.

Many times a Genesis case is added to Verbs and Adjectives after the manner of
the Greeks, or rather a N^^n being understood; Desine [mentionem facere]
querelarum.

In general all Verbs in Composition govern such Cases as they do out of
Composition, as, Quod eos soire aut nostra aut ipsorum interesset [i. e. esset
inter officia vel munera nostra, vel officia ipsorum] Interest Regis recte
facere, i. e. est inter [munera] Regis, etc. Quae Superest Claudij aupona, i.
e. Quae est super, etc. To which add Refert, i. e. rei fert. Vel dic quid
referat intra Naturae fin^s viventi. i. e. rei ferat. Mea unius est Remp.
defendere i. e. est inter mea [officia] [mei inquam unius [officia] etc. Or Mea
[cura mei] unius est Remp. etc. Or. [de] mea [cura pars] est Remp. etc.

III. Dative Case.
All Verbs that either signify, or include in their signification any
acquisition, getting, giving, offering, or the like, (that is almost all
V^rbs,) also all Nouns and ^ articiples, which include or suppose such a Verb,
govern a Dative ^ase, and those Datives have to before them; as (...)
praesidio; a defense to thee; or, thou have obtained me for thy defense.
Sacrificium, [quod Sacrificetur vel tribuatur] Deo. Huic habeo quod detur. So,
tibi doceo; tibi soli amas; Matter, at cui vides, Med* But all these and the
like in a different sense from the Accusative; i. e. to the advantage of any
one. So, tibi decet; huic latuit; huic dormio; huic succurro, huic misereor;
Sen. Iubeo tibi; I give thee Commandment. Vae [est] victis. Surripuit mihi
(...) os; lac subducitur agnis; as we say to gain thy loss. Mihi cuncta pere^nt
quisquis est Hecubae est miser. So when two Dative Cases, they both signify
acquisition; erit tibi laudi; hoc, erit mihi curae. the one signifying the end
why or the thing which is acquired, the other the Person to whom acquired.

But attinet, pertinet, and such like, though the Participle ( to) belong to
them, yet govern not a Dat. but an Accus. Case, with the Preposition ad. Heus!
quid ad te pertinet? Perhaps because those words signify not the relation of
Acquisition or the like, or because it so pleased the Founders of the Language,
who have used their liberty, when no reason for it; as they say noceo tibi; but
laedo te.

IV. Accusative Case.
The Accusative Case follows all Verbs Active* or, signifying actively, and
there is no Active that has not an Accusative Case expressed, or understood,
terra movet, [Se:] It also comes before an Infinitive Mode Passive. Amo te;
cupio i^ amari a me; ardebat Alexin; ambulat maria; terras navigat. It also
follows Verb Neuters, if a preposition be understood. Vixit annos centum, i. e.
per annos centum; ante annos centum; in hunc annum. Eo [ad, in, versus] Romam.
Pendet [ad^circa] libras centum. Nouns, also and Adverbs, have an Accusative
with a Preposition, prid^^ [ante] Compitalia. Obsidio vix [in] paucos di^^
tolerabilis. Albus [quoad] dentes. Fractus [quoad] membra. But sometimes a Verb
is also understood; O! [miremini] curas hominum! E^ [videte] quatuor aras. Ecce
[spectate] hominem.

V. Ablative Case.
The Ablative Case is always governed by a Preposition expressed or understood.
Doctior [prae] omnibus. Major est calceus [quam pro] pede. [Sub] Paulo
praeceptore discam. And is applied to all Verbs Passive where there is the
Preposition a or ab: And by many Actives where of or from is expressed or
understood; They are frequently expressed in Latin. Hoc a te petit, sperat,
accipit, Distat a Lutetia. Liberatur a malo. Though sometimes also they be
understood. Cavere malo. Tecto prohibere.

Likewise Nouns that signify the matter whereof a thing is made, the Instrument
whereby, the cause from which, the manner how, are all put after Adjectives and
Verbs in the Abla. Case, as, Ardet [prae] dolor; Perfodere [cum] Sagittis;
Punire supplicio: Tota [in] cute cont^emisco: Land floret: Foelix [in] nato:
Dives opibus: [a] Jove natus: Ingenio vacuus: Vti [de] aliquo: Fungor [ab]
officio: Dignatur honor. Sometimes Potior governs a Genesis Case, as, Potiri
rerum, then facultate is understood. In all these the Prepositions are
understood, which, in ours and most modern Languages, are commonly expresed;
Insomuch that whereas we use diverse Verbs indifferently with or without
Prepositions, the same Verbs in Latin govern sometimes an Accu. sometimes an
^bl. Case. Vtor, I use, I make use

Vescor carnes, carnibus, I eat flesh, I feed upon (...).

When two Nouns, or more, one a Substantive, the other an Adje^^ive or
^articiple, come together, and are not governed of any Verb, they are put in
the Abl. ase absolutely. In our Language we expr^ss this by ( being) or a
Participle Active, Me vivo, I being alive. Te amante, Thou loving, or ^eing in
love with. And is used both for brevity and Elegancy, it being instead of an
interposed Sentence, [a] rupto foedere regni. Marco [sub judice palles; so in
these also a Preposition is understood.

Note, that anciently the Abl. ended both in e and i, whence Ruri agit, i. e.
ru^e.

The Answer is made in the same Case in which the Question is asked: (except in
Possessives, as, Cujum pecus? Aegonis. Cujus pecus? Meum: or when the Verb
governs diverse Cases,

Quanti Constitit? Denario. Furtine accusa^ an ho^icidij? Vtroque: which shows
that in Verbs of valuing [pretio] or some such Noun is understood.) Quid
agitur? Studetur. Quis dives? Qui nil cupit. Quis pauper? Avarus. This Rule is
also observed when the Question is made by Adverbs, which signify as much as
the Question made by the other: Such are, Vbi, i. e. in qui loco est; Vbi
vivit? ^arthagine.

No^ns of the First and Second Declension are many times put in the Genesis Case,
and then Vrbe, or such like is understood.

Q^o, i. e. in q^em locum? Quo vadis? in Angli^m

Qua, i. e. per quam viam? Qua iter fecit? P^ Ga^^am. Vnde, i. e. a, e, ex, de
quo loco? Vnde venis? Ab Inferis. Quamdiu, i. e. per quod tempus? Quamdiu
vixit? Per tres annos. Quamdudum,

Quando, i. e. quo tempore? Quando accidit? Superioribus diebus.

And therefore since any Proposition may be expressed by a Question, whenever
the answer is, though the Question be not, expressed, the Government is the same.

Comparatives require an Abla Case, with the Sign [ than] (the Preposition
prae, pro, or quam being understood) ^latone doctior. More learned, or
learneder, than Plato.

The Superlative, and Partitive Nouns (and Comparatives when they have the
Nature of Superlatives, i. e. when preferred to more, or when a Partitive, as
Animalium fortiora quibus crassior est Sanguis. Fortior manuum est dextra;) and
Nouns of number require a Genesis Case: Philosophorum [Philosophus] maximus. Vter
horum. Sapientum [Sapiens] octavus. The Subject being always understood.

Comparatives and Superlatives also require the same Case their Positive does;
Similior Patri. Literis quam Armis instructior. Gratissim^ mihi fuerunt.

De Accentu.
PRosodiam dicimus eam partem Grammatices, quae docet recte pronunciare
Syllabas, q^oad Accentum and Quantit^tem sive tempus.

Unusquisque inter loquendum duplici utitur Tono, sive Vocis modulamine. Gravi
scil. sive ordinario, and Acuto sive vehementiore: Et in pronunciatione
periodorum and Sententiarum voees magis notabil^s variatione Toni in acutiorem
animis Auditorum firmius imprimuntur: Quales sunt illae locutiones Tropicae,
Metaphoricae, Hyperbolicae etc. vel Figuratae, quales voces iteratae,
correspondentes, oppositae; Aliae denique omnes quibus totius ^ententiae
Emphasis inesse videtur; Sicut Epitheta, voces praecipuae in Exclamationibus,
Interrogationibus, and quibuscunque sensum loquentis efficaius exprimentibus.
Sed haec non ad Grammaticum sed Rhetorem spectant.

2. At in pronunciatione vocum accentuatur ea Syllaba quae gratiorem efficit
sonum; Et antiquitius quidem cum Lingua Latina (de qua solum hic tractare
intendimus) fuit etiam vernacula, melius and accuratius de hac pronunciationis
ratione judicabatur consuetudine and usu, tum de accentu tum de tempore; sive
syllaba erat gravior aut acutior, brevior aut longior: Nec vero multitudo pedes
novit, nec ullos numeros tenuit, nec illud quod offendit, aut ^ur, aut in quo
offendat, intellexit: Et tamen omnium longitudinum and brevitatum in sonis,
sicut a^utarum graviumque vocum, judicium ipsa Natura in auribus illorum
collocavit, ^ic Orator. Idem in Paradoxis, Histrio, si paulo se movit extra
numerum, aut si versus pronunciatus est una syllaba brevior aut longior,
exibilatur and exploditur. Hodie fere in desuetudinem abijt Accentus, nec satis
accurate de Tempore distinguitur, unaquaque Gente Latinae Linguae enunciationem
propriae suae conformante. Franci quidem Accentum ultimae syllabae contra
totius mundi consuetudinem imponunt, ut and breves frequenter producunt, ut
Dominus, ac si scriberetur (...).

3. Ratio autem and intentio Accentuum omnino alia est a differentia
pronunciationis vocalium, sive literarum, (tempus enim vocales tantum respicit)
haec enim omnino consistit in temporis and morae observatione qua quaeque
vocalis pronunciabatur; illa autem in variatione Toni and elevatione vel
depressione vocis, eo modo quo nos inter canendum a suescimus, neque ab
hodiernis Graecis penitus omittitur: and in Carminum recitatione, quae eorum
Cantus erat, maxima cura habebatur utriusque tum Accentus tum Temporis.

4. Accentus Acutus sive Toni variatio apud nos (non loquimur hic de Scriptura
qua nonnunquam tum Gravis tum Circumflexus notatur) nunquam fieri debet in
ultima syllaba; Ut in ultima Accentus siat Latinitas vetat. Serve. nisi quis
dicere velit Enclyticas que, ne, ve, ce, Accentum in ultimum praecedentis more
Graecorum transfer. Sed cum illud praestant, ipsae quidem voci praecedenti
tanquam parts adjunguntur, adeo ut penultima acuatur.

5. Sed in Dyssyllabis omnibus and Polysyllabis longa penultima acuitur: Quod
si penultima sit brevis Accentus est in antepenultima ut Dominus affatim. In
compositis vero a facio fa -- retinentibus accentus est in fa -- ut benefacis,
frigefacis, nobis pleniorem A sonum respicientibus: Antiquitus enim acuebatur
in antepenultima. Monosyllabarum Gravis est pronunciatio, sit brevis vel longa;
unde fit ut ultimae in Carmine syllabae ratio non habeatur.

6. Polysyllaba accuuntur tantum in Antepenultima licet ultima acuatur ut
Mensa. Antiquitus videtur fuisse differentia Temporis non Toni. In Virgili,
Aemili and similibus accentus adhuc servatur in penultima, quia antiquitus
dicebant Virgilie, Aemilie. Ultima enim Vocalis primo vix pronunciari coepit,
dein and omitti, vel forte coalescere.

De Tempore.
1. UNaquaeque Vocalis duplex habet Tempus, Longum and Breve.. II.
Graeci -- e and - o-diversa nomina and Characteres tribuerunt, (...) Sed pari
ratione bina deberent esse a, i, u, quae ideo Communes dicuntur, quia idem
Character utrique Tempori communiter inservit. Verum apud Latinos, prout and
Nostrates, singuli sunt Characteres, potestates diversae: and usu and
consuetudine quae longae, quae breves plerunque dignoscuntur, neque vernaculam,
ut peregrinam Linguam, disc^ntibus adeo necessaria est Characterum varietas.
Antiquitus tamen vocales longas duplicatione elongabant ut feelix, poopulus.
(arbor) maalus (arbor) and pro i -- longum usurpabant -- ei.

2. Temporis praeter longum and breve nullam differentiam agnoscimus: Et brevis
Syllabae unum tempus esse dicitur, longae vero duo; hoc est Syllaba longa
duabus brevibus est aequalis. Sed revera magna est differentia temporum tum
longi tum brevis. Aliae enim multo celerius pronunciantur, adeo ut vix earum
sonus audiatur, ut, Alvearia, Harpyia, Cui, Anteambulo, Eadem, Dij, Inquino,
Anteire, etc. Syllabae quae pluribus constant Consonantibus, vel etiam
vocalibus sonantioribus, majorem postulant dilationem and quo e pluribus eo
impeditius and productius pronunciantur, ut, Ex, Rex, Grex; nulla autem syllaba
contine^ plusquam sex literas, ut Stirps. Scrobi.

3. A, and O, sonantiores sunt, majorem enim oris apertionem postulant; V, and
I, suaviores cum sibilatione quadam pronunciantur; E, vero exilis.

4. Notandum est antiquam in prounciatione consuetudinem etiam literis and
scriptione variatis, fere semper r^tineri, ut Cai, Pompe^i, die^i, faciei^ and
reliquis quintae Declinationis in -- iei desinentibus. Quoniam veteres dixerunt
Caij, Pompeij, diei^j, facieij. Eeo, eis, eit, eitur, quae postea coaluerunt in
Eo, is, it, itur, sic Punire erat poenire, Murus, moerus, Munire, moenire, and
^^de moenia, Vti, oiti, Ludus, loidus, Cura, coira, Punicus a Poenus.

DeVocibus Graecis inter Latinos.. II^^

1. GRaeca retinentia formam Graecorum, retinent etiam quantitatem, hoc est
(...), and (...), Reg. I.
semper sunt Natura longae, (...), and (...), semper natura breves, (...),
dubiae. Matter, Pater, Poe^ma, Orpheus, Aer, L^ertes, De^iphobus, Diatyposis,
Metamorphosis, Antiphona. In Graecis autem diversimode Scriptis variatur etiam
quantitas, ut Eous, aliquando (...), aliquando (...), scribitur (...) aliquando
(...).

2. Graeca vero sequentia formam and analogiam Latinorum sequuntur etiam
Regulas quantitatum Latinas. II.
Graeca nomina cum in Latinum vertuntur, nostra Regula pronunciantur, nisi
maneant Graeca; Soph^a, Symphon^a, Monarch^a, Geograph^a, Crep^da, Oedipus, pi.

3. E Graecis derivata, III.
fi Diphthongum servent, sunt longa, ut ^^rphe^us, Cassiope^ia.

Quod si diphthongum, servatis utrisque voca^^bus, dividant, prior est brevis,
quia ante alteram, ut Orphus, Polymnia.

Si vero una Vocalis tantum retineatur, and prior, brevis est, ut Plata,
Caesara, Laodica, Cyclopa.

Academia est dubia quia scribitur (...) and (...) frequentius autem brevis,
quia saepius etiam (...) scribitur. Cheragra and non Chiragra scribitur apud
Martial. Lib. 9. Epig. 93* quando scil. est brevis.

Si posterior retineatur plerunque longa est, Aristobulus, Oedipus, podis,
Dari^us, Alexandri^a, Thali^a.

Regulae generales ante alias observandae.. IV.

CUm minimum Temporis sit unius vocalis, Reg. I.
necesse est ut vocalis ante alteram sit brevis. D^us, Iustit^a.

Sed ^ inter i and i nominibus quintae Declinationis (ut dictum est) et
aliquando etiam an^e i solum longa est, dicebant enim aliquando fideij, speij,
reij etc. tunc enim ei est longa.

Pari ratione Fi^ cum suis, ubi non est r, etiam longa est; quia olim scriptum
erat Feio and feirem; feires, postea vero soluta diphthongo per Metathe^in
vocalium facta est fierem, fieres, etc.

Sic etiam Genitiva in -- ii^s sunt ambigua ut Vnius, illius, ipsius, olim enim
dicebant Vneius, illeius, etc utrius, n^utri^us, alter utri^us, solius, autem
and al^^s semper longae, alter^us semper brevis.

Diana ^liquando producitur ac ^i esset Deiana, aliquando corripitur ae si
esset Deana.

Cum duo brevia Tempora uni longo aequivalen^, diphthongi omnes sunt longae,
sunt enim aequales duabus ^ocalibus, II.
Musae, era, nam olim ut distin^tae vocales pronunciabantur, ut, pictai,
aulqi, aes, (...) scribebantur aesar, Phaethon -- (In prosa adhunc separat
vocales.) Duae etiam vocales in ea^em syllaba post s longae sunt ut suavis,
suetus, mansuetus; Prae^o tantum dubia est.

Aliquando Diphthongus in duas resoluta vocales in priori, Diphthongi
quantitatem retinet, in altera, omittit, ut Elige^ia; sed hanc Licentiam Poetae
videntur sibi assump^^sse.

Quid dicendum est de inqu^nat et de diphthongo ui generatim? Cum apud Horat.
brevis est; Mihi videtur pronunciatum fuisse inkinat literis q et u
coalescentibus.

Duae vocales coalescentes per Crasin, II
producuntur, ut, C^go a C^ago, Tibicen pro Tib^^cen, ^t pro ^^t, ali^us pro
al^^us. Bi^gae pro b^jugae, malo a magis v^lo, retinent enim tempus duarum
brevium.

Sic et quae antiquum scribendi modum contrahunt, ut, Ius, juris, pro Ious,
jouris, ufens pro Oufens, sic et cop^ruisse, ve^mens, de^ro, nil, conesto,
bobus, cogito, b^cula, ex c^^peruisse, v^hmens, dro, nihil, c^h^nosto, b^vibus,
c^agito, b^v^cula.

Vocalis ante duas Consonantes vel duplicem, IV.
( x et z) vel eandem iteratam, syllabam producit; licet ipsa vocalis non sit
longa, neque semper ut longa pronuncietur. Pronunciatio enim talis Syllabae est
impeditior, et hoc* sive in ^^dem Syllaba ut, ars, abs, d^ns. Sive si una
Consonans sit in un^, ali^ in alia Syll^ba, ut ig-nis, bel-lum, v^r-te; ^ive
vocalis in una, Consonae in alia syllaba ut ma-tris, a-mnis, a-cris,
ambulacrum, vel una demum in unius vocabuli sine, altera in initio alterius,
Formosamresonare, etc.

Si, l, vel, r, sequantur mutam in eadem syllaba (^on in eadem cum vocali) in
Carminibus, syllaba ista praecedens frequenter est communis, etsi vocalis sit
brevis.

Et primo similis volucri, mox veravolucris -- Ovid. etc.

Nox tenbras profert, Phoebus fugat inde tene^bras. Idem.

In eadem Syllaba] nam obruo, quamobrem et similes sunt semper longae.

Si vocalis sit natura longa nunquam fit brevis

Sustulit hic Matrem, Sustulit ille Patrem. Mart. Sio acris, atri, fratris,
ambulacrum, delubrum, saluber, volutabrum. Et pronunciatio sequitur Naturam
vocalis.

Ratio autem Regulae est; quia vocalis (quae conjungitur in sono istarum
consonantium) in pronunciatione includitur in muta and liquida; Et proinde
binae istae Consonantes in eundem fere sonum coalescunt. F autem muta debet
intelligi ut

Si vocalis brevis in fine unius dictionis antecedit duas consonantes (maxim
Sc -- Sp -- St --) in initio sequenti^, Poetae Licentia sua utuntur, (...)
projudicio producunt, vel (ut soep^us) corripiunt.

Imbuere^ fragilique viros faedare tri^umpho.
Occulta spolia, etc.
De Incrementis Nominum and Verborum.. V.

QUae ex alijs siunt, sive per Variationem Casuum, sicut in Nominibus et
Verbis; sive per Comp^^^^ionem, sive per Derivationem, sequuntur plerunque
quantitatem eorum ex quibus siunt.

Casus Nominum, quoad omnes syllabas praeter finalem, Reg. I.
sequuntur quantitatem Nominativi. Musae, Magistri, Lapidis.

Si Genitivus singularis habeat plures Syllabas quam Nom. II.
penultima Genitivi habetur pro Incremento, and reliqui Casus servant
quantitatem Genitivi in eorum incrementis. Sermonis, -- oni, -- one, -- ones,
-- onibus.

Iter (olim dicebatur (...)) and Supell^x, and composita a Caput in -- ps;
duplex habent incrementum, utrumque breve, it^nris; supellectilis, prima est
longa positione, altera brevis, and sola proprie dicitur incrementum. Et in
bic^p^tis etiam posterior est incrementum, prior enim syllaba est tantum
explicatio simplicis Caput contracti in Nominativo.

Incrementum in prima declinatione null^m reperitur. In secunda vero brevis
est, III.
ut vir, viri, puer, puri. In tertia dissyllabi f^cti ex Monosyllabis
Nominativis plerunque longi; ut Rex, re^gis, Lex legis, Plebs, plebis, sol,
solis. Ver, veris. Quae s^rvant vocalem Nominativi natura longam. Sed grgis,
d^^is, trucis, nucis, b^vis, I^vis, maris sunt breves.

Incrementum in -- a est longum, Vectig^lis, Calcaris, Titanis. Masculina v^ro
in -- al, and -- ar, and -- as corripiuntur, ^t, Sal, s^lis, par, p^ris cum
composit is, mas, maris* Fax, facis, trabs, ^rabis, lampas lampadis, faeminina.

Increm^ntum in -- e, breve est, abies, abitis, pes, pdis cum compositis and
derivatis, Hymen, Hymnis.

Excipiuntur in -- eni^, Lien, e^nis, Siren, e^nis.

Incr^m^^tum in i, vel y breve est, Nix, n^vis, pix, picis, Stryx, Str^jgis;
Phr^jgis, Stipis, poll^cis, chalijbis.

Excipiuntur Vibex, vibicis, apsis, apsidis, and Genitivus in -- inis and --
ynis a Graecis: Plurima item in -- ix and -- yx, sunt longa, felix, perdix;
excipe ^il^cis, Histr^cis, forn^cis, natr^cis, mast^gis quae corripiuntur.

O Incrementum longum est, Sol, solis, Ros, roris, and omnia Comparativa,
Melior, -- oris.

Brevia autem sunt Neutra, ut, Marmor, ^bur, frigus, corpus, tempus, etc. Et
composita ex (...). Item Mem^ris, arb^ris, lepus lep^ris b^vis, compos
comp^tis. Et quae consonantem habent ante -- s -- ut, Scrobs Scrobis, and
nomina Gentium, ut, Cappad^cis, Allobr^gis.

V Incrementum breve est, murmuris, furfuris, g^t^uris, pecudis.

Excipiuntur Genitivi in -- udis, -- uris, and -- utis, a Nominibus in -- us,
ut, Virtutis, telluris, paludis. Item. Pollucis, frugis.

Penultima Genitivi and Dativi Imparisyllabici^ in Numero Plurali dicitur etiam
Incrementum. IV.


In -- a --, -- e --, -- o --, producuntur.

In -- i --, and -- u --, corripiuntur, ut quibus, tr^bus, mont^bus, lacubus,
in dativis; sed non semper in genitivis.

Incrementum in quarta Declinatione non datur, and de incremento in quinta
prius dictum est.

De Incremento Verborum.. VI.

PRima syllaba and Characteristica Conjugationis semper servant propriam
quantitatem. Crementum Verbi est quod excedit secundam personam Numeri
singularis praesentis temporis Indicativi, Activi.

Et ultima vocalis illius personae dicitur ab aliquibus primum crementum,
vocales sequentes dicuntur esse in secundo cremento.

A in omni Cremento longa est, Am^mus, Reg. I.
Legeb^mus; Excipitur damus, dare etc a do, cum compositis. Quae tamen in
secundo cremento producitur, d^b^mus, dab^tis, dab^tur.

E in utroque cremento producitur, II.
nisi post ponatur -- r -- nam tunc corripitur; sic omne praesens tertiae
Conjugationis cum praeterito imperfecto Subjunctivi Modi, ut, Legor, legris,
legrimus, legrem.

Re ante re vel ris semper producitur Amare^ris, amar^re, leger^ris, audire^ris.

E, ante -- rim, -- to, semper corripitur, Amavrim, amavro.

Sicut and e in bris and bre, Amabris, Docebris.

In crementis primis Sum, Fero, and Volo, e semper corripitur, nisi obstet
positio; Eram, to, fram, vlim.

I, III.
in primo Cremento Verbi quartae Conjugationis semper producitur Audimus; Item
in Verbis sum Nolo and Volo (cum Compositis) sitis, nolito, vel^tis, vel^mus,
possimus. Itidem in praeterito in -- vi, ^ etivi, petiveram.

-- Imus, in omni praeterito corripitur, vid^mus, etc. In Subjunctivi
praeterito ^aro, si unquam, producitur, in futuro autem tum corripitur tum
producitur. Licet multi praesertim apud nos, and antiqui aliquot Grammaticis
futurum producunt ut a praeterito distinguatur.

O, IV.
In cremento producitur, Legitote.

V, Corripitur, Volumus, Quaesumus.

Perfectum dissyllabum priorem, V.
and in plurali etiam habet longam, exceptis, d^di, st^ti, bibi, tuli, fidi,
sc^di: Prima syllaba iterata in praeterito brevis est, ut and secunda.
Excipiuntur Pepedi. Ceci^di.

Omne praeteritum in -- vi a^t -- si desinens penultimam producit.

Omne supinum dissyllabum priorem habet longum, VI.
ut citum a cio; excipe datum, statum, a stiti, satum, ^tum, ratum, c^tum a
cieo, l^tum, s^tum, quitum, rutum. Omne supinum polysyllabum penultimam habet
longam, Amatum, quaesitum, volutum, etc. Exceptis quae desinunt in -- itum
praeteritis perfectis non desinentibus in -- ivi. Pos^tum, trad^tum, mon^tum,
etc.

Supina in -- tum post u, a, i, e, quorum praeterita desunt in -- vi longa
sunt, ut vi^vi, vietum, flevi, fletum, sic deletum, and composita a pleo,
adjutum, auditum, amatum, at -- ui corripiuntur, ut, monitum, mol^tum, al^tum,
vel altum, vom^tum, frent^tum, gen^tum, strep^tum, sed inolevi, obsolevi^, and
exolevi, -- e^tum: abolevi, abol^tum. Ac^tum ab acui, argutum, delibutum,
ex^tum, fut^tum, imbutum, min^tum, plutum, sp^tum, sternutum, statutum, sutum,
tributum, indutum, excipiuntur. Rutum autem breve est.

De Compositis.. VII.

COmpositum sequitur, Reg. I.
in ijs Syllabis quae recipiuntur a simplicibus, Regulam simplicis; etiam
Dipthongo aut Vocali variata. Ludo, colludo. Laedo, colli^do. Ami^cus,
in^mi^cus. Cado, occ^do. Caedo, occi^do.

Sed a Di^o, Nomina in -- d^cu^, corripiuntur, Causid^cus.

a Nubo, Pronubus; Connubium vero dubium.

a Sopio, fit semis^pitus.

a Notus, agn^tus, and cogn^tus.

a Iuro, dejro.

a Fi^do, perf^dus, unde tamen inf^dus, etc.

Praepositiones eandem in Compositione retinent Quantitatem, II.
quam habuerunt extra compositionem.

Longae autem sunt --
A, amando^ averto. Excipe aperio, nisi forsan componatur cum ab, and rejiciat
consonam, ut, operio cum ob) E, ^ligo, ^mitto. S^, s^paro. Se^curus. Di^,
divido, praeterquam d^rimo and d^sertus. C^, sequente Consona, cogo. De^
de^pono.
Breves sunt.
Ab, abeo. Ad, ^deo. In, ^neo. Ob, ^beo, ^mitto, ^perio. Pr, preo. Sub,
Suborno. Supr, Supraddo. Intr, in^reo. R, rdeo, rnuo, rfero.
Pro, natura longa est, tamen in aliquibus est brevis, ut in
Prfiteor. Pr^tervus. Pr^ficiscor. Pr^cella. Pr^cus. Pr^fanus. Pr^fundus.
Pr^fect^. Pr^nepos. Pr^fari. Pr^cello. Pr^fugus. Pr^fugio. Pr^festu. Pr^^eptis.
Pr^pero.
Et in reliquis quae proficiscunter a (...) ante ut pr^pheta. Procumbo,
procurro, profundo, propello, propulso, propago, (Nomen and Verbum) propino,
sunt communia.

In ijs quae componuntur ex alijs non praepo. III.
sitionibus, a and o, frequenter producuntur, quare, alioqui, quandoque.

In e, i, u, frequentius breves; Nfas, trdecim, nqueo.

Biceps, b^celox, b^vium, Agr^cola, al^ger, manumitto

Exceptis quae vocalem natura habent longam; Se^decim, n^quam est enim a nec;
memet, vene^icus, vid^licet. Tamen vid^sis breve est.

Exceptis etiam Biduum, etc. Triceni, etc. Nimirum, ibidem, ubique, etc.

O, brevis est in Hodie, qu^que, quand^quidom, and compositis cum Nomine,
Sacr^sanctus.

De Derivatis.. VIII.

DErivata retinentia vocalem Primitivorum, sequuntur etiam Quantitatem.
Salubris a sal^te. Scuris a sc^re. Lavacrum a Lavatum. Rf^rt a Rfero. R^fert a
r^ -- fert.

Suffoco a faux, Suff^co a f^cus, Scuris a s^o. Se^curus a Praepositione se.

Longae sunt e Brevibus.
Vox, vocis, a v^co. Lex, l^gis, a lgo. A Lectum supino potius. Re^gula and
Rex, re^gis. a rgo. A rectum supino potius. Se^des, a sdeo. ( etiam se^dile.)
M^bilis, a m^veo. A motum. Sopio, a s^por. Feralis, a frus. M^cero a macer.
Secius a scus. Amb^tus, (participium) ab amb^tum. (Amb^tus vero Nomen est
brevis.)
Brevia derivata e longis.
Dux, d^cis, a Duco. Apta Duci non est Vxor, non aptaque Regi. Quae d^ci non
est apta, nec apta rgi. D^cax, and Adjectiva in -- us, a Di^co. Nato, a ^atum.
Brev^a derivata e Longis.
N^to, a notum. Quater, a quatuor ( antiquitus scribebatur quattuor.) F^des, a
fi^do. Pagella, a pagina. Odium, ab odi. Sagax, a sagio. Arena, arista, ab
areo. C^ma, a como. Curulis, a curro, vel c^rrus. Fragor, frag^lis, a frango.
P^sui, a pono. Gnui, a gigno. Ofella, ab Offa. Lucerna, a luceo. Mamilla, a
mamma. Quasillus, a qualus. Scutulatum, a scutum. S^gillum, a signum. S^lutum,
a solvo. Tigillum, a tignum. Varicosus, a varix. V^lut^m, a volvo. Ag Cog n^tum
ab Ag Cog novi. Rel^quum, a reli^qui.
Derivata Adjectiva in -- osus, orus, aceus, II.
longa: in -- ^tius, vel -- ^cius, -- ^nus, and -- ^mus fere semper brevia.

Derivata frequenter addunt vel demunt Consonantem, III.
ut Quantitatem mutent, ut Rettulit a rfero. D^sertus a dissero, farina a
farris.

Derivata in -- ites habent penultimam longam. IV.


Adjectiva in -- i^nus a Rebus animatis sensitivis descendentia, V.
item Distributiva Numeralia, Nomina cognationis, Propria and Gentilia
penultimam producunt. Abelli^nus. Adulterinus. Agrigenti^nus. Amiti^nus.
Albi^nus. Bombyci^nus, etc.

Adjectiva in -- ^nus a Plantis, Lapidibus and alijs inanimata significantibus.
Item ab Advervijs temporalibus, aut Substantivis Anni Tempestates notantibus,
descendentia, penultimam corripiunt. Querc^nus. Corall^nus. Crast^nus,
Chrystall^nus. Cedr^nus. Hornot^nus. Serotinus.

Participia Passiva a Supinis facta seqnuntur plerunque Quantitatem Supinorum,
Adjutus, Peti^tus.

De Syllabis Medijs.. IX.

A producitur ante, Reg. I.
g, and u, bundus, bilis, culus, la, lum, cea, ceum, cius, cia, cium, cus, ca,
cum, dus, lis and le. In infinitis in -- men and -- mentum, -- nius, -- nia, --
nium; in habentibus vocalem aut a ante r in finitis in aris, are, arius, arium,
ante t in finitis in atius, a^icus, ato, atus, atim, ates; in Ablativis and ab
hisce derivatis.

In Reliquis omnibus corripitur.

E, II.
producitur ante, c, d, l, m, t, r, in substantivis in -- erium, ante -- simus.

In Reliquis Corripitur.

I, III.
producitur ante, qu; excipe rel^quum; rel^quiae. In Verbalibus ante -- bilis
and -- bundus, in derivatis a supinis penultimam producentibus, ante -- culum,
a Verbis quartae Conjugationis* ante do, dinis; Ante des, in Patronymicis a
Nominibus in eus: ante go; in Neutris, ante le; in Verbalibus ante men and
mentum, a verbis quartae Conjugationis. In -- inus exeuntibus modo non
significent Materiam and tempus: Ante sinita in -- na and -- ne: Ante -- tus in
derivatis a Substantivis: Excipiuntur Adverbia in ^tus, ut fund^tus, pen^tus.
Ante ta, it is, tes, tos, tim, tius in Verbalibus a quarta Conjugatione.

O, IV.
producitur ante, n, s, t, cimum; In Neutris habentibus m, ante, vel post o;
ante -- rius, ria, rium: rus, ra, rum.

V, V.
producitur ante, c, g, m, n, r, s, t, lis, and lium in derivatis.

De^iderativa autem corripiuntur, Esurio, Par^turio. Excipe Scatu^io. Nomina in
urius, uria, M^rcurius, luxuria. Etiam decurio.

Excipiuntur etiam Nol^mus, volumus, quaesumus, etc.

Et composita a ruo in supinis erutum, etc.

De Finalibus.. ^*

1 1 2 3

FInita in b, Reg. I.
d, t, l, r, brevia.

4 5 6 7 8

in, II.
^, n, as, ^s, os, producuntur.

9 10

in, III.
is, and us, corripiuntur.

11 12

in, IV.
a, i, ^, longae.

13 14

in, V.
e, breves; In, o, dubiae.

in, y, breves.

1. Excipe Hebraea ut Job, Jacob, Davi^d.

2. Excipe s^l, sol, ni^l, pro nihil, and Hebraea, ut Joel.

3. Excipe far, lar, nar, ve^r, fur, cur, and par, cum compositis, Graeca etiam
in (...), ut Aer, crate^r, characte^r etc. nisi patr and matr quae brevia sunt.
Cor producitur apud Ovid.

4. Nc, donc Corripiuntur. Fac, Masc. hic and Neut. hoc sunt communia.

5. Corripiuntur Forsan, forsitan, an, tamn, attamn, veruntamn, ^n, cum
compositis exin, sub^n, de^n, pro^n: Quae patiuntur Apocopen, vidn, aud^n,
nem^n, nost ^n; Nomina etiam in -- en quorum Genitivi exeunt in ^nis, ut
Carm^n, crimn, etc. Graeca in (...). Ilion, ^elion, etc* Accusativi in in vel
in, Alex^n, Ityn. etiam in an a Nominativis in a, Iphigenian. Aeginan.

6. Excipiuntur ea quorum Genitivus exit in adis, ut Vas, Pallas. Et
Accusativus pluralis Nominum Graecorum tertiae Declinationis, ut Heroas,
Hectoras.

7. Brevia sunt Nomina tertiae Declinationis imparisyllabica, in quibus
penultima Genit* vi brevis est, ut mils, segs, divs, etc. (Longae sunt tamen
abie^s, arie^s, cere^s, pe^s cum compositis, and pari^s;) s quoque a sum cum
composit is, pots, ads, etc. pens etiam and neutra in es, Hippomans, Cacoeths,
add Nominativos Graecorum plurales, Cyclops, Naiads, Dryad^s, etc.

8. Exci^e Comp^s, imp^s, ^s ossis; and Graeca in (...) desinentia, Del^s,
Cha^s, Pallad^s, Phillid^s.

9. Longi sunt obliqui, ut Musis Dominis, Nominativi etiam ^ingul* longorum
imparisyllabicorum, Samni^s, i^tis, Salam^s, ^nis, It^m Nomina in -- is a
Graecis in (...) de^in^ntibus, Simoi^s. Mon^syllaba omnia praeter is, qu^s,
b^s. Secundae etiam personae temporis praes. Indicat. Modi verborum qua^tae
Conjugationis, ut, aud^s, add veli^s and sis cum compositis, and adverba
fori^s, and grati^s.

Commune est tempus futur. Modi Subjunct.

Is, mihi dives eris, si causas eger^s, inquit. Martial.

Da mihi te placidum, dederi^s in carmine vires. Ovid.

10. Excipiuntur imparisyllabica quorum Genitivi habent penultimam longam,
salus, utis, tellus, uris. Item Genitivi Singul. Nominativi, Accusativi,
Vocativi, Plural* Nominum quartae Declinationis Hujus manu^s, hae manus, has
manus, o manus. Monosyllaba etiam Crus, mus, sus. Nomina eitiam in -- us, facta
e Graecis in ovs Panthus, Melampus, Clius; praeter Oedipus and Polypus secundae
Declin.

11. Brevia sunt eja, ita, quia. Omnes etiam Casus in -- a (exceptis Vocativis
a Graecis in as, Aene^; and obliqus primae declin. Mus^.) Numeralia in -- (...)
sunt communia.

12. Corripiuntur nis^, quasi. Vocativi etiam and Dativi Graecorum quorum
G^nitivus exit in os, Palladi, I hillid^, ^ Amarill^, o Alex^.

Communia sunt mihi, tibi, sibi, ubi, ibi; Sicu^^ semper breve est, alibi
longum.

13. Producuntur obliqui quintae Declin. cum suis Adverbijs ^odie^, quotidie^,
quibus add (...). Secundae etiam personae singul. Modi Imperat. Activi
verborum secundae Conjugat* Doce^. Adverbia ab Adjectivis in -- us, aut -- er
desinentibus, derivata, pulchre^, belle^. Ferm^ etiam fere^ and Ohe^: Sed ben,
mal, mag corripiuntur.

Monosyllaba producuntur omnia praeter qu, n, v Encliticas, c, t, pt,
Adjectiones syllabicas.

14. Producuntur obliqui in o, Domino. Adverbia ab Adjectivis derivata Tanto,
etc. Eo cum compositis, ideo, etc. Communia sunt Sedulo, crebro, sero, mutuo.
Semper brevia, modo, quomod^, cit^; saepius etiam sunt, Amb^, du^, eg^, hom^,
sci^, nesci^, im^, illic^.

Propriorum Nominum qu^^titates ad has Terminationes revocantur.
A in penultima, brevis est in Nominibus quae desinunt in abus, aces, acus,
agus, and agum, alus, (excipitur Sardanapalus) ames, ares, aris, arus, ala.

Longa est in acum, (in iacum vero corripitu^ adus, and ^da, ^mus (excipe
Graeca and Asiatica) ane, anes, anus (excipe Concanus, Dardanus, Marcomanus,
enomanus, Sequanus, and (ut vulgo) Lipomanus) asis, asus, ^tus, ates, athes,
(excipiuntur Pelates, Lapathes, Zelates) ata, ati^, avus, avum, (...).

E, in penultima --

Brevis est in res.

Longa est in e^dus, e^ne, e^nus (praeter Diadumnus, Misumnus, and Ar^nus) crus
and e^ra.

I, in penultima --

Brevis est in ^cus, si Nomina sint Latina vel a Latinis aut Grae^is orta. Si
vero sint Nomina barbara producuntur excipiuntur C^pern^cus; ^ga, ^ta, ^ito.

Longa est in i^cum, i^de, i^dus, i^mus, i^nus, and ina tum propria tum
Gentili^ia, irus, isus, i^tus, and i^ta, tum propria tum Gentili^ia, i^tes
nomina Gemmarum and Lapidum, Vinorum; and Gentilia, ^is Gentilia Foeminarum.

O, in penultima --

Brevis est in ^lus;, and ^rix.

Longa est in odes, omus, onus, and ona, ota, otes, otis.

V, in penultima --

Longa est ubique.

Hebraea, Syriaca, Arabica, Turcica, has sequuntur regulas.

Quibus additur terminatio Latina, producuntur, ut Adamus, Abrahamus: Excipe
crementa ab ar and or quae corripitur, ut Salmanasaris, Nabuchadonos^ris.

Quae vero propriam terminationem retinent penultimam corripiunt, ut Absalon.
Excipiuntur Aaron, ^biram, Abi^ron, Adiram, Aduram, Asate^la, Asemona, Aseroth,
Arbona, Bahurim, Barje^su Barjona, Bethoron, Bethsura, C^rbona, Ele^le,
Esricam, Gaderoh, Gaze^ta, Ierusa, Mammona, Noe^mi, Rabboni, Sabactani, Salome,
Zabulon.

Books Printed for and sold by Will. Miller, at the Golden-Acorn in St.
Pauls-Church-Yard, London.
Folio.
BOok of Martyrs, in 3 Vol. Willets Synopsis Papismi -- - on Genesis and Exodus
Charleton's Physiologia Extravagant Shepherd, a Romance Love and Revenge, a
Romance, by James Hayward Hart's Diet for the Diseased Reconciler of the Bible
Bishop Smiths Sermons Spanish Bawd Rycauts History of the Turkish Empire Nani's
History of the affairs of Europe Violet's Proposals for calling to account all
Committee Men, Sequestrators, Treasurers and Custom-Commissioners, Collectors
of Monthly Assessments, and all that have been entrusted in the Public
Revenues. Ben. Iohnson's Bartholomew-Fair, Staple of News, and the Devil is an
Ass.
Quarto.
Iackson's Concordance Weemse of the Ceremonial Laws -- Observations ^atural
and Moral -- of the Judicial Laws of Moses -- of the Moral Law Hookers Souls
Preparation Hookers Souls Humiliation Strouds Anatomy of Mortality History of
Prince Arthur C^mpleat Bolton's General Directions for Comfortable Walking with
God. Quercitan's Practice of Chemical and Hermetical Physic for Preservation
of Health. Feltham's Resolves White on the Sabbath Heylin's History of the
Sabbath Sibbs on Hosea^ Cooper's Heaven Opened on Romans 8. 1. Benefield on the
first Capter of Am^s Dodd on the Lords Prayer Chapman on the 117 Psalm Dodd and
Cleaver on the Ten Commandments
Octavo and Twelves.
Milton Paradise regained Complete Chemist Government of the Tongue Janua
Linguarum Vestibulum Reserata Scudder's Christian daily walk Louder de Cord
Farnaby's Epigrams Childrens Dictionary History of the Great Mogul, first and
secon^ Part. Fanshaw's Horace, Latin and English Holidays Persius in English
Hopton's Concordance of Years Arundel's Secrets I. de Lunas Spanish Grammar
Monarchy Asserted by a Committee* of Parli^ment in Speeches. Novae Solymae
Nomen clatura, English, Latin and Greek New Light to Alchimy Bagshaw's Rights
of the Crown of England Locker's Balm for Bleeding England and Irelan^ Heath's
Tri^mph of King Charles II. Leigh's Description of England Nosce Te Ipsum, a
Poem by Davies Ladies Calling Waraeus de Antiquitatibus Hiberniae Pantoni
Apparatus Theologiae Epicurus's Morals, English Humes Jacob and Boaz, or the
Steadfast and Unwave^ing Christian. Ward of Wit, Wisdom and Folly Brough's
Sacred Principles in Welsh Beverley's Great Soul of Man Vines on the Sacrament
Gourdon's Tyrocinium Linguae Latinae Dent on the Revelations Continuation of
Sidney's Arcadia Smith's David's Blessed Man Arcandam by William Ward
Traihern's Exposition of St. John's Gospel Times Silver Watch-Bell Frewen's
Sermons on Romans 14. 2. to 9. Four General Heads, Christian Religion Surveyed
and Explained. Ball's large Catechism Dig's Unlawfulness of taking up Arms
against the King Hieron's Dignity of Preaching, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20 Chetwind's
Historical Collections Leeches Grammar Questions Crashaws Meat for Men, or
Service on the Sament. Sharps Midwi^ery Merry Drollery Complete Lod. Vives
Exercitationes Ling. Lat. Ross Virgilius Evangelizans Textoris Epistolae Tullii
de Officiis Elborough's Exposition on the Common Prayer French Schoolmaster
Daphnis and Cloe, a Romance Bunworth of the French-Disease Observations of
Fulke of Meteors Knowles Rudiments of the English Grammar Justini Historia
Nasmiths Divine Poems Ramsey of Poisons Stewards Catholic Divinity Lucius
Florus in English Harrington's Art of Law Hows Marks of Salvation Starkies
Natures Explication, and Helmonts Vindication Boteler of War in Marches,
Battles and Sieges Hill's Natural and Artificial Conclusions St. Bernard's
Meditations English Dictionary and Expositor Third part of the Bible and New
Testament Herles Wisdoms Tripos Countess of Kents Rare and Select Secrets in
Physic and Chyrurgery Staphurst Officina Chymica Londinensis Fettiplace's
Christian Monitor Mall and Polhill of Holy Living Sibbs Christian Portion --
-Fountain Sealed Ametius Bellarminus Enervatus L'Florus Notis Stadii Granado of
Prayers and Meditation Cottons None but Christ Fettiplace's Holy Exercise
Abbot's Young Man's Warning-piece Bradshaw and Hildersham On the Sacrament
Bacons History of Life and Death Garbuts Demonstrations of the Resurrection
Idiot in four Books by Cusanus White's Ground of Obedience Vade Mecum, a Manual
of Essays, by T. D. Warwick's Meditations Web's arrignment of an Unruly Tongue
-- - Agars Prayer Understanding Christians Duty Henshaw's spar^ hours of
Meditations Resolution of Doubts between the Church of Rome and the Reformed
Church. Midnight Trance. Nordeus Poor Man's Rest -- -Pensive Man's Practice Holy
Sinner, by W. H. Barclaii Argenis -- -Euphormio Boltons Help to Humiliation
Mothers Blessing Bradford on the Lords Prayer and Ten Commandments. Doctrine
of the Bible Boltons Prayers Coral of Steel, Experiments in Physic Clark of
Comfort Life of Mrs Clark Lukins Interest of the Spirits of Prayer Marshals
Epigrams, by Busby Protestant Prayer Book Wit Revived (...) Novels Catechismus
Pietatis E^^ons Catechism Fentons Catechism Goug^s Catechism Balls Catechism
Bernards Catechism according to the Common Prayer. Pagits Catechism Veseys
Catechism Mayers Catechism Drants Epigrams Ovid de Art Amandi in English
Supplication of Saints Spurstow's Divine Meditation Smiths Complete Practice of
Physic Moral Practice of the Jesuits Duty of every one that intends to be
saved English and French Cook Oxford Jests Refined and Enlarged Smiths Joseph
and his Mistress Combachii Metaphysicae Rusneri Symbola Tuckney's works
Co^ntess of Kents Manual Lessius of Health 24o
FINIS.

