LUES VENEREA.

WHEREIN The Names, Nature, Subject, Causes, Signs, and Cure, are Handled.

Mistakes in these discovered Rectified; Doubts and Questions Succinctly
Resolved.

BY JOHN WYNELL. M.D.

Desidia and Luxuria, haec duo prius in Graecia corpora vitiarunt, deinde apud
nos afflixerunt -- ^um recle curaturum esse dicunt, quem prima origo causae non
fefellerir -- Alii putant interesse, non quid morbum faciat, sed quid tollat.
Celsus. LONDON, Printed by W.W. for the Author, and are to be sold by H.
Herringman, in the lower Walk in the new Exchange. 1660.

To my deservedly honored Friend, James Boevey, of Upper-Chelsey, Esquire;.
SIR,
IT is the Sanction of long-lived Custom, that no one appear to public view,
without Dedication to some considerable Friend. And while others affect to
choose Nobles by Nativity, and mutable Titles; I, one Noble by Nature, and a
better portion of her endowments, the most primary, true and immutable dignity;
which is not, in honorante, nor in the power of Men or Laws, to give or take
away; but immures it self in your Principles, and sheds its beams of love and
favor on all ingenious men (known) of what faculty soever. Sir, Bountiful
Nature (to give an instance of what she can do) has bestowed on you (not
lavished) much more than a child's part, (the less she has for some others,
for her store is not infinite.) I write not this to make you known, whom all
Europe knows already: Much less would I offer dirty Wits an occasion to slurre
you, by this Dedication, as if the Argument ensuing spoke your disease, and
therefore fittest for your view, study, and countenance. No, Eagles are not
wont to prey on carrion. Great minds, sublime fancies, (furnished with Arts,
Tongues, enriched with the advantages of Travel, kept in busiest speculative
employments) I say, Great Souls, (whose activity the local world is too narrow
to circumscribe) are above these carnal inescations, and leave them condemned
to those, whose souls dwell in their senses. This Treatise has lien in broken
papers some years past, (penned for private use) and had never seen more light,
but by your encouragement. And now, being got abroad, first offers self to you,
to pay its birth duty and respects for public freedom. It lies in a small
bulk, and without Rhetorical ornament, for, it intends the diseased, to make
them known to themselves; appales to abide the narrow scan of your curious
fancy, which knows neither bonds nor rest, (the more's your danger.) For, let
me tell you, Sir, you have a mind, (whom to supply with necessary
animal-spirits) is able to depauperate the most just and equilibrious Temper.
And provident Nature will store her Headquarters, and not fail to send enough
to her Court and University, though the lower Towns and Villages of the
Microcosm fail and pine for it. For the animal spirits luminous and aetherial,
(fit to irradiate the soul's commands through the imperforate Nerves) are
raised out of the Vital (in the Plexus Choroides) by further elaboration;
whence Nature amaunds the more foeculent part to the sewers of the Brain, and
the residue by the veins to the Heart, for further concoction. Hence, the weak
and depopulate bodies of busiest minds. Hence, those troublesome floods of
rheums and destillations in them, whose nature delights to dwell largely in the
Animals, (especially, quibus natura matter, fortuna noverca.) And such would be
your condition, did not Fortune and Prudence conspire, to prompt you a more
elegant and defoecated diet to prevent it. But what do I, setting up my Candle
to your Torch, casting my Mite of advice into the Treasury of your prudentiall
Rules? Your Tongue and Pen drop little else, and your loving Soul can do no
less, than to publish and enlarge the stock of Learning, with your methodicall
Digests.

All the divertisement that I shall further give your serious employment, is,
to signify and assure you, that I am,

SIR, Your affectionate Servant, JOHN WYNELL.
Duresm-Yard 3d Nonas December. 1659.
To the Reader.
Reader,
BEfore thou enter the Treatise following, peruse well this Epistle directed
unto thee; wherein thou have, 1 The Occasion, that induced the penning and
publishing of it. 2 My Scope, or End therein. 3 The advanragious Use that thou
may make thereof.

1. The Occasion was made up of these Observations following. 1 Of the
stupendous grouth and spreading of two depopulating diseases, the Venercous,
and the Scurvy: And (enquiring thereupon into their effects, in the yearly
Bills of Mortality) I found them so benign, that it gave me occasion to admire
the mystery of concealment. I observed the Consumption (in this sulphury air)
to have slain its thousands; and the Venereous disease scarce its hundreds. I
concluded thereupon, that, Latet dolus in generalibus, Consumption's back is
broad enough to bear such mocks. I perceived also, that the Scurvy had scarce a
constant name in the killing Catalogue, (though it destroy more than any ten of
its fellows) but the Dropsy, Feavours of many kinds, etc. have great numbers
dead at their feet. I concluded thence, that, Filiae devorarunt matrem. 2, I
observed the mortality and pining of great, noble, and generous Families, their
generations gasping, and soon run out, one treading on the heels of another,
which gave me to enquire what should be the occasion. And guiding my thoughts
by that rule, Causa and Effectus sunt simul; I accused their pampering diet,
effeminate education, praemature marriage, indiscreet covetousness, in taking
a weak, crooked, rickety woman, (for her Portion) to be matter familias. But my
thoughts (reasoning against the sufficiency of this enumeration, as not of
sufficient consideration) carried me with greatest reason to their diseases.
And finding the Venereous disease amongst them, (as in its headquarters) I was
strong in my conjecture, that this (traduced in the seed of parents, and mi1k
of nurses, hindering nature in accomplishing her intention of perfection) has
brought this calamity on great Families, Haeret semini lethalis arundo. 3, I
observed further, that hereby, one principal end of Marriage, (to propagate a
strong, healthy, and numerous posterity, fit to traduce the being, name, and
memory of parents, to such an eternity, as their mortal condition is capable
of) was much made void. For (in this wanton, painting, patching, perfuming
Issuing age) a man knows not whom or what he, takes, to himself or his son, in
marriage, a blessing, or a curse. Whereby not only our own bodies are
endangered, damnified; but posterity, primarily, foundamentally, corrupted,
extirpated; hearts of yoke-fellowes alienated, jealousy let in (of
non-faithfulnsse after, having lost their girdle before:) and indeed, an
uncomfortable life together, because they cannot asunder, (like two dogs in a
chain, ever snaring) and all because abusefull deceit in the marriage, Manet
alta mente repostum. And now, no securing evidence from the Hymen (as amongst
the Jews anciently) being found; Nature now in formation, rarely plating any
such transverse membrane; the weeping breach whereof may assure the husband, he
is not deceived in his choice. 4. I observed also, that all pretenders to
Physic, gave out a more than ordinary skill in the Venereous Cure; yet, scarce
one patient of ten went off from them sound, (as by relapse it too ordinarily
appears.) I was therefore led to believe, that either the ignorance of the
disease, or shamefac'dnesse to discover it, made them carry it about them too
long; or the ignorance of such as they applied unto, or the impatience of
Patients to bear a cure, gave the disease this advantage. For, though by
palliation, the dolorous symptoms were baffled; yet, the virulent cause was
left in the dark, (deep in their spirits and bones, and made future work for
the Physician. Hereby their Patients are deceived, who (not being able to
judge) think better of their recovery than is meet and safe; and find by sad
experience, that (the next evoking season) the disease (getting strength, by
lying in trenches) breaks forth more dangerously, than was its first onset.

2. My scope therefore in publishing this little Treatise, is, to present a
good office to my Nation, by entering the lists with this Champion; who (by
trampling on such eminent members of it) abates its grandeur, and bids defiance
to all the boast of Remedies in the Commonwealth of Physic. Therefore, since
publicos in hosts quilibet homo miles; I sent out my Scouts, that I might
acquaint my self with the enemy in all his motions. I enquired after an, Army
that would not run, until they had broken his pride. I considered, how I might
cut off provisions, supplies, r^cruits; and finally, how I might engage the
Enemie's whole body, until I had cleared him of all the coasis and quarters of
the Microcosm. Whereby I conceived, I should deserve well of my suffering
Countrymen; by, not. suffering the grandeur of the Nation to lie trodden under
the foot of a proud stranger, and I stand by as an idle spectator. And since
this Enemy plays small game also, and is come down so low as on the Spinster;
I have therefore made him speak plain english, (not without due respect to
modesty, and better understandings) that ordinary capacities may be able to
judge of their own condition by their own light; and in season look out for
relief, before captivity, and the further enervation of a valiant Nation.

3. The advantageous use of these papers, either respects all, that, having
been in unknown Hypocausts, have any reason, from perusing this Treatise, to
suspect their bodily condition) to deal prudently for themselves, by seeking
relief in season. Or especially, such as intend marriage, and the blessings of
it; that they get them bodies made fit for marriage. For though they know their
own personal integrity, yet what lurks in their humors from parent's seed, or
nurses milk^, they are ignorant of. And, however no present symptoms thereof
discover it to themselves, much less to others; yet the fomes of it, (often and
long lying obscure) does traduce a present defilement in generation to
posterity. And (by marriageduty) that latent disposition is urged to break
forth the sooner, (and will without such stimulation make it self known in
time.) And though the pursuance of this Advice may question their Honor, yet
it provides for their own, and posteritie's safety, which all wise men highly
value.

I have read many Authors on this argument, and found satisfaction in none, (or
this Treatise had been silenced.) I perceive, that on this (as on other
Subjects) they too much tread in the steps of their Ancestors, and rest in
their dictates without further enquiry; (swelling their volumes with
transscriptions into their own methods) which serves to fill Libraries with
much paper, yet few Bocks. But every man's breath will smell somewhat of his
diet, and after-ages can but inventis addere; which has been my endeavor
throughout. And though I write in English, that all may know their condition of
body, (as is fit) yet have I not set bogglers at work on the Therapeutick part,
of which they are incapable. If in this service I am accepted; then may thou,
ere long, expect another Treatise, Of the Scurvy, (if an abler Pen (which were
very acceptable) or want of leisure prevent m^ not.) Wherein the Press has
failed, thou may excuse: but wherein I have erred, or come short, (if the
more learned shall heartily correct or supply) it (tending to the advancement
of health, and of the Commonwealth of Learning) shall be friendly taken by,

Thine health-Servant, J. W.

LUES VENEREA. Wherein its Names, Nature, Subject, Causes, Signs, and Cure, are
handled. The mistakes in these, discovered, rectified; and many Doubts and
Questions, succinctly resolved.
CHAP. I. The Praeface.
THat Africa is never without some new Monster, nor England without some new
Disease, as strange and monstrous, is a truth that needs no proof. But the
proper reasons hereof are hard to find, and do less appear. Some send as far
as the Stars, and accuse the inclemency of their influences; Others go no
farther then the Kitchen, and accuse our diet of too much variety and change
from the plainness of the Ancient healthier times, and our new inventions of
Spermfiring Cookery. But a Christian looks yet higher, to the displeasure of
God, at the new and horrid sins of man acted by the body, chastised and marked
out by new and unheard of diseases, of which this is one.

Before the year 1493. this disease never gave a visit to Europe, kept its own
region in the then unknown Western world, where it was Endemical. Thence (as
it is storied) the followers of Chr. Columbus returning brought it, and gave it
to the Ital^an women, and they to the French Soldiers at the siege of Naples,
Sua simul pudenda et pudendum morbum communicarunt. After that siege, the
French returning, brought it to those that were or should be their wives from
whom they received a malevolent benevolence. And when it was come so near us,
we (that delight to imitate the French) took their faults and their fashions
together. And this disease (liking this fertile Soil) amongst us brought forth
a dreadful increase. Brassavolus observed long since 234 several differences
(accidental he means); and, amongst us, scarce in two several bodies has it
the same face and phaenoms, so strangely, (in the effects and symptoms) did it
soon appear, and therein the wrath of God. And that this is to be looked on as
the most considerable cause of its grouth in France, and Italy, and plentiful
spreading amongst us, we shall easider, that (when first this Pest began to
break out there, and became more spreading of late here) the wickedness of man
increased. Great wars, and of long continuance, were moved by mighty Nimrods,
heat of blood, brought forth heat of lust, the insatiability whereof was
punished by this new Pest.

But not to stay the reader on the provoking cause (or the avenging hand) I
shall next lead him to the best Definition of this disease that I can find,
that it may appear by its Essence, after I have given it its name.

CHAP. II. The Names.
WE commonly (knowing whence we had it) call it the French Pox. They for the
same reason (for none take pleasure to own it) entitle it the Neapolitan,
Italian, or Spanish. They again whip the vagarant, give it a passe-port and
send it to the place of its birth, calling it the Indian disease. Some again,
(observing how ill it is taken by each Nation, (that it should take the name of
its Sire from their Country) have found or made a name for it, (from its first
quarters commonly) and will have it called Pudendagra. But (what word bearing
no modest English Translation) we, without slurring any other Nation, as making
them reputed fathers of the common Bastard, (and knowing our selves) do choose
rather to call it the Venereous disease; or, (in contradistinction to the
Variolae) the Great Pox.

And there is no less dissent and clashing, amongst Authors of the first note,
in defining its nature, than in assigning its name; which comes to pass, by
the deep silence and darkness of the Ancients, in that they had no light from
the Fathers of Physic, to slay and be a Basis to their thoughts. And therefore
I shall take my liberty also, and give you its nature and being, thus.

CHAP. III. The Definition.
THe Venereous disease is, A praeternaturall Affect or Disposition of man's
body, primarily, and of it self, hurting or offending the Natural Operations
(and thence the Vital and Animal) from a cause or reason occult or unknown.

I call it an Affect or Disposition, not in a strict sense, as opposed to
Habit, (as if I thought it easily removed) but in a large and genrall sense,
such as may imply Habit as well as Disposition. For this Disease in weaker and
more depravable constitutions, becomes so rooted, and has committed such waste
in the Vital and Animal spirits, and induced such an Atony on the whole
Microcosm, as may admit Palliation, but not Cure. I call it Praeternaturall, in
opposition to natural, ordinate, and preserving dispositions. And, Of man's
body; for there is no disease of man's body, (this excepted) but is common to
them with beasts; but this befalls mankind only, (more lustfully insatiate
than the beasts themselves). I say farther, That it hurts and offends the
natural operations; it being proper to such as labor under this disease, that
some natural operation be offended. And I call them Natural, (retaining the
old received distinction) in opposition to Vital and Animal, as arising from
the Vegetable faculty, (which the Stoics called Nature) amongst whom,
Nutrition, Augmentation, and Generation, are contained, and such other
operations as arise from, and are subservient to them. Now, there is a
threefold hurt or offense done to any operation, viz. Abolition, Diminution,
and Depravation. And, in this disease, the operations are evidently depraved: I
do not say, they are not diminished, but they are always depraved; and as far
as they are diminished, it comes on them by depravation. Then I say, Primarily,
and of it self; because, though the Vital and Animal operations be also (and
speedily) offended; yet it is Secondarily, and by reason that the natural
operations were first offended; and so, not as Animals and Vitals, but as
Natural bodies, have they their first injury. Lastly, I say, For, or from a
cause or reason, occult and unknown. To distinguish this from other diseases,
concerning whom, it appears, whence, how, and when, the operations are iujured,
either by dissolution, or corruption, or some other manifest way. But, how this
disease wounds the operations, is very obscure, and we hardly find words to
express, what we conceive of it. And though in the disease, ulcers, and gummy
tumors do appear, and other loathsome symptoms, (as in the Chapter of Signs
more at large); yet these are not the disease it self, much less the causes,
but the effects. I deny not, that the effects do appear, and often do, where the
true nature, reason, and causes thereof, lie in the dark. If I should call
these ulcers and tumors, the disease, by a Metonymy; yet even in them is found,
that which reason but imperfectly, much less sense, can know: For we do not
find them cured by such remedies, as give the effect by their first or manifest
qualities, or by any remedies, taught by the Ancients; but by other remedies,
and such as are new, and were unknown unto them. Neither let this seem strange,
to affirm, that there are diseases, whose nature, cause, and formal reasons,
lie obscure; for the evidence of this is prepared, and plainly made out to our
hands, by learned Fernelius, De abditis rerum causts, from the Monuments of the
Ancients. And thus much for the description of the Disease Venereal.

If any object, that I have penned a Treatise, to make a disease better known
to my Countrymen, laboring under it, or in danger of it; and that I do in the
issue resolve all, in rations incognitas, occult operations, which are
ignorantiae asyla. I answer, That of many things we know the quod sit, not the
cur sit. When the Objectors can give me the reason of the strength of the
Neather-jaw; of the Load-stone's work and impotency; of the Compass, its
variation and stupor; of the motion of the Sea and Winds; of the production of
the Stone and Worms; of the forms, and their transmutations in bodies mixed; of
the causes and reasons of operations in pestilent diseases; By that time, I
shall further satisfy them. Qui nil dubitat, nil didicit: and maxima pars
eorum quae scimus, est minima pars eorum quae nescimus. Shall the learned
Lights of the Apollinaean Art, (called to set forth the causes and reasons, of
the Stone and Worms, in the several parts, ventricles, and cavities of the
body; and being urged by stresse of argument) fly (to defend their opinions) to
Spiritus lapidescens and lumbrificans, as the Essicient cause; and Materia
lapidescibilis and lumbrisicabilis, as the Material? Shall those Heroes (in
showing the reason of pestilent and malignant cacoethicall diseases) fly to a
cause, quae agit tota substantia, the Asylum ignorantiae? Then, what excuse or
plea could my ignorance and madness have, if in so learned an age, I should
tell the world in print, that I knew any thing so comprehensively, as that I
were ignorant of it in nothing; Whereas, there are more depths of nature in a
little Gnat, then the learning of the World shall ever attain in this mortal
state. And he has gone far in knowledge, that knows his own ignorance; And
he is unworthy to know more, that is ashamed to consesse it. And so much, by
digression. From the Definition, I shall come to the Subject of this disease,
and then more distinctly to the Effect it self; which, (though they have been
touched in the Definition,) yet being most considerable parts, require a
particular hand.

CHAP. IIII. The Subject of the Venereous Disease.
AND that I take to be the humors (and spirits) primarily, and (by their
circulation^, and dispersing themselves throughout the body) there is no part
secure from being, secondarily, the seat and Subject of it. Why the whole body
is not always afflicted of this disease, but the Members of generation, the
mouth, and instruments of sense and motion; no greater reason can be given,
then the tenderness of those parts, their impotency to resist such an enemy,
and their exquisite sense. That the humors first, and next the spirits, are the
chief seat, this amounts to a reason undeniable; that the disease so speedily
spreads the whole body. Besides, the spirits having their chief residence in
those parts, (the genitalls, and seminary vesse^ls for generation,) the Liver,
(according to old opinion) and the Veins, heart and mass of blood, (according
to the new) and in the head for sense and motion; these parts must needs be
first, and more taken of this disease, then the outward parts, which with their
nourishment must of necessity, afterward, successively have this defilement
conveyed unto them also. Neither may any one think, that the humors and spirits
are no living bodies, and therefore, not the subject of this disease; Though I
could grant the consequence, yet the Antecedent can never be made good. For can
they be the first receivers, instruments, and conveyers of Life unto the other
parts, and yet have no life in themselves? Are they nourished, augmented,
diminished, (which are properties of living bodies) and yet be no living
bodies? We conclude then, the humors and spirits to be the subjects of this
disease; For they have the requisite conditions of a true subject, which are
these: That primarily, and of themselves, and not by the intervention of any
other, and always, while the disease abides in the body, it is seated in them,
though not always in them only. The truth of this opinion, you will the more
rest in, and with the greater evidence; if I avoid the pretended claim, that
other parts of the body are supposed to have, to be the seats of this disease.
There be three options only, amongst many others, which are worthy to be taken
into this contest.

For some have seated this disease in them members of generation; others in the
Liver* and a third sort in the Head. First, R^^son and experience both, will
discharge the Genitalls, from being the subject of this disease. Reason, For
then there were no such disease in the body, but of necessity they must be
offended, and injured: but we often find men strongly taken of this disease,
without Ulcer, Tumor, or any other sign of wrong to the proper actions of
those parts. Besides, if they were the subject, and the diseases lodged in
them, then (supposing them to be amputed) the disease were cured, and the body
rendered incapable of it, (which cannot be granted.) For many receive this
disease by inheritance, in the seed of their parents, one or both; and give it
to their Nurses. Many receive it from the venereous milk of their nurses; the
genitalls of both which, for a long while remain sound. So that the members of
generation are discharged.

Next to quit the Liver's claim, to be the seat of this disease, (which has
been the opinion of many Physicians of note) against whom, I argue thus. That
part which is primo, and per se offended, is the subject of that offense, or
disease injuring; but that is not the Liver: for Ulcers and Tumors arise in the
genitalls, from this disease, (and that sometimes very speedily) which if by
seasonable and fit remedies they were Cured, the Liver and whole body would
remain sound. If any doubt, whether these Ulcers and Tumors be effects, and do
show the presence of this disease; let them enquire, How their bodies were
contaminated, and by what Contact; also by what specificall remedies they were
cured, and they will cease to doubt. If then these effects discover the disease
present, then that disease (being an accident) must have a subject proper to
it, which, we have proved the genitalls themselves, (though offended) cannot
be; much less the Liver, which for a time remains untouched, (the disease
being as yet not propagated so far.) Therefore, either the accident must be
without a subject, or there is some other; for the Liver must cease its claim.
Besides, it is well known, that the disease is propagated by Contact, and
contact is not of the Liver, which is far distant. Now, if the disease enter
the body by Contact, it is then immediately, in its proper subject, or not; If
not, then the disease passes from subject to subject, and so has no proper
subject. Further, If the Liver were the proper subject, then (to speak in their
language) the sanguifying faculty must necessarily be presently vitiated, as
soon as the disease enters. For, if a bowell be vitiated, its proper faculty
and work must necessarily be forthwith vitiated. Galen will tell you, that
where sanguification is vitiated, Fiunt fluxus sanguinei, aut vitiatus color.
The body nourished by virulent blood, the whole habit of it becomes virulent.
For, as is the blood, so is the flesh, and consequently the color of the same,
throughout the whole body. But that dark, squalid, fuscous, dull, flowerlesse
color, that usually accompanies and discovers this disease (grown,)
appears not of a long time, in many infected, in whom the disease lurks, as
curbed and corrected by stronger spirits and bowels; and is in its progress
resisted, (Nature endeavoring her own prefervation, and to keep her quarters
secure.)

Now for the third opinion, of those that make the Head the seat and subject of
this disease. If not the Liver or Genitals, much less the Head can be: for
many have the disease grown (as appears by afflicting-symptoms;) and yet find
no sensible injury thereby, in their heads. Again, The Head is never primarily
and immediately affected, but because some other parts of the body have been
first taken with this disease; and, therefore, not the Subject. Besides, the
effects of this disease have often been removed from the Head, and yet this
Pest remained in other parts of the body, (which sufficiently evinceth the
opinion asserted, and confuteth the contrary.) Now, though grievous symptoms,
as flames, pustules, hard tumors, ringing in the ears, dimnesse of sight,
falling away of the hair; and many other effects of this disease appear in the
head: Yet these are caused by the contagion, carried along in the humors and
vital spirits, which are distributed through the whole body; who (especially
moving toward the head, and having this disease lodged in them) produce these
effects there. For the spirits being light substances, thin, and passable, do
naturally move upwards, and, by their tenuity, do pierce and pass through all
the parts of the head; yet, the disease has not its seat there, (for the
reason in the former Section delivered): For the proper and principal
operations of the animal faculty, are not offended by it, as Imagination,
Reason, Memory. And if the sensory parts be offended, vitiated, and weakened by
the disease, it is rather, by reason that they are natural bodies, (nourished
by such blood and spirits) than that they are the instruments of, and belonging
to, the animal and rational faculty. And therefore I conclude, Not the
Genitals, not the Liver, not the Head, but the Humors and Spirits, are the
true and proper subjects of this disease; of which, I had not so much enlarged,
but for that it is importantly necessary to be known, to direct, how the Cure
is to be specified and determined.

CHAP. V. What the Affect is, which is seated in the Humors, etc.
IF you enquire what that Affect is, which is seated in the Humors and
Spirits, I say, it is no other than a distemper. If, What distemper? a hot,
cold, moist, or dry? I say, it may accompany any one, every one of them, and
yet be another thing different from them. For the character of this disease is
a certain degree and manner of distemper, which we have not words to express.
Neither therefore must we fly to a fourth kind or species of diseases,
(amongst whom, to place this) to the Ancients unknown, who have left us the
acknowledgment but of three kinds, (though they knew a kind of diseases that
offend after a secret manner) for they knew the biting of a mad Dog, of which
they could give no sufficient reason, and yet they did not constitute another
kind, besides the three, usually received; for Modus aut gradus non variat
speciem.

That there is in this Disease a degree and manner of distemper, above that
which is Elementary, appears in this; that there are certain effects and
impressions of it, that cannot be reduced to any manifest Distemper. The
operations arise from the Temper, and they are injured or offended by
Distemper. As therefore, perfect operations proceed from a like degree of
Temper; so also, operations eminently offended, are thus offended by a like
degree of Distemper. Also we find, that this Disease is cured by remedies, that
do not cure manifest Distempers: yet, if they restore the operations, it is
necessary, that they restore the Temper. But seeing they do not, (as curing
this Disease) restore the manifest Temper; it follows, that they restore a
degree of Temper, that we cannot express; and that they take away a like
degree of Distemper, superinduced by this Disease. This also is to be
considered; that this Disease may lodge in every Distemper: for in practice we
find, that men of cold Distemper, as well as hot, and some of dry, and
marasmodicall bodies, as well as the moist, and succulent, are taken with this
Disease. So that this Distemper may join with any, with every Distemper. It is
evident therefore, that the Character of this Disease, is another degree, and
manner of Distemper, super-induced besides that of their own formerly
introduced.

And this consideration also in of great moment; that in receiving this disease
by Contact, (as in the next Chapter at large) this degree and manner of
distemper, wherein it consists, is introduced after the manifest distemper is
induced; yet so, as that there is no great space of time, (rather a priority of
nature then time,) between the degree impressed, and the distemper: which
though at the beginning it may be disjunct from all proper matter, yet most
commonly it is joined to, and conveyed with, and in matter. And if not always
so, yet while it corrupts the humors and spirits, bowels and members; it
becomes the cause of begetting this corrupt and depraved matter, tough and
viscous sanies, which is by degrees propagated in the humors and spirits,
throughout all the bowels and members. And this is the manner of producing, and
deriving the Venereous disease, which the next Chapter will more fully clear.

CHAP. VI. Of the Causes of the Venereous Disease.
NOw we shall enquire into the Causes, producing this Disease, which are either
External, or Internal. The External are all comprehended under Contagion,
and that is either Immediate, or Mediate. Immediate contagion is, when there is
an immediate Contact between the bodies infecting, and infected. Mediate, when
some other body comes between, which receives the infective vapor, and
conveyeth it to the body, that is to be infected, (as the air;) Either the
common air, or that portion of it, that by the infector is breathed out, and
by the infected, is received in. Now that this disease cannot be contracted by
the medium of common or outward air, is evident; for then, multitudes that
dwell in places and neighbourhoods of venereous persons, (as it falls out in
times of pestilent contagion) would daily be infected, (especially they that
domesticaly cohabit, and kindreds mostly, would be much endangered) which
experience does not confirm. So that this good has the Venereous plague beyond
the other, that it keeps more at home, and does not cast forth so strong a
seminary of contagion, (though Fracastorus, an Author of no mean rank, thinks
otherwise.) Neither is it conveyed by air, breathed out, and received in; for
then, they that talk mouth to mouth with the Venereous, (and especially such as
apply remedies to the ulcers of their mouth) must needs be infected; which is
not found. It is true, the Tabes of the lungs communicates a seminary of to
the air breathed out, so that they which are apt to receive that disease
(drawing it in) are endangered. But not for it self, but as accompanied with an
Hectic Fever. But of this disease, it is not observed. So that, all mediate
contact being rejected, it follows, that only by immediate and corporeal
contact, this disease is conveyed. And hereby I understand, carnal use of a
venereous person, sucking venereous milk, or herditary disposition from the
seed of venereous parents, (which Plautus in Amphiter, calls Contagio.) The
true manner then how this disease is contracted, is no other but this, (as has
even now bin showed) either by generation, lactation, or mutual attrition of
bodies; whereby defiled spirits (mixed with the pure) communicate a degree and
manner of distemper, together with a prava proluvies, (induced or produced)
which running up and down the body, infecteth the bowels only in some, and in
others the members also; but in some, not, (being resisted) as in Answer to the
Questions shall be made appear.

The Internal cause of this disease is no other, but, Ichor and sanies quaedam
prava, (having their proper leaven in them) communicated, and tenaciously
adhering to the humors and spirits. Why this Sanies is propagated, sometimes,
and in some, sooner; in others, later; many causes may be alleged: 1. The
latitude or straitness of the seminall passages; for, in wider pores and
passages, this Illuvies is more easily drunk in. Where the way is strair, the
disease does seldomer, and more hardly propagate it self. 2. A greater, or
less plenty of humors, as in bodies more or less moist-3. Greater or less
disposednesse of the bowels and members, to receive or resist the contagion.
And hence is it, that they which have loose flesh, and abounding with humors,
(their vessels being large and open-mouthed) are soonest tainted, (first, the
humors; then, the genitalls; next, the mouth) for these causes, and other
reasons before expressed.

You may observe, that men of dryer, harder, and colder bodies, are less
subject to this disease, (as laboring men, poor men, old men). I have read it
observed, that the Turks are not easily infected herewith, though they have
always amongst them venereous captives, of both sexes; and the reason
suggested, is, for that their bodies are more hard and dry, and consequently
their genitalls. And thus much for the causes, whereby you may perceive, how
this disease deriveth, insinuates, and propagateth it self. Now, (forasmuch as
no Argument can be set forth so clearly, as to leave no darkness or doubts in
the mind of the Reader, especially in this branch of it, touching the Causes.)
I shall therefore farther endeavor his satisfaction, by solving such Questions
and Doubts, as may yet beclowd him.

CHAP. VII. Doubts and Questions Resolved, touching the Causes especially.
1. QUest. Why may not Venereous contagion be conveyed mediately by the air,
(since we find asserted before, touching the Tabes of the lungs; and, by
venerable Authors, of the Ophthalmia, that it sends out spirits infecting the
air; which the same air retaining, (for a certain time and distance)
communicates by contagion to the eyes of others)? And if it be so in these
cases, why may not, from the ulcers in the mouths of the Venereous,
infecting-vapours be sent out into the air, and that again infect others, as
well as in the Opthalmia and Tabes?

Answ. This disease lies primarily in the humors and natural spirits, (for
so I may call them) and they are more gross, and less moveable, and cannot be
emitted or darted out of the body, or, (if they should) would take weak
impression upon the air. The vital spirits indeed are more subtle, and may
pass further; and therefore diseases, primarily in them, have a more flagrant
seminary, to impoison the air. Yet, if this disease be accompanied with a
feavour, (as, in time and grouth, it will) that may put stings into it, and
render it mediately contagious.

Quest. 2. May not the contagion be conveyed by Garments, as some have thought?

Answ. No; for if the air cannot receive it, so as to convey it from person to
person, much less other external bodies, which should receive it from the
air. For, qualities communicated to the air, are altered and changed by
further mixture, and change of fleeting air; and so lose their morbifick force.

Quest. 3. May not kissing the Venerous, pledging them out of the same cup,
sitting next after them on the same stool, close-stool; lying after them on the
same bed, bed-cloaths, convey the infection?

Answ. The contrary has been proved, that no mediate contact, can, of it self,
convey it; for, if the air or garments cannot, (for reasons expressed) much
less solider bodies, as close-stools, and cups, leight contact of lips, etc.
And if they should, then would this disease be much more spreading; and
cohabitants with the Venereous, unavoidably be infected: so that Pest-houses
were as necessary for these, as for the Leprous anciently, and of late for the
visited with the plague of Pestilence. And although this diseased (usually) be
a gentleman, yet common safety were preponderous to any man's private quality.

Quest. 4. May a woman bring this Disease upon her self, by prostituting her
body to many clean and uninfected men?

Ans. To affirm this, does suppose brothelry, debauched brothelry, to be of
late edition in the World; or at least in those places, or regions, where not
withstanding the Venereous Disease, never had a footing.

Quest. 5. May sperm, often injected by coition, with the same, or several clean
Persons, (clogging the expulsive faculty of the Womb) cause such a
putrefaction, as that her Humors become venereously corrupted, and so the
disease be produced?

Ans. No, for if clean seed extravasate, by not being expelled the Womb, should
cause such a putrefaction, as to render the person Venereous; then seed long
detained and kept in the seminary vessels, and there corrupting and putrefying,
(the cause of the most leonine Histericall fits, as is commonly asserted)
should have much more causality to produce this disease. But this cannot be
granted, and therefore not the former.

Quest. 6. What is the reason, that this Disease, which in some persons, for
some years lurketh in the body, so, as no sign of it appears; yet that at
length, it should discover it self, and break forth in great rage?

Ans. The venom of the biting of a mad Dog, lies for some years in the body
of some man, without any sign discovering it, (which all Physicians after
Hippocra^^s acknowledge) and yet neither he, nor any of the Ancients understood
the disease; So may this Lues. But the manner How, and reason Why, is most
worthy to come under Consideration. I said before, that this proluvies is
viscous, and therefore, tenaciously adheres to the bowels, and is mingled with
the humors and spirits; but because, evidence of its presence cannot clearly,
and by manisest effects, be showed but on solid bodies; which this venereous
Illuvies does find bowels so strongly spirited, as that they make great
resistance, and refuse it, and obtrude it into the bycavities of the body,
(where it lies fermenting) the disease resideth especially in this Venereous
Illuvies, and is not communicated to the outward parts. So that, when, how,
and where this disease begins, acts, and creeps on, is not perceived. There are
workings and alterations, and morbifick sensations in the body, which are not
(at all in strong constitutions, and in others not) perceived by their proper
causes, and are of tentimes attributed to other, than their own. So that, if
you put together the time, wherein the bowels resist the Venereous poison, and
the time wherein it works insensibly, together with the time of the bodies
state neutral; it may amount to a year, many years, before the effects,
symptoms, and evidences, undoubtedly discover the disease present.

Quest. 7. How comes it to pass, that sometimes, and to some, at one coition
with the Venereous, this disease is contracted; yet others can scarce be
infected at many?

Ans. This must be ascribed to many causes.

1. To the various dispositions of bodies; for some are more prone to this, or
that disease, and therefore take it sooner: for nature makes less resistance.
Which also is the reason, that they which have any weak part of their bodies,
do receive a disease sooner in that part. For example, let a man that has the
gowt, be taken Venereously, and he shall find it more to prevail, and afflict
him in his feet. So on him that has weak eyes, if this disease supervene; his
eyes are sooner, and more afflicted, than other parts.

2. Carelessness, sordidness in neglecting their own bodies, is another cause.
For they that rightly and rationally cleanse themselves after coition, are
scarcely, and seldomer, taken of this disease. But they that (having no care of
themselves) do suffer the Illuvies to cleave unto them, are sooner, and more
fiercely, taken of it.

3. Long stay in carnal coition, makes much to infection; for they that welter
in unclean bodies, (and, through the ecstasy of lust, much inflame themselves
after saciety) are speedily, and at one coition infected: But they that soon
withdraw, and are less inflamed, are not so easily stung.

4. They are soonest infected that most burn in lust, and are (with the horse)
more violently carried to coition, by a sperm-fire. And hence it is, that so
many of the younger sort are so soon infected. For when heat of youth, and heat
of lust, (more turgent, by spermatick and too liberal diet) meet together,
there is a great flame, which makes them fearlesse of a worse, and greater. The
like may be said of them, qui raro venere fruuntur; for when they obtain their
desires, they go on violently, and so are the sooner infected. The reason is,
because a great conflux of stimulating spirits fall into the genitalls, by
whose heat and rage, the spermatick ways are much dilated, and so set the more
open to the poison.

Quest. 8. Some move the Question, Whether a woman, carnally known by a
venereous man, and rem^ining her self (as to sense, at least) uninfected; may
yet infect him that next approaches her?

Answ. Some hold the Negative, because, Nemo dat quod non habet; and therefore
it hardly finds credit, that a person uninfected, should yet infect another.
But to hold the Affirmative, is to maintain that, which is neither impossible
nor irrational. It is evidenced already, that this Lues may lurk in the body
many years, (in the humors and cavities) and therefore let it not seem
strange, if, in coition, it defile others. We have the story in Avicen, of a
young woman, nourished up with poisonous diet, who was never poisoned her self,
and yet poisoned all that had carnal use of her. You have another president
(in plague-times) of cats and dogs, who (not being infected themselves) carry
the infection to others. So that the Affirmative is no absurd assertion.

Quest. 9. whence comes it to pass, that at the beginning, when this disease
came newly into Europe, it was so formidably raging; but now is became much
more mild, and less destructive?

Answ. There were many causes conspiring, that at first made this disease more
fierce, which at this time ceasing, (or abating their activity) it is
reasonable, the disease should remit. The causes that made the disease so
formidable at first, were, 1. Affrighting novelty, new and fierce symptoms,
whereof they neither understood whence they arose, nor to what degree of
afflicting they might ascend. So that men being terrified by this novelty, and
ignorant of the power of their enemy, became spirit-faln; and their bodies (not
having the benefit of the counsel and courage of their minds) were delivered
up captive to the disease, to do what it could on them. And this was one
reason, why it became so formidable. For, as in times of Pestilence, that
disease affrights most at first; so, they are in most danger, which are most
cast down and trampled on by their own fears. Whereas the more careless and
confident (having all the help, strength, and defense, of courage and
resolution, that the generous governing mind can give) are so much the more
secure. So is it in this case. And this also is the reason, why the body, in
sleep, is more subject to the inclemency of the air; for (not being governed
by the mind) it is wholly delivered up to the piercing air, (it being of it
self able to make no resistance) and therefore men are then most subject (as we
phrase it) to take cold, (which let them observe, who sleep in their
day-cloaths, without superstrate coverings.) 2. At the first breaking in of
this disease, apt remedies were not found out, to arm men against the rage of
it. The virtues of those Indian-Simples (whence the disease came) were not
known; and when they were found, it was looked upon as a blessing dropped down
from heaven, and the Inventors blessed. 3. When apt Simples were found, they
were used (by most in practice) without weighty reason; so that for want of
method to direct their use, those remedies not only proved fruitless to some,
but to others hurtful. Bodies ill handled with acute medecines, become more
defiled. 4. All enemies in their avaunt, show themselves most formidable. Time
was, when the Yex, or Hicket, produced dreadful effects; the Neezing (which we
look upon as a remedy) was once a disease so deplorate, that bystanders
(terrified with it) brought in that custom of praying over them, Christ help,
etc. which custom prevails to this day. So we read of the Mentagra and
Gemursa, diseases, at their entrance, fierce, which afterward became more
remiss. And this leads me to the next Question.

Quest. 10. What the reason should be, that though this disease be generally
milder, yet, on some, it appears very cruel?

Answ. Hereof may be assigned many reasons: 1. Either the disease finds weak
bodies, full of corrupt humors, bodies passively disposed; and hereby it
becomes the more tyrannous. 2. Or the disease is a relapse, and finds nature
yielding; and renewed and ingeminated diseases ever appear worst. 3. Or other
diseases fallen in, are joined with it, (one disease drawing on another his
congenerate); and diseases the more complicate, the worse. 4. Besides, the new
disease falls in, when nature is weak, low, and languishing; so that its
expulsive ability cannot keep out, or drive off the diseases, new nor old.

Quest. 11. Whence comes it to pass, that this disease falls most, sometimes
on the hairs, sometimes the nerves, sometimes the bones, sometimes the fleshy
parts?

Answ. Because they are more disposed and propense to receive it; or, because
they do less repel it. Hence it is, that when and where the flesh is weak,
and does less resist, (which arises of many causes) then it falls on fleshy
or musculous parts. And the like may be said of all the rest. That which
Physicians say of the Feavour-heat, (that sometimes it falls on the humors,
sometimes on the spirits, and sometimes on the solid parts, as they are more
disposed to inflammation, or do less resist that flame) may as truly be
affirmed of this disease.

Quest. 12. Some move the question, Whether there be any region or people,
amongst whom this disease is more spreading? And the reason, why, they move,
it, is, because it is observed of old, that there are diseases which have
spread some Countries, for special reasons, and aptnesses in the natives: as
the Elephantiasis in Egypt, the gout in Attica, the Dracunculi in Arabia, the
Aphthae in Syria. In Aethiopia, was a disease that sent out of their bodies
winged lice, and out of the same perforations grew a strange scab, which held
them till death.

Ans. To give resolution to this question, know; That all diseases, (which
distinctly befall some Countries more than other) do arise; either, from their
diet, or from some evil conjunction of humors in, and thereby, inclinations of
that people; or, from some winds, that bring contagious vapors, by inspiration
assaulting them; or, from the temper of the air, impressed by Influences. The
scab of Aethiopia, the Dracunculi of Arabia, (which the Ancients mention) came
on them by their excess in diet; (for they were a voracious people) and
especially, from their feeding on Locusts, which depraved their constitutions.
The gowt of Attica, arose from their full and delicious diet, and much venery.
We read also of Winds, which brought the causes of sicknesses, (as the south
Wind from Africa to Europe) and some Winds barrenness to Women. So that all
Endemicall diseases, proper to regions arise; either, from a corrupt usage of
those Countries, or from the temper of the air. But this disease has no such
rise (adjuvant causes, I deny not) so that it cannot be peculiar to any region:
but seeing it is gotten by contact, (especially, that of coition) I say, it is
most peculiar to those Countries, Cities, Families, Persons that are most
addicted to Venery. And so I come from the Causes, and such doubts as arise
thereupon, unto the, Signs.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Signs, Diagnostick.
THe signs of this disease, are either Diagnostick, or Prognostic:
Diagnostick, or such as discover the disease present, (besides those which have
been scattered in the precedent Chapters) may from the accidental differences
of this disease, (the essence being always the same) be rallied in this order:
as they flow, 1. From the rise, that one is haereditary and native, another
accidentary; as by a soul bed, a venereous Child to the Nurse, or a venereous
Nurse to the Child. 2. From the age of it; that one is begun, another growing,
a third consummate. 3. From the symptoms; that one is more vehement, another
milder, 4. From the sex. 5. From the age of the patient. 6. From the
constitution. 7. From the usages.

1. From the rise: for if the Countenance do not plainly speak the disease, (as
by paint, it may be much silenced) yet it will give occasion to enquire,
whether they have not been carnally joined to the venereous; whether they have
not been informed, or had reason to believe, that they descended of venereous
parents, one or both; or had a venereous Nurse; or she a venereous Child. These
may make the matter probable, and prevent, or strengthen other enquiries.
Otherwise, the signs discovering, are not certain, and infallible; but
suspicious, and conjecturall.

2. Signs from the age of the disease, fall under three Heads; either as it is,

1. Begun, for at entrance they are all obscure, and general, and much common
with other diseases: as weariness, (without labor) overthe whole body,
moveable pains in the head and body, heaviness or sloathfulnesse of all
instruments of motion, unlustfulnesse after sleep, the color of the face
changing, and growing darker. If it entered by a defiled bed; heat and
sharpness of urine, smart in the genitals, heat in the reins, dullness,
sadness.

2. Growing on: virulent running of the reins, (green, yellow, or toward
black) pains, swellings, soft tumors of of the privities, (one or all) with
increasing anguish. Sometimes a little feavour, (without any great signs of
putrefaction) akeing of the periostia, or by the bone; pains increasing in the
evening, and later part of the night, and enraged by the heat of the bed; a
little cough, urine becomn sabulous, pale, smelling strong and rancid,
spermaticall matter floating on it; ordure foeculent, of various forms and
colors, (toward green, yellow, black) not only in diverse, but in the same
stool.

3. Consummate and Confirmed, are, coldness of nature, desirous of the fire, a
continued and settled pain of the head, in some part of it; tumors, ulcers about
the head; flaccidity, loosnesse of flesh, and rottenness of the privities;
tumors, ulcers (or both) of the mouth, (which are sometimes crusty, sometimes,
purulent, sometimes callous); whorsenesse of voice, speaking through the palate
or roof of the mouth, and nose; not opening their mouths wide to speak as
formerly, and finding it painful so to do; falling down of the nose, and a
stinking breath, from the cariosity thereof; falling of the hairs, especially
of the eye brows; sometimes a painful flying humor, from the brain, to the
haemorhoid-veins, and thence a recurrence to the brain; hard knots in the legs,
arms, neck, or all; rottenness of the periostia and bones; tumors, and sharp
pains about the cheek-bones, ringing of the ears, clefts of the hands and feet;
and grievous tormenting pains throughout the whole body; which becomes
emaciate, (appetite being decayed, and concoction much weakened); dimnesse of
sight, the color of the eyes changed, (having lost their brightness and
agility) become slow of motion; stinking, loathsome, slimy sweats; tophous
knots, (like those of the gout) the color of the skin becoming still more
darksome, squallid, and like the countenance in a black Jaundies; Buboes
swelling out in the Inguina, and sometimes falling in, (flying from place to
place, especially of the Emunctories). Most commonly it appears in this order.
First, by acrimony, and sharpness of urine, virulent running of the reins,
(and sometimes not, which is seldom.) This flowing, women often mistake for the
Whites, whereby the disease is let grow on unperceived. Then, pustules appear,
(arising first about the genitalls;) next, swelling gums, knots. Thence crusty
sores, white in the midst, and red round about, which being broken give case.)
Then pains of the Head, in the evening increasing. After that, buboes about the
Inguina, growing as big as Eggs. Then Tophous knots. At length, Ulcers of the
Nose, palate, and cruel pains.

3. Signs from the symptoms; which ever at beginning are milder, and
afterward more fierce. This is the reason, why the patient neglects the best
season of Cure, governing the care of his health, by sense of pain; which
(creeping on insensibly) makes him think the distemper will spend it self, and
so wear away.

4. Signs from the sex; for the weaker sex have some benefit above the
stronger, (to abate the disease by Childbed, and monthly clensings) but a
greater mischief, by the passive and receptive formation of their bodies,
(lodging virulent sperme) and (being of more soft and spungy bodies) are more
apt to receive contagion, and have weaker humors, and spirits to resist, and
repel the same. And hence it is, that the signs and symptoms, before
mentioned on them, do become more fierce and dolorous.

5. Signs from the age of the Patient: As more years are an advantage against
infection, (old men do not so easily receive it, and the signs and symptoms do
not appear so fierce) so have they thereby a greater disadvantage, for if they
are once seized, it seldom departs but with Life.

6. Signs from the constitution, and temperament. The Choleric are soonest
tanged, the Melancholy most afflicted, the sanguine make best resistance to
infection, and are best Cured; the Phlegmatic have it lying longest in their
humors, (all which must be taken into Consideration, when you examine upon the
signs before mentioned.)

Lastly, From the Usages. The tender and idle take it soonest, are most
afflicted, and with greatest difficulty Cured: Contrarily, laborious and dry
bodies. And thus you have a Catalogue of the signs, (not all, for that were
endless): about which, three things are to be observed.

1. That all these, at the entrance of the disease are less visible, and more
mild; but as the disease grows on, do more appear and rage.

2. That as it is not necessary, that all these signs concur where ever the
disease is; so it is hard to find a venereous body, on which one of these
appears alone, (for if there befalling of the hairs, there are also Ulcers,
Tumors, and manifold Pains; and so of all the rest.) For you shall never find
one laboring under this disease (grown) but many of these signs conspire to
blab, and discover it; and the reason is, (because the fomes of this disease is
seated in the humors, (as is before said) which are dispersed throughout the
body, from which each bowell and member with its nourishment, having its
defilement) filement) so that it cannot be, the disease should have but one
window to look out at.

3. That most of these signs are produced by other diseases; yet, in two things
they differ: One is, The contumacy or stubbornness of this disease, and its
accidents, beyond those of other diseases. The other is, The disobedience and
opposition, that this disease makes to all ordinary remedies. When you find a
disease (seeming another) throughout not obedient to the remedies, left us by
the Ancients, you may vehemently suspect to be Venereous.

CHAP. IX. Of the Signs Prognostic, or discovering the Event of this Disease.
THis disease of it self is seldom and slowly mortal. I say, Of it self; for
it may, and often does, beget, or is accompanied with another, more nimbly
mortal, (for diseases seldom go alone.) Unless it fall on a flaming
constitution. It is no acute, but chronick disease, and therefore worst in old
men. ( Hippocrates gives the reason, 2 Aph. Old men are less subject to
sickness than the younger; but their diseases are wont to be long, and
accompany them till death.) Again, This disease contracted by coition only, is
easiest cured; next, when brought on by the breast; and hardest, when inherited.
Besides, they that purge well by childbed, terms, or flowing haemorrhoides,
are less subject to, or afflicted by this disease; and on them it is more
easily cured, (they having many ordinary Sewers for corruption.) Likewise, if
there be a falling away of hairs, a pronenesse to sweat, the disease is the
safer; (for when it falls outward, and the skin open) it appears the sooner to
be removed; but the deeper the disease lodges, the harder the cure. Also, if
the disease be joined with a fever, the more considerable the feavour, the
harder the cure. For the remedies which remove the venereous disease, (being
hot and dry) increase the fever. Lastly, diseases, by relapse, the oftener, the
worse. For, if rational means could not remove the body's disposition to this
disease, it becomes still more prone and succumbent to it; therefore in such
cases, the patient needs a more prudent and well-furnished Artist. And so much
for the signs. Before I enter upon the Cure, it will be necessary to remove
some doubts, which tend to the clearing of what has been delivered, and make
way to the Cure.

CHAP. X. Doubts and Questions Resolved.
1. QUest. Why does this disease (which has such cruel symptoms, and
sometimes such as are commensurate with life it self) ordinarily kill so slowly?

Answ. Death comes not, but when the heart is vehemently injured; and Nature
ever (what it can) preserves and defends that fortress, especially against
this disease. Besides, this disease of it self begets no fever, but by
accident. In this disease, Respiration is not changed, but rarely, and at last
extremity. The Pulse is not altered, for there are no diagnostick signs from
thence of this disease, (a good evidence, that Nature defends the Heart.) But,
de Modo quaeritur, which take thus. The vital spirits are the most mighty
instruments of Nature, to secure themselves and her. Their fire is ever in
opposition to, and depuration of, and from, what is heterogenious, (and,
against what is most opposite, most active.) And the oftener they pass the
elaboration of the heart, the more strong they become. That which Aristotle
says of Choler, (how truly, I do not affirm) Quarto de part. Animal. [That the
heart will not suffer choler to come near it, because choler is a great enemy
to the heart] the like do I say of this venereous poison, The heart will not
suffer it to come near it, but ever, by the vital spirits, oppugns it, because
it is a great enemy unto it; and the heat of the heart is ever in depuration of
them. As impure gold is (by the fireheat, and separating ability) illustrated,
purified, perfected; so, the humors and spirits (venereously defiled) by the
hearts heat, are purified and preserved, the less and more slowly corrupted.

Quest. 2. Whether this disease be curable? Whether it be true, (which some
affirm) that it never makes peace, but truce only?

Answ. Experience evidenceth the contrary. It is true, that unless this
disease be seasonably set on, and restrained, it takes deeper roots; and though
at beginning it has secret and underground workings, and do less, or not at
all appear, (for reasons formerly showed) yet, with time, it takes increase,
and discovers it self. Now, one reason why this disease is so seldom cured,
arises from the Patient, who being (by the industry of the Physician) once
delivered from fierce symptoms, and sense of pain, too hastily becomes
confident of being cured; declines obedience to further endeavors: so that the
disease-still lurks in the humors, (and with them imbibed by the bowels and
members) and breaks forth again. Hence has risen that proverbiall speech, that
it admits a truce, not a peace.

Quest. 3. Whether, as time was, when this disease was not, (for it is a
stranger unto us, not endemicall) so time shall be, when it shall cease?
Whether it shall have but a season only; as the Mentagra, and Gemursa in
Italy, and the Sweating sickness in England?

Ans. It is propable that it shall be so, and this I am induced to think from
these conjectures. 1, Because, other diseases formerly not known, (nor being)
had but their seasons, and now are antiquated and extinct, (as is instanced in
the question.) 2, Because, since this disease began in Europe, it is much
abated of its rage: and that which may abate, may abolish. If you ask me, how
this should come to pass? I answer, many ways, 1. By diet, and manner of
living, men will become more choice and frugall, 2. They have, and will learn
more prudence in coition; and as time teaches men discretion, so will they
more avoid this contagion, 3. Cleanliness about the body, will do much to
effect this, (as in answer to the seventh question.) I shall further give
probability to this opinion, by answer to another Question, thus. Why was the
plague of Pestilence, and Leprosy so frequent formerly, and now so rare? (Or,
if the Pestilence break forth, is often so soon quelled?) No reason, (as to men)
can be given, but, that men have more care of their diet, skill to manage
preservatives, are more diligent in clensing their Cities, and Habitations,
have more care of their persons in avoiding contagion: The same may be said of
this disease. It raged formerly, because men were more negligent of themselves:
but time and experience teach them more prudence.

Quest. 4. Does not the supervention of this disease, cure and remove the
falling sickness, Asthma, or other mortal disease.

Ans. I know, it is affirmed by some, and they give this reason; because, by
this disease, there is a total change wrought upon nature: so that it should
easily come to pass, that those almost natural diseases (mentioned) should
hereby be removed. But these are fallacies; for, grant that by this disease, a
great change is made on nature; yet it is a change to the worse. Therefore, how
can it be, that those diseases, which (in a body otherwise sound) are of
themselves difficult, should (being coupled with a more depraved disease)
become more easily cured?

Quest. 5. Does the Pox keep out the Plague?

Ans. I know it has been vulgarly asserted, that the venereous are secure
against Pestilent contagion: and they give this reason, because another kind of
distemper prevails in the venereous, distinct from that which is apt to
produce pestilent diseases. They argue also from experience, that venereous
houses and persons, are seldom visited with pestilent diseases. But these are
trifles; for the character of the pestilence is Putrefaction, (whether occult
or not) venenous putrefaction. And who can deny putrefaction in this disease?
and that the humors, spirits, bowels, and members, (depraved by it) are apt
further to beget it? So that it cannot be hoped, that one kind of putrefaction
should secure against another. Only thus far it is true, that (if any
venereous person has been lately and perfectly cured) he is the less subject
to pestilent infection; and the reason is, because the Fomes of putrefaction is
taken away in the venereous cure. But, that one plague keeps out another, is a
pleasant dream, and were a madness to affirm.

Quest. 6. Whether there be any Antidote, any true and certain means of
avoiding contagion; so as, that a man may use a venereous woman, and yet not be
infected by her?

Answ. I know there are those, who promise great matters this way; and (that
they may feed their own covetousness, and others lust, and factor for the
devil) do boast of their secrets in this kind, as if they were skild beyond
others, to give an Antidote, that should secure against such venereous
contagion. But I look upon these pleasant and wicked fales, as cheats, and
methods of base gain. For we know, that in coition, there is a mutual
attrition of genitals, a mixture of humors and spirits; (for the pores, by
such flames, are set open) so that it cannot be, but that infected spirits
should be mixed with the pure, in those pores, and they so become defiled. It Is
true, such prophylactick medecines may do two things: 1. They may, densare
poros genitalium, so that the passages of the humors and spirits may be less
patent. 2. They may corroborate and confirm the spirits, that they may the more
strongly repel the infection, (as Treacles do against poison.) But there is a
different reason between poisons that are taken inwardly, and this disease,
which is contracted by Contact; for poisons do not always and presently mingle
themselves, with the humors and spirits, as this does. Besides, poisons first
enter the stomach, (which presently repells them, as appears in dogs
vomitings) then are dispersed through the vessels, and contaminate the
spirirs: but this Pest presently enters the inward parts, by defiling the
humors and spirits. Lastly, such things as preserve from poison, are taken
inwardly, that they may be diffused throughout the whole body, and so confirm
the spirits and bowels. But the medecines (to which these attribute so great
virtue) are outward things, which cannot diffuse their efficacy through the
inward parts. Again, if there be any medecines to be given, which shall
preserve from this infection, it must be those Antidotes which cure the
disease, (as Treacles cure the poisoned, they also preserve from poison.) But
the Indian Woods, which (though more flowly) do at length cure this disease,
cannot preserve, but that they which use them, may at the same time be
infected; much less can other remedies. But you will object, that many go in to
the Venreous, and yet find, by experience, that they are not infected (which
yet is more than they can be assured of:) And then; that which Nature does for
some, Why may not Art do for others? I answer, Art cannot impresse upon the
spirits such a faculty of refisting, as Nature can. Yet, I do not deny, but
that Antidotes may be found, which may work, in tantum, that men may not so
easily be taken of this disease; but, that they may promise them safety, I
utterly deny. Therefore let none suffer themselves to be deluded; for, to avoid
this danger, they have only these three remedies: To maintain Chastity, To
live Continently, and, To avoid the Venereous.

Questt. 7. Is the venereous cure to be attempted, as soon as the disease, by
any sign or just suspicion, discovers it self?

Answ. I know, some are for the Negative, and they tell us of their experience,
That they have found the disease thereby exasperated. Also they argue further,
that the disease may be cured and expelled at first by Nature it self; but
(when provoked by Medecines) it further spreads throughout the body. But this
opinion is not more false than pernicious; for, all men rest in that general
rule, Principiis obsta; and (from Hippoc. de locis in hom. and de sacro morbo)
that a disease must be withstood at the beginning; and that great care is to be
used, that young diseases be forthwith extinguished. Now, as this is a good
rule in the curing of all diseases, so especially of this; for at first, this
disease (when taken by impure coition) lodges in the out-parts, and needs not
medicines that work by alteration, but expulsion. And who doubts of the truth
of that, Turpius ejicitur, etc? that venom is more easily driven out of the
porch, than turned out of the house; when it enters by the genitalls, than when
it has taken its walk through the humors and bowels? And so I come to the
cure in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XI. Of the Cure in Common.
THe Cure has two branches, either as common to other diseases, in the use of
Vniv rsals; or, as Special and proper to this, Antivenereal. And this again;
either the cure of the disease it seif, or of the symptoms, which are many and
fierce. And though some go off, or abate, with the disease; yet others require
special cure, (which is done by Chirurgicall applications, whereof I need not
further trouble the Reader.) Now the cure in common, consists in the right use
of Catharicks, Phlebotomy, Diaphoreticks; for if this Pest be to be thrown out,
all passages are to be set open, that way may be made for the special cure. A
method is to be taken from this distemper, and all complications, (for it
rarely goes alone) and all other indications. The fix things called
not-naturall, must be rightly ordered. Venery, for a season, banished, that so
the Vires may be kept strong, to expel a disease of long cure, and short diet;
and lest, by inflaming-motion of the body in coition, the disease entered in one
part be diffused. Phlebotomy is (in case of Plethory, or fierce accidents) to
be used, and not (as is the manner of some) in all venereous cures, to breathe
a vein presently. Diaphoreticks in grown diseases are of great moment, and
require due management.

CHAP. XII. Of the Cure in Special.
AS there are many methods of Special Cures, so they may all be reduced to
these two heads, Reproved, or Approved. Methods Reproved are,

1. By remedies common, and not Specificall, which find no obedience here; or,
not without a greater mischief, than benefit to Nature.

2. The good cheap poor whore cure, by Fontanels, taken up from the practice of
the poorer Spaniards, (amongst whom it is in common use) whereby Nature finds
some ease, (disburthening part of the purulent matter), but the fomes is left
within, to render their condition deplorate. I am no friend to continued
Issues, which prevailed not in practice, until this disease brake into to
Europe.

3. By Mercuriall Unguent, which may serve for Carriers and Porters, robustious
bodies; and yet, even in them, the consequents render it perilous, if not
pernicious. I know, some are so ignorant and audacious, that they make it their
ordinary Champion, setting upon every venereous patient with this dreadful
remedy, as if no cure could be dispatched without it; the effects of whose
boldness, many have mournfully carried to their graves. What this Unguent is,
I need not express; its composition is well known, better than trusted to, or
delighted in by Artists. For, this Unguent, rubbed on the palms and plants of
hands and feet, is speedily carried to the head, (as appears by the floods of
salivation that follow the use of it.) For its Mercury (being an aerial and
spirituous body compacted as appears by its orbicular and trembling motion)
as soon as it is attenuated, and resolved by natural heat, breaks out of its
compacture, as fired powder out of a gun, and (naturally flying upwards) is
carried through veins and arteries to the brain, with many vapors accompanying
it; which Vapors and Mercury (there condensing) are attenuated, eliquated, as
a cloud for rain; and, through the palate are cast down to the mouth or
stomach, in salivation. The truth of this appears to them, (who, in salivation,
hold a piece of gold in their mouths) who find the spirits and vapors of the
Mercury (concreating) hang about it; as it does about other solid bodies: for
its subtle flying spirits pass through the whole body, and fix about the
bones also, who receive on themselves the substance and color of the Mercury,
(as in the mouth about the gold.)

4. By Mercuriall Cinnaber-fume, which is yet more formidable; and (to such as
have pectorall diseases, short breath, ill affected lungs, are troubled with
distillations, weak bowels, chollick pains, dysenteries) pernicious; use what
care you can, Mercuriall air will get in. There being safe methods of cure,
let these be laid aside: for scarce to any person are they used, without the
manifest offense and detriment of some bowell. And though great pretenders may
promise security in its use, yet it is no wisdom to adventure your person upon
every one's, bold rash, and ignorant confidence; Melius est non prodesse, quam
obesse, Fierce accidents will all in. Bold Empericks will promise much, and
perform little; and will adventure upon what they cannot govern: and therefore
must needs abuse themselves, and their patients. I do not decry the right use
of Mercury; for, take away Mercury, Antimony, and Vitriol, you leave the Armory
of Physic, reproachfully weak.

The Methods of cure approved, are

1. That by Treacles and Indian Alexipharmaca, which in time, and right use,
will take effect: but this way is long and tedious.

2. That by Antivenereall Magnets; which is noble, and to be rested in; sure,
potent, and effectual to draw out the venereous matter: which let none
despise, because they do not understand by such hints. Dii laboribus omnia
vendunt.

The Last is, that by Sympatheticall application; which saves the patients
much trouble, and uses nature in her most sublime, and noblest activities.
(These two last Methods of cure, let the weaker sex especially take notice of
whose more tender bodies, and feeble spirits, render them more unable to bea
the more rough and difficult ways of cure.) These are methods, which many men,
of great seize otherwise, (through pride and unthankfullnesse) have
rendered themselves incapable of. What the Magneticks are, how applied, and by
what causality they operate; what the Sympatheticks to be chosen are, and by
what symmetry, oneness, and community of spirit, they have their effect, or
whereby their causality is hindered, or set on motion, longa dies docuit; every
one is not fit to receive it, nor would understand if they were told, nor could
apply if they understood. The learned unprejudiced, may inform themselves. If
any one find a new spring issuing out of Parnassus, reason will, that he first
drink the waters thereof. The effect will best commend the work, and the
patients Euge's the cure: and that is enough to secure against the mad tooth of
detraction, and silence the charge of Novelty, (the strength whereof others,
(famous in their generation) have broken to my hands.) For who knows not, that
the opinion of the Circulation of the blood is new, and thereupon the doctrine
of Fevers fundamentally new, the way of the Chyle new, the sanguification of
the heart, veins, mass of blood it self new, the proper work of the Liver
new, the Chymicall anatomy of all mixed bodies new, the whole frame and face of
natural Philosophy new: and yet the Assertors of these not despised by any,
but proud Stoics, whom no reason can persuade that they are men. Physic came
in at first Empirically, (though it stood not so) and by induction of manifold
experience it was brought into Precepts and Principles: And had the way of
improving experience, been longer stood on, and Physic too soon not taught to
systematize it had better improved, and fewer breaches been made on its
doctrine; to the greater honor of the Art, and its Professors, and benefit of
Patients. But this practical Art must be like speculative Sciences, and take a
body of general Principles before they be found side digna, and sufficient
causes of Conclusion. But had they been such; the Fabric had been firmer. It
is true, and cannot be denied, that naked Experience, (not supported by weighty
Reason) is but a dwarf, and can do little; nay, is often mischievous: but they
that join both together, will find them a fortress strong enough to abide the
battery of calumny. If (in these methods of cure) I walk in paths less
trodden, yet (since my foundation is purest Philosophy) I shall say for my
self, Salve amicum lumen! I will not, with some others, contra rationem
insanire. All the satisfaction, I shall in conclusion give the Reader, (and
that will satisfy the sober and modest) is, to remit him to that of Seueca.

Multi ad sapientiam pervenire potuissent nisi putassent se pervenisse --
Multum egerunt qui ante nos fuerunt, sed non peregerunt. Multum adhuc restat
operae, multumque restabit; neque ulli nato post mill secula praecidetur
occasio aliquid adhuc adjiciendi.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap I. THE Preface. Page 1 Chap II. The Names. Page 2 Chap III. The
Definition. Page 6 Chap IV. The Subject. Page 12 Chap V. The Affect it self.
Page 22 Chap VI. The Causes. Page 26 Chap VII. Doubts and Questions resolved
touching the Causes, viz. Page 31 1. Whether the disease may be conveyed by the
air? ibid. 2. Whether by garments? Page 32 3. Whether by drinking after the
Venereous of the same cup, sitting after on the same stool, lying next af er on
the same bed? Page 33 4. Whether a woman, by much prostitution to clean men,
may contract it? Page 34 5. Whether by extinguishing the expulsive faculty of
the womb? ibid. 6. Why the disease often lurks in the body, etc? Page 35 7.
Whence it is, that some are infected sooner than others? Page 37 8. Whether a
woman, having coition with a venereous man, may remain uninfected, and yet she
infect others? Page 39 9. Whence it is, that this disease at first enentrance
into Europe, was so formidable, but now is more mild? Page 40 10 Whence it is,
that though the disease be generally milder, yet it is cruel on some? Page 43
11. Why the disease falls mostly, in some, on the Hairs; in others, on the
Nerves, Bones, etc? Page 44 12. Whether this disease be proper to any Country,
and to what, etc? Page 45
Chap VIII. The Signs Diagnostick. Page 47 Chap IX. The signs Prognostic.
Page 55 Chap X. Questions leading to the cure, viz. Page 57 1. Why this disease
kills so slowly? ib. 2. Whether this disease be curable? Page 59 3. Whether (as
time was, when the disease was not) it will in time cease to be? Page 60 4.
Whether the supervention of this disease does cure the Falling Sickness, etc.
or other mortal diseases? Page 61 5. Whether the Pox keep out the Plague? Page
62 6. Whether there be any Antidote to keep a man (using a venereous wonan)
from being infected? Page 63 7. Whether Cure be to be endeavored at first
entrance of the disease? Page 66
Chap. XI. Of the Cure in Common. Page 68 Chap. XII. Of the Cure in Special.
Page 69 Some Methods Approved, others Reproved. Page 70
FINIS.

