The Preciousness OF CHRIST To the Believing-Christian. Plainly and Briefly set
forth for the Edification and Consolation of Believers in, and Lovers of the
Lord Jesus Christ. IN A SERMON On 1 Pet. 2. 7.

By William Walker, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by Anne Maxwel, for Joseph Clark, 1667.

An Answer to the Sope-makers Complaint, etc,
THis morning I being abroad about my affairs, I met with a scandalous
Pamphlet, entitled as before; and finding therein several things reflecting
upon the Honor of the Parliament, and the Committee for regulating the Excise,
as also some aspersions and untruths, cast upon particular men; I showed it to
some eminent persons, more honorable in place, and able in judgment, than any
subscriber, who quickly perceived by the Language, who was the Author, and
desired me to give an answer to what was material.

And now to his first objection against me, wherein he declares,

It is an easy matter to raise money by way of Excise, but the difficulty is
to do it justly.

To which I reply, if it be just in the Parliament of England which is the
Supreme Authority of this Commonwealth, to impose a legal tax by way of
Subsidy, Fifteens, Custom and Excise, or otherwise, (which is undeniable,
except you will argue against principles) whether those men the Parliament
shall employ duly and without partiality, to collect and gather that
Imposition so put, without breach, or altering any of their Ordinances or Acts
in that kind provided; whether in justice, these men are guilty of the
oppression and ruin of those people, upon whom it is imposed, for their due
execution of that act, I leave to the impartial Reader to judge.

But here is Anguis in Herba, he first would lop the branches, and then pedi
tente root and branch, first take away the Collectors, then the Assessors.

He says next, which they never look after or speak of, it being their
maxiome or principle, so they get money they care not how.

It is my maxiome and principle, which I have ever observed, not to question
the power of Parliament, that belongs not to me, but allwaies to submit to that
power which so well protects me from such turbulent spirits.

Next he says, it is true the King made the Sope-makers pay above 30000 li. a
year.

I say it is false, the King made them not, for they bought the Patent of the
former Patentees, the white Sopemakers, and for it gave 40000 l. that they
might become immediate Farmers to the King.

Next he says, And there is no doubt, but the same principle he went upon,
such men as the proposers are.

To which I reply, it is true he went upon the same principle of such men as you
the Objectors are, which were propriis personis, real actors in that business.

And next with him I join, that I hope our eyes shall never see that
destruction and ruin of the Parliament, as we have upon the King, etc. And
further I hope God will defend them from the calumnious pens, and tongues of
such men, as not many months ago would have rendered them odious to the
people, and at that time have subjugated them (if possible those designs had
come to pass) to the insolent power of a confused multitude, but God blasted
their wicked and shirking ways, for all which their wicked practices, we need
no other prospective glass, then their own Books, which had they been owned,
the Author had ere this received his most just demerit.

And for our Proposals, style them what you will, your tongue nor pen is no
slander, but this I may say for them, that they received a fairer Character
then your large paper, and more reality and truth appeared in them as by the
honorable Committee did appear, when several heads of your long speech (to be
modest with you) did not appear truth.

Example, you did declare, that the Excise of the materials had for the time
past, did for the present, and would for the future, advance more to the
benefit of the Commonwealth, then the manufactory, this being the main pillar
upon which you had builded your long work, or Basis, happened to be rotten, and
by the Committee proved to your face contrary, for the fore-past time, and such
like solid reasons given, that it was likely to be less for the future, as (put
you altogether) you can never give a true answer to the contrary, and this was
but by inconsiderable sum, a matter of 9000l. these acts speak you what you
are, I pass on to enquire, how the due execution of a legal power of 7. years
establishment, should all of a sudden put the people to shake off their
Governors and Government, and truly this I cannot find, except it be by such
as have your spirit, which are never contented with any thing, witness your
many changings from one party to another, in both Parliament and Army.

And how any of our Proposals, look with a species to set the Prince upon his
Fathers Throne, I know not.

But here you appear like your self, a Firebrand in the Commonwealth, If you
be the man (to conclude in your phrase) whose name I have seen subscribed to
many a scurrillous pamphlet; and so much for your first Proposition.

And as for your second, wherein you desire to know, how the work must be
done, if it be not in the road the King troad in? Alas good Man, you must be
better practiced in in your trade, your partners may do well to instruct you,
you are an ingenious Pupil, and would learn quickly; certainly the way is
honest, or else you had known it; some of your partners knew the Kings paths
to a hair, and have walked therein year after year; and if a man would
follow a president to do evil, and answer your own words, to destroy Houses
and Goods, and to ruin the Poor, he must tread in those steps your Brethren
have done, which how dangerous and clamorous that has been, I leave to be
determined by those that in a short time will take it into consideration, which
are much wiser, and are in greater power then You or I.

Then next you admit that a Toleration be given to all in City and Country to
make Soap; it is impossible for those that have fixed houses to pay Excise
exactly and not break, as the Proposers have done, say you.

To which I answer; leave shall be given to all in City and Country to make
Soap, no restraint from any, no not from so very a -- as your worship, but make
till you break, which would not have been very long, if those you most
calumniously have abused, had not proved your best friends; and therefore
hereafter pray for my Lord General CROMWELL.

And for the fixed houses in London, I know no reason why their owners should
not join with me which really endeavor the restoration of the Trade to
London, by a due and exact execution of the Acts of Parliament, without either
addition of Excise, or further penalty then is already prescribed; so that
every one may pay exactly and not break no more then I: which I do abhor from
your calumnious pen, and dares to tell it to you, that you unjustly slander me,
as hereafter may to your cost appear; but you have abused far better men then
my self, God forgive you for both, and for the future I resolve to follow the
example of that honorable person forenamed, to reward you good for your evil,
if it ever be in my power.

But now to your hundred of pans so lately set up, though I believe not one
half, yet some more may be then I imagine, because diverse of your most eminent
Subscribers have of late set up just such as you speak of, and I do verily
believe to the same purpose, that they might pay the less Excise; but for any
power to break open doors, or oppress the poor, I declare it to all the world,
I had rather suffer then do injury to another, neither was it ever my practice,
or ever shall be to run any desperate course, or cause others so to do in
these troublesome times, (to answer your words verbatim) which may prove of
dangerous consequence to the State, for so I might come like you to render my
self capable of a hanging.

But to proceed; next you are informed that the Proposers are Soap-makers, (I
grant it) and yet upon this bare report your slanderous pen dares render them
broke, and presently following, you say not worth two groats; I do believe you,
and your Partners could wish it so, but God forgive you, I shall not much
trouble my pen to vindicate my self in a thing so well known to the contrary,
yet let me tell you if such desperate affirmations upon so false informations,
and such rash censures be the Levellers Tenants, into their Congregation let
not my soul come; and yet as if you would fill full the measure of your
abominations, dares without knowledge of the parties pass your censure of Gods
judgments upon them; but if all were true you had spoke of us, I would say
with the Prophet Micah, Rejoice not against me, O my Enemy, for though I fall,
I shall rise again.

Next you affirm your confidence is, we will not stand to it, nor can give
security for our performance of it.

To both which I say thus; in that we would not stand to it, your eyes and ears
were sorrowful witnesses that your confidence has deceived you, and that to
your face before a judicious and honorable Committee; and for our security, I
can if there were any necessity for it, bring more honest, less turbulent,
more able, less insolent men then your self, to be responsible security for
the true performance of what we propose, and so much for your second.

Now for the third, which you say to your understanding runs thus; indeed I
imagine your wits are but weak, and sometimes may run a wooll-gathering, but I
hope we shall not walk in any crooked and rigorous ways, for that would not
agree with my Motto, which is to walk in the light purely and surely; and so
thereby shall be able to give a better answer to the State, then all your
following lines but the last, sets forth; not one of which is worth the
answering: but in a word, we will double the Excise with less charge then
formerly, yea, or the breach or altering any Ordinance or Act of Parliament in
that kind provided, no nor offer injury in the least to any man, if the State
shall think us worthy the employment; and I am confident nothing troubles
neither you or your Partners more, then the fear of the employment of able men
in that business; for set a Thief to catch a Thief, is sometimes State Policy.
Sir, and for the information you give of the Bobber at Bow, I am not sensible
that of late you have don the State any greater service: but catch him napping,
and take half for your pains; then I undeniably conclude with you, as you of
us, that neither you nor we, will or can work for nothing.

And one thing let me tell you by the way, I believe you have not got much by
bobbing.

Well, but here I must resolve a riddle, as it seems to me, you tell them of
our great houses, and a great Trade, and that we may prove the great ones we
talk of to devour the little one; what a great Trade, and great house, and yet
not worth two groats? here is a mystery to me, and broke too; well I pass it by
for present, but if I knew but at this day what you were worth, which for any
thing I know may not be much (and there is some hazard too, as it may happen in
the keeping of it) I could give a near guess (if you continue your bobbing
trade) how long it would be ere you broke, for I know some that join with you
in subscribing, that outwit you there, and being always ready to help on
another at a dead lift, will rather then fail, give you a heave too. I advise
you beware and remember this, when any one of them buys a good bargain, and
lets you have part, let me know it, and I Will acknowledge my error.

Well, next you tell the Parliament of their great streights, and the cause of
the Excise, they know all this as well as you, and I believe would not have
continued it thus long, had not urgent necessities of the Commonwealth required
it, and all this evil is caused by turbulent Spirits (God keep you quiet) and
therefore seeing the case so stands, make a virtue of necessity, and pay this
the Parliaments legal Imposition duly and truly, and as your Petition has it
freely and willingly, all which your carriage in this business declares you
do? but how, I leave the World to judge. Indeed your words and deeds seldom
agree; submit then to the present power, and threaten not the Parliament, (...)
Committee, as may be easily gathered in your 7. last lines, where you pretend
to seek ease and redress, but meet with honest proposals, which if they
countenance, what you will do God knows, but a world of clamors follows, I
do therefore in love to your person advise you to submit to a legal power,
and forbear to lay platforms and ground-works to ill-minded people, which may
do more hurt than ever you did good, and so much for your 3d. and 4th.
Proposition or interjection be it what you please.

Now follows wonders, for in your last line, I find most Honorable and Worthy
Senators: here is a Title indeed, good God keep you in this mind, I fear it is
too good to hold; it is not long since you rendered them in other words, but
keep you there, and you hear no more of me, I will even leave you while you
are in good mind to your reasons, and proposalls so real and certainly gaining
to the Nation, (this is new with you too) which I believe has not appeared so
to the Honorable Committee for regulating the Excise by their answer to your
papers and my words (which follow now in writing) for I find not their answer
in all your book, therefore I will insert it modestly in mine, to whom, by
their wisdom and solid judgment it more properly belongs, and for ever bid
you adieu having spent 3. whole hours upon your paper this 24th. October. 1650.
half an hour past 12. and rest your wel-wishing friend,

John Walker.

Propositions made to the grand Commissioners of the Excise Anno Dom. 1650.
Annoque secumdo libertat. Angliae.
1 THat till the total, of so much be advanced, as was the last year, we the
undertakers will expect no sallarie.

2. That to make that double which we will engage to do, we shall only expect
2. s. per pound, and that not out of that bare sum, but out of the overplus
which shall be produced above the double.

3. That whatsoever we bring in to the State or Commissioners above the double
of the last years produce, we for our extraordinary pains and industry in it,
may have a fourth part.

4. That there be a reasonable allowance for under Officers as the
Commissioners shall think fit.

Whereby these ensuing Benefits will inevitably follow, viz.

1. To the State a far larger advance of the Excise than formerly.

2. To the Trade, the great ones shall not be, so much as formerly, enabled to
destroy the inferior sort.

3. That upon no man whatsoever there shall be any oppression or injury to him,
but a Commutative justice shall flow equally to all, according to the true
intent and meaning of all former Ordinances and Acts of Parliament in that kind
provided.

4. That nothing shall be altered in the former Constitution by Ordinance and
Acts of Parliament,

These Inconveniences will certainly fall upon the altering of the Excise from
Soap to the Materials.

1. Though it may appear to this Honorable Committee, that whereas there is
great quantities of all sorts of Oil brought into this Commonwealth, the
Excise whereof may amount to a considerable sum of money, in Sweet, Whale,
Holland, Train, Newland and Pitchard Oils, a great part of all which, are used
for other commodities, then Soap, as Lamps, Curriors, Wool-combers,
Stuffe-weavers and Clothiers, upon all or any of which, if you put a greater
Excise, you ruin the poor, and undo the Trades.

2. Tallow is used for several uses then Soap, as Curriours, Chandlers, and
Shipping, in all which there will be far greater difficulties in gathering the
Excise, then as it now stands.

3. And for Potashes, If you shall put any Additional Impost upon them, it
will much dis-encourage the Merchants, prejudice both Custom, and Excise,
increase the poor, decay Seamen, and Shipping, and cause great quantities of
Ashes to be made here at home, which in fine, you will find much prejudicial
to this Commonwealth; for in making much, they make bad; and when none was
made here, or but few, it rendered this Kingdom as then, in a better condition
then now, when so great quantities are made.

For a further and more satisfactorie Answeri, I humbly offer to this
honorable Committee these eight Queries following.

Eight Queries, presented to the Honorable Committee for Regulating the
Excise, October 23. 1650, in answer the Sope-makers Petition.
By John Walker.
1 THat it may please your Honors to observe, whether in all their long Paper,
containing to sheets close writ, in answer to our few lines, if they have
propounded any thing for the advance of the State, and whether there appear not
a greater measure of self interest in their proposals, than in ours?

2. That your Honors seriously consider; whether their proposals or ours, tend
most to the prejudice of the Common wealth?

3. Whether the altering of the Excise, from the Manufactory of Soap, unto the
Materials; or continuing of it statu quo, will most advantage the Common
wealth, in point of Trade, Custom, and Excise?

4. Whether they, or we, appear to have put greater oppression upon the peopl
of this Commonwealth, they in giving to the late King 18s. 8d. per Barrel, or
we which endeavor only the due execution of a legal Imposition of 4s. 8d. per
Barrel, to preserve a Common wealth, according to the true intent and meaning
of several Ordinances, and Acts of Parliament in that kind provided, to the
intent no man should be restrained, no man oppressed, but every maker to pay
his proportion, rato pro rato?

5. How these men intend the advance of the Excise, which have already bought
up the gratest part of the Ashes in Town, upon the bare supposall of altering
it, whereby they might both defraud the State of their due and be able to
undersell, and consequently ruin the inferior sort, that must buy for the
future?

6. Whether the East Country Merchants did not (upon a Petition formerly by
these men presented for this purpose) give a plenarie satisfaction to the House
of Commons, that it might not be laid upon Potashes; whereby at that time their
design was laid aside?

7. Whether that part of their Paper be true or false, which Declares, the
Pole, Casocks, and Tartars at Peace, whereby (say they) great store of Ashes
will be imported; when it is well known to some here, that their difference
there is great, and the Wars in that very place, where usually Potashes were
made; so that but few or none will come from thence, and so you will seem to
put the Excise upon a bare shadow, rather than substance.

8. Whether it will not apparently alter the whole Fabric of your 7 years
buil^ing, when almost all Trades may as justly petition as these men, for
altering of it from the Manufactory, to the (...), the Clothie^ to Wool, the
Broad Weaver to Yarn and Hair, the Brewers to Malt, the Silk Weaver to (...),
(...) so you may, ad infinitum, alter it from the shoulders of one party to
another, if you listen to such men as are never satisfied when they are well,
and not contented with any thing but what they contrive themselves, though
never so distructive to the Commonwealth.

The Answer that was returned by the Honorable Committee, whereof Colonel
George Thompsom has the Chair, October. 23. 1650.

GEntlemen, I am appointed to deliver you the opinion of the Committee, in this
business. First, that they do not take notice of any part of your Paper,
wherein you detract from the proposers, for we find in them matter of profit
and advance to the Commonwealth, and must acknowledge them as good
Commonwealths men. And to you I say we have perused your Papers and Accounts,
and find you in an error; for here we find, that the advance upon the
Materials, falls short of the Manufactory by 9000 l. and and this when we had
a free trade from foreign parts, and now our Seas may be troublesome, and so
not so much of the materials come in, whereby it is possible and probable to
be less, and if it fell short by so much when Soap made less then for the
future it is like to do, when it is doubled; we shall present both to the
Parliament, and leave them to determine, more may be said but we shall report
it to the House.

FINIS.

