THE PRETENSIONS OF THE Triple Crown EXAMINED: IN Thrice Three Familiar
Letters, Upon so many Controverted Points, which require more than a single
Consideration.

Written some years ago By Sir Christopher Wyvill Baronet.

With certain later Reflections on the same Subjects

LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for Matthias Walker, under St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. 1672.

To all my near RELATIONS, AND Esteemed ACQUAINTANCE OF THE Romish Persvvasion.
THose that have the Fancy, or the Fate to come under* the Press, have (for
most part) the Wit, in their Dedications, to cull out such persons whose
Inclinations, they know, are well set toward the subject matter of the Book;
and who are, they hope, willing to afford it their Patronage. By this Address,
I have deprived my self of those Advantages: Instead of Favor, (which I cannot
antecedently expect) I request, only, that you will not bring Prejudice, and,
in the room of Protection, I court you but for fair Perusal.

I know not whether any of you may be convinced or no; yet, at the least, I am
desirous (as never affecting Fireside or Table-disputes of this Nature) to let
you see, upon what Grounds my Judgment leads me to stand off from you, in those
Principles, which administer sad occasions of Contention to all the (Christian)
World, and wherein only, you can, at any time, be disagreeable unto him, who is

Yours, with sincere and real Love, to serve you, Christopher Wyvill.

TO THE READERS In General.
FInding all those little Sophisms which laid hold on me, when I was a Child,
(or thought as a Child) new-vampt, for the seduction of the growing
Generation; I am not unwilling (nay, methinks, I am in a manner obliged) to
communicate what Antidotes I found most effectual.

What is offered here, is, I hope, fully consonant to the true Standard of the
Reformation, and genuine Sense of our English Church. If the Antinomian in his
impetuous flights from Rome, have run quite out from any habitable Zone; If the
rigid Anabaptists, or Quakers, have, in their heady, and heedless Course,
brought back the Quintessence of Popery, by a side-wind, into the Body of their
Belief; If the Socinian, or his younger Brother, have warpt aside from once
established Truths, I have not a word to say for them: nor, will I add more to
you, save Farewell.

Part I.
YOU have now spent a Luster and an half, or thereabout, in that Adventurous
Calling, which has let you see the Wonders of the Deep; and acquainted you
with the Admirably various Dispositions and Customs of several People and
Places: It has been a Joy to my self, with many others of your Friends and
Well-wishers, to hear that in your Employments abroad, you have gone through
much, both with Reputation and Success. Of late a Rumor (for I would not
willingly think it any more) has arrived here, as if you should have made
Shipwreck of your Religion, and not past Scylla and Charybdis in safety,
without drinking in, or rather being swallowed up of, the Italian Delusions.

I am no affector of scurrilous or foul Language; yet, if I should enquire of
you, with what deceitful tincture that Roman Curtizan had washed over her
Deformities so, as you could become inamoured on her, the nature of her
Apostasy would, perhaps, justify the Term. I shall endeavor in this Address,
to wipe off the Varnish (whereby, I know well, she allures a great Part of the
Prejudiced or Interessed World) and discover to you Blemishes of too large a
Size to pass for Beautyspots.

And, whilst I declare unto you what Considerations they were, which, by God's
blessing, removed out of my way all those stumbling Blocks that I found cast in
it, and whereby I was reduced into the right Paths, even when my feet had
almost slipped; I do humbly supplicate the Father of Mercies, That it may please
him to enable you, and all that desire to seek him in Truth, to see through the
dark Mist which Popery draws before the eyes of its Proselytes, stuffing the
Phancies even of her Babes and Sucklings (in stead of wholesome food drawn from
the sincere Milk of God's Word) with I know not what Conceits of Romes
Infallibility, Perspicuity, Succession, Supremacy, Perpetuity and the like,
till she have brought them under a gross and blind Submission to all her
Dictates; and, before they understand things that differ, made them ready to
swear to all the words of that most Imperious Mistress.

Thus it was, that a Young Lady within my knowledge, being in Discourse brought
to such a point of Convincement, as compelled her Reason to go over into the
Tents of her Antagonist; at the last, clapped her self down upon her Knees, made
the Sign of the Cross, and rejected all as a Temptation.

But let us remember we are advised to be able to give a reason of the Faith
that is in us; and take Courage to Examine how sufficient the Foundation is,
whereupon the Church of Rome would build so vast a Claim to Perpetual Exemption
from Error, and fix the Pillars of Truth within her Territories only: Yet first
I think it necessary to desire you not to despise the Animadversions I offer
you, because they are transmitted from an hand which you know weak and
insufficient for the Undertaking. There is here little of mine besides what is,
indeed, the only Culpable part, the Composure, or lying together; the Materials
being decerped from many Learned and Pious Authors, who now, most of them,
rest from their Labors, and enjoy that Crown of Righteousness, which they
strove for in their several Generations.

That minatory Admonition, Romans 11. 20.
to the whole Church of the Mr. Reynolds upon the 110. Psalm.
Gentiles, and particularly directed to that of Rome (wherein the Apostle bids
her beware of High-mindedness, (as if he had foreseen what would be her ruin)
makes it clear to me, That her standing was not assured to her
less-conditionally, than that of the Temple of Jerusalem, whereof Morney Lord
du Plessys.
it was said 2 Chronicles. 33. 4. 7. The Lord would dwell for ever in it; as in
Psalm. 132. 14. This is my Rest for ever: here will I dwell.

When did the great Disposer of all things divest himself of that Prerogative,
whereby he usually punishes the sins of any Nation, by removing his
Candlestick from thence? Does not the very appellation of Catholic (given to
the Gospel Church, in opposition to that Administration, whereby it was
confined within the Pale of the Jews Synagogue) strongly intimate, That all the
Climates of the World are equally Gods Temple? What reason I pray to terminate
all the Promises at Rome? If you will argue, as I know those of that Communion
do, from the words of our Savior to St. Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock, etc. This Quaere will arise, Whether the Promise relate to Peter's
preceding words, which had newly poynted out the Chief Corner Stone; Or,
whether the Design of it were to fasten an Infallibility of Judgment, not only
upon Peter, but to convey it even to his Heirs and Successors till the end of
time? It has, long since, been observed, that in the Original there is an
apparent The saine du Plessys.
Distinction betwixt the name and the person, interwoven in Christ's answer: Tu
es Petrus leads up the Van; but then, not in te Petrum, but super hanc Petram
marches next; and so that Interpretation which would seem to interess the Pope
in the Place, is left in some disorder. But it may be you are apt to think this
a new sense put upon the words; I will therefore bring you Doctors, ancient
enough, that were satisfied with this Exposition. St. Hillary thus; This Faith
is Lib. 2. de Trinitate.
the one unmovable Foundation, the alone happy Rock, confessed by the mouth of
Peter, Thou art the Son of the living God: And again, This is the Foundation
Lib. sexto.
of the Church, by it the Gates of Hell are made weak against her. Ambrose in
his Epistles is of the same mind; so is Hierom in many Places; as upon Psalm.
40. Math. 18. and Amos 9. So is St. Augustine Gregory on the 5. Penitent. Psalm.
on John in his 6th. Sermon de Verbo Dom. And having in a certain place, slipped
into the other acception of the meaning, he solemnly retracts Vid. the Primate
of Ireland's Answer to a Jesuit's Challenge.
the same; and notes, besides, the (it seems) then usual mistake in singing the
Verses of St. Ambrose concerning the Cock.

The Truth is, when any of them seem to favor that sense which we oppose, they
do it in a certain Rhetorical way In Sacriloquio, quando in singulari numero
fundamentum dicitur, Nullus alius nisi Christus designatur. Greg. lib. 28. in
Cap. Josuae 6.
(whereby they were accustomed to give high applauds to the Bishop of Rome,
sitting in the then Imperial City, and therefore accounted Chief) rather than
seriously and dogmatically. Yet will it not at all disadvantage us, to grant
that St. Peter was a Rock, that is, a main Pillar, and a Master Builder in the
Church of God: Nay, what would it harm our Cause, if we should confess that it
was promised to Peter, he should become the Founder of an eminent Church? And
that the Faith he was to Preach should surmount the power of Hell? Yea let us
further suppose, what we will not grant; That there is some particular Place or
Succession of men, whereto, by virtue of the Promise made to Peter, perpetual
Truth were to be affixed: Why may not Antioch in Syria (within the Verge of his
peculiar Charge) or Babylon in Egypt (the first Gal. 2. 7. The Jews and such
as were Circumcised.
Place of his residence amongst the Gentiles) put in for a right of Succession
to that Grand Privilege, rather than Rome; since, whether ever he came there or
no, at most, whether any otherwise than to suffer, is a Controversy not yet
decided? but that he could sit 26. years Bishop (as some of them affirm) is a
thing utterly Vide Bunting his Itinerarie in the Travels of St. Peter.
impossible, if we regard the Computation of times, and reflect upon those
years, he must necessarily have spent in other places. Vid. Bunting's
Itinerarium totius Scripturae, page 496.

As for that other place, weakly enough urged by some, I prayed for thee that
thy faith fail not: It Is clear that was spoken only to fortify St. Peter
against the approaching time wherein Satan had desired to winnow him, and
cannot with any front be transferred beyond his own person in the Application.

Next you may, I suppose, put a Question to me which I have, not unfrequently,
put to my self; Where was the Truth, if not at Rome? Have patience, but a
little, and I hope I shall return you an answer more satisfactory and rational
than I could ever have Jesuits and their followers.
from any of those Papists, who make the Decision of all Controversies, a
Privilege fitted only to the narrow Dimensions of the Pope's Breast: when I
have demanded of them what Course they would have taken to have found out Truth
in a disputable point, if they had then lived when there was sometimes Europe
for more than 40. years was almost equally divided in their judgments as well
as in cruel hatred, one part against the other, about the Right of Clement and
Urbane 6. to the Infallible Chair.
two, once three, and more than once no Pope at all for many years together, a
thing evident enough in History.

Now for the solving of your doubt; We willingly do acknowledge, That at Rome
there was a very early and famous Church; her Faith was spoken of through the
whole World: And when it pleased God by the Conversion of the Emperor
Constantine, to clear a way for the farther Increment of the Gospel, she grew
in Eminency and Splendor; till overset, as it were, with the Indulgence and
Bounty of him and some of his Successors, she began to recoyl, and study
Grandeur, more than Grace. We do not imagine that all in one day, or year, or
age, she became so infected, that it was presently necessary to separate from
her: But we think the manner of her Defection was well foreshewen (and perhaps
aimed at) in that Parable of the Tares, injected by night, and hardly discerned
in their growth; yet increasing still, as the Negligence, Avarice or Ambition
of the Priests and People did servein an opportunity. Thus, the Wisdom of the
Primitive Church, dispensing her Admonitions, her Suspensions,
Excommunications, her Pennances, Relaxations, Absolutions, etc. in such manner
as the Condition of her refractory, or penitent, Delinquents might require,
(things conducing merely to the outward Regiment and Discipline of those times)
degenerated at last into such Conceits, as kindled the Fire of Purgatory, and
gave birth to Pardons and Indulgences prodigally extended to whole Families and
their Descendants, for many Ages yet to come: And by this means were the
Purses, in a manner, of the whole World opened, and their owners made
inclinable to pour out their Treasure into the Popes Lap. For, who would not,
both easily be persuaded to taste the tempting Sweets of Sin here, and to part
with a good proportion of his worldly Goods at his death, under the Notion of
bringing so much health to the Estate of his Soul in the next Life?

Thus the Style which the Ancient Fathers thought fit to use when they The
Authors of France painted to the life, page 16.
treated of the Lords Supper, wherein they often held to the Tropes and
Metaphors of the Institution, was at length perverted into the opinion of
absolute Transubstantiation; a Pyx commanded to be made for a Cover to the
Bread, and a Bell to ring before it, Anno 1215. Adoration of it enjoined, Anno
1226. Corpus Christi Day instituted, Anno 1264. and further confirmed in the
Council of Vienna, Anno 1310. All which served well to settle in the people a
greater Veneration toward the Workers of such Miracles, the Priests. And that
such a thing was much in the business may surely seem not improbable to any,
that will impartially Eye the Posture and Inclination of those times, For if
ordinary Priests could do such things; what submissions could be thought
enough, toward the supreme Bishop, as Men were then learning to call him. Ep.
fol. 885.
when the Bishop of Rome had his great design on foot to Exalt himself above
all Civil Magistracy. When I find Erasmus making this return to our Tunstall,
who had provoked him to write against Luther; That he ought to take heed, lest
he had a Zeal not according to knowledge; and that there was a sort of men too
tenacious of some things unluckily crept into the Church. When I over-hear him
complaining to his Friend Stephanus Rhodericus, Fol. 859.
That the Vulgar sort of Divines examined all Scripture by the Text of certain
School-disputes, attributing very little to the ancient Doctors of the Church;
When I observe him going on, with a kind of indignation, thus; Now (and
therefore but newly) We learn, That Christ in the business committed to him by
the Father, owed to his Mother Obedience; That, now in Heaven, she may command
him, according to a Form of Invocation (it seems then usual) Show thy self A
further strange Instance of this I shall hereafter give you.
a Mother; That Heaven is a Debt to our Works of Condignity. When, I say, such
a man as he groans, as it were, under the burden of the Innovations in his
time, it is enough to establish in me this belief, That, ab initio non fuit sic.
The first divinely inspired Workmen, upon a good foundation, built up a Noble
Structure of Gold and Silver; but their degenerating Doctor Chalanours Unde
Zir. in a --
Prentices laid thereupon rows of Stone, Brick, Lome, Slime, Rubbish.

Yet, though the Church of Rome was, in respect of many of the chief Prelates,
and a Predominant Faction, guilty The Primate of Ireland, lib. citato has their
names.
of Errors; there were diverse disliked them, and desired a Reformation; though
not holding themselves obliged to refuse her Communion, till she with open
face, owned some grosser Tenets, and enjoined them to be received Chalanours
Credo Eccles. page 215.
under a Curse, about the year 1160. and then came out from her a People
professing the same Affirmatives and Negatives with us. And there wanted not
some, who may be said to have even Prophesied, long before Luther, of that
Restoration of Primitive Truth, which we Primate of Ireland, as before.
and our Fathers have seen. I suppose those men's Faith (which eyes only the
splendor and outward glory of Professors) if they had been to choose their
Religion, when God was pleased to support his almost despairing, because (to
his own sight) single Prophet, with an assurance, That there were seven
thousand who had not bowed the knee unto Baal, would have been at a sore loss.
And, however those who sat in Moses's Chair had, at our Savior's Coming, made
the Law of God of none effect by their Traditions; yet many believed on him
(old Simeon, Zachary and Elizabeth etc.) who Communicated in the outward
Sacraments, and Discipline of the Church, but were the Flock of another Fold.

You will reply here, perhaps, The Word of God is large in Promises concerning
the great Extent, and flocking of the Gentiles to the Church of Christ. How are
they fulfilled? The very taking down the Partition Wall, when the whole World
was cried free to come to God; and the enlarging of the Churches Bounds (till
then impaled within the Confines of Jury) even to as many as the Lord our God
shall (before his second Coming) call, was certainly a very glorious Work, and
the main end of such Predictions. Thus St. Paul affirms the Gospel to have, in
his time, been preached to every Creature under Heaven; and doubtless there was
grand access to the Church by the Labors of the Apostles and their Successors:
Yet we are told of a Mystery of Iniquity, beginning to Creep even then; and
ought not to forget, that we are forewarned of a season, when the Woman was to
be forced into the Wilderness. The Estate of the Church is like that of the
Moon, sometimes in the Wane, and sometimes, by God's permission, suffering
grievous Eclipses: but since by his goodness she can again, at other seasons,
elevate her head, the Gates of Hell cannot be said to have prevailed against
her.

Next, let me entreat you to put one Question to those ne'er-erring Doctors;
and, if they give you a positive Answer, it may encourage you to take more of
Strongly disputed every way, as may be seen in Bellarmine de Council. and
Eccles. Milit. Yet he boldly resolves all by the Determinations of Trent.
their advices: Is it the Pope, is it a Council, or both together; or, which of
them severed is it, upon which you ought to Pinn your Belief? Believe me, and
that were a thing worth knowing: But let not the Romanists vaunt so much of
their Unity, so long as in this Cardinal Point, (for, no less than the whole
Frame of their Religion turns with it) Eugenius was deposed by a General
Council; and it was declared impossible for those to be saved that held him
Pope. Yet he continued in by force, and from him is the so much vaunted of
Succession.
they are at variance amongst themselves. The Jesuits for the most part cry up
the Pope, many others, both ancient and modern, stand for the Councils; in my
judgment, the third sort, who plead for them conjoined, are the least
irrational; though it is evident enough, that even their United Results have
deviated; for we discover them Poynt-blank thwarting one another, and that of
Trent (protested against even by the French) domineering over them all.

Sixtus the Fifth, and Clement the Eighth authorized both their very much
disagreeing Editions of the Bible; both enjoined their own, and only that, to
be used under an Anathema; both were backed with the Authority of a Council.
What stir has been about the introducing and rejecting Images? What Animosities
and Bickerings between Baxter's Winding sheet, page 10.
Stephen the Sixth, Formosus, Theodorus the Second, Romanus, John the Tenth,
and Sergius? Even such as would not suffer them to rest in their Graves,
without being taken thence dismembered, and thrown into Tyber. The first Nicene
Council allowed the Marriage of Priests Sundry General Councils obtruded
Arianism upon the World, and Liberius Bishop of Rome confirmed it.
and Communion in both kinds: The later Councils of Constance and Basil forbid
the Laity the use of the Cup; and Trent interdicteth both Marriage to the
Clergy, and the Cup to the People. The Davenant de Judice and Norma Fidei. cap.
21. fol. 125.
General Council of Constantinople overthrows Images, the second Nicene decrees
for them; again, that of Franckford under Charles the Great determines them
Idolatrous, and goes so far as solemnly to accurse the Council of Nice. The
third Council of Carthage pronounces him accursed that shall call himself The
calling of Councils formerly, was the right of the Emperor undeniably, now
usurped by the Pope.
Universal Bishop, and terms such an one the Forerunner of Antichrist. The
Tridentine Assembly threatens in no lower Phrase, all, whosoever do deny the
Pope that Title; which he could never scrue himself into, till (the Eastern
Patriarchs That he had no such universal Dominion, may strongly be proved out
of Sir Roger Twisden's Vindication of the Church of England, cap. 2.
and their Jurisdiction, now swallowed up by the Turk, and the Western Empire
weakened by its own divisions, gives him lieve still to think himself secure in
it) he drove on his Ends, by striking such a Bargain with Phocas that
Murdering Usurper.

Lastly, to draw off something from the opinion which may, I suspect, possess
By the Abbot of Bangor's Reply to Augustine the Monk, who demanded their
obedience.
you of their perfect Unity at present (though their Religion, consisting much
in the Shell of Outward Rites and Performances, is more easily conspired in) I
shall let you see, how even since the Famous Definition of Trent, as Vasquez
phrases it, their disagreements and differences are not inconsiderable. Else,
why could not that Council declare what was its own meaning, when it was called
on to arbitrate betwixt Dominicus Soto, and Ambrose Catherinus, who both were
present at the drawing the Canons, yet Writ (in Books now Extant)
irreconcileably concerning Original Sin, and the Doctrine of Justification. But
those Fathers had it certainly in design to speak ambiguously in most of
Gelasius the Pope said, The Sacrament without the Cup, is a grand Sacrilege,
but half Communion.
their Decrees, framing them so as every one might take them in a sense best
suting to his own apprehension, and then forbad all manner of Commentaries to
be made upon them; so their words were Unisons, not regarding what differing
Crotchets were retained in their Opinions, etc.

Now, for our selves, though I do infinitely bewail the differences amongst
What means the present bussle in France betwixt the Jansenists and Jesuits
about Efficacious grace and the next power?
us; it lessens my Scandal at them every time I read the Tenth chap. of S.
Matthew, since I am there told, what is (through the fault of Gainsayers) an
ordinary Consequence of the Truths presence. Perfect Unity in Opinion is the
Privilege of Minds triumphant above, and the Churches of the Apostles
themselves were some of Paul, some of Cephas, etc. If you will strain at a
Gnat, because you hear there are dissentions amongst us, and yet swallow such a
Camel as this, That the Creed of every Christian must be resolved into the
present Dictates of the Roman Church; and that you ought not to question
whether she tread in the good old Paths (a shift that some of her Champions are
driven to) I must confess I am at a stand what to say to you. But let us by one
particular, make a ghess what her posture has been in the rest. The Fathers of
the first five Centuries may, I think, with a safe Confidence be affirmed to
have intended nothing by their Merita, but such a Title to the Recompense of
Reward, as is plainly co-incident in its meaning with our expectation of that
Crown which God, the Righteous Judge, has laid up against the last day, for
them that have finished their Course, and kept the Faith; therefore are they
well called by some Certain Seminaries of Hope. And they were so far from any
thought of a Proportionate value or Condignity, as they every where speak
against it. When the high-soaring Schoolmen Bernard of Clareval de Great. and
liber. Arbitr.
hatched that Opinion (since fledged and much improved by the industrious care
of the Jesuits with their adherents) how unhandsome it appeared to men of sober
minds, you may observe from that place of Erasmus given you before; two others
the next Epistle shall acquaint you with, and abundance more cited by the
Primate of Ireland, and Davenant, in the Point. We will here lay together the
Judgment of Theodoret and Cyril of Alexandria; with the late Positions of the
Rhemists; then judge whether there be such a Consonancy and Identitie betwixt
Antiquity and Rome at this day, as is pretended: The former tells us, that the
Salvation of men depends Theodoret in Sophon. cap. 3.
upon the sole Mercy of God: For we do not obtain it as a Reward and Wages of
our Righteousness; but it is the Gift of God's goodness. The Crowns do excel
the Fights; the Rewards are not to be compared with the Labors, etc. And
therefore (says he) the Apostle called those things that are looked for, not
Wages, but Glory, Romans 8. 18. and again, not Wages, but Grace, Romans 6. 23.
Although a man should perform Say not, this means Natural works only, for the
contrary is evident.
the most absolute Righteousness, Things Eternal do not answer Temporal Labors
in equal poyse. The same is Cyril's mind too: for he tells us, The Crown does
much surpass the pains which we take. Not a paying a price for labor, but
pouring out the Hom. Paschal. 4.
riches of his goodness, says Prosper.

Well, now hear the Rhemists in another Note. All good works done by God's
grace after the first Justification, be truly and properly Meritorious, and
fully worthy of Everlasting life: and thereupon Heaven is the just Annot. upon
2 Timothy 4* 8.
Stipend, Crown, or Recompense, which God by his Justice owes Upon 1 Cor. 3. 8.
to the Persons so working by his Grace, etc. And in another place they
therefore will have us to think, that the word Reward (which in our English may
signify a voluntary, or bountiful Gift) is not expressive enough of the
Original which they will render better by a very Stipend that the hired Workman
or Journey-man covenanteth to have of him whose work he does; and is a thing
equally and justly answering to the weight and time of his Travels, rather than
a free Gift. But let them answer St. Paul who calls it so, Romans 6. 23. and it
were their best, in their next Edition of their Expurgatory Indexes, to wipe
out such pestilent places (of former Writers) as will not suffer them to hugg
their Diana in quietness.

Thus you may discern in part, how unsafe it will be to take up Religion upon
trust, without laying the several points thereof to the Square of Gods word; a
course which the Commendation fixed upon the Bereans may encourage all men
unto, and which I do (God willing) intend to make the Subject of some future
Letters.

LETTER II.
ALthough it be an old received Truth; That Discords in Religion are the most
bitter, and for the most part prosecuted with most violence; I shall desire to
contract, rather than widen, the Differences betwixt us; and (leaving the
Outworks which fortify our Cause in other points we hold in Opposition to the
Roman Church, to stand a while upon their own Guard) set my self, at present,
to the defense of that which is most oppugned by Papists, against which the
Jesuits have raised their fiercest Batteries; I mean our Doctrine of
Justification. Our answers are so Consonant in the first Quaere, that, one
would think we were almost agreed, and Dispute at an end; for this Maxim is, as
I conceive, embraced on both sides, We are saved by Grace. But, alas! they have
framed such strange Comments, and affixed so perverse a Definition to the
nature of their Grace, as will, and must needs, keep us at a grand and
perpetual distance: With them, it is nothing else, but an Ability to perform,
in our own persons (after we have received to believe the Word of God) such
obedience to the Law, as, for that, we become righteous, and deserve, by equal
Compensation, the Kingdom of Heaven.
Forasmuch as I have observed most of the Objections brought in against us, to
arise merely from a misunderstanding of that Faith to which only we dare trust
our Justification; I will in the first Place sub-joyn it is Nature and Office in
three Propositions.

First, the Faith we desire to establish, is not a bare Opinion, is not a mere
Notion, but it is a Grace, a purifying, a cleansing, reforming Grace of God's
Spirit. And though the Principal and main Act of Faith be an Accepting,
Receiving and Resting upon Christ alone for Justification, by virtue of the
Covenant; Yet they who are Effectually called and Regenerate, have a new heart
Created in them, and are farther Really and Personally sanctified; the Dominion
of the whole Body of Sin destroyed, the several Lusts thereof by degrees
mortified; and they more and more strengthened in all saving Graces to the
practice of true holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. Nor do we
say that good Works done by such an one are, of their own Nature, sins (as we
are slanderously reported to do;) No, so far as they are good, they are the
Product of God's own Spirit, and he approves them: But because of a mixture of
Imperfections, adhering to the best of men, in this Life, and their Works; We
think they are no better than the Reeds of Egypt, which if a man lean on them,
with hopes of Justice from them, will break and wound his sides. We are
Justified by Faith alone without Works; Not that Works are separated from
Faith, or can be; But only excluded from the Act of Justifying. A Mr. Allen.
Dead Faith cannot Justify; a Living Faith cannot be Idle. The Concurrence of
Works is Certain, their Agreement Amiable, in the Life of one Justified: Yet
their Contrariety irreconcilable in the procurement of Justification. Those
terms Justifying Faith is, When a man does, practically, believe the two great
Doctrines of Justification and Sanctification.
Romans 4. 5, 6. of Justifying the Ungodly, and of Imputing Righteousness without
Works, are not so to be taken, as if God ever did, or ever would, save any
Person, who resolved to continue impious, or contemn the practice of good
Works; but they stand in opposition to all conceit of any Justifying power in
good Works; and may teach us, That no man's holiness can be such in this Life,
but he will at God's Tribunal, stand in need of that Covering, which St. Paul
fetches out of the 32. Psalm. and points out to us in ver. 7. Ponder too ver.
8. and tell me then, whether you can conceal from your self the whole Platform
of the Protestant Doctrine in this point: For, the not Imputing of Sins, and
the Imputing of Righteousness without Works, make up the Whole of our Belief.

Secondly, a Sinner is not Justified by Faith, as it is a Quality which
deserves remission of Guilt, and the Glory of Heaven; Paul the Apostle in the
terms of, toward God Repentance, and Faith toward Christ, clearly points out
this Office of Faith, Acts 20. 21.
nor as it is by God's favorable acceptance, taken for the whole and perfect
Righteousness of the Law; But it justifies only with reference to its Object
Christ; Faith being that Grace which the Soul makes use of to close in with
him, receive, and embrace the Promises; by it we are ingrafted into that
Olive Tree, It Is strange how those that hold a Treasury of Saints Merits, can
term our Doctrine of Imputation an empty Speculation: For, Is there a Communion
of the Members one with another, and not with the Head?
and are made Members of that glorious Head. We do not here (as some traduce
us) erect a Justification merely supposititious; or state, betwixt Christ and
the Believer, only an imaginary Relation; But we hold the Interest we have in
him to be of most real and true Participation; Forasmuch as (having by God's
effectual and gracious Ordination, taken upon him the Humane Nature, so
entirely put on) he communicates (by virtue of the Mystical Union through the
Covenant, whereto God the Father, the Son, and Man, are Parties) really, his
Satisfaction and Merits to all Believers, Joh. 6. 27. Isa. 42. 1. Heb. 5. 4* 5.
Jer. 31. 31. Thus he who knew no Sin, was made Sin for us, and we not Bearing
by Imputation, and no otherwise, the Iniquities of us all.
having any Righteousness in our selves are made the Righteousness of God in
him, Romans 3. 26. Who rose again for our Justification, as he died for our sins.
Thus he is Finis Legis Christus omni Credenti. Bernard. ad Innoc. 190.
the Justifier, and thus the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that
believes, Romans 10. 4.

Let but Faith be the Substance of things hoped for, the Evidence of things
un-seen; whereby we Receive and Embrace, as well as are Persuaded of, the
Promises, Heb. 11. Suffer us but to draw Consolation, by laying hold on the
Hope set before us, Heb. 6. 18. Let it be an Eying of Christ offering his Body,
shedding his Blood, and fulfilling the Law perfectly, as the Church of England
speaks in the Homilies of Salvation, very clearly; Let it be a Fiducial
Recumbence upon our Savior in his whole Mediatorial Office; which is,
certainly, our Duty, as well as Privilege; And we desire no more. Heb. 12. 1, 2.

The Free Gift, which is said to come upon all men to the Justification of
Life, is held forth as the immediate Consequence and Effect of that exact and
complete Justice which was in our Savior Christ only, and the word (...) there
used, imports the very Act of Justifyng, or judicially pronouncing Just, and
not infusion Davenant de Justitia habituali, fol. 373.
into the Soul of any Habit of Justice. We have no obscure Intimation what
Righteousness is able to appear before God, in all those Places where the
Scriptures (treating of Man's Justification in his sight) points out (...), The
Righteousness of God, affixing it to the very Person of Christ, and not (...),
as it were only derived from him, into the Regenerate.

Thirdly, We are Justified by Faith in Opposition to the Righteousness of
Works, by fulfilling the Law in our own persons, or else making Satisfaction
for what we come short. Paul's Disputations are levelled against the Moral Law,
as well as the Ceremonial, for in the point of Justification he waves even that
Law, Romans 7. 12, 13. which he terms Holy, and Just, and Good, and which to
other uses he is careful to establish. Here again, if we consult the Original,
where the Righteousness of the Law is said to be fulfilled in us, we may (by
the word (...), Romans 8. 4. (never applied to that inherent Righteousness, which
is our Sanctification, but to that Righteousness of Christ whereby he satisfied
the utmost Davenant, ut supra, cap. 28.
Demands of the Law) be guided through the Labyrinth of Disputes, to a right
understanding of this Unum Necessarium: wherein having expatiated a little more
than the Brevity I at first proposed to my self would permit; let me now
represent to your view these three former heads, copied out in Little.

1. Faith is not an Empty Speculation, but an Operative Grace of God's Spirit.
2. The Righteousness wherewith we shall be clothed in the World to come, is
both Perfect and Inherent. The former in Christ, the latter in us. 3. The
Righteousness which is our Sanctification is, indeed, Inherent but not Perfect.
And

1. Justificatio apprehensiva, called often Justifying Faith, is not properly
Justification, but an apprehension or knowledge of it. 2. Justificatio
Effectiva, termed Causal Justification, none but Christ can have a Claim unto.
3. Justificatio declarativa is by St. James styled Justifying by Works, as it
is the manifestation or testimony of true Conversion.
Thus those Scriptures do sweetly agree, which say we are Justified, sometimes
by Grace, sometimes by Faith, sometimes by Christ; and, that once, by Works.
Let us do Evil that Good may come thereof, Romans 6. 1. was the Devil's
Rhetoric, in the mouths of licentious men, to bring an obloquie upon St.
Paul's Doctrine of free Grace: But, doubtless, Satan is a more cunning
Sophister than to frame an Argument of so much Inconsequence as to say,
Continue in Sin, that inherent Grace may abound. Whence I think, we may, not
improbably, conclude, That nothing else is intended by all the preceding
Discourse, but the Gracious Act of Almighty God, whereby he absolves a
believing Sinner at the Tribunal of his Justice, Pronouncing him Righteous,
acquitting, and accepting him to Glory only for Christ's sake. Thus when he had
assigned to sin, its proper Effect, due Wages, and Merit, Death; coming to
speak of Life Eternal, we find no such terms in his mouth; but he suddenly cuts
off the File of his How insincerely the the Rhemists do render this place see
in Dr. Fulk.
Contexture, and calls it Romans 6. ult. (...), The Free Gift of God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. There is Justification by Remission of Sins; there is
Justification, by having the Righteousness of the Law fulfilled in us; there is
the Justification of Life, or the Receiving that Crown of Life. All these are
laid up in the Person of Christ for the use of his Church; and brought home to
every true member by the hand of Faith. There is, too, another Sort of
Justification, viz. At the Bar of Conscience, and in Foro Humano, by Works of
Righteousness which we are to do, after the Pattern, but cannot do up to the
measure showed in the Mount; not for these, nor yet without these, can we have
Entrance into the desired Rest. According to which we draw forth this
Abridgment of our Belief and Practice.

In Sanctification we renounce all Our Sins. In Justification we renounce all
Our Graces.
In stead of this most holy Faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. and for
the Profession whereof Rome was spoken of throughout the World, she has now
introduced such a Doctrine of Works foreseen, of Free Will, of Works having
Merits of several Sizes, before and after Conversion, of Works of Penance and
Satisfaction, of suffering to the last Mite in Purgatory, of Indulgences,
Pardons, and the like, of Opus operatum, or the very Doing the work, in holy
Duties; as gets their Entertainment in the World, by their Consistency with the
Pope's Ends of Gain and Power; and by their obviousness and sutableness to the
proud Nature of Man.

1. Bellarmine and the Rhemists go far, when they tell us, That the good De
Justify. lib. 5. cap. 17. The Arguments are good against all Works.
Works of just Persons do merit Eternal Life Condignly, not only by reason of
God's Covenant or Acceptance, but also by reason of the Work it self.

2. Maldonat a little more roughly affirms, That we do as properly and truly
Merit Rewards, when with the Grace of Upon Ezech. 18. 20.
God we do well, as Punishments when we do ill. So the Progeny of Catholics
and Heretics, a Book full of cunning mistakes, and slander, gives us these as
their Tenants, That good Works do Progeny of Cathol. etc. lib. 2. cap. 21. page
86.
truly merit and deserve Grace in this World, and Glory in the next; That a Man
may perfectly fulfill and keep all God's Commandments. Which surely stands need
of Bellarmine to Lib. 2. de Monach. cap. 13.
help it out, who has this fine Fancy. If, says he, I sin not when I love
God no otherwise than in the first Degree of Love; then I am not, in
strictness, bound Romans 8. 4. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
to love him more than so; therefore if I do add one farther degree of Love, I
love God more than I am bound to, and perform an Act of Supererogation. But we
will think (having so good a Warrant for it, Math. 5. 17, 18. and 22. 37, 38.)
that we are obliged to Love the Lord our God, with all our might. The Terms of
the Gospel do not at all alter or mollify the Demands of the Law; only it
shows how they are fulfilled by Christ: who having the Law transferred from us
(in our own persons) unto his most sacred Person, as Mediator, performed (for
so it behoved him to do) all Righteousness, Matthew. 3. became the End of the
Law, for Righteousness, Romans 10. and makes his true Members just, by his
obedience. Bernard tells us, the Law (even under the Gospel) requires no less
than Obedience [ Rectam] according to Rule; all that is Bernard. de Verb. Esa.
Sermon. 4.
prescribed, and only what is prescribed; [ Puram] free from blemish in manner
and measure; [ Firmam] steady for continuance without intermission. A Yoke that
neither we nor our Fathers are able to bear. And August. in Epist. 29. ad
Heron. Charitas in aliis major, in aliis minor, in aliis nulla; plenissima
vero, quae jam non potest augeri, quamdiu hic homo vivit, in nemine est;
quamdiu autem augeri potest, profecto illud quod minus est quam debet, ex vitio
est.

The full Mystery of their Iniquity is held forth at large by the Audacious
Vasquez, pretending fully to know the minds of the Trent Fathers, Thus; That
Good In his Com. Disp. 214. cited by the Primate of Ireland, ut supra; and by
Davenant, de Justitia habituali and actuali.
Works of Just Persons are, of themselves, without any Covenant or Acceptance,
worthy of the reward of Life Eternal, and they have an equal value of
Condignity to the obtaining of Everlasting Glory: That no accession of Dignity
does come to the Works of the Just by the Merits or Person of Christ, which the
same Works should not have otherwise, if they had been done by the same Grace,
bestowed, liberally, by God alone, without Christ: That God's promise is
annexed indeed to the Works of Just men; yet it Paul declares his whole
Justification, both in his first Conversion, and in the time of his writing,
and at the Resurrection, to be wholly absolved in Faith. Phil. 3. 9.
belongs not to the Reason, or Cause why they become Meritorious, but comes
rather to the Works themselves, which are already so: That, after Grace
infused, our Works are so perfectly Meritorious of Life, that it cannot be
denied them; Therefore (going on in Terms wherewith I am almost afraid to black
my Paper) says he, In vain do we require a Continued Imputation of Christ's
Merits, or Justice, after the receipt of inherent Grace. Agreeable hereto, is,
what he tells us farther. Disp. 222. cap. 3.
They never request of God by the Merits of Christ, that the reward of Eternal
Life may be given to their If the Works of Righteousness which we have done
must be our Justification, though Grace received from above, be conceived to
enable us thereto; yet are we under the Covenant of Do this (wholly, purely,
constantly) and live. Which if any man say, he deceives himself, 1 Jo. 1. 8, 9,
10.
worthy and meritorious Works; but that by Christ, Grace may be given them,
whereby they may be enabled worthily to merit that Reward. That besides that
Imputation of Christ's Merits for the obteining of Grace; it is not needful for
atteining of Life in Heaven: and from that time forward, they do not expect any
any other Imputation, than what Bernard de Verbo Esa. Sermon. 4.
at first they did receive, viz. Grace to keep the Commandments and thereby
become just. We will leave this man to his own Inventions, when we have viewed
him a while, fallen foul upon both the Ancient and Modern Doctors, because they
run not with him to the same Excess in this business. I cannot but wonder,
says he, at Disp. 204. cap. 2.
those ancient Schoolmen, whom I have named, that thought so meanly of our
inherent Justice, as that they were afraid to ascribe thereto, such a true
Existency of Justice, as must, of its own Nature, needs be pleasing to God. But
(goes he on) I do much more admire the later Divines, who after the famous
definition of the Council of Trent, afford to the Just so The Phariseo himself
(by thanking God that he was not as other men) may seem to acknowledge his
works to have been from Grace infused, yet we know how he was dismissed.
diminutive an inherent Righteousness, as has not, of it self, power to wipe
off the stains of sin, unless they be eased or lightened by the favor and
condonation of God: They both, adds he, if they be well weighed, do destroy the
true Essence of inherent Justice, which the Council, so much, set it self to
hold forth and maintain.

This Confession, or rather Complaint, of the Jesuit, might save us a labor
of culling out the Testimonies of such Learned men as, even through the Umbrage
of Popery, had Glimpses of so pure a Truth; since he grants, That if our Works
( before or without Cap. 3.
the Promise, Covenant, or Acceptance, of God) were not worthy; and ( after
such promise) became worthy; it would thence follow, That to this
Dignification, arising from the Promise, the Application and Imputation of
Christ's Merits must, of necessity, intervene: A thing, it seems, he is afraid
to discover. We are thus far of Vasquez his mind, rather than of those other
Romanists; That the Promise of God does not affix any Condignity to the Works
of the Regenerate, by changing their Quality, so as to render them, in
themselves Meritorious: but whereas he will have them not need such Indulgence,
we know they need much more; and the Tenor of God's Promise to be this, That
he will look upon Christ, our Mediator (who is the End (or chief aim) of the
Law, Romans 10. 4. for it was given with a Design to drive us to him, Gal. 3. 24.
and is a Yoke, which we nor our Fathers were able to bear, Acts 15. 10.) and
(in Contemplation of that Righteousness he performed, in our Nature, for us) by
virtue of the Covenant of Grace, deal with us and our Works, so as the
Imperfections, which we acknowledge, and bewail in them, shall never come in
sight. Welfare those men, (if they can) for the Condignity of their Services:
It is enough for us (under the sense of the Skars and Blemishes in our, too
often, lame Obedience) to look up to the Hills, from whence comes our Help;
and to shelter our selves under his Feathers who has Healing in his Wings.

We will now hear what the old Fathers of the New (I mean the Primitive) Church
will say to this business. But let us take along with us the Advice of
Vincentius Lirinensis, who highly commends this way of confuting Errors; yet
with this Caveat: Neither all ways, nor all kinds are to be impugned after this
manner; but such only as are new, and lately sprung; whilst, by the straitness
of time, they be hindered from falsifying the Rules of the ancient Faith, and
before their poison spreading farther, they attempt to corrupt the Writings of
the Elders, etc. Which I mention, not because I am diffident of their
Testimony, but to give you an hint that the Policy of Rome has been notorious
in Curtaling, Expunging, Depraving the Fathers, yea, and foysting in new Matter
to many of their Works.

Note, again, in what sense the word Merit (often indeed occurring in their
Writings, before ever that Acception the Jesuits, now, have it in, was dreamed
of) was used by them. It Ordinarily imports no more, when they say Merita, than
if they had said Opera; and to merit, no more than Primate of Ireland's Answer
to the Jesuit.
simply to attain unto, or procure, without any Relation, at all, to the
Dignity either of the Person or the Work. Thus St. Augustine says; Paul for his
Persecutions and Blasphemies, Merited to be made a vessel of Election: and
Cyprian, In Tim. 1. 13.
Misericordiam merui, I obtained Mercy. So Gregory; Paul, when he went about to
extinguish the name of our Redeemer upon Earth, Merited to hear his Words from
Heaven: and lest you have a Conceit that he means of Paul's Works foreseen:
See the same manner of Rhetoric concerning Adam's Sin, O happy Sin that
Merited to have such and so great a Redeemer! meaning, that gave the occasion
of his Coming.

And now I am to acquaint you with a Secret has been hid from your It is not
said, He has made us wise, just* and holy; but He is made unto us Wisdom, etc.
which is as if he had said. He has given himself unto us. So Chrysostom. on 1
Cor. 1. 30. Homil. 2. on Colof.
Eyes, by the Cunningness of those you build your Belief upon: St. Chrysostom,
Cyprian, Augustine, and the rest, will, I think in my Conscience, prove as
arrant Heretics as we* For the first, peremptorily, affirms, against Vasquez,
That no man can show such a Conversation of life, as may be worthy of the
Kingdom, but this (Kingdom) is wholly the Gift of God: and in another place,
Although we did die a Thousand Deaths, De Compunct. Tom. 6.
and perform all Virtuous Actions; yet we should come far short of rendering any
thing worthy of those honors which are conferred on us by God. Take one more
of his: That one destitute of Works should be justified by Faith, might,
perhaps, In Romans 4. Hom. 8.
seem well to be; but that Viz. Abraham.
one, adorned with Virtues and good Works, should yet not be Justified by them,
but only by Faith, is admirable. Who would have thought good old Chrysostom had
so much dissented from the reverend Society at Rhemes? who teach us another
Lesson: That good Works are Meritorious, and the very cause of Salvation;
Annotat, on Heb. 6.
so far, as God should be unjust if he rendered not Heaven for them. Take the
next Testimony out of Gregory, in the Original, because there is one word, whose
just force and Emphasis, as it stands, here, our English can, I think, but
hardly reach. Justus noster Advocatus nos defendet in Judicio, quia nosmetipsos
and cognoscimus and accusamus Injustos: Non ergo in fletibus, non in actionibus
nostris, sed in Advocati nostri Allegatione confidamus.

When the day of Judgment or our Death shall come, says Hierom; all hands In
Isa. lib. 17.
shall fail, because no work shall be found worthy of the Justice of God. That
is a known place of Augustine: Enchirid. cap. 41.
He (viz. Christ) is Sin as we are Justice, not our own but God's, not in our
selves but in him; as he is Sin not in himself, but in us: And remarkable that
of Athanasius; Impossible est puritatem and innocentiam in humana Natura
exhiberi, nisi Deus credatur in Carne fuisse, qui Justitiam omni ex part
liberam in mundum introduxit. Cujus quia participes sumus vivemus and
salvabimur. Illud enim, Non est justus in terra, etc. in Commune ad omnes
pertinet; Unde ex Coelo descendit qui immaculatam Justitiam, ex se, daturus
erat: No less this of Gregory Nyssenus in his Oration upon Math. 5. 6. and 1
Cor. 1. 30. Expounded by Gregor. Nyssen.
Beati qui esuriunt Justitiam. It seems to me (says that Father) That our Lord
by mentioning Justice, does propose to the appetite of his hearers, his own
self, who is made unto us Wisdom from God, Justice, Sanctification, etc. That
Proverb, Bernardus non videt omnia, may perhaps be true; yet in this, Omne
tulit punctum; he has hit the right Nail on the Head, and rivetted it in, so
strongly, as not even the Teeth of Time shall be able to pull it Sermon. 61. in
Cantic.
out. We find in him, these words, fit to be writ in Letters of Gold; I will
make mention of thy Righteousness only, for even that is mine too; to wit, thou
art made unto me Justice; I need Quoted by the incomparable Davenant, de
Justitia habituali and actuali, cap. 28. fol. 369.
not fear but it will serve us both; It is not a short Cloak that will not
cover two, etc. We will; here, take lieve of these Stars of the first
Magnitude; and come to those of later Note in the Church's Constellation, that
lived after the light of this Doctrine had been clouded; and set themselves to
enquire how it came so, and to deliver their opinions more distinctly and
apposite to the present Question, than the ancient Doctors Why must Jacob stand
before his Father in the Garments of his elder Brother, before he could have
the blessing? but to typifie the necessity of our being covered with Christ's
righteousness, who is the first born of his Father. Sermon. 1. de Annunciatione.
could do, who had finished their Course, before the Corruption was
discoverable, or the Controversy started. But take in, as we pass, another
Instance or two out of the last named Doctor; It Is necessary, first of all to
Believe, That we cannot have remission of sins, but by the* Mercy or
Condonation of God. 2. Then, That we cannot, at all, have any whit of good
works, unless he give it. Lastly, That by no good works we can merit Life
Eternal, Nisi gratis de^ur and illa. In another place thu^. If we must speak
properly of that which we call Merits, they are certain Seminaries of Hope,
Incitements of Love, Signs of secret Predestination; the way to the Kingdom,
not the Cause of Reigning: Dangerous is the way and dwelling of those that
trust in their Merits; dangerous, because ruinous.

Thomas Waldensis, our Compatriot, and the others Contemporary, professes his
utter dislike of that saying, That a man Tom. 3. de Sacra. cap. 7.
may by Merits be worthy of Heaven, or this Grace, or that Glory: however (lo
here their rise) certain Schoolmen had invented the Terms of Condignity and
Congruity. I do repute him, (adds he) the more faithful Catholic, and more
sound Christian, more consonant to the holy Scripture, who does simply deny
such Merit; and confesses, That no man Merits Heaven, but by the Grace of God,
or will of the Giver. As all the former Saints, and whole Church (until the
late Schoolmen) have written. Here Is even enough to end withal; yet we will have
one Instance more of our Truth, but Romes falsehood, and departure from the
Faith of her forefathers: We will bring it thus. Our Libraries were ordinarily
stored with certain old Instructions, and Consolations to be used to departing
sick Persons; out of which the Spanish Inquisitors thought fit to expunge these
dangerous Interrogations. Do Primate of Ireland, ut supra.
thou believe to come to Glory, not by thine own Merits, but by the Virtue and
Merit of the Passion of our Lord? Do thou believe that our Lord Jesus Christ
did die for our Salvation; and that none can be Johannes Pi^us the Bishop,
Interpreter of Mareus the Eremite, rendering Not by the Proportion of works of
Nature, where the Original is Not by the Proportion of works of Faith, is a
gross falsifier.
saved by his own Merits, or by any other Means but by the Merit of his
Passion? Uincentius his Rule now appears prudent, when we have to deal with a
sort of men that care not how they deal with old Records, and endeavor, all
they can, to make the Tongue of An. Primate of Ireland page 502. Simpson of the
Church, Cent. 5. So Zosimus pretended a Decree of the Council of Nice, which
could never be found.
tiquity to have a Tangue of their Novelties: and can frame new Decrees,
fathering them on old Councils, as both has, and may be proved.

I shall shut up all with the result of two Assemblies, and the astipulations
of two Eminent Persons. The Canons of Colen in a set meeting establish the
Imputed Righteousness of Christ, as the formal Cause of Justification. Davenant
de Justit. habituali, cap. 29. Noted by Bellarmine himself, lib. ^2. de
Justify. cap. 1 and 2. page 124.
We are Justified, say they, two ways; The one and first of which, is that
absolute Righteousness of Christ; not as it is clearly without us in him, but
as, when it is, whilst apprehended by Faith, Imputed to us for Righteousness;
this very same so imputed, is the chief and great Cause of our Justification.
This was much, considering the time they lived in; but better explained in that
Colloquy of Ratisbon, whose words are; Though Idem ut supra.
he who is Justified, does receive inherent Justice; yet a faithful Soul rests
not upon that, but only upon the Justice of Christ, given to us, without which
there can, clearly, be no Justice at all. I mention these (being soon after the
Reformation begun) not as entirely Reformed; but as such unto whom, in this
great point, the light of Truth (even to a good Degree) could not be hid. The
next is a remarkable passage concerning Ernestus Archbishop of Magdeburge,
witnessed by his own Chaplain Clement Schaw, who was present at his Death,
about five years before Luther. A Friar Minor offered Dr. Twisse his
Resolutions of Conscience, etc.
him Consolation, thus; Take good heart, most worthy Prince; We do Communicate
to your Excellence all the good works, not only of our selves, but of our whole
Order; and therefore doubt not but receiving them, you shall appear before the
Tribunal of God, blessed and righteous. He replied; I do not desire your Works
to any thing; The Works of my Lord Christ must wholly do it; On these I rely.
And Bellarmine himself (who spent so much Time and Sweat, in oppugning Imputed,
and propugning Inherent Grace, under the Notion of Condign Merit) was at last
brought to say; Propter incertitudinem, etc. For the uncertainty of our Works,
De Meritis bonorum operum.
it is the safest to put all our Confidence in the sole Mercy and Bounty of
God, and rely upon Christ. Which totally unravels again the thinn wrought
Covering, he had before (with other Jesuits) patched up.

Thus have we followed this pure stream of living water, through the Meanders
of many Ages of several Constitutions, even to the confines of our own;
Wherein, if you look at the present outward face of things, we may almost say,
the Enemy has got the upper hand. Yet, praise be to God, We are not without
many Eminent and Faithful Laborers in his Harvest, who, I hope, will leave it
upon Record, that the Truth is not left without Witnesses. And thus too, if you
take it (as we say) at the right End, I have given you a Testimony that I am,
etc.

LETTER III.
ARising from, depending on, and subservient to the Doctrine of Meritorious
inherent Justice, are all those Opinions of Freewill, Satisfactions, here and
in Leofwin, a Noble man, gave two Towns in Essex to the Church of Ely; to
Expiate, and make Satisfaction for the Murder of his own Mother, Cambden, fol.
440. The large English Impression.
Purgatory; Prayer and Sacrifices for the Dead, Indulgences; and Vendable
Pardons; from the Extreme grossness whereof (when he saw those goodly
Advantages made the Wager in a Game at Dice) Luther first So Alfrida, the
Relict of King Edgar, built a Nunnery near Ambursbury, having murdered Edward.
took occasion to discountenance them. We think they are but as
super-structures reared with untempered Mortar, Cambden, ut supra, fol. 254.
which we are sure will all as Wood, Hay, Stubble, perish and be consumed by
that Fire, the Spirit of Burning, mentioned, Isa. 4. 4. Matthew. 3. 11. 1 Cor. 3.
13.

And therefore, waving them; the next Point wherein I shall endeavor, if it
may so please God, to rectify your Judgment, is that much Controverted
business of the Sacraments. Which are visible Signs of invisible Grace given,
and conferred unto us; Instituted by Christ himself, and ordained to be a means
to Receive, and a Seal to Confirm the same. Let us review this Definition, and
draw from it some Observations in the words of a Learned Author. Many things do
here The. Trent Faith is, That Sacraments cause Grace, not by the Devotion of
him that works, nor of him that receives the work, but by virtue of the work
it self, Hist. of that Council, fol. 230.
occurr, which require a deep and serious Consideration by those who desire
thoroughly to understand the Nature and Essential parts of Sacraments: For
first, there must be a Conferrence of Grace, of which the Sacraments are termed
Seals: (yet this Conferrence of Grace, is not causatively, but instrumentally,
not Physically, but Metaphysically in them.) Therefore those are not properly
Sacraments, which relate to any thing but matters of Religion. By this Argument
is Matrimony Matrimony*
excluded from the List, as not being in it self considered a Religious Work,
neither is any Grace at all conferred or exhibited thereby. So that (though
Marriage does Legitimate many) one may say, it self is but a Bastard Sacrament.

2. Next, these Signs of Grace ought to be subject to the Senses: For so it
seemed good to God, by sensible and external things, to lead by the hand, as it
were, us who, for the most part, live by sense, toward Intelligible, Internal
and Spiritual matters: They must, farther, be visible and subject to the Eyes;
Hence Absolution and Ordination Absolution and Ordination,
cannot fall within the number of Sacraments, not having any visible Element or
Material Sign.

Thirdly, They are said to be ordained, and instituted by Christ: Signs they
are by the Institution of him, and not of their own nature; He only, who
created the Elements, can by his word make of them Sacraments: nor is it from
the choice of Men that the Signs become Sacraments; but by the Ordinance of
God, who super-added the word to the sign. The Relation is mutual, betwixt the
Word and the Sign, as betwixt the Form and the Matter. The Word as the Form,
the Sign as the Matter: Conjoyn them, and they are a Sacrament: By the Word we
are to understand the Mandate of Christ, enjoining us to use them, and to
expect spiritual Grace thereby. So we think, we have good right to root out the
other two, and whole five supernumerary Sacraments: since Confirmation and
Extreme Unction Confirmation and Extreme Unction no Sacraments.
have, indeed, the Element but, wanting the Word, ought not to be accounted
Sacraments; since Absolution and Ordination have no Element; since Matrimony
has no promise of Grace. And thus we may more than ghess at the just number of
Sacraments. Wherefore laying aside the Supposititious, we find but two
Sacraments of the Gospel, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper.

In the first of these we have no Dispute with the Church of Rome, but will I
hope in some sort be cleared by our Disquisitions concerning the latter, save
about such trifles, as their mixing of Salt and Spittle, their Exorcisms, their
suffering Women sometimes to administer it, etc. Come we then to that which is,
commonly, called the Communion. How far the real Presence of Christ's Body is
allowed by us, I shall in the first place declare. We are, then, to distinguish
betwixt the outward and inward Act of the Communicant: Primate of Ireland's
answer to the Jesuit.
In the outward, with our bodily mouths, we receive really the Elements of
Bread and Wine; In the inward we do by Faith, really receive the Body and Blood
of the Lord; that is, We are, truly and indeed, by Virtue of the Covenant,
where the Sacrament is a Seal, made partakers of Christ crucified to the
spiritual strengthening of our souls. Our Adversaries of the Roman And since we
find our Savior himself, Joh. 6. 63. affirming that the flesh profits
nothing; I shall not at all fear to say, We ought to be satisfied with a
spiritual Manducation.
Persuasion have made such a confusion of these things, that* for the former,
they deny that after Consecration, there remains any Bread or Wine at all to be
received; though Paul does in my mind* give a strong intimation, 1 Cor. 11. 26.
-- 10. 16. That it is Bread at breaking or distribution, at eating or
participation. Then for the second, they affirm, That the body and blood of
Christ is in such a manner present under the outward shows of Bread and Wine,
as Idem. ibidem.
whosoever receives the one (be he good or bad, Believer or Infidel) does
therewith really receive the other. A Tenent not consistent with that place in
John 6. where our Savior says, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, has Eternal life abiding in him; and I will raise him up at the last
day. Hence has that Reverend Usher, (often before quoted, in that Answer to
the Jesuits Challenge, where you may find many clear testimonies out of the
Fathers to this purpose) framed this Syllogism.

The Body and Blood of Christ Qui discordat a Christo, nec Carnem ejus
manducat, nec Sanguinem bibit, etc. Prosper ex Aug. Sent. 341.
is received unto Life, by all that do receive it; and by none unto
condemnation. But that which is outwardly delivered in the Sacrament, is not
received by all, unto Life; but by many unto Condemnation. Therefore, that
which is outwardly delivered in the Sacrament, is not really the Body and Blood
of Christ.
What was his last shall be my first proof out of St. Augustine, handling Tract.
26.
this very place. The Sacrament of this thing (viz. of eating the flesh of
Christ) is taken from the Lord's Table; by some unto life, by some unto
destruction: but the thing it self, whereof it is a Sacrament, is received by
every Man that does receive it unto Life, and by none that is made Partaker
thereof, unto destruction. Now, seriously, if Protestants could add no more
Arguments to this, and my self were as much an Adorour of that Way and Church
as ever I was; I am persuaded that it alone had been sufficient (by the
blessing of God) to have gained me to the Reformed Belief.

But let us ponder well the Words of Institution. It Is true This is my Body,
and This is my blood, is the Phrase used. But were not the Sacraments of the
Old Testament instituted with the same manner of Speech? This is my Covenant;
and the slaying of the Lamb called the Passover? The former is presently
expounded by God himself, when he says, It shall be a Sign of the Covenant. The
other is known to have been the Commemoration of passing by the Israelites when
the firstborn of Egypt were slain. Thus our Savior having said, This is my
body; goes on, This do, in Remembrance of me, Luke 22. 19. The Disciples
(having been trained up to the meaning of the Old Sacraments) could not; and we
(if we will compare them with the New) need not think the Expression at all
obscure. As the Lamb was the Passover, As the Sign of the Covenant was the
Covenant, As the Rock was Christ: So we acknowledge the Bread to be his body.
In the Institution of the other part of this Sacrament, the Words are clear,
Matthew. 26. He took the Cup, blessed, and gave it them, saying: Drink ye all of
this, for it is my This must needs be a figurative speech; why then not the
other?
Blood of the New Testament, or, (as St. Paul and Luke relate it) This Cup is
the New Testament in my Blood. How is the Cup, or that contained therein, the
New Testament, otherwise than as a Sacrament of it? And, generally, for all
Sacraments the Rule is thus laid down by St. Augustine: Epist. 23.
If Sacraments did not, some way, resemble the things whereof they are
Sacraments, they should not be Sacraments at all; for this resemblance they do
often bear the names of the things: As therefore the Sacrament of the Body of
Christ, is after a certain manner the Body of Christ, etc. In another place he
tells us the seven Quaest. 37. in Levit.
Ears of Corn were seven years, and the Blood is called the Soul of Man, after
the manner of Sacraments.

It Is Evident, the Fathers though they delighted to imitate our Savior's
manner of locution, yet their meaning (even when they followed the Metaphor
through large discourses) were not dissonant from that of Origin who, after he
had played the Rhetorician, in this sort concludes: Et haec Upon Matthew. 15.
quidem de typico symbolicoque Corpore. If you will but observe what strange
relations my Author gives Primate of Ireland, page 67, 68, 69, 70,
(you have full lieve to examine the truth of them, though for my part, I
believe them;) What can you think? but that some by-ended Priests, the better
to increase their esteem with the People (such as Marcus Radbertus, Damascen
and Amalalarius, there named) wrought up the Vulgar Ignorance to an amazed
Admiration of those men's power, who could perform such great wonders, and were
the Makers of that they were taught to adore. In Charles the Bald's time, this
Fancy had got some ground, and several Questions and Debates arose about it:
That Emperor required Ratrannus to deliver his thoughts upon it; whereunto he
obeyed, in such terms, as Turrian the Jesuit is forced to say, That to cite
Bertram (so is Ratrannus more usually named) What is it else, but to say, The
Heresy, (so he thinks fit to phrase it) of Calvin is not New? One Allfrick of
Malmesburie, in an Homily writ 650 years ago, and publicly read on Easter
Days before the Communion, fully consents with the Reformed Churches herein:
And in another Book Dedicated to Woulstan Archbishop of York, he says, The
Bread is Christ's Body, and the Wine his Blood, as Manna, and the Water out of
the Rock, mentioned by Paul 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. were of old to the Israelites. By
these and some others, was the right and true Doctrine contended for, and in
good measure held-forth; (though in the midst of those times, wherein
Knowledge, both as to the concernments of Religion, and of humane Literature,
was at a low Ebb) till at length that Council at In the time of Innocent 3. who
made Otho Emperor, and put by Frederick left to his Care by Henry his Father.
Simpson's Hist. fol. 371.
Lateran, Anno 1215. Decreed, That the Body and Blood of Christ must be
believed to be in the Sacrament by Transubstantiation. I know they will to this
answer; This Council did but invent a significant word to express, what was
before the Tenent of the Church: But I am in some hopes, what has been said,
will convince you of the contrary: If not; I wish I could prevail with you,
laying aside Prejudice, to peruse the never enough honored Primate, and a late
Fol. 44. etc.
well writ piece of Doctor Taylor's. But what need we go farther for the Sense
of the words of Institution, than that place, Joh. 6. ver. 35. whereby our Lord
himself had prepared his Disciples to receive them, plainly attributing the
quenching of that Appetite he desired to excite in them, unto Faith, or
Believing.

LETTER IV.
LET us, in the next place, use what means we can, to discover that fitting
Esteem, and Value we ought to put upon the Heavenly Host; I mean the blessed
Quire of Angels and Saints, who now rest from their Labors, and reign with
God. You shall find us ready, to afford them as much reverence and respect, as
the Word of God does either Commend or Command; and to deny them no honor,
which the purest, or Primitive times thought requisite to give them. We read,
in the New Testament, of diverse who made supplications immediately Davenant in
Col. ^^ natura and amore nobis conjunctior.
to Christ, Romans 5. 2. Ephesians. 3. 12. Heb. 4. 16. John 2. 1. (for he is by the
Wisdom of the Father, appointed to be our Intercessor and Advocate) but not of
one that prayed to the blessed Virgin Mary, or other Saint: and, with Hierom,
we fear not to say, Non Credimus, quia non Legimus. Tome 3. c^nra H^lvidium.
We read farther of some who being forward to prostrate themselves before
appearing Angels, were prevented by a See you do it not, Revel. 22. 9. We
cannot but take notice of that interdictive Precept which disswades us from
voluntary humility, etc. Col. 2. 18, 23. And, Origin bids us not to doubt,
but when we commit our selves to him, who is God over all, through Jesus
Christ, and desire of him the help and protection of those ministering Spirits
that do his pleasure, they shall all be propitious unto us.
therefore, though we doubt not but those glorious Spirits do rejoice at any
access of happiness that befalls the Church Militant, or any Member thereof:
Though we should grant that they are instant with God for the consummation of
the felicity of his Elect; and that, perhaps too, they solicit him, for the
particular concernments of his Servants here below: Yet, Invocation being a
Prerogative belonging to the great Creator only, and Intercession being an
Office affixed so clearly to the person of Jesus Christ only, We hold it safe
for us, and no way derogatorie from them, to propose them to our selves, for
our Imitation, but not for our Adoration. 2 Chronicles. 6. 30. For thou (Lord) only
know the hearts of the children of men.

If I had an express Precept for it, really I would do it with all my heart,
and I am persuaded I could be a great Zealot in the way; but in Religious, as
well as other affairs, Sunt certi fines, Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere
Rectum; and Will Worship is no venial Idolatry.

The Church of Rome has attributed so much of Merit to the Devotions, Vows and
Pilgrimages made to Saints, and their Shrines; that they have almost justled
all other Piety out of door, and drawn a dark cloud betwixt the eyes of the
Vulgar, and the Offices, and Functions of our Savior. Whatever Artifice is
used by the great Ones, to usher in this very gainful Tenent unto the
well-meaning sort of Papists under the Notion of Dulia, a sort of worship,
which they will have to consist of an under-qualification, to their Latria; Yet
the reverend Davenant has made In Col. 2. 18.
it apparent enough, That the Orisons, Vows, Dedication of Churches, with
Altars, as they are, by Romanists directed to them, are inconsistent with
Truth, Reason, or Practice of Antiquity. And here I shall insert, what I
promised in my first Letter, an Ejaculation Recorded by Famianus Strada* de
Bello Belgico.
so strange, that, methinks, it is sufficient to turn the stomachs of any, and
make them (nauseating so absurd a practice) not swallow down all that is offered
to them as wholesome food. Mary of Portugal, wife to Prince Alexander Farnezes,
calls upon her Husband in the Church of Scala to join in Prayer to the blessed
Strada de Bello Belgico.
Virgin, supplicating Christ, That in Obedience to his Mother he would give
them another Son. This yet has more of Modesty in it than those particular
Letter 1.
Applications to her in terms which Erasmus (a man that stood enough in awe of
the Churches Name) has, as before is hinted, taxed of both vanity and novelty.
Such as this found in their Psalters, Psalt Bonavent. Edict. Paris. 1596.
Compel him to have Mercy upon us.

I am resolved before I end this Letter to rake together a huge bundle of such
Applications made to, and Appellations obtruded upon her (out of Authors you
will not disown) as the wisest Papists will, I believe, not approve, and the
learned of them never can prove to be rightly used toward her. Which may
extenuate, if not excuse, the tartness of some of ours, who seem to have
mingled a great deal of Vinegar into their Ink; when they inveigh, not against
her Person, but the performance of such Devoyrs as are not due unto her.

Yet first I will give you in a few places out of the Fathers which speak my
very thoughts, to the full, as to this point. Epiphanius asks; What Scripture
has delivered any thing concerning this? Which of the Prophets have permitted
a man (that I may not say a woman) to he worshipped? For a choice vessel she is
indeed, but yet a woman. Let Mary be in honor; but let the Father, Son and
holy Ghost be worshipped: This Mystery is appointed, I do not say for a woman,
nor for a man, but for God: The Angels themselves are not capable of such kind
of glorifying: Although Mary be most excellent, and holy, and to be honored,
yet she is not to be worshipped; the Virgin, indeed, was a Virgin, and
honorable, but not given unto us for Adoration, etc.

Next Origin against Celsus, exhorts us to endeavor to please God, and to have
him propitious unto us; and if Celsus will yet have us to procure the good will
of any other, after him that is God over all; Let him consider, That as when
the body is moved, the motion of the shadow follows it; So, having God
favorable, we shall have all his friends both Angels and Spirits so too. And
in another place, thus: Away with Celsus his counsel that we must pray to
Angels; for we must pray to him alone, who is God over all, and we must pray to
the Word of God his only Son: We must entreat him, that he, as High Priest,
would present our prayers unto his God, and our God. Consonant to these
(besides a number more) is St. Ambrose; Tom 5. in Romans 1.
A miserable excuse, says he, have they that think to go to God by these, (
viz. Angels) as men go to a Prince by an Officer: Men go to a King by Officers,
because he is but a man, etc. But to procure the favor of God, from whom is
nothing hid, we need to no spokesman, but a devout soul. Behold See many more,
and very pregnant proofs in the Primate of Ireland, p. 377. etc.
here a threefold Cord so firmly twisted by the hands of three eminent
Doctors, as the strongest Arm, no nor the united forces of the Romish Synagogue
can untye, or break asunder. It Is true, that in the times of Persecution, some
men were so exemplary for their active Zeal, and passive Fortitude in the cause
of God, and their memory was so precious to their surviving Friends, Scholars
and Auditors; as, they conceived, it heightened their Devotions to pray, and
perform their religious services near their Monuments, which sometimes they
did; yet addressed them only to God. And in their commemoratory Orations (such
as, now, we have diverse on the Anniversary days of the dissolutions of certain
extraordinary persons, especially in our Universities) recorded their praises
in expressions, whereby the Martyr was vocatus, but not invocatus; where, the
Lord being pleased to give a gracious answer to their prayers, and to honor
that Christian Profession, which those Worthies had maintained unto the death;
Men began, afterward, to conceive that it was at their suit and mediation
those things were effected; and that therefore they were themselves to be
prayed unto. The former part of which conjecture we need not much oppose, but
with Origin: We do think, That all those Fathers In Josue, Hom. 16.
who are departed this life before us, do fight with us and assist us with
their prayers: And yet with the same Origin hold fast the Truth in opposition
to the latter part, thus: All Prayers and Supplications, Idem ibidem, page 239.
Intercessions and Thanksgivings, are to be sent up to God the Lord of all, by
the High Priest who is above all; being the living Word and God: For, to call
upon Angels (we do not comprehend the knowledge of them, which is above the
reach of man) is not agreeable to Reason: And if by supposition it were
granted, that the knowledge of them might be comprehended; that very knowledge,
declaring their Nature, and the charge over which every one of them is set,
would not permit us to pray unto them, or any other but God. Now for those
strange Apparitions and Cures, said to be made at the places of their
Sepulture, or otherwhere; whether it was so and so, or how it was, I am content
with St. Augustine (knowing the way of God, in permitting such Events to be
inscrutable, and the wisdom of man, in making application thereof to be often
mere foolishness) they should remain the Objects of my Admiration, rather than
the Subjects of my Scrutinie; and I hold them, in some sort, able (especially
in the eyes of young Believers) to confirm a point which is consonant to the
Word of God; but no proofs of any thing without or against it. Deuteronomy. 13.

And here it will be no unseasonable enquiry; How it can be lawful for any sort
or Calling of men, to vaunt themselves, at all times empowered, to command
unclean spirits; Or, by Exorcisms, at their own arbitrament, to pretend to
order them? A device whereof the Factors of Rome do, at this day, make great
advantage, and insinuate strangely into the minds of unstable people. We know
the arm of the Lord is not shortened, nor infeebled from what it was: We
acknowledge, that he may, and sometimes does, exert his own Almighty Power, in
a wondrous manner. We are not ignorant, That in the Apostles days there were
many extraordinary gifts, of which that of doing Miracles, for the better
settling of the infant Church was one; nor that their is a certain miraculous
Faith, which, pitching only upon St. Hierom assures that the power of Miracles
may be permitted to them that profess not the truth of the Gospel. In Epist. ad
Galat. Tom. 9.
the Power of God as it is Object, may be where there is neither truth of Piety
nor Principles. But withal, We have observed that our Savior has told us how,
at the last day, some should come before him and allege, They had cast out
devils in his name, whom yet he would not own, Matthew. 7. 22. Revel. 13. 14. We
cannot forget that we are fairly warned of him, whose coming was to be in great
deceiveableness of Signs and lying Wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10. and therefore
think such unfit to be the Overrulers of our Faith, especially where (in the
things they would persuade us Tertullian in Praescriptionibus, cap. 24.
unto) they have not a, probable at least, concurrence of the written Word. We
cannot understand how those Pretenders (by virtue of any calling whereto it is
always affixed) appropriate to themselves the gift of doing such Miracles, in
the Truth thereof, unless they will lay their claim to All; and see, if they
can persuade the world, they have the gift of speaking with strange Tongues
too. To Enervate all Arguments drawn from their practices in this; there needs
no other convincement than the frequent Discoveries of most gross Forgeries: Of
this sort (to give in one for instance, omitting many that are of
unquestionable Record) was that, accidentally made by Bishop Morton, in his
journey toward London, when he found, the Boy of Bilson had been long trained
up by the Popish Priests, and become a fit subject for those Impostors to show
feats upon. But if we should say, Satan himself Du Moulin in his accomplishment
of the Prophecies.
may submissively comply with their Designs, that go about to introduce a
belief in others, suitable to the interests of his own Kingdom: Who could
either question his forwardness to act in, or Gods Justice in permitting such a
fraud upon those ( Revel. 13. 14.) who, neglecting the wells of Salvation,
whence flows the Water of Life, have merited to see strong Delusions, That they
may believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. One, known to my self, altered his
Religion upon no better ground, than because, going in company with a Papist,
and a friend of his, thought to be possessed; the supposed Demoniack embraced
him, and would not come near the Papist. Both St. Augustine puts us in De cura
pro mortuis, cap. 10.
mind that men are sometimes led into great errors by deceiptful Dreams, and
that it is just they should suffer such things: And St. Chrysostom gives a
good Admonition that little heed should be given De Lazaro conc. page 235, 236.
to the Devil's sayings, in a Case of the same Nature with this we have been in
hand withal. These are his words: What is it, then, that the Devils do say? I
am the Soul of such a Monk: Surely, for this I will not believe it, because the
Devil says it, for they do deceive their hearers; and therefore Paul silenced
them, though they spoke truth, Acts 16. 18. lest taking occasion from thence
they might Primate of Ireland, page 396.
mingle false things again with those truths, and get credit. And in another
place. If this once were settled in men's minds, that many of those that are
departed did come again to us; for this cause God How common is the conceit
now, that departed souls do appear?
has shut up the doors, and does not suffer any of the deceased to return; lest
he, taking occasion from thence, should bring in all his own Devices.

Who can digest such Relations as are made of St. Theclae, that she may be
yearly seen driving a Fiery Basil. Seleuc. de miraculis Theclae, cap. 10.
Chariot, etc? Such was the pleasantness of Dalisandus Situation, as both she
in that, and other Saints deceased, rejoiced much in the like solitary places.
That she was after her Death Idem. cap. 21.
much delighted with Oratory and Poetry; rewarding Alipius, a Grammarian (for
aptly answering her in a Verse of Homer, which seemed to ascribe to her an
alldiscerning and universal knowledge) Idem, cap. 24. all quoted by the Primate
of Ireland in his Answer to the Jesuit. page 397.
with the present cure of his desperate sickness. Can these be looked at any
otherwise than as the froth of an idle brain, writ on purpose, to help forward
those superstitions, whereof the Pope has since made very advantageous uses?
The Primate of Chapt. 9. page 337.
Ireland has evidenced how clear the first Ages of the Church were herein; by
what steps the errors received growth; and how much, and how long the
difference was betwixt the former (even when declining) times, and the
stupendous height the Romanists now have flown to in these later days. When
Bonaventure in his Psalter (amongst his works) printed at Rome, Anno 1588.
could think it reasonable where David advances the honor of our Lord, to turn
all (by a simple conversion indeed) unto the honor of our Lady. Out of which I
thought to have given you a long bead-rowel; but this Letter having out-grown
my first purposes, I Will only call out some of the most notorious expressions. We
will begin with the first.

Blessed is the man that loves thy Name, O Virgin Mary: thy Grace shall
comfort his Soul.

Judge me, Lady, for I have not departed from mine innocence; but because I
will trust in thee, I shall not be weakened.

Blessed are they whose hearts do love thee, O Virgin Mary: their sins by thee
shall be mercifully washed away.

Have mercy upon me, O Lady, who art called the Mother of Mercy, and according
to the Bowels of thy mercy, cleanse me from all mine iniquity.

Lady, the Gentiles are come into the Inheritance of God; whom thou by thy
Merits have confederated unto Christ.

God is the Lord of revenges; but thou, the Mother of mercy, do bow him to
take pity.

And what will you say to him that quotes the places in your own Authors, which
affirm that the blessed Virgin appeared twice in the place of two Nuns, the
fruit of whose wantonness would not suffer them to endure the probation? It Is
Dr. Du Moulin, in his Accomplishment of Prophecies. Till you disprove him,
suffer me to stand amazed at so prodigious a relation.

If here be not enough to fright away your affection; I shall think, that
Religious love is blinder, than (we use to term) Carnal.

LETTER V.
WHat has been said, as to the Invocation of Saints, will necessarily lead us
on to make some Enquiries into the lawfulness of the Adoration of Images; a
Practice, which seeing it is every where spoken against in the Old Testament,
and has not so much as one syllable to countenance it in the New, we may justly
wonder, how it could gain so much ground, even as to set a foot on, in the
Christian Church; especially since the ancient Champions and Defenders of the
Faith did so strenuously oppose it.

When Adrian the Emperor had commanded, that Temples should be made in all
Cities without Images, it was presently conceived, he did prepare those Temples
for Christ (as the Primate of Ireland notes Answer to the Jesuit's Challenge,
page 504.
out of AElius Lamprid. in the life of Severus) which is an Evidence, That it
was not the use of Christians, in those days, to have Images in their Churches.
And soon after, in the time of the great Constantine, the voice of a whole
Council, that of Illiberis in Spain, decries them; which has so troubled the
Minds of our late Romanists, that Melchior Canus sticks not to charge them, not
only with Loc. Theol. lib. 5. cap. 4. prope finem.
Imprudence, but also with Impiety, for making such a Law as this. Ambrose in
his Epistles to Valentinian tells him, and us, That God would not have himself
worshipped in Stones. In another place, That the Church knows no vain Idaeas,
nor diverse figures of Images; but the true Substance of the Trinity. What
Amphilochius said, to this purpose, is memorable: We have no care to figure by
Colors the Visages of the Saints in tables, because we have no need of such
things, etc. What Epist. ad Johan. de Hierusalym. Tom. 1. Oper. Hieronym.
Epist. 60.
Epiphanius did, more remarkable; take it in his own words. I found there, viz.
in the Church of Anablatha, a Veil hanging in the door, dyed and painted,
having the Image as it were of Christ, or some Saints; for I do not well
remember whose Image it was. When, therefore, I saw this, that contrary to the
authority of the Scriptures, the Image of a Man was hanged up in the Church of
Christ; I cut it, and gave counsel to the Keeper of the Place, that they should
rather wrap or bury some dead man in it. And afterward he entreats the Bishop,
under whose government that Church was, that no such Veils might be suffered.
That we may not leave Epiphanius alone, let us join to him Serenus Bishop of
Marseiles (who brake down the Images in his Church, because he found they drew
the People to Idolatry) and then view the fierce Contentions that arose about
this matter; Three hundred thirty and eight Prelates at Constantinople,
solemnly condemning all Image Worship, anno 754. And about Thirty three years
after, something more in Number, that advanced it, at Nice; though to the
dissatisfaction of the best part of the Christian World, as was demonstrated by
the Resolutions of the Council at Franck ford, An. 794. In France the Doctors
declared as much, An. 824. as our English had before done. We cannot here
sufficiently wonder at the frontless impudence of that double Renegado, Mar.
Anton. de Dominis, alias the Bishop of Spalato, who would bear the World in
hand, that the Christian Church, even the most ancient, the whole, and the
universal, without any opposition, or contradiction, did with wonderful Consent
worship Images. By many passages, as well as this, you may, if you please; or,
to speak better and more near the Truth of the Case (for it is a strange slavish
Credulity under which the Church of Rome would yoke up her Disciples) if you
dare, easily see, they care not with how many Untruths they temper the Lime,
wherein they mean to catch their deceived Proselytes.

If yet you will plead for the use of Images, as not Worshipping them, but God,
or the Saint they do represent; and argue for them, under the Notion of
instructing the ignorant by the Eye: Be entreated to consider, whether what has
already been said, does not quite overthrow that end; and whether, in the
Judgments of those, whose sentence we have laid before you, the Ignorant would
not be in more peril of Idolatry by them, than otherwise. Indeed they had never
been tolerated so much as they were, unless they had crept in by that pretense
of being Laymens Books; but, because they proved rather their bane, they are,
with Justice enough, rejected. There is one Consideration which relates to our
Savior alone, from whence I cannot but think it is very absurd to make his
Image. As he is to us a Jesus, it was necessary to unite both the Natures,
Divine and Humane; Why then should we hold it convenient, to fix him before our
eyes, and consequently in our minds, by halfs, when we go to speak to him, to
perform his Office of Mediator to the Father for us?

The Custom of representing God the Father like an old Man, is so gross, as, I
hope, you will not put me to disprove it; If you do, I shall only mind you, It
was he asked Moses, whether he had seen any Image in the Mount, and so left him
with Cave ne facias.

How fair soever you may think the Intentions of Papists may be in their use of
Images, I am sure 'twas fowl play to leave the Second Commandment quite out,
and the fourth reduced to, Remember thou sanctify the holy Days, as my self
have, to He had sure been instructed out of such Catechisms, who refused to
shoot at Buts on May day, because it was, he said, a dear holy day; and yet I
found him the next Lords day with others at Slide-Groat.
my amazement, seen it in some of their Catechisms. Speak truth, and tell me,
does it not smell rank of some Design? But, I think, I was once informed, it
was for brevities sake. Alas, within two small leaves after, or not many more,
I found, I know not how many Commandments of the Church, laid in equal
Balance with those of Sinai. Doubtless they had a mind to instill into the
apprehensions of the Vulgar, such Notions of Image Worship, and Saint
Adoration, as the too common sight of those Precepts would not a little have
discountenanced. But I will leave this under your Consideration, to ask the
Romish Church, how she will piece together those Rents, which her Members (by
the Ears, about the Manner and Nature of that Worship due, as they say, to
Images) have made in her Coat, which she would have thought to be seamless: and
she must be careful too, since it is a main Article of her Faith, to draw it up
so dexterously, as Protestants may not discover where the Slit was, lest they
get an hole in it, do what she can. Durand and his followers, not a few, could
be content (honest men!) only to worship God, or the Saint, represented by the
Image: But, for this, Friar Pedro Upon Tho. in his 3d. part quoted by the
Primate, page 499.*
has marked them with the black Coal of parcel Heresy; and Francis Victoria
minceth it not at all, calling it plain Heresy. I shall conclude this
discourse in wonder, what is meant by granting pardon of Sins to all who wore a
Medal of the Queen of Heaven, as Famianus De Bello Belgico, lib. 5.
Strada tells us, the Pope did; and what they meant, whom Erasmus blames for
placing confidence in the wearing of St. Christopher's Image to prevent sudden
Death. The naming of that Author brings to my memory a sad story of his; and I
cannot end, before I have helped him to lament the Fate of his Acquaintance,
Ludovicus Berquinus, who after a long imprisonment at Paris, was at the last
burnt, I know not, whether for any greater Crimes, than because he had taught,
That it was necessary for the increase of Piety, to have the holy Scriptures in
the Vulgar Tongue, read by the People. That it was incongruous to invoke (a
thing it seems usual in those times) the assistance of the Virgin Mary, instead
of the Holy Ghost, by those that were going to Preach. That she could not fitly
be called the Fountain of all Grace; nor (as they had it commonly in their
Evening Songs) our Hope, and our Life, since those Eulogies were more properly
the right of her Son. Certainly that blessed Mother of Christ, if she now at
all resent things below (for you must suffer me to hold it disputable, since I
find Nazianzen doubtful in the Case) is far from taking any pleasure in
Addresses of this nature. This last, it is true, ought to have come in more
seasonably in the former Letter: but it is no matter what place it have here; so
that it may gain so much room in your thoughts, as to keep thence such vile
Guests, these Opinions. And, me thinks, if you weigh these things well, you
must needs either become no Papist, at all, or hold your self, not yet Popish
enough.

Thus you have it laid before you, how,

1. We look at Rome as sometime a Famous, but now a miserably depraved Church.
2. We account Good Works necessary in the person Justified, but not to his
Justification. 3. We, in a sound sense, retain the Real Presence, but reject
Transubstantiation. 4. We reverence the Saints departed, but dare not adore
them. 5. We forbid not absolutely the making of all sorts of Images, but cannot
be persuaded to worship any.
Christ himself has, Luke 4. 8. told me (and I dare not but take his Word for
it) that I must worship and serve God only; and that not represented by any
Similitude, Deuteronomy. 4. 15.

LETTER VI.
SInce his Word, who was from the beginning both the Word and God, is our early
Warrant for it, whatsoever the Church of Rome can say to the contrary, we hold
it our Duty (and rejoice in the Privilege) to search the Scriptures; for those,
he has told us, are they that testify of him, John 5. 39. and in them we look
to have Eternal Life, 7. 17. Though the Well be deep, lett-down the Bucket of a
Conscionable, Fervent, Unbyassed, Pious, Humble Address to the Almighty, and,
my life for yours, you need not fear miscarrying. It must needs be confessed, and
had no less need be lamented, that many, of impertinently-curious,
contentiously-inquisitive, politickly-subtil, and unstable minds, do daily
wrest some things to their own Destruction, and the Perversion of others; but
this is a personal deviation, and ought to increase our Care, not to abate our
Constancy in doing that which is an absolute and positive Command. If it had
not been so, I cannot believe that the Bereans would have had such a mark of
Nobleness put upon them for their searching the Scriptures daily, whether those
things were so; nor would St. Chrysostom, applying his speech even to the
Shopkeepers and Mechanics of his time, have lifted up his voice like a
Trumpet in this ingeminated Note, Get you Bibles, O ye people, Get you Bibles.

So that all that will fall within our present Dispute, is concerning the
number of those Books which are to be held for Canonical; wherein we must
necessarily suffer our selves to be ruled much by the Usage and Custom of the
Primitive Church, not having any clearer certain Enumeration of them in holy
Writ; though the last little Chapter of Malachi, pointing so directly to the
Sun of Righteousness, who was the Expectation of all Nations, and to his
Forerunner, the Baptist, may seem to have been designed for the period of
those that were to be before his coming. Our Savior himself divides all
Scripture into the Law and the Prophets, Luke 16. 29. but none of the
Apocryphal Allen's Antidote, page 13.
Books were writ by either. We retein the same Canon of Scripture which the
Christian Church received from the Jews, unto whom were committed the Oracles
of God, being therein, as St. Augustine terms them, our Library-keepers. They
never had deposited to them those Books which are called Aprocryphal; whereof
Epiphanius says, They are profitable, but yet not reckoned amongst those that
are by the Church held Canonical; and were not laid up with Aaron's Rod, nor in
the Ark of the New Testament* Isidore flies as high as I would desire any man
to do, where he tells us; Although there is some Truth to be found in them, yet
propter multa falsa, for many things that are not so, they are not of Divine
Authority. Melito Bishop of Sardis, having drawn, at the instance of Onesimus,
a Catalogue of the Books of the Old Testament, makes no mention of Judith,
Tobit, Ecclesiasticus or the Maccabees; though he professes to have made a
very Lib. 4. Cap. 26.
diligent search; as witnesses Eusebius; who affirms too, that Origin, as he
received the Canon of the Jews, Lib. 6. cap 24.
viz. 22 Books, so he rejected those that we admit not of. So St. Hierom, who
was a great Linguist, and was not without the best helps to further his Quest,
after he had labored much, nominates all those Books which we make use of; In
his Prefaces before the Kings and Proverbs.
and afterward denies that any but they are empowered to prove or confirm a
point of Doctrine. That Council of Carthage, where Augustine was present,
commanding that none should be read in the Church, as Canonical, but such as
were indeed so, leaves out the Maccabees; and as for Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus,
Judith, etc. that Father gives us to understand, they De Civitate Dei.
were reputed no part of the Jews Canon, which he determines to be most
Authentic. Peruse, I pray, and believe, if you cannot confute, what Doctor
Cousin has lately held forth unto us, that the In his Scholastical Hist. etc.
Epist. to the Reader.
Council of Trent first dressed up a new additional Canon, whereon to build their
Religion; equalling the Apocryphal Writings and Traditions of Men, to the
sovereign Dictates of God, and allowing them the same power in Fideal Contests.
With how much reason we deny to the Bishop of Rome the sole Superintendency,
and in what sort we decline all humane Writings, and Councils (whilst yet we
willingly subscribe to this, that they are of singular use) for the absolute
decision of such like Controversies, you may best learn out of the right
Reverend Davenant his Tractate De Judice and Norma Fidei: And I forbear to
quote any thing from thence here, because I would put you upon the perusal of
the whole; which you may do at a small and wise Expense, both of money and
time, I will take lieve at present of you, when I have told you in the words of
that Golden mouthed Father: That whatever is necessary, is in the Chrysostom.
upon 2 Cor. Homil. 13.
holy Scriptures manifest, and they are the most exact Balance, Rule and
Square of Divine Verity. In them the Lamb may with no less safety wade, than
the Elephant swim.

Though it may seem to stand like an Independent to this place, I shall here
lie before the Reader, a Collect (which came to my Eye, in a Missal, or, at
least, an authorized Prayer Book) so gross, as I could not have imagined: Thus
it runs,

Per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te impendit,
Fac nos ascendere quo Thomas ascendit.
And all this of our Becket, who surely does not merit, either to be concluded
a fit Savior, or a good Subject; however odious their part was, who slew him
(with that aggravating circumstance) in his own Church.

LETTER VI.
MY Task in this is not so much to make good our Doctrine (which so soon as
understood aright, stands clear upon its own Basis) as to wipe off the
Calumnies which our Adversaries do very disingenuously endeavor to load us
withal; whilst they frame themselves, and would obtrude upon us, such
Positions, as have indeed no being at all, but in the apprehensions, and mouths
of those bitter Antagonists; and if one of their great Accusations could be
justly fastened upon us, it would certainly stop our mouths for ever, and
spread our faces all over with Confusion. But, if there be any, in these worst,
and Sin is not a Being, but rather a defect of what should Be, and has for its
efficient Cause, nothing but a deficient Will.
giddy Times, that dare flatly say, God is the Author of Sin, it is a poison
they have like enough sucked even out of the Popish Volumes; for they were the
first (though only with design to make Protestants odious) that brought the
World acquainted, and that in Print, with such Conceits: Their own hands have
Preston of Converting Grace, page 15.
both put on, and scrued up (even to a Note beyond Ela) those strings which are
of harsh Sound, and make a jarring Discord in our Ears. If you turn over our
published Authors, weighing their greatest Latitude of Expression in an equal
balance, you may, I believe, observe the Word of God himself running parallel
with them. For which of them has gone about to interess our ever holy Creator
in the sinfulness of any Action, otherwise than as they cannot be persuaded,
that the most remote Event does escape the all-discerning Eye of his
Prescience, or outreach the Arm of his Almighty Power? Compare 2 Samuel 24. 1.
with 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. You may then discover, how God is said to move, and Satan
to provoke David unto that Act of numbering the People, in a forbidden, and
therefore sinful way: The first did it only permissively (forasmuch as he did
foreknow it, and, if it had stood with his Will, could have prevented it) the
other so, as he If our Savior knew that Sodom and Gomorrah (had they enjoyed
the same means as Chorazin and Bethsaida) would have repented; what can be said
but their Final impenitencie was according to God's Will?
really had an hand in its pravity, and a partnership in the Guilt. It Is here,
I confess, that we ought to put on abundance of fear and trembling; that we
must cloth all our words, and our very thoughts in a profound and cautious
reverence. But since the Protestant Doctrine of Predestination, rightly
understood, makes very much for the consolation and establishment of a
Christian; Let us not refuse to make such modest enquiries thereinto, as may
repel those invenomed Arrows, even bitter words, wherewith some (who will needs
pervert our Order in handling this point) do incessantly molest us, and strive
to fasten a sad Reproach upon an innocent Cause. We are far, even as far as any
Papist or Arminian can be, from thinking that the Motions of Sin invade the
Soul by the Impulse of our holy, merciful, and good God; yet we do so much
adore his Wisdom, and Power (Attributes no less Essential in him than the
other) as we know all Events are within the Verge of his Cognizance, and do not
fall out otherwise, than as it seemed good unto him. Adam, who laid The Fall of
Adam was not praeter Voluntatem Dei, that were to make a lame Providence; nor
contra, that were to make a weak Omnipotence; but it was juxta, and that leaves
all the Attributes of God (wrapped up by his Wisdom) in their full power.
not, as we, under Original guilt and stain, might blame his wifes persuasion,
she, the deceit of Satan; but his deviation could no way reflect upon God; for
it was not by nor through the Divine Decre, but only according to it: And
though it cannot be denied, but God did permit the Fall (because he foreknew,
and if it had stood with his determinate Counsel, could have prevented it) yet
the Delinquency of that common Root of mankind (in whom we all have sinned) was
a voluntary, free and uncompelled Action: He came out from under the hand of
his Creator, upright and undefiled; but he sought unto himself vain Inventions:
He tasted sour grapes, and our teeth are set on edge; and it is now true (what
Augustine, I think it was, affirmed long ago) Man sins necessarily, yet freely.

Thus far, even as far as to, and beyond the beginning of Time, we are to look
back, if we must have a Reason for the Almighty's Dispensations to the Children
of Men; and there we shall presently find (I use the words of the last named
Father, quoted by Augustine.
Mr. Yates, in his Model of Divinity, page 257, 258.) That we all are, as it
were, one mass or heap of Sin, liable to Divine wrath; which whether God exact
or remit, there is no Iniquity with him: Of the Twins, Esau and Jacob, the one
is taken and the other left; their ends are different, their deserts alike: Let
none argue God of Injustice, if he render John 5. 21.
to one his merited punishments, and do bestow upon the other immerited favor.

That there is an Election, no body will, I think, gainsay; that that Election
is not grounded upon foreseen Faith or Obedience, I shall, I hope, before I end
this Letter, demonstrate; and that it is the exceeding greatness of God's own
mighty power, ( Ephesians. 1. 19.) whereby any man is brought from being dead, in
Trespasses and Sins, to become alive unto God. The Wisdom of the Church of
England, in her 17. Article, lays down the Doctrine of Predestination thus
far very clearly; and does not so much as name that other part, which the
Disputes of Men call Reprobation, leaving us to conceive, that the one is the
mere just negation or denial of the special Grace, and immerited favor, which
is mercifully bestowed on the other. Faith is the Effect of Election, but
Infidelity not so of Reprobation; That is, the Will of the Creature failing in
Obedience.
for there is no efficient, but deficient cause of Unbelief. God's eternal
Purpose, his Foreknowledge, his Election are Acts of his all at a time and
before all time: The first news that comes Mr. Case in a Sermon on Romans 8. 28.
to us of these things, is in his Effectual Calling; here, and here only, it
will become us to prove and examine.

Election
Is an Action of the Father, Means. In the Son, according to the Dispensation
of Means. By the holy Ghost, for the Consummation of Means. To Faith the
Instrument of applying those Means. Upon Man the Object of his Mercy through
Means.
By the same Decree, and from the same Eternity has God ordained all the And
this is it which frees our Doctrine from all danger of working in men a secure
or careless Presumption (as it is no less ignorantly than maliciously aspersed
by some) since our evidence does so much consist in the sincerity tho: not in
the perfection, of Obedience.
means to every End, respectively, and those Means to lead unto that End; So
that none can further assure themselves of the End, than they are careful to
use the Means. He that takes his aim by the Means need not fear to fail of the
End; but he that by a preposterous haste to see the End, looks and leaps over
the means, can expect nothing but a fearful and destructive end.

In Reprobation (the reverend Davenant choseth rather to term it Nonelection)
Election may, at length, come to be known, and thence assurance; but
Reprobation never. Mr. Sheffeild.
none of the sacred and undivided Trinity are interessed farther, than that God
contracts his hand, and suffers man to remain overwhelmed under the ruin he
has brought upon himself. Election communicates good things to the Creature
immediately; Reprobation only Primate of Ireland in an Epistle published by Dr.
Bernard.
forbears to confer those good things upon some men; yet brings not upon them
the evil of punishment but in contemplation of intervening Sin. Man as fallen
is the proper Object of Predestination, and the fall of Man is an annexed
Condition which God looks at, both in the Elect whom he snatcheth, by his free
mercy, as brands out of the fire, and in the Reprobate, whom he leaves under a
Conviction as great as their Crimes or Sufferings. Of this we draw a
Resemblance, not from an Horse already lamed by his owner, and then beaten for
not going sound (as our Adversaries, the more to facilitate to themselves an
imaginary victory, will have it) but from a Man holding a Greyhound in a Slip,
and suffering Mr. Birkbeck in his Protestants Evidence.
him to pursue an Hare; the man, sure, did not plant in the Dog his rapacity or
thirstiness after the blood of that Animal; neither did he endue him with the
faculty of running; only he did not withold him. Thus, say we, was it the
voluntary Transgression of Adam, arising from his own free choice (for he was
created Upright, and left by God capable of continuing so) which introduced
upon the whole World, his successors (since in him we all have sinned) such an
Enmity, as God was no way bound to restrain; and out of this perdid and lost
heap none, we think, can come, but such as the Father is pleased to draw,
according to the good pleasure of his Will.

When we come to Heaven, we shall know even as we are known, and perhaps see
into the Bottom of this Abyss: in the mean time we must rest content with our
partial knowledge; yet acknowledge this for truth, Ignota possit esse, non
injusta causa.

Our Savior Christ's Satisfaction takes in the common Lump of Humane Nature,
making it capable of redintegration with God, and a fit subject for mercy; a
thing denied to the fallen Angels, whose Nature he assumed not; and, without
which, none of Humane race, no more than they, had been within possibility of
Salvation. His Intercession (that other part of his Priestly Office) makes
particular application of that benefit, and brings it home to those the Father
has given him, even to as many as the Lord our God shall effectually Call.
These know, they are to give him the Glory of his Works in them and for them:
whilst those that are left to their own devices know too, they justly suffer
(for those wickednesses they have adhered to, and perpetrated of their own
accord, and with full bent of Will, so as they must needs say, Ex me perditio
mea, Hosea 13. 9.) Let those whom this will not satisfy, ponder what is
written for their learning, and to stop their mouths, Romans 9. 20. We willingly
grant, we are so much dissatisfied with their Doctrine of Justification, which
they place in inherent righteousness, that we think we do well when we oppose
it in the first Seeds thereof, the opinion of Free Will. Is it not enough to
say, that when God has, in the first Act of Conversion, made the Will free
indeed, by quickening, enabling, rectifying, reforming it, then it acts, and
operates, according to its true, proper, and original Principles, in some good
measure, and is, forthwith, not merely passive? Or must we hold, that he only
proposes to the depraved Will of Man, the choice of Life, or Death, and leaves
him room Man is not active but passive in regeneration: In repentance man is
the doer, complies with God in it, and turns himself. Ephesians. 2. 1. Phil. 2. 13.
to Sacrifice to his own Net, in Case he miscarry not in the Election? Is It not
safe to hold, that, in the Commission of Sin, Man's will acts of it self (as
never since the Fall of Adam in a posture to do otherwise:) But in the
performance of Good, God acts by it, effectually restoring its lost faculty? Or
shall we take out of the Crown of the Almighty's Prerogative, so fair a Flower
as that of Election, by saying, He offers the means of Salvation alike, to
all, both in their sufficiency and efficacy? UUe all know that Man is not drawn
up to Heaven (as the bulk of a Tree from the place where it grew, with a Team
and strength of Oxen) by the Cords of an absolute Violence; We think That power
of God which subjects a man to Christ, comes not by moral persuasion only, or
violent impulses; but is tempered to the disposition of the Will.
not, that God so compels him to come in, as he has (through the whole) neither
Sense, nor Motion, or acts not in the Duty: But we say with Saint Augustine: To
will, God works without us; Lib. de gratia and libero arbitr. cap. 27.
but when we do will, and so will that we Act, God co-works with us. UUe say
not that any is made a Believer without Free Will; yet are we made Believers
only by his Grace that freed the Will. We do not absolutely deny the freeness
of the Will; but we deny that the Will is free of it self. For, whether out of
a true Judgment it move one way, or out of a false another; yet, in both, it
moves naturally, in a manner suitable to its own Condition; either as depraved
in it self; or freed by God's effectual Operation. Those very things which he
himself works in the Soul, he produces in it by such Allurements and Threats,
Expostulations and Adhortations, as are suitable unto, and fit to move a
rational Creature, and make the Will follow without Constraint. For that power
of God which subjects a man to Christ, comes not by moral Persuasion only, nor
yet by violent Impulses; but is sweetly tempered to the disposition of the Will
it self; which is so drawn with these Cords, as that it cannot resist, because
it cannot but yield. None of those Scriptures (usually brought in opposition)
are such Conditions, whose Effects stand determinable by Man himself: but they
are such Motives as God makes instrumental, to accomplish his own purposes, and
manuduct us to our Duties. This obviates all contrary reasonings, drawn from
some passages in holy Writ, clearly reconciles those with other parts of the
same undoubted Verity (unpossible to be done by any other Doctrine;) and
ascribes most Glory to God, bottoming all our Rejoicing only in him, wherein
there is no danger. Mr. Gery, a late Writer, explicates this in a fivefold
Order.

First, says he, though we have no power, now, to turn, since we are fallen in
our first Parent, yet he, and we in his loins, might have stood: And therefore
it is no Severity in God to require that at our hands, which he once gave us,
both a Command, and power to do. 2. God's Commands, as (since that) directed to
us, do not always import what we can do, but what we should; they do not argue,
ever, our ability, but our duty. 3. God requires it, though we cannot perform
it of our selves, to put us in mind of craving his Aid. 4. God's end in this
proceeding is to excite us to join in with such Means as are by his appointment
conducible and available thereunto. Fifthly and lastly, such Commands aim not
only at our first Conversion; but at our secondary and subsequent returns to
God, upon our prevarications from him, and after the first Infusion of his
Grace; when, we grant, the Will has some power and ability to cooperate, but
not at all before.
They who would introduce that Free Will, which will not down with us, besides
many other pernicious Consequences, put upon themselves a necessity of holding;
That sufficient Means is afforded to all, whereby they may come to Salvation if
they list: than which, what can be uttered more alien to Truth? For, how great
a part of the World do we know not to have any Means at all; not any, either
Notional as to the Adult, or Foederal Interest as to Infants, amongst them. If
you admit of Original Sin either in the Guilt, or Contagion it brings upon
Mankind, we have there a sufficient ground for God's Election of some, and
Dereliction of others; since the whole Lump being equally subject to Wrath,
it is Mercy and mere Grace that saves any. If you deny it, why are Children, who
have not yet sinned according to the Similitude of Adam's transgression,
subject to Death, which had never invaded the world, but for sin? I use St.
Paul's way of arguing, in a Case much like this, Romans 5. 13, 14. where he
proves the Obligatory power of the Law to antecede the promulgation of it by
Moses, from this very ground: Or, how would such children be under a necessity
of Regeneration, as all are declared to be? John 3. 5, 6. But, if it be true,
as needs it must, even by this last proof, That we have a delinquencie and
vitiousness of Nature too about us, even from, and in the Womb; How can the
Will be free to any thing but evil, till it be healed, rectified, and
made-a-new by God. There is no hope, that a sinner of himself, no nor by any
arguments (and, as I conceive, the Papists with the Arminians, Mr. Gurnal's
Christian in Complete Armor, part 2. page 526, 527. 530.
allow to the Grace of Vocation no more but a Moral Swasion, or probable
inclination of the Will, which they say, the outward preaching of the words may
effect) should be won over to like the Motion that Christ makes, so long as the
ground of the dislike remains in Man's earthly, sensual, and devilish Nature,
James 3. 15.

First therefore, God, by his Spirit, makes approach to the Understanding, and
on it puts forth an Act of Illumination; he beats out a Window in the Soul, and
lets in light from Heaven, renewing the spirit of the mind in knowledge, Ephesians.
4. 23. with Coloss. 3. 10.

Secondly, an Act of Conviction, which is a reflection of that light, formerly
wrought, in the Understanding upon the Conscience: by it we feel the weight and
force of those Truths we know.

Thirdly, an Act of Renovation, whereby he does both powerfully and sweetly
incline the Will to accept of Christ, and to make a free, deliberate choice of
him: without any compulsion, other than such, as wherewith the Soul cannot
choose but most willingly go along. And certainly, they stand upon very hard
terms with God Almighty, who are loath to ascribe to him as much as this comes
to, in a work which is not brought to pass without his exceeding great and
mighty Power, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19. And take the sum of all, that I desire should
be looked at as my belief, in reference to those points here touched, from no
less Orthodox a Pen than St. Augustins: Many hear the Word of Truth, De
Praedest. Sanctorum.
but some believe, others do contradict. Therefore these have a will to
believe, the others have not. Who is ignorant of this? who would deny it? But
seeing the Will is to some prepared by the Lord, to others not; We are to
discern what does proceed from his Mercy, and what from his judgment. That
which Israel did seek, says the Apostle, he obtained not: but the Election
has obtained it, Cyrus, who was Christus Domini, and therein but a shadow of
Christus Dominus, in this manner published his Proclamation. Who is amongst you
of all his people? the Lord his God be with him: let him go up, Ezra 1. 3. Now
they alone did follow this Call, whose Spirits God had raised to go up. But
could those that stayed still behind plead any thing but their love of slavery
and idleness, why they also went not up? Verse. 5.
and the rest were blinded. Behold Mercy and Judgment; Mercy in the Election,
which has obtained Righteousness of God, but judgment upon the rest that were
blinded: because they would not, did not believe, Mercy, therefore, and
Judgment were executed even upon the wills themselves. Thus far he. This
instance is by the Primate of Ireland brought in, and applied to our purpose in
a Letter published by Doctor Bernard.


But because a verse may take him, that has not patience for a long discourse,
hear Prosper, astipulating this Truth, That God powerfully leads Man in the
first Act of Conversion.

Non hoc Consilio, tantum, hortatuque benigno
Suadens, atque docens, (quasi norman legis haberet
Gratia) sed mutans intus mentem atque reformans:
Vasque novum ex fracto fingens, virtute Creandi.
Till I considered upon what foundation the Doctrine of Perseverance was built,
and with how many Cautions it is strongly impaled, I was as forward as any to
cry out, There was by it an open gap made for men to leap out at, and beyond
the bounds of that fear and trembling, with which we are exhorted to work out
our Salvation. But when I found that there were many Cases wherein a Christian
must needs lie down in darkness, sorrow, and despair too; notwithstanding all
the sparks of Comfort, which can any way arise from the Collision of his own
thoughts with his greatest measure of Charity and Obedience; or, from any
support offered from a weaker arm, than that of the Almighty: And especially,
when I find so many places in the Jer. 32. 40. Romans 8. 15, 16. 2 Cor. 1. 22. 5.
5. Gal. 4. 6. Ephesians. 1. 14. 1 John 2. 19.
Word of Truth to countenance it; I am almost induced to make a Question,
whether he that questions the Truth of this Tenent, did ever truly know what it
means. Those that may seem to make against it, are either directed to whole
Churches (which in the future succession of Professors, may fall away) or do
speak of common Illuminations, or outward works of Righteousness. To say, that
one may at this instant be truly a member of Christ, and, dying now, received
into Glory; yet, living but a while longer, may drop off from that
Incorporation, and perish for ever, has, surely, in it something of Derogation
from him, whose Gifts and Callings are said to be without repentance, Romans 11.
29. Isai. 54. 8. John 15. 16. It Is true, if the Springhead of our Adoption
were laid in our Free Will, our Assurance could mount no higher, than a level
proportionable to that: but we have this Aqua perennis, this Water of Life
given us to drink, by one who has annexed thereto a promise, Joh. 4. 14. And
whoever eats that Manna which came down from Heaven, has eternal Life, and
shall be raised up, at the last day, John 6. 54. Here is both meat and drink
prepared and fitted to become the Nutriment of an immortal Soul; and in case of
accidental wounds or distemper (such as wherewith our common Enemy, and many
inbred Traitors do conspire to infest us) the good Samaritan, and great
Physician (able, willing, and ever at hand, near to all such as call upon him)
can cure our imperfections, heal our backslidings, and receive us graciously.
Why ought we not then to be persuaded that he who has begun a good work in us,
will perform it until the day of his coming? Heb. 12. 2. He is the finisher as
well as the Author of our Faith; (and in his power, only, it is that we found
our confidence of being kept unto Salvation.) Since we are often called upon,
to examine our selves, whether we are in the Faith; 2 Pet. 1. 5. 1 John 5. 10.
Romans 8. 15. Jude verse. 1.
and may know the things that are freely given us of God; I cannot but wonder
at those men, who hold it either impossible (without an extraordinary
Revelation) or unnecessary to discover whether a man be, at any time, himself
in God's favor or no. Indeed the fullness of persuasion is more commended, than
commanded: It is not absolutely necessary to the very being of a Christian, but
it is of great importance to his well-being. It Is not an absolute Precept, but
a gracious privilege: without it a Christian may dye well; but without it he
cannot dye so comfortably: Neither, if he seek it right, can he be too covetous
of it. What if some vain persons, by a preposterous haste (never staying to
take in truly those Principles whereof the Ladder is framed that should help
them to ascend) will yet pretend to have reached the top of this excellent
knowledge, (which is too hard for the most, yea, scarce atteined by any, but
after long experiences of the ways of God) if such will needs perish in,
because they are, no better than players with, these flames? Shall, for this,
the Doctrine of the Saints perseverance be thought criminal? without which I
cannot see, how in certain cases and exigencies, any Balm can be found that is
likely to heal a wounded Conscience. Every one that has been present at the
pressing of this Point, might hear the Preacher say, In seeking after the Grace
of Assurance, you must not begin where God begins, but where God ends; you must
not begin at the root to find the branch, but by the branch and fruit to descry
the root; you must not, at first dash, eye Gods Decree in Predestination, but
through Regeneration take view of, and judge your interest. The truth is; He
that will not believe, until A late Treatise published by Mr. Calamy.
he reads Gods Decree in Heaven, must never look for any assurance of Heaven
here, nor fruition of it hereafter. It Is more possible for the Sun to co-habit
with undissolved Ice, than for true Faith to lodge in an heart hardened to sin:
Every right Believer applies Christ to himself, and himself to Christ; the
Promises to himself, and himself to the Condition of those Promises. If thy
hearing of free-Justification by Christ, Romans 3. 24. of Gods good pleasure to
give thee a Kingdom, and of his promise to keep thee by his power, through
Faith unto Salvation, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. make thee not to stand in awe, and not
sin, because his Mercy is great; thou have not yet, either part or share in any
of them. But if upon good and infallible grounds, thou have arrived at the
blessed knowledge, that God in Christ is at peace with thee; yet take heed of
slipping into sin, or growing careless of duty; lest he hide the light of his
Countenance, withdraw from thee the Testimony of his Spirit (that main part of
thine evidence) and leave thee to roar day and night, for the very disquietness
of thy Soul, till thou becomest like a Pelican in the Wilderness, or an Owl in
the Desert. If such a Night of Desertion come, if a dark cloud be quite drawn
over thy once-enjoyed comforts, thou will soon confess, thy best pleasing, or
most gainful sin, to have been full dear bought, and that sweet condition of
peace and joy in believing far to fetch. So that thy self shall, ever after, be
a witness, That the Doctrine of Perseverance, rightly understood, brings along
with it, what is as proper to the repelling of sin, as it is to the
establishing of Consolation: Since the fear of losing Gods favorable Aspect,
has something more of terrible in it, than the unconverted, who never had any
feeling of such matter, can apprehend.

I will fold up this sheet with the words of St. John, Whosoever is born of
God, sins not, for his seed remains in him, 1 John 3. 9. And leave it to
you to find out his meaning, if it import any thing less, than the being sealed
unto the Day of Redemption, Ephesians. 1. 13. 4. 30.

LETTER VIII.
HAving made some reflections upon those words of yours, when in our last
discourse (we rambled over many things very immethodically) you named a great
and pious Doctor of the Protestant Doctor Sibbs at Grays- Inn Chapel.
Church, who, from the Pulpit, had long since told you; that the difference
betwixt the Papists and us lay principally in this, That we believed not so
much as they. So great an inadvertencie was then upon me, that I made but
little reply, not indeed reaching so far as to deduce any objection which might
concern us, from the Doctors words; nor, I dare answer for him, did he dream of
such an acception of them, as might represent the choice betwixt the Religions
any way indifferent. But by the manner of your speech I have since conjectured,
you perhaps thought there might be some weight in a surmise which would flow
from the assertion, as if they went beyond us in credible things; or that our
belief, consisting more in Negatives, were not sure, but it might come short of
what it ought to be; whilst theirs, taking in all, might be looked upon as safe.

I hope the former Letters, if you please to re-view them, will give you some
satisfaction, and may serve to demonstrate that we, who dare not go beyond the
Pillars set up by God himself, in the holy Scriptures, to bound our Faith, are
in a far safer way and posture, than they who leap over, or trample them down
at their pleasures; And, that if we leave not them till they forsake the
guidance of Gods Word, and primitive practice of his Church, we run no hazard
at all, nor ought to find less esteem upon that score; but do indeed shun and
avoid the danger of Will Worship, than which there is nothing more prejudicial
to man, nor more displeasing to God, because of ill consequence to his Truth.

1. We do know, That no man is made a Believer without a freeness of Will; that
is, he is not drawn up to Heaven, whether he will or no, and all along by mere
compulsion, or without acting in the Duty (as the Papists, with other
adversaries of the Protestant Doctrine, seem to mistake us:) But he is made a
Believer, by Gods Grace, that frees the Will, and inables it to act according
to the motions of the Spirit, and to follow him in the way of his Precepts,
Promises, Threats and Exhortations. But, we acknowledge not, That the will of
man (on which, in its natural capacity, the Apostle James has fixed the
Appellations of Sensual and Devilish) can of it self, choose the better part,
being only helped forward by some persuasions, or probable inclinations, such
as the outward Preaching of the Word may effect, till God by an act of
Renovation, without any compulsion, other than such as wherewith the Soul
cannot choose but willingly go along (so sweetly are his operations tempered and
suitable to the disposition of the Will) has brought to pass a work, which
never would be effected, but by his exceeding great and mighty power. Ephesians. 1.
18, 19.

2. We do know, That in the Lord's Supper all Christ, with all the benefits of
his Life and Passion, are (not barely represented but) really and truly, yet
spiritually exhibited to every Faithful, Penitent, Humble, Charitable
Communicant. But we acknowledge not, That all Receivers do, in a corporal and
carnal manner ( John 7. 37, 38.) tear their Redeemer with their teeth; since
the Sacramental way of locution in the Old Testament leads us to the true
understanding of This is my body, in the New. Compare Genesis 17. 10, 11. Exodus
12. 11. with John 6. 47, 48. and 63.

We do know, That the act of Justification passes not upon the Soul, without a
work of Sanctification in the Soul. That good works are of such necessity in
the business of Justification, that there can be no Justification where the
practice of them is contemned. That the good works of the Regenerate (so far as
they are good, and the product of Gods own Spirit) are not displeasing to him,
nor of their own nature sin: yet, that in regard of much imperfection (which
the best of men will confess is adherent to their works, in this life) we take
a safe course not to place confidence, or set any value upon them; but on him,
who is the Lord our Righteousness, and our Advocate with the Father, Jer. 23.
6. 1 John 2. 1. But we acknowledge not, That the good works of just persons do
truly merit, and deserve Grace, in this world, and glory in the next: Nor, that
such good works are of themselves, without any Covenant or acceptance on God's
part, worthy of Eternal Life, and Vasquez Disput.
have an equal value of condignity to the obtaining of everlasting Glory: Nor,
that that is the just stipend, crown or recompense, answering to the weight and
time of our labors, rather than a free gift: Nor, that no accession of Dignity
comes to the works of the Just by the Merit or Person of Christ, which they
should not have, if they were done by the same Grace bestowed, liberally, by
God alone without Christ: Nor, that it is vain, after Grace received, or
infused, to expect a continued imputation of Christ's Righteousness.

According to the best Definitions of that Grace which the Romanist allow to be
procured for us by Christ, their plea for Heaven must run after this manner:
Lord, by the strength of that Grace, which (because thou did foresee, I would
use it well) thou have extended to me, I have so performed my duty in doing or
suffering for thee, as thou can not in justice deny me (for that) the Kingdom
of Heaven. See the Rhemish Annotations upon 2 Timothy 4. 8. 1 Cor. 3. 8.

But let them consider what Reply they could make, if God should enter the
lists with them, and say: I have a Law that requires perfect, unerring,
universal, constant, perpetual obedience; a Law that exacts Truth in the inward
parts, that is a discerner of the thoughts and spirit, that is not satisfied
without the whole heart: I have said, not one jot or tittle of it shall pass
away, till all be fulfilled, Matthew. 5. 17, 18. 22. 37, 38. These habits and
acts of righteousness which thou seem to rely upon, even thine own
conscience will tell thee have been imperfect, unconstant, partial, yea,
sometimes, none at all, but thy soul has frequently been inslaved to contrary
vices; therefore, thou must have something of more integrity, a more immaculate
and spotless obedience, to present me withal, and make out thy interest therein
too, before thy claim be just.

Now let us see what answer the Protestant Principles will put into our mouths;
and let the safer, the truer, the modester carry it.

Thus then:

Lord, I know thy Law is holy just and good, it is likewise eternal: by the
righteousness of this Law, Justification is to be had even yet, as well as in
the Covenant of works, made with Adam, before his fall; only here is the
difference: It Is now accepted in the hands of a Mediator, The Lord our
Righteousness, who, as surety of a better Covenant, and as Head of his Body the
Church, has fulfilled the Law in its utmost Demands. My faith, my obedience,
my charity, are all weak, poor inconsiderable things; Eternal life, and the
whole of my salvation from the one end to the other, is purely a free gift.
Though I have had some Graces of thy Spirit, in such a measure as have been a
comfortable evidence, that my heart was set aright to serve thee (for without a
conformity to thy Son in holiness, begun in the life below, no flesh may hope
with joy to see thy face above) yet I dare not, I ought not, to present these
unto thee as the matter of my justification; I have through thy mercy been
sincere, but it is in Christ only that I am complete.

We do know, That we ought to have in honor the Saints departed; and not to
think meanly of the Angels, those ministering Spirits. But we do not
acknowledge, that we ought to invocate them, or direct our prayers or vows unto
them, much less place confidence in the wearing their Relics or Pictures, to
prevent lightning, sudden death, etc.

5. We do know, That an high and profound reverence is due to Fathers,
Councils, voice of the Church. But we acknowledge not, That any particular
place, or succession of men, is exempt from all possibility of Error: Nor, that
Rome keeps her first Principles.

6. We do know, That men of ungodly, unstable, contentious dispositions, do not
look upon the Bible, without danger to their own souls, and pervert many things
therein to their destruction. But we acknowledge not, That, therefore, the
sincere milk of the Word is to be locked up from those that might grow thereby:
Nor, that meat is to be kept from the children, because it is sometimes abused
to excess and riot, by dissolute and licentious men.

LETTER IX.
THat Person (to me yet unknown) whom you did, some years since, substitute to
shape me an answer unto a few Lines I then hastily offered to your view, cut
his Work into a very uncourtly Mode; and takes it for granted, that I have not
so much understanding as to know, they would be understood to place the
Condignity of Merit in works done by Grace not by Nature; nor so much Learning,
as to English Opus Operatum. For the first, I would have both him and you to
know, that we oppose, as to Justifying before God, all Works both of Nature and
Grace. For certainly, if we consider the Testimony alleged; Romans 4. by Paul
out of Genesis Sasbout, upon the place, confesses it is meant of Abraham's
second Justification, (that is) of his Works done in Faith. See Selater, page
29.
15. to prove that Abraham was not then Justified by Works; it will appear he
was (long before that) Regenerate, and had sundry Works of Faith. It was a Work
of Faith that he followed God's call out of his Country: Compare Genesis 12. 4.
with Heb. 11. 8. Other Works of Piety and Love see recorded, Genesis 12. 8. and
13. 8, 9. and 14. 16, 20. Yet none of these, but after them all, Genesis 15. Faith
was imputed to him for Righteousness; and he obtained the Promise, (that is,
saw Christ afar off, and had his share in him) not by Working, but Believing.
And if Works merely Natural had been in Question, why comes in the Example of
Abraham, rather than of Abimelech, Socrates, or the like. That St. James meant
not to reach beyond Justification in Foro Humano, by that which he attributes
to Works, is evident from what he subjoyns, ver. 18. Show me thy Faith by thy
Works. He denies a saving power, only, to such a Faith as is not Operative; and
to such a one, neither do we ascribe any thing at all. The two Apostles both
instancing in him, to confirm their seeming contrary assertions, makes it
evident, they are to be referred to the several Tribunals, of God, and Or the
Eyes and Judgments of others
of Conscience. But if he will give me lieve to mind him, that the Franciscans
in the Council of Trent were of opinion, that Works done before Faith, were
truly meritorious in the sight of God; and how Sir Kenelme Digby doubts not to
say, The old Philosophers (without Christ, for so History of that Council fol.
197. In his Observations upon Religio Medici.
we all know they were) if any of them followed the Dictates of right Reason
(no Grace is there mentioned) might attain Heaven; it may abate his anger at
the Expression I there used.

I have set my self to School again, that I might improve my knowledge in the
Roman, as well as the Latin Tongue; and have learnt from those Doctors at
Trent, History of that Council, fol. 237.
That there are some actions which cause Grace, not by the devotion of him that
works, or of him that does receive the work; but by virtue of the work it
self. And, That Prayers in absolution are Fol. 349.
only laudable, not necessarily added to, I absolve thee: So making the
Efficacy to flow, ab Opere Operato. Thus I conceive is to be understood what I
have more than once read in their Books; That to the merit of Prayer, it
suffices that the words be repeated; but, if a man have a particular request to
put up, it is necessary the heart and affections accompany them in that desire.
I think now, there is no great difficulty in construing Opus operatum; nor was I
much out of the way, when I applied it to their practice in their Sacraments. I
do not conclude, that all those who delight to be styled Roman Catholics
(making light of the latter appellation, if not ushered in by the former) are
guilty of all this high Treason against God's Truth; nor of Misprision of that
Treason neither: for I am confident, very few of the Laity amongst them are
privy to such bold Positions as are maintained by Vasquez, with the now
predominant Faction of the Jesuits, and their adherents; yet it were well they
would consider, whereunto their implicit credulity would lead them.

I once had from the mouth of a Romanist, (whose memory has all the reason in
the world, to be ever dear to me) an expression wherewith I was much taken, as
neighboring very near unto Truth, and far from the malignity of some I have
before cited. When I insisted upon the Righteousness of Christ, as our
justification; it was answered, The difference laid only in the means of
applying it; and, that, not only faith, but the exercise of all other virtues
was that means. I have already declared, how this is attributed to the
instrumentality of Faith; it alone being that Grace which is capable of laying
hold upon Christ, held forth to the Soul, in the promises of the Gospel; and as
it is a quality inherent, it does not justify, Faith does not consist in a
belief that we do believe; but in an affiance bottomed upon such Trials as
Scripture holds out.
no more than other Graces. Now, if all Papists would grant, that only the
Righteousness of Christ is to be brought before the Tribunal of Gods justice; I
should, without any difficulty, yield, that all other virtues are inseparable
adjuncts to Faith, and admit them to the Office of applying (as without which
Faith has no such power, nor indeed can at all subsist) though not to the
Office of justifying. Cloth me but with the Garments of our Elder Brother, so
that nothing of my own may come in sight, and I shall be less sollicitous after
what manner it be got on. The Pelagians, for all their Confession that they had
their Souls, and all the faculties of them, their wills, and all the abilities
thereof from God, yet could not free their Opinions touching Free Will from the
just imputation of Heresy: So the Church of Rome, though she draw the fairest
colors she can over her Doctrine of inherent Righteousness and Merit thereby
(acknowledging the first rise of that power to be from God) yet (for as much as
she places the formal Cause of Justification in a wrong place, whilst that is
made a quality within man) cannot wipe off the Error of their Tenent, which
puts them under the Condition of, Do this and Live, never since the Fall,
required by God, in the full extent thereof (the perfect fulfilling and keeping
all his Commandments, yet this all Papists are obliged unto) Progeny of
Catholics and Heretics, lib. 2. cap. 21. page 80.
from any mere man. For the Gospel, in its Epitome, was early preached to Adam
presently after his defection, and so ran through the Administration under
Moses (whose Ordinances, Sacrifices, and Ceremonies were full of
Representations of Christ) as Believers are truly said to have embraced the
Promises, Heb. 11. 15. to have drank of him (1 Cor. 10. 3, 4.) in those times;
and were not under the Covenant of Works. But I am almost driven back into the
Ocean, when it is time to bring my Bark to shore; I will therefore draw in the
Sails, and strike Anchor, only adding this Advertisement.

They have long since been invited by the Pen of a very modest and temperate
Adversary to demonstrate, That certain Articles of their Creed, which surely
are main ones in their esteem (for they proclaim every Oppugner of them no less
than Heretic) were held for Orthodox during the first five hundred years after
our Savior, Viz.

1. That there is a Treasury of Saints Merits, and superabundant satisfactions
to be disposed of by the Pope. 2. That private Masses, wherein the Priest says,
Edite and bibite ex hoc omnes, Eat and drink ye all of this, yet eats and
drinks only himself, have their Authority from the practice of Christ or his
Apostles. 3. That the Laity are excluded from receiving the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper in both kinds by Christ's Institution. 4. That the public worship
of God in the Church, may, or ought to be celebrated in an unknown Tongue. 5.
That the Popes Pardons are useful or necessary to release souls out of
Purgatory. 6. That extreme Unction is a Sacrament, properly so called. 7. That
we may adore God by an image. 8. That the Pope cannot Err, in matters of Faith.
If they have already made this out; I pray you enrich me with the knowledge of
it: if they have not yet gone about it; put them upon it, and suspend your
compliance with them till they have effected it: But if they fail, as I suspect
they must, of For we will expect from them proofs both full, and legitimate;
beyond those usually brought.
performing it; what excuse can you have, if you disclaim not their Communion,
who have so grossly abused the world, with glorious nothings, and mere pretenses?

FINIS.
Part II.
Some Rubs laid in the way of those Jehu's, who at this time seem to drive-on
so furiously; which they must, necessarily, either remove, or leap-over, before
they can arrive at the Supremacy, or Infallibility of the Roman Church.

1. IF those words, Tu es Petrus, vested him in an absolute preheminency over
the rest; Why did the Apostles afterward ask, which of them should be Chief?
And why did not our Savior thereupon plainly satisfy them; but chose so to
determine the Question, as to convince them of the vanity in that Enquiry? Mark
9. 34, 35. But if an infallible Judge, in all Controversies, were thereby to
have been for ever introduced, the Wisdom and Goodness of Almighty God would
not have left a Point of so vast concernment to the whole World (in all its
successive Generations) without a clear and evident Precept.

2. From that minatory Exhortation ( Romans 11. 18, 19, 20, 21.) we collect a
possibility (for it is indifferently levelled at all Gentile Churches) and
particularly directed to Rome) that no less She, than any other, may be cut off.

3. Where St. Paul, Gal. 2. magnifies his Office in reference to his
Apostleship over the uncircumcision, and seems to confine the jurisdiction of
St. Peter within the limits of the Jewish Pale; he ought, rather, without more
to do (if a succession of infallible truth, to be derived from Cephas, to the
Chair of Rome, had been foreknown by him) to have directed our Eyes thither.

Again, where Acts 20. 29, 30, 31, 32. he sadly foretells the Church, that after
his departure, grievous Wolves should enter in, and amongst them many should
arise speaking perverse things: He advises them, not to make (in that case)
their addresses to him, that should then happen to be St. Peter's Successor at
Rome; but commends them to the word of God's Grace to be built up and
established by it.

4. St. John an Evangelist and the beloved Disciple (out-living Peter about
thirty years) should have ought subjection and obedience to Linus or Cletus, if
the primacy of Rome had risen out of St. Peter's ashes.

5. The Apostles send from Jerusalem to Samaria, Peter, and John, Acts 8. 14.
which is not, certainly, any great sign of St. Peter's jurisdiction over the
rest; since the very best in a Nation, are never sent out, be the Embassage
never so great or honorable; and where those that seemed Pillars are named,
Cephas has but the second place.

6. When that Article which relates to the Catholic Church was made a part of
the Creed; there was not a Bishop, nor a formed Church, nor peradventureso much
as any particular Christian at Rome.

7. Ere ever Rome durst be so hardy, Constantinople (in the person of John her
Bishop) grasped at the Title of Universal; which, then, was looked at as so
prodigious a Claim, that for it Gregory the First pronounced whomsoever should
aspire toward it Antichristian. And good reason had he so to do, since the
third Council of Carthage, Canon 26. provides, The Bishop of the first should
not be termed Head or Prince of Priests. And when afterward Rome would needs
challenge an authoritative Supremacy (not from the Emperors Laws or Presence,
which, indeed, was the true foundation of all the preheminency the Ancients do
at any time give her; but) from St. Peter; She should have remembered that St.
Basil, in his Epistle 32. gives to Alexandria, and in his 50. to Antioch, the
better right: Which yet he speaks not as conceding to any of the Seats of St.
Peter's Infallibility or Supremacy over the Rest: But to convince the Western
great Pretenders, by their own way of Argument, (as St. Paul does the denyers
of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 29.) having in his 10. left something of
another nature for the Westerlings to chaw upon. And in truth that smoaky Pride
he there mentions, could never ascend to its height, or any fixation, till in
the midst of the distractions that fell upon the Empire, the bargain was (add
fairly, if you can) struck up with Phocas that murdering Usurper of his
Masters dignity; and the possession continued by the weak Concessions upon
strange Interests, and Persuasions, of some late converted, and but lately
Catechized Princes.

8. The contradictory Sentences of Pope Sextus the Fifth, and Clement the
Eighth, as to the use of their different Editions of the Bible; The
inconsistent results of Councils, the First of Nice, and those Later of
Constance and Basil, as to the Priests marrying, and the Cup to the Laity; That
general one, the Seventh of Constantinople, as well as that of Frank ford
compared with the Second of Nice, as to the use of Images; Nay, the undoubted
mistakes of the Roman Council approved by Nicholas the Second ( vide Daven. de
Jud. cap. 23.) of that held at Neocaesaria, confirmed by Leo the Fourth, do
clearly speak out thus much, That Infallibility is not to be expected below the
Moon. During the great Arrian deluge, several General Councils obtruded their
Errors upon the World; and at last, Liberius subscribed to them; whether
through fear, infirmity of old age, tediousness of Banishment is not material,
done it was; and what has been, may be.

9. The Contests betwixt Councils and Popes for Superiority, could never have
happened; nor would so many learned men have militated, with their Pens, so
freely on the Councils part, if then, or in the Ages before them, the Popes
Infallibility had been settled an Article (yea the chief Article, as now it is
held forth) of the Christian Faith: Nay sure those of Constance, and Basil,
durst not have decreed themselves above the Pope.

10. If his Holiness have indeed the undoubted Privilege of never erring
Decision, he might do well to exert its virtue in those Points of the Seat of
Supremacy, the power of the Will, and the reason or ground of Merit. Why will
he suffer, for want of clear speaking, his own great Doctors to clash, and the
whole World to fluctuate in uncertainties, and under dis-satisfactions?

11. If we had lived when two or three Popes were up together, each one
Anathematizing the Adherents of his Antagonist (which was once and more for a
long time the case) what course could we have taken to discern the infallible
Head?

12. Since Hieroine informs us, Si authoritas quaeratur, orbis major est urbe,
in his Epistle to Euagrius, Printed at Basil, Anno 1565. Since Cyprian assures
us, Pari omnes inter se fuisse authoritate Apostolos, Tract. de Simplicitate
Praet. Printed at Colen, Anno 1544. (neither was St. Peter himself, if we
consult his first Epistle Chap. 5. ver. 2. and 3. at all ambitious of being
Chief amongst his Fellow-Elders, or a Lord over God's Heritage.) Since Amb. de
Poen. has taught us to say, Non habent Haereditatem Petri qui fidem Petri non
habent. But especially since we find the Bereans not only approved but
commended for searching (even in case of the Apostles own Doctrine) the
Scriptures, whether these things were so; we are bold to call them (our
Adversaries) to that Test. And since the value of this Cardinal Point (for no
less than the whole Frame of their Religion, as it is distinguished from ours,
turns with it) must stand or fall, according to the success of the several
Controverted Heads; I shall single out one which seems to me to be more
considerable than any of the Rest, and give a short, but, I hope, a clear
prospect, into the grounds whereupon we build our Dissent from them, in the
great Doctrine of Justification. And if that Church may be discovered to have
trod awry in one particular, the more than stupendous Fabric of her
Infallibility, Mole ruet sua, must fall of it self. Reflect then upon it under
the notion (for I desire rather to contract than widen our differences; though
I have not a few things to say against that congruous kind of merit, which
they will have to deserve the Grace which makes their after good works
meritorious) of that by them termed the second Justification, that inherent
Righteousness, whereby, they say, they may perfectly fulfill and keep all Gods
Commandments, truly deserve Grace in this World, and Glory in the next,
together with remission of sins ( Prog. of Catho. lib. 2. cap. 21. which their
Rhemists rather choose to say is recompensed than rewarded (because that word is
sometimes applied to the Alms we bestow upon a mere Beggar, who deserves
nothing at our hands) with eternal life; Justly and equally answering to the
weight and time of our travel; a Debt, but by no means a free gift, on 1 Cor.
3. on 2 Timothy 4. In respect to which Vasquez is not afraid to affirm, Post
infusam Gratiam, after Grace infused our Works are so perfectly meritorious of
eternal life, that it cannot in Justice be denied them.

Frustra igitur, In vain therefore after such inherent Grace were it to expect
a continued imputation or application (by faith) of Christ's merits. Yea so
violent is that Jesuit, in propugning these audacious Expressions, that he
lets fly on all sides against both ancient and modern Divines, that fly not
to the same height, calling in the definitions of the Trent Council to bear
witness, That inherent Righteousness has (of it self, without being eased or
lightened by the favor or condonation of God) power enough to wipe off the
stains of sin. And to clear all, he will have us to understand, that they
never request of God, that by the merits of Christ the reward of life may be
given to their worthy and meritorious Works, but that Grace may by Christ be
given them, whereby they may be enabled worthily to merit that reward; and,
that no Accession of dignity does come to the Works of the Just by the Merits
or Person of Christ, which should not have had, if done by the same Grace
bestowed by God alone without Christ. These are duri sermones, hard of
digestion; and yet they would have us by one strenuous Act of implicit
Credulity, to down with them, and to suspend our whole Belief, upon the most
imperious dictates of their supposed infallible Church: But we have not so
learned Christ. And (as to my part) after a long and diligent search (whereto
never any could be more engaged than my self) I despair of ever finding any
more sure, or near way to Heaven,

Than by renouncing in

Sanctification all my Sins 1 John 8. 3. Justification all my Graces Dan. 9.
18.
Than by having unfeigned

Repentance toward God Acts 20. 21. Faith toward Christ Isaiah 64. 6.
Matthew. 5. 17, 18. Matthew. 22. 36, 37. Luke 10. 27, 28. Romans 3. 31.

We find that Law which, had it not been weak through the flesh, should have
given Life, both declared and established: Expounded too we find it by Bernard
de verb. Es. Sermon. 4. who reminds us, That it requires (even yet) Obedientiam
rectam, according to the Rule; all that is, only what is prescribed; puram,
free from all blemish in manner and measure; firmam, steady, and without any
intermission. Chrysostom, upon 2 Cor. 5. holds out, as requisite to our
Justification, a Righteousness wherein there must not be either Spot or Stain.
The Law, thus applied and understood, is still (before God's Tribunal) the
Matter of our Justification, and there to be pleaded: but where to be found? If
we confine our search to within our selves, and fall seriously to ponder our
best Works, either of Nature or by Grace; we shall find it a Yoke, which we (no
more than our Fathers were) are not able to bear. Has God any where discovered
that he has drawn off something from its expectation, in order to its giving us
Justice (in his sight) upon more facile Terms? I think not. If then, a
fulfilled Law, and that the same was first given, must be presented to God for
our Justification, that we may appear faultless before the presence of his
Glory, Jude, ver. 24. Where may we seek it, and not lose our labor? Let them
that have a mind look amongst the Rubbish of their Performances; whilst we,
with a thankfully-humble boldness, do contemplate

What it is,

Dan. 9. 24. Jer. 23. 6. Romans 10. 4. Isai. 45. 25. 46. 13.
Where,

Col. 1. 19. Joh. 1. 16. Romans 5. 17. Col. 2. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 21. 1 John 5. 11.
How had,

Joh. 3. 14, 15. Romans 3. 22. Gal. 3. 24. Phil. 3. 9.
Let us now call in some Evidence, and enquire whether the Protestant Cause be
so altogether unbefriended by Antiquity, as some of our Adversaries are
desirous the World, should believe: And 1. what we meet with in Athanasius. We
find Tom. 2. That the fulfilling of the Law wrought by the first fruits,
Christ, is imputed to the whole Lump.

2. Gregory upon Ezekiel. Hom. 8. I will give it you in the Original; because
there is one Word, the just force and importance whereof our English can, I
think, but hardly reach: Justus noster Advocatus nos defendet in judicio; quia
nosmetipsos and cognoscimus, and accusamus injustos: Non in Fletibus, non in
Actionibus nostris, sed in Advocati nostri Allegatione considamus.

3. Chrysostom upon 1 Cor. 1. 30. It is not said he made us Wise, Just, and
Holy; but he is made unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Justification, etc. Upon
Romans 10. There is no cause thou should fear as a Transgressor of the Law, if
thou believe in Christ; because thou have fulfilled it, and received a far
greater Righteousness.

4. Basil. de Humil. Hom. 51. This is perfect and full rejoicing in God, when a
man boasts not of his righteousness; but knows himself void of true Sanctity,
yet justified by Faith.

5. Gregory Nyssen, on those words of our Savior, Beati qui esuriant
justitiam. It seems to me, says he, that our Lord, by mentioning Justice, does
propose to the appetite of his hearers his own self, who is made unto us wisdom
from God, Justice, etc.

6. Another from Chrysostom upon Romans 4. That one destitute of Works should be
Justified by Faith, might, perhaps, seem well to be: But that one adorned with
virtues and good works should, yet, be justified not by them, but by Faith
only, is admirable.

7. Bernard, who every where gives us clear glimpses of this light, lets it
shine broad out in his 61. Sermon on Canticles, where he calls us under shelter
of that Long, Large Eternal Righteousness of Christ; professing, He will make
mention of that only. And why must not Jacob attain the blessing without the
garments of his Elder Brother? but to impart to us the knowledge, that we must
have ingress into Heaven, no otherwise, than under the Tegument of Christ's
Merits. I may well, says he again, Ep. 190. call my self Just, but it is by his,
Christ's, Justice; and what is that? even Christ the end of the Law, for
Righteousness, to all Believers. It is not a short Cloak (adds he further) that
cannot cover two.

8. Besides Augustin's Non nobis, and his Sicut found and usually observed in
his Peruse his 45th. Sermon de Temp. and you will find by him, that it is the
fullness of Virtue which the Law means, when it says, Thou shall not Covet; then
adds he after this manner, It cannot be fulfilled.

9. But Sedulius, on Romans 10. shows how it may; saying, Perfectionem Legis
habet qui credit in Christo.

10. Both Irenaeus and Augustine do most clearly design that particular Act and
Office of Faith, which respects our Savior, whilst they expound John 3. 14.

11. Ambrose de vita beata, lib. 2. cap. 2. upon these words, Odoratus est
odorem vestimentorum: Peradventure (he says) it is meant, that we are not
justified by Works, but by Faith; because the weakness of our Flesh is an
impediment to our Works; but the Excellency of Faith does cover the errors of
them.

12. As we begun, so we will end (though it were easy to bring a whole Cloud
of reverend Authors to attest this thing) with Athanasius, de incarnatione
Verbi: It Is impossible that Purity and Innocence can be exhibited in humane
Nature; unless it be believed that God was in the Flesh, who brought into the
World a Justice free from all sin: Because we are made partakers Hujus, (render
it how you will of him, or of this) we shall live, and be saved: For, illud,
non est justus in terra (adds he) belongs equally to us all; and for that
reason, he descended from Heaven, who was to impart Righteousness (ex se) out
of himself.

These proofs are not cited in order of time, as they were writ; but in course,
as they seemed best to make out, what I have said before in this Point.

13. Ambrose upon Romans 10. He that believes on Christ has attained the
perfection of the Law: For; seeing (of old) none were to be justified by the
Law, because none fulfilled it otherwise than by hoping in Christ promised;
Faith is introduced to believe the Law fulfilled: That, all things else laid
aside, Faith might satisfy, both for the Law and Prophets.

14. Augustine again, in his 200. Epist. The Law says, Thou shall not covet,
and it says so, not for that here we are absolutely able to perform that
Command; but to show toward what our Endeavors are to bend themselves.

15. Theophylact on Gal. 3. No man can do what is prescribed in the Law; and by
its Sentence he that does it not is accursed: So it comes to be the Office of
Faith to give the Blessing.

16. To all such as esteem the Law so easy or possible to be fulfilled, let me
recommend Bishop Davenant's Treatise de Justitia Habituali and Actuali; and
particularly the 49th. Cap.

17. Hierom on 2 Cor. 5. 21. Christ being offered for our Sins, received the
name of Sin; that we might be made the Justice of God in him, not our own, nor
in our selves.

18. Origin on Romans 6. 23. Well does the Apostle here continue the Metaphor he
had before taken up, that he might affirm Death, the due pay of such as fight
under the Standard of the King of Sin, to be their Wages: But it would have
been as much unfit to say, God gives Stipends to his Soldiers, but a free Gift
and Grace.

19. Theodoret in Sophoniam cap. 3. The salvation of men depends upon God's
mercy alone, for we do not attain unto it as Wages. And on this very place (
viz. Romans 6. 23.) his words are: Hic non dicit Mercedem, sed Gratiam.

20. Lastly, our venerable Countryman Bid on Psalm. 23. And thus, that the
godly man shall be well rewarded, non ex meritis, sed ex sola gratia. Anselm,
once our Archbishop, has left behind him this great Truth (inconsistent, sure,
with those Rhemish Annotations I formerly touched, or the bold dictates of
Vasquez) That if a man should serve God, and that most fervently a thousand
years, he should not condignly merit to be half a day in the Kingdom of Heaven.
And more fully to our purpose in his Book de modo visitandi infirmos; If Satan
say, thou have deserved damnation; answer thou, I set Christ's death betwixt me
and my evil merits; and I offer his merits for that merit which I should have
had, but do want now. Lest we should apprehend (as the confident and diligent
Factors for the Roman Cause could be content to have us) that their Opinion in
this Point, had been derived to them through the long Current of 1600 years,
let us ponder the words of Thomas Waldensis, who lived a man of great learning
(even when the thickness of this darkness began to overspread the face of the
earth) Tom. 3. de Sacram. He professes his utter dislike of that saying, A man
may by merits be worthy of Heaven, of this Grace, or that Glory: However, says
he, (lo here their rise) certain Schoolmen have invented the Terms of Congruity
and Condignity. I do repute him (adds he again) the more faithful Catholic,
more sound Christian, and more consonant to holy Scripture, who does simply
deny such merit: And confesses; That no man merits Heaven, but by the Grace of
God, or will of the Giver; as all the former Saints and whole Church have
written. The same may be collected from Erasmus, who may certainly pass for a
sufficient witness in Matter of fact, Epist. ad Stephanum Rhodricum.

From these premises we, I hope, may with safety and confidence (after it is
past for Law, upon the venerable Bench of Primitive Antiquity, and veritas,
truth, is, non quod antiquum, not what had got a prevalence in our Grandfathers
or Great-grand-fathers days; but, quod antiquissimum, what from the beginning
was so) affirm, That even now, under the Gospel, Justification cannot be
absolved toward a Sinner, but in the contemplation of Christ's Righteousness,
whereby he, and none but he, fully answered all the demands of the Law. Nor is
it any prejudice to our Cause at all, that in the writings of the Latin
Fathers. the Terms Merita, mereri, and Justificationes do frequently occur;
since their importance with them for the most part is, singly, works, not the
desert of working, but particular Acts of Justice; and mereri, to attain unto,
or procure (as the way whereby, not the cause wherefore) the Reward of Heaven:
which is largely, as well as clearly manifested by our Bishops, Usher,
Davenant, and Downham; their true sense and meaning being not contrary, but
subordinate to our Doctrine. We shall not fear therefore to say with St. Paul
(compare Romans 4. 3. Ja. 2. 21.) That the best man living must expect
Blessedness without Works, by Faith alone; and yet that Faith must not, nor
indeed can, be alone in any good man: For it is as infallibly true, which St.
James tells us cap. 2. That Works do in the sight of men, and to our own
Consciences justify us: supposed or mistaken Faith alone, being dead and
ineffectual, can do nothing at all thereto. How this goodly Building of condign
merit, or Justification by the desert of inherent Righteousness, has a very
congruous foundation on the doctrine of Free Will, Alphonsus a Castro gives us
to understand, Lib. 7. de haeres. when he says; For this, even because we
consent to God's Monition, when we might have dissented, Wages are ow'n to us,
and from thence is our merit. If by this Monition they intend but a bare
ineffectual swasion, and then leave Nature to determine in that work, which is
not brought to pass but by the mighty power of God, Ephesians. 1. 19. the difference
betwixt them and the Pelagians of old, is sure but very minute, and scarce
perceptible: The one (though they would not hear of the energy of Grace, yet)
acknowledge, that Nature, which they so much exalted, was the gift and work of
God: The other (though they seem to assign a kind of Grace to the Conversion of
a sinner) coarct its operation under such Terms as render the whole business,
in a manner, the Fruit of a man's own acquisition.

Three Questions there are very pertinent to this (...), which being resolved,
are so determinative of the Point, as leaves the Judgment no more room further
to hesitate.

1. What state the Father of the Faithful was in, whenas St. Paul, Romans 4.
assures us, he was Justified without Works? The Romanists allege, that this is
to be understood of Natural Works, done before, or without Faith. Well, but
Abrahani was called of God, and answered his call, had received and embraced
the Promise, Genesis 12. built an Altar, and twice thereat invoked the Name of the
Lord, Genesis 13. had solemnly been blessed by Melchizedek, Genesis 14. had a
Testimony given by God, that he was his particular care, Genesis 15. had performed
several Acts of Righteousness in Faith, as is apparent from Heb. 11. 8, 9. and
was now about an hundred years old, Romans 4. 19. yet after all this, of him it
is spoken, and by St. Paul drawn to general application, That by Faith without
Works, (this is without any consideration had on God's part to their merit) he
was Justified.

2. What Law is it whereby St. Paul affirms, Romans 3. 20. that no Flesh can be
justified? Even that Law which to other necessary uses he was careful to
establish, ver. 31. by which comes the knowledge of Sin, Romans 7. 7. which is
holy, just, and good, ver. 12, Spiritual, ver. 14. Encomiums that cannot be
given to the Ceremonial, and therefore must be of force against that Doctrine,
whereby Justification is made to consist, in either habitual, or actual
holiness; all which is nothing but conformity to the Moral-Law, too weak,
through the flesh, for such an end.

3. What sort of Grace is there designed, where St. Paul (having by all his
preceding discourses, thereto ascribed Justification) subjoyns, Romans 6. this
caution, What then? Shall we continue in sin, that Grace may abound? It Is not
at all possible, or imaginable, that any body, how egregiously wicked, or how
stupidly gross and dull soever he were, should be of opinion, that by
continuing in sin Grace inherent could abound. By infallible deduction, then,
it follows, That the power of justifying is not by the Apostle left in the
hands of such Grace, but rests in that gracious imputation of Righteousness
through Faith, which makes our Salvation from one end to another, the free gift
of God; as we find it contradistinguished to the wages of sin, Romans 6. 23. Let
not any Romanist, here, think to come off by alleging, that they hold the
eternal punishments of sin to be remitted by the Sacrifice of Christ; which
being done, there then remains their good deeds to merit glory in Heaven: For,
pardon relates only to the person of the repenting sinner, not at all unto the
devious works, so as to render legitimate what was in the commission criminal.
But the Law, which takes no notice of Pardon, remains unfulfilled by the party
absolved, still: And a righteousness, adequate to that, must be found, before
we can claim the rewards of life. Nor let them imagine the business is salved,
because some of them build the reason or ground of merit on the promise and
acceptance of God: for neither can they show that ever God made his promise of
such a Tenure; nor yet will Vasquez (and therein he pretends fully to know the
mind of the Trent Council) suffer that to pass as Catholic Doctrine: for he
tells us, If our works be not of themselves, before the Promise, worthy; and
after the Promise do become worthy; it must follow, that for their
dignification, or to make them acceptable, the Merit of Christ must needs
intervene, and be imputed* Disp. 214. Chap. 6. That what I have delivered in
this Point, is the very Mind, Sense and Precept of the English Church, whereto
I desire to approve and submit my self, is manifest by her eleventh Article,
thus made up: That we are justified by Faith alone, is a most wholesome
Doctrine; referring us for farther explication to her Homily of Salvation: and
there we are directed to the right Object of Faith, as it justifies, viz.
Christ suffered death for us, Christ fulfilled the Law for us.

As Utensils, or a kind of hang-by's on to their main Point of Justification by
the merit of works, follow an whole Legion of vendible Pardons, Indulgences,
Dispensations; Terms which in the Primitive Church signified no more than
certain relaxations of Penances imposed upon Delinquents, and upon evident
signs of their amendment mitigated to the persons yet living: Whereas, in the
after practice of the Romanists, they degenerated into such notorious
superstition (as applied to the dead,) and into so great impiety (as extended
to the living,) that they have left skars upon the face of their Church, which
cannot pass for beauty-Spots. Of this we have all Germany for a witness: for
not only Luther (from the extreme grossness thereof (when he saw those goodly
advantages made the wagers in a game at Dice) took occasion to write against
them: But the whole Imperial Diet at Norimberg, Anno 1522. gives them a chief
place among their 100 grievances represented to the Popes Nuntio then amongst
them: So that we doubt not but we do well, in accompting them but as
superstructures reared with untempered Mortar, which we are sure will (as Wood,
Hay, Stubble) perish, and not abide the fire, that spirit of burning mentioned,
Isai. 4. 4. Matthew. 3. 11. Cor. 3. 13. It will be worthy the while to hearlien
(perhaps with more attention than the Legate Franciscus Theregatus did, for I
do not find there was any present redress) to the complaints of those Germans.
You shall have them then, out of a Copy printed 141 years since, and published
by Authory, faithfully done into English. They usher in all the rest by this
comprehensive one, which might have indeed a great many in the belly of it:
And, as we pass the threshold, we cannot but take up this Note, They fix the
blame not upon the irregular exorbitant actings of some particular
ill-governing Minister. But the Preamble runs thus: An hundred grievances of
the sacred Roman Empire, Princes and Nobles, which they put up to his Holiness
his Legate against the Roman Chair, and the whole Ecclesiastical Order. Anno
1522.

First, This is not the least, nor the last to be mentioned, that many things
are prohibited, many things imposed, by humane constitutions, which are not
commanded or forbid by any Divine Precept: Of such sort are, The innumerable
obstacles invented for the prohibition of Marriage, drawn through so many
degrees of affinity, and consanguinity: The injunction to forbear meats, which
God, notwithstanding, has created, indifferently, for the use of Man; and the
Apostle so teaches, They may be taken with thanksgiving: These and the like
stand in force, till money (which thus makes the same thing lawful to rich, and
criminal to poor) procure a Dispensation. By the casting of such illegal nets,
not only a vast quantity of Treasure is caught in Germany, and hoysted over the
Alps; but a most unreasonable iniquity is exercised upon persons equal in
Christianity: Whence arises great scandal, and heart-burning, whilst the less
able sort do find themselves intrapped and held fast, only because they have
not those Thorns of the Gospel riches; as Christ more than once terms them.

2. Of the same stamp are the proceedings as to set times for marriage; done it
must not be at such and such seasons; that is to say, if the parties think to
do it for nothing; though in the mean time both Ecclesiastics and Seculars live
most luxuriously: but if Coin enough appear, that makes all pass into just and
right: this likewise is a cunning picklock to the German Coffers.

3. They tell him how long this unsupportable burden has laid upon their
backs; that, Whenever some Church is pretended to be in building at Rome, or
an expedition to be made against the Turk, then, under the notion of a pious
Contribution, the very bottom of the German bags must be turned out; and, what
is more considerable, by these Impostures managed by a sort of Preachers for
the carrying on that work purposely set, true Christian Piety is almost justled
out of the Nation. For, ( that they may to most advantage put off that sort of
Ware) no end is made of crying up those Bulls, ascribing thereto a wonderful
and unutterable power of pardoning sins, not only past and to come unto the
living, but also, unto the dead, who are, as they call it, in the fire of
Purgatory; yet not unless something jingle from the fist. By these mercenary
Indulgences, not only our Country is drayn'd of Treasure, but the fear of God
extinguished, when every one must needs frame to himself a persuasion, that he
has purchased a secure liberty of sinning. Hence are Whoredoms, Adulteries,
Perjuries, Slaughters, Thefts, Rapines, Extortions, and the whole kennel of
suchlike wickedness. For who will any more be awed from evil, when once he is
brought to think, that for money he may have a license to sin here, and
impunity in the world to come? Especially ( add they) our Germans, who are
behind none in forwardness to embrace any thing, that has the countenance of
Piety.

4. But they assure him, The people are now grown by use so knowing of those
deceipts, (since they discern the Corn goes to the wrong Mill) that now when
there is really a need of their aid, they will not part with it.

Next is represented, how particular Causes are referred to Rome it self, and
there, if the just have no money, he cannot be quit; if the unjust have, he may
return home not freed from censure, but fenced with a Dispensation for the
future: and then, what cares he how flagitiously he live, since every
Hedge-Priest has power by the already procured Indulgence to absolve him?

Then they follow another sort of Indulgencemongers (their Stationary Preachers
of them) through all sorts of Villages and Habitations of men; standing amazed
to hear how confidently they bear the vulgar in hand, that it will make highly
for the thriving of their Families, if they give somewhat yearly to such a
Saint, whose prayer they set forth (suppose St. Valentine, St. Hubert, etc.)
but this Pension must go through the hands of those Priests. Again, they inroll
every one of these poor men for a reward, under the protection of some Saint,
making them believe an immunity from some disease or other, which would for the
year be the consequent thereof. In all which there is no greater design, than
to exhaust their wealth. This custom taking its rise from St. Anthony, has now
got an universal influence upon all maladies; for you cannot name one, over
which these Stationaries do not assign some such Saint to superintend: by this,
sucking the very heart-bloud from these credulous persons, and eating the very
bread out of their Childrens mouths. Then they lay open all the practices of
another sort of begging-Fryars Terminarii, who play their pranks too, and put
in for a share of the Peoples sustenance. Next they travel forward into a large
Field, fruitful beyond measure, in Enormities of various kinds, as abuse of
Church Censures, Multitude of holy days, etc. At length bringing us to the
sight of one, which though I had formerly heard of from Authors of
unquestionable credit, yet could not take root with me, till I viewed it
irrefragably made out by this authentic Copy of so solemn and great a
Transaction, viz. That the Church of Rome (for it is not to be considered singly
as a prevarication, in the managements of some private persons) could suffer a
Weed of so vile and poisonous nature, to spread its branches so far and so
thick: We see it full blown, and bearing fruit too, where their complaint is
thus renewed.

75. Furthermore, the Officials, drawn with infamous and insatiable thirst
after Gold, not only not discountenance Usury and unlawful Gain, but do every
where advance it. They suffer Clergymen and Religious of all sorts, (for money
still) freely to enjoy Concubines, Whores, Strumpets, and on them to beget
Children. But,

91. This Grievance is superadded, That in most places, even chaste Priests,
such as had no intent to use Concubines, are, nevertheless, compelled to pay
the Rate that such Dispensation would come to, and then let them choose whether
they will take it out or no.

These are Corruptions that naturally, and almost necessarily flow from the
Doctrines of Indulgences, Pardons, Dispensations, of Catholic (I mean
Universal) practice amongst the Pontificians; for, with us in England, we find
Grants of the same frame, nay worse, if worse can be: Two Towns in Essex given
to the Church of Ely, by Leofwin, to expiate and satisfy for the murder of
his Mother. ( Cambd. fol. 440. of the large English Edition.) And Alfrid, the
relict of King Edgar, founded a Nunnery near Ambersbury, having made away
Edward, who was by the former Wife, that her Son might succeed, Cambd. fol.
254. These are deeds of darkness acted in the light: And must we have the Gate
of Heaven shut against us, because we cannot but believe, That the Pope, who
interdicteth marriage to men in Orders, and yet by a Law establishes the
Iniquity of Concubination, who winked at such things as these, might, at
length, fall asleep, and give the envious Man large opportunities to sow Tares,
Matthew. 13. and 25. or because we cannot swear to all the words of that most
imperious Master.

Let us now crave, or if that will not be granted, take lieve to examine how
well they have stated this business amongst themselves; how, or whether at all,
they agree therein. Some would have us to think (for so it is often proposed in
gross, and so the greatest part of their own, especially Laics, understand it)
That the High Priest of Rome is no way subject to mistake. But that is not to be
defended. Then they inform us, That in Matters of Faith, he cannot err. When
they are driven by the Testimony of their best Historians, in the examples of
Liberius, Honorius, and many others, to confess, that this has come to pass:
Then; Not when he undertakes to teach the Church. Which likewise being
demonstrated by the instance of John 22. who both believed, and proposed to
others a notable Error about the Souls of the departed: And of John 23. who
publicly taught, that there was no life after this: Oh then; Not in a General
Council. But where is then their always visible, easily to be consulted,
continually necessary Judge of Controversies: for under these Notions they
commonly infer the reasonableness of their Tenent. The 300 years next to the
Apostolic times knew no such thing as an Ecumenical Assembly: the first that
ever was would not (if all truth had been to be fetched, if all power had been
to be derived, from Rome) by their quadripartite division of Jurisdiction, have
limited Sylvester, as well as the other three, to his proper bounds. The third
of Carthage would not have made a Decree to the contrary: Nor that of Milevetum
have denounced Excommunication against all such as should appeal beyond their
Sees. Neither would the sixth Carthaginian Council, so stiffly, have opposed
Zosymus, then Bishop of Rome, and his successor Boniface; till at last they
evidenced his pretensions to be false, by the attestation which Cyrillus Bishop
of Alexandria, and Atticus of Constantinople gave to the Nicene Canons. The
Pope had his Deputy at the Council of Basil: Its Decrees, together with those
of Constance, confirmed by Apostolic Letters of Eugenius, Anno 1449. ratified
by Nicholas 5. In them the Authority of a Council is set above the Pope, and he
is subjected to it. This is certainly to them a very pungent Dilemma: Either
let them confess that a Council confirmed by the Pope may err; or let the
Decrees pass for Catholic Doctrine* For our parts, we think, we can bring an
infallible instance from this Council, I mean of Constance, that they may err:
Since in that very Decree which they dared to make against the Communion in
both kinds, they acknowledge that they went against the first Institution. But
the Jesuits now at last (for what reason they know best) will, after all this
poother, have the whole privilege fitted to the narrow dimensions of the Pope's
Breast. Bellarmine lib. 2. de Conc. cap. 12. and 18. Thus at last, all Councils
must be brought back to the Bishop of Rome's Examination, that what he approves
may pass, what he is not satisfied in may fall to the ground: Gregory de
Valentia Ann. lib. 8. cap. 3. Thus the Pope indeed ought to use all good means
and diligence to find out Truth: But whether does he so or no? If he undertake
to determine, in a Controversy, he always does it infallibly. This is well and
soundly to the purpose: yet before they do vest him with that Prerogative, or
ascertain it to him, they put such conditionary Qualifications upon him (he
must be duly elected, whereto abundance of odd things must concur: he must not
openly nor in his heart, which no body can ever understand, be a favourer of
Heresy, and the like) as it is the hardest thing in the World to know when it
is fixed, and therefore no competent groundwork to rear our Faith upon.

Popery has its several Depths, wherein the Members of the Romish Communion
(however they would bear others in hand, and diverse of them may themselves
believe, that there is nothing but Unity among them) are more or less immersed.
Yet from a concession made by their daring Vasquez, though not made with any
design of reconciliation, but upon grounds that must perpetuate the Breach, I
can (methinks) bring the most of our English Papists, and a great part of their
more ancient and more modest Writers, within the comprehension of true, though
not in all regards sound, Belief. That bold Jesuit, where he so eagerly
contends for the condign Merit of Works done by infused Grace, and scorns to
derive it from any Covenant or Acceptance, on God's part made, thus argues:
(And indeed the consequence is very strong, though the use he would make of it
be very impertinent.) His words are: If our Works were not (of themselves)
before any Promise worthy, but became so by virtue of a Promise; the Merits of
Christ must necessarily be applied, and imputed, to bring such Dignification to
them. ( Quaest. 1, 2. Disp. 3. cap. 6.) Now for such among them, as do own a
Tenent that will undeniably fetch in the Merits of Christ (though it be not in
a way so explicit as is proper for the raising the Soul to those discoveries of
strong Consolation, which may flow from the Doctrine rightly understood) I dare
not but be so charitable as to think, That if they joined a sincere Piety to
that measure of Faith, they shall have their share in the Resurrection of the
Just, at the last Day. Their Notions seem (as to this great business) to run
into disorder upon a supposition, That the Merits of Christ are applied to the
Works, not to the Persons of the Regenerate.

To sift, therefore, these things a little; Consider:

1. That the gracious Condonation, whereby God is pleased not to animadvert the
Obliquities, nor the gratuitous acceptance, which he vouchsafes to our best
Actions, can neither of them relate to the Works themselves, nor have such
influence upon them, as to render them (now) Legitimate, which were (before)
Anomious. Will any body say, or think, That those illegal proceedings, whereof
many in England were guilty, ceased to be Treason, as soon as the King's Grace
had, by the Act of Oblivion, quitted their Persons from punishment? Though God,
in like manner, through the greatness of his mercy, do let all our guilt pass
into the Land of forgetfulness; yet, there is an holy, just, good, eternal,
exceeding broad Law, which must not pass away till all be fulfilled, which
requires the whole heart, and reaches the very inmost thoughts. Notwithstanding
Remission, this Law remains unfulfilled still; and poor Dust and Ashes (in
whose hands, through the weakness of the Flesh, it failed of its End) would be
left grovelling on this side heaven, if the glorious light of the Gospel did not
manifest a new way thither; not by patching up or ekeing out the rags of our
Works, but by putting on us the Garments of our elder Brother, and by directing
us (when we plead with our Maker, for the blessing) to make mention of his
Righteousness only. The clearest intimation of this is had from Jer. 23. 6. and
33. 16. laid together; where the Spouse and her Heavenly Bridegroom are united,
and put together under one Appellation, He shall be called, yea and She shall
be called too, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. It Is prodigiously strange, it should
seem strange to any, that there should be a Communication betwixt the Head and
the Members, such as may derive the fullness which is in the one (purposely for
that end) unto the other (see Colos. 1. 19. John 1. 16. Colos. 2. 9. 10.)
especially when they admit of a Communication of the Members, one with another,
by Supererrogation, whereof Scripture is absolutely silent.

Of Prayer to Saints.
THE Agents for the Church of Rome (who have, indeed, a singular Dexterity in
adapting their Discourses to the frame of the times wherein, and to the temper
of the persons wherewith, they are conversant) do think fit to assault this
Generation (trained up to a deplorable inadvertency, through the unsetledness,
and discomposure, which lately was upon us) by mincing, or veiling those
Doctrines and Practices, most liable to exception; putting upon them such a
varnish as may look best to the eyes of transient, slight beholders. Thus they
bear us in hand, that the Adoration paid by them to Saints and Angels, is an
innocent, humble, safe thing, whereby they only bespeak (and who will not
desire to make a friend in the Court?) those favorites of Heaven to be on
their side.

If this were all; yet, since we are sure, that he with whom we have to do,
perfectly discerns all the desires, all the necessities of his Supplicants: (a
Prerogative no Ambrose on Romans 1.
Potentate on Earth is capable of, and therefore several Patrons are there
sought out, the more effectually to inform them:) Since we are sure, there is no
Mediator betwixt God and man, but the Man Christ Jesus: Since to be adored is
so peculiarly due to our great Creator: Since to intercede, is, exclusively to
all others, in things pertaining to God, the Office of our Savior: We dare not
make the Angels or Saints departed the Objects of our Devotions; especially
since it is written (certainly for our instruction) See thou do it not, Revel.
22. 9. But they will give us (or at least we must take) lieve to view a little,
by the perspective of their own Authors, those immediate, downright
Applications, they would have it believed, St. Hierom, (for they are published
with the third part of his Epistles, though the style plainly speaks them five
hundred years younger) had not only accepted, but rewarded; being now in Heaven
a favorite.

1. Therefore we must make no question, but St. Hierom is equal to any of the
Apostles; John the Baptist having accompanied him (soon after his departure out
of this life) unto St. Augustine's Cell, purposely to assure that Father, he
would not take it ill, if St. Hierom were as much venerated as himself, and to
be feared above the rest of the Saints, having more power to prevail with God
for whatsoever he please, than almost any other has. We must understand too,
that Christ himself, with all the glorified Souls, and the Blessed Virgin, went
out to meet the Spirit of St. Hierom, the same instant it left the flesh, to
conduct it with more honor into Heaven.

2. Where it had not been long, before, three men, dying all about a time, were
brought before the Judgment Seat of God, and were upon the point of being
condemned to everlasting Chains; when St. Hierom (accompanied by John Baptist
and St. Peter) desired those three might be given back to him, for the
reverence and devotion, (I use the very words I find) they had always born him.
His suit would not be denied. He then takes them, shows them Heaven, Hell, yea
and Purgatory; then joins them to their bodies again, and sends them unto earth
for twenty days, under this condition, that, if in that space they could
perform the Penance due to their sins, they should then be admitted into Heaven.

3. During which twenty days, they conversed with several persons here, told
many strange and wonderful things (particularly one of them said, That whilst
he was dying, many Devils beset his bed, till St. Hierom came to send them
away, and gave him a better guard of Angels) at the time prefixed departed this
life over again, and were buried together in the Yard of that Church where St.
Hierom's body lies: And our Author is confident of their Salvation.

4. Thither, upon a certain day, when his body was to be removed from its first
earthy into a Marble Tomb, an innumerable company of people came crowding: The
restoring of sight to the blind; the freeing of Demoniacks, upon the touch of
his Relics, were at that time nothing: But a certain poor Widow, having one
only little Son, was there, and the Child pressed to death in the throng: In a
sad taking she carries her lifeless darling to the Grave, whence St. Hierom had
been taken; with these words: Holy, Glorious Hierom, I will never go hence,
till thou restorest me my boy: As soon as ever his body touched the ground, the
Soul returned again. And the like befell another also, that had been no less
than three days before buried, whom his father took up and cast into the
Sepulcher of St. Hierom, receiving him immediately from thence alive, whole and
sound.

5. We are reminded that St. John the Baptist made one expedition more, on his
Birthday, into the Church of Alexandria, accompanied by St. Hierom, both clad
alike in rich and precious Garments: In great State and Majesty they came hand
in hand through the body of the Church, top-full of people, and in two golden
Chairs (placed there, by something like two most beautiful Youths, for the very
nonce) set themselves directly before the Altar; a good while they remained
silent, civilly offering to each other the precedence of speech; at last it was
agreed, that because the day was solemn for St. John's Birth, the other should
first chaunt his Praises, which he did succinctly and elegantly beyond humane
expression: But then St. John fell to work, and so extolled his Companion, that
he left in the good Bishop Cyril (whose Vision this was) a great deal of joy
and admiration; and he published what he had seen unto all the people.

6. A certain man was infinitely troubled to think what condition his Nephew's
soul (a fine, but wild, young man lately dead) was in: at last, by
importunities, St. Hierom set him before his eyes, manacled all in burning
fetters; because he had forgot, at his last Confession, to acknowledge how
vainly he had been addicted to Plays.

7. Subjoyn to this another story of an excellently featured young man, who had
entered into the Monastical life, but was by his elder Brother over-perswaded to
marry; which having done, the same brother of his abused his Bed, and both he
and the offending wife were slain by the hand of this youngster: After which he
fled the City, turned High-way-man, committed many flagitious Acts; but in the
midst of all, forgot not to recommend himself to St. Hierom, and let scarce any
day go over his head, but, once before night, he would perform something that
was good to his honor. Well, at last St. Hierom caught him, by this device; He
put himself on the way, where this Votary of his used (with his Companions) to
play his pranks, habited like a traveling Merchant; is assaulted by him; but
the lifted-up arm, and drawn sword, both remained unmovable in the Air: at
which being strangely enraged, the Robber called his fellows to fall on: The
seeming Merchant besought him (even for St. Hierom's sake) to hear him, which
words, being uttered by St. Hierom himself, wrought so, as they all listened to
his advices, and became new men.

8. Let us fetch our next remarque (as my Author has done) out of Egypt. One of
the same long Robe, a Monk I mean, had, for twelve years, been an example of
singular Piety to all his fellows, and so chaste he was, that he abhorred the
sight of a woman, worse than of a Toad: The Devil though, that old Serpent,
made many assaults upon, and grievously tempted, him night and day; for two
months he valiantly resisted him by fasting, prayer, and providently putting
himself under St. Hierom's protection: At length, it so fell out, that his
Father fell desperately sick, and above all things desired to have one sight of
this long absented son before his death, which would infallibly be hastened and
ascertained to him, if he had it not. The scrupulous virtue of the man was
such, as (had not all the Convent persuaded him) he would sooner have suffered
his father to dye for sorrow, than run the hazard of coming where a Female
might happen to be: Overruled, home he went: After a while, a Sister of his
(who, at his going away, had not age enough to bear a Temptation about her, but
was now a very Miracle for beauty) and he, from adverse-sides of the sick man's
bed, met with their bare hands, whilst they were performing some necessary
office about him: the touch set him all in a flame, and that so burnt up all
devout inclinations in him, as, after their Fathers recovery, he lingered there
a long time without thought of returning to the Monastery, till as well shame,
as his Parents commands, drove him back: But, alas! he was there so perdidly
given up to that new and vile affection, as after some while, he, knowing where
the Keys lay, resolved to steal out by night, and run all hazards for its
satisfaction: This he attempted several times, yet was still so led in a maze,
that he could never light on the place where the Keys were, but run from place
to place, till morning overtook him. And what, think we, was the cause of this?
He had in his Cell the Image of St. Hierom, and every day on bended knees
before it, did commend himself to the protection of that Saint; and therefore,
that his admirable clemency might be known to all, he kept him from
perpetrating the evil he intended: Till seeing him obstinately bent, he
appeared to another holy man of that fraternity, and sent him to tell this
erring sheep, that (for the reverence he accustomed to do him) he had hitherto
secured him: but, if he gave not over his folly quickly, he would throw him out
of his protection. The admonition was scorned, the poor Monk derided as an idle
dreamer, and the next night the Keys were found, and the man let loose to reap
the shame and danger of his attempt: But yet St. Hierom (for he still kept some
kind of Devotion toward him) forgot him not; he suffered him to make this
experiment of his folly for his own good: By his intercession it was, the man
came afterward to true penitence, and underwent such austerities for years
almost two, as is not to be believed; dying, at length, very happily.

9. Take notice of a certain Priest-Cardinals story, Andreas by name. He, dying
at Rome, was accompanied to his Grave by the whole Clergy, people, and his
Holiness to boot; all on a sudden the Corpse stood up, as from sleep. Whereupon,
the Pope (which of them, tell you that can, for my Author fails me here) puts
all out, and enters into conference with revived Andrew, who tells him, That
whilst he stood at Gods Tribunal, and was even going to be transmitted into
everlasting torments, for the excess in meat, drink, and fine clothes, he had
given himself unto, a certain man more glorious than the Sun, and whiter than
Snow, whom he understood by others that stood by to have been St. Hierom, came,
and with bended knees supplicated the Judge, that his soul might return again
into the body, which was granted and done, in the twinkling of an eye.

10. Worse fared poor Cardinal Caelestinus, who being (it seems) an emulator
and despiser of St. Hierom, on a day when they had a great meeting (in the
Conclave, I suppose) used some rash and audacious expressions concerning him;
upon which he was suddenly taken with horrible pain in his Bowels; and thinking
to get ease, by the ordinary way of evacuation, retired himself, where he
extruded guts and life together, never more returning to his Companions.

These are, doubtless, Phancies of too gross and course a thread, to work up an
acceptable Devotion, or a reasonable service withal: But we will go a little
farther, and see whether those Ejaculations, and Orasons, they bestow on (or
rather throw against) the Mother of our Savior, be such, as she is at all like
to take in good part.

In a Psalter termed by them Bonaventure's, printed at Rome, An. 1588.
They think it reasonable, where David advances the honor of our Lord, to
turn all (by a simple Conversion indeed) to the honor of our Lady. For, thus
they invoke her.

1. Blessed is the man that loves thy Name (O Virgin Mary) thy Grace shall
comfort his Soul. 2. Judge me (Lady) for I have not departed from mine
innocence; but because I trust in thee, I shall not be weakened. 3. Blessed are
they whose hearts do love thee, O Virgin; their sins by thee shall be
mercifully washed away. 4. Have mercy upon me, O Lady, who art called the
Mother of Mercy; and according to the bowels of thy mercy, cleanse me from all
mine Iniquity. 5. Lady, the Gentiles are come into the Inheritance of God; whom
thou, by thy Merits, have confederated unto thee. 6. God is the Lord of
revenge; but, thou, the Mother of Mercy, do bow him to take pity. 7. We are
informed (by Sir Robert Stapylton in his translation of Famianus Strada) That
Mary of Portugal, wife to Prince Alexander Farnezes, called upon her husband,
in the Church of Scala, to join with her in prayer, to the Blessed Virgin;
supplicating Christ, that, in obedience to his Mother, he would give them
another Son. 8. Which, yet, has something more of Modesty in it than what
Erasmus (one that stood enough in awe of the Roman Church) complains of in his
time, and taxes both with vanity and novelty, (Epist. ad Steph. Rhodricum) That
it was then customary to beseech her to compel her Son, etc. 9. And what will
they say to him that quotes the places, in their own Writers, which affirm,
That the Blessed Virgin appeared, twice, in the place of two Nuns, the fruit of
whose wantonness would not suffer them to endure the Probation? Till they
disprove it ( it is Dr. Du Moulin has it in his Accomplishment of Prophesies) I
can do no less than stand amazed at so prodigious a relation.
In a Missal I have now by me, I find (besides many other strange things) the
Petition directed immediately to Thomas Becket, whom they hold a Martyr,
because he stiffly maintained the encroachments of Rome, made, about that time,
upon all Princes; but our Histories hold forth as a Rebel. Opem nobis, o Thoma,
porrige; rege stantes;
Jacentes erige; mores, actus, and vitam
Corrige; and in Pacis nos viam dirige.


What can be said more to Christ himself?

Let them be ashamed of what they sometimes affirm (when they would captivate
the judgments of those they fear would be scandalized to hear the utmost, at
first) viz. They tell such; Prayer to Saints they may choose whether they will
use or no, it is but recommended to them: I say, let them for shame forbear
insinuations of this Nature: They know their Council of Trent has commanded the
Belief of it under an Anathema.

After all this, deserves it not a full Consideration, That it is expressly
hinted (2 Chronicles. 6. 30.) that God only knows the hearts of the Children of men?
and this spoken in direct reference to the Duty of Prayer.

We have good information from Matthew, our honest Monk of St. Albans, in what
channel the Zeal, Devotions, Piety, Learning, and Studies of that Age ( viz.
in the days of Henry the Second) did run. To say nothing of all that bustle
and disquiet this Kingdom suffered about the Rights, Privileges, Exemptions,
Jurisdictions of Abbeys and Bishoprics, whereby he renders the Designs,
Encroachments, and Imperiousness of Rome so plain, that one who runs may read,
and discover, That they were both new and unjust. Let us here transcribe, as
near as we can to his own sense, a Story or two, ejusdem farinae, of the same
frame with those already noted.

It was in those days that one Godric, brought up at first a Pedlar, then a
Merchant, would leave all and go a Pilgrim to Jerusalem; returned from thence,
he must foot it to Rome; his Mother also will not stay behind; whom he
dutifully carried upon his back as often as any rugged or uneasy way opposed
it self. This journey happily effected, he brings back to his aged Father his
long absent Wife again: But immediately betakes himself to an Hermit's Life.
Passing therefore out of Northfolk (for there he had his Nativity) Northward,
he comes at length to Carlisle, and there by a Kinsman was presented with a
Hierom's Psalter; which in a short time, he was able not only to read, but say
all without Book. Then he slips from all his acquaintance, and to the wild
Woods he goes, which afford him herbs and fruit, his only sustenance for a
great while. The ravenous wild Inhabitants of Deserts, (that is, Wolves,
Serpents, etc.) would often come and look him in the face, and so quietly pass
away. On a certain day, he stumbled upon a certain Den or Cave, into which as
he was entering, he heard one bid him, by name, Welcome; whilst he returned the
salute, by name too, to old Ailric, though they had never seen, or heard of one
the other, in their lives before. Well; the space of two years, these two made
a shift to live together: And then Ailric growing near to his departure, Godric
solemnly adjures (by what warrant is worth a Quaere) the Soul of his Comrade,
that it should not leave that feeble Body, without giving him notice. Very
shortly after Ailric breathes his last, and something of a round form, after
the Similitude of a fervid, burning wind (this is the first time I have ever
noted a Similitude given to wind) all shining like clear glass, and encircled
round with incomparable white, appeared to Godric: But yet (as our Author with
great modesty and prudence adds) it is beyond any man's reach absolutely to
explicate Modum Qualitatis Animae. Ailric is now committed to the Dust, and
Godric comes back again into the Cell, to listen what God will farther reveal
unto him, as to his future Course of life. After many Prayers, not only a
Voice, but St. Cuthbert, appearing, tells him, It will be expedient to go the
second time to Jerusalem, and promises he will be his Adjutor and Patron, not
only in all things during that journey, but afford him a safe place to serve
God in ( viz. at Finchale) upon his return.

Let us briefly post over that Peregrination, which cost him many a weary step,
and meet him again in Esk-dale, where he had (forgetful, as should seem, of St.
Cuthberts invitation) an huge mind to settle; for he built him a little Hut of
Boughs and Sods, where he continued a year and some months; till the rough-hewn
Lord of the Soil gave him Disturbances so many, that he removed to Durham.
There he again conn'd his Psalter with other Hymns and Prayers, till he had got
learning even to his own Wish. He took a walk, on a certain time, to a
Neighbor Grove, and heard a certain Shepherd calling his fellows, to go water
their Flocks at Finchale. Godric, hearing this, gave the poor fellow all he had
(an halfpenny) to be his guide to that place: got thither, he hastens into the
thickest of all the Wood, and is encountered by an huge fierce wolf, which
menaced the tearing him to pieces: But Godric well aware that it was the
Project of the old Serpent (showing him the sign of the Cross) adjured him, in
the name of the Trinity, to depart, which the Beast did, crouching on his
impious knees, as if he had begged pardon. Thus far well: But let us now see at
what rate this Man of God sets himself to do him service at Finchale. Upon
those banks of Were the Bishop of Durham gave him lieve to erect a little
Cottage, where he inhabited among wild Beasts only; not unfrequently the Devil
presented himself to his view, in the shape of a Bear or Lion (the only mention
that I find of wild ones in England, but take it as it comes to me) of a Bull,
or a Wolf. He laid, to tame his flesh, not upon any bed, but on an hair-Cloth
upon the cold ground: Nay, (because Satan tempted him often that way) to
suppress the burnings of lust, he would (besides other severe remedies) on
frostie snowie nights stand up to the neck in the River, offering himself (in
that manner) a Sacrifice to God, and reciting Prayers and Psalms. Yet, even in
this posture the Devil was often busy about his (only not immersed) head; but,
when he seemed ready to rush upon, and overwhelm him, he was sure to set him
packing by the sign of the Cross.

On a certain day (for I must needs keep to our Author's words) whilst he was
sitting in his Oratory, and ruminating on (this is the very phrase) his
Psalter; a little boy seemed to come out at the mouth of his Crucisix, and go
straight into the lap of the Virgin's Image, which was placed on the
North-side, and bowed it self so much to help her child up, that the beam it
stood on seemed to threaten a fall, and ruin to the whole Structure, both at
his ascent and descent; but after three hours time, he crope quietly in again,
whence he had come out.

At another time he saw two fair persons of the female Sex standing at the
corners of his Altar: He stood amazed, yet observed them well, and sometimes
bowed himself, and said his prayers. At length they drew near to him, and she
that had stood on the right hand, said; Godric, know thou not me? He
replying; Lady, that is a thing none can do, but he to whom thou will reveal it.
The Virgin answered; Thou have said right: I am the Mother of Christ; and by my
aid thou may obtain his favor: That other is Mary Magdalen, the Apostoless
of the Apostles. Godric did all his Devoyrs, committed himself for ever to her
Patronage: They went off stroking his head, and leaving an admirably sweet
Scent behind them.

Whether it were at this time or no, I do not certainly find; but the blessed
Virgin did not only present to Godric, but sang to him, as well as taught him
to sing, a short Song; which he by often repeating, committed to safe memory,
and thus it went: Seint Marie, clane Uirgine,
Mother Jesu Christ Nazarene,
Onfo seild thin Godrich
On fang haali widh the in Gods rich:
Seint Marie, Christ's burr,
Meidens clenhad, Moders flur;
Dielie men sinnen, rixe in min mod,
Bring me to pin widh self God.


He that would master the Original must study Chaucer a long time; but in our
Matthew's plain Latin it sounds thus: Sancta Maria, Christi Thalamus,
Virginalis Puritas, Matris Flos;
Dele mea Crimina, regna in me,
Due me ad foelicitatem Cum solo Deo.


And in my plainer English thus: Holy Mary, Christ's Bed,
Virginal Purity, Flower of thy Mother;
Blot out mine Offenses, reign in me
Guide me to Felicity, where God only is.


Whether this were likely to be either sent from Heaven, or fit to be sent
toward Heaven, let the Reader judge: We must return to our Hermit. The
Parents of one only Daughter, his Neighbors brought (in a sack) their dead
Child, beseeching him to try if he could not restore its life. The humble man
(far from holding himself worthy to work such a miracle) seemed not to heed,
and went out to his accustomed work. They had shak'd the Corpse out on the
floor: finding it at his return, he fell to his Prayers, and continued his
importunities, till on the third day he perceived the Girl coming toward him,
as he was prostrate at the Altar, and delivered her to her joyful Father and
Mother. This was done at our Lord's Altar; but, lest our Ladies Altar be
thought to come short, know, that having laid another dead male Child on it,
their Son came smiling off to the admiring old people.

Poor Godric (having lived threescore long years in this Wilderness) had two
sore bouts more with Beelzebub. He betook him to his Bed the last eight; not
able to stir without lifting: Two Devils come suddenly, and (haleing his bed
and all) said, they would hurry him into Hell for a doting old man, that had
outlived all his wisdom, and was become a fool. But he fortified himself with
the sign of the Cross, and upon his prayer they quit the place.

The last Encounter I find recorded was thus. He laid, one day, all alone upon
his Bed; those that used to be about him, heard him (though then at some
distance) calling aloud: They found him, lying all along on the floor naked;
after they had laid him in bed again, they asked him, Why he would do so? He
replied; The Devil came on me so suddenly that I had not time to hold up my
Cross; showing them a lump upon his head, which he had got by that Malignant's
so violent thrusting him against a Block. At length, he found Death there, and
lies buried in the North-side of his Oratory, below the Steps of St. John
Baptist's Altar.

The same Author affords us a trim relation, concerning a certain Monk of
Evesham, who (having by a voluntary abstinence and watchings, not only
neglected, but done outrage to his body) fell at last into a Temptation, (as
Matthew styles it, and so he might well.) He must needs know, by some
extraordinary Revelation, what the treatment of Souls was presently upon their
dissolution. To this end, he makes importunate Applications to Christ, to the
blessed Virgin, but with special expectation from St. Nicholas his
intercession. At length, that Saint manuducts him into three or four sorts of
Purgatories, where he finds several of his known friends, under diverse sorts of
inexpressible Punishments, which (as some of them said) they must undergo till
the day of Judgment, unless (before that) either the Justice of God were fully
satisfied by their sufferings, or the munificent Devotions of the living gave
them freedom. Then going on to describe (for such as had attained that
immunity) pleasant Fields etc. just like those the Philosophical Poets, or
Poetic Philosophers (long since) made for the old Heathen. But in order to
this Discovery, and to confirm the poor delirous Monk in a belief, that what he
should see (touching this) was infallible, he must first find, behind the Altar
dedicated to St. Laurence, in their Oratory, a Cross, which they used to adore,
on such a day: With joy enough, it comes to pass even so: He falls a kissing
the mouth and eyes of this Crucifix: when (by and by) he felt something (with a
grateful warmness) trickle down upon his face, and wiping it off with his hand,
he found it Pure blood. Well; beyond measure (now) transported, he saw flow
from the Image full as much as a Phlebotomist would ordinarily take, when he
had struck a Vein: Whereupon (though he were not sure whether he might sin in
so doing, yet) he could not choose but swallow down a little thereof; but the
rest he carefully preserved. What is (let me tell you) very strange, this weak
decrepid Man could not merit to have all these Celestial discoveries, till he
had not only undergone the usual Discipline of Rods, from the Fraternity; but,
not till he had received (I know not how many) lashes (six times over) from the
hands of St. Nicholas himself, who, it seems (or else the Monk was mistaken)
afforded him both Instruction and Correction, in manner and form aforesaid.
Vide Matthew. Paris circa Annum 1196. Regis Richardi Primi Tempore.

I cannot but here insert what I find our Author very intent upon in two
several places; The Fate of William Rufus. This King had (indeed) not only a
close hand, but something an heavy hand toward the Clergy, especially Abbots,
and in time of their Vacancies would often keep them long in his own hands
(induced perhaps thereto by what he had seen in the days of his Father, when he
of St. Albans put fair for the depriving William the first of his newly settled
Royalty.) For this, these Men, from whom nothing of God's secret Judgment must
be concealed, tell us; That the very night before Rufus received his deaths
wound (by the glance of an Arrow from a Tree) in the new Forest, Anselm the
Archbishop had an admirable Vision; and thus it was. All the English Saints in
Heaven put up a complaint against the King; Almighty God (in wrath) bids St.
Alban draw near, gives into his hand a burning Dart, and bids him take revenge
(for himself and all the rest) upon the Tyrant. He takes it, throws it down to
the Earth, and gives Satan commission to put all in execution. Well, William is
slain, and his dead Body, at the same hour, met two days journey from the place
by the Earl of Cornwall (I do not remember any such Title on foot at that time)
on the back of a shag-hair'd, ugly, black Goat. The Earl adjur'd the beast to
speak what that was: It replied; He was carrying William Rufus to his Judgment.
Yet, we are informed too (by honest Matthew as well as by all other Historians)
That his body was solemnly interred (the very next day after he was slain) at
Winchester. Do but lie all this together, and you will find somewhat (I can
tell you) worth your noting. Oration ad M. V. Mariam pro Cordis Puritate.
Per sanctam Virginitatem and immaculatam Conceptionem tuam, Purissima Virgo;
Emunda Cor and Carnem nostram; In nomine Patris and Filii and Spiritus sancti.
Amen.

Juxta Exemplar Romae incisum.



This is subscribed to a Cut (black and white) which serves for a Chimney
Piece, at a Gentleman's house I know very well.

Touching it, I cannot but make two Observations.

1. That it is not true, what some Papists (when they would insinuate (to such
as they endeavor to make Proselytes) that their Doctrine concerning Prayer to
Saints is an innocent safe thing) do affirm: viz. That they never pray to them
for spiritual Grace, immediately.

2. That it is a strange thing they should publicly authorize, in a prayer,
such a Clause, as is very stiffly denied by one half, I believe, of their
Church; viz. That the blessed Virgin was not born with Original sin: or, That
her own Conception was immaculate.

Such a Reverence toward the Saints departed, as exerts it self in thanks to
God for them, and excites in us a desire to follow their good examples, all
Christians, doubtless, are bound to retain: But with such Sacrifices as the
voluntary and culpable humility of Multitudes, have, it seems, obtruded on
them, it is as certain, they themselves are far from being well, or at all,
pleased.

If the present Romanists will own practices, like these above; their next
Task is to defend them: If they disclaim them, they must disprove the
relations: In both Cases, we are not without something more to say.

Of Prayer for the Dead.
THere is no Controversy, wherein I found it more difficult to give my
thoughts a settlement, than this. It was, strongly, the dictate of my Nature,
not to omit any Office, which might possibly avail a dear departed friend: It
was, hugely, my inclination to subject my Judgment to the Dictates of
Antiquity: And, indeed, the Writings of some, justly to be reputed Fathers old
enough, are not without Expressions, such as, taken in gross, and at first
view, may seem to lean toward the practice of the Romish Church.

But, upon the most sollicitous scrutinies I have been able to make, little is
the Conformity, betwixt its Doctrine, and the Notions of those Venerable
Persons. Bellarmine (in his second Book and 18th. Chapter of Purgatory) will
have it to be most certain, that Prayers bring no advantage either to the
blessed or damned; only, then, to such as he places in Purgatory. But a man
with half an eye may discover, That those laudatory Nominations, those
gratulatory Commemorations, those benevolent Options, which, here and there,
occurr in the Ancient Doctors, with reference to the deceased, had no design to
kindle that imaginary Fire, which has, since, been made so terribly to Flame
in the faces of departing Souls; unless, by a liberal Donation, they would make
the Pot to boil lustily in the Pope's Kitchen.

St. Augustine seems ( lib. 9. cap. 13. of his Confessions) rather to indulge
himself (newly got from under some extraordinary transports upon the death of
his Mother) than to give determinate Laws for a necessary rite: For having
signified his full belief, that the thing he prayed for was done already; He
entreats Almighty God (not without something of hesitancy) to approve
Voluntaria cordis sui, words too feeble to sustain half the superstructures
that Rome would rear thereupon. In another place he solemnly professes, That
having wearied themselves to find out what manner of sins those could be, which
should impede our Admission into Heaven, and yet receive pardon by the
Intercessions of our friends remaining on this Earth, he was not able to attain
the knowledge thereof; and gives us lieve (elsewhere) to dissent from him,
where there is not evident Scripture to resolve our Faith into: of which sort
their own Bredenbachius does acknowledge, the Oblations and Sacrifices for the
dead to be. Vide Morton's Appeal, lib. 2. cap. 8.

Since Nazianzen, praying for Caesarias, since Ambrose, praying for Theodosius,
do at the same time profess a confidence that the Persons did possess Christi
requiem: Nay since we read of certain Liturgies wherein, not only Supplications
for Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, but even for the blessed Mother of our Lord
were inserted (yea and termed Sacrifices too;) what can we judge, but that
those addresses were either merely gratulatory, or proceeded more from the Zeal
they had of expressing their Affections to those parties, than from any settled
opinion of their necessity. The truth is, a Phancie had then got some footing,
which will not now generally pass for Orthodox, either with them or us, viz.
That Souls (of best Saints) departed were reserved in an outward Court of
Heaven (not in the Verge of Hell, nor under Satan's Jurisdiction, let this be
noted by the way) before they were admitted to the full fruition of God, nay
even till the Resurrection of the Body. This might occasion some modes of
Prayer, which yet do not at all justify that sort of Orasons, Oblations,
Sacrifices, Indulgences, which we condemn in the present Romanists. To
conclude; Though we should suffer it to pass among the Credibilia, That some
access of Felicity might accrue to a dead Relation; though I need not disclaim
that Opinion which tells me, a better Resurrection may be procured for him, by
the multiplied prayers on his behalf made, against that time when his Body, now
in the dust (or dust it self) shall be reunited to the Soul: Yet can I not
think well of that Doctrine, whereby so dark a Cloud is drawn, betwixt the Eye
of my Faith, and him, in whose blood I must be cleansed from all Sin; or
whereby I may be seduced, by a deceivable hope of succor from other hands,
after death, to venture upon the pleasures of Sin, for a season; under that
most deluding expectation, of having my Lamp lighted with the Oil of such
Devotions as are not at all mine own.

Of Purgatory.
BEcause we find not (in sacred Writ) a Fire penal, after this Life, but what
is kindled with Brimstone for evermore; Therefore we exhort all men to beware,
they entertain not a vain hope of escaping everlasting Burnings, by dwelling in
an imaginary Flame for a time.

Of Penance.
WHether it be a Sacrament or no is not here the Question. The Learned, on our
side, have drawn many Arguments, both from its Constitution and Institution,
which sufficiently evince, that it cannot (properly) be so esteemed, nor come
within either the nature or number of Sacraments.

Amongst the Genuine Concomitants of Repentance St. Paul enumerates (with godly
sorrow, indignation, fear) also Revenge: And, in some other places, and cases,
we understand Restitution, Reparation, Satisfaction to take place; but, in
reference to all these, there may be a dead fly, to make them justly stink in
the nostrils of God; yea, there may be (and it is to be feared the thing falls
out too often) Death in the Pot. Where the conscience is guilty of, and the
Church scandalized by enormous crimes, it is absolutely necessary (so far as
means or opportunities are given) to be much in exercise of such good works and
virtues, as are contrary to the vices we were formerly given up unto; both to
ascertain peace at home, and to cause others to say of us, as 'twas said of
Mary Magdalen; Our sins that were many are shown to be remitted, for we love
much. But, if Queen Alfrida, or Leofwin (who were both deep dyed in blood
guiltiness) give liberally to build Monasteries, under a belief that by the
merit of the work, they might leave this world in safety, and escape the
punishment due to those crimes, after dissolution; or that the Prayers, there
to be ratled over by the living Monks, should merit remission for them, being
already dead: There was, sure, an horrible indignity offered to our great
High Priest, who, by once offering himself, has perfected for ever, those that
are sanctified (Heb. 10. 12, 14.) There Is no doubt, but it is universally a
duty, to curb the flesh, to keep under the body, and so to bridle the appetite,
as to bring them under the yoke of obedience; yet, if any Monk, Anchorite, or
other person (whereof you may see many Examples in Matthew. Paris) should
macerate his carcass, and deny himself all use of wholesome food, till he
becomes fit for nothing but Enthusiastical dosings; at last (when he felt the
infallible prodromes of approaching death) engaging the whole Convent to flea
him unmercifully with Rods; from a conceit, that (merely) for such Penances
here, he should escape wrath to come, or deserve a greater degree of Glory;
what can we say, or think, but that he was, in a manner, Felo de se; and that
the best he shall, at any time, hear from the Great Judge will be; Who required
this at thy hands?

For the real presence, but not Transubstantiation.

I Perceive, by my Saviors own Words, recorded Joh. 6. 23. that I am under an
absolute necessity of eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood. In the first
place (having therefore considered of how great concern it is to arrive at the
true meaning of them) I do humbly supplicate the Divine Majesty (in St.
Augustine's phrase) that he will give me ever to think, comprehend, speak of,
and to go about that great Mystery, so, as may be best pleasing to him, and
most expedient for my soul.

His own Paraphrase, on what he had said, cannot deceive me, in the sense I
ought to give them. I dare believe (since he so told his inquisitive Disciples
( verse. 63.) that the life of them is wrapped up in a spiritual acception. And,
since he declares ( verse. 35.) after he had termed himself the Bread of Life,
that whosoever comes to him (which is the peculiar act of Faith, Joh. 1. 12.)
shall never hunger; and, attributes most clearly, in pursuit still of the same
Metaphor, the quenching of thirst to believing, as well in that place, as in
Joh. 7. 37, 38, 39. I can doubt no more concerning the matter. He takes not off
their amazement, nor gives stop to their murmurs ( verse. 61.) by assuring them;
That, though they were to see him ascend up where he was before; yet they were
ere long to have him corporally present, in the form of Bread, upon ten
thousand Altars at once; nay, in the very jaws of every person (how wicked
soever) that comes but to eat there: He does not, I say, make his return, at
this rate, but instructs them how to spiritualize the whole business, in their
apprehensions; as is evident from verse. 62, 63. Neither would any thing obscure
or difficult be found in the words of institution, afterward; for (besides
that Christ had, as we see in this Chapter, informed and pre-instructed his
hearers) there was almost nothing among the Jews, which had Type, or
significancie in it, but was expressed in this manner: Circumcision, the Pascal
Lamb, Manna, the Rock were all sufficiently known to carry the names of those
things they did but adumbrate. If we may believe St. Augustine (in Psalm. 98.)
with the most holy Sacrament, Not the flesh which was crucified, is carnally
eaten; but the virtues of that flesh are, really, eaten by the Soul, in such
manner as the soul can eat; that is, spiritually, by her affections, and other
immanent real Acts, or internal Operations.

Of Images.
ALL that dust, wherewith the Church of Rome would blear our eyes, in reference
to the use of Images, is easily blown away by the breath of that one Text, (
Deuteronomy. 4. 15) which plainly speaks no less, than that it is mainly the mind and
intent of God, by the second Commandment, severely to prohibit all
representations of him in his worship. The well-meaning Papist makes, perhaps,
full account, that he worships not the Image, but God (or some Saint) by the
Image: But, let them know, that most of their great Doctors have determined it
lawful (yea, absolutely necessary) to terminate a religious worship in the
Image it self; and that even it is to be worshipped with the same sort of
Devotion, as is due to the Antitype: For instance; If it be the Image of a
Saint, I must adore it with Doulia; If of God, with Latria. In this doughty
dispute, they have been so keen and eager, as whoever notes it, can be no more,
surely, of opinion that Romanists are (more than Protestants) at unity amongst
themselves.

Since I have so good an Author for what I am about to say, as Della Villa,
that noble Roman, let none be offended, if I insert here a (pleasant, shall I
say, or deplorable) story; however, it will evince, that there is abundance of
grossness in the vulgar practice. Thus it was: Upon the Persian Gulf (as I
remember, and not very many years since) the Portugnise Ship, he had taken his
passage in, was in great stress and imminent danger; the Mariners having now no
confidence in the Sails or Rudder, plied St. Anthony with their Orasons and
Vows; but, all in vain, the storm still rages* at last they tied the Image to
the main Mast, and whipped it most grievously; because, they said, he would often
do what they required of him for blows, when he could not be prevailed with by
supplications.

Of Miracles.
COncerning which, and more especially the dispossession of Daemoniacks, our
present Romanists are got to so great a degree of confident boasting, that no
place almost is free from the noise. We ought to regulate, and bound our Notions

By The light of Scripture, By The light of History, By The light of Reason, By
The darkness of their practice.
1. In the Book of God we have* a direct Prohibition, we must not make them the
sole or principal rule of our Faith; yea, not though the sign or wonder should
come to pass ( Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2.). We have, farther, a clear caution, that we
expose not (by too easy a credulity) our selves to such deceptions ( Mark 13.
22. Matthew. 24. 11.). We have, too, an evident Declaration, that it should so
fall out; the greatest part of the Earths inhabitants should be led away by the
prevalencie of certain stupendous works done by such as were, nevertheless,
great Impostors ( Revel. 13. 13, 14, 15.). We read again, of some that were
casters out of Devils, yet followed not Christ ( Mark 9. 38, 39.) And if we
should follow them into Doctrines, which are without the concurrence of his
Word (whether this be the case or no, betwixt Rome and us, may be decided
elsewhere) we might easily go astray. St. Augustine tell us, ( cap* 8. de
Civit. Dei) He that, yet, requires wonders, in order to his believing, is
himself a great wonder* And this leads us on to enquire after Historical
discoveries.

2. Whence, it will not be hard to learn what the Church, in times ancient
enough, held as to this question. It was, evidently, the opinion (of old) that
the ordinary working of Miracles ceased, when the Apostles deceased: That they
were of use to allure Heathens, and Unbelievers then; but, not to be expected,
or singly relied on, for the determination of a controverted Point, where
Christianty has already been settled: That they have been done by some persons
(in justification of their Tenants) when Truth was not on that side: That they
may, indeed, soberly be eyed, as a concurrent Testimony (where it pleases God
they happen) for establishment of a Truth, contained in the Scriptures; but,
not for the Introduction of any belief or practice, without or against it. As
to the former of these, Gregory, commonly called the Great, Bishop of Rome,
about an. 600, has affirmed; That, as watering to young Plants is necessary;
but not to rooted Oaks: so Miracles to the infant Church, but not when grown
up (Hom. in Evang. 43.) And St. Augustine, about two Ages before, makes a
wonder, not only at, but of those that pinned their faith on wonders. That
reverend African has taught me to say after him; Against the Miracle-mungers
(he meant the Donatists) the Lord has made me cautious by saying, In the last
times, false Prophets shall arise, and shall show signs and wonders, but take
heed, behold I have told you ( Tom. 29. Tract. 13. in Jo.) Mark 13. 22, 23, 24.
The false Prophets there said to do signs and wonders, were not to be Ethnicks,
without Christ, but only to obtrude false Christ's, or a fallacious way to him.
What need we say more, than what we have full and clear authority for, (1 Cor.
14. 22.) signs are not to them that do believe, but to them that believe not?

That great wonders have been done, or at least undeniably urged, by some that
had not right on their side, may visibly be made good, from the Testimony of
Bid, who informs us, that the argument from Miracle-working was very rife, on
both parts, in that grand contest about the time of celebrating Easter, lib. 2.
cap. 15. 16, 29. This may serve, as to the two first enquiries: and so let us
pass to the third Disquisition, viz. by Reason.

3. I would know, since sundry other miraculous operations, as well as casting
out Devils, are enumerated, in Mark 16. and said to accompany those that were
sent; why do not our Romish Priests appropriate and take to themselves all the
rest, as well as that domination over unclean Spirits? Let us hear them, having
never been taught, speak with strange Tongues; let us see them, unhurt, touch
all sorts of venomous Creatures, etc. let them show us that, immediately and
infallibly, they can cure all manner of Diseases. For, I see not any
differences in the Grant, in the intentional end, or in the time of
continuance. Again, the Promise may seem made to all true Believers, not
restrained to Priests only: and it is more than probable, that those Exorcists (
Mark 9. 38.) were not in Orders; Why then do they monopolize it, and think
themselves as sure of it as the Coats on their backs? We acknowledge, there
was, in the infant-Churches, a sort of Faith sometimes found, even amongst
miss-believers, which was productive of admirable events; (not of Satan's
operation neither.) This Faith having for its object only that essential
Attribute of God, his Power, and relying thereon by a strenuous Act of
Credence, particular to that business, impetrated frequently then (and may
peradventure do so yet sometimes) wonderful things at his hands; though neither
the Person, nor the Cause stood upon a right foot. St. Augustine, not denying
but the Heretics of his time might do true Miracles (I mean, things strange
beyond understanding) forbore not though to dehort his people from listening to
them upon that account, as may be seen, Tract. de Unit. Eccles. cap. 9. Tom. 7.
Why may not we also, though we should see wonders done, (even such as are
mentioned, Revel. 13.) bring them to the Test of Gods Word, and require proof
from thence, that those Doctrines designed for establishment thereby are true?

4. But let us in the last place do what we can to see through the darkness of
their practice. And, seriously, we can hardly be brought to think, that to out
the Devil of his hold, is the common, usual effect of their Sprinklings,
Fumings, Crossings; of their Beatings with the Priestly stole, repetitions of
Latin Words, etc. since we find not any of all these used by Christ, nor
instituted to any such end. Again, we must not, nor can forget, what palpable
collusions and deceipts they have been found to use in almost every place,
where they met with any body that durst but peep under the veil, they at such
times do hang before the eyes of the vulgar. Let the boy of Bilson (as yet, I
think, living a Shooemaker in Northhampton) speak. And it is not so very long
ago (about a dozen years) since a most gross cheat, of this sort, was re-acted,
and fully discovered at New Castle upon Tine. But, whoever shall peruse the
twenty fourth Chapter of Dr. Du Moulin's Answer to Cardinal Perron, as it is
published, Anno 1662. cannot, certainly, but discover what he ought to think,
and how to demean himself upon such Rancounters. What shall we conceive of
their giving a solemn Oath to Satan, and then questioning him about
controverted Points (as they did in the case of the Boy of Bilson) Oh! he would
tear (he told them, or made signs thereof) a dying Protestant; but a good (that
is in their sense a Roman) Catholic departing, he would be as quiet as a Lamb.
Does not this smell rank of design?

Spectatum admissi.
A Conjecture, how it is come to pass that the Church of Rome has partly been
plundered, and partly has cheated her self of so much Primitive Truth.
THe bitter Contests which had arose, and for some Ages continued, betwixt the
Orthodox, and Manacheean, Pelagian, but especially the Arrian Heretics, had
now alienated the minds of men, one from another, interrupted the
correspondences they used formerly to hold, and so shaken the Foundations, laid
by the first Master Builders; when the sudden rise of the Sarazen in the East,
and the violent rushings of other Barbarians upon the Western Empire, had
either induced or compelled the most (for the sense of danger is more pungent,
ordinarily, in temporal than in spiritual Concerns) to suspend the care of
Religion, and lay it out more sedulously about their outward Condition. It
pleased the most High to permit those Infidels to prevail to such a degree, as
the World was (in a manner) turned up-side down: And, amongst those violent
Agitations, Theology was forced to seek Corners (a thing that might happen to
the greater part, since we know, 'twas so here in this Island, upon the
Invasions of Danes and Saxons) so, as it was not easy to retain, either
Principles or Practices right. It Is, beyond exception, certain, That by those
Perturbations, Barbarism got so much the upper hand in the Commonwealth of
Learning, that what we have in writing, from that time till Erasmus, is (the
most of it) very litte above Pedantry; and it is probably true, That the marrow
of Religion was (so far) consumed, amidst these broils, as the dry Bones
thereof were much without life.

From the days of St. Augustine, downward, a kind of Lethargick Temper, as to
the more Spiritual part, did strangely, by little and little, insinuate it
self; till at last, the total of the Credenda was summed up in the Romish High
Priest's supposed Infallibility: And, very agreeable thereto, the Agenda
consisted in Pilgrimages, made Meritorious by his Institution, in Offerings,
paid to Saints of his Canonization, in Prayers to relieve Souls out of a
Purgatory of his Erection, in seeking after Pardons for Sin and Indulgences, of
his Invention. It was not hard to rivet these persuasions into the minds of a
People, the main body of whom was either lately converted, or lamentably
perverted. Neither yet do I believe that every particular Bishop of Rome, or
every singular great Man, who cooperated toward the Introduction of these
things, did act absolutely contrary to their Consciences, or merely by Rules of
Policy (though the course of story informs us sufficiently, that many of them
were of such Frame) but, one may, without violence (I hope) offered to Reason,
Truth, or Charity, entertain a Conjecture, That, after their hold of right
Notions was lost, their very Judgment might suffer depravation, and lead them
to build with Hay, and Stubble, instead of more precious and durable Materials.
However it came to pass (letting the contract with wicked Phocas, the Forgery
of Decrees and Donations alone, till the review of the last day) we find the
Pontifical See, in the 9th. and 10th. Century, arrived at this height, to tread
upon the Necks of Princes, to suffer them to hold his Stirrup, to dispense with
Oaths of Allegiance, to arm not only their Subjects, but their Sons against
them, and, by an unheard of Example, to kick off, or trample on their Crowns
and Scepters; whilst the Parish Priests stuffed their Auditors, with wonderful
relations of Visions, Apparitions, Revelations, which solitary Monks or
voluntary Hermites (those first Enthusiasts) obtruded on the World; all tending
either to advance the Reputation, or inhance the Revenues of the Clergy. For,
who would not lie at the feet of such men, as (as they conceived) did, ever and
anon, bring them News from Heaven? Or, who would not lie out their worldly
Substance in such ways as (those men taught them) were available to the
Redemption (out of a fiery Lake) of their own and all their Friends Souls? Nay,
who would stick at a liberal distribution of his Coin, even here, for such
large Indulgences, as then went a begging? During the disorders brought upon
Christendom (touched before) the Writings of the Primitive Fathers were locked
up in the privatest retirements of Monasteries, rarely seen by the Sun; where
they suffered a greater Corruption than of Moths, and were taught (in several
things) to speak the Language of Ashdod, after the Tone, and in the Tune of the
Superstitions growing more and more Epidemical: A great Instance whereof I
have, now, by me, an Episte pretended to be St. Augustin's (bound up with the
3d. part of St. Hierom's) but without any thing that savours either of his
Style, Spirit, or Doctrine.

One word, by way of Return, to several Discourses I have met with.
OF all the Rules that ever were given to judge of Religions by, you offer me
the most fallacious, The Examples of Professors: For, if the Austerity and
strictness of Discipline be it, we must look after; the Bonzi amongst the
Chinoyse carry it away from all I read of. If we must go to preciseness of
Conversation, or demure carriage, our present Quaker might lay before us a
great temptation. But, to speak seriously, Holiness of life, being the great
Duty of every Christian, is, doubtless, too, a grand Glory to any Church; and
that Religion, the Principles whereof do most effectually lead to sincerity
therein, does deserve to bear away the Bell. Yet to constitute the sanctity of
any man (the outside whereof only is to us descernible) the main Guide in
Religious Elections, cannot be other than a most unsafe course.

It Is the Roman Examples of Life (not the Controvertists) you would have me to
Contemplate: Well! But here you must not be allowed, to appropriate in gross to
your side (a Conceit I have always observed you apt to take up at adventure)
the Fathers of the Primitive Church, who had served their Generations, before
you put your Tenants (those, I mean, wherein we do not, nor dare go along you)
as a Law upon the World: No! You may find them, in a matter of Twelve or
Thirteen Points, wherein we think you Innovators, more Ours than so.

I suppose, then, the best way, to apply your Directions to our purpose, will
be, by examining the Lives of Popes, to discover, whether they have been
universally endued with Cardinal Virtues. Inform your self, I pray, by your own
Historians (for such words from my pen might look like Calumnies) what precious
men your Church was headed with, in the Persons of John the Thirteenth, Julius
the Third, Boniface the Eighth, John the Twenty third, Sixtus the Fourth,
Alexander the Sixth, Leo the Tenth. What great Scholars, the late Innocent the
Tenth, and before him many others of them were? Is there any Credit to be given
Platina, who acquaints us freely, That all the Popes, from Sylvester the
Second, to Gregory the Seventh, in number about eighteen, were, What? hark in
your Ear, and I Will tell you, Magicians. Can we stop our Ears against the
outcries of all Germany, about the Hundred Grievances (some of them
thwackers?) We cannot hood-wink our selves so much as not to discover, a
little, how things have gone, seeing we find Cardinal Julian telling Eugenius
the Fourth, That all Councils, since that of Chalcedon, have been instituted,
Not for the Investigation of Truth, but for the defense or increase of Power to
Clergymen.

Will you suffer us to put any weight upon a known Saying of St. Basil's;
where, in his Tenth Epistle, he tells Nazianzen thus; If the Wrath of God
continue, what help shall we have from those Westerlings (so he terms them of
Rome) who neither know the Truth, nor can endure to be taught it? If this be
the case, and I were to choose a Religion; I do seriously think, I might close
in with any, now upon the face of the earth (that does not in plain Terms deny
the Lord who bought us) less timorously than with Rome.

I am somewhat confident, and do hold it for a great Truth (which I speak
neither timorously, nor temerariously) That the Arrian Heresy, and the Turkish
Arms, which pulled all other things, where they came, down; lifted up the Pope
(by accident, and Divine Permission) into his Chair.

For the Eastern Prelates, and men of Eminency, being under persecutions at
home, had a safe retreit into the West: And therefore made that Patriarch their
Asylum: In order to which, or by way of gratitude for benefits received, they
often made the frame of their addressive Epistles to consist of complemental
Elogies; these (being no more than what the kindness and hospitality, wherewith
they had been entertained did seem to deserve) were yet due only to the
Persons, then sitting at the Stern (nor farther intended:) But, afterward,
cunningly made use of, and represented to the Credulous World for the Popes
Advantage.

One Observation more, and I have done.

The Church of Rome (or at least her darling Sons the Jesuits) will have the
Pomise of Christ, That the holy Spirit shall lead his People into all Truth, to
be suspended unto that very Moment, wherein their Bishop shall assent to the
Results of a Council; and the performance to depend on this Contingency
(amongst a many more) whether he will (at all) confirm them or no: Then, at
last, they judge them infallible, when the Pope, either present or absent,
signifies his pleasure so to declare them. Well! But Liberius (as above hinted)
himself confirmed the Arrian Conclusions of the Council at Sermium. And the
Pope had his Deputies at Basil and Constance, those Decrees were confirmed by
the Apostolic Letters of Eugenius. Yet I suppose few Romanists will grant,
these were infallible: And I think we may continue our Opinion upon good
ground, That the Roman Bishop's Vote is but a sandy Foundation to build our
Faith upon.

I shall, last of all, request you, not to refuse your joining with me in those
Words of our (and I think too of your) Liturgy:

That Almighty God will Grant, All who Confess his holy Name, may agree in the
Truth of his holy Word; and Zion become a quiet Habitation.

FINIS.
To the most Reverend; the right Reverend, Prelates; and all the Learned
Clergy in this Kingdom.
THat I have, without a word of command, presumed to engage in this war-fare,
requires (I confess) a submiss Apology; but, since I go upon that general
Precept, which bids us be ready to give a reason of our faith (and it is as
importunately demanded, now, as if never any thing had been done (by your
worthy Predecessors) for the Protestant Cause) I will not despair of Pardon.
There may be need, I fear, not only of the Chariots and Horsemen, but of the
Infantry too; amongst whom he desires but to trail a Pike, who is

Your just Adorer, and humble servant, Christopher Wyvill.

FINIS.

