A DISCOVERY OF THE BEASTS.

Being AN EXPOSITION OF THE XIII. Chapter of the Revelation of JESUS CHRIST.

Wherein All true Christians (yet in Babylon) are admonished to come out: And
the Anti-christians foretold what their plagues will be.

By I. W.

Revel. 16. 15. Behold, I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches and
keeps his garments, lest he walk naked and they see his shame.

Printed in the year M. DC. XLI.

CHRISTIAN READER.
AMong the many excellent helps which the Lord at this present time has given
unto his Elect, for to discover the Mystery of Iniquity: and to direct them in
the way which Ieadeth to eternal life, this little Treatise is a choice and
chief one. Thou art therefore desired to peruse the same with an understanding
and impartial heart: and so doing I doubt not (through Gods blessing on they
labor) but thou shall reap much comfort and good thereby. I have set it forth
for the public good, and do desire the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
it may prove so every where: even a means to raze down the false Churches, and
to help forward the buildlng up of Gods House. And so prays he who is thine,
if thou be Christ's,

I C.

AN INTERPRETATION OF THE XIII. CHAPTER OF THE REVELATION OF JESUS CHRIST.
THe Eternal (whose power is over all) from the beginning has put enmity
between the Serpent and the Woman, Gent. 3 15.
and between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent, whereupon it
has come to pass in all ages, that the seed of the woman has labored to
break the Serpents head; that is, to destroy his works, tread him under foot,
and triumph in victory over him: He on the contrary has labored as earnestly
to resist God; to deceive the Nations, and to bring all into condemnation and
destruction with with himself. And amongst the manifold ways and means, which
Satan has devised and practiced, to manifest his malice against God and his
Saints, none has been more dangerous, nor more availeable to further iniquity,
and cause destruction; then the Antichristian generation, which under the title
of the Church and Spouse of Christ, and Ministers of the Gospel, have
corrupted the earth, and brought the Nations into miserable bondage and
slaverie.

In this 13 Chapter is declared the state, policy, and proceeding of the
Antichristian Dominion and Kingdom, as the same was signified and foreshewed to
John the servant of Jesus Christ, in a threefold form, First, by a Beast
rising up out of the Sea, having 7 heads, and 10 horse, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10. Secondly, by a Beast coming up out of the earth, having two
ho^^es like the Lamb, but spoke like the Dragon, verse. 11, 12, 13, 14, Thirdly,
by an image of the first beast, which the second beast caused them that dwelt
on the earth to make, as in verse. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.


As the Dominion of the Medes, Persians and Grecians (which persecuted and
destroyed the holy people of God, the Jews) were signified and foreshewed to
Daniel in a vision, under the forms of several beasts, according to the
qualities of those Dominions; so here the Antichristian dominion which
persecuted the Churches and people of Christ, was foreshewed to John under the
forms of such Beasts as are here described, whereby we may learn that as
reason and judgment is not to be expected in a beast, so equity and right is
not to be expected in this dominion, but the contrary.

Concerning the first of these beasts, John says. That as I stood upon the sea
sand. I saw a beast rise up out of the sea having seven heads and 10 horns,
and upon his horns 10. Crowns: and upon his heads the names of blasphemy. And
the beast which I saw was like unto a Leopard, and his feet as the feet of a
Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion. and the dragon gave him his power,
and his seat, and great authority.

That by this first beast was signified and represented some state of people
and body politic, I presume no reasonable man exercised in the Scriptures
will deny, because (as it has been said) it is there to be seen that such
states and dominions as God has used as rods and scourges to chastise and
correct his Church and people withal, have been represented by beasts. States
and dominions they are of two sorts, either Ecclesiastical or Civil, but of
which sort the State here meant is, there has been and is great opposition.
Many understand it to be the Roman Empire, to which I cannot consent, because
the Roman Empire is ordained of God, and is therefore a lawful Dominion, But
the Dominion here represented, is said to be from the dragon that old serpent
the Devil, who is said to give his power and his throne and great authority
unto it, and therefore unlawful: neither can I conceave it to be any other
civil dominion for the same reason. But to be short I understand it to be an
Ecclesiastical State or Dominion, and in particular that Dominion which is
called the Catholic Church representative, consisting of the Prelacy and
Preisthood of many Nations, as Patriarchs, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops,
with diverse other elected persons, who being called and gathered into Counsels
or Synods, (usually called general Counsels) did usurp and take on them the
office of Jesus Christ in making laws and Canons, erecting Courts, instituting
offices and officers in matters of Religion, as for the government of the
Church and for the worship of God) to be of all men observed and obeyed. These
general Counsels (or as the Catholics call it) the Catholic Church
representative, have challenged and exercised spiritual authority and
dominion, According to the text, over all kindreds tongus and nations. By their
laws and canons they guided and governed them as one uniuersall or Catholic
Church, and made them also to observe their decrees and commandments for
doctrine, this they have done both before and also since the Pope was exalted
to his dignity, as all histories of the Church do testify, So that it has
been and is a great question among the Catholics whither the authority of the
Pope, or the Catholic Church in cases of Religion be the greater. And whereas
it is said in the 12. verse that the second beast exercised all the power of
the first Beast before him, thereby is confirmed the truth of this exposition.
For the second Beast being the Pope as hereafter is showed (has exercised the
whole power of the Catholic Church or general counsels, and not of any other
state or Dominion.

Further that this is the first beast here presented that which follows
(through Gods help) shall make manifest and apparent. But before I do proceed
I desire the reader to observe that I do not condemn all use of counsels and
Synods, but do hold that diverse churches may lawfully be assembled together,
to consult and advise of matters concerning Religion, and the worship of God,
for their instruction and information of their Judgments, and so a good and
holy use may be thereof. But that any counsels have such power over the church
of Christ, as to impose upon them their comandements for doctrine, and usurp
the government of the Churches, and to rule and reign over them by their laws
and Canons, and prescribe rules and forms how God will be worshipped, as these
general counsels have done, that I do deny, as being contrary to the
perfecton of the holy Scriptures and the practice of the Apostles and Elders of
the-Church of Jerusalem, 2 Timothy 3.17 Deuteronomy. 4.2 Reve. 22, 18 Act. 5, 10,
who being assembled together did profess it to be a tempting of God to lay
such a yok on the disciples necks, as the observing of the Jewish ceremonies,
which being unlawful to do, it is uuch more unlawful to devise and impose any
other. And therefore the said assembly of the Apostles and Elders concluded to
lay no greater burden upon the disciples, then to abstain from such necessary
things as either were simply evil in them selves, as fornication, Act. 15, 8
19, etc.
or else evil in respect of offense, as meat offered to Idols, blood and
things strangled.

Now to proceed. first it is said of this Beast. That he did rise up out of
the sea, By his rising up was foreshewd that the Antichristian policy should
arise from a poor and mean estate to great riches and honor in the world,
which we and former generations have seen to the uttermost fulfilled. For
days there were when the Churches of Christ both Ministers and people were
hated, despised, and persecuted in the world; spoiled of their goods, made
gazing stocks and wonders, and afflicted with all kind of cruelty, as
histories both sacred and humane do abundantly specify and declare. The
Apostle Paul says of himself and his fellow-bretheren the Ministers of the
Gospel, that they were as men appointed to death: and in the account of the
world, as the filth, refuse, and of-scouring of all things. But since this
beastly generation has succeeded the Church, and under the titles of Ministers
of the Gospel, and the Bishops over Gods people, have found means by little
and little to rise up, and to exalt themselves over the Nations, and to bring
the multitudes, and peoples, and Nations, and Tongues, under their
Jurisdiction, rule and Dominion, Rev 18 3 2 These. 2. 7.
and they have so risen up, that they are become the great men of the earth,
and are waxed rich through the abundance of their delicacies. This mystery of
iniquity was working in the Apostles time, for there were then crept into the
Church those that desired worldly pomp and promotion, and were not contented
with the portion of the Lords Heritage, but their ambitious desires could not
then be satisfied, there was a let in the way that hindered it, which lets
being removed, their purposes (soon after) took effect, fitly therefore is
this generation said to rise up (in respect of those whose successors they
boast themselves to be.) The former hold no certain dwelling places, but were
exposed to hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness, buffetings, etc. But these latter
have their Lordly Houses, warlike Castles, and Princelike Palaces, they have
their Rents, Revenues, and abundance of riches, in great excess, they are
pompously arrayed in stately Robes and rich apparel, they rule like Lords over
the people, and have power to aflict all that will not bear the yoke of their
Dominion, thus is this generation risen up and exalted as all may see that list
to mind it.

The Place from whence this Beast is said to rise up, is the sea, The natural
sea we know is the gathering together of many waters, Genesis 1.9. 10. A Like
thing must that be out of which this beast was to rise, But in the 17. Chapter.
Multitudes, and nations, peoples, and Tongues, are resembled by waters,
therefore the gathering together of such into one body politic, may rightly be
resembled by the Sea. Thus then the truth stands, By the rising up of this
Beast out of the Sea, was foreshewed, that those many waters (that is, the
people, and multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues, not only under the Roman
Empire: but most nations and people of the World) being gathered into one Sea,
or Ecclesiastical State, should breed and bring forth this Monster.

For they being of two contrary sorts, the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of
the Woman, Children of the Kingdom, and children of the wicked; unto the one
sort the Word of God (in the administration thereof) is the savor of life unto
life, unto the other sort it is the savor of death unto death. The one sort
fear God, and will obey him rather then man; The other fear and reverence the
arm of flesh, more then they do the living God. These (as light and darkness)
being contrary one to another; the one being of Christ, the other of Belial;
how therefore should they in things concerning God and Christ, Faith and
Religion, agree together?

Those which be of God, cannot but witness against those that be of the world,
because their deeds are evil. Those which are of the world, are heady,
high-minded, proud boasters, wise in their own conceit, and therefore scorn to
be rebuked, and hate to be reformed. These being together in the world as Wheat
and Tares in one field; and as Sheep and Goats in one Flock; the true end of
the administration of the Word of God had been to call and separate the one
from the other, the precious from the vile, believers from infidels. But
notwithstanding, this generation thought it to be wisdom to take a contrary
course, namely, to bring all people of all sorts to be one Church, and likewise
unto uniformity in Religion. And because it could not be effected by the Word
of God (that sword of the Spirit) they procured the help of worldly governors
to bring it to pass by their power and command. By which device and policy
these many waters, that is, the Nations and people have been gathered into one
Church, and Ecclesiastical body politic, here represented by the Sea, and
have been brought to use all one order or worship, service, and government.

But this conformity not being procured through love, but constrained by
fear, was but an humane devise, and worldly policy, and no divine Institution,
and therefore could not be upholden, maintained, and continued by the Word of
God, and the administration of a serviceable Ministry; but by the overruling
power of a Lordly Prelacie, whereupon it was thought meet that Synods or
Counsels of the chiefest of the Prelates and Clergy of diverse Dominions
should be gathered together to make Laws and Canons, which all men should be
constrained by penal Laws to observe and yield obedience unto, and so peace
and unity might be preserved and kept amongst them. And in short time it came
to pass, that whatsoever these Synods or Counsels did agree upon, and set
down, (how false soever) was to be held Canonical, and those that contradicted
the same, were therefore cast out and condemned as Heretics. This was the
manner and the occasion of the rising of this Beast out of this turbulent Sea.
And here by the way observe, (...) 1.17
That every good giving, and perfect gift is from above, from the Father of
lights: But this Beast is from the Sea beneath, not from above, and therefore
not belonging to the kingdom of Christ, But an adversary and enemy thereof.

Of this Beast it is said, that he had 7, heads, a thing which is monstrous in
nature, And therefore by this wasforeshewed that the dominion represented by
this beast should be a monstrous dominion.

Concerning these heads, let this be considered, That the whole state or
society of the Antichristian Sea, is of two sorts of people; the one sort they
call the Clergy, the other sort the Layetie. Of these; the Clergy are as
heads and guides to direct and go before, and the Laietie as the body, or
rather the tail, to follow after. Again, by the same policy, their Clergy
are sorted into seven orders or degrees, namely (to speak in their language)
1. Iamtores sets ostiarij. 2. Lectares. 3. Exorcistie, 4. Acolithi. 5.
Subdiaconi. 6. Diaconi. 7. Sacerdotes. These are the seven orders of the
Antichristian Clergy. As for Popes, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacous, etc. they are titles of Dignity, and not of order. For
the Pope is but a Priest concerning his orders, and when he stands at the Altar
and faith Mass, he does that as Priest, and not as a Pope, and so of all other
degrees. This considered, it may well be said of the Antichristian Synagogue
and State, that it is as a Monster with seven heads. As for the Ministers which
God has ordained to be in his Church, they are first Apostles, secondly
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc. 1 Cor. 12.28, etc. See also, Romans 12.6, 7, 1.
and Ephesians. 4, 11, 12, 13. And these only were given for the gathering together
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edification of the
body of Christ. Not some to have a bunch of Keys, with a charge of the doors of
this or that Temple or Cathedral Church; Another to have a book to read to the
people things which neither he nor they did understand. A third to have a Book
of Conjurations or Charms, with charge to read them, or say by heart, to such
as were distracted of their wits, or possessed with Devils, and to put their
hands upon them. A fourth, to have a Taper or Wax-candle, with a Candlestick to
carry before the Priests and Deacons, in doing their service.

A fifth, to recive of the people oblations and offerings, and to deliver them
to the Deacon to carry to the Altar, to read the Epistle, and to stand by the
Priest while he was saying the Mass,

A sixth to be the Bishops spy and intelligencer to inform him of such as be
irregular, and observe not their orders, to read the Gospel, attend the Priest
at the Altar, etc.

A seventh, to consecrate the Host, as they call it, and then to offer it as a
sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and dead.

These are not they which God has given to be in the Church; But these are
they whereof the Antichristian Clergy consists, for whosoever is one of
that Clergy, is one of these seven orders, be he Pope, Prelate, or else
whatsoever, and to note and foreshew this point of policy, this Beast which
JOHN saw had seven heads.

If any shall think this to be a vain, frivolous, and strange interpretation
to understand, by the seven heads of the Beast, these seven order of the
Clergy, as thinking those heads to betoken things of greater note and
importance: Let such consider, what account and reckoning is made of such
persons as have received the Sacraments of Orders, and holy tonsure in the
kingdom of the Beast, and they shall find the interpretation not impertinent,
but very agreeable. For a time there was since the writing of this prophecy,
Vide Council, Matisconen, secundum. Can. 9.10
when the meanest shrimp that was within these holy Orders (as they call them)
was held to be of that dignity, that the chiefest and worthiest secular Judge
in a Kingdom was held unworthy to judge or censure them for any trespass or
fact, how notorious, wicked, and manifest soever, because they had received
holy Tonsure, and were thereby consecrated and set apart unto God, to be his
portion and heritage, and to pray for the people, and therefore were exempted
from all secular jurisdiction and power, such was their dignity accounted to
be, and still is, where that kingdom prevails, and has the dominion: yea,
ever in this Land that quarrel has cost the King his Crown: as it is to be
seen in the Histories of the Reign of King JOHN and not his Crown only, but
his life also. Now if the meanest of them be above the dominion of any King or
secular Judge, and secular Judges be the heads of the people, whom God has
appointed to bear rule over them, well may these be said to be as heads in the
kingdom of the Beast, wherein these shavelings are holden to be so holy and
high in dignity and degree.

As this Beast which John saw had seven heads, so likewise it had ten horns,
whereby was foreshewed, that as the Kings of the Medes and Persians were showed
and represented to Daniel, by the two horns of the Beast which he saw in his
vision, so the Kings of many Kingdoms should be as garders and defenders of
the Antichristian kingdom and state.

And that this Scripture has been fulfilled to the uttermost by the Kings of
the Nations, is so manifest, that none can be ignorant of it, that are of
judgment and experience. And it was just with the Lord to make the Kings of
the earth vassals to this Beast, because they received not the love of the
truth, but took pleasure in urighteousnesse; they would not forsake their sins
to live godlily, righteously, and soberly (as all must do, that will attain
salvation) but they would live after their lusts, and for their sins they would
make satisfaction by building of Churches and Monasteries, etc. and endowing
them with Lands, Rents, and other Revenews, by means whereof those which traded
like Merchants in those many waters, the kingdom of the Beast grew rich and
wealthy, and became the great men of the earth.

Furthermore, John faith of the Beast that he saw, that it was like a Leopard,
etc. By the resemblance and likeness of a Leopard was signified that this
Beast should be foul and full of spots, as is showed in the 18 Chapter:
Babylon is become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of foul spirits, and
the Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird. The filthiness of this Beast is
apparent, in that he does by force and Arms compel all sorts of wicked and
ungodly people to be of his society, and refuses none but the godly, therefore
fitly was he thus prefigured.

Secondly, by the quallity and disposition of the Leopard, was signified that
this Generation should be subtle and crafty in getting their prey. They boast
themselves to be the Church and Spouse of Christ; but if it be so, whence then
had they that infinite store and abundance of worldly wealth and riches,
wherewith they exceed in deliciousness of living? This was not the condition
of Christ and his Disciples, the Lord himself had not whereon to lay his head,
but in that respect was more destitute then Foxes which have holes, and then
Birds which have nests: his Disciples wanted gold and silver, and had no
certain dwelling place; whence therefore had this Generation their Lands,
Livings, and Lordships? Their Castles, Manors, Houses, and Princely Palaces?
It will be said of the donation and gift of Emperors, Kings, and other great
States, and of the charitable devotion of all sort of people: But how were
people brought to be so full handed to this generation? To bring this about,
much slight, craft, and nimblenesse of with was used; first, people were made
to believe, that what they gave to the Church, was to the maintenance of the
Ministry of the Gospel, and for the comfort and relief of the poor, and
therefore should be a sacrifice so well pleasing to God, and meritorious, as
that it should receive great reward at his hands, herewith the minds of
religious and devout people was so much moved, that they thought nothing too
much to give to the Church, by means whereof Churches began to grow rich.
Secondly, people were made to believe that the worshipping of Images and Relics
of Saints, and building of Churches, Chapels, Oratories, etc. and endowing
them with Lands, Tenements, Parsonage and Vicarage houses, etc. was an
effectual way to have favor with the Saints, and to procure their prayers and
intercession for them: By these and such like means this wily and crafty
generation deluded the people, and made themselves rich, and robbed Christ of
his honor, who only is our Advocate to God. And furthermore, they gathered in
heaps of wealth, by Masses, Pilgrimages, Pursse-penance, Offerings, and such
like Merchandises, wherein their subtilty and craft was prefigured by a
Leopard; a Beast subtle by nature, whose property is to lie in wait for her
prey, and slilie to catch it as the Cat does the Mous^ and in that respect does
well resemble the Antichristian Clergy, that subtle generation.

But further it is added, that the feet of this Beast were as the feet of a
Bear.

The Leopard is more nimble to catch then the Bear, but the Bear is more
strong and eager to hold fast that which he has seized upon, then is the
Leopard* both these properties this generation has, nimble to catch and greedy
to hold, they catch by slight, But hold by force. and therefore in catching
resemble the Leopard, but in fast holding the feet of a Bear.

To this it is added, that the mouth of this Beast was as the mouth of a Lion.
And by this another property of the Antichristian Clergy was foreshewed, for
as the Lion when he has taken his prey roareth upon it, at whose roaring the
Beasts tremble: So this generation being thus exalted and made rich, and have
gotten their prey, they terrify the small Beasts of the Forests, roaring with
curses, and excommunications against, be he Prince or Pesant, that shall
presume to part stakes with them, or meddle with their prey, or diminish their
portion, but an Egg or an Onion. That these be the properties of this
Generation needs no proof, it is manifest by daily experience.

Here therefore we may learn what to esteem and judge of the Antichristian
Clergy, together with those Multitudes, People, Nations, and Tongues, out of
which they have sprung, and over which they are set and supported; namely, that
they are a monstrous and beastly Generation, excelling in craft, covetousness,
pride, cruelty, and all iniquity; and therefore not to be esteemed, as they
boast themselves to be a holy Catholic Church, and Spouse of Christ, which
cannot err, etc. And by this we may see how lamentably the Nations have been
deluded and led into error and ungodliness, by their guides and leaders.

Now it follows, that unto this Monster the Dragon gave his power, and his
Throne, and great authority.

Here is declared of whom the Prelates and Clergy have received their
spiritual Lordships, power, authority, and jurisdiction, to devise and make
spiritual Laws and Canons, to erect spiritual Courts, and create Officers to
bear rule, and exercise dominion over the Nations, even from the Devil: they
have not any lawful authority from God, but an usurped authority from the
Devil, whose instruments they are, to advance his kingdom, and to persecute
the Saints, which obey God rather then men,

And here we may observe that they are rightly called spirtuall Lords, because
originally they proceed from that prince that rules in the air, the spirit
that works in the children of unbelief* but withal, in stead of spiritual
Lords, Laws, Courts and Officers, call them spiritual wickednesses, and so we
give them their right titles: and being such, if we will fight the good fight
of faith, we must by witnessing what they be, wrestle against them, and not
submit unto them, but stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and not be entangled with any yoke of bondage: and that we may wrestle
and prevail, we must take unto us the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.

Further, John says, that he saw one of the heads of the Beast as it were
wounded to death, and his deadly wound was healed, and all the world wondered
after the Beast.

By this Head, which was as it were wounded to death, was signified the
reviving of Priesthood, the mystery whereof, in few words, is this. The
workers of iniquity in this Antichristian kingdom, having ordained this order
of ministry, called Priesthood (whether it were in imitation of the Jews, or
Heathen, it is doubtful) but certain it is, that because it wanted external
sacrifices, it came short both of the Jewish Priesthood, and also of the
Heathen, so that it was a lame and wounded Priesthood, and was not respected.
In time it came to pass that they found out a sacrifice (as is to be seen in
their Masse-book) which was the transubstantiating of Bread into Wine, into the
very Body and Blood of Christ, really and substantially (as they use to speak
and teach) and being so transubstantiated to offer it up unto God, a sacrifice
propitiatory both for quick and dead. Thus the wounded head of Priesthood was
cured and revived, and so became the worlds wonder, as now it follows to be
declared, according as John here witnesses:

And all the world wondered after the Beast. That is, the people of the Nations
having this Priesthood set over them, and commended unto them to be of such
power and dignity, as that they could make them a visible God, not only to
behold with their eyes, and look upon, but also to eat, and that their Maker
and Redeemer, to their everlasting salvation: And being so effectually deluded,
as that they believed these lies, hereupon they wondered, and followed the
Beast. Well might they wonder to see bread, and taste bread, where was no
bread; and to see wine, and taste wine, where was no wine (for so were they
made to believe) and to eat flesh, and drink blood, and yet neither to see nor
take flesh nor blood: this was a wonder to wonder at; and who would not follow
him for a guide, that had power to work such wonders?

But they did not only follow the Beast, as the Jews did Christ, when they saw
his miracles, But they worshipped the Dragon which gave power unto the Beast,
and they worshipped the Beast, saying, who is like unto the Beast? Who is able
to make war with him? To worship, is to hear and obey; and by worshipping
the Dragon was showed, that they wholly addicted themselves to be directed and
ruled by the Beast, whom the Dragon used as his instrument to work his will,
and to whom he had given authority and power to that end: thus originally they
worshipped the Devil. Secondly, they worshipped the Beast, as being the
instrument of the Devil, and they became subjects in all things obedient unto
the Beast, as being of such holiness and truth, as that it could not err, nor
deceive others, and of such power, as what they loosed on earth, was loosed in
heaven; and what they bound in earth, was bound in heaven; and therefore such a
power as had no match or peer, so that they boasted and said of it, Who is
like unto the Beast? As David considering the power and wonderful works of
God, says; Who is like unto the Lord? So do the Nations boast of this Beast,
saying: Who is like unto the Beast? And further they said of him, Who is able
to make war with him? As if they should say, This our holy Mother has power
to excommunicate, and deliver to Satan, all (of what estate, condition, degree,
soever they be) that will not hear her voice, bear her yoke, and be ruled by
her: Who therefore is able to make war with her? that is, make his party good
against this our holy Mother. Of such admiration was this Beast in the earth;
thus has the world thought, and spoken of her.

And moreover, there was given unto this Beast a mouth, speaking great things,
and blasphemies, and power was given him to make 42 months.

As the mouth is the means and instrument whereby men do declare their minds,
so this Beast had a mouth to declare and utter her mind; by which mouth was
signified a ministry of false prophets, and lying spirits, namely, Doctors,
Schoolmen, Monks, Friars, and all sorts of their Preachers, who teach for
doctrines the commandments of the Beast, and declare and utter the mind and
will of the Beast, as being equal to Gods Word, this their Canons, Laws, Books
and Monuments, do manifestly witness.

The effect of that which this mouth utters, is noted to be great things, and
blasphemies. They boast of this Beast, that she is the holy Catholic Church
Militant, the Mother of all rrue believers: the chaste Spouse of Christ, the
Pillar and ground of Truth, that it cannot err, etc. And that all which will
have God to be their Father, must have her to be their Mother. Finally, that
out of her lap and communion, there is no salvation. These and many other such
great things speaks the mouth of this Beast, which are indeed great things,
and being so spoken, are great blasphemies. For is it not great blasphemy to
call that Holy, which is most abominable? To call her the Mother of all true
Believers, which is the mother of fornications, and of all abominations? To
call that the Pillar and ground of Truth, which has corrupted the earth with
her errors and fornications, and caused all Nations to drink of the wine of
the wrath thereof? To say there is no salvation but in her fellowship, whose
end and judgment is to go to destruction? Beware of false Prophets, and
teachers of lies, for such are the mouth of this Beast.

And it is further to be minded, that it is said of this Beast, that the mouth
which she had, was given her; for had this Beast no more to maintain this
mouth, then she has of her own by descent and heritage, she could not have so
many to speak for her as she has: But Emperous and Kings, Princes and Nobles,
and other great sinners, became benefactours to this Beast, giving unto her
Lands and Tenements, Rents and Revenews, to maintain this mouth to utter great
things, and blasphemies, and more then this, Power was given him to act, or
make, two and forty months.

For the better understanding of this point, let this be considered: In the
Antichristian kingdom they have a rule how to proceed in every cause, but not
given them of God, but of their own making, which they commonly call the Canon
Law; concerning which Law, here we may learn by whom it was made, and how long
it was in making. These Makets usurp the name of the Church of Christ, but the
true Church is the Kingdom of Christ, and being the Kingdom of Christ, it has
him only for Lawgiver, they therefore which under the title of the Church
presume to make laws, are fitly and worthily resembled by a beast, for what is
more unreasonable then for those whose greatest dignity, glory and happiness,
consists in hearing, obeying, and administering of gods word, to fall from
this, and Lucifer-like to exalt and oppose themselves against their Maker, as
though they were wiser and iuster then God: and to add unto his Testament
Which is suficient to instruct us in all Wisdom, and to make the man of God
perfect in every good work: and to take from the same Testament at their
pleasure which is not lawful to do to any man's Testament, without great
offense and injustice, as the Apostle shows, Ga. 3.15 yet thit is the way
wherein those great doers, the authors of the Canon Law have walked. It is said
of those Actors, that Power was given them, etc. Where first we may observe,
that of themselves they had not this power, for then it could not have been
said to be given them, but given them it was; it is therefore to be considered,
Who was the giver: Not Christ he gave his disciples no power to make Laws, but
gave them charge to teath belivers to observe all things whatsoever he had
commanded them, it is certain therefore that this power was given them, not by
God but by men: namely by Kings and Princes, for the states and degrees of men
considered, it is plain, that none can give power to make Laws but such as be
Sovereigns; by such therefore this power to make Laws was given unto this
Beast. But what should move Sovereigns to give power to Bishops and Ministers
to make Laws for the Church? Nothing verily but blind devotion; for they being
ignorant of God and of his Word, thought it the best way to keep peace and
unity in the Church. Whereas indeed it was the cause of strife and dissension,
and at length by that means iniquity was established for a Law, and Gods Word
wholly rejected and cast aside as unmeet for Lay men to use. Now as in all
lawful proceedings, Princes are Gods ministers, in Gods stead unto their
subjects and people, so in giving this power to this Beast, they are the
Dragons ministers, and instruments. Whereas it is said that power was given
unto the Beast to make, but it is not noted what should be made, it argues
that the things made are of that nature and quality that they are not worthy
of any name, the makers themselves use to call their Acts, Canons,
Constitutions and Laws, but falfly, for if they were such indeed, then men
might have some good use of them, but that no man can have, therefore it is but
falsehood and deceit so to name them: It is like the caling of one carved Image,
S. Peter, another S, Paul, another S. John etc. that is to name things that
they be not, and that is to lie.

In that it is said, that power was given unto the beast to make 12. Months,
It shows that the Beasts time is limited, and seeing that the time is
limited, we must find that the time of making of the Catholic Church agrees
with this stint, before we can be sure that it is the Beast, here represented,
wherefore consider that the ecclesiastical state began to make about the year
of our Lord, 304. (the Ancyran counsel being the first, whose constitutions
took the effect and force of Law, (And made not an end of making until the
year 1564. the Counsel of Trent being the last wherein the Beast acted the
last act of this making, and fulfilled the measure of that iniquity, and
therefore is now to receive judgment and condemnation from the Lord, as is
hereafter in this prophecy declared, So that if we account a year for a day,
and thirty days for a month, it will amount to 1260, days which is the just
sum of 42. months, that this Beast was a making, which is a strong argument,
that by this Beast was signified the ecclesiastical estate or Catholic
Church, as is showed before, page 2.

Further it is said of the Beast, that he opened his mouth in blasphemy against
God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.

In that this Beast, by the ministry of false Prophets and Teachers, as by her
mouth has seduced the Nations, and made them believe, That God by the
ministry of his holy Apostles and Prophets, has not left us a sure rule
sufficient rule of faith, in the holy Scriptures, but that the want thereof
must be supplied with unwritten verities, the writings of Ancient Fathers,
determinations of Counsels, and the Popes Decretals, otherwise all people would
run into confusion, it may truly be said, that she has opened her mouth
untoblasphemy against God, First the eternal who has created all things, and
for whose wills sake all things are and were created, To be but a rude and
gross beginner of a work, which he has left and given up for vain man to
finish and make perfect. Secondly, if there be particular laws left out of the
Scriptures, for want of which all people would run into confusion, then God
has not showed himself to be a God of order. Thirdly, the World of God is not
sufficient to make the man of God perfect, in every good work, as the Apostles
says. But thus to think, is a horrible error. Thus to speak, is wicked
blasphemy, and thus to teach, is hellish iniquity. For how will it stand with
the glory of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, not to give unto his people a
perfect Law, and sure Testimony, whereunto they might trust, and wherein they
might rest and live by faith, but must depend upon other men, to see as it were
with their eyes, and not with their own, and so hold their faith, in respect of
other men's persons, to believe as they believe, etc. as though Gods people
(their Leaders excepted) were not reasonable creatures, but as beasts without
understanding: But blessed be our God, we have a sure Word of the Prophets,
which is as a light shining in a dark place, whereunto we shall do well if we
take heed. Gods people have no need of unwritten verities, men's precepts and
traditions; They have surer Lights to walk by, then the writings of the
Schoolmen, and other Writers of ancient times; They have surer Rules, and
righter Testimonies, whereby to decide and end controversies and doubts, then
the determination of Counsels, and Popes decrees, and they which speak to the
contrary, open their mouth to balspheme against God. Concerning blaspheming the
Name of God, amongst other attributes or titles whereby he is set forth unto
us, he is called the Holy one of Israel, and the High Priest in Israel did
bear this inscription upon his forehead graven in gold, Holiness to the Lord.
First, therefore we may truly and boldly say of the Lord, that Holy is his
Name. Secondly, we may likewise truly and boldly affirm, that to give the
title of Holiness unto any unholy profane and abominable thing, is to
blaspheme the name of God: But thus the Beast has done many and sundry ways.
They ascribe Holiness unto their Antichristian orders, and Priesthood to their
Idolatrous Mass, to their exorcised or conjured Bread, Water, Oil, Tapers,
Ashes, Vestures, Vessels, and many other implements in and by all which they
blaspheme the name of God.

And as they blaspheme the Name of God; So likewise the blaspheme his
Tabernacle, That is to say, the true visible Church of Christ under the Gospel,
which is the place of Gods, presence, which he has chosen to put his Name
there, where two or three, or more are gathered together in the Name of Christ,
there is Christ present, and where Christ is present, there has God put his
Name, there he is to be sought, and there he may be found, and there is his
Tabernacle. To come together in the Name of Christ, is when Gods people join
themselves together in a spiritual body politic, separated from the common
multitudes of known unbeleevers, to the end to meet together for the mutual
edification and comfort one of another, by doctrine, breaking of bread, and
prayer, and to practice all other Ordinances of Christ set down in his
Testament, as they shall have occasion: and to Companies of Believers, having
such fellowship and communion one with another, the title of the Churches of
Christ does (in our use of speech) properly and of right belong: but for
believers to do this apart by themselves, is adjudged contempt of authority,
factious, novelty, making of Conventicles, and unlawful Assemblies, dangerous
to the State, and not to be suffered in any Kingdom or Commonwealth, and so
they blaspheme the Tabernacle of God in a high degree, as if Gods people were a
company of ungodly rebels, and wicked conspiratours; but the righteous Lord
will in due time visit his people, and rebuke his enemies.

And on the other side, for Gods people now to deny the kingdom of the Beast;
that is, (as they call it) the holy Catholic Church Militant, to be the true
Church of Christ; To refuse to partake and communicate with them in their
abominations, delusions, and unlawful works of darkness, is adjudged
disobedience, schism and contempt of the power and authorty of the Church; To
speak against their proceedings, sedition, disturbance of the peace of the
Church, heresy, impiety, and what not? Thus they adorn the Harlot, which
corrupts the earth with her fornications, with the title of the Church, and
Spouse of Christ, and Tabernacle of God, and so blaspheme the Tabernecle of
God, as if it were not a communion of Saints, by calling and profession, but an
habitation of Devils, an hold of foul Spirits, and a Cage of every unclean and
hateful Bird.

Further, it is said of the Beast, that it did blaspheme those that dwelt in
heaven, that is, the Saints departed this life.

Those that dwell in heaven, are then blasphemed, when it is said of them, that
they take it as an honor done unto them, when we make them our Patrons, build
them Temples, set up their Images, offer and pray unto them, and make them
Mediators between Christ and us, for by this they are made, not only Idols,
but also favorers and chief maintainers of Idolatry: They are also blasphemed
when the doctrine which they taught and practiced, is condemned for heresy, or
when erroneous doctrines, vain traditions, superstitious rites, ceremonies and
customs are fathered upon them, as received from them by Tradition, as
unwritten verities, but the world has been brought to believe that Saints in
heaven might by these means be as it were bought and sold, between Priest and
people, wherein they have been highly blasphemed.

Moreover, it is said, that it was given to the Beast to make war with the
Saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over all Kindreds, and
Tongues, and Nations.

War is made with the Saints, when they are accused to Rulers and Governors,
to be Heretics Schismatics, wicked and ungodly persons; and they may then be
said to be overcome, whem their accusers are justified, and they condemned,
according to this, this Scripture has been fulfilled and verified. Great and
of long continuance have been the wars which the Beast has made with the
Saints, and many have been the victories of this kind which the Beast has had
against them, as the Histories, and other records of the Nations do plentifully
witness.

It was given to the Beast to make war with the Saints, when Rulers and
Governors gave way to the Beast to devise and make laws at their own pleasure,
concerning Religion, and the worship of God, and then to condemn for
Delinquents, and evil doers, all that would not observe those Laws. How free
and forward Rulers and Governors have been to give such power unto the Beast,
they themselves have felt by long and woeful experience: for much woe has the
Beast wrought (not to the poor and meaner sort of the Saints only, but) even
to Emperors and Kings, and all degrees of people, and therefore it is said in
the words following, that power was given unto this Beast over every Kindred,
Tongue and Nation: So that the exaltation thereof was such, as to be a Father
above all fathers to every Kindred; a Lord above all Lords to every Tongue; a
King above all Kings to every Nation. Thus was this Beast exalted and sat as a
Queen triumphing over them, having all of all degrees brought in bondage unto
her Dominion, which was a just recompense upon their heads, that gave such
power unto this Beast: yet see how the world was herein deluded, they were not
captives against their wills, but in blind devotion, had this Beast in most
high reverence, as being a devine power ordained and given by God, and not from
the Dragon, Thus did the Lord give them over to be deluded by this Beast, as a
just reward of their ungodliness, in that they received not the love of the
truth, but took pleasure in unrighteousness.

Further it is declared in the words following, That all that dwell upon the
earth must worship him, (that is the Beast) whose, names are not written in the
book of the life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World.

by those that dwell on the earth is meant those that have set their habitation
there, and choose rather to enjoy the prosperity of the world and plesures of
sin, together with the Beast, then to sufffer affliction for the truth, and
for witnessing against the Beast: these are they that worship him, that is,
receive their precepts and rules, for their doctrine and wholesome instuction,
and observe their ordinances and Laws as perfect rules of eqitie and
righteousness, casting the word of God declared in the holy scriptures, be
hind their backs, and treading his Ordinances under their feet, making far
more conscience not to eat an Egg on Friday, then to steal, or to commit
adultery, But of such it is said, that their names are not written in the
Book of life of the Lamb which was slain from the beginning of the world:
That is, they are not of the number of Gods Elect and Choosen in Christ, and
given unto him for his portion and heritage, whose condition is to be hated,
despised, persecuted, and afflicted in the world, for righteousness sake, in
whom the Lamb Christ Jesus, as in his members has been slain since the
beginning of the world: which condition, those which cannot brook and endure,
but count it a pleasure to live deliciously for a season, and take delight to
enjoy the pleasures of sin, may thereby be discribed, not to have their names
written in the Book of life.

Concerning these things it is added, If any man have an ear, let him hear,

As if it should be said, few there be which have an ear to hear these
things: For who can endure to hear that Catholic Church, which they account
to be spiritual, holy, and heavenly, to be compared to a Beast, ugly in
form, and horrible and monstrous in nature; Who can endure to hear that
Power, that Throne, and that authority, which they believe to be of God, to be
said and affirmed to be of the Dragon, that old Serpent, the Devil, and Satan?
Who will believe that a righteous God would give way to his enemies, the
workers of iniquity, so far to prevail, and so long time, as for many
hundred years together to delude the Nations, to bring them into bondage, and
to keep them in slavery? And that a few poor despised people, of no reckoning
in the world, here one, and there another, should see more, and be wiser then
all the great Clerks, wise Counselors, mighty Princes, and all the Nobles of
the earth? Who (I say) has an ear to hear these things, and not be moved to
fret in himself, and to gnash his teeth at the hearing of them?

Yet notwithstanding all this, and more, let him that has an ear hear, for
times and seasons will change: a time will come (as the verse following does
declare) when these great workers of iniquity shall be subdued and trodden
under foot.

He that leads into captivity, Ver. 20,
shall go into captivity, he that kills with the sword must be killed with
the sword, here is the patience and faith of the Saints.

Here is showed the justice of God, who will recompense unto the wicked,
according to the works of their hands, as they have measured unto others, it
shall be measured unto them again; they shall reap the fruit of their
unrighteousness to the full: Therefore the Saints and Servants of God should
here learn with patience to bear the Cross, because the Lord will take their
parts, and avenge their blood upon their enemies, and those which with patience
rest upon the Lord. are here recorded for Saints. Here is the patience and
faith of the Saints. As if it were said, those which patiently endure
affliction for the truth, and commit their cause unto God, resting faithfully
upon him, are thereby tried and made manifest to the world, to be the Saints
and Servants of God, that in sure hope of a time of refreshing, choose to endure
captivity and the sword, rather then they will (to have peace with the world)
together with the world worship the Beast.

Thus much concerning the first part of this Chapter, and of that power and
promotion which the Prelates and Clergy crope up unto before the exaltation
and supremacy of the Pope. The mystery of whose iniquity is next to be
considered; To God be glory for ever.

THE SECOND PART OF the XIII. Chapter of the Revelation, beginning at the XI.
verse.
VERSE XI. And I heheld another Beast coming up out of the earth, and he had
two horns like a Lamb, and he spoke as a Dragon.
AS in the former part of this Chapter, the Prelacy and Clergy in general,
who under the title of the Catholic Church Militant, exalted themselves to
work iniquity, and bring the Nations into captivity and bondage to their
traditions, were resembled by a seven-headed Beast: so here after much striving
amongst themselves who should be the chief and greatest, not being content
with former riches, honor, aad earthly promotion, but aspiring higher, at last
the Prelate of Rome in particular, attained to this title and dignity, to be
Christ's Vicar, Peter's Successor, and universal Bishop; and under that Title
pretended a fullness of power and supremacy over all persons and causes, and
therefore is here resembled and fore showed by a Beast, etc.

First whereas it is said of this Beast that it came out of the earth, thereby
is signified, that the high degree and dignity whereunto the Prelates of Rome
have aspired, and exalted themselves, is not from heaven, it is from the earth,
earthly; it is a plant which our heavenly Father has not planted, and
therefore shall in the end be rooted out.

Concerning the coming up of this Beast, it is to be minded, that the
Ministers of the Word of God (of which rank of men this Beast boasts
himself to be the chief) if they were in their right kind, should be as the
Stars of Heaven, lights and guides unto others: But at the opening of the sixth
Seal, John saw the Stars fall from Heaven to the Earth, as a fig tree
casts her green figs when she is shaken of a mighty wind; whereby was
signified, that the Ministers of the Word of God would in time degenerate and
go out of kind; they would, contrary to the Apostles rule, set their
affections on earthly things, they would for filthy lucre make Merchandise of
the people, and Word of God; they would gather riches, and grow wealthy by the
wages of unrighteousness, and so become the great men of the earth: all which
is fulfilled and come to pass, as all may see that are not willingly blind.

Among the rest of the fallen Stars, to one was given the Key of the
bottomless pit, Rev. 9, 1. whereby was signified that power and pre-eminence
should be given to one of the fallen Stars above the rest: which thing was
effected and came to pass, when Phocas being Emperor, he promoted Boniface,
then Prelate of Rome, to be universal Bishop, and to have power and
jurisdiction over all other Bishops. Which thing when Phocas had done, this
Abaddon King of Locusts, with the rest of the brood of the bottomless pit that
succeeded him, who had the opening and shutting of Purgatory at their pleasure,
so prevailed in time, that they exalted themselves above Emperors and Kings,
which thing they could never have done, had they not first besotted the Nations
in blind devotion to impoverish themselves to feed these Locusts, under the
Title of the Church, and in hope of meriting thereby, and to be released from
their sins, and from the supposed pains of Purgatory: For had the Pope, that
Prelate of Rome, been as destitute of worldly wealth, and as well furnished
with spiritual grace, as Peter and John were, when they went up into the
Temple to pray, and healed the lame man, he had never set his foot upon the
Emperors neck. For as much therefore as the Romish Prelate from a mean and
lowly estate and degree in the world, has crept up and been exalted above
Kings and Emperors: and seeing worldly wealth and riches have been the means
whereby he has got the pre-eminence, very significantly was this upstart
resembled and prefigured, by a Beast coming up out of the earth.

Again, it is said of this Beast, that it had two Horns like the Lamb: By
Horns in the Scripture is usually signified power and authority, and by the
Lamb is meant CHRIST JESUS, who had all power in Heaven and earth given to him,
Mat. 28.18. So that hereby was showed, that the Prelate of Rome would challenge
and usurp great power and authority, which he persuades the world does belong
unto him, as being Christ's Vicar, and under this pretense usurpeth a twofold
power and jurisdiction, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, not in earth only,
but in Heaven also; what he binds in earth, is bound in Heaven, and whom he
will, he can release from the pains of Purgatory, and place them in Heaven:
Therefore in token of this his power, he is armed with two Swords, which thing
was plainly signified by the two Horns which he had, like the Lamb. But
though the Beast would be the Lambs equal, and resemble him in power, yet his
voice bewrayes him to be but a counterfeit, and a dissembling hypocrite: he
speaks like the Dragon, he pretends property to that which is not his own,
and exalts himself against those, unto whom he should submit and give
honor: Even as the Dragon said of the Kingdoms of the world; Luke 4.6.
All these are in my power, I give them to whom I will? So likewise says this
Beast his Vicar, the Prelate of Rome: The Empire and Kingdoms of the earth are
in my power, and at my disposition, and to me it belongs to depose and set up
Emperors and Kings at my pleasure, as shall be behovefull for the peace of the
Church. And thus may the Beast in this be known by his voice, likewise in
diverse other particular blasphemous speeches and divelish doctrines.

Further, it is said of this Beast, That he exercises all the power of the
first Beast before him, and causes the earth, and them which dwell therein, to
worship the first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed.

In that this beast is said to exercise, All the power of the first Beast
before him, thereby was signified, That what the first beast could do by her
motherly authority and power, under the usurped title and name of the holy
Church, the same could this beast do, by the authority and power of his
fatherhood, under the title and pretense of Christ's Vicar, and Peter's
successor, universal Bishop, etc. But that this Beast may yet further be
discerned, it is said of him, That he caused the earth, and those which dwell
therein, to worship the first Beast, etc. By causing the earth to worship the
first Beast, was foreshewed, that the Pope would exact of the earth the tenth
part of the fruits thereof, for the maintenance of the holy Church, and this is
indeed to worship: For as the paying of Tithes in the time of the Law, was a
part of the true outward worship of God, so this is the worship of the Beast.
And further, by causing the Inhabitants of the earth also to worship the first
Beast, was showed that he would carefully see due homage, service, and
obedience to be yielded and performed to the holy Church: so that though the
Prelate of Rome, as a son of Perdition, did exalt himself above measure, yet
still does he maintain the power and dignity of the Catholic Church; the
estimation of her Motherhood must still be maintained, her voice must still be
heard and obeyed; not to come when she calls, is contumacy and contempt, not to
be endured; they that dare so far to despise her authority, as not to obey her
Paritors Process, are by her doom to be accounted cursed children, and worthy
of no less censure and punishment, then to be struck with that terrible
Thunderbolt of her Excommunication, the violence whereof is such, as who can
endure it? Who will not rather ride, run, dance attendance, crouch, kneel,
pay, pray, or do any thing else, which Master Official or his Register will
enjoyne them, then undergo so heavy a burden, as the censure of
Excommunication? Thus will the Pope have the magnificence of this Diana to be
maintained; The earth and those which dwell in it must yield unto her the Tithe
of all their increase, as also Mortuaries, Offerings, and many other Church
duties, which she requires of them; for she is a Goddess, and must be
worshipped. And this diminishes the Popes glory never a jot, the two estates of
the Whore, and false Prophet, can well agree and stand together, as Father and
Mother in one Family, and therefore the second Beast, as Father of all, will
have the first Beast worshipped; that is, obeyed and maintained in glory, as
Mother of all. And further observe, in that the Pope has executed all
authority of the Catholic Church, thereby is confirmed the truth of the
exposition, that the first Beast was the Catholic Church, and the second Beast
the Pope, as has been before observed.

And he does great wonders, so that he makes fire to come down from Heaven on
earth in the sight of men.

First, by the wonders which he did, was foreshewed what wonderful things the
Prelate of Rome, that false Prophet should bring to pass; as namely, under the
title of the servant of the servants of God, (which indeed all Ministers of the
Word, and other Church Officers ought to be) to creep up and exalt himself
above Emperors and Kings, and all other estates in the earth, which being
considered, is indeed a thing wonderful: for first, the Prelacy and Clergy,
in respect of the pretended holiness of their Orders, were exempted and freed
from being subject to any secular jurisdiction and power, Vide Consiliu^ Matis,
Can. 9.10.
the meanest of them might not be produced before any secular Judge, for any
crime or offense how heinous soever, yet unto this Beast, they must be obedient
in all things, as servants to their Lord; upon him they must depend with all
observation, as children upon their fathers: And as for Emperors and Kings,
and other worldly States, it is plain to be seen, that though they stand
highly upon their titles and dignities, not to have them impaired, or in any
thing diminished, which is a thing which they will withstand, to the shedding
of abundance of blood; yet to be made such vassals to this Beast, as to hold
his stirrup, to lead his Horse by the bridle, to kiss his feet, they thought
it no abasement, but an honor: And notwithstanding, that very many of that
beastly rank have been notorious wicked men, and abominable livers, yet have
they the craft so to delude and besot all people, of all degrees in the world,
as to bring them to believe that the truth is so infallibly annexed to that
seat of the Beast, that it is not possible for him to err in judgment; yea,
he made the world to believe it as an Article of faith, that his determination
and judgment of any controversy, or point of doctrine, is a more indifficient
and infallible rule of faith then is the holy Scriptures: That these and the
like gross doctrines is believed and received, are great wonders.

Further, He makes fire to come down from Heaven on the earth, in the sight of
men, etc.

By fire in this place was foreshewed the punishment which should be inflicted
on the Saints, which was burning with fire: And in that the fire was said to
come from Heaven, Psalm. 82.6
whereby was foreshewed, that the Judges of the earth, Who are called gods, and
their seats as the Throne of God in Heaven, should be so corrupted by the Pope,
as that they should believe the Saints and Servants pf God, which refused to
obey the Pope and his Laws, to be therefore Heretics, Schismatikes,
refractary, rebellious and disobedient persons, and therefore should condemn
them to be burnt to death: This they have done, thinking they did God there in
good service, and that it was the just judgment of God upon them. Thus he made
fire to come down from heaven: For true it is, that the judgments rightly
pronounced by the lawful Magistrates, are the Judgments of God, and their
punishments, Gods punishments, and therefore it is that Magistrates are called
Gods: but seeing Magistrates have been thus corrupted by the Pope, and made to
pronounce unrighteous and unjust judgments, we are to esteem them as the
judgments of the Dragon; and yet nevertheless their authority and power
lawful, and ordained of God. Thus the Beast deceives them that dwell on the
earth, by means of those Miracles (falfly so called) which he had power to do
in the sight of the Beast, as is showed in the verse following. Verse, 14.


And he deceives them that dwell on the earth, by the means of those Miracles
which he had power to do in the sight of the Beast.

Those which the Beast deceives, are said to dwell on the earth; that is, have
their affections set upon earthly things, and not upon heavenly, so that they
will not for love of the truth forsake their earthly possessions and pleasures:
these are they which are deceived by these lying wonders of this Beast; but
those that are strangers and Pilgrims in this world, whose affections are set
upon heavenly things, and not upon earthly, these are not deceived, nor deluded
by him: these making trial of him by Gods Word, have found him to be a liar
and a deceiver, and believe him not, but taking their lives in their hands,
witness against him to the death; that his power and working is of Satan, and
that his wonders are lies.

And Whereas it is said, that he had power to do these Miracles in the sight of
the Beast: thereby is confirmed and made manifest, that which before is showed,
to wit, that this son of Perdition, the chief Darling of his holy Catholic
Mother, is present with her, and in her bosom, and for her sake, and in her
behalf exercises his power, she retains still her former authority, without
any diminishing thereof, as is evident unto all that are acquainted with the
acts of that Church. Thus much for the second part of this Chapter.

THE THIRD PART OF the XIII. Chapter of the REVELATION.
Wherein is foreshewed a third Beast, which was set up by the commandment of
this second Beast the Pope, who said to them that dwelt on the earth, that they
should make an Image to the Beast which had the wound with a sword, and did
live.

HEre we may see that the Pope by his commanding power was the cause of
setting up this Image, and for the better and more clear understanding. what
this Image is, Let us a little consider the pattern, whose Image and liknes it
bears, namely the first Beast.

The first Beast as has been showed, was the representative body of the
Catholic Church Militant, consisting of the select Prelacy and Preisthood of
sundry Nations, gathered together into one counsel or Synod, with authority
to make Laws, and canons for the universal Church, to be observed uniformely
of all Nations under pretense of the insufficiency of the Scripture for the
government of the Church, and the worship of God, in like manner the Pope, (in
his wisdom seeing it necessary for the good government, maintenance, and
upholding of his kingdom, and the rooting out of Heretics, and seditious
persons, (as they call them which daily increased in every country) did
ordeyne and command, Vide concilium Lateran secundum, Can, 6.
that in every province there should yearly be held and kept a provincial
counsel or Synod consisting of the Prelates and many other selected persons
which should look to those matters, to which Synod he also gave power to make
Laws atd ordinances, to which the people should be conformable and obedient:
This is the Image which he caused the dwellers on the earth to make of the
Beast, which had the wound with a sword and did live.

Further it is said, Verse. 15.
Verse. 15. And power was given him to give life unto the Image of this Beast,
that the Image of the Beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would
not worship the Image of the Beast, should be killed.

In this Verse we may observe: first, that a gift was given to the Pope to
bestow upon this Image: Secondly, what this gift was, viz. to give life or
breath to the Image: thirdly, the end and effects of the gift, which was, that
the Beast should speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the Beast
should be killed: As there was given by the Dragon to the first Beast, great
power and authority, and also a mouth to speak blasphemies, and to make war
with the Saints, in like manner by the same Dragon was this gift given to the
Pope, to give life or breath to this Image: By life is here meant authority,
which is, the life of a Synod, without which it is of no force, and so this
Image should have been no more then a very Image or picture, and set up to no
purpose, but the Pope having received it, gave authority to the Image that he
should speak, that is, make and set forth Canons and Laws; for to speak is so
understood: as for example: A King is said to speak to his subjects when he
sets forth his Laws and Proclamations: so this Beast having made Canons and
Decrees, speaks to her vassals and subjects by them.

Moreover, the Image caused, that as many as would not worship him, should be
killed: Here the pride and cruelty of this Image is set forth, to be answerable
to the first Beast, and therefore rightly is he called her Image: for as the
first Beast made war with the Saints, and overcame them, all that dwelled on
the earth worshipped him, etc. so whosoever would not worship this Image; that
is, hear his voice, and keep his commandments, there was no way for him but
death. All the worship that the Lord requires of his servants, Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13.
is, That they fear him, walk in all his ways, love him, and serve him with
all their hearts, and with all their souls to keep the Commandments of the
Lord, and his Ordinances, And this is indeed the true worship of God. In like
manner, this Image will be worshipped, his Laws must be observed, and his Canons
obeyed without examining and trying of them, be they never so unholy and
unjust: They that do not observe and obey them, be they never so upright and
holy men, they shall be thereby indicted, arraigned, judged, and condemned to
death, as being in their estimation, Heretics, Schismatikes, disobedient and
rebellious persons, contemners of God, and of the Church, yea, as the filth and
of-scowring of the world, and unworthy of the society of men.

And he causes all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
receive a Mark in their right hand, and in their foreheads.

This Image challenging worship to be performed unto him, of all people of all
sorts and degrees, according to the authority given him by the Pope, was by
some contradicted and despised, wherefore the Image in policy, for the better
trial of those that were his trusty subjects and slaves, ordained that all his
Ministers should receive a Mark, at the receiving whereof, they should vow and
swear to be of his Dominion, and under his Banner, to fight against Christ and
his Saints, What this Mark is, and what is the manner of giving and receiving
of it, is now to be declared. For proof of this, look no further then in the
36 Canon of the Church of England, An. 1603


The Prelacy and Clergy being as has been before showed, assembled with
authority to make laws, did ordain that every Bishop in his Diocese should
carefully observe that none should preach or execut the function of a parish
Parson, Vicar or Curate, in any Parish, but he that would swear to observe
their Laws and Canons, and thereupon should receive the letters of orders of
the Bishop of the Diocese, which letters of orders signed and sealed by the
Bishop, is the Mark of the Beast here mentioned, and does testify in the
behalf of the bearer thereof that he is their sworn servant, under holy
orders, either a Priest, a Deacon, or a half priest, etc. and that he is a man
found capable and meet for the cure and charge of souls, and therefore to
what parish soever these tried lads are sent to do service, upon sight of this
mark, they must be received without any oposition, upon penalty of the law
upon those that shall refuse them.

Here may be objected, that this mark is only received by the Clergy, and not
by the people of all sorts, rich and poor, bond and free, according to the
text. I answer, that all persons which receive the false Priests do likewise
receive, and submit to that authority which sent them, and also the mark by
which they are sent, as is-evident, when a Priest comes to take possession of
a parish to which he is appointed by the Bishop; he is not received upon his
word, nor because he tolleth the bell, and and putteh on the Surplice, and
uses other Ceremonies enjoined him by the Prelate: But showing the foresaid
Mark of the Beast, they receive both him and it, and communicate with him:
thus all both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, that submit unto
their appointed Priest, receive a mark in their foreheads, by receaving and
submitting to him. For as our savior Christ faith of his Apostles and
Ministors, He that receaueth you, receaueth me, and he that Hears you
hears me. Luke 16. John 20.
So those that receive, hear, and join in fellowship with these false
Ministers, do hear, receive, and join to the false power which sent them,
and the mark by which they are sent:

whereas it is said that they received the mark in their foreheads, or right
hand, thereby was showed that this mark should be an aparent testimony that
they were servants of the beast, and that they were of that band which had
joined hands, and made a league to walk in the ways of destruction.

Further, it is said; Verse. 17. And that no man might buy or sell, save he that
had the mark of the Beast, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his name,

Here is propounded three conditions, and whosoever had not one of them,
thereby to be known to be of that Kingdom, might not buy or sell, or have any
thing to do amongst them. For the better understanding hereof, let us mind,
that although these three Beasts in respect of their several power and
jurisdiction did differ one from another, the Catholic Church being the chief,
and the Pope inferior to her, and the Image of the Beast as it were a servant
or handmaid, inferior to them both, yet notwithstanding they were one body,
being joined and knit together by the power of the Dragon, and have so far
prevailed over the Nations, as that they have brought all, both small and
great, rich and poor, bond and free, to be in subjection to their Kingdom,
which bears the name of the holy Catholic Church, or Sea of ROME, (...) 14.8
^1.
but the Holy Ghost calls it BABYLON THE GREAT CITY: for as the material
Babylon was a City which dwelled upon many waters, which caused her to abound
in riches and treasure: so this mystical Babylon, this great City of Rome, I
mean the Ecclesiastical State, is said also to sit upon many waters, which
the Holy Ghost expounds to the People and Nations, as in the seventeenth
Chapter, and 15, verse: The Waters on which the Whore sits, are Peoples and
Multitudes, and Nations and Tongues: And these Waters have been the means of
the flowing and increasing of the wealth and riches of this City, so that
their Merchants, that is, the Prelates have grown rich, and become the great
men of the earth, by trafficking in them; also the Ship-masters (which are the
Parish Priests) and all Ship-men and mariners (which are the inferior guides,
and Ecclesiastical Officers) have gathered crumbs, and waxed rich thereby, and
therefore at the destruction of this great City shall stand a far off and
shall howl to see the desolation thereof, and their own gain taken away, for
from thence-forth no man will buy their commodities any more. Here note, that
these foresaid spiritual persons are the sellers, and the Lay People are the
buyers, and the wares which are bought and sold in this kingdom (...) called
spiritual, as pardons for sin, and indulgences of diverse sorts, which is a
special commodity, and brings in abundance of treasure, also their Pistling,
Gospelling, Chanting, Homeling, Massing, which must be maintained with the
Tithes, or Tenth of all things, which they usually call the maintenance of the
Ministry; Also the Sacrifices (unacceptable to God, and well-pleasing to the
Devil) which are daily offered at their Altars, and at diverse Images of
Saints; also the body of their Maker and Savior: besides Marrying, Baptizing
of Children, Churching of Women; Houseling the sick, burying the dead; these
and many such like, are the spiritual Wares sold in this Kingdom, which have
particular prizes set on them: Now so it is, that these wares are privileged,
that none may either buy or sell them, save he that has the Mark of the
Beast, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his name. What the Mark of
the Beast is, has been before showed: Secondly, the name of the Beast is to be
considered, For the manifestation whereof let us consider and mind, that those
which did preach and profess Christ and his doctrine, are said to have and to
^eare his Name. The Lord Christ Jesus said unto Ananias in a Vision concerning
Paul, That he was a chosen Vessel to bear his Name before the Gentiles, and
Kings, Acts 9.15.
and the Children of Israel. By the Name of the Lord, here was meant that Paul
should preach the doctrine of Christ, and those that believed by his Preaching,
were said to believe in the Name of Christ, and were therefore baptized into
his Name, and called Christians. Acts 11.26.
The Disciples were first called Christians in Antioch. Also the Disciples and
followers of Christ are said to have the Lambs Fathers Name written in their
foreheads: According to this is the meaning of the name of the Beast, which the
holy Ghost sets down in a mystery in the 17 Chapter, and 5 verse, Babylon
the Great, the Mother of Harlots, the abominations of the earth: But the
Papists call it not Babylon the Great, but the great universal or Catholic
Church; not the Mother of Harlots, but the Mother of all true Believers; not
the Mother of all abominations of the earth, but the Pillar and ground of
Truth, that cannot err: This is the difference betwixt the name which God
gives them, and which they take and attribute unto themselves: But let them
speak the best of themselves, and let us consider and answer them in their own
language, they call themselves the Catholic Church, and their professed
vassals and subjects are therefore called Catholics, and whatsoever they be,
that do either preach or profess the Catholic faith, that is, believe as this
Catholic Church believes, that it is Mother of all true Believers, that it
cannot err, etc. they are Catholics, such persons wheresoever they live, if
they thus believe (although they never received the mark of the Beast, nor can
receive it) yet this profession is enough to entitle them in the right of
buying or selling these foresaid wares, such persons have the name of the
Beast, and therefore they may buy pardons of the forgiveness of part, or all
their sins, and use any of these things which they suppose necessary for their
souls health: (but indeed destruction) yea, after their death they may, for a
sum of money given to the foresaid Merchants by their charitable Successors,
be released out of Purgatory: thus, by their own description we have found out
the name of the Beast, and who they are that have received it.

The third condition is the number of his name, as the Beast had one general
name which is the Catholic Church) whereby he was known from all other States
and Kingdoms in the world, so it has a number of names belonging to the
particular parts and members thereof, to distingnish one from another, as in
the 17. Chapter, and third verse, The Beast was full of names of blasphemy. As
the true Church, which is that body whereof Christ Jesus only is the Head, is
complete and furnished, when it is coupled and knit together by every joint and
member, which Christ Jesus has given for the furniture thereof; namely,
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers: So this false Church
being furnished with those parts and members which that great red Dragon has
invented and set up, under the title of Ministers of Christ, to work upon the
children of disobedience; namely, the Pope, Patriarchs, Cardinals,
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Abots, Priors, Prebends Canons,
Chancellers, Commissioners, Registers, Doctors, with the rest of the selected
Synod or Counsel: so (I say) this Church or Beast, being furnished with these
members, are the full number of his name; that is, they are the number of whom
the Catholic Church consists, and from them all inferior power and offices
of Ministry, as Monks, Friars, Parsons, Vicars, Curats: and Jesuits are
derived. This I understand to be the number of his name, and this exposition
agrees with that in the verse following, where it is said, let him that has
understanding count the number of the Beast, what can be understood but the
Number of the particular parts whereof he consists? And where it is said, For
it is the number of a man. What can be understood but that it bears the
resemblance and likeness of a man? as follows to be declared. Thus we see
who may buy and sell in this Kingdom, and who may not.

Here is wisdom; let him that has understanding count the number of the Beast,
for it is the number of a man, and his number is 666.

Here is showed, first, what is required in searching out this mystery, and
that is wisdom and understanding, not such as is from beneath, but from above,
which comes down from the Father of lights, from whom comes every good and
perfect gift, he it is that gives wisdom to the simple, and the understanding
of his secrets to those that fear him; which should teach those that desire to
know the Mysteries of his will, to labor to be such as to whom he has
promised to reveal them, then whatsoever we ask, we shall receive of him, for
to such he gives liberally, and upbraideth not.

Secondly, here is showed a direction how to employ a man's wisdom in finding
out this Mystery, and that is, by counting or reckoning the number of this
Beast.

Thirdly, a reason why the number of the Beast is to be counted, Because it is
the number of a man; that is, it agrees with, and is answerable to the parts
of a man, and so is the more easily to be found: for as we know the true Church
of Christ is compared in the Scriptures to the natural body of a man, as in 1
Cor. 12.12. For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members
of that one body being many are one body, so also is Christ Jesus: And in the
27. verse, the Apostle speaking of the Church of Corinth, he says: Ye are the
body of Christ, and members in particular, etc. So in the Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
Christ is given to be Head over all things, to the Church which is his Body.
Thus as the true Church is called and compared to a body; so the Catholics
affirm, that they only are that Church, and that Body, and that the
particular parts and members of their Church are the full number thereof. Now
whereas they say they are the Church, let us say they are the Beast. And
whereas they say, their particular parts and members make up the number of the
Church, let us say their particular parts and members make up the number of the
Beast, and so we find the true interpretation of this Scripture.

Further, here is set down the number of the Beast, which is 666. By this
number I do not understand any set number, and that the parts and members of
the Beast are no more nor less, but thereby I understand is meant a full and
complete number, as before was showed: As all the parts and members of a man
joined together make a whole perfect man, so do the particular parts and
members of the Beast make a perfect and entire Beast. Thus briefly, according
to the ability which God has given me, I have gone over this Chapter, wherein
is briefly set forth the workers of iniquity, which have done, and yet still do
prevail over Gods people, under the title of Ministers of the Gospel, and
Church of Christ, as they were represented under the form of three several
Beasts: The first Beast representing the General Counsels, or (as the Papists
call it) the Catholic Church. The second Beast representing the POPE. And the
third Beast, the PROVINCIAL COUNCELS, which were established by the Pope.

The which three Beasts bearing rule and Dominion in these times whereinto we
are fallen, and being enemies and opposers of Christ and his Kingdom, it does
behoove us to know them, to the end that we may eschew them and their evil
ways, and seek after the truth, making strait steps unto the Kingdom of God.

Now, that we our selves may make particular use hereof, it is necessary for us
to examine the National Synod, or Convocation, consisting of the Prelacy and
Clergy of the Land, who whilst they remained under the yoke and bondage of the
Church of Rome, and whilst they exercised their power, which was first given
them by the Pope, for, and in the behalf of that Church and Dominion, they
were the very Image of the first Beast before mentioned: But being now
separated from the Pope, and Church of Rome, they think (as it should seem)
that their spiritual Pontifical power and authority which they exercise is
lawful and warrantable, and to be submitted unto: They being gathered
together, boast themselves to be the representative body of the Church of
England, and the true Church of Christ, and that they have power to make Laws
and Canons for Government thereof, and for the worship of God, which all men
ought to yield obedience unto, as appears by diverse of their Books of Canons.

But we are not to take this upon their word, but to make trial thereof by the
Word of God, whether it be true or false. If the Word of God did give them such
power and authority, then indeed we were bound in conscience to yield already
obedience to their Laws and Canons: But the most wise God, and Disposer of all
things, who knows the vanity of men's minds, would not have his people to
hold their faith in respect of men's persons, and at their pleasure to alter and
change the same, and therefore did not give to any of his Ministers power to
make Laws in matters of Religion, and for the worship of God, but gave them
power only to teach the Nations to observe the things which he had commanded
them, as in the 28. of Matthew, the 19. and 20. verses. And the Apostle Paul
bids the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.1. to be followers of him, as he followed
Christ, And in the same Chapter he also says, That which he had received of
the Lord, he delivered unto them. Acts 15.
Also the Assembly of the apostles and Elders of the Church of Jerusalem, they
would not impose any yoke of bondage upon the Churches of Christ, but held it
to be a tempting of God so to do, as before has been showed: And this agrees
with that in Deuteronomy. 12.32. Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it; Thou
shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom: By which Scriptures it is
plain, that the chiefest Ministers of the Gospel had no such power as these
Prelates presume to have, as we shall find, by examining their particular
Canons and Constitutions, of which for examples, I will only note some few of
their late and best reformed Book, made Anno, 1603. in the first year of the
Kings Majesty's reign, by which it will be apparent, that they pass the bounds
of the Subjects of Christ, and that they have no power from him to make such
Laws; but by so doing, they usurp the place of God to reign in men's
consciences, for unto him only it does belong to make Laws in matters of
Religion, and for the worship of God, to which, men are only bound to yield
obedience, without adding, or detracting, and that for this their presumption,
they are liable to the curse of God, being indeed the Image of the Beast here
spoken of, that is originally sprung from the Dragon, and has received power
of Law-making from him. Concerning the first and second Canons, wherein they
pretend their zeal for the abolishing of all foreign power repugnant to the
jurisdiction of the Kings Majesty over the Ecclesiastical estate, he being
the highest power under God, to whom all men owe most loyal obedience; and
that his Majesty has the like authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, as the
godly Kings had amongst the Jews. To these I do most willingly assent and
agree: And further do desire, that (as the Pope) so the Prelacy, with all their
Antichristian Adherents which usurp spiritual power and superiority, above the
Majesty of Christ Jesus, being a strange and foreign generation, brought in
and established in this Land by the Pope of Rome, may also be abolished and
cast out after him: for by them the Pope lives in hope hereafter to be served,
as he has been heretofore, to the great vexation of the Kings and Princes of
this Land, yea to the loss of their Crown and lives.

But to be short, I will proceed to mention some few of their Canons, whereby
iniquity is established for a Law, and their beastliness discovered. In the
third Canon it is enacted, that whosoever shall affirm the Church of England,
by Law established, not to be a true and Apostolical Church, teaching and
maintaining the doctrine of the Apostles, that person shall be excommunicated,
ipso facto. That there are some, yea many doctrines of the Apostles maintained
in the Church of England, I do not deny; so there are in the Church of Rome:
But that the Ecclesiastical state, or spiritual body politic, which is
called the Church of England, which consists of Archbishops, Diocesan
Lord-bishops, Suffragans, Deanes, Archdeacons, Prebends, Canons, Chancellours,
Commissaries, with the rest of the Clergy, as heads and guides of that body to
go before, and the whole multitude of the Layitie (as they call it) which is as
the Tail to follow those Heads, that this political Body is the Spouse and
Church of Christ, as they affirm in their seventh, eighth, and ninth Canons,
that I do deny: For first, if it were true, that they are the Ministers of
Christ, which is his Church, we should find warrant for them in his Testament,
wherein is set down the Ministers which he has set in the Church: namely,
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers; and also their office
and administration: But in all the New Testament, no Archbishops nor
Lord-bishops, no Deanes nor Archdeacons, Prebends, Priests nor Canons, no
Chancellours, nor Commissaries, and other their Court-officers, nor any such
administration, as they challenge and execute, can there be found, they are a
strange generation that is risen up out of the earth, for earthly-minded and
vain men have invented them, and therefore the body which consists of them
cannot of right be acknowledged to be the Body of Christ, whose Ministers in
respect that they are called according to the Commandment of Christ, are from
Heaven: But it is indeed the Image of the first Beast, whose mouth was as the
mouth of a Lion, his body like a Leopard, and his feet as the feet of a Bear,
an ugly compounded and deformed monster. And as their names are strange, and
different from the Ministers of Christ, so is their practice contrary: they are
not servants to the Flock and Church of Christ, and helpers of their joy, but
they are authors of their woe, challendging and exercising Lordship and
Dominion over their faith; for in stead of a due administration of the Word of
God, they have mingled a cup of fornication for the people to drink, that is,
devised a form of Book-worship, with Orders, Rites and Ceremonies, which they
have imposed on the people, under the title of Divine Service, and which they
must observe without adding thereto, or taking any thing from it, as in the 4,
6, 7, 8, and 14. Canons.

Further, they are not painful Preachers, but lazy Lords; they are not
followers of Christ and of his Word, but are contemners thereof, casting it
behind their backs, and will not be reformed, nor ruled by it, they are
Lawmakers much like Nebuchadnezzar, for as he would destroy all that would not
worship his golden Image; So whosoever does refuse to yield obedience to their
Laws, shall be most severely punished, as is plain by diverse penalties
annexed to their Canons.

In consecrating and ordaining Priests, they are like to Jeroboam, for as he
consecrated whom he would of the basest of the people, to be the Priests of the
high places which he had set up, so do they ordain for the most part ignorant
fellows to be their Parish Priests and inferior Ministers: wherein though they
do most absurdly, yet will they not be contradicted, as we may see by the 57
Canon, where it is said, whosoever shall refuse to communicate with a dumb and
unpreaching Minister, Let him be excommunicated. And although their own
Doctors complain and cry out against it, yet they will not amend: amongst the
rest it is worthy to be observed what their own great Champion profound Master
Hooper faith, viz. That both Arguments from light of nature, Laws and Statutes
of Scripture, the Canons that are taken out of ancient Synods, the decrees and
constitutions of sincerest times, the sentences of all antiquity, and in a
word, every man's consent and conscience, is against ignorance, in them that
have the cure and charge of souls. If it be so how unreasonable and beastly is
it for the Prelates to ordain, allow, and approve of such for the Ministers of
Christ, of which there are many hundreds in the Land, whom the Prelates are not
ashamed to forbid to expound the Scriptures, as in the 49 Canon, where it is
said, that some of their Parish Priests shall not take upon them to expound in
their cure, or elsewhere, any Scripture, or matter, or doctrine, but shall
only study to read, etc. It is greatly to be wondered at, that so many grave
heads as were gathered together, and sat consulting about these matters,
should breed and bring forth such absurd and impious Canons. If there were
nothing else, this allowance of dumb Ministers, is sufficient to show the
vanity of their minds, and the darkness of their foolish hearts: So that we
may truly say of them, that when they professed themselves to be most wise, by
exalting, and making themselves equal with God, in making Laws for the
government of his House, the Church, even then they became most foolish, and
void of judgment.

As for the best sort of their Parish Priests, which are men of learning, and
gifts; they must also be confined within their limits, they must worship God
according to the rules prescribed them, by these their spiritual Fathers, as
in the 38 Canon.

If any Minister shall omit to use the form of prayer, or any of the Orders or
Ceremonies prescribed in the Communion Book, let him be suspended, and if he do
not conform within the space of a month, let him be deposed. The absurdities
and blasphemies contained in that Common Prayer Book, are many; which having
been discovered and laid open by diverse Treatises already published in print, I
will omit, only this I will add, that in the imposing of that Service Book,
or any other, this great iniquity is committed by the imposers thereof; That
they do exalt themselves both against Christ, who is ascended into Heaven, and
has given gifts to his Ministers, Ephesians. 4.1, 11, 12.
for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and
for the edification of the Church, his Body; and also they exalt themselves
against the Holy Ghost, who only has power to help our infirmities, Rom, 8.26.
and to furnish men with gifts, to worship God aright. Further, their Preachers
may not teach against their corrupt Church state and Ministry, though they know
it to be Antichristian, nor against the form of worship prescribed in the
said Common Prayer Book, nor against the ceremonies, nor the Government of the
Church of England by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and the rest
that bear office in the same, nor against the manner and form of making and
consecrating Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, nor against the Laws and Ordinances
Ecclesiastical, established in the said Church, whosoever transgresses in
these things, shall be excommunicated, ipso facto, as is plain in the 4, 6, 7,
8, and 54. Canons. Thus by excommunicating and cursing, they labor to
maintain and defend their corruptions, but not one jott of Scripture dare they
show, and no marvel; seeing the whole Scriptures are against men's inventions
and traditions, of which nature these abuses are, being left here by the Pope,
and retained and renewed by his Prelates. As they may not teach against these
things, so on the contrary, they may not teach the true and right way which
Christ has prescribed in his Testament, how we must worship God, nor how the
true Church of Christ ought to be gathered and constituted, the Ministers
thereof ordained, nor the manner how it ought to be governed, as appears in
the 9.10, 11. and 12. Canons. By which we may see in what bondage their
Preachers are kept, they must hide their Talent in the earth, and put their
candle under a Bushed, lest men by the light thereof should come to the
knowledge of the truth and believe it. Also it is to be observed as a general
rule, that none, good or bad, learned or unlearned, can be suffered to receive
their Orders of Priesthood or Deaconship, or be admitted to preach, or execute
a Ministry in their Parish Churches, unless they swear to conform to the
worship and ceremonies prescribed by these Prelates, and also submit to their
Antichristian rule and government, which they challenge to themselves, as
being Lords over all: Thus by swearing they make their inferior Priests to
sell themselves to work wickedness, which trick they have cunningly devised
to bring the Land in subjection to these Antichristian yoke: And upon the
taking of this Oath, they receive the Prelates Mark, which is called in this
Chapter, the Mark of the Beast: which is understood to be the Letters of
Orders under the Prelates hand and Seal, to testify that they are made
Priests or Deacons, according to the Order and Canons prescribed in that
behalf, in this their Convocation, as we may see in the 36, 48, and 50 Canons:
And for refusing to worship them in these things, many are put back, and those
that formerly have been ordained, for refusing so to do, (which they call
revolting) have had their penal Laws executed upon them; which is Suspension,
Degradation, and Excommunication, and after these many other afflictions in
body, goods and name; being accounted factious and seditious persons, that have
no right to buy or sell their Wares.

Concerning the people, whereof the Church of England consists, it is
necessary that we find them such as the Scriptures do require, otherwise they
can^^^ be accounted the Church of Christ, and to this end observe these few
places following: Ezeck. 44.19. Thus says the Lord, no stranger uncircumcised
in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into any Sanctuary: And the
people of Israel for suffering such uncircumcised strangers to enter into the
Sanctuary of the Lord, he calls them a rebellious people, that had poluted
his Sanctuary, and broken his Covenant; And in the 23 verse, The Lord teaches
his Ministers to put difference between the holy and profane, the clean and
unclean; And according to this was the practice of the Apostles in the
Primitive Age, who by preaching the Word, gathered none but such as believed,
and voluntarily submitted themselves to walk according to the profession of
the Gospel; and if any did cunningly creep into the fellowship of the Saints,
and not walk accordingly, they were to be cast out by the Church, as in the 1
Cor. 5. Likewise the Apostle Paul, he separated the Disciples of Ephesus from
those that believed not; so the Apostle taught the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.14,
15, etc. Be not unequally yoked together with unbeleevers, for what fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteousness, And what communion has light with
darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part has he that
believes with an Infidel? And what agreement has ehe Temple of God with
Idols? For ye are the Temple of the Living God, as God has said, I will dwell
in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people; Wherefore come out from amongst them, and be ye separate, faith the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you.

Now if we compare the Church of England with these Scriptures, we shall find
that the practice and proceedings thereof, has been, and is contrary. The
people thereof (for the most part) are such as visibly and apparently live in
all kind of licentiousness, and in their works deny God, being abominable
and disobedient. For these Lordly Prelates being armed with the Sword of Civil
authority, and having the Law of their side, they have not labored by
painful preaching to draw men to the obedience of the faith, and to the
fellowship of the Gospel apart from the profane and wicked, that speak evil
of the ways of the Lord, but they have compelled and enforced all sorts of
people, both religious and profane, not only such as fear God, but also such
as fear him not, by bodily punishments to be conformable to the profession
which is by their Canon Law, established in this Church: As if the Word of God,
that Sword of the Spirit were not mighty enough in operation for the gathering
together of the Saints. That this is their practice is plain by the 90. and
114. Canons, where it is said, that Ministers and Churchwardens must present
all persons above the age of thriteen years, that come not to the Church and
receive the Sacraments, after which presentation, if they do not conform,
they shall be excommunicated, imprisoned, and have their goods attached: This
is the means which has been used for the gathering of this Church of England,
whereby they have confounded and mingled them together, whom God has commanded
to be separated: wherein what do they less then think themselves wiser and
stronger then God? The Word of God is the seed whereby the Church of God is
begotten, and those that are begotten by any other means are bastards, and not
Sons: for as that Woman is an Harlot which has Children by any but her
lawful Husband: so that Church whose members are gathered by any other way or
means, then by the Word of Go^ persuading and moving their hearts, the same is
not the Church of Christ: But this has been the manner of gathering the Church
of England, and therefore it is unworthy to be adorned with the title of the
Church, but ought to be accounted the Image of the first Beast before spoken
of, that is, of Great Babylon, which is an habitation of Devils, an hold of
foul Spirits, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird.

And for confirmation hereof, by the testimony of their own mouths, let us but
consider the estimation which the members of this Church have one of another:
Some there are amongst them, who for making more conscience of their ways then
the rest, are in dirision called Puritans or Precisians; these on the contrary
seeing the ungodly conversation of the rest of their brethren, esteem them as
wicked, profane, carnal, and unregenerate men, such as (for the most part)
are mockers, contemners, and evil speakers of the truth, and in whom is no
appearance of Religion, and the fear of God; and therefore they distinguish
the better sort from these profane persons, by the name of Professors. This
is the estimation which they have one of another, which is a manifest note that
they are not come into the order of the Church of Christ.

I deny not but there are many amongst them, that are the Saints and Servants
of Christ, that are godly and zealous people, which so far as they know, they
labor to yield obedience to the Commandments of Christ; and although by
means of their Guides which make them to err and go astray, keeping them in
ignorance of this doctrine, yet it shall go well with them: Such persons (I
say) as fit stones for the building of the Church of Christ, but so long as
they remain in this confusion, they can no more be said to be the true visible
Church of Christ, then a heap of stones fitted for a building can be said to be
a House, therefore they must be separated from the wicked, and placed together,
according to the order prescribed by Christ Jesus, and practiced by his
Apostles, as in the New Testament, before they can be so esteemed.

As these Prelates will have this Church of England to be accounted the true
Church of Christ, so they will have the true Church of Christ to be accounted
false, schismatic, and heretical, as in the 9. 10. and 11. Canons: by which
it does appear, that if any people separate from this corrupt Church state, and
join together apart from the wicked and profane, to walk in all the ways
and ordinances of Christ prescribed in his Testament, acknowledging Christ
Jesus to be the only King, Lord, and Lawgiver, in matters of Religion, and
the worship of God, which is the true and right rule whereby Gods people ought
to walk, and by so doing, they become indeed, the true Church of Christ, to
whom he has promised his presence and blessing: yet notwithstanding, such
persons, are for this to be accounted Schismatikes, and to be excommunicated,
ipso facto, as holding wicked errors. Thus they open their mouths wide, to
speak evil of the ways of God, whereby also they appear to be the very
Images of the Beast, that blasphemed the Tabernacle of God, as is showed
before, upon the sixth verse.

Further, whereas the Apostles did ordain diverse Elders in every Church, to
whom they gave charge to feed the Flock of Christ, whereof the Holy Ghost had
made them Overseers: On the contrary, these Prelates, in stead of Elders to
feed one Flock, they do ordain one idle priest to be fed of diverse Flocks;
that is, some to have two, some three, and some four Benefices; and this they
are not ashamed to publish, as appears in the 41 Canon, by which it is
allowed, that Licenses and Dispensation shall be granted to Masters of Arts,
and other Graduates, to have plurality of Benefices, so that they be within the
compass of 30. miles.

Concerning their Copes, Surplices, Crossing in Baptism, and other their
foolish Ceremonies, which they themselves acknowledge to be things indifferent,
yet those that refuse to use them, through the tenderness of their
consciences, are therefore greatly afflicted and persecuted, so far are they
unlike the Apostle (who would not use necessary things, that were offensive to
his brethren) as that they themselves will, not only use those things which
are unnecessary, but also in their use, justly scandalous and offensive; yea,
and compel their brethren also to use them, which if they refuse, they shall
enjoy neither liberty, nor worldly possessions. How unworthy this their
practice is, for those that would be accounted Christians, let the world judge:
certainly, it is so, contrary to Christian charity, as that it is to be
accounted Heathenish impiety, and beastly cruelty, and it is a Mark in their
foreheads to testify unto the world that they are those which our Savior
Christ speaks of, that should come in Sheeps clothing, (that is, pretending
themselves to be the Ministers of the Gospel, and such as desire peace and
unity) but inwardly are ravening Wolves: such as do sow strife and contention,
and by this means they grow rich, filling themselves with the spoil of their
Brethren, whom they persecute, as Lions, Bears and Leopards, fill themselves
with their prey.

These, and many other evils by their Canon Law established, and to the
dishonor of God, and vexation of his people daily practiced, have been much
opposed, and the iniquity of them sufficiently manifested, but as yet it
remains like unto the Decrees of the Medes and Persians, that may not be
changed: yea, they boast and say (like their old Mother) that without their
Laws, the Church of Christ would run into confusion, as if the Testament and
Laws of Christ were not sufficient for the government of his Church and
Kingdom. Thus they open their mouths, and reproach the Almighty: But he who
sits in the Heavens laugheth them to scorn, and will vex them in his sore
displeasure, if they repent not.

By these few examples of their wicked practices, I have briefly showed, that
this Church of England still remains under the bondage of Antichrist, and is
ruled and governed by the Image of the Beast, mentioned in this 13 Chapter,
which usurpeth that power, which is only proper to Christ Jesus.

And whereas it is objected in the behalf of the Church of England, that it is
fallen and separated from Babylon, the universal Church of Rome, and therefore
it is the true Church of Christ, and needs no other separation.

To this I answer, that true it is, that that great City is now divided into
three parts, as was foreshewed in the 16 Chapter of this prophecy, and the
Cities of the Nations (that is, the National Churches, whereof the Church of
England is one,) are fallen from it; but this is no argument that therefore
they are the true Churches of Christ, that are divided from Rome, unless they
be united and joined to Christ, and framed and built together, according to the
pattern prescribed in his Testament.

It is indeed an argument, that this kingdom shall not long stand, as our
Savior Christ teaches, Mat. 12. Every kingdom divided against it self, is
brought to desolation: and every City or House divided against it self, shall
not stand. And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself: how
shall then his kingdom stand? Thus by the division of this Great City, Gods
people may receive comfort, and rejoice in assured hope, that the fall and
destruction of Babylon is near, and that the Lord will shortly be avenged of
their iniquities, which should teach us, to come out from amongst them, that we
partake not of their sins, and so receive of their plagues, and to have no
fellowship with their unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them,
and steadfastly resist and fight against them. So shall we receive the Crown of
righteousness, which God the righteous Judge shall give at his appearing. To
whom be glory and Dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

REVEL. 20.4. And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness
of Jesus, and for the Word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast,
neither his Image, neither had received his Mark upon their foreheads, or in
their hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.


FINIS.

