

Look not without on Votes alone
But see what is hid in Flesh and Bone.
Ecce Homo; THE Little PARLIAMENT unbowelled: WITH, The substance, quality, and
disposition of the outward Members; and inward faculties, virtues, and
properties.

The glory of the good ones, and sad condition of rotten Back-sliders.

1 COR. 10. 15. I speak as to wise men: judge Ye what I say. LONDON. Printed
by JANE COE, and are to be sold at her house without Creeple-Gate: 1644.

TO The Honorable and truly Pious, WILLIAM LENTHALL Esquire* Speaker of the
Honorable House of Commons, in Parliament assembled.
Renowned Patriot;
WHen I consider those admired gifts wherewith your honor is so excellently
qualified: I censure it too much abruptness to present such worth with so
mean a tallent; yet having had the happiness to be an eyewitness of your
love and countenance to Religion and piety: And knowing how ignorant many are,
not only of God, but themselves too; who may be bettered (if God please to give
a blessing to this my labor) by the use hereof; I humbly crave leave to beg
this favor to patronize my poor endeavors, published for the meditation of
those who know better, and instruction of those that know less: That all who
use it, may savingly know God, and themselves; which for you and all Gods
people, is the prayers of

Your humble Servant, Henry Walker.

The Contents of the Chapters contained in this Book.
CHAP. I. Seweth what the soul is. Chap. 2. Shows whence the souls come* when
and how they enter into the bodies. Chap. 3. Shows the purity of the soul.
Cha. 4. Shows how the soul is defiled with ^ginall sin. Chap. 5. Shows how
the Sensative part of the soul. Chap. 6. The powers of the souls essence.
Chap. 7. The fuclties of the soul. Chap. 8. That when the body dies, the soul
neither sleeps nor perishes, but goes immediately, either to joy or
torment. Chap. 9. Souls remain where they are sent till the Resurrection. Chap.
10. The inward faculties, and virtues of the body. Chap. 11. Of the vital
spirits. Chap. 12. Of the periurbations, and passions of the mind. Chap. 13.
Of the particular faculties of the mind^. Chap. 14. The distinction of the
faculties of the soul, from the faculties of the mind. Chap. 15. The leading
of the flesh, or spirit one by the other. Chap. 16. Of the resurrection, Chap.
17. Of Hell. Chap. 18. Of Heaven.
A SECRET Disclosed.
CHAP. I. Shows what the soul of man is.
I. SOme Pithagoras.
define the soul to be the Spirit of life, created after the Image of God, and
inspired into the body of man. II. Others say it is an understanding spirit,
the second part of the substance of man, which does not perish, when it
departs from the body, but is immortal. III. But the true description of the
soul (according to the diffinition of great learned men) is this; Namely, that
the soul of man is a spiritual substance, (...) Alley. ^s. 13. ^aelec. 2^
infused of God into the body of man, that being joined thereto, may give it
life, direct, and rule it, and being separated from the body, does not perish,
but live immortally, and eternally.

^. The soul is a very substantial ^actanti. opifi^ia ^ei.
essence, and not a quality.

A quality without a substance, is Argu.
not sensible of joy or torment. But the soul of man is in it self sensible of
joy or sorrow.

Ergo. The soul of man is a very Example.
substantial essence. The soul of the Luke 16. Luke. 23. Apo. 6.
rich glutton was tormented in Hell. The soul of the thief was with Christ in
Paradise. The souls under the Altar did cry aloud.

2. This substance of the soul is Augustine. de quanti^at. animae. cap. 1.
not of these usual and known natures, which we touch, and perceive, with
these senses of the body, which are corporal, but a spiritual substance.

That substance which consists Argu.
neither of earth, water, air, nor fire, neither of any of them severally, of
part of them, or of them all joined together, does consist, not of a corporal,
but of a spiritual substance. But the substance of the soul does Cassiod^
Austine*
consist, neither of earth, air, fire, nor water; of any of them, nor of all of
them.

Ergo: The soul of man is not a corporal, Exampl^
but a spiritual substance.

God breathed the soul of Adam into Genesis 2. 7 1 Cor. 1^ 4^
his body. First, God made Adam a natural body; then gave him a spiritual
soul. The body was a type of Adam, the soul a type of Christ: therefore, when
the body, the earthly part of man dies: the soul which is spiritual, dies
not, but departs Genesis 35. ^
points it.

3. The soul of man, is of God infused into the body, and not received by
generation from the parents.

That which we received from our Argume^
parents, we received by generation from them; but we received not our D.
Wille^ Synops.
souls by generation from our paretns, but from God who gave them.

Ergo. We received not our souls from our parents, but from God.

God (...) says Zechariah) formed the spirit of man within him: Our ^b. 12* 9.
^l. 12. 17.
parents are the fathers of our bodies, but God is himself, the father of our
souls; therefore, when we die, the ^le. 12* 7.
soul perishes not with the body in death, but returns to God that gave it.

CHAP. II. Shows whence the souls come, when, and how, they enter into the
bodies.
I. SOme have thought, that the soul ^lato. ^rigen.
does slide from Heaven. II. Others have thought, that the soul has (...),
^anichies, riscilians.
its original from the proper substance of God. III. Some do believe, that all
the souls being once made together, are reserved in the treasure-house of God,
and so sent into the bodies after the perfection thereof. IIII. Others do
suppose, that as the body ^ertullian, (...)* West-Church. H^erome*
comes of the body, so the soul (also) springs of the soul. V. Others have
declared, that the souls of men, are daily made of God, and so sent into the
bodies. VI. Lastly, others of better approved judgments in this particular:
affirm, the soul to be made B* Alley, Prael. 2. (...) the soul. Resp. 3.
by God of nothing, and to be powered of God into the body, when that the fruit
is made perfect in the mothers womb, with shape, and all other Psalm. 33. 1 Job
10.
parts. It is the Lord that fashioneth the soul of man in him, and preserves
man by it.

CHAP. III. Shows the purity of the soul.
THe soul is created of God, pure, and holy; as God creates it, in its own
simple nature, in respect of God.

What God creates to praise his Argument.
name, he creates pure, and holy, Isai. 43. 7.

But God creates the soul of man to praise his name, Psalm. 119. 175.

Ergo. God creates the soul of man Conclus^on.
pure, and holy: Therefore, says Austine, Anima recens creata, ab omni De
nature great. co^ pelag. l^ 3. c. 10.
delicto immunis: The soul newly created, is void of all offense; that is, in
respect of God.

CHAP. IV. Shows how the soul is defiled by original sin.
THe soul of man, beingr ceated in the ^. Wille^. ^nops. ^l. 864.
midst of the body, in an unclean and polluted place does forthwith (being
coopled to the body) begin to be unclean, because the body in which it is
created, is defiled by propogation from our parents throug original sin.

Though the body be defiled by propogation from our parents, through sin, yet
does not sin springfrom the body, but from the soul; Matthew. 15. ^8. so that the
soul is properly ^lat. 15. 18. ^. Willet, ^l. 1107.
the principal agent in sin, and the body the instrument of the soul.

The purest rain water that comes ^imile.
from heaven, no sooner falls upon the earth (on a durty place) but it becomes
forthwith, the moisture of that dirt, and with it polluted. So does the soul of
man, which God from heaven places in the body, a durty defiled place, it is no
sooner coopled therewith, but becomes forthwith to be unclean.

The reward of sin is death. Romans 6. 2*


But sin is not in the body till the Argum
soul come.

Ergo, The soul that sins with Ephesians. 1^
the body is guilty of death.

Object. If sin be an adjunct of the Objctio
soul, not of the body, so that it is not in the body before the soul come, and
that the soul is created of God, pure and ^nspotted, and so placed in the body,
where shall we place original sin.

Answer. Original* sin, is neither Answer
proper to the body, nor to the soul, D. Will^ original sin quest.
but is, Hominis peccatum, a sin of the whole man, neither the body must be
respected alone, nor the soul alone, but as they do jointly make one man, and
so enter into one condition, and are partakers each of others woe, or welfare.

CHAP. V. Shows the sensative part of the soul.
THe sensative part of the soul is that which is touched with the sense,
either of Joy, or grriefe.

This joy of the soul cannot be hindered by man, where it is, it is not in ^ohn
29. 22. ^sal. 73. 21.
man's power to take it away. Ioh. 26. 22. So also, neither can all the comforts
in the world; ease a soul that is grieved, except the soul it self be touched
with the sense of joy.

This joy or grief, does arise in the ^he cause ^f joy ^r Grief.
soul: First, from the sense of its present condition: Secondly, In respect of
its future expectation.

1. From the sense of the present condition of the soul, does arise either joy
or grief; Thus:

The soul of man does either rejoice Pet. 1. 1. 10. 26. 15.
(in the sensative part thereof) under some present concived good; or else
grieveth under some present conceived evil, and that may be, when the
Imagination of the soul, being fixed on Deuteronomy. 31. 12 Ro^. 2. 15.
something which it has or wants, the judgment does either like or detest
it, and so accordingly, does rejoice or grieve in the enjoying, or want
thereof. As for example.

A man that is Rich, imagines 1 Example.
with himself what good is in Riches, if the judgment likes that estate
which he enjoyes? then is his soul joyful in the enjoying thereof, for the
present.

Again, A man whose mind is on 2 Example.
pleasure: the judgment likes it, and therefore rejoyseth in enjoying it, and
grieveth, in being abridged from it*

Again, A man whose imaginations 3 Example.
are toward God, the judgment being clear, and seeing the good that is in
God, the soul does rejoice to worship him and is grieved because of sin: but if
the imaginations deceive the heart: and the judgment be corrupted, so that he
cannot see any sweetness therein, then does Gods worship become a burden to
the soul.

2. This joy or grief does arise in Psalm. 32. 10.
the soul from the sense of its future expectation. When the mind is set on 1 Timothy 6. 19.
something that shall befall man, the Imagination conciveth it either to be
good or evil and thereupon does either fear it, or with hope desire it, which
breeds either joy, or grie^ in the soul.

As when the mind is set on Jesus 1 Example.
Christ, desiring salvation through him, the Imagination conceives it to be
good or evil, so to do and accordingly as we mind created comforts, or (...)
ourselves on Christ as our chiefest good, so fear does greive, or hope rejoice
our souls.

A man that seeks felicity from the 2 Example.
creature, if the judgment conceive it to be evil, then though the heart of
man be delighted therewith, yet does not the soul desire it, but is grieved
thereat, but if the Imagination conceive it to be good then does the soul
desire it, hope for it, and rejoice in the thought thereof. When the soul 3
Example.
desires Christ, apprehending the glory that is in him, here is rejoicing. Hen^
is the soul, (even in this life) delight^ in the hope of its glory in heaven,
(...) Conclusion.
tormented with fear of its horror i^ hell.

CHAP. VI. Of the powers of the souls essence.
THe soul of man, being really one B. Alley on the Triaity. praecel. 3.
thing, has three powers, Memoriam, Int^llectum, and Voluntatem: Memory,
understanding, and will, which three make one essent all soul, but in property,
they are distinct: For the property of the memory, as to remember; the
understrnding to perceive, and understand: The will to choose; out of the memory
springs intelligence, and out of both, the will. Herein the soul may appear
to be created after the Image of God, because the Deity has three persons: the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which three constitute one essenciall God,
yet every person has this property. From the Father, comes the Son, and from
both the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. VII. Treats of the faculties of the soul.
THe faculties of the soul are those inward gifts, which God has framed in it,
for the help of it self? As the Lord has given the body members; so has he
given the soul faculties. With the Judement we allow or disallow; With the
understanding Acts. 8. 33. Job. 23. 2 Cor. 7. 15. Isa. 26. 8.
we perceive and apprehend. With the Affection we love and delight in things.
The desire seeks and waits for what it does effect* Math. 18. 14. 2 Cor. 7.
7.
with the Will we choose to follow what we desire: With the mind we are servent
in seeking what we choose. By the memory we retain in mind, etc 1 Cor. 1 5 2
Isa. 59. 8.


The Judgment being rightly informed we walk in peace, and serve God with
comfort, but when the Judgment is corrupted: all joy is gone.

The understanding being enlightened, 2 Pet 2. 12, 13, 14.
we abhor sin, but when the understanding is darkened, we are beguiled with sin.

The Affection being set upon a good Collo. 3. 2, 3, 6.
object, brings life; but being set on earthly things makes us in danger of
the wrath of God, etc.

Thus as the mouth receiving poison; Ephesians. 2. 3.
The hand receiving a vveapon; The feet leading into the sea, etc. Is the way
to destroy the body, So to have the Desire, Mind, Affection, etc. set on
worldly things is the way to destroy Psalm. 37. 4 11. 2 Chronicles. 29. 3. Isa 11 10.
1 Cor. 3. 16 Gal 4. 7.
both soul and dody. But being set on God, on heavenly things: they make the
soul glorious; The body the temple of the glorious Spirit, and both soul and
body, Heir of eternal glory, through Christ Jesus.

CHAP. VIII. Shows, that when the body dies, the soul neither sleeps, nor
perishes, but immediately is received either to joy or torment.
1 SOme say, that it is the doctrine Iren^
of Heretics, to persuade themselves, that they shall ^scend into Heaven, and
to be inhanced to the sight of Father, before the general resurrection of the
dead. Sad.


2. Others do imagine that the soul perishes, when the body dies.

3. But the Sripture proves plainly 1 Cor. 13. Luke 23. 43 1 Cor. 15. Eccle.
12. 7. Luke. 16. Policarpus. Eclesia^* hist. l. 4.
that the soul being loosed from ihe body, does forthwith, either ascend to
glory, or descend to tormment, not that the soul receives the perfection of
its estate till the Resurrection, yet does the soul enjoy either real bliss,
or misery, when the body dies, in part, which after the day of resurection,
shall be absolute, both of soul and body. The body indeed dies, as Paul
says, because of sin, but the soul Romans 8. 10.
dies not. Romans 8.

CHAP. IX. Shows that the souls remain^ where they are sent till the
Resurrection.
1 SOme believe that the souls of persons deceased have often times apeared.

2 Others have declared, that Sacrifices, Raba^s. Ar. Bis. of Magun. Bellarmin.
and prayers of the living have much profited the souls of men the were dead.

3. The Lord does forbid to ask, or to seek any truth of the Spirits (...) the
dead. The Prophets do send (...) Deuteronomy. 18. Esaias 8.
from such Oracles, to the Law and Testimony of Gods Word. The Evangelists Luke
16.
teach us in the Gospel, the those that are dead rise not again i^ apparitions.

Obeict. But many, partly by A^ Objection
Magic, have been raised, as Samuel 1 Samuel 28.
1 Samuel 28.

Answ. Chrysostom answers thi^ Answer.
objection very fully. The question On Matthew.
being asked? What shall we say (...) those voices which say, I am such ^ soul:
He answers. That voice (sait^ he which speaks these things) is no^ the soul
of any parson departed, but it is the Devil, which does feign these things to
deceive the hearers; Such B. Allemi^el. on apparition.
words are to be Counted Old wives tales, and foolish fables of Children, for
the soul separate from the body, faith B. Alley, does not wander in this world,
for the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God; and the souls of
sinners after their departure are presently carried to their place of torment.

Object. But the souls of some have Objection
returned again into their bodies; after departure, and they have lived on
earth again, As Lasarus, John. 11. John 11.


To this objection, Tertul: makes Answer.
answer (saying) Although the power Lib* de anima.
of God, has called again certain souls into their bodies: in token of his
might and right; This was done in example of the Resurrection, when the power
of God, whether by the Prophets, or by Christ, or else by the Apostles, did
render souls, then into their bodies: it is declared by the sensible, and
sufficient truth, that this is the very form of the truth, that thou may judge
every incorporat apparition of the dead to be deceits, and delusions.

CHAP. X. Treats of the inward virtues and faculties of the body.
THe inward virtues; and faculties of Galen l. de facultat natural.
the body are such which stir up the powers to action: Which are of three
sorts.

The first, comes from the brain, p. Low. discourse.
and sedeth the sense and moving into all the body through the muscles, and
nerves, by motion, which feeds all the senses, outwardly, and the imagination
reason and memory, inwardly.

The second carries life through all the body; which either dilateth the heart,
and arteries, from whence mirt^ and love arises, or else does constrain and
bind the arteries, and heart, from whence arises, melancholy sadness, and
revenge.

The third comes from the liver, and sends the nourishment through all the
body; which does 1. attract tha^ which is proper. 2. retain that which is
d^awn. 3. digest that which is retaine^ (...) expel that which is hurtful,
(as Low says.)

CHAP. XI. Treats of the vital spiritg of the body.
THe substance of the spirits in man's Low p. 2^
body, is the most pure; and thinnest of the blood, which passes through all
the body, to the effect, the members may do their proper actions, abounding
most in the heart, arteries, brains, and nerves, which Andreas d^ lortaine.
are of three sorts.

The first rem^ineth in the brain, which passes from thence to the ears and
other parts, but chiefly to the eyes: Therefore these who are ^linde have their
other virtues more strong. Democritus, and other philosephers have pu^ out
their eyes, to the end their understrnding might be more clear.


The second is that which is in the heart, and Arteries; and is made of the
evaporations of the blood, and of the air, labored in the lig^s, by the force
of vital heat, and thereafter is diffused through the members, for the
Conservation of the natural heat.

The third is that which is engendered in the liver, and veins, and there
remains, while theliver makes the blood; and other natural operations.

The use of it is, to help the conconcoction; As says Low.

CHAP. XII. Treats of the perturbations, and passions of the minds.
THe mind being governed by reason, Aristole.
is preserved from extremity in passion. But being without reason, such
passions, and perturbations, do^ arise, which brings great mutations, into
the natural heat, in so much that (as some have written) many Hipocrates.
Epist. 6. Galen. 2. de sum. cause. c. 5. method. ^. H^nricus Ranzaurus, de cons.
Vale^ud.
dye by the passions, and perturbations of the mind.

This is caused when the passions of the midne, does either dilate, or
comprimce the heart, for the vital spirits, and cast forth, by the great
dilation of the heart, as also retained by the great Compression thereof.

As for example: Joy, Hope, Love, Example.
etc. These being out of reason, do (through the passion of the mind) so
dilate the heart: that they cast forth the spirits. And sadness, fear, envy,
etc. do recall the vital spirits inwardly, to the center of the body, whence
many times ensues death.

CHAP. XII. Treats of the particular passions of the mind.
THe particular passions of the mind are many: but chiefly these, Mirth,
Sadness, Fear, anger, Shamefastness, Envy, Hatred, Hope, Love, etc.

I. Mirth, or Joy, is an affection of the mind, of a thing good, and pleasant,
by the which the blood, and spirits are pleasantly spread, for the present, by
the dilation of the heart, but if it be great, and last any long space, death
often ensues, because the heart is altogether destitute of blood.

As Aristole reports such a woman so died.
Pollicritia A writer of plays, who because he overcame one in dispute fell in
to such an extratordinary joy, that he died with the passion thereof! V^lerius
Maximus, VVriteth of two women, Chilon, and Diogora, who died for joy, for the
the happy return of their sons from the VVarres, who had overcome their
enemies, lib. 9. chap. 12. Gallius reports of one Diogoras, who when he did
see his 3. some crowned at Olimpus, for their virtue, died for joy, embracing
them in the presence of the whole people.
Phillipedes, and many others, who have died through extremity of joy.

2. Sadness is an affection, that does Hen. Ram. de consualetud.
revoke the natural heat inwardly, to the Center of the body; which in time
presses the heart, and dries up the body: hinders the government of the
spirit vital: which is sometimes so weakne^, that it is not able to go with
the blood, through the rest of the body, so wastes the body, in such sort,
that it becomes attrified, and We have many examples, hereof daily. Cornelius
Agrippa de ^accul. philosilius c. 63.
lean, whereupon death often insueth.

3. Fear, is a motion which revoketh the spirits to the heart the Center of
the body; whereby the natural heat, is suffocated, causing trembling, which
sometimes causes many women to that are with child fall in labor: sometimes
Diverse learned men do affitme, that men have grown white in 25. years, only by
the aprehension, and fear of death. Antonius Beneven. writes, of a body that
dies for fear, by seeing a vision, as he thought, of two men, clad in black,
when he was going to Schole, the which boy, through the extreme passion of
fear, died eight days after about the same time, De abditis mor. causis.
through fear, death ensues to men, or women.

4. Anger is a sudden revocation or Or an ardent heat, or ebullation of blood,
in the heart, with desire of of revenge.
calling back of the spirits, to the external parts, with an appetite of
revenge. It inflameth the whole habitude of the body, the spirits and blood are
troubled, as also the brains, it binds the heart, and lights. Whereof
Dangerous siknesses are often caused, and sometimes death ensues.

5. Shamefastness is a motion whereby one knows, or suspecteth some notise
to be taken of one for the same fault; for which he would be be angry with
himself.

In this passion, the blood first returns Pliny tells that one Diodorus,
Profesor of Dialectick^, having ^ ^uestion propounded unto him, and not
answering as he should, died for shame. Valer^us Maximus reports, that Homer
died for ^ame because he could not answer a question propounded to him by
ce^ain Fishers.
in (says Haly Abbas) and suddenly comes out again, which makes the Cheeks
often very read lib. 5. Of this passion some dy^: As Diod^; Homer, and others.

6. Envy is a heavy oppression of the heart, angry at some conceived good thing
an other does enjoy.

7. Hatred is an old malicious habitude, bred of anger, by the which the heart
would revenge the injury.

8. Hope is a motion by the which the heart desires the good ^ure, it opens
and dilateth the heart

9. Love is a fervent motion, by the which the heart desires (...), and
endeavors to draw unto it, a conceived good, assuredly, and apparently (as
Low says.) Low.


CHAP XIV. Shows how the faculties of the soul, are distinguished from the
faculties of the mind.
THe soul is not of any corporal Romans 8.
substance, but spiritual, as has been showed before; therefore the pure
faculties of the soul must needs be spiritual also.

The faculties of the mind of the Not the mind which is of the faculty of the
soul, but that which is of the body.
internal part of the body of man, is of a natural disposition, as the body
it self is; whole greatest and chiefest guide is at the highest, but reason.

Therefore as God that is spiritual, is infinitely more glorious in his divine
essence, then can be conceived in Luke 5. 21. 1. Cor. 2. ^. Verse. 9.
man's reason; so is the faculties of the soul of a far higher nature then the
faculties of the mind can reach.

That of the soul is spiritual, that of the mind is carnal. Rom 8. ^.


CHAP. XV. Shows, how the flesh is led by the spirit, or the spirit by the
flesh.
When all the faculties of the soul, Romans 8. 5.
and all the powers of the body, do mind fleshly things; then is the soulled
by the flesh; but when all the faculties of the mind are set on spiritual
things, then are the powers of the flesh led by the spirit. As for example;
Example.
If the devil present a man with some object of sin, as Lust, Covetousness,
Pride, Envy, Murder, ^tc. If the love hereof be so great and earnest that
this man runs headlong to the act hereof without consideration; then does he so
bind the faculties of the soul, that he captivates them under the bondage of
the flesh; but if he resist these sins to which he is entised, by advising and
deeply considering in his soul the evil thereof, then is the flesh overcome,
and led by the spirit.

These combats between the flesh Gal. 5. 17. 2 Cor. 10.
and the spirit are dive as; but according to the love or hatred we ^ear to the
thing about which we strive, so will the mind be affected or disaffected
therewith, and advance the prosecution thereof accordingly, whither it be ^les
aly or spiritual.

When a man does apprehend something Example.
in his thoughts, being moved thereto either by outward sense, or inward
motion, when the will is ready presently either to choose or refuse it; this
arises from the flesh; but when the understanding brings it first to the
judgment, and comparing it with the role of Gods word, without any affection
^o the thing, other then the Word does approve, or disapprove thereof; and so
does will, desire, and seek after it; this is of the spirit.

CHAP. XVI. Treats of the Resurrection of the Body.
IT is to be understood, that there is 1 Cor. 15. 44
a natural body, and there is a spiritual body, as Paul says: The natural
body is the first, which we have by generation from our parents; The (...)
spiritual body, is that which is la^ (...) so by Christ* (...) when we are
first estated in grace in this world; but the bodies of the e^ect shall be ma^e
(...)
so when they ^scend into heaven; for this corruptible body of flesh and blood,
cannot inherit the Kingdom of heaven.

When (...)
the elect dye, their natural bodies are as seed ^wn in the ground, but at the
resurrection they shall be raised in their spiritual bo^es, without (...)
imperfections or any deformity* they shall have their sen^ made pure, and be
rais^d with an heavenly and spiritual bod^; c^pable of inheriting heaven, and
^ith Christ shall as^d to i^mortal joy to all Eternity.

Every De civitate Dei, lib (...)
part that is in (...) body o^ Gods Elect, shall r^se without all deformity
(...) superfluity wha^soever, as Augustine says; That the (...) so often
(...), and the (...) so often paired, shall not with deformity come again ^o
their places, when the body rises at the day of judgment; and where the Lord
says Luke 21.18
, one hair of our head

shall not p^sh, Math. 10.3^
it is not s^oken of the length of our hairs, but of the number of them; for all
the hairs of our head are numbered.

The age and quantity of the bodies, when they shall rise again, says (...)
Austine, shall be in that measure, in the measure of perfect state of youth,
even in the measure of the age of the ful^sse of Christ; that is, the age to
which Christ came; All shall rise again (as the (...) have written) Master of
(...)
in the age in which Christ dyed and rose again, in (...) ^oever they die.

CHAP. XVII. (...) of Hell.
HEll signifies a Pit, a grave, B. Alle^ (...) on Hell
death it se^, the sta^e of the dead, hell, and the place of the damned spirits.

1. Hell signifies a grave, Jonah. 3
having relation to the body.

2. Hell signifies the horrible Psalm. 11^ James 3.^
dismaying of the mind, and feeling of the wrath of God; with a taste (as it
were) of the feeling of the infernal pains for sin, having relation to the
mind.

3. Hell signifies the place of the Psalm. 4. 17. Math. 10. 28
damned spirits, having relation to soul and body.

Concerning the local place of the Luke 10. 15. Pro* 27. 20* Mark. 8. 12.
damned, it is far from heaven; a place where is nothing but horror and
misery, but whether it be on the earth, in the earth, in the air, or any
Objction.
other place, it is not revealed; therefore I shall answer with Socrates, who
Socrates.
being demanded of a certain person* what was done in hell? deri^ing the
curiosity of the question, he answered, that he never went thither, nor
communed with any that returned from thence.

CHAP. XVIII. Treats of Heaven.
THe Scholasticall Divines do say, that Heaven is taken three manner B. All*
Misc. coeli.
of ways;

1. It signifies those things that be under the soul. 2. Those things that be
in the soul. 3. Those things that be above the soul.
1. Those things that be under the soul, are such things as the corporal eyes
behold beyond, or above the faculty of nature; that is to be alienated from the
corporal senses: As (...) was when he saw the Dan* 5*
^and writing upon the wall. This is the first Heaven.

2. Those things that be in the soul, are such things as cause the soul to be
list up, and taken by imagination or spirit, to know or see any thing
supernaturally; As Peter was wrapped Act. 10.
and taken, when he saw the sheet sent sent down from heaven. This is to be
wrapped and taken unto the second Heaven.

3 Those things that be above the soul, are such things as are intelligible;
and the nature of them not to be understod, by any sense or fantasy, when
they are, or have been seen, and thus Paul was rapt, and taken unto the 2 Cor.
^2. 2.
third heaven, because he was so alienated from his senses, and so inhansed
above all Corporal things and visions, that he saw things Intelligible,
simply, purely and plainly, even after that manner as the Angels, and the souls
separated from the body do see, (...) (that which is more) did see God by
Essence, as Austin does expressly (...) (...). 1^
write: to avoid curiosity. In a word (and so to conclude) Christ says to
(...). 14.
his Disciples; Let not your hearts be troubled: ye believe in God, believe,
also in ^e, in my Fathers house are many dwelling places, if it were not so, I
would have told you I go to prepare a place for you; and though I go to prepare
a place for you I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I
am there may ye be also. Therefore instead of curios^y, let us rather labor to
be Christ's Disciples, that these promises may belong to us, that so we may not
be too curious to search for the shadow, but may find Christ Jesus the Life,
the Truth, and the Way: and by him salvation. To whom with the Father, and the
holy Ghost, be all honor, and glory for ever, Amen.

FINIS*

