THE Dean of Ripon's Thanksgiving-Sermon UPON THE Taking of NAMUR.

A SERMON Preached in the Collegiate-Church of Ripon, ON Sunday the 22d of
September, 1695.

Being the Day appointed for A Public Thanksgiving FOR THE Reduction of the
Town and Castle of Namur, And the Preservation of his Majesty's Person.

By Christopher Wyvill, D. D. And Dean of Ripon.

Published at the Request of some Friends.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1695.

TO THE Right Worshipful THE Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen, And other The
Inhabitants of the Town of RIPON.
Gentlemen,
THE reason of this Sermon's appearing in Print so long after the day on which
you heard it Preached, was my unwillingness to publish it till I was prevailed
with to do it by some who thought it might be serviceable to the Present
Government; and if it can obtain that end, I think it comes not out too late.

And I Dedicate it to you, as an Acknowledgment of the many great Civilities
and Respects which I have had from you, who am

Gentlemen, Your most Obliged and Faithful Servant, Christ. Wyvill.

A SERMON Preached in the Collegiate-Church of Ripon.
2 Samuel iii. I. Now there was long War between the House of Saul, and the House
of David: but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the House of Saul waxed
weaker and weaker.
THese words do give us a short account of a long War betwixt two great
Families, and the different event it had in reference to each of them, tending
to the exaltation of the one and the depression of the other.

David, a Man after God's own Heart, was by God's express Declaration
(sufficiently made known to all the People) appointed to be King, after the
Death of Saul, over all the Tribes of Israel; and accordingly, upon Readiness
Death, he was forthwith Anointed into the Regal Office at Hebron, and
acknowledged as King by the Tribe of Judah; but the other Tribes (who did
sometimes bear the name of Israel in distinction from that of Judah, 1 Samuel 11.
8.
even before the division of the Kingdom, 2 Samuel 24. 9.
in the days of Jereboam, I say the other Tribes) followed Ishbosheth the Son
of Saul, whom Abner the Son of Ner, had set up in opposition to David,
notwithstanding that he could not but know he derived his Title to the Crown
from the immediate nomination of God himself; upon which there began a civil
War betwixt the House of David and the House of Saul. But God was pleased so
far to assert the cause of David, as to grant him Success over his Enemies; for
David (as the Text tells us) waxed stronger and stronger, but the House of Saul
waxed weaker and weaker.

How far we may judge of the righteousness of a Cause by the Success it has, I
shall take upon me to determine. Certain it is, that good Success is not always
an Argument of a good Cause. How often have we known wicked Attempts, and the
most horrid Villainies to thrive and prosper, whilst Just and righteous
Undertakings have met with great Miscarriages, and have had improsperous
Events? but when the Cause is apparently Just and Right, and then good Success
attends it, we cannot but acknowledge that the hand of God is concerned in it,
we cannot but discern his Favor to it, and his Approbation of it; and yet from
hence we must not conclude either that God disallows of a good Cause when he
permits it to suffer, or that he approves of a wrong Cause when he grants it
good Success. For as to the first Case, be the Cause of a People never so just
and right on which they are engaged in War, yet he may permit them to suffer
for their manifold Sins and Offenses; and as to the other Case, he sometimes
grants Prosperity to men engaged in a wrong cause, on purpose to make them the
Instruments of his just Wrath, in executing his Judgments on a sinful People.
But now the Cause of David was undeniably just and right, for he sat on the
Throne by God's own express Appointment, and God so far prosper'd his Arms, as
that he waxed stronger and stronger, whilst his Enemies waxed weaker and weaker.

I shall not make a parallel betwixt the War in my Text, and the War in which
we of this Nation are engaged: for the Parallel will not hold good in every
particular; for the War in which we are engaged is not (God be praised) a Civil
War, not a War betwixt two Families, or two Houses, within the same Land or
Dominion, but betwixt two distinct and independent Kingdoms, betwixt Us and
France, betwixt the Defender of the Faith, joined in Confederacy with other
Christian Princes and States of Europe on one side, and the Most Christian
King, joined with the Great Turk on the other. The Parallel therefore not
exactly holding true, I shall wave it; nor shall I any farther take notice of
the story in my Text, than as it affords occasion to speak upon these four
heads of Discourse; I. Concerning the lawfulness of War in general. II.
Concerning the War in which we of this Nation are now engaged. III. Concerning
the Success we have had, which gives occasion to this days Thanksgiving. IV.
And lastly, Concerning the effect which that Success should in reason have upon
us.


Of these I shall speak in their order, through God's Blessing, with as much
plainness and brevity as I can.

I. I shall speak concerning the lawfulness of War in general. Now it must be
confessed that it is a great unhappiness for any People to be engaged in War;
for the Miseries attending it are great, and the event of it uncertain, and
whether side soever gets the better, yet much blood may be spilt, many a brave
Man may lose his Life in the quarrel, much of the Nations Treasure may be
exhausted, many unforeseen Losses and Calamities may be the issue of the
Victory. But yet it is as certain, that War is sometimes unavoidably necessary;
in many cases, and upon certain occasions, it may be very lawful, and not
repugnant to the profession of Christianity.

We cannot indeed with truth admit of that Principle which some of late Years
have so greedily imbibed and spread abroad, viz. That the state of Nature is a
state of War; as if Men were naturally Enemies unto Men; or as if one Man were
become by nature a kind of a Wolf or a Tiger to another Man: For Man by
original Creation was made a sociable Creature, and all Mankind by nature are
inclined to Peace, Unity and Concord, and mutual Love and Kindness one with
another. Some Men indeed may have by evil custom so far debauched and corrupted
their nature, as that they may have contracted an habit of doing wrong and
injury to others, and perhaps, take some delight in quarrellings and fightings;
but to say or believe, that a disposition to such evil practices is originally
implanted in humane nature, is not only to disparage and vilify the noblest
piece of God's Creation, but to do despite unto, and to blaspheme God himself,
who is the Author of our Being, and the Contriver of our Nature: An inclination
therefore to fight, or to do such violence as may be the cause of War, proceeds
not from nature, but from the corruption of it, and from a defection from that
innocence wherein Man was at first Created. Jam. 4. 1.
From whence come Wars and fightings amongst you, says St. James? Come they
not hence, even from your Lusts which War in your members? So long as there are
different Passions in Men ungoverned and unrestrained, so long there will be
fightings in the World, Whilst Pride and Ambition, whilst desire of Power, and
of enlarging Dominions, and thirst after Revenge, do rule in Men's hearts, it
cannot well be otherwise but that Wars and Tumults will be raised. And although
the state of Nature be not a state of War, yet it is agreeable to nature for a
Nation, or Society of Men to defend themselves against violent Opposition, and
even to repel injuries with force. When Rebellion or an Insurrection is raised
in the Land, it is certainly lawful for the supreme lawful Magistrate, Romans 13.
4.
to whom is committed the power of the Sword, to endeavor by force of Arms,
when other means will not prevail, to quell and suppress it. When a Prince of
an aspiring Spirit, armed with Power and Strength, shall set upon his
Neighbors, threatening Ruin and Destruction to them, or do them any eminent
Injury, or otherwise violate or invade their just Rights and Liberties, it is
but reasonable, as well as lawful, for them to withstand his hostile attempts,
and to betake themselves to their Arms in their own just Defense and
Vindication; and if nothing else can reduce him to an advantageous and
honorable Peace, they may, if they can, compel him to it by offending him, and
pull down the haughtiness of his Pride by the diminution of his Forces; and
even to be upon the offensive part upon great and high provocations, is as
allowable as the defensive. This we know to be practiced, not only in our days,
and in most parts of the World, but even in times of old, and is justified by
the Example of Gods own People the Israelites, throughout the History of the
Old Testament.

Even Abraham the Father of the Faithful, a Man of most exemplary Piety, as
well as of great Wisdom, when he had heard of the spoil of Sodom, by the four
Kings that had set themselves against it, and that Lot, his Brother's Son, was
taken Captive by them, he armed his own trained Servants, and with what other
Forces he could get, he pursued them, he fought them, and beat them, he
recovered the spoil and set Lot at liberty; which fact, although he had not
God's express Command for it, yet met with God's Acceptance and Approbation;
for immediately after this Victory, Melchizedeck, the Priest of the Most High
God, met him in his return with the spoil, and blessed him in the name of God,
Genesis 14. 19, 20.
saying, Blessed be Abraham of the most high God, Possessor of Heaven and
Earth; and blessed be the most high God, which has delivered thine Enemies
into thine hand.

And when the Children of Israel, under the Conduct of Moses and Joshua, Exodus
17.
had fought the Amalekites and beaten them, although they had not the Command
of God for so doing, yet they afterward had his Approbation of it: and in the
20th Chapter of Deuteronomy, he gives his people general and perpetual rules to
be observed in waging War, declaring thereby his allowance of it upon some
accounts, although it has not his Especial Command.

Neither is there any thing in the Christian Religion that forbids it, but
rather some things that do very much favor it, and makes it lawful for
Christians, upon good occasions, to go to War, and to be engaged in it. St.
Paul exhorts us to pray, as for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
so particularly for Kings, that under them we may lead quiet and peaceable
lives, in all godliness and honesty; but how can a quiet and peaceable Life be
obtained, unless it be lawful for them to make use of the Sword, against the
disturbers of our Peace, and the hinderers of our Quiet? and accordingly we
find in Tertullian, that the Primitive Christians prayed for the Heathen
Emperors, that they might have faithful Soldiers and Victorious Armies; and
many of the ancient Christians who lived nearest the time of our Savior, and
of his Apostles, and who therefore may be presumed to know our Lord's mind very
well as to this matter, did serve as Soldiers in the Wars of the Emperors
under whom they lived, which we may imagine they would never have done, had
they thought it had been contrary to the profession of their Religion.

We are indeed, by the Gospel of Christ, obliged to love our Enemies, but that
lays no restraint upon us from going to War against them; we may love them,
even then when we are fighting with them, i. e. Love their Souls, and wish well
unto their better and Eternal State. We are commanded to forgive Injuries, and
to put up Affronts, not to revenge our selves, not to retaliate wrong with
wrong, but to overcome evil with good. But these Commands and Prohibitions
concern only private Persons in their private Capacities, and cannot be
construed to extend to public Societies, or the united body of a Nation.

Besides, we may observe, that St. John Baptist, who was a Person under the
strictest rigor of a spiritual Life, a Forerunner of our Savior, and sent on
purpose to prepare men for the reception of the Gospel, and who gave
instructions of Life to all that resorted to him; when the Soldiers, amongst
others, came to take his Counsel, and asked him what they should do, did not
bid them leave that course of life they were then engaged in, Luke 3. 14.
but only to do no violence, to accuse none falsely, and to be content with
their wages. He left them still the use of their Arms, and only forbad them the
abuse of their Power. And Cornelius, who was a Centurion of a Band of Soldiers
under the Roman pay, when he was made a Christian by St. Peter, did still
continue a Centurion, and had no directions given him to lay down his
Commission.

As for that famous Prophecy, which without doubt relates to the Church of
Christ, and foretells the happiness of the World upon his coming into it,
namely, Is. 2. 4.
that men should beat their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks; Mich. 4. 3.
that Nation should not life up Sword against Nation, and that they should not
learn War any more; there are these two things that may be said to it; First,
That it may be understood conditionally, that such indeed would assuredly be
the happy state of the World, if all Men in it would embrace the Christian
Religion, and live up to the Rules and Duties of it; for that would keep them
from doing any wrong or injury, and consequently there would be no occasion for
Wars, but an universal and perpetual Peace should overspread the Earth. Or,
secondly, That we are still to expect the accomplishment of it, that it still
remains to be fullfill'd, as do also some others which concern the state of
Christ's Church upon Earth; and therefore considering the present state of the
World, we cannot from that Prophecy rationally conclude, that War is absolutely
unlawful.

To this we may also add, that if our Blessed Lord had ever designed to make
Warfare Criminal, and to forbid it wholly to his Disciples and Followers, we
may be sure that he would some where or other, have given us a plain
Declaration of his Mind in the case, and have forbidden it us in plain, and
express, and intelligible words; which being he has no where done, we cannor
but think them very rash, and their Censure highly culpable, who condemn the
use of Arms amongst Christian; or that from our Saviors Command to St. Peter,
to put up his Sword (which he did no purpose to give a check to private
revenge) do infer that it was his Mind, that none who prosess his Gospel,
should upon any account be engaged in War.

Wherefore, to conclude this point, as it may be lawful for private Persons to
go to Law, and to appeal to the chief Magistrate, and the Courts of Justice,
which is commonly the last, and the only way of deciding the Controversies that
may arise betwixt one Man and another, so it may be lawful for one Nation to go
to War with another, and to appeal to the Sword, when the differences betwixt
them cannot otherwise be determined: And the lawfullness of levying War, and of
being engaged in it upon accounts that are just and weighty, and when there is
the Authority of the chief Magistrate for it, has been agreed upon in all
Ages, and by all Religions; if we think otherwise, we shall condemn the actions
of those ancient and noble Worthies, who are mentioned with honor in the 11th
Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and recorded to Posterity for their
Warlike and Heroic Deeds, who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, escaped the edge
of the Sword, out of weakness became strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to
flight the Armies of the Aliens. In a word, if we either say or think that the
use of Arms, and the military employment is absolutely inconsistent with the
profession of the Gospel, what is it but to expose the Lives and Fortunes of
Christians, as a prey to the rage and fury of the Enemies of the Christian
Church and Faith? And thus having considered the lawfulness of War in general,

II. I come now, in the second place, to speak somewhat concerning the War
which we of this Nation are now engaged in; concerning which I have this to
say, that it is as Just and as lawful a War as ever any People were concerned
to manage; if we consider either the Enemies against whom, or the causes for
which, we fight.

First, As for our Enemies they are such as are the most inveterate and
implacable Enemies of our Peace and Religion, who at first began the War upon
us, who invaded his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, and made sad havoc there,
and would still have done more, had they not by the Blessing of God upon our
Arms, been beaten off, who have often threatened England with an Invasion, who
are perfect haters of our Church and Nation, and upon all occasions do seek our
ruin and destruction. We are engaged against a Prince, the Ruler of those our
Enemies, who is become a Scourge and a terror to all that are round about him,
who has made his Will a Law, who persecutes Christians whilst he is in League
with the Mahometans, who has made War upon his Neighbors without cause, and
enlarged his Dominions without right, and seeks after an Universal Monarchy to
bring all Europe into Slavery; who carries Tyranny and Oppression, Injustice
and Cruelty, Fire and Desolation wheresoever he conquers. Which things when we
seriously consider, we cannot but stand amazed at those amongst our selves, who
either wish in their hearts, or dare speak with their mouths, that they would
have, those our Enemies, to get the better of us, who can rejoice and exult at
any little advantage they hear the Enemy has gained, and would willingly have
it believed to be greater than it is, and do magnify it to excess on purpose
to discourage the Nation, and endeavor to make a Mountain of a Molehill. What
could these persons gain, supposing that our Enemies should really become
Victors and Conquerors over us? What if for our great Sins and Provocations
against Heaven, God should permit our Enemies to come within our own Bowels,
and with Fire and Sword to rage here as they have done in other places, and to
make an entire Conquest of our Land? Could these Persons, who are so great
Well-wishers to 'em, expect to be exempted from the common Calamity? Could they
think to escape that ruin which they wish to their own Fellow Subjects, or be
excused from that Drag^^^ing which makes no distinction of Persons? Could they
be glad to see the Land of their Nativity turned into an Aceldama of Blood? or
rejoice to have the English Nation become Tributary to France? But Blessed be
God, that there is now as little ground for our fearing of this, as they have
to hope that their unnatural wishes or desires may take effect. However this
shows us what great reason we have to be united against those our Enemies, and
both to pray and to endeavor all we can, that they may never prevail against
us, nor triumph in the ruin of us and our Posterity.

II. As for the causes for which we sight; they are as just and as honorable
as can be; for we fight not for trifles, for small or inconsiderable things,
but for things of the greatest moment and concern, for our Lives and Liberties,
for the defense of our just Rights our Laws and Privileges, for the
preservation of our Religion against the most violent attempts for its
Subversion; in a word, for the Vindication of the common liberties of Mankind,
invaded and trampled on by Tyranny and Oppression. And these are certainly as
justifiable causes of a War as ever any Nation had or can have. From the
consideration of which give me leave, I beseech you, to make these few
Inferences;

(1) That we are from hence obliged freely and willingly, cheerfully and
contentedly, without murmuring and complaining, to contribute and pay
whatsoever the Wisdom of the Great Council of the Nation shall think fit to lay
upon us as a Tax, for the carrying on of this War with Vigor, till God by his
Providence shall see fit to put an happy end to it. This methinks is as little
as we can do, who fit at home and enjoy the great Blessing of Peace, whilst
others our Fellow Subjects, are hazarding their Lives abroad in fighting for
us: and surely we may be very well pleased and contented, if by parting with
our Money, we can keep the War at a distance from us.

(2.) That it is not only lawful but necessary for those who are able, and
whose occasions and manner of Life will permit them (may, perhaps it may be
their duty too) actually to assist the King in this just War with their own
Persons, and to endeavor by their Prowess and Courage, to lay his Enemies
prostrate at his Feet. For it is not imaginable, that any King whatsoever can
withstand the insults of his Enemies, or protect his Subjects without their
assistance and presence with him.

(3.) That we should pay a just deference, and an honorable respect to the
memory of those worthy Persons whom the hand of the Enemy has unfortunately
slain in this War, particularly in the Reduction of that City and Castle for
which we now give thanks; that we should speak well of them and thank God for
them; for that they spent their Blood in the defense of their Country, lost
their Lives in a just Cause, and dyed upon the Bed of Honor.

(4.) Lastly, that we should thankfully acknowledge our selves obliged, as to
all those in general, who actually fight for us; so particularly to the King
himself, who has exposed his own Person to all the Fatigues and hazards of the
War; who, like David, himself does fight the Lords Battles, whose vigor in
action is more quick than the Lightning of his own Cannon, whose Magnanimity
and Conduct, whose Prudence and undaunted Courage, have gained him Immortal
Renown in the Annals of Fame, and made him to become a terror to his Enemies.
To Him especially who has hazarded his Royal Person and Life in the Defense,
and for the Honor of our Church and Nation, we should pay our thankful
acknowledgment in a dutiful return of Honor and Faithfulness toward him;
which if we should fail to do, we might justly be reproached for our
ingratitude like as were the Children of Israel, Jud. 8. 34, 35.
who showed no kindness to the house of Jerubbabel, namely Gideon, according to
all the goodness which he had showed unto Israel. His very Presence in the Camp
animates our Forces with new Life and Vigor, and therefore when he is pleased
to be at the head of our Armies, unless by our Sins and Rebellion against God,
(unless by our ingratitude to him and the King, we provoke God to disappoint
our hopes, and blast our Undertakings) we need not doubt, but that through
God's Blessing, we shall do Valiantly, and tread them under that rise up
against us. To his Matchless Valor and wise Conduct, next to the Mercy and
Goodness of God, we owe our Preservation from the direful effects of our
Enemies Rage and Malice. And therefore returns of Gratitude are due; first to
God as the Author of all our Successes, and then to him as the glorious
Instrument whereby he works them.

III. And thus I come in the third place to consider the Success we have had in
this War, particularly this last Summers Expedition, which gives occasion to
this Days Thanksgiving.

We cannot indeed as yet truly say that we have totally vanquished and overcome
our Enemies, but I hope I may say truly in the words of my Text, that through
God's Blessing we are waxed stronger and stronger, and they wax weaker and
weaker. For what places have they gained of us this or the last Years Campaign,
as they have formerly done at the beginning of others? Nay have they not lost
much ground this Summer? and is there not a plain stop put to the Enemies
Career? Have we not by the bravery and resolution of our Forces and our Allies,
Retaken that strong, that most Important City and Castle, which our Enemies two
Years ago did take, and could no otherwise take from us than by Fraud and
Treachery? Have we not retaken them in the face and under the sight of a
numerous Army of the adverse Party, who came to be the inglorious Lookers on of
the loss they sustained thereby? Where is that Bravading-Navy, that once or
twice appeared upon our Coasts, and threatened us with an Invasion? It Is plain,
that they sculk, and shelter, and hide themselves in their lurking-holes, out
of which they dare not, they cannot with safety look forth. But as for our
Navy, has not part of it. Victoriously danced on the British Ocean, stopping
upon the Avenues of the Enemies Ports and Havens, and with considerable Success
attacking the chiefest of their Sea-Coast-Towns? and does not part of it ride
triumphantly, at this Day, in the Mediterranean, putting thereby a check to all
their Pride and Glory? 2 Kings 19. 28.
God at present seems to have put his Hook (as he once threatened to do to
Sennacherib) into the Nostrils of the great Leviathan, that for so long a time
has taken his pastime in the deep. He has given a terrible Rebuke to the
aspiring Fortune and Fury of the Enemy, by the Success of ours and our
Confederate Forces, both by Sea and Land. So that now we may hope be will in a
little time begin to hearken to a Peace; nay, that he will be brought to such a
condition, as to be forced to seek and desire it; to which he has hitherto
been as deaf as the Adder that stops her Ears. For the Lord has now pulled
down the high looks of the Proud, and levelled the haughty Stomach; he has
clipped his Wings in his towring-flight, and brought him nearer to the ground; he
has put the Heathen in fear, and made them to know themselves to be but men.

But that which Crowns our Success, and is the glory of our Triumphs, and the
chief cause of this Days-Thanksgiving, is that it has pleased God to preserve
our King from the many dangers to which his Royal Person was exposed, during
the late Siege, and in all his public Expeditions for our Safety, and for the
deliverance of our Suffering Brethren; that he has kept him under the shadow
of his Wings, from falling into the hands of his Enemies, that he has covered
his Head in the Day of Battle, and been a Wall of Defense to him on every side.
What a deplorable and fatal blow would it have been, not only to this Nation,
but to the most considerable part of Europe, if He, the Head of the Confederate
Allies, had by any means been cut off? If He, the Prop and Stay of the
Protestant Religion, had any ways suffered by the hands of those that hate him?
How would they have rejoiced to have been made Masters of His Life, whose Death
would be their greatest advantage? how would they have triumphed in His ruin,
which only could have given Life to their dying Cause? But now how will they be
astonished and amazed, how will they shake and tremble, when they shall see him
once more besieging some of their strongest Towns; or at the Head of a Gallant
Army, in the open Field, (Him whose very name is enough to strike them into a
Panick Fear,) when they shall see him once more armed, not so much with his own
Forces, as with the strength and right hand of the Almighty? Blessed therefore
be God who has given prosperity unto his King, and has delivered David his
Servant from the peril of the Sword.

IV. And this leads me to the Fourth and last head of my present Discourse, and
that is concerning the effect which our Success in this War should have upon us.

(1.) And first it should fill our hearts with an holy Joy in the remembrance
of the loving kindness of Almighty God toward us: for should we not rejoice
and exult when we consider that God is still mindful of us, that he has not
yet left off to do us good, and that he gives us every year fresh instances of
his concern on our accounts? Is it not a ground of exceeding great comfort to
receive so clear, and so many pledges of his love and favor expressed in such
watchful care over us, such Protection in times of danger, such Success over
our Enemies, such deliverance from their Spite and Malice? Such public
Benefits as these cannot, I am sure they ought not, to be received without
great cheerfulness and gladsomness of heart. We are all of us, or at least
should be, concerned for the Public Good, as being living and sensible Members
of the State, and are like to partake both of the good and ill sare thereof.
And therefore how can we look upon or hear of any prosperous Issue of God's
Providence over our Nation, of any happy Success with which God has blessed
our Public Undertakings, without great delight and complacency?

(2.) The Success with which God has blessed us, should also excite us to
praise and bless God for it. For God's Favor toward us will not have its due
effect unless it fill our Mouth with Praise, as well as our Heart with Joy. We
should look beyond the Hills from whence comes our help, beyond the efficacy
of second Causes, and search out the Primum Mobile, that secret sacred Wheel of
Providence which winds and turns about humane affairs as it pleases: Then
shall we be ready to acknowledge with David, that it is not our own arm that
helps us, but the right hand of God, and his arm, and the light of his
countenance because he has a favor unto us.

It is necessary indeed that toward the achievements of great Exploits, or
the encountering of formidable Enemies, great Preparations should be made, Arms
and Money (the strength and Sinews of War) should be provided, and considerable
Forces raised. For God (who makes use of second Causes to produce his own wise
designs) works by these toward the defense and safeguard of his People; and we
can no more reasonably expect, that God will help a Nation or Kingdom, without
their own concurrent endeavors, than that he will recover a Man out of a
dangerous Sickness, without the application and use of proper Remedies, or
relieve a Man in distress and want, without his own Industry and Care. But then
we must not impure our Victory and Success purely to any Prowess, or Conduct,
or Wisdom of our own, but to the great God who teaches our arms to war and our
finger^ ^o fight, who guides our Counselors, and teaches our Senators Wisdom,
who presides over Ba^^les, and gives not always Victory to the strong and
crafty, but oftentimes to ^he weak and seeble; who pulls down the mighty from
their s^at, and exalleth the humble and meek; who alone gives Victory unto
Kings, and delivers his Servants from the hurtful Sword. Upon the
consideration therefore of the good Success we have hitherto had, as we cannot
but ascribe the accomplishment thereof to God's good hand of Providence, so we
are bound to make a grateful acknowledgment of it by our hearty Thanksgiving
unto him, saying with the Royal Psalmist, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy Name give the Praise for thy loving kindness, and for thy truths sake,
for we know that no King or People can be saved by the multitude of an host,
and that no mighty Man is delivered by much strength.

And we have great reason to praise and bless All-mighty God for our late
Success, if we either look upon it as the ^^^^ious return of our Prayers and
Fasting, or if we reflect upon our unworthiness of it.

First, If we look upon it as the gracious return of our Prayers and Fasting.
For we prayed and humbled our selves by fasting, and implored the Blessing of
God upon our Forces, and upon our King throughout his Expedition; and he has
been graciously pleased to hear our Prayers, and has granted our desires, by
giving us good Success, and protecting the King in the day of Battle. Blessed
therefore be God who has not withholden the request of our lips, Blessed be
God who has not cast out our Prayer, nor turned his Mercy from us!

Secondly, let us reflect upon our unworthiness of it; when we consider our
many great and high Provocations of All-mighty God, our unthankfulness for
former Mercies, our Incorrigibleness under all the Judgments which God at
several times has brought upon us, and when we withal reflect upon the
goodness of God in having thus blessed and prosper'd us, notwithstanding such
our unworthiness of it, can we forbear to praise God, saying with the Holy
Psalmist, Thou Lord have forgiven the offenses of thy people and covered all
their sins, thou Lord have dealt graciously with thy servants; be thou
therefore exalted in thine own strength, so will we sing and praise thy power.

(3.) Moreover, the Success we have had should engage us to trust in God for
the future, and never to doubt that God who has appeared so much, and so
signally stretched forth his arm on our accounts, will now leave us; but to
hope with humble confidence, that he will still continue to do great things for
us.

(4.) It should also oblige us to newness of Life, and better Obedience toward
God. For fresh instances of his goodness do call aloud upon us, to show forth
his praise, not only with our Lips, but in our Lives, by giving up our selves
to his Service, and walking before him in holiness and righteousness all our
days.

(5.) Lastly, The Success we have had against our temporal Enemies, should put
us in mind of the contest we have with our Spiritual, and that as we are
Christians we are engaged in a War far more dangerous, and of far greater
consequence than any we can have with our most inveterate Foes upon Earth, in
which if we are overcome, we shall be reduced to a worse condition than all our
other Enemies can ever bring us into, in which if we get the Victory, we shall
gain Imm^^tal Life and Glory in the Regions above, in comparison with which,
all the Trophies and Spoils, all the Riches and advantages we can obtain over
our Enemies here, are but inconsiderable trifles.

When we were baptized into the Faith of Christ, we took upon us to fight
manfully against Sin, the World, and the Devil; these are our most formidable
Enemies, with which we must have no Peace so long as we live upon Earth; with
these we must not so much as enter into a Truce, or think of doing so; nay it is
extremely dangerous even but to parley with them. We carry a War continually
about with us, the flesh warring against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh, and these two are contrary the one to the other; we have a law in our
members warring against the law of our mind, endeavoring to bring us into
captivity to the law of sin: We have Lusts and Passions which War in our
Members, and there are fleshly lusts which war against the Soul. A Christian
Man's Life therefore in this World is a state of continual Warfare, and the
Church of Christ it self is but Militant here upon Earth.

Let therefore our Success against our temporal Enemies encourage us to get the
better of our Spiritual. What a shame will it be for us to conquer those, and
to suffer our selves to be led Captive by these? What disgrace is it to let Sin
reign in our Mortal Bodies, when we can so easily subdue our other Enemies?
What a sad exchange of a Victory would it be to beat our Enemies so as that
they wax weaker and weaker, and yet to suffer our Lusts and Passions to wax
stronger and stronger? O therefore let us watch and stand fast in our Faith,
let us quit our selves like Men, like Christians, and be strong. Let us take
unto our selves the whole Armor of God, that we may be able to withstand all
the assaults of our Spiritual Enemies; Let us gird our loins with truth, and
put on the Breastplate of righteousness; let our feet be shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace; and let us take the shield of Faith, and
the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit which is the word of God.
And let us withal humbly beg the Assistance of God's Holy Spirit and Grace,
which then will not fail to strike in with us; and then we need not doubt but
that we shall overcome all our Enemies of what nature soever they be. Then,
when we have fought a good fight, and finished our course, and Successfully
ended our Warfare here, we shall enjoy an Eternal Jubilee of Peace, Rest and
Glory in the happy Regions of Immortality.

Which God of his infinite mercy grant to you, and to me, and to all Mankind,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
Three Persons, and one most Glorious God, be ascribed by you and by me, and by
all our Fellow Creatures, all Honor, Praise and Glory, now and for evermore.
Amen.
FINIS.
Sermons Written by the same Author.
AN Assize-Sermon Preached in the Cathedral-Church of St. Peter's in York.
March the 8th 1685. on Judgess xvii. 6.

The Duty and Obligations of serving God. A Sermon Preached before the Queen,
at White Hall, July xxix. 1694. on Joshua xxiv. 15.


