A REMARKABLE REVELATION OF THE WANDERINGS Of the Church of England in Idolatry,
Superstition, and Ceremonies, from the first motion through each particular
Station to the first great period. IN PARALLEL With the Children of Israel in
the Desert from Rameses to mount Sinai. By H. Walker Cantab.

Printed by Tho: Harper. 1641.

A remarkable Revelation.
PAul tells us that the journeyes of the old Church, the Isralites, is to be
remembered of us, that we may profitably bring it to our own estate; and he
calls their wandering* and stations, and what in them fell out, types and
examples to us, 1 Cor. 10. Their standings and journeyes were 42. which number,
as Austin says, is rare and excellent, comprehending 6. and 7. which being
multiplied make 42. to teach us, that as after six days of the worlds Creation
the Lord rested on the seventh day, to the children of Israel after six sevens,
that is 42. journeyes of pilg^image, entered into the land of Canaan, the
country of rest.

In par^llell of which 42. month of years, or prophetical days, amounting
to 1260. years, does reveal the space of time of the English Churches
pilgrimage and wanderings in the Popish Ceremonies, before she be brought to the
Canaan of true reformation.

I. The first station of the children of Israel was at Rameses, Gen: 47. 11.
where they being oppressed by cruel bondage under Pharaoh, as is expressed in the
twelve first Chapters of the book of Exodus, were forced to wander toward the
wilder^esse.

This was fulfilled in our English Christian Church in the days of Gratianus,
who ruled this our British nation, Anno Dom. 390. who being brought under
foot, subdued and spoiled by the Picts, were forced to send to Rome for aid,
Siricius being Bishop there: at which time the pride and unsatiable avarice of
the Clergy was so great, that they drew the Empero^rs to assist them in the
establishing of such wicked Laws as proved then the undoing and impoverishing
of many subjects. Plat: de vita Pont f. lege 27. de Epis. and Clo. in c. Th.

II. The Israelites removed from Rameses to Succoth, Ex. 12. 37, a journey of
8. miles, which they undertook when like distracted and forlorn people they
were constrained to carry their dough to bake at Succoth, because they were
thrust out of Rameses, Exodus 12. 39. This was fulfilled in this our Land, after
Gratianus was dispatched, Anno Dom. 420. when the British were without any
certain government, the Cl^rgy being the chief; and the people were so sore
distracted, that they were constrained to petition to Aldrocnus (a King in
France) to send his brother Constantine to varquish their enemies, and be made
their King, before they could bake* their dough in peace* Holl. fol. 108.

III. The Israelitish Church removed from Succoth, and pitched in Etham, Exodus
13. 20. a journey of 8. miles, which was the entry of so vast a Desert, that
had not God been to them a pillar of a cloud by day, and of fire by night, they
had all perished in the wilderness, and been u^terly ruined and destroyed,
verse. 21.

This was fulfilled in our British Nation in the days of Vortiger* who by
treason, fraud, and great deceit, being made King, did with his Nobles and
Prelates live in such gluttony, le^hery, and other vices, Anno Dom. 450. that
practicing so great enormities, each man turned the point of his spear against
the godly and innocent persons, Holl. fol. 110. It was only Gods providence
that stayed the utter destruction and ruin of the whole nation.

IV. The old Church of Israel removed from Etham to Migdol, Exodus 14 2. that i^
16. mil^s, where the people were in that distress, that being p^r^ued by
Pharaoh, when the Red Sea was before them, and mountains (over which it was
not possible for them to pass) on both sides of them, could see no way to
escape: yet by Gods miraculous deliverance they passed over the Sea dry shod,
and the waves fell upon Pharaoh, and drowned him and his host, as is expressed
in the said 14 Chap. of Exo^us.

This was fulfill^d in our Christian British Church, Anno 480. when whilst
Vortiger, his N^bles and Prelates did cast off religion, and persecute the
people of God, there fell miraculously fire from heaven upon the Castle where
they were with the King, and the house fell upon them, and the fire burnt and
consumed them. H. Hunt.

V. They of the Israelitish Church removed from Migdol, and pitched in Marah,
Exodus 15 23. a journey of 40. miles, where the water was too bitter for the
people to drink, until God directed them to a tree, which being dipped in those
waters did make them sweet, verse 25.

This was fulfilled in this our British Church, Anno Dom. 510. in the reign
of Uterpendragon, who being himself exceeding lustful, which vice did the
more increase in him, because it was countenanced by the Clergy that were about
him, by whose policy and magic was mixed a bitter cup for the people, not
only to delude the Ladies to uncleanness, but to deprive the Nobles of their
lives, till it pleased God to direct the grave Worthies of his Council,
through their consultations to contrive way for a redress, Isa. cr. Holl. fol.
128.

VI. The Israelites removed from Marah, and pitched their sixth station in
Elim, Exodus 15. 27. a journey of 8. miles, where the people like pilgrims were
feign to ^it by the wells, where multitudes of Hearts resorted, with other
beasts from among the Palms, to refresh themselves with the water thereof. Tr.
Pet.

This was fulfilled in this our British Church, in the days of K. Arthur,
Anno Dom. 540. when amongst the people the right faith was not ^nely brought
into great danger by the Pelagian heresy, then broched by naughty persons, but
the whole body of Christian Religion was utterly abolished, so far as the
Saxons prevailed, who (at this time) disquieted the Brita nes by cruel war^es,
whereby they were driven to hide themselves in woods, and pitch their
situations by the water brooks.

VII. The Isra^litish Church removed from Elim to Suph, that was 6. miles
southw^rd* where they rested themselves by the Red Sea, Numb 33. 10. G^d seeing
their murmurings at the waters of Marah, and knowing how ready they were to
rebel against him, brought them back to behold again the place where Pharaoh
and his host was overthrown, to put them in remembrance that they give ear
to Gods commandments, and keep his ordinances, Genes. 15. 26.

This was fulfilled in this our British Church, Anno Dom. 570. when Almighty
God seeing the uncleanness of the Clergy, and the abominations of the
Governors, brought them again into great distress, suff^ring their enemies
to prevail against them, by bringing in Cutha, the brother of Cheuling, King
of the West Saxons, to fall upon them, by whom their ungodly governors were
slain; admonishing them to repent and turn to the Lord, and give ear to his
commandments, lest they also perish. Ales^a. Gilda.

VIII. The children o^ Israel passed from Suph, and pitched their eighth
station at Sin, that is 16. miles journey from Elim, which they made two
j^urneyes of as before, Exodus 16. 1. where the whole Congregation fell again
to mu^muring for want of victuals; for their hearts did hanker after the
fleshp^ts of Egypt, yet the Lord looked in m^^cy upon them, and sent them Manna
from heaven, as is expressed, Exodus 16.

This was fulfilled in our land, Ann. Dom. 600. when the people were turned to
Paganism, and had turned from the Lord, and were become as heathens, in the
days of Ethelbert, whose heart the Lord directed to marry the Lady Bertha of
France a religious Princess, who with some godly Divines that came with her,
and other religious people that were about her, who fearing God, used prayers
in the Court, and practiced other duties of Christian Religion, whereby, by the
heavenly working of Gods spirit (in the process of time) the thick mists of
unb^liefe was removed, and their hearts prepared to the receiving of the
Gospel, which afterward was preached to the whole Church, and published
through the whole land; at which time ^ustine, and others, sent from the Bishop
of Rome, preached and baptized in our Church* and the people received the Word
of God, Isak Cro. Beda. Will. Mal. Math. West.

IX. The old Israelitish Church removed from Sin, and pitched in Dophka, which
was twelve miles, Numb. 33. 12. This journey was through many bushes and thorny
places, which grew in this part of the wilderness, Tr. ^atr. T^is was
fulfilled in the days of Edwin, Ann. Dom. 630. a King of mighty power, yet
through great difficulty brought to believe the Gospel: He loved the Lady
Ethelburga, but could not obtain her, except upon condition of permitting her,
and whomsoever she would have with her, to use and practice the Christian
Religion, Bed. lib* 2* c. 9. He called a Council to hv^e the matter treated on
Having married her she used all the means she could for his conversion. Then
again he was held back by seeking revenge against his enemies: still his
Queen used means to prevail wi^h him as far as she could; whereupon he
called together the wis^st men of his Realm, and asked them the question, what
they thought of this Divinity, Hol. fol. 161. They gave their consent, that it
ought to be received; whereupon he gave license to one Pauline to preach the
Gospel, and from that time forwards himself professed the Christian faith.
And when he demanded of one C^ifi, an idolatrous Bishop, who had been very
great with him, who should first deface the Altars of their Idols, and the
Tabernacles with which they were compassed about, he answered, that he himself
would do it; for what is more meet, says he, than that I, which through
foolishness have worshipped them, should now for example-sake destroy the
same, through wisdom given me from the true and living God; and straightwayes
(throwing away the superstition of vanity) required armor and weapons of the
King; and being mounted upon a stately Steed, he rode forth to destroy the
Idols. This was a strange sight to the people, for it was not lawful for a
Bishop of their Law to put on armor, or to ride on any beast, except it were a
Mare; therefore the common people seeing him ride on the Kings horse, with a
sword by his side, and a spear in his hand, had thought he had been stark
mad, and out of his wits; but he without longer deliberation, incontinently
upon his coming to the Temple, began to deface the same, and in contempt,
threw his spear against it, and commanded the company about him to destroy and
burn down the same Temple, with all the Altars, Holl. page 161.

X. The Israelitish Church removed from Dophka, and pitched at Alus, Numb. 33.
12. which was twelve miles. They began now to come into that part of the
wilderness which was both pleasant, fruitful, and stored with variety of
comfortable herbs, that so they might refresh themselves after their
troublesome journey through the thorns and bushes, Tra. Patr. This was
fulfilled in this English Church, in the reign of Os^y, Ann. Dom. 660. When
the Gospel began to flourish, Penda, who ruled one part of this land, he was
converted by a Lady, whom he loved, that was a Christian. The last Saxons also
received the Christian faith, and banished their ungodly idolatrous Bishops,
and the Word of God was preached through the whole land, to the great increase
and enlarging of the Church of Christ, Beda lib. 3. cap. 21 and 22. Yet in
these days sprang up weeds also, for now they began to sing Divine Service
after the Popish manner. Theodore the Archbishop, finding the Church of
Rochester void by the death of the last Bishop, named Damian, he ordained one
Putta, a simple man, to make a Bishop, but well skilled in songs and music,
to use such form in the Church, after the manner as he had learned of Pope
Gregory's Disciples.

XI. The Israelites removed from Alus, and pitched in Rephidim, eight miles,
Exodus 17. 1. and during the time of their abode there, three things are very
remarkable. First, the people did murmr for want of water, and God relieved
them, Secondly, Amaleck fought against Israel, and was overcome. Thirdly,
Rulers were set over the people, because of the hardness of their hearts.
These three were all fulfilled, Ann. Dom. 690. In parallel of the first, when
Etholburga (seeing her Lord and King given to great wickedness, and ungodly
living) did labor earnestly to bring him to repentance, but finding his heart
like a rock of stone, did cause hi^ stately hangings to be taken down, and
his rich bedding and furniture to be taken away, and the chamber to be mired
with dung and filth, and laid a dirty Sow with her Pigges, in the same bed
where before they had lien. The King beholding such an alteration in his
pleasant Palace, was mightily humbled; wept, and mourned, and was thereby cast
down so low, that he resigned up his Kingdom to his Cousin, and forsook all
his glory, Will. Malm. In parallel of the second, the same story does express
her conquering event against the innovation of sin and Satan, wrought in her
husband through Gods mercy, Will. Malm. In parallel of the third, it is
recorded, that about this time also there was great strife about Church
government, at which time Brightwald (the eighth Archbishop in number, but the
first of the English Nation) was seated in the Sea of Canterbury, for his
Predecessors were not born in England, but sent from Rome.

Thus ends the first great period or division of journeyes, before they came
to Mount Sinai, where they received the Commandments in two Tables of stone.

FINIS.

