THE HEAVENLY GVIDE TO TRVE PEACE OF CONSCIENCE.

Wherein is observed in a most plain and Comfortable manner,

1. What Conscience is. 2. What a miserable thing an evil Conscience is. 3.
What an happiness a good Conscience is. 4. How the estate of Conscience is
truly discerned. 5. The means to procure a good Conscience.
By H. V. V. I.

1 PET. 3. 21. The like figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us,
(not the putting away of the filth of the flesh) but the answer of a good
conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Printed at London
by Tho. Harper. 1641.

The heavenly guide to the true peace of Conscience.
I. What Conscience is.
COnscience is the Act of a reasonable creature, apprehending the revealed will
of God, takes notice of his own actions, and compasses it with the rule of
Gods Word, and so passes sentence upon himself.

1. I say, Conscience is the act of a reasonable creature; not of a beast, or
any creature save only such who are endued with reason; because creatures
without reason are not capable to serve God in any other Heb. 9. 14.
way then they do. In which service, notwithstanding the evils they are
incident unto, do yet serve God in their kind: But man, who is a reasonable
creature, has a conscience, which by sin is defiled, and being purged by the
blood of Christ, is brought by the eternal Spirit, from dead works to serve
the living God. Conscience does exceedingly raise up the joys both of Saints
and Angels in Heaven, and increases the horror of the Devils and damned in
hell.

2 Conscience is an act of apprehending the revealed will of God: it is not of
the apprehension of man's will: it is not having an eye to profit, or pleasure,
or favor; no, Conscience is an act proceeding from the revealed will of God,
which being fully comforted with the assurance of the pardon of sin from God,
is fully satisfied. We cannot Heb. 10. 2.
begin to look into the conscience, till we look up to God.

3. Conscience takes notice of a man's own actions. It is not the applause
which others give a man; it is not the commendations of companions, it is not
any thing taken upon trust from men: but the taking notice of a man's own
actions, bearing witness in the holy Ghost. This arises from Conscience. Romans
9. 1.


4. Conscience compares a man's actions with the rule of Gods word; to look how
others live, to have an eye to man's esteem, to look no further then outward
carnal respects: this arises not from Conscience. But the renouncing even the
secrets of dishonesty, by bringing of 2 Cor. 5. 11.
the conscience to the manifestation of the truth: this does truly arise from
the Conscience.

5. Conscience passes censure upon it self: It is not the stilling of the
thoughts that arise by music, dancing, and such like vanities: it is not the
slender looking on a man's life, and presently looking off again, and passing
by Romans 2. 15
it with an undaunted courage, as if a man would outface heaven, this
conclusion is not of conscience: no, it is then of conscience when it shows
the work of the Law written in the heart, the conscience also bearing
witness, and the thoughts the mean while passing censure; that is, either
accusing or excusing.

II. What a miserable thing an evil Conscience is.
There is no misery can exceed the misery of an evil Conscience, both in
respect of wants that attend thereon, as also the woes belonging thereto:
first, in respect of the wants that attend on an evil conscience, it is
miserable, as may appear both by the present wants thereof, as also by its
unprovidednesse for the time to come.

The present wants that attend an evil conscience, makes a miserable
conscience; and that is always effected 1.
either by being seared up with hardness, and fensing it self against the
breathings and workings of Gods Spirit: so that it will not bow nor bend, nor
yield to come to trial in truth; but peremptorily persisteth in its 1 Timothy 4. ^
own way, and will not be controlled: or else it becomes so fearful, that it
casts a man into utter desparation, so that it is as impossible for such a
man or woman to look up to God with comfort, as for a blind man to behold the
Sun. Hence it has come to pass, that some have been so far perplexed in
this sad condition, that they have been so confident that they should be
damned in hell, that though the Lords Ministers have come after a most sweet
and heavenly manner, with an olive branch of peace in their mouths, yet still
they have cast off all, nothing could yield them any comfort, nothing but hell,
nothing but damnation could appear before their eyes.

So likewise also an evil Conscience is miserable in the future: for it is
unprovided for the time to come. 2.
For such is the misery of an evil conscience, that when it stands at the
Bar of Gods judgment, before whose tribunal we must all appear, then will
torments of an evil conscience be the greatest plague of all: this is the
hottest cole in hell fire, even a defiled conscience full of unbelief and
horror, and not able to behold any thing with comfort, but the Devils, the
damned, nay the very Saints, nay more, God himself is terrible for their
conscience Tit. 1. 15.
to behold.

Secondly, the woes of an evil conscience makes a man exceeding miserable, and
these woes are both temporal and eternal.

Temporal woes incident hereunto, are, fears that arise from a polluted
Conscience, fears of sickness, 1.
fears of the plague, fears of death, fears where no fear is, still meets
with them often in the way. Oh! thou that fear the judgment so, why do
thou not Eccl. 12. 5.
fear to sin? Why do thou not trust in God? These fears, and troubles,
and doubts, arise from thy want of faith: Thou have a polluted conscience, and
therefore thou art loath to come to trial; to have thy defiled conscience come
to a trial before God, this is a terrible misery, therefore labor to come out
of it.

Those eternal woes that lie upon a polluted and evil 2.
conscience, in case it be not purified, and brought to believing, are even
such as the Devils themselves Matthew. 25. 41.
are plagued with, eternal torments in hell, where is nothing but weeping, and
gnashing of teeth, plagues upon plagues, torments and woes, and miseries for
ever, never to have end.

Thus may you see briefly the misery of an evil conscience.

III. What an happiness a good Conscience is.
The comforts of a good Conscience are exceeding great: And that may appear,
First by the communion it has with Gods Spirit: Secondly, by the union it has
with Christ: Thirdly, by the unity it has with God through Christ. Fourthly,
by the promises of eternal life.

First, the happiness and comfort of a good Conscience is great, by the
communion it has with Gods Romans 8. 26.
Spirit; insomuch, that is there any weakness in us? the Spirit strengthens
us. Do infirmities hang upon us? the Spirit helps us? Do we not know how to
pray to God for something to do us good? The Spirit will pray for us. Are we
weary with prayer? The Spirit will groan for us. Here is an happiness, here is
a comfort beyond and above all the glories in the world.

Secondly, the happiness and comforts are great also, that the conscience
finds in its union with Christ; Joh. 17. 22.
by which union the soul is knit to Christ, and Christ is united to the soul,
and both made one, as Christ is one with God the Father, and man who is
naturally (by sin) the heir of hell, is made by Christ, a joint heir of
heaven, a son of God, a member of Christ by a glorious union with him.

Thirdly, great is the comfort of a good Conscience, by reason of the unity it
has with God through Christ; insomuch, that were all the Devils in hell
pleading against him before Gods Tribunal, they could not keep him from laying
claim to the promises of God, the greatest cross in the world is not able to
over-whelme him with unbelief: but still he is 1 Timothy 3. 9.
enabled, through the power of the holy Ghost, to hold the mystery of faith in
a pure conscience.

Fourthly, the comfort is also great, yea unspeakeable is the comfort that
arises to a good conscience, through the beholding of the promises of eternal
life, by which a man lays claim to heaven, as an heir to his own
inheritance, and therefore is not drawn away with the vanities of the world,
which perish, nor through fear is overcome, nor led to delight in folly, or to
deny his God: but going on from grace to grace, through faith and patience,
passes his days till he inherit the promise of eternal life. Heb. 6. 12.


IV. How the estate of the Conscience is truly discerned.
The Conscience may discover to man his estate and condition, either, First,
under the cross: or, secondly, in the midst of pleasure, or earthly glory:
or thirdly, under the promises. Fourthly, under Satan's temptations. Lastly, by
the effect of the working of Gods Spirit upon the conscience.

First, the estate of Conscience may be discerned under the cross: when
affliction comes upon a man, a good conscience may be discerned from an evil
conscience, as follows.

An evil conscience in trouble, and under the cross, does not set a man
forward to seek to God in the chiefest place, but to some temporal means
which 1 Samuel 16. 15.
natural reason teaches; whereby the heart is fixed upon the creature, as if
there were no help but even by what arises from carnal reason; whereupon the
mind comes to be troubled, and the heart discouraged until such time that
fleshly reason does perceive a redress begin.

But on the contrary, a good conscience is fortified with patience and faith
under the greatest cross, patience 2 Thessalonians. 1. 4. and verse. 7
to endure with meeknes, as concerning every present means, suitable (through
Gods blessing) to the present condition; and faith to believe undoubtedly

THE REPORT Of the Bishop of Canterburies Dream, for an advertisement to all
proud Lordly, persecuting, unpreaching, oppressing, tyrannizing Prelates, who
suppress the Preaching and progress of the Gospel.
IT is reported of his Arch-grace of Canterbury, that when he was a poor
Scholar in Oxford, he dreamed, that he should be a Bishop, then Archbishop
of Canterbury, and a great persecuter of Gods Ministers and people, (which we
see all verified) and that at last he sunk down into Hell, whereupon he
awaked, and then and since, often related this dream; enough to have terrified
and awaked his Lordship, if true. Oh that a man had but a view of Hell (says
Father Latimer in his Sermons) he should see on one side of it, a row of
unpreaching Prelates in their square Caps, I warrant you as far, as between
this and Dover. And no marvel since they have so hated, despised, and
blasphemed both the word of God, the true Preachers and lovers thereof, driving
away, and silencing Gods faithful Ministers, and setting up in their rooms
and places, Doct. Ignorance, Domine Drunkard, Sir William Wild-oates that
hunteth after Whores, and such also as can play dissembling Hypocrites, whereby
the Devils empire of darkness exceedingly flourishes: lest faithful
Preaching should root it out. But the Churches hope is, that God in his good
time, will now in this happy Parliament-time, hear the prayers of the people
of this Land every where put up: That the Seas of those Lordly Prelates,
Pope-successors, Tyrants, Persecuters of Christ, etc. shall be, Nidos eorum
ubique destruendos; or else put to some better uses.

FINIS.

