PEPIAA 'EPID'ION: Or, VULGAR ERRORS in Practice Censured. Also The Art of
ORATORY* Composed for the benefit of young Students.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-lane. 1659.

PEPIAA 'EPID'ION: Or, VULGAR ERRORS in Practice Censured.

Tandem nequitiae pone modum tuae. Horat. LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston,
at the Angel in Ivy-lane. 1659.

The EPISTLE to the READER.
Reader,
THou art here presented with a few talents, laid up formerly in a Napkin, and
now laid out in Sheets. Thou have an account of some unmolested hours and
vacant intervals, spent, not in needless Controversies, but in necessary
Censures. This Tre^tise meddles not with the times, but with the manners of
men; though both may admit the Oratour's O tempo^a! O mo^es! Cic. ^rat. in L.
(...).
O! It speaks no^ evil of the Rulers of the people; and (with Jude v. ^9.
Michael) it dares not bring a railing accusation against present Authority:
For even all chief Governors have as long Ears as Midas, which entertain
intelligence of each particular negotiation. And as they have, with him, Golden
Hands, to gratify pens steeped in oil, which flatter them: so also they have
Iron Hands, to terrify pens dipped in gall, which flout them. The Book
abounds more with savoury then Satyricall Truths, and more with Instructions
then Invectives. Although this Iron Age does even extort a file: Cum pars
Niliacae plebis, Juven. sat. 1.
cum verna Canopi
Crispinus Tyrias humero revocante lacernas
Ventilet aestivum digitis sudantibus aurum,
Nec sufferre queat majoris pondera gemmae;
Difficile est Satyram non scribere: nam quis iniqui
Tam patiens orbis, tam ferreus, ut teneat se?
If thou believe not that the ensuing Myndus is answerable to these gates,
that there is not in the succeeding Building what is promised in this Portal^;
enter in, and trust thine eyes: and what thou see propos^d in Words, follow
with Works. The Father of Lights bestow his rays upon thee. To hi^ Tuition I
commend thy person; to which if thou once attainest, it will be superfluous for
me to bid thee Farewell.

The Introduction.
IN the Microcosme few Comets are above the Moon: There Fire goes not beyond
Light, but Knowledge surpasses Zeal. Men abound in new Notions, but abstain
not from their old Vices* Many of them can almost (with Berengarius) dispute de
omni Scibili; but few comply with Luc. 10. 42.
Mary in the choice of the unum neceslarium. They want not the eyes of Argus,
but the hands of Briareus. The Disease with which they labor is the Spiritual
Rick^ts, whereby their Head swells beyond due proportion, but their Feet abate
of their usual dimensions: their Conscience is not adequate to their Science,
Marc. 8. 24.
I see men as trees rooted in the earth, having their affections here below;
and the longer they continue the deeper root they take. And it is a sad
symptom of the decaying health of the Body Politic, when, after so many meals
made upon the meat which will make it perish, upon the forbidden fruit of the
fruitless works of darkness, it becomes not cold; but is still ardent in its
desires after the supposed delicacies of Iniquity. That men's Souls abound thus
with peccant humors needs not proof more then a Proleptick notion; and That
all the Extravagancies of which men are guilty deserve reproof, that all these
unprofitable branches call for the pruning-hook, is as evident as if it were
deciphered with a Sunbeam: But to inveigh against the whole catalogue, were a
work too difficult even for a single Hercules. I have contributed my weak
endeavors toward the stopping of some of these muddy Rivolets, which have not
often been molested with Censures, but have passed on in an undisturbed
current. I confess, what I have written came in collaterally and by accident
not in the prosecution of the ordinary method of my studies; but I account that
in no degree prejudicial. It is observed of Saint Augustine's Comments, that
those Scriptures which come in occasionally, obtain a better Gloss then those
which are treated on professedly. The famed work of Erasmus was his By-work;
his Adagies were his (...): and the Painter, by an immethodicall dash of his
pencill, made a lively representation of the Horses Foam, which before he
attempted in vain according to the rudiments of his Art. If the lines which I
have drawn arrive at a center where they may totally rest, if these my Censures
pass uncensured, if this my Ink meets not with the Gall of Momus* I shall be
fortunate beyond expectation: For he that spits against an Epidemicall wind,
spits, for the most part, upon his own Face.

Ad Librum.
GO, blot out Errors with thine Ink, and kill,
Porcupine-like, those Monsters with thy Quill.
Like Lightning, melt the Sword, but spare the Sheath.
Spit on the Vice, don't on the Person breath.
Kill not the harmless Bees with hurtful Drones.
Tread not, like Dying men, on Pigeons.
Into a Lanthorn do thou frame thy Paper,
Which may preserve the light of Virtues Taper.
Thou Moonet tell fair Phoebus of his Spots,
And Masters at the Tables of their Blotts.
Thou Cubit, unto men of stature reach.
Leontia may Theophrastus teach.
If worms from th'teeth of Momus would thee eat,
Tell them Forbidden Leaves are no such meat.
Or rather bid them welcome: Envie's file
Will give thine Innocence ^ brighter smile.
The Contents of the several Chapters.
CHAP. I. A Censure of the Epidemicall practice of reproaching Red-Hair'd men,
Page 1. CHAP. II. A Censure of the general Scandal of some Professions,
especially that of the Profession of Physic, 18 CHAP. III. A Censure of that
common evil practice of reproaching the Feminine Sex, 38 CHAP. IV. A Censure
of the practice of the many Writers amongst us, who even wholly neglect the
defense of the Deity of Christ, notwithstanding the hell-born nature of the
contrary Doctrine, and the potency of its maintainers, and spend their time in
writing^ upon needless Subjects, 53 CHAP. V* A Censure of the vanity of
affecting Epitaphs, with a declaration of their uselessenesse: where, by way of
Praeamble, of the fitness of decent Sepulture, occasioned by the neglect of
many Sectaries, who bury a Dog with as much solemnity as a Christian. 75 CHAP.
VI. A Censure of the common evil practice of Pretenders to Religion, viz.
their running to one Extreme to avoid another, in Doctrine or Worship. 98 CHAP.
VII. A Censure of the common evil practice of Railing against an Adversary in
Opinion. 104
CHAP. I.
A Censure of the Epidemicall practice of reproaching Red-hair'd Men.
MEn take no rest in the point of reflection upon the credit o^ each other.
Sect. 1.
The tongue of 2 Samuel 6, 20.
Michal is an epidemicall member. As Vitiis, so Convitiis nemo sine nascitur.
All, through the degeneracy of their nature, have putrid Lungs, whereby they
mutually pollute their names with virulent spittle. Each man disparageth his
fellow creature, and gratifies his haughty humor in the derision of his
Brother. And this is often done upon such trivial grounds, that a due
perpension would cause an abashment in the face of the Practiser. My present
Instance shall be in a common, yet causeless Calumniation: viz. the vilifying
of Phanaretae ducet filia, rufam^illam virginem. Te^^^. He (...) autont.
Red-hair'd Men, the putting a disesteem upon Persons, merely because of the
native color of the Excrement of the Head. Scen. ult.


It is scarce conjecturall from whence this opprobrium should take its rise;
there being no rational foundation for such a superstruction. Certainly it
began (...) (as Epict. Enchirid. (...).
Epictetus counseled in other cases) it had its original from some petite and
slender consideration. Perhaps this usual practice owes its producement to
the mutual semblance betwixt the color of the Hair, and some entities in
nature of As sand, etc.
no considerable value, which, without study, offer themselves to a mean
capacity. Now although it might come into comparison with the most sparkling
and precious created bodies; yet the soul of depraved man goes according to the
byasse^ of innate corru^tion, and like Medea in the Medea apud Ovid. -- video
^neli^ra ^roboque, De^eriora ^equor --
Poet, or the Conclusion in a Syllogism, evermore follows the worse part.

2.
Although Lucian worthily scoffed at the artificial Stoici e^an^ t^nsi (...)
Adr. Turneb. Advers. lib. 23. cap. 23.
Baldness of the severe Stoics, and made them a byword with his Turneb. ad.
lib. 15. cap. 16.
(...), and likewise Juv. Sat. 2.
Iuvenal with his -- Supercilio brevior coma -- and Suet. in vita C. J. Caes.
non solum tonderetur diligenter ac rad^retur, sed etiam velleretur.
Caesar deserved an hiss, for doing violence to his hair by eradication: yet
the deriding of a Red-hair'd man comes within the compass of the Ephesians. 5. 4.
Apostles (...), foolish talking and jesting, which are not convenient.

Red-hair'd men are not, as such, branded with any signal and notable
extravagancy above others: Black-hair'd men are as well nigro carbone notandi;
and (...) (...) Homeru^ in Odys. and II. quam saepissim^
Gray-ey'd Minerva may, with as much reason, be the mark of calumny. White
hair, although it seems to have more of Innocence, yet it has less of
Modesty. The In plag^^ mundi gl^ciali, ca^^dida (...) sunt gen^tes, flav^
promissae crinibus. Plin. (...) hist. lib* cap. 78
Complexion of Red-hair'd men is clear and masculine, and very serviceable to
the superior faculty in laudable achievements. Those which the mouth of
slander calls sandy heads, are seldom barren, but of pregnant intellectuals:
and they that endeavor an extraction of poison out of Red heads, imitate the
Spider, which sucks her venom out of the sweetest flowers.

The water of separation, 3..
a purification for sin, was Numb. 19. 9.
made of the ashes of a Red Hei^er. This color was once Gallia's delight:
Mart. lib. ^4. Epig. ^ 29.
Roma magis fuscis vestit^r, Gallia ru^is. In Virgils days the Women, who add
all possible luster to their ex^erior accoutrements, were decked with saffron.
colored raiment. Virg. 9. En. ita ex ^ristoph.
Vobis picta croco and splendenti murice vestis. The Carthaginian Zygantes
esteemed this Color far beyond that which they received from the hanc* of
Nature, they colored their bodies with Red Lead. The four ancient and
primitive Painters, Apelles, Echion, Melanthius, Nicomachus, used but R^nis,
(...).
four colors, and ^lbum, sieum, ru^^m, ni^^, Plin. (...) c. ^. ^ub. (...) ^il
est g^nus pigme^ti, luteum colorem, quemad^odum ochra, (...) Vide J. C. Buleng.
de Pict. and stat. lib. 1. ca^. 4.
two of them are of this color. Yellow, the highest step of which is the
lowest stair of Red, was in Ovid's time an ingredient in the composition of a
Beauty. Ovid. l. 2. Fast.
Forma placet, niveusque color, flavique capilli. Clay-colour of old was
Turneb. l. 28. Adv. c. 21. Luteus color nuptiis dicatus erat; and non solum in
delitiis erant rubra sandalia, ve^rum etiam Lutei calcei.

Catul. in Epithal. Iul.

-- Luteum pede socc^. Apul. As. Aur. lib. 9. cingulo sub. ligati pede^, Luteis
indu^i call. ceis.


sacred at Nuptials, and they were much enamoured hereon; and not only Red
Sandals were in use and esteem, but also Clay-coloured shoes. The Plin. hist.
lib. 15. cap. 22. Cortice earum ruffatur capillus, primum prodeuntibus nucleis.
Wallnut gives the Hair this color, and therefore we may presume that it is
not contemptible: for Plin. ibid. H^nor hi^ naturae peculi^^is, gemino
protectis ope^imento, pulvinar^ primum calycis, mox lig^ei (...): qu^e causa
eas nuptiis fecit religiosas, (...) modis (...).
Nature is a peculiar honourer of that fruit, protecting it with a double
guard: whereupon it became venerable at Matrimonial solemnities; being an
adumbration of the like protection of the toe^us. The Lacedaemonians made choice
of this color, for their warlike attire, out of a singular piece of Policy,
viz. that in the effusion of their blood no tincture might be perceived, to the
cowardice of themselves, or the courage of their enemies. The stately Sabina
Poppaea, wise to Domitius Nero, had Amber* colored hair, Burton, in praef. to
his Mel. p. 37. from Pliny.
and all the Roman Ladies followed her with an artificial imitation. This
color was of such repute in Tert. lib. de Cultu foem. page 514. Video quasdam
capillum croco vertere; male ac pessime ^ibi auspicantur flammeo capite.
Tertullian's and Hier. ad Laetam de instit. filiae, Nec caput gemmis oneres,
(...) capillum erufes, and ei aliquid de Gehennae ignibus auspiceris.
Saint Hieromes days, that artificial Red was deemed an ornament to the Hair.
The At si virgineum suffuderit ore ruborem. Virg. 1. Georg.
Virgin's blush is of this color; and women are so delighted with it, that if
their cheeks want natural, they add artificial Vermilion. The vail of Nature
is died in Red; Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 7. cap. 11.
Natura pudore tacta, sanguinem ante se p^o velamento tendit: and, without all
peradventure, the Color which that admits is not ridiculous. How dare any
Palate disrelish that Color, by which that matter was visible which went to
the composing of the Adam so called from Red earth.
Protoplast? Publius Lentulus Vice-Consul, in his Epistle to the Roman Senate
written from Jerusalem, deciph^reth at large the body of our Savior; and
amongst many other particulars in his description, he inserteth this one, That
the Hairs of his Head and Beard were Red. And accordingly the profound
Spaniard Huart. in Exam. d^ Ing c. 14* page 259.
interprets Isaiah 63. 1. Who is he that comes from the Red Land?

B. Hall Moderat. lib. 2. p. 13
Innocent the Fourth, in the Council of Lions, graced the dignity of the
Cardinallship with a Red Hat; and Budaeus de Ass and partibus, 5 p. 77 ^
sordere (...) Francia prae mul^ tudine ^^stantium etc.
Budaeus the French man had so high an opinion of it, that he passionately
declaimed against it is general usage, and judged its extension to a multitude,
a diminution of its worth.

The excellencies of the Creation resemble the Red Head as to its tincture. 4..
The Fire, the most agile and aspiring body, the (...). Herodot. Thal. cap. 16.
false God of the Persians, and Vbi aliquid de igneo allegatur, Heraclitus
intervenit. Tertul. de praescript. adv. page 98.
by Heraclitus ascribed to the true Sovereign Majesty, is of a Ruddy
Complexion. So is the rich Cyprius vocatur in Cypro repertus, vergens in areum
colorem, in medicina efficacissi^us. Plin. hist. l. 37. cap. 4.
Cyprian Adamant, which is medicinal without compare. Gold is of the like
Color, and that Burtons Melancho^y, part. ^2. Sect. 4. Memb. 1. Subs. 3.
Physically c^res Melancholy, and is so precious, that it denotes The Gol^en
Age. Valor. ^axim.
happy and peace^^ll enjoyments: it makes Crowns and Scepters, and is adored by
those that wear and manage them. Ptolemaeus King of Cyprus was 9. cap. 4.
^^sulae Rex ^^ulo, sed ^im^ pe ^niae ini^rabile ^ancipi^n.
taken captive by th^s Ruddy champion. The Genuine Spikenard, that Paradise of
the smell, that by which the Tibul. l. El. ^^opere.
venerable Hairs of the ancient Romans were graced with a fragrant redolencie,
^art. Sincerum nardum levir^te deprehenditur and coloreruffo. Plin. Nar. (...).
lib. 12. cap. 12.
is of a Red and modest appearance. The re^plendency of Amber admits this
tinct^re; and that is not to be ranked amongst the meanest entities. In
Martials judgment, the costly Macrob. Sat. l. 3. c. 1^.
Cleopatra, she that in her lifetime made, not Gold, but Pearls, potable, and
after her death Illius puro distillent tempora Nardo.
Iamdudum Tvrio mad^factus ^empora Na^do.
Debueram se^tis implicuisse comas.
Quod madidis Nardo sp^sa corona comis.
obtained a proportionable monument, was not entombed so richly as the Mart.
lib. 4. ep. 59. de vipera electro inclusa.
Viper, enclosed alive in an Electrick sepulcher. Ne tibi Regali placeas,
Cleopatra, sepulchro,
Vipera si tumulo nobiliore jacet.
The Sun, whose very Sol quasi solus.
name s^^aks it the singular artifice of the corporeal Creation, and whose
excellency made it deifi'd by the Heathen, Erythr^us Solis equus, Gr^c^ rubens
significat quod a matutino Sol lumine rubicundus exsurgat. Fulgent. Mythol. l.
1. in Fab. Apoll.
displayes the glory of its radiancy in this Color, especially at that time
when the Persians do it homage, when it makes it is appearance in the
comfortable Varro de Lingua Lat. l. 6. Aurora dicitur ab eo quod igne solis
aure^ a^r aure^s^it.
blush of the approaching Morn. This Center of the Planetick Vortex will cease
to be such, as soon as it disrobes it self of its Ruddinesse: for that
privation speaks the inactivity of its particles, and the over-prevaling of the
Maculae, and consequently the absorption of its Whirlpoole; whereupon the whole
Earth would be clad in Sables, and surrounded with Disconsolation.

This mocking at Red Hair is a Declamation against Nature, 5..
which is to be worshipped, nor worried; this is a grand affront put upon the
supreme Creator, it reflecteth unworthily upon his Power, and calls into
question his Contrivance: For such men are Ephesians. 2. 10. (...) Homo factura
Creatoris est. Tertul. adv. Marc. l. 5. p. 324.
his workmanship, Psalm. 100 2.
It is he tha^ made them, and not they themselves: their slender performances
cannot attain to the Mat. 5. 36.
making of one Hair white or black. So that what Tert. lib. de carne Christi.
Tertullian replied to the Heretical Marcion blaming the structure of the
whole Body, may be propounded against the defaming of this single For it is not
properly a Part of the Body.
Appendix; Turpe hoc Deo, this derogates from the Divine Majesty, and is a base
imputation: This is to speak the same language with him, (who, for his
presumption beyond Lucifer's, shall be namelesse) whose voice was the voice of
a Devil, not of a Man, Si ego creationi adfuissem, ego res melius ordinassem,
Had I been at the Creation, things should have been put in a better posture.
Now what is vile Dust, and Ashes that it dare thus fly in the face of its
Maker through the windiness of pride? What is Man, that he should control the
Artifice of God? when his understanding is so shallow and incomprehensive, that
he is forced into admiration whilst he contemplates the workmanship of
inferior Beings, even the Spiders web, or the Hexagony of the Honeycomb.

If we suppose (which yet is in no wise to be granted) that Red Hair is a
bodily defect and imperfection, 6..
yet were it rather to be covered then carped at. It was allowable for Apelles,
when he drew the Effigies of Alexander, to lay his finger upon his Scarre: and
Alphonsus was not painted wryneck'd, but his Picture was contrived so as if he
was viewing the curtains of Heaven. Furthermore, as the Casuisticall Lessiu^ de
just^^ and alii^^ virt. li^ 2. cap. ^^dub. 3.
Lessius determines, ob defectus naturales non censetur quis informis: a
disgraceful Conclusion follows not from such Premises; this is not ground
sufficient to make it the mark of the arrows of Contumely. The ornament of the
Nobis non corporis cultus sed vigor animi quaeritur. Hieron. in Epist. ad
Furiam de viduit. serve.
Mind, not of the Body, is to be looked upon, according to the practice of S.
Hierome, (...). Xenoph. in orat. de Agesilao Rege page 533.
and Agesilaus. And the man whose Mind is not decked with the Pearl of great
price, is, Auro te ^^cet and ^emmis ^ondecores, ^ne Christi ^core de^rmis es.
^ypr. ser. de lapsis, ^g. 157.
notwithstanding all outward Ornament, deformed and ugly, according to the
doctrine of S. Cyprian The Body is Macrob. Some
(...) and ^ip. lib. 1. p. 11. (...).
(...), a bond and a sepulcher, and who blames such things, if they have
harshnesse and rottenness? A crooked Body may be the serviceable associate of
an upright Soul: the conjunction of corporal blemishes and mental ornaments
is an usual Systasie. Cicero, if you will believe his A Cicere in nasum. Vide
Pl^tarchum in ^a Ciceronis.
Name, had a protuberancy on his Nose. The Cicero ad Q. fra^rem de Oratore.
fluent Demosthenes had once a stammering tongue. Nicias Gram^ticus Romae,
familiaris Pompeio and Ciceroni. Sueton.
Nicias the renowned Grammarian, the familiar of Great Pompey and Good Tully,
had such ill-shap'd feet, that when one had stole his Shoes, he wished the
Thief no worse, then that they might fit him. Galba was eloquent and judicious,
but deformed and crooked; whereupon it was said by Apud Macrobium in Sat: l. 2.
c. 6.
M. Lollius, Ingenium Galbae male habitat, Galba's wit has an ill habitation.
Horace, whom S. Augustine thinks worthy the perusing above all others of his
order, because of his ample commendations of Virtues, and bitter invectives
against Vices, who made a Augustus.
Monarch his Heir, was almost of a Suet. in vita Horat, habitu corporis brevis
fuit atque ob^sus.
Pygmies stature; which was the cause of that Satyricall speech of Augustus to
him, after the presenting of a small Book of his, Vereri mihi videris ne
majores tui libelli sint quam Ipse es, Thou seem to me to fear that thy
Books should become bigger then thy Body. He knows not Letters that is ignorant
of the worth of Homer; his Works are of much repute, and comprehend In Ilias he
describes strength and vigor of Body, in Odyssea, the perfect pattern of the
Mind.
both parts of Man; his Name is of such credit, that the place of his Birth is
deemed a national honor, and Homeru^ Col^phonii civem esse dicunt suum, Chii
suum vendicant, Salaminii repetunt, Smyrn^^ ver^ suum esse confirmant. Cicero
pro Archia* Sic disticho^ apud Agelli^m Noct. At. lib. 3. c. 11. (...).
several have with earnestness pretended a title to his Nativity: yet was he
not master of a comely Personage, yea he was deficient in the most delightful
and useful of his exterior organs, he was blind, according to the importance
of this his Dictus prius Melesigenes, natus ad Meletem fluvium, dein Homerus
quod apud Jones significat capium oculis.
second Name, and the common suffrage of Writers. Only Suidas in Lex. in verbo
(...).
Suidas is somewhat singular, and must needs allegorize: he explains his
blindness by an indisposition to Avarice, which thief makes its first (...)
qu. (...). Plotinus.
entrance at the window of the Eye. The Ci^. lib. 1 de Not. Deorum.
beauty of Roscius is preferred before that of the Gods themselves, and yet his
organs of Sight were dull and deformed; erat pulchrior Deo, and tamen oculis
perversissimis. If all these testimonies were concealed, there might be had
sufficient proof from the Sacred Volume. Let this be established by the mouth
of two witnesses. Luc. 19. 3, 5. 6.
Zachaeus is somewhat dwarfish; and the Zachaeus Publ. ad ^nius horae
conversionem hospitem habere mer^it Salvatorem. Hier. Epist. ad Lucinium: Vide
dominum festinanter praecipientem, and hominem festinanter obedientem. Spera^z^
de Z^chaeo, in script. select. punct. 27.
shortness of his spiritual reparation does recompense the shortness of his
bodily stature. The Man that was born blind, Ioh. 9. was not Job 3. 16. and
Psalm. 58. 8.
the untimely birth of a woman, although throughout his whole minority he never
saw the Sun. He was happier then those, who in their own towering imaginations
presumed they Joh. 9. 41.
were men of acute eyes: he at length obtained the view of a glorious
Constellation, the sight of the heavenly fireballs, and Omnis pulchritudo
florum, hominum, angelorum, rerum pul^herrimarum, ad Dei pulchritudinem collata
nox est (...) te. nebrae. Draxel. Nicet. lib. 2. cap. 11.
that to which these Lights are a dark shadow, the light of Gods countenance.

Were Red Hair a disease of the Body, 7..
(which is to give a further advantage to the cause, and to suppose a non
supponendum) yet were it not to be derided. The Devil may Marc. 9. 22.
fling some into the fire of a Fever, and others into the water of a Dropsy,
and yet Psalm. 66. 12.
both in fire and water God may be with them. It is very observable, that of
the innumerable company of diseased persons who had Christ for their Physician,
Except the nine ungrateful Leper^, Luc. 17. 17, 18. ^oh. 7. 23. (...). Qui
foris ab infirmitate, Ipse etiam in^us fervavit a scelere. Beda in Ioh. 5. 14.
scarce any had only an exterior Cure, but almost as many as were healed in
Body were cured in Soul. No man can loo^ up to Heaven, and forget Job, who was
so great a servant of the King of Stars: yet even all men have heard of the
diseases of Gods servant Job: he had as many Diseases as Parts. He was visited
with the Gout, Job 13. 27. and 33. 11.
his feet were put in the stocks. He was tortured with a cruel Dysentery; Job
16. 13.
God powered out his Gall upon the ground. He was afflicted with the dolor of
the Reins; Id. ibid.
Gods archers compassed him about, and clave his Reins in sunder. He underwent
the violence of an hectic Fever, Job 19. 20.
so that his bones cleaved to his skin and to his flesh, and he was escaped
with the skin of his teeth. 'Twas even death to him to do that by which he
lived, 'twas troublesome to breathe, for he was wonderfully Asthmatick: he
says, in the Text, Job 17. 1.
his breath was corrupt, and in the margin, his spirit was spen^. To omit
particulars, take the sum total, Job 2. 7.
Job was smitten by Satan with sore biles, from the sole of his foot unto his
crown.

It is then manifest, 8.
that they that laugh at Red Hair are tickled ^y the Devil: that they commit a
greater outrage against the Head then the Scythians did, who (...). etc. (...).
Herod. Melpom. c. 65.
converted into drinking-Cups the Skulls of the^r most ^refull Enemies. I could
wish that the minds of men were of a more serene and Dovelike constitution:
that what the ingenious Car^esiu^ in Meth^do, et in init. med. ^^t^phys.
Des Carts abhors in Philosophy, might not take place in Morality, to wit,
that men would not hoodwink themselves with their own prejudice; but take an
impartial view of this their practice, and see whether it speaks not a
contradiction to an Evangelicall spirit: that so they might not irreverently
accost the Manufacture of God, nor disrespectfully excite each other: that so
they might not become ridiculous by deriding that which is not a capable
subject of a real Defamation, and thereupon rebounds the Disgrace toward the
place of its original.

CHAP. II.
A Censure of the general Scandal of some Professions, especially that of
Physic.
IT is as easily experienced as asserted, 1.
that many Professions are the perpetual Subjects of the tong^e of Scandal.
It Is almost proverbiall with us, The first Commodity a young Tradesman sets to
sale is his own Honesty. There are some Occupations both lawful and useful,
in which, notwithstanding, if (...) man has interest, he must always expect
in the blaz^ning of his Credit, to have a Sed for part of his Motto: The Man is
hones^, But he is of such a Calling. In like manner said he of old, Anony^mus
apud Tertull. in Apolog ad verse. Gent. page 810.
Bonus vir Caius Seius, sed malus tantum quod Christianus, Caius Seius is a
good man, but he is a Christian. Bols. in vita Calvini.
Bolsecus tells tales of Calvin, such in actual power, though not in name.
the Bishop of Geneva; he charge him with a large and black Catalogue of
Enormities: and one grand Objection against his Testimony is this, The man is
a Physician, and therefore it is presumed that what he speaks is neither slander
nor truth. Thus men of some Callings are exposed to the finger of the world;
they are pointed at for their supposed Dishonesty, as (...).
Demosthenes and -- monstror digito praetereunti^m Romanae Fidicen Lyrae. Hor.
Carm. lib. 4. Od. 3.
Horace were for their known worth.

The Spring-heads from whence this corrupt practice did at first issue, 2.
and the Channels in which it has successively been conveyed, may, in
probability, be these two.

First, the geniall indisposition and natural averseness of many to these
employments. -- Horat. Sermon. lib* 1. sat. ^.
inseverit olim
Natura --
It was thus with Maximinian, the Lord of an Empire, but the slave of
Ignorance, who was a professed foe to all men of clarified Intellectualls and
learned attain^ments, because the Muses frowned upon his ow^ dull capacity.
Thus the Fox in the Fable sets a low estimate upon those Apples which were too
high for his reach. It Is too common a Truth, Non ama^ hic Arts qui non
intelligit Arts. But such Ignorance ought not to be the mother of such
Indevotion: for if a natural non-proclivity to a Profession be a sufficient
ground of a quarrel with the Profession it self; then may the Christian
Profession be j^stly disrelished by the whole progeny of Adam, because all Per
peccarum originis naturalia bona ^n ipso ho^ine sunt corrupta
gratuitade^tracta. Lombard. l. 2. did. 25
lost their appetite to Good by his eating of the Tree of Good and Evil.
Cyprian. in p^ol. ad sermon. de Not. Christi, p. 290.
Omnino rarum est et difficile fieri bonum, facile et pronum est esse malum,
and hac, sine Magistro, sine Exemplo, doctrina statim a pubescentibus annis
imbuimur and docemur. Then may Act. 18. 17. (...).
Gallio be excused if he cares not for these things.

Secondly, 3..
the irregular and undecent practices of some Professors. Hor. ser. 1. I. sat.
3.
Turpia decipiunt caecum vitia -- is as true here, as in the sense that Horace
meant it. Thus the exactions of the Publicanes caused the office of
Taxe-gathering to be evil spoken of. An honest Publican was accounted at Rome
a fallacy of Composition. Quam honestus olim fuerit Publicanorum ordo apud
Romanos, and pueri sciunt, illi saltem quibus nova Latinitas M. Tullium nondum
e manibus excussit, Is. Casa^. Exer^it ad Annal. Baronii, Ex. 13. p. 220.
says a Learned Critic. Every Schoolboy whose Lesson is in Tully knows the
usual cozenage of these men. Whereupon Sueton. in Flav. Vesp. c. 1.
one Sabinus, for his discreet and punctual managing of this office, had
certain Images erected to the immortality of his name, with this inscription,
(...). Upon this account also the spirits of the Jews suffered such an
exasperation against the Publicanes, that it became a Rabbinicall Proverb,
Casaub. ubi supr^, p. 221.
Choose (...) a Wife out of that family in which a Publicane has his residence,
for there all the rest are Publicanes; that is, (according to the Casaub. ibid.
omnes sunt Publicani, i. e. Latrones, scelerati, Peccatores, ut dicitur, Mat.
9. 10.
exposition of the aforesaid Author All the rest are persons of rapacious
hands, and wicked hearts. Yet notwithstanding all these Obloquies, this was a
Calling very influentiall upon the public good, and subservient to the
maintenance of a Commonwealth. Neither were all those to whom its management
was committed men whose names did swell bigg in the rolls of Satan. Mat. 10. 3.
(...).
Matthew the Pub^icane made one of the catalogue of the twelve Apostles. And
Luc. 19. 3.
Zachaeus, a man of great Faith, though of little stature, whose house had no
meaner guests then Luc. 19. 9.
Salvation and Luc. 19. 5.
its purchaser, was Luc. 19. 2.
(...) a Governor of a society of Publicanes. And that speech of Christ, Mat.
21. 31. Vide Weems in 4. Degen. sons, on Mat. 18. 17. p. 36.
The Publicanes and Harl^ts go i^to the Kingdom of Heaven before you, was not
utte^^d as a reproach of the Calling of the Publicanes; for no guile was found
in, or proceeded out of the mouth of the Lamb; the breath of Christ was pure
and Crystalline, and admitted not the dross and mixture of Reviling: But it
referred only to that ill opinion of the Publicans, which was cherished in the
breasts of those to whom he did direct his speech.

Now, if by reason of the bad Conversation of Professors, the Profession be
justly vilified and set at naught, and if -- Horat. Carm. lib. 3. Ode 2.
Incesto additur integer, if because of the iniquity of some, all the rest be
worthily brought into a disrepute; then even the sacred Office of Apostleship,
and the ministerial Function, is subject to the lash of lawful Censure,
because Judas Joh. 6. 70. (...).
was a Devil, and 2 Timothy* 4. 10. (...)*
Demas preferred the present world before him that did exist before the world.

I shall confine my Discourse to the Profession of Physiok, 4..
the most common center of reproachful lines. This is evident from Chaucer's
verses, Physicians know what is digestible,
But their study is but little in the Bible.
All Man-curers may speak the same language with the Timon (...). ^os, apud
Horat. sermon. l. 1. sat. 1.
Man-ha^er, -- Populus me sibilat -- But they have an Antidote against this
Poison: Almost each of them can comfortably go on with the verse, -- at mihi
plaudo
Ipse domi, simul ac nummos contemplor in arca.
The people flout abroad; but I my self
Applaud at home, and smile upon my Pelf.
Physic is accounted the mother of no less monstrous a birth then that of
Atheism; and yet its Medicin^ Diis primum inventores suos assignavit, et coelo
dicavit. Plin. hist. lib. 29. cap. 1.
first founder was Aesculapius, a God. It Is as usual as an Adage, Ubi tres
Medici, duo Athei, Where there are three Physicians, there are two Atheists:
which, notwithstanding, is but to sport at Artiasme, Hor. ser. ^. 2. sat. 3.
Ludere par impar -- Scho^. Aristoph. ^^d Plutum.
(...), to play, like Boys, at even and odd; Vox, and praeterea nihil, a
Saying, and no reality. And I can no more rationally deduce from hence the
Physitian's Atheism, then I can collect the subordination of the Medick to the
Mendicant, from that in Plau^. Rudens Act. 5.
Plautus Grip. Number Medicus quaeso es? Lab. imo aedepol una litera plus sum quam
Medicus. Gr. Tum tu Mendicus es? Lab. tetigisti acu.

Religio Medici is not the product of the Pen alone, but also of the practice
of Physicians. The rude Rabble of the world proclaims the contrary; but the
words of dying men cry louder for attention then the others noise: and who ever
heard a man in such a condition commit outrages against the credit of those
from whom he expects the restoration of his Health? unless the man be in a
frenzy, Horat. Ser. lib. ^. sat. 3.
-- quum sit Pugil and Medicum urget, and then how regardlesse are his words?

It is true, 5.
Physicians often fail in their enterprises, and many of their Patients
miscarry. One B. Halls contempl. Pool of Bethesda.
Hebrew word signifies both Physicians and dead men. The poor Mark 5. 25, 26.
Haemorrhoissa was twelve years in the Physicians hands, without profit to her
body, and with detriment to her purse. Xiphil. in Adriano.
Multitudo medicorum perdidit Caesarem, is in every ones mouth; and hereupon
many curse them, because they cannot cure them. But if Nature has resolved
that the tenement of clay shall crumble into its primitive constitution, and
return to its dust, who can imagine a Physician can put a stop to its
proceedings? Physicians cannot sail beyond the ^ine of Humanity: -- Hor. Epist.
l. 2. ep. 1.
quod medicorum est
Promittunt Medici --
they cannot outrun their abilities: they can promise no more, then what is in
that Seneca in epist. 95. Iste versus et in pectore et in ore ^it, Homo sum,
etc.
Verse which Seneca would have entertained in two rooms, in heart and mouth,
Homo sum, alienum nil hominis a me puto. It was but Paracelsus, who died at
Salizburg in the 47. year of his age.
one of them who boasted of the performance of a contradiction, in his sense,
To put a man into a state of Immortality.

As for the Profession it self, 6..
it is of as lawful, yea Ecclus. 38.
necessary, as universal use: for man is bound by the Law of self-preservation
to keep up his crazy cottage with all possible honest reparations; and the Soul
is not to break prison, but it must wait till, in despite of means, death's
violent approach gives it a Jail-deliver. Caussin. Polyhist. Symb. l. 1. sym.
28.
In the temple of Aesculapius there was a fountain of oil with a golden arch;
the perfect Symbol of Physic, denoting by -- liquidi corrumpitur usus olivi.
Oil it is use, by Au^um (...) Graeco (...), quo^ divitem (...) potentem
significat.
Gold it is Honor. Osiris King of Egypt thought it not below his crown to have
commerce with Physical rules; Virg. 2^ Georg.
it was Helvic. Chron. ad Annu^ mun. 2200*
he from whence Physic received its first institution among the Germans. The
2 King. (...). 7.
Prophet was Physician to Ezechias, and prescribed a lump of Figgs to be
applied to his boil. Now that such a Cure should be effected by such a Cause,
that such a Malady should be removed by such a Medicine, is agreeable to
Physical principles, and not wholly supernatural. Galen. de art (...). l. 6.
Galen advises the same for the ripening of Tumors and Impostumations in the
flesh. The great Physician of Souls was a great Physician of Bodies; he that
redeemed them, repaired them; he went about all Galilee Mat. 4. 23.
(...), healing all manner of sickness and all manner of disease among the
people. The Blessed Disciples derived strength from this Almighty Physician
Lu^. 9. 1.
(...), to heal Diseases. Why then do the generality of men accost that
Profession with Rudeness, and not with Reverence, which has had no meaner
Practitioners then the Head and Pillars of the Universal Church?

This Profession is so far from prompting Atheism, 7.
that it is signally advantageous to an holy life. The D. Brown ^n Epist. Ded.
ante Hydriot.
study of Physicians is Life and Death: They of all men least need artificial
memento's, or Coffins by their Bedsides, to mind them of their Graves. Their
frequent conversing with sceletons, and the farewell breath of their departing
Patients, is as effectual to the true Philosophy, Philosophy so defined by
Plato.
the meditation of Death, as Philip's boy's Memento Mori. And what greater
spur to our Christian race, then to be mindful or Mortality? Hieron. ep.
(...). 3. conc. ep. Paulino.
Facile contemnit omnia qui se semper cogitat moriturum, says Saint Hierome.
Hear the suffrage of an Heathen, Epicte^. in Euchir. cap. 28.
(...) which is in brief thus, Daily fix thy meditation on difficult matters,
and especially upon Death, and thou will contemn so low a thing as earth, and
thy desires after its enjoyments will be curbed in the vehemence of their
pursuit. Speranz. Script. sell. punct. 125. quod totum est de utilissima
consideratione mortis.
Ex mortis oblivione omnia mala, says Speranza; The forgetting of Death is the
fountain of all the evils of Life. He that makes his bed in a Coffin, will
scarce entertain an Harlot; he that drinks in a Death's Head, will scarce
adventure to be drunk; he that has Death in his contemplations, has Goodness
in his actions. In the fourteenth of Proverbs v. 32. where we read, The
righteous has hope in his death, the Chaldee has it, He that hops that he
is about to die is righteous. He that takes it into consideration, that the
Knife of Atropos is never in it is Sheath, that Death is always in readiness
to put a period to his transitory breath, and that if the associate of his Body
has been faithful in returns of service to Him from whom it received it is
Being, it shall presently after disunion make it is abode in an eternity of
Bliss, if otherwise, in an eternity of Woe, either in Paradise with Blessed
Souls, or in Hell with cursed Serpents; this man will be any thing, in an
Ecstasie of being ever; he will abandon the pleasure of Dalilah's lap, in
contemplation of the happiness of Abraham's bosom; he will forsake this
present evil world, in a rapture of a joyous futurity.

Knowledge in Physic and ignorance of the existence of a God, 8.
seem to me even incompossible: because Physicians have, beyond all other men,
a multiplicity of palpable proofs of a First Being, all-wise and potent, which
continually attends them. In their Botanicall employments every smile and
flourish of a Flower darts the mind up toward the Fountain of it is Beauty,
Praesentemque refert quaelibet Herba Deum. Every Herb has a signature of a
Divine majesty enstamp'd upon it. Their eyes are so far happifi'd, as to be
almost the only spectatours of the most lively evidence of a Deity that the
material Creation can produce; I mean their view of the Psalm 139. 15.
contextus sum, verbum Hebraeum (...) significat acu pingere.
needlework of heaven, of that exact model and Harmonicall composure of the
Body of Man, in their Anatomical negotiations. In contemplation of this the
Heathen called God (...) the best Artist. The Circulation of the Blood is a
Demonstration of an Eternal Being. Galen was hushed into a wonder by some
anatomicall observations, and after his amazement for some space, he brake
forth in an hymn to the praise of his Creator, though formerly a professed
Atheist. He that contemplates the Tunicles, Humors, and other parts of the
Eye; the two orders of Teeth, which prepare the meat for the Stomach by
mastication; the many Vertebrae of the Spina disposed most artificially; the
Lungs which are spongious, and carry that air to the Heart which they had
attracted through the Aspera Arteria, that so its heat might be attempered and
allayed by a moderate ventilation; the many conjugations of Nerves arising from
the Brain and Spinall Marrow, divided into several Fibers, and those at length
into most slender Filaments, distributed after a most exact order throughout
the whole Body, and serving to Motion and Sensation; the various bendings of
the Intestina, the Membranes of which they consist, the right and transverse
Villi, those serving for Extension, these for Contraction; the Rivulets tending
toward the Liver, and conveying the exuccous Chyle; the multitude of little
Cells ordained for the retention of Ordure; lastly and especially, the
stupendous disposition of the Heart; He must of necessity be enforced to cry
out, Digitus Dei hic est, This is the Lords doing.

I must acknowledge that some Physicians Danda est Ellebori multo pars maxima
avaris. Horat. sermon. l. 2. sat 3.
want Hellebore, 9..
and plant too many of their Simples upon the mountain of Potosi: and that
there are those among them, to whom Application may be made in particular of
what Philomenis (...).
he affirmed too generally, viz. That Physicians are ill when none else are
ill. Some of them, that they themselves may not want Gold, wish their
neighbors may want Health; and we may dispatch another Pollux to them (after
the example of Lucian. in Dial. (...).
Diogenes ab inferis to rich men on the earth) with a (...); That is in effect,
O vain men, why do you watch and ward your treasures, and set your selves upon
the rack, whilst you contrive to lay Pelion upon Ossa, to add one talent to
another -- Hor. epist. lib. 2. ep. 2.
velut und a supervenit undam, as one wave is forced upon the back of its
predecessor? when you must come to the grave, where one halfpenny is a
sufficient treasure, yea a superfluity. But men of all Callings, yea even all
men, are peccant as well in this as in all other extravagancies. -- Hor. Ser.
l. 1. sat. 1.
bona pars hominum decepta cupidine falsa,
Nil satis est, inquit --
I confess that the Physician Eudemus Amicus ac Medicus Liviae, speci^ artis
frequens secretis, etc. Tacit. An. l. 4. c. ^
Eudemus was a manager of an adultery, and that in no meaner place then In the
house of Drusus Caesar.
the palace of a Prince, and that under color of his art. I desire not to
palliate the exorbitancies of Cardan and Paracelsus, although the latter was
called Divinus vir by Johannes Montanus.

What I now contend for is, that there are good as well as bad livers of this
Profession. -- Hor. Ser l. 2. sat. 3.
Medicus multum celer atque fidelis is not a Platonicall Idea, a mere imaginary
Chimaera. The Physicians of Tertul. l. de Anima, page 641.
Tertullians time claimed a propriety in the doctrine of the Soul beyond
Philosophers. Pliny, an hater of Physicians, relates no unworthy Practice of
Herophilus; and had there any been extant, he would not have spared his own
Venom, or the other's Credit: The worst he says of him is good enough, Plin.
Not. hist. lib. 29 cap. 1.
Deserta est haec secta, quoniam necesse erat in ea Literas scire; that is, He
had few followers, because he put them upon a necessity of Learning. It was he
Herophilus apud Gaffendu^ in lib. 10. Diog. Laert. p. 457.
that at once cured Diodorus of his senseless Philosophy and his dislocated
member. Diodorus denied local motion, and endeavored to persuade others to
espouse his opinion with this argument, Si quic* quam movetur, aut in loco quo
est movetur, aut in loco quo non est. Sed neutrum dici potest: Ergo, etc. It
chanced that his Shoulder Bone suffering a dislocation, he came to Herophilus
for help; who told him that no such thing could possibly happen to him: for if
there were no Motion there could be no Dislocation. Whereupon Diodoru^
perceiving his Sarcasmus, and feeling by experience the falsity of his Opinion,
desclaimed it with shame. Hippocrates in the Graec. Epig. l. 1. tit. 39. (...),
etc
Greek Epigramme is allowed no less emphaticall a title then, The light of
men: and his Translated by Sir Tho. More out of 3. book of Grae^. Ep.
Epitaph is proportionate, Thessalus Hippocrates, Cou^ genere, ha^ jacet urna,
Phoebi immortalis semine progenitus:
Crebra trophaea tulit morborum, armis medicinae;
Laus cui magna, nec id sort, sed art fuit.
Who dares blow upon the glittering name of the renowned Cyrus with
reproachful breath? He was the Monarchs mirror, one tha^ practiced nothing
unworthy a Diadem: and yet that Physic was his usual employment, has as
much authority as the word of Xen. de Instit. Cyri, lib. 8. page* 167.
Xenophon can afford it; yea his Xenophon. ibid. (...).
own hands did, in this kind, administer to the necessities of some decaying
bodies.

To conclude, 10.
If all the Professors of Physic were beasts by degeneration, Conclusion.
and wallowers in sensuality, and Saint Luke the only Exception to that
general Rule, it were abundantly enough to wash off all the Spots which the
hand of Malice can cast upon the Physical employment; he being Colos. 4. 14.
(...) the beloved Physician; he being also (that wherein is the Emphasis of
Emphasis) the Quill of the Holy Dove, even Heaven's Amanuensis.

CHAP. III.
A Censure of that common evil practice of Reproaching the Feminine Sex.
THe Protoplast, 1..
by his Fall, broke in pieces the frame of evennesse of spirit, and raised a
disturbance in the serenity of the Soul. Ever since this Father eat sour
Grapes, his Childrens teeth have been set on edge with reviling language. Since
Adam came into compliance with the Serpent, the whole race of Mankind has
plentifully vented the Poison of Reproach. My purpose is not to create a
tedious Discourse, by evincing this in it is latitude: But my present intention
is to bring in evidence and inveig^ against those arrows of Contumely with
which Cedars pierce S^^rubs, with which men shoot at the reputation of the
Feminine sex. Men erect the trophyes of their ambition upon the ruins of the
repute of Women. They draw their malice to the dregs, and power it upon them
with a flood of evil words: As if an universal malady possessed that Sex; as
if all Women were of a bad complexion; as if those weaker vessels could not
possibly contain any thing that is good. No man can plead ignorance in this
particular, if he has looked but so far as Mantuan or Aretine. If Chapter Fon.
seca cited by Burt. in Mel. par. 3. sect. 2. Memb. 5. Subsect. 3.
Fo^seca mistakes not, Non possunt invectivae omnes and Satyrae in Faeminas
scriptae uno volumine comprehendi. The repute of Women has been perplexed with
Volumes of Invectives. According to Petronius, we may put more confidence in
the inconstancy of a Wave then in the Promise of a Woman, -- Animaan ne creed
puellis,
Namque est faemine a tutior unda fide.
And Ca^ullus is not of a different opinion, who averreth that Wind and Water
are of sufficient stability to receive the speeches of a Woman to him who is
amorous, and would captivate her affection, and sues to her for matrimonial
entertainment. -- Catul. El. ^.
Mulier cupido quod dicit A. manti
In vento aut rapida scri^ere oportet aqua.
One of our own Poets agrees with these, and with his hobling feet thus
tramples upon Female Credit: Chaucer.
Half so boldly there can ^one
Swear and lie as Wom^n can.
A woman is made by Graec. Ep* lib 1. ^it* 19 ver. per Obsopaeum.
some the Moral of Pandora's Box, the emphaticall punishment of the over^bold
Prometheus. Est mulier Iovis i^a ^gnis vice ^radita --


No tongue is so impudent as to affirm that Adams Rib abstracteth wholly from
Crookedness; 2.
that there is no particular Woman whose merits has not raised her above the
reach of a just Reproof. I confess that many of the Daughters of Eve stretch
forth their hands toward Forbidden Fruit. These Daughters of Venus have their
deformed, as well as their beauty spots. Some Women are censurable for their
practices. Some married ones are worthy rebuke for cutting off their own Heads,
for their cruelty toward their Husbands: of this number was Hom. Odys. l. 4.
Clytemnestra, of whom her husband Agamemnon complains in the Graec. Ep. lib.
1. tit. 19. Ep. (...), verse. per Obsop.
Epigramme, Uxor me occidit quem non ferus ^bstulit Hector. Some unmarried
ones, although probably no Virgins, deserve a check for their artificial
allurements, their Rhetorical Attires, whereby they persuade and entice their
Servitours to Folly. This is intima^ed in the Question and Answer of Iovianus,
Quid lacteolos sinus, and ipsas
Prae ^e fers sine linteo papillas?
Hoc est dicere, Posce, posce, trado.
Which may be thus rendered, without violence to the sense, Why do those fleshy
pillows want a vail?
This is to say, Ask and thou may prevail.
But the reproach is not a single but a many-headed monster: it imitates the
Tyrant Mezentius, tying the living and the dead together; Goo^ and Bad are
encompassed in general terms with the chain of Calumny. This dart of Satan
strikes not against particular Women, but against the Feminine Sex, for so runs
the language of the Mant. Alph^s.
Woman-hater, Faemineum servile genus, crudele, superbum. Let him whose tongue
is thus generally set on fire, quench it at the reproof of the sage Euripides,
who bespeaks him in these words, (...)
(...).
(...),
(...).


The Masculine Gender is the most worthy, 3.
but the Feminine is not worthless. The Aristot. l. 9. hist. Animal.
Great Naturalist makes this observation upon the Cuttle-fish, That the Female
takes vengeance on the Adversary of its Male; but the Male exemplifies friends
in Adversity, and departs with speed when the Female meets with Persecution.
Modesty abounds most in Women, and where the habitation of Modesty is, there is
the tabernacle of Virtue. If the Man be the Sun of the Creation, the Woman is
the Ray. If the Man be 1 Cor. 11. 7.
(...) the glory of God, the Woman is (...) the glory of the Man: and how
sordidly does he degenerate from the innate dictate of self-preservation, that
puts an Eclipse upon his own brightness? Woman is Genesis 3. 20.
the mother of all Living; and shall not Men rather Luke 11* 27.
bless then curse the womb that bare them? Woman is the Faemina viri por^io
est, atque ex eo sumpta and formata. Cyprian. tract. 2. de hab. Virg. p. 106.
Rib of Man; and what an intense degree of folly possesses him, who biteth in
sunder his own Rib with the teeth of Slander? The Intellexit sapientissimus
omnium rerum opifex, in vi^a solitaria non posse Adamum perfecta f^ui
felicitate. Bidembach. Prompt. Con. p. 10.
All-wise God judged Adam's felicity unaccomplished, until he enjoyed a meet
help, or (as the Heb. tale auxilium quod ^it veluti Alter ipse. Jun. and Trem.
in not. brev.
Hebrew signifies) Another self: and dare presumptuous man account a Pearl of
Gods sending a S^one laid in his way, and so to be kicked at? dare he exclaim
against a companion of Gods choosing? Vile worm! thus to affront the Wisdom of
Heaven, and scorn the workmanship of God's Finger.

Tert. de Habitu mal. initio. Tu es Ianua Diabo^li, etc.
Tertullian indeed calls Eve the Devils gate, 4.
but it was in reference to her Sin, not her Sex: and he afterward declares so
much, when he addresseth his speech to her in this ^itter sarcasmus, Tert.
paul^infrd.
Tu es quae eum persuas^sti quem Diabolus aggredi non valuit, Thou art she who
did overcome him who was Temptation-proof against the Serpent. And whereas
the Tert. adv. Val. In coe ^o non Angelus and Angela, etc.
same Father makes it a part of Heavens happiness, to have Angels and not
Angelicalls too, to have a God and not a Goddess also, he speaks not in
relation to the Feminine Sex, but in relation to the diversity of Sex; which
Cause. Holy Court* 4. ^ome. Pass. of Amity, p. 9.
the eloquent Caussin supposes would alter something of Heavens Tranquillity.
It is the Assertion of Cujus cantu tole. rabilius est audire Bafiliscum
sibilantem. Cyp. de Sing. Cleric. p. 273.
Saint Cyprian, that the hissing of a Basilisk is a more tolerable sound then
the singing of a Woman. But (as the Cypr. paulo su^pr^, nunc lacertos ac
faemora, etc. nudat.
foregoing words evidence) he means this of such a Woman as Aretines Lucretia,
of one of a tempting carriage and wanton behavior: and such words well become
such a subject: such a Woman's breath will blow up the sparks of Love into the
fire of Lust. Ep. to. 2. ad Ctesiph. adv. Pelag. p. 84.
S. Hierome has a large catalogue of Women who were isntrumental in the
propagation of the designs of Heretics: he relates how Helen was subservient
this way to Simon Magus, and Prisca and Maximilla to Montanus: besides which he
has variety of Instances. But we may observe, that these Wolves were men,
making use not of the Malice, but of the Facility of these Sheep, being Women.

Instances of Good Women are very 5.
numerous. Many of them are inwardly, as Cardan. de Lis. prop.
Cardan's Wife was outwardly when he was first enamoured on her) all in white,
surrounded with Innocence, and Candor of disposition. Socrates Soc. Hist. Ec.
l. 4. c. 14.
makes mention of a Wom^^ who made a passage through a multitude to the place
of Execution of Christians under Valentinian: which fire of zeal in her to
suffer for Christianity, turned to water in the breast of that cruel Emperor,
and made an abatement of his rage and malice for the future. Evagrii Eccl.
hist. l. 1. c. 20.
Eudocia the wife of Theodosius did so abound in honorable practices, that a
most artificial brazen Statue was erected to the eternity of her memory:
although she had consulted better for her self in that particular, Evag. ib. c.
21, 22.
by erecting of Churches. Soc. Hist. Ecc. l. 1. c. 13.
Helen the mother of Constantine, who, it seems, found the stage on which was
acted the most terrible, and yet the most happy, Tragedy since the foundation
of the world, to wit, the Cross of Christ, together with the Nails, was of an
exemplary life and laudable conversation. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 8. c. 17.
Eusebius reports of the Virgin Theodosia, not yet eighteen years of age, too
tender a morsel for devouring fire, that with incredible constancy she endured
Martyrdom under Diocletian. Ecc. Hist. l. 8. c. 24.
The same Author has registered to after-Ages a pair of Virgins expiring by the
same ^ate; and gives them this for an encomium, That the earth which they had
trampled on was not worthy to bear them. Hier. Ep. to. 1. Ep. ad Eustoch. virg.
Epitaph. Paulae Mat^is, ad initium.
S. Hierome bestows an Hyperbolicall Hyperbole upon on the virtuous Paula, and
speaks thus in her commendation, Si cuncta corporis mei membra verterentur in
linguas, and omnes artus humana voce resonarent, nihil dignum Sanctae ac
Venerabilis Paulae virtutibus dicerem: that is, Were all my Members so many
Tongues, and all my Joints endued with the gift of Elocution, the expressions
which I could then utter would be frigid and diminutive, and come below the
worth of the Venerable Paula. Have you not heard of the Maffaeus Hist. Ind.
lib. 16.
Patience of Eleonora? who with constancy endured commerce with Wolves and
Tigres, and with Men more savage then those untamed Beasts. Have you not read
in Xenop. Instit. Cyri l. 6. p. 121, 122.
Xenophon of Panthea, whom he styles (...), an excel^ent Woman? of whom he
relates, that (...), her Husband was at home when he was abroad, that she was a
faithful Wife as well in his absence as in his presence. It was she that, as
it were, Xen. Inst. Cyri, p. 135 (...), etc.
changed Sexes with her Husband, and infused courage and magnanimity into his
faint^ng spirits. Women were once the best Soldiers of Xerxes, by his own
confession, who after their valiant service uttered himself thus, Herodot.
Vran. cap. 88.
(...), The Men have turned their Swords into Distaffs and become women, the
Women have turned their Distaffs into Swords and become men. Eusebius. in vita
Constant. li. 1. cap. 3.
The hand of a Woman took away both the Scepter and the Soul of Cyr^s the
peerless King of Persia. Amongst the (...). Herod. in Eut^rpe, cap. 35.
Egyptians of old the Women did negotiate abroad, and the men kept house,
betaking themselves to diminutive labors. The Women were more serviceable in
their generations; Herodot: ibid. (...).
they carried burdens upon their shoulders, the men upon their heads. Two Women
were mothers to Homer's Offspring, they gave birth to the Issue of his Brain:
we have his Virgil.
Brother Poets word for it, Praestitit ergo una Iliadi muliercula causam,
Fecil Odysseam scribere Penelope.
Vide Bu^t. Mel. part. 3. sec. 2. memb. ^. subsect. ^.
Admetus King of Thessaly being ready to breath out his last and farewell air,
was told by the Oracle of Apollo, that he might still live in his own Person,
if he could die by Proxy. All his Friends denied to perform so much for him;
even those that were aged, and ready to return to their primitive dust, would
not anticipate their fates some few hours: only Alcestes his Wife, youthful
and beautiful, too tender a Bud to be cropp'd by Death, took the burden upon
her own shoulders with a joyous alacrity.

But why do we wander thus far for Instances, when we are presented with a
renowned example at home? that of the Puissant Queen ELIZABETH, one whose
actions evidenced the irrationality of the Salique Law. To let my words run
without the biasse of partiality, I must acknowledge, with her Camden in Elizab.
own servant, that she abandoned part of her Integrity in the ^usinesse of Mary
Queen of Scots, and Dowager of France. But notwithstanding this Scar in the
face of Beauty, what was affirmed of By John Speed in the Chron. of his Life.
Edward the third may likewise be spoken of Her without a deviation from the
Truth, to wit, That few Princes that had so great and Heroic Virtues had sewer
Vices.

Had all the forementi^ned proofs been lo^ked up in silence, 6.
yet were there confirmation sufficient by examples written in the Volume of
Gods Book. There are registered with honor Jud. 4.
Deborah and Ruth. 1. 16.
Ruth, Mark 16 ^.
Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of James and Salome, Luc. 1.
Elizabeth and Luc. 2. 36, 37.
Anna: and a multitude of others too tedious to insert. As Job 2. 9.
Job, being a good man, had an evil Wife, who bad him curse God; so Mat. 27.
19.
Pilat, being an evil man, had a Good Wife, who forbad him to crucify Christ.
Women were more liberal Luke 23. 28.
in shedding of their tears then Men, when the Jews were a shedding their
Redeemers blood. What fallen Man could ever come into comparison with the
VIRGIN MOTHER? Although she was not without sin, yet was she without parallel;
insomuch that the Labata* Loc. com. tit. Mari^ Excellen.
Jesuits expound those places of Scripture of Mary the Spouse of Joseph, which
are spoken of the Church the Spouse of Christ.

And now the success hoped for from these Lines is, Conclusion.
the drawing men from this fruitless Vanity, 7.
this pernicious Folly. My hearty Option is, that the Stream of men's words
would run more clearly in this particular Channel: that they would respect
and not revile that Sex, the absence of which would cause a well-peopled
Universe to become a so^itary Wilderness: that they would show themselves Men
by countenancing Women: that they would prove themselves of the worthier Sex,
by defending the weaker Sex: that they wou^d, at length, bid adieu to this
long-lived Cacoethes, and no longer be constant to that vicious practice, in
which Inconstancy is a Virtue.

CHAP. IV.
A Censure of the Practice of the many Writers amongst us who even wholly
neglect the defense of Christ's Deity notwiths^anding the hell-born nature of
the contrary Doctrine, and the potency of its maintainers, and sp^nd their time
in writing upon needless Subjects.
THe worm of Curiosity has devoured much paper since the invention of the
Press. 1..
The greatest number of Writers, throughout all Ages, have spent their Ink in
curing Tetters, not Maladies of concernment in the Body of the Church. They
have spent their pains in cutting of Cummin-seed, by their nice division* Mat.
23. 23.
neglecting weightier things, and dealing with necessary Truths as if they
labored with a Noli me tangere. These Divines (like Aristotle's Commentators)
have taken voluminous pains about matters very trivial and of no moment.
Johannes de Rada has filled two large Volumes with the needless Controversies
in agitation betwixt the Thomists and Sc^tists. And the Dominicans and Jesuits
have crowded whole Libraries with their endless quarrels about Grace and
Free Will. Fr. Ribera in c. 14* Apocal.
Ribera and Lessius l. 13. de Moribus divinis, ^. 24.
Lessius have spent many fruitless thoughts about the locality and extent of
the fire of Hell. The latter contends, that one Dutch mile in diameter is
sufficient for a local Hell, because that space cubically multiplied will make
a sphere comprehensive of eight hundred thousand milions of damned bodies
(allowin^ each body six foot square,) which (says he) is abundantly capable,
for there will not be an hundred thousand millions of them. How numberless are
the Questions of Schoolmen concerning the First Adam and the Mother of the
Second; and the things possible in respect of Gods Absolute Power? How many
have raised such Quaeries as these? How could Adam hear a Serpent speak, and
yet be devoid of suspicion? How could he walk out of the Paradise of Innocence
into the Wilderness of Sin? out of that spotless state of Life, into the
chambers of Death? he having faculties not immersed in Ignorance, and therefore
not to be imposed upon: and he must either be drawn into sin by deceit, or rush
into it by wilfullness; and the latter speaks the depravity of his Will, which
was good and innocent. How did his own Rib become such a Bow as killed him at
the first shoot? he having no inward corruption ready to assent. How could
Lazarus Joh. 11. 44.
come forth, when his feet were bound with Grave-clothes? How can the body of a
Mat. 19 24.
Camel, exceeding by infinite dimensions the compass of a needles eye, be, in
possibility, circumscribed by so narrow a superficies? or was not the original
word (...), which signifies a cable, and not (...)? and if so, whether so
great a body, being untwisted and reduced to its constituting parts, cannot
enter in at so narrow a gate? ^ith many more unnecessary Disquisi^ions, quae
nec scientem juva^t, nec ignoranti nocent, which neither help him that knows
them, nor hurt him that knows them not, (as the Remonst. (...) Prfae. ad Conf.
Remonstrants speak) and are only fit for -- pleno ^^idet Call ^^hurnius (...).
Horat.
Calphurnius and Democritus to make merry with. Tannerus the Jesuit is in hot
pursuit after Tobies Dog, and with earnestness averrs his existence to be an
article of Faith. Dave^antius de Iudice and ^orma ^i^ei, c. 5.
Tobiam Canem habuisse, esse. Fidei nostrae articulum magnis clamor^bus
contendit. An English Divine once In a Sermon at S. Mary's in ^amb. on (...)
Sam. 17. ^.
entertained his Auditory with a discourse concerning the dimensions of
Goliah's beam: which extorted this expression from one then present, The man
has not di^inity enough to save the soul of a Gnat, About the year 1605. there
was a great controversy betwixt master Broughton and Mas^^r A^^sworth, whether
the lining o^ (...) Ephod was Blew, or Sea-water-Gr^en.

Thus Pebbles are ushered in by the hand of corrupt fancy, 2.
and possess the place of Pearls: and Learned men (with the mighty Navy of
Caligula) gather Cockle-shels, and neglect matters of greater value. Thus, by
handling nicities, they endeavor to show their wit, for their own applause,
and will not bring a drop toward the quenching of the fire of dangerous
Heresies, whereby they may show their zeal for the glory of God. Thus most of
our own Writers, of this present Generation, do bonas horas male collocare,
spend much paper de lana caprina, and scarce a single leaf toward the
redemption of the Golden Fleece. Amidst the thousands of Books, there is scarce
one Cover for the Deity of Christ. If I should make enquiry after its
Defenders, I should not be answered by one of a thousand. The Arian Devil
possesses many; but how few do endeavor to cast him out? Numerous Polemicall
pages have daily recourse to the Press, which might be omitted without
detriment to the Christian Cause; of which I mention none, lest I should seem
to let slip any: but how few Quills fly the right way? How few hands of these
ready writers are lifted up against the Giantlike heresy of Arius, which
defieth and debaseth Gods Heb. 1. 9.
Anointed, which has many, and those lea^ned and crafty, abettors? This
Heresy is the main, if not the one thing necessary in doctrine to be opposed.
This is even the whole Militia of the Prince of Darkness, whereby he fortifies
his black Territories; an Engine that strikes at the Ground^work of
Christianity; as the ensuing Paragraph does make manifest.

As earthly Kings are said to be Plato a^^ud Cau^. ^n Polyhist. Symb. l. 5.
^ymb. ^8.
(...), Gods amongst men: 3
so the Heavenly King Jesus was (...) God-man. Now the (...), the word of
reconciliation of God and Man, having this truth for its foundation, the utter
Mat. (...) 25, 39. (...).
Enemy of Mankind, he who is neither God nor Man, has endeavored to possess
the world with this destructive Opinion, That Christ is not God, but Man. It
has been the attempt of fallen Lucifer Isa. 14. 12.
the son of the morning, in all Ages, to represent the Malac. 4* 2.
Sun of Righteousness not as an Heavenly Light, but as a Sublunary Meteor.
This Red Dragon's tail has been always isntrumental, not only in Rev. 12. 4.
drawing down the third part of the Stars, but even him that made them, and i.
e. only making him Man^Homo ab humo.
laying him level with the earth in the mind of credulous Mortality. He has
evermore made his assaults against the Ephesians. 2 20.
chief Cornerstone of Christianity, hereby laying a surer foundation for his
strong holds. And what way more compendious? hac itur ad Astra, by these means
the Dominions of Hell are as highly exalted as those of Heaven. For victory
over the kingdom of Satan being promised solely 1 Cor. 15. 57.
through Christ Jesus, if assent be yielded to this persuasion, that this Heb.
2.
(...) this Captain of our Salvation is no more then humane, Hell will still
triumph, and march on in it^ bloom and verdure, and say, O Christ, where is thy
victory? whilst no greater strength then what a Man affords does wield that
Sword which pretends its overthrow. And 1 John 5. 5.
who is he that overcomes the world, bu^ he that believes that Jesus is the
Son of God? This fiery dart of Satan has been the most pernicious incendiary
in the Church of God: and we have no less testimony then that of Eras. ^chol.
in ^. Hier. (...) 2. ep. ^amaso.
Erasmus to confirm it, who, although a favourer of this Opinion, has thus
written, Nulla haeresis gra^ius afflixit totius orbis Ecclesias, quam
Arianorum: and, you know, the case is plain, when men are judged out of their
own mouths. Horat. (...) Art ^oet.
Intererit muli um, Davusne loquatur Eros^e.

The men of this Nation may, ^4.
from the sad Topic of Experience, derive too many Arguments to evince that
the Enemy has sowed these Tares in this Land. It is true, when England was in
its glory, a messenger sent out to find an Arian Heretic might have returned
with a vix est inventus, Socrate^.
as he did with a non est, after search made for a Wiseman. Such traytorous
principles against the King of Heaven were Salvo Episcopo Salva pax est.
Tertul. de Bapt. page 710.
kept in exile by the grave censure of Episcopal jurisdiction. But since the
glory departed from our Israel, since Head-pieces were in more request then
Mitres, since ruder Drumms and Trumpets outvoyc'd the melody of more sacred
Organs, the old Serpent has cast his skin, and renewed the vigor of his
youth, and has vented this Venom with too plentiful an effusion, and with
too great success. We may utter the ^ame now which Hier. ep. Damaso, p. 45.
Saint Hierome did of old, Ariana rabies fremit, The rage of the Arian Heresy
grows headstrong and tumultuous, it is even become a popular frenzy. Since the
Spiritual Courts were thrown down, this Concilium vanitatis (for Cypr. Exp.
symb. p. 264.
so the doctrine of Arius is called by Saint Cyprian) is reared up. It is a
sign the Gardiners Knife is in its sheath, when such venomous Weeds do riot in
their growth.

This Socinian Heresy has of late, 5.
without much regret, found entertainment in the breasts of many, being ushered
in by the plausible insinuation of a blameless life. Its Professors pretend
to be men of a pious conversation, and to be zealous for the Lord of Hosts: but
it is evident that their zeal has eaten him up; for they deny him who is the
same with him whom they affirm they worship. But certainly opinions are not to
be taken up merely upon the seeming, yea, or real Holiness of those that hold
them. The Vide Petrum Bertium in vita Arminii.
orphans of Arminius, according to their duty and his deservings, afforded
large Eulogies of the devout life of their deceased Father. Whereupon Vind.
Gratiae. Resp. ad praef. exam. lib Per^infiani.
one of our Learned Supralapsarians takes occasion to write thus, Quid superest
agendum, quam ut cujusvis Theologi, quantacunque eruditione fulti, quantacunque
sanctitate celebra^i, dogmata Isa. 8. 20.
ad Legem and testimonium, tanquam ad Lydium Lapidem, explorentur? i. e. The
most learned and most religious men's opinions are to be put upon their trial
before the Scripture, the judge of Controversies. But I suppose that, without a
transgression of the limits of Charity, I may affirm that the Socinians, for
the most part, are good only in show, and bad in deed; that, like Harpies,
they have the Face of an Angel, but the Talons of an Eagle. For the
consistence of the true Catholic Church with one fundamental Error in all of
its members, is as impossible to conceive, as to frame an Idea of God and
Belial in a combination: and it is not ordinary, but barely possible to be a
good Christian, and yet err in one fundamental Point of the Christian
Doctrine. I add possible; for the Mat. 20. 21.
Disciples of Christ, after much converse and numerous instructions, Act. 1. 6.
thought the gold of the New Jerusalem not re^ined from corporeal dross, they
imagined that the Kingdom of Christ was even like the Paradise of Mahomet,
sensual, not spiritual. And Act. 19. 2
the holy Dove was not so much as arrived at the ears of the C^ristians of
Ephesus, They had not so much as heard whether there were an Holy Ghost. And
the good Synes^us, whom Evagr. Ec. hist. l. 1. cap. 15. Phot. Myriobib. cod. 26.
Ecclesiastical Story records as richly embellished with Christian graces, and
whose life as well as learning advanced him to the dignity of a Bishop of the
Catholic Church, ^id not fully embrace the doctrine of the Resurrection:
although at length Heaven crowned his Soul with the belief of that necessary
Article. And how much soever the modern Socinians have pretended to the
maintenance of Piety, it is certain (as D. Hammond in Fundam. p. 46, 47.
one of the Worthies of our Israel observes) they have taken out one principal
Stone from the Foundation of it, the 1 Timothy 3. 16. This could not be said, if
he were not first God before he was thus made manifest by the means of his
Inca^nation.
(...), God made manifest in or by the flesh. This, I am fully persuaded, is a
great truth, that their Heresy is a quencher of the spirit of true Piety. For
if it were not the Son of God by eternal generation that was incarnate, the
Love of God toward Mankind in Christ Jesus would wax cold: men might without
an unholy boldness ask, what needs an Joh. 3. 16.
(...), so God loved the world that he sent Christ? a sic without a sicut? What
needs that expression beyond hyperbole, Ephesians. 2. 7.
(...), the excee^ing riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through
Christ Jesus? and 1 John 4. 9.
parallel expressions running through the whole vein of Sacred Writ? Upon this
account Men would apprehend God to be (as Theod. Ecc. hist. l. 1. c. 14. Sozom.
Eccl* hist. l. 2. c. 28.
Arius was by the just judgment of the Lord) without bowels; and so serve him
as Slaves, out of fear, not as Sons, out of love. Again, The issue of the belef
of Christ to be mere Man, is the Presumption of some, and the Despair of
others. Many will presume, building heaven upon the Quicksands of their own
imaginary Righteousness, and considering that they are men, and Christ no more,
will not give audience to the offer of an imputed merit. Many will despair; for
they making a more exact enquiry then the former, will experimentally find that
Jam. 3. 2.
in many things they offend, and that these affronts against an Infinite
Majesty cannot be expiated by a finite Man: whereupon they split presently
against the Rock of Ages considered as Man, who might support them considered
as God. Thus, by this Heresy men make shipwreck of Faith in the very haven of
Salvation, and stumble at him who should guide their feet in the way of peace.

The weapons which Heretics use in their encounters against the Deity of
Christ are, 6..
most of them, taken out of the armory of carnal Reason. They cannot apprehend
the consistence of a Trinity of Persons with an identity of Essence. If w^
(...) insanire (say they) we do insanire cum ratione, for our Reason tells us
that it is a strange Paradox, that Christ should be eternal, and yet begotten;
that the Essence of the Father and the Son should not admit a numericall
difference; with a volume of the like corrupt reasonings: whilst in the mean
time they attend not to the dictates of sober and well-regulated Reason, whose
language is, That Quaedam sic subsunt fidei, quod secundum communem cu^sum
humanae cognitionis non suntdemonstr abilia, ut, De^ unum in ess^ntia esse
trinum in personis; et, Illud suppositum esse Deum and Hominem. Durand. in
Prol. sent. qu. 1. number. 39.
the things of God are above reason; That an Elephant may swim in the waters of
the Sanctuary; That Greg.
Fides non habet meritum ubi humana ratio quaerit experimentum; That an Entitie
by participation has not so comprehensive a capacity, as to have a distinct,
clear, and full notion of a Being by essence. The incomparable Gassend. in lib.
10. Diog. Laert p. 647.
Gassendus, to pluck the plumes and curb the Curiosity of some Philosophers,
who would not content themselves with less then the indagation of whole
nature, thus reasons against their irrationality; Qualis artifex esset Deus, si
posset homuncio metiri comprehendereque ingeniolo suo opus Creationis? What a
mean workman would God be, if so narrow an Intellect as that of Man could
comprehend the whole frame of the work of his hands? And if this be so high a
disparagement to his workmanship, what is the other to his Being? B. Hall,
Contem. Angel and Zach.
If Reason will be encroaching upon the bounds of Faith, she is presently taken
captive by Infidelity. We are not fit to follow Christ if we have not denied
our selves, and the chief piece of our selves is our Reason. Such objections
which make Sarah serve Hagar, which make Faith the handmaid o^ Reason, are
unworthy a serious examination. No arguments are suggested to the Socinians by
the Oracles of God: no such Mudde has commerce with these Waters of Life: no
such corrupt Fruit is brought forth by this Tree of Life: this Pot of Manna
gives admission to no such Worm: the Word written testifies that Christ is ^he
Word eternal. Yet these men endeavor to extract their Poison ou^ of this
Physic of the So^l; which I shall declare in examin^^^ one of their Objections
from Scripture which I find Fulgent. ^bject. Ar. discuss.
in Fulgentius, whereby will be discovered, that what the profane Apud Episcop.
El. Resp. ad Bellarm. apolog. page 260. Scriptura inst^r v^gin^ est, quae
quemlibet gladium admittit, etiam plumbeum vel ligneum.
Costerus asserted concerning the Scripture, they strive to verify; to wit,
that it is a Sheath which will admit any kind of Sword, even a leaden or wooden
one.

Object. 7.
What is Man that he should pry into the arcana of his Maker? If he will soar
alo^t and face the Sun, the just recompense of his labor in vain is to be
scorched and sent back headlong. What the Scripture proclaims as dubious, and
not attainable by the most sublimated endeavors of mortality, that Man must
not dare to resolve by a peremptory determination: But the Scripture speaks
expressly, Isa. 53. 8.
Who shall declare his Generation? therefore it is high presumption thus to
determine, The Generation of Jesus Christ is an eternal Generation.

Respons. Thus to determine is not with too curious an eye to peep into the
Ark, or to encroach upon the mysteries of heaven: But this is to resound the
common voice of Scripture. As for the place al^edged, it is sent of a wrong
errand, and comes in here to no purpose. For to assert the eternal Generation
of Christ, is not to declare his Generation: for that speaks a particular
explication of the manner of his Generation, and denotes the (...), whenas we
contend only for the (...). Hear how the Elegant Fulg. Obj. Ar. disc. Resp. ^d
1. ^bj.
Fulgentius defeats this weak enemy. Quia Filii generatio enarrabilis est,
ignorabilis non est: neque enim consequens est, ut quod non potest enarrari non
potest sciri; cum nullus Deum val^at enarrare, nec impune tamen liceat ali^ui
ignorare. Et paul^ ^^frd V^ram filii nativita te^ datum vobis est cognoscere;
licet datum non f^^ qualiter na^us fuit enar^are. Propheta non dixit,
Generationem ejus quis cogno^it? sed, quis decl^ravit?
It Is not consequentiall arguing from a not-declaring to a not-knowing: A
declaration of God is not possible with man; and yet an ignorance of God shall
not go unpunished. We say then concerning the eternal Generation of Christ,
what the Great Tilen* syntag. Theolog. de Deo ess. uno perso^is ^^ino.
Tilenus has written concerning the unsearchable Trin-unity, (...) satis
perspicue tradit Scriptura, (...) vero ipsis quoque Angelis est (...). That it
is so, we have the evidence of the Scripture; but in what manner it is, we have
the Ignorance even of the Angels.

By this single Instance it may appear, how the polluted breath of the
Socinians soileth the luster of the brightest steel, how their corrupt Glosses
obscure the perspicuity of Scripture. And, in my opinion, in these Jud. 16. 19.
locks of their perverting Gods volume, in their evasions of places which
proclaim aloud the falsity of their Tenants, lies their chief strength. As the
followers of the P^olemaicall Systeme have, by their Cycles and Epicycles,
Eccentricks and Concentricks, put the Planets into an heavenly labyrinth and a
learned perplexity: so these men by their Distinctions and Criticismes, and
Shifts and Querks, make the most plain Scriptures inevident, and put a cloud
upon the clearest Truths; making a Labyrinth of a clue, and a Wilderness of a
well-shap'd Grove. Whereupon it is necessary that they be encountered by able
Champions.

Now you Lovers of Christ that are men of Learned strength, 8.
come out to fight the battle of Jesus, to help the Lord against the mighty.
Quit your selves like men against this uncircumci^ed Goliath. Take 1 Samuel 17. 40.
stones out of the Scripture, the brook of the water of Life, which may make
this Monster surrender his being: fling them with so powerful an arm, that
these dogs may not so much as snarl. Give these Heretics no rest till you have
led them captive. Men of that rank will construe your Silence, though out of
contempt, an Overthrow. Fight 1 King. ^2. 31.
neither with great Erro^rs, if they be buried in silence and not revived, (if
such a supposition may take place in these days, wherein all Heresies of
former Ages live again by a Diabolical (...)) neither with small Errors, they
being not so malignly influentiall upon Christian practice: but principally
pursue this King of Heresy. Make no delay. 2 Chronicles. 20. 17.
To morrow go out against him, and the Lord will be with you.

Now if any man should call upon me with an Ede tua, 9..
you who are thus zealous for this cause, make the attempt your self; I must
reply, by way of Apology, that my slender accomplishments are unfit for so
weighty a work, my strength bears no proportion to my will. Yet although I am
not of ability to perform the race, I have not been wholly wanting, but have
brought this spur, to quicken men sufficient for these things. I have here
brought this drop, making as ample a contribution toward the extinguishing of
these unhappy flames as was producible by my weak Endeavors. The tribute of
these lines is abundantly due unto the God of Caesar: Now Greg. Epist. before
his Observe.
Rays of incidency contract no warmth if they be not reflected back toward
their original Sun. And I should have manifestly declared, that the beamings
of the Sun of Righteousness had not enkindled in me reciprocal flames, if I
should have denied to rebound all my received talents toward the redemption of
his honor. These poor mites, with the favorable influence of heaven, may tend
to the advancement of the glory of my Savior. For Gazzi pia ^ilaria. adinit.
Est in tenuibus and pusillis reculis
Laus Optimique Maxim^q^e maxima.
Small matters do afford
Great praise to the great Lord.
Now M. Geo. Herbert in his Letter to the ^ranslat. of Jo. Valde^^. Div.
Considera.
as the devout Herbert spoke concerning Valdesso's Considerations, which
mention with reverence and frequency the name of Christ; I will say concerning
these few pages which mention the Deity of Christ, with a desire to have that
doctrine res^ued, that, Were there nothing else, I would print them, that with
them the honor of my Lord might be p^blished.

CHAP. V.
A Censure of the vanity of affecting Epitaphs, with a declaration of their
uselesseness: where, by way of Praeamble, of the fitness of decent Sepulture,
occasioned by the neglect of many Sectaries, who bury a Dog with as much
solemnity as a Christian.
IT is not the part of a Man to exercise care and vigilance over but one Part
of Man. 1.
To be somewhat ceremonious about the Body, is neither Dotage nor Superstition:
Dust requires a Grave, Ashes an Urne. Let such as Apud Te^t. ad^ Marc. l. ^ p.
324.
Marcion declame against their material part, and spit the venom of their
malice against the handiwork of their Creator. Let such as Apud P. Gassend.
in lib. 10. Diog. Laert. circa page 5^0.
Epicu^us, who terminate their hopes at the approach of Death, and ch^rish no
after-considerations, expose the breathless Body to hardship and incivilities.

Indeed, 2.
the rude and Eth^ick inhabitants of the Scythian Province Bactra Canes apud
illos alunt quos sepulchrales vocant, quibus parents morbo aetateve confectos
objiciunt dilacerandos. One^^crit.
have their Sepulchrall Dogs, and in their bellies do savagely en^omb the
bodies of the Aged: at which customary Folly amongst these people I cannot
cease to wonder, since they had a King, a man of sublimated reason, and the
Z^roa^tres Rex Bactriano^^um primus dicitur ar^es Magi^as inve^isse. Ju^tin.
Hist. ^ib. 1.
Primitive searcher into the Arcana of Nature, which ^ath pregnant As 1 Cor. 5.
36. in grain, and in the reviving a plant out of i^'s ashes, etc.
semblances of the Re^urrection. Mecaenas also is wholly regardlesse of his
en^errment, and must needs declare so much in a Poetical line, Non tumulum
curo, sepelit Natura relictos. And I wonder not at his careless mind, since he
was practically ignorant of a future state, and by his debauched and dissolute
carriage had Test Petro de Loier lib. de Spect^. and Appar. c. 6. p. 59.
made his Body it self a Sepulcher containing nothing but corruption: since it
was an object offensive to all the Senses, and a morsel ready prepared for the
Palates of Worms. Diogenes throughout his whole life treated the companion of
his Soul with harsh usage and severity: and at his death was not willing to
gratify it with so much as a Tub for it is protection. He desired no other Cic.
Tus. quaes. lib. 1. jussit cadaver suum inhumatum rejici.
Canopy besides the curtains of Heaven, and would not condescend so far as to
lie below the superficies of the Earth. Quaerentibus amicis, volucrib^sne and
feris corpus suum dilaniandum vellet relin* qui, Minime, inquit, sed bacillum
apud me, quo illos abigam, to^ito^e. Cic* ibid.
When his friends, out of a courteous intent, intimated to him how, by this
means, he would expose his Body to the cruelty of Birds and Beasts; he replied
in no fairer language then this scoff, Provide me a stick which I may have in
readiness to prevent their approach. Neither is this worthy to be entertained
with an admiring thought, for Dogs will bark at the Moon her self, and a Cynick
will snarl at the brightest actions.

But true Christians have learned otherwise, 3.
and allow that which Christ has redeemed a civil deposition, a decent
Repose. Adam had a worthy Sepulcher, which D. Kellet in miscellan. of Div.
videat^r c. 5. p. 13.
some affirm to have been Calvarie, Aquin. 3. pars qu. 46. art. 10. 3.
others in Hebron, but few deny to have been. Likewise Abraham and Isa^c had
rich and stately Sepulchers in Erasm schol. in Epist. Hier. ad Marcellam.
Arbe in the tribe of Judah. 2 Paral. 35. 24. sepul^us in Mausoleo patrum.
Josiah was buried in the Mausoleum of his Fathers, according to the Vulgar
Translation. And Saint Hier. Ep. ^o. 1. Epist. ad Ma^c. In David. ^rare
mausoleo.
Hierome makes mention of the Mausoleum of David. Even the heathenish
Babylonians were ceremonious about the dead body, (...), according Herod. Clio,
cap. 198
to Herodotus, with much solemnity they buried it in honey. So likewise were
the Egyptians, who buried it in (...), Herod. Thalia, cap. 24.
glass; a perspicuous emblem of its frail constitution. What the crafty
Vibulenus Apud Tacit. Annal. l. 1. c. 22. ubi cadaver ^bj^ce^is? (...) hosts
quidem sepul. turam invident.
spoke pathetically to Blaesus is true and ancient, Even Enemies deny not
Burial to each other. The Jews, that denied their Messiah life, objected not a
word, that we read of, against his having a Sepulcher. He was entombed by
Joseph of Ar. Mark 15. and Nicod. John 19.
noble hands, and not without usual ceremonies: and laud abiliter commemor
antur in Evangelio qui corpus ejus de cruce acceptum diligenter atque
honorifice tegendum atque sepeliendum curarunt, their praise is in the Gospel
who were offious in this kind, according to August. l. 1. de Civit. Dei, c. 13.
S. Augustines observation. If we will credit Plin. lib. 11. Not. hist. c. 18.
Pliny, we may descend a step lower, and contemplate funeral Exequies in the
Commonwealth of Bees: Apes defunctas progerunt, and funer antium more
comitantur exequias. Christ pronounced Mat. 23. 29.
a Woe against the Scribes and Pharisees building the Sepulchers of the
Prophets, and adorning the monuments of the just: thereby Non reprehendit quod
^dificarent sepulchra prophetaru^^, sed quod hepocritic^ animo ^oc facerent and
ambi^ioso. Bredem^ach. in locum.
not reprehending the act simply considered, and in it self, which was good and
warrantable; but that which attended it, to wit, their vanity and ostentation;
they endeavoring to palliate their more secret crimes, and gild them over with
exterior performances, and to seem to the world to be zealous followers of
those whose very places of burial they so studiously preserved: which Christ,
the searcher of their hearts, perceived, and intimated so much whilst he called
them Hypocrites. Civil rites performed upon the Body after the dislodging of
the Soul, speak aloud our hopes of their reunion. The acute Doctor of the
Gentiles draws an Argument as powerful as a cloud of witnesses, to testify
the Re^urrection, out of the 1 Cor. 15. 29.
water in which the Corinthians immersed the body in their funeral
solemnities. (...);

But the affectation of Epitaphs is 4.
justly censurable, and the practice trivial and useless. Most of those who
have been so passionately transported as to write their own Epitaphs, have
thereby eternized their Pride and Haughtyness, which above all things abhorrs a
Register; and whereby to be immortal is to condescend to the design of the
obscure Herostratus. For instance consider that in Aul. Gel. Noct. At. l, 1.
c. 24.
A. Gellius of the Poet C. Naevius, Immortales Mortales flere si foret fas,
Flerent Divae Camoenae Naevium Poetam.
Or that of Graec. Epig. l. 3.
Julian, into which he thrust a verse out of the third of the Iliads, dedicated
by the pen of Homer to the immortality of Agamemnon, who was Agam. quem
Alexander magnus pra^mnibus probavit. Obsopaeus
prized by Alexander the Great above all other Worthies. Or that upon the famed
Of Dr. Caius in his Coll. Chapel.
laterall Monument of England, Fui Caius, I was Caius. Or that of him, who in
good opinion of himself went beyond those of China, supposing himself to have
two Eyes, and adjudging all the learned world besides to blindness, Scaligeri
quod reliquum est, Here Is all that remains of the great Scaliger. In all which
the Authors afford themselves most emphaticall commendations.

As for Epitaphs, 5.
they were of Their Orig. was from the Scholars of the Heathen Poet Li^us, upon
their Master: whence Aelinus.
Pagan institution, and can ple^d nothing but prescription, and that more
Heathenish then Christian. Throughout the whole Book of God honorable mention
is made of Sepul^ure, none of Epitaphs. And Christians, whose monuments have
been thus scribled, for the most part have had their Epitaphs forced upon their
Executo^rs by some Poetical Sycophant, some pursemilking Rimer; or else too
willingly contributed by some stinging Satyrist, an avowed enemy of the
deceased person. Indeed Epitaphs abstracted from the interest of persons, and
considered without the byasse of prejudice or officiousness, may pass
^olerably in a notion; but the practice will always be accompanied with the
forementioned associates.

The learned M. Camden in his Remains.
Clarenceaux enumerates four uses of Epitaphs; 6.
which, I suppose, he reckons according to the common opinion of those that
affect them, and not according to his particular judgment: for then I should
scarce presume so highly as to contradict that knowing Worthy; although I am
not ignorant, that a man may err by great Example, and that Nullum magnum
ingenium est sine mixtura dementiae, is a Truth in reference to Principles as
well as Practices.

The first pretended use is, 7.
Love showed in them to the deceased. But composers of Epitaphs strive to show
their Wit, not their Love. He showed neither, who made himself and his subject
ridiculous to after-Ages by the composing of this Epitaph; Hic jacet in requie
Woodcock John, vir generosus,
Major Londoniae, Mercerus valde morosus.
Or the Author of that upon William Longspee base son to Hen. 2. by Rosamond
daughter to Walter Lord Clifford, in a simple allusion to his name, Flos
Comitum, Willielmus cognomine Longus
Ensis, vaginam coepit habere brevem.
There be passages enough for thee to vent thy Love, and more perhaps then thou will willingly make use of; and those of a more noble strain. As by being
pathetically ceremonious in the decent Genesis 3. 19. Pulvis es, and in pulverem
reverteris.
restitution of his Body; as did the Egyptian Queen toward the departed M.
Anthony. By a vindication of his Credit, if called in question by malevolent
tongues: As Tertul. Apol. c. 38. Diog. Laert. l. 10. Seneca l. de vita beata.
many have showed kindness to Epicurus, in wiping off the aspersions of his
sensuality and brutish behavior, by showing his obedience to the Hieron. Ep.
to. 2. lib. 2. adv. Iovin. Epicurus volupta^is assertor om^es libros suos
replevit holeribus and po^is, and vilibus cibis dicit esse vivendum; qui^
carnes and exquisitae epulae majorem poenam habent in inquirendo, quam usum in
abutendo.
Stoics (...), and declaring that his pursuit was after Spirits, not Dregs;
after the refined Pleasure of the Mind, not the faeculent delight of the Body.
By Liberality of head and hand, in counselling or relieving those of
Consanguinity or Familiarity with thy deceased Friend: contrary to the practice
of Pedro Mexia, Hist. Romans Imp. in Just. 2.
Justinian the second, who having lost his Kingdom and Nose by the cruelty of
the Usurper Leontius, and being, after a tedious exile, repossess'd of the
former, caused some of the friends of Leontius to be put to death, as often as
he would have wiped his Nose if he had had it. If thy friend was a good man,
endeavor not to express thy love in Verse; for that will be a vain attempt,
for thou will go beyond his worth, and turn Parasite: now Love and Flattery Non
been convenient, scarce admit of a mutual Copulation. Follow him, not with the
feet of a Poetical Fancy, but with the feet of a godly Conversation: and
therein will be the expression of thy Love toward him and his; for so his
Memory survives in thee, whilst thou treadest in his steps, and thou live thy
Friend over again. Herein will the fire of thy Love sparkle and shine forth, in
that thou art so diffusive of thy goodness toward his friends, as to continue
in thee the good example which was set before them in him; abolished by Death
to their Detriment, but revived by thee to their Benefit. If thy Friend whom
Death has taken into possession was, whilst living, a whelp of the roaring
Lion, a son of his father the Devil, a drop belonging to the bottomless pit,
when thou writest his Epitaph, thou blottest out thine own love. Thou she west
not thy Affection, but thy Indiscretion, in the discovery of his Nakedness,
and in the exposing to public view of present and future times the deviations
of his life. Now if thou writest, thou art bound to do this by the law of
Sincerity, which lays an engagement upon thee to decipher him with the pencill
of truth; and not, where he is defic^ent, to add color of thine own: as
Xenophon is supposed to have done in his Cyrus, and is therefore accounted by
some a Painter rather then an Historian, a setter of a Pattern for a good
Prince, not a writer of a Description of a Prince so good. The most sensible
evidence of thy Love to such a person, which can come within the compass of
imagination, is, not the writing of his Epitaph, but the not transcribing of so
foul a Copy; the making him one of thine Antipodes, and not making him still
live by thine imitation: for hereby, in probability, thou will cease from
contributing more links to his everlasting chains, from heaping more coals upon
his head, who is in the midst of an intolerable Furnace. For so some make
conjecture from the importunity of Luc. 16. 27.
Dives in the wilderness of Hell with Abraham in the typifi'd Canaan for a
Monitor for his Brethren, that, since there is not a spark of true Charity in
the flames of Hell, and that they only harbor a self-respect, the Torments of
the Damned receive addition according to the extensivenesse of their bad
Example in the practice of their followers.

The second pretended use is, 8.
that thereby the Memory is continued to Posterity. But how is this agreeable
to Epitaphs in their minority? unto the custom in their first inst^tution?
when they were only mournful Dirges sighed out with affectionate lungs at the
interrment of the dead, existing only viva voce, and dying with that breath
which gave them life. Gordianus lives, and his memory is with us until this
day, notwithstanding It is pe^ished, though it was in 5. languages*
the five-fold dissolution of his Epitaph. The memory of Adrian must needs be
conveyed to us after a more comely manner then that of his Horse; and yet time
has spared the Beasts Epitaph, but not his Masters. Noble achievements and
Learned accomplishments will transmit the Memory to after-ages, without the
favor of the tongue of an Epitaph, and in despite of the teeth of Time; Nam
neque Pyramidum sumptus ad sidera ducti, Propert.

Nec Iovis Elei coelum imitate domus,
Nec Mausolei dives fortuna sepulchri,
Mortis ab extrema condition vacant.
At non ingenio quaesitum nomen ab aevo
Excidet: Ingenio stat sine morte decus.
To which may be joined that of the Lofty Virgil, Marmora Maeonii vincunt
monumenta libelli: virg.

Vivitur ingenio, caetera mortis erunt.
Caesar will live till the funeral of the world in his Commentaries: and
Cardan, in his own opinion, Stella Fomahan^ immortalem da. bit. Card.
in his Fomahant. Horace was persuaded that his poetical feet would carry him
to Immortality, and make his Name durable beyond brazen Statues and stately
Pyramids. Horat. Carm. l. 3. ode 30.
Exegi monumentum aere perennius,
Regalique situ Pyramidum altius.
And Naso told the world, he should live to the end of it in his Metamorphosis:
Iamque opus exegi quod nec Iovis ira^ nec ignis,
Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas.
Neither of them trusted to the courtesy of an Epitaph to enroll their names
in an everlasting Register. If the party that has felt the arrow of death, was
o^ a bad life and an inglorious Name, ways had need be invented to obliterate,
not to perpetuate, his Memory. What well-regulated mind would desire to be^^
remem^red like Thersites for his cowardice? or to exist like Herostratus to
succeeding years (and as many subsist in this present Age) by the firing of a
Temple?

Some Epitaphs take notice only of an empty title, as that upon the tomb of
that famous Rowland Nephew to Charles le magne, slain in the battle of
Roncivalles, and enterred at Blauz in Xantogne, which declared that he was
Seldom. Tit. of Honor, part. 2. cap. 5.
Primus Comes Palatinus. And some make mention only of a bare Name, as that
Holland in vita ^jus.
of him who was called by those of his Sect, Angliae Res^aura^or Depositum
Cardinalis Poli. And how does the Memory of worthy mortals ride in triumph to
futurity by such despicable supporters? Few Generous spirits are of Cardans
mind, Cuperem notum esse quod sim* non opto u^ scia^ur qualis sim Cardan. i^
vita prop.
who desired only that it might be known That he was, not, What he was.

The third pretended use is, 9.
that hereby the Friends of the dead are comforted. Here every Epitaph is
supposed to be (...) commendatory, which is therefore (...) consolatory,
according to Erasm. ^ Epit. Ne^ pot. Hie^ ep. ad He^ ^iod. Na^ aequiore ^ nimo
fer^^ mus^ mo^ tem nostr^^ rum* si cu^^ laud d^^ cesserint (...) etc.
Erasmus; because the mind is the more calm and serene, when the departed has
left behind him a good Report. There is no mind so replenished with
contradiction, as to d^ny that it is comfort to the surviving, Lipsius^ Epist.
cem^ 5. Ep. 7^^ ad H. V. post matris obitum. Magna vobis consolatio (tibi ac
s^^ rori dico) quod pie vixerit, etc.
when their dead relations go out, not like a Candle, but leave a fragrancy and
luster behind them, when they go into the land of rottenness and the shadow of
Death. But consider, that the Flowers strewn upon the Grave of the deceased
are even always more beautiful then those to whom their Merits gave birth. It
would have been imagined that the Epitaph of Cyrus could scarce have admitted
an Hyperbole; and yet Flattery the worst ^n manners. Seldom in Epist. before
Tit. ^f Honor.
that which is the worst in manners did take place in so high a degree, that
Quid am^lius prae ^tenti and ^m^ortali Deo tribui^us, fi quod (...) propri^m
est eri^imus? Bo^in. de Re. ^ub. lib. 1. ^ ult.
God was debased in his exaltation: that what was attempted by Isa. 14. ^4.
Lucifer, and commanded by Domi^^m se ac ^eum ap^llari jus^^ Domitianus. Xiph.
and Suet. in vit^. Mart. ep. l. 5. ep. 8. Edictum ^omini Deique nostri.
Domitian, was ascribed to him, to be 1 Timothy 6. 15. (...).
like the most High; for on his Tomb was Eustath. ad Dionys. (...). Strabo
Geogr. l. 15.
written for an Epitaph in Persian Characters (...). Certainly this could not
be a cordial to his fainting Friends; this wind of Ostentation could not blow
over their showers of Tears; this fire of Pride would rather melt their cloudy
thoughts into mournful waters. Could there possibly have been knowledge of
this in the Grave, that modest Prince would not have layn dry. Parallel to
this is the Epitaph of that Martel of France, mentioned by Seldom Tit. Hon.
p^rt 1. c. 2. out of Hi^rom Bignon.
M. Seldom out of a French Author, Non vult regnare, sed regibus imperat ipse.
The Comfort administered to the living at the death of their beloved Friends is,
their being registered in the book of God, not their being recorded with praise
in an Epitaph by man. If the deceased was not a guilelesse Israelite, no lively
branch of the true Vine, no sprig of the tree of Life, but a fruitless branch
fit for unquenchable fire, his Epitaph will be a memorial of his evil, and so
administer a conduit of tears for Sorrow, not a cruse of oil for Joy. Isidor.
Illi deplorandi sunt in morte quos miseros infernus ex hac vita recipit.

But what if thy deceased Friend meets with a Fuit M^r^ialis ingen^o acri, et
qui in scribendo et plurimum salis haberet et fellis. C. Plin. apud P. Crinitum
in vita Mart.
Martial to write his Epitaph? How art thou comforted concerning him if he
meets with ink which has salt mixed with it? if the writer of his Epitaph has
in the place of a pen, the point of a Diamond, which cutteth glass, defaceth
the perspicuity of his name? What if he meets with a Poet, who, Pilat-like,
crucifies him with a Superscription? How comfortable to the pensive spirit of a
Mourner is such an Epitaph as Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury obtained, who
was notable only for a single exorbitancy, and that too such an one as, if
laid in the balance of these times, would not be found too light, but pass
for current, to wit, his being a little sacrilegious, and a disciple to Simon
Magus? His Epitaph was no other then this, Hic jacet Herodes Herod ferocior;
hujus
Inquinat infernum spiritus, oss a solum.
Herod more fierce then Herod here does dwell;
His Body Earth defiles, his Spirit Hell.


The fourth pretended use is, 10.
that hereby the Reader is put in mind of Humane Frailty. But all Epitaphs have
not memento's of Mortality: as for instance, that of Grae^. Ep. l. 3. (...),
etc.
Q. Metellus is one of the number, rendered in Latin thus by Obsop. Comm. in
Graec. Ep.
Obsopaeus, Ne mea praeteriens culpes monumenta, Viator:
Nil dignum lachrymis fata tulere mihi.
I acknowledge that some of them are spent in the discovery of the brittle
estate of man, declaring that even in his pomp and bloom he may fade and
wither. Where by the way I cannot but take notice how gross a soloecism is
committed in most of them which are in Villages: their beginnings, for the most
part, are with a Siste, viator, or heus Peripatetice, by which are denoted
travelers about their affairs, who pass by with speed, and taking small
notice of things, being in transitu. Now how improper is this in Parish
Churches? few rodes lying through these temples, and few footpaths through the
King of Heaven's Highway.

I grant this, that Epitaphs have in them some characters representing a Deaths
head, that they contain lessons of Mortality; and every man must grant also,
that this is wholly needless, for the stones themselves with which the
Monument is built will speak so much: the Monument it self is of the self-same
use, it being Monumentum ^ monendo nos esse mortales.
to admonish us of our Frailty. A Common Grave is of sufficient height to give
a prospect of the confines of Mortality, to give a view of the transitory
existence of mankind. The Sepulcher of what kind soever is sufficiently
expressive of that* Now Color upon Color is ill Heraldry; and a
super-addition, a superfluity.

Thus having shaked these four branches, 11..
I am not able to gather from thence those fruits which men of pregnant fancy
have created to themselves. Conclusion.
And now, if herein I have transgressed the limits of a sober disquisition, and
am blameworthy for not exhibiting a less peremptory censure, (which my hope
suggests will not be charged upon me) I crave the pardon of my judicious
Reader, and am already upon my Knees: for it is not my Ambition to walk above
others with an exalted crest, or to tread contrary to others with the foot of
Singularity.

CHAP. VI.
A Censure of the common evil Practice of pretenders to Religion, viz, their
running to one Extreme to avoid another, in Doctrine or Worship*
AN eye less sparkling then that of Lynceus is quick enough to discern the
woeful desolation of our English Sion. 1.
Our magnificent Diana is too apparently laid in ashes, and it is Lovers clad
in sackcloth, by the followers of Herostratus. England had a Church which was
the most exact transcript of the original, the most lively pattern of
Primitive constitution: but its native luster is ^efaced by the envious
Galliardize of a titular Reformation. We may take up the assertion of Hier. Ep.
ad Heliodorum. Epit. Nepot.
S. Hierome concerning the calamities of the Church in general, and apply it
in particular to the miseries of our own. Duos historiae Principes nominat,
alterum Graecae, alterum Roma, nae; and Fabius Thucydidi oppenit Salustium,
Herodoto Livium. Erasm* Schol. in locum.
Ad haec merito explicanda and Thucydides and Salustius muti sint, If a
complete narration were required, both Thucydides and Salust might become
tongue-ty'd.

If Ambition and Avarice be excepted, 2.
that which has acted the largest part in these Tragical Combustions has
been the fiery zeal of some pretending Reformers, whereby they endeavored not
to purge, but burn up the Romish Church; to frame a new Church which was not,
and not to repair the Church which was: they would be parents to beget a
Church, not Physicians to heal one: they, like Novis^^ ma verb^ Plut. de
superst. (...) etc.
those in Plutarch's time, embraced Atheism and Profanation, to avoid
Superstition. Happy had been their eyes, if they had not overlooked the decency
observable in the Church of England, wherein some Init. Pre Com.
Ceremonies were abolished, and some retained; wherein flourished the happy
mediocrity betwixt the Prove. 3^ 8.
riches of ceremonious vanity, and the poverty of Atheistical rudeness. It
would have been worth their animadversion to have considered, That in the
Geography of Religion, the Torrid zone is not under the Equator but under the
Poles; That the Extremes are dangerous, and the Mean amiable; That as he that
is in a Aurea^ quisquis mediocritatem Di ligit, tut^ caret obs^ leti Sord^ bus
tecti, caret invi denda Sobrius aula. Hor. Ca^ l. 2. od. 1*
middle condition, is neither the object of the finger nor of the envy of the
world; so he is with Jesus, that is betwixt two Thieves, neither of which can
ever challenge the Epithet of Good. But these men make no Isthmus betwixt
Scylla and Charybdis: they walk not as strangers, but as Antipodes to the Pope.
Because the Papist calls upon Saints, the Puritan will not call them Saints.
Because the Papist sometimes even ^ MS. hist ^S. Walst.
prefers Saints before God, the Puritan abaseth Saints even below men. Thus
Chin^s hatt defies the Courtship of Tartary's shoe. Thus if the -- By ^ean of
^alston ^d Gods ^^ace. Hor. ser. ^. sat. 2.
raiment of Malthinus covers all, and sweeps the superficies of the earth, the
rest will so epitomize their garb, that those parts of the body at whose
non-concealment nature blu^^eth will be destitute of a vail. Malthinus tunicis
demissis ambu^at, est qu^
Inguen ad obscaenum subductis usque facetus.
Thus is one affects only Matrons, the others arms are closed to all but the
maintainers of a Brothel-hou^e. Horat. ^d.
Nil medium est; sunt qui nolint tetigisse nis^illas
Quarum subsut a talos tegat instita vest;
Contra, alius nullam nisi olen^i in fornice stantem.
Thus folly runs against a Rock to escape the violence of a Wave. Stulti dum
vitant vitia in contraria currunt. One party must be Antarctick to the other,
and the mean neglected. Hier. ad^ Vigilant. Episcopos Vigilantiu sui sceler^
dicitur h^ ^ere consortes, si (...) men Episcopi nomi nandi su^ qui non
ordinant Di aconos ni^ pris uxo^ res duxe rint.
Vigilantius is of this opinion, that Deacons must of necessity have
she-Associates: whilst he thus imposes a wife upon the Clergyman, the
Romanist denies him the solace of a meet help, and will sooner allow him an
Turpissimum est quod Officiales permittunt Clericos cum Cencubinis*
meretricibus and pellicibus co^abitare, liberos procreare sinunt, accepto ab
iis certo quotannis censu. Espen^aeus in Tits. cap. primo.
Harlot then an Espouse: whilst the true doctrine has its situation in the
middle, and gives a liberty to live in a virginal or matrimonial estate,
according to every man's 1 Cor. 7. 7.
(...), his proper gift and capacity. True Christian liberty stands -- parts
ubi se via findit in ambas, betwixt wild Licentiousness, and tyrannical
Restraint. Remonst. Conf. Fidei in Praefal.
Liberate abutitur tam qui ejus fibulam nimis licenter laxat, quam qui nimis
arcte astringit: Extrema omnia vitanda sunt, and mediocritati litandum, quae
tyrannidem inter and vagam atque effraenem licentia^ media consistit. The true
doctrine of providence is in the middle, and has on one hand the blind fortune
of Epicureans, and on the other the irony fatality of the Stoics and Rem. ib.
p. 6. de rovid. p. 3.
Praedestinarians. The learned Bellarm. ontrov. to. Praef. ^ 2. Conov. Genesis
^nto^ar^re in ^tanca^m invehuntur, ut interim ad scopulum ipsi long duriorem
navicu^m suam allidant; dum enim utrique naturae Christi M^diatoris of^cia
tribuunt, divinam Christi naturam et a Patris n^tura distin^unt, et rem creatam
cum Arianis faciunt.
Bellarmine charge the Tigurine and Geneva Ministers with complying with
Arius, out of a passionate vehemence against Stancarus: But this is judged to
be a causeless exprobration.

If these Reformers proclaim Rome wholly Babel, 3.
and to have nothing of Bethel; wholly Whore, and to have nothing of the
Spouse; a den of Thieves, and not at all to ^e called the house of Prayer; If
they be hot, and Rome cold; they fire, and Rome water; If they not only go but
run from Rome, it will be a means, ut si veritas occultata jampridem sit, in
aeternum jaceat consepulta, (as Gassend Exerc. Pa^radox. Ex^ 2^. p. 24*
Gassendus spoke of Authority in Philosophy) to keep the Candle eternally under
a bushel, to hide the light of Truth from the eyes of both. Whereas if these
would abate of their Presbyterian Anarchy, those of their Papal Supremacy;
these of their Extemporary Service, those of the superfluities and vanities of
their Mass; these of their Solifidiannesse, those of their meritorious works;
these of their Hos. 13 9.
perditio tua ex Deo, their absolute Reprobation, those of their salus tua ex
te, their Condignities, Congruities and Supererogations; these of their
Irreverence, those of their Ceremoniousnesse in Gods house, and so in other
Extreme particulars; there might be an hopeful Reconciliation of Parties and
Opinions, and a gladsome resurrection of the buried glory of the Church of
England.

CHAP. VII.
A Censure of the common evil practice of Railing against an Adversary in
Opinion.
TRuth is so radiant in it self, 1.
that it needs not fetch luster from the disgrace of another. Flinging dirt
upon an Error tends not to the beautifying of the face of Truth. He that blots
his Adversaries name, may defame his Person, but not de^ace his Opinion. The
fire of Contumely will not burn up a Falsehood, but it serves only to make the
spirit of the maintainer so much the more to boil over. Rancour in dispute is
as Oil poured upon the flame, which is so far from an extinguishing, that it
is an increasing of its rage. As an uttering of some Truths to an Enemy Veritas
o^^um parit. Gal. 4. 16.
brings an odium upon the speaker: so the Obloquy of the speaker brings an
odium upon every Truth. The violent striking of the tongues of Luther and the
Pope against each other, was a way too irregular to produce the sparks of
Truth, and a practice which deserved a reprehension. Ill language proceeds not
with decency out of a David's mouth, though he be a man of war: and Zach. 14.
20.
Holiness to the Lord is a Motto to be engraven upon the bridle of the Horse,
though a warlike beast. The Ministers duty Tit. 1. 9.
is (...), to confute a Gainsayer with Arguments, not with Obloquies. 1 Samuel
17. 40.
Smooth stones are most likely to give an overthrow to the Goliath of Heresy.

The Rasour cuts not the better for its rough edge. In the Act kept betwixt the
Archangell and the evil Angel, (...), the Champion of Truth dares not
adventure upon foul terms wherewith to asperse the Patron of Falsehood; his
proceeding is with modesty, not with malice; he Jude 9.
implores an increpation from the Almighty, (...), The Father of Lights rebuke
thee the father of Lies. If the Cynegirus amputata dextra, navem finistra
comprehendit: quam et i^sam c^m amisisset, po^tremum navem norsu detinuit.
Justin. lib. 2.
hands of Arguments will not do, it is in vain to endeavor to hold the ship of
Truth by the teeth of Rancour.

If a man errs in Fundamentalls, 2..
and yet deserves not to be called by the worst name imaginable, to wit, an
Heretic, that is, if he has not so passionately espoused his Errare potero,
haereticus no^ ero. Aug. Haeres^s ab haerendo dicitur; ideo siquis ex levitate
sentiat in aliquo oppositum Fidei, non dicitur haereticus, nis^ vehementer seu
ex electione (quae etiam Prohaerefis dicitur) inhaere^ suae opinioni. Durand.
in Sent. l. 4. did. 13. qu. 5.
Opinion, but that he will give it a divorce, if by a clear conviction he find
it Adulterate; he is to be assaulted with Shot out of Reasons Armory, with
palpable Demonstration, at the appearance of which he resolves to surrender;
and not with the Flashes out of Passions furnace, at the approach of which he
is forced into a suspicion of his Adversaries weakness: for that Cause may
justly be deemed to want the patronage of Arguments, and consequently of Truth,
which is pleaded for only with a multiplicity of words, and those unsavory.
If the man be somewhat scurrilous, the way to make him a Proselyte is by the
Courtship of fair language. And it is the most compendious way, to invite a man
of a serene spirit to a closer embrace of what he holds, to urge against him no
stronger Arguments then those which are deduced from the Topic of a virulent
Tongue: to have no other weapons brought against him then what every weak
Convitiis and diris He^culem vincet muliercula. Clam. Reg. sang. ad coel. page
20.
Woman, every Xantippe, can afford, to wit, the Sword of the Tongue, Psalm. 57.
5.
and the Arrows of bitter words.

It will be surmized, that these feet of Clay are not the attendants on an head
of Gold, yea, that there is no Head, where there is so much Foot; no Reason
that can prove, where there is nothing but kicking, which can nothing but
provoke; that these Maculae contrary to the Des Carts.
Philosopher's, are inconsistent with solid particles: and what Amb. in Psalm.
118.
S. Ambrose has delivered, will be rightly objected, Quem Veritate non potest,
lacerat Convitiis.

In his Cathol. Eng. against the Apol. of K. James, parag. 1.
Parsons, notwithstanding he wanted nothing but a glass at any time to view
the Effigies of a Rai^er, yet he censureth this practice as unworthy; and makes
use of an instance of the lowest degree, taxing King JAMES with an Incivility,
for calling the Romish Champion, Master Bellarmine.

If a man errs in Fundamentalls, 3.
and superadds Contumacy to his Mistake; if he be one quem non persuadebis
etiamsi persuaseris; if he be Adder-ear'd, and has attained to the extremity
of deafness that he will not hear; if he stops his ears against persuasions
advancing soberly under evident Reason; if he will not attend to those of the
N^que a^ liunde haereses obortae sunt aut nata sunt sehismata, quam inde, quod
sacerdoti Dei non obtem. peratur. Cyprian. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 3. Corn. ^ra^ri, p.
6.
Tribe of Levi when they lift up their voices as trumpets in Exhortations and
Rebu^es, or to the thunder of a delivery to Satan; if after all these Batteries
he stands out without remorse, and lays out the utmost of his ability that
others may join with his heretical conceptions, and that Truth may not be
struck at only with his single hand; to this man reproachful words will be no
Bridles to restrain, but Spurrs to hasten him in his mad cariere.

Such ill-composed souls, like well built Vaults, are by so much the stronger,
by how much the more pressure they sustain. Here virulent spittle is an
eyesore, not an Joh. 9. 6.
eye salve. The fire of the Tongue will make such stony hearts fly out with
speed and violence. Such impetuous minds are like boisterous torrents, which
meeting with a stoppage grow the more loud and clamorous. The only Logic
against such a man is argumentum a fustibus: the only Law is, Possunt
haere^ici ab ecclesia damnati temp-poenis, et etiam morte mulctari. Bellarm.
Cont. tom. 2. c. 21. de Laicis, l. 3. p. 547. Igne and fuste potius agendum cum
haereticis quam cum disputationibus. Ber^. Ep. 190.
Breve de haereti^o comburendo.

If a man errs not in Fundamentalls, but is only of a contrary ^^rsuasion to
you in some few Superstructions, 4.
which depend upon deduction, what Reproaches you cast upon him, may by the
same equity be retorted against you, seeing these are dubi^us, and not
generally determined: he may embrace Juno, and you a Cloud; he may as justly be
offended with you, because you comply not with his judgment and apprehension.
Be candid, and use ingenuous and rational Persuasions, not peremptory Threats;
and by so doing, if he has unadvisedly led Truth captive, you may redeem both
it and him. Thus Cecilius the Presbyter turned Cyprian from a Pagan Rhetorician
to an eloquent Christian. So Hier. Cat. script. eccl. in Cyp^iano.
S. Hierome witnesses, (...). If you attend without prejudice to sober
discourse, and oppose not Reviling to Reasoning, you may in time see that to be
erroneous which at present you judge Orthodox: you may (li^e Saint Augustine)
write the Retractations of your junior years, and (like In Apoc. de mill an.
nis.
Brightman) you may live to confu^e your self.

This corrupt practice of railing against 5.
a supposed Error is not of yesterday. Saint Hierome, the father of Fathers,
though not in time, yet in the tongues, (as Vide Erasmum in vita ejus ante
Epist.
Erasmus relates, and his a viz.. ers. bibl. Quae^t. and trad. Heb. Catal.
script* (...). etc.
Works demonstrate) was too ready a Practitioner in this Art. Take a single
instance, and by that foot you may guess at the too ample stature of this
Christian Hercules. It Is in the beginning of his Treatise adversus Vigilantium;
where he falls soul upon his name, Exortus est subito Vigilantius, seu potius
Dormitantius: where also he lays down a catalogue of fourteen Monsters, and
then brings in Vigilantius as the worst at the bottom. Upon which place
Erasmus speaks thus, Mire a convitiis auspicatur, idque suo more. To labor in
the proof of this practice in these days, in the men of this Nation, were to
show light to the Sun, or to suppose my Readers wanted Ears or Eyes to give
them intelligence from the Pulpit and Press. It Is too true that England has of
late abounded more with Firebrands then shining Lights: England has granted to
Megera qu. (...). Fulg. Myth. l. 1.
Megera too large dominions. In the court of Controversiall Divinity, there are
few who stand not in need of a Pulch^'e placitando: we may bespeak almost each
of them with the language of Croesus to Solon in the Dialogue, Luc. dialog.
(...).
(...), Good words, O Man. I wish that, at length, men's breasts would entertain
calmer thoughts; that difference in Judgment may not be a cause of alienation
in Affection; that Adversaries in Opinion would be free from Animosity and
wrathful discomposure, Ephesians. 4. 15.
(...) that the hearts of both Parties in a Controversy were tuned up to a
melodious Unison; that Controversiall Divines would cease to be stinging
Satyrists; that they had more of the Pigeon and less of the Gall; that the
Meekness of Moses were more exemplifi'd then the Railing of Michal; that men
would tip their tongues with Reason, not with Rashness. A mild spirit ^equires
a modest refute: and it is better to remai^ indebted to a Reviler, then to
repa^ him in his own Coin.

FINIS.

