The Preciousness OF CHRIST To the Believing-Christian.

Plainly and Briefly set forth for the Edification and Consolation of Believers
in, and Lovers of the Lord Jesus Christ.

IN A SERMON On 1 Pet. 2. 7.

By William Walker, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by Anne Maxwel, for Joseph Clark, 1667.

To the deservedly much Honored Christian Lady, the Lady Esther Gooderick, The
Virtuous and Religious Wife of the truly Noble and Christian Knight, Sir
Francis Gooderick, of Manby in the County of Lincoln, Chancellor of the County
Palatine of Durisme; and a Member of the Commons House of Parliament. W. W.
Wishes all the present and future happiness of Earth and Heaven, of Grace and
Glory.
MADAM,
YOur Ladyships long-continued favors to me and mine, do exact of me by way of
just retribution, some monument of my Obligations to your Ladyship. Here
therefore according to my small abilities do I erect a little Pillar of
Gratitude unto your name (a Name to which I am sure Christ is precious, a Name
which I assure my self is precious unto Christ) Dedicating unto it this short
discourse of the preciousness of Christ. Which Monument though little, yet I
hope may be lasting, because that so long as there shall be believing souls in
the world, which I persuade my self will be as long as the world shall last,
(for all the Apostatizing of this last and worst age of the world, so much as
it does from the Faith of Christ) so long there will be souls in the world unto
whom Christ Jesus will be precious. And with those to whom Christ himself is
precious, any discovery, any discourse of the preciousness of Christ will be
sure to be in some esteem; and so this, I hope, among the rest; both because
the subject of it is sweet, and because the discourse thereon is short, as
rather giving brief Hints to it, than being any full handling of it. And to
this pass the world is grown, that even amongst some that are good, that which
is good is the better liked, if there be but little of it. I shall not here put
your Ladyship so much to the blush, though I should thereby add a yet more
lively tincture of Grace to those lovely features which you have from nature,
and which you keep too as you had them from nature, neither spotted, nor
stained with adventitious complexion, (a rare thing in these Hyppocritical days
of ours, when it is in the fashion forsooth, under one hood to carry two faces,
one of Gods making, and another of our own) I say, I shall not here put your
Ladyship so much to the blush, as to lanch forth into any large discourse of
your many and excellent virtues and graces; that were the way to bring Envy
instead of honor upon you, and to expose my self to be accused for Flattery,
whilst I spoke but the Truth. For so is the world now, that another Goodness
is our Envy, and their Commendation for it, our Accusation for the want of it;
and what we have not of it our selves, must needs be flattery if ascribed to
any other: Else if the curious carping folks, that can epsy a single hair
where it chances to lie awrie on a Ladies forehead, would look off a while. I
could discourse of your great Affection and Loyalty to your Husband; a thing
which is grown to be a very considerable commendation now a days, in as much
as through the like animosity betwixt Husband and Wife, to that which was of
old betwixt Caesar and Pompei, whereof the one would bear no equal, and the
other could brook no superior; some scarce Lords, are enforced to keep Houses
like Kings, that is two a piece, one for themselves, and another for their
wives. I could discourse also of your prudent Ordering of your Family in that
Christian way, that if St. Paul himself were on Earth, and were to write a
Letter to you, as once St. John did to an Elect Lady, he would undoubtedly not
let it go without a salutation to the Church which is in your House. I could
discourse of your Love to the Ordinances of Christ, and of your constancy in
attending on them, and of your Reverence and Devotion during that attendance;
which also is no small commendation in this irreligious age, wherein Gods
Public Service, anciently the Saints delight, is become the Peoples Public
grievance; so that few have any affection for it, many absent themselves wholly
from it, and of those that afford their presence at it, how many be there, of
whom the Lord may justly say, what once of old he said of the Jews, This people
draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have
removed their heart far from me, Isa. 29. 13. Much after the rate of their
carriage at a Playhouse is the carriage of themselves at the House of God,
save that they give not half that heed to the Preaching of the Word, which they
give to the Acting of the Play. To look about them, and spy marvels; to see
fashions and study faces, this is, (is it not) the main business that many
mind whilst they are at Church, forgetting in the mean time where they are,
and what they are about, and in whose presence they are about it. I could
discourse also of your zeal and care to bring others to the Ordinances, as well
as to come to them your self. O how comely is the sight of your Ladyship
marching together with your Husband in the Head of your following Family to the
House of God! Which is so much the more commendable in you, in regard of the
great neglect in this Point, which too many great ones are guilty of, who quite
contrary to the temper of Joshuah (whose resolution was, that though all Israel
beside should go away from, and forsake God, yet he and his house would serve
the Lord,) are neither for serving the Lord themselves, nor for having so much
as their house to serve him; but to the great discountenancing of the Ministers
of God, and to the great discouraging of Godliness it self, the nearer they are
in respect of dwelling to the Church, the farther in respect of devotion they
are from God. I could further tell what a precious esteem you have of the
Ministers of Christ, and that for their Work sake: (Large is that share of
respect which I my self have received from you, even but for my relation that I
have to that work, though far short from being any workman at it.) And this
also is by much the more commendable, in regard the Atheism and Infidelity of
this age is grown to that height, that those Ambassadors of Christ, and for
Christ, whose business is the negotiating of that great work of Reconciliation
betwixt God and man, whom the Primitive Saints would have plucked their eyes out
for, and have given entertainment unto, even as unto Jesus Christ, are made
amongst Christians, what the Apostles were amongst Jews and Pagans, as the
filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things: Fellows, whom some
account as unfit to live, as the Jews did our Savior; to whom it would be the
greatest pleasure in the world, to have the power and opportunity of serving
those servants of the high God, as Hanun the Ammonite did the servants of King
David, 1 Samuel 10. 4. or putting any other, as ill, or worse indignity upon
them. I could tell also of your tender Care for any poor afflicted Member of
Jesus Christ, that comes under your notice, relieving them both spiritually and
corporally, as their wants are; which is not at any time the least commendation
of a Christian Lady, but the greater now in regard of the deplorable neglect
thereof that is generally observable in most places and persons; so that
instead of going to visit and relieve Christ in any of his afflicted distressed
Members, too many of us I fear should Christ come himself to us in his own
person in any afflicted condition for comfort and relief to him in his
distresses, I say I fear too many of us would let him go away from us
unrelieved, even as cold and comfortless, hungry and naked as he came. These
and many more things, (excellent things) I could tell of your Ladyship, which
would be very much to your honor, but I forbear, because they would be no less
to your envy; and leave them to God, who sees them in secret, to reward them
openly; only wishing here withal, that those that do themselves see the
excellencies that I have mentioned in you, or by report from others shall hear
them of you, may so glorify God by a diligent imitation of them, that they may
hereafter be glorified by God, in an abundant compensation for them. And now
that my Pedestal prove not too big for my Pillar, nor my Epistle too large for
my little Book. I will dismiss your Ladyship from this trouble, and leave you
to the more delightful contemplation of the preciousness of him whom your soul
loves. And as I have in my preaching commended him unto you, so I shall in my
prayers recommend both you, and all that is yours unto him; and rest,

MADAM, Your Ladyships most devoted, as most Obliged servant Will. Walker.
From Colsterworth, in the County of Lincoln, Decmeber 1. 1666.
The Preciousness of Christ to the Believing-Christian.
1 Pet. 2. 7. Unto you therefore which believe, he is Precious.
THE Apostle having in the third verse of this Chapter, proposed the
graciousness of the Lord, (appearing in those precious sweets, and rich
advantages designed unto Believers by the Gospel) as an Argument to move these
Christians, to whom he writes this Epistle, to reject those Heretical Gnostick
Doctrines, whereby the deceivers of those times went about to infuse into the
minds of men, villainy, deceitfulness and hypocrisy, maliciousness and
reproachfulness (which he exhorts them to in the first verse) -- and with the
sincere and earnest desire of newborn Babes, to suck and drink in the pure
Milk of the Word, that sound and wholesome Christian Doctrine, which by the
Orthodox Teachers of the Gospel was afforded to them, as being the means
whereby they should grow in grace unto glory, (which he exhorts them unto in
verse the second) he goes on in verse the fourth and fifth, to exhort them to
come and conjoyn themselves unto Christ, and build themselves upon him, as
living stones, on a living foundation, and to become both a spiritual House,
and an holy Priesthood, (both Temple and Priests) to offer up spiritual
Sacrifices (prayers and praises) unto God; proposing as an argument thereunto,
the acceptableness thereof unto God through Jesus Christ; and that confirmed by
a Text of Scripture, verse the sixth; Behold I lay in Sion a chief corner
stone, elect and precious, and he that believes on him shall not be
consounded. Which is, as if he had said, The Lord Jesus Christ is so sure and
steady, so choice and precious a foundation-stone to whatsoever is built on
him, that he that builds on him shall never have cause to repent of, or be
ashamed of his building, as they are used to be, when having built on an ill
foundation, live to see their buildings buried in their own ruins. What is
built on Christ will abide, what is offered unto God by him, will be accepted.
Now Christ being this to the Believing soul, it rationally follows, that such
an elect foundation-stone as he is, should be very highly esteemed by it, and
be very dear and precious unto it. And accordingly it follows in the words of
my Text, unto you therefore which believe, he is precious.

In which words are set forth unto us two things.

The First is, what Persons they are unto whom Christ is precious; and they are
Believers. (...) (says our Apostle) unto you that believe he is precious;
where by the opposition of (...) them that believe, unto (...) the disobedient
in the immediate following clause, it is evident that by the Believers unto
whom Christ is precious, the Apostle did mean obedient Christians, such
Believers as do obey the Gospel of Christ; obey it in cordially assenting to
the truth of the things revealed in it; obey it in hopefully expecting the
fulfilling of the things promised by it; and obey it in sincerity, performing
the things commanded in and by it. This is the first.

The Second is, What Christ is unto those that believe on him; and that (says
our Apostle) is (...) according to the Original Text; Precious, according to
our Traslation of it.

This word (...) has two significations, which are Rivals in contest for place
in this Text. Those significations are, Honor and Price. First it signifies
Honor, as in Joh. 4. 44. where our Savior testifies, that a Prophet (...)
has no honor in his own Country; so Romans 13. 7. where the Apostle appoints,
that Christians should render to all their dues, and particularly (...) honor
to whom honor is due. Secondly it signifies Price; as in Mat. 27. 6. where the
money for which Judas sold his Master is called (...) the price of blood. So 1
Cor. 6. 20. (...), Ye are bought with a price. Now because that which gives a
price, is in its degree and kind precious, therefore by an Enallage of the
Substantive for the Adjective, it may also signify precious. To be sure all
the words in the New Testament, which are so rendered, (viz. (...)) are derived
from it in this signification.

Now according to this variety of acceptance of the word, is the Text
expounded by several men after a several manner: St. Hierome, Beza and Amesius,
take the word in the first sense, and so render it, as if the Text were to be
read, unto you therefore which believe he is an honor. And this very reading
is so far favored by our Church, as to be admitted into the Margent of our
Bibles. Again Piscator, Tyndal, the Geneva Interpreters, and our own Bibles,
both of the Old and New Translation, taking the word in the latter sense,
render it precious; and our late learned Paraphrast, in the abstract, the
preciousness, I suppose in conformity to the Context, where Christ is once and
again, (namely in verse the fourth and sixth) beside this third place, styled
precious.

According to whether acceptance we take the word, the sense of the Text is
unquestionably sound and Orthodoxal. We will therefore not reject either, but
consider and handle the Text according to both, beginning with that, which
renders it Honor. And the Point delivered in the Text according to this
Interpretation of it, is this, That Christ is an Honor unto those that believe
on him.

Whereas those feigned Deities which the Heathen Idolaters worship for Gods,
whether they be creatures of Gods making, or of their own making, are a shame
and a reproach to the worshipers of them, as being but so many either nothings,
i. e. none of the things that they are believed to be, and ^rus. ^bserv. ^ 16.
c. 9.
worshipped for, or stinking things, dunghil-gods, which it were a shame for
any rational man to do any religious reverence, and perform any sacred worship
to: Yet Christ Jesus, the God whom we serve, even that crucified Christ, who to
the Jews is a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishness, is so far from
being any reproach or shame, that he is an Honor and a Credit to the Believers
on him, to the Worshippers of him. Such he is as in Himself; Such he is in his
Relations unto them; and such also he is in that esteem which they have of Him.

And First, Jesus Christ is an Honor unto them that believe on him, if
considered as such as he is in Himself. And what is that? Why, the only
begotten Son of God, Joh. 3. 16. One with his Father, Joh. 10. 30. The Power of
God, and the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. Whom God has exalted with his right
hand to be a Prince and a Savior, Act. 5. 31. And has made him Lord and
Christ, Act. 2. 36. The King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19. 16. The Judge
of the World, Act. 10. 42. The Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. The mighty God, Isa.
9. 6. The Head of all Principality and Power, Colos. 2. 10. Whom all things
were created by and for, and by whom all things do consist, Col. 1. 16, 17. Now
Jesus Christ being such an one in Himself, what an Honor can it but be unto
those that believe on him, that they do believe and trust in, worship and serve
such an one as he?

Secondly, He is an Honor unto them that believe on him, if considered in his
Relations unto them. What are they? We may reckon many, and all honorable. He
is their Brother, Heb. 2. 1. their Husband, 2 Cor. 11. 2. their Advocate, 1 John 2. 1. their Captain, Heb. 2. 10. their Prophet, Act. 3. 22. their Priest,
Heb. 8. 1. their King, Rev. 15. 3. their Shepherd, Heb. 13. 20. their Bishop, 1
Pet. 2. 25. their Foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 10. their Head, Ephesians. 5. 23. Now what an
Honor is there flowing from every of these Relations to every true Believer in
Christ? O what an honor is it to a a believing soul, to have the only
begotten Son of God, the Heir of all thing, the first born of every creature to
be its Brother? To have the Lord of life and glory to be its Husband? To have
the Son of Gods love who is in the bosom of his Father? to be its Advocate
with the Father? to have the mighty God to be the Captain of its Salvation? to
have the eternal wisdom of the Father to be its Prophet? the Holy One of God
to be its Priest? the Head of all Principality and Power to be its King? to be
a Sheep in that Flock, whereunto Christ is the Shepherd? to be a Communicant in
that Church over which Christ is the Bishop? to be a Stone in that Building,
whose Foundation is Christ? to be a Member of that Body whereof Christ is the
Head? Like the precious ointment upon the head that ran down upon the beard,
even Aarons beard, that went down to the Skirts of his garments; so the Honor
of Jesus Christ descends upon, and is derived unto evey member of his body,
even the lowest as well as the highest member of it; the meanest as well as the
grearest Christian in it. Such honor have all his Saints, from the Relations
which he stands in unto them. Such an honor he is unto them from those
Relations.

Thirdly, As in Himself, and in his Relations unto his Saints; so in that
esteem which they have of him he is an Honor to them. However he be
disesteemed, despised and rejected of other men, (to the Jews a stumbling
block, and to the Gentiles foolishness, to Heretics and Atheists a scoff and
scorn) yet to the true Believers on him, he is (...) an honor in that account
which they make, and in that esteem which they have of him. Hence proceeded
their nameing of his name upon themselves, calling themselves Christians; and
as it were glorying in that Appellation, as did Sanctius the Confessor, from
whom no tortures could extort any other answer, to whatever question was put to
him, but this, I am a Christian. Hence their professing with a kind of delight
to be related as Servants unto him, and intimating that relation by a frequent
respectful calling him their Lord and Master. Christ Jesus my Lord, so St.
Paul, Phil. 3. 8. Scarce would the devout Divine Mr. Harbert, even in his
ordinary speech, mention the blessed name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
but he would add unto it, My Master. How sweetly does my Master sound! My
Master! As Ambergre ese leaves a rich scent unto the Taster, so do these words
a sweet content: An Oriental fragancy, My Master! So he begins one of his
Divine Poems, and goes on too in the same strain. Hence again their free and
bold confessing him, even before Kings, in times of hottest and sharpest
persecutions for his name; glorying in it, and counting it an honor, and an
happiness to them to suffer shame and reproach, yea torments, and death it self
for his Name. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, says
St. Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 41. who together with the rest of the Apostles being
beaten by the Council of Jerusalem for speaking in his name, went away
rejoicing that they were counted worthy; or, as the word (...) may signify,
had the honor done them to suffer shame, (...) to be dishonored for his name,
Act. 5. 14. In which expression St. Ignatius a follower of their faith and
sufferings, does also follow them; (...), so says he of the chains, wherewith
he was bound for the name and faith of Christ, I have been vouchsafed, counted
worthy, or had the honor done me, to bear these bonds for the honor of God.
Hence their triumphing in that great scandal both to Jews and Pagans, the only
seeming thing of shame that could be objected to them, the Cross of Christ. I
determined not to know any thing among you save Jesus Christ, (...), and him
crucified; so St. Paul wrotein his first Epistle to the Corinthians, c. 2. v.
2. And in like manner to the Galatians, God forbid that I should glory, save in
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6. 14. In so much that to confront
those Infidels, whether Jews or Pagans, that objected it as a reproach unto
them, that they worshipped a Crucified God, it was ancienty an use amongst the
Christians of the first and best Ages of the Church (and that without incurring
thereby any guilt either of Popery or Superstition that I know of, however upon
that groundless surmise disliked and disused by some of late) to apply the sign
of the Cross, as a Badge of Honor, as well as Cognizance, to the Foreheads of
Persons baptized, in token, as our Church expounds it, that thereafter they
should not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified; but fight
manfully under his Banner against sin, the world and the Devil, and continue
his faithful Soldiers and Servants unto their lives end. And thus you see how,
both in Himself, and in those Relations wherein he stands unto Believers, and
in that Esteem which they have of him, Christ Jesus is an Honor unto those
that do believe on him.

Now this consideration of the Honor that Christ is unto those that believe on
him, may be useful sundry ways.

And First, It may be a good inducement unto persons of ingenuity to embrace,
or retain the Faith of Christ. Christianity, it is an honorable Religion. The
Author of it is an Honor to those that profess it, and that far beyond what
ever the founder of any Sect either amongst Jews or Greeks was to the Sectaries
of it. It may be a shame to the Followers of Mahomet, to have no better than an
Epileptical Impostor to be their Leader. It may be a shame to Idolatrous Pagans
to have the Father of lies to be the Author of their Religions. But unto the
Believers in Jesus Christ it cannot but be an Honor, that in their way they do
follow him in the Truth, who is the way of Truth, to Life; yea who is the true
God and eternal life, 1 John 5. 20.

Secondly, It might be a good check to our too eager pursuit after wordly
honor. Do we believe in Christ? It Is honor enough, even that for us. Christ
is an honor to us; and what better? what greater honor can we have, or hope
for, than what Christ is? Why do we then unwisely neglect that which is our
chiefest honor, and childishly run after gaudy baubles; needlessly prosecute
insignificant Titles; such as a man may carry on his back to Hell with him, and
perhaps be helped to be sunk thither by? O let us content our selves with that
honor which Christ is unto us, and never engage our selves into a solicitous
pursuit after any honor, but that which comes from God, and that which tends
unto the honor of God; rejoicing more to have our names written in heaven,
than to be assumed unto the highest honors upon earth; and pleasing our selves
better in it to be the servants of Jesus, than the Sons of Nobles, to be the
Members of Christ, than to be the Monarchs of the world.

Thirdly, It should be a good Argument to persuade those that believe in
Christ, to labor to be an Honor unto Him. Do ye believe in Christ? Christ is
an honor unto you, and gratitude requires that you should mutually be an
honor unto him. They should honor him, that are honored by him. Besides,
it is wisdom to be all the honor ye can unto Christ. For those that honor
him, them will he honor, and in proportion to that honor that they are unto
him; the greater that the honor is that ye are unto Christ, the greater shall
that honor be that ye shall receive from Christ; For he will render to every
man according to his deeds, Romans 2. 6.

Perhaps ye will here ask me, how ye shall do to be an Honor unto Christ? To
this I answer plainly and shortly; Lead good lives, lives made up of piety and
purity, like the life of Christ, and ye shall thereby be an honor unto Christ.

Our evil lives are a great dishonor unto Christ. De Gub. l. 4.
In nobis Christus patitur opprobrium, says Salvian. By our means reproach
falls upon Christ himself, through our evil deeds his name is blasphemed
amongst the Infidels abroad, and the Atheists at home. Ecce quales sunt qui
Christum colunt! See, say they, by way of scoff, what kind of persons your
Christians are! 'Twere well that they would stop there, and that that were all.
But they go on further to the dishonor of Christ and his Gospel; Sancta a
Christianis fierent, si Christus Sancta docuisset. Christians, say they, would
have practiced holiness if Christ had taught it. And again, A^stimari de
cultoribus suis potest ille qui collitur. Quomodo enim bonus Magister est,
cujus tam malos videmus esse discipulos. Ye may judge of him that is
worshipped, by them that are the worshipers of him. How can we think the Master
good, whose Scholars we see to be so bad? O whose heart is not ready to run out
at his eyes in tears of blood, to think that the evil lives of Christians
should be such a dishonor unto Christ! It is too true, they are so, and we
cannot deny it; (Pudet haec opprobria nobis and dici potuisse, and non potuisse
refelli) and a great shame it is unto us, that so they are, and we must confess
it.

On the contrary therefore, lead good lives, and ye shall be an honor unto
Christ. As the goodness of the Scholar is the glory of the Master, so the
holiness of a Christan is the honor of Christ. For our light so to shine
before men, that they may see our good works, that is the way to bring them to
glorify our Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5. 16. The Subjection of
Christians unto the Gospel of Christ, is matter of Glorification unto God, 2
Cor. 9. 13. How will reason argue from the Life, to the Law! from the
Transcript, to the Original! If the actions of Christians be so good, how good
is the Law that guides those actions! If the lives of Christians be so holy,
what holiness was there in the life of Christ, which is the Exampler of all
that holiness that is in them! When the Disciples shine as stars on earth,
what shall the glory of the Master be, but as that of the Sun in Heaven! That,
that is the way to honor Christ above other Gods, for those that honor him, to
be holy above other men. And O, what an encouragement must this needs be unto
holiness and goodness, when the goodness of the creature shall be the glory of
the Creator, and the holiness of a Christian the honor of Christ. As ever
therefore ye desire not to be a reproach and shame, but a reputation and honor
unto Christ, so be ye holy in your lives, and godly in your conversatitions.
Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity, and him that
says he abides in Christ, so walk even as Christ himself walked; denying all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and living soberly, righteously and godly in
this present world; and every day more and more perfecting holiness in the fear
of God.

And thus far we have discoursed of the Text according to that acceptance of
the word (...) in it, in which it is by some rendered Honor. We will now, in
reverence to our own Translators who render it Precious; and in reference to
Authority which has stamped that Translation for current amongst us; and also
out of respect unto the context, wherein Christ is more then once termed
precious; we will now (I say) proceed to discourse of the Text according to
that acceptance of the word also. And the Point delivered in the Text
according to that Interpretation of it, is this, That Jesus Christ is very
precious to a true believing-Christian. Unto you therefore which believe (says
our Apostle here) he is (...) even preciousness in the abstract, that is, very
precious.

Now this we shall show him to be in five respects. Things are precious unto
men in respect, either first of their Rarity and Singularness; or secondly of
their Worth and Excellencies; ot thirdly, of their Pleasingness and
Delightfulness; or fourthly, of their Usefulness and Profitableness; or fithly,
of their Needfulness and Necessariness. And upon all these considerations
Christ is precious unto those that believe on him.

And First in respect of Rarity and Singularness. Men use to account those
things precious, which are rare and singular; besides which there are few, or
none other of the same kind in being; as the Phoenix or other rare birds or
beasts, fruits or trees; and upon this account is Jesus Christ precious to a
believing soul. There is no such Savior as he, no Savior but he. Other
foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 3.
11. Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is no other name under
heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, Act. 4. 12. Whence he is in
Scripture styled by way of Emphasis, The Savior, Joh. 4. 42. Phil. 3. 20. Now
the believing soul being fully peswaded of this, does upon this account highly
esteem of Jesus Christ; He is very dear and precious unto it.

Secondly, In respect of Worth and Excellentness. Men use to account those
things precious, which are of great worth and excellency in any kind; as Gold
and Pearls, and precious Stones. And upon this account is Jesus Christ even
(...) the preciousness to a believing soul; as being of worth above its
comprehension, excellent beyond its imagination. As there is no considerable
light in the Stars, but what is imparted unto them from the Sun; so there is
nothing of worth or excellency in any respect in any part of the Creation, but
what is a communicated ray of the worth and excellency that is in Christ, by
whom all things were created and do consist, Colos. 1. 16, 17. What worth, what
excellency then must there needs be in Christ, from whom all worth and
excellency is communicated! The particulars of his Excellencies are
innumerable, the nature of them unutterable, the value of them inconceivable;
they are an Ocean which knows neither bank nor bottom, every way infinite and
incomprehensible. And this the Believing soul being fully persuaded of, sets a
high price upon him; counts him the chiefest of ten thousand, as the Spouse in
the Canticles did her Beloved; yea worth ten thousand of us, as David's servants
did their Lord. Yea were there ten thousand times ten thousand persons of more
worth and excellency than any that ever yet lived upon the face of the earth,
yet in the esteem of the Believing soul, they be all of no worth if compared
with Christ, which would say to him in David's words, Psalm. 73. 25. Whom bave I
in heaven but thee, and there is none on earth that I desire in comparison of
thee. In them could be but the finite worth and excellency of the Creature, in
Him is the infinite worth and excellency of the Creator. Now betwixt finite and
infinite there is no proportion, and so there can be no comparison. Thus
precious is Christ Jesus unto the Believing Christian in respect of worth and
excellency.

Thirdly, In respect of Pleasingness and Delightfulness. Men use to account
those things precious wherein they find much pleasure, and take great delight;
as beautiful flowers, rich perfumes, charming airs, etc. And upon this account
is Christ Jesus very precious to a Believing soul. The Spouse in the Canticles
first compares him to a Tree, and then expresses what delight she took both in
his shadow, and in his fruit. I sat down (says she) under his shadow with
great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste, Cant. 3. 3. O the rare
pleasures, the ravishing sweets of that Communion which true Believers have
with Christ! Those that truly believe in Christ are spiritually united unto
Christ, and have the spirit of Christ in-dwelling in them. Now what inward
joys are, at some times especially, communicated unto their souls, what
secreet sweets are impressed upon their spirits by the Holy Ghost which
dwells in them, cannot so well be told as felt. It Is indeed (...), as our
Apostle tell us in the first chap. of this Ep. ver. 8. joy unspeakable, such as
they that feel it within, yet are not able to speak it out. A believing soul
enjoying inward actual communion with Christ, is sometimes as it were
emparadised on this side heaven, not being with S. Paul, wrapped into the third
heaven, but having with Christ on the Mount, the third heaven brought down unto
him, yea, and into him too, so that he has a heaven in the very heart of him.
O speak it when I am gone (said one) and preach it Mr. Holland.
at my Funeral: God deals familiarly with man, I feel his mercy, I see his
Majesty, whether in the body or out of the body I cannot tell, God he knows,
but I see things that are unutterable. I am (says another) Mr. Bolton.
by the wonderful mercies of Christ as full of comfort as my heart can hold,
and feel nothing in my soul but Christ, with whom I heartily desire to be. O
(cries out a third) the joys, the joys, the joys that I feel Mr. Kat.
Brettergh.
in my soul! O they be wonderful, they be wonderful, they be wonderful, etc.
With some such prelibations of bliss, foretasts of happiness, earnests of
their promised inheritance, does Christ sometimes comfort the hearts, delight
the souls, and endear to him the affections of those that truly believe on him;
and thence also he is very precious unto them.

Fourthly, in respect of Usefulness and Profitableness. Men do usually set a
great price upon things that are greatly Useful and Profitable to them; as rich
Land, fat Pastures, vendible Merchandise, helpful Engines and Instruments, etc.
And upon this account also is Jesus Christ very precious to a believing soul.
He is of mighty use, hugely advantageous to it. He is a Father to it for Care,
a Brother for Love, a Head for Direction, and a Husband for a Protection. He is
the Believers Prophet to teach and instruct him; his Priest to sacrifice for
and bless him; and his King to govern and reward him. Do thou believe in
Christ? then let the Devil accuse thee, Christ will be thy Advocate to justify
thee: let God be angry with thee, Christ will be thy Mediator to reconcile him
to thee; let the Enemies of thy salvation oppose and fight against thee, Christ
will be the Captain of thy salvation to fight for thee and defend thee. Art
thou a Believer in Christ? then in sickness Christ will be thy Physician to
heal thee; in sorrow Christ will be thy Friend to comfort thee; in need Christ
will be thy Assistant to help thee, in distress Christ will be thy Counselor
to advise thee, and in danger Christ will be thy Savior to deliver thee. To
the hungry, he is bread, to the thirsty, he is drink; to the naked, he is
clothing; to the destitute he is a covering; to the persecuted, he is a
sanctuary; to the weak, he is strength; to the blind, he is light; and unto the
dead, he is life. He is wisdom to the ignorant, righteousness to the guilty,
sanctification to the polluted, redemption to the imprisoned, salvation to the
condemned. In a word, to the believing soul Christ is every thing that it can
want, or can desire. And the believing soul being both persuaded by See S.
Chrysostom. Sermon. 24. on Romans 13. 13.
the Gospel, and finding by experience that he is all this unto it, upon this
account also, as I know not how it should do any other, holds him exceeding
dear and precious to it self.

Fifthly, in respect of Necessaries in order to the Believers happiness. Men do
usually make great account of, and esteem very precious such things as they
must needs have, and can no ways be, or be well without; as meat in hunger,
clothes in cold, Physic in sickness, etc. And even upon this account is Christ
Jesus exceeding precious unto those that believe on him. They know that there
is no salvation to be had without him; that there is no other Savior besides
him, there is no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be
saved, but his only. They know that without him there would be none to give
them any instruction, or to make for them any satisfaction, or to afford them
any protection; that without him they could neither be justified from guilt,
nor sanctified from corruption, nor redeemed from damnation; that without him
they could neither do any thing but sin, nor expect any thing but punishment,
nor be any thing but the miserable objects of Gods wrath, and the Devils
malice, the power of Death, and the plagues of Hell; and therefore upon this
absolute necessity that they apprehend themselves to have of him, he is
exceedingly dear and precious unto them.

And thus I have shown you, both that Christ is very precious unto them that
believe on him, and also upon what account it is, that he is so precious to
them. The point will be useful two ways; first by way of Examination, and then
by way of Exhortation; unto both which I now proceed.

And First for Examination. You see Brethren that Christ is precious unto them
that do truly believe on him; examine your selves a while now, whether he be so
to you, or no. By such examination you may come to understand something of your
own condition, and discern whether you be in the faith or no; whether you
believe, or do not believe in Christ; or at leastwise what kind of Believers in
Christ you are: Well then the question is, Is Christ Jesus precious to you?
That which is precious to a man, First he will have his mind much and often
upon; Secondly, he will highly prize it; Thirdly, he will greatly desire it;
Fourthly, he will diligently seek it; Fifthly, he will dearly purchase it;
Sixthly he will carefully keep it. And so it is with those to whom Christ Jesus
is precious. By these notes Believers do use to evidence the preciousness of
Christ to them; by these notes therefore do you examine your selves about
Christ's preciousnesse unto you, and by that examination try the truth, and see
the slrength of your faith in Christ. And first, they to whom Christ is
precious, will have their hearts and minds much and often upon him. A man's heart
will be much upon his treasure, and so will the Believers heart be much upon
Christ; he thinks he can never have his fill of thinking of him; and wishes to
spend eternity in that communion with him. But because the Bow cannot always be
at full bent, and the affairs of this temporal life do necessitate frequent
interruptions of that spiritual commerce, therefore he is forced to give
entertainment to other cogitations; but yet as if they were but only occasional
diversions, and not the business of his life, he returns eftsoons after every
interruption to his main concerning meditation. An evidence whereof we may have
in the Primitive Christians, who did separate not only a week of extraordinary
days in every year, but one Ordinary day in evry week, ye and I had almost said
a week of hours in every day to acts and exercises of holy communion with him,
praising him with David seven times a day, and rising with him at Midnight also
to praise him; and all this, besides what came in by the by, in occasional
ejaculations and devotions, in respect of which they might besaid to pray
continually, and even without ceasing. Now Christians, examine your hearts; how
stand they toward Christ? is their inclination, like that of the needle
toward the pole, continually moving toward him? Do your souls like David's,
(Psalm. 63. 8.) hang upon him, and follow hard after him? Upon every
interruption do your souls, like the Spouses soul in the Canticles, c. 6. v.
12. make you like the Charrets of Aminadib, hot and swift in the retirement of
him? Plainly and shortly, Is it a sweet thing to you to meditate upon him? And
do you exercise your selves much in that converse with him? Are you often
thinking of him? And do you delight in such thinking? Then it is a sign you have
some value for him, that he is precious unto you. But if the world, or any
thing in it, take up the whole, or the remain of your hearts, so that your
minds are little or nothing upon Christ, and you are seldom or never thinking
of him, it is a sign Christ is not very precious to you. Small is the value we
have for that, which we are seldom or never thinking of.

Secondly, they to whom Christ is precious, as they will be much and often
thinking of him, so they will set a high price and value upon him, they will
very highly prize him. His worth with them is above Rubies, and all the things
that may be desired are not to be compared to him, Prove. 8. 11. Like St. Paul,
they will count all things but loss and dung in comparison with him, Phil. 3.
8. Now Brethren, is it so with you? Have you such high thoughts of Christ? Do
you set so great a price upon him? Do you apprehend a Divine nature and
excellency, an infinite worth and value in him? Is there nothing that your
heart can prefer before him? It is then a sign he is precious to you. But if
your thoughts touching his nature and excellency be mean and low, so that like
the Arian Heretics of old, and the Socinian Heretics of late, you esteem him
but (...), a mere man; if his worth and value in your apprehension be scanty
and little, such as it was in his, who sold him for thirty pence; (and it is
sad to think how many there be at this day that matter not the selling of him
at a much lower rate;) if there be any thing that you prize above him, or
prefer before him, then it is a sign that in your eyes he is despised, and you
esteem him not, that you make no great account of him, that he is not precious
to you. Those things are not precious to us, which we have but little value for.

Thirdly, They to whom Christ is precious, have a (...) Ignat. ad ^n.
very great desire after him. They hunger after him, they pant and breath after
him, even as the Heart pants and brays after the Waterbrooks; their Souls, like
David's, are athirst for God, (Psalm. 42. 1, 2.) for the living God; they count
all things, like St. Paul, but loss and dung, that they may win Christ. Phil.
3. 8. O my Dove, that art in the clefts of the Rocks, in the secret places of
the stairs, let me see thy Countenance, let me hear thy Voice, for sweet is thy
Voice, and thy Countenance is comely: So breaths the Spouse in the Canticles
after Christ her beloved, Cant. 2. 14. Christ is the desire of the souls of
them that truly believe in him, and their hearts do even run after him with the
swiftest feet of the strongest affections. Is it so with you Brethren? Examine
your hearts upon this Point. Have you so fervent a love for your Lord? Have you
so passionate affections for Jesus? Have you so strong desires after Christ? Is
the desire of all Nations the delight of your souls? Answerable unto his
preciousnesse to you will be your affections for, your love to, your desires
after him. But if your affection for him be small, your love cold, your desire
weak, it is a sign he is not precious to you. That is not very precious to a
man, which he has no great love for, nor mind to, nor desire after.

Fourthly, they to whom Christ is precious, will be very industrious in their
Inquest after him; they will seek him diligetly even as silver, and search for
him as for hidden treasures, Prove. 2. 4. or as a Merchant seeks for goodly
Pearls, Mat. 13. 45. they will seek him, like the Spouse in the Canticles, by
night, upon their beds, and by day in the streets, and in the broad ways,
Cant. 3. 1, 2. in private duties, in public Ordinances, any where, every
where, wherever they may hope to find him, neglecting no means, refusing no
pains, missing no opportunities of coming to him. Is it so with you Brethren?
Are you diligent in your search after Christ? Can you find in your hearts to be
at pains to sind him? Do you think no labors, no watchings, no fastings, no
prayers, no tears, no attendance in duties, and on Ordinances too great so you
may win Christ? It is then a sign Christ is precious to you. But if you make
little or no inquiring after him, if you be lither and lazy in the seeking of
him; if you think much and grudge to be at pains to find him, it is a sign you
set small value upon him, that you have no precious esteem for him. It is not
precious to a man that is not worth his seeking after.

Fifthly, they to whom Christ is precious, will be willing to purchase him at
any rate, though never so dear, so they may but have him. They will part even
with all for him. Like the Merchant in the Gospel that sought for goodly
pearls, when they have found this one Pearl of great price, they will sell all
they have, that they may buy him. They will forgo their Liberties for Christ;
they will forgo their estates for Christ; they will forgo their Honors for
Christ; they will forgo their Friends for Christ; they will forgo their sins
for Christ; they will forgo their righteousness for Christ, and they will
forgo even their lives for Christ I have goods, a Mr. Copin.
Wife and Children, (said a French-Confessor once) and yet I have lost those
affections which I formerly bore to them, neither are they dear to me, so I may
gain Christ. I love my wife and children in the Lord, said an English ^ich.
^oodman.
Martyr, and if I had ten thousand pound in gold, I had rather forgo it all,
than them: but I have them as if I had them not, and I will not for their sakes
forsake Christ. What things were gain to me, says St. Paul, those I counted
loss for Christ. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all tbings, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ.
Phil. 3. 7, 8. It were easy to be very large, even so as to tire you with such
like instances as these, of Persons who have been willing at any rate to
purchase Christ, weighing neither things visible nor things invisiblr, as St.
Ignatius said by himself, ^p. ad ^om.
(...), for the gaining of Christ. But how is it now with you Brethren? Are you
so fond of this great purchase? Are you willing to part with any thing, yea
even with all thing for Christ? Have you nothing but what you can readily
forgo for him, however otherwise dear and delightful it be to you? Then it is
a sign that in your esteem of him Christ is precious. But if there be any
enjoyment, whether of Liberty or Estate, Honor or Friend, Sin or Duty, yea if
it be even Life it self, which you are not contented to part withal for
Christ, I shall leave it unto your selves to consider whether Christ be
precious unto you or no. It is not precious which one would not part with a
Vanity for; And what is the best of earthly comforts and enjoyments more!
Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity,
Eccl. 1. 2

Sixthly, They to whom Christ is precious, having got him, are careful to keep
him. When the Spouse in the Canticles had found him whom her soul loved, O how
careful was she to keep him! I held him, says she, and would not let him go,
until I had brought him into my Mothers house, and into the Chambers of her
that conceived me, Cant. 3. 4. Christ when once gained, is too precious, the
believing-soul thinks, for her to be ever willing to part with again; and
therefore she uses no less care to keep him, than she took pains to get him. O
how she clings to him, and clasps about him with the powerfullest arms of
purest Love! No man is more careful to preserve a Jewel, than a believing-soul
is to keep its Jesus. She Cabinets up this Pearl of inestimable price, in the
innermost Closet of her heart. And as if she could never think him safe enough,
she is continually visiting of him there. Like the man in the Comedy, that had
found and hid a pot of Gold, her eye or mind is seldom off Plaut. Aulut.
from him. Nor will she upon any terms do any thing that may vex him thence; as
well knowing, that if once upon any unworthy usage he withdraw himself, it is
no easy matter to recover him again. Here therefore she bestows all her
care* here (...) exercises all her skill how she man (...) her Beloved, how
she may everlastingly enjoy her Dearest one. And how is it now with you
Brethren? are you so careful to keep your Christ? are you so fearful to lose
your Jesus? are you so cautious not to do any thing whereby he may be provoked
to withdraw himself from you? If so, then it is a sign he is precious to you.
But if you have small or no regard to the holding of so precious a possession
as Christ is; if you slight such a Friend when he is come to you; if you abuse
him, or by any unworthy carriage toward him, do provoke him to depart from
you, then it is a sign you do not much esteem him, that you set no very great
value upon him. Not very precious are those things to us, which when we have
them, we care not whether we lose or keep them.

I may yet over and above all these Notes, add in the seventh place, That they
to whom Christ is precious, do preciously esteem of any thing that is Christ's;
any thing that bears upon it the stamp and signature of Christ; any thing that
has relation unto Christ, as the Members of Christ, the Ministers of Christ,
the Word of Christ, the Name of Christ, the Day of Christ, and the House of
Christ. They to whom Christ is precious, will have a precious esteem for all
these. His Members they refresh as his own bowels; his Ministers they receive
as his own self; his Word they hear as his own voice; his Name (that Name which
is above every Name, his Name Jesus) they do account with St. Chrysostom to
contain a thousand treasures of good (...). 4. in (...)
things; and will not hear it named, especially in Divine Service, without some
token of an especial (...). His Day with St. Ignatius and Gregory (...)* they
account (...) and (...) (...), the Queen and highest of all Days, and call his
Sabbath a delight. And for his House, with the Patriarch Jacob, they account it
no other but the House of God, and the Gate of Heaven. Now Brethren, how is it
with you as to these things? Have you such dear affections for any thing that
is Christ's? Have you so precious an esteem for any of the Relatives of Christ?
If so, it is well; it is a sign of a good esteem that you have of Christ
himself, and that he is precious unto you. But if not (and there be too many
that with their mouths do show much love to Christ, who in their hearts have
love little enough for the Members of Christ, less for the Word of Christ, and
least of all for the Ministers of Christ; too many there be that pretend to be
great honourers of Christ, that show no more respect to the Name of Christ,
than to any other Name; not much more respect to the Day of Christ, than to any
other day; and as little (if not less) respect to the House of Christ, as to
any other house) I say, if that be not precious to you, which is Christ's, it is
to be feared, that you do but pretend, all the while that you say, That Christ
is precious unto you.

And now Brethren, if upon examination of your selves by these Notes, you find
that Christ is precious unto you, ye may comfort your selves with a confidence
of your being in the Faith of Christ. For unto those that believe in him, he is
precious. But on the other side, if upon this examination you cannot find
Christ precious to you, ye may do well to consider whether ye be in the faith
or no. If he be precious unto those that believe on him, then how can those be
thought to believe on him, to whom he is not precious?

And therefore (to proceed in the second place, from Examination unto
Exhortation) to the end you may be able to assure your hearts of the truth of
your faith, that ye do in truth believe in Jesus, labor, O labor that Christ
may be precious unto you. He is infinitely precious in himself; O never leave
till he be answerably precious unto you. These two are very distant things, for
Christ to be precious in himself, and to be precious unto us. We cannot make
him more precious then he already is in himself. To that which is infinite can
nothing be added to make it more infinite; and it is infinite the preciousnesse
that is in Christ. But we may make him much more precious unto our selves, then
as yet he has been to us. The Jewel in the Table was perfectly possessed of
all its genuine native worth, at the same time when the dunghil-Cock preferred
a barlie-corn before it. The Lord Jesus Christ was the brightness of his
Fathers glory, and the express image Isa. 53. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 4. Isa. 53. 3.
of his person, (Heb. 1. 3.) even then when in the sight of men he had no form,
nor comeliness, nor beauty that they should desire him. He was chosen of God and
precious, even then when he was despised and rejected of men. He was the Lord
of glory, even then when the Jews his own people denied and crucified him. That
therefore being precious in himself, he may be precious unto you; That Is the
thing I exhort you to labor for. O labor to endear Christ to your souls.

Now if any would know how to do this, Two Directions I shall give him in this
case. First let him study the worth that there is in Christ; Secondly let him
consider the need that he has of Christ. If there be any man to whom Christ is
not precious, surely it is upon one, or both of these points: either first
because he is not sufficiently informed of the due worth of Christ, or else
secondly, because he is not truly sensible of the great need that he has of
Christ. That therefore he may be precious unto you, be much and often upon these
Meditations.

First, Study the worth of Christ; consider the various excellencies, that with
most illustrious beams do shine forth in him, and that whether you look upon
him as God, or as Man, or as Meditator betwixt God and Man.

Look upon him, First as man, and how can ye but admire the exemplary holiness
of his life! He knew no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. How can ye
but admire the insuperable patience of his Death! He was led as a sheep to the
slaughter, and as a lamb is dumb before the shearer, so opened he not his
mouth. Lastly, how can ye but admire the incomparable charity which he showed
both in his life and death! In his life he went about doing good, and healing
all manner of diseases and sickness of the people. In his death he prayed to
his Father for pardon for his very Crucifiers.

Secondly, Look upon him as Mediator, and acting in all his several offices.
And how can ye but admire the excellencies of his Teachings as a Prophet!
Gracious words proceeded out of his mouth. Never man spoke as he spoke. How can
ye but admire the prevalency of his Sacrifice and Intercession as a Priest!
Thereby he made satisfaction unto God for our sins; and makes our Persons
acceptable unto God. And how can ye but admire the magnificency of his
Administration of the Regal Government as a King! Thereby he rescues us from
the power, malice, and injuries of all our enemies, whether they be Sin or
Satan, Death or Grave, World or Hell; and both at present translates us into a
Kingdom of Grace, and will hereafter estate us in a Kingdom of Glory.

Lastly, If you are able, look upon him as God. And how can ye but admire the
incomparable greatness of his Power! He is Omnipotent; nothing too hard for
him, he can do all things. How can ye but admire the incomprehensible deepnesse
of his Wisdom! He is Omniscient, his understanding it is infinite; he knows all
things. And how can ye but admire the unmeasurable largeness of his goodness!
He is Omnibenificent, good to all, and his mercy is over all his works. Yea not
an Attribute of his, but may be a Subject for Angels to contemplate upon* and
even they too will come short of comprehending the full of it, and lose
themselves at la^^ into high admirings and holy adorings of him for it.

O meditate my Brethren, much and often upon these things. And when you find that
the Lord whom you serve, the Jesus whom you believe in, the Christ in whom ye
put your trust, is so glorious a God, so gracious a Man, so efficacious a
Mediator betwixt God and Man, you will find your hearts carried strongly forth
in high and lofty affections toward him, so that his person will be dear, his
name sweet, and the very thought of him precious to your souls.

Secondly, Consider the Need you have of Christ; which will appear by
considering the utter undonness of your condition without Christ. The want of
this consideration is one cause why it is that to many men Christ is no more
precious than he is. They set no price upon him, because they discern not their
need of him. O call yourselves to a strict account, and commune with your own
hearts diligently about this; even what need you have of Christ. And that as we
noted, you will quickly discern, when once ye come to understand the
miserableness of your estate without Christ.

And alas! What is man without Christ? An enemy to God, a servant to sin, a
slave to Satan, a Child of wrath, a Captive to Death, a brand of hell. Now
surely to be in this estate is a fearful thing. And to him that rightly
understands the fearfulness of this estate, nothing can be imagined more
needful, than that by which he may be delivered out of, and freed from this
estate. Why, there is no deliverer of any from this estate but Chrlst; there is
no deliverance for any from it, but by Christ. O how precious then must Christ
needs be to a poor creature that is terrified with the fearful apprehensions of
his being in so woeful a condition. Never was sight more welcome to man that was
blind, never feet more acceptable to him that was lame, never health more
desirable by him that was sick, never liberty more dear to him that was
imprisoned, never pardon more precious to him that was condemned, than Christ
would be to such a soul.

Let me put a few Queries into your mouths to ask your selves about this
business, when you are at your best leisures. Have you given a perfect
unsinning Obedience to the whole Law of God in every point of it? If so, then
you may challenge life from God as due debt, upon the score of his promise,
This do and live. But if not (as sure you have not, for there is none that
lives, and sins not) then, are you able to bear that curse of the Law which
is due to him that continues not in every thing that is written in the Book of
the Law to do it? Are you able to dwell to all eternity with devouring fire? If
not that (for who is able to dwell with everlasting burning?) then are you able
to free your selves from it, either first by powerful resistance, not suffering
the sentence to be put in execution? or secondly by persuasive eloquence,
softning the Judge to a revoking of the sentence of your condemnation? Or
thirdly, by prevalent intercession of interposing friends, men or Angels,
extorting from him a pardon for your transgression? Or fourthly, by giving unto
Justice in some way of Commutation a full and valuable satisfaction? If your
deliverance from eternal damnation be neither to be wrought any one of these
ways, nor be obtained any other way beside these, but only through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, and that invaluable merit of his most
precious blood, there needs no more, sure, to tell you what need ye have of
Christ. How can a soul fully convinced of this, but cry out for Christ, as
Rachel did for Children, Give me Christ, O give me Christ or else I die. If
ever there were any of you brought into that condition, experimentally to
understand the miserableness of the case of a man without Christ, that is of a
sinner without a Savior, I know your experience will confirm my sayings.

Let me yet add, Which of you is able to overcome a temptation without strength
from Christ? Which of you sufficient himself to perform a good action (yea even
think a good thought) without grace from Christ? O what is the best of us but a
with^red branch if separate from communion with Christ? The all that we can do
without him, is just nothing at all. In a word, if all the hope of your
acceptance with God, of your Resurrection unto life, and of your Reception
into Glory be founded upon Christ, and Christ alone, then understand your need
of Christ; and accordingly as you need him, so esteem of him. If such extreme
need of Christ as in you, added unto such exceeding Worth as in Christ, be not
enough to render him precious to you, who is able to imagine what should be
enough? The Lord help you to such a frame of spirit, as that Christ Jesus may
be precious to you.

And yet I might further add, First, That to have a precious esteem of Christ,
is the way to be preciously esteemed of by Christ. If Christ be in your esteem
a pearl of great price, you shall be in Christ's esteem jewels of no little
price. Not the least drop of respect you shed on him, but shall be showred back
manifold upon your selves. And this is comfortable. There Is a sweet blessing
pronounced on all those that are sincere lovers of Christ, by St. Paul in the
close of his Epistle to the Ephesians, c. 6. v. 24. Grace be with all them that
love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, Amen. Grace, what is that here? Why,
the love, the favor, the mercy, the kindness of God, expressing it self in
blessings from God. This grace the Apostle prays that it may, and according to
his prayer, most assuredly it will be with the sincere lovers of Jesus Christ,
unto whom he is precious.

Secondly, I might add, That not to have Christ precious unto you, is the next
to your making light of Christ, If he that is not a lover of his brother be in
Gods account a murderer of his brother, O take heed that your not having a high
esteem of the Son of God, be not in the account of God a treading of his Son
under foot. And as the other was comfortable, so this is terrible. There is a
bitter curse denounced against all those that are not lovers of Christ by St.
Paul also in the close of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, c. 6. v. 23. If
any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maranatha. Let him
be Anathema, Maranatha; what is that? Why let him fall under the heavie^^
censures of the Church, be excommunicated to the severest degree of
excommunication; cut off from all communion with the Church of Christ, and
consequently from all union and communion with Christ himself (as he deserves
to be that makes light of Christ.) And what more sad c^^^^tion than this can a
man be in on this side hell (...)

But I am loath to draw away your minds too far from the two former
considerations, namely that of the worth of Christ, and that of your want of
Christ, which alone are sufficient to endear him very much unto you and
therefore to give you room for Meditation t^^^eon, I shall here break off, and
conclude my ^^^^ourse.

(...)
FINIS.

