TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
E. W. Gent.

LONDON. Printed by L.N. for BENJAMIN ALLEN dwelling in Pope's Head Alley. 1642.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
SIR,
THere is nothing more pernicious in a body of State than Jealousy, (...) that
of Love, has a double passion of fear^ and hate; this causes the patient to
think all remedies too weak for the danger; and certain it is, that such as
advise either to sooth their Princes humor, or for their own particular
advantage may well be heard, but ought not to be followed. I confess, I had
thought since the departure of some that was near unto You, that none would
have ventured to have incroched Your favors any more to their own particular
advantage, whereby Your good subjects are deprived of those blessings that
ought to be common to all, how ever the benefit that King David found by the
reasonable counsel of a woman (when he was upon a desperate design) has
given me some encouragement, and I make bold to return to Your Majesty for
Patronage; what then the great God has joined toge^^er, let no man dare to put
asunder. For as much then as it has pleased the great God to bring Your
Majesty and Parliament together, let no man dare to put asunder: and yet so it
is, that there are many in these days who desires nothing so much, as to make
a difference between Your Majesty and your Parliament, but believe it, Sir, who
ever they are, they are no friend to Caesar, how ever, I will smite David to
the wall, is become profitable to the Church and State, and well it is for the
innocent that wicked men cannot keep their own counsels, God fetches their
thoughts out of their mouths, or their countenance to be a reasonable
prevention to the godly, which otherwise might proceed to a present execution
for your Parliament; they are even wearied both from Ireland and England, with
several complaints, and they have a long time traveled, as it were, with
child, and fain would they bring forth a son, but behold there is no strength
to bring forth; that Counties and Cities petition, sure it is because they have
just cause of complaint, let then the sighs of the poor come before You, and
since Your Majesty have refused to hear the Petition of both Houses by the
hands of the Lord of Essex his Excellence; call to mind the saying of Job, If I
did despise (says Job) the cause of my man servant, or of my maid servant,
when they contended with me, what then shall I do when God rises up, and
when he visits, what shall I answer. True it is, by reason of some evil
minded people, the Crown is become full of cares, and many that have brought
your Majesty into them, have with Orpha left you, and the more to blame they.
For to engage Your Majesty in an Action, the success whereof can be but slight
and of small moment, whereas the miscarrying may beget dangerous defects to
Your Majesty and the whole State, and better it were for Your Majesty to
foresee the dangers at first, and prevent them, or desist from the motion; for
Your Parliament they have met with many fears, difficulties and oppositions,
and although they have already stayed the tide, yet until I saw them remain
firm and constant, I had thought that both Moses and Paul had died without
issue, but me thinks I see them now quitting themselves like men, and are not
willing to suffer three Kingdoms to perish, for that they cannot preserve it by
ordinary ways, and it is not fit a father should suffer his son to be drowned
for fear of pulling him out by the hair of the head; and sure I am, it were
lawful to cure a sick man without asking his consent, if he were capable of
remedies: For Your Parliament, they seek not themselves, if they had, they
would have been wearied after so much labor before now, how ever for
discharging of their duty they are defamed, despised, and neglected of many,
yet I doubt not but God whose battles they fight will provide a due reward of
their patience, and sure I am Your Majsty is happy in them, though You will
not come nigh them, nor be ruled by them: But know, if You still withstand
them, half the thanks will be lost, besides all this while You loses Honor;
for by reason of Your evil Councillors men are not apt to believe You:
Wherefore, O King, give me leave to say unto you as Ioab said to the King, Sam.
2. Now therefore arise and speak comfortable to Your people; and if You do
not, the Parliaments enemies will at length be Yours, and that will be worse
unto you than all the evil that befell you from your youth until now. But if
your Majesty will yet hearken unto them, you will win them to obedience with
kindness, and in so doing, you will make good that which you were sent for,
whose care ought to be employed for the good of your Subjects, knowing that
their love is your greatest safety, and their prosperity your greatest Honor
and felicity, and this is that, which will make your bed easy for you when you
shall possess the just title to the Crown, with the love of your people, and
sure I am that the countenance of it with the willing applause of the subject
is the nighest way to a blessing: true it is, were it not for Flatterers and
evil Counselors your Parliament would appear just men unto your Majesty, The
Lord Jesus Christ had many enemies, but there was made known one Judas: Your
Parliament have many Iudases, but one enemy, and if your Majesty would know
him, it is he that hates to be reformed; and for your Parliament, they may
justly take up the saying of David, and were it Papist or an open enemy that
should envy them, and so speak evil of them, the offense was not so great:
but as David said when his familiar friend that eat bread at his table and had
communion together: This, even this, is that which troubled him. Most gracious
Sovereign, if You love God, set Your self against this kind of men (that set
Your Majesty against Your Parliament, and call to remembrance the principal
contrivers of former plots, doubtless they that now blow the coals will heat
the furnace; they owe you a good turn, and will (if they can) pay it, You see
their hearts by their deeds; prove Your faith so too, the best work that you
can do, is to do the best you can against them, or suffer it to be done upon
them. I must confess the Church and State always thrived, and was made a
gainer by foreign Jarres, but by home-division it loses honor, and
suffers much by civil wars, the Lord so assist Your Majesty that You gain
peace at home, that so You need not care with whom You war abroad: the Church
of God was twice preserved in Egypt, in Abraham and Jacob, in Christ; and who
knows but that Your Majesty a fourth time, nay, forever may be a means to
preserve a Church to God: true it is, there is pro and con, and much ado about
the settling of the government of the Church. It is no matter what this man or
that man say to the Law then, and to the Testimonies, and if any man refuse to
come in, compel them all.

Most gracious Soveraig^, there are many sorts of people that are enemies to
Your Majesty, and Your Kingdoms. Papists, L. Bishops, Flatterers, and evil
Counselors, and Monopolizers: my humble suite is that Your Majesty should deal
with them all, as Moses dealt with his Rod, and whilst it wa^ a Rod, he held it
familiar in his hand, but when once a Serpent, he fled from it.

It is true, the loss of these men would be the Churches gain, and whilst
God is effecting what he purposes concerning them and Your Parliament. I
shall desire with David to attend the issue in silence; knowing that modest
beginnings, and hopeful proceedings makes happy endings, and if Your Majesty
would but return, the work would be perfected, and if I should but hear of
Your return: I would with Abigail make haste to fall down before you: however
Troubles begun, more feared, yet not ended, that they were past, and the three
Kingdoms united in a posture to serve the living God. I would die next, so I
might save the rest.

I conclude with a story of old age; A mother being misinformed against her
son, and threatening him very sore to beat him, he brake out into these
terms; Mother, do not beat too hard, for we must be friends.

FINIS.

