THE MAID'S TRAGEDY ALTERED.

With some other PIECES.

By EDMUND WALLER, Esquire

Not before Printed in the several Editions of his POEMS.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judges Head in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet Street. 1690.

MOST of the following Pieces, being unfinished, were never intended to be
published; but that a Person, who had borrowed a Manuscript Copy of them, took
upon him to print them. The Copy from which they were printed, was very
Imperfect; and there being noe means left to suppress them, it was thought fit
to suffer them to be more correctly printed from the last and truest Copies.

THE MAIDS TRAGEDY, ALTERED BY Mr. WALLER.

PROLOGUE.
SCarce should we have the boldness to pretend
So long renowned a Tragedy to mend:
Had not already some deserved your praise
With like attempt. Of all our elder Plays,
This and Philaster have the lowdest fame:
Great are their Faults, and glorious is their Flame.
In both our English Genius is expressed;
Lofty and bold, but negligently, dressed.
Above our Neighbors our Conceptions are:
But faultless Writing is the effect of Care.
Our Lines reformed, and not composed in haste;
Polisht like Marble, would like Marble last.
But as the present, so the last Age writ;
In both we find like negligence and wit.
Were we but less indulgent to our faults,
And patience had to cultivate our thoughts:
Our Muse would flourish, and a nobler rage
Would honor this, than did the Grecian Stage.
Thus says our Author, not content to see
That Others write as carlesly as He.
Tho he pretends not to make things complete;
Yet to please You, he would have the Poets sweat.
In this old Play, what is new we have expressed
In rhiming Verse, distinguished from the rest:
That, as the Roan its hasty way does make,
Not mingling Waters, through Geneva's Lake:
So having here the differeut styles in view,
You may compare the former with the new.
If we less rudely shall the Knot unty,
Soften the rigor of the Tragedy:
And yet preserve each persons character:
Then to the Other, This you may prefer.
It Is left to you: the Boxes and the Pit,
Are sovereign Judges of this sort of Wit.
In other things the knowing Artist may
Judge better than the people: but a Play,
Made for delight, and for no other use,
If you approve it not, has no excuse.
Enter Evadne, with a Page of Honor. Evad. A Mintor lost, it were as vain a
thing,
As it is prodigious, to destroy the King.
Compelled by Threats, to take that bloody Oath,
And the Act ill, I am absolved by both.
This Island left with pity I Will look down
On the King's Love, and fierce Melantius's frown.
These will to both my resolution bring:
Page, give Melantius that, this to the King.
Exit Page with the Letters Under how hard a fate are Women born!
Prized to their ruin, or exposed to scorn!
If we want Beauty, we of Love despair;
And are besieged like Frontier Towns, if fair.
The power of Princes Armies overthrows:
What can our Sex against such force oppose?
Love and Ambition have an equal share
In their vast Treasures; and it costs as dear
To ruin us, as Nations to subdue:
But we are faulty, tho all this be true.
For Towns are starved, or battered e're they yield;
But We persuaded rather than compelled:
For things superfluous neglect our Fame,
And weakly render up our selves to shame.
Oh! that I had my Innocence again,
My untoucht Honor: but I wish in vain.
The Fleece, that has been by the Dyer stained,
Never again its native whiteness gained.
The unblemisht may pretend to virtue's Crown:
It Is Beauty now must perfect my renown.
With that I governed him that Rules this Isle;
It Is that which makes me triumph in Spoil,
The Wealth I bear from this exhausted Court,
Which here my Bark stands ready to transport.
In narrow Rhodes I Will be no longer pent;
But act my part upon the Continent:
Asiatick Kings shall see my Beauties Prize,
My shining Jewels, and my brighter Eyes.
Princes that fly, their Scepters left behind,
Contempt or Pity, where they travel, find:
The Ensigns of our Power about we bear;
And every Land pays Tribute to the Fair.
So shines the Sun, tho hence removed, as clear
When his Beams warm the Antipodes, as here.
Exit. Enter Melantius, with a Letter in his hand. She Is gone to perish, if the
Gods be just;
The Sea's not vast enough to quench her Lust.
The standing Regiments, the Fort, the Town,
All but this wicked Sister is our own.
Oh! that I could but have supriz'd the Wretch,
E're she that Watery Element did reach.
Twice false Evadne; spightfully forsworn,
That fatal Beast like this I would have torn.
Tears the Paper with fury. But this design admits of no delay;
And our Revenge must sind some speedy way.
I Will sound Lucippus, he has always paid
Respect to my deserts: could he be made
To join with us, we might preserve the State;
And take revenge, without our Countries fate.
He loves his Brother; but a present Crown
Cannot but tempt a Prince so near the Throne.
He Is full of Honor: tho he like it not,
If once he swear, he will not reveal the Plot.
Exit. Enters the King alone.
King. Melantius false! it cannot be: and yet,
When I remember how I merit it,
He is presented to my guilty mind
Less to his Duty, than Revenge inclined.
It Is not my nature to suspect my friends,
Or think they can have black malicious ends:
It Is doing wrong creates such doubts as these,
Renders us jealous, and destroys our peace.
Happy the Innocent, whose equal thoughts
Are free from anguish, as they are from faults.
Enter a Page with a Letter.
Page. It Is from Evadne, Sir.
Exit.
King. Why should she use
Her Pen to me? it is some important news!
Reads the Letter. From aboard my Yacht. [Strangely dated.] WHich is now
bearing me away from the rage of my offended Brothers: I wish you were as safe
from their Revenge. They aim at your Life, and made me swear to take it. They
have got the Fort, and are assured of the Inclinations, both of the Soldiers
and Citizens. My first Prayer is to the Gods, for your Preservation: my next to
your Majesty, that if they return to their Duty, you would afford them your
Grace.

It Is no feigned tale Callianax has told;
The Great Melantius is as false as bold.
The Crown we hazard, when at home we stay,
And teach our forces others to obey.
Conduct of Armies is a Princes Art:
And when a Subject acts that Royal Part;
As he in Glory rises we grow less:
While our Arms prosper, ruined by success.
For in a Court what can so dreadful be,
As one more glorious than our selves to see!
Enter Melantius and Lucippus. Such is the General: to Lucippus Ear,
What it is he trusts, I Will step aside and hear.

Lucipp. How am I caught with an unwary Oath,
Not to reveal the secret, which I loath!
To stain my Conscience with my Brother's blood,
To be a King! No, not to be a God.
He that with patience can such Treason hear,
Tho he consent not, has a Guilty Ear.
Unto thy self pronounce the name of King;
That word will keep thee from so foul a thing.
[late,

Mel. Sir, your fond care and kindness comes too
To save your Brother, or prevent my hate:
The People mutiny, the Fort is mine,
And all the Soldiers to my will incline.
Of his own Servants he has lost the Heart,
And in the Court I have the nobler part.
Unto your self pronounce the name of King;
That word will tell you it is no trivial thing
That you are offered: Do not storm and frown
At my endeavors to preserve the Crown.
Wear it your self; occasion will not stay;
It Is lost, unless you take it while you may.
Tumult and ruin will o'rewhelm the State;
And you will be guilty of your Country's fate.

Luc. aside. Some formed design against the King is laid,
Let Us try how far our reason may persuade.
To him. The Crown you value so, my Brother bears
Upon his Head, and with it all the cares;
While I enjoy the advantage of his State,
And all the Crown can give, except the weight.
Long may he Reign, that is so far above
All Vice, all Passion, but excess of Love.
And can the effects of Love appear so strange,
That into Beasts our greatest Gods could change?

Mel. The deathless Gods, when they commit a Rape,
Disguised a while, again resume their Shape:
But Princes once turned into Beasts, remain
For ever so; and should, like Beasts be slain.

Luc. Tho more in years, you have a Mistress still;
And for that fault would you your Sovereign kill?
Love is the frailty of Heroic minds;
And where great Virtues are, our pardon finds.
Brutes may be Chaste; Pigeons, Swans and Doves,
Are more confined, than we are, in their Loves.
Justice and Bounty, in a Prince, are things
That Subjects make as happy as their Kings.
Will you contract the guilt of Royal Blood?
And rob your Country of her chiefest good?

Mel. Of one, whose Lust his Family has stained,
By whose good Conduct he securely reigned.

Luc. Of one, whose choice first made your Valor known,
And with whose Armies you have got renown.
It Is all the gratitude Subjects can show,
To bear with Patience what their Princes do.

Mel. Yet Brutus did not let proud Tarquin escape.

Luc. The Prince his Son was guilty of a Rape.
For Joys extorted with a violent hand,
Revenge is just, and may with honor stand.
But should a Prince, because he does comply
With one, that is fair and not unwilling, dye?
Or is it fit the people should be taught
Your Sisters frailty, with my Brothers fault?

Mel. Let her be known unchaste; so it be said,
That he that durst persuade her to it is dead.

Luc. The King has wronged you: Is it just that you
Mischief to me and the whole Nation do?

Mel. Rather than not accomplish my Revenge,
Just, or unjust, I would the World unhinge.

Luc. Yet of all Virtues, Justice is the best:
Valor, without it, is a common Pest.
Pirates and Thieves, too often with Courage graced,
Show us how ill that Virtue may be placed.
It Is our complexion makes us chaste or brave;
Justice from Reason, and from Heaven we have.
All other Virtues dwell but in the blood,
That in the Soul, and gives the name of good.
Justice, the Queen of Virtues, you despise,
And only rude and savage Valor prize.
To your revenge you think the King and all
That Sacred is, a Sacrifice should fall:
The Town be ruined, and this Isle laid wast,
Only because your Sister is not chaste.
Can you expect, that she should be so sage
To rule her blood, and you not rule your rage?
Both foul distempers are; but yours the worse,
Less pleasure has, and brings the greater curse.

Mel. In idle Rhodes Philsophers are bred,
And you, young Prince, are in their Morals read.
Nor is it hard for one that feels no wrong,
For patient duty to employ his Tongue.
Oppression makes men mad, and from their breast,
All reason does, and sense of duty wrest.
The Gods are safe, when under wrongs we groan,
Only because we cannot reach their Throne.
Shall Princes then, that are but Gods of clay,
Think they may safely with our honor play?
Reward a Soldiers Merit with a stain
To his whole Race, and yet securely Reign?
Farewell! I know so brave a Prince will scorn
To tell the secret, unto which he is sworn.

Luc. aside. I promised Secrecy, but did not say
I would look tamely on. Melantius stay:
You have my Promise, and my hasty word
Restrains my Tongue, but ties not up my Sword.
Of other Virtues tho you are bereft
By your wild rage, I know your Valor's left.
Swear not to touch my Brother, or with speed
Behind the Castle-wall let us meet.

Mel. Agreed.
Exit Lucip.
Mel. His well-known Virtue, and his constant Love,
To his bad Brother may the people move:
I Will take the occasion, which he gives, to bring
Him to his Death, and then destroy the King.
[Ex. Mel. Enter the King as discovering himself.
King. O! what an happiness it is to find
A friend of our own blood, a Brother kind!
A Prince so good, so just, so void of fear,
Is of more value than the Crown I wear.
The Kingdom offered if he would engage,
He has refused with a becoming rage.
For such a Brother, to the immortal God
More thanks I owe, then for the Crown of Rhodes.
Happy this Isle, with such a Hero blessed!
What Virtue dwells not in his Loyal Breast?
Enter Strato.
Str. Sir we are lost, Melantius has the Fort,
And the Town rises to assault the Court:
Where they will find the strongest part their own:
If you will preserve your self, you must be gone.
I have a Garden opens to the Sea,
From whence I can your Majesty convey
To some near friend.

King. There with your Shallop stay.
The Game's not lost; I have one Card to play.
Suffer not Diphilus to leave the Court,
But bid him presently to me resort.
[Exit Strato. Had not this Challenge stopped the impendent fate,
We must have perished with the ruined State.
Forts, Soldiers, Citizens, of all berest,
There Is nothing but our private Valor left:
If he survive, I have not long to Reign;
But he that is injured, should be fairly slain.
The people for their Darling would repine;
If he should fall by any hand, but mine.
Less wise than valiant, the vain man is gone
To fight a Duel, when his work was done.
Should I command my Guards to find him, where
He meets my Brother, and destroy him there:
All hope of Peace would be for ever lost;
And the wild Rabble would adore his Ghost.
Dead, than alive, he would do greater harm,
And the whole Island, to revenge him, arm.
So popular, so mighty have I made
This fighting man, while I lived in the Shade.
But 'twas a double fault, to raise him so;
And then dishonor on his house to throw.
Ill governed passions in a Princes Breast,
Hazard his private, and the public rest.
Slaves to our Passions we become, and then
It grows impossible to govern Men.
But Errors not to be recalled, do find
Their best redress from presence of the mind.
Courage our greatest failings does supply,
And makes all good, or handsomely we dye.
Life is a thing of common use, by Heaven
As well to Insects as to Princes given.
But, for the Crown, it is a more sacred thing:
I Will dying lose it, or I Will live a King.
Enter Diphilus. Come, Diphilus, we must together walk,
And of a matter of importance talk.

Diph. aside. What fate is this! had he stayed half an hour,
The rising Town had freed me from his Power.
Exeunt. Scene changes into a Field: Into which enter Lucippus and Melantius,
with Swords drawin.
Mel. Be yet advised, th'injurious King forsake;
Death, or a Scepter from Melantius take.

Lucip. Be thou advised, thy black design forsake;
Death, or this Counsel from Lucippus take.

Mel. Youth and vain confidence thy life betray:
Through Armies this has made Melantius way.

Lucip. Drawn for your Prince that Sworn could wonders do;
The better Cause makes mine the sharper now.
Thy brutal anger does the Gods defy;
King are their care: resume thy Loyalty:
Or from thy guilty Head I Will pluck the Bays,
And all thy Triumphs shall become my praise.

Mel. That shall be quickly tried.
Enter the King with Diphilus.
King. With Sword in hand,
Like a good Brother, by your Brother stand.

Diph. Glad that your pleasure lies this noble way;
I never did more willingly obey.

King. Thy Life, Melantius, I am come to take,
Of which foul Treason does a forfeit make.
To do Thee honor, I will shed that blood,
Which the just Laws, if I were faultless, should.

Mel. It Is bravely urged, Sir; but, their Guards away,
Kings have but small advantage of the Law.

King. Having infringed the Law, I wave my right
As King, and thus submit my self to fight.
Why did not you your own fierce hand employ,
As I do mine, and tell the reason why?
A Subject should be heard before he is slain?
And does less right belong to us that Reign?

Mel. If, as unjust, I could have thought you brave,
This way I chosen had Revenge to have.
A way so noble; that I must confess,
Already I begin to hate you less.
So unexpected and so brave a thing,
Makes me rember that you are my King.
And I could rather be contented, since
He challenged first, to combat with that Prince.
That so, a Brother for a Sister changed,
We may be of your wanton Pride revenged.

King. 'Twas I that wronged you, you my Life have sought;
No Duel ever was more justly fought.
We both have reason for our fatal wrath:
Nor is it fit the World should hold us both.
Lucippus to the King apart. Me for what nobler use can you reserve,
Than thus the Crown from danger to preserve?
Members expose themselves, to save the Head:
This way he shall be satisfied, or dead.
Melantius to his Brother apart. Tho foul Injustice Majesty did stain,
This noble carriage makes it bright again.
When Kings with Courage act, sometthing divine
That calls for Reverence, does about them shine.

Diph. Were we born Princes, we could not expect,
For an affront received, greater respect.
They that with sharpest Injuries are stung,
If fairly fought withal, forget the wrong.
A thousand pitties, such a Royal pair
Should run this hazard for a wanton fair.

Mel. Let us sight so, as to avoid the extreme
Either of fearing, or of killing them.

Lucippus apart to his Brother. Sir, you should wield a Scepter, not a Sword;
Nor with your Weapon kill, but with your Word.
The Gods by others execute their will.

K. Yet Heaven does often with its own Thunder kill:
And when Necessity and Right command,
A Sword is Thunder in a Sovereign's hand.
Let us dispatch, lest any find us here,
Before we fight; or they grow less severe.
Here they all Fight.
Lucippus to the King. Hold Sir, they only guard, and still give place
To them. Fight us, as Enemies, or ask for Grace.

Mel. I never thought I could expedient see,
On this side death, to right our Family.
The Royal Sword thus drawn, has cured a wound
For which no other Salve could have been found.
Your Brothers now in Arms our selves we boast,
As satisfaction for a Sister lost.
The blood of Kings exposed, washes a stain
Cleaner, than thousands of the Vulgar slain.
You have our pardon, Sir; and humbly now,
As Subjects ought, we beg the same of you.
Here they both kneel. Pardon our guilty Rage; which here takes end,
For a lost Sister, and a ruined Friend.

Luc. Let your great heart a gracious motion feel:
Is It not enough, you see Melantius kneel?
I Will be a pledge for both; they shall be true
As heretofore; and you shall trust 'em too.
His Loyal Arm shall still support the State,
And you no more provoke so just an hate.

King. Rise, brave Melantius, I thy pardon sign,
With as much Joy, as I am proud of mine.
Rise, Valiant Diphilus, I hope you will both
Forget my fault, as I shall your just wrath.

Diph. Valor revealed in Princes does redeem
Their greatest faults, and crowns them with esteem,
Use us with Honor, and we are your Slaves,
To bleed for you, when least occasion craves.

King. With Honor and with Trust this Land shall know,
After my Brother, none so great as you.
Enter the Kings Guards.
Mel. If these approach us, Sir, by your command;
Take back your Pardon, on our guard we stand.
The King steps between 'em.
King. What over-diligence has brought you here?

Captain of the Guards. Such as you will pardon when the News you hear
Amintor is retired, Aspasia gone;
And a strange humor does possess the Town.
They arm apace, Sir, and aloud declare
Things which we dare not whisper in your Ear.
The Council met, your Guards to find you sent,
And know your pleasure in this Exigent.
This honored person you might justly fear,
Were he not Loyal, and amongst us here.
They say his merit's ill returned, and cry,
With great Melantius they will live and dye.

Mel. Sir, not your Power, but Virtue made me bow;
For all he tells you, I did kneeling know.
Tho now the faithful'st of your Subjects, we
Have been the cause of all this Mutiny.
Go comfort, Sir, Amintor, while we run
To stop the rage of this revolting Town;
And let them know the happiness they have
In such a Royal pair, so just, so brave.
Lend me your Guards, that if persuasion fail,
Force may against the Mutinous prevail.

K. to the Guards. Go, and obey, with as exact a care,
All his commands, as if our self were there.
Aside. He that depends upon another, must
Oblige his Honor with a boundless trust.
Exeunt King and Lucippus.
Mel. How frail is Man! how quickly changed are
Our wrath and fury to a Loyal care!
This drawn but now against my Sovereigns Breast,
Before it is sheathed, shall give him peace and rest.
Exeunt Brothers and Guards.
The Scene changes into a Forest. Enter Aspasia. Asp. They say, wild Beasts
inhabit here;
But Grief and Wrong secures my Fear.
Compared to him that does refuse,
A Tyger's kind, for he pursues.
To be forsaken's worse than torn;
And Death a lesser ill than Scorn.
No Forest, Cave, or Savage Den
Holds more pernicious Beasts than Men.
Vows, Oaths, and Contracts they devise,
And tell us, they are sacred Ties:
And so they are in our esteem;
But empty Names, despised by them.
Women with studied Arts they vex:
Ye Gods destroy that impious Sex.
And if there must be some to' invoke
Your Powers, and make your Altars smoke,
Come down your selves, and in their place
Get a more Just and Nobler Race:
Such as the Old World did adorn,
When Hero's like your selves were born.
But this I wish not for Aspacia's sake;
For she no God would for Amintor take.
The Heart, which is our Passions Seat,
Whether we will or no does beat:
And yet we may suppress our Breath:
This let us us see that Life and Death
Are in our Power; but Love and Hate,
Depend not on our Will, but Fate.
My Love was Lawful, when 'twas born;
Their Marriage makes it merit Scorn.
Evadne's Husband it is a Fault
To Love, a blemish to my thought;
Yet twisted with my Life; and I
That cannot faultless live, will dye.
Oh! that some hungry Beast would come,
And make himself Aspasia's Tomb.
If none accept me for a Prey,
Death must be found some other way.
In colder Regions Men compose
Poison with Art; but here it grows.
Not long since; walking in the Field,
My Nurse and I, we there beheld
A goodly fruit; which tempting me,
I would have plucked; but trembling she,
Whoever eat those Berries, cried,
In less than half an hour died.
Some God direct me to that Bough,
On which those useful Berries grow!
Exit. Enter Amintor alone.
Am. Repentance, which became Evadne so,
Would no less handsome in Amintor show.
She asked me pardon; but Aspasia I,
Injured alike, suffer to pine and dye.
It Is said, that she this dangerous Forest haunts,
And in sad accents utters her complaints.
If over-taken, e're she perish, I
Will gain her Pardon, or before her dye.
Not every Lady does from Virtue fall;
The Injurious King does not possess them all.
Well I deserved Evadne's scorn to prove,
That to Ambition sacrificed my Love.
Fools that consult their Avarice or Pride!
To choose a Wife, Love is our noblest Guide.
Exit. Enter Aspasia alone, with a Bough full of fair Berries
Asp. This happy Bough shall give relief,
Not to my hunger, but my grief.
The Birds know how to choose their fare,
To peck this fruit they all forbear.
Those cheerful Singers know not why
They should make any haste to dye:
And yet they Couple -- Can they know
What it is to Love, and not know Sorrow too?
It Is Man alone, that willing dies;
Beasts are less Wretched, or less Wise.
How Lovely these ill Berries show!
And so did false Amintor too.
Heaven would ensnare us! who can escape
When fatal things have such a shape?
Nothing in vain the Gods create,
This Bough was made to hasten fate.
'Twas in compassion of our woe,
That Nature first made Poisons grow;
For hopeless wretches, such as I,
Kindly providing means to dye.
As Mothers do their Children keep,
So Nature feeds, and makes us sleep:
The indisposed she does invite
To go to Bed before it is night.
Death always is to come, or past:
If it be ill, it cannot last.
Sure it is a thing was never known;
For when that is present, we are gone.
It Is an imaginary Line,
Which does our being here confine.
Dead we shall be, as when unborn;
And then I knew nor Love, nor Scorn.
But say we are to live elsewhere,
What has the Innocent to fear?
Can I be treated worse than here?
Justice from hence long since is gone,
And reigns where I shall be anon.

Enter Amintor. Am. It Is she; those fatal Berries show
The mischief she is about to do.
Women are governed by a stuborn fate:
Their Love's insuperable, as their hate.
No Merit their Aversion can remove;
Nor ill requital can efface their Love.

Asp. Like Slaves redeemed, Death sets us free
From Passion, and from Injury.
The Living chained to Fortunes Wheel,
In Triumph led, her changes feel:
And Conquerors kept Poisons by,
Prepared for her Inconstancy.
Bays against Thunder might defend their Brow:
But against Love and Fortune here is the Bough.
Here she puts some of the Berries to her mouth, Amintor, strikes the Berries
out of her hand, and snatches the Bough.
Am. Rash Maid, forbear; and lay those Berries by,
Or give them him that has deserved to dye.

Asp. What double Cruelty is this? Would you
That made me wretched, keep me always so?
Evadne has you: let Aspasia have
The common refuge of a quiet grave.
If you have kindness left, there see me laid:
To bury decently the injured Maid,
Is all the favor that you can bestow,
Or I receive -- Pray render me my Bough.

Am. No less than you, was your Amintor wronged:
The false Evadne to the King belonged.
You had my promise, and my Bed is free;
I may be yours, if you can pardon me.

Asp. Your Vows to her were in the Temple made;
The sacred Altar witnessed what you said.

Am. The powers above are to no place consigned,
But every where hear promises that bind.
The Heaven, the Air, Earth, and the boundless Sea,
Make but one Temple for the Deity.
That was a Witness to my former Vow:
None can Amintor justly claim, but you.
Who gives himself away the second time,
Creates no title, but commits a Crime.

Asp. I could have died but once; but this believed
I may (alas!) be more than once deceived.
Death was the Port, which I almost did gain,
Shall I once more be tossed into the Main?
By what new Gods, Amintor, will you swear?

Am. By the same Gods, that have been so severe;
By the same Gods, the justice of whose Wrath
Punished the infraction of my former faith.
May every Lady an Evadne prove,
That shall divert me from Aspasia's Love.

Asp. If ever you should prove unconstant now;
I shall remember where those Berries grow.

Am. My Love was always constant; but the King,
Melantius's friendship, and that fatal thing
Ambition, me on proud Evadne threw;
And made me cruel to my self, and you.
But if you still distrust my faith, I vow
Here in your presence I Will devour the Bough.

Asp. Snatching the Bough from him. Rash Man, forbear! but for some unbelief,
My Joy had been as fatal as my Grief:
The sudden news of unexpected bliss,
Would yet have made a Tragedy of this.
Secure of my Amintor, still I fear
Evadne's mighty friend, the King.

Am. He Is here.
Enter the King, and his Brother, to them. King, turning to his Brother. How
shall I look upon that noble Youth,
So full of Patience, Loyalty, and Truth?
The fair Aspasia I have injured too,
The guilty author of their double woe.
My passions gone, and reason in her Throne,
Amazed I see the mischiefs I have done.
After a Tempest, when the Winds are laid,
The calm Sea wonders at the wrecks it made.

Am. Men wronged by Kings impute it to their fate,
And Royal kindness never comes too late:
So when Heaven frowns, we think our anger vain;
Joyful and thankful when it smiles again.
Taking Aspasia by the hand. This knot you broke, be pleased again to bind,
And we shall both forget you were unkind.

King. May you be happy, and your sorrows past,
Set off those Joys I wish may ever last.
Giving the Letter. Read this Amintor.
Am. Evadne fled! Aspasia now
You Will have no more occasion for your Bough.

Enter a Messenger. Mess. Melantius, Sir, has let the people know
How just you are, and how he is graced by you.
The Town's appeased, and all the air does ring
With repetitions of Long live the King.

Luc. Sir, let us to the Sacred Temple go,
That you are safe our Joys and Thanks to show.

King. Of all we offer to the Powers above,
The sweetest Incense is fraternal Love.
Like the rich Clouds that rise from melted Gums,
It spreads it self, and the whole Isle perfumes.
This sacred Union has preserved the State;
And from all Tempest shall secure our fate:
Like a well twisted Cable, holding fast
The anchored Vessel in the lowdest Blast.

EPILOGUE, Spoken by the King.
THE fierce Melantius was content, you see,
The King should live; be not more fierce than he.
Too long indulgent to so rude a Time;
When Love was held so capital a Crime,
That a Crowned Head could no compassion find;
But died, because the Killer had been kind.
Nor is it less strange such mighty Wits as those
Should use a Style in Tragedy, like Prose.
Well sounding Verse, where Princes tread the Stage,
Should speak their Virtue, or describe their rage.
By the loud Trumpet, which our Courage aids,
We learn that sound, as well as sense, persuades.
And Verses are the potent charms we use,
Heroic Thoughts and Virtue to infuse.
When next we act this Tragedy again,
Unless you like the Change, we shall be slain.
The innocent Aspasia's Life or Death,
Amintor's too, depends upon your breath.
Excess of Love was heretofore the cause;
Now if we dye, it is want of your applause.
MR. Waller in his first Thoughts of Altering this Play, pitched upon a design
of making Evadne go among the Vestals. But considering, that the Persons in
this Play are supposed to be Heathens, who never admitted any but pure Virgins
among their Vestals; he changed his design. Nevertheless before he did so, he
had writ the following Verses.

Evadne. A Vestalvow'd, with Pity I Will look down
On the King's Love, and fierce Melantius's frown.
But here is the Sacred place, where we may have
Before we dye, an honorable Grave.
The Dead, and they that live retired here,
Obtain like Pardon from the most severe.
Knocks at a Door. Enter Governess.
Gov. The Great Evadne visiting our Cell!

Ev. It Is not to visit you; but here to dwell.
Can you find room for one so bad as I,
That humbly begs she may among you dye?

Gov. You that so early can correct your Thoughts,
May hope for Pardon for your greatest faults.
Happy is she that from the World retires,
And carrys with her what the World admires.
Thrice happy she, whose young thought fixed above,
While she is Lovely does to Heaven make Love.
I need not urge your Promise, e're you find
An Entrance here, to leave the World behind.

Ev. My guilty Love Devotion shall succeed;
Love such as mine was, though a dangerous Weed,
Shows the rich Soil, on which it grew so high,
May yield as fair a Crop of Piety.
But of all Passions, I Ambition find
Hardest to banish from a Glorious Mind.
Yet Heaven our Object made, Ambition may,
As well as Love, be turned a Nobler way:
Still I ascend; it is a step above
A Princes favor, to belong to Jove.
They go in and the Door shuts. Enter Melantius with a Letter. Among the
Vestals! she will corrupt them all,
And teach them from their Sacred Vow to fall.

POEMS
The Triple Combat.
WHen through the World fair Mazarine had run,
Bright as her Fellow-Traveller, the Sun;
Hither at length the Roman Eagle flies,
As the last Triumph of her conquering Eyes.
As Heir to Julius, she may pretend
A second time to make this Island bend.
But Portsmouth, springing from the ancient race
Of, Britains, which the Saxon here did chase,
As they great Caesar did oppose, makes head,
And does against this new Invader lead.
That goodly Nymph, the taller of the two,
Careless and fearless to the Field does go.
Becoming blushes on the other wait,
And her young look excuses want of height.
Beauty gives Courage; for she knows the day
Must not be won the Amazonian way.
Legions of Cupids to the Battle come,
For little Britain these, and those for Rome.
Dressed to advantage, this Illustrious Pair
Arrived, for Combat in the List appear.
What may the fates design! for never yet
From distant Regions two such Beauties met:
Venus had been an equal friend to both,
And Victory to declare her self seems loath.
Over the Camp with doubtful Wings she flys;
Till Chloris shining in the Field she spys.
The lovely Chloris well attended came,
A thousand graces waited on the Dame:
Her matchless form made all the English glad,
And foreign Beauties less assurance had.
Yet, like the Three on Ida's Top, they all
Pretend alike, contesting for the Ball.
Which to determine Love himself declined,
Lest the neglected should become less kind.
Such killing looks; so thick the Arrows fly;
That it is unsafe to be a stander by.
Poets approaching to describe the sight,
Are by their Wounds instructed how to write.
They with less hazard, might look on and draw
The ruder Combats in Alsatia.
And with that Foil of violence and rage
Set off the splendor of our Golden Age:
Where Love gives Law, Beauty the Scepter sways;
And uncompell'd, the happy World obeys.
Prologue for the Lady Actors.
AMaze us not with that Majestic Frown:
But lay aside the greatness of your Crown.
And for that Look, which does your people awe,
When in your Throne and Robes you give 'em Law;
Lay it by here, and use a gentler smile;
Such as we see great Joves in Picture, while
He listens to Apollo's charming Lyre,
Or judges of the Songs he does inspire.
Comedians on the Stage show all their skill,
And after do as Love and Fortune will.
We are less careful, hid in this disguise;
In our own Clothes more serious, and more wise.
Modest at home, upon the Stage more bold,
We seem warm Lovers, though our Breasts be cold.
A fault committed here deserves no scorn,
If we act well the parts to which we are born.
To Mr. Killegrew, upon his altering his Play Pandora, from a Tragedy into a
Comedy, because not approved on the Stage.
SIR, you should rather teach our Age the way
Of judging well, than thus have changed your Play.
You had obliged us by employing Wit,
Not to Reform Pandora, but the Pit.
For as the Nightingale, without the Throng
Of other Birds, alone attends her Song:
While the loud Daw, his Throat displaying, draws
The whole assembly of his Fellow-Daws.
So must the Writer, whose productions should
Take with the Vulgar, be of vulgar mould:
Whilst nobler Fancies make a flight too high
For common view, and lessen as they fly.
On the Statue of King Charles the First, at Charing Cross.
THat the First Charles does here in Triumph ride,
See his Son Reign where he a Martyr died;
And People pay that Reverence, as they pass,
Which then he wanted, to the Sacred Brass:
Is not the effect of Gratitude alone;
To which we owe the Statue and the Stone.
But Heaven this lasting Monument has wrought,
That Mortals may Eternally be taught;
Rebellion, though successful, is but vain;
And Kings so killed rise Conquerors again.
This Truth the Royal Image does Proclaim,
Loud as the Trumpet of surviving Fame.
On the D. of Monmouth's Expedition into Scotland, in the Summer Solstice, 1678.
SWift as Joves Messenger, the Winged God,
With Sword as Potent as his Charming Rod,
He flew to Execute the Kings Command,
And in a moment reached that Northern Land;
Where Day contending with approaching Night,
Assists the Hero with continued Light.
On Foes surpised, and by no Night concealed,
He might have rushed, but noble Pity held
His Hand a while, and to their choice gave 'space,
Which they would prove, his Valor, or his Grace.
This not well heard, his Cannon louder spoke,
And then, like Lightning, through that Cloud he
broke;
His Fame, his Conduct, and that Martial Look,
The guilty Scotch with such a Terror struck;
That to his Courage they resign the Field,
Who to his Bounty had refused to yield.
Glad that so little Loyal Blood it cost,
He grieves so many Britains should be lost;
Taking more Pains, when he beheld them yield,
To save the Flyers, than to win the Field:
And at the Court his Interest does employ,
That none, who escaped his fatal Sword, should dye.
And now these rash bold Men their Error find,
Not trusting one beyond his Promise kind;
One whose great Mind, so bountiful and brave,
Had learnt the Art to Conquer, and to Save.
In Vulgar Breasts no Royal Virtues dwell,
Such deeds as these his high Extraction tell;
And give a secret Joy to him that Reigns,
To see his Blood Triumph in Monmouth's Veins:
To see a Leader, whom he got and chose,
Firm to his Friends, and fatal to his Foes.
But seeing Envy, like the Sun, does beat
With scorching Rays, on all that is high and great:
This, ill requited Monmouth, is the Bough
The Muses send to shade thy Conquering Brow.
Lampoons, like Squibs, may make a present blaze;
But Time and Thunder pay respect to Bays,
Achilles Arms dazzle our present view,
Kept by the Muse as radiant, and as new,
As from the Forge of Vulcan first they came;
Thousands of years are past, and they the same:
Such care she takes, to pay desert with Fame:
Then which no Monarch, for his Crowns defense
Knows how to give a Nobler Recompense.
Of an Elegy made by Mrs. Wharton on the Earl of Rochester.
THus mourn the Muses; on the Hearse,
Not strowing Tears, but lasting Verse:
Which so preserve the Hero's Name;
They make him live again in Fame.
Chloris in Lines so like his own,
Gives him so just and high Renown:
That she the afflicted World relieves;
And shows, that still in her he lives.
Her Wit as graceful, great and good;
Allied in Genious, as in Blood.
His loss supplied, now all our fears
Are, that the Nymph should melt in Tears.
Then fairest Chloris, comfort take,
For his, your own, and our sake;
Least his fair Soul, that lives in you,
Should from the World for ever go.
Reflection on these Words, Pride was not made for Man.
NOT the brave Macedonian Youth alone,
But base Caligula, when on the Throne,
Boundless in Power, would make himself a God;
As if the World depended on his Nod.
The Syrian King to Beasts was headlong thrown,
E're to himself he could be mortal known.
[Line,
The meanest Wretch, if Heaven should give him
Would never stop, till he were thought Divine.
All might within discern the Serpents Pride,
If from our selves our selves did nothing hide.
Let the proud Peacock his gay Feathers spread,
And woo the Female to his painted Bed.
Let Winds and Seas together rage and swell,
This Nature teaches, and becomes 'em well.
Pride was not made for Man: a conscious sense
Of Guilt, and Folly, and their consequence
Destroys the claim; and to beholders tells,
Here nothing, but the shape of manhood, dwells.
Translated out of French.
FAde Flowers, fade, Nature will have it so;
It Is but what we must in our Autumn do:
And as your Leaves lie quiet on the Ground,
The loss alone by those that loved them found;
So in the Grave shall we as quiet lie,
Mist by some few, that loved our Company.
But some, so like to Thorns and Nettles, live;
That none for them, can, when they perish, grieve.
Some Verses of an Imperfect Copy, designed for a Friend on his Translation of
Ovid's Fasti.
ROme's Holy Days you tell, as if a Guest
With the old Romans you were wont to feast.
Numa's Religion by themselves believed,
Excells the true, only in show received.
They made the Nations round about 'em bow,
With their Dictators taken from the Plough:
Such Power has Justice, Faith and Honesty;
The World was conquered by Morality.
Seeming Devotion does but guld a Knave,
That Is neither Faithful, Honest, Just, nor Brave:
But where Religion does with Virtue join,
It makes a Hero, like an Angel shine.
Of the late Invasion and Defeat of the Turks, etc.
THe modern Nimrod, with a safe delight
Persuing Beasts, that save themselves by flight,
Grown proud, and weary of his wonted Game,
Would Christians chase, and Sacrifice to fame.
A Prince with Eunuchs and the softer Sex
Shut up so long, would Warlike Nations vex;
Provoke the German, and neglecting Heaven,
Forget the Truce for which his Oath was given.
His Grand Vizier presuming to invest,
The chief Imperial City of the West;
With the first Charge compelled in have to rise,
His Treasure, Tents, and Cannon left a Prise:
The Standard lost, and Janisaries slain,
Render the hopes he gave his Master, vain.
The flying Turks, that bring the tidings home,
Renew the Memory of his Fathers Doom;
And his Guard Murmurs, that so often brings
Down from the Throne their unsuccessful Kings.
The trembling Sultan's forced to expiate,
His own ill Conduct by another's Fate:
The Grand Vizier, a Tyrant though a Slave,
A fair Example to his Master gave;
He Bassa's Heads, to save his own made fly,
And now, the Sultan to preserve must dye.
The fatal Bow-string was not in his thought,
When breaking Truce, he so unjustly fought;
Made the World tremble with a numerous Host,
And of undoubted Victory did boast.
Strangled he lies! yet seems to cry aloud
To warn the Mighty, and instruct the Proud;
That of the Great neglecting to be Just,
Heaven in a Moment makes an heap of Dust.
The Turks so low; why should the Christians loose
Such an advantage of their Barbarous Foes?
Neglect their present Ruin to complete,
Before another Solomon they get?
Too late they would with shame, repenting, dread
That numerous Heard by such a Lion lead.
He, Rhodes and Buda from the Christians tore,
Which timely Union might again restore.
But sparing Turks, as if with Rage possessed,
The Christians perish by themselves oppressed:
Cities and Provinces so dearly won,
That the Victorious People are undone.
What Angel shall descend to reconcile
The Christian States, and end their Guilty Toil?
A Prince more fit from Heaven we cannot ask,
Than Britain's King for such a Glorious task:
His dreadful Navy, and his lovely Mind,
Gives him the Fear and Favor of Mankind.
His Warrant does the Christian Faith defend;
On that relying all their Quarrels end.
The Peace is signed, and Britain does obtain,
What Rome had sought from her fierce Sons in vain.
In Battles won Fortune a part does claim,
And Soldiers have their Portion in the Fame:
In this successful Union we find
Only the Triumph of a worthy Mind:
It Is all accomplished by his Royal Word,
Without unsheathing the destructive Sword;
Without a Tax upon his Subjects laid,
Their Peace disturbed, their Plenty or their Trade.
And what can they to such a Prince deny,
With whose Desires the Greatest Kings comply?
The Arts of Peace are not to him unknown,
This happy way he marched into the Throne;
And we owe more to Heaven than to the Sword,
The wished return of so benign a Lord.
Charles by Old Greece, with a new Freedom graced
Above her Antique Heroes shall be placed.
What Theseus did, or Theban Hercules
Holds no compare with this Victorious Peace;
Which on the Turks shall greater Honor gain,
Then all their Giants and their Monsters slain.
Those are bold Tales, in fabulous Ages told;
This Glorious Act the Living do behold.
A Panegyric, etc. to O. Cromwell.
WHile with a strong, and yet a gentle hand,
You bridle Faction, and our Hearts command;
Protect us from our selves, and from our Foe,
Make us Unite, and make us Conquer too:
Let partial Spirits still aloud complain,
Think themselves injured that they cannot Reign;
And own no Liberty, but when they may
Without Control upon their Fellows prey.
Above the Waves as Neptune showed his Face,
To chide the winds, and save the Trojan Race:
So has your Highness, raised above the rest,
Storms of Ambition tossing us, represt.
Your Drooping Country, torn with Civil Hate,
Restored by you, is made a Glorious State:
The Seat of Empire; where the Irish come,
And the unwilling Scot, to fetch their doom.
The Sea's our own; and now all Nations greet,
With bending Sails, each Vessel of our Fleet:
Your Power extends as far as Winds can blow,
Or swelling Sails upon the Globe may go.
Heaven, that has placed this Island to give Law,
To Balance Europe, and her States to awe:
In this Conjunction does on Britain smile;
The greatest Leader, and the greatest Isle.
Whether this Portion of the World were rent
By the Rude Ocean from the Continent;
Or thus Created: sure it was designed
To be the Sacred Refuge of Mankind.
Hither the Oppressed shall henceforth resort
Justice to crave, and Succor at your Court:
And then your Highness, not for ours alone,
But for the Worlds Protector shall be known.
Fame, swifter than your winged Navy, flies
Through every Land, that near the Ocean lies,
Sounding your Name, and telling dreadful News,
To all that Piracy and Rapine use.
With such a Chief the meanest Nation blessed,
Might hope to raise her Head above the rest:
What may be thought impossible to do,
For us embraced by the Sea and you?
Lords of the Worlds great waste, the Ocean, we
Whole Forests send to reign upon the Sea:
And every Coast may trouble or relieve;
But none can visit us without your leave.
Angels and we have this Prerogative,
That none can at our Happy Seat arrive:
While we descend, at Pleasure to invade
The Bad with Vengeance, and the Good to aid.
Our little World, the Image of the Great,
Like that amidst the Ambient Ocean set,
Of her own growth has all that Nature craves;
And all that is rare, as Tribute from the Waves.
As Egypt does not on the Clouds rely,
But to her Nile owes more than to the Sky:
So whatsoever our Earth and Heaven denies,
Our ever constant Friend the Sea supplies.
The taste of hot Arabia's Spice we know,
Free from the scorching Sun that makes it grow.
Without that heat, in Persian Silk we shine;
And without Planting, drink of every Vine.
To dig for Wealth we weary not our Limbs;
Gold, tho the heaviest Metal, hither swims.
Ours is the Harvest, where the Indians mow;
We plow the Deep, and reap what others sow.
Things of the noblest kind our own Soil breeds;
Stout are our Men, and Warlike are our Steeds.
Rome, tho her Eagle thro'tho World had flown,
Could never make this Island all her own:
Here the Third Edward, and the Black Prince too;
France Conquering, Henry flourisht, and now you;
For whom we stayed, as did the Grecian State,
Till Alexander came to urge their Fate.
When for more Worlds the Macedonian cried,
He wist not Thetis in her Lap did hide
Another yet, a World reserved for you,
To make more great than that he did subdue.
He safely might old Troops to Battle lead,
Against the unwarlike Persian and the Mede;
Whose hasty flight did from a bloodless Field,
More Spoil than Honor to the Victor yield.
A Race unconquered, by their Clime made bold,
The Caledonians Armed with want and cold,
Have by a fate indulgent to your Fame,
Been from all Ages kept for you to tame.
Whom the old Roman Wall so ill confined,
With a new Chain of Garrisons you bind:
Here foreign Gold no more shall make them come;
Our English Iron holds them fast at home.
They that henceforth must be content to know
No warmer Region than their Hills of Snow;
May blame the Sun, but must extol your Grace,
Which in our Senate has allowed them place:
Preferred by Conquest, happily overthrown,
Falling they Rise, to be with us made one.
So kind Dictators made, when they came home,
Their vanquished Foes Free Citizens of Rome.
Like favor find the Irish, with like fate,
Advanced to be a Portion of our State.
Whilst by your Valor, and obliging Mind,
Nations divided by the Sea are joined.
Holland to gain our friendship is content
To be our Out-gard on the Continent:
She from her fellow Provinces would go,
Rather than hazard to have you her Foe.
In our late fight, when Cannons did diffuse
(Preventing Posts) the Terror and the News;
Our Neighbors then did Tremble at the roar:
But our Conjunction makes them tremble more.
Your never failing Sword made War to cease;
And now you heal us with the Arts of Peace:
Our minds with Bounty, and with Awe Engage;
Invite Affection, and restrain our Rage.
Less Pleasure take brave Minds in Battles won,
Than in restoring such as are undone:
Tigers have Courage, and the Rugged Bear;
But Man alone can when he Conquers, spare.
To Pardon willing, and to punish loath:
You strike with one Hand, but you heal with both:
Lifting up all that Prostrate lie, you grieve
You cannot make the Dead again to Live.
When Fate or Error had our Rage misled,
And over these Nations such Confusion spread:
The only Cure, which could from Heaven come down,
Was so much Power and Clemency in One:
One whose Extraction from a Noble Line,
Gives Hopes again that Well-born Men may shine;
The meanest in your Nature, Mild and Good;
The Noblest Rest secured in your Blood.
Much have we wondered, how you hid in Peace,
A Mind proportioned to such things as these:
How such a Ruling Spirit you could restrain;
And Practice first over your self to Reign.
Your Private Life did a Just Pattern give,
How Fathers, Husbands, Pious Men should live.
Born to Command, your Princely Virtue slept,
Like Humble David, whilst the Flock he kept:
But when your troubled Country called you forth;
Your flaming Courage and your matchless worth,
Dazzling the Eyes of all that did pretend,
To fierce Contention gave a Prosperous end.
Still as you rise, the State exalted too,
Finds no Distemper, while it is changed by you;
Changed like the Worlds great Scene, when without noise
The Rising Sun Night's Vulgar Lights destroys.
Had you some Ages past this Race of Glory
Run, with amazement we should read the Story:
But living Virtue (all Achievements past)
Meets Envy still, to grapple with at last.
This Caesar found, and that ungrateful Age,
Which losing him, fell back to Blood and Rage.
Mistaken Brutus thought to break the Yoke;
But cut the Bond of Union with that stroke.
That Sun once Set, a thousand meaner Stars
Gave a Dim light to Violence and Wars:
To such a Tempest as now threatens all,
Did not your Mighty Arm prevent the fall.
If Rome's great Senate could not weild the sword,
Which of the Conquered World had made them Lord;
What hope had ours, while yet their Power was new,
To Rule Victorious Armies, but by you?
You, that had taught them to subdue their Foes,
Could order, teach, and their high Spirits compose:
To every Duty could their Minds engage;
Provoke their Courage, and command their Rage.
So when a Lion shakes his dreadful Main,
And angry grows; if he that first took pain,
To tame his Youth, approach the haughty Beast;
He bends to him, but frights away the rest.
Then let the Muses, with such Notes as these,
Instruct us what belongs unto our Peace.
Your Battles they hereafter shall Endite,
And draw the Image of our Mars in Fight;
Tell of Towns Stormed, of Armies overrun,
And Mighty Kingdoms by your Conquest won:
How while you thundered, Clouds of dust did choke
Contending Troops, and Seas lay hid in Smoke.
Illustrious Acts high Raptures do Infuse;
And every Conqueror creates a Muse.
Here in low strains your milder Deeds we Sing:
But then (my Lord) we'll Bays and Olive bring,
To crown your Head; while you in Triumph ride
Over Nations Conquered, and the Sea beside:
While all the Neighbor Princes unto you,
Like Joseph's Sheaves, pay Reverence and bow.
Upon the Death of O. C.
WE must resign; Heaven his great Soul does claim
In Storms as loud as his Immortal Fame:
His dying Groans, his last breath shakes our Isle;
And Trees uncut fall for his Funeral Pile.
About his Palace their broad Roots are tossed
Into the Air: So Romulus was lost.
New Rome in such a Tempest mist her King;
And from obeying, fell to Worshipping.
On Oeta's top thus Hercules lay dead,
With ruined Oaks and Pines about him spread.
Those his last Fury from the Mountain rent:
Our dying Hero from the Continent,
Ravished whole Towns; and Forts from Spaniards reft,
As his last Legacy to Britain left.
The Ocean, which so long our hopes confind,
Could give no limits to his vaster mind:
Our bounds enlargement was his latest toil;
Nor has he left us Prisoners to our Isle.
Under the Tropic is our Language spoke,
And part of Flanders has received our Yoke.
From Civil Broils, he did us disingage;
Found Nobler Objects for our Martial Rage:
And with wise Conduct, to his Country showed,
Their ancient way of Conquering abroad.
Ungrateful then! if we no Tears allow
To him, that gave us Peace and Empire too.
Princes that feared him, grieve, concerned to see
No pitch of Glory from the Grave is free.
Nature her self, took notice of his Death;
And sighing, swelled the Sea with such a breath:
That to remotest Shores her Billows rolled
The approaching Fate of their great Ruler told.
Mr. WALLER's Speech to the House of Commons, April 22. 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
I Will use no Preface, as they do who prepare Men for some thing in which they
have a particular Interest: I will only propose what I conceive fit for the
House to consider: and shall be no more concerned in the Event, than they that
shall hear me.

Two things I observe in his Majesty's Demands.

First, The Supply.

Secondly, Our speedy dispatch thereof.

Touching the First: His Majesty's Occasions for Money are but too evident.
For, to say nothing, how we are neglected abroad, and distracted at home; the
Calling of this Parliament, and our Sitting here (an Effect which no light
Cause could in these times have produced) is enough to make any reasonable Man
believe, That the Exchequ^r abounds not so much in Money, as the State does in
Occasions to use it. And I hope we shall all appear willing to disprove those
who have thought to dissuade his Majesty from this way of Parliaments, as
uncertain; and to let Him see, it is as ready, and more safe for the
Advancement of His Affairs, than any New, or pretended Old, way whatsoever.

For the speedy Dispatch required, which was the Second thing, not only his
Majesty, but Res Ipsa loquitur; the occasion seems to importune no less:
Necessity is come upon us like an Armed Man.

Yet the use of Parliaments heretofore (as appears by the Writs that call us
hither) was to advise with His Majesty of things concerning the Church and
Commonwealth. And it has ever been the Custom of Parliaments, by good and
wholesome Laws to refresh the Commonwealth in general; yea and to descend into
the Remedies of particular Grievances; before any mention made of a Supply.
Look back upon the best Parliaments, and still you shall find, That the last
Acts are for the free Gifts of Subsidies on the Peoples part, and General
Pardons on the Kings part. Even the wisest Kings have first acquainted their
Parliaments with their Designs, and the Reasons thereof; and then demanded the
Assistance, both of their Council and Purses. But Physicians, though they be
called of the latest, must not stomach it, or talk what might have been, but
apply themselves roundly to the Cure. Let us not stand too nicely upon
Circumstances, nor too rigidly postpone the matter of Supply, to the healing of
our lighter Wounds. Let us do, what possibly may be done with reason and
Honesty on our parts, to comply with His Majesty's Desires, and to prevent the
imminent Ills which threaten us.

But consider (Mr. Speaker) that they who think themselves already undone, can
never apprehend themselves in Danger: and they that have nothing left, can
never give freely. Nor shall we ever discharge the Trust of those that sent us
hither, or make them believe that they contribute to their own Defense and
Safety; unless his Majesty be pleased, first to restore them to the Propriety
of their Goods and Lawful Liberties, whereof they esteem themselves now out of
Possession. One need not tell you, That the Propriety of Goods is the Mother of
Courage, and the Nurse of Industry, makes us valiant in War, and Good-husbands
in Peace. The Experience I have of former Parliaments, and my present
Observation of the care the Country has had to choose Persons of Worth and
Courage, makes me think this House like the Spartans, whose forward Valor
required some softer Music to allay and quiet their Spirits, too much moved
with the found of Martial Instruments. It Is not the fear of Imprisonment, or,
if need be, of Death it self, that can keep a true-hearted English Man from the
care to leave this part of his Inheritance as entire to Posterity, as he
received it from his Ancestors.

This therefore let us first do, and the more speedily, that we may come to the
matter of Supply; let us give new Force to the many Laws, which have been
heretofore made for the maintaining of our Rights and Privileges, and
endeavor to restore this Nation to the Fundamental and Vital Liberties, the
Propriety of our Goods, and the Freedom of our Persons: No way doubting, but we
shall find His Majesty as gracious and ready, as any of his Royal Progenitors
have been, to grant our just Desires therein. For not only the People do think,
but the Wisest do know, That what we have suffered in this long Vacancy of
Parliaments, we have suffered from his Ministers. That the Person of no King
was ever better beloved of his People; and that no People were ever more
unsatisfied with the Ways of levying Moneys, are Two Truths which may serve one
to demonstrate the other: For such is their Aversion to the present Courses,
That neither the admiration they have of his Majesty's native Inclination to
Justice and Clemency, nor the pretended Consent of the Judges, could make them
willingly submit themselves to this late Tax of Ship Money. And such is their
natural Love and just Esteem of his Majesty's Goodness, That no late Pressure
could provoke them, nor any Example invite them to Disloyalty or Disobedience.

But what is it then, that has bred this misunderstanding betwixt the King and
his People? How is it, that having so good a King, we have so much to complain
of? Why, we are told of the Son of Solomon, that he was a Prince of a tender
Heart; and yet we see, by the Advice of violent Counselors how rough an Answer
he gave to his People. That his Finger should be as heavy as his Fathers Loins,
was not his own, but the Voice of some Persons about him, that wanted the
Gravity and Moderation requisite for the Counselors of a young King. I love
not to press Allegories too far: but the Resemblance of Job's Story with ours
holds so well, that I cannot but observe it to you. It pleased God to give his
Enemy leave to afflict him more than once or twice, and to take all he had from
him; and yet he was not provoked to rebel, so much as with his Tongue: though
he had no very good Example of one that lay very near him, and felt not half
that which he suffered. I hope his Majesty will imitate God in the benigner
part too; and as he was severe to Job only while he discoursed with another
concerning him; but when he vouchsafed to speak himself to him, began to rebuke
those, who had mistaken and mis-judged his Case, and to restore the patient Man
to his former Prosperity: So now, that his Majesty has admitted us to His
Presence, and spoken Face to Face with us; I doubt not, but we shall see fairer
Days, and be as Rich in the Possession of our own as ever we were.

I wonder at those that seem to doubt the Success of this Parliament, or that
the Misunderstanding between the King and his People should last any longer,
now they are so happily met. His Majesty's Wants are not so great, but that we
may find means to supply him: Nor our Desires so unreasonable, or so
incompatible with Government, but that His Majesty may well satisfy them. For
our late Experience, I hope, will teach us what Rocks to shun; and how
necessary the use of Moderation is. And for His Majesty, he has had Experience
enough, how that prospers, which is gotten without the concurrent Good Will of
his People: Never more Money taken from the Subject; never more want in the
Exchequer. If we look upon what has been paid; it is more then ever the People
of England were wont to pay in such a time: if we look upon what has been
effected therewith* it shows, as if never King had been worse supplied. So that
we seem to have endeavored the filling of a Sieve with Water. Whosoever gave
Advice for these courses, has made good the saying of the Wise Man, Qui
conturbat Domum suam, possidebit ventum. By new ways they think to accomplish
Wonders; but in truth they grasp the Wind, and are at the same time cruel to
us, and to the King too. For if the Commonwealth flourish, then he that has
the Sovereignty can never want nor do amiss: so as he govern not according to
the Interest of others; but go the shortest and the safest Ways to his own and
the Common Good.

The Kings of this Nation have always governed by Parliament: And if we look
upon the Success of things since Parliaments were laid by, it resembles that of
the Grecians, Ex illo ftuere and retro sublapsa referri
Res Danaum --
especially on the Subjects part. For though the King has gotten little; they
have lost all.

But His Majesty shall hear the Truth from us; and we shall make appear the
Errors of those Divines, who would persuade us, that a Monarch must be
Absolute, and that he may do all things ad libitum; receding not only from
their Text (though that be a wandering too) but from the way their own
Profession might teach them, State super Vias antiquas, and Remove not the
ancient Bounds and Landmarks which our Fathers have set. If to be Absolute,
were to be restrained by no Laws; then can no King in Christendom be so; for
they all stand obliged to the Laws Christian. And we ask no more; for to this
Pillar are our Privileges fixed, our Kings at their Coronation taking a sacred
Oath not to infringe them.

I am sorry these Men take no more care to gain our Belief of those things,
which they tell us for our Souls Health; while we know them so manifestly in
the wrong, in that which concerns the Liberties and Privileges of the Subjects
of England: But they gain Preferment; and then it is no matter, though they
neither believe themselves, nor are believed by others. But since they are so
ready to let loose the Consciences of their Kings, we are the more carefully to
provide for our Protection against this Pulpit-Law, by declaring and
reinforcing the Municipal Laws of this Kingdom.

It is worth observing, how new this Opinion is, or rather this way of rising,
even among themselves. For Mr. Hooker, who sure was no refractory Man, (as they
term it) thinks, That the first Government was Arbitrary, till it was found,
that to live by one Man's Will, became the Cause of all Men's Misery: (these are
his Words) concluding, That this was the Original of inventing Laws. And if we
look further back, our Histories will tell us, that the Prelates of this
Kingdom have often been the Mediators between the King and His Subjects, to
present and pray redress of their Grievances: and had reciprocally then as much
Love and Reverence from the People.

But these Preachers, more active than their Predecessors, and wiser than the
Laws, have found out a better Form of Government. The King must be a more
Absolute Monarch, than any of his Predecessors; and to them he must owe it:
though in the mean time, they hazard the Hearts of his People; and involve him
in a Thousand Difficulties. For, suppose, this Form of Government were
inconvenient; and yet this is but a Supposition, for these Five hundred Years
it has not only maintained us in safety, but made us Victorious over other
Nations; but, I say, suppose they have another Idea of one more convenient: we
all know how dangerous Innovations are, though to the better, and what hazard
those Princes must run, that enterprise the change of a long established
Government. Now of all our Kings that have gone before, and of all that are to
succeed in this happy Race; Why should so Pious and so Good a King be exposed
to this Trouble and Hazard? Besides, that Kings so diverted can never do any
great Matter abroad.

But while these Men have thus bent their Wits against the Laws of their
Country; whether they have neglected their own Province, and what Tares are
grown up in the Field which they should have tilled, I leave it to a second
Consideration: not but that Religion ought to be the first thing in our
Purposes and Desires: but that which is first in Dignity, is not always to
precede in order of time. For Well-Being supposes a Being; and the first
Impediment, which Men naturally endeavor to remove, is the want of those
things, without which they cannot subsist. God first assigned unto Adam
Maintenance of Life, and gave him a Title to the rest of the Creatures, before
he appointed a Law to observe. And let me tell you, if our Adversaries have any
such design, as there is nothing more easy, than to impose Religion on a
People deprived of their Liberties; so there is nothing more hard than to do
the same upon Freemen.

And therefore (Mr. Speaker) I conclude with this Motion, that there may be an
Order presently made, that the first thing this House will consider of, shall
be the restoring this Nation in general to the Fundamental and Vital Liberties;
the Propriety of our Goods, and Freedom of our Persons: and that then we will
forthwith consider of the Supply desired.

And thus we shall discharge the Trust reposed in us, by those that sent us
hither. His Majesty will see, that we make more than ordinary haste to satisfy
his Demands: and we shall let all those know, that seek to hasten the matter of
Supply, that they will so far delay it, as they give Interruption to the former.

Mr. WALLER's Speech July 6. 1641.
MY LORDS,
IAm commanded by the House of Commons, to present you with these Articles
against Mr. Justice Crawley, which when your Lordships shall have been pleased
to hear read, I shall take leave (according to custom) to say something of what
I have collected from the sense of that House, concerning the Crimes therein
contained.

Then the Charge was read, containing his extrajudicial Opinions subscribed,
and judgment given for Ship Money; and afterward, a Declaration in his charge
at an Assize, That Ship Money was so Inherent a Right in the Crown, that it
would not be in the power of a Parliament to take it away.

My Lords,

NOT only my Wants, but my Affections ronder me less fit for this Employment:
For though it has not been my happiness to have the Law a part of my breeding;
there is no Man honors that Profession more, or has a greater Reverence
toward the Grave Judges, the Oracles thereof. Out of Parliament, all our
Courts of Justice are governed or directed by them: and when a Parliament is
called; if your Lordships were not assisted by them, and the House of Commons
by other Gentlemen of that Robe, Experience tells us, it might run a hazard of
being styled Parliamentum indoctorum. But as all Professions are obnoxions to
the malice of the Professors, and by them most easily betrayed; so (my Lords)
these Articles have told you, how these Brothers of the Coif are become fratres
in malo; how these Sons of the Law have torn out the Bowels of their Mother.
But this Judge (whose charge you last heard) in one expression of his, excels
no less his Fellows than they have done the worst of their Predecessors, in
this Conspiracy against the Commonwealth. Of the Judgment for Ship Money, and
those extrajudicial Opinions preceding the same (wherein they are jointly
concerned) you have already heard: how unjust and pernicious a proceeding that
was in so public a Cause, has been sufficiently expressed to your Lordships.
But this man, adding despair to our misery, tells us from the Bench, that
Ship Money was a Right so Inherent in the Crown, that it would not be in the
Power of an Act of Parliament to take it away. Herein (my Lords) he did not
only give as deep a Wound to the Commonwealth, as any of the rest; but dipped his
Dart in such a Poison, that, so far as in him lay, it might never receive a
Cure. As by those abortive Opinions, subscribing to the Subversion of our
Propriety, before he heard what could be said for it, he prevented his Own; So
by this Declaration of his, he endeavors to prevent the Judgment of Your
Lordships too; and to confine the Power of a Parliament, the only Place where
this Mischief might be redrest. Sure he is more wise and learned, than to
believe himself in this Opinion; or not to know how Ridiculous it will appear
to a Parliament, and how Dangerous to himself: And therefore, no doubt, by
saying, no Parliament could abolish this Judgment; his meaning was, That this
Judgment had abolished Parliaments.

This Imposition of Ship Money, springing from a pretended Necessity; was it
not enough, that it was grown Annual, but he must entail it upon the State for
ever; at once making Necessity inherent to the Crown, and Slavery to the
Subject? Necessity, which dissolving all Law, is so much more prejudicial to
His Majesty than to any of us, by how much the Law has invested his Royal State
with a greater Power, and ampler Fortune. For so undoubted a Truth, it has ever
been, that Kings, as well as Subjects, are involved in the Confusion, which
necessity produces; that the Heathen thought their Gods also obliged by the
same; Pareamus necessitati, quam nec Homines nec Dii superant. This Judge then,
having in his Charge at the Assize declared the dissolution of the Law, by this
supposed necessity; with what Conscience could he at the same Assize proceed to
condemn and punish Men; unless perhaps he meant, the Law was still in force,
for our Destruction, and not for our Preservation? That it should have Power to
kill, but none to Protect us? A thing no less horrid, than if the Sun should
burn without lighting us; or the Earth serve only to bury, and not feed and
nourish us.

But (my Lords) to demonstrate, that this was a supposititious imposed
Necessity, and such as they could remove when they pleased; at the last
Convention in Parliament, a Price was set upon it; for Twelve Subsidies you
shall reverse this Sentence. It may be said, that so much Money would have
removed the present Necessity: but here was a Rate set upon future necessity;
for Twelve Subsidies you shall never suffer necessity again, you shall for ever
abolish that Judgment. Here this Mystery is revealed, this Vizor of Necessity
is pulled off: And now it appears, That this Parliament of Judges had very
frankly and bountifully presented His Majesty with Twelve Subsidies, to be
levied on Your Lordships and the Commons. Certainly there is no Privilege
which more properly belongs to a Parliament, than to open the Purse of the
Subject: and yet these Judges, who are neither capable of sitting among us in
the House of Commons, nor with your Lordships, otherwise than as your
Assistants, have not only assumed to themselves this Privilege of Parliament,
but presumed at once to make a present to the Crown, of all that either your
Lordships, or the Commons of England do, or shall hereafter possess.

And because this Man has had the boldness to put the Power of Parliament in
balance with the opinion of the Judges; I shall entreat your Lordships to
observe by way of comparison, the solemn and safe proceeding of the one, with
the precipitate dispatch of the other. In Parliament (as your Lordships know
well) no new Law can pass, or old be abrogated, till it has been thrice read
with your Lordships, thrice in the Commons House, and then it receives the
Royal Assent; so that it is like Gold seven times purified: Whereas these Judges
by this one Resolution of theirs, would persuade his Majesty, that by naming
Necessity, he might at once dissolve (at least suspend) the great Charter two
and thirty times confirmed by his Royal Progenitors, the Petition of Right, and
all other Laws provided for the maintenance of the Right and Propriety of the
Subject. A strange force (my Lords) in the sound of this word Necessity, that
like a Charm it should silence the Laws, while we are dispoyl'd of all we have.
For that but a part of our goods was taken, is owing to the Grace and Goodness
of the King; for so much as concerns these Judges, we have no more left than
they perhaps may deserve to have, when your Lordships shall have passed
Judgment upon them: This for the neglect of their Oaths, and betraying that
public Trust, which for the conservation of our Laws was reposed in them.

Now for the cruelty and unmercifulness of this Judgment; you may please to
remember that in the old Law they were forbid to sees a Kid in his Mothers
Milk; of which the received interpretation is, that we should not use that to
the destruction of any Creature, which was intended for its preservation: Now
(my Lords) God and Nature has given us the Sea as our best Guard against our
Enemies, and our Ships as our greatest Glory above other Nations; and how
barbarously would these Men have let in the Sea upon us, at once to wash away
our Liberties, and to overwhelm, if not our Land, all the Propriety we have
therein; making the Supply of our Navy, a pretense for the ruin of our Nation?
For observe, beseech you, the fruit and consequence of this Judgment, how this
Money has prospered, how contrary an effect it has had to the end, for which
they pretended to take it: On every County a Ship is annually imposed; and who
would not expect, but our Seas by this time should be covered with the number
of our Ships? Alas (my Lords) the daily Complaints of the decay of our Navy
tell us how ill Ship Money has maintained the Sovereignty of the Sea; and by
the many Petitions which we receive from the Wives of those miserable Captives
at Algier, (being between four or five thousand of our Countrymen) it does too
evidently appear that to make us Slaves at home, is not the way to keep us from
being made Slaves abroad: so far has this Judgment been from relieving the
present, or preventing the future necessity; that as it changed our Real
Propriety into the shadow of a Propriety, so of a feigned it has made a real
necessity.

A little before the approach of the Gauls to Rome, while the Romans had yet
no apprehension of that danger, there was heard a voice in the Air, louder than
ordinary, The Gauls are come; which voice after they had sacked the City, and
besieged the Capitol, was held so ominous, that Livie relates it as a Prodigy.
This Anticipation of necessity seems to have been no less ominous to us: These
Judges, like ill boding Birds, have called necessity upon the State, in a time
when I dare say they thought themselves in greatest security. But if it seem
Superstitious to take this as an Omen; sure I am, we may look on it as a cause
of the unfeigned necessity we now suffer; for what regret and discontent had
this Judgment bred among us? And as when the Noise and Tumult in a private
House grows so loud as to be heard into the Streets, it calls in the next
Dwellers either kindly to appease, or to make their own use of the domestic
strife; so in all likelihood our known discontents at home have been a
concurrent cause to invite our Neighbors to visit us, so much to the expense
and trouble of both these Kingdoms.

And here, My Lords, I cannot but take notice of the most sad effect of this
oppression, the ill influence it has had upon the Ancient Reputation and Valor
of the English Nation: And no wonder, for if it be true that Oppression makes a
wise Man mad; it may well suspend the Courage of the Valiant. The same happened
to the Romans, when for renown in Arms they most excelled the rest of the
World; the story is but short, 'twas in the time of the Decemviri (and I think
the chief troublers of our State may make up that number.) The Decemviri, My
Lords, had subverted the Laws, suspended the Courts of Justice, and (which was
the greatest grievance both to the Nobility and People) had for some years
omitted to assemble the Senate, which was their Parliament: This, says the
Historian, did not only deject the Romans, and make them despair of their
Liberty, but caused them to be less valued by their Neighbors: The Sabines
take the advantage and invade them; and now the Decemviri are forced to call
the long-desired Senate; whereof the People were so glad, that Hostibus
belloque gratiam habuerunt: This Assembly breaks up in discontent: nevertheless
the War proceeds; Forces are raised, led by some of the Decemviri, and with the
Sabines they meet in the Field: I know your Lordships expect the event: My
Authors words of his Countrymen are these, Ne' quid ductu aut auspicio
Decemvirorum prospere gereretur, vinci se patiebantur: They chose rather to
suffer a present diminution of their Honor, than by victory to confirm the
Tyranny of their new Masters: At their return from this unfortunate expedition,
after some distempers and expostulations of the people, another Senate, that
is, a second Parliament, is called; and there the Decemviri are questioned,
deprived of their Authority, imprisoned, banished, and some lose their Lives:
and soon after his vindication of their Liberties, the Romans by their better
success, made it appear to the World, that Liberty and Courage dwell always in
the same Breast, and are never to be divorced. No doubt, my Lords, but your
Justice shall have the like effect upon this dispirited people; it is not the
restitution of our ancient Laws alone, but the restoration of our ancient
Courage, which is expected from your Lordships. I need not say any thing to
move your just indignation, that this Man should so cheaply give away that
which your Noble Ancestors with so much Courage and Industry had so long
maintained: You have often been told how careful they were, though with the
hazard of their Lives and Fortunes, to derive those Rights and Liberties as
entire to Posterity as they received them from their Fathers: what they did
with labor, you may do with ease; what they did with danger, you may do
securely: the foundation of our Laws is not shaken with the Engine of War; they
are only blasted with the Breath of these Men, and by your Breath they may be
restored.

What Judgments your Predecessors have given, and what Punishments their
Predecessors have suffered for Offenses of this nature, your Lordships have
already been so well informed, that I shall not trouble you with a repetition
of those Precedents: Only (my Lords) something I shall take leave to observe of
the Person with whose Charge I have presented you, that you may the less doubt
of the wilfulness of his Offense.

His Education in the Inns of Court, his constant Practice as a Councellor, and
his Experience as a Judge (considered with the mischief he has done) makes it
appear, that this Progress of his through the Law, has been like that of a
diligent Spy through a Country, into which he meant to conduct an Enemy.

To let you see he did not offend for company; there is one Crime so peculiar
to himself, and of such malignity, that it makes him at once incapable of your
Lordships favor, and his own subsistence incompatible with the right and
propriety of the Subject: for if you leave him in a capacity of interpreting
the Laws; has he not already declared his opinion, That your Votes and
Resolutions against Ship Money are void, and that it is not in the power of a
Parliament, to abolish that Judgment? To him, my Lords, that has thus played
with the power of Parliament, we may well apply what was once said to the Goat
browsing on the Vine. Rode, caper, vitem; tamen hinc cum stabis ad aras
In tua quod fundi Cornua possit, erit:


He has cropped and infringed the Privileges of a banished Parliament; but now
it is returned, he may find it has power enough to make a Sacrifice of him, to
the better establishment of our Laws: and in truth what other satisfaction can
he make his injured Country, than to confirm by his Example those Rights and
Liberties which he had ruined by his Opinion?

For the proofs, my Lords, they are so manifest, that they will give you little
trouble in the disquisition: his Crimes are already upon Record, the Delinquent
and the Witness is the same; having from several seats of Judicature proclaimed
himself an Enemy to our Laws and Nation, Ex ore suo judicabitur. To which
purpose, I am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons, to desire your Lordships that as speedy a proceeding may be had
against Mr. Justice Crawley, as the course of Parliaments will permit.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 4. Line 11. for its, r his. p. 7. l. ult. in Spoil, r. in the Spoil. p.
8. l. 14. after She Is gone, make! p. 9. enters, r. enter. p. 22. l. ult. King,
r. Kings. p. 24. l. 1. dele? ib. l. 8. rember, r. remember. p. 41. l 3.
passions, r. passion. p. 42. l. 12. Tempest, r. Tempests. p. 56. l. ult. and
our sake, r. and for our sake. p. 60. l. 5. guld, r. guild. p. 60. l. 9. the,
r. these.


