portrait or Sir William Waller Sr William Waller.

DIVINE MEDITATIONS Upon SEVERAL OCCASIONS: With a Daily Directory.

By the Excellent Pen of Sir William Waller, Knight.

LONDON.

Printed by B. Griffin for Benj. Alsop at the Angel and Bible over against the
Stocks-Market, 1680.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
I Will not draw the Justice of this Dedication into suspicion by a needless
Apology, since it is evident none else will relish them, none else can improve
them: Had I invited those degenerated Souls that have so far forgotten their
celestial extract, as to plunge themselves in earthly pleasures, to enjoy these
Divine Meditations, it had been the same discourteous Courtesy, as to turn a
filthy Swine into a curious Garden or clear Fountain, whose sordid inclinations
would rather choose to Wallow in the Mire, its own proper Element. To remove
these earthly natures from their own gross air, into the purer breathings of
these Regions, is but to Transport Toads into Ireland, where the climate being
contrary to their poisonous constitutions must immediately destroy them: It was
equally the folly and sin of the Projectors of the Tower of Babel, to design a
structure as high as Heaven; not considering that their earthly frames must
starve and pine with the Refined breezes of those Heavenly Habitations: I could
wish therefore that the Superliminare of the Holy Herbert to his Divine Poems
were perfixt to these Meditations.

Avoid Profaneness! come not here!
Nothing but Holy, Pure, and Clear,
Or that which groanveth to be so,
May at it is peril, further go!
To enlarge in their Commendations is a labor as vain as Impossible Vain; for
what Accession will it make to the luster of the Sun, to light up our dim
candle to paraphrase upon his glorious Beams? and Impossible too; for to
commend below the Dignity of the Subject is an Interpretative Reproach: Modesty
will not blush to say of these Papers, that in respect of the matter, they are
all Glorious within; and in respect of the Language, their Clothing is of
wrought Gold: And Gold needs no Gilding! It Is the great disparagement of
Authentic beauties to paint; Let Vulgar faces owe their Complexions to ceruss:
And Vermillion, such approved pieces of proportion are their own Orators; the
Diamond needs no foil to set of its beauty, and one taste of Honey will more
effectually recommend its sweetness then the most elaborate Panegyric.

The pious Author, being here placed in the shades of his privacy and
retirements, sits in the most advantageous posture for an Artist to draw him to
the life, which must have deluded his Art were he represented in the glaring
shine of outward glory; but without his own pencil who shall dare to take his
picture? Let us then content our selves that we have here a window into his
breast through which we may observe the inward workings of his Soul which we
conclude are therefore sincere because secret, God and his own conscience being
only privy to them.

As we would not take the counterfeit of a friend, when inflamed with a Fever,
emaciated with a consumption or discomposed with passion; but in his most
vegete, and healthful habit, in his most sedate and composed hours, so do these
Meditations represent the Author, not as engaged in the dust and sweat of
Action; not as heated with the emotions, and fermentations of Valor, but as
one sequestered from the noise, and bussle of a vexing world, when he was most
himself, that is when most in the contemplation of the unseen world* The Soul
is then its own faithful mirror, when the contracted adventitious dust is wiped
off: as the Sea is then the trusts looking Glase when least ruffled with
storms and Tempests.

If he be justly famous to this day, who first taught the Great Calvin to
write, and speak Latin, we need nothing more to evidence this pious Authors
worth, than that one of the most mortified persons of this our Age has professed
that he learned from him, the Art of Dying. A lesson, which we are all the more
concerned to take out exactly, that we may not be to seek when the Sovereign
Arbitrator of our lives shall call us out to repeat it. Once we must die; and
whatever errors we commit in that work, must not return toreview, correct, and
amend them. It Is our Interest then as well as our duty to die every day, that
we may not bungle at it, when we come to die at our last day: In order to which
great end the Author has bequeathed us these directions as a Legacy, that we
may die but once, and live for ever: I shall add but one small thing more, that
thou have this Copy from his own Hand, without the Addition or substraction of
one word, one syllable, one letter; and in this his exactness, do center the
excellencies of the two great Poets, Virgil, and Ovid, to the former of whom,
none could add, from the latter, none could steal the smallest particle,
without apparent injury, to their digested raptures, Farewell!

Errata.
IN the Preface p. ^. l. 5. r. groaneth. p. 6. l 15, dele: p. 1^. l. 1 r truest
looking Glass. p. 106. line ult. read these words.

Divine Meditations Upon SEVERAL OCCASIONS.
MEDITAT. I. Upon my awaking in a dark Night.
LOrd where am I? and in what world? how are all things about me (as they were
in that no world, in that confused Mass and Chaos) swadled up in bands of thick
darkness? It is not without reason, that the most horrid things, that we can
imagine ( misery, death, hell it self) are represented by this black Solitude;
there being nothing of more contrariety to our nature, than the privation of
light. If it be so uncomfortable to be in the dark, and to have no light, how
dismal must it be in a spiritual sense to be in the dark, and to have no trust?
that is a darkness to be felt indeed!

If this night were to continue but three days, (like that in Egypt) I should
think it a plague; how much more, if it were to be everlasting, would it be a
hell to me, though there were no other torment to accompany it? How
unconceivably miserable is the estate of those damned Souls, that lie manacled
and fettered in chains of eternal darkness, and are not only banished from the
light of the Sun, but (which is the blackness of darkness) shut out from the
light of Gods countenance, and adjudged to eternal pains? But what an Idol am I
in this condition? I have eyes and see not; all natural helps and parts are
vain and useless, except the God of nature, vouchsafe to actuate them, and to
make them instrumental. O my Soul, be not disquieted with this; what though I
cannot see for the present? God has made comforts, as he has made lights for
the night as well as for the day. There are songs in the night, and my mouth
may be open to show forth the high praises of God, even when I am upon my Bed,
and mine eyes sealed up in darkness. The sight of the eyes is not always
pleasing! how many times have mine eyes wounded my heart, when they have seen
what they would not have seen? nay (which is worse) how many times have they
corrupted my heart, when they have seen what they should not have seen? at the
best, various objects are but a distraction to the mind, and by raising vain
desires, bring it to a needless indigency, inducing a want of many things,
which we want not. There is a kind of innocence in seeing nothing!

It is a comfort, and an inestimable one, that in the want of the use of my
bodily eyes, I have the benefit of a spiritual eyesight; so that although I
cannot see, as Cats and Bats, and Owls do, yet I can see as Saints, and Angels
see, no interpositions can hinder an intellectual prospect. Be it never so
dark, I can (without the help of a Candle) look into my self, and in the sense
of my wants, looks up, to God, and find a clear lightsome passage through Jesus
Christ to the throne of his grace. But what do I say? I can? O my God, pardon
the presumption of that language! of my self, as of my self, I can do nothing
but sin! I am darkness (there is a midnight within me) and I can only see, that
I cannot see! It were not only a blindness in me, but a remaining sin to boot,
if I should say, I see. Who so blind, as they that are perfect? It is in thy
light alone, that I see light! Thy gracious illuminating eye, is mine eye sight!

Lord let me ever enjoy the continuance of that aspect, and then in the darkest
condition (though it were the shadow of death) I shall not be afraid of any
terrors; even the night shall be light about me; or if it be not, it shall be
light with me. Sorrow may endure for a night, but joy will come in the Morning;
and in a morning that shall never see night! In the mean time, O my God, though
I can see nothing here but darkness and obscurity, it is my safety, that thou
see me; it is my happiness that I can see thee! what can I wish for more in
this world, then to be safe, and happy? return again unto thy rest, O my Soul,
for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee!

MEDITATION. II. Upon the Sunrising.
TRuly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold
the Sun! look out, O my Soul, and see a miracle, and no wonder. Behold that
glorious ruler of the day, as a bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, decked
with beauty and excellency. If this great luminary had never showed it self
abroad till now, and were now to be seen, but as a rarity, this once; with what
a Persian adoration should we be ready to welcome it, and with what dejected
countenances, should we bid it farewell? Now that we see it every day, we scarce
take notice that we see it: once certain it is, that we heed it nothing so
much, as any unusual Meteor, or fiery exhalation; so much more prone are we by
nature to be taken with new, than with worthy, if ordinary objects!

And yet, upon a just account (all things considered) Gods ordinary works,
which are established in a constant course, are more wonderful than those
extraordinary miracles, which we most admire: for the standing still of this
Sun at Joshua's arrest, was not in it self so stupendous, as the daily
progress thereof, that being so vast a body, as it is, it should in the compass
of a few hours circulate the World: Lord give me a true sense and apprehension
of thine eternal Power and Godhead; and of thine invisible things, in the
things that are made, even for common use, and which thou have distributed unto
all Nations under the cope of Heaven; that so, as all those works praise thee,
in the determinate order of their services; I may likewise constantly give thee
praise for them; not only because thou have made them beautiful and excellent
in their kinds, for thine own glory; but because thou have made them ordinary
and common, for the good of all thy creatures.

How does this morning light revive, and cherish all things, and give them as
it were a resurrection from the dead, and a new being? But even now they were
buried in obscurity, and before I can well recollect my self, they appear in
their proper colors, and stand as a garment new made up. O thou Sun of
Righteousness, arise upon my Soul with healing in thy wings, and scatter those
shaddows of darkness, that have so long benighted me; enlighten the eyes of my
understanding, and so renew and quicken me by the influence of thy grace, that
thy light may be a new life unto me; that I may live, yet not I, but thou that
live in me!

That Philosopher said truly, if the Sun were wanting, it would be night for
all the Moon and Stars; for nothing but the Sun can make it day: And it is as
true in a spiritual consideration; if it were not for Jesus Christ the light of
the world, notwithstanding all the illumination we can receive from reason and
sense, we should be still in the dark; and therefore some have observed, that
our Savior was born on the fourth day of the week, which was the same day of
the week, wherein the Sun was created; as to show that he was that Sun of
Righteousness, and that true light that lights every one that comes into the
world.

What a general blessing is this beneficent planet? and how is the divine
nature of God emblematically represented by it? It is good unto all; it rises
on the evil, and on the good; and without regard of persons, shines upon the
poor man's Cottage, as well as upon the Princes Palace, and nothing is hid from
the influential heat thereof! Lord, this is a Copy of that universal Goodness,
which is originally in thy self; but with this difference, that what the Sun
does, as to the fomenting and cherishing of inferior Bodies, it does it as a
natural agent, necessarily, and insensibly; but what thou do, is voluntarily
and freely done, out of thine infinite love, and goodness to thy Creatures.
Thou art the Fountain of all blessing, and the God of all praise! Lord work
upon my corrupt nature by the influence of thy grace, that I may be conformed
unto thee in the extension of mine affections unto all; in a way of doing good,
not only to my neighbors, and such as love me, but to mine enemies, to those
that curse, hate, and despightfully use me; that so I may approve my self a
true child of my father which is in heaven; and be perfect, even as he is
perfect.

But yet this beneficence of the sun works not alike upon all; those gracious
beams that soften the wax, do but harden the Clay; and as they make the flowers
smell the sweeter, so they operate no further upon the Dunghill, then to make
that the more fetide, and noisome. It is a sad thing to be hardened by mercies,
and to be the worse for Gods being good to us!

Though this sun-light be so pleasant to behold, yet it does mine eyes no good
to gaze upon it. If the luster of a created light be so dazeling; how
unapproacheable must that divine light be wherein the great Creator dwells,
the resplendency whereof is the light of light? Content thy self, O my Soul,
with that prospect thou have had of God's goodness (so far as he has been
pleased to reveal himself unto thee) but do not presume to speculate into his
glory, least thou be oppressed with it.

It is impossible to see this light, but by its own light: who ever beheld the
sun, but by the light of the sun? as impossible is it to see the Father of
lights, but by the radiancy of the Son, who is the brightness of his glory! or
to discern the things of the Spirit of God, otherwise then by the revelation of
his spirit! The commandments of the Lord is pure, inlightening the eyes: we
see it, and see by it. But what is become of all those heavenly tapers, those
spangles of light, that did so lately adorn the sky? How has the luster of
this predominant light obscured, and darkened them; It is in one sense, a sad
exchange between the light of the Sun, and the light of the Moon and Stars;
that the Sun, though it do open, and reveal the sight of earthly things, yet it
closes, and shuts up the prospect of the celestial Globe, so that we cannot
discern the beauty, and variety of those heavenly bodies above us, as we may
do in the night. It is the misery of prosperity, that as by reason of the
brightness of that light wherewith it is environed, it gives us a clear view
of the glory of this world, and of all the vanities in it; so withal it
darkeneth, and concealeth divine things, and thereby indisposeth us to raise
our affections unto them: And on the other side, it is the felicity of
adversity, that although the air about it be very obscure, yet therein we best
discern God, and spiritual things; so Job in his afflicton could say, Now mine
eye sees thee, of whom before he had only heard, by the hearing of the ear.
Lord thou know what condition is fittest for me, and I presume not to
appoint thy wisdom, but so far as a poor beggar may be a chooser, I beseech
thee rather to keep me in the dark (if thorough that veil, I may be admitted
to see the light of thy countenance) then to suffer me to be dazeled with the
luster of this vain world, wherein there is nothing to be seen, but that which
is nothing, and less then nothing; O let me rather enjoy light in darkness,
then live in darkness, when I am in the light!

In the beginning, for the first three days of the Creation week, there was no
sun at all; but yet there was light, and that light was universally diffused
thorough all parts, until it pleased God to contract it into one body. O Lord,
thou alone do great wonders! how great are thy works? how great this work?
wherein thou did (as I may say) create the effect, before the cause. Thou art
not limited to the methods of our weak reason, but can do every thing,
according to the council of thine own will, not only by, but without, and
contrary to means. There is no glorying, no trusting but in thee alone, unto
whom all means, and more, are alike subservient!

As in the Creation, during those first three days, God made, and continued
the light, and then upon the fourth day, made that light a sun; so in his order
of proceeding with his Children, he gives them a three days light; the first
of nature, when he quickens them in their Mothers womb, with a reasonable
soul; the second of Grace, when he regenerateth them in the womb of his Church,
by his Sanctifying spirit; the third of beatitude, in a state of bliss, when he
receives their departed Souls into his rest; and then upon the fourth day
(that is, at the general resurrection) when he reuniteth their Souls, and
bodies in glory, he gathers this light into a Sun, from which time they shall
to all eternity shine forth, as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father.

What a World will that be, when we shall have no Sun again? when we shall need
none? nay, when instead of one Sun, there shall be more Suns than there are
Stars in the Firmament? when every Saint shall be a Sun, and yet all those
Saints (as if they were but so many stars) shall receive their light from
another Sun of infinite glory; from the glory of God, the Fountain of all
light? that light is sown here for the Righteous; O when will the harvest time
come? Awake, awake, O my Soul, and contemplate that happy time, whenever it
shall come. It is some anticipation of it, to think upon it before it comes!
Watch for that morning, more than they that watch for the morning! But, Lord,
it is not of him that watches, no more than of him that wills, but of thee
who show mercy! O do thou, by the irradiation of thy grace make such a clear
day in my Soul, as that I may not only see thy light here, and receive in it,
and walk by it, but be it; so shall I be light in thee, and (according to that
expression in thine own word) thou shall then walk in me! my path shall then be
as the shining light, and I shall shine out more and more unto that full, clear
and everlastingly perfect day of thy Glory.

MEDITAT. III. Upon my rising out of Bed, and putting on my Clothes.
SLuggish Soul, how long will thou lie lazing? what, yet a little slumber? yet,
a little folding of the hands? Awake, they that sleep, sleep in the night, do
not fancy thy self to be among the Antipodes, as if it were night with thee,
when it is day with us. If thou will but open thy window, thou may with
shame behold the Sun already mounted above our horizon, and in his silent
language seeming to reproach thee, that he has traveled round about the world
but Yesterday, and yet is up before thee this morning! let no sleep, like an
unjust Publican, exact more of thy time, then is his due, and make thy days
shorter, then God has made them. There is so much life gained, as is saved out
of sleep!

Be not too secure in this condition; whilst thou art drouzing, the devil is
hunting; and he has a way to hunt Souls with Pillowes, and night-caps.
Remember he is no sluggard, but will surely roste what he takes in hunting!

How strangely do those people live, that begin their morning at noone, and
their noone at night; that turn day into night, and live backward? But it is no
wonder to see Owls fly abroad at late hours! O my Soul, God never created thee
to live in a feather-bed! life consists in action; idleness is but a living
death. And what does the Lord require of thee; not to lie still; but to arise,
and be doing; to walk whilst thou have light, humbly with thy God, and
honestly with thy neighbor, as a child of the day!

Up then my Soul, and cast off the works of darkness; night clothes are not a
fit wear for the day. He, whom thou love, calls thee, do not say, I have
put off my coat, how shall I put it on? but without delay, echo that call,
with a lo, I come, to do thy will!

But where are my clothes? O my God, what a beggarly creature am I, that have
nothing to put on, but what I am feign to borrow? if it were not for the supply
which I receive from a poor worm, from a silly sheep, I could neither be fine,
nor warm. By right the borrower should be servant to the lender; but Lord,
thou have given me dominion over these serviceable creditors. How should I at
once be humbled under the sense of mine own indigence, and thankfully exalted
in the apprehension of thy goodness to me? But what is man? nay (which is
worse) what am I? surely I am more brutish then any man; more sottish then
those brute creatures, unto whom I am so much indebted. They are not proud of
those habiliments which they impart to me, I live upon their collections, and
yet am apt to pride my self in this beggary. O my soul, this glorying is not
good: what is it, but a glorying in shame? nakedness was the original bravery
of our first parents in Paradise, and shall be our last bravery in heaven, when
we shall be in the Angels mode. Lord correct this depraved nature in me by thy
grace, that I may no longer fashion my self according to my former lusts and
vanities, but be conformed to that inward dress, which in thy sight is of
greatest price; so though mine outside may be plain and bare, I shall be sure
to be all Glorious within.

But yet, O my God, thou know I have need of raiment, as well as of food,
and other outward accommodations; and thou art pleased to allow me a
providential (though not a sollicitous) care, for what I shall put on. I
beseech thee so to order my thoughts, that in the pursuit of these things, I
may follow thy prescribed method of husbandry; first to seek thy Kingdom, and
thy righteousness, and then in the use of good means to trust thee for the rest.

But in what a new case am I, when I am apparelled? how warmed and comforted?
blessed be God, that I have not that curse upon me, mentioned in the Prophecy
of Haggai, to be clothed and not warm, those clothes cannot but do me good,
that are lined with thy blessing!

It is the common opinion, that our clothes warm us, but the truth is, we warm
our clothes, and they do but keep us warm with our own heat. As it is in this,
so it is in all earthly comforts, which have nothing of satisfaction in
themselves, but that placency which we take to be in them, is but a resultance
from our own minds, a warmth which we give them. Lord sanctify these outward
things unto me, that, in the fruition of them, I may so use them, as not to
abuse them, by looking for that in them, which is only to be found in thee.
Thou art the blessing of all blessings; from thee I have all, in thee I enjoy
all, and without thee all is nothing?

O my God, it is the desire of my Soul to be dressed and fitted to wait upon
thee in the way wherein thou would have me to go, but I dare not think of
coming into thy presence in an unseemly Garment; in the nasty rags of the old
man; and I have no other suit of mine own but that. O do thou give that happy
word of command, to have that filthy Garment taken away from me; and say unto
my Soul, behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass away, and I will cloth
thee with change of raiment. I beseech thee furnish thy poor Creature, out of
thy divine wardrobe with those graces that may most adorn my profession: above
all vouchsafe to cloth me with the Garment of mine elder Brother (that is the
best Robe) and under that covert grant me thy blessing: so what ever may befall
me here, I shall be sure to rise in a happy hour at the last day; when being
clothed with his righteousness, I shall be clothed upon with his Glory!

MEDITATION. IV. Upon my retirement into my Closet.
HOw little does the world know the happiness of a Closet? But it is no wonder,
for this happiness is not of the world: and therefore by those that can discern
nothing spiritually, it is esteemed as no other, then a delight in a sedentary
sluggish life, or as no better then a melancholy discontented humor. But my
Soul, thou art above these misapprehensions. Go in; shall I say into this room,
or rather into this other world? into thy world? for when thou art abroad, thou
art abroad, thou art in a common world, wherein every person has an
inter-right with thee; but here, within the enclosure of these Walls, thou art
in a particular world of thine own; and all is thine own.

In this little Monarchy, methinks I may say without offense, Soul take thine
ease, and with quiet senses enjoy thine own company, it is something for a man
to be his own inmate, to dwell with himself; and no small happiness in that
cohabitation to live quietly, and without a dropping house. There is a physical
virtue in quietness; some diseases in the body, and most distempers in the mind
are cured by it; I may add further, that there is a heavenliness in it; those
Regions that are highest are quietest, and God himself who is higher then the
highest, is in the fruition of himself, the most quiescent. O my God, whilst
others affect the wings of an Eagle to fly high, let it be my prayer to have
the wings of a Dove, to fly away, and be at rest; that being sequestered from
the vexatious vanities of the world, I may enjoy a free conversation with thee
in heaven; so shall my quietness be my strength; and this rest a prelibution of
my eternal rest!

But yet my Soul take heed unto thy self in this solitude; it is possible for
thee to be in ill company, when thou art alone. Be not rash; but think what
thou would think! do not affect a free will in thinking; evil thoughts have
an evil communication in them, and may corrupt good manners: slight not vain
thoughts; the thought of foolishness is sin; and every foolish thought, as well
as every idle word, must be accounted for; bar them out, as much as thou can,
and though they may clamor at it, and challeng a prescription for a thorough
fare in thee, and thou art not able altogether to hinder their way, but that
they will break thorough, yet never let it be with thy consent, and sufferance,
and so long the trespass will be on their side. Above all be sure to give them
no lodging; though thou can not hinder the birds of the air from flying over
thine head yet thou may keep them from building, and nestling in thine hair:

But my God, what shall I do? or wherewith shall I come before thee, who have
not so much as a good thought to offer unto thee? O do thou work all my
thoughts, as well as (in reference to any good) thou do work all my works
in me: all my sufficency is of thee. Perfect thy strength in my weakness, and
I, even when I am weak, shall be made strong.

Methinks this place has something of a Bethel in it: I may call it the house
of God, where I have frequently enjoyed a sweet and comfortable communion with
his divine Majesty; and the gate of Heaven, where I have often knocked, and it
has been opened unto me. From this poor room I can freely, and without
disturbance, or interruption look up, and with an eye of faith contemplate the
glories of heaven, the felicity of the Saints, the perfection of those
tabernacles not made with hands, and behold those invisibilities, which mortal
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor heart conceived; from hence, I can look
down upon all the works, that are done under the Sun, and see that they are
but as the labors of a company of ants in an ant-hill, where some are employed
to gather in their small provisions, and others are buisied about their eggs,
and young ones; and some go up, and some go down, crossing and thwarting one
another; and all are in action, and all is about a little heap of dust.

Let the vain world deride these speculations, and retirements; it is, and
shall be the delight of my Soul to enjoy both: whereby I may gain more light
to my knowledge, more heat to my affections, and more acquaintance with my God;
and from a right estimation of the temporal things which are seen, come to have
a sweet fruition of those eternal things which are not seen. In order to this,
O thou God of my prayers, and praises, teach me how to pray that I may
meditate; and teach me how to meditate that I may pray; so shall the words of
my mouth, and the meditations of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight; and thou
shall have the praise of thine own work in me!

MEDITATION. V. Upon the contentment I have in my Books and Study.
HEre is the best solitary company in the World: and in this particular chiefly
excelling any other, that here I am sure to converse with none but wise men;
but abroad it is impossible for me to avoid the society of fools: what an
advantage have I by this good fellowship, that besides the help which I receive
from hence, in reference to my life after this Life, I can enjoy the life of so
many Ages before I lived? that I can be acquainted with the passages of three
or four thousand years ago, as if they were the weekly occurrences! here,
without traveling so far as Endor, I can call up the ablest spirits of those
times; the learned Philosophers, the wisest Counselors, the greatest
Generals, and make them serviceable to me; I can make bold with the best Jewels
they have in their treasury, with the same freedom that the Israelites
borrowed of the Egyptians, and, without suspicion of Felony make use of them,
as mine own. I can hear, without trespassing, go into their Vine-Yards, and not
only eat my fill of their Grapes for my pleasure; but put up as much as I will
in my Vessel, and store it up for my profit, and advantage.

How does this prospect at once set off the Goodness of God to me, and discover
mine own weakness? his Goodness in providing these helps for the improvement of
mine understanding; and my weakness in needing them. What a pitiful simple
creature am I, that cannot live to any purpose, without the help of so many
other men's brains? Lord, let this be the first Lesson that I learn from these
silent counselors, to know my own ignorance: other knowledge puffs up, this
edifieth.

It was a scoffing, and unhandsome speech in Festus to Paul, that much learning
made him mad: but it was seriously, and sadly said by the prophet Jeremy, that
every man (every idolatrous wicked man) is foolish, or brutish, (which is mad
almost) by his own knowledge. It is possible for a man to know so much, that at
last, by overvalluing his knowledge, he may come to know nothing, as he ought to
know; and we have an unhappy proof of this, in the example of our first
parents; who, out of a fond desire to know more then came to their share,
transgressed, and thereby brought themselves to that pass, that they know only
their own shame, and were ashamed of their own knowledge. Whilst others please
themselves in high notions, and speculations, it shall be my study to follow
the Apostles rule, and to be wise unto sobriety.

But we have a generation of people in the world, that are so far from putting
themselves upon the hazard of knowing too much, that they affect a kind of
Socratical knowledge (though it be the clear contrary way) a knowledge of knowing
nothing they hate learning, and wisdom, and understanding with that perfect
hatred, that if one could fancy such things to be in paradise, one would think
(if I may speak it, as I mean it without profaness) that the Devil could not
tempt them to come near the tree of knowledge; I cannot say these are in a state
of innocence, but I am sure they are in a state of simplicity. But among those
few persons (especially those of quality) that pretend to look after books,
how many are there that affect rather to look upon them, then in them? some
covet to have Libraries in their houses, as Ladies desire to have Cupboards of
plate in their Chambers, only for show; as if they were only to furnish their
rooms, and not their minds; if the only having of store of Books, were
sufficient to improve a man, the Stationers would have the advantage of all
others; but certainly books were made for use, and not for ostentation; in
vain do they boast of full Libraries, that are contented to live with empty
heads.

In opposition to these extremes, I meet with another sort of people, that
delight themselves in reading, but it is in such a desultory way, running from
one book to another, as Birds skip from from one bough to another, without
design, that it is no mervaile if they get nothing but their labor for their
pains, when they seek nothing, but change, and diversion: they that ride post,
can observe but little.

It is in reading, as it is in making many books; there may be a pleasing
distraction in it, but little or no profit. I would therefore do in this, as
Merchants use to do in their trading; who in a coasting way, put in at several
ports, and take in what Commodities they afford, but settle their factories in
those places only, which are of special note: I would by the by, allow my self
a traffic with sundry authors, as I happned to light upon them, for my
recreation; and I would make the best advantage that I could of them; but I
would fix my study upon those only, that are of most importance to fit me for
action, which is the true end of all learning, and for the service of God,
which is the true end of all action. Lord teach me so to study other men's
works, as not to neglect mine own; and so to study thy word, which is thy work,
that it may be a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path; my candle to work
by. Take me off from the curiosity of knowing only to know; from the vanity of
knowing only to be known; and from the folly of pretending to know more then I
do know; and let it be my wisdom to study to know thee, who art life eternal.
Write thy law in my heart, and I shall be the best book here.

MEDITATION. VI. Upon an entertainment of Godly Friends.
WHat a deal of Heaven is there in in this company? methinkes, like Abraham, I
entertain Angels; the comfort, and illumination that I receive from them, has
so much of that society in it. Certainly there is no pleasure in this world
comparable to the enjoyment of the Communion of Saints; where good people are
compacted, and united together in affection, and judgment, and interest, as
fellow members of one body, which (though many) have but one heart, and one
head; and are so one another, that they are members one of another, that they
are all one in Christ.

But in the name of wonder, what is it that should be so taking in this
company? where is the wine, and the strong drink? where are the costly
ointments, and the Crowns of rosebuds? the Music, dancing, laughing? the
world understands the language of these jollities without the help of an
interpreter: But for people to meet, only to talk one another into gravity, and
to spend time in speculative discourses of another world, when they might give
themselves the pleasure of this: if this be mirth, what does it? It may seem a
strange and an impertinent advice of this great Moralist to his friend
Lucilius, that above all things, he should be careful to learn^, how to be
merry; one would think there should go no great matter of Philosophy to that:
But there is a mistake in it: True mirth is Metaphysical, and supernatural. It
is not the crackling of thorns under a pot; a blaze, and a noise, and a
nothing; (the laughter of a mad man is not mirth); but it is a severe, and (I
may say) a Divine thing. It is an anticipation of the joys of Heaven in the
delightful society of a good conscience, when we are alone; and (together with
that) of conscientious friends, when we are in company. They are the merry
hearts, that keep the continual Feast. It is one of the Devils lies, and that
of which he has made as great advantage, as of any, that Religion is a dull
flat melancholy thing; whereas in truth, there is no such clear, defecate
mirth, as that which comes from the Springs above. The Prophet Isaiah,
speaking of the coming of our Savior in the flesh, gave this Character of him,
That he should not be sad, (so it is rendered in the vulgar translation) that
he should not be of a sullen, retired disposition, but amicable, and free; and
it was verified in his conversation. He was anointed with the oil of gladness,
and we have that Spiritual unction from him. Let the men of the world deride
this heavenly mirth, as the Covetous Pharisees derided the true riches, which
Christ spoke of, as a fantastical thing; they do but like those, that make
themselves merry, at the sight of a company dancing a far off, when they
cannot hear the music whereby their gestures and motions are directed, and
therefore judge them to be antic, and ridiculous: They take this mirth to be
no other then a folly, and laugh at they know not what; because being at such a
distance from the godly, they cannot take notice of the heavenly harmony, and
accord, that is between their orderly conversation, and the aires of Gods
spirit, quickening, and inlivening them with joys unspeakable, and full of
glory. Nothing but ignorance is the mother of this misopinion.

But what are these friends, that are so wellcom? are they persons of honor,
or interest; is there any thing to be gotten by them? the fashion of the world
is, to serve the Ball only to those that can return it; and to bid those only,
that can bid again. It is a sad word; Not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called; but God has chosen the foolish, weak,
base inconsiderable things of the world, things that are nothings, to route and
confound all humane wisdom and might, and to annul things that are. The Lord
sees not, as man sees; vainglorious fools may pride themselves in that,
which is none of their own (the virtue and generosity of their ancestors) or in
that which has no being at all, but in fancy, riches and estate: It is not
flaggs, and pedigree, but a noble heart, that makes a noble person; true
goodness is true greatness; and Gods blessing, the true riches; he that has
that, has all ^s slight account as there is made of these good people, and of
such as these, they are the Children of the King of heaven, and though possibly
their names may not be extant in the Heralds books, they will be found written
in the book of life. Our little great ones of the world may think them only
fit, to stand at the lower end of the room, or to sit under the footstool;
but with their good leave, they that shall one day sit down with Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, are good enough now, to be guests
at the best table upon earth.

How happy are the hours that are spent in such company as this? to speak more
properly, they are not spent but gaind: So much time thus redeemed, is so much
life clearly gotten; there is a prolongation of life in a holy Conversation, it
is one thing to be in the world, and another to live in it. They only live,
that live well. Vicious persons, that give themselves up to their pleasures,
are dead whilst they live, and are but a kind of walking Ghosts; but the
living, the living, they praise God, and they only live, that do praise him.

There is nothing that has a greater influence upon our lives, than the
company we keep, generally Men are like that Mercurial Planet, good or bad
according to their conjunction with others. There is in all societies an
attracting, and assimilating quality; and although thorough the corruption that is
predominant in our natures, this is more apparent in the operation of evil,
rather than of Good Company, yet there is true grace, this Magnetic Virtue
will show it self, and those that are touched with it, will endeavor to work
upon others, and to make them like themselves; so Philip will draw Nathaniel;
Andrew will draw Peter, and Peter (when converted) will strengthen his Brethen.
And of this the worst times are the best Witnesses; when thorough the common
opposition of wicked men, the affections of those that are good, are the more
inflamed each to other: for as Roses and Garlic set near together, do by
extraction of contrary juices out of the Earth become both, in their several
kinds, the stronger sented; and the Roses are the more sweet and oderate, by
the fetide and stinking neighborhood of the Garlic; so by the contrary
workings of opposite parties, the Good are made very Good, and the Bad very
Bad; and those that are good, are meliorated, and imbettered, even by the
illness of those that are bad. O my Soul be wary with whom thou do associate;
it may be discretion to carry a fair civility to those that are without, but
let thy delight be fixed upon the Saints that are in the Earth; the touch of
their conversion will derive virtue to thee. Be not conformed to the Men of the
world, but let their contrary qualities serve, as by a spiritual
Antiperistasis, to strengthen thy virtue, and to make it the more compact in it
self; so if thou can not amend others, thou shall be sure however to be
amended thy self.

But alas, what are all worldly comforts? this good fellowship will not hold.
We cannot sit by it, like those long lived Fathers before the flood, who might
meet, and be merry together two or three hundred years, and part with a promise
to see one another again so many hundred years after. We are but of
Yesterday, and know not what to morrow may bring forth; a few years, or
months, or possibly a less time, may determine all our jollity. This were sad
indeed, if we had no hope, but having that anchor hold, we may comfort one
another with this, that wherever we are separated, we can enjoy the Communion
of one another prayers, and meet together at the Throne of Grace: And tho
death may part us here for a while, it will be but with a good night one to
another, as when we go to bed, and to morrow we shall meet never to part. In
the mean time, O my Soul think what a blessing it is to have the eternal God to
be thy friend, who in the defailliance of all these transitory comforts, will
not fail to make up all losses with himself. But will God indeed dwell with
men on the earth? will the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity,
vouchsafe to humble, and abase himself so low, as not only to take notice of,
but in an infinite condescension to enter into covenant, into friendship with
poor mortal sinful creatures? with such a despicable worm as I am? to call me
friend, as he does those that obey his commands? what? friend worm? friend
dust? O the depth! Lord, what is man? what am I, poor no man, a nothing, that
thou so regardest me? O my God, I am unworthy to be called thine, in any
relation; unworthy to be reckoned in the number of thine hired Servants, much
more to be accounted in the rank of thy friends; but it is thy pleasure to call
things that are not, as if they were, and such is the influence of thy power,
that by virtue of that call, thou can make things to be, what they were not.
O let the power of thy gracious vocation have a perfect work upon me to change
me, and I shall be changed, to convert me, and I shall be converted; so though
by nature, I am enmity against thee, by grace I shall be reconciled to thee; I
shall then fear thee and thy goodness; shall fear and love thee; and I shall
love those that are conformable to thy goodness, because I fear thee; I shall
not only have fellowship with thine excellent ones here upon earth, but
together with them enjoy society with thee O Father, Son, and holy spirit to
all eternity in heaven.

MEDITAT. VII. Upon the sight of a full Table.
LOrd do not hold it a presumption in thy poor dust, and ashes, that I humbly
desire, as thy Prophet Jeremy did, to talk with thee; what is man, that thou
take knowledge of him? thy word is mine answer, that tells me, it is a
pitiful thing, compounded, and made up of sin, and corruption; its Father was
earth, and its Grandfather was nothing; it walks in a vain show, and is, in
its greatest estate, a Lie; and at its best, altogether vanity, which is so
much less then nothing before thee. But behold I have taken upon me to speak
unto thee, O let not my Lord be angry, if I ask thee now, what man is not, that
thou make such account of him, and so providest for him? thine other
creatures, even those that are the chief of thy ways, are contented with their
single portions; thy Behemoth is satisfied with that ordinary which the
mountains bring him forth, and he looks no further; so is the Leviathan
pleased with his recreation in the great and wide sea, and that element is
enough for him. But man (as if all were too little for his grandeur) has no
bounds, thou have put all things under his feet, Earth, Sea, Air, Fire, pay
contribution to his subsistence, and comfort; what could thou have done unto
him that thou have not done? O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name? all
thy works praise thee; how should man praise thee, for whose service thou have
made all thy works? what a deal of labor is here for the mouth? what a
concurrence of art with nature, to please the gluttony, not only of the mouth,
but of the eye? people affect an ingenuity in luxury, as if their wits lay in
their bellies and not in their brains. It is not enough to have good meat, if
it have not a relish of the East Indies; it must be so spiced, that an
Egyptian would think it were rather imbalmed to be buried, and kept for Mummy,
then seasoned to be eaten; it must be so diversisied and so disguised in the
dressing, that every dish must be a riddle, as if it were a special point of
reputation for a man to eat he knows not what: If our Forefathers could see
our hachees, and olliaes, and hodgpodges, and such like commixtures, as we make
of several meats together, they would take them to be no better, then the
discharges of full stomachs, and think that, like dogs, we affected to eat our
meat twice.

But to what purpose is this waste? how many empty stomachs might this
superfluity have filled? possibly less at the table, and more at the door,
might have done better. Certainly, we are not the better for it: this high
feeding does but cloud the understanding with fumes, and vapors, and pampers
lust, and breeds ill humors, and makes provision for worms, and ends in
excrement; and who would place any felicity in that, which being received into
him, must pass at last by so ignominious a way from him? But for prevention of
all surfeiting, the witty folly of this time has found out another way, how to
make costly entertainments, and no bodies belly the fuller for them; an art to
furnish a table with nothing, but nothing; with quelque chooses, and apparitions
of meat. This is perfectly to spend money for that which is not bread; and it
is justly punished in the dissatisfaction that follows it; for, as in a dream
of a feast, so here, a man seems to eat, and to drink, but after all is done
his Soul is empty and faint, and craving. What is this, but to play with Gods
blessings, as little children play with their meat, when they have weak, and
squaimish, or no stomachs? this nicety, and wantonness is far from the
plainness, and simplicity of the good old world, when a shoulder of mutton was
set by, for the special entertainment of a King, in designation; and a piece of
veale, a dish of butter, a mess of milk, and a few cakes baked upon the hearth
was accounted a fit welcome, and treatment for Angels.

I am not so straight laced, as not to allow a convenient latitude in the use
of Gods Creatures; not only for necessity, but for comfort, and delight, a due
regard being had to the quality of persons, and to the emergency of occasions.
Our ever blessed Savior stuck not to honor diverse festival intertainments
with his gracious presence. But that which is a scandal to me, is the sinful
abuse of this liberty; when plain Master Nabal will needs make good his name
in feasting it like a King; and when nothing less will serve Dives then fairing
deliciously every day: it is no wonder if his end were damnation, whose belly
was his God. We are commanded to rejoice in the lawful use of the creatures,
but we are forbidden to abuse them either thorough profuseness or wantonness or
cruelty. What an ugly sight is it to see men eat not only as to live, but as if
they lived only to eat? to see them eat, as if they were at day labor, and in
their vocation; turning Gods curse into wantonness, when with the pains they
take, they eat their bread in the sweat of their faces. O my God, what shall I
say, or what shall I not say of them? Their throats are open Sepulchers,
wherein together with their graces, and parts, and estates, they bury
themselves, in themselves. They are no better then living vaults, or sewers,
only of use for the conveiance of filth, and ordure: such beastly creatures, as
it is a hard matter to speak of them in cleanly terms. Who can take in a
Dunghill without offense?

In opposition to this excess, there is another generation of people, that run
into a contrary extreme, affecting a show of wisdom in humility, and neglect
of the body; who refuse and reject Gods blessings, out of a seeming fear least
they should abuse them; and upon that account abstain from meats, which he
has created to be received with thanksgiving; but who has required this at
their hands? every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, that
comes from his divine bounty. Ahaz was never a wit the more tenderer
conscienced, for refusing to ask a sign when it was offered him. We do but
provoke Gods patience, when we will not accept the free tenders of his goodness,

Lord keep thy servant in a middle condition, between luxuriancy, and penury;
feed me with food convenient for me; that as on the one side, I may not
thorough fullness deny thee; so on the other, I may not thorough want be reduced
to take irregular ways. Give me such a mannerly appetite (as to the things of
this world) that considering diligently what thy providence has set before me,
I may rest contented and satisfied with thy carving, without reaching over the
board for a better bit, or rudely snatching it from my neighbors trencher; so
shall I in the midst of all straights enjoy a sufficiency, and in that enough
have as good as a feast. If enough be too little, too much will not be enough.

MEDITATION. VIII. Upon a fit of the Gout.
LOrd, when thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, what a moth is he
in thine hands? and how easily crushed? Eliphaz says he is crushed before the
moth; so that according to his opinion, the moth, should be the better man of
the two. I am here a lecture of mortality to my self; and yet in truth, I can
hardly expound my self, and say what I am, in this condition. I am an infirmity
of the world, rather then any part of it; a living Hospital; or, to speak more
properly, the Ghost of my departed self; here I dwelt once, but now, here I
lie, and am mine own monument, with the figure of a man, and nothing within,
but a dead man's bones, and corruption. How near nothing am I? I have so much of
an idol in me, which is nothing, as I have feet, and walk not. I can neither
go, nor stand nor hardly stir, but as my pain quickens me; and yet I cannot
without a suffering, lie still. My pain is my life. O my Soul, when the
pillars, upon which the house stands, begin to fail, it is high time for
thee, to think of removing.

May I say, why am I thus? whether should I go to enquire, O my God, but unto
thee? I know thou do nothing, but upon just grounds, and for good ends. Thou
art righteous, but I am a sinful creature: I do remember my faults this day:
How I have loved to wander in the world: My steps have turned out of thy way;
and mine heart has walked after mine eyes; and I have polluted, and stained
the garments of my profession. It Is therefore just with thee, to punish me as a
fool, and a vagrant; to stock, and whip me; to shut me up, and to make me smart
for it, as children are shut up, and corrected, when they have run abroad, and
durtied themselves. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver
of men? I have borne chastisement, and by thy grace I will offend no more.

It is no less then a signal mercy, that I am not taken away at once, with a
sudden stroke, by a dead palsy, or appoplexy, or some such speeding disease;
that I am not chased out of the world, as a vision of the night, and hurled out
of my place, as with a storm; that I do not go down in a moment to the grave,
in mine unrepented sins; but that I have time given me, by this visitation, to
sit my self for mine appointed change. Lord Sanctify this mercy to me, that
whilst I do live, I may endeavor to spend my little remnant of time here so, as
I would spend mine eternity hereafter, in glorifying thee; and then let death
come never so suddenly, it will come but like a friend; the sooner, the better
welcome!

But why should I be so much moved with the sense of this weakness? there is no
new thing happened unto me, but what is ordinarily incident to my years. This,
and other the like infirmities, are in the course of any considerable age, but
as the accidents of dust, or dirt, or rain in a long journey; which every
rational man will expect, and reckon upon before hand. Lord give me a true
sense of the frailty of my condition, and I shall no more wonder at mine
infirmities, then I wonder at my life.

But what do I speak of infirmites? I may rather justly bless God for the long
continued health, which for so many years I have formerly enjoyed, then grudge
at my present suffering. I have been a young man a great while, and therefore
it is but reason I should be contented to be an old man a little while: what?
shall I receive good at the hands of God, and shall I not receive evil?

But why do I miscall my Gout? shall a heathen Philosopher Possidonius be able,
upon the strength of a natural resolution, to protest in the midst of his
pain in this infirmity, that no extremity should ever make him confess it to be
an evil; and shall not grace have so much power upon me, as to make me
acknowledge that it is good for me to be thus chastened? shall I fly out into
impatience when God corrects me for my profit? they that will not lie still
when God whips them, do but gain the more stripes; and by their impatience
make it appear that they were not corrected enough before.

Nay Lord, I bless thee, not only for thy staff but for thy rod, which although
it be one of thy smartest ones, and by the continuance whereof I am brought
thus low, yet I find the end thereof to be dipped in honey, tending to mine
edification, not to my destruction. This very infirmity under which I lie, has
the reputation to be of a medicinal nature; as it contracteth other malignant
humors into one channel, and spends them with it self, so let all thy
chastisements, O Lord, operate upon me, for the purging of mine iniquity, and
the taking away of my sin, and I shall reckon them in the number of my
blessings.

What though these pains be violent? they are the less likely to continue;
either they will end themselves, or end me; the difference is not much; either
way there will be an end, and that shortly. The life of man is of few days,
and full of trouble: And therefore when I think how short my time is, I am
contented, because it is so full of trouble, and when I consider how
troublesome it is, I am comforted with the thought, that it is so short.

But now Lord, what wait I for? my hope, my only hope, is in thee. Shall I
say, remove thy stroke away from me? let me alone? far be that from me; deliver
me, O my God, from that penal impunity; and vouchsafe rather to continue thy
gracious rod upon me, so long as thou shall see it good; for so long I am sure
it shall be for my good; and I shall look upon it as a dear blessed gout to me.
Show thy mercy to me, as thou did to thy Children of Israel, in punishing
mine inventions: Chasten me, so thou love me; scourge on, so thou receive me,
and it shall be my consolation. O give me not only strength to bear these
pains, but thankfulness for them, and wisdom to improve by them; that I may
neither despise thy chastening, nor be weary of thy correction: So shall thy
rod (like the rod of Aaron) be productive, and not only blossom, but bring
forth fruit unto me, even the peaceable fruit of righteousness. Make me such
when I am well, as I would be when I am sick. In all conditions, let thy grace
be sufficient for me; perfect thy strength in my weakness, and imperfection;
and then I shall take pleasure in my pains, and glory in mine infirmities; and
be able to say with that great Apostle, when I am weak I am strong, and when I
am sick, I am well.

MEDITATION. IX. Upon my recovery out of the Gout.
IS this a recovery, or a resurrection? It was but a while ago, that I had two
feet in the grave, and that I was ready to claim my last kindred with worms,
and corruption; and in what an Eagle condition am I now? how renewed, or rather
resuscitated? me thinks I am (as if I had outlived my death) mine own
surviour, the posterity of my self: Certainly life does not consist in living,
but in well being; health is the life of life, and without that, we have but a
name that we live, but we are dead. There is nothing to be preferred before the
health of the body, but holiness, which is the heal^h of the Soul. O Lord, thou
art the God of life, and death; thou killest, and thou make alive; thou
woundest, and thou healest; thou, even thou art he, and there is no God with
thee. I drew near unto destruction, but upon my cry unto thee, it pleased thee
to send thy Sovereign word to heal me, and I was healed. O that I could
therefore praise thee for thy goodness, not only with my lips, but with that
life, which thou have so often re-given me. The living, the living, he shall
praise thee, as I do this day, and as I desire to do all my remaining days.

But am I so perfectly well? I may ask my self how I do, without offense: and
it is not an impertinent inquiry. Blessed be God, my house of clay is in a
comfortable measure repaired and made tenantable again for a while. But how is
all within? how does the principal one (so Job calls the Soul)? it is my
Soul, that is my self; my body is but mine old suit new mended; the sheath of
my Soul, (as it is styled by Daniel); the health, and prosperity of that, would
signify little to me, except (according to the tenor of St. John's wish unto
Gains) my Soul also prosper; a sick Soul in a sound body, is the worst
constitution that can be. It is written in the prophecy of Isaiah, touching the
restoration of Jerusalem, that the inhabitants thereof shall not say, I am
sick, for the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity. O
Lord, I am sick till mine iniquity be forgiven. Thou have showed mercy to my
worldly part, to my lay part; O heal my Spiritual part; which needs thy mercy
most, and will relish it best. Until that be done, I am sick, though never so
well. But admitting (with all humble thankfulness) my present being in perfect
health; I have no reason to think it will continue long; all things under the
Sun are subject to vicissitude, and change; and whilst that I say so, I am
changed my self. My very health, is but a brooding of sickness, and every
sickness is a pang of death. My whole life is no other then a gradual dying: I
remember the first time I died, was when mine infancy expired in my youth; the
next was, when my youth ended in middle age; which was followed by the
determination of that, in mine old age; and yet I have no less then two deaths
more to look for; the departure of mine old age in death it self; and the death
of death, in the death of Christ. Who would covet such a pitiful life, which
the longer it lasts, the oftener it dies? nay which in truth is so far from
a true lasting, that it takes up no time at all; there is a time to be born,
and a time to die, says the Preacher, but there is no time assigned to live,
because our whole life, is but a time of dying.

If I had a lease of health for term of life, I could not but look upon it (at
my years) as near worn out. When I was at my best, I was but grass; now that
the flower of that grass is faded, in this dried, withered condition, what am I
better then mere hay, and stubble? O my Soul, be not secure upon this recovery,
there is nothing that does sooner draw on sickness, then a fond presumption of
health: many had never been sick so soon, if they had not been well too soon.
Health requires a good husbandry. But in a special manner consider how it is
possible for that body to be well long, that has but a short time to be.
Would thou redeem this time, and so extend it? labor to be good. Virtue is
not subject to time, but will outlive death it self. What is the health of my
body, but the strength of my prison? who would glory in that? I read of some
pious men, that have lamented their recovery out of sickness, as finding
themselves to be worse when they were better, and best when they were ill. Lord
look upon thy poor Prisoner of hope, and in thy good time deliver me well out
of my self; and in the mean time make me truly thankful for any comfort, or
accommodation that I enjoy in my present condition. Without thy Sanctifying
grace thy mercies are judgments; and this health will be but a killing
prosperity to me.

Health is one of God's Talents, which they, unto whom it is committed, are to
account for; and if they do not improve it to his service, they might be sick
better cheap. That health is pestilential, that makes the possessor thereof
luxurious and disorderly. O my God, let it be my care to devote my life, and
particularly my health (the best of my life) unto thee, from whom alone I
derive both health and life. Bedrid oblations are but the offerings of the
refuse. I confess mine are little better than such, at this time of mine age,
but my trust is in the goodness of thine eye, that thou will not in any wise
reject those that come unto thee, though at the eleventh hour. O my God, and
most gracious Father, sanctify all thy dispensations unto me, and then they
shall cooperate together for my good. My reins shall instruct me in the night
season; my Gout shall make me run unto thee; and my recovery shall enable me to
minister unto thee, as Peter's wives Mother did, so soon as her fever had left
her. Blessed be thy name, that I have been ill, and thy name be praised that I
am well. Let me never live longer than I praise, and bless, and glorify thee.

MEDITATION. X. Upon my imprisonment.
WHat is there in an imprisonment, that should make that condition so
formidable? it is not the uncouthness of it (we cannot say this is new) for it
is common to all: we are all Prisoners by Nature, during life; even before we
were born, we suffered a confinement in the womb that bear us; lying for so
many months as we lived there, enclosed in the lowest parts of the earth in a
polluted, dark, narrow Rome, where we could not so much as be turned, without
hazard of our lives, and when we came into the world, we were but removed (as
by a writ) to another prison; or rather we were born (like Snails) with our
prisons upon our backs. Our Souls, (which are the man in us) being captivated
in our bodies, and so cooped up, that they are disabled thereby to act or
operate, further then, as through a grate, according to the narrow latitude of
our corporeal organs. What is the whole World, but as it were a common Jail,
wherein we are all imprisoned? and however some may have a larger and better
accommodation therein than others, yet all are within the rule. I read of Nicolo
Donato Duke of Venice, that he was foretold by an Astrologer (who had
calculated his Nativity) that he should die in a noble Prison; which was
afterward applied to the restrained, limited honor of that Dukedom, wherein
he ended his days: to let the Prediction pass; I may truly affirm, that the
greatest, and most resplendent fortunes in the world, are no better than
commodious captivities, and honorable Prisons; and they that enjoy them may
account themselves in the condition of that Greek Emperor Michael Balbus, who
took possession of his Chair of State, with a pair of Shackles about his heels.

But what are the inconveniences of a Prison? I deny not but that there may be
a just resentment of the loss of liberty He that does not feel it, wants
sense; but he that cannot bear it, wants reason, if not grace; whatever the
suffering be, impatience does but aggravate it. When we lie like wild Bulls in
a net, fretting and struggling against the providence of God, we do but
impester, and entangle our selves the more, and (like those sottish Thracian
Captives, that Florus l. ^. 1. 1^.
brake their teath with biting and gnawing their chains) by our impatience we
do both punish our own ferity, and thereby, make sport to our enemies.

Is the bare confinement, a matter so to be startled at? We may as well think
the fixed Stars unhappy, because they cannot wander. Things are best kept when
they are locked up; many men have been preserved by this means from greater
dangers, which they might have incurred, if they had been at liberty; and their
imprisonment has been really a safe custody unto them. How ever, it is for
Children to cry, when they may not go abroad. True liberty is to be found
within doors. What tho my body be confined? my Soul is not. I may possibly be
disabled by this restraint, from performing good actions, but that cannot
hinder me from enjoying good thoughts; from communing with mine own heart; from
having my conversation with God in Heaven. Thoughts are free. Let the
imprisonment be never so close, and straight, if I be not straightend in my
self, I am at liberty; it is not the narrowness of the room, but of the mind,
that makes the prison incommodious; no man suffers by it, but he that is
unwilling to suffer; for he that will do, what he must do, is a free man,
because he does what he will: a free imprisonment, is better then a servile
liberty. They are the prisoners in truth, that are captivated to their own
lusts and passions, and interests. It is not evil to suffer, but to do evil.

But I am hear immured in an obscure base condition: What then? true virtue is
a jewel, that can give a luster in the dark. If the worth of a mere moral man
(as was Socrates) could be thought sufficient to take off the ignominy, and
reproach of a prison, upon the account of his lying there, how much more should
the honor of a Christian illustrate, and dignify the basest Dungeon?

But I am separated and cut off from the society of the world: The further off
the better, except the world were better. What is there in the world, but the
lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life? and what
can there be more proper for remedy of these evils, then this confinement?
wherein, as to the first, my body is sufficiently kept under, and brought into
subjection; for although I cannot say, that I am lodged as our King Edward the
Second was, in a vault, among dead carcasses; yet in a civil way I am buried
here, and am but a kind of a living Corpse; a mortification to my self. As for
mine eyes they are secured from the temptation of any vain objects, having
little else to behold, but bare old, ruinous walls; the emblems of mine own
decayed condition; and in this desolate, forlorn habitation, what exercise can
there be for pride, except it be in a holy way, to despise the world? company,
and not solitude is the Scene of pride.

O my Soul, is it not an happiness to be freed from these snares? will thou be
disquieted for being shut out of a pesthouse? What, though thou be as a
Sparrow alone, and that no eye take notice of thee? It is for players to be out
of countenance, when no body sees them act; a good Conscience is a thousand
spectators. Nay, be not deceived, thou art not alone, when thou art most alone:
God is here, and he that is higher then the highest, regards thee; Christ so
with thee, that he is in thee; persecuted in thee; and afflicted in thine
affliction; the Holy Ghost is thy comforter; the Angels are thy Guardians, they
keep thee, they Minister unto thee; and is not this good company?

But there is a dishonor that sticks to this condition; which is usually
followed with contempt, and scorn: True, if the cause of committment were
dishonorable; if I suffered as a malefactor: But when the cause is Gods, and
that I suffer for doing well, I am so far from being ashamed of my chain, that
I glory in it, as in a favor from Gods own hand. What have I, that I have not
received? my very sufferings, as well as the grace of believing, are to be
reckoned among my receipts; to me it is given, not only to believe, but to
suffer. As to the contempt of the world, there is nothing more contemptible; no
man is subject to that, but he that lies under a contempt within himself.
Retain thine own dignity, O my Soul, and thou art above it.

But possibly thou may shrink at the apprehension of poverty, and want, which
are usual concomitants of a captive estate; be not cast down, nor disquieted
with this. He that has himself, and is in possession of his own Soul, has
lost nothing. I am yet richer then I was when I came into the world. Blessed be
God, I have yet all that Jacob could wish; bread to eat, and raiment to put on;
whilst many better then I have not so much. Whatsoever is more then that, is
more then needs. Job gave God thanks, when he had nothing before him; Paul,
when he had nothing, had all. I can claim nothing from God, as due unto me, but
the wages of my sins; and that is something worse then nothing. Be thankful, O
my Soul, for what thou have; be humbled for what thou have not: in all
conditions labor to be content; and in that contentment, with Gods blessing,
thou will find all.

But it is the continuance of an imprisonment, that may seem tedious, and be
grievous: Certainly that cannot be long; for the life of man, is but of short
continuance: It can be but like an ill lodging in an Inn, and we should bear it
accordingly; what tho the night be long; it is but a night, and we shall be
gone in the morning. Remember, O my Soul, that a long imprisonment is not so
bad, as an everlasting one. Bless God that thou art not laid in chains of
darkness, with the Devil, and his Angels, reserved unto the judgment of the
last dreadful day. Be not weary of well suffering, no more then of well doing:
think of the glorious Army of Martyrs; How did many of them languish with a
desire to be in thy condition, and reckoned themselves in prison, till they
were in prison? thou have not yet resisted unto blood, as they did; thou art in
the hands of thine heavenly Physician, who best knows thine infirmity, and thy
constitution, and complexion, and what is fittest for thee, beyond all that
thou can think; what if he, seeing that sharp, and quick remedies be not so
proper for thee, and that thou can not bear them, do put thee in this slow
course of Physic; to spend thy disease by a strict, restrained diet? will thou
presume to dispute his prescription? do not, but obey, and follow it.

But what if this imprisonment should be but praecursory to a further, a
greater, and it may be a capital punishment? I may consider in what hands I am;
that I am under the power of a frantic People, that have cast off their
obedience to all lawful authority, and know not how to weigh out Justice unto
any, without putting their sword into the scales: O my Soul thou may do
wisely to look beforehand thorough thy danger, to the uttermost end thereof;
and to arm thy self against the worst that may be; but in taking this
perspective, make use of thy reason, not of thy passion: a provident care, and
a solicitous despondency are two things. Do not punish thy self with may be's.
Do not antidate afflictions, and make thy self miserable at present, by an
apprehension that thou may come to be miserable hereafter. He that in a
timorous, solicitous way takes thought for to morrow, labors under that
suffering to day, which he apprehends for to morrow; and cannot but fear more
then he should, because he fears sooner then he should; He does in a sort put
the lie upon our blessed Savior, as if the evil of the day were not sufficient
unto it. These querulous fancies argue an unfixedness of heart, as the creaking
of a board shows it to be loose, and not well fastened. The Moralists can
tell us in this case, that there is nothing more easily deceived, then humane
foresight: That in such future contingencies (as it is observed in acute
diseases) our predictions are very uncertain; that there is a levity in evil,
as well as in good fortune; both alike subject to vicissitudes, and changes,
and neither of them long lasting; that we many times apprehend things to come,
that do not come, and that our expectations do as often fail us in our fears,
as in our hopes; that in dangers imminent, our fear of them, may exceed the
dangers we fear; death it self may be overfeared, so that by running from it,
we may run into it. (Nabal died, for fear of dying); that those hazards that
threaten us most, may break up of themselves, as we see the clouds that gather,
and look black upon us, do often blow over without a shower; that great
appearances of evil are some times averted by petty accidents, as some say,
that lightening may be put by with the wind of a man's hat; and that it is good
therefore to intermix hope with fear, and fear with hope, so to contemper, and
balance one affection with another. But these Philosophers are like Meteors,
something above earth, and a great deal below Heaven: O my Soul, have faith in
God, and let thine heart be fixed on him, and thou shall not be afraid of evil
tidings; thou shall never be moved. Take no thought for the morrow, as to the
evil thereof, for the morrow shall take thought for the things of it self. Thou
art a poor captive exile, yet do not make have thorough unbeleif to be loosed;
who art thou that fear the fury of the Oppressor, as if he were ready to
destroy, who shall himself be destroyed and made as grass? and where is the
fury of the Oppressor? O my God, my time is in thine hand, and what can man do
unto me? nay what can the Devil do? He may, by a divine permission, for a
season (if need be) cast me into prison; but it shall be only to try and
purify, and whiten me. It is not in his power to do me so much hurt, but for
my greater good. He cannot take my liberty and my life both from me; but in
taking the one, he must give me the other; he cannot take my life, but withal
he must restore me my liberty; and that in such a way as he can never take it
away from me more. The worst that he can do, is but that which is best of all;
and therefore at what time I am afraid, I will trust in God.

Lord sanctify this dispensation to me (this rod of thine own appointment) and
teach me to understand the language of it. I confess I have abused my former
liberty to a licentiousness, and therefore this restraint is but a due reward
unto me, and the proper wages of my sin. O my God, unto thee belongs mercy,
for thou have rendered to me according to my work. It is of thy never failing
compassion, that I am not consumed. Thou art merciful in thy justice, and just
in thy mercy. O take what vengeance thou will of mine inventions, so thou
forgive my sin; lay what bands soever it shall please thee upon my body, so
thou free my soul, and enlarge my heart to run the way of thy Commandments.
Give me not only a patient, but a thank(...) sense of any sufferings, which I
may, or do undergo, for the advancement of thy glory; and let me never think my
penny too little, which I receive from thee, if it be accompanied with the
honor of bearing the heat of the day in thy service; but give me the grace to
look upon that honor, as the best part of my pay; and until the time, that thy
Word do come for my deliverance, let thy Word try me, so shall I at last come
out gold; in the mean while, in the worst of Prisons, I shall be thy freeman,
which is the best and most noble of all conditions.

MEDITAT. XI. Upon my Release.
WHen the Lord turned again my captivity I was like them that dream. Me thought
I had been made a Prisoner for diverse years, by a tumultuary violence; and in
that condition tossed, like a ball, from one place to another; remote from my
relations; where I was as unknown, yet well known; as dying, and yet living;
persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed; and me thoughts
upon the sudden, all these as it were sufferings vanished, and I was restored
to my liberty, to my family, and friends again. At the first, like Peter, I was
in a manner intraunced, as if I had seen a Vision, and I could hardly believe
mine eyes; but recollecting my self, I found sufficient reason to acknowledge,
as that great Apostle did, that the Lord had sent his Angel, and delivered me
out of the hand of mine enemies, and from all the expectation of those that
hated me. What shall I do, or what shall I say unto thee, O thou preserver of
men? thou art exalted above all thanksgiving and praise. Lord, open my lips,
and I shall be enabled at once, both to praise thee for this mercy, and to
praise thee for opening my lips, and inabling me to praise thee.

How sweet is liberty after a restraint? certainly a prosperous condition is
never so well relished as after an affliction; as wine is then best tasted,
when we have first tasted a bitter Olive.

But as honey is good, and yet in the excess thereof nauseous: So liberty (how
sweet soever in it self) may (if taken beyond the measure of sufficiency) draw
on a furfet of licentiousness. It is in that, as Physicians say it is in
health; a high degree thereof may be dangerous. O my Soul, labor to moderate
thine affections in all conditions; and now that God has been pleased to fill
thy cup again, pray for a steady hand, that thou may carry it without
spilling: Otherwise, this sudden change, from such a confinement, to such an
inlagement, will be but like a sudden good sign immediately after a bad one,
which (according to the old rule of divination by the intrails of beasts) was
accounted to be of unlucky Signification; it may be a prognostic, that a worse
thing will happen unto thee. In all time, not only of my tribulation, but of my
weal, and prosperity, good Lord deliver me.

But it may be a moot point, whether I am much safer now, then I was before. My
former restraint was in the nature of a safeguard, or of a harbor to me, where
though I were in a manner landlockt, yet I lay secure, and out of the wind: now
that I am abroad, I may say I have more Sea room, but withal I am more
exposed to foul weather, then I was before. There is no condition under the
Sun, so purely, and simply good, but that it has an allay of evil in it, and
that to such a proportion, that (as it is in base money) the allay is, for the
most part, more then the true metal.

But is liberty then so indifferent a thing, that there should be but a
measuring cast between it and imprisonment? there must needs be a wider
difference between them, then so; for it is said, that God does not willingly
greive the Children of men, to crush under his feat the Prisoners of the earth,
but that he has pleasure in the prosperity of his Servants; and therefore in
their liberty, without which there can be but little taste in prosperity.

The greatest blessings that come from the hand of God, are characterized by
this blessing: The Gospel is styled a Proclamation of liberty to the captives,
and an opening of the prison to them that are bound; the Spirit of God is
termed a free Spirit, and where that is, there is said to be liberty; we are
called unto liberty and commanded to stand fast in it; we shall be judged by
the law of liberty; this as to our Spiritual condition. And as to our outward
freedom, it may be a sufficient argument of the value that God sets upon it,
that he laid a particular command upon his people of Israel, that they should
be tender of one another liberty; and to that end, bound them to the
observation of the seventh, and fiftieth years, for the release, and
manumission of those that were held under service; and that he punished those
violators thereof in the Siege of Jerusalem, with so much severity; by
proclaiming a liberty to the Sword, Pestilence, and Famine against them for it:
Liberty is in it self an inestimable blessing, and such a jewel as every man
may set his own price upon it, and it is worth it to him; if we cannot enjoy it
as we would, or know not how to bear and use it, as we should; it is either our
own unhappiness, or our fault: The old bottles are to be blamed, and not the
new wine.

But what is liberty? there may be a mistake in that, the Apostle speaks of
some in his days, that talked much of liberty and promised it to others, whilst
they themselves were the Servants of corruption; there may be a servility,
under an ostentation of liberty. They that are captivated to their own
inordinate affections are no better then Slaves, let their quality be otherwise
what it will. True liberty does not consist in a power over others, but in a
command over our selves. He is not a freeman that can do what he will, but he
that will do what he should; and who is a law unto himself, and can rule his
own Spirit: Neither can that be called properly a liberty, which is an
obstinate opposition of lawful authority; such an inflexibility, as will bow to
nothing: We do not say that Lions and Wolves are at liberty in their woods, but
that they run wild there; and so for those despisers of Dominion that will run
their own irregular ways, and think (as God spoke ironically of the Babel
builders) that nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined
to do, they may be said to be rather Savage, and brutish, then free. The best
is, they are, both the one, and the other, alike in this, as well as in their
ferity, that as they have not the will to obey, so they have not the wit to
command, and therefore break, and divide among themselves, and settle nothing.
God who has determined the bounds of our habitations, has likewise set bounds
unto our liberties, beyond the which they that are proudest, and swell
themselves highest, are not to pass.

I have read of King Agrippa, that being restored to his liberty by Claudius,
after a long imprisonment under Tiberius, he consecrated his chain to God in
the Temple at Jerusalem, in memory of his former suffering and in recognition
of Gods mercy to him in his deliverance: The example is good, and carries a
good light with it. And now Lord what shall I render unto thee for the like
mercy in this enlargement of my condition? Shall I offer up my chain unto thee?
Lord, accept my whole self, body, soul, subsistence, the service of my all, as
an entire oblation and thank-offering devoted to thy Glory.

O my Soul, praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me, bless his holy
name, who has heard thy groaning, and redeemed thee from destruction, and
brought forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noon day.
Rejoice in this day of thy prosperity, but withal consider, that there is no
day so clear, but may be overcast before night; the clouds may return again
after the rain. Be not secure, but walk circumspectly, least if thou use this
liberty for an occasion to carnal ends, and for a cloak of maliciousness, thy
last state prove worse than thy first. Thy Person is now at liberty; let not
thy Passions be so too, but keep them under restraint, so shall thou lead thy
captivity captive. Lord, vouchsafe to enlarge my heart, not that I may walk in
the counsel of the ungodly, but that I may pursue the way of thy commandments.
O lead me into thy truth; thy word is truth, thy son is thy word; and if thy
Son do make me free, I shall be free indeed.

MEDITATION. XII. Upon the sight of a fair House.
WHat a goodly Fabric is here? Our first Parents were never so housed. For
ought that does appear, they took no more care at first for building, than the
Birds or Beasts did: there were then no Royal Palaces, for the ambitious
Spider to weave in; but Nature was the common Architect, as well as Cook and
Caterer. A shadie Tree, or the covert of a Grotto, or Cave, served for all
Lodgers: Man was never so happy, nor so well provided for, as in that
condition, which we esteem most miserable, when he had neither clothes to put
on, nor house to put his head in. If we look to the second edition of the
World, after the Flood, and to the generation of the Faithful therein (to
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, those heirs of Promise) they dwell in Tents, and, like
the Sun, were carried about in their movable Tabernacles; ever in a transitory,
but heavenly estate. But what do I speak of Man, or of the Son of Man, that is
a Worm? Our blessed Savior himself, who was Lord of Heaven and Earth, by whom
all things were made, that were made, when he made himself Man, and dwelt on
the Earth, was not so well accommodated as the meanest Creatures, the Foxes,
and the Birds of the air; they had their holes, and they had their nests, but
he had not where to lay his sacred head: His first lodging was in another man's
house, and his last in another man's Grave: in the mean time the mighty Man, he
had the Earth, and the honorable Man dwelt in it; the Earth was his House, he
was the only Dweller; when the Goodman was but a Sojourner; and the God-man (if
I may speak it with all humble reverence) our blessed Savior was little more
than a beggar in it; who then would put any extraordinary value upon these
worldly contentments, seeing how they are dispensed? they are but the crumbs
that fall under the Table, of which the dogs have the greatest share. It is
said, that that great Apostle knew not what he said, when he said, it was good
being here; our true happiness consists in our not being here. O my Soul, let
the Men of the World please themselves with their portion in this life, and
join house to house, and lay field to field, till there be no place for a
neighborhood about them; but do thou rejoice, that this is not thy continuing
place; thou know where to be far better then here; even in that heavenly
Mansion prepared for thee, whose builder and maker is God. Never look to be in
a settled condition, till thou come thither!

How are our vanities heightened? and a what vast excess are we grown from that
primitive simplicity? when instead of contenting our selves with what nature
affords, in order to our preservation from the injuries of the air, and
weather; we exhaust, and wear out the materials of nature, and rack the
inventions of art, to please the lust of our eyes, which may quickly have too
much, but can never have enough to satisfy their seeing. We build Houses like
Towns, and Towns like Countries (for their capacity, and extent) when God
knows contentment may be lodged in a little room.

But what was the reason of that plainness, and homeliness of those good people
of old? was it because they were ignorant, and poor, and had not the wit, nor
ability to be such magnificent fools, as we are? certainly no, those holy
Patriarks were not so plainly bred, but that they understood Kings, and Courts
well enough; sometimes scorning to be beholding to them, and at other times
being courted by them. They were not indigent persons, but according to the way
of those times, rich in Flocks, and and Herds; they had great families, and
wanted not for Gold, and Silver, nor for any other accommodation: but the truth
is, they looked for a heavenly country, and for a habitation of Gods making;
looking upon no house as worth the consideration, but that which is not made
with hands.

But yet there is no hurt in these enjoyments; they are things, not in
themselves simply evil; for then the righteous would have no portion at all of
them; Abraham would have been as poor as Lazarus; neither are they positively
good; for then the wicked would not have so large a share in them; Dives would
not have fared so deliciously every day; but they are indifferencies, either
good or bad, according as they are well, or ill used. It is free for any man to
take comfort in a good house, and to delight himself (as Solomon did) in his
works, and buildings, and plantations; but then it must be upon Solomon's
terms too, so as his Wisdom also do remain with him. The fault is not in the
having, but in the abusing of these things, by trusting in them, and bottoming
our selves upon them. Let our houses be never so strongly, and massily built,
if (according to Bildads expression) we lean upon them, they shall not stand,
but we shall (like Samson) bring them down about our own ears, and our trust
shall be a Spiders web. Nebuchadnazzar might have enjoyed his great Babylon,
the house of his Kingdom, long enough, if he had not prided himself in it, but
when he came to boast of the might of his Power, and of the Honor of his
Majesty, it was just with God to Seal an ejectment against him, and to turn his
Majesty to grass, to have his dwelling, and intercommoning with the beasts of
the field. The only way to use the world, as we should use it, is so to use it,
as if we did not use it. It was a curse among some people, to wish that a man
might affect building; and it is no better then a malediction to those, who so
dote upon it, that (as Apollonius told the young man that was fond of his new
house) they seem not so much to possess their houses, as their houses seem to
possess them; and who are so taken up with this vanity, that they bestow more
time upon it, then they can afford to the service of God. Solomon seems to ly
under some note for this, in that he was Seven years in building the house of
the Lord, but he was thirteen years in building his own house: but that is not
without reflection. God does not take well from his people, when they are more
careful to accommodate themselves in their cieled houses, then to repair his
house.

This is a fair building, but who is within? the Master should dignifie the
house, and not the house the Master. It is pity that any such places should be
Owls nests. If there be no body of worth within, to give it reputation, the
Masons and Carpenters that built the House, may challenge more Honor then the
Master of the house. It is not the beautiful front, nor the rich furniture, but
the noble heart, and the rich mind of the owner, that recommends the house.
What a miserable thing is it to consider, that for the most part, in this
corrupt age wherein we live, great houses are in effect, but mear Theators of
debauchery, and viciousness. The Devil keeps the house, and he that is called
the Master is but the Sign of the Tavern, or the Owl in the Ivy bush. It was
the honor of Abraham that he kept a religious family, and commanded and taught
his household to keep the way of the Lord; but that is fanaticism now. Our great
ones can tell how to live without God in the world, allowing themselves such a
latitude in their way, as if the way of God were too narrow for their quality
to walk in. They are so far from improving those that are about them in the
knowledge and practice of religion, that, like people that have the plague,
they delight to infect others with their vices, and to make them as ill as
themselves, as if it were a point of honor to go to hell with a great train.
They have a strange perverseness in them; they covet to have good houses, good
stuff, good fare, and to have every thing good, to their very horses and dogs,
but themselves, and their Household. Justly may those houses Spue out their
Masters, and families, that live only to drink, and spue in them. This is a
sore evil, which I have seen under the Sun, namely riches, and these outward
conveniences, kept for the possessors thereof to their hurt.

I have read a Rabbinical story of Melchisedec, that being warned by God to
build a house for himself, for that he had yet five hundred years to live; he
answered, that for so short a time it was not worth the labor. Let the Author
be answerable for the credit of the story: All the use that I shall make of it,
is but to observe the folly of these times, wherein we that cannot calculate
our lives by hundreds of years, but by the day, by the Span, by the inch, are
yet as sollicitous, as if we were to live to the last day of the world. We go
(according to that expression in Syracedes) two ways at once; we build, as if
we were to live for ever; and we eat, and drink, as if we were to dye to
morrow. The vain, as well as wicked Nero, when he had built his Palace to to
that vastness, that the Epigrammatist made it a question, whether the house
stood in the City of Rome, or the City of Rome in the house; he called it
Transitory; and that not insignificantly (whatsoever he intended by it); for
there is a transitoriness, and (as I may say) a mortality in buildings, as well
as in persons. Man dies; and where is he? his place shall know him no more. The
house decays, and falls; and where is that? within a few years, no body shall
know the place of that any more; the memorial of both is perished with them:
And yet such is the sottish stupidity of people, that though they see, and
cannot but know these things, yet they figure to themselves imaginary
perpetuties, and adopt their houses in their own names, and please themselves
with the inward thought that their dwelling places shall continue for ever unto
all generations: this their way, is their folly, yet their posterity approve
their sayings.

O my Soul, never look to be well seated in this low morish vale of tears.
Whatever is built here, must needs sink, for want of a solid foundation, which
this loose rotten ground will not admit. There is no foundation stands sure,
but that which is of God. Except he build the house, and the house be built
upon him (upon his blessing) it will never be weather proof. Take example
therefore from that feeble folk, that make their houses in the rock, build upon
that rock, which is Christ; and with that good, and noble Eleazar, take up thy
habitation in his wounds; embrace that rock, and thou shall never want a
shelter; no not in that day, when the dens, and rocks of the mountains shall
not afford that curtesy to the greatest upon earth: and when thine earthly
house of this tabernacle shall be dissolved, thou shall have a building of God,
and be clothed upon with thy house, which is from Heaven, and shall stand for
ever!

MEDITAT. XIII. Upon the sight of Pictures in a Gallery.
HOw many artificial miracles are there in this room? how are mine eyes at
once pleased, and distracted? I may truly say, the eye is not satisfied with
seeing. How many ways at once, have I to look? here, without taking the pains
to go abroad I can go abroad within doors, and in a small table see, a whole
Contry, diversified with Hills, and Dales, with Boscage, Campagnes, Cities,
Rivers, Sea's, all so perfectly represented, that a Poet would make a question
upon it, whether it were a natural work of art, or an artificial work of
nature. In another place, I can behold a beauty drawn with that sweetness, and
ingenuity of aspect, that it might pass for a picture of a mind, as well as of
a face. There, is a peace of devotion, set forth so movingly that it would move
devotion to see it; and near unto that, a picture of a dead friend, so exactly
resembling him, and with that vivacity, that if the eyes were to be the only
judges, one would think it lived, and spoke, and were the party, and not the
picture. To fill up the measure of mine admiration, all this variety is
expressed by the help of a few colors, blended together, and laid on with a
pencil, made up of a few hoggs hairs; such materials, and utensils, as an
ignorant stander by, would judge only fit, to foul ones fingers, and spoil
ones clothes.

O my God, whilst I feed mine eyes upon these works of men's hands, I cannot
but glorify and adore thine excellent working, who have created all things, and
who do work all our works in us. Let others admire the men that made these
pictures, I admire the God that made these men; I admire that picture (as I may
so call it) which was of Gods own making; the impression of his image in man.
There is no peace in the world comparable to that.

Pleasant pictures (such as are merely for recreation, and diversion) may seem
to be inoffensive; and yet in a bedrol of sins enumerated by the Prophet
Isaiah, I find them mentioned, with a particular denunciation against them.
There is nothing so innocent in the world, but by a too much affection may be
abused, and turned into sin: I would therefore make use of the pleasures of
this world, as I would do of the pictures in this gallery; walk by them, and
look upon them with a transient eye, but not stop my way, nor spend my time
upon them.

What is this sublunary world, but (as it were) a painters shop, wherein we see
nothing but appearances, and fancies, and not any thing of reallity? All the
glory of it, is but a painted bubble; it swells, and looks bigg, and Casts
fine colors, and then breaks, and vapors into nothing; The friendship of the
world, which (if any thing) should be real, is (for the most part) but so much
picture, and complement, but daubing; Plato calls it by a right name,
Rhetorical friendship; and Rhetoric is no other then a kind of painted
language. What are the beauties of the world, which vain men so much admire,
and are so inveigled with, but (at the best) in their native favor deceitful,
and vain? and thus far resembling pictures, as all their comeliness consists
in the due proportion of lineaments, and in the clearness and freshness of
colors, which are the very elements of painting: As for others, many of them
may pass for no other then living pictures; so painted, and patcht, that being
compared with their pictures, which are made for them, it might be a question,
which were the principals, and which the copies; for both are painted like;
only of the two, their own faces may be said to be the worst, because they are
not like themselves. I could wish that we had not too many Christians in
Picture; such hypocrites, as think it religion enough, to seem religious. These
are double faced pictures; one way so putting to show the beauty of holiness in
their profession, as if (according to the language of the Lycaonians) Gods were
come down in the likeness of men; another way so representing the ugliness of
sin, in their practice, as if men were come up in the likeness of Devils. I
confess, that of late, the number of these kind of pieces (thorough an
inundation of debauchery, and profaness among us) is so much abated, that a man
(with the safety of his charity) might wish, there were more hypocrites
stirring again; for tho those painted Sepulchers, might by their specious
appearance deceive some; these open Sepulchers do by their pestilential
corruptions, infect more. Between both, all rooms are filled up; if there be
fewer seemingly righteous then there were; there are the more that are openly
vicious; such as have the resemblance of beasts, as of Goats, Swine, Apes,
Peacocks, Asses, and so we are sufficiently furnished with pictures still.

The world loves to be cousened, and (as it is in juggling) the more curious
the deceit is, the more it pleases, tho it be known to be a deceit, so the
picture of the grapes, that cousened the birds; and that of the veil, that
cousened the painter, were therefore held excellent pieces, because they
deceived the sight with so much art. How commendable is truth, when the mere
resemblance thereof is enough to give commendation to falsehood!

Likeness to nature is the perfection of art, and likeness to the God of nature
is the perfection of grace. God is the Original of all perfection, and we are
expressly commanded to be conform unto his Image; that is, not in his power,
and glory; the Angels affected that, and fell; nor in his knowledge, and
wisdom; our first parents coveted that, and transgressed; but in his holiness,
and righteousness; in being good, and doing good. Lord teach me to copy out thy
divine nature, in those attributes wherein thou art imitable, that since I
cannot be like thee as thou art the most high; I may endeavor to resemble
thee, as thou art the most lowly, and meek, and holy, and beneficent God. It is
my misery, as well as my crime, that I have so long borne the image of the
first man, which was of the earth, earthly; vouchsafe I beseech thee, to stamp
the image of the second man, the Lord from heaven, upon my corrupt nature, and
by the renewing of my mind, so transform me, that whilst others please
themselves in their walk thorough the gallery of this world with beholding vain
objects, and entertaining the lust of their eyes with them, mistaking shadows
for substances, and pictures for realities; calling (but not in thy sense)
things that are not, as if they were; I may have the eyes of my faith fixed
upon thine image, as the only object of my delight; so shall I be satisfied,
when I awake out of this dreaming life, with thy likeness, and be like unto
thee, when I shall see thee as thou art in glory.

MEDITAT. XIV. Upon the sight of a Parret in a Cage.
WHat has this poor bird committed, that she should be made a Prisoner? I see
others of our own climate fore at liberty, whilst this far fetched stranger is
in hold. Surely our vanities are sharp set, when they come to stoop at a
feather. But what is it, that the lust of the eyes will not fly at? to trade
for Apes, and Peacocks is no new thing. The world has ever been given to
affect trifles, and the mischief is, that while we take them up, they take us,
and so we are in the cage too. We shall never be able to set a just price upon
any thing, so long as we suffer our fancy to be the cleark of the Market.

If this Parret had been of a common plumage, she might to this day have
pearcht, where she was hatched; now her unfortunate beauty has betrayed her to
this captivity. Thus many times the things that should be for our advantage
become unto us an occasion of falling.

But what language is this? who would not think but that the Devil were in the
Parret, as well as he was in the Serpent? and yet, it is but a speaking into
the air, and of little signification; there are such babblers to be found among
us, without the help of a lantern, that have the art of speaking much, and
saying nothing; and I wish it were a rarer thing to hear Parrets speak like
men, then to hear men speak like Parrets.

But yet I see this good language houlds but during pleasure; upon the least
provocation, the bird returns to her own natural clamor again. How many are
there that can bestow goodly words upon God, so long as he is pleased to please
them: and yet are ready to curse him to his face, if he do but touch them in
their persons, or estates? such trencher disciples, as can follow Christ, with
a plausible formality, so long as they may eat of the loaves, and be filled;
but when persecution arises, are by and by offended.

O God, whilst the world is taken with garish toys, and things that cannot
profit; let it be the delight of my Soul to apprehend thee, and to be
apprehended by thee. Teach me so to look upon thy works, that they may be a
lesson, not a snare to me: So shall I, even in the vanity of the creature, read
thy glory; and from the folly of the world receive some instruction.

MEDITATION. XV. Upon hearing good Music.
I cannot but think that Soul out of tune, that is not affected with Music.
For tho I am not of the opinion of that fidling Philosopher, that defined the
Soul to be a harmony; yet I do really believe, that there is nothing that
strikes so immediately, and incorporeally upon the powers thereof, as Music
does. It insinuates into the Spirits, and has such a secret familiarity with
them, that it disposes them to variety of passions, conformable to the several
changes, and inflexions thereof. It stilleth the child at the nurses breast,
and lays it a sleep; it cheareth the labourer at his work, the gally slave at
his Oar; it rouzeth the Soldier in the field, and exciteth him to action.
History tells us of Pythagoras his practice of physic, by Music, and of his
curing of diverse sicknesses by that means; and experience verifieth the
possibility thereof, in the recovery of those that are stung with the
Tarantula, by the same way. As to the operation thereof upon the mind, every
one almost, that has ears to hear, may be called to witness, whether some
aires, and tunes, do not sensibly attrist, others comfort; some move, others
moderate affections. To say nothing of those fables of Orpheus, and Amphion;
the one reported to have charmed birds and beasts; the other said to have moved
stocks and stones by their harmonious accents; the moral whereof tended only to
signify the power of persuasion, and the efficacy thereof, to reduce brutish,
and ignorant people to civility, and cohabitation, and polity; tho withal
inferring (in that allusion to Music) that even in those rude times of old,
there was a sense of the operation of it upon the Spirits, and natures of men;
for which cause both Plato and Aristotle recommended the use of it, in their
states, and common weals, as beneficial to the regulation of manners. It may be
enough to say, that there is a kind of divine power in harmony, working even
upon those Spirits, which are of a nature exalted above the Spirts of men:
this* sufficiently witnessed by the word of God, in those famous examples of
Saul, and Elisha. What the reason of these strange effects should be, is beyond
the compass of reason to imagine. Lord! whilst this harmony delights mine ear,
let the consideration of thine infinite wisdom, whereby thou have made all
things in number, weight, and measure (in a harmony to be seen), affect my
heart, that so while I admire thee in what I hear, and see; I may adore thee in
what I cannot comprehend.

How ravishing is this pleasure; and how is my Soul elevated with it, even to
an ecstasy? that whether it be in the body, or out of the body, me thinks I can
hardly say; certainly there is nothing of greater use for the raising, and
sweetning of our affections toward God, then the singing of his high praises
in Psalms, and Hymmes, and Spiritual Songs. The primitive Christians were so
taken with it, that in the times of persecution, at their conventicles before
day, they could not forbear making their melody to the Lord, though many times
they were discovered by it, to their extreme hazard. It is written by a Father,
that in the little Town of Bethleem, near unto which he lived, there was
nothing almost to be heard, but that heavenly music, resounding in all places;
from the shop to the plough; there was no mirth, but in singing Psalms. O the
goodness of God, who knowing our infirmity, how much more we are inclined to
that which delights, then to that which profits, has so contrived it; that
by borrowing from melody that pleasure which touches our ears, he does by the
smoothness, and softness thereof, as by a holy stealth, convey a treasure of
Good things into our hearts; so that whilst we think we sing, we learn; and in
doing that wherein we delight, we are taught that, whereby we profit. It is
observable that the sweetness of Music consists in discords (high, low,
mean) there can be no harmony in Unisons. If there be not a distinction in
sounds, how shall it be known, what is piped, or harped? but then those
discords must be proportionately accorded, or the sound will be ingrate, and
odious; and it is no otherwise in the point of Government; there must be a
distinction of degrees observed; a superiority, and an inferiority; with a due
order held between them; every one retaining his proper place; the treble must
not be strung, where the base should be, nor the mean where the treble should
be: every one must be kept in his proper tone, neither too flat, nor too
sharp; one pin should not be wound up too high, nor another let down too low,
(which was noted by Apollonius to have been Nero's fault in Government) but
every one in his peculiar station, must be kept in a due harmony: So we see
Octaves, or Diapazons, (though so many notes distant, yet (as by a secret
simpathy) correspond, the one to the pulse and touch of the other, and make the
sweetest concord. Parity (at the best) is but a kind of orderly confusion;
there can be no Music in it.

But there be some strings, which are called false ones, which by reason of the
inequality, and unevenness of their making, will never be brought to accord
with the rest, but will perpetually jar; It were well if we had not too many
Spirits of that Uneven jarring temper, that nothing will ever work them to any
agreement. I would they were cut off that trouble the harmony.

But what a deal of time is spent in tuning, before we can come to have any
Music? and how easily and quickly is that delight of the Sons of men
interrupted, by the slipping, or breaking of a string or the mistopping of a
fret? the case is alike in our most pleasing earthly enjoyments; there is
hardly any pleasure we take, but it costs us pains to take it; and when we have
it, every little accident is enough to discompose it. If we set our hearts upon
it, and make it our businness, we stop upon a wrong fret; and if we scrue it up
too high in our estimation, or let it down too low, to the service of base
unworthy ends, we run the hazard of making it break, or stip, or yield no sound
at all to please us. There is nothing more sure, then that there is nothing
sure under the Sun.

O my Soul, if there be so much pleasure to be taken in that, which we call
Music hear, which (when all comes to all) is but a sound, arising from the
percussion of a few guts, or wire strings fastened to a concave frame, or
instrumet of wood, moved by the fingers of men, and it may be accompanied with
their voices; raise thy self upon the wings of faith, and love, to the
contemplation of that truly melodious harmony, whereof thou shall, by the grace
of God, be a partaker in the quire of Heaven without interruption to all
eternity; when the voices of Saints, and Angels shall be conjoined with the
harpes of God in everlasting Hallellujas unto him that sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb for ever, and ever. Lord, I have had enough, and enough of
the scraping of this world; which although it may for the time afford some
pleasure to mine ear, yet it is so momentary, and to my Soul so unsatisfactcry;
that I humbly beseech thee to fit me for a better consort, even that celestial
one; where all mouths shall be filled with thy praise, and with thy honor; and
where my lips shall rejoice, when I sing unto thee, and my Soul which thou have
redeemed. Here the best of thy Servants have been weary of their crying, there
the meanest of them shall never be weary of their singing; they shall rest from
their labors, but they shall never rest from their Holy, Holy, Holy'es, to the
Lord God almighty; that labor shall be their rest. There shall need no keeping
time in that blessed Music, for none shall be out in their part, and time
shall be no more. O my Soul, what do thou here? I wait for thy Salvation, O
Lord, but Lord how long?

MEDITAT. XVI. Upon the sight of a pleasant Garden.
THere is no humane pleasure that has so much of antiquity, and of the state
of innocence in it, as the pleasure of a Garden. The first notice, and mention
that we have of pleasure in the world, is with reference to that garden in
Eden, which was of Gods own plantation, and wherein he gave intertainment to
our first Parents, as in a room dressed up on purpose to receive them, and to
give them delight. But yet, all was not made for mere delight there; there was
that which was good (good for foood) as well as that which was pleasant to the
sight. All the pleasures that are of Gods making, are good; vanity came in with
sin.

How happy might we have been in that Primitive condition, if sin had not
corrupted it? when without fears for to day, or cares for to morrow, we might
have lived immortally blessed, in a constant communion with God, and in the
affluence of all good things in him; when our roses should have had no briers;
when our pleasures should have had nothing but an innocent sweetness in them,
and we might have gathered them without scratching our fingers, without
raveling our Consciences: when the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden,
would have been an invitation to us, to have walked with him, and not a terror
to have driven us from his presence. O Adam! what have thou done? what a happy
estate have thou forfeited, for an inconsiderable trifle! How have thou by one
bit of an Apple (a sower one) set both thine own, and thy Childrens teeth on
edge, to all thy succeding generations? but blessed be God, who has sent his
Son Jesus Christ, the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, who by the merits of
his sufferings has redeemed that forfeiture, and infeoffed us in a better
estate, then we were in before the fall: whereby we who were of the earth
earthly, are made conformable to the image of the heavenly; and entitled to a
celestial paradise, into which no Serpent shall ever be able to enter, and out
of which we shall never be ejected.

It is worth the noting, that if our first Parents had not transgressed, but
had continued in their imparadised conditon, they should not have enjoyed an
idle lazy felicity. God did not put them into the Garden, as we put beasts into
a good pasture, to graze and batten; or as he placed the Leviathan in the Sea,
to play therein; but to dress, and keep it; to employ their time in doing good
in it; and that exercise of their vocation, should have been unto them there,
as the doing of Gods will is to the blessed Angels in Heaven, a maine part of
their beatitude. It is a comfortable thing to live in a good vocation; and
indeed, without that, we cannot properly be said to live. A calling, or
vocation, is, in the language of the law, termed an Addition; but it is such
an addition, as a figure is to a cyphar; it is that, that makes us something in
the world; and without which, the greatest that are, are but like Nulls in a
character, only remarkable, because they signify nothing: O my Soul, consider
this; it is better to dye, then not to live; and they live not, that live to no
end. Make it thy buisiness so to live, as that when God shall call thee, thou
may be found in the way of thy calling, doing thy Lords buisiness; which is
the way to be admitted into the joy of thy Lord.

It is written of our blessed Savior, that he affected a garden, and
frequented it often with his disciples. God does not prohibit us the liberty,
and free use of lawful pleasures, so long as we do not set our hearts, and
affections upon them, but make use of them, as we do of our gardens, for
recreation, and diversion, and not to dwell in; and so long as we look up to
him in the enjoyment of them, as the God of our comforts and have our rejoicing
in him. O my Soul, take him whom thou love, for an example, and study to
improve this delight to a sanctified use: when thou art here, in company, to
edify others (as he did his disciples) by a holy communication, Ministering
grace unto them; and when alone to spend thy time, and exercise thy thoughts
(as he also did) in Meditation, and prayer. Nay let his burial, and
resurrection (both which were in a garden) be remembrances unto thee, to put
thee in mind, (in the midst of thy delights) that thou art implanted with him
into death; that like as he was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the
Father, even so thou also should be conformed to the likeness of his
resurrection, to walk in newness of life. Let these thoughts be thine
intertainment, and thy garden will be so much paradise unto thee. He that
walks with God, can never want a good walk, and good company. There is no
garden well contrived, but that which has an Enoch's walk in it.

How cleanly are these Allies kept? and how orderly are the Hedges cut, and the
Trees pruned and nailed, and not an irregular Twig left? there is no such care
taken for the weeds, and bushes, and brambles that grow abroad. God is careful
to preserve the Garden of his Church in all decency and order; and will not
suffer it to be overgrown with errors or profaneness; but is (like a good
Husbandman, if I may say so with all humbleness) ever at work about it; either
weeding out, what his heavenly hand has not planted; or if need be, lopping,
and cutting off luxuriant branches, that bear not fruit; or purging those that
do bear, that they may bring forth more fruit. But as for those that are
without, he lets them alone to grow wild, not giving himself so much trouble
(to speak after the manner of men) as either to dig about them with his
Chastisements, or to dung and enrich them with his Mercies, but leaving them to
their own barrenness, and to the curse attending it. God in his judgment
begins at his own House; and if so, what shall the end be of those, that are
not of his Household? It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, though for correction an edification; but it is infinitely more fearful,
and horrid, to fall out of his hands; to be, as without the pale of his
providence, left to bring forth fruit unto our selves. Why should those that are
of the Church of God be discouraged under their crosses, and afflictions, when
as they are but the effects of his divine husbandry, whereby to meliorte, and
improve them? their sufferings, are but signs of his owning them to be true
plants of his own setting; and that they grow where they should do. Lord, do
any thing to me, rather then nothing: Let thy pruning knife be never so sharp,
and cutting, it can do me no hurt, so long as it tends to make me good.

At present this is a sweet place, but what will it be a few months hence? at
what time the liberality of nature will (for this Season) be spent, and her
charity to us, will have reduced her to a bare condition? When winter is come
all this verdure, and fragrancy is gone; and we may go seek the garden, in the
garden; and the place thereof shall not know it. How vain and transitory, and
fugitive, are all earthly pleasures? like flowers, they wither, even whilst we
are smelling to them, and perish in the using; the fashion of the world, as
well as of the garden, passes away. It was well said of a Heathen, that in
this inferior visible world, there is nothing to be seen, but the shadows, and
appearances of things, but that in the invisible, in the superior world, there
are solids, and substances to be found, as in their proper region. In vain do
we look for any thing in any thing here, when there is a superscription of
vanity written upon all things under the Sun. If any body would know, what
vanity is? the word of God will tell him, it is something less then nothing; if
any would be satisfied what nothing is; I can tell him, it is nothing; and it
is so, because it is not, because it has no being. He is wise, that knows how
to take things, as they are, in their true entity. The world can never deceive
us, so long as we are led by truth, and not by opinion. He is not confined in
the receiving of money, that takes brass coin according to the true value of
the metal, and as brass coin. O my Soul, learn this wisdom; use pleasures,
as pleasures; and whilst thou laiest hold on these follies, do as Solomon did,
retain the wisdom to know they are but follies. Do not set thine eyes upon
that which is not; or which (if, in any sense, it be) is never at such a
consistence, but that even whilst it is, it may be said, it was; so fluid, that
like water, the more it is embraced, and grasped, the more it slips away. But
look up, and consider; the things here below, which are seen, are temporary,
and of short continuance, but the things which are above, and which are not
seen, are eternal. Those, and none but those, are the true pleasures, which are
at Gods right hand for evermore.

MEDITAT. XVII. Upon the sight of a fair horse, well managed.
WHat a noble Generous creature is this? and how answerable to that character
of a brave goodly horse, which was delivered by God himself out of the
whirlwind? His crest seems to be clothed with thunder; the glory of his
Nostrils is terrible; he swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage; and
says among the trumpets ha, ha; he mocketh at fear; he paweth, and rejoices
in his strength; and is ready to go on to meet the armed men, as if he smelt
the battle afar off, and heard the thunder of the Captains, and the shouting.
God seems (if I may so speak) to take pleasure in describing this piece of
his own workmanship, setting forth (as in the description of the Leviathan) his
parts, and his power, and his comely proportion. Where God thinks it not fit to
conceal the commendation of his works, they ought to be had in remembrance, and
to be glorified by us. All thy works praise thee O Lord, and thy Saints shall
bless thee in all thy works. O my Soul praise thou the Lord, as in other
things, so in this particular opperation of his hands, which he himself has
praised, and ranked with the chief of his ways.

It may be matter of just admiration, even to the most knowing persons, to
consider how the strength, and fierceness of this creature is subdued, and
subjected to the service, and mannagement of a weak infirm man; who is so far
unable to cope with such an enemy upon even terms, that he cannot withstand
the kick of his foot. Lord what is man, that thou should thus magnify him,
and put the fear, and dread of him upon all thine inferior creatures, and
deliver them into his hand? Certainly they are injurious to nature, or rather
to the God of nature, that think man ill dealt with, because he is not so long
lasting, as most vegetables are; nor so strong and active, as many sensitive
creatures are: not considering that the great creator aiming at a higher end in
man, is in these lower faculties less intent, and elaborate; as having in that
excellent gift of reason (wherewith he is endued) not only repaired, and
compensated those defects unto him, but exalted him above all other creatures;
and enabled him thereby to command their parts and qualities, wherein they
exceed him, and to make use of them for his own service.

But what merit is there in man, that should thus mount him, and set him on
horseback? It is true, in his creation, God innobled him, by impressing the
Signature of his own Image upon him, and by giving him that dominion over the
works of his hands; but man being in honor continued not, but by his
prevarication fell; whereby he became not only like the beasts that perish, so
that they might say, man is become like one of us; but inferior to them, and
subject to their annoyance, to be mischeived, and maistered, and (as it were)
to be ridden by them. All other creatures retain the honor, and dignity of
their creation: all that host (so the word of God calls it) all that army of
creatures, does punctually observe the discipline, and pass upon the duty
imposed on them by their maker; and act accordingly: but man only, who was
commissionated general of that army, could not command himself, but being
misgoverned by his own corrupt affections, did imbase, and abbasterdise that
noble kind wherewith God had honored him. O the riches of free grace! the
reprobate Angels sinned but once, and were immediately, and irrecoverably
damned; the sensitive creatures never sinned, and yet are subdued to the
bondage of corruption; Man, whom God had made little inferior to the elect
Angels, and superior to all the works of his hands in this sublunary world, he
does nothing, and can do nothing of himself, as of himself, but sin in every
imagination of the thoughts of his heart, and has thereby rendered himself
justly liable to death and hell: and yet, as if God had loved him better then
himself, it pleased him to give himself (his only begotten Son, Coessential,
Coequal with himself) to be a ransom for his sins, and by the all sufficiency
of that redemtion, and atonement, to re-invest him in his former command here,
and to entitle him to the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter. O the depth! How much
should man love, to whom so much is given, and so much forgiven?

I cannot but have a charity for those poor ignorant people, who upon the first
sight of horse men, took the men, and the horses to be but one and the same
creature. But taking them as they are distinct; who would not think, but that
(as it was in the vision of the living creatures, and the wheels) the Spirit of
the one, were in the other, and that one Soul acted both? So does the beast
answer to every, the least motion of the rider, and obey his manage. What is
is this but an emblem of sense guided by reason? This horse may pass for the
representative of a well governed man. The great Moralist made that use of the
description of a brave serviceable Horse in Virgil, to apply it to the
Character of a gallant person; professing that if he were to commend Cato, he
could not express his constant, regular, noble carriage in better terms. How
beautiful is virtue, and a well commanded courage in a man, when the bare
shadow of that gallantry, (tho so far short) is so well becoming, even in a
beast?

But we have a caveat given us, Not to be as the horse; which is exemplified,
in our turning to our own precipitate courses, as the horse rusheth heedlesly
into the battle, and in our pampering, and fomenting our corrupt affections,
when (like fed horses) we neigh after our lusts. What a beast is man, when he
suffers his sense to transport him beyond his reason? Surely, so much worse
then the horse, and mule, which have no understanding, as he has an
understanding, which he himself has imbrutishtand abased below his Species. He
is brutish (as the Prophet says) in his very knowledge. The man may ride the
horse, but so long as the sense rides the reason, the beast rides the man. In
vain does he rain in his horse with bit, and bridle, who lets himself loose to
an unbridled conversation. O my God, I have a natural restyness in me, which I
beseech thee to break; and and therefore whenever my follies would fly out,
and attempt to run away with me; use me like my self, a whip for the horse, and
a rod for the fools back; and if I will not hear the voice, let me feell the
smart of it. Blessed is he whom thou chastenest, and teach.

A horse is a plain dealing creature, and, tho very serviceable, yet (if
provoked) as ready to cast a King, as a beggar; he is no courtier; and
therefore it was upon that account, that Carneades advised Princes, and great
men to practice horsemanship, that they might be used to something that would
not flatter them. I hold it but decent to be serviceable to the quality of
public, and eminent persons; but he that will be ridden by their humors, must
pardon me if I esteem him to be of something a lower degree then a horse, and
worthy to be Spur-galled if he do not (at the least) try their horsemanship
that back him, whither they can keep the saddle, and sit fast, or no.

I find it written, as an expression of honor to the house of Judah, that God
had made them as his goodly horse in the battle; and yet in other places it is
said, that a horse is but a vain thing, and (without the divine protection)
utterly unable to deliver any by his great strength. Surely God is a jealous
God, tender of his honor; and tho he do allow and appoint means for our
defense, and preservation, yet he will not by any means that we should trust
in any, but him. The woe, is not to those that ride, but to those that stay on
Horses, because they are many, and strong. Let who so will, put their
confidence in Chariots, and in horses; I will remember the name of the Lord my
God, and stay upon him. He is a sure refuge, a present help: The horse is
prepared against the day of battle, but safety is of the Lord.

MEDITAT. XVIII. Upon the sight of Bowlers in a Green.
WHat an emblem of the world have we here in this Green? what making and
abetting of parties? What casting to attain ends? some one way, and some
another; according as they are biassed? and most are short, or over, or wide;
and few there be, that get to ly near the mark they aim at. All are very
buisy, and clamorous; and yet none enjoy the sport so much, as those that have
no part in it, but are standers by, and dissinteressed persons. It is a
privilege next to that of God, and his Angels, to be a spectator in the world.
Lord, whilst others affect to be gamsters here, let me be in the number of
those that look on; or rather of those that look up; so shall I have a double
advantage, both in my security from loosing any thing here^ where I adventure
nothing; and as I shall be sure to winn all that I can desire hereafter, whilst
I set mine affections on things above.

It is a measuring cast, whether it be better sport to see the bowling, or the
bowlers; of the two, the last would make one laugh most; and therefore I think
the best part of the sport lies on their side. Certainly there cannot be a
better jest seen, then the antic figures, into which they screw themselves;
nor a greater absurdity heard, then the sensible advice that they cast after
their senseless bowls; now and then, to have them rub; now and then, to have
them fly; and to observe their impatience (many time, to a degree of
desperation) if they chance not to run correspondently to their flexures, and
cringes. What is the difference in point of folly, between asking Council of a
stock and giving Council to a block? The Moral of it may serve to inform, us
that all passions, in their excesses, are unbecoming.

But where is the fault, if the bowl do go wrong? is it not in the hand that
misguided it? and yet rather then fail, we can lay the blame, either upthe
lightness, or heaviness, or biass of the bowl. We are naturally loath to own
what we do amiss, and are willing to discharge our errors upon others; tho
never so much guilty our selves. We know whose plea it was, the woman did it,
and the Serpent did it, but that would not acquit.

It is true, tho a bowl be never so well delivered from the hand, it may meet
with such rubs in the way, as may either retard, or divert it, and therefore
there must be a consideration had accordingly, to give it a fit strength, to
carry it thorough those accidents. They do well that begin well, and ground
their designs well, but if they do not allow for a rub in their cast, it is
odds if ever they get home.

It is a great advantage (especially to an unskilful bowler) to have a knowing
friend to give him ground; and it is no otherwise in the mannagement of affairs
in the world. The greatest, and most prudent persons, that have lived in their
generations, have been most careful in this point, to have men of advice about
them. To say nothing of those Persian Monarchs, that had their Counselors,
whom they called their eyes, to guide them in the conduct of their Government;
nor of the Asyrian Ahasuerus, whose manner it was, in matters of law and
judgment, to consult his wise men, that knew the times; David, the man after
Gods own heart, had his Ahitophel, an oraculous Counselor, if he had had
honesty to his wisdom; Solomon the wisest of all men, was not without his
Et^am, and Haman, and Chaliol, and Darda; and if Rehoboam would have taken that
ground which was given him by those old men, that had stood before his Father,
he might have done well, but his biass wheeled him to the young men, that were
brought up with him, and so by their misguiding him, he lost ten Tribes at a
cast; where no Council is, people fall, but in the multitude of Counselors
there is safety. How safe, and happy are they that have God to give them ground
who is the Counselor? and that can hear his voice directing them, and telling
them, this is the way, walk in it? O my God, give me a hearing heart (according
to the prayer of that wise and roial Servant of thine) that thy pure
Commandment may enlighten mine eyes, to discern the way wherein I should go;
so shall I be sure not to cast away mine endeavors, whilst I follow thine
advice, who art both my guide, and my way, and the only way of truth.

But it is an unlucky thing to have a bowl lie short in a good ground; for
thereby, it does not only loose the cast it self, but it becomes a stumbling
black unto others: We have many such short casts made in the world, by those
who begin well (in the Spirit) and, with the Lawyer in the Gospel, run far
toward the Kingdom of God, but then grow weary of well doing, and end in the
flesh; in Agrippa's Almost; whereby they are both loosers themselves, and
hindrances to those that would willingly fling home; and so become answerable
both for their own, and for other men's sins. That condition must needs be sad,
that cannot be amended, but by knocking up.

It is a part of the sport to see, how by a lucky hit, an unlikely bowl may
sometimes come to lie near, which without that chance, would have been far
enough off. There be such bowlers among us, that get more by justing and
knocking, then by fair play,

But yet it is here, as it is abroad in the world, the best bowls may have the
worst luck; all the huddle is about them, and none are struck at, but those
that lie next the Master. O my Soul, whilst others, with so much trouble, and
hazard to themselves, are casting at greatness, and honor, let it be thy
buisiness to aim at goodness, which is indeed the only true greatness; and
then however the world may strike at thee, even to the turning of thee, out of
the green, the greatest blow it can give thee, will but make thee a toucher in
Heaven.

MEDITATION. XIX. Of Hunting.
It is observed by some, that hunting has an ill name in Scripture; and that
we do not read in all those sacred Records, of any one good man, that did
affect it. Nimrod the mighty, and the first hunter, who was in aftertimes
deified in memory of it, under the name (as some write) of that constellation,
which we call Orion, with the dog star at his heels; and Esau, the cunning
hunter, are both therein sufficiently branded, the one for his oppression, the
other for his profaneness: the very term of hunting is seldom therein used,
but in an evil sense; so we read of violent men, hunting one another; of evil,
hunting violent men; of the adulteress, hunting the precious life; of false
prophetesses, hunting Souls. All which notwithstanding, it will not
consequently follow, that hunting is in it self illicite, because the name of
it is thus applied, or because the thing it self has been, and is by many
abused. To say nothing of those arguments used by some Philosophers, in
justification of it; as that it is a manly exercise, whereby men's Spirits are
quickened and sharpened, and their bodies corroborated, and hardened, and fitted
to undergo the service of the field; and that it is but just, and natural, for
men to take this freedom, upon the account of their dominion over the
creatures, which are naturally theirs: It may be enough to say, that God has
in his word permitted it, with this only caution, that the blood of those
creatures, that were taken, and killed in hunting, should be powerd out, and
covered with the dust; which was but the same prohibition that was given
against the eating of any flesh whatsoever, with the life thereof. Gods
permission is the best commission we have for the use of any pleasures, and
therefore may suffice to authorize this. I might allege out of History, that
Saint John the beloved disciple is reported to have been a great lover of this
sport, as some proof that a good man might, and that no less then a holy
penman of the Scripture did affect it. But I pass it by. O my God, thou
know that our frail, and weak bodies have need of recreations, and
divertisments, as well as of food and raiment, to preserve, and sustain them
in a good habitude; let me not live to abuse this liberty, which thou art
pleased to allow, either by over affecting it, or by turning my delight in it
to a Sanguinary wontonness, but do thou teach me by thy grace, so to use thy
Creatures, in a moderate, sober way, as having a dominion, but not a tyranny
over them; and that it may be my principal end by this exercise to improve my
health, and strength to the advantage of thy service; that there may be an
inscription of holiness upon the belly, as well as upon the bowels; upon my
pleasures, as well as upon my most serious, or necessary actions, so as
whatever I do, (whether I hunt, or whether I eat or drink) I may do all to thy
glory!

What a breach of the peace has sin made in the world? not only between God,
and man, and man and man, but even between brute creatures. Had it not been for
that common make bate, the Lion and the Kid, the Wolf and the Lamb, the Hound
and the Hair, might have lain down together as good Friends. It is a sad thing
to consider that sin is the Master of the game among us, and that we are feign
to be beholding to the Devil for our sport. O my God! let the sense of this,
lay such a restraint upon mine affections, that whilst I follow this sport,
which is occasioned by the entrance of sin, I may never be so foolish as to
make a sport of sin, but that I may make it my game to hunt that out; and to
destroy that, which would otherwise pursue me to my destruction.

There be several sorts of chases in the world; some of beasts of prey; others
weak, harmless creatures. The first was noble, and had a gallantry in it; when
men took pleasure in freeing their countries from what was noxious, and
destructive; but as people grew degenerate, and base, so they became weary of
sporting with danger, and contented themselves with smaller game, such as they
might play at with more safety and now the poor Deer and Hare, do in effect pay
for all: They that do least hurt, suffer most. It is no otherwise in the
course, and practice of the world, wherein those of strength, and power,
instead of opposing others that are in a capacity to rest their violence, do
commonly turn upon such as can make least defense, and devour those that are
more righteous then themselves. There is game enough in the world besides, but
the poor man that departs from evil, is the easiest prey.

But what an insatiety is there in all these delights, which with so much
pains, and clamor we pursue? when we have taken what we hunted through thick
and thin, the roasting comes to a poor business. All the delight seems to be
in the pains we take. Our very pleasures, as well as our cares, grow in the
thorny ground, as it is said in the parable of the seed. There is no end in
worldy desires, but even when we have what we would, we find we have not what
we would! O my Soul, let this very disatisfaction teach thee that there is
nothing here worth the desiring. The game we hunt would not be in so much
danger, but for the sent thereof, which it carries with it self, and yet leaves
behind it, and upon which it is followed. As we hunt other creatures, so we our
selves are hunted by that roaring Lion, the Devil, that seeks to devour us; and
yet we might be safe enough from him, if it were not for the corruption that is
in our own natures; but every man has an evil man within him, and there lies
the sent, upon which we are persued. Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man;
from that evil man, which is my self in my self, and I shall not fear what the
Devil can do unto me!

I have often seen a hunted Hare, when she is hard run, get into a flock of
sheep, and put the hounds to a loss, by keeping among them in their walk, O my
Soul, as thou desire to save they self from the destroier, follow the example
of that poor creature, go thy way by the footsteps of Christ's Flock, and keep
close to the Shepherds tents, so shall thou put that enemy of thine to a loss,
and remain safe under the protection of the great Shepherd of the Sheep, who
will in no wise cast thee out, and out of whose hand none can pluck thee.

It is remarkable that there is nothing that hunts so like a Hare, as a Lion;
both using alike the same arts, and doublings, when they are chaced. There is a
coincidence in extremes: Fear and courage may many times act alike, and are
not incompatble in the same subject. One may generate the other. Desperation,
which is the depth of fear, does many times (being sharpened by necessity)
excite courage, and beget hope. Temerity, which is the hight of courage, does
often (from experience of danger) breed caution, which is a discreet fear. Lord
grant me such a sanctified commixture of both these affections in the temper of
my mind, that in the greatest trials, and dangers, when I am most put to
preserve my self, I may use no other doublings than such as may consist with
the Hare and the Lion, with a fear of thee, and a bouldness in thee; that even
at what time I am afraid, I may trust in thee; so shall I whilst I fear thee,
fear nothing.

It is a great disadvantage in hunting, to meet with too much game, and to have
several Hares on foot at once; and it is no otherwise in the pursuit of worldly
affairs; they that buisy themselves in starting several designs, and projects
together, do nothing but change, and run from one think to another, and so come
home with their labor for their pains; like those pragmatical Thessalonians,
they are buisy bodies working not at all; all they do comes to nothing. Lord,
whilst others loose themselves in the vanity of their own imaginations, and are
encumbered in many things, and those (for the most part) far from any tendency
to the service of Christ; let it be the delight of my Soul, and the endeavor of
my life, to hunt after the one thing needful, and to fix my choice upon that
good part, which shall not be taken away from me. O my God, thou art the only
adequate object of my desires; thou have promised that thou will be found of
those that seek thee, and that thou will not be sought in vain. My Soul follows
hard after thee (thee, and none but thee) O let me find thee, and be found in
thee; So shall I at once, take and be taken; apprehend, and be apprehended, and
in both be made everlastingly happy.

MEDITAT. XX. Of Fishing.
OF all recreations, Fishing is the most agreeable to contemplative Spirits, as
being a sedate quiet sport; free from those clamours, and disturbances of the
senses, which usually accompany other pleasures of the field; and not so
engrossing the mind, but that withal it is at a freedom to intertain it self
with good thoughts, in which respect, it is by some of the School, preferred
before hunting.

But yet how delightful so ever it may be as a recreation, it is but a poor
bnisiness to make a trade of; and if we were called to it under that notion, we
should quickly be ready to leave our nets, to follow a more beneficial
vocation: Such is the power and operation of fancy upon the will, that by
representing the pleasure of freedom unto it (which it naturally affects) it
can induce it to like or dislike the same thing, more or less, according to the
liberty, or constraint, wherewith it acts it. There is a pleasure in willing.

But how has God honored this despicable trade, and the followers of it, with
his presence, and miracles? passing by the wisemen after the flesh, the mighty,
the noble; and choosing a few simple, weak, mean Fishermen, with their cloths
hardly dry upon their backs, to promulgate the glad tidings of his Gospel to
every creature; calling them from mending their nets, to mend, and reform the
world? O the infinite wisdom of the foolishness of God! O the unresistable
strength of his weakness. Blessed be God for Jesus Christ; and let no flesh
glory in is presence!

It has even been the ambition of the Devil, to be like the most High, in the
immitation of his actings. As Christ has his Fishers of men, so has that
wicked one his, who many times (to conceal themselves from the eye of the
world, and that there may be the less perspective into their methods) do croude
into Christ's boat, and put hard to have an oar in it, as if they were of his
gang; transforming themselves into his Ministers of righteousness. It is the
misery of the Sons of men, that many times they are not so careful, as they
should be, to try the Spirits whether they be of God, or no; whether it be a
good, or a bad Angel that is stirring in the waters: And hence it is that for
want of distinguishing rightly between the motions of the Spirit of Christ, and
the suggestions, and illusions of the Devil, it comes to pass that so many fall
into the snare of the Devil, and are caught by him, as the fishes that are
taken in an evil net.

They that are Masters at this Sport, do not when a fish bites, immediately
twitch him up, but having struck him, give him line, and let him seemingly run
away with the bait, whereby to book him the more surely, and at last, with
the more ease to draw him up. It is no otherwise, when a sinner bites at a
temptation, and the Devil strikes him, he is contented to give him Scope to
enjoy the pleasure of his sin for a season, but it is to have the surer hold of
him, and to make a pray of him with the less trouble.

When fish are inclined to bite, a small thing, a fly, or the very likness of
a fly, an artificial fly, will be a sufficient bate for them. We are ready to
smile at the simplicity of those poor Creatures, to see them so easily
deceived; and yet do not consider with what facility we our selves are taken,
when we catch at the worthless vanities of the world; and are taken with the
appearances of honor, riches, pleasures, which are deceitful, and have nothing
in them. But that is true, which the plain dealing Confessor told Philip the
Second of Spain (who doted upon a Lady, that was none of the handsomest) It is
all one to the Devil, how, or by what means he takes a man, (whether with an
ill favored face, or with a Beauty) his pleasure lies in the taking; and those
are welcomest to him that will be damned with the most ease.

It is ordinary with those that delight in fishing, to bait certain places
where the fish are aptest to frequent; but in this point, the Devil has the
advantage above all others, that he has his baits in all places; Count,
Country, Pulpit, Bench; fitted for all conditions, all ages, all complexions;
agreeable to all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the Pride of life. Who can escape his snares? O my God, when I
reflect upon mine own condition, how miserable do I find it to be? which of all
his baits (that have fallen within my reach) have I not bitten at, and
swallowed? and now how many hooks have I within me? where is the sweetness,
where is the pleasure, where is the profit of those sins whereof I am now
ashamed? now by a sad experience I find, that as I have caught the baits, so
the hooks have caught me. Who shall deliver me? Who can? None can, and will,
but that gracious ever blessed Redeemer, who gave himself a ranson for me, and
by his own death has made a way for me to escape; who has not only freed me,
but taken him that took me; and that, by being taken himself by him; conquering
him by death, that had the power of death; and by the advantage of that
victory, leading my captivity captive. What shall I render? To him be all
glory, and praise and thanks.

MEDITAT. XXI. Upon the Sunsetting.
BY what insensible degrees, and yet how speedily, has the Sun traveled his
day's journey? it was but some hour's since, that he arose, and showed himself
to our Hemisphere from the uttermost end of Heaven, and he has already
finished his Circuit to the other end thereof. Certainly day unto day utters
speech, and in their silent language seem to put me in remembrance, that I am
going, or rather (as Job phraseth it) posting my circuit too from earth to
earth: From the dust, out of which I was originally taken, to the dust, into
which I must finally be resolved.

When I look back to the morning of my life, and consider my time past,
methinks it is but a very little while, since I came out of the Chamber of my
Mothers Womb. How soon is the tale of threescore and seven years told? shall I
say, according to the impropriety of some Languages, that I have so many years?
nay rather I may say, I have them not; according to the expression of Hezekiah
(tho something in another sense) so much of mine age is departed from me; and
is as dead, as nothing to me. None can say he is the same Yesterday, and to
day, but he that is for ever. How is my time stolen away, and so much of my
self gone with it? before I can well take notice, what a clock it is with me, I
find my self in the evening, or rather the night of mine age. It is a sad thing
for a man to sleep out his best time (as it was fabled of Epimenides) and not
to wake till he be old; and then to bid the world good morrow, when the world
may bid him good night. Lord, since the time past is so fluid, and transitory,
that it is gone before I can say what it is; and the time to come so un
certain, that I know not what may be to morrow; no not what the next moment may
bring forth; teach me, I beseech thee; so to husband my time present, that in
this my day, or rather in this my Now (which is all I can call mine) I may so
live to thy praise, and glory, as I would live mine eternity hereafter, which
(without past, or future) is an everlasting present.

The motion of this glorious Planet is hardly to be discerned, but in rising
and setting of it; at noon, when it is at the height, it seems to be at a stay,
as if it were there to stand still, as it did upon Gibeon. The like may be
observed in the course, and progress of our lives; when we are gotten up to our
middle age, which is our Meridian (when we are in the strength of our years) we
appear to be at a kind of consistency; not sensible of any motion toward our
appointed change; but in the beginning and ending of our days, we may without
any great difficulty remark how we gradually rise, and set. It is apparent how
our infancy grows up from a sensitive, to a rational condition; and how by
little, and little, our reason comes to maturity; from speaking as Children,
understanding as Children, and thinking as Children, we become in time men, and
put away childish things. And so likewise, when the evil days overtake us, and
the years wherein we have no pleasure, it is for the most part easy to
observe, by what degrees our shadow goes down. Lord I am now near my Sun set,
and cannot but plainly see my self hastening to the place of my long home; my
Sun, and Light, and Moon, and stars grow dark, the Clouds return after the
rain, and one infirmity follows upon another: O let these signs of my
approaching night, be as so many tolls of my passing Bell to warn me that my
days are extinct, and that my grave is ready for me, that accordingly I may
make my self ready for my grave, and not suffer my self to fall asleep when I
should be fitting my self to go to bed.

With what a full faced, glorious Aspect, does the Sun now look upon this
inferior world, and in his lowest condition, appear greater, than at another
time? it is no otherwise with a noble hearted Christian, who though he be never
so low laid in the opinion of the World, yet retains an ^ndejected
countenance, and breaks thorough all interpositions, with so much the greater
bravery, and luster.

It is a pleasing sight to see the Sun in his going down, how he does not only
show forth his own resplendency to the uttermost, but many times, out of his
abundance, irradiate the Clouds about him, and guild, and enamel them with his
departing beams. A dying Saint is a setting Sun, and in his going down to the
grave does not only show his own brightness, and glory, but often communicates
the divine tincture thereof to all about him, and gives them occasion by the
light thereof, to glorify their father, which is in heaven. Let the foolish
World adore the rising Sun, God grant I may set clear, and by my dying example
illustrate others, and thereby induce them to praise him, Better is the end of
a thing than the beginning, and the day of death, than the day of birth.

But let the Sun set never so clear, we see it many times followed by mists,
and noisome vapors (the ancient Persians sent their imprecations and curses
after it): there is no person so innocent, but when he is laid in his grave,
may have his memory bemisted (as it were) and clouded by the stinking vapors
of malice, and envy. Our Savior himself (that Sun of righteousness) was no
sooner set (tho with so much glory, that the beholders, even his enemies,
acknowledged him to be the Son of God) but the chief Priest and Pharisees
endeavored to cover his sacred name with darkness, aspersing him as a
deceiver, and bribing the Guards to belie his Resurrection: if they have done
these things in the green tree, what can the dry expect? the disciple is not
above his Master; and the charities of the World are still the same,

It is a sad thing to have a guilty soul: this Sunset, which otherwise I might
behold with comfort, as putting me in mind of the approaching time of my rest,
is to me an exprobration; at once remembering me of the command, not to suffer
the Sun to go down upon my wrath; and condemning me for suffering so many Suns
to go down in my passion. O my God, if thou should deal with me according to
my deserts, in what a Cloud should I set? But thy goodness shines in my
wickedness. O let the brightness thereof dispel, and scatter those Clouds that
are in my perverse nature; and then although the days of my life have been
frequently overcast by my exorbitant passions, I shall hope in this evening of
it, to go down in the serenity of thy mercy, and to set in thy love!

But what do I speak of rising, and going down, as if the Sun went higher, or
lower, at one time then another, and were subject to excentrick motions? that
glorious luminary, however it appears unto us, is constant to one, and the same
rode; and is as high at night, as it is at noon, or morning. It is so with a
mind well trained, and exercised in virtue, and piety; which although, as to
outward things, it may appear subject to variations, (now and then abused, now
and then abounding) yet in it self, it is above all sublunary changes, neither
elated, nor dejected, and keeps an even course, in a constant equi-distance
from earth, and all earthly things. Lord give me that mind, that whatever my
state and condition be, I may keep still at one, and the same height, and in a
regular motion; that in all mutations, I may be one, and the same man: So shall
I be happy in my conformity to thee, who art ever the same, without shadow of
change.

But the Sun is set, and how soon are all things benighted with it? what are
all the comforts of this World, when the light of Gods countenance is
withdrawn? when thou O Lord hidest thy face, it is no marvel if we be troubled.
As thy light is a rejoicing to us, so the privation of it, is at once both
uncomfortable, and dangerous: thou make darkness, and it is night, wherein
all the beasts of the forest do creep forth: in a spiritual sense, when it is
night within us, all our lusts, and corruptions are in motion, and that roaring
Lion, that seeks to devour us, is most stirring and active: darkness, and cruel
habitations go together. O thou who art the true light of the World, and whom
no darkness can comprehend; enlighten my darkness; be my Sun, and I shall have
no need of this Sun; be my shield, and I shall fear no danger: I shall be at
once safe, and happy.

If the Sun when it sets should bid us goodnight for all, what a sad world
would there be at his departure? now we are not troubled at it, because we know
it will rise again: it should be no otherwise with us upon the departure of
godly friends and relations: why should we grieve so immoderately, many times,
for them, as if we had no hope, when we know that they shall as surely rise
again at the last day, as the Sun shall arise the next morning? we have the
assurance of Gods own word for it, that if we believe that Jesus died, and rose
again, even so those also which sleep in Jesus he will bring with him; and
that, with this further advantage to them, that they shall then appear in
glory, and shine like the Sun in the Kingdom of their father, never to set
more: what would we have more? Lord teach us to comfort one another with
athewwords.

It is observed that a clear evening, is for the most part, a forerunner of a
fair morning, especially if (as our Savior himself has told us) the Sky be
red. O my God, grant that at my last end, I may leave a clear memory behind me,
and discern a red sky over me, tinctured with his most precious blood; and it
shall be a prognostic to me of an everlastingly happy good morrow.

MEDITAT. XXII. Upon my lying down to rest.
MEthinks, I have had a long days journey in the world, and a wedrisome;
accompanied with blustering weather, and rugged ill ways; and now, a bed would
do well: there is a time to every purpose under heaven; a time to travel, and a
time to rest; a time to wake, and a time to sleep; a time to be born, and a
time to die; the longest day has a night, and the longest life, a death; the
one is the emblem of the other: those fathers before the flood, Adam, Jared,
Methusalem, that made nothing of a journey of nine hundred years, and upwards,
had their bed time, as well as their rising; and after their reckoning of so
many Ages, what do we read of them, but that they died, and they died, and they
died? this is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to heart! It is
late, and I cannot but confess I am tired, and my bones would gladly be at
rest; yet such is my infirmity, that when death is ready to come in, to help me
to bed, I am startled, and more willing to sit up, and keep him out of doors,
like Jehorams Messenger, then to be troubled with such an attendance. O my
soul, what is the matter? it is for children to apprehend bull-beggers, and to
be afraid to lie to sleep in the dark: be not frighted with a name: death is no
more the thing he was; the King of fear is departed; death is dead, as to any
hurt it can do thee; and yet I may say, so far alive, as to serve thee: he is
thine, without any more tergiversations; therefore, O my Soul, prepare thy self
for thy last rest, and in order thereunto, acquaint thy self with this pale
complexioned Servant before hand, that his face may not be strange unto thee:
we do not affect to have strangers about us, to help us off with our cloths,
but such as we know well: accustom thy self to entertain communion with him; go
down to the Potters house, as God commanded the Prophet; that is, as some
Expositors say, descend to the consideration of mortality; and so live to day,
as if thou were to be taken from me to night; so shall death never be a
surprise to thee, but whenever he comes, he shall find thee ready for him:
That person is in a sad condition, that looks for death, and cannot find it;
but he is in a sadder, whom death finds, before he looks for it.

The way to sleep well at night, is to exercise well in the day: the sleep of a
laboring man is sweet, says the Preacher. Death is but a long sleep; and if
we would hereafter rest with happiness from our labors, we must so labor
here, that our works may follow us hereafter: if we so sleep, we shall do well!

We are not troubled when we lie down to take our natural rest, upon the
confidence we have in Gods ordinary providence, that he will raise us up again;
why should Christians, that do, or should know the Scriptures, and the power of
God, be more anxious, and doubtful of their eternal, then of their natural
rest? this is nothing but our infidelity, for upon a true account there is more
uncertainty of our waking out of our beds, then there is of our rising out of
our graves. None can tell when he lies down, whether he shall see any to morrow
in this World, or rise no more till the Heavens be no more, but as to our
Resurrection, we are already so far raised, as Christ our head is risen, who is
our resurrection, and our life. Lord increase our faith!

But what is it troubles us? is it the thought, that we shall live no longer?
We may as well lament that we were born no sooner; it is but a measuring cast,
between the time when we were not, and the time when we shall ^ot be, one is as
inconsiderable as the other if it be a matter of sorrow to think that we are
mortal, it may be a just cause of rejoicing, to consider that we are so near
being immortal: it was (as some hold) the mercy of God, after our first Parents
had eaten of the forbidden fruit, and thereby made themselves, and their
posterity miserable, to prevent them that they should not eat of the tree of
life; for then both they, and we, had been everlastingly miserable. Mortality
is a mercy!

But possibly it is not death, but dying (that which the Philosopher calls, the
pomp of death) that is so much apprehended: the pangs and convulsions of death
have a horrid Aspect: certainly in those things, we do many times but fright
our selves with our own fancies; for when we think those agonies insupportable,
nature is spent, and often senseless. But admitting the worst; as our desire to
sleep makes us bear with some tossings, and tumblings, and disquietings, before
we can well settle to rest; so should our desire to depart, and to sleep in
Jesus, prevail with us to endure those sufferings, which are but for a moment,
but are followed with a quiet happy rest in the bosom of our Savior to all
eternity.

But it is a dismal thing to flesh and blood, to think that after death, we
must lie rotting, and corrupting in a dark silent grave; and that when we are
reduced to dust, as we were grass, when we lived (in regard of our frailty) so
we may come to be grass again after we are dead (in a litteral sense) and so
pass away into several other substances: this, I confess, might justify some
melancholy thoughts, if we had no hope; But when we are taught of God, that
after this Life ended, our spirit shall return unto God who gave it: and that
after this World ended, our dust shall be raised again, and recompacted into a
glorious body, clothed with immortality, and honor, and reunited to our Soul;
both, to be for ever with the Lord; we may bid defiance both to death, and the
grave. O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory?

But what needs all this persuasion? is it in our choice, whether to die, or
not? if we must die (as die we must) it is a perfect folly to be unwilling to
do that, which of necessity we must do, whether we will, or not: take courage
then, O my Soul, and act thy last part handsomely: it is a degree toward dying
well, to be willing to die?

But I am dead; what do I talk of dying, or the fear of dying? my whole life,
is but a continued death. I have more reason to be apprehensive of my living,
then of my dying; for I can never hope to live, till I die; that which we call
death, being in truth, but the dying day of our death, and the birth day of our
everlasting life.

Nay, I am not only dead, but in a great part buried: how much of my self, is
already laid in the dust? death has taken three of my ribs from me, and so
many of my limbs, as I have lost children by his stroke. My dearest relations
are gone to bed before me; to what purpose serves this fragment, this remainder
of me here? Lord, take all to thee; let me not lie half in the bed, and half
out: thy bed is not too little, nor thy coverlet too narrow, but thou have room
enough for me: receive me I humbly beseech thee, as thine; I am thine, O save
me. Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace! In thy name, I lay me
down to rest.

FINIS.
A DAILY DIRECTORY.
EVery day is a life in little; in the account whereof, we may reckon our
growth from the womb of the morning; our growth, from thence to noon (when we
are as the Sun in his strength) after which (like a shadow that declineth) we
hasten, to the evening of our age, and so to our Sun set, when we come to close
our eyes in sleep, the Image, and representative of death. Our whole life, is
but this tale of a day told over, and over. I would therefore so spend every
day, as if it were all the days I had to live; and in pursuance of this
resolution, I would by the assistance of divine grace, endeavor to observe
this following daily practice.

1. I Would awake with God, as early as I could. David has a high expression
for this, In the morning shall my Prayer prevent thee; as if he meant to be up
first. But to speak in a style, that may be fit such a worm as I am;
whenever I awake, I would willingly have my mouth prevent mine eyes, and open
first, to show forth his praise; that so God may awake for me, and make the
habitation of my righteousness prosperous. To this end, I would be careful to
ly down the night before, in the peace of God, who has promised that his
commandment shall keep me when I sleep, and talk with me when I awake;
otherwise I may justly fear, that those corruptions that bid me last good
night, may be ready to bid me first good morrow.

2. I would arise as early as I could, that course being most profitable both
for Soul, body, and estate. In Summer time, I would be up by five; in Psalm. 88.
13.
winter, by six, or soon after, as my health would permit, and if nothing
intervene of necessity to hinder me. However by Gods grace, it should be mine
endeavor to preserve my bed, and heart undesiled, and to yield as little as
might be to the foulding of the hands.

3. I would make my self ready as quickly as I could, with a special care,
while I were dressing my body, not to neglect the adorning of my Soul, but to
be sure to keep that in a graceful fashion; in order whereunto I would
endeavor (in that time) to call to mind (by some ejaculatory Meditations) the
benefit of putting on the Lord Jesus; the advantage of being furnished with the
Spiritual Panoply; the armor of light, and of righteousness, on the right
hand, and on the left; and the bravery of wearing a meek, and quiet Spirit,
which in the sight of God himself is of a great price. Romans 13. 14. Ephesians. 6. 11.
Romans 13. 12. 2 Cor. 6. 7. 1 Pet. 3. ^.


4. I would pray with my Wife (if I omitted to do it before I rose) and
together with the confession of our sins, acknowledge the mercy of God to us
both, in bringing us together, and in conjoyning not only our hands by his
ordinance, but our hearts, and affections by the Sacred bond of his love; and
implore the Sanctification of our condition, that this happy union might
continue without any further provocations between us, then to love, and good
works; or other contention, then that between the Vine, and the Olive, which of
us should bring forth the best fruit.

5. So soon as I went out of my Chamber, I would retire into my Closet, and
there lift up my heart with my hands, as an heave offering to God, in private
prayer: and although I would not absolutely limit my self here in to one place more
then to another; yet I would perform that duty there, as constantly as I could,
because I have found there is something in the place, that makes impression
upon the memory; and my thoughts are easilier recollected, and come in sooner,
where they have been formerly accustomed to a call.

6. In prayer, whether with my Wife, or alone, I would labor to stir up all
that is within me; first to an awful, reverent apprehension of the Majesty,
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God; and Secondly, to a care, not to utter
Eccles. 5. 2
hastily any thing before him; not to use vain Matthew. 6. 7.
repetitions; and not to ask Jam. 4. 3.
amiss; but to adopt, and suit my 1 John 19. 1^.
requests to his Will; and that in as few words as conveniently might be,
Eccles. 5. 2.
considering that he is in heaven, and I upon earth. But yet I would not so
contract my self, as to make an end before I had done; but so continue in
prayer, and watch in the same, till I found mine affections thoroughly warmed,
and quickened. For encouragement to this perseverance without fainting, I would
endeavor to make use of these, or such like considerations; as first, that I
pray to a God hearing prayer, unto whom all flesh should come; a God, that
hears, when none else can hear; when the children (the departed Saints) are
in bed with him, and asleep, ignorant of our condition; That hears, when none
else will hear; at midnight, in the darkest time of our condition; and is
willing to be importuned, and to have no rest given him; That hears while we
are yet speaking, and is ready to answer before we can call; That is so willing
to open the door, when we knock, that he has made himself the door to give us
admission. Secondly, that I pray unto a God, that commands us to pray unto
him in time of trouble; and (if I may speak it with humble reverence) prays
us Psalm. 65. 2. Luke 11. 3. Isaiah 63. 16. Luke 11. 5. Luke 18. 7. Isaiah 6^.
7. Isaiah 65. 24. John 10 9. Psalm. 50. 15.
to pray unto him, and is delighted with our voice. And thirdly, that this God
is, 1. The Father, and in Christ Jesus my Father, that knows better then I my
self, what I stand in need of before I ask him, and is able to do exceeding
abundantly, above all that I can either ask, or think. 2. The Son, who is not
ashamed to call me brother; my Mediator, and Advocate, who ever lives to make
intercession for me. 3. The Spirit, (and my comforter) who helps mine
infirmities, when I know not what I should pray for, as I ought. Lastly, that I
have a promise from this good God, to be heard in what I ask according to his
will, which should sufficiently imbolden me to come unto the Throne of grace;
his hearing being a granting, either of what I pray for; or of what is better,
or of what is enough for me.

7. I would make it my first study, Cantic. 2. 14. Math. 6. 8. Ephesians. 3. 20.
Hebr. 3. 11. Hebr. 7. 25. Romans 8. 16. 1 John 5. 14
to read some portion of the Holy Scripture, both beginning and ending it, with
some short Prayer to God for his blessing upon it, that it might be of
edification to me: That my reading of it might (according to that advice of
Isaith. ^^, 23.
Isaiah, for the hearing of it) not only serve for the present, but be of use
for the time to come, as a rule, and Canon of righteousness unto me, in the
course, and practice of my life.

8. I would walk half an hour, and intertaine my self with as good thoughts as
I could; that whilst my body were in exercise, my mind might neither be idle,
nor misemploied.

9. The time intercurrent between this and noone, I would give either to study,
or to buisiness, or to company; but if I could choose, the most of it to study;
which is the improvement of time.

10. Because in reading, Eccles 1^. 12.
as in making many books, there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the
flesh; I would especially apply my self to the knowledge of divinity, as that
which most directly tends to the cleansing of the inside of the Cup; and
leads me to the observation of my Saviors rule, To seek first the Kingdom
of God, and his Righteousness; which is the beginning of wisdom, and the end,
and conclusion of the whole matter. But yet, I would not altogether lay by the
study of Morality, but labor to make use of it in a sanctified way; and so, as
that that learning should still be subservient to the study, and practice of
piety; the eyes of the Maiden should look unto the hand of the Mistress.

11. After a convenient time spent in my Closet, I would, if I had a special
calling, apply my self unto that which S. Paul terms, the doing of ones own
business; and I would be diligent in the pursuance of it: no day (so far as I
had liberty) should pass without a line. But however in the want of such a
calling, I would be constant to that general calling which I have taken upon
me, and wherein I would be a law unto my self, which is (according to S. Paul's
injunction) to do good as I had opportunity, unto all, but especially unto
those who are of the Household of Faith. This I would have to be the Decretal
end, (as Seneca phraseth it) the bent, and aim of my whole life, whereunto all
mine undertakings should collineate: without such a design as this, men live
they know not why; they live by fits, and snatches, and according to particular
accidents, but as to their general, and main course, without any certain
purpose at all; their lives are made up of shreds, and fragments, and there can
be no continuity, nor sutableness in their actions, because they are not of a
whole piece, nor all of the same stuff. I would therefore make it my daily
business, in all conditions (whether in my special, or general calling) to be
one, and the same man in well doing.

12. I would constantly observe to have prayers at noon with my family, and to
be present my self at the duty; and that, both for mine own comfort, and for
example to my Servants; who are then most likely to be wrought upon, and made
such as I desire, when I show my self to be such as I desire to make them. I
look upon the example of Genesis 18. 19.
Abraham, as in this particular sufficient to turn all Masters of Families into
examples: what he commanded his household to do in the service of God, that he
first of all performed Genesis 17. 6. 27.
himself; and therefore as I desire the blessing of Abraham upon my Children,
and Family, so it should be my care, both to order them to keep the way of the
Lord, and by mine own example to guide them into that way, which I would have
them keep.

13. At Meals, I would observe a moderation; a mean between eating by the
ounce, and by the pound; a sober competent enough, is the best diet. He that
exceeds that, makes his Table a snare. In an especial manner, I would avoid
drinking, further then for the satisfaction of nature; for of all sins, that is
the most bestial. Indeed I wrong the beasts when I say so, (for most beasts are
sober); but what a pitiful creature is a brutish man, a man sunk beneath his
Species? It is no Hyperbole to say, that drunkenness is all sins, in the
complication of it, so that it is a difficult matter to be simply drunk, and no
more; to be drunk, and to be guilty of no more then being drunk. Let the jolly
good fellows of the World deride this as a morose, and (it may be) a nice
precise humor, I would have them know, that I scorn to make my self a beast in
a civility, for any man's pleasure. That is the worst good manners in the World.

14. I would in the choice of my Company, wherever I were, associate (if I
could) with those only, that went mine own way (as I would do, when I went a
journey); all my delight should be in the Saints, Psalm. 16. 3
who are the only excellent ones. But yet because it is impossible, altogether
to avoid the meeting with vain, or vicious 1 Cor. 5. 10.
persons (for then I must needs go out of the world); I would in mine ordinary
conversation, labor to observe these rules,

1. According to the direction of the 1 Cor. 5. 11.
Apostle, to keep a resolved settled distance with those people that are called
Brethren, and are but nominals; those that look one way in their profession,
and row another way in their Jude 12.
practice; and with such spots in feasts, and meetings, not to commaculate my
self, by keeping them company, or by 1 Cor. 5. 11.
eating with them willingly.

2. To avoid, as much as I could, the society of vain, as well as of scandalous
company; and if I could not do that, yet to stay as little as might be with
them; for that (at the best) they do but (in a civil kind of Felony) rob a man
of his time.

3. In case I were necessitated to be in ill Company, then to observe their
miscarriages, but this, not to deride them, and to make a jest of them (for he
that, does that, does but rejoice in the Devils victories) but to avoid them,
and from their evil examples to gather good instruction, as the Prove. 24. 30.
3^.
wise man, when he went by the field of the slothful, became the wiser by
remarking his Sloth. It is no paradox to say, that wise men learn more from
fools, than fools learn from wisemen.

4. To make profit of the abilities, and parts of those that are persons of
understanding, as I should have opportunity in their Company (if they were such
as I might be free with) by leading them on to discourse, and by putting
questions unto them whereby to provoke them to show where their strength lay
(as we put water into a Pump, to make the water come) which would be at once a
civility to them, in giving them opportunity to make demonstration of their
worth, and a benefit to my self, whereby I might receive instruction.

15. In reference to the right ordering of my self in Company, I would set as
strict a watch, as I could, upon my thoughts, words, and actions.

1. Upon my Thoughts, that they might be free from Impiety, Pride,
Covetousness, Wrath, Impurity, and Vanity. To which end, I would study to keep
my heart with all possible diligence. 1. By possessing it with a deep, and
awful apprehension of the Majesty, Holiness, Omnipresence, and Omniscience of
God; the sense whereof was that, Job. 13. 4.
which principally secured Job from exorbitant fancies. 2. By directing, and
fixing it upon the love of the law of God; Psalm. 119. 37.
O how love I thy law, says David, it is my Meditation all the day. Where the
love is settled, there the thoughts will be amused, and busied; as where the
carkse is, there the eagles will be gathered together. 3. By inuring my self to
frequent, and fervent ejaculations unto God, that the Meditations of my heart
might be acceptable in his sight; and this was a piece of David's method too. 4.
And lastly by committing my way to God, according to Solomon's direction, that
my thoughts might be established: and though I knew I could never keep the door
so close shut, but that some wicked, and vain imaginations would be crowding in
upon me, yet however by the assistance of divine grace, I would make it my
work, to use them like vagrants, and to whip them out again. Those Sparrows,
and Swallows, might keep a fluttering about me, but they should never be
willingly admitted by me to house, and to nestle, and to lay near Gods Altar in
my heart.

2. I would set a guard upon the door of my lips, that I might not sin in my
words; for in the multitude of words, there cannot want sin. The talking Devil
is of more danger, then the dumb Devil, and therefore I had rather at any time
be put to repent the saying too little, then the saying too much; for I could
remedy the one, but not the other; That which is not spoken may in good time be
uttered, but that which is once uttered, cannot be unspoken. According to this
caution, I would be careful not to offend. 1. By Atheistical Speeches (words
clothed with death) as Syracides rightly terms them) tending to the contempt
of God, and of Religion, and Devotion, and to the profanation of his name; all
which kind of expressions may justly be reckoned among the unfruitful works of
darkness, as bringing forth nothing either of profit or pleasure to those that
affect them. 2. By using slanderous, defamatory words, which commonly are
repaid again in the same Coin; and therefore he that will take the freedom to
talk of others, what he pleases, must be contented many times to hear that from
others which pleases him not. This venom may be vented, either a malicious
whispering way, the which is many times more penetrative, than that which is
delivered in a public manner, as a wind at a Window may do one more hurt, than
in the air; or in a jesting way, which is a casting of firebrands, arrows, and
death in sport, as Solomon expresses it; or under a mask of friendship
commending a man with a But that shall be sure to spoil all the commendation;
or with a pretended pity, that such a one should be so, and so; or as not
believing the report, which we would have believed: such tongues as these are
worse than Dog's tongues, for they are healing, these wounding. To avoid this
baseness, I would not only look to my tongue, but to mine ears; there may be a
slander in hearing, and listening, as well as in speaking. I would not make
talebearers by listening to misreports; the receiver makes the Thief: if the
Master hearken to lies, all his Servants are wicked, and will take the Wind of
him: so says Prove. 29. ^^.
Solomon. But such Masters are seldom wise, and such Servants seldom honest.
Midas his ears showed what he was. 3. By taking a liberty to speak obscenely,
which the Apostle calls corrupt communication; this is no other, then the
semen of lust, when it is set on boiling by the fire of Hell, and there is a
contagion in it, corrupting, or (at the best) offending the hearers. 4. By
using words of heat, and provocation in argument, or other discourse with any;
for passion will never convert reason. In such a case, when I met with that
distemper in others, or found it in my self, I would not heap wood on the fire,
by contesting, but either divert the discourse, or end it in silenee. The best
way to keep the peace, is to hold ones peace. But this will not be so handsomely
done, if it be not done at first, and before the discourse grow too warm;
Prove. 17. 14.
as the opening of a watercourse is better stopped in the beginning, before it
have gained too much passage, then when it has blown up the floodgates, and
overthrown the banks. For prevention of the worst, I would be wary not to be
too positive, or peremptory in mine own opinion, but to deliver my sense, with
a submission to better reason, and with a willingness to be better informed;
which was noted to have been Socrates his way in argumentation, and whereby he
gained so much upon others and brought them to a concurrence with him; under
the notion of one that desired to find out the truth, and to be satisfied in
it, but not as imposing his own opinions upon any in a magisterial way. 5. By
uttering untruths; by false speaking; than which there can be nothing imagined
more servile and base. It is a quality befiiting none, but such as go in fear
of a Rod, or a Cudgel; Children, or Cowards; and therefore one cannot be too
wary in avoiding it. In order to that end, I would be careful in my discourse,
to keep to the plain rode way of truth; and to be clear, and moderate in mine
expressions. I would not affect telling wonders: I would neither tell such
truths willingly, as in their incredibility might resemble lies; nor tell such
lies, as in their probability might resemble truths. Whatever I said, tho
possibly I might from the report of others, tell that which were a lie; yet I
would be sure not to lie, by telling that for a truth, which I knew to be a
lie. I would speak the truth in my heart. Psalm. 15. 2.
He that believes himself in what he says, never lies. 6. By unadvised
promises to any person, much more by any rash vows to God, least in keeping
them, I might ensnare my self; or in violating them injure others, and sin
against God. He that promises more then he is able to perform, is a vain weak
man; he that promises more then he means to perform, is a false unworthy man.
The word of a person of honor should be led by his thought, and followed by
his deed. Above all, there is no dallying with God, in what we have promised,
or vowed to him. He has no pleasure in fools; Ecclos. 5. 4. 6.
such as after vows make inquiry. Prove. 20. 25.
It is not enough for one to say, it was an error, and then (as upon better
advisement) to vow, not to perform his vow, Plut in Lo^on.
as that Heathen did. God will not be mocked. He expects indelaid payment. I
would therefore be cautelous before hand how I bound my Soul with any such
bond, but having once taken the obligation upon me, I would by all lawful
means, and with as much speed as I could, resolve, and endeavor to perform it.
7. By ostentation, and bragging of any thing done or to be done by me; for this
vanity is most tedious to the Company, and in Spiritual matters, odious to God.
It is offensive to others, who, for the most part, are lovers of themselves
too, and apt to look upon it as a diminution to their worth, to hear another so
exalt, and proclaim his own; and it is a sin against God, to rob him of his
honor, and glory, by Idolizing our selves, and Sacrificing to our own parts,
and abilities, when we have nothing, but what we have received from his Divine
beneficence. If therefore thorough the grace of God actuating my weakness, I
had, or might have done any thing in any measure commendable, I would
(according to Salomons advice) Prove. 27. 2.
let another man extol it, and not mine own mouth. He is hard put to it, that
must be fain to be his own trumpeter. There is no greater sign of emptiness
then for a man to be full of himself. 8. By unadvised disclosing of matters of
secrecy, whether concerning my self, or my friend, or the public. He that
suffers for that fatality, can justly blame none but himself; for why should
another man be tied to keep his Counsel, that could not keep his own? 9. By
taking a freedom to chide in my family in a violent passionate way, and with
unseemly expressions. Job. ^^. 13.
So did not Job, and so would not I: for every Master, has a Master in heaven,
Ephesians. 6. 9.
with whom there is no respect of persons: from the highest to the lowest, all
are in the same relation, fellow servants unto him. He that made me, made them,
and nothing but his free grace put the distinction between us; without which, I
might have held a Trencher to them, as well as they to me. I would therefore so
use them, as I would be used by them, if I were in their quality. My endeavor
should be to give them that which were just, and equal; to take care of them
upon all occasions; to show my self affable to them, Ephesians. 6. 9.
forbearing threatening, and harshness; and by that crriage to oblige them to
be, not only faithful Servants to me, but (according to Seneca's phrase) Sen.
Ep. 47.
humble friends. But in case I should find my self necessitated to take notice
of faults, and to express a sharpness upon it, as sometimes, and too often,
there might be occasion for it, (which if I should not be sensible of, I might
quickly be Servant-ridden, and reduced to that Proverbial condition of the
Major of Senegalia in Italy, to command, and do it my self) I would be careful
to bridle my passion so, as that it might not run away with me, but that I
might be able to manage it, and to keep it within the ring, and compass of
these considerations. 1. I would show a present sense of any dishonor offered
to God, either by profane Speeches, or wicked actions, with a further
allowance to my self to chide in this case, then in any else, both as the
concernment is higher, and as I might with more safety trust my dull heavy
affections for mounting too fast upward: But then I would intermingle mine
anger with grief (as our Savior did) Mark. 3. 5.
for the hardness of their hearts that had so offended, and endeavor to
convince them of their sin, and to reduce them to repentance. 2. I would not
discover mine anger too often, or upon light occasions, for that (like the
frequent, and ordinary giving of hot water) would abate the operation of it,
and at last render it ineffectual, and despicable. 3. I would not chide the
air, when my Servant had misdemeaned himself, but six the blame upon the
person, and that (as Paul rebuked Peter) to his face: Galat. 2. 11.
for to make a clamor against any behind their backs, and to say nothing to
them when they came in presence, would be but a disturbance to my self, a jest
to those that should have the reproof, and an emendation to no body. 4. I would
be moderate in chiding, when soever I were put to it. He that goes beyond that
measure, deserves to be chidden himself; as Plutarch was justly told his own,
and reproached as a person not worthy to be called a Philosopher, for that
having written so much against anger, he himself gave so much way unto it
against his Servant. 5. I would be careful not to retain mine anger too long,
least it should grow sower; there may be a passant anger in a wise man, Eccles.
7. 9.
but we know in what bosom it rests. 6. I would avoid occasions of anger,
and not be too curious, an dinquisitive after all words that are spoken, least
I should hear my Servant curse me; Eccles. 7. 21.
and therefore if my Servant would not amend by fair means, I would resolve to
part with him, rather then to keep him, to the hazard of my making my self the
worse by my passion, because he would not be bettered by my reason. Lastly if
at any time I should find my self transported to sin in this way, I would
labor to be humbled for it, and to be angry with my sin, which is the right
way to be angry without sin.

3. I would take heed unto mine actions: 1. Not to do any thing that might give
occasion of Scandal, whereby I should at once dishonor God, open the mouths of
the wicked to blaspheme, greive the Spirits of good people, and wound mine own
conscience. I like not the humor of those that despise a bad fame, for none do
that so much as those that despise the virtues that produce a good fame: and
this shows worst in those that are greatest, as the scandals they give are
more exemplary then others; for the faults of great men can never be small. But
there is a twofold scandal; the one real, the other imaginary, and in
appearance only: I would if I could avoid both; but it should be with more
solicitude for the one, than the other. For the first, I hope I should as soon
choose to dive into the bottom of the Sea with a Millstone about my neck, as
in a real way be guilty of it, as to the scandalizing of the least of Christ's
little ones; but for the other (which I reckon an offense taken, and not given)
such as is grounded upon unsound, and depraved opinions about things
indifferent, or impertinent, I would not asservile my self to any men's fancies,
and Chymera's, and I know not what dominations, and spirits of the Air, but
either give a rational satisfaction for what I did, or (if that would not be
taken for good payment) acquiesce in the satisfaction of mine own conscience,
and stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ had made me free. I had rather
never have been, born than that it should be said of me, that I had committed
murder, or adultery, or felony; but if any should charge me with preciseness,
or fanaticism, for not going to a Play, or a Tavern, or for not using that
freedom, and liberty in my discourse, and conversation, that others did, I
should be so far from being troubled at it, that it should be a comfort to me
to be found guilty of such innocent scandals. I would be wary not to give the
men of the World advantage to tax me in the course of my life with any thing of
dishonor; but if all the occasion they could find against me, were but
concerning the law of my God, and my devotion to his service, I hope I should
never shut the window for it. I would therefore make it my care, and constant
endeavor to provide that whatsoever I did, might not only be good but of good
report, and honest in the sight of honest, and good men, that my good might not
be evil spoken of by them: But for those that are without; I shall say no more.
2. I would be careful, as to do good, so to do that good in a good manner,
which is to do it well; for a thing done, may be good in the substance of the
work, and yet vitiated in the manner of the doing of it. Cain and Abel, the
Pharisee and the Publican performed both the one, and the other, the same
duties; but with so much difference in the manner of their performance that God
had respect unto the one, and not unto the other; he justified the one, and
rejected the other. For my better direction herein, I would endeavor. 1. To be
good; for as things be, so they operate; Math. 7. 17
every good tree brings forth good fruit; and herein I should be conform to
the nature of God himself, whose character it is, Psalm. 119. 68.
to be good, and to do good. 2. Not to rest upon a moral goodness, but upon
mine implantation in Jesus Christ, Job. 15. 5.
and to bring forth fruit in him. 3. In doing good, to make use of none but
good means; I would not do a wrong to do a right; Isay. 61. 8
God hates robbery for burnt-offering. 4. To place the good I would do, upon a
right object; upon those that want, and not upon those that have enough. What
is poured into a full vessel is so much Spilt; Pro^. 2^. 16.
and therefore Solomon puts that which is given to the rich, into an equal
scale, with that which is taken from the poor, with a severe denunciation of
poverty against those that do it. 5. To do the good I did, for good ends. It is
the end, that denominates, and qualifies, and Crowns the action. They that do
good for evil ends, and they that do evil that good may ensue, are both evil
whilst they do good. 3. I would not do that to another, which I would not have
done to my self, or mine, but I would admeasure mine actions by the rule of my
blessed Savior in that particular, and make that my standard 4. I Would not be
abuisiy body in affecting multiplicity of engagements, and the having many
Irons in the fire at once, for that kind of ^^agmatical undertaking seldom
effects any thing to the purpose, and is no better then a buisy doing nothing.
Neither would I intrude my self into other folks matters, when I had no call,
nor power to do good; yet not forgetting Gods command, Levit. 19. 17.
Not to hate my Brother, but in any wise to rebuke him, and not to suffer sin
upon him; (or as it is in the margent) that thou bear not sin for him. In Gods
account, he is interpreted to hate his Brother, that does not rebuke him, and
his suffering his Sin upon him, is reputed a taking of it upon himself: but
then, this must be done with great tenderness, and in the Spirit of meekness;
in the spirit of the Dove, that kisses, when it bills, and seems to bite.
Gentle reprehensions make deepest impressions; like the Snow, that falls soft,
and yet soaks, and penetrates to the root. 5. I would not entangle my self in
too many friendships; for there is a kind of incontinency in it, and a man does
but prostitute himself thereby, and make himself common. Prove. 5 17.
In this case Solomon's Council is good, withdraw thy self from thy Neiehbours
house; or (as some read it, out of the Original, instead of withdraw) make thy
self precious: that is, make thy self valluable, do not wear out every man's
threshold; by obtruding thy self upon them; do not make thy self vulgar, and
cheap; for thereby, a man does but imbase himself, as a mean commodity, that is
every bodies money. I would hold a fair civility with as many as I could, Eul. 6
6.
but (according to the advice of Syracides) I would have but one Counselor of
a thousand. 6. As I would not affect a multitude, Sen. de benef. 1. 6. c. 33.
or (as Seneca calls it) a people of friends, so I would be very wary, how I
received any into that number, without weighing, and trying them, as I would do
gold. I like not those friendships that are begun in the Parlour, and concluded
in the Cellar: He that closes overhastily with a friend, before he has eaten
a good deal of salt with him, and had sufficient proof of his piety, fidelity,
and ability, may quickly come to take the name of friend in vain. 7. I would
not captivate my self to any man's friendship, so as to render my self obnoxious
unto him, whereby it might be in his power to ruin me, if he should prove
false; but I would so govern my carriage (if I could) as neither to trust to
far, nor to seem to mistrust at all. He that shows that he doubts his friend,
teaches his friend to doubt him. It is a safe, and (with the allowance of some
grains) no ill advice, so to look upon a friend, as one that may become an
enemy, and so to look upon an enemy, as one that may become a friend. The best
way in conversation is the middle way, between ungirt, and straight laced;
between a confidence, and a diffidence; an open facility, and a close
reservation. But in case of suspicion, I should think the fairest way to clear
it were the openest, that is, to communicate it freely to the party suspected,
Bacon Ess.
whereby (as it has been well observed) a man shall both know more of the
truth of the buisiness, then he did before; and withal make that party (if he
have any ingenuity in him) the more desirous to discharge himself of it, and
the more circumspect, not to give further cause of jealousy. 8. I would not
affect any recreations, or games, but such as were lawful, and innocent;
unprejudicial to my self, and Company; either as to health, or estate; without
scandal, or offense: and those which I did give my self a liberty to use, I
would be as moderate, in, as in eating, drinking, and sleeping, making use of
them for the refreshment, and releif ofnature, and no further; spending as
little time at them, as I could, otherwise I should think my self a looser,
although I played for nothing.

16. After dinner about an hour, or so soon as might consist with the
preservation of my health, I would retire to prayer, with the same cautions
above mentioned in reference to that duty.

17. I would return to mine employment, either in study, or buisiness, or
intertainment of Company, according to the occasion offered; and with the
former cautions.

18. Upon all emergencies, I would, as frequently as I could, lift up my heart
unto God, either by confession, upon any sensible failing (although but in a
sinful thought); or by thanksgiving upon any accident of welcome importance,
or by request, in case of any want wherein I I should desire to be releived.

19. I would carefully observe to have prayers with my family before supper, or
in a fit time after, if I should be then diverted from it, by any avocation, or
interruption. God requires, and expects, an evening, as well as a morning
sacrifice.

20. At Supper, I would endeavor to keep the same watch, both upon mine
appetite, and conversation, as at dinner.

21. I would be as careful, as I could, with civility, to break up company
after supper in a good hour, least sitting up late should make me sleepy, and
indispose me to the concluding duties of the day, or enforce me to redeem that
time, with the expense of so much time the next morning.

22. Between supper, and going to bed, I would be careful to read again
somewhat of the Scripture, after the former prescript, as near as possibly I
could observe it; and this I would do, to leave my heart with a good relish in
it.

23. Before I went to bed, I would constantly examine my self, and take a view
of what I had done in the several passages of the day past, as God did of every
thing he had made in the creation, and as far as I were able to recollect my
self, I would sum up, how often, and wherein I had offended God in thought,
word, or deed; in commission, or omission; thorough ignorance, or presumption;
alone, or in company, or both ways: with an especial eye upon those sins which
were most predominant in my corrupt nature. I would observe mine improvements,
or decays in grace, what I had gained, or lost; and according to the state of
mine account, I would make my application to the throne of grace by Confession,
Petition, or Thanksgiving. I would with all humbleness confess my sins unto
God, in all the particularity I could, and accknowledg my unworthiness of the
least of all his mercies, imploring his gracious pardon for what is past, and
his preventing grace for the time to come; beseeching him to take an entire
possession of me, as his own (tho most unworthy) by purchase; and so to
preserve me, that there might be nothing in me, but what were his; that there
might be no strong holds of habitual sins held out against him; nor any
presumptuous imaginations exalted in opposition to his saving knowledge; but
that every thought in me might be led captive unto his obedience; lastly, I
would bless and praise him with lips unfeigned, and with all that were within me
for all his mercies renewed, and continued to me from day to day; and above all
for Christ Jesus the mercy of all mercies; and fountain of all blessing, in
whom alone I desired to be found. Thus I would endeavor to wash off the soil
of the day, and to make all clean at evening, as under the law.

24. I would reckon that day for lost, wherein I could not give some account to
my self, that I had either done, or received some good.

25. When I were in bed, I would not settle to rest, until I had asked my
Heavenly father blessing and laid my head in the bosom of his Son my gracious
Savior, with an humble recommendation of my body, and Soul into his hands, by
some short ejaculatory prayer. Thus sleeping, and thus awaking, I should hope,
that whilst I slept, my heart might be kept awake: and that when I awaked, I
might be still with him, whom my Soul loves.

26. I would have Jesus Christ to be the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
determination of all my purposes, and actions. He alone is my wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification and redemption; mine only all, and without
whom I can do nothing; unto whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, one
infinitely glorious God, be all honor, and glory, and praise, and adoration for
ever and ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

