CHRISTIAN WARNING-PIECE FOR ALL TRUE PROTESTANTS BY WAY OF CHRISTIAN COUNSEL
and ADVICE TO THE KING'S Most Excellent MAJESTY, and all His good Protestant
Subjects, sounded forth out of the Written Word of GOD.

Wherein is clearly showed, the true Causes why the Lord in former Ages brought
his severe Judgments on his own People, both before the Law, under the Law, and
under the Gospel.

All which being applied to the present State of Protestants, is proved both by
Scripture and History, that it is the same Cause still for which the Lord is
bringing His severe Judgments on his Protestant People: Together with the
Means, if embraced, which God in Mercy has Ordained to prevent the same.

By THOMAS* WALL.

Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show my People
their Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their Sins. Isa. 58. 1. For
whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our Learning, and
Admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come. Therefore let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. Romans 15. 4. 1 Cor. 10. 11.
Whosoever hears the sound of the Trumpet, and takes not Warning, his Blood
shall be upon his own Head: But he that takes Warning, shall deliver his own
Soul. Ezekiel. 33. 4, 5. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1680.

TO THE King's Most Excellent Majesty.
Most humbly showing,
THat the most Wise God, who has made all things for his Rev. 4. 11.
Pleasure, has ordained in every Nation but two States, Pillars, or Legs, to
stand upon; the one Civil, and the other Spiritual. The Civil State is God's
Ordinance of Magistratical Government, under diverse Titles, as Kings, or other
Chief Governors, unto whom an excellent Dan. 4. 36.
Majesty is given them of God, as next under Romans 13.
God, Head of the Commonwealth, the Lord's Lieutenants here on Earth. And
seeing since the Fall, Man's Heart is Jer. 17. 9.
deceitful, and in Man's Flesh dwells no good thing, so that the Good he would
do, he does not; but the Evil he would not, that he does Romans 7.
. Therefore for guide in Government, God has given Kings the second Exodus 20.
Table of his Royal Law, as a most sure Foundation and Rule, to square all
their Laws by to govern their People; so that by it they bear not the Sword in
vain, but use it to the Glory of God, for the punishment of Evildoers Romans 13.
, and the praise of them that do well: Of which Trust and Stewardship committed
to them, they must shortly give an Account to their Chief Judge, the Prince of
the Kings of the Earth, the Lord Jesus, at the last Day.

The other State or Pillar is the Rev. 15. 3 Mat. 28. 18
Kingly Government of the Lord Jesus in his Church, or John 18. 36.
Kingdom, in all things Spiritual. As Christ has his Office under God, the
only Head of his Mystical Body Ephesians. 5. 23. Col. 1. 17.
the Church, unto whose Government is given the first Table of God's Law,
according to which most sure Foundation are all the Laws made in all Ages for
his worship: And though Christ was not manifested in the Flesh till these last
Times, yet was he from the Days of Adam King in his Church, on his holy Psalm.
2. 6.
Hill of Sion, in those who were Figures of him, as Heb. 7. 1. Ps. 110. 4.
Melchisedeck, Acts 3. 22.
Moses, and David; so Christ was the same Yesterday, to Day, and for Heb. 13. 8
ever, who now in his Church sits on the Throne of his Father David, as it
is written of him, Isa. 11. 3, 4.
That he shall not judge after the sight of his Eyes, nor reprove after the
hearing of his Ears; but with Righteousness shall he judge the Poor, and reprove
with Equity, for the Meek of the Earth: and shall smite the Earth with the Rod
of his Mouth, and with the breath of his Lips shall he slay the Wicked. So that
his Weapons are not Carnal, as his Kingdom is not of this World; so differing
from the Civil State.

Moreover, as these be the only States ordained of God, and the nature of them
being so different the one from the other, as the nature of a thing Civil and
Spiritual is, so that the one State may not meddle with the Work^ that
belongs to the other. And hereupon did the Lord in his Wisdom, constitute the
Civil State in the Tribe of Genesis 49. 10. 2 Chronicles. 5. 2.
Judah, and the Spiritual State in the Tribe of Levi; but when King Uzziah
would presume to break God's Order, to do that Work which 2 Chronicles. 27. 16, 17,
18.
belonged not to the Civil States Office, the Lord smote him with Leprosy to
the day of his Death; that others may be warned, not to presume above what is
written, 1 Cor. 4. 6.

Therefore the Lord Jesus, our High Priest, and only Lord Spiritual in his
Church, would not meddle with the Magistrates-work nor Office, to give Judgment
on a Woman taken in Adultery John 8. 3, 4, 5.
, nor divide Inheritances between Brethren: And likewise commanded his
Disciples, and all Bishops and Ministers to the Worlds end, not to take on them
the title Luke 22. 25. Mat. 20. 25.
of Politic Princes, but rather he that would be Chief, to be Servant to all;
and not as Lords, either in Title or Rule, over God's Heritage 1 Pet. 5. 3.
, or Churches of God.

Therefore we see God in his Wisdom has limited either State to keep within
the limits he has ordained for them. Therefore as touching the Civil
Magistratical State, we may justly conclude, That whatsoever Person he be,
whether Noble or Ignoble, that shall presume to Alter, Change, or Diminish to,
or from any part of the Laws, Ordinances, Offices, or Order, contrary to the
King's Royal Crown and Dignity established by Law, according to the second
Table of God's Law, must needs be accounted a Traitor to the King, and suffer
his high Displeasure.

Accordingly may we conclude, concerning the Spiritual State of Christ's
Government in his Church, That whatsoever Person he be, whether Noble, or
Ignoble, that shall presume to Add or Diminish, Alter or Change any thing in
Government, or Ministry, Time, Maintenance or Order, contrary to the Rules or
Laws of Christ's Testament, founded on the first Table of God's Law, in all
things pertaining to the Worship of God, may justly be deemed a Traitor to the
Royal Crown and Dignity of the Lord Jesus; and may hear the Sentence out of his
own Mouth against them, saying, Bring those mine Enemies that would not that I
should Reign over them, and slay them before me: Either by casting out of his
Church, or by everlasting Woe at the last Day.

May it therefore please your Majesty, in your Wisdom to consider these things,
That it is one of the Crying Sins in this your Kingdom, for which God's
Judgments are threatened against it, because the Civil and Spiritual State is
mingled together; the Civil State assuming into the Spiritual Prerogative of
the Lord Jesus (who has this Testimony from God, that he was faithful in his
House, or Church, as Moses, to give Laws and Directions in every thing
appertaining to the Worship of God) to make Laws and Directions how, and what
we must worship God with and by. The Ministers, or Bishops, contrary to
Christ's express Word and Practice, do take on them the Office of Civil State,
and Titles of Politic Princes, to be Lords in Councils, as Parliaments, and
Lords Spiritual in and over Churches, if not Justices of the Peace; so that by
this breach of God's Order, there is such a state of Confusion; to wit, A third
State, or Leg, a Compound of both Civil and Spiritual, yet neither really Civil
nor Spiritual; but a Monster, called a Beast, Rev. 13. 1, 11. Which, as Writers
say Plat. Politiq. See Hen. Ains. Arrow.
, was first brought forth in Egypt, by those Heathens void of God's Order in
Grace and Nature, and therefore they would have all their Kings, Priests; so
commingling the Kingdom and Priesthood together in one Person. And this
abominable Invention was the Romish Church, when fallen from Christ, enamoured
with; for which sinful Act, among others, she is called not only Babylon Rev.
18. and Rev. 11.
, Sodom, but Egypt, because the Romish Church would have the Magistracy and
Ministry, Princedom and Priesthood, in the persons of her Popes, Cardinals, and
Bishops, to be Church Princes, and indeed above Princes, to Dethrone them at
their pleasure; and from Rome was this Egyptian Fashion brought by her Rev. 18.
15.
Merchants into England. And this being such a Confusion, that the very Pont.
l. 5. c. 9.
Philosopher condemns it by the light of Nature, and says, it could not stand
with the actions of those two Offices (meaning the Civil and Spiritual) so
different the one from the other, that one Man should perform both at one time
together; but must needs fall out, when both Duties are to be done, that the
one would be omitted. So either God is not duly served, or the Civil State
suffers Damage.

And for as much as it is a work belonging to the Civil State to redress, which
your Majesty's Ancestors, King Henry the 8th, King Edward the 6th, and Queen
Elizabeth of happy Memory, began (as God had promised, That he would put into
the Hearts of the Kings of the Earth, to hate the Whore, eat her Flesh, and
Rev. 17. 16.
burn her by the Fiery Law of God, in making her desolate and naked) to abolish
out of their Dominions the Pope's Supremacy, the Lord Abbots, Cardinals,
Jesuits, Monks, Friars; and the rest of that Ministry is left for your Majesty
to abolish; which if your Majesty refuse to do, it must be done: And why?
Because the Lord has said it; who will (by whom he pleases) give them Blood to
drink, for strong is the Lord that judges her. And the Kings of the Earth, who
have committed Fornication, and lived deliciously with her, yet now shall
bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her Burning;
as more at large is written, Rev. 18. 8, 9, 10, 11. And all Magistrates that
endeavor to hinder it, are withstanders of God's Word; because in her is found
the Blood of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and of all that were slain upon
the Earth (Oh Bloody Papists!) Rev. 18. 24.

And hereupon it is written, Rev. 17. 6. I saw the Woman drunken with the Blood
of Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Which Woman, is clearly
in this ensuing Book, proved to be the Church of Rome; For every Tree is known
by its Fruit Mat. 7. 20.
. Therefore the chiefest Article of her Faith, is to Murder all that believe
not as She believes. Now so far is that Church from being the Church of
Christ, or Children of God; that they are Children of the Devil John 8.
, who was a Murderer from the beginning, so have him (and not God) for their
Father; because they do his works to the uttermost of their power. Witness
their Cruelty in Queen Marie's days, the Powder Plot, and now this Hellish Plot
to take away the Life of your Majesty, and your good Protestant Subjects: As
they began with that worthy Knight, Sir Edmondbury Godfrey; and will never be
out of hopes of coming to possess this Land, whilst Protestants can embrace
their Brethren in Office of Arch and Lord-Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans,
Prebends; which Offices for Gospel Ministers, Christ's Testament knows nothing
of, but the Pope's Records. Oh therefore,

That the Lord would be pleased to open your Majesty's Heart, to Act as a most
Worthy Protestant Prince, as with the Isa. 14. 22, 23.
Beesom of the Lord, to sweep out of your Dominions (not so much in their
Persons, as out of Office) the remaining part of the Romish Ministry, by Law of
oversight established in Protestant Churches, together with all other Popish
Devices in Worship; some of many are after noted. And for your Majesty's
glorious President in this so excellent a Work, for the Honor of God and good
of his People, who as Protestants will live and die with You; Cast your
Majesty's Eye on that young King 2 Chronicles. 34
Josiah, who so soon as he heard of the Judgments of God denounced against his
Land and People, called for, the Book of the Law to be read before him, and by
it comparing the Acts of his Forefathers, and present state of his Kingdom,
rent his Clothes; And for fear of the Judgments of God, in the 16th Year of his
Age, and 8th Year of his Reign, began to seek the Lord, and in the 12th Year
began to purge out of his Dominions the Relics of Idolatry, all Devices of
Men in Worship, set up by former Kings, together with the false Ministry,
called Zeph 1. 4
Chemarims, either for their Black Garments they wore, or being smoked in
offering Incense to Idols; (as the Margent of the great Bible notes) and
restored the Lord's true Ministry and holy order of Worship, as the Lord had
appointed by the hand of Moses. Which if your Majesty will do this like
Glorious Work by the Light of Christ's Testament, comparing the Acts of your
Predecessors, and present state of your Kingdom, so poluted with a Romish
Ministry, and other Inventions in Protestant Churches, that so a true Ministry,
according to the Lord's Will in Christ's Testiment, may be enjoyed, and the
People left free to choose their own Ministers (according to Nature and Grace)
to grow out of every particular Can. 8. 8. Ezekiel. 16. 7. Acts 14. 23.
Body, or Congregation, and not by Humane Art for Ministers to be made by they
know not whom, and set afterward to the Body whether they will or no, as an
artificial Eye or Breast. So shall your Majesty and People hope, as King Josiah
and his People did, that the Judgments threatened against this Land may be
turned away, as it was from his. As it is proved in the following Lines, that
it was chiefly for corruptions in Faith and Worship, that God brought his
Judgments on his own People.

Now, would it please your Majesty in your Civil Kingdom to suffer your Self to
be so abused, as to have no Servants to serve You in your Kingdom, or at your
Table, but what the King of another Nation thinks fit? No sure.

How then shall the Lord Jesus, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, suffer
himself any longer to be so Abused, as to have no Servants to serve Him in his
Church of his own Appointment, either in Name or Office, as Pastors Teachers,
Elders, and Deacons, but what the Pope, or other Mortal Men think fit?

Neither would your Majesty accept of the Service of any Subject, Noble or
Ignoble, that should proffer his Service to serve You in your Civil Affairs, if
he did not do the same as your Majesty had given him Command, and not as he
pleased?

How then shall the Lord Jesus accept, nay, he does not accept of the Service
of any Person, of what Degree soever, that shall in his Spiritual Kingdom, or
Church, serve him never so zealously, except he do that Work and Service to
God, as Christ in his Testament has commanded him.

If it were not so, the very Turks that boast how they are Worshippers of the
Living God, and do abhor Idols, would go beyond many that bear the name of
Christians; who though they do zealously worship the Living Beal. Ep. to image
of both Churches.
God, and concerning Christ, allow him to be a great Prophet, the Word of God,
the Spirit of God, born of Mary the Virgin; yet because they worship not God by
the Appointment of the Lord Jesus in his Testament, but according to the
directions of Mahomet, therefore are they and their services rejected of God.
So likewise, the Papists boast how they worship God, (yet abhor not Idols) but
because they do it by direction of sundry Popes, and not by Christ's
Appointment, they are rejected of God and their service. But if a Turk or
Papist should ask many Protestants, By whose Appointments do you worship God?
If truly answered, must say, Partly by the directions of Christ, (for we have
his Ordinances of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper) and partly by the
Appointments of sundry Popes and Bishops, as after is showed. So that for these
things, among other Evils, God is bringing his Judgments on your Kingdom. Oh
therefore, that your Majesty, together with your Honorable Council, would
seriously consider these things, that the Wrath of the Lord may be turned away
from us.

And lastly, Seeing there is but one way to escape God's Judgments threatened,
let not a Heathen Prince (as Christ told the Jews) come in Judgment at the last
Day against a Christian Prince, viz. the King of Jonah 3.
Nineveh, who so soon as he heard the Judgment of God threatened against him and
his People, arose from his Throne and laid his Robes from him, issued forth a
Proclamation to his People, to keep a true Fast to the Lord as he required;
that is, to break off their Sins by Repentance, in turning every one from his
evil way, and from the violence that was in their Hands, who did so; so that it
is written, God saw their Works, and repented of the evil he threatened against
them.

Thus having discharged the part of a true Protestant Subject, presented to a
Wise Protestant Prince, not doubting but this Mite shall be accepted and
protected by yonr Majesty in Christian love to the Truth, for the Honor of
God, and comfort of your Soul, and the joy and comfort of your Protestant
Subjects: So that your Majesty (with the Godly Kings of Judah) doing the Will
of God herein, may have many Years Acts 13. 36. Rev. 21. 24.
on Earth a prosperous Reign; and having brought your Honor and Glory to the
glorious State of Christ's Kingdom in his Church, whereby She may enjoy all her
Rights and Privileges, you may undoubtedly receive with Christ a Crown of
Glory eternally in the Heavens; which is and shall be, the Prayer of your most
humble Subject.

THO. WALL.

A Word of Advice to all true Protestants.
AS it is the duty of every true Christian not to hide his Talant in the Luke.
19. with Mark 25. 25.
Earth, but put it on a Candlestick, that all may be benefited by the same; I
therefore judge, if ever there were a time to speak, it is now, when the
Protestant Religion lies at stake to be utterly Ruined, and the Professors
thereof Murdered by the Blood-thirsty Papists, the Spiritual Assyrians, the Rod
of God's Anger Isa. 10. 5.
against his own People: So that as Affliction does not come out of the Job 5.
6.
Dust, nor Trouble spring out of the Ground; for (as says the Scripture) Is
there any Evil Amos 3. 6.
in the City, (to wit, of Punishment) and I have not done it, says the Lord?
And, when the Lord gives Quietness, who can make Job 34. 29.
Trouble? and when he hides his Face, who can behold him? whether it be done
against a Nation, or a Man only. Therefore I have thought it the most
profitable way, to show what I have gathered out of holy Scripture, was the
cause in Ages past that the Lord brought Judgments on his own People, and to
apply the same to our present Condition: Which if the Lord help us truly to
mind the same, as Christians ought to do, it may be a means to obtain Mercy at
the Hand of the Lord, to turn away his Judgments. Let us take a view of these
things from the first State of old.

Secondly, When God had graciously restored Adam, by his Grace in Christ
promised, and given him Ordinances as Figures of Christ to come, to perform in
the Lord's holy order of Worship, which in the days of his Son Enos, his
Children had greatly departed from, corrupted their Way, meaning their Genesis 6.
12. with Acts 18. 25. and 22. 4.
Faith and Religion, as also their making Marriages with Cain's Posterity,
called the Daughters of Men, which was not lawful for the Members of the
Church, called the Sons of God, to do; and though God called them to Repentance
by Noah's Preaching, and warned them, by his building the Ark, of the Judgment
intended by the Flood; yet they persisted in their evil Course, until the
Flood destroyed them all: And how like to this, is the state of Lukewarm
Protestants now? So that Christ likened the last Days we are fallen in, to the
Days of Luke 17. 26.
Noah, for Sin and Wickedness, by departing from the true Faith, and by
corruption in Worship, and Members of Churches now making Marriages with those
they cannot in Conscience join with in the Ordinances of Worship.

Thirdly, Though God did miraculously save Eight Souls by 1 Pet. 3. 20.
Water, yet in the days of Ferah, the Father of Abraham, was the Church so
corrupted in Faith and Worship, that God forsook them, and called Abraham
thence Genesis 11. 12. Josh. 24. 2.
and they that would go with him; so God made his Covenant in Christ with him
and his Children, which went in process of time into Egypt. But when they
defiled themselves with the Ezekiel. 20. 7.
Idols of Egypt, and were corrupted in their Faith and Worship, the Lord made
the King of Egypt, the Rod of his Anger Exodus 2. 23.
, grievously to Afflict them: How like is this to the Condition of Corrupt
Protestants now in their Faith and Worship?

Fourthly, The Lord, for his own Name sake, first by his Punishments, and then
by his Promises and Wonders Exodus 4. 30.
, won them again to his true Faith and Worship; and then he quickly destroyed
their Oppressors in the Sea, and afterward in the Wilderness gave them his
just Precepts between Man and Man, and his holy Ordinances and Decrees for
Worship, which when they broke, the Lord 1 Cor. 10. Numb. 16. 31.
destroyed, some by the Sword of their Enemies, and others by the Sword of
their own Brethren: Some the Earth opened and swallowed up alive, others died
of the Pestilence; so that within the space of forty Years, of 600000 Fighting
Men that came out of Egypt, but two Numb. 14. 24. 2 Cor. 10.
entered Canaan: And this is written, says the Apostle, for ensample to us
Protestants, on whom the Ends of the World are come.

Fifthly, When God by the hand of Joshua brought their Posterity into Canaan,
the Lord strictly charged them concerning their Faith and Worship, saying,
After the Lev. 18. 2, 3,
doings of the Land of Egypt wherein ye dwelt, ye shall not do: neither after
the doings of the Land of Canaan whither I bring you, shall ye not do, neither
walk in their Ordinances: My Judgments shall ye do, my Ordinances shall ye keep
to walk in them, I am the Lord. Yea, they were not so much as to Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
enquire how the Nations served their Gods, that they might do so unto the Lord
their God; but whatsoever the Lord commanded them, they should take heed to do,
without adding or diminishing. But how quickly after the death of Joshua, and
the Elders of his Time, did they corrupt themselves with the Inventions of Men
in their Worship, for which the Lord sold them into their Enemies hands Judges
chapter 2.
, that so they could no longer stand before them. And will not Protestants mind
this in our day of Danger?

Sixthly, And was not King Solomon beloved of his God, who appeared to him
twice? Yet when he was drawn away with his Idolatrous and straying Wives to a
Worship devised by Man, did not God stir up Adversaries 2 Kings 11. 14, 25.
against him, Hadad the Edomite, and Rezon, who were Adversaries to Solomon all
his days? And shall not Kings remember this? Because the Judge of all the Earth
will reward every one according to their Works. And when Rehoboam, Solomon's
Son, who was brought up in the Ways of the Lord, forsook, the same, the Lord
stirred up Shishack King 2 Chronicles. 12. 12. 1 Kings 14. 24.
of Egypt to come against him to his great Prejudice. And when the ten Tribes
under King Jeroboam, worshipped God by the 2 Chronicles. 11. 15.
devices of Men, and by another Ministry than what God had ordained, they were
not only said to be without the True God, without a Teaching Priest, and
without Law, but there was no 2 Chronicles. 15. 3, 4, 5, 6
Peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in; Nation was destroyed of
Nation, City of City, for God did vex them, says the Scripture, with all
Adversity. And whilst God was thus chastizing them in Measure, he sent his
Prophets to call them to his true Faith and Worship, which still they
despising, at length the Lord stirred up the Spirit of Pull 1 Chronicles. 5. 26. 2
Kings 15. 19.
, and the Spirit of Tilgath-Pilneser, Kings of Assyria, who carried them away
into Captivity, to their utter Ruin. And when Judah would not take warning,
but fell to false Worship, and would not be reclaimed by the Lord's Prophets,
rising early 2 Chronicles. 36. 15. Jer. 25. 3. and 35. 15.
sent to them, and after many Afflictions on them, the Lord sent against Judah,
Rezin the King of Assyria, to their great Prejudice. And again the King of
Egypt came against Judah, and condemned the Land 2 Chronicles. 36. 3.
in a hundred Talents of Silver, and a Talent of Gold, yet they were not
bettered; then came the King of Babylon and carried Ver. 18.
away many of them Captive with much Spoil; yet they would not repent and
return to the Lord's true Faith and Worship, but persecuted the Lord's
Prophets; then the Lord gave them again into the hands of the King of Babylon,
who burned 2 Chronicles. 36. 17, 18, 19, 20.
both City and Temple, and carried more of them Captive. Thus we see the grand
cause is still for Corruptions in Faith, and Disorder in Worship, that God
brought his Judgments on his People: And will not Protestants mind this, seeing
the like Judgments for like Causes are at our Doors? as will hereafter appear.
Therefore,

Now let us come to Gospel Times, and see the Causes of God's Judgments that
fell on Christians in the Primitive Times of the Gospel, and compare our
Condition with theirs in Miscarriages and Rewards, if it be not the same still.
So that unless there be a speedy Repentance, we can expect to fare no better
than they. Thus if the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
Transgression received a just recompense of Reward, though under the
performance but of Heb. 2. 2.
Figurative Ordinances, even the smallest breach of God's Law; as Vzza for
touching the Ark, was struck dead 1 Chronicles. 13. 10. Numb. 4. 15.
. Dathan and Abiram, for offering of Incence, were swallowed up alive in the
Earth; and King 2 Chronicles. 26. 19.
Vzziah smote with Leprosy to the day of his Death: And likewise Miriam Numb.
12.
and Gehazi 2 King. 5.
, were they unpunished? No sure: How then shall we escape the Judgments of God,
having the Word spoken unto us by the Son of God, Creator Col. 1. 16.
of Angels? sealed with his precious Blood Heb. 13. 20.
, delivered and commended unto all Christians by his Apostles Acts. 20. 32.
, whereunto may nothing be added or diminished Rev. 22. 19.
, either in Doctrine, Ministry, Ordinances, Time, or Order, according to
fleshly Wisdom, without Rebellion and most heinous Transgression, Sacriledg and
Impiety, as against the Scepter Psalm. 45. 6.
of our Lord Jesus, blessed for ever, his Word being commanded to be purely
taught, without corrupting or swerving either to the right Hand, or to the
left: Which when the Primitive Christians observed not, but neglected their
Watch Rev. 3. 3.
, in suffering false Doctrine to creep in among them, as in the Church of
Pergamos reigned the Doctrine of Balaam Rev. 2. 14, 15.
, and the Nicolaitans; and in Thyatira, the Doctrine of Jezebel Ver. 20.
; Ephesus Rev. 2. 4
having left her first Love; and among the Corinthians, and other Christians,
both Men and Women, were they not reproved for walking in a vain Conversation?
Whilst Men wearing long Hair, the 1 Cor. 11. 14.
shame of Nature; their Women likewise wearing of Gold, Pearl, 1 Timothy 2. 9. 1
Pet. 3. 3.
plaited Hair, uncovered, expressly in plain words forbidden by the Apostle, not
becoming modest Women, professing Godliness with good Works. For which Evils
and Disorders, with others, because the Churches punished them not according to
God's Order, by casting the Mat. 17. 18.
obstinate Sinners out of the Churches, the Lord Jesus threatened to cast them
into a Bed of great Tribulation Rev. 2. 22.
, under the term of ten Prophetical Days (meaning Years) which some have
observed to come on the Churches in the -- Year of Christ, in the Reign of
Trajan the Emperor. So that if God in his just Judgment for the Sins of the
ten Tribes, delivered them of old into the Hands of the Kings of Assyria, and
likewise Judah into the Hands of the King of Babylon; even so for like Cause
did the Lord deliver the East Churches into the Hands of Mahomet, and the West
Churches into the Hands of the Beast, the Pope and his Clergy. Unto which
agrees Mr. Fuller's Testimony, in his History of the Holy Wars, [worth all
Protestants observation, especially in this Day of Apostacy] in Chap. 6. page
6. in these words: But the Sins of the Eastern Countries, and chiefly their
damnable Heresies, hastened God's Judgments on them: and in the Western parts,
Heresies, as an Angle, caught single Persons; which in Asia, like a Draw-Net,
took whole Provinces. The staid and settled Wits of Europe, were not easily
removed out of the old Road and Track of Religion, whilst the active and nimble
Heads of the East were more desirous of Novelties, more desirous and cunning to
invent Distinctions to cozen themselves; more fluent in Language to express
their Conceits, as always Error grows fastest in hottest Brains. Hence it
came to pass, the Melchites, Maronites, Nestorians, Euticheans, Jacobites,
overspread those parts. Then it was (mark that) just with God, says he, to
suffer them that would not be convinced by Christian Counsel, to be subdued by
the Pagans Sword. And again, says he, it may justly seem Admirable, that that
senseless Religion should gain so much ground on Christianism, especially having
neither real substance in Doctrine, nor winning behavior in Ceremony, to
allure Professors; being but the scum of Judaism and Paganism sod together,
here and there strawed with a spice of Christianity. Thus was fulfilled, what
was written, on those that received not the love of the Truth, God gave them
over to believe Lies, and punished them with the Pagans Sword; and being no
whit bettered, then the Lord prepared the four Angels, or Messengers of his
Wrath, whom John Napier, a Nobleman of Scoland, observes to be the four
Mabometan Nations, that inhabit about, or beyond the River Euphrates; to wit,
the Saracens, Turks, Tartarians, and Arabians, all Confederates together in one
Law of Mahomet, and under one great Emperor Ottoman, whom God for the Sins of
Christians, had prepared for an Hour, a Day, a Month, and a Year, to slay the
third part of Men: By whom, says the learned Ainsworth, God scourged
Christendom with Fire, Smoke, and Brimstone, out of the Horses Mouths, and
Horsemen conducted by the Angel of Destruction. Yet the Rev. 9. 20.
Remnant of Men not killed by these Plagues, repented not of their Works, that
they should not worship Devils, and Idols of Gold and Silver, and Brass, and
Wood, and Stone, which can neither hear, nor see, nor walk. See Ainsworth
Arrow, page 96.

Notwithstanding the Judgments of God upon the Primitive Apostate Churches,
some falling to Mahometism, others to Papistry, yet no Apostate Church retained
more Idolatry than Rome; and that that Church is the great Whore, Mystery
Babylon, and the Beast that she rides on is the Popish Prelacy, is plainly
showed in the Answer of that famous Protestant H. Ainsworth, to John Ainsworth
the Papist: That whereas in their Letters written to each other, John Ainsworth
says, The seven Mountains, in Rev. 17. are said to be seven Kings, none of
which agree with the Pope. Yea, says Henry Ainsworth, the seventh agrees very
well; for the Woman is the great City Rome; the Beast, on which she rides,
has seven Heads, which are expounded there to be seven Mountains, and seven
Kings, Rev. 17. 3, 9. The seven Mountains are famous through the World, as
Palatinus, Capitolinus, Aventinus, Esquilinus, Caelius, Virminalis, Quirinalis,
on which Mountains Rome was builded. The seven Kings are also seven Governments
of Rome, renowned also in Histories, as by Cornel. Tacitus, ^. 1.
Kings, by Consuls, by Decemviry, by Dictators, by Triumphiry, by Cesars, by
foraign Emperors, and Popes; therefore when John wrote, the Five first were
fallen, and removed, Rev. 17. 10. and one (says he) is, namely the Sixth by
the Cesars, and another is not yet come, which was the Foraign Emperors, as
Trajan the Spaniard, and the like, who when they come, should continue but a
while; Constantine going to Bizantium, and the Empire being overrun by the
barbarous Goths; and the Beast, says he, is the eighth, and is one of the
seventh, Rev. 17. 11. meaning the Popes, who by an Ecclesiastical Government
differ from the Civil Emperors, and so are the eighth, yet because they Reign
together with the Emperors, they make as it were one Government; So the eighth
is one of the seven, as the Scripture says. Unto this agrees the words of St.
Bernard, The Beast Bernard. Epist. 125.
that has a Mouth speaking Blasphemies, occupies Peter's Chair.

Moreover, says the Scripture, Rev. 13. 18. Let him that has understanding,
count the number of the Beast, for it is the number of a Man, and his number is
666. Now for the better understanding of this Mystery, we must know that it is
the general Course of the Spirit of God throughout the Revelations, to take
Words and Phrases out of the Prophets, and apply them to the things there
prophesied; as in this number of the Beast, which is by a borrowed speech taken
from the name of a Man and his Family, in Ezra 2. 13. the Man's name being
Adonikam, by signification, a God ascending, or standing up; his Sons were 666.
Now the Beast by signification is called a Man (to wit) of Sin, who by
agreement with Adonikam's name, is said to be a God standing up, or exalting
himself above all that is called God, meaning above Christ, by his assuming
into the Office of Christ, to give Laws or Directions in Worship, which only
belongs to Christ, the Prophet like unto Moses; so was he faithful in all his
House, Heb. 3. 2.

Now as in the Mystical Body of Christ's Church, 1 Cor. 12. 14. 27.
many Members make one Body, or Ephesians. 3. 15.
Family, all honoring Christ the Col. 1. 18.
Head of the Body, as Children do a Father, and serve God in Worship by his
Direction and Appointment, are therefore of the number Acts 1. 25.
of his Name, called Christians Acts 11. 26. Isa. 65. 15.
, do grow up in him unto a perfect Man, unto the Measure and Stature of the
Fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13, 15.

Even so as the false Church is an Harlot, the Man of Sin, the Pope being Head,
their Lord, and Lawgiver in Worship, consisting of many Members which serve
and worship by his Directions, are joined to that Harlot 1 Cor. 6. 15.
, together with her Head, the Pope, all make one Body, or Man 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 4.
of Sin; so are they of the number of his Rev. 13. 18.
Name, as Children to their Reverend Father in God, making one Family with him;
as the Sons of Adonikam 666, made one Family to their Father: and thus the
number of the Beast is the number of a Man, by this borrowed speech 666. So
that in some respects the Beast may be likened to the Image Nebuchadnezzar saw,
Dan. 2. 31. The Pope with his Triple Crown, who is proclaimed for a Vice-God
Lib. Benedictus, printed at Bonenia. Anno. 1608. Hen. Ains. Animad. page 100.
, the Invincible Monarch of of the Commonwealth, and vehement Conserver of the
Popish Omnipotency, he is the Head of Gold; the Cardinals and Prelates are next
to him, as Breasts and Arms of Silver; the other Belly-god Clergy, is the strong
brazen Panch; the Lay People are as Legs and Feet of Iron and Clay, which carry
and bear up the Bulk; and the unclean Rev. 16. 13, 14. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
spirit of Satan gives life and effectual operation to the Beast: and to be a
member of this their Body and Church, the Papists themselves Bellarm. de
Eccles. l. 3. c. 2.
profess that there is not any inward Virtue required, so then there is no need
of the Spirit of God to join the Limbs of the Beast together.

Moreover, that these Popes are Beasts, note farther what Henry Ainsworth says
to John Ainsworth the Papist, Their Vows of Chastity being but to defile
themselves with vile Sodomy, Adultery, and Fornication. So that the six
thousand Childrens Heads found Murdered in Pope Gregory's Fish Pond, made him
reverse his own wicked Decree, in restraining the Clergy from their Wives. And
again, says John Traper, in his Treasure of Holy Truths, Page 153. That Pope
Leo the 10th, admiring the huge masses of Money which he had raked together by
Fraud and Wile, said to Cardinal Bembus, See what a deal of Wealth we have got
by this Rabble of Christ. And when the same Bembus brought a place of Scripture
to comfort him, lying on his Deathbed, Away (says he) with these Bawbles,
speaking concerning Christ.

Moreover, says John Napier aforesaid, on his Paraphrase of the Revelation,
Page 58. proved out of the Papists own Authors, That of Popes, thirteen were
Adulterers, three were common Brothellers, four were Incestuous Persons, eleven
were poisoned with Sodomy, seven were Whoremongers, and Inventers of
Brothel-Houses; finally, one was a Whore, and died (being delivered of a
Bastard) in open Procession.

Now surely on those People God has sent strong Delusions, that believe that
these sinful wicked Popes can pardon Sins, and give power to his Priests so to
do, upon a false ground gathered from Christ's Words to Peter, Matthew. 16. 19.
Whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever
thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven: When this Power belongs
not to one Man; but when any obstinate Sinner is cast out of a true Church, and
upon his repentance he is received in again; as it is written to the whole
Church, To whom ye forgive any thing, says the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 2. 10.
I forgive: So that this Power is not given to one Man, but to every true
Church of Christ in God's Order and Manner aforesaid. But how is it possible
that either the Popes, or the whole Church of Rome, can forgive Sins, when the
present Church of Rome cannot be proved a true Church, no, nor (in all
likelihood) the Natural Posterity of the Saints in S. Paul's time?

First, Considering the many Changes in the Roman State, so that Rev. 6. 14, 15.
Heaven departed, as a Scrowl when it is rouled together; and every Mountain
and Island were moved out of their places: Kings, and Captains fled, and hid
themselves: So great was the Judgment of God on the Roman Power for Murdering
the Lord Jesus, and after Persecuting him in his Members.

As for particulars, Alaricus with his Goths, in the Year of Christ 414, took
Hierony in Epist. See Henry Ainsw. Animad. p. 102, the many Authors quoted to
prove it.
and spoiled Rome in burning it: Forty four Years after, Gensericus with his
Vandals, took and spoiled it; so that Rome for a time remained without
Inhabitants. Some Years after did Odoacer with another Company invade Italy,
and Conquered Rome, and put the Emperor to flight, made himself King. Then
Theodoricus, with the Ostrogoths, took it; and after him again Bellisarius with
his Army wan it: But above all, Totilus King of the Goths, in the Year of our
Lord 546, after all the former Invasions, did overthrow Rome quite, cast down
the Walls, burnt the Houses, and made it so Desolate, that there remained in it
neither Man nor Woman. These Turmoils in Rome within a few Years, and the
possessing of that Land by Foreigners, as the Goths mixing themselves with the
People, degenerated into the name of Italians; afterward the Blond. l. 2. d.
2. Fascic. temp. f 66.
Saracens killed innumerable People in Rome, and Italy. All which may teach us
how unpossible it is, that the present Church of Rome is so much as the Natural
Stock of the Saints in Paul's time; which if they were, can be no better than
the Ishmalites and Edomites, the natural stock of Abraham, could be justified
to be the Church of God then, as Rome now; or the Amorites and Jebusites Josh.
10. 1.
in Jerusalem, because Genesis 14. 18.
Melchisedeck Priest of the most High God with his faithful company, lived
there five or six hundred Years before, as well as the Romish Church, be now
pleaded for, because above 1600 Years ago a true Church once lived there. Now
let all Protestants judge, where is the Antiquity that the Romish Church
pleads so much for, unless it be old in Wickedness? So that it is admirable,
how any that owns the name of a Protestant can believe, that it is lawful to
worship God by that Ministry, that had the succession of his Ministry from
Popish Ordination.

Therefore in the next place, let us take a view of the manner how they are
made Priests in Rome, as themselves have written. They are made Priests, when
by the Bishop (who only can give this Order) it is said, Receive power to
celebrate Masses, both for the Living and for the Dead, and to offer Sacrifices
unto God, in the Name of the Lord. The Bishop says withal, Receive the Holy
Ghost. (Oh blasphemous Speech!) The Priests are also shaven on their Crowns,
and anointed with Oil on their Hands, that by that See Hen. Ainsw. Anim adver.
p. 61. Bellarm. Pontifical. Lib. de Ordinat. Presbit.
Unction and the Bishops blessing, those Hands may be Consecrated and
Sanctified of God. A Stole of Innocence is put upon the Priest, and he
promises to the Bishop and his Successors, Reverence and Obedience, and the
Bishop gives him again the Blessing of God the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, that he may be blessed in his Priestly Order, and may offer
placable Hosts (or Sacrifices) to God for the Sins of the People. This
Ordination has a double effect: First, A perpetual Spiritual Power, in sign
whereof a Character (or Mark) indelible is imprinted on them. And secondly,
Grace, making them acceptable, whereby they are enabled to execute their
Office. So this Bishoply Ordination conferreth Grace. And if any shall say,
That the Holy Ghost is not hereby given, Let him (says the Council of Sess.
23. Can. 4.
Trent) be accursed. Now judge ye, Protestants, whether this Ordination do not
make Men more like Zech. 11. 17.
Idol-Shepherds, (being the very mark of the Beast) than Ministers of the
Gospel.

Now that we may the better discern how contrary to Nature and Grace this way
of making Gospel Ministers by this Romish Ordination, let us take a view of the
true Way, how all true Ministers come to their Office by the Rules of Christ's
Gospel. First, Every true Church is likened to a Virgin 2 Cor. 11 2.
, who by the Covenant of the Gospel is espoused Isa. 62. 5. Ephesians. 5. 23.
to Christ her Head and Husband, and is said in her first Constitution to have
no Cant. 8. 8.
Breasts, that is, Ministers: but in process of time her Breasts are said to be
Ezekiel. 16. 7. 1 Timothy 3. Isa. 66. 11.
fashioned, by the Lord's fitting some of her Members with Gifts, Graces, and
Qualifications for the Work of the Ministry; which so soon as the whole Body,
or Church, finding fit, do by common Acts 1. 26.
consent Elect and 6. 13. Acts 14. 23.
, and after Fasting and Prayer, by what Member the Church thinks fit for her
Mouth, on the Lord's Day in the time of Government, do ordain the Person before
Elected, some of the Fathers of Families laying their Hands Numb. 8. 9.
on the person Elected, in sign, and for no other end, in the presence of the
whole Church, or Body, they are to take Charge of: That they are not only first
Elected by common Consent, but by common Consent are now ordained by that
particular Church, or Body, they are to abide with whilst Life does Acts 20 28.
last. And this is the true Eldership, or Ministry, the Lord has given to
every particular true Church; (as Paul wrote to Titus) as I have appointed thee
*. Which way of making Ministers, is both agreeable, first to the Tit. 1. 5.
Word of Grace, and also to the Order of Nature, that Ministers, or Breasts,
should grow or proceed out of their own Bodies; and not like Romes Ordination,
for Breasts, or Ministers, to be made by a Bishop, without the knowledge of the
particular Body whereof they are to take Charge, and afterward by unnatural
Art set to the Body by the Bishop's order, it may be, without the Peoples
consent, whether they will or no, as no Natural, but an Artificial Breast, or
Eye, to that Body so entering into their Office contrary to Grace, and order of
Nature, not entering by the Door of Christ's Appointment, are compared to
Thieves, Robbers, and Hirelings; John 10.
who so soon as they hear of a bigger Benefice, being not by Grace and Nature
in the Body, but only stuck on, they slide away, let the Flock shift how they
can. Oh dear Protestants! Shall the Lord always wink at this Confusion among
you? No sure: He will bring his Judgments speedily, if it be not amended.

Now having laid these things before you, let us in the next place observe,
that there was a time fixed by the Lord, how long the Beast, or false
Ecclesiastical State, should generally reign over the Nations; to wit, by the
space of a thousand Years. Which Rev. 20. 4.
time, as John Napier has Calculated the Prophetical Dates in the Prophets and
the Revelations together, That the Beast's reign began See Napier, on Rev. 10.
about the Year of our Lord 113, and 115, about which time the first Pope was
set up, and so Poison was brought into the Church, and so continued their
general Reign till about the Year 1541. And then, says Napier, the seventh
Angel began to sound, at which time, says the Angel, there shall be Time no
longer; meaning, that the Rod of the Wicked should not always rest on the back
Psalm. 125.
of the Righteous: But all the Mysteries Rev. 10. 7. and 8. 9.
in the Prophets should be fulfilled, which last Mystery in these latter Days,
seems to be the call of the Lord's Elect Rev. 20. 5. Ephesians. 2. 1.
, dead in Sin, out of the Spiritual Babylon, or Romish Church, according to the
Mystery, or Figure thereof, by the Lord's Call of his People out of the
Temporal Babylon. So that, as aforesaid, the Way of God in the Revelation, is
to take Words and Phrases out of the Prophets, and to apply them to things of
like nature, to be fulfilled in these last Days. Therefore as Ezekiel did eat a
little Ezekiel. 3. 3.
Book, signifying thereby that he must Prophecy to the dry Ezekiel. 37.
Bones in Old Babylon; even so in these latter Days under the Person of John,
must the Lord's Servants eat a little Book Rev. 10. 9.
, that is, Prophecy to the dead in Sin in the Spiritual Babylon, even among
the many Nations, Peoples Tongues, and Kings. So that about the Year aforesaid,
1541, came forth the eaters of the little Book, some of which were Luther,
Calvin, Melancthon; all under the name of an Angel Rev. 14. 6.
, to preach the everlasting Gospel to every Nation, Kindred, Tongue, and
People: By whose means, not only many People of all degrees saw how they had
been deceived, but also Kings, by the Light of the Gospel, saw how their Senses
were stupefied, and made Drunk with the Wine of the Whores Fornication: so that
not only in other Nations, but in this Nation also, the Kings who had long
given their Power to the Beast, until the Words of God should be fulfilled,
Rev. 18. 17. began to hate the Romish Whore, and the Beast that carried her, so
that a part of the Beast's power out of this Land was destroyed, when the
Cardinals, Jesuits, and others aforenamed were Abolished: By which means the
power of the Beast was abated, and more of the Lord's Servants came boldly
forth Rev. 7. 14.
out of great Tribulations, all signified by an Angel flying through the midst
of Heaven, to Preach the Everlasting Rev. 14. 6.
Gospel unto them that dwell on the Earth: So that by this time, the Temple of
God was opened in Heaven Rev. 11. 19.
, and the Ark of the Testament, meaning God's Law, clearly seen in the truth
thereof; as was signified by the Lightnings, and Voices, and Thunderings, which
wrought such an Earthquake among the Antichristian Professors, that the tenth
Rev. 11. 13.
part of the City fell, meaning the great City, the Romish Church, that Reigned
over the Kings of the Earth, to the number of God's Elect in Israel 7000; of
which number of Faithful, Elect, Precious, Living Stones, were many famous
Churches established in England, Scotland, France, Germany, Holland, and other
parts, to the great joy of Christendom.

And thus according to the Mystery signified to Zechariah, by a Man with a
Zach. 2. 1, 2. Ezekiel. 40. 2, 3, 5.
Measuring-Line in his Hand, signifying that Jerusalem should be built, the
second Temple in it, and God's true Worship restored, as was done in the days
of Ezra and Nehemiah. Even so, according to the Figure, was it showed to Rev.
11. 1.
John, by a Reed given him to measure the Temple of God, the Altar and
Worshippers; that God's Temple of living Stones, and holy Truth, and Order of
Worship, should be restored by a Call of the Lord's People out of the Spiritual
Babylon, in these latter Days, as aforesaid. So that as Judah, their Figure,
must separate themselves from all the Ezra. 6. 21.
filthiness of the old Babylonians in Worship, in so much that they admitted no
Man to the work of the Priesthood, but such as could prove their Neh. 7. 64.
Chronology according to God's Law; neither suffer any Priest that had fallen
down before an Idol, never Ezekiel. 44. 12, 13.
more to Administer in the Priests Office, because they were Figures of Christ
our High Priest in his Office: Even so the forenamed Christian Protestants, by
the number 7000, would not take a Stone of Babylon for a Corner Jer. 5. 26.
, or for a Foundation; that is, any one to be their Minister, by virtue of
Romes Ordination; because the Ministers under the Gospel, that enter not into
their Ministry by the Door of Christ's Ordination, as before showed, are
accounted by Christ but Thieves, and Robbers. So that as Virgins not defiled
with Women (or the devices of false Churches) Rev. 14. 1, 4. Heb 12. 22
ought all those to be that follow the Lamb Christ Jesus, on Mount Sion; no
more bearing the Beast's Rev. 13.
mark in serving God by Men's devices, but the Isa. 42. 4. Mat. 12. 21.
Name or Law of Christ in their Foreheads, serving the Lord in Worship by the
Appointment of the Lord Jesus only. As it is written, This is my beloved Son,
hear him, Luke 9. 35.

Moreover, dear Protestants, note that in the Earthquake aforesaid, there were
besides the 7000 aforesaid, a Remnant Rev. 11. 13.
, who seeing and hearing the powerful Doctrine of true Faith in Christ,
Temperance, and Judgment to come, like Felix, Act. 24 25
trembled; or, as the Scripture says, were affrighted, to see the great Power
of God in the work of Conversion: Of 7000, with Caleb and Number. 14.
Joshuah, following the Lord fully, gave Glory to the God of Heaven, as some in
Acts 5. 13. but durst not join themselves with them, yet by the small glimps of
the Light they saw, they began to take their Journey toward Sion, after the
forenamed Christians: But in the Wilderness Rev. 12. 14. Ezekiel. 20. 35. Gal. 1.
16.
of this World, meeting with some Crosses and Troubles in the Flesh for
Christ's sake, began to reason with Flesh and Blood, like some Israelites,
whether God were able to furnish a Table in the Numb. 11. 4.
Wilderness? So these having received the Seed of God's Word on a Rock, had no
root Luke 8. 13.
; (that is, having no more Love to Christ, than to any Worldly Joy or Pleasure)
in time of Temptation fell away. So that they would go no farther than the
King, and the most went in that Day, not willing to suffer any more for
Christ's sake; were content to go so far as to have the Pope's Supremacy, Lord
Abbots, Cardinals, Jesuits, Monks and Friars, expelled the Land, but staid
there, and sat down in the midway between Sion and Rev. 18. 4
Babylon or Rev. 11. 8
Egypt, under a part of the Romish Ministry and Service Book, some of the
grossest things being wiped out: And this was the state of many Protestant
Congregations, (as may be seen at this day) as is also confirmed by Mr. Fox, in
the Acts and Monuments of those Times; some of which Report is as follows,
Acts and Monuments, Edit. 5. page 1180, 1181, 1184. The Priests and Clergy that
yielded to the King's Laws were suffered to keep their Places and Livings.
After this, the King appointed the Archbishop of Canterbury, with other
Bishops, to make one convenient and meek Order, Rite, and fashion of
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, who did so: Then in the
next Parliament following, it was agreed that all Ministers in the Realm,
should be bound to say and use the Mattines, Even-Song, Celebration of the
Lord's Supper, in such Order and Form, as was contained in the said Book, and
not otherwise. Now because some small Alteration was made, Complaint was made,
how Ibid. 1186.
by the cloaked Contempt, and wilful Winking, and stubborn disobedience of the
Bishops, and old Popish Curates, the Book of Common Prayer was long after the
publishing of the same, either not known at all, or else very irreverently used
through many places of the Realm. Yet was there no great cause why the People
should so despise it: for, as the King answered the Rebels in Devonsh. Ibid.
1189.
If the Service was good in Latin, it remained good in English; for nothing was
altered, but to speak with Knowledge, that which was spoken in Ignorance.

And thus we see, that these Protestants did not separate themselves fully in
coming out of Babylon, so as to 2 Cor. 6. 17. Isa. 52. 11. Rev. 18. 4.
touch none of their unclean things, as God's Word commanded; but sat down
under a part of the Romish Ministry and Service, with many other Devices: For
it was neither Christ nor his Apostles that appointed Priests Apparel, as long
Gowns, Tippits, four horned Caps, but, as See Hen. Ainsw. Counterpoyson, page
234, 235. proved out of sundry Authors.
Writers say, did Pope Zachary; nor white Linen Surplices to wear at
Service-time, as did Pope Silvester; nor ringing of Bells to call the People to
hear Service, as did Pope Sabiniam; and to make up the Music, Pope Vitalian
brought in the Organs; and if these, or other Popes had brought in to the
Worship under the Gospel the 120 Trumpets 2 Chronicles. 5. 12.
, and other Instruments of Music used in the Ceremonial Worship under the Law,
as well as Priests Garments would it not have bin as lawful to have used them?
Yea, but Protestants should not be unmindful how that Christ by his Death,
abolished all the Ceremonial Figurative Ordinances Ephesians. 2. 15.
out of his Worship, as also the Instruments of Music, and has made or
appointed Rev. 21. 5.
all things new in Worship, a new Ministry, new Ordinances, new Maintenance,
new time and order for Gospel Worship: So was Christ faithful in his own House,
or Church, as a Son Heb. 3. 5, 6.
, as was Moses being but a Servant. So, that whosoever professes to bear the
Name of a Protestant, or true Christian, may remember what is written to them;
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your Brethren, like unto
me, him shall ye hear Acts 3. 22, 23.
in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you: And every Soul that will not
hear that Prophet (to wit, Christ Jesus) shall be destroyed from among the
People.

And to conclude with these Protestants, under the performance in Worship of so
many Popish Devices, let us hear what some of the Martyrs have sealed with
their Bloods, whose Tombs they garnish with their approving their Sufferings as
true Martyrs of Jesus. John Wickliff Acts and Monum. Edit. 5. page 114.
says, That the Archbishops, Bishops, Deacons, Dians, be the Disciples of
Antichrist. William Swenderby Ibid. page 431.
says, That the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Prelates, making Laws contrary to
Christ's Living, and his Laws, or any other ground put in Ruling the Church of
Christ, but by Christ and his Laws, is very Antichrist, Adversaries to Christ
and his Apostles. Sir John Oldcastle (Lord Cobham) says Ibid. page 518.
, The Priests, Prelates, and Monks, are the very Body of the great Antichrist;
and that the Possessions, and Lordships of the Clergy, are the Venom of Judas
shed into the Church. John Claidon, burnt in Smithfield, Ibid. page 588.
professed, That the Archbishops, Lord-Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans, Parsons,
Vicars, and the rest of that sort, are the Disciples of Antichrist, the very
Antichrist themselves. Now though these Men be dead, yet with Abel they Heb.
11. 4.
speak, and their Blood with all the Martyrs that have Suffered for the
Testimony of Jesus, cries for Luke 18. 7, 8. Rev. 6. 9, 10.
Vengeance against all that uphold that Popish Prelacy. Therefore, as one chief
Reason among others that Jerusalem was destroyed, was for the Sins of her
Prophets, and Iniquities of her Lam. 4. 13.
Priests, that have shed the Blood of the Just in the midst of her: Therefore,
O England! by this be warned who they are that hasten thy Destruction.

Now we have seen what a lame Reformation was here made by many thousand
Protestants, when they came out of Spiritual Egypt, (for so the Romish Church
is called, Rev. 11. 8.) having utterly forgot, or else for fear, regarded not
the Word of the Lord to God's People of Old, when they came out of Temporal
Egypt; After the doings Lev. 18. 2, 3. with Deuteronomy. 12. 30, 31, 32.
of the Land of Egypt, shall ye not do; as is foreshewed, and written for our
Romans 15. 4.
Learning. So that instead of being fully separated to touch no unclean thing,
yet a part of the Romish Egyptian Ministry of Lordly Prelates was embraced, and
the Service aforesaid by Law of oversight established, so that there was
another false Ecclesiastical State, neither Spiritual nor Civil, set up, to the
great dishonor of Christ's Spiritual State, and the Civil State, or Government
in the Nation: And hereupon, says John, I beheld another Beast Rev. 13. 11.
coming out of the Earth, (therefore not from Heaven) having two Horns like a
Lamb, as if he were the only Vican of Christ (as the Pope pretends) on Earth.
And who more than they against the Pope, until (as aforesaid) the Civil Power
had established them by Law? And thereby Life was given to the very Image of
the Pope, the first Beast, who because they were so near akin, as a Child is
to the Father, begotten after his own Image or likeness, which was not only so
in its like false Ecclesiastical State, but also in Mind and Quality, and
therefore this second Beast is said; by the Spirit of God, not only to speak
like a Dragon, but to Rev. 12.
exercise all the power of the first Beast before him, causing the Earth, and
them that dwell therein, to worship the first Beast, by retaining a Ministry
and Service, and other things, in Worship of his devising, very little refined,
but still of the same nature: So that no Man might Buy nor Sell, save those
that had the Mark of the Beast in their Forehead, or Hands; that is, yield
professed Obedience to his Commands, in Worship to God by Law established,
whether they had Faith or no.

Now the Lord in his Mercy toward this Nation, that was scarce come half out
of Babylon, sent others of his Servants under the name of another Rev. 14. 8.
Angel, declaring to all Protestants, both Prince and People, that Babylon is
fallen; and for more certainty again, saying, It is fallen: That so they might
come fully out from all her devices in Worship, and so might no longer Rev. 18.
4.
partake of her Sins, lest they receive of her Plagues. But so soon as this
false Ecclesiastical State, or Rev. 13.
second Beast, perceiving with Acts 19. 27.
Demetrius, that if Christ's true Ministry and Government, as it was in the
Primitive Days, of Ephesians. 4. 11.
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, and Deacons, were embraced, their gain of
Shrine-making, (or keeping People in Ignorance what the true Ministry,
Government, and holy Order of Christ's Kingdom of Worship is) would be lost,
and their Princely Revenues by the King, (as their Elder Brethren, Lord-Abbots,
Cardinals, etc. by former Kings) be converted to Charitable Uses; and they (if
they had any Grace) must by laborious Preaching, live of the free 1 Cor. 9. 7
Gift of the Flock they feed, and Vineyard they dress, when they had degraded
themselves by repentance of their false Ministry; and the People, if they
thought fit, to Elect and Ordain them in God's Order, into the Work of the
Ministry. But this was so contrary to these Prelates minds, that they sent
forth their Pursivants to take and bring before them all that should either
refuse to come to their Worship, or did speak against their Ministry. So that
in the Year 1592 As was mentioned in a Petition to the Parliament at that time.
, on a Lord's Day, they took to the number of fifty six Persons, as they were
serving God according to Christ's Directions in his last Will and Testament,
(in the very place the like Christians were forced to serve God in Queen
Marie's days) and sent them by two and two into the several Prisons in and
about London; some of which by long Imprisonment were near Starved, others were
Bapished, and three they Hanged, two at Tiburn, namely, Mr. Henry Barrow, Mr.
John Greenwood; and Mr. John Penry was hanged at Thomas a Watering near
Southwark, in the Year 1593. That these were true Protestants, appears to any
that have, or shall read Mr. Barrow's Discovery, his Answer to Gifford; Mr.
Barrow's and Mr. Greenwood's Conference in Prison with several Persons; beside
all their Examinations before the Lord Treasurer, and some Justices; all
Printed at that time: So that they were put to Death contraty to Queen
Elizabeth's Mind, as was then specified in Print As was afterward noted in an
Apology presented to King James by the same Church.
, because she sent her Reprieve two several times to fetch them back when they
were carrying to be Executed; but contrary to her knowledge (it may be supposed)
were they at last put to Death, sooner than the ordinary time a day, by means
of the Prelates; as I find in a certain printed Relation of their Sufferings,
in these words: Mr. Barrow, and Mr. Greenwood, were put to Death by the
Prelates, in Queen Elizabeth's Time, without her knowledge or privity; and that
early in the Morning, the figure of their Sufferings being seen in the Sky by
Mariners that were in other parts; and it was supposed by the beholders of the
Figure, then to be done in England, because of the Women wearing of Hats: The
two poor Widows that attended upon them in the Prison, waited on them to the
Gallows, bearing their winding Sheets.

Now, dear Protestants, if the Blood of God's Servants shed in King Manasses
days, for bearing their Testimony against the inventions of Men, set up in
Worship, contrary to the Law of God written by Moses, was charged near eighty
Years after on their Posterity, who followed the steps of their Forefathers,
in Persecuting the Lord's Prophets for like Work in Jeremiah's Jer. 15. 4.
days; and if the righteous Blood shed from the days of Abel Mat. 23. 35.
, was by Christ charged on the Jews for persecuting him and his Disciples, for
telling them they worshipped God in vain Mat 15. 9.
, teaching for Doctrine the Commandments of Men; how may Protestants now fear
that the Lord may have like Indignation against this Nation, or Generation, for
persecuting the Lord's Servants, who call them from the Devices of Men in
Worship, to worship God as he has appointed by his Son Christ Jesus in his
Testament?

Now therefore, before the Judgment is poured on us, Oh that the King's most
Excellent Majesty would do the Work herein that belongs to Kings, to abolish
all Inventions (set up by other Kings) out of Worship; and every good
Protestant to do his Duty, to touch none of the unclean 2 Cor. ^. 17.
things of Men's Inventions in Worship! Then may we expect, as Jacob did when he
purged the Church from all Idolatry, that God would turn the Hearts of Kings to
be (as God has ordained them) Isa. 49. 22.
Nursing Fathers to the Lord's People, as Pharaoh was to the Church in Jacob's
days: But when Jacob's Posterity after his Death had corrupted themselves with
the Idols of Egypt, then God turned the Heart of King Pharaoh to afflict them.
So when all that go by the name of Protestants, shall do as aforesaid, God will
turn the Hearts of Kings to them; and until this Work be done, God will make
Kings the Rod Isa. 10 5.
of his Anger against a Hypocritical Nation; as he did the King of Assyria, and
call them his Servants, as he did Nebuchadnezzar Jer. 25. 9.
, to afflict his People. Therefore let no Protestant, like Children, envy the
Rod, but consider the cause for which the Rod is prepared, and amend those
things that are amiss, and God will break the Rod, and turn it against our
Enemies; and then Kings will (as God has ordained them) be Nursing Fathers, to
preserve the Church of God from all Injuries and Wrongs, as it is written, Rev.
12. 16.
The Earth helped the Woman; as is very excellently showed by Mr. Penry, in his
Examination before two Justices of the Peace, Mr. Fancha, and Mr. Young, in the
Year 1593, April the 10th, in his Answer to some Questions put to him. The
first was this:

Quest. 1. You labor to draw her Majesty's Subjects from their Obedience to
her Laws, and from this Church of England, to hear you, and such as you are,
teach in Woods.

Mr. John Penry's Answer:
Answ. Nay, I persuade all Men unto the Obedience of my Prince and her Laws:
Only I dissuade all the World from yielding obedience and submission unto the
Ordinances of the Kingdom of Antichrist, and would persuade them to be subject
to Christ, and his Blessed Laws, as I assure my self that the same is warranted
thereby: Her Majesty having granted, (in Establishing and Confirming the great
Charter of England, whereunto, as I take it, the Kings and Queens of this Land
are sworn when they come to the Crown) That the Church of God under them,
should have all her Rights and Liberties inviolable for ever. Now let the
benefit of this Law be granted unto me, and others of my Brethren, and it shall
be found that we have done nothing but what is warrantable by her Laws.

Quest. 2. What, is it meet that Subjects should charge their Prince to keep
Covenants with them, and enter to scan what Oaths they have taken for this
purpose? Where find you this warranted by Scripture?

Answ. The Subjects are in a most lamentable case, if they may not alledg their
Princes Laws for their Actions, yea, and show what their Princes have promised
to the Lord and to them, when the same may be for declaration of their
Innocence. And it is the Crown and Honor of Princes, to be known not only to
hold, but even to be in Covenant with their Subjects, that they will maintain
and preserve them from Violence and Wrong. Nay, Heathen Princes have thought
themselves honored, when their mean Subjects have charged them very earnestly
with the Covenants whereby they were bound unto their People. The Laws of this
Land are so full this way, as no Man conversant in them can be ignorant, that
our Princes have preferred the observing of those equal Covenants, whereby they
are tied unto their People, before the accomplishing of their own private
Affections, yea, and Commandments in some Cases. Hence it is that the Judges of
this Land are bound by Law to administer Justice and Equity unto the poor
Subjects, notwithstanding that the Prince's Letter be directed to them to the
contrary. And as to the Law of God, all Kings and Princes are bound thereby, to
be so far from thinking themselves tied by no Bonds unto their Subjects, as
they are plainly forbidden to be lifted up in Mind above their Brethren, Deuteronomy.
17. 20. For so the word in that place, calls their Subjects and Servants. The
Kings of Judah, who had the greatest Privileges and Prerogatives, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, over their People, that ever any Kings or Princes can
have, (because they were Types and Figures of that Great King of Kings, the
Lord Jesus) yet entered into Covenant notwithstanding with their People, even
particularly, besides the general former Law, whereby they were bound unto
them. Yea, the Prophet Jeremiah being in no less danger and disgrace with all
Estates, than I and my Brethren are at this present, required his Sovereign
Lord and King Zedekiah, to promise that he would do him no Violence nor Wrong,
nor yet suffer others to do the same, for telling him the truth of the Word, in
the things wherein the King required to be resolved at his hands: The which
thing Zedekiah yielded unto, and that by an Oath and Covenant of the Lord, Jer.
38. 15, 16. Whereby it appears, that it is not without great Warrant of the
Lord, that Princes should enter into Covenant with their Subjects, and that
Subjects should require Promise and Oath to be kept with them; otherwise,
Whereto serves the Covenant? But alas. I enter not to scan her Majesty's Oath,
I only tell you what her Laws allow me, and my poor Brethren; and I am assured,
if her Majesty knew the equity and uprightness of our Cause, we should not
receive this hard measure which we now sustain, seeing we and our Cause are
never brought before her but in the odious weeds of Sedition, Rebellion,
Schism, Heresy, etc. therefore it is no marvel to see the edge of her Sword
turned against us.

Quest. 3. Has not her Majesty by her Laws established these Offices, and this
Order that now is in the Church of England?

Answ. Her Laws have, I grant, of oversight, as taking them for the right
Offices and Order which appertain unto the Church of Christ; which because we
evidently see that they are not, therefore fly we unto her former Promise and
Act, whereby she grants us the enjoying of all the Privileges of the Church
of God.

In the next place, There be other Protestants that have come yet farther out
of the Romish Babylon, in disclaiming the Service Book, Surplice, Organs, Cross
in Baptism, Priests Garments, and the like, because they were Popish: Yet it is
to be admired, why such cannot as well disclaim the Order of the Ministry
received from the Bishops, as the Bishops received it from the Pope, one
Minister ordaining another without the Congregations knowledge where they are to
take Charge; and likewise pay and receive Tithes for their Ministers
Maintenance, which Pope Pascalis, 827 Years after Christ Qu. 19. cap. 1.
Decimus a populo.
, first ordained for his Priests: These Protestants cannot think to escape the
Judgments of God, who 2 Cor. 6. 17. Rev. 18. 4.
touch the unclean things forbidden, and are not fully come out of Babylon, as
Judah our Figure was, who sent away all Babylon's filthiness Ezra. 6. 2. Zech.
5. 8, 9, 11.
with the Wings of a Stork, into the Land of Shiner, or Babylon, where they
were hatched, as afore-shewed.

Moreover, There are other Protestants, who though they have forsaken the
Ministry, Service, and all the forenamed Romish Inventions, yet they retaining
the Romish Errors of Free Will, falling from true Grace, general Redemption,
and denying that glorious Doctrine of Election, cannot think to escape the
Judgments of God; because Error in Faith is so heinous in the sight of the
Lord, being likened to Leaven Mat. 16. 6, 12. 1 Cor. 5.
, Darkness Luke 11. 34. 35.
, and Poison Deuteronomy. 32. 3.
, that God threatened the Church of Pergamos, to fight against them, for not
punishing them by Excommunication that maintained the Error, or Doctrine Rev.
2. 14, 16.
of Balaam; and the Church at Thyatira, for suffering the Women Jesebel to
teach Ver. 20.
, and to deceive them: All which came on the Churches afore-shewed, in Page 13.
also Junius, on Rev. 2. 10.

Again, There are other Protestants that are not guilty of the forenamed
Errors, yet for other sins of disorder, in making Genesis 6. 4. Ex. 34 16. 1 Cor.
7. 39.
Marriages with them they cannot join with in the Ordinances of Worship, and
their walking in the shame of Nature, long Hair 1 Cor. 11. 14.
, and Perriwigs; which Evils, as well as other sinful Conversations not in
God's Order punished, the whole Church becomes 1 Timothy 5. 22. Ps. 26. 5, 6. Pro.
11. 21. Josh. 22.
guilty of one another Sins: As says the Law, Whatsoever the unclean Person
touches, shall be unclean; and the Person that touches him, shall be unclean,
Numb. 19. 22.

Again, There are others that would be called they know not what, who refuse
the use of God's Ordinances in Worship; to wit, Baptism of Water, and the
Lord's Supper, and suffer their Females 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35.
(Jesebel like) to teach their Imaginations. For no Person can teach any other
thing concerning God or Christ, in the work of Man's Redemption to Salvation,
that own not the written Scripture as the John 5. 39. Gal. 6. 16. 1 Kings 8.
25. with 2 Chronicles. 6. 16.
Ground of Faith, and the Rule to try all Doctrine and Worship by, who (as it
is said) do deny the Resurrection of the Body: Unto such the Apostle has said,
If the Body rise not, then is not Christ risen; and so to them, All Preaching
is vain, and they are yet in their Sins 1 Cor. 15. 14, 17.
, and of all Men most miserable.

Another great mistake is among many Protestants, in understanding the
Prophecies and Mysteries in the Prophets literally, concerning the Spiritual
Glory of the Church under the Gospel, or Christ's Reign with the Saints on
Earth. I would fain have these Protestants first to remember, that Christ's
Kingdom John 18. 36.
is not of this World, neither the Warfare, nor Weapons 2 Cor. 10. 4.
Carnal; and in all things exemplary to the Church under the Gospel, we are
exhorted to behold Israel 1 Cor. 10. 18.
our Figure. First, In the Wilderness, figuring our Spiritual Warfare over Sin,
the World, and the Devil; and then by Joshua, as they were led into Canaan, the
figure of Heb. 11. 13 14, 15.
Heaven. So the Saints in the Wilderness Rev. 12. 6. Exodus 13. 14. chap. Ezekiel.
20. 35.
of this World, through many Tribulations Acts 14. 22.
, under the conduct of the true Joshua, Christ Jesus, enter into the glorious
Rest, even the Haven of Eternal Happiness: And hereupon it is written in praise
of Christ's Called, Chosen, and Faithful Rev. 17. 14.
, That all the thousand Years Reign of the Beast, aforesaid, they lived and
reigned Rev. 20.
with Christ, and they overcame him by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the Word
of their Testimony, and that in the Wilderness, and this World; and the same is
still the Saints 1 John 5. 4.
Victory, even our Faith, by which we overcome the World.

Now as touching Election, that most Heavenly Doctrine of Comfort to God's
Children, for the help of them deceived about it, note. That Election is a Work
of God the Ephesians. 1. 4.
Father; Redemption Rev. 5. 9.
a Work of God the Son; and Sanctification 1 Cor. 6. 11.
the Work of the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son: So that the
very nature of the word Election means not all Men, but God foreseeing before
all Time, in respect of Creation, whatsoever would come to pass in time, did
make choice of a Remnant Romans 11. 5.
out of the Lump of Mankind, to be Heirs of Glory through Christ, and left the
rest in their fallen Estate: And who shall call God to account Rom 9.
in these his Matters? So that whomsoever the Father Elected, he gave John 17.
12.
unto his Son to Redeem. And hereupon it is written in praise of God in Christ,
Thou have Redeemed us Rev. 5. 9.
out of all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and People: So not all Nations, because
he was given a Ransom for many: So that these Mat. 26. 28.
as many as were Acts 13. 48.
ordained to life, believed. For Jo. 6 44.
no Man can come to Christ, but those the Father draws. Now if all had been
Redeemed, the Altar under the Law, and Priests that served at the same, (all
Figures of Christ in the Work of Man's Redemption) would have signified so much
in Christ the true Altar and High Priest, and Sacrifices offered thereon. So
that if he had Redeemed all, would he not at the Golden Altar have offered up
his Prayer for all? But as Christ redeemed only the Elect, or whole Romans 4. 1 John 2. 2.
World Abraham was Heir of, so he appeared at the Golden Altar, to offer
Prayers for no other but Rev. 8. 3, 4.
Saints; as it is written, I pray not for the World John 17. 9, 20.
, but those the Father had given him (in the Ezekiel. 16. 8. Cant. 2 16
Covenant of Grace) out of the World. And thus all all that is Truth will agree
to the Law (to wit) of Figures, and Testimony of the Gospel of Salvation. And
that those Elected ones by God the Father, and Redeemed by Christ, cannot
totally fall away, because none can pluck them out of his Father's Hands John
10. 29.
, who has put his fear into their Hearts, that they shall not depart Jer. 32.
40. Prove. 14. 26, 27.
from him: So are they kept by the Power 1 Pet. 1 5. John 17. 12.
of God through Faith unto Salvation, that they cannot possibly, says Christ,
be totally deceived, Mat. 24. 24.

Now some will object, If the Elect cannot fall away; how came so many, as
Demas, and the like, to fall from the Faith they professed?

Answer. The Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a Mat. 13. 47, 48.
Draw-Net, which gathers into it both good and bad; as in the Figurative
Building, among the Materials, came 1 Kings 10. 22.
Apes and Peacocks: So among the Elect Living Stones, the Materials of the
Spiritual Building, came Hypocrites, who, like Apes, imitate for a time what
the Saints do: These are at the Feast, but want the Wedding Mat. 22. 11.
Garment of Christ's Righteousness, put on by Faith, having only Lamps of
External Mat. 25. 3.
profession, or form of Godliness, and not the 2 Timothy 3. 5.
Power, or Life thereof, the Oil of God's Grace; so having received the Seed of
God's Word on a Rock, wanting Root Luke 8. 13.
, Faith that works by Love; so were in the Church (says the 1 John 2. 19.
Scripture) but not of it; for had they been of it, no doubt they would have
continued in it: Therefore, like Peacocks, through Pride fell away, not from
Grace, but from that Grace they seemed Luke 8. 18.
to have; their 2 Pet. 2. 22.
Swinish nature being never changed, turn again to wallow in the mire of open
Filthiness, as a Dog to their Vomit.

As touching Free Will in Man in his fallen Estate, to repent, and turn from
Sin to God, is a gross mistake. First, Because if Adam the Root had not this
Power, how came his Children to have it? For cover Job 31. 33.
his Sin he did, but repent he could not, because it is not a virtue in Nature:
As it is written, If God perad venture will give them Repentance 2 Timothy 2. 25.
to the acknowledgment of the Truth, who only works in his Elect, both to will
Phil. 2. 13.
and to do of his good Pleasure. Therefore, when Esau sought Repentance with
Tears, he found it not; because true Repentance is a change Heb. 12. 17.
of the Mind, which only belongs to God to do: As by the gift of Faith, he
opened the Acts 16. 14.
Heart of Lydia to believe, and obey the Truth as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 21.

Some will object, If all Men have not power to believe and obey, why is it
required of all Men?

Answ. As Belief is a point of Obedience to God our Creator, upon the
Covenanted Estate Angels and Men made with God before the Fall, it is still
applied unto all as the word of their Condemnation: And hereupon Noah by his
Preaching condemns Heb. 11. 7.
the old World, as it is still the savor of Death unto Death, in them that
perish 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16.
: Else Christ would not have said to the fallen Angel, It is written, Thou
shall worship Mat. 4. 10.
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: So that as this was spoken to
Satan, being what the Law required of him, yet it does not therefore follow,
that he had power to repent and believe; so can no Man. Though the same Deuteronomy.
6. 13.
. Law requires Obedience of all, yet none can believe and obey but the Elect,
whom God gives 2 Timothy 2. 25.
Repentance to: and to them only the Word is the savor of Life unto them that
are saved by Faith in Christ Jesus. Yet the Preacher knowing not who are the
Elect, does apply the Word as generally, calling all Persons to believe and
obey in his Message. As says the Lord to Paul, when he sent him to Corinth, I
have much People in this City: So Act. 18. 10. John 10. 20.
not all, for they could not all believe, because they were not all Christ's
Sheep, as it is written, All Men have not Faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.

For these and the like errors in Faith, and corruption in Worship (which were
too tedious here to refute) about the state of Infant Baptism, and the
Seventh-day Sabbath; of the gross mistake in them that deny the one, and keep
the other, (largely handled by me, not long since printed in a Book, entitled,
Ancient Truth Revived: Wherein is also in 22 Articles, every true Protestant's
Faith inserted, the State of a true Church, and how every Ordinance, and by
whom, and in what Order they were performed in the Primitive Churches,
containing six Sheets of Paper, unto which I refer the Reader) is one cause why
God has not before this destroyed the false Ecclesiastical power of the Romish
Babylon: because as the Sins of God's People of old, were the cause why old
Babylon was not sooner destroyed; even so is it See and read Jer. 25.
now. That as then God did first give his own People a Cup to drink, and then
Shishack did drink after them: So Judgment must first begin at the House 1 Pet.
4. 17.
of God, unless there be a speedy Repentance. Else surely the time is come, as
that Servant of God Mr. Beal has noted on Rev. 20. in his Book called The
Image of both Churches, That when the 1000 Years of the Beast's Reign was
expired, Satan the common Adversary of Man, shall be loosed out of his dark
Prison, and set at large by the sufferance of God; Man's wickedness deserving no
other, strongly deluding the Unbelievers for their unbelief-sake, to deceive
the Universal People of the World, through the operation of Errors: He shall
cause them to give credance to Lies, that they may be damned for refusing the
Truth: So that the abomination of Desolation shall be set up in the holy Place
(meaning in the Heart, where Christ by faith should dwell) to the utter
destruction of Faith. Which People of him thus deluded, is called in a mystery
Gog and Magog; that is as much as to say, Covered, and Off-covered: For both
the grand Captains of them depending, does these two words comprehend, the one
covering the Devil with many false Religions, (meaning, Lo, here is Christ,
and lo, there is Christ); the other in his sort following the same wicked
consent, these two Tyrants, the Romish Pope, and Mahomet, with the whole
generation of like Spirits with them, (mark that) have gathered themselves
together against God and his Christ, to destroy the whole face of Christianity.

Now the woeful experience of the beginning of these things is seen among us, so
that our Condition looks too like the state of the Jews. When Titus
Vespasian, the Roman Emperor, came and besieged Jerusalem, the Jews, by reason
of their many Errors, were divided into sundry Mark 12. 13, 18.
Sects, and their dividing in Faith, divided them in Heart, that they destroyed
one another: So the words of Christ were fulfilled on them that despised his
Counsel, as it is written, Every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to
desolation. Mat. 12. 25.
How then does it behove all Protestants to be by Christ's Words warned with
speed to examine whether they be in the Faith of God's Elect Tit. 1. 1. Heb. 11.
, and worship God by Christ's Rev. 14.
directions only; that there be no dividing in Judgment, and so not in Heart;
considering what In his Book called the Card and Compass of Life, presented to
Prince Charles the first.
one has noted, That the Jews affirm the first Blood split in the World, was
by reason of the differences in Judgment among Brethren (for so all that bear
the name of Protestants ought to be) in these words: Cain was so possessed with
Covetousness, that he believed there was no Life after this: But Abel believed
there was after this Life a reward for the Good, and punishment for the
Wicked; in which Contention, Cain slew Abel. So that Cain was of the Wicked
one: For, to Persecute, Imprison, or kill any one for Conscience sake, is a
work 1 John 3. 12. Rev. 2. 10.
of the Devil, and a Woe is pronounced against them: As it is written, Woe to
them that follow the way of Jude ver. 11.
Cain, they shall perish. So that Protestants may be ashamed to own that evil
Spirit, to force Men to believe, when it is written, That it is God shall Genesis
9. 27.
persuade Japhat to dwell in the Tents of Shem. Therefore to force Men to
believe or practice in things Divine before God gives them Faith, is but to
make a Church of Hypocrites, whose Sacrifice is Prove. 15. 8.
Abomination to the Lord, as their Father Cain's was.

Now if any Protestant should be offended, (like Amos chap 7.
Amaziah the Priest of Bethel) with this Christian Warning-piece, (as he was
with the Prophet Amos's Warning to King Jeroboam and his People, and say, The
Land cannot bear these words) against the Inventions of Men in the Worship of
God, and charge me, as Amaziah did Amos the Prophet, with Conspiracy against
the King, when but for declaring the only means then, from the immediate Mouth
of the Lord, to preserve the King and the Nation, as this is from the mediate
written Word of God to preserve our King and the Nations, from the Judgments
threatened: I say, if we (like them) will regard no Christan Counsel, (all
Scripture being written for our Admonition) then in all likelihood the
Judgments threatened on them, will fall upon us, that God will darken Amos chap.
8.
the Earth in a clear day, by sending a Famine in the Land, not of Bread, nor
thirst for Water, but of hearing the Words of the Lord. For by reason of so
many false Teachers in Judah, their Silver became Isa. 1 22.
dross, their Wine was mixed with Water, and they were fed with Jer. 23. 28.
Chaff instead of Wheat. As is now seen by woeful experience, whilst God's Word
is not truly Taught, but corrupted with Errors, under the color of
Christianity, with Lo, here is Christ, and lo, there; as they said of old, The
Temple of the Jer. 7. 4.
Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these: Nevertheless, they were told, Thy
Prophets Lam. 2. 14.
have seen vain and foolish things for thee; for they have not discovered thine
Iniquities to turn away thy Captivity, but have seen for thee false Burdens,
and causes of Banishment. Oh that Protestants would lay these things to Heart,
considering the many signs of God's displeasure showed against this Nation, of
a Captivity threatened for these Sins: Witness the Spanish Invasion, in 1588,
then the Powder Plot, in 1605; the late Dreadful Plague and Fires; and lastly,
this Cursed Popish Plot. Now, consider according to the Law of Nations: If a
Ship at Sea meets with another which ought to strike to her, and she
refuses, then a warning Piece is sent to her; if that make her not submit,
there is lot sly at her two or three Ordnance, if then she will not do her
duty, there is poured into her a Broadside, which possibly sinketh her, and all
that is in her. Even so, if no Judgment nor Warning will make us submit in all
things Spiritual to the Royal Scepter of the Lord Jesus in his Church, to serve
God in his Worship by the directions in his holy Testament, then may we expect
unavoidably, that he will pour in on us Iris Murdering Places, the Turks and
Papists, who like the Armies of Rev. 20. 9
Gog and Magog, compass the Tents of the Saints about, bringing great Luke 21.
25.
distress of Nations, until Fire come down from Heaven, even at that day when
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming
2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
Fire, who shall reap the Harvest of the Earth, in taking Vengeance on them
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be destroyed from
the glory of his Power; when the Remnant of the Faithful, as in the days of
Noah, shall be preserved, and caught up to meet the Lord in the Air, so shall
they 1 Thessalonians. chap. 4.
ever be with the Lord.

The sum of all is, Seeing God has said, He will do nothing, (concerning Mercy
or Judgment to his People) but he reveals Amos 3. 7. Romans 15. 5.
his Secrets to his Servants the Prophets; written in the holy Scriptures for
all Christians Admonition^ which we have here laid before this present Age. The
chief Causes why God brought his Judgments in Ages past were for Errors in
Faith, and Corruptions in Worship. Seeing then there is but Ephesians. 4. 5.
one Faith, and proper Object thereof, even the Evangelical Promise Romans 1. 16.
of Grace in Christ, from the days of Adam, called the Faith of Jesus Rev. 14.
12.
, once given to the Saints Jude 3.
, therefore called the Faith of God's Elect Tit. 1. 1.
; which Faith in God's Elect either more, or less, is built upon the Ephesians 2.
20.
Foundation or Doctrine both of the Apostles and Prophets: So, that whatsoever
Article of any Christian's Faith agrees not to the Law and Testimony; that is,
to the figures of Christ in the Law, the Schoolmaster leading to Christ for
fulfilling of the same in the New Testament, with applying the Promises to the
right Subjects Acts 2. 39.
they belong unto, with all the benefits thereof to be enjoyed in God's (...),
is not the faith of God's Elect, but a falned Faith, which saves not: So that
whatsoever Faith is not thus proved (as it is written) 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Examine your selves, etc. know ye not how that Christ is in you except ye be
Reprobates? Forasmuch as Christ is said to dwell Ephesians. 3. 17.
in the heart by Faith, that is, by true belief: And hereupon it is written,
Mark 16. 16.
He that believes not, shall be damned. How needful is it then that every ones
Faith be right, seeing it is a matter that concerns their Salvation.

Secondly, As touching Worship; It has been proved, that whatsoever Ministry,
or Ordinance God is served with, or by, after the Commandment and Doctrine of
Men, is Col. 2. 22, 23.
Will Worship, which all are to perish with the using: Because the true Worship
is to serve or worship God in John 4. 24.
Spirit and in Truth; that is, by Faith in Christ, according to the word of
Truth, as Christ the only Lawgiver in Worship has commanded.

Thirdly, And for as much as God is a God of Order 1 Cor. 14. 40.
, therefore true Faith and Order in the performance of every Ordinance in the
Worship of God, must go Col. 2. 5.
together: Every Officer is to keep within the Order God has placed him, and
every Member within the bounds of their Places set in the 1 Cor. 12. 18.
Body. For the clear distinguishing of every Officer and Member's place and
duty in Worship, as Members in the Body, see the Book forenamed, Ancient Truth
Revived.

For the breach of these things, God's Anger was still kindled against his
People; for which cause the Lord is now searching Jerusalem Zeph. 1. 12.
with Candles, and will punish the Lukewarm Carnal Professors that are settled
on their Lees, who make Worldly Gain and Pleasure, their Religion and
Godliness; Who say in their Hearts Ezekiel. 9. 9.
, either the Lord has forsaken the Earth, or He will not do good, neither will
he do evil. Thus as in the days of Noah, is a state of Security seized on
Professors, saying, Soul, take thy ease: Let Us build, plant, Marry, Eat, Drink,
join House to House, Field to Field, till there be no more place in the Earth:
The Harp, the Viol, and Pipe Isa. 5. 8, 12, 13.
, and Wine are in their Feasts, but regard not the Works of the Lord, neither
consider the Operation of his Hands. Therefore on such, both Famine and
Captivity will come, so that their Goods shall become Zeph. 1. 13, 17.
a Booty, and their Houses a Desolation: Even as Christ has said; Distress
Luke 21. 26.
of Nations, Men's hearts failing them for fear, and looking after those things
which (for the Sins aforesaid) are coming on the Earth. The evident signs of
the foregoing Mat. 24. 15, 21, 24.
Type of Jerusalem's destruction, shows that the time is near of Christ's
coming to Judgment, true Faith so greatly decays among Men; as it is written,
When the Son of Man comes, shall he find Luke 18. 8
Faith on Earth? Oh! that open Pro. 27. 6
Rebuke may be in this Day better than secret Love, and the Wounds of a Friend
better than the Kisses of an Enemy! And to give to any Job 32. 22.
flattering Titles I know not; for in so doing, my Maker will soon take me
away: But have herein sought the good of every Soul, yea the very Mat. 5. 44.
Enemies of all true Protestants, the Papists, and desire their Conversion,
that the Lord upon their true Repentance may have mercy on them

Now to conclude, by way of an healing Medicine both to the King's most
Excellent Majesty, and all his good Subjects, in whom is the least sense and
fear of the Judgments of God (for the Sins aforesaid, or any other) ready to
come on this Nation, that they would be pleased to remember that Word the Lord
sent to Judah, Jer. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10.
At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom,
to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that Nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their Evil, I will repent of the Evil that I thought
to do unto them. And at what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and
concerning a Kingdom, to build and to plant it: if it do evil in my sight, that
it obey not my Voice, then I will repent of the Good wherewith I said I would
benefit them. Therefore if all Degrees, both noble and ignoble, do believe,
that it is not only for the Sins of some few in the Nation, (as Christ told the
Jews of the Galileans, whose Blood Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifices:
Luke 13. 1, 2, 3.
Suppose ye, says Christ, that these Galileans were Sinners above all the
Galileans, because they suffered these things? I tell you, nay; but except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish) but for the general Sins of all, some in
one thing, and some in another, as before noted. So that according to the Evil
will the Punishment be; as is showed by the Prophet Amos, in the first and
second Chapters. The Irreligious are punished for their Cruelty to the Lord's
People; and the Religious People, both Judah and Israel, were punished, because
they had despised the Law of the Lord, and kept not his Commandments, which
they Exodus 19 8. Jer. 7. 23, 24.
promised to obey. Seeing then the Sin of Leprosy is spread over all Degrees,
either in Corruption in Faith, and Disorder in Worship, or Oppression among
Men, that almost all are shut up, as in a 2 Kin. 15. 5.
severed House, as unclean, because by their Sins the Lord's Camp or Dwelling
is Numb. 5. 2, 3.
defiled.

Therefore, dear Protestants, under what other Title soever by Men called,
Christ Jesus, the great High Priest, is Levit 13. Heb. 4. 13.
looking on you. Therefore I shall close up all to you with the Observation of
that worthy Servant of the Lord, Henry Ainsworth, on Levit. 13. 15. who has
noted there, That it is one of the remarkable things in the Law, That quick or
sound Flesh in the Sore should be judged Leprosy, and the Man pronounced
unclean; whereas if the Leprosy cover all his Flesh, he was pronounced clean.
And hereby the Holy Ghost seems to teach, that if we would 1 Cor. 11. 31. 1 John 1. 7.
judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord, 1 John 1. 9. If we
confess our Sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive us our Sins, and to
cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. But if any quick or sound Flesh, that is,
any Gal. 2. 16. Ephesians. 2. 5. Romans 11 6. Gal. 5. 4.
part of Health or Life be pretended in our sinful Nature, or any whit of
Righteousness by Works of the Law, by which no Flesh can be justified, then God
pronounces us unclean; for we cannot be justified but by the Faith of Jesus.
Therefore, with David, that we may find Mercy with the Lord, we must
acknowledge, there is no soundness in our Flesh, Psalm 38. 4, 8. Until this be
done, God will leave us as unclean, 2 Kin. 15. 5. Numb. 12. 14. shut up from
Deliverance from our Enemies, and Communion with himself, until we be humbled
for our Sins, Lam. 1. 8. and 3. 1, 28. As it is written, Your Iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your Sins have hid his Face from you,
that he will not hear, Isa. 59. 2.

And lastly; If in this Warning-piece I have unadvisedly, in zeal to God's
Glory, and good Will and true Affections I bear to my Prince and Countrymen,
let fall any words that do not become a Christian, that is not warranted by
God's Word, let the Righteous Psalm. 146. 5.
smite me, and it shall be taken as a kindness. And let not any Protestant
despise this plain way of discovering the Iniquities of these Times, because it
is not garnished with Eloquent Language; nor yet think with themselves the
Medicine is too sharp to work a Cure at this time, but let all such before they
judge, or rashly censure it, examine the Ingredients by that most Heavenly
Herbal, God's written Word, and they shall find the whole Composition is
gathered together by directions of God's Spirit in his Servants the Prophets
and Apostles, all written for our Learning, gathered from the Tree of Life,
whose Fruit is for Souls food, and the Leaves thereof for Healing of the
Nations. Now if the Lord prosper it, is the thing desired herein, and I have
obtained my end, who am one of the Lord's unprofitable Servants, to bring any
Glory to his Name, or Comfort to his People.

ERRATA.
Page 9. lin. 2. Marg. for Mark read Mat. Page 19. lin. 15. for 113, 115. read
313, 315. P. 28. l. last, r. Also see Junius.


