Sed Carmina major jmago



Poems, etc. Written upon several OCCASIONS, And to several PERSONS: BY EDMOND
WALLER, Esquire

Licensed, May 18. 1686.

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

The Fifth Edition, with several Additions

Never before Printed.

Non ego mordaci distrinxi carmine quenquam,
Nulla venenato littera Mista ioco est.
Printed for H. Herringman, and are to be sold by J. Knight and F. Saunder at
the Blew Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1686.

The Printer TO THE READER:
WHen the Author of these Verses (Written only to please himself, and such
particular persons to whom they were directed) returned from abroad some years
since, He was troubled to find his name in Print, but somewhat satisfied to see
his Lines so ill rendered that he might justly disown them, and say to a
mistaking Printer, as one did to an ill Reciter, -- Male dum recitas, incipit
esse tuum. Having been ever since pressed to correct the many and gross faults
(such as use to be in Impressions wholly neglected by the Authors) his answer
was, that he made these when ill Verses had more favor and escaped better,
than good ones do in this age; the severity whereof he thought not unhappily
diverted by those faults in the impression, which hitherto have hung upon his
Book, as the Turks hang old rags (or such like ugly things) upon their fairest
Horses and other goodly Creatures, to secure them against fascination; and for
those of a more Confined understanding, who pretend not to Cens^^e) as they ad
m^re most what they least comprehend, so his Verse^ (maimed to that degree that
himself scarce knew what to make of many of them) might that may at least have
a Title to some Admiration, which is no small matter, if what an old Author
observes be true, That the aim of Orators, is Victory; of Historians, Tr^^^ and
of Poets, Admiration; He had reason therefore to indulge those faults in his
Book whereby it might be reconsiled to some, and commended to others.

The Printer also be thought would fore the worse, if those faults were
amended; for we see maimed statues sell better than whole ones, and clipped and
washed Many go about when the entire and weighty lies ^oarded up. These are the
reasons which for above twelve years past he has opposed to our request; To
which it was replied, that as it would be too late to recall that which had so
long been made public, so might it find excuse from his Youth (the season it
was produced in) And for what had been dome source and now added, if it commend
not his Poetry, it might his Philosophy, which teaches him so cheerfully to
bear so great a Calamitr, as the loss of the best part of his fortune (torn
from him in Prison, in which, and in (...), the best portion of his life has
also been spent) that he can still sing under the burden, not unlike that
Roman, -- Quem demisere Philippi
Decifis humilem p^nnis inopemque Patorn*
Et Laris, and ^undi --
Whose spreading wings the civil war had clipped*
And him of his old Patrimony Stripped,


Who yet not long after could say, Musis amicus Tristitiam and Metus
Tradam protervis in Mare Creticum
Portare ventis. --
They that acquainted with the Muses be,
sand care and (...) by the winds to Sea.
Not so much moved with these reasons of ours (or pleased with our R^^^^^s) as
wearied with our importunity, He has at last given no leave, To assure the
Reader, That the Poems which have been so long and so ill set forth under his
name, are here to be found as he first ^uit them; as also to add some others
which have since been composed by him. And though his Advice to the contrary
might have discouraged us, yet observing how often they have been reprinted,
what price they have born, and how earnestly they have been always inquired
after, but especially of late, making good that of Horace, -- Melioradies, ut
Vina, Poemata reddit; Some Vinsos being (like some wines) recommended to our
Taste by time and Age, we have adventured upon this new and well corrected
Edition, which for our own sakes, as well as thin^, we hope will succeed better
than be apprehended.

Vivitur ingenia, C^tera mortis erunt. Postscript.
NOT having the same Argument as at first to persuade the Author that I might
print his Verses more Correctly, which he found so ill done at his Return; I
have now, adventured, without giving him farther Trouble by, importuning him
for a new Permission, to Collect all that I can find, either left out of the
former Edition, or such as have been since made by him; to which I am the more
encouraged, because the first (tho most of them were composed Fifty or Sixty
years since) seem still New, which would be more strange in so changing a
Language, had it not been by him improved, which may make one think it true
that I have heard from some learned Critics, that Virgil when he said -- Nova
carmina pango. Meant not Verses that were never seen before (for in that sense
all at first are New) but such as he thought might be ever New. May these still
appear to be so for the diversion of the Readers, and interest of (...)

(...) Their Humble Servant.
TO THE KING On His NAVY.
WHere e're thy Navy spreads her canvas wings,
Homage to thee, and Peace to all she brings.
The French and Spaniard, when thy Flags appear;
Forget their Hatred, and consent to fear.
So Jove from Ida did both Hosts survey,
And when he pleased to Thunder, part the sray.
Ships heretofore in Seas like Fishes sped,
The mighty still upon the smaller fed.
Thou on the deep impofest Nobler Laws,
And by that Justice have removed the Cause
Of those rude Tempests, which for Rapine sent,
Too often alas, involved the innocent.
Now shall the Ocean, as thy Thames, be free
From both those fates, of Storms, and Piracy:
But we most happy, who can fear no force
But winged Troops, or Pegasean Horse:
It Is not so hard for greedy foes to spoil
Another Nation, as to touch our soil.
Should Natures self invade the World again,
And over the Center spread the liquid Main;
Thy power were safe, and her destructive hand
Would but enlarge the bounds of thy command.
Thy dreadful Fleet would style thee Lord of all,
And ride in Triumph over the drowned Ball.
Those Towers of Oak over fertile plains might go,
And visit Mountains where they once did grow.
The Worlds Restorer never could endure,
That finished Babel should those men secure,
Whose Pride designed that Fabric to have stood
Above the reach of any second Flood:
To thee his Chosen more indulgent, he
Dares trust such Power with so much Piety.
Of the danger His Majesty (being Prince) escaped in the Road at Saint Andrews.
Now had his Highness bid farewell to Spain,
And reached the sphere of his own power, the main;
With British bounty in his Ship he Feasts,
Th'Hesperian Princes, his amazed guests;
To find that watery Wilderness exceed
The entertainment of their great Madrid.
Healths to both Kings, attended with the rore
Of Cannons echoed from the affrighted shore,
With loud resemblance of his Thunder prove
Bacchus the seed of Cloud eompelling Jove.
While to his Harp Divine Arion sings
The Loves and Conquests of our Albion Kings.
Of the fourth Edward was his Noble song;
Fierce, Goodly, Valiant, Beautiful and Young:
He rent the Crown from vanquished Henry's head;
Raised the white Rose, and trampled on the Red:
Till Love triumphing over the Victor's pride,
Brought Mars and Warwick to the Conquered side;
Neglected Warwick (whose bold hand like fate,
Gives and resumes the Scepter of our State)
Wooes for his Master, and with double shame,
Himself deluded; mocks the Princely Dame,
The Lady Bona; whom just anger burns;
And Foreign War with Civil Rage returns.
Ah spare your Sword, where Beauty is to blame;
Love gaveth' Affront, and must repair the same: (eyes
When France shall boast of her, whose conquering
Have made the best of English hearts their prize;
Have power to alter the decrees of Fate,
And change again the Counsels of our State.
What the Prophetic Muse intends, alone
To him that feels the secret Wound, is known.
With the sweet sound of this harmonious lay
About the Keel delighted Dolphins play;
Too sure a sign of Seas ensuing rage,
Which must anon this Royal Troop engage:
To whom soft sleep seems more secure and sweet,
Within the Town commanded by our Fleet.
These mighty Peers placed in the gilded Barge,
Proud with the burden of so brave a charge:
With painted Oars the Youths begin to sweep
Neptunes smooth face, and cleave the yielding deep,
Which soon becomes the seat of sudden War
Between the Wind and Tide, that fiercely jar.
As when a sort of lusty Shepherds try
Their force at Football, care of victory
Makes them salute so rudely breast to breast.
That their Encounters seem too rough for jest:
They ply their feet, and still the restless Ball
Tossed too and fro is urged by them all:
So fares the doubtful Barge'twixt Tide and Winds;
And like effect of their contention finds.
Yet the bold Britains still securely rowed;
Charles and his Virtue was their sacred load:
Than which a greater pledge Heaven could not give,
That the good Boat this Tempest should outlive.
But storms increase, and now no hope of grace
Among them shines, save in the Princes Face.
The rest resign their courage, skill and sight
To danger, horror, and unwelcome night.
The gentle Vessel, wont with state and pride
On the smooth back of Silver Thames to ride,
Wanders Astonished in the angry main;
As Titans Car did, while the golden rein
Filled the young hand of his advent 'rous Son,
When the whole world an equal hazard run
To this of ours; the light of whose desire
Waves threaten now, as that was skar'd by fire.
The Impatient Sea grows impotent and raves,
That (night assisting) his impetuous waves
Should find resistance from so light a thing:
These surges ruin, those our safety bring.
The Oppressed Vessel does the charge abide;
Only because assailed on every side:
So Men with rage and passion set on fire,
Trembling for have, impeach their mad desire.
The pale Iberians had expired with fear;
But that their wonder did divert their care;
To see the Prince with danger moved no more,
Than with the Pleasures of their Court before.
God-like his courage seemed, whom nor delight
Could soften, nor the face of Death affright:
Next to the power of making Tempests cease,
Was in that storm to have so calm a peace.
Great Maro could no greater Tempest feign;
When the loud Winds usurping on the Main,
For angry Juno, labored to destroy
The hated relics of confounded Troy.
His bold Aeneas, on like Billows tossed,
In a tall Ship, and all his Country lost,
Dissolves with fear; and both his hands upheld,
Proclaims them happy whom the Greeks had quel'd
In Honorable fight: Our Hero set
In a small shallop; fortune in his debt,
So near a hope of Crowns and Scepters, more
Than ever Priam, when he flourished, wore;
His Loins yet full of ungot Princes, all
His Glory in the bud; lets nothing fall
That argues Fear: if any thought annoys
The gallant youth, it is Loves untasted joys,
And dear remembrance of that futal glance,
For which he lately pawned his Heart in France.
Where he had seen a brighter Nymph than she
That sprung out of his present foe, the Sea.
That noble Ardor, more than mortal Fire,
The Conquered Ocean could not make expire*
Nor angry Thetis, raise her waves above
Th'Heroick Princes Courage, or his Love;
It Was Indignation, and not Fear he felt,
The shrine should perish, where that Image dwelt.
Ah Love forbid! the Noblest of thy Train
Should not survive to let her know his pain:
Who nor his Peril minding, nor his Flame,
Is entertained with some less serious Game
Among the bright Nymphs of the Gallique Court;
All highly born, obsequious to her sport:
They Roses seem, which in their early pride,
But half reveal, and half their Beauties hide;
She the glad morning, which her beams does throw,
Upon their smiling leaves, and gilds them so:
Like bright Aurora, whose re^ulgent Ray
Foretells the fervor of ensuing day;
And warns the Shepherd with his Flocks retreat
To lea^ie shadows, from the threatened heat.
From Cupids strings, of many shafts that fled,
Winged with those plumes which noble fame had shed,
As through the wondering world she flew, and told
Of his Adventures haughty, brave and bold,
Some had already touched the Royal Maid;
But love's first summons seldom are obeyed:
Light was the Wound; the Prince's care unknown,
She might not, would not yet reveal her own.
His glorious name had so possessed her ears,
That with delight those antique tales she hears
Of Jason, Theseus, and such Worthies old,
As with his Story best resemblance hold.
And now she views, as on the wall it hung,
What old Musaus so Divinely sung:
Which Art with life and love did so inspire,
That she discerns, and favors that desire,
Which there provokes th'advent'rous youth to swim,
And in Leanders danger pities him:
Whose not new love alone, but fortune seeks
To frame his story like that amorous Greeks.
For from the Stern of some good Ship appears
A friendly light, which moderates their fears:
New courage from reviving hope they take,
And climbing over the waves, that Taper make;
On which the hope of all their Lives depends;
As his on that fair Hero's hand extends.
The Ship at anchor like a fixed Rock
Breaks the proud Billows, which her large sides knock;
Whose rage restrained foaming higher swells,
And from her Port the weary Barge repels;
Threatening to make her, forced out again,
Repeat the dangers of the troubled main.
Twice was the Cable hurled in vain; the fates
Would not be moved for our Sister States:
For England is the third successful throw,
And then the Genius of that Land they know:
Whose Prince must be (as their own Books devise)
Lord of the Scene, where now his danger lies.
Well sung the Roman Bard; all human things
Of dearest value hang on slender strings.
O see the then sole hope, and in design
Of Heaven our joy, supported by a line:
Which for that instant was Heaven's care above,
The chain that is fixed to the Throne of Jove;
On which the fabric of our World depends;
One Link dissolved, the whole Creation ends.
Of His Majesty's receiving the News of the Duke of Buckingham's Death.
So earnest with thy God, can no new care,
No sense of danger interrupt thy Prayer?
The sacred Wrestler till a blessing given,
Quits not his hold, but halting conquers Heaven:
Nor was the stream of thy Devotion stopped;
When from the Body such a Limb was lopped,
As to thy present state was no less maim;
Though thy wise choice has since repaired the same.
Bold Homer durst not so great virtue feign
In his best pattern, of Patroclus slain;
With such amazement as weak Mothers use,
And frantic gesture, he receives the news:
Yet fell his Darling by th'impartial chance
Of war, imposed by Royal Hector's Lance;
Thine in full peace, and by a vulgar hand
Torn from thy bosom, left his high command.
The famous Painter could allow no place
For private sorrow in a Princes face:
Yet, that his piece might not exceed belief,
He cast a Veil upon supposed grief.
'Twas want of such a President as this,
Made the old Heathen frame their Gods amiss.
Their Phoebus should not act a fonder part
For their fair Boy, than he did for his Heart;
Nor blame for Hyacinthus fate his own,
That kept from him wished death; had thou been known.
He that with thine shall weigh good David's deeds,
Shall find his Passion, not his Love exceeds.
He cursed the Mountains where his brave friend died;
But let false Ziba with his Heir divide:
Where thy immortal Love to thy best Friends,
Like that of Heaven, upon their Seed descends.
Such huge extremes inhabit thy great mind:
God-like, unmoved; and yet like Woman, kind.
Which of the ancient Poets had not brought
Our Charles His Pedigree from Heaven, and taught
How some bright dame comprest by mighty Jove,
Produced this mixed Divinity and Love?
To the Queen, occasioned upon sight of Her Majesty's Picture.
WEll fare the hand, which to our humble sight
Presents that Beauty, which the dazzling Light
Of Royal spendor hides from weaker eyes;
And all access (save by this Art) denies.
Here only we have Courage to behold
This Beam of Glory; here we dare unfold
In numbers thus the wonders we conceive:
The gracious Image seeming to give leave,
Propitious stands, vouchsasing to be seen;
And by our Muse saluted,
Mighty Queen,
In whom th'extreams of Power and Beauty move;
The Queen of Britain, and the Queen of Love.
As the bright Sun (to which we owe no sight
Of equal Glory to your Beauties light)
Is wisely placed in so sublime a seat,
T'extend his light, and moderate his heat:
So happy it is you move in such a sphere;
As your high Majesty with awful fear,
In humane Breasts might qualify that Fire,
Which kindled by those Eyes had flamed higher,
Than when the scorched World like hazard run,
By the approach of the ill guided Sun.
No other Nymphs have Title to men's Hearts,
But as their Meaness larger hope imparts:
Your Beauty more the fondest Lover moves
With Admiration, than his private loves;
With Admiration; for a pitch so high
(save sacred Charles his) never Love durst fly.
Heaven that preferred a Scepter to your hand,
Favored our freedom, more than your command:
Beauty had crowned you, and you must have been
The whole Worlds Mistress, other than a Queen.
All had been Rival's; and you might have spar'd'
Or killed and tyrannized without a Guard.
No power achieved, either by Arms or Birth,
Equals love's Empire, both in Heaven and Earth.
Such eyes as yours, on Jove himself have thrown
As bright and fierce a lightning as his own:
Witness our Jove, prevented by their flame
In his swift passage to th'Hesperian Dame;
When, like a Lion, finding in his way
To some intended spoil, a fairer prey;
The Royal youth pursuing the report
Of Beauty, found it in the Gallique Court.
There public care with private passion fought
A doubtful combat in his noble thought:
Should he confess his greatness, and his love,
And the free Faith of your great Brother prove,
With his Achates breaking through the cloud
Of that disguise which did their Graces shroud,
And mixing with those gallants at the Ball,
Dance with the Ladies and outshine them all;
Or on his journey over the Mountains ride?
So when the fair Leucothoe he espied,
To check his steeds, impatient Phoebus earned;
Though all the world was in his course concerned.
What may hereafter her Meridian do,
Whose dawning beauty warmed his bosom so?
Not so divine a flame, since deathless gods
Forbore to visit the defiled abodes
Of men, in any mortal breast did burn;
Nor shall; till Piety and they return.
Upon His Majesty's repairing of Paul's.
THat shipwrackt vessel which The Apostle bore,
Scarce suffered more upon Melitas shore,
Than did his Temple in the Sea of Time;
(Our Nations Glory, and our Nations crime)
When the first Monarch of this happy Isle,
Moved with the ruin of so brave a pile,
This work of cost and piety begun,
To be accomplished by his glorious Son;
Who all that came within the ample thought
Of his wise Sire, has to perfection brought.
He like Amphion makes those Quarries leap
Into fair figures from a confused heap:
For in his Art of Regiment is found
A power, like that of Harmony in sound.
Those antique Minstrels sure were Charles-like Kings
Cities their Lutes, and Subjects Hearts their Strings,
On which with so divine a hand they struck,
Consent of motion from their breath they took.
So all our minds with his conspire to grace
The Gentiles great Apostle, and deface
Those State-obscuring sheds, that like a Chain
Seemed to confine and fetter him again;
Which the glad Saint shakes off at his command,
As once the Viper from his sacred hand:
So joys the aged Oak, when we divide
The creeping Ivy from his injured side.
Ambition rather would affect the fame
Of some new structure, to have born her name:
Two distant Virtues in one act we find,
The Modesty and Greatness of his mind;
Which not content to be above the rage
And injury of all-impairing age,
In its own worth secure, does higher climb,
And things half swallowed from the jaws of Time
Reduce; an earnest of his grand design
To frame no new Church, but the Old refine:
Which Spouse-like may With comely grace command
More than by force of argument or hand.
For doubtful reason few can apprehend;
And War brings ruin where it should amend:
But Beauty with a bloodless conquest, finds
A welcome Sovereignty in rudest minds.
Not ought which Sheba's wondering Queen beheld
Amongst the works of Solomon, excelled
His ships and building; emblems of a Heart
Large both in Magnanimity and Art.
While the propitious Heavens this work attend,
Long wanted showers they forget to send;
As if they meant to make it understood,
Of more importance than our vital food.
The Sun which rises to salute the Quire
Already finished, setting shall admire
How private bounty could so far extend;
The King built all, but Charles the Western end:
So proud a Fabric to Devotion given,
At once it threatens and obliges Heaven.
Laomedon that had the Gods in pay,
Neptune, with him that rules the sacred day,
Could no such structure raise; Troy walled so high,
The Atrides might as well have forced the sky.
Glad, though amazed, are our neighbor Kings,
To see such power employed in peaceful things.
They lift not urge it to the dreadful field;
The task is easier to destroy, than build.
-- Sie gratia Regum
Pieriis tentata modis.
Horat. The Country to my Lady of Carlisle.
Madam,
OF all the sacred Muse inspired,
Orpheus alone could with the Woods comply;
Their rude Inhabitants his Song admired,
And Natures self in those that could not lie.
Your Beauty next our Solitude invades,
And warms us, Shining through the thickest shades.
Nor ought the Tribute, which the wondering Court
Pays your fair Eyes, prevail with you to scorn
The answer and consent to that report,
Which Eccho-like the Country does return:
Mirrors are taught to Flatter, but our Springs
Present th'impartial Images of things.
A Rural Judge disposed of Beauties prize,
A simple Shepherd was preferred to Jove;
Down to the Mountains from the partial Skies
Came Juno, Pallas, and the Queen of Love,
To plead for that, which was so justly given
To the bright Carlisle of the Court of Heaven.
Carlisle! a Name which all our Woods are taught,
Loud as his Amarillis to re^ound;
Carlisle! a Name which on the Bark is wrought
Of every Tree that is worthy of the Wound.
From Phoebus rage, our Shadows, and our Streams,
May guard us better than from Carlisle's Beams.
The Countess of Carlisle in Mourning.
WHen from black Clouds no part of Sky is clear,
But just so much as lets the Sun appear;
Heaven then would seem thy Image, and reflect
Those Sable Vestments, and that Bright Aspect.
A spark of Virtue by the deepest shade
Of sad adversity is fairer made;
Nor less advantage does thy Beauty get,
A Venus rising from a Sea of Jet.
Such was th'appearance of new formed Light,
While yet it strugled with Eternal night.
Then mourn no more; lest thou admit increase
Of Glory, by thy noble Lords Decease.
We find not that the Laughter-loving Dame
Mourned for Anchises; 'twas enough she came
To grace the Mortal with her deathless Bed,
And that his living Eyes such Beauty fed:
Had she been there, untimely joy through all
Men's Hearts diffused, had marred the Funeral.
Those eyes were made to banish grief: as well
Bright Phoebus might affect in shades to dwell,
As they to put on sorrow; nothing stands
But power to grieve, exempt from thy commands.
If thou lament, thou must do so alone;
Grief in thy presence, can lay hold on none.
Yet still persist the memory to love
Of that great Mercury of our mighty Jove,
Who by the power of his enchanting tongue,
Swords from the hands of threatening Monarchs wrung.
War he prevented, or soon made it cease,
Instructing Princes in the Arts of Peace:
Such as made Sheba'scurious Queen resort
To the large-hearted Hebrews Famous Court.
Had Homer sat amongst his wondering guests,
He might have learned at those stupendous Feasts,
With greater Bounty, and more sacred State
The Banquets of the Gods to celebrate.
But O! what Elocution might he use,
What potent Charms that could so soon infuse
His absent Masters love into the Heart
Of Henrietta, forcing her to part
From her loved Brother, Country, and the Sun,
And like Camilla Over the waves to run
Into his arms; while the Parisian Dames
Mourn for their Ravished glory: at their flames
No less amazed, than the amazed Stars,
When the bold Charmer of Thessalian Wars
With Heaven it self, and numbers does repeat
Which call descending Cynthia from her Seat.
In answer to one who Writ against a fair Lady.
WHat Fury has provoked thy wit to dare
With Diomede, to wound the Queen of Love,
Thy Mistriss's Envy, or thine own Despair?
Not the just Pallas in thy Breast did move
So blind a Rage, with such a different Fate;
He Honor won, where thou have purchased Hate.
She gave assistance to his Trojan Foe;
Thou that without a Rival thou may love,
Do to the Beauty of this Lady owe,
While after her the Gazing world does move.
Can thou not be content to Love alone,
Or is thy Mistress not content with one?
Have thou not read of fairy Arthurs shield,
Which but disclosed, amazed the weaker eyes
Of proudest Foes, and won the doubtful Field?
So shall thy Rebel wit become her prize.
Should thy Iambicks swell into a Book,
All were confuted with one Radiant look.
Heaven he obliged that placed her in the skies,
Rewarding Ph^ebus, for inspiring so
His noble Brain, by likening to those Eyes
His joyful Beams: but Phoebus is thy Foe,
And neither aids thy Fancy nor thy Sight;
So ill thou Rim'st against so fair a Light.
On my Lady Dorothy Sidneys Picture.
SUch was Philoclea, such Mucidorus Flame;
The matchless Sidney that immortal Frame
Of perfect Beauty on two Pillars placed:
Not his high Fancy could one pattern graced
With such extremes of Excellence compose,
Wonders so distant in one Face disclose:
Such cheerful Modesty, such humble State,
Moves certain Love, but with a doubtful Fate:
As when beyond our Greedy reach we see,
Inviting Fruit on too sublime a Tree.
All the rich Flowers through his Arcadia found,
Amazed we see, in this one Garland bound.
Had but this Copy, which the Artist took
From the fair Picture of that noble Book,
Stood at Calanders; the brave friends had jarr'd,
And Rivals made, the ensuing story marred.
Just nature first instructed by his thought,
In his own House thus practiced what he taught.
This glorious piece transcends what he could think;
So much his Blood is nobler than his Ink.
To Vandike.
RAre Artisan! whose Pensil moves
Not our Delights alone, but Loves
From thy Shop of Beauty, we
Slaves return, that entered free-
The heedless Lover does not know
Whose Eyes they are that wound him so:
But confounded with thy Art,
Inquires her name that has his Heart.
Another who did long refrain,
Feels his Old wound bleed fresh again,
With dear remembrance of that Face,
Where now he reads new hopes of Grace:
Nor Scorn, nor Cruelty does find;
But gladly suffers a false wind
To blow the ashes of Despair
From the reviving Brand of care:
Fool that forgets her stubborn look,
This softness from thy finger took.
Strange that thy Hand should not inspire
The beauty only, but the fire:
Not the form alone, and grace,
But act and power of a Face.
May thou yet thy self as well,
As all the world besides, excel;
So you th'unseigned Truth rehearse;
That I may make it Live in Verse
Why thou could not at one assay,
That Face to aftertimes convey,
Which this admires; was it thy wit
To make her often before thee fit?
Confess, and we will Forgive thee this;
For who would not repeat that bliss,
And frequent sight of such a Dame,
Buy with the hazard of his Fame?
Yet who can tax thy blameless skill,
Though thy good hand had failed still?
When Natures self so often errs:
She for this many thousand years
Seems to have practiced with much care,
To Frame the Race of Women Fair;
Yet never could a perfect Birth
Produce before to grace the Earth:
Which waxed old, e're it could see
Her that amazed thy Art and Thee.
But now it is done, O let me know
Where those immortal Colors grow,
That could this deathless piece compose
In Lillies, or the Fading Rose?
No, for this Thest thou have climbed higher
Than did Promethe^s for his Fire.
Of the Lady who can sleep when she pleases.
No wonder Sleep from careful Lovers flies
To bath himself in Sacharissi's eyes;
As Fair Astrea once from Earth to Heaven
By Strife and loud Impiety was driven:
So with our Plaints offended and our Tears;
Wise Somnus to that Paradise repairs,
VVaits on her Will and wretches does forsake
To court the Nymph, for whom those wretches wake!
More proud than Phoebus of his Throne of Gold
Is the soft God, those softer Limbs to hold;
Nor would exchange with Jove, to hide the Skies
In darkning Clouds, the power to close her eyes:
Eyes which so far all other Lights control,
They warm our Mortal parts, but these our Soul.
Let her free Spirit, whose unconquered Breast
Holds such deep quiet, and untroubled rest,
Know, that though Venus and her Son should spare
Her Rebel Heart, and never teach her Care;
Yet Hymen may enforce her vigils keep,
And for another Joy suspend her Sleep.
Of the mis-report of her being Painted.
As when a sort of Wolves infest the night
With their wild howlings at fair Cynthia's light;
The noise may chase sweet slumber from our eyes,
But never reach the Mistress of the Skies:
So with the news of Sacharissa's wrongs,
Her vexed servants blame those envious tongues;
Call Love to witness, that no painted Fire
Can scorch Men so, or kindle such desire:
While unconcerned she seems moved no more
With this new Malice, than our Loves before;
But from the height of her great Mind looks down
On both our passions, without Smile or Frown:
So little care of what is done below
Has the bright Dame, whom Heaven affects so.
Paints her, it is true, with the same hand which spreads
Like Glorious Colors through the Flowery Meads;
When lavish Nature with her best Attire
Clothes the gay Spring, the season of desire.
Paints her, it is true, and does her Cheek adorn
With the same Art wherewith she paints the Morn:
With the same Art, wherewith she gildeth so
Those painted Clouds which form Thaumantias bow.
Of her passing through a crowd of People.
AS in old Chaos Heaven with Earth confused,
And Stars with Rocks, together crushed and bruised;
The Sun his light no further could extend
Than the next hill, which on his Shoulders leaned:
So in this throng bright Sacharissa fared,
Oppressed by those who strove to be her Guard:
As Ships though never so obsequious, ^all
Foul in a Tempest on their Admiral
A greater Favor this disorder brought
Unto her Servants, than their awful thought
Durst entertain, when thus compelled they pressed
The yielding Marble of her snowy Breast.
While love insults, disguised in the Cloud,
And welcome force of that unruly Crowd.
So th'amorous Tree, while yet the Air is calm,
Just distance keeps from his desired Palm:
But when the VVind her ravished Branches throws
Into his Arms, and mingles all their Boughs;
Though loath he seems her tender leaves to press,
More loath he is that Friendly storm should cease,
From whose rude Bounty, he the double use
At once receives, of Pleasure and Excuse.
The Story of Phoebus and Daphne applied.
THirsis a Youth of the inspired Train,
Fair Sacharissa loved, but loved in vain:
Like Phoebus sung the no less amorous Boy;
Like Daphne she as lovely and as Coy:
With numbers he the flying Nymph pursues,
With numbers such as Phoebus self might use.
Such is the chase, when Love and Fancy leads,
Over craggy Mountains, and through floury Meads;
Invoked to testify the Lover's care,
Or form some Image of his cruel fair:
Urged with his fury like a wounded Deer,
Over these he fled, and now approaching near,
Had reached the Nymph with his harmonious lay,
Whom all his charms could not incline to stay;
Yet what he sung in his immortal strain,
Though unsuccessful, was not sung in vain:
All but the Nymph, that should redress his wrong,
Attend his passion, and approve his Song.
Like Phoebus thus, acquiring unsought praise,
He caught at Love, and filled his Arm with Bays.
Fabula Phoebi and Daphnis.
ARcadiae juvenis Thirsis, Phaebique Sacerdos,
Ingenti frustra Sacharissae ardebat amore:
Hand Deus ipse olim Daphni m^jora canebat,
Nec fuit asperior Daphne, nec pul^hrior illa:
Carminibus Phoebo dignis premit ille fugacem
Per rupes, per saxa, volans per florida vates
Pascua; formosam nunc his componere Nympham,
Nunc illis crudelem insana mente solebat:
Audiit illa proculmiserum, ^itheramque sonantem,
Audiit, at nullis respectexit mota querelis;
Ne tamen omnino caneret, desertus, ad alta
Sidera perculsi, referunt nova carmina montes.
Sic non quaesitis cumulatus la^dibus olim
Elapsa reperit Daphni sua laurea Phoebus.
Of Mrs. Arden.
BEhold, and listen, while the fair
Breaks in sweet sounds the willing air,
And with her own breath fans the Fire
Which her bright eyes do first inspire.
What reason can that Love control,
Which more than one way courts the Soul?
So when a flash of Lightning falls
On our Abodes, the danger calls
For humane Aid, which hopes the Flame
To Conquer, though from Heaven it came:
But is the Winds with that conspire;
Men strive not, but deplore the Fire.
To Amoret.
FAir, that you may truly know
What you unto Thirsis owe;
I will tell you how I do
Sacharissa Love, and you.
Joy salutes me, when I set
My blessed Eyes on Amoret:
But with wonder I am struck,
When I on the other look.
If sweet Amoret complains,
I have sense of all her pains;
But for Sacharissa I
Do not only Grieve, but Die.
All that of my self is mine,
Lovely Amoret, is thine;
Sacharissa's Captive fain
Would untie his Iron chain;
And those scorching Beams to shun,
To thy gentle shadow run.
If the soul had free Election
To dispose of her affection,
I would not thus long have born
Haughty Sacharissa's scorn:
But it is sure some power above,
Which controuls ours Will in Love.
If not Love, a strong desire
To create and spread that Fire
In my Breast, solicites me
Beauteous Amoret, for thee.
It Is Amazement, more than Love,
Which her radiant eyes do move;
If less splendour wait on thine,
Yet they so benignly shine,
I would turn my dazelled sight
To behold their milder light.
But as hard it is to destroy
That high Flame, as to enjoy:
Which, how easily I may do
Heaven (as easily scaled) does know.
Amoret, as sweet and good
As the most delicious Food,
Which but tasted, does impart
Life and gladness to the Heart:
Sacharissa's beautie's Wine,
Which to madness does incline;
Such a Liquor as no Brain
That is Mortal, can sustain.
Scarce can I to Heaven excuse
The Devotion, which I use
Unto that adored Dame;
For it is not unlike the same,
Which I thither ought to send:
So that if it could take end;
'Twould to Heaven it self be due
To succeed her, and not you,
Who already have of me
All that is not Idolatry;
Which, though not so fierce a Flame,
Is longer like to be the same.
Then smile on me, and I will prove,
Wonder is shorter lived than Love.
On the Head of a Stag.
SO we some antique Hero's strength
Learn by his Lances weight and length;
As these vast beams express the beast,
Whose shady brows alive they dressed:
Such Game, while yet the world was new,
The mighty Nimrod did pursue.
What Huntsman of our feeble Race,
Or Dogs, dare such a Monster chase?
Resembling with each blow he strikes
The charge of a whole Troop of Pikes.
O fertile Head, which every year
Could such a crop of wonder bear!
The teeming earth did never bring
So soon, so hard, so hugh a thing;
Which, might it never have been cast,
Each years growth added to the last,
These lofty Branches had supplied
The Earths bold Son's prodigious Pride;
Heaven with these Engines had been scaled,
When Mountains heaped on* Mountains failed.
To a Lady in a Garden.
SEes not my Love, how Time resumes
The Glory which he lent these Flowers?
Though none should taste of their perfumes,
Yet must they live but some few hours;
Time, what we forbear, devours.
Had Hellen or The Egyptian Queen,
Been nere so thrifty of their Graces;
Those Beauties must at length have been
The spoil of Age, which finds out faces
In the most retired places.
Should some malignant Planet bring
A barren drought, or ceaseless Shower
Upon the Autumn, or the Spring,
And spare us neither Fruit nor Flower;
Winter would not stay an hour.
Could the resolve of Loves neglect
Preserve you from the violation
Of coming years, then more respect
Were due to so Divine a fashion;
Nor would I indulge my passion.
The Misers Speech in a Masque.
BAlls of this Metal slack'd Atlanta's pace,
And on the Amorous Youth bestowed the Race
Venus, the Nymphs mind measuring by her own,
Whom the rich spoils of Cities overthrown
Had prostrated to Mars, could well advise
Th'adventurous Lover how to gain the prize.
Nor less may Jupiter to Gold ascribe;
For when he turned himself into a Bribe,
Who can blame Danae, or the brazen Tower,
That they with-stood not that Almighty shower?
Never till then, did Love make Jove put on
A Form more bright, and Nobler than his own:
Nor were it just, would he resume that shape,
That slack Devotion should his Thunder escape.
'Twas not Revenge for grieved Apollo's wrong,
Those Asses ears on Mida's Temples hung:
But fond Repentance of his happy wish,
Because his Meat grew Metal like his Dish.
Would Bacchus bless me so; I Would constant hold
Unto my wish, and dye Creating Gold.
On the Friendship betwixt two Ladies.
TEll me Lovely loving Pair,
Why so kind, and so severe?
Why so careless of our care,
Only to your selves so dear?
By this cunning change of hearts,
You the power of Love control;
While the Boys deluded Darts,
Can arrive at neither soul.
For in vain to either Breast
Still beguiled Love does come;
Where he finds a foreign Guest,
Neither of your hearts at home.
Debtors thus with like design,
When they never mean to pay;
That they may the Law decline,
To some friend make all away.
Not the silver Doves that fly,
Yoakt in Citharea's Car;
Not the wings that lift so high,
And convey her Son so far,
Are so Lovely, Sweet, and Fair,
Or do more ennoble Love,
Are so choicely matched a pair,
Or with more consent do move.
Of her Chamber.
THey taste of death that do at Heaven arrive;
But we this Paradise approach alive.
Instead of Death, the dart of Love does strike,
And renders all within these walls alike:
The high in Titles, and the Shepherd here,
Forgets his Greatness, and forgets his Fear:
All stand amazed, and gazing on the fair,
Loose thought of what themselves, or others are;
Ambition loose, and have no other scope,
Save Carlisl^s favor to employ their hope.
The Thracian could (though all those tales were true
The bold Greeks tell) no greater wonders do;
Before his feet, so Sheep and Lions lay
Fearless and wrathless, while they heard him play:
The Gay, the Wise, the Gallant, and the Grave,
Subdued alike, all, but one passion have:
No worthy mind, but finds in hers there is
Something proportioned to the rule of his.
Whilst she with cheerful, but impartial grace,
(Born for no one, but to delight the race
Of men) like Phoebus, so divides her light,
And warms us, that, she stoops not from her height.
Of Loving at first sight.
NOt caring to observe the Wind,
Or the new Sea explore,
^natcht from my self, how far behind,
Already I behold the shore!
^ay not a thousand dangers sleep
(...) the smooth bosom of this deep?
^o: it is so Rockless and so Clear,
that the rich bottom does appear
^av'd all with precious things, not torn
^^om shipwrackt vessels, but there born.
^weetness, Truth, and every Grace,
which time and use are wont to teach,
(...) eye may in a moment reach,
and read distinctly in her face.
Someother Nymph with Colors faint,
And pensil slow may Cupid paint,
And a weak heart in time destroy;
She has a stamp, and prints the Boy,
Can with a single look inflame
The coldest Breast, the rudest tame.
The Self Banished.
IT is not that I love you less
Than when before your feet I lay:
But to prevent the sad increase
Of hopeless Love, I keep away.
In vain (alas!) for every thing
Which I have known belong to you,
Your Form does to my Fancy bring,
And makes my old wounds bleed anew.
Who in the Spring from the new Sun,
Already has a Fever got,
Too late begins those shafts to shun,
Which Phoebus through his veins has shot;
Too late he would the pain assuage,
And to thick shadows does retire;
About with him he bears the rage,
And in his tainted blood the Fire.
But vowed I have, and never must
Your banished servant trouble you;
For if I break, you may mistrust
The vow I made to love you too.
SONG.
GO lovely Rose,
Tell her that wastes her time and me,
That now she knows,
When I resemble her to thee,
How sweet and fair she seems to be.
Tell her that is young,
And shuns to have her Graces spied,
That had thou sprung
In Deserts, where no men abide,
Thou must have uncommended died.
Small is the worth
Of Beauty from the light retired;
Bid her come forth,
Suffer her self to be desired,
And not blush so to be admired.
Then die, that she,
The common fate of all things rare,
May read in thee;
How small a part of time they share,
That are so wondrous sweet and fair.
Thirsis, Galatea.
Th. AS lately I on Silver Thames did ride,
Sad Galatea on the Bank I spied:
Such was her look as sorrow taught to shine;
And thus she graced me with a voice Divine.

Gal. You that can tune your sounding strings so well
Of Ladies Beauties, and of Love to tell;
Once change your Note, and let your Lute report
The justest grief that ever touched the Court.

Th. Fair Nymph, I have in your Delights no share*
Nor ought to be concerned in your care:
Yet would I sing, if I your sorrows knew,
And to my aid invoke no Muse but you.

Gal. Hear then, and let your Song augment ou^ grief*
Which is so great, as not to wish relief:
She that had all which Nature gives or Chance,
Whom Fortune joined with Virtue to advance,
To all the joys this Island could afford,
The greatest Mistress, and the kindest Lord:
Who with the Royal mixed her Noble blood,
And in high Grace with Gloriana stood;
Her Bounty, Sweetness, Beauty, Goodness, such,
That none e're thought her happiness too much:
So well inclined her favors to confer,
And kind to all, as Heaven had been to her.
The Virgins part, the Mother, and the Wife,
So well she acted in this span of life,
That though few years (too few alas!) she told,
She seemed in all things, but in Beauty, old.
As unripe Fruit, whose verdant stalks do cleave
Close to the Tree, which grieves no less to leave
The smiling pendant which adorns her so,
And until Autumn, on the Bough should grow:
So seemed her youthful soul not easily forced,
Or from so fair, so sweet a seat divorc't.
Her fate at once did hasty seem and slow,
At once too cruel, and unwilling too.

Th. Under how hard a Law are Mortals borr
Whom now we envy, we anon must mourn:
What Heaven sets highest, and seems most to prize,
Is soon removed from our wondering eyes.
But since the Sisters did so soon untwine
So fair a Thread, I Will strive to piece the line.
Vouchsafe sad Nymph to let me know the Dame,
And to the Muses I Will commend her name,
Make the wide Country echo to your moan,
The listening Trees and savage Mountains groan:
What Rocks not moved when the death is sung
Of one so good, so lovely, and so young?

Gal. 'Twas Hamilton, whom I had named before;
But naming her, Grief lets me say no more.

The Battle of the Summer-Islands.
Cant. I.
What Fruits they have, and how Heaven smiles
Upon those late discovered Isles.
AId me Be^^ona, while the dreadful Fight
Betwixt a Nation and two Whales I write:
Seas stained with goar, I sing, adventurous toil,
And how these Monsters did disarm an Isle.
Berm^das walled with Rocks, who does not know,
That happy Island, where huge Lemons grow,
And Orange trees which Golden Fruit do bear,
Th'Hesperian Garden boasts of none so fair?
Where shining Pearl, Coral, and many a pound,
On the rich Shore, of Ambergris is found:
The lofty Cedar, which to Heaven aspires,
The Prince of Trees, is fuel for their Fires:
The smoke by which their loaded spits do turn,
For ^ncense might, on Sacred Altars burn:
Their private Roofs^on odorous Timber born,
Such as might Palaces for Kings adorn.
The sweet Palmettas a new B^cchus yield,
With Leaves as ample as the broadest shield:
Under the shadow of whose friendly Boughs
They sit carowsing, where their Liquor grows.
Figs there unplanted through the Fields do grow,
Such as fierce Cato did the Romans show,
With the rare Fruit inviting them to spoil
Carthage the Mistress of so rich a soil.
The naked Rocks are not unfruitful there,
But at some constant seasons every year,
Their barren tops with luscious Food abound,
And with the eggs of various Fowls are crowned:
Tobacco is the worst of things, which they
To English Landlords as their Tribute pay:
Such is the Mould, that the Blessed Tenant feeds
On precious Fruits, and pays his Rent in Weeds:
With candid Plantines, and the jucy Pine,
On choicest Melons and sweet Grapes they dine;
And with Potatoes fat their wanton Swine.
Nature these Cates with such a lavish hand
Pours out among them, that our courser Land
Tastes of that bounty, and does Cloth return,
Which not for Warmth, but Ornament is worn:
For the kind Spring which but salutes us here,
Inhabits there, and courts them all the year:
Ripe Fruits and blossoms on the ^ame Trees live;
At once they promise, what at once they give:
So sweet the Air, so moderate the Clime;
None sickly lives, or dies before his time.
Heaven sure has kept this spot of earth uncurst,
To show how all things were Created first.
The tardy Plants in our cold Orchards placed,
Reserve their Fruit for the next ages taste:
There a small grain in some few Months will be
A firm, a lofty, and a spacious Tree:
The Palma Christi, and the fair Papah,
Now but a seed (preventing Natures law)
In half the Circle of the hasty year
Project a shade, and lovely fruit do wear:
And as their Trees in our dull Region set
But faintly grow, and no perfection get;
So in this Northern Tract our hoarser Throats
Utter unripe and ill-constrained notes:
Where the supporter of the Poets style,
Phoebus, on them eternally does smile.
O how I long! my careless Limbs to lay
Under the Plantanes shade, and all the day
With amorous Airs my fancy entertain,
Invoke the Mus^s, and improve my vein!
No passion there in my free breast should move*
None but the sweet and best of passions, Love:
There while I sing, if gentle Love be by
That tunes my Lute, and winds the Strings so high,
With the sweet sound of Sacharissa's name,
I Will make the listening Savages grow tame.
But while I do these pleasing dreams indite,
I am diverted from the promised fight.
Canto II.
Of their alarm, and how their Foes
Discovered were, this Canto shows.
THough Rocks so high about this Island rise,
That well they may the numerous Turk despise;
Yet is no humane fate exempt from fear,
Which shakes their hearts, while through the Isle they hear
A lasting noise, as horrid and as loud
As Thunder makes, before it breaks the Cloud.
Three days they dread this murmur, e're they know
From what blind cause th'unwonted sound may grow:
At length Two Monsters of unequal size,
Hard by the shore a Fisherman espies;
Two mighty Whales, which swelling Seas had tossed,
And left them prisoners on the rocky Coast;
One as a Mountain vast, and with her came
^ Cub not much inferior to his Dame:
^ere in a Pool among the Rocks engaged,
^hey roared like Lions, caught in toyls, and raged:
^he man knew what they were, who heretofore
^ad seen the like lie murdered on the shore,
^y the wild fury of some Tempest cast
^he fate of ships and shipwrackt men to taste.
^s careless Dames whom Wine and Sleep betray
(...) frantic dreams their Infants overlay:
So there sometimes the raging Ocean fails,
And her own brood exposes; when the Whales
Against sharp Rocks like reeling vessels quasht,
Though huge as Mountains, are in pieces dashed;
Along the shore their dreadful Limbs lie scattered,
Like Hills with Earthquakes shaken, torn and shatter'^
Hearts sure of Brass they had, who tempted first,
Rude Seas that spare not what themselves have nurs^
The welcome news through all the Nation sprea^
To sudden joy and hope converts their dread.
What lately was their public terror, they
Behold with glad eyes as a certain prey;
Dispose already of th'untaken spoil,
And as the purchase of their future toil,
These share the Bones, and they divide the Oil;
So was the Huntsman by the Bear oppressed,
Whose Hide he sold before he caught the Beast.
They man their Boats, and all their young men arm
With whatsoever may the Monsters harm;
Pikes, Halberts, Spits, and Darts that wound so far,
The Tools of Peace, and Instruments of War:
Now was the time for vigorous Lads to show
What love or honor could invite them too;
A goodly Theater where Rocks are round
With reverend age, and lovely Lasses crowned*
Such was the Lake which held this dreadful pair
Within the bounds of noble Warwicks share:
Warwicks bold Earl, than which no title bear^
A greater sound among our British Peers;
And worthy he the memory to renew,
The fate and honor to that title due;
Whose brave adventures have transferred his name,
And through the new world spread his growing fame.
But how they fought, and what their valor gained,
Shall in another Canto be contained.
Canto III.
The bloody fight, successless toil,
And how the Fishes sacked the Isle.
THe Boat which on the first assault did go
Struck with a harping Iron the younger ^o;
Who when he felt his side so rudely goar'd,
Loud as the Sea that nourish't him he roared.
^s a broad Bream to please some curious taste,
While yet alive in boiling water cast,
^ex't with unwonted heat, boyls, flings about
The scorching brass, and hurls the liquor out:
So with the barbed Javeling stung, he raves,
And scourges with his tail the suffering waves:
Like Spencer's Talus with his Iron flayl,
^e threatens ruin with his pondrous tail;
Dissolving at one stroke the battered Boat,
And down the men fall drenched in the Moat:
With every fierce encounter they are forced
To quit their Boats, and fare like men unhorst.
The bigger Whale like some huge Carrack lay,
Which wants Sea room, with her foes to play:
Slowly she swims, and when provoked she would
Advance her tail, her head salutes the mud;
The shallow water does her force infringe,
And renders vain her tails impetuous swinge:
The shining steel her tender sides receive,
And there like Bees they all their weapons leave.
This sees the Cub, and does himself oppose
Betwixt his cumbred mother and her foes:
With desperate courage he receives her wounds,
And men and boats his active tail confounds.
Their forces joined, the Seas with billows fill,
And make a tempest, though the winds be still.
Now would the men with half their hoped prey
Be well content, and wish this Cub away:
Their wish they have; he to direct his dam
Unto the gap through which they thither came,
Before her swims, and quits the hostile Lake,
A prisoner there, but for his mothers sake.
She by the Rocks compelled to stay behind,
Is by the vastness of her bulk confined.
They shout for joy, and now on her alone
Their fury falls, and all their Darts are thrown.
Their Lances spent; one bolder than the rest
With his broad sword provoked the sluggish beast:
Her oily side devours both blade and heft,
And there his Steel the bold Bermudian left.
Courage the rest from his example take,
And now they change the color of the Lake:
Blood flows in Rivers from her wounded side,
As if they would prevent the tardy tide,
And raise the flood to that propitious height,
As might convey her from this fatal straight.
She swims in blood, and blood does spouting throw
To Heaven, that Heaven men's cruelties might know.
Their fixed Javelins in her side she wears,
And on her back a grove of Pikes appears:
You would have thought, had you the monster seen
Thus dressed, she had another Island been.
Roaring she tears the air with such a noise,
(As well resembled the conspiring voice
Of routed Armies, when the field is won)
To reach the ears of her escaped son.
He (though a league removed from the fo)
Hastes to her aid; the pious Trojan so
Neglecting for Creusas life his own,
Repeats the danger of the burning Town.
The men amazed blush to see the seed
Of monsters, human piety exceed:
Well proves this kindness what the Grecians sung,
That Loves bright mother from the Ocean sprung.
Their courage droops, and hopeless now they wish
For composition with th'unconquer'd fish:
So she their weapons would restore again,
Through Rocks they would hew her passage to the main.
But how instructed in each others mind,
Or what commerce can men with monsters find?
Not daring to approach their wounded foe,
Whom her courageous son protected so;
They charge their Muskets, and with hot desire
Of full revenge, renew the fight with fire:
Standing a looff, with lead they bruise the scales,
And tear the flesh of the incensed Whales.
But no success their fierce endeavors found,
Nor this way could they give one fatal wound.
Now to their Fort they are about to send
For the loud Engines which their Isle defend.
But what those pieces from'd to batter walls
Would have effected on those mighty Whales,
Great Neptune will not have us know, who sends
A tide so high, that it relieves his friends.
And thus they parted with exchange of harms;
Much blood the Monsters lost, and they their Arms.
SONG.
PEace, babbling Muse,
I dare not sing what you indite;
Her eyes refuse
To read the passion which they write;
^he strikes my Lute, but if it sound,
Threatens to hurl it on the ground:
And I no less her anger dread,
^han the poor wretch that feigns him dead,
^hile some fierce Lion does embrace
^is breathless corpse, and licks his face;
Wrapped up in silent fear he lies,
Torn all in pieces if he cries.
Of Love.
ANger in hasty words or blows,
It self discharges on our foes,
And sorrow too finds some relief,
In tears which wait upon our grief:
So every passion, but fond Love,
Unto its own redress does move;
But that alone the wretch inclines
To what prevents his own designs;
Makes him lament, and sigh, and weep,
Disordred, tremble, fawn and creep;
Postures which render him despised,
Where he endeavors to be prized.
For women, born to be controlled,
Stoop to the forward and the bold,
Affect the haughty and the proud,
The gay, the frollick, and the loud.
Who first the generous Steed oppressed,
Not kneeling did salute the beast;
But with high courage, life and force
Approaching, tamed the unruly horse.
Unwisely we the wiser East
Pity, supposing them oppressed
With Tyrants force, whose law is will,
By which they govern, spoil and kill:
Each Nymph but moderately fair,
Commands with no less Rigor here.
Should some brave Turk, that walks among
His twenty Lasles bright and young,
And beckens to the willing Dame
Preferred to quench his present flame,
Behold as many Gallants here,
With modest guise, and silent fear,
All to one Female Idol bend,
Whilst her high pride does scarce descend
To mark their follies, he would swear
That these her guard of Eunuchs were;
And that a more Majestique Queen,
Or humbler slaves he had not seen.
All this with indignation spoke,
In vain I strugled with the yoke
Of mighty love; that conquering look,
When next beheld, like lightning struck
My blasted soul, and made me bow
Lower than those I pitied now.
So the tall Stag upon the brink
Of some smooth stream about to drink,
Surveying there, his armed head,
With shame remembers that he fled
The scorned dogs, resolves to try
The combat next; but if their cry
Invades again his trembling ear,
He straight resumes his wonted care;
Leaves the untasted Spring behind,
And winged with fear, out-flies the wind.
To Phillis.
PHillis, why should we delay
Pleasures shorter than the day?
Could we (which we never can)
Stretch our lives beyond their span;
Beauty like a shadow flies,
And our youth before us dies;
Or would youth and beauty stay,
Love has wings, and will away.
Love has swifter wings than Time;
Change in love to Heaven does clime.
Gods that never change their state,
Vary often their love and hate.
Phillis, to this truth we owe,
All the love betwixt us two:
Let not you and I require,
What has been our past desire;
On what Shepherds you have smil^d,
Or what Nymphs I have beguiled;
Leave it to the Planets too,
What we shall hereafter do;
For the joys we now may prove,
Take advice of present love.
To Phillis.
PHillis, 'twas love that injured you,
And on that Rock your Thirsis threw,
Who for proud Caelia could have died,
Whilst you no less accused his pride.
Fond Love his darts at random throws,
And nothing springs from what he sows:
from foes discharged as often meet
The shining points of Arrows fleet,
In the wide air creating fire,
As souls that join in one desire.
Love made the lovely Venus burn
In vain, and for the cold youth mourn*
Who the pursuit of churlish Beasts,
Preferred to sleeping on her Breasts.
Love makes so many hearts the prize,
Of the bright Carliles conquering eyes,
Which she regards no more than they,
The tears of lesser beauties weigh:
So have I seen the lost Clouds pour,
Into the Sea a useless shower,
And the vexed Sailors curse the rain,
For which poor Shepherds prayed in vain.
Then Phillis, since our passions are
Governed by chance, and not the care
But sport of Heaven, which takes delight
To look upon this Parthian flight
Of Love, still flying or in chase,
Never incountring face to face;
No more to love we'll sacrifice,
But to the best of Deities;
And let our hearts which love disjoined,
By his kind Mother be combined.
SONG.
WHile I listen to thy voice,
( Chloris) I feel my life decay,
That powerful noise
Calls my flitting soul away.
Oh! suppress that Magic sound,
Which destroys without a wound.
Peace Chloris, peace, or singing die;
That together you and I,
To Heaven may go:
For all we know,
Of what the blessed do above,
Is, that they sing, and that they love.
SONG.
STay Phoebus, stay,
The world to which you fly so fast,
Conveying day
From us to them, can pay your have,
With no such object, nor salute your rise
With no such wonder, as de Mornay's eyes.
Well does this prove,
The error of those antique books,
Which made you move,
About the world; her charming looks
Would fix your beams, and make it ever day,
Did not the rolling Earth snatch her away.
To Amoret.
AMoret, the milky way,
Framed of many nameless stars,
The smooth stream where none can say,
He this drop to that prefers;
Amoret, my lovely foe,
Tell me where thy strength does lie;
Where the power that charms us so,
In thy Soul, or in thy eye?
By that snowy neck alone,
Or thy grace in motion seen,
No such wonders could be done:
Yet thy wast is straight and clean,
As Cupids shafr, or Hermas rod,
And powerful too, as either God.
To my Lord of Falkland.
BRave Holland leads, and with him Falkland goes:
Who hears this told, and does not straight suppose
We send the Graces and the Muses forth,
To Civilize, and to instruct the North?
Not that these ornaments make swords less sharp;
Apollo bears as well his Bow as Harp;
And though he be the Patron of that Spring,
Where in calm peace the Sac^ed Virgins sing,
He courage had to guard th'invaded Throne
Of Love, and cast the ambitious ^iants down.
Ah (noble Friend) with what impatience all
That know thy worth, and know how prodigal
Of thy great Soul thou art, longing to twist
Bays with that Ivy, which so early kissed* (...)
Thy youthful Temples, with what horror we
Think on the blind events of war and thee?
To Fate exposing that all-knowing breast,
Among the throng as cheaply as the rest:
Where Oaks and Brambles (if the Cops be burn^^
Confounded lie to the same Ashes turned.
Some happy wind over the Ocean blow
This Tempest yet, which frights our Island so*
Guarded with Ships, and all the Sea our own,
From Heaven this mischief on our heads is thrown.
In a late Dream the Genius of this Land,
Amazed, I saw, like the fair Hebrew stand,
When first she felt the Twins begin to jar,
And found her womb the feat of Civil War:
Inclined to whose relief, and with presage
Of better for^un^ for the present age,
Heaven sends, quoth I, this discord for our good,
To warm, perhaps, but not to waste our blood,
To raise our drooping spirits, grown the scorn
Of our proud neighbors, who ere long shall mourn,
(Though now they joy in our expected harms)
We had occasion to resume our Arms.
A Lion so with self provoking smart,
His rebel tail scourging his Nobler part,
Calls up his courage, then begins to roar,
And charge his foes, who thought him mad before.
For Drinking of Healths.
LEt Bruits and Vegetals, that cannot think,
So far as drought and nature urges, drink:
A more indulgent Mistress guides our sprights,
Reason, that dares beyond our appetites;
She would our Care as well as Thirst redress,
And with Divinity rewards excess:
Deserted Ariadne thus supplied*
Did perjured Theseus cruelty deride;
Bacchus embraced, from her exalted thought
Banished the man, her passion, and his fault.
Bacchus and Phoebus are by Jove allied,
And each by others timely heat supplied:
All that the Grapes owe to his ripening fires,
Is paid in numbers which their jucie inspires.
Wine fills the Veins, and healths are understood,
To give our Friends a Title to our Blood:
Who naming me, does warm his courage so,
Shows for my sake what his bold hand would do.
On my Lady Isabella playing on the Lute.
SUch moving sounds, from such a careless touch
So unconcerned her self, and we so much!
What Art is this, that with so little pains
Transports us thus, and o^r our spirit reigns?
The trembling strings about her fingers crow'd,
And tell their Joy for every kiss aloud*
Small force there needs to make them tremble so,
Touched by that hand who would not tremble too?
Here Loves takes stand, and while she charms the ear,
Empties his quiver on the listening Deer;
Music ^o softens and disarms the mind,
That not an Arrow does resistance find.
Thus the fair Tyrant celebrates the prize,
And acts her self the triumph of her eyes.
So Nero once, with Harp in hand surveyed
His flaming Rome, and as it burnt he played.
To a Lady singing a Song of his Composing.
CHloris your self you so excel
When you vouchsafe to breath my thought,
That like a spirit with this spell
Of my own teaching I am caught.
That Eagles fate, and mine are one,
Which on the shaft that made him die,
Espied a feather of his own
Wherewith he wont to soar so high.
Had Echo with so sweet a grace,
Narcissus's loud complaints returned,
Not for reflection of his face,
But of his voice the Boy had burned.
Of the marriage of the Dwarfs.
DEsign or chance makes other wive,
But Nature did this Match contrive;
Eve might as well have Adam fled,
As she denied her little Bed
To him, for whom Heaven seemed to frame,
And measure out this only Dame.
Thrice happy is that humble pair
Beneath the level of all care;
Over whose heads those Arrows fly
Of sad distrust and Jealousy;
Secured in as high extreme,
As if the world held none but them.
To him the fairest Nymphs do show
Like moving Mountains topt with snow;
And every Man a Polyph^me
Does to his Galatea seem;
None may presume her faith to prove,
He profers Death that profers Love.
Ah ( Chloris) that kind nature thus
From all the world had server'd us,
Creating for our selves us two,
As Love has me for only you.
Loves farewell.
TReading the path to Nobler ends,
A long farewell to Love I gave;
Resolved my Country and my Friends
All that remained of me should have;
And this Resolve no mortal Dame,
None but those eyes could have o'rthrown.
The Nymph, I dare not, need not name,
So high, so like her self alone.
Thus the tall Oak which now aspires
Above the fear of private Fires,
Grown and designed for nobler use,
Not to make warm, but build the hou^e,
Though from our meaner flames secure,
Must that which falls from Heaven endure.
From a Child.
Madam,
AS in some Climes the warmer Sun
Makes it full Summer e're the Spring's begun'
And with ripe fruit the bending boughs can load,
Before our Violets dare look abroad:
So measure not by any common use,
The early Love your brighter eyes produce.
When lately your fair hand in women's weed,
Wrapped my glad head, I wished me so indeed,
That h^sty time might never make me grow
Out of those favors you afford me now;
That I might ever such indulgence sind,
And you not blush, or think your self too kind,
Who now I fear while I these joys express,
Begin to think how you may make them less;
The sound of Love makes your soft heart afraid,
And guard it self, though but a Child invade,
And innocently at your white breast throw
A Dart as white, a Ball of new fallen snow.
On a Girdle.
THat which her ^lender waste confined,
Shall now my joyful Temples bind;
No Monarch but would give his Crown,
His Arms might do what this has done.
It was my Heaven's extremest Sphere,
The Pale which held that lovely Dear;
My Joy, my Grief, my Hope, my Love,
Did all within this Circle move.
A narrow compass, and yet there
Dwelt all that is good, and all that is fair:
Give me but what this Riban bound,
Take all the rest the Sun goes round.
The Apology of Sleep.
For not approaching the Lady, who can do* any thing but sleep when she
pleases,
MY charge it is those breaches to repair
Which nature takes from sorrow, toil and care*
Rest to the Limbs, and quiet I confer
On troubled minds; but naught can add to her,
Whom Heaven and her transcendent thoughts have placed
Above those ills, which wretched Mortals taste.
Bright as the deathless gods, and happy She,
From all that may infringe delight, is free*
Love at her Royal Feet his quiver lays,
And not his Mother with more haste obeys.
Such real pleasures, such true joys suspense,
What Dream can I present to recompense?
Should I with lightning fill her awful hand,
And make the Clouds seem all at her command;
Or place her in Olympus top, a guest
Among the immortals, who with Nectar feast:
That power would seem, that entertainment short
Of the true splendour of her present Court;
Where all the Joys and all the Glories are
Of three great Kingdoms, severed from the care.
I that of ^umes and humid vapors made,
Ascending do the seat of sense invade,
No Cloud in so serene a Mansion find,
To over-cast her ever-shining mind;
Which holds resemblance with those spotless Skies,
Where flowing Nilus want of Rain supplies;
That Crystal Heaven, where Phoebus never shrouds
His golden beams, nor wraps his Face in Clouds.
But what so hard which numbers cannot force*
So stoops the Moon, and Rivers change their course:
The bold Maeonian made me dare to steep
Jove's dreadful Temples in the dew of sleep.
And since the Muses do invoke my power,
I shall no more decline that Sacred Bower,
Where Gloriana their great Mistress lies,
But gently taming those victorious Eyes,
Charm all her senses; till the joyful Sun
Without a Rival half his course has run:
Who, while my hand that fairer light confines,
May boast himself the brightest thing that shines.
At Pens-hurst.
WHile in the Park I sing, the listening Deer
Attend my passion, and forget to fear.
When to the Beeches I report my flame,
They bow their Heads as if they felt the same:
To Gods appealing, when I reach their bowrs
With loud complaints, they answer me in showrs*
To thee a wild and cruel Soul is given,
More deaf than Trees, and prouder than the Heaven.
Loves ^oe professed, why do thou falsely ^eign
Thy self a Sidney* from which Noble strain
He sprung, that could so far exalt the name
Of Love, and warm our Nation with his Flame,
That all we can of Love or high desire,
Seems but the smoke of amorous Sidneys fire.
Nor call her Mother, who so well does prove,
One breast may hold both Chastity and Love.
Never can she, that so exceeds the Spring
In Joy and Bounty, be supposed to bring
One so destructive; to no humane stock
We owe this fierce unkindness, but the Rock,
That cloven Rock produced thee, by whose side
Nature to recompense the fatal pride
Of such stern Beauty, placed those healing springs,
Which not more help, than that destruction brings.
Thy heart no ruder than the rugged stone,
I might ^ike Orpheus with my numerous moan
Melt to compassion; now my trait^^ous song,
With thee conspires to do the Singer wrong*
While (...) I suffer not my self to lose
The memory of what augments my woes*
But with my own breath still foment the Fire,
Which flames as high as fancy can aspire.
This last complaint the indulgent ears did pierce
Of just Apollo, President of Verse:
Highly concerned, that the Muse should bring
Damage to one whom he had taught to sing;
Thus he advised me, on yo^ aged Tree,
Hang up thy Lute, and hye thee to the Sea,
That there with wonders thy diverted mind
Some truce at least may with this passion find.
Ah cruel Nymph! from whom her humble Swai^
Flies for relief unto the raging Main;
And from the Winds and Tempests does expect
A milder fate, than from her cold neglect:
Yet there he will pray that the unkind may prove
Blessed in her choice; and vows this endless Love
Springs from no hope of what she can confer,
But from those gifts which Heaven has heaped on her.
Another.
HAd Sacharissa lived when Mortals m^de
Choice of their Deities, this Sacred shade
Had held an Altar to her power, that gave
The Peace and Glory which these allays have:
Embroidred so with Flowers where she stood,
That it became a Garden of a Wood:
Her presence has such more than humane Grace,
That it can civilize the rudest place;
And beauty too, and order can impart,
Where Nature never intended it, nor Art.
The Plants acknowledge this, and her admire
No less than those of old, did Orpheus's Lire:
If she sit down, with tops all toward her bowed,
They round about her into Arbors crowd;
Or if she walk, in even ranks they stand,
Like some well-Marshall'd and obsequious band.
Amphion so made stones and timber leap
Into fair Figures from a confused heap:
And in the symmetry of her parts is found
A power, like that of harmony in sound.
Ye lofty Beeches, tell this matchless Dame,
That if together ye fed all one Flame,
It could not equalize the hundredth part
Of what her Eyes have kindled in ^y heart.
Go Boy, and carve this passion on the Bark
Of yonder Tree, which stands the sacred mark
Of Noble Sidneys birth; when such benign,
Such more than-mortal making stars did shine;
That there they cannot but for ever prove
The monument and pledge of humble Love:
His humble Love, whose hope shall never rise higher
Than for a pardon that he dares admire.
To my Lord of Leicester.
NOt that thy Trees at Pens-hurst groan
Oppressed with their timely load,
And seem to make their silent moan,
That their great Lord is now abroad:
They to delight his taste or eye,
Would spend themselves in fruit, and dye.
Not that thy harmless Deer repine,
And think themselves unjustly slain
By any other hand than thine,
Whose Arrows they would gladly stain:
No, nor thy friends which hold too dear
That peace with France, which keeps thee there.
All these are less than that great cause,
Which now exacts your presence here,
Wherein there meet the diverse Laws
Of public and domestic care.
For one bright Nymph our youth contends*
And on your prudent choice depends.
Not the bright shield of Thetis's Son,
For which such stern debate did rise,
That the Great Ajax Telamon
Refused to live without the Prize,
Those Achive Peers did more engage,
Than she the gallants of our age.
That beam of Beauty which begun
To warm us so when thou were here,
Now scorches like the raging Sun
When Syrius does first appear.
O fix this Flame, and let despair
Redeem the rest from endless care!
To a very young Lady.
WHy came I so untimely forth
Into a world, which wanting thee
Could entertain us with no worth
Or shadow of felicity?
That time should me so far remove
From that which I was born to love.
Yet fairest blossom do not slight
That age which you may know so soon;
The Rosy Morn resigns her light,
And milder Glory to the Noon:
And then what wonders shall you do,
Whose dawning Beauty warms us so?
Hope waits upon the flowery prime,
And Summer though it be less gay,
Yet is not looked on as a time
Of declination or decay.
For with a full hand That does bring
All that was promised by the Spring*
SONG.
SAy lovely dream, where could thou find
Shadows to counterseit that face?
Colors of this ^lorious kind,
Come not from any mortal place.
(...) Heaven it self thou sure were dressed
With that Angel-like disguise;
Thus deluded am I blessed,
And see my joy with closed Eyes.
But ah this Image is too kind
To be other than a dream!
Cruel Sacharissa's Mind
Never put on that sweet extreme.
Fair dream, if thou intend'st me grace,
Change that Heavenly face of thine;
Paint despised Love in thy face,
And make it to appear like mine.
Pale, Wan, and Meager let it look,
With a pity-moving shape,
Such as wander by the Brook
Of Lethe, or from graves escape.
Then to that matchless Nymph appear,
In whose shape thou shinest so,
Softly in her sleeping ear,
With humble words express my woe.
Perhaps from Greatness, State, and Pride,
Thus surprised she may fall:
Sleep does disproportion hide,
And death resembling equals all.
SONG.
BEhold the brand of Beauty tossed;
See how the motion does dilate the Flame:
Delighted Love his spoils does boast,
And triumph in this game.
Fire to no place confined,
Is both our wonder and our fear,
Moving the mind,
As Lightning hurled through the Air.
High Heaven the Glory does increase
Of all her shining lamps this artful way;
The Sun in Figures such as these
Joys with the Moon to play.
To the sweet strains they advance,
Which do result from their own spheres;
As this Nymphs dance,
Moves with the numbers which she hears.
On the discovery of a Ladies Painting.
PIgmaleons fate reverst is mine.
His marble Love took flesh and Blood;
All that I worshipped as Divine,
That Beauty now it is understood,
Appears to have no more of life
Than that whereof he framed his Wife.
As Women yet who apprehend
Some sudden cause of causeless fear,
Although that seeming cause take end,
And they behold no danger near,
A shaking through their Limbs they find,
Like leaves saluted by the wind:
So though the Beauty do appear
No Beauty, which amazed me so;
Yet from my breast I cannot tear
The passion which from thence did grow,
Nor yet out of my fancy raze
The print of that supposed face.
A real Beauty, though too near,
The fond Narcissus did admire;
I dote on that which is no where,
The sign of Beauty feeds my fire:
No mortal Flame was e're so cruel
As this, which thus survives the fuel.
To a Lady from whom he received a Silver Pen.
Madam,
INtending to have tried
The silver Favor which you gave,
In Ink the shining point I died,
And drenched it in the sable wave:
When grieved to be so foully stained.
On you it thus to me complained.
Suppose you had deserved to take
From her fair hand so fair a boon;
Yet how deserved I to make
So ill a change, who ever won
Immortal praise for what I wrought,
Instructed by her Noble thought?
I that expressed her commands
To mighty Lords and Princely Dames,
Always most welcome to their hands,
Proud that I would record their names,
Must now be taught an humble style
Some meaner Beauty to beguile.
So I, the wronged Pen to please,
Make it my humble thanks express
Unto your Ladyship in these:
And now it is forced to confess,
That your great self did nere indite,
Nor that to one more Noble write.
On a Bread of diverse Colors, woven by four Ladies.
TWice Twenty slender Virgin fingers twine
This curious Web, where all their fancies shine;
As Nature Them, so They this shade have wrought
Soft as their hands, and various as their thought.
Not Juno's Bird, when his fair train dispread,
He wooes the Female to his painted bed;
No not the bow which so adorns the Skies,
So Glorious is, or boasts so many dies.
To my Lord of Northumberland upon the death of his Lady.
TO this great loss a Sea of Tears is due;
But the whole debt not to be paid by you:
Charge not your self with all, nor render vain
Those showers the eyes of us your servants rain.
Shall grief contract the largeness of that heart,
In which nor fear nor anger has a part?
Virtue would blush, if time should boast (which dries
Her sole child dead, the tender Mothers eyes)
Your minds relief, where reason triumphs so
Over all passions, that they never could grow
Beyond their limits in your Noble breast,
To harm another, or impeach your rest.
This we observed, delighting to obey
One who did never from his great self stray:
Whose mild example seemed to engage
Th'obsequious Seas, and teach them not to rage.
The brave Emilius, his great charge laid down,
(The force of Rome, and fate of Macedon)
In his lost sons did feel the cruel stroke
Of changing fortune, and thus highly spoke
Before Romes people: we did often implore
That if the Heavens had any bad in store
For your Emilius, they would pour that ill
On his own house, and let you flourish ^till.
You on the barren Seas (my Lord) have spent,
Whole Springs and Summers, to the public lent:
Suspended all the pleasures of your life,
And shortened the short joy of such a wife:
For which your Countrey's more obliged, then
For many lives of old, less-happy men.
You that have sacrificed so great a part
Of Youth and private bliss, ought to impart
Your sorrow too, and give your friends a right
As well in your Affliction, as Delight:
Then with Emilian courage bear this cross,
Since public persons only public loss
Ought to affect: and though her form and youth,
Her application to your Will and Truth,
That Noble Sweetness, and that humble State
All snatched away by such a hasty fate,
Might give excuse to any common Breast,
With the huge weight of so just grief oppressed;
Yet let no portion of your life be stained
With passion, but your character maintained
To the last Act; it is enough her Stone
May honored be with Superscription
Of the sole Lady, who had power to move
The Great Northumberland to grieve and love.
To my Lord Admiral of his late Sickness and Recovery,
WIth joy like ours, the Thracian youth invades
Orpheus returning from the Elizian shades,
Embrace the Hero, and his stay emplore,
Make it their public suit, he would no more
Desert them so, and for his Spouses sake,
His vanished Love, tempt the Lethean Lake:
The Ladies too, the brightest of that time,
Ambitious all his lofty bed to clime,
Their doubtful hopes with expectation feed,
Who shall the fair Euridice succeed*
Euridice, for whom his numerous moan
Makes listening Trees, and salvage Mountains groan:
Through all the Air his sounding strings dilate
Sorrow, like that which touched our hearts of late^
Your piing sickness, and your restless pain,
At once the Land affecting, and the Main:
When the glad news that you were Admiral,
Scarce through the Nation, spread,'it was feared by all,
That our Great Charles, whose wisdom shines in you,
Would be perplexed how to choose a new.
So more than private was the joy and grief,
That at the worst, it gave our souls relief:
That in our age such sense of virtue lived,
They joy'd so justly, and so justly grieved.
Nature, (her fairest lights eclipsed,) seems
Her self to suffer in those sharp extremes:
While not from thine alone thy blood retires,
But from those cheeks which all the world admires*
The stemm thus threatened, and the sap in thee,
Droop all the branches of that noble Tree:
Their Beauty they, and we our Loves suspend,
Naught can our wishes, save thy health intend*
As Lillies overcharged with Rain they bend
Their beauteous heads, and with high Heaven contend;
Fold thee within their snowy Army, and cry
He is too faultless and too young to die:
So like immortals round about thee they
Si^, that they fright approaching death away:
Who would not languish by so fair a train,
To be lamented and restored again?
Or thus withheld, what hasty soul would go,
Though to be blessed? over her Adonis so
Fair Venus mourned, and with the precious shower
Of her warm tears cherisht the springing Flower.
The next support fair hope of your great name,
And second pillar of that Noble frame,
By loss of thee would no advantage have,
But step by step pursues thee to the grave.
And now relentless fate, about to end
The line which back ward does so far extend,
That antic stock which still the world supplies
With bravest Spirits, and with brightest Eyes,
Kind Phoebus interposing, bid me say
Such storms no more shall shake that house, but they
Like Neptune, and his Sea-born Niece, shall be
The shining Glories of the Land and Sea:
With Courage guard, and Beauty warm our age,
And Lovers fill, with like Poetic rage.
Ala Malade.
AH lovely Amoret, the care
Of all that know what is good or fair,
Is Heaven become our Rival too?
Had the rich gifts conferred on you,
So ample thence the common end
Of giving Lovers, to pretend.
Hence to this pining sickness (meant
To weary thee to a consent
Of leaving us) no power is given,
Thy Beauties to impair; for Heaven
Sollicites thee with such a care,
As Roses from their stalks we tear,
When we would still preserve them new,
And fresh as on the bush they grew.
With such a Grace you entertain,
And look with such contempt on pain,
That languishing you conquer more,
And wound us deeper than before.
So lightnings which in storms appear*
Scorch more than when the Skies are clear.
And as pale sickness does invade
Your frailer part, the breaches made
In that fair Lodging, still more clear
Make the bright guest your soul, appear.
So Nymphs over pathless Mountains born,
Their light Robes by the Brambles torn
From their fair Limbs, exposing new
And unknown Beauties to the view
Of following gods, increase their flame,
And haste to catch the flying Game.
Of the Queen.
THe Lark that shuns on losty boughs to build;
Her humble Nest, lies silent in the Field;
But if the promise of a cloudless day,
Aurora smiling, bids her rise and play,
Then straight she shows, 't was not for want of voic^
Or power to climb, she made so low a choice:
Singing she mounts, her airy wings are stretched
Toward Heaven, as if from Heaven her note she fetch
So we retiring from the busy throng,
Use to restrain the ambition of, our Song;
But since the light which now informs our age
Breaks from the Court indulgent to her r^ge,
Thither my Muse, like bold Promethe^s, flies^
To light her Torch at Gloriana's eyes.
Those Sovereign beams, which heal the wounded soul
And all our cares but once beheld control;
There the poor Lover that has long, endured
Some proud Nymphs scorn, of his fond passion cured
Fares like the man who first upon the ground
A glow worm spied supposing he had found
A moving Diamond, a breathing Stone
(For life it had, and like those Jewels shone:)
He held it dear, till by the springing day.
^nform'd, he threw the worthless worm away.
She saves the Lover as we Gangreens stay,
By cutting hope, like a Iopt Limb, away:
This makes her bleeding patients to accuse
High Heaven, and these expostulations use:
Could Nature then no private Woman grace
(Whom we might dare to love) with such a face,
Such a complexion, and so radiant eyes,
Such lovely motion, and such sharp replies?
Beyond our reach, and yet within our sight,
What envious power has placed this glorious light?
Thus in a Starry night fond Children cry
For the rich spangles that adorn the Sky;
Which though they shine for ever fixed there,
With light and influence relieve us here.
All her affections are to one inclined,
Her bounty and compassion to Mankind:
To whom while she so far extends her grace,
She makes but good the promise of her face:
For Mercy has (could Mercies self be seen)
No sweeter look than this propitious Queen;
Such guard and comfort the distressed find
From her large power, and from her larger mind,
That whom ill fate would ruin, it prefers,
For all the Miserable are made hers.
So the fair Tree whereon the Eagle builds,
Poor Sheep from tempests, and their Shepherds shields:
The Royal Bird possesses all the bows,
But shade and shelter to the Flock allows.
Joy of our age, and safety of the next,
For which so often thy ^ertile Womb is vexed:
Nobly contented, for the public good
To waste thy spirits and diffuse thy blood:
What vast hopes may these Islands entertain,
Where Monarchs thus descended are to reign?
Led by Commanders of so fair a Line,
Our Seas no longer shall our power confine.
A brave Romance who would exactly frame,
First brings his Knight from some immortal Dame*
And then a weapon, and a flaming shield,
Bright as his mothers eyes, he makes him wield.
None might the mother of Achilles be,
But the fair Pearl, and glory of the Sea;
The man to whom great Maro gives such fame
From the high bed of heavenly Venus came;
And our next Charles, (whom all the stars design
Like wonders to accomplish) springs from thine.
Upon the Death of my Lady Rich.
MAY those already cursed ^ssexian plains,
Where hasty death and pining sickness reign^
Prove all a Desert, and none there make stay,
But ^^v^ge Beast, or men as wild as they.
There the fair light which all our Island graced,
Like Hero's Taper in the window placed,
Such fate from the malignant air did find,
As that exposed to the boisterous wind.
Ah cruel Heaven ^ to snatch so soon away
Her, for whose life had we had time to pray,
With thousand vows and tears we should have sought
That sad decrees suspension to have wrought.
But we (alas) no whisper of her pain
Heard, till 't was sin to wish her here again.
That horrid word at once like Lightning spread,
Struck all our ears, The Lady Rich is dead.
Heart rending news, and dreadful to those few
Who her resemble, and her steps pursue.
That death should license have to rage among
The fair, the wife, the virtuous, and the young!
The Paphiam Queen from that sierce battle born,
With goared hand and veil so rudely torn,
Like terror did among the immortals breed,
Taught by her wound that Goddesses may bleed.
All stand amazed, but beyond the rest
Th'heroique Dame whose happy womb she blessed,
Moved with just grief expostulates with Heaven,
Urging the promise to the obsequious given,
Of longer life; for never was pious Soul
More apt to obey, more worthy to control.
A skilful Eye at once might read the Race
Of Caledonian Monarchs in her Face,
And sweet Humility; her look and mind,
At once were losty, and at once were kind.
There dwelt the sorn of Vice, and pity too,
For those that did what she disdained to do:
So gentle and severe, that what was bad
At once her hatred and her pardon had.
Gracious to all, but where her Love was due,
So fast, so Faithful, Loyal, and so True,
That a bold hand as soon might hope to force.
The rouling lights of Heaven, as change her course.
Some happy Angel, that beholds her there,
Instruct us to record what she was here:
And when this cloud of sorrow's over-blown,
Through the wide world we will make her graces known.
So fresh the wound is, and the grief so vast,
That all our Art and Power of speech is waste:
Here passion sways; but there the Muse shall raise
Eternal monuments of louder praise.
There our delight complying with her fame,
Shall have occasion to recite thy name,
Fair Sacharissa, and now only fair:
To sacred friendship we will an Altar rear,
Such as the Romans did erect of old,
Where on a marble Pillar shall be told
The lovely passion each to other bare,
With the resemblance of that matchless pair,
Narcissus to the thing for which he pined,
Was not more like, than yours to her fair mind:
Save that you graced the several parts of life,
A spotless Virgin, and a faultless Wife:
Such was the sweet converse 'twixt her and you,
As that she holds with her associates now.
How false is hope, and how regardless fate,
That such a love should have so short a date!
Lately I saw her sighing, part from thee
(Alas that such the last farewell should be!)
So look 't Astraea, her remove designed:
On those distressed friends she left behind:
Consent in Virtue knit your hearts so fast,
That still the knot, in spite of death does last:
For as your tears and sorrow-wounded soul
Prove well that on your part this bond is whole:
So all we know of what they do above,
Is, that they happy are, and that they love.
Let dark oblivion and the hollow grave
Content themselves our frailer thoughts to have:
Well chosen Love is never taught to die,
But with our nobler part invades the Sky:
Then grieve no more, that one so Heavenly shaped
The crooked hand of trembling age escaped;
Rather since we beheld her not decay,
But that she vanished so entire away:
Her wondrous beauty and her goodness merit,
We should suppose that some propitious spirit,
In that celestial form frequented here,
And is not dead, but ceases to appear.
To the Queen Mother of France upon her Landing.
GReat Queen of Europe, where thy offspring wears
All the chief Crowns, where Princes are thy heirs.
As welcome thou to Sea-girt Britains shore,
As erst Latona (who fair Cinthia bore)
To Delos was. Here shines a Nymph as bright,
By thee disclosed, with like increase of light.
Why was her joy in Belgia confined?
Or why did you so much regard the wind?
Scarce could the Ocean (though enraged) have tossed
Thy Sovereign Bark, but where the obsequious coast
Pays tribute to thy Bed: Romes conquering hand
More vanquished Nations under her command
Never reduced; glad Berecinthia, so
Among her deathless Progeny did go;
A wreath of Flowers adorned her reverent Head,
Mother of all that on Ambrosia fed:
Thy godlike race must sway the age to come,
As she Olympus, peopled with her womb.
Would those Commanders of Mankind obey
Their honored Parent, all pretenses lay
Down at your Royal Feet, compose their Jarrs,
And on the growing Turk discharge these Wars:
The Christian Knights that sacred Tomb should wrest
From Pagan hands, and Triumph o'r the East;
Our Englands Prince and Gallia's Dolphin might
Like young Rinaldo, and Tancredo fight
In single combat; by their sword again
The proud Argantes and fierce Sultan slain;
Again, might we their valiant deeds recite,
And with your Thuscan Muse exalt the fight.
To the mutable Fair.
HEre Caelia for thy sake I part
With all that grew so near my heart;
The passion that I had for thee,
The Faith, the Love, the Constancy,
And that I may successful prove
Transform my self to what you love.
Fool that I was so much to prize
Those simple virtues you despise,
Fool that with such dull Arrows strove,
Or hoped to reach a flying Dove;
For you that are in motion still
Decline our force, and mock our skill.
Who like Don Quixot do advance
Against a Windmill our vain Lance.
Now will I wander through the Air,
Mount, make a stoop at every fair,
And with a Fancy unconfined
(As lawless as the Sea or Wind)
Pursue you wheresoe'r you fly,
And with your various thoughts comply.
The formal Stars do travel so,
As we their names and courses know,
And he that on their changes looks,
Would think them governed by our Books.
But never were the clouds reduced
To any Art the motion used
By those free vapors are so light,
So frequent, that the conquered sight
Despairs to sind the rules that guide
Those gilded shadows as they slide.
And therefore of the Spacious Air
Jove's royal consort had the care:
And by that power did once escape,
Declining bold Ixions rape;
She with her own resemblance graced
A s^ining cloud which he embraced.
Such was that Image, so it smiled
With seeming kindness which beguiled
Your Thirsis lately when he thought
He had his fleeting Caelia caught.
T was shaped like her, but for the fair
He filled his Arms with yielding Air:
A fate for which he grieves the less,
Because the gods had like success.
For in their story one (we see)
Pursues a Nymph, and takes a Tree:
A second with a Lovers haste
Soon overtakes whom he had chased;
But she that did a Virgin seem,
Possessed appears a wandering stream:
For his supposed love a third
Lays greedy hold upon a bird;
And stands amazed to find his dear,
A wild Inhabitant of the air.
To these old tales such Nymphs as you
Give credit, and still make them new,
The Amorous now like wonders find
In the swift changes of your mind.
But Caelia if you apprehend
The Muse of your incensed friend;
Nor would that he record your blame,
And make it live, repeat the same,
Again deceive him, and again,
And then be swears he will not complain.
For still to be deluded so,
Is all the pleasure Lovers Know,
Who, (like good Faulkners) take delight,
Not in the quarrey, but the flight.
Of Salley.
OF Jason, Theseus, and such worthies old,
Light seem the tales Antiquity has told.
Such beasts and monsters as their force oppressed
Some places only, and some times infest;
Salley that scorned all power and laws of Men,
Goods with their owners hurrying to their den,
And future ages threatening with a rude
And savage race successively renewed,
Their King despising with rebellious pride,
And foes professed to all the World beside,
This pest of Mankind gives our Hero fame,
And through th'obliged world dilates his name.
The Prophet once to cruel Agag said,
As thy fierce sword has mothers childless made,
So shall the sword make thine; and with that word
He hewed the man in pieces with his sword:
Just Charles like measure has returned to these,
Whose Pagan hands had stained the troubled Seas;
With Ships they made the spoiled Merchant mourn,
With ships their City and themselves are torn.
One squadron of our winged Castles sent
O'r-threw their Fort, and all their Navy rent:
For not content the dangers to increase,
And act the part of tempests in the Seas,
Like hungry Woolves these Pirates from our shore,
Whole flocks of sheep, and ravished Cattle bore;
Safely they might on other Nations prey,
Fools to provoke the Sovereign of the Sea:
Mad Cacus so whom like ill fate persuades
The herd of fair Alcmena's seed invades;
Who for revenge, and mortals glad relief,
Sacked the dark cave, and crushed that horrid Thief.
Moroccos Monarch wondering at this fact,
Save that his presence his affairs exact,
Had come in person to have seen and known
The injured worlds revenger, and his own.
Hither he sends the chief among his Peers,
Who in his Bark proportioned Presents bears
To the renowned for piety and force,
Poor captives manumiz'd and matchless horse.
Puerperium.
YOu Gods that have the power,
To trouble, and compose
All that is beneath your bower,
Calm silence on the Seas, on Earth impose.
Fair Venus in thy soft arms,
The God of rage confine,
For thy whispers are the charms
Which only can divert his fierce design.
What though he frown, and to tumult do incline,
Thou the flame,
Kindled in his breast can tame,
With that snow which unmelted lies on thine?
Great Goddess give this thy sacred Island rest,
Make Heaven smile,
That no storm disturb us, while
Thy chief care our Halcyon builds her nest.
Great Gloriana, fair Gloriana,
Bright as high Heaven is, and fertile as Earth,
Whose beauty relieves us,
Whose Royal bed gives us
Both glory and peace.
Our present joy, and all our hopes increase.
Of a Lady who writ in praise of Mira.
WHile she pretends to make the Graces known
Of matchless Mira, she reveals her own,
And when she would another praise indite,
Is by her Glass instructed how to write.
To one married to an old Man.
SInce thou would needs, bewitched with some ill charms,
Be buried in those monumental arms:
All we can wish, is, may that earth lie light
Upon thy tender limbs, and so good night.
To Flavia Song.
It Is not your beauty can engage
My wary heart:
The Sun in all his pride and rage,
Has not that Art;
And yet he shines as bright as you,
If brightness could our souls subdue.
It Is not the pretty things you say,
Nor those you write,
Which can make Thirsis heart your prey:
For that delight,
The graces of a well-taught mind,
In some of our own sex we find.
No Flavia, it is your love I fear,
Loves surest darts,
Those which so seldom fail him are
Headed with hearts;
Their very shadows makes us yield,
Dissemble well, and win the field.
The Fall.
SEe how the willing earth gave way
To take the impression where she lay.
See how the mould as loath to leave
So sweet a burden, still does cleave
Close to the Nymphs stained garment; here
The coming Spring would first appear,
And all this place with Roses strew,
If busy feet would let them grow;
Here Venus Smiled to see blind Chance
It self, before her son advance,
And a fair image to present
Of what the Boy so long had meant:
'T was such a chance as this made all
The World into this order fall:
Thus the first love^s, on the clay
Of which they were composed lay;
So in their prime with equal grace
Met the first patterns of our race:
Then blush not (fai^) or on him frown,
Or wonder how you both came down;
But touch him, and he will tremble strait,
How could he then support your weight?
How could the Youth alas, but bend
When his whole Heaven upon him leaned?
If ought by him amiss were done,
'T was that he let you rise so soon.
Of Silvia.
OUr sighs are heard, just Heaven declares
The sense it has of lovers cares:
She that so far the rest out-shin'd,
Silvia the fair whiles she was kind;
As if her frowns impaired her brow,
Seems only not unhandsome now:
So when the sky makes us endure
A storm, it self becomes obscure.
Hence it is that I conceal my flame,
Hiding from Flavia's self her name:
Lest she provoking Heaven should prove
How it rewards neglected love.
Better a thousand such as I
Their grief untold should pine and die;
Then her bright morning over-cast
With sullen clouds should be de^ac't.
The Budd.
LAtely on yonder swelling bush,
Big with many a coming Rose,
This early Bud began to blush,
And did but half it self disclose;
I plucked it, though no better grown,
And now you see how full it is blown.
Still as I did the leaves inspire,
With such a purple light they shone
As if they had been made of fire,
And spreading so, would flame anon:
All that was meant, by Air or Sun
To the young flower, my breath has done.
If our loose breath so much can do,
What may the same inform's of love,
Of purest love and music too
When Flavia it aspires to move:
When that, which life-less buds persuades
To wax more soft, her youth invades.
Upon Ben. Johnson.
MIrror of Poets, mirror of our age!
Which her whole face beholding on thy stage,
Pleased and displeased with her own faults, indures
A remedy like those whom music cures:
Thou have alone those various inclinations
Which Nature gives to Ages, Sexes, Nations:
So traced with thy All-resembling Pen
That what ere custom has imposed on men;
Or ill got habit, which deforms them so,
That scarce a Brother can his Brother know,
Is represented to the wondering eyes
Of all that see or read thy Comedies:
Who ever in those Glasses looks, may find
The spots returned, or graces of his mind:
And by the help of so divine an Art
At leisure view and dress his Nobler part.
Nar^iss^s couzened by that flattering Well,
Which nothing could but of his beauty tell,
Had here discovering the deformed estate
Of his fond mind, preserved him self with hate;
But Virtue too, as well as Vice, is clad
In Flesh and Blood so well, that Plato had
Beheld what his high fancy once embraced
Virtue with colors, speech, and motion graced:
The sundry postures of thy copious Muse
Who would express, a thousand Tongues must use;
Whose fate's no less peeuliar than thy Art,
For as thou could all characters impart:
So none could render thine, who still escapes
Like Proteus in variety of shapes:
Who was, nor this, nor that, but all we find,
And all we can imagine in mankind.
To Mr. George Sands, on his translation of some parts of the Bible.
HOw bold a work attempts that Pen,
Which would enrich our vulgar tongue
With the high raptures of those men,
Who here with the same spirit sung,
Wherewith they now assist the Quire
Of Angels, who their Songs admire?
Whatever these inspired Souls
Were urged to express did shake,
The aged deep, and both the Poles;
Their numerous Thunder could awake
Dull Earth, which does with Heaven consent
To all they wrote, and all they meant.
Say (Sacred Bard) what could bestow
Courage on thee, to soar so high?
Tell me (brave Friend) what helped thee so
To shake of all mortality?
To light this Torch, thou have climbed higher,
Than he who stole Celestial fire.
Chlorus and Hilas. Made to a Sarabran.
C^l. HIlas, o Hilas, why sit we mute,
Now that each Bird saluteth the Spring*
Wind up the slackned strings of thy Lute,
Never can thou want matter to sing:
For love thy Breast does fill with such a fire,
That whatso'er is fair, moves thy desire.

Hill. Sweetest you know, the sweetest of things,
Of various flowers the Bees do compose,
Yet no particular taste it brings
Of Violet, Woodbind, Pink or Rose:
So love the result is of all the graces
Which flow from a thousand several faces.

Chl. Hilas, the Birds which chant in this Grove,
Could we but know the Language they use,
They would instruct us better in Love,
and reprehend thy inconstant Muse:
For Love their Breasts does fill with such a fire,
That what they once do choose, bounds their desire.

Hill. Chloris, this change the Birds do approve,
Which the warm Season hither does bring;
Time from your self does further remove
^ou, than the Winter from the gay Spring:
She that like lightning shined while her face lasted,
The Oak now resembles which lightning has blasted.

Under a Ladies Picture.
SUch Hellen was, and who can blame the Boy
That in so bright a Flame consumed his Troy?
But had like Virtue shined in that fair Greek,
The amorous Shepherd had not dared to seek,
Or hope for Pity, but with silent moan,
And better Fate had perished alone.
In Answer Of Sir John Suckling's Verses.
Pro. STay here, fond Youth, and ask no more, be wi^e*
Knowing too much, long since lost Paradise.

Con. And by your knowledge we should be bereft
Of all that Paradise which yet is left.

Pro. The virtuous joys thou have, thou would, should still
Last in their pride, and would not take it ill
If rudely from sweet dreams, and for a toy
Thou awak't, he wakes himself that does enjoy.

Con. How can the joy or hope which you allow
Be styled virtuous, and the end not so*
Talk in your sleep, and shadows still admire^
It Is true, He wakes that feels this real fire,
But to sleep better; for who e're drinks deep
Of this Nepenthe, rocks himself asleep.

Pro. Fruition adds no new wealth, but destroys,
And while it pleases much, yet still it cloys:
Who thinks he should be happier made for that
(...) reasonably might hope he might grow fat
By eating to a Surfeit, this once past,
What relishes? even kisses lose their taste.

Con. ^^essings may be repeated, while they cloy,
But shall we starve, cause Surfeitings destroy?
And if fruition did the tas^e impair
Of Kisses, why should yonder happy pair,
Whose joys, just Himen warrants all the night,
^onsume the day too in this less delight?

^ro. Urge not it is necessary; alas! we know
The homeliest thing that Mankind does, is so.
The world is of a large extent we see,
And must be peopled, Children there must be,
So must Bread too; but since there are enough
Born to that drudgery. what need we plough?

Con. I need not plough, since what the stooping Hind
Gets of my pregnant Land, must all be mine:
But in this nobler Tillage it is not so;
For when Anchises did fair Venus know,
What interest had poor Vulcan in the Boy,
Famous Aeneas, or the present joy?

Pr^. Women enjoyed, what e'retofore they have been,
Are like Romances read, or Scenes once seen:
Fruition dulls, or spoils the Play much more
Than if one read, or knew the Plot before.

Con. Plays and Romances read, and seen, do fall
In our opinions, yet not seen at all
Whom would they please? to an Heroic tale,
Would you not ^^sten, lest it should grow stale?

Pro. It Is expectation makes a blessing dear,
^^aven were not Heaven, it we knew what it were.

Con. If 'twere not Heaven, if we knew what it were,
^ would not be Heaven to those that now are there.

Pro. As in Prospects we are there pleased most,
Where something keeps the eye from being lost,
And leaves us room to guess; so here restraint,
^^lds up delight, that with excess would faint.

Con. (...) preserves the pleasure we have got* (...)
(...)
In goodly prospects who contracts the space,
Or takes not all the bounty of the place?
We wish removed what stands in our light
And nature blame for limiting our sight,
Where you stand wisely winking that the view
Of the fair prospect may be always new.

(...). They who know all the wealth they have are po^^
He Is only rich that cannot tell his store.

Con. Not he that knows the wealth he has, is poor,
But he that dares not touch, nor use his store.

To a Friend of the different success of their Loves.
THrice happy pair of whom we cannot kno^
Which first began to love, or loves most now
Fair course of passion where two Lovers (...),
And run together, (...)
Successful Youth, whom Love has taught the way
To be victorious in the first Essay.
Sure Love's an Art best practiced at first,
And where th'experienc'd still prosper worst;
I with a different Fate pursued in vain
The haughty Calia, till my just disdain
Of her neglect, above that passion born,
Did pride to pride oppose, and scorn to scorn,
Now she relents, but all too late to move
A heart directed to a Nobler love;
The scales are turned, her kindness weighs no more,
Now, than my vows and service did before:
So in some well wrought hangings you may see
How Hector leads, and how the Grecians flee;
^ere the fierce Mars his courage so inspires*
that with bold hands the Argive Fleet he fires;
(...) there from Heaven the blew eyed Virgin falls
and frighted Tro^ retires within her Walls.
They that are foremost in that bloody Race
Turn head anon, and give the Conqu'rors chase*
So like the chances are of Love and War,
That they alone in this distinguished are:
In love the victors from the vanquished fly,
They fly that wound, and they pursue that die.
An Apology for having loved before,
THey that never had the use
Of the Grapes surpri^ing juyc^;
To the first delicious cup,
All their Reason render up:
Neither do not care to know,
Whether it be best or no.
So they that are to love inclined;
Swayed by Chance, not Choice or Art,
To the first that is fair or kind,
Make a present of their heart*
It Is not she that first we love,
But whom dying we approve.
To Man that was in the ^evening made,
Stars gave the first delight;
Admiring in the gloomy shade,
Those little drops of light.
Then at Aurora, whose fair hand
Removed them from the Skies,
He gazing toward the (...) did stan^*
She entertained his Eyes,
But when the bright Sun did appear,
All those he can despise,
His wonder was determin^d there,
And could no higher rise;
He neither might, nor wished to know
A more refulgent light*
For that (as mine your beauties now)
Employed his utmost sight.
To Zelinda.
FAirest piece of well formed Earth,
Urge not thus your haughty birth:
The power which you have over us lies
Not in your Race, but in your Eyes:
None but a Prince^ alas that voice
Confines you to a narr^^ choice!
Should you no Honey vow to taste,
But what the Master-Bees have placed
In compass of their Cells, how small
A portion to your share would fall?
Nor all appear among those few,
Worthy the stock from whence they grew?
The sap which at the Root is bred
In Trees, through all the Boughs is spread;
But Virtues which in Parents shine,
Make not like progress through the Line*
It Is not from whom, but (...) we live;
The place does often those graces give
Great Iuli^s on the Mountains bred,
A Flock perhaps, or Herd, had led,
He that the world subdued* had been
But the best wrestler on the Green:
It Is Art and Knowledge which draw forth
The hidden Seeds of Native worth;
They blow those sp^rks* and make them rise
Into such flames as touch the Skies
To the old Heroes hence was given
A Pedigree which reached to Heaven*
Of mortal Seed they were not held.
Which other mortals so excelled*
And Beauty too in such excess
As yours, Zeli^da claims no less.
Smile but on me; and you shall scorn
Henceforth to be of Princes born.
I can describe the shady Grove
Where your loved Mother slept with Jove,
And yet excuse the faultless Dame,
Caught with her Spouses shape and name;
Thy matchless form will credit bring
To all the wonders I shall sing.
On Mr. John Fletcher's Plays.
FLetcher, to thee we do not only owe
All our good Plays, but all those other too,
Thy Wit repeated, does support the Stage,
Credits the last, and entertains this Age,
No Worthies form 'd by any Muse but thine
Could purchase Robes, to make themselves so fine.
What brave Commander is not proud to see
Thy brave Mela^ti^s in his Gallantry.
Our greatest Ladies love to see their scorn
Outdone by thine, in what themselves have worn;
The impatient Widow e're the year be done,
Sees thy Aspasia weeping in her Gown.
I never yet the Tragic strain assayed,
Deterred by that inimitable Maid.
And when I venture at the Comic style,
Thy scornful Lady seems to mock my toil.
Thus has thy Muse at once improved and marred
Our sport in Plays by rendering it too hard;
So when a sort of lusty Shepherds throw,
The Bar by turns, and none the rest out-go
So far, but that the best are measuring casts,
Their emulation, and their pastime lasts;
But if some brawny Yeoman of the Guard
Step in and toss the Axle-tree a yard
Or more beyond the furthest mark, the rest,
Despai^^ing stand, their sport is at the best.
To Chloris.
CHloris since first our calm of peace
Was frighted hence, this good we find,
Your favors with your fears increase,
And growing mischie^s make you kind:
So the fair Tree which still preserves
Her Fruit and State, whilst no wind blows,
In storms from that uprightness swerves,
And the glad earth about her strows
With Treasure from her yielding boughs.
On St. James's Park, as lately improved by His Majesty.
Of the first Paradise there is nothing found,
Plants set by Heaven are vanished, and the ground*
Yet the description lasts; who knows the ^ate
Of lines that shall this P^radice relate?
Instead of Rivers rolling by the side
Of Eden's Garden, here flows in the Tide;
The Sea which always served his Empire, now
Pays Tribute to our Prince's pleasure too:
Of famous Cities we the Founders know;
But Rivers old, as Seas, to which they go,
Are Nature's bounty; it is of more Renown
To make a River than to build a Town.
For future shade young Trees upon the banks
Of the new stream appear in even ranks:
The voice of Orpheus or Amphion's hand
In better order could not make them stand;
May they increase as fast, and spread their boughs,
As the high Fame of their great Owner grows!
May he live long enough to see them all
Dark shadows cast, and as his Place tall.
Methinks I see the love that shall be made,
The Lovers walking in that amorous shade,
The Gallants dancing by the Rivers side,
They bathe in Summer, and in Winter slide.
Methinks I hear the Music in the Boats,
And the loud Echo which returns the Notes,
Whilst over head a flock of new sprung Fowl
Hangs in the Air, and does the Sun control:
Darkning the Sky they hover over, and shroud
The wanton Sailors with a feathered cloud:
Beneath a shole of silver Fishes glides,
And plays about the gilded Barges sides;
The Ladies angling in the Crystal Lake,
Feast on the waters with the pray they take;
At once victorious with their Lines and Eyes
They make the Fishes and the Men their prize;
A thousand Cupids on the Billows ride,
And Sea-Nymphs enter with the swelling Tide,
From Thetis sent as Spies to make report,
And tell the wonders of her Sovetaign's Court,
All that can living feed the greedy Eye^
Or dead the Palate, here you may desory*
The choicest things that furnished Na^h's Ark,
Or Peter's sheet, inhabiting this Park^^
All with a border of rieh Fruit Trees or owned,
Whose loaded-branches hide the lo^ty mound.
Such various ways the spacious Allies lead,
My doubtful Muse knows not what path to tread*
^onder the harvest of cold months laid up,
^ives a fresh boolness to the Royal Cup,
There Ice, like Crystal, firm, and never lost,
Tempers hot Iusy with Decembers Frost,
Winters dark Prison, whence he cannot fly,
Though the warm Spring his enemy draws nigh:
^trange! that extremes should thus preserve the snow
High on the Alps, or in deep Caves below.
Here a well-polisht Mall gives us the joy
To see our Prince his matchless force employ;
His manly posture and his graceful mien
Vigor and Yo^th in all his motion seen,
His shape ^o lovely, and his limbs so strong,
Confirm our hopes we shall obey him long:
No sooner has he touched the flying Ball,
But (...) more than hals the Mall*
And such a fury from his arm has got
As from a smo^king Culverin 'twere shot.
Nere this my Muse, what most delights her, sees,
A living Gallery of aged Trees;
Bold Sons of earth that thrust their arms so high,
As if once more they would invade the Sky;
In such green Palaces the first Kings reigned,
Slept in their shades, and Angels entertained:
With such old Counselors they did advise,
And by frequenting sacred Groves grew wise;
Free from th impediments of light and noise
Man thus retired his nobler thoughts imploys:
Here Charles contrives the ordering of his States,
Here he resolves his neighboring Princes fates:
What Nation shall have Peace, where War be made
Determined is in this oraculous shade;
The World from India to the frozen North,
Concerned in what this Solitude brings forth.
His Fancy objects from his view receives,
The prospect thought and contemplation gives:
That seat of Empire here salutes his eye,
To which three Kingdoms do themselves apply,
The structure by a Prelate raised, Whitehall,
Built with the fortune of Rome's Capitol;
Both disproportioned to the present State
Of their proud Founders, were approved by Fate;
From hence he does that antique Pile behold,
Where Royal heads receive the sacred gold;
It gives them Crowns, and does their ashes keep;
There made like gods, like mortals there they sleep
Making the circle of their Reign complete,
Those Suns of Empire, where they rise they set:
When others fell, this standing did presage
The Crown should triumph over popular rage,
Hard by that House where all our Ills were shaped,
The auspicious Temple stood, and yet escaped.
So Snow on Aetna does unmelted lie,
Whence rolling flames and scattered cinders fly;
The distant Country in the ruin shares,
What falls from Heaven the burning Mountain spares.
Next, that capacious Hall he sees the room,
Where the whole Nation does for Justice come.
Under whose large roof flourishes the Gown,
And Judges grave on high Tribunals frown.
Here like the peoples Pastor he does go,
His flock subjected to his view below;
On which reflecting in his mighty mind,
No private pa^^ion does Indulgence find;
The pleasures of his Youth suspended are,
And made a Sacrifice to public care;
Here free from Court compliances he walks,
And with himself, his best adviser, talks,
How peace^ul Olive may his Temples shade,
For mending Laws, and for res^oring Trade;
Or how his Brows may be with Laurel charged,
For Nations conquered, and our Bounds enlarged:
Of ancient Prudence here he ruminates.
O^ rising Kingdoms, and of falling States:
What ruling Arts gave Great Augustus Fame,
And how Alcides purchased such a name:
His eyes upon his native Palace bent
Close by, suggest a greater argument,
(...) thoughts rise higher when the does restect^
On what the world may from that Star expect
Which at his Birth appeared to let us see
Day for his sake could with the Night agree;
A Prince on whom (...) different lights did smile^
Born, the divided world to reconcile:
Whatever Heaven or high extracted blood
Could promise or foretell, he will make good;
Refors^^ these. Nations and improve them more*
Than this fair Park from what it was before.
To Sir William D'avenant upon his Two fir^^ Books of Gondibert, written in
^rance
THus the wi^e Nightingale that leaves her ho^^
Her native Wood, when storms and winter (...)
Pursuing constantly the cheerful Spring,
To foreign Groves does her old Music bring;
The (...) unstrung*
At (...), upon the Willows hung*
Yours sounds aloud, and tells us you excel
No less in Cou^^ge, than in Singing well;
Whilst unconcerned you let your Country know.
They have impoverished themselves, not you;
Who with the Muses help can mock those Fates
Which threaten Kingdoms, and disorder States.
So Ovid when from C^sar 's rage he fle^,
The Roman Muse to Pontus with him led;
Where he so sung, that we through pities Glass,
See Nero milder than Augustus was.
Hereafter such in thy behalf shall be
The Indulgent Censure of Posterity.
To banish those who with such art can sing,
^^a rude crime which its own curse does bring:
^ges to come, shall never know how they fought,
Nor how to Love their present Youth be taught.
This to thy self. Now to thy matchless Book,
Wherein those few that can with Judgment look,
May find old Love in pure fresh Language told,
Like new stampt-Coin made out of Angel-gold.
Such truth in Love as th'antique world did know.
In such a style (...) Courts may boast of now.
Which no bold tales of Gods or Monsters swell,
But humane Passions, such as with us dwell.
Man is thy ^heme, his Virtue or his Rage
Drawn to the Life in each elaborate Page.
Mars nor Be^ona are not named here;
But such a Gondibert as both might fear.
Venus had here, and Hebe been out-shin'd,
By the bright Birtha, and thy Rhodalind.
Such is thy happy skill, and such the odds
Betwixt thy Worthies and the Grecian gods.
Whose Deities in vain had here come down
Where mo^^ al Beauty wears the Sovereign Crown
Such as of flesh composed, by flesh and blood
(Though not resisted) may be understood.
To my worthy Friend Mr. Wase, the Translator of Gratius.
THus by the Music we may know
When Noble Wits a Hunting go
Through Groves that on Parnassus grow.
The Muses all the Chase adorn,
My Friend on Pegasus is born,
And young Apollo winds the Horn.
Having old Gratius in the wind.
No pack of Critiques e're could find
Or he know more of his own mind.
Here Huntsmen with delight may read
How to choose Dogs for scent or speed,
And how to change or mend the breed.
What Arms to use, or Nets to frame,
Wild Beasts to combat or to tame,
With all the Mysteries of that game.
But (worthy Friend) the face of War
In ancient times does differ ^ar
From what our fiery battles are.
Nor is it like (since powder known)
That man so ^ruel to his own,
Should spare the race of Beasts alone.
No quarter now but with the Gun,
Men wait in Trees from Sun to Sun,
And all is in a moment done.
And therefore we expect your next
Should be no Comment but a Text,
To tell how modern Beasts are vexed.
Thus would I further yet engage
Your gentle Muse to court the age
With somewhat of your proper rage.
Since none does more to (...) owe,
Or in more Languages can show
Those Arts which you so early know.
To the King, upon His Majesty's happy Return.
THe rising Sun complies with our weak sight,
First gilds the clouds, then shows his globe of light
At such a distance from our eyes, as though
He knew what harm his hasty Beams would do.
But your full MAJESTY at once breaks forth
In the Meridian of Your Reign, Your Worth,
Your Youth, and all the splendour of Your State,
Wrapped up, till now, in clouds of adverse Fate,
With such a flood of light invade our eyes,
And our spread hearts with so great joy surprise,
That, if Your Grace incline that we should live,
You must not (SIR) too hastily forgive.
Our guilt preserves us from the excess of joy,
Which scatters (...), and would life destroy.
All are obnoxious, and this faulty Land
Like f^inting Hester does before you stand,
Watching your Scepter, the revolted Sea
Trembles to think she did your Foes obey.
Great Brit^^i^, Like blind Rolipheme, of late
In a wild r^ge became the scorn and hate
Of her proud Neighbors, who began to think,
She, with the weight of her own force would sink
But You are come, and all their hopes are vain,
This Giant Isle has got her Eye again;
Now she might spare the Ocean, and oppose
Your conduct to the fiercest of her Foes:
Naked, the Graces guarded you from all
Dangers abroad, and now your Thunder shall.
Princes, that saw you, different Passions prove,
For now they dread the Object of their love;
Nor without envy can behold His height,
Whose Conversation was their late delight,
So Semele contented with the rape
Of Jove disguised in a mortal shape,
When she beheld his hands with lightning filled,
and his bright rays, was with amazement killed,
And though it be our sorrow and our crime
To have accepted life so long a time
Without You here, yet does this absence gain
No small advantage to Your present Reign:
For, having viewed the persons and the things,
The Councils, State and Strength of Europe's Kings,
You know your work; Ambition to restrain,
And set them bounds, as Heaven does to the Main:
We have you now with ruling wisdom fraught,
Not such as Books, but such as Practice taught:
So the l^st Sun, while least by us enjoyed,
Is the whole night, for our concern employed:
He ripens Spices, Fruit, and precious Gums,
Which from remotest Regions hither comes.
This seat of Yours, from the other world removed,
Had Archimede's known, he might have proved
His Engines force, fixed here, your power and skill
Make the world's motion wait upon your will.
Much suffering Monarch, the first English born,
That has the Crown of these three Nations worn,
How has your patience, with the barbarous rage
Of Your own Soil, contended half an age?
Till (Your tried Virtue, and Your sacred Word,
At last preventing Your unwilling Sword)
Armies and Fleets, which kept You out so long,
Owned their great Sovereign, and redrest His wron^
When straight the People, by no force compelled*
Nor longer from their inclination held,
Break forth at once, like Powder let on fire,
And with a Noble rage their KING require*
So th'injur'd Sea, which from her wonted course,
To gain some Acres, Avarice did force,
If the new Banks, neglected once, decay,
No longer will from her old Channel ^tay,
Raging, the late-got Land the over^^ows,
And all that is built upon it to ruin goes.
O^^enders now, the chiefe^^, do begin
To strive for Grace, and expiate their (...)
All Winds blow fair, that did the World imbroil,
Your Vipers Treacle yield, and (...),
If then such praise the Macedonian got,
^or having rudely cut the Gordian knot;
What Glory's due to him that could divide
^uch ravell'd interests, has the knot untied,
And without stroke so smooth a passage made,
Where craft and malice such impeachments laid*
But while we praise You, You ascribe it all
To his high hand, which threw the untoucht Wall
Of self-demolisht Ierico so low:
His Angel 'twas that did before You go,
Tamed savage hearts, and made affections yield,
Like Ears of Corn when Wind salutes the Field.
Thus Patience crowned: like Job's Your Trouble end*
Having your Foes to pardon, and your Friend^:
For though your Courage were so firm a Rock,
What private V^rtue could endure the shock?
Like Your great Master, You the Storm withstood,
And pitied those who Love with ^railty showed.
Rude Indians torturing all the Royal Race
Him with the Throne and dear bought Scepter grace
(...): what Region could be found,
Where yo^^ h^roick Head had not been crowned?
The next experience of Your mighty mind,
(...) how You combat Fortune now she is kind;
And this way too, You are victorious found,
^^e flatters with the same success she frowned;
While to Your Self severe, to others kind,
With power unbounded, and a will confined,
Of this vast Empire You possess the care,
(...) softer part falls to the Peoples share:
^^^ey and equal Government are things
Which Subjects make as happy as their Kings.
Faith Law, and Piety, that banished train,
(...) and Truth, with You return again:
(...) Cities Trade, and Countries easre life
(...) strife.
Your Reign no less assures the Ploughman's peace,
Than the warm Sun advances his increase;
And does the Shepherds as securely keep
From all their fears, as they preserve their sheep.
But above all, the Muse inspired train
Triumph, and raise their drooping heads again;
Kind Heaven at once has in Your Person sent
Their sacred Judge, their Guard, and Argument.
Nec magis express^ vultus per aenea signa
Quam per val is op^^ mores, animique (...)
C^rorum apparent --
To my Lady Morton on New-years-day, 16^0. at the Louvre in Paris.
Madam,
New Years may well expect to find
Welcome from you, to whom they are (...)
Still as they pass, they court, and smile on you,
And make your Beauty as themselves seem new.
To the fair Villars we Dalkith prefer;
And fairest Morton now as much to her;
So like the Sun's advance your Titles show;
Which, as he rises, does the warmer grow.
But thus to style you fair, your Sexes praise;
Gives you but Myrtle, who may challenge Bay^*
From armed Foes to bring a Royal prize,
Shows your brave Heart victorious, as your Eyes;
(...) Iudeth marching with the General's head,
(...) give us passion when her Story's read,
What may the living do which brought away;
Though a less bloody, yet a Nobler prey?
Who from our flaming Troy, with a bold hand
(...) her fair Charge, the Princess, like a brand,
^brand preserved to warm some Princes heart
(...) make whole Kingdoms take her Brother's part
(...) Venus from prevailing Greeks did shroud
(...) hope of Rome, and saved him in a cloud;
This gallant act may cancel all our rage,
Begin a better, and absolve this age.
Dark shades become the Portraict of our time,
Here weeps Misfortune, and there triumphs Cri^^
Let him that draws it hide the rest in night,
This portion only may endure the light,
Where the kind Nym^h changing her ^aultless shap^
Becomes unhandsome, handsomely to s^^pe,
When through the Guards, the River, and the S^^
Faith, Beauty, Wit and Courage, made their (...)
As the brave Eagle does with sorrow see
The Forest wasted, and that lofty Tree
Which holds her Nest about to be O'^e thrown
Before the feathers of her young are grown,
She will not leave them, nor she cannot stay,
^ut bears them boldly on her wings away;
So fled the Dame, and Over the Ocean bore
Her Princely burden to the Gallick shore.
Born in the storms of (...) this Royal fair,
Produced (...),
Though now she flies her native Isle, less kind,
^ess safe for her, than either Sea or Wind,
Shall, when the Blossom of her Beauty's blown,
See her great Brother on the British Throne,
Where Peace shall smile, and no dispute arise,
But which Rules most, his Scepter, or her Eyes.
Of a fair Lady pl^ying with a Snake.
STrange that (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
To start at Love, and play with Snakes.
By this and by her coldness (...)
Her Servants have a task too hard,
The Tyrant has a double guard.
Thrice happy Snake, that in her sleeve
May boldly creep, we dare not give
Our thoughts so unconfined a leave:
Contented in that Nest of Snow
He lies, as he his Bliss did know,
And to the Wood no more would go.
Take heed, (fair Eve) you do not make
Another Tempter of this Snake,
A marble one so warmed would speak.
To his worthy Friend Master E'velyn, upon his Translation of Lucretius.
THat Chance and Atoms make this all
In Order Democratical,
Where Bodies freely run their course
Without design, or Fate, or Force.
In English Verse Lucretins sings
As if with Pegasean wings,
He soared beyond our utmost Sphere,
And other Worlds discovered there;
His boundless and unr^ly Wit
To Nature does no bounds permit;
But boldly has removed those Bars,
Of Heaven, and Earth, and Seas, and Stars,
By which she was before supposed
By moderate Wits to be enclosed,
Till his ^ree Muse threw down the Pale,
And did at once dispark them all.
So vast this Argument did seem
That the great Author did esteem
The Roman Language, which was spread
^'re the whole world in Triumph led
Too weak, too narrow to unfold
The Wonders which he would have told.
This speaks thy Glory, Noble Friend,
And British Language does commend;
For here Lucretius whole we find,
His Words, his Mu^ick, and his Mind,
Thy Art has to our Co^^try brought
All that he writ, and all he thought.
Ovid translated, Virgil too,
Showed long since what our tongue could do;
Nor Lucan we, nor Harace spared,
Only Lucretius was too hard*
Lucretius, like a Fort did stand
Untoucht, till your victorious Hand
Did from his Head this Garland bear.
Which now upon your own you wear:
A Garland made of such new Bays,
And sought in such untr^dden ways,
As no Man's Temples e're did Crown,
Save this famed Authors and your own,
Part of the 4th Book of Virgil (...), beginning
-- Talesque miseri^^^ (...)
Fertquer fertq^e for o^. --
And ending with*

Adnixi torquent spumas and caerula v^rrunt.
All this her weeping sister does repeat
To the stern Man, whom nothing could entreat;
Lost were her Pray' is, and fruitless were her Tears,
Fate and great Jove had stopped his gentle Ears.
As when loud winds a well-grown Oak would rend
Up by the roots, this way, and that they bend
His reeling Trunk, and with a boisterous sound
Scatter his leaves, and strew them on the ground,
He fixed stands, as deep his root does ^ie,
Down to the Center, as his top is high.
No less on every side the Hero pressed,
Feels Love and Pity shake his Noble breast,
And down his Cheeks though fruitless tears do roll,
Unmoved remains the purpose of his Soul.
Then Dido urged with approaching Fate
Begins the light of cruel Heaven to hate;
Her resolution to dispatch and die
Confirmed by many a horrid Prodigy.
The water consecrate for Sacrisice,
Appears all black to her amazed eye^,
The Wine to putrid Blood converted flows,
Which from her, none, not her own sister knows.
Besides there stood as sacred to her Lord
A marble Temple which she much adored,
With snowy Fleeces and fresh Garlands crowned,
Hence every night proceeds a dreadful sound.
Her Husband's voice invites her to his Tomb,
And dismal Owls presage the ills to come.
Besides, the Prophesies of Wizards old
Increast her terror and her fall for^told.
Scorned and deserted to her self she seems,
And finds Aeneas cruel in her dreams.
So, to mad Pentheus, double Thebes appears,
And Furies howl in his distempered ears,
Orestes so with like distraction toft,
Is made to fly his Mothers angry ghost.
Now grief and fury, at their height arrive,
Death she decre^s, and thus does it contrive*
Her grieved Sister with a cheerful grace,
(Hope well-dislembled shining in her face)
She thus deceives. (Dear Sister) let us prove
The Cure I have invented for my Love.
Beyond the Land of Aethi^pia lies
The place where Atlas does support the Shies;
Hence came an old Magician that did keep
The Hesperian Fruit, and made the Dragon sleeps;
Her potent Charms do troubled Souls relieve,
And where she lists, makes calmest minds to grieve,
The course of Rivers or of Heaven can stop.
And call Trees down from th'airy Mountains (...).
Witness ye Gods, and thou my deatest part,
How loath I am to tempt this guilty Art.
Erect a Pile, and on it let us place
That Bed where I my ruin did embrace.
With all the relics of our impious Guest,
Arms, Spoils, and Pr^sents, let the Pil^ be (...)
(The knowing-woman thus prescribes) that we
May (...) the Man out of our (...)
Thus speaks the Queen, but hides the fatal end
For which she does those sacred (...) pretend.
Nor worse effects of Grief her Sister thought
Would (...) murder wronghs,
Therefore obeys (...), and now (...) high
The (...) Oaks (...)
Hung all with wreaths and (...) garlands round;
So by her Self was her own (...).
Upon the top, the Trojan's Image lies,
And his sharp Sword where with anon the dies.
They by the Altar stand, while with loose hair
The Magic Propheress begins her Prayer,
On Chao's, E^ebus, and all the Gods,
Which in the infernal shades have their abodes,
She loudly calls, besprinkling all the Room
With drops suppo^'d from L^thes Lake to come,
She seeks the (...) which on the forehead grows
Of new-foal'd Col^^ and he^bs by moonlight mows.
A Cake of Leaven in her pions hands
Holds the devoted Queen, and barefoot stands,
One tender Foot was bare, the other (...),
Her Robe ungi^^ invoking every God,
And every Power; if any be above
Which takes (...) Love
Now was the ti^e when weary Mortals steep
The^^ careful Temples in the dew of sleep.
On Seas, on Earth, and all that in them dwell,
A death like quiet, and deep silence fell,
But not on Dido, whose untamed mind
Refused to be by sacred night confined:
A double passion in her breast does move
Love and fierce anger for neglected Love.
Thus she afficts her Soul, What shall I do?
With Fate inverted shall I humbly woo?
And some proud Prince in wild Numidi^ born,
Pray to accept me, and forget my scorn?
Or shall I, with the ungrateful Trojan go,
Quit all my State, and wait upon my Foe?
Is not enough by sad experience known,
The perjured Race of false L^oinedon?
With my Sidoni^^i shall I give them chase?
Bands hardly for^ed from their native place?
No, dye, and let this Sword thy fury tame,
Naught but thy blood can quen^h this guilty flame.
Ah Sister! vanquished with my passion thou
Betrayd'st me first, dispensing with my vow.
Had I been constant to Sycbaeus still,
And single-liv'd, I had not known this ill.
Such thoughts torment the Queens enraged breast,
While the Dardani^n does securely rest
In his tall ship for sudden flight prepared,
To whom once more the Son of Jove appear^d,
Thus seems to speak the youthful Deity,
Voice, Hair, and Color, all like Mercury.
Fair (...)! Can thou indulge thy sleep?
Nor better guard in such great danger keep,
Mad by neglect to lose so fair a wind?
If here thy ships the purple (...),
Thou shall behold this hostile Harbor shine
With a new Fleet, and Fire, to ruin thine;
She meditates Revenge resolved to dye,
Weigh Anchor, quickly, and her Fury fly.
This said, the God in shades of Night retired.
Amazed Aeneas with the warning fired,
Shakes off dull sleep, and rouzing up his men,
Behold! the Gods command our flight again;
Fall to your Oars, and all your Canvas spread,
What God soever that thus vouchsaf'st to lead,
We follow gladly, and thy Will obey,
Assist us still smoothing our happy way,
And make the rest propitious. With that word
He cuts the Cable with his shining Sword;
Through all the Navy does like Ardor reign,
They quit the Shore, and rush into the Main;
Placed on their banks, the lusty Trojans sweep
Neptune's smooth face, and cleave the yielding deeps.
Of a War with Spain, and a Fight at Sea.
Now for some Ages had the pride of Spain
Made the Sun shine on half the world in vain;
While she bid War to all that durst supply
The place of those her cruelty made dye.
Of Nature's bounty men forbore to taste,
And the best portion of the Earth lay waste.
From the new world her silver and her gold
Came, like a Tempest, to confound the old.
Feeding with these the bribed Elector's hopes,
Alone she gave us Emperors and Popes;
With these accomplishing her vast designs,
Enrope was shaken with her Indian Mines.
When Britain looking with a just disdain
Upon this gilded Majesty of Spain,
And knowing well that Empire must decline,
Whose chief support and sinews are of coin;
Our Nations solid virtue did oppose.
To the rich troublers of the worlds repose.
And now some Months incamping on the Main,
Our Naval Army had besieged Spain.
They that the whole world's Monarchy designed,
Are to their Ports by our bold Fleet confined,
From whence our Red-cross they triumphant see,
Riding without a Rival on the Sea.
Others may use the Ocean as their Road,
Only the English make it their abode,
Whose ready Sails, with every wind can fly,
And make a Covenant with the unconstant Sky;
Our Oaks secure, as if they there took root,
We tread on billows with a steady foot.
Mean while the Spaniards in America
Near to the Line the Sun approaching saw,
And hoped their European Coasts to sind
Cleared from our ships by the Autumnal wind:
Their huge capacious Gallions stuffed with Plate
The laboring winds drive slowly toward their ^ate.
Before St. Lucar they their Guns discharge,
To tell their joy, or to invite a Barge;
This heard some Ships of ours (though out of view;
And swift as Eagles to the Quarry ^lew:
So heedless Lambs which for their Mothers bleat,
Wake hungry Lions, and become their meat.
Arrived, they soon begin that Tragique play,
And with their smoaky Cannons banish day;
Night, Horror, Slaughter, with Confusion meets,
And in their sable Arms embrace the Fleets.
Through yielding Planks the angry Bullets, fly,
And of one wound hundreds together die:
Born under different stars one Fate they have,
The Ship their Coffin, and the Sea their Grave.
Bold were the Men which on the Ocean first
Spread their new Sails, when shipwreck was the worst;
More danger now from Man alone we find
Than from the Rocks, the Billows, or the Wind;
They that had sailed from near the Antar^ick Pole,
Their Treasure safe, and all their Vessels whole,
In sight of their dear Country ruined be
Without the guilt of either Rock or Sea.
What they would spare, our siercer Art destroys,
Surpassing storms in terror and in noise;
O^ce Jove from Ida, did both Hosts survey,
And when he pleased to thunder, part the fray;
Here Heaven in vain that kind retreat should sound,
The louder Cannon had the Thunder drowned.
Some we made prize, while others burnt and rent
With their rich Lading, to the bottom went,
Down sinks at once (so Fortune with ^s sports)
The Pay of Armies, and the Pride of Courts.
Vain man! whose Rage buries as low that store,
As Avarice had dig'd for it before;
What Earth in her dark bowels could not keep
From greedy hands lies safer in the deep,
Where Thetis kindly does from Mortals hide
Those seeds of Luxury, Debate and Pride.
And now into her Lap the richest prize
Fell with the noblest of our Enemies,
The Marquis glad to see the fire destroy
Wealth, that prevailing Foes were to enjoy,
Out from his flaming Ship his Children sent
To perish in a milder Element;
Then laid him by his burning Ladies side,
And since he could not save her, with her died.
Spices and ^ums about them melting fry,
And Phoenix-like, in that rich Nest they die;
Alive in flames of equal Love they burned,
And now together are to ashes turned;
Ashes more worth than all their funeral cost,
Than the huge Treasure which was with them lost.
These dying Lovers, and their floating Sons
Suspend the Fight, and silence all our Guns*
Beauty and Youth about to perish finds
Such Noble pity in brave English minds,
That the rich Spoil forgot, their Valors prize,
All labor now to save their Enemies.
How Frail our Passions^ how soon changed are
Our wrath and fury to a friendly Care?
They that but now for Honor and for Plate
Made the Sea blush with blood, resign their hate,
And their young Foes endeav'ring to retrive,
With greater hazard than they fought, they dive.
Epitaph to be written under the Latin Inscription upon the Tomb of the Only
Son of the Lord, Andover.
It Is fit the English Reader should be told
In our own Language what this Tomb does hold:
It Is not a Noble Corpse alone does lie
Under this Stone, but a whole Family;
His Parents pious Care, their Name, their Joy,
And all their Hope, lies bur^ed with this Boy;
This lovely Youth, for whom we all made moan,
That knew his worth, as he had been our own.
Had there been space, and ^ears enough allowed,
His Courage, Wit, and Breeding, to have showed,
We had not found in all the numerous Roll
Of his famed Anoestors, a greater Soul,
His early Virtues to that ancient Stock
Give as much Honor, as from thence he took.
Like Buds appearing e're the Frosts are past,
To become Man he made such fatal haste,
And to perfection labored so to climb,
Preventing slow Experience and Time,
That it is no wonder Death our hopes beguiled;
He Is seldom Old, that will not be a Child.
To the Queen, upon Her Majesty's Birthday, after Her Happy Recovery from a
Dangerous Sickness.
Farewell the Year* which threatened so
The fairest Light the world can show;
Welcome the New, whose every day
Restoring what was snatched away
By pining sickness from the Fair,
That matchless Beauty does repair
So fast, that the approaching Spring.
Which does to Flow^y Meadows bring
What the rude Winter from them (...),
Shall give her all she had (...).
But we recover not so fast
The sense of such a danger past;
We that esteemed you sent from Heaven,
A pattern to this Island given,
To show us what the Bles^'d do there,
And what alive they practiced here,
When that which we Immo^^al thought,
We saw so near Destruction brought,
Felt all which you did then endure
And tremble yet, as not secure;
So though the Sun victorious be,
And from a dark Eclipse set free,
Th'Influence which we fondly fear,
Afflicts our Thoughts the following Year:
But that which may ^elieve our Care,
Is that You have a Help so near
For all the Evils you can prove,
The Kindness of Your Royal Love:
He that was never known to Mourn,
So many Kingdoms from him Torn;
^is Tears reserved for You, more dear,
More prized than all those Kingdoms were*
For when no h^aling Art prevailed,
When Cordials and Elixars ^aild,
On your pale Cheek he dropped the shower,
Revived you like a Dying Flower.
Nunc itaque and versus and caetera ludiera pono,
Quid verum, atque decens, curo, and rogo, and omnis in hoc sunt
Instructions to a PAINTER, For the Drawing of the Posture and Progress of His
Majesty's Forces at Sea, under the Command of His Highness-Royal: Together with
the Battle and Victory obtained over the DUTCH, June 3. 1665.
FIrst draw the Sea, that portion which between
The greater world, and this of ours is seen;
Here place the British, there the Holland Fleet,
Vast floating Armies, both prepared to meet:
Draw the whole world, expecting who sho^ (...)
after this Combat, over the conquered Main;
Make Heaven concerned, and an unusual Star,
Declare th'Importance of the approaching War^
Make the Sea^ shine with Gallantry, and all
The English Youth flock to their Admiral,
The valiant Duke, whose early Deeds ab^oad,
Such Rage in Fight, and Art in conduct showed;
His bright Sword now a dearer Interest draws,
Hi^ Brothers, Glory, and His Countries Cause.
Let thy bold Pencil, Hope, and Courage spread
Through the whole Nav^, by that Hero^ led;
Make all appear, where such a Prince is by,
Resolved to Conquer, or resolved to Die:
With His Extraction, and His Glorious mind
Make the proud Sails swell, more than with the (...)
eventing Cannon, make His louder Fame
(...) the Batanians, and their Fury tame:
(...) Wolves, though greedy of their Prey,
(...) When they find a Lion in their way.
(...) him bestride the Ocean, and Mankind
(...) His Consent, to use the Sea and Wind:
^hile his tall ships in the barred Channel stand,
(...) grasps the Indies in His armed Hand.
Paint an East Wind, and make it blow away
(...) excuse of Holland for their Navies stay;
^ake them look pale, and the bold Prince to shu^^,
Through the cold North, and Rocky Regions run;
^o find the Coast where Morning first appears,
^y the dark Pole the wary Belgian steers,
Confessing now, He dreads the English more,
^han all the dangers of a frozen Shore;
^hile from our Arms security to find,
^hey fly so far, they leave the Day behind*
Describe their Fleet abandoning the Sea,
And all their Merchants left a wealthy Prey;
Our first success in War, make Bacchus Crown,
And half the Vintage of the Year our own:
The Dutch their Wine, and all their Brandy lo^^
Disarmed of that, from which their Courage grow^
While the glad Englsh, to relieve their toil,
In Healths to their great Leader drink the spoil:
His high Command to Africks Coast extend,
And make the Moors before the English bend:
Those barbarous Pirates willingly receive
Conditions, such as we are pleased to give;
Deserted by the Dutch, let Nations know,
We can our own, and their great business do;
False Friends chastise, and common Foes restrain,
Which worse than Tempests did infest the Main.
Within those Streights make Holland's Smirna Fle^^
With a small Squadron of the English meet;
Like Falcons these, those like a numerous Flock
Of Fowl, which scatter to avoid the Shock.
There paint Confusion in a various shape,
Some sink, some yield, and flying some escape:
^^rope and Africa from either shore
^ectators are, and hear our Cannon roar;
While the divided world, in this agree,
Men that Fight so, deserve to rule the Sea.
^ut nearer home, thy Pencil use once more,
(...) place our Navy by the Holland shore;
The World they compassed while they fought with
(...) here already they resign the Main: Spain,
Those greedy Mariners, out of whose way,
^issusive Nature could no Region lay,
^t home preserved, from Rocks and Tempests lie^*
Compelled, like others, in their Beds to die;
Their single Towns the Iberian Armies pressed,
We all their Provinces at once invest,
And in a Month Ruin their Tra^^ique more,
Than that long War could in an Age before.
But who can always on the Billows lie?
The watery Wilderness yields no supply;
Spreading our Sails, to Harwich we resort,
And meet the Beauties of the British Court,
The Illustrious Duchess, and her Glorious Train,
Like Thetis with her Nymphs adorn the Main;
The gazing Sea-gods, since the Paphian Queen
Sprung from among them, no such sight had se^
Charmed with the Graces of a Troop so fair,
Those deathless Powers for us themselves (...)
Resolved the aid of Neptune's Court to bring,
And help the Nation where such Beauties sprin^
The Soldier here his wasted store supplies,
And takes new Valor from the Ladies Eyes:
Mean while like Bees when stormy Winter's goo^
The Dutch (as if the Sea were all their own)
Desert their Ports, and falling in their way
^ur Hamburgh Merchants are become their Prey;
Thus flourish they, before the approaching Fight,
As dying Tapers give a blazing Light.
To check their Pride, our Fleet half victual'd goes;
enough to serve us till we reach our Foes,
Who now appear so numerous and bold,
The Action worthy of our Arms we hold;
A greater force than that which here we find,
^^'re pressed the Ocean, nor employed the Wind.
^estrain'd a while by the unwelcom Night,
^h' impatient English scarce attend the Light.
But now the Morning, Heaven severely clear,
^o the flerce Work Indulgent does appear;
And Phoeb^s lists above the Waves his Light,
That he might see, and thus record the Fight:
As when loud winds from different quarters rush,
^ast Clouds incountring, one another crush*
With swelling Sails, so, from their several Coasts,
Join the Batavian and the British Hoasts.
For a less Prize, with less Concern and Rage,
The Roman Fleets at Actium did Engage;
They for the Empire of the World they knew.
These for the Old contend, and for the New:
At the first shock, with Blood and Powder stained
Nor Heaven, nor Sea, their former face retained;
Fury and Art produce Effects so strange,
They trouble Nature, and her Visage change:
Where burning Ships the banished Sun supply*
And no Light shines, but that by which men die*
There YORK appears* so prodigal* is he
Of Royal Blood as ancient as* the Sea*
Which down to Him so many Ages told,
Has through the veins of Mighty Monarchs rolled
The great Achilles marched not to the Field,
Till Vulcan that impenetrable Shield
And Arms had wrought, yet there no Bullets flew,
^ut Shafts and Darts, which the weak Ph^ygians threw;
Our bolder Hero on the Deck does stand
Exposed the Bulwark of his Native Land*
Defensive Arms said by, as useless here,
Where massy Balls the Neighboring Rocks do tear:
Some Power unseen those Princes does pro^^ct,
Who for their Country thus themselves neglect.
Against Him first Opdam his Squadron leads,
Proud of his late Success against the suedis,
Made by that Action, and his high Command,
Worthy to perish by a Princes Hand:
The tall Batavian in a vast Ship rides,
^aring an Army in her hollow sides,
^t not inclined the English Ship to board,
(...), than on his Sword,
From whence a fatal Volly we received,
It missed the Duke, but His Great Heart ^ grieved;
Three worthy Persons from His side it tore,
And died His Garment with their scattered Gore:
Happy! to whom this glorious death arrives,
More to be valued ^han a thousand Lives!
On such a Theater, as this, to die,
For such a Cause, and such a Witness by!
Who would not thus a Sacrifice be made,
To have his Blood on such an Altar laid?
The rest about Him struck with horror stood,
To see their Leader covered o^re with Blood;
So trembled Jacob, when he thought the stains
Of his Sons Coat had issued from his veins:
He feels no wound, but in his troubled thought
Before for Honor, now Revenge He fought,
His Friends in pieces torn, the bitter News
Not brought by Fame, with His own Eyes He views;
(...) Mind at once reflecting on their Youth,
Their Worth, their Love, their Valor, and their Truth,
The joys of Court, their Mothers and their Wives
To follow Him abandoned, and their Lives.
He storms, and shoots; but flying Bullets now
To execute His Rage, appear too slow;
They miss, or sweep but common Souls away,
For such a Loss, Opdam his Life must pay:
Encouraging His Men, He gives the Word,
With fierce intent that hated Ship to Board,
And make the guilty Dutch, with His own Arm,
Wait on His Friends, while yet their Blood is warm:
His winged Vessel like an Eagle shows,
When through the Clouds to truss a Swan she goes;
The Belgian Ship unmoved, like some huge Rock
Inhabiting the Sea, expects the shock:
From both the Fleets Men's eyes are bent this (...)
Neglecting all the business of the day,
Bullets their flight, and Guns their noise suspend,
The silent Ocean does the event attend,
Which Leader shall the doubtful victory bless,
And give an earnest of the Wars success;
When Heaven it self for England to declare,
Turns Ship, and Men, and Tackle into Air;
Their new Commander from his Charge is ^o^t,
Which that young Prince had so unjustly lost,
Whose great Progenitors with better Fate,
And better Conduct swayed their Infant State.
His flight toward Heaven the aspiring Belgian took*
But fell like Phaeton with Thunder struck,
From vaster hopes than his, he seemed to fall,
That durst attempt the British Admiral:
From her Broad-sides, a ruder Flame is thrown,
Than from the fiery Chariot of the Sun;
That bears the radiant Ensign of the day,
And she the Flag that Governs in the Sea.
The Duke ill pleased that Fire should thus prevent
The work which for His brighter sword He meant,
Anger still burning in His vallant breast,
Goes to complete Revenge upon the rest;
So on the guardless Herd their Keeper slain,
Rushes a Tiger in the Lybian Plain.
The Dutch accustomed to the raging Sea,
And in black Storms the frowns of Heaven to see,
Never met Tempest which more urged their fears,
Than that which in the Prince His look appears;
Fierce, Goodly, Young, Mars he resembles, when
Jove sends him down to scourge per^idious Men,
Such as with foul Ingratitude have paid
Both those that Led, and those that gave them Aid;
Where He gives on, disposing of their Fates,
Terror and Death on His loud Cannon waits,
With which He pleads His Brothers Cause so well*
He shakes the Throne to which He does appeal;
The Sea with spoil His angry Bullets strew,
Widows and Orphans making as they go;
Before His Ship, fragments of Vessels torn,
Flags, Arms, And Belgian Carcasses are born,
And his despairing Fo^s to flight inclined*
Spread all their Canvas to invite the Wind:
So the rude Boreas where he lists to blow,
Makes Clouds above, and Billows fly below*
Beating the Shore, and with a boisterous rage
Does Heaven at once, and Earth, and Sea engage:
The Dutch elsewhere, did through the watery field
Perform enough to have made others yield;
But English Courage growing as they fight,
In Danger, Noise, and Slaughter takes delight;
Their bloody Task, unwearied still, they ply,
Only restrained by Death, or Victory:
Iron and Lead, from Earths dark Entrails torn,
Like showers of Hail from either side are born*
So high the Rage of wretched Mortals goes,
Hurling their Mothers Bowels at their Foes,
Ingenious to their Ruin, every Age
Improves the Arts, and Instruments of Rage;
Death hastening ills Nature enough has sent,
And yet Men still a thousand more invent.
But Bacchus now which led the Belgians on
So fierce at first, to favor us begun;
Brandee and Wine, their wonted Friends, at length
Render them useless, and betray their strength:
So Corn in Fields, and in the Garden Flowers,
Revive, and raise themselves with moderate show^^^;
But overcharged with never-ceafing Rain,
Become too moist, and bend their heads again:
Their reeling Ships on one another fall,
Without a Foe enough to ruin all:
Of this Disorder, and the favoring Wind,
The watchful English such advantage find,
Ships fraught with Fire among the heap they throw,
And up the so entangled B^lgians blow;
The Flame invades the Powder-Rooms, and then
Their Guns shoot Bullets, and their Vessels Men;
The scorcht Batavians on the Billows float,
Sent from their own to pass in Charon's Boat.
And now our Royal Admiral, Success
With all the marks of Victory does bless;
The burning Ships, the taken, and the slain,
Proclaim His Triumph over the conquered Main:
Nearer to Holland as their hasty flight
Carries the noise and tumult of the Fight,
His Cannons roar, Forerunner of His Fame,
Makes their Hague tremble, and their Amsterdam*
The Eritish Thunder does their Houses rock,
And the Duke seems at every door to knock;
His dreadful Streamer like a Comets hair
Threatening Destruction, hastens their Despair,
Makes them deplore their scattered Fleet as lost*
And fear our present Landing on their Coast.
The trembling Dutch the approaching (...) behold,
As Sheep a Lion leaping toward their Fold;
Those Piles which serve them to repel the Main.
They think too weak His fury to restrain:
What Wonders may not English Valor work*
Led by The Example of victorious YORK?
Or what Defense against Him can they make,
Who at such distance does their Country shake?
His fatal Hand their Bulwarks will overthrow,
And let in both the Ocean and the Foe:
Thus cry the People, and their Land to keep,
Allow our Title to command the Deep,
Blaming their States ill Conduct to provoke
Those Arms which freed them from the Spanish yoke.
Painter, excuse me, if I have a while
Forgot thy Art, and used another Style;
For though you draw armed Heroes as they sit,
The task in Battle does the Muses ^it;
They in the dark confusion of a Fight
Discover all, instruct us how to write,
And Light and Honor to brave Actions yield,
Hid in the smoke and tumult of the Field.
Ages to come shall know that Leaders toil,
And His Great Name on whom the Muses smile;
Their Dictates here let thy famed Pencil trace
And this Relation with thy Colors grace.
Then draw the Parliament, the Nobles met,
And our Great Monarch, High above Them set;
Like young August^s let His Image be,
Triumphing for that Victory at Sea,
Where Egypts Queen, and Eastern Kings overthrown,
Made the possession of the World His own.
Last draw the Commons at His Royal Feet,
Pouring out Treasure to supply His Fleet;
They vow with Lives and Fortunes to maintain
Their King's Eternal Title to the Main,
And with a Present to the Duke approve
His Valor, Conduct, and His Countries Love.
TO THE KING.
GREAT SIR, Disdain not in this piece ^o stand
Supreme Commander both of Sea and Land*
Those which inhabit the Celestial Bower,
P^imers express with Emblems of their Power;
His Club Al^ides, Phoebus has his Bow,
Jove has his Thunder, and Your Navy You.
But Your Great Providence no Colors here
Can Represent; nor Pencil draw that Care
Which keeps You waking, to secure our Peace,
The Nations Glory, and our Trades increase;
You for these Ends whole days in Council sit,
And the Diversions of Your Youth forget.
Small were the worth of Valor and of Force,
If Your high Wisdom governed not their Course;
You as the Soul, as the first Mover You
Vigor and Lif^ on every Part bestow,
How to build Ships, and dreadful Ordinance cast,
Instruct the Artists, and reward their Haste:
So Jove himself, when Typhon Heaven does brave*
Descends to visit Vulcan's smoky Cave,
Teaching the brawny Cyclops how to frame
His Thunder mixed with Terror, Wrath and Flame.
Had the old Greeks discovered Your abode,
Crete had not been the Cradle of their God,
On that small Island they had looked with scorn,
And in Great Britain thought the Thunderer born.
TO A Friend of the AUTHORS, A Person of HONOR:
Who lately writ a Religious Book, Supposed to be the Lord Berkley of Bethley.
Entitled, Historical Applications, and occasional Meditations upon several
Subjects.
BOld is the Man that dares engage
For Piety, in such an Age.
Who can presume to find a Guard
From Scorn, when Heaven's so little spared?
Divines are pardoned, they defend
Altars on which their Lives depend:
But the Profane impatient are
When Nobler Pens make this their care.
For why should these let in a Beam
Of Divine Light to trouble them*
And call in doubt their pleasing Thought,
That none believes what we are taught?
High Birth and Fortune warrant give,
That such Men write what they believe*
And feeling first what they indite,
New credit give to ancient Light.
Amongst these few our Author brings
His well-known Pedigree from Kings.
This Book, the Image of his Mind,
Will make his Name not hard to find.
I wish the Throng of Great and Good
Made it less easily understood.
To Mr. Henry Laws, who had then newly set a Song of mine in the Year 1635.
VErse makes Heroic Virtue live,
But you can Life to Verses give:
As when in open Air we blow,
The Breath (though strained) sounds flat and low;
But if a Trumpet take the blast,
It lifts it high, and makes it last:
So in your Ayrs our Numbers dressed
Make a shrill sally from the Breast
Of Nymphs, who singing what we penned,
Our passions to themselves commend,
While Love victorious with thy Art
Governs at once their Voice and Heart;
You by the help of Tune and Time,
Can make that Song which was but Rhyme.
Noy pleading, no man doubts the Cause,
Or questions Verses set by LAWS.
As a Church-window thick with Paint,
Lets in a light but dim and faint;
So others with Division hide
The light of Sense, the Poets pride,
But you alone may truly boast
That not a Syllable is lost;
The Writers and the Setter's skill
At once the ravished Ears do fill.
Let those which only warble long,
And Gargle in their Throats a Song,
Content themselves with VT, RE, MI,
Let Words and Sense be set by thee.
Upon Her Majesty's New Buildings at Somerset House.
GReat Queen, that does our Island bless,
With Princes and with Palaces;
Treated so ill, chased from your Throne,
Returning, you adorn the Town,
And with a brave Revenge do show,
Their Glory went and came with you.
While Peace from hence, and you were gone
Your houses in that Storm overthrown
Those wounds which Civil Rage did give,
^t once you Pardon and Relieve:
Constant to England in your Love,
As Birds are to their wonted Grove,
Though by rude hands their Nests are spoiled,
There, the next Spring again they build:
Accusing some malignant Star,
Not Britain, for that fatal War,
Your Kindness banishes your Fear,
Resolved to fix for ever here.
But what new Mine this work supplies?
Can such a Pile from Ruin rise?
This like the first Creation shows,
As if at your Command it rose;
Frugality, and Bounty too,
Those differing Virtues meet in you;
From a confined well-manag'd Store
You both employ, and feed the Poor:
Let Foreign (...) boast
The rude (...) Pride and Cost,
Of (...) to which They
Contribute nothing, but the Pay:
This, by the Queen her self designed,
Gives us a pattern of her mind;
The State and Order does proclaim
The Genius of that Royal Dame,
Each part with just proportion graced,
And all to such advantage placed,
That the fair View her Window yields,
The Town, the River, and the Fields
Entering, Beneath us we descry,
And wonder how we came so high;
She needs no weary steps ascend,
All seems before her feet to bend,
And here, as She was born, She lies
High, without taking pains to rise.
On the Picture of a fair Youth taken after he was dead.
AS gathered Flowers, whilst their wounds are new,
Look gay and fresh, as on the stalk they grew,
Torn from the root that nourist them, a while,
Not taking notice of their Fate, they smile,
And in the hand, which rudely plucked them, show
Fairer than those that to their Autumn grow;
So Love and Beauty still that Visage grace,
Death cannot fright them from their wonted place
Alive the hand of crooked Age had marred
Those lovely Features, which cold death has spared
No wonder then --
The rest is lost.
Epigram upon the Golden Medal.
OUR Guard upon the Royal side,
On the Reverse, Our Beauty's pride
Here we discern, the Frown and Smile,
The Force and Glory of Our Isle;
In the rich Medal both so like
Immortals stand, it seems Antique,
Carved by some Master, when the bold
Greeks made their Jove descend in Gold,
And Danae wondering at that shower,
Which falling, stormed her brazen Tower;
Britannia there, the Fort in vain
Had battered been with Golden Rain;
Thunder it self had failed to pass,
Virtue's a stronger Guard than Brass.
Of a Tree cut in Paper.
FAir Hand that can on Virgin-paper write,
Yet from the stain of Ink preserve it white,
Whose travel over that Silver Field does show,
Like track of Leveretts in morning Snow;
Love's Image thus in purest minds is wrought,
Without a spot or blemish to the thought;
Strange that your Fingers should the Pencil foil
Without the help of Colors, or of Oil;
For though a Painter Boughs and Leaves can make,
It Is you alone can make them bend and shake,
Whose Breath salutes your new created Grove
Like Southern winds, and makes it gently move;
Orpheus could make the Forest dance, but you
Can make the Motion and the Forest too.
To a Lady from whom he received the foregoing Copy which for many years had
been lost.
NOthing lies hid from radiant Eyes,
All they subdue become their Spies:
Secrets, as choicest Jewels are
Presented to oblige the Fair,
No wonder then, that a lost thought
Should there be found, where Souls are caught.
The Picture of fair Venus, That,
For which, men say, The Goddess sat,
Was lost, till Lilly from your Look,
Again that Glorious Image took;
If Virtue's self were lost, we might
From your fair Mind new Copies write:
All things, but one, you can restore,
The Heart you get returns no more.
The Night-piece, or a Picture drawn in the dark.
DArkness, which fairest Nymphs disarms,
Defends us ill from Mira's Charms;
Mira can lay her Beauty by,
Take no advantage of the Eye,
Quit all that Lilly's Art can take,
And yet a thousand Captives make;
Her Speech is graced with sweeter Sound,
Than in another's Song is found,
And all her well-plac'd words are Darts,
Which need no Light to reach our Hearts.
As the bright Stars and milky way,
Showed by the Night, are hid by Day;
So we in that accomplished Mind,
Helped by the Night, new Graces find,
Which by the splendour of her view
Dazzled before we never knew;
While we converse with her, we mark
No want of Day, nor think it dark;
Her shining Image is a light
Fixed in our hearts, and conquers Night;
Like Jewels to advantage set,
Her Beauty by the shade does get;
There, Blushes, Frowns, and cold Disdain,
All, that our Passion might restrain
Is hid, and our Indulgent mind
Presents the fair Idea kind.
Yet friended by the Night, we dare,
Only in whispers, tell our Care;
He that on her his bold hand lays
With Cupid's pointed Arrows plays,
They, with a touch, they are so keen,
Wound us unshot, and She unseen;
All near approaches threaten Death,
We may be shipwrackt by her Breath.
Love favored once, with that sweet Gale,
Doubles his Haste, and fills his Sail,
Till he arrive, where she must prove
The Haven, or the Rock, of Love;
So we the Arabian Coast do know,
At distance, when the Spices blow,
By the rich Odor taught to steer,
Though neither Day, nor Stars appear.
Of English Verse.
POets may boast [as safely-Vain]
Their work shall with the world remain:
Both bound together, live, or die,
The Verses and the Prophecy.
But who can hope his Lines should long
Last in a daily-changing Tongue?
While they are new, Envy prevails,
And as that dies, our Language fails.
When Architects have done their part,
The Matter may betray their Art;
Time, if we use ill-chosen Stone,
Soon brings a well built Palace down.
Poets that lasting Marble seek,
Must carve in Latin or in Greek;
We write in Sand, our Language grows,
And like the Tide our work o'reflows.
Chaucer his Sense can only boast,
The glory of his Numbers lost,
Years have defaced his matchless strain;
And yet he did not sing in vain;
The Beauties which adorned that Age,
The shining Subjects of his Rage,
Hoping they should Immortal prove,
Rewarded with success his Love.
This was the generous Poet's scope,
And all an English Pen can hope
To make the Fair approve his Flame,
That can so far extend their Fame.
Verse thus designed has no ill Fate,
If it arrive but at the Date
Of fading Beauty, if it prove
But as long-lived as present Love.
Sung by Mrs. Knight, to Her Majesty on Her Birthday.
THis happy day two Lights are seen,
A Glorious Saint, a Matchless Queen;
Both named alike, both Crowned appear,
The Saint above, the Infanta here:
May all those years which Catherine
The Martyr did for Heaven resign,
Be added to the Line
Of Your blessed Life amongst us here.
For all the pains that She did feel,
And all the Torments of Her Wheel:
May You as many Pleasures share;
May Heaven it self content
With Catherine the Saint.
Without appearing old,
An hundred times may You,
With Eyes as bright as now
This welcome Day behold.
To his Worthy Friend Sir Thomas Higgons, upon his Translation of the Venetian
Triumph.
THE winged Lion's not so fierce in ^ight
As Liber's hand presents him to our Sight,
Nor would his Pencil make him half so fierce,
Or roar so loud as Businello's Verse;
But your Translation does all three excel,
The Fight, the Piece, and lofty Businel:
As their small Galleys may not hold compare
With our tall Ships, whose Sails employ more Air*
So does the Italian to your Genius veil,
Moved with a fuller and a nobler Gale:
Thus while your Muse spreads the Venetian story,
You make all Europe emulate her Glory:
You make them blush, weak Venice should defen^
The cause of Heaven, while they for words contend*
Shed Christian Blood, and populous Cities raze,
Because the'yre taught to use some different Phraze.
(...) listening to your Charms we could our Jars
Compose, and on the Turk discharge these Wars*
Our British Arms the sacred Tomb might wrest
From Pagan hands, and Triumph over the (...):
And then you might our own high Deeds recite,
And with great Tasso celebrate the Fight.
Epitaph.
HEre lies Charles Candish: let the Marble Stone
That hides his Ashes, make his Virtue known:
^eauty and Valor did his short Life grace,
^he Grief and Glory of his Noble Race:
^arly abroad he did the World survey,
^s if He knew he had not long to stay;
Saw what Great Alex^nder in the East,
And mighty Julius conquered in the West;
Then with a Mind, as great as theirs, he came
To find at home occasion for his Fame;
Where dark Confusion did the Nations hide,
And where the Juster was the we^ker side
Two Loyal Brothers took their Sovereign's part;
Employed their Wealth, their Courage, and their Art*
The Elder did whole Regiments afford,
The Younger brought his Conduct and his Sword;
Born to Command, a Leader he begone,
And on the Rebels lasting Honor won:
The Horse instructed by their General's worth,
Still made the King victories in the North;
Where Candish fought, the Royalists prevailed,
Neither his Courage nor his Judgment failed;
The Current of his Victories found no stop;
Till Cromwell came, his Parties chiefest prop*
Equal success had set these Champions high,
And both resolved to Conquer, or to Die:
Virtue with Rage, Fury with Valor ^^rove;
But that must fall which is decreed Above.
Cromwell, with odds of Number, and of Fate,
Removed this Bulwark of the Church and State;
Which the sad Issue of the War declared,
And made his Task to ruin both less hard:
So when the Bank neglected is overthrown,
The boundles Torrent does the Country drown.
Thus fell the Young, the Lovely, and the Brave,
Strew Bays and Flowera on his honored Grave.
Of Her Royal Highness Mother to the Prince of Orange, and of Her Portraict
written by the late Duchess of York while She lived with Her.
Heroic Nymph, in Tempests the Support,
In Peace the Glory of the British Court,
Into whose Arms the Church, the State, and all
That precious is, or Sacred here, did fall.
Ages to come, that shall your Bounty hear,
Will think you Mistress of the Indies were:
Tho streighter Bounds your Fortune did consine,
In your large Heart was found a wealthy Mine;
Like the bles't Oil, the Widow's lasting Feast,
Your Treasure, as you poured it out, increas't.
While some your Beauty, some your Bounty sing,
Your native Isle does with your Praises ring:
But above all, a Nymph of your own Train,
Gives us your Character in such a strain,
As none but She, who in that Court did dwell,
Could know such Worth, or Worth describe so well:
So while we Mortals here at Heaven do guess,
And more our Weakness than the Place express;
Some Angel, a Domestic there, comes down,
And tells the Wonders he has seen and known.
To the Duchess of Orleans, when She was taking Leave of the Court at Dover.
THat Sun of Beauty did among us rise,
England first saw the Light of your fair Eyes;
In English too your early Wit was shown;
Favor that Language which was then your own,
When, though a Child, through Guards you made your way,
What Fleet or Army could an Angel stay?
Thrice happy Britain! If she could retain
Whom she first bred within her ambient Main.
Our late-burnt London in Apparel new
Shook off her Ashes to have treated you;
But we must see our Glory snatched away,
And with warm Tears increase the guilty Se^:
No Wind can favor us; how e're it blows,
We must be wreckt, and our dear Treasure lose
Sighs will not let us half our Sorrows tell;
Fair, Lovely, Great, and best of Nymphs, Farewell*
Written on a Card that Her Majesty tore at Ombra.
THE Cards you ^are in Value rise,
So do the Wounded by your Eyes:
Who to Celestial things aspire,
Are by that Passion raised the higher.
To the Duchess, when he presented this Book to Her Royal Highness.
Madam,
I Here present you with the Rage,
And with the Beauties of a former Age;
Wishing you may with as great Pleasure view
This, as we take in Gazing upon you:
Thus we writ then, your brighter Eyes inspire,
Anobler Flame, and raise our ^^nius higher:
While we your Wit and early Knowledge fear,
To our Productions we become severe;
Your matchless Beauty gives our Fancy wing*
Your Judgment makes us careful how we sing.
^ines not composed, as heretofore, in haste,
^olisht, like Marble, shall like Marble last;
And make you through as many Ages shine,
As Tasso has the Hero's of your Line:
Tho other Names our wary Writers use,
You are the Subject of the British Muse,
Dilating Mischief to your self unknown,
Men write, and die, of Wounds they dare not own;
So the bright Sun burns all our Grass away,
While it means nothing but to give us Day.
These Verses were writ in the Tasso of Her Royal Highness.
TAsso knew how the fairer Sex to Grace,
But in no One, durst all Perfection place:
In Her alone, that owns this Book, is seen,
Clorinda's Spirit, and her lofty Mien,
Sophronia's Piety, Erminia's Truth,
Armida's Charms, her Beauty, and her Youth.
Our Princes here, as in a Glass, does dress
Her well-taught Mind, and every Grace express:
More to our Wonder, than Rinaldo fought,
The Hero's Race excels the Poet's Thought,
Upon our late Loss of the Duke of Cambridge.
THE failing Blossoms which a young Plant bears,
Engage our Hope for the succeeding Years:
And Hope is all which Art or Nature brings
At the first Trial to accomplish things.
Mankind was first created an Essay,
That ruder draft the Deluge washed away:
How many Ages past, what Blood and Toil
Before we made one Kingdom of this Isle?
How long in vain had Nature strived to frame
A perfect Princess e're her Highness came?
For Joys so great we must with patience wait,
It Is the set-price of Happiness complete.
As a First^fruit Heaven claimed that lovely Boy,
The Next shall live, and be the Nation's Joy.
Translated out of Spanish.
THo we may seem importunate,
While your Compassion we implore;
They whom you make too Fortunate,
May with Presumption vex you more.
Of the Lady Mary, etc.
AS once the Lion Honey gave,
Out of the strong such sweetness came;
A Royal Hero no less brave,
Produced this sweet, this lovely Dame:
To her the Prince that did oppose
Such mighty Armies in the Field,
And Holland from prevailing Foes
Could so well free, himself does yield:
Not Belgia's Fleet (his high Command)
Which Triumphs where the Sun does rise,
Nor all the Force he leads by Land,
Could guard him from her conquering Eyes.
Orange with Youth, Experience has;
In Action young, in Council old:
Orange is what Augustus was,
Brave, Wary, Provident, and Bold:
On that fair Tree, which bears his Name,
Blossoms and Fruit at once are found;
In him we all admire the same,
His flowery Youth with wisdom Crowned.
Empire and Freedom Reconciled,
In Holland are by Great Nassaw;
Like those he sprung from, Just and Mild,
To willing People he gives Law.
Thrice Happy Pair! so Near Allied,
In Royal Blood, and Virtue too;
Now Love has you together tied,
May none this Triple knot undo.
The Church shall be the happy place,
Where streams which from the same source run,
Tho diverse Lands awhile they grace,
Unite again and are made one.
A thousand thanks the Nation ows
To him that does protect us all;
For while he thus his Niece bestows,
About our Isle he builds a Wall;
A Wall like that which Athens had,
By th'Oracles advice, of wood:
Had theirs been such as Charles has made,
That mighty State till now had stood.
To the Servant of a Fair Lady. This Copy of Verses being omitted in the former
Edition.
FAir Fellow Servants, may your gentle Ear
Prove more propitious to my slighted care,
Than the bright Dames we serve; for her Relief
(Vexed with the long expressions of my Grief)
Receive these Plaints; nor will her high disdain
Forbid my humble Muse to court her Train:
Thy skilful hand contributes to our Woe,
And whets those Arrows which confound us so.
A thousand Cupids in those Curls do sit,
Those curious Nets thy slender Fingers knit:
The Graces put not more exactly on
Th'attire of Venus, when the Ball she won,
Than that young Beauty by thy care is dressed,
When all our Youth prefers her to the rest.
You the soft Season know, when best her Mind
May be to Pity or to Love inclined;
In some well-chosen hour supply his ^ear,
Whose hopeless Love durst never tempt the Ear
Of that (...) Goddess: you (her Priest) declar^
What offerings may propitiate the Fair,
Rich Orient Pearl, bright Stones that n're decay,
Or polisht Lines which longer last than they:
For if I thought she took delight in those,
To where the cheerful Morn does first disclose;
(The shady Night removing with her Beams)
Winged with bold Love, I Would fly to fetch such gems*
But since her Eyes, her Teeth, her Lip excels,
All that is found in Mines or Fishes shells;
Her Nobler part as far exceeding these,
None but Immortal gifts her Mind should please:
The shining Jewels Greece, and Troy bestowed
On Spar^an's Queen, her lovely Neck did lode,
And snowy (...) ^ut when the Town was burned,
Those fading (...) were to Ashes turned*
Her Beauty too had perish^ and her Fame,
Had not the (...) from the Flame.
Upon the Earl of Roscommon's Translation of Horace De Art Poetica: And of the
Use of Poetry.
ROme was not better by her Horace taught,
Than we are here to comprehend his thought*
The Poet writ to Noble Piso there,
A Noble Piso does instruct us here,
Gives us a pattern in his flowing Style,
And with rich Precepts does oblige our Isle;
Britain, whose Genius is in Verse expressed
^old and Sublime, but negligently dressed.
Horace will our superfluous Branches (...)
Give us new Rules, and set our Harp in tune;
Direct us how to back the winged Horse,
Favor his flight, and moderate his force.
Tho Poets may of Inspiration boast;
Their Rage ill governed, in the Clouds is lost.
He that proportioned wonders can disclose,
At once his Fancy and his Judgment shows.
Chaste moral writing we may learn from hence;
Neglect of which no Wit can recompense:
The Fountain which from Helicon proceeds,
That sacred stream should never water weeds;
Nor make the Crop of thorns and thistles grow,
Which Envy or perverted Nature sow.
Well sounding Verses are the Charm we use,
Heroic Thoughts, and Virtue to infuse;
Things of deep sense we may in Prose unfold,
But they move more, in lofty Numbers told;
By the loud Trumpet, which our Courage aids,
We learn that sound, as well as sense, persuades.
The Muse's Friend unto himself severe;
With silen^ pity looks on all that E^r;
But where a brave, a public Action shines;
That he rewards with his Immortal Lines.
Whether it be in Council or in Fight;
His Countries Honor is his chief delight:
Praise of great Acts he seatters, as a seed,
Which may the like, in coming Ages breed.
Here taught the fate of Verses, always prized
With admiration, or as much despised;
Men will be less indulgent to their Faults,
And patience have so cultivate their thoughts:
Poets love hal^ the praise they should have got,
Could it be known what they discreetly blot:
Finding new Words, that to the Ravished Ear
May like the Language of the Gods appear;
Such as of old, wife Bards employed, to make
Unpolisht Men their wild Retreats forsake;
Law giving Heroes, famed for taming Brutes,
And raising Cities with their charming Lutes:
For rudest minds with Harmony were caught,
And civil Life was by the Muses taught.
So wandering Bees would perish in the Air,
Did not a sound proportioned to their Ear,
Appease their Rage, invite them to the Hive,
Unite their Force, and teach them how to thrive,
To rob the Flowers, and to forbear the Spoil;
Preserved in Winter by their Summers Toil,
They give us Food, which may with Nectar vie,
And Wax, that does the absent Sun supply.
Epitaph on Sir George Speak.
UNder this Stone lies Virtue, Youth,
Unblemisht Probity and Truth:
Just unto all Relations known,
A worthy Patriot, Pious Son.
Whom Neib ouring Towns so often sent,
To give their Sense in Parliament;
With Lives and Fortunes trusting one,
Who so discreetly used his own.
Sober he was, Wise, Temperate;
Contented with an Old Estate,
Which no soul A varice did increase,
Nor Wanton Luxury make less.
While yet but Young, his Father died,
And left him to an happy Guide:
Not Lemuel's Mother with more care
Did counsel or instruct her Heir;
Or teach with more success her Son
The Vices of the Time to shun.
An Heiress she, while yet alive,
All that was here is to him did give:
And he just Gratitude did show
To one that had obliged him so;
Nothing too much for her he thought,
By whom he was so bred and taught;
So early made that path to tread,
Which did his Youth to Honor lead.
His short Life did a P^ttern give,
How Neighbors, Husbands, Friends should live.
The Virtue of a private Life
Exceed the glorious Noise and Strife
Of Battles won; in th^se we find
The solid In^rest of Mankind.
Approved by all, and loved so well,
Though Young, like Fru^ that ripe, he fell.
Of Her Majesty on New Years Day, 1683.
WHat Revolutions in the World have been,
How are we changed, since first we saw the Queen?
She, like the Sun, does still the same appear,
Bright as She was at her Arrival here:
Time has Commission Mortals to impair,
But things Celestial is obliged to spare.
May every New-year find her still the same,
In Health and Beauty as She hither came;
When Lords and Commons with united Voice,
The Infanta named, approved the Royal Choice:
First of our Queens, whom not the King alone,
But the whole Nation lifted to the Throne.
With like Consent, and like Desert was crowned
The Glorious Prince, that does the Turk confound.
Victorious both; his Conduct wins the day,
And her Example chaces Vice away.
Tho louder Fame attend the Martial Rage;
It Is greater Glory to Reform the Age.
A Presage of the Ruin of the Turkish Empire, Presented to His Majesty on His
Birthday.
SInce JAMES the Second graced the British Throne,
Truce well observed has been infringed by none.
Christians to him their present Union ow,
And late Success against the Common Foe:
While Neighboring Princes, loath't to urge their Fate,
Court his Assistance, and suspend their Hate.
So angry Bulls the Combat do forbear,
When from the Wood a Lion does appear.
This happy day Peace to our Island sent,
As now he gives it to the Continent.
^ Prince more fit for such a Glorious task
Than England's King, from Heaven we cannot ask:
^e Great and Good, proportioned to the Work,
Their ill-drawn Swords shall turn against the Turk.
Such Kings, like Stars, with influence unconfined,
^^ine with Aspect propitious to Mankind;
^avour the Innocent, repress the Bold,
^ndwhile they flourish, make an Age of Gold.
Bred in the Camp, famed for his Valor young,
At Sea successful, vigorous and strong;
His Fleet, His Army, and His mighty Mind
Esteem and Revrence through the World do find*
A Prince with such advantages as these,
Where He persuades not, may command a Peace*
Britain declaring for the juster side,
The most Ambitious will forget their Pride;
They that complain, will their endeavors cease,
Advised by Him incline to present Peace;
Join to the Turks destruction, and then bring
All their Pretenses to so just a King.
If the successful Troublers of Mankind,
With Laurel crowned, so great Applause do find;
Shall the vexed World less Honor yield to those
That stop their Progress, and their Rage oppose*
Next to that Power, which does the Ocean ^w,
Is to set Bounds, and give Ambition Law.
The British Monarch shall the Glory have,
That famous Greece remains no longer Slave;
That source of Art and cultivated Thought,
Which they to Rome, and Romans hither brought.
The banished Muses shall no longer mourn;
But may with Liberty to Greece return:
Tho Slaves, (like Birds that sing not in a Cage)
They lost their Genius and Poetic Rage;
Homers again, and Pinda^s may be found,
And his great Actions with their numbers crowned.
The Turk's vast Empire does united stand;
Christians divided under the Command
Of jarring Princes, would be soon undone,
Did not this Hero make their Interest one;
Peace to embrace, ruin the Common Foe,
Exalt the Cross, and lay the Croissant low.
Thus may the Gospel to the rising Sun
Be spread, and flourish where it first begun;
And this great day, so justly honored here,
Known to the East, and celebrated there.
Haec Ego longaevus cecini tibi m^xime Regum:
Ausus and ipse m^nu juvenum tentare laborem.
Virgil. OF Divine Love.
6. CANTO'S.
ASserting the Authority of the Scripture, in which this Love is revealed.

The Prefer^nce and Love of God to Man in the Creation.

The same Love more amply declared in our Redemption.

How necessary this Love is to reform Mankind, and how excellent in it self.

Sh^wing h^w happy the World would be if this Love were univers^lly embraced.

Of preserving this Love in our memory, and how useful the Contemplation
thereof is.

CANTO I.
THe Grecian Muse has all their Gods survived*
Nor Jove at us, nor Phoebus is arrived;
Frail Deities, which first the Poets made,
And then invoked, to give their Fancies aid!
Yet if they still divert us with their Rage,
What may be hoped for in a better Age?
When not from Helicon's imagined Spring,
But sacred Writ, we borrow what we Sing:
This with the Fabric of the World begun,
Elder than Light, and shall out-last the Sun.
Before this Oracle (like Dagon) all
The false Pretenders, Delphos, Hammon, fall;
Long since despised, and silent they afford
Honor and Triumph to the Eternal Word.
As late Philosophy our Globe has graced,
And rolling Earth among the Planets placed;
So has this Book intitl'd us to Heaven,
And Rules to guide us to that Mansion giv^n:
Tells the conditions, how our Peace was made*
And is our Pledge for the great Author's aid*
His Power in Nature's ampler Book we find;
But the less Volume does express his mind.
This Light unknown, bold Epicurus taught*
That his blessed Gods vouchsafe us not a thought;
But unconcerned, let all below them slide,
As Fortune does, or humane Wisdom, guide*
Religion thus removed, the sacred Yoke,
And Band of all Society is broke:
What use of Oaths, of Promise, or of Test*
Where Men regard no God but Interest?
What endless War would jealous Nations tear,
^f none above did witness what they swear?
Sad Fate of Unbelievers, (and yet just)
Among themselves to find so little trust!
Were Scripture silent, Nature would proclaim,
Without a God, our falsehood and our shame.
To know our Thoughts, the Object of his Eyes,
Is the first step toward being good, or wise;
For tho with Judgment we on things reflect,
Our Will determines, not our Intellect:
Slaves to their Passion, Reason men employ
Only to compass what they would enjoy;
His fear, to guard us from our selves, we need,
And sacred Writ our Reason does exceed.
For the Heaven shows the Glory of the Lord,
Yet something shines more Glorious in his Word;
His mercy this (which all his work excels)
His tender kindness, and compassion tells:
While we informed by that Celestial Book,
Into the Bowels of our Maker look.
Love there revealed, which never shall have end,
Nor had beginning, shall our Song commend;
Describe it self, and warm us (...) that flame,
Which first from Heaven, to make us Happy, came.
CANTO II.
THE fear of Hell, or aiming to be Blessed,
Savours too much of private Interest;
This moved not Moses, nor the zealous Paul,
Who for their Friends abandoned Soul and all:
A greater yet, from Heaven to Hell descends.
To save, and make his Enemies his Friends*
What line of Praise can fathom such a Love,
Which reached the lowest bottom from above?
The Royal Prophet, that extended Grace
From Heaven to earth, measured but half that space:
The Law was regnant, and confined his though^*
^ell was not conquered, when that Poet (...)*
Heaven was ^earce heard of, until be came down
To make the Region, where Love triumphs, known*
That early Love of Creatures yet unmade,
To ^^ame the World The Almighty did persuade:
For Love it was, that first created Light,
Moved on the Waters, cha^'d away the Night
From the rude Chaos, and bestowed new Grace
On things disposed of to their proper place;
Some to rest here, and some to shine above:
Earth, Sea, and Heaven, were all The Effects of Love*
And Love would be re^urn'd; but there was none*
That to themselves, or others yet were known:
The World a Palace was, without a Guest,
Till one appears, that must excel she rest;
One, like the Author, whose Capacious mind
Might by the Glorious Work, the Maker find;
Might measure Heaven, and give each Star a name*
With Art and Courage the rough (...);
Over the Globe, with swelling Sails might go,
And that it is round, by his experience know;
Make strongest Beasts obedient to his Will,
And serve his use the fertile Earth to Till.
When by his Word, God had accomplished all;
Man to Create, he did a Council call;
Employed his Hand, to give the Dust he took
A graceful Figure, and Majestic Look;
With his own Breath, conveyed into his Breast
Life and a Soul fit to command the rest,
Worthy alone to Celebrate his Name
For such a Gift, and tell from whence it came:
Birds sing his Praises, in a wilder Note,
But not with lasting numbers, and with thought,
Man's great Prerogative. But above all
His Grace abounds, in his new Favorites fall.
If he Create, it is a World he makes;
^f he be ang'ry, the Creation shakes:
From his just wrath our guilty Parents fled;
He curs't the Earth, but bruised the Serpent's head.
Amidst the Storm, his Bounty did exceed,
In the rich promise of the Virgins seed;
Tho Justice death as satisfaction craves,
Love finds a way to pluck us from our Graves.
CANTO III.
NOT willing Terror should his Image move,
He gives a Pattern of Eternal Love;
His Son descends, to treat a Peace with those,
Which were, and must have ever been his Foes;
Poor he became, and left his Glorious Seat,
To make us humble, and to make us great;
His business here was happiness to give
To those, whose Malice could not let him live:
Legions of Angels, which he might have used,
For us resolved to perish, he refused*
While they stood ready to prevent his Loss,
Love took him up, and nailed him to the Cross*
Immortal Love! which in his Bowels reigned,
That we might be by such a Love constrained
To make return of Love; upon this Pole
Our Duty does, and our Religion roll.
To Love is to believe, to hope, to know,
It Is an Essay, a taste of Heaven below.
He to proud Potentates would not be known,
Of those that loved him, he was hid from none.
Till Love appear, we live in anxious doubt;
But Smoke will vanish, when that Flame breaks out:
This is the Fire, that would consume our Dross,
Re^ine, and make us richer by the Loss.
Could we forbear Dispute, and practice Love,
We should agree, as Angels do above.
Where Love presides, not Vice alone does find
No Entrance there, but Virtues stay behind*
Both Faith and Hope, and all the meaner train
Of moral Virtues, at the door remain;
Love only enters, as a Native there,
For born in Heaven, it does but sojourn here.
He that alone, would wise and mighty be,
Commands that others Love, as well as he:
Love as he Loved, how can we soar so high?
He can add wings, when he commands to fly:
Nor should we be with this Command dismayed,
He that Example gives, will give his Aid;
For he took flesh, that where his Precepts fail,
His Practice as a Pattern may prevail;
His Love at once, and Dread instructs our thought,
As Man he suffered, and as God he taught;
Will for the Deed he takes, we may with ease
Obedient be, for if we Love, we please;
Weak tho we are, to Love is no hard task,
And Love for Love, is all that Heaven does ask:
Love, that would all men just and temperate make,
Kind to themselves, and others, for his sake.
It Is with our Minds, as with a fertile ground;
Wanting this Love, they must with Weeds abound;
Unruly Passions, whose effects are worse,
Than Thorns and Thistles springing from the curse.
CANTO. IV.
TO Glory Man, or Misery is born,
Of his proud Foe the Envy or the Scorn;
Wretched he is, or happy in Extreme,
Base in himself, but great in Heavens esteem;
With Love, of all created things, the best,
Without it more pernicious than the rest.
For greedy Wolves ung^arded Sheep devour
But while their hunger lasts, and then give over;
Man's boundless Avarice his want exceeds,
And on his Neighbors, round about him, feeds:
His Pride, and vain Ambition are so vast,
That Deluge^like, they lay whole Nations wast;
Debauches and Excess, tho with less noise,
As great a portion of Mankind destroys.
The Beasts and Monsters, Hercules oppressed,
Might in that Age, some Provinces infest;
These more de^^ructive Monsters, are the Bane
Of every Age, and in all Nations reign;
But soon would vanish, if the World were blessed
With Sacred Love, by which they are represt.
Impendent death, and guilt that threatens Hell,
Are dreadful guests, which here with Mortals dw^ll^,
And a (...) Conscience mingling with their Joy
Thoughts of Despair, does their whole Life annoy:
But Love appearing, all those Terrors fly,
We live contented, and contented die;
They in whose breast, this sacred Love has place,
Death as a passage to their Joy embrace.
Clouds and thick Vapors which obscure the day,
The Suns victorious Beams may chase away;
Those which our Life corrupt, and darken, Love,
The Nobler Star, must from the Soul remove:
Spots are observed in that which bounds the year,
This brighter Sun moves in a boundless Sphere;
Of Heaven the Joy, the Glory, and the Light,
Shines among Angels, and admits no Night.
CANTO V.
THis Iron Age, so fraudulent and bold,
Touched with this Love, would be an Age of Gold;
Not as they feigned, that Oaks should Honey drop,
Or Land neglected bear an unsown Crop:
Love would make all things easy, safe, and cheap,
None for himself, would either sow, or reap:
Our ready Help, and mutual Love would yield
A nobler Harvest, than the richest Field.
Famine and Dearth, confined to certain parts,
Extended are, by barrenness of Hearts;
Some pine for want, where others surfeit now,
But then we should the use of Plenty know:
Love would betwixt the Rich and Needy stand,
And spread Heavens bounty with an equal hand;
At once the Givers, and Receivers bless,
Increase their Joy, and make their Sufferings less.
Who for himself no Miracle would make,
Dispensed with Nature for the Peoples sake;
He that long Fasting would no wonder show,
Made Loaves and Fishes, as they eat them, grow.
Of all his Power, which boundless was above,
Here he used none, but to express his Love;
And such a Love would make our Joy exceed,
Not when our own, but other mouths we feed.
Laws would be useless which rude Nature awe,
Love changing Nature, would prevent the Law;
Tigers, and Lions, into Dens we thrust,
But milder Creatures with their freedom trust.
Devils are chained, and tremble; but the Spouse
No force but Love, nor Bond, but Bounty, knows:
Men, whom we now, so (...) and dangerous see,
Would Guardian Angels to each other be:
Such wonders can this mighty Love perform,
Vultures to Doves, Wolves into Lambs transform.
Love, what Isaiah prophesied, can do,
Exalt the Valleys, lay the Mountains low:
Humblethe Lofty, the Dejected raise,
Smooth, and make strait, our rough and crooked ways.
Love, strong as Death, and like it, levels all;
With that possessed, the great in Title fall,
Themselves esteem, but equal to the least,
Whom Heaven with that high Character has blessed.
This Love, the Center of our Union, can
Alone bestow complete Repose on Man;
Tame his wild Appetite, make inward Peace,
And Foreign strife among the Nations cease:
No Martial Trumpet should disturb our rest,
Nor Princes Arm, tho to subdue the East;
Where for the Tomb ^^o many Hero's, taught
By those that guided their Devotion, faught.
Thrice Happy we, could we like Ardor have
To gain his Love, as they to win his Grave!
Love as he Loved, a Love so unconfined
With Arms extended would embrace Mankind.
Self-Love would cease, or be dilated, when
We should behold, as many Selfs, as Men;
All of one Family, in Blood allied,
His precious Blood, that for our Ransom died.
CANTO VI.
THo the Creation, so divinely taught,
Prints such a lively Image in our thought,
That the first spark of new Created light
From Chaos struck, affects our present sight:
Yet the first Christians did esteem more blessed
The day of Rising, than the day of Rest;
That every week might new occasion give,
To make his Triumph in their memory live.
Then let our Muse compose a Sacred Charm
To keep his Blood, among us, ever warm;
And singing, as the Blessed do above,
With our last breath dilate this ^lame of Love.
But on so vast a Subject, who can find
Words that may reach the Idea's of his mind?
Our Language fails, or if it could supply,
What Mortal Thought can raise it self so high?
Despairing here, we might abandon Art,
And only hope to have it in our heart;
But though we find this Sacred Task too hard,
Yet the Design, th'endeavor brings Reward;
The Contemplation does suspend our Woe,
And makes a Truce with all the Ills we know.
As Readiness afflicted Spirit, from the sound
Of David's Harp, a present Solace found;
So on this Theme while we our Muse engage,
No Wounds are felt, of Fortune, or of Age:
On Divine Love to meditate is Peace,
And makes all care of meaner things to cease.
Amazed at once, and comforted to find
A boundless Power so infinitely kind;
The Soul contending to that Light to fly
From her dark Cell, we practice how to die;
Employing thus the Poet's winged Art,
To reach this Love, and grave it in our heart.
Joy so complete, so solid and severe,
Would leave no place for meaner Pleasures there;
Pale they would look, as Stars that must be gone,
When from the East the Rising Sun comes on.
Floriferis ut Apes in saltibus omnia libant,
sic nos Scripturae depascimur aurea dicta;
Anrea perpetua semper dignissima vita.
Nam Divinus Amor, cum coepit vociferari,
Diffugiunt Animi Terrores: --
Lucr. Exul eram, requiesque mihi, non Fama petita est,
Men's intenta suis ne foret usque malis.
Namque ubi mota calent Sacra mea Pectora Musa,
Altior humano Spiritus ille malo est.
De Trist. OF Divine Poesy, TWO CANTOS, Occasioned upon sight of the 53d
Chapter of Isaiah, turned into Verse by Mrs. Wharton.
CANTO I.
POets we prize, when in their Verse we find
Some great employment of a worthy mind.
Angels have been inquisitive to know
The Secret, which this Oracle does show.
What was to come Isaiah did declare,
Which she describes, as if she had been there;
Had seen the Wounds, which to the Reader's view,
She draws so lively, that they Bleed a new.
As Ivy thrives, which on the Oak takes hold,
So with the Prophets may her lines grow old;
If they should die, who can the World forgive?
Such pious Lines! When wanton Sapho's live.
Who with his Breath his Image did inspire,
Expects it should foment a Nobler fire:
Not Love which Brutes as well as Men may know;
But Love like his, to whom that Breath we owe.
Verse so designed, on that high Subject wrote,
Is the Perfection of an ardent Thought:
The Smoke which we from burning Incense raise,
When we complete the Sacrifice of Praise.
In boundless Verse the Fancy soars too high,
For any Object, but the Deity.
What Mortal can with Heaven pretend to share
In the Superlatives of Wise and Fair?
A meaner Subject when with these we grace,
A Giants habit on a Dwarf we place.
Sacred should be the Product of our Muse,
Like that sweet Oil, above all private use:
On pain of Death forbidden to be made,
But when it should be on the Altar laid.
Verse shows a rich inestimable Vein,
When dropped from Heaven, it is thither sent again:
Of Bounty it is that he admits our Praise,
Which does not him, but us that yield it raise.
For as that Angel up to Heaven did rise,
Born on the Flame of Manoah's Sacrifice:
^o winged with Praise, we penetrate the Sky,
Teach Clouds and Stars to praise him as we fly;
The whole Creation, by our Fall made groan,
^^is Praise to Echo, and suspend their Moan
For that he Reigns, all Creatures should rejoice,
And we with Songs supply their want of voice.
The Church Triumphant, and the Church below
In Songs of Praise their present Union show:
Their Joys are full, our Expectation long;
In Life we differ, but we join in Song.
Angels, and we, assisted by this Art,
May Sing together, tho we dwell apart.
Thus we reach Heaven, while vainer Poems must
No higher rise, than Winds may lift the Dust.
From that they spring; this from his breath that gave
To the first Dust, th 'Immortal Soul we have:
His Praise well sung, our great endeavor here,
Shakes off the Dust, and makes that breath appear.
CANTO II.
HE that did first this way of Writing grace,
Converst with the Almighty face to face.
Wonders he did in Sacred Verse unfold,
When he had more than Eighty Winters told:
The Writer feels no dire effects of Age,
Nor Verse that flows from so Divine a Rage.
Eldest of Poets, he beheld the Light,
When first it triumphed 'ore eternal Night;
Chaos he saw, and could distinctly tell
How that Confusion into Order fell:
As if consulted with, he has expressed
The Work of the Creator and his Rest.
How the flood drowned the first offending Race;
Which might the Figure of our Globe deface:
For new made Earth, so even and so fair,
Less equal now, uncertain makes the Air:
Surpised with heat, and unexpected cold
Early distempers make our Youth look old:
Our Days so evil, and so few, may tell
That on the ruins of that World we dwell.
Strong as the Oaks that nourish't them, and high,
That long-lived Race did on their force rely,
Neglecting Heaven: but we of shorter date,
Should be more mindful of impendent Fate.
To Worms that crawl upon this Rubbish here,
This Span of Life may yet too long appear:
Enough to humble, and to make us great,
If it prepare us for a Nobler Seat.
Which well observing, he in Numerous Lines,
Taught wretched Man, how fast his Life declines:
In whom he dwelt, before the World was made,
And may again retire, when that shall fade.
The lasting Iliads have not lived so long,
As his and Deborah's triumphant Song.
Delphos unknown, no Muse could them inspi^e,
But that which governs the Celestial Quire.
Heaven to the Pious did this Art reveal;
And from their store succeeding Poets steal.
Homer's Scamander for the Trojans faught,
And swelled so high, by her old Kishbon taught*
His River scarce could fierce Achilles stay;
Hers more successful, swept her Foes away.
The Host of Heaven, his Ph^ebus and his Mars,
He Arms, instructed by her ^ighting Stars.
She led them all against the Common Foe:
But he misled by what he saw below,
The Powers above, like wretched Men, divides,
And breaks their Union into different ^ides,
The Noblest parts which in his Hero's shine,
May be but Copies of that Heroine.
Ho^^ himself, and Agamemnon, she
The Writer could, and the Commander, be
Truth she relates, in a sublimer strain
Than all the Tales the boldest Greek could feign:
For what she sung, that Spirit did indite,
Which gave her courage, and success in fight.
A double Garland crowns the matchless Dame;
From Heaven her Poem, and her Conquest came.
Tho of the Jews she merit most esteem:
Yet here the Christian has the greater Theme.
Her martial Song describes how Sisera fell,
This sings our Triumph over Death and Hell.
The rising Light employed the sacred breath
Of the blessed Virgin and Elizabeth
In Songs of Joy; the Angels sung his Birth:
Here, how he treated was upon the Earth
Trembling we read; the Affliction and the Scorn,
Which for our Guilt, so patiently was born.
(...) and Suffering, all belong
Tho (...) to one Celestial Song:
And (...) using so divine an Art,
Has in this Con^ort, sung the Tragic part.
As Hann^h's Seed was vowed to sacred use,
So here this Lady consecrates her Muse.
With like Reward may Heaven her Bed adorn,
With Fruit as fair as by her Muse is born.
Of the Paraphrase on the Lords Prayer Written by Mrs. Wharton.
SIlence, you Winds, listen Etherial Lights,
While our Urania sings what Heaven indites;
The Numbers are the Nymphs, but from above
Descends the Pledge of that Eternal Love.
Here wretched Mortals have not leave alone,
But are instructed to approach his Throne;
And how can he to miserable Men
Deny Requests, which his own Hand did Pen?
In the Evangelists we find the Prose,
Which Paraphrased by her a Poem grows;
A devout Rapture, so divine a Hymn,
It may become the highest Seraphim;
For they like her in that Celestial Quire,
Sing only what the Spirit does inspire.
Taught by our Lord and theirs, with us they may
For all, but pardon for Offenses, pray.
Some Reflections of his upon the several Petitions in the same Prayer.
I. HIS Sacred Name, with reverence profound,
Should mentioned be, and trembling at the sound*
It was Jehovah, it is our Father now,
So low to us, does Heaven vouchsafe to bow:
Psalm. 18. 9.
He brought it down, that taught us how to pray,
And did so dearly for our Ransom pay.
II. His Kingdom come: For this we pray in vain,
Unless he does in our affections reign:
Absurd it were to wish for such a King,
And not Obedience to his Scep^or bring;
Whose Yoke is easy, and his Burden light,
His Service Freedom, and his Judgments right.
II^. His Will be done; In Fact it is always done,
But as in Heaven, it must be made our own:
His Will should all our Inclinations sway,
Whom Nature and the Universe obey.
Happy the Man, whose Wishes are confined
To what has been Eternally designed;
Referring all to his Paternal care,
To whom more dear, than to our selves we are.
IV. It is not what our Avarice hoards up;
It Is he that feeds us, and that fills our Cup:
Like newborn Babes, depending on the Breast,
From day to day we on his Bounty Feast*
Nor should the Soul expect above a day
To dwell in her frail Tenement of Clay:
The setting Sun should seem to bound our Race,
And the new day a gift of special Grace.
V. That he should all our Trespasses forgive,
While we in hatred with our Neighbors live;
Though so to pray may seem an easy task,
We curse our selves when thus inclined we ask:
This Prayer to use, we ought with equal care
Our Souls as to the Sacrament prepare*
The Noblest Worship of the Power above,
I^ to extol, and imitate his Love:
Not to Forgive our Enemies alone,
But use our Bounty that they may be won.
VI. Guard us from all Temptations of the Foe,
And those we may in several stations know:
The Rich and Poor in slippery places stand;
Give us enough, but with a sparing Hand:
Not ill-persuading Want, nor wanton Wealth;
But what proportioned is to Life and Health.
For not the Dead, but Living sing thy Praise,
Exalt thy Kingdom, and thy Glory raise.
-- Favete Linguis --
Virginibus Puerisque Canto,
Horat. Of the last Verses in the Book.
WHen we for Age could neither read nor write,
The Subject made us able to indite.
The Soul with Nobler Resolutions decked,
The Body stooping, does Herself erect:
No Mortal Parts are requisite to raise
Her, that Unbody'd can her Maker praise.
The Seas are quiet, when the Winds give over;
So calm are we, when Passions are no more:
For then we know how vain it was to boast
Of fleeting Things, so certain to be lost.
Clouds of Affection from our younger Eyes
Conceal that emptiness, which Age descries.
The Soul's dark Cottage, battered and decayed.
Let Us in new Light through chinks that time has made
Stronger by weakness, wiser Men become
As they draw near to their Eternal home:
Leaving the Old, both Worlds at once they view,
That stand upon the Threshold of the New.
-- Miratur Limen Olympi.
Virgil. FINIS.
THE TABLE.
TO the King, on His Navy. Page 1 Of the Dang^r His Majesty (being Prince)
es^aped in the road at Saint Anderes. 3 Of His Majesty's *receiving the Ne^s of
the Duk^ of Buckingham's death. 13 To the Queen, occasioned upon sight of Her
Majesty's picture. 15 Upon his Majesty's repairing of Paul's. 19 The Country to
my Lady of Carlisse. 23 The Countess of Carlisle i^ Mourning. 24 In answer to
one who writ against a fair Lady. 27 On my Lady Dorothy Sidneys Picture. 29 To
Vandike. 30 Of the Lady who can sleep when she pleases. 33 Of the misreport of
her being painted. 34 Of her passing through a crowd of People. 36 The story of
Phoebus and Daphne applied. 37 Fabula Phoebi and Daphnis. 38 Of Mrs. Arden. 39
To Amorett. 40 On the Head of a Stag. 44 To a Lady in a Garden. 45 The Misers
Speech in a Mask. 46 On the friendship betwixt two Ladies. 48 Of her Chamber.
49 Of loving at first sight. 51 The self banished. 52 SONG. 53 Thirsis,
Galatea. 55 The Battle of the Summer Islands in three Canto's. 58 SONG. 71 Of
Love. 72 To Phillis. 75 To Phillis. 76 SONG. 78 SONG. 79 To Amorett. 80 To my
Lord of Falkland. 81 For drinking of Healths. 83 On my Lady Isabella playing on
the Lute. 84 To a Lady singing of a Song of his Composing. 85 Of the Marriage
of the Dwarfs. 86 Loves Farewell. 8^ From a Child. 89 On a Girdle. 90 The
Apology of Sleep: For not approaching the Lady who can do anything but sleep
when she pleases. 91 At Pens-hurst. 93 Another. 96 To my Lord of Leicester. 98
To a very young Lady. 100 SONG. 101 SONG. 103 On the discovery of a Ladies
Painting. 104 To a Lady from whom he received a Silver Pen. 106 On a Bread of
diverse colors, woven by four Ladies 107 To my Lord of Northumberland upon the
Death of his Lady. 108 To my Lord Admiral, of his late Sickness and Recovery
111 (...) Malade. 114 Of the Queen. 116 Upon the Death of my Lady Rich. 120 To
the Queen Mother of France upon her Landing. 125 To the mutable Fair. 127 Of
Salley. 131 Puerperium. 133 Of a Lady who writ in praise of Mira. 135 ^o one
married to an old man. Ibid. To Flavia, a Song. 136 ^he Fall. 137 Of Silvia.
138 The Budd. 139 Upon Ben. Johnson. 141 To Mr. George Sands, on his
Translation of some parts. of the Bible. 143 Chloris and Hilas, made to a
Saraban. 144 Under a Ladies Picture. 145 In answer of Sir John Suckling's
Verses. 146 To a Friend of the different success of their Loves. 150 An Apology
for having loved before. 152 To Zelenda. 154 On Mr. John Fletcher's Plays. 156
To Chloris. 158 On St. James' Park, as lately improved by his Majesty. Ibid. To
Sir William Davenant, upon his two first Books of Gondibert, written in France.
166 To my worthy Friend, the Translator of Gratius. 169 To the King, upon his
Majesty's happy Return. 171 To my Lady Morton on New-years-day 1650. at the
Louvre in Paris. 178 Of a fair Lady playing with a Snake. 1^1 To his worthy
Friend Mr. E'velyn upon his Translation of Lucretius. 182 Part of the fourth
Book of Virgil Translated. 185 Upon a War with Spain, and a Fight at Sea. 193
Epitaph, to be written under the Latin inscription upon the Tomb of the only
Son of the Lord Andover. 199 To the Queen upon her Majesty's Birthday, after
Her happy recovery from a dangerous sickness. 200 Instructions to a Painter,
for the drawing of the Posture and Progress of His Majesty's Forces at Sea,
under the Command of his Highness-Royal. Together with the Battle and Victory
obtained over the Duch, June 3. 1665. 203 To the King. 222 To a Friend of the
Authors; a Person of Honor, who lately writ a Religious Book, Entitled,
Historical Applications, and occasional Meditations upon several Subjects. 224
To Mr. Henry Laws, who had then newly set a Song of mine in the year 1635. 225
Upon Her Majesty's new Buildings at Somerset House. 227 On the picture of afair
Youth taken after he was dead. 230 Epigram upon the Golden Medal. 231 Of a Tree
cut in Paper. 232 To a Lady from whom be received the foregoing Copy which for
many Years had been lost. 233 The Night-piece, or a Picture drawn in the dark.
234 Of English Verse. 236 So^g by Mrs. Knight, to Her Majesty on Her Birthday.
238 To his (...) by Friend Sir Thomas Higgons, upon his Tran^^tion of his
Venetian Triumph. 240 Epitaph. 241 Of Her Royal Highness, Mother to the Prince
of Orange, and of ^er Portr^ictt, written by the late Duchess of York white
she lived with her. ^44 To the Duchess of Orleans, when she was taking leave
of the Course at Dover. 245 Written on a Cord that Her Majesty tore at Ombra.
246 To ^he Duchess when he presented this Book to Her Royal Highness. 247
Verse writ in the Tasso of her Royal Highness. 248 Upon our late loss of the
Duke of Cambridge. 249 Translated out of Spanish. 250 Of the Lady Mary, etc.
Ibid. To the Servant of a fair Lady. 253 Upon the Earl of Roscommon's
Translation of Horace de Art Poetica: And of the use of Poetry. 255 Epitaph on
Sir George Speak. 258 Of Her Majesty on New-years-day 1683. 261 A Presage of
the Ruin of the Turkish Empire, presented to His Majesty on His Birthday. 262
Of Divine Love. 267 Of Divine Poesy. 287
FINIS.

