THE Second Part OF Mr. Waller's POEMS.
Containing, His Alteration of the MAIDS TRAGEDY, And whatever of his is yet
unprinted: Together with some other Poems, Speeches, etc. that were Printed
severally, and never put into the First Collection of his Poems.

-- Siquis tamen haec quoque siquis
Captus amore leget.
LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCXC.

Licensed,

Sept. 26. 1689.
EDMOND WALLER. esqr. AEtatis suae. 76.


The Preface.
THE Reader need be told no more in commendation of these Poems, than that they
are Mr. Waller's: A Name that carries every thing in it, that is either Great or
Graceful in Poetry. He was indeed the Parent of English Verse, and the first
that showed us our Tongue had Beauty and Numbers in it. Our Language owes more
to him than the French does to Cardinal Ri^hlieu, and the whole Academy. A Poet
cannot think of him, without being in the same rapture Lucretius is in, when
Epicurus comes in his way. Tu pater and rerum inventor, Tu patria nobis
Suppeditas praecepta: Tuesque ex Inclyte, chartis
Floriferis ut Apes in sallibus omnia libant
Omnia Nos itidem depascimur aureadicta:
Aurea, perpetua semper dignissima vita.


The Tongue came into his hands, like a rough Diamond; he polished it first,
and to that degree that all Artists since him have admired the Workmanship,
without pretending to mend it. Sucklyn and Carew, I must confess, wrote some
few things smoothly enough, but as all they did in this kind was not very
considerable, so 'twas a little later than the earliest pieces of Mr. Waller.
He undoubtedly stands first in the List of Refiners, and for ought I know, last
too; for I question whether in Charles the Second's Reign, English did not come
to its full perfection; and whether it has not had its Augustean Age, as well
as the Latin. It seems to be already mixed with Foreign Languages, as far as
its purity will bear; and, as Chemists says of their Menstruums, to be quite
sated with the Infusion. But Posterity will best judge of this -- In the mean
time, it is a surprising Reflection, that between what Spencer wrote last, and
Waller first, there should not be much above twenty years distance: and yet the
one's Language, like the Money of that time, is as current now as ever; whilst
the other's words are like old Coyns, one must go to an Antiquary to understand
their true meaning and value. Such advances may a great Genius make, when it
undertakes any thing in earnest!

Some Painters will hit the chief Lines, and master strokes of a Face so truly,
that through all the differences of Age, the Picture shall still bear a
Resemblance. This Art was Mr. Waller's; he sought out, in this flowing Tongue
of ours, what parts would last, and be of standing use and ornament; and this
he did so successfully, that his Language is now as fresh as it was at first
setting out. Were we to judge barely by the wording, we could not know what was
wrote at twenty, and what at fourscore. He complains indeed of a Tide of words
that comes in upon the English Poet, o'reflows whatever he builds: but this was
less his case than any man's, that ever wrote; and the mischief on it is, this
very complaint will last long enough to confute it self. For though English be
mouldring Stone, as he tells us there; yet he has certainly picked the best out
of a bad Quarry.

We are no less beholding to him for the new turn of Verse, which he brought
in, and the improvement he made in our Numbers. Before his time, men Rhym'd
indeed, and that was all: as for the harmony of measure, and that dance of
words, which good ears are so much pleased with, they knew nothing of it. Their
Poetry then was made up almost entirely of monosyllables; which, when they come
together in any cluster, are certainly the most harsh untunable things in the
World. If any man doubts of this, let him read ten lines in Done, and he will be
quickly convinced. Besides, their Verses ran all into one another, and hung
together, throughout a whole Copy, like the hook't Attoms, that compose a Body
in Des Carts. There was no distinction of parts, no regular stops, nothing for
the Ear to rest upon -- But as soon as the Copy began, down it went, like a
Larum, incessantly; and the Reader was sure to be out of Breath, before he got
to the end of it. So that really Verse in those days was but downright Prose,
tagg'd with Rhymes. Mr. Waller removed all these faults, brought in more
Polysyllables, and smoother measures; bound up his thoughts better, and in a
cadence more agreeable to the nature of the Verse he wrote in: So that
wherever the natural stops of that were, he contrived the little breakings of
his sense so as to fall in with 'em. And for that reason, since the stress of
our Verse lies commonly upon the last Syllable, you will hardly ever find him
using a word of no force there. I would say if I were not afraid the Reader
would think me too nice, that he commonly closes with Verbs, in which we know
the Life of Language consists.

Among other improvements, we may reckon that of his Rhymes. Which are always
good, and very often the better for being new. He had a fine Ear, and knew how
quickly that Sense was cloyed by the same round of chiming Words still
returning upon it. It Is a decided Case by the great Master of Writing. Quae
sunt ampla and Pulchra, diu placere possunt; quae lepida and concinna, (amongst
which Rhyme must, whether it will or no, take its place) cito satietate
afficiunt aurium sensum fastidiosissimum. This he understood very well, and
therefore, to take off the danger of a Surfeit that way, strove to please by
Variety, and new sounds. Had he carried this Observation (among others) as far
as it would go, it must, methinks, have shown him the incurable fault of this
jingling kind of Poetry, and have led his later judgment to blank Verse. But he
continued an obstinate Lover of Rhyme to the very last: 'Twas a Mistress, that
never appeared unhandsome in his Eyes, and was courted by him long after
Sacharissa was forsaken. He had raised it, and brought it to that perfection we
now enjoy it in: And the Poet's temper (which has always a little vanity in it)
would not suffer him ever to slight a thing, he had taken so much pains to
adorn. My Lord Roscommon was more impartial: No man ever Rhym'd truer and
evener than he; yet he is so just as to confess, that it is but a Trifle, and to
wish the Tyrant dethroned, and blank Verse set up in its room. There is a third
person, the living Glory of our English Poetry, who has disclaimed the use of
it upon the Stage, tho no man ever employed it there so happily as He. 'Twas
the strength of his Geinus that first brought it into credit in Plays; and it is
the force of his Example that has thrown it out again. In other kinds of writing
it continues still; and will do so, till some excellent Spirit arises, that has
leisure enough, and resolution to break the charm, and free us from the
troublesome bondage of Rhyming.

As Mr. Milton very well calls it, and has proved it as well, by what he has
wrote in another way. But this is a thought for times at some distance; the
present Age is a little too Warlike: It may perhaps furnish out matter for a
good Poem in the next, but 'twill hardly encourage one now: Without
Prophesying, a Man may easily know, what sort of Laurels are like to be in
request?

Whilst I am talking of Verse, I find my self, I don't know how, betrayed into
a great deal of Prose. I intended no more than to put the Reader in mind, what
respect was due to any thing that fell from the Pen of Mr. Waller. I have heard
his last Printed Copies, which are added in the several Editions of his Poems,
very slightly spoken of; but certainly they don't deserve it. They do indeed
discover themselves to be his last, and that is the worst we can say of 'em. He
is there Iam Senior: Sed cruda Deo viridisque Senectus. The same censure
perhaps will be past on the pieces of this second part. I shall not so far
engage for 'em, as to pretend they are all equal to whatever he wrote in the
vigor of his Youth. Yet they are so much of a piece with the rest, that any
Man will at first sight know 'em to be Mr. Waller's. Some of 'em were wrote
very early, but not put in former Collections, for reasons obvious enough, but
which are now ceased. The Play was altered, to please the Court: It Is not to be
doubted who sat for the two Brothers Characters. 'Twas agreeable to the
sweetness of Mr. Waller's Temper, to soften the rigor of the Tragedy, as he
expresses it; but whether it be so agreeable to the Nature of Tragedy it self,
to make every thing come off easily, I leave to the Critics. In the Prologue,
and Epilogue, there are a few Verses that he has made use of upon another
occasion. But the Reader may be pleased to allow that in him, that has been
allowed so long in Homer and Lucretius. Exact Writers dress up their thoughts
so very well always, that when they have need of the same sense, they cannot put
it into other words, but it must be to its prejudice, Care has been taken in
this Book to get together every thing of Mr. Waller's, that is not put into the
former Collection; so that between both, the Reader may make the set complete.

It will perhaps be contended after all, that some of these ought not to have
been Published: And Mr. Cowly's decision will be urged, that a neat Tomb of
Marble is a better Monument, than a great Pile of Rubbish, etc. It might be
answered to this, that the Pictures and Poems of great Masters have been always
valued, tho the last hand weren't put to 'em. And I believe none of those
Gentlemen that will make the objection would refuse a Sketch of Raphael's, or
one of Titian's draughts of the first sitting.

I might tell 'em too, what care has been taken by the Learned, to preserve the
Fragments of the Ancient Greek and Latin Poets: There has been thought to be a
Divinity in what they said, and therefore the least pieces of it have been kept
up and reverenced, like Religious relics. And I am sure, take away the mill
anni, and Impartial reasoning will tell us, there is as much due to the Memory
of Mr. Waller, as to the most celebrated names of Antiquity.

But to wave the dispute now of what ought to have been done; I can assure the
Reader, what would have been had this Edition been delayed. The following Poems
were got abroad, and in a great many hands: It were vain to expect that amongst
so many admirers of Mr. Waller, they should not meet with one fond enough to
Publish 'em. They might have staid indeed, till by frequent transcriptions they
had been corrupted extremely, and jumbled together with things of another kind:
But then they would have found their way into the World. So 'twas thought a
greater piece of kindness to the Author, to put 'em out; whilst they continue
genuine and unmixed; and such, as he himself, were he alive might own.

PROLOGUE TO THE MAIDS TRAGEDY.
Altered by Mr. W.
SCarce should we have the boldness to preter
So long renowned a Tragedy to mend,
Had not already some deserved your praise
With like attempt: Of all our elder Plays,
This and Philaster have the lowdest fame,
Great are their Faults, and glorious is their Flame.
In both our English Genius is expressed;
Lofty and bold, but negligently dressed.
Above our Neighbors our Conceptions are,
But faultless Writing is the effect of Care.
Our Lines reformed, and not composed in haste;
Polisht like Marble, would like Marble last.
But as the present, so the last Age writ;
In both we find like negligence and wit.
Were we but less indulgent to our faults,
And patience had to cultivate our thoughts.
Our Muse would flourish, and a nobler rage
Would honor this, than did the Grecian Stage.
Thus says our Author, not content to see
That Others write as carelessly as He,
Tho he pretends not to make things complete,
Yet to please You, he would have the Poets sweat.
In this old Play, what is new we have expressed
In rhiming Verse, distinguished from the rest:
That, as the Roan its hasty ways does make,
Not mingling Waters, through Geneva's Lake:
So having here the different styles in view,
You may compare the former with the new.
If we less rudely shall the Knot unty,
Soften the rigor of the Tragedy:
And yet preserve each persons character:
Then to the Other, This you may prefer.
It Is left to You: the Boxes and the Pit,
Are sovereign Judges of this sort of Wit.
In other things the knowing Artist may
Judge better than the people: but a Play,
Made for delight, and for no other use,
If you approve it not, has no excuse.
Enter Evadne, with a Page of Honor. Evad. AMintor lost, it were as vain a
thing,
As it is prodigious, to destroy the King.
Compelled by Threats, to take that bloody Oath,
And the Act ill, I am absolved by both.
A Vestal vowed, with pity I look down
On the Kings Love, and fierce Melantius frown.
These will to both my resolutions bring:
Page, give Melantius that, these to the King.
Exit Page with Letters. Under how hard a fate are Women born!
Prized to their ruin, or exposed to scorn!
The power of Princes Armies overthrows:
What can our Sex against such force oppose?
Love and Ambition have an equal share
In their vast Treasures, and it costs as dear
To ruin us, as Nations to subdue:
But we are faulty, tho all this be true.
For Towns are starved, or battered e're they yield:
But We persuaded rather than compelled:
For things superfluous neglect our Fame,
And weakly render up our selves to shame.
But here is the sacred place, where we may have,
Before we dye, an honorable Grave.
The Dead, and they that live retired here,
Obtain like pardon from the most severe.

She knocks and the Abbess enters. Abb. The great Evadne visiting our Cell!

Evad. It Is not to visit you, but here to dwell.
Can you find room for one so bad as I,
That humbly begs she may among you dye?

Abb. You that so early can correct your thoughts,
May hope for pardon for your greatest faults.
Happy is she, who from the World retires,
And carries with her what the World admires!
Thrice happy she, whose young thoughts fixed above,
While she is lovely, does to Heaven make Love.
I need not urge your promise, e're you find
An entrance here, to leave the World behind.

Evad. My guilty Love Devotion shall succeed.
Love, such as mine was, tho a dangerous Weed,
Shows the rich soil, on which it grew so high,
May yield as fair a Crop of Piety.
But of all passions, I Ambition find
Hardest to banish from a glorious mind.
Yet Heaven our object made, Ambition may,
As well as Love, be turned a nobler way.
Still I ascend -- it is a step above
A Princes favor, to belong to Jove.

They both go in, and the door shuts. Enter Melantius alone, with a Letter in
his hand. Mel. Among the Vestals! she will corrupt them all,
And teach them from their Sacred Vow to fall.
The standing Regiments, the Fort, the Town,
All but this wicked Sister is our own.
O! that I could but have surpised the Wretch,
Before she did the place of refuge reach!
That fatal Beast, maliciously forsworn,
Twice false Evadne, thus I would have torn.
Tears the Paper with fury But this design admits of no delay,
And our Revenge must find some speedy way.
I Will sound Lucippus, he has always paid
Respect to my deserts: could he be made
To join with us, we might preserve the State;
And take revenge, without our Countries fate.
He loves his Brother, but a present Crown
Cannot but tempt a Prince so near Throne.
He Is full of Honor: tho he like it not,
If once he swear, he will not reveal the Plot. Exit.

The King enters alone. King. Melantius false! it cannot be, and yet
When I remember how I merit it,
He is presented to my guilty mind
Less to his Duty, than Revenge inclined.
It Is not my nature to suspect my friends,
Or think they can have black malicious ends.
It Is doing wrong creates such doubts as these,
Renders us jealous, and destroys our peace.
Happy the Innocent, whose equal thoughts
Are free from anguish, as they are from faults.

Enter Page with a Letter. Page. It Is from Evadne, Sir. Exit.

King. Why should she use
Her Pen to me? it is some important news!

Reads the Letter. From among the Vestals. [Strangely dated!]
WHere I am retired from the rage of my offended Brothers. I wish you were as
secure from their Revenge. They aim at your Life, and made me swear to take it.
They have got possession of the Fort, and are assured of the inclination both
of the Soldiers and Citizens. My first Prayer is to the Gods for your
preservation; my next to your Majesty, that if they return to their duty, you
would afford them your Grace.


Enter about the middle of the Letter Melantius and Lucippus whispering. O my
presaging thoughts! how right are you!
All that Callianax affirmed is true.
The Crown we hazard, when at home we stay,
And teach our forces others to obey.
Conduct of Armies is a Princes Art:
And when a Subject acts that Royal Part,
As he in Glory rises, we grow less:
While our Arms prosper, ruined by success.
For in a Court what can so dreadful be,
As one more glorious than our selves to see!
Seeing them whisper. But there is Melantius -- to Lucippus ear;
What it is he trusts, I Will step aside and hear.
He hides himself, to hearken to their discourse. Lucipp. How am I caught with
an unwary Oath,
Not to reveal the secret, which I loath!
To stain my Conscience with my Brothers blood,
To be a King! No, not to be a God.
He that with patience can such Treason hear,
Tho he consent not, has a Guilty Ear.
Unto thy self pronounce the name of King;
That word will keep thee from so foul a thing.

Mel. Sir, your fond care and kindness comes too late,
To save your Brother, or prevent my hate:
The People mutiny, the Fort is mine,
And all the Soldiers to my will incline;
Of all his Servants he has lost the heart,
In his own Court I have the nobler part:
Unto your self pronounce the name of King;
That word will tell you it is no trivial thing
That you are offered: Do not storm and frown
At my endeavors to preserve the Crown.
Wear it your self; occasion will not stay;
It Is lost unless you take it while you may.
Tumult and ruin will o'rewh^lm the State,
And you will be guilty of your Countries fate.

Luc. aside. Some formed design against the K. is laid;
Let Us try how far our reason may persuade.
To him. The Crown you value so, my Brother bears
Upon his Head, and with it all the cares;
While I enjoy the advantage of his State,
And all the Crown can give, except the weight*
Long may he live, that is so far above
All Vice, all Passion, but excess of Love.
And can the effects of Love appear so strange,
That into Beasts our greatest Gods can change!

Mel. The deathless Gods, when they commit a Rape
Disguised a while, again resume their Shape;
But Princes once turned into Beasts, remain
For ever so, and should, like Beasts, be slain.

Luc. Tho more in years, you have a Mistress still
And for that fault would you your Sovereign kill
Love is the frailty of Heroic minds,
And where great Virtues are our pardon finds.
Brutes may be Chaste; Pigeons, Swans and Doves
Are more confined, than we are, in their Loves.
Justice and Bounty, in a Prince, are things
That Subjects make as happy as their Kings.
Will you contract the guilt of Royal Blood?
And rob your Country of her chiefest good?

Mel. Of one, whose Lust his Family has stained,
By whose good Conduct he securely reigned.

Luc. Of one, whose choice first made your Valor known,
And with whose Armies you have got renown.
It Is all the gratitude Subjects can show,
To bear with Patience what their Princes do.

Mel. Yet Brutus did not let proud Tarquin escape.

Luc. The Prince his Son was guilty of a Rape.
For Joys extorted with a violent hand,
A just revenge might with your honor stand.
But should a Prince, because he does comply
With one, that is fair, and not unwilling, dye?
Or is it fit the people should be taught
Your Sisters frailty, with my Brothers fault?

Mel. Let her be known unchaste, so it be said,
That he that durst persuade her to it is dead.

Luc. The King has wronged you: Is it just that yo^
Mischief to me and the whole Nation do?

Mel. A brave Man rather than not take reveng^
Just, or unjust, should the whole World unhing^

Luc. Yet of all Virtues, Justice is the best,
Valor, without it, is a common Pest.
Pirates and Thieves, too often with Courage graced
Show us how ill that Virtue may be placed.
It Is our complexion makes us chaste or brave;
Justice from Reason, and from Heaven we have.
All other Virtues dwell but in the blood,
That in the Soul, and gives the name of good;
Justice, the Queen of Virtues, you despise,
And only rude and savage Valor prize.
To your revenge you think the King and all
That Sacred is, a Sacrifice should fall:
The Town be ruined, and this Isle laid wast,
Only because your Sister is not chaste.
Can you expect, that she should be so sage
To rule her blood, and you not rule your rage?
Both soul distempers are, but yours the worse,
Less pleasure has, and brings a greater curse.

Mel. In Idle Rhodes Philosophers are bred,
And you, young Prince, are in their Morals read.
Nor is it hard for one that feels no wrong,
For patient duty to employ his Tongue.
Oppression makes men mad, and from their breast,
All reason does, and sense of duty wrest.
The Gods are safe, when under wrongs we groan,
Only because we cannot reach their Throne.
Shall Princes then, that are but Gods of clay,
Think they may safely with our honor play?
Reward a Soldiers Merit with a stain
To his whole Race, and yet securely Reign?
Farewell! I know so brave a Man will scorn
To tell the secret, unto which he is sworn.

Luc. aside. I promised Secresy, but did not say
I would look tamely on. To him. Melantius stay:
Tho you surpised me, and my hasty word
Restrains my Tongue, it ties not up my Sword.
Of other Virtues tho you are bereft
By your wild rage, I know your Valor's left.
Swear not to touch my Brother, or with speed
Behind the Castle-wall let us meet.

Mel. Agreed.

Exit. Lucip. Mel. His well-known Virtue, and his constant Love,
To his bad Brother may the people move:
I Will take the occasion, which he gives, to bring
Him to his Death, and then destroy the King. Ex. Mel.

Enter the King as discovering himself. King. O! what an happiness it is to find
A friend of our own blood, a Brother kind!
A Prince so good, so just, so void of fear,
Is of more value than the Crown I wear.
The Kingdom offered, if he would engage,
He has refused with a becoming rage.
Happy this Isle, with such a Hero blessed;
What Virtue dwells not in his Loyal Breast?

Enter Strato. Str. Sir, we are lost, Melantius has the Fort,
And the Town rises to assault the Court:
Wherein they will find the strongest part their own:
If you will preserve your self, you must be gone.
I have a Garden opens to the Sea,
From whence I can your Majesty convey
To some near friend.

King. There with your Shallop stay:
The Game's not lost, I have one Card to play.
Suffer not Diphilus to leave the Court,
But bid him presently to me resort. Exit Strato.
Had not this Challenge stopped the impendent fate,
We must have perished with the ruined State.
Forts, Soldiers, Citizens, of all bereft,
There Is nothing but our private Valor lest:
If he survive, I have not long to Reign;
But he that is injured should be fairly slain.
The people for their Darling would repine,
If he should fall by any hand, but mine.
Less wise than valiant, the vain man is gone
To fight a Duel, when his work was done.
Should I command my Guards to find him, where
He meets my Brother, and destroy him there,
All hope of Peace for ever would be lost,
And the wise Rabble would adore his Ghost.
Dead, than alive, he would do greater harm,
And the whole Island, to revenge him, arm.
So popular, so mighty have I made
This fighting man, while I lived in the Shade.
But 'twas a double fault to raise him so,
And then dishonor on his house to throw.
Ill governed passions in a Princes Breast,
Hazard his private, and the public rest.
But Errors, not to be recalled, do find
Their best redress from presence of the mind.
Courage our greatest failings does supply,
And makes all good, or handsomely we dye.
Life is a thing of common use, by Heaven
As well to Flies, as unto Princes given.
But, for the Crown, it is a more sacred thing:
I Will dying lose it, or I Will live a King.
Enter Diphilus. Come, Diphilus, we must together walk,
And of a matter of importance talk.

Diph. aside. What fate is this! had he stayed half an hour,
The rising Town had steed me from his Power.

Exeunt: Scene changes into a Field: Into which enter Lucippus and Melantius,
with Swords drawn. Mel. Be yet advised, the injurious King forsake;
Death, or a Scepter from Melantius take.

Lucip. Be thou advised, thy black design forsake;
Death, or this Counsel from Lucippus take.

Mel. Youth and vain confidence thy life betray;
Through Armies this has made Melantius's way.

Lucip. Drawn for your King, that Sword would wonders do;
The better Cause makes mine the sharper now.
Thy brutal anger does the Gods defy;
Kings are their care, resume thy Loyalty:
Or from thy guilty Head I Will pluck the Bays,
And all thy Triumphs shall become my praise.

Mel. That shall be quickly tried.

Enter the King with Diphilus. King. With Sword in hand'
Like a good Brother, by your Brother stand.

Diph. Glad that your pleasure lies this noble way.
I never did more willingly obey.

King. Thy Life, Melantius, I am come to take,
Of which foul Treason does a forfeit make.
To do Thee honor, I will shed that blood,
Which the just Laws, if I were faultless, should.

Mel. It Is bravely urged, Sir; but, their Guards away,
Kings have but small advantage of the Law.

King. Having infringed the Law, I wave my right
As King, and thus submit my self to fight.
Why did not you your own sierce hand employ,
As I do mine, and tell the reason why?
A Subject should be heard before he is slain:
And does less right belong to us that Reign?

Mel. If, as unjust, I could have thought you brave,
This way I chosen had Revenge to have.
A way so noble, that I must confess,
Already I begin to hate you less.
So unexpected and so brave a thing,
Makes me remember that you are my King.
And I would rather be contented, since
He challenged first, to combat with that Prince.
That so, a Brother for a Sister changed,
We may be of your wanton Pride revenged.

King. 'Twas I that wronged you, you my Life have sought;
No Duel ever was more justly sought.
We both have reason for our fatal wrath:
Nor is it fit the World should hold us both.
Lucippus to the King apart. Me for what nobler use can you reserve,
Than thus the Crown from danger to preserve?
Members expose themselves, to save the Head:
This way he shall be satisfied, or dead.
Melantius to his Brother apart. Tho foul Injustice Majesty did stain,
This noble carriage makes it bright again.
When Kings with Courage act, something divine
That calls for Reverence, does about them shine.

Diph. Were we born Princes, we could not expect
For an affront received; greater respect.
They that with sharpest Injuries are stung,
If fairly fought withal, forget the wrong.
A thousand pitties such a Royal pair
Should run this hazard for a wanton fair.

Mel. Let us fright so, as to avoid the extreme
Either of fearing or of killing them.
Lucippus apart to his Brother. Sir, you should wield a Scepter, not a Sword,
Nor with your Weapon kill, but with your Word.
The Gods by others execute their will.

K. Yet Heaven does often with its own Thunder kill:
And when Necessity and Right command,
A Sword is Thunder in a Sovereign's hand.
Let us dispatch, lest any find us here,
Before we fight; or he grow less severe.
Here they all Fight. Lucippus to the King. Hold Sir, they only guard, and
still give place,
To them. Fight us, as Enemies, or ask for Grace.

Mel. I never thought I could expedient see,
On this side death, to right our Family.
The Royal Sword thus drawn, has cured a wound
For which no other Salve could have been found.
Your Brothers now in Arms our selves we boast,
As satisfaction for a Sister lost.
The blood of Kings exposed, washes a stain
Cleaner, than thousands of the Vulgar slain.
You have our pardon, Sir; and humbly now,
As Subjects ought, we beg the same of you.
Here they both kneel. Pardon our guilty Rage, which here takes end,
For a lost Sister, and a ruined Friend.

Luc. Let your great heart a gracious motion feel:
Is It not enough, you see Melantius kneel?
I Will be a pledge for both, they shall be true
As heretofore; and you shall trust 'em too.
His Loyal Arm shall still support the State,
And you no more provoke so just an hate.

King. Rise, brave Melantius, I thy pardon sign,
With as much Joy, as I am proud of mine.
Rise, Valiant Diphilus, I hope you will both
Forget my fault, as I shall your just wrath.

Diph. Valor revealed in Princes does redeem
Their greatest faults, and crowns them with esteem.
Use us with Honor, and we are your Slaves,
To bleed for you, when least occasion craves.

King. With Honor and with Trust this Land shall know,
After my Brother, none so great as you.

Enter the Kings Guards. Mel. If these approach us, Sir, by your command,
Take back your Pardon, on our guard we stand.

The King steps between 'em. King. What over-diligence has brought you here

Captain of the Guards. Such as you will pardon when the News you hear
Amintor is retired, Aspasia gone,
And a strange humor does possess the Town.
They arm apace, Sir, and aloud declare
Things which we dare not whisper in your Ear.
The Council met, your Guards to find you sent,
And know your pleasure in this Exigent.
This honored person you might justly fear,
Were he not Loyal, and amongst us here.
They say his merit's ill returned, and cry,
With great Melantius they will live and dye.

Mel. Sir, not your Power, but Virtue made me bow;
For all he tells you, I did kneeling know.
Tho now the faithfulst of your Subjects, we
Have been the cause of all this Mutiny.
Go comfort, Sir, Amintor, while we run
To stop the rage of this revolting Town;
And let them know the happiness they have
In such a Royal pair, so just, so brave.
Lend me your Guards, that if persuasion fail,
Force may against the Mutineers prevail.

K. to the Guards. Go, and obey, with as exact a care,
All his commands, as if our self were there.
He that depends upon another, must
Oblige his Honor with a boundless trust.

Exeunt King and Lucippus. Mel. How vain is Man! how quickly changed are
His wrath and fury to a Loyal care!
This drawn but now against my Sovereigns Breast,
Before it is sheathed shall give him peace and rest.

Exeunt Brothers and Guards. And the Scene changes into a Forest. Enter
Aspasia. Asp. They say, wild Beasts inhabit here;
But Grief and Wrong secure my fear.
Compared to him that does refuse,
A Tyger's kind, for he pursues.
To be forsaken's worse than torn,
And Death a lesser ill than scorn.
Oh! that some hungry Beast would come,
And make himself Aspasia's Womb!
If none accept me for a Prey,
Death must be found some other way.
Not long since, walking in the Field,
I and my Nurse, we there beheld
A goodly fruit; which tempting me,
I would have plucked; but trembling she,
Whoever plucked those Berries, cried,
In less than half an hour died.
Some God direct me to the Bough,
On which those useful Berries grow! Exit.

Enter Amintor alone. Am. Repentance, which became Evadne so,
Would no less handsome in Amintor show.
She asked me pardon; but Aspasia I,
Injured alike, suffer to pine and dye.
It Is said, that she this dangerous Forest haunts,
And in sad accents utters her complaints.
Not every Lady does from Virtue fall,
The Injurious King does not possess 'em all.
Women are governed by a stubborn fate,
Their Love's insuperable as their hate.
No merit their aversion can remove,
Nor ill requital can efface their Love.
If I can find her, e're she perish, I
Will gain her pardon, or before her dye.
Well I deserved Evadne's scorn to prove,
That to Ambition sacrificed my Love.
Fools that consult their Avarice or Pride!
To choose a Wife, Love is our noblest Guide. Exit.

Enter Aspasia alone, with a Bough in her hand, ful^ of fair Berries. Asp. This
happy Bough shall give relief,
Not to my hunger, but my grief.
In colder Regions men compose
Poison with Art, but here it grows.
How lovely these ill Berries show!
And so did false Amintor too.
Heaven would ensnare us -- who can escape,
When fatal things have such a shape?
The Birds know how to choose their fare,
To peck this fruit they all forbear.
Those cheerful Singers know not why
They should make any haste to dye:
And yet they Couple -- Can they know
Love, without knowing Sorrow too?
Nothing in vain the Gods create
This Bough was made to hasten fate.
'Twas in compassion of our woe,
That Nature first made Poisons grow;
For hopeless Wretches, such as I,
Kindly providing means to dye.
As Mothers do their Children keep,
She feeds us, and she makes us sleep:
The indisposed she does invite
To go to Bed before it is night.
Death always is to come, or past:
If it be ill, it cannot last.
Sure it is a thing was never known;
For when that is present, we are gone.
It Is an imaginary Line,
Which does our being here confine.
Dead we shall be, as when unborn;
And then I knew nor Love, nor Scorn.
But say we are to live elsewhere,
What has the Innocent to fear?
Can I be treated worse below,
Than here? or more unjustly? No!
Justice from hence long since is gone,
And reigns where I shall be anon.
Like Slaves redeemed, Death sets us free
From Passion, and from Injury.
The Living chained to Fortunes Wheel,
In Triumph led, her changes feel:
And Conquerors kept Poisons by,
Prepared for her Inconstancy.
Bays against Thunder might defend their Brow:
But against Love and Fortune here is the Bow.

Here she puts some of the Berries to her mouth Enter Amintor in haste, strikes
the Berries out of her. hand, and snatches the Bough. Am. Rash Maid, forbear;
and lay those Berries by,
Or give them him that has deserved to dye.

Asp. What double Cruelty is this? Would you
That made me wretched, keep me always so?
Evadne has you: let Aspasia have
The common refuge of a quiet grave.
If you have kindness left, there see me laid:
To bury decently the injured Maid,
Is all the favor that you can bestow,
Or I receive -- Pray render me my Bough.

Am. No less than you, was your Amintor wronged:
The false Evadne to the King belonged.
You had my promise, and my Bed is free;
I may be yours, if you can pardon me.

Asp. Your Vows to her were in the Temple paid,
The sacred Altar Witnessed what you said.

Am. The powers above are to no place confined,
But every where hear promises that bind.
The Heaven, the Air, Earth, and the boundless Sea.
Make but one Temple for the Deity.
That was a Witness to my former Vow:
None can Amintor justly claim, but you.
Who gives himself away the second time,
Creates no title, but commits a Crime.

Asp. I could have died but once; but this believed,
I may (alas!) be more than once deceived.
By what new Gods, Amintor, will you swear?

Am. By the same Gods, that have been so severe
By the same Gods, the justice of whose Wrath.
Punished the infraction of my former faith.
May every Lady an Evadne prove,
That shall divert me from Aspasia's Love.

Asp. If ever you should prove inconstant now,
I shall remember where these Berries grow.

Am. My Love was always constant; but the King,
Melantius friendship, and that fatal thing
Ambition, me on proud Evadne threw;
And made me cruel to my self, and you.
But if you still distrust my faith, I vow
Here in your presence I Will devour the Bough.

Asp. Snatching the Bough from him.
Rash Man, forbear! if not restrained by doubt,
From my stretched heart my Spirits would fly out.
But for the mixture of some unbelief,
My Joy had been as fatal as my Grief.
The sudden news of unexpected bliss,
Would yet have made a Tragedy of this.
Secure of my Amintor, still I fear
Evadne's mighty friend, the King.

Am. He Is here.
Enter the King, and his Brother, to them. King, turning to his Brother. How
shall I look upon that noble Youth,
So full of Patience, Loyalty, and Truth?
The fair Aspasia I have injured too,
The guilty author of their double woe.
My passion gone, and reason in the Throne,
Amazed I see the mischiefs I have done.
After a Tempest, when the Winds are laid,
The calm Sea wonders at the wrecks it made.

Am. Men wronged by Kings impute it to their sat,
And Royal kindness never comes too late:
So when Heaven frowns, we think our anger vain;
Joyful and thankful when it smiles again.
Taking Aspasia by the hand. This knot you broke, be pleased again to bind,
And we shall both forget you were unkind.

King. May you be happy, and your sorrows past,
Set off those Joys I wish may ever last.
But, Madam, make not that fair fruit your food:
It is the greatest Poison in the Wood.

Am. She knows it, Sir; yet, had not I made haste,
Upon these Berries she had broke her fast.

K. Read this.

Am. Evadne with the Vestals! Now
You Will have no more occasion for this Bough.

Enter a Messenger from Melantius, applying himself to the King. Mess.
Melantius, Sir, has let the people know
How just you are, and how he is graced by you.
The Town's appeased, and all the air does ring
With repititions of Long live the King.

Luc. Sir, let us to the Sacred Temple go,
That you are safe our Joy and Thanks to show.

King. Of all we offer to the Powers above,
The sweetest Incense is fraternal Love.
Like the rich Clouds that rise from melted Gums,
It spreads it self, and the whole Isle perfumes.
For such a Brother, to the Immortal Gods
More thanks I owe, than for the Crown of Rhodes.

EPILOGUE, Spoken by the King.
THE fierce Melantius was content, you see,
The King should live; be not more fierce than he.
Too long indulgent to so rude a Time;
When Love was held so capital a Crime,
That a Crowned Head could no compassion find;
But died, because the Killer had been kind.
Nor is it less strange such mighty Wits as those
Should use a Style in Tragedy, like Prose.
Well sounding Verse, where Princes tread the Stage,
Should speak their Virtue, or describe their rage.
By the loud Trumpet, which our Courage aids,
We learn that sound, as well as sense, persuades.
And Verses are the potent charms we use,
Heroic Thoughts and Virtue to infuse.
When next we act this Tragedy again,
Unless you like the Change, we shall be slain.
The innocent Aspasia's Life or Death,
Amintor's too, depends upon your breath.
Excess of Love was heretofore the cause;
Now if we dye, it is want of your applause.
EPILOGUE, Designed upon the first alteration of the Play; when the King only
was left alive.
ASpasia bleeding on the Stage does lie,
To show you still it is the Maids Tragedy.
The fierce Melantius, etc. as before, to
-- the Killer had been kind.
This better natured Poet had reprieved
Gentle Amintor too, had he believed
The fairer Sex his pardon could approve
Who to Ambition sacrificed his Love.
Aspasia he had spared; but for her Wound,
Neglected Love, there could no Salve be found.
When next we act this Tragedy again,
Unless you like the change, I must be slain.
Excess of Love was heretofore the Cause;
Now if I dye, it is want of your Applause.
Some Verses that seem to be a part of the foregoing Play.
NO Forest, Cave, nor Savage Den,
Holds more pernicious Beasts, than Men.
Vows, Oaths, and Contracts they devise,
And tell us they are Sacred Ties.
And so they are, in our esteem;
But empty Names despised by them.
Women with studied Arts they vex:
Ye Gods, destroy that impious Sex!
And if there must be some to invoke
Your Powers, and make your Altars smoke;
Come down your selves, and in their place,
Get a more just, and nobler Race:
Such as the old World did adorn,
When Heroes, like your selves, were born:
But this I wish not for Aspasia's sake;
For she no God would for Amintor take.
Epitaph on the Lady Sidly.
HEre lies the learned Savil's Heir,
So early wise, and lasting fair;
That none, except her years they told,
Thought her a Child, or thought her old.
All that her Father knew or got,
His Art, his Wealth, fell to her Lot:
And she so well improved that Stock;
Both of his Knowledge and his Flock;
That Wit and Fortune reconciled,
In her, upon each other smiled.
Whilst she to every well-taught mind
Was so propitiously inclined;
And gave such Title to her store,
That none, but the ignorant, were poor.
The Muses daily found supplys
Both from her hands, and from her eyes.
Her bounty did at once engage,
And matchless Beauty warm their rage.
Such was this Dame in calmer days,
Her Nations ornament and praise.
But, when a Storm disturbed our Rest,
The Port and Refuge of the oppressed.
This made her fortune understood,
And looked on as some public good.
So that, her Person and her State
Exempted from the common Fate,
In all our Civil Fury she
Stood, like a Sacred Temple, free.
May here her Monument stand so,
To credit this rude age; and show
To future times, that even we
Some patterns did of Virtue see:
And one sublime Example had
Of good, among so many bad.
Epitaph, unfinished.
GReat Soul, for whom Death will no longer stay,
But sends in haste to snatch our Bliss away.
O cruel Death! to those you take more kind,
Than to the wretched Mortals left behind!
Here Beauty, Youth and noble Virtue shined,
Free from the Clouds of Pride that shade the mind.
Inspired Verse may on this Marble live,
But can no honor to thy Ashes give.
The Triple Combat.
WHen through the World fair Mazarine had run,
Bright as her fellow-Traveller, the Sun;
Hither at length the Roman Eagle flys,
As the last Triumph of her conquering Eyes.
As Heir to Julius, she may pretend
A second time to make this Nation bend.
But Portsmouth, springing from the ancient race
Of Britains, which the Saxon here did chase,
As they great Caesar did opppose, makes head;
And does against this new Invader lead.
That goodly Nymph, the taller of the two,
Careless and fearless to the field does go.
Becoming blushes on the other wait,
And her young look excuses want of height.
Beauty gives Courage; for she knows the day
Must not be won the Amazonian way.
Nor does her Grace the better title want;
Our Law's indulgent to the Occupant.
Legions of Beauties to the Battle come,
For little Britain these, and those for Rome.
Dressed to advantage, this Illustrious Pair
Arrived, for Combat in the List appear.
Venus had been an equal friend to both,
And Victory to declare her self seems loath.
What may the fates design! for never yet
From distant Regions two such Beauties met?
Over the Camp with doubtful Wings she flys,
Till Chloris shining in the Field she spys.
The lovely Chloris Shining well attended came,
A thousand graces waited on the Dame.
Her matchless form made all the English glad,
And foreign Beauties less assurance had.
Yet, like the Three on Ida's Top, they all
Pretend alike, contesting for the Ball.
Which to determine Love himself declined,
Lest the neglected should become less kind.
Such killing looks! so thick the Arrows fly!
That it is unsafe to be a stander by.
Poets approaching to describe the fight,
Are by their wounds instructed how to write.
They, with less hazard, might look on and draw
The ruder Combats in Alsatia.
And with that Foil of violence and rage
Set off the splendor of the Golden Age:
Where Love gives Law, Beauty the Scepter sways;
And uncompell'd, the happy World obeys.
To Mr. Killegrew, upon his altering his Play Pandora, from a Tragedy into a
Comedy, because not approved on the Stage.
SIR, you should rather teach our Age the way
Of Judging well, than thus have changed your Play.
You had obliged us by employing Wit,
Not to Reform Pandora, but the Pit.
For as the Nightingale, without the Throng
Of other Birds, alone attends her Song:
While the loud Daw, his Throat displaying, draws
The whole assembly of his fellow-Daws.
So must the Writer, whose productions should
Take with the Vulgar, be of vulgar mould:
Whilst nobler fancies make a flight too high
For common view, and lessen as they fly.
Some Verses belonging to a Copy in the First Part of his Poems, entitled, Upon
a War with Spain, and a Fight at Sea: The Close of it was Originally thus.
WIth these returns Victorious Mountagu,
With Laurels in his hand, and half Peru.
Let the brave Generals divide that Bough,
Our great Protector has such Wreaths enough.
His conquering Head has no more room for Bays:
Then let it be* as the glad Nation prays.
Let the rich Ore forthwith be melted down,
And the State fixed by making him a Crown.
With Ermin clad and Purple, let him hold
A Royal Scepter, made of Spanish Gold.
On the Picture of a fair Youth, taken after he was dead.
This Copy is Printed Imperfectly in the first part of his poems.
AS gathered Flowers, whilst their wounds are new,
Look gay and fresh, as on the stalk they grew;
Torn from the Root that nourished 'em, a while,
Not taking notice of their fate, they smile;
And in the hand, which rudely plucked 'em, show
Fairer than those that to their Autumn grow:
So love and Beauty still that visage grace,
Death cannot fright 'em from their wonted place;
Alive the hand of crooked Age had marred
Those lovely features, which cold Death has spared.
No wonder then he sped in Love so well,
When his high passion he had breath to tell,
When that accomplished Soul in this fair frame,
No business had but to persuade that Dame:
Whose mutual Love advanced the Youth so high,
That, but to Heaven, he could no higher fly.
Long and Short Life.
CIrcles are praised, not that abound
In largeness, but the exactly round.
So Life we praise, that does excel
Not in much time, but acting well.
Prologue to the Lady Actors.
AMaze us not with that Majestic Frown,
But lay aside the greatness of your Crown.
For your diversion here we act in Jest;
But when we act our selves, we do our best.
You have a Look, which does your people awe,
When in your Throne and Robes you give 'em Law.
Lay it by here, and give a gentler smile;
Such as we see great Jove's in Picture, while
He listens to Apollo's charming Lyre,
Or judges of the Songs he does inspire.
Comedians on the Stage show all their skill,
And after do as Love and Fortune will.
We are less careful, hid in this disguise;
In our own Clothes more serious, and more wise.
Modest at home, upon the Stage more bold,
We feign warm Lovers, tho our Breasts be cold.
A fault committed here deserves no scorn,
If we act well the parts, to which we are born.
To Mr. Creech, on his Translation of Lucretius.
WHat all men wished, tho few could hope to see*
We are now blessed with, and obliged by Thee.
Thou from the ancient Learned Latin store,
Giv'st us one Author, and we hope for more.
May they enjoy thy Thoughts -- Let not the Stage
The Idl'st Moment of thy hours engage.
Each year that place some wondrous Monster breeds,
And the Wits Garden is o're-run with Weeds.
There Farce is Comedy, Bombast called Strong;
Soft words, with nothing in 'em, make a Song.
It Is hard to say they steal 'em now adays,
For sure the Ancients never wrote such Plays.
These scribbling Insects have what they deserve,
Not Plenty, nor the Glory for to starve.
That Spencer knew, That Tasso felt before,
And Death found surly Ben exceeding poor.
Heaven turn the Omen from their Image here,
May he with Joy the well-plac'd Laurel wear:
Great Virgil's happier fortune may he find,
And be our Caesar, like Augustus, kind.
But let not this disturb thy tuneful head,
Thou writ'st for thy Delight, and not for Bread;
Thou art not cursed to write thy Verse with care,
But art above what other Poets fear.
What may we not expect from such a hand,
That has, with Books, Himself at free Command?
Thou know in Youth what Age has sought in vain
And bring'st forth Sons without a Mothers Pain:
So easy is thy Sense, thy Verse so sweet,
Thy Words so proper, and thy Phrase so fit,
We read, and read again, and still admire
Whence came this Youth, and whence this wondrous Fire
Pardon this Rapture, Sir; but who can be
Cold and unmoved, yet have his thoughts on thee*
Thy Goodness may my several faults forgive,
And by your help these wretched lines may live:
But if when viewed by your severer sight,
They seem unworthy to behold the Light,
Let them with speed in deserved flames be thrown
They Will send no sighs, nor murmur out a groan,
But dying silently your justice own.
On the D. of Monmouth's Expedition into Scotland, in the Summer Solstice, 1678.
SWift as Jove's Messenger, the Winged God,
With Sword as Potent as his Charming Rod,
He flew to Execute the Kings Command,
And in a moment reached that Northern Land;
Where Day contesting with approaching Night,
Assists the Hero with continued Light.
On Foes surpised, and by no Night concealed,
He might have rushed; but Noble Pity held
His Hand a while, and to their choice gave space,
Which they would prove, his Valor, or his Grace.
This not well heard, his Cannon louder spoke,
And then, like Lightning, through that Cloud he broke;
His Fame, his Conduct, and that Martial Look,
The guilty Scotch with such a Terror struck,
That to his Courage they resign the Field,
Who to his Bounty had refused to yield:
Glad that so little Loyal Blood it cost,
He grieves so many Britains should be lost;
Taking more Pains, when he beheld them yield,
To save the Fliers, than to win the Field.
And at the Court his Interest did employ,
That none, who escaped his fatal Sword, should dye
And now these rash bold Men their Error find,
Not trusting one beyond his Promise kind;
One whose great Mind, so bountiful and brave,
Had learnt the Arts to Conquer and to Save.
In Vulgar Breasts no Royal Virtues dwell,
Such deeds as these his high Extraction tell;
And gives a secret Joy to him who Reigns,
To see his Blood Triumph in Monmouth's Veins:
To see a Leader, whom he got and chose,
Firm to his Friends, and fatal to his Foes.
But seeing Envy, like the Sun, does beat
With scorching Rays, on all that is high and great;
This, ill requited Monmouth, is the Bough
The Muses send to shade thy Conquering Brow.
Lampoons, like Squibs, may make a present blaze,
But Time and Thunder pay respect to Bays.
Covered with Dust at one another thrown,
How can the luster of their Wit be shown!
Achilles Arms dazles our present view,
Kept by the Muse as radiant and as new,
As from the Forge of Vulcan first they came;
Thousands of years are past, and they the same:
Such care she takes, to pay desert with Fame.
Then which no Monarch, for his Crowns defense
Knows how to give a Nobler Recompense.
Pride.
NOT the brave Macedonian Youth alone,
But base Caligula, when on the Throne,
Boundless in Power, would make himself a God;
As if the World depended on his Nod.
The Syrian King to Beasts was headlong thrown,
E're to himself he could be mortal known.
The meanest wretch, if Heaven should give him Line
Would never stop, till he were thought divine.
All might within discern the Serpents pride,
If from our selves nothing our selves did hide.
Let the proud Peacock his gay feathers spread,
And woo the Female to his painted Bed.
Let Winds and Seas together rage and swell,
This Nature teaches, and becomes 'em well.
Pride was not made for Man: a conscious sense
Of Guilt, and Folly, and their consequence
Destroys the claim; and to beholders tells,
Here nothing, but the shape of manhood, dwells.
Of Tea, commended by Her Majesty.
VEnus her Myrtle, Phoebus has his Bays;
Tea both excels, which she vouchsafes to praise.
The best of Queens, and best of Herbs we owe,
To that bold Nation, which the way did show
To the fair Region, where the Sun does rise;
Whose rich Productions we so justly prize.
The Muses Friend, Tea, does our fancy aid;
Repress those Vapors, which the head invade:
And keeps that Palace of The Soul serene,
Fit on her Birthday to salute the Queen.
Panegyric upon O. Cromwell.
WHile, with a strong, and yet a gentle hand,
You bridle Faction, and our Hearts command
Protect us from our selves, and from our foe,
Make us Unite, and make us Conquer too
Let partial Spirits still aloud complain,
Think themselves injured that they cannot Reign
And own no Liberty but when they may
Without Control upon their fellows prey.
Above the waves as Neptune showed his face,
To chide the Winds, and save the Trojan Race;
So has your Highness, raised above the rest,
Storms of Ambition tossing us represt.
Your Drooping Country, torn with Civil Hate,
Restored by you, is made a Glorious State:
The Seat of Empire, where the Irish come,
And the unwilling Scot, to fetch their doom*
The Sea's our own, and now all Nations greet,
With bending Sails each Vessel of our Fleet:
Your Power extends as far as Winds can blow,
Or swelling Sails upon the Globe may go*
Heaven, that has placed this Island to give Law*
To Balance Europe and Her States to awe*
In this Conjunction does on Britain smile*
The greatest Leader and the greatest Isle.
Whether this Portion of the World were Rent
By the Rude Ocean from the Continent;
Or thus Created; sure it was designed
To be the Sacred Refuge of Mankind*
Hither the Oppressed shall henceforth Resort
Justice to Crave, and Succor at the Court:
And then your Highness, not for ours alone,
But for the Worlds Protector shall be known.
Fame, swifter than your Winged Navy flies,
Through every Land that near the Ocean lies,
Sounding your Name, and telling dreadful News,
To all that Piracy and Rapine use.
With such a Chief the meanest Nation blessed,
Might hope to lift her Head above the rest*
What may be thought Impossible to do,
For us Embraced by the Sea and you*
Lords of the Worlds great waste, the Ocean we
Whole Forests send to Reign upon the Sea*
And every Coast may Trouble or Relieve;
But none can Visit us without your leave*
Angels and we have this Prerogative,
That none can at our Happy seat arrive,
While we Defend, at Pleasure to Invade
The Bad with Vengeance, and the Good to Aid.
Our little World, the Image of the Great,
Like that amidst the Ambient Ocean's set
Of her own growth has all that Nature craves,
And all that is rare, as Tribute from the Waves*
As Egypt does not on the Clouds rely,
But to her Nile owes more than to the Sky*
So whatsoever our Earth and Heaven denies,
Our ever constant Friend the Sea supplies:
That taste of Hot Arabia's Spice we know,
Free from the scorching Sun that makes it grow*
Without the heat in Persian Silks we shine*
And without Planting, drink of every Vine:
To dig for Wealth we weary not our Limbs*
Gold, tho the heaviest Metal, hither swims*
Ours is the Harvest, where the Indians mow*
We plow the Deep, and reap what others sow*
Things of the noblest kind our own soil breeds*
Stout are our Men, and Warlike are our Steeds.
Rome, tho her Eagle through the World has flown
Could never make this Island all her own
Here the Third Edward, and the Black Prince too,
France-Conquering Henry flourisht, and now you
For whom we stayed, as did the Grecian State,
Till Alexander came to urge their Fate.
When for more Worlds the Macedonian cried,
He wist not Thetis in her Lap did hide
Another yet a World reserved for you
To make more great than that he did subdue*
He safely might old Troops to Battle lead,
Against the unwarlike Persian and the Mede;
Whose hasty flight did from a bloodless Field*
More Spoil than Honor to the Victor yield:
A Race unconquered, by their Clime made bold,
The Caledonians, Armed with want and cold*
Have by a fate indulgent to your fame*
Been from all Ages kept for you to tame*
Whom the old Roman Wall so ill confined,
With a new Chain of Garrisons you bind:
Here foreign Gold no more shall make them come,
Our English Iron holds them fast at home*
They that henceforth must be content to know
No warmer Region than their Hills of Snow*
May blame the Sun, but must extol your Grace,
Which in our Senate has allowed them place:
Preferred by Conquest, happily overthrown,
Falling they Rise, to be with us made one:
So kind Dictators made, when they came home,
Their vanquished Foes, Free Citizens of Rome*
Like favor find the Irish* with like fate,
Advanced to be a Portion of our State*
Whilst by your Valor, and obliging mind,
Nations divided by the Sea are joined:
Holland to gain our friendship is content
To be our Out-guard on the Continent*
She from her fellow Provinces would go,
Rather than hazard to have you her Foe*
In our late fight, when Cannons did diffuse
(Preventing Posts) the Terror and the News,
Our Neighbors they did tremble at the roar*
But our Conjunction makes them Tremble more.
Your never-failing Sword made War to cease,
And now you heal us with the Arts of Peace*
Our minds with Bounty and with Awe Engage,
Invite Affection, and restrain our Rage*
Less Pleasure take brave Minds in Battles won,
Than in Restoring such as are undone:
Tigers have Courage, and the Rugged Bear,
But Man alone can when he Conquers spare*
To Pardon willing, and to Punish loath,
You strike with one Hand, but you heal with both:
Listing up all that Prostrate lie, you grieve
You cannot make the Dead again to Live.
When Fate or Error had our Rage misled,
And over these Nations such Confusion spread,
The only Cure which could from Heaven come down,
Was so much Power and Clemency in One;
One whose Extraction from a Noble Line,
Gives hopes again that Well-born Men may shine,
The meanest in your Nature, Mild and Good,
The Noblest Rest secured in your Blood.
Much have we wondered how you hid in Peace
A Mind proportioned to such things as these*
How such a Ruling Spirit you could Restrain,
And Practice first over your self to Reign*
Your Private Life did a just Pattern give,
How Fathers, Husbands, Pious Men should live*
Born to Command, your Princely Virtue slept,
Like Humble David, whilst the flock he kept;
But when your troubled Country called you forth,
Your flaming Courage and your matchless worth,
Dazzling the Eyes of all that did pretend,
To fierce Contention gave a prosperous end*
Still as you rise the State exalted too,
Finds no distemper whilst it is changed by you;
Changed like the worlds great Scene, when without noise
The Rising Sun Nights vulgar light destroys.
Had you some Ages past, this Race of Glory
Run, with amazement we should read the Story;
But living Virtue (all Achievements past)
Meets Envy still to grapple with at last:
This Caesar found and that ungrateful Age,
Which losing him, fell back to Blood and Rage.
Mistaken Brutus thought to break their yoke,
But cut the Bond of Union with that stroke:
That Sun once Set, a thousand meaner Stars
Gave a Dim light to Violence and Wars:
It Was such a Tempest as now threatens all,
Did not your Mighty Arm prevent the fall.
If Rome's Great Senate could not weild the Sword,
Which of the Conquered World had made them Lord,
What hope had ours, whilst yet your Power was new
To Rule Victorious Armies but by you?
You that had taught them to subdue their Foes,
Could order* teach, and their high Spirits Compose*
To every Duty could their Minds engage,
Provoke their Courage, and command their Rage:
So when a Lion shakes his dreadful Main,
And angry grows, if he that first took pain
To tame his Youth approach the haughty Beast,
He bends to him, but frights away the rest.
Then let the Muses with such Notes as these,
Instruct us what belongs unto our Peace;
Your Battles they hereafter shall Endite,
And draw the Image of our Mars in Fight
Tell of Towns Stormed, of Armies overrun,
And Mighty Kingdoms by your Conquest won;
How while you thundered, Clouds of dust did choke
Contending Troops, and Seas lay hid in smoke:
Illustrious Acts high Raptures do Infuse,
And every Conqueror Creates a Muse*
Here in low strains your milder Deeds we Sing*
But then (my Lord) we'll Bays and Olive bring
To Crown your Head, while you in Triumph Ride
Over Nations Conquered, and the Sea beside;
While all the Neighbor Princes unto you,
Like Ioseph's Sheaves, pay Reverence and bow.
Upon the late Storm, and Death of the late Usurper O. C.
WE must resign Heaven his great Soul does claim
In Storms as loud as his Immortal Fame:
His dying Groans, his last breath shakes our Isle,
And Trees uncut fall for his Funeral Pile.
About his Palace their broad Roots are tossed
Into the Air: So Romulus was lost:
New Rome in such a Tempest mist their King,
And from obeying fell to Worshipping.
On Oeta's top thus Hercules lay Dead,
With ruined Oaks and Pines about him spread;
The Poplar too, whose bough he wont to wear
On his Victorious Head, lay prostrate there.
Those his last Fury from the Mountain rent;
Our Dying Hero from the Continent
Ravished whole Towns, and Forts from Spaniards reft,
As his last Legacy to Britain left.
The Ocean which so long our hopes consigned,
Could give no limits to his vaster mind:
Our bounds enlargement was his latest toil,
Nor has he left us Prisoners to our Isle.
Under the Tropic is our Language spoke,
And part of Flanders has received our Yoke.
From Civil Broils he did us disingage,
Found Nobler Objects for our Martial Rage*
And with wise Conduct to his Country showed*
Their ancient way of Conquering abroad:
Ungrateful then, if we no tears allow
To him, that gave us Peace and Empire too*
Princes that feared him, grieved, concerned to see
No pitch of Glory from the Grave is free:
Nature her self, took notice of his Death,
And sighing, swelled the Sea with such a breath,
That to remotest Shores her Billows rolled,
The approaching Fate of her great Ruler told.
To Chloris.
The two following Copies are in the Edition Printed 1645.
CHloris, what is eminent we know,
Must for some cause be valued so;
Things without use, tho they be good,
Are not by us so understood.
The early Rose made to display
Her blushes to the youthful May,
Does yield her sweets, since he is fair,
And Courts her with a gentle Air.
Our Stars do show their Excellence,
Not by their Light, but Influence;
When brighter Comets, since still known
Fatal to all, are liked by none:
So your admired Beauty still,
Is by effects made good or ill.
Madam,
AS in some Climes, the warmer Sun
Makes it full Summer e're the Spring's begun,
And with ripe fruit the bending boughs can load,
Before the Violets dare look abroad:
So measure not by any common use,
The early love your brighter eyes produce.
When lately your fair hand, in Woman's weed,
Wrapped my glad head, I wished me so indeed,
That hasty time might never make me grow
Out of those favors you afford me now;
That I might ever such Indulgence find,
And you not blush, or think your self too kind,
Who now I fear while I these joys express,
Begin to think how you may make them less:
The sound of Love makes your soft Heart afraid,
And guard it self, though but a Child invade;
And innocently at your white Breast throw
A Dart as white, a Ball of new fallen Snow.
An Epigram On a Painted Lady with ill Teeth.
WEre Men so dull they could not see
That Lyce Painted, should they flee
Like simple Birds into a Net,
So grossly woven and Ill set;
Her own Teeth would undo the knot,
And let all go that she had got.
Those Teeth fair Lyce must not show,
If she would bite: her Lovers, though
Like Birds they stoop at seeming Grapes,
Are disabus'd, when first she gapes;
The rotten bones discovered there,
Show it is a Painted Sepulcher.
To my Lady --
MADAM,
YOur Commands for the gathering of these sticks into a Faggot, had sooner been
obeyed, but intending to present you with my whole Vintage: I stayed till the
latest Grapes were ripe, for here your Ladyship has not only all I have done,
but all I ever mean to do in this kind: Not but that I may defend the attempt I
have made upon Poetry, by the examples (not to trouble you with History) of
many Wise, and Worthy Persons of our own times: As Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Fra.
Bacon, Cardinal Perron, the ablest of his Countrymen; and the former Pope, who
they say, instead of the triple Crown, wore sometimes the Poets Ivy, as an
Ornament, perhaps, of lesser weight and trouble. But, Madam, these Nightingals
sing only in the Spring, it was the diversion of their Youth. As Ladies learn
to Sing and Play when they are Children, what they forget when they are Women.
The resemblance holds further, for as you quit the Lute the sooner, because the
posture is suspected to draw the body awry, so this is not always practiced
without some Villainy to the mind, wresting it from present occasions, and
accustoming us to a Still somewhat removed from common use. But that you may
not think his case deplorable, who had made Verses, we are told, that Tully
(the greatest Wit among the Romans) was once sick of this Disease, and yet
recovered so well, that of almost as bad a Poet as your Servant, he became the
most perfect Orator in the World. So that not so much to have made Verses, as
not to give over in time, leaves a man without excuse; the former presenting us
with an opportunity, at least, of doing Wisely; that is, to conceal those we
have made; which I shall yet do, if my humble request may be of as much force
with your Ladyship, as your Commands have been with me: Madam, I only whisper
these in your ears; if you publish them, they are your own, and therefore as
you apprehend the reproach of a Wit, and a Poet, cast them into the fire; or if
they come where green Boughs are in the Chimney, with the help of your fair
Friends, (for thus bound, it will be too hard a task for your hands alone) to
tear them in pieces; wherein you shall honor me with the fate of Orpheus, for
so his Poems, whereof we only hear the form (not his limbs as the Story will
have it) I suppose were scattered by the Thracian Dames. Here, Madam, I might
take an opportunity to Celebrate your Virtues, and to instruct you how Unhappy
you are, in that you know not who you are; how much you excel the most
excellent of your own: And how much you amaze the least inclined to wonder of
your Sex. But as they will be apt to take your Ladyship for a Roman Name, so
would they believe that I endeavored the Character of a perfect Nymph,
Worshipped an Image of my own making, and Dedicated this to the Lady of the
Brain, not of the Heart of your Ladyships most humble Servant

E. W.

Mr. Wallers Speech in Parliament, 1641. about Innovations in Doctrine and
Discipline, etc.
WE shall make it appear, the Errors of Divines, who would that a Monarch can
be absolute, and that he can do all things ad libitum; receding not only from
their Text, (though that be wandering too) but from the way their own Profession
might teach them. Stare super vias antiquas, and remove not the ancient bounds
and Landmarks which our Fathers have set.

If to be Absolute, were to be restrained by no Laws, then can no King in
Christendom be so, for they all stand obliged to the Laws Christian, and we ask
no more; for to this Pillar be our Privileges fixed, our Kings, at their
Coronation, having taken a Sacred Oath not to Infringe them. I am sorry these
men take no more care, for the informing of our Faith of these things, which
they tell us for our Souls Health, whilst we know them so manifestly in the
wrong way, in that which concerns the Liberties and Privileges of the Subjects
of England.

They gain Preferment, and then it is no matter, though they neither believe
themselves, nor are believed by others; but since they are so ready to let
loose the Conscience of our Kings, we are the more carefully to proceed for our
Protection against this Pulpit-Law, by declaring, and reinforcing, Municipal
Laws of this Kingdom.

It is worthy the Observation, how new this Opinion, or rather this way of
Rising, is even amongst themselves.

For (Mr. Speaker) Mr. Hooker, who was no Refractory man (as they term it)
thinks that the first Government was Arbitrary, until it was found, that to
live by one man's Will, becomes all men's Misery; these are his Words, and that
these were the Original of inventing Laws.

And (Mr. Speaker) if we look farther back, our Histories will tell us, that
the Prelates of this Kingdom, have often been the Mediators between the King
and his Subjects, to present and pray redress of their grievances, and had
reciprocally then, as much love and reverence from the People.

But these Preachers, more active than their Predecessors, and wiser than the
Laws, have found out a better form of Government.

The King must be a more Absolute Monarch than any of his Predecessors, and to
them he must owe it, though in the mean time they hazard the hearts of his
People, and involve him into a thousand Difficulties.

For, suppose this form of Government were inconvenient; (Mr. Speaker) this is
but a Supposition; for this five hundred years, it has not only maintained us
in safety, but made us Victorious over other Nations. But suppose this form of
Government were inconvenient, and they have another Idea of one more
convenient, we all know how dangerous Innovations are, though to the better,
and what hazards those Princes run, that enterprise the change of a long
Established Government.

Now (Mr. Speaker) of all our Kings that have gone before, and of all that are
to succeed in this Happy Race, why should so Pious, and so Good a King, be
exposed to this trouble and hazard? Besides, that King so diverted, can never
do any great matters abroad.

But (Mr. Speaker) whilst these men have thus bent their Wits against the Law
of their Country, have they not neglected their own Profession? What Tares are
grown up in the Field which they should have Tilled? I leave it to a second
consideration, not but Religion be the first thing in our purposes and desires:
But that which is first in Dignity, is not always to preceed in order of time,
for well-being supposes a being; and the first impediment which men naturally
endeavor to remove, is the want of those things; without which they cannot
subsist. God first assigned unto Adam maintenance of life, and added to him a
title to the rest of the Creatures, before he appointed a Law to observe.

And let me tell you, that if our Adversaries have any such design, as there is
nothing more easy, than to impose Religion on a People deprived of their
Liberties, so there is nothing more hard, than to do the same upon Freemen.

And therefore (Mr. Speaker) I conclude with this motion, that there may be an
Order presently made, that the first thing this House goes about, shall be the
restoring of this Nation in general, to the Fundamental and Vital Liberties,
the Prosperity of our Goods, and Freedom of our Persons; and then we will
forthwith consider of the supply desired.

And thus shall we discharge the Trust reposed in us, by those that sent us
hither: And His Majesty shall see, that we will make more than ordinary haste
to satisfy His Demands; and we shall let all those know that seek to hasten
the matter of Supply, that they will so far delay it, as they give no
interruption to the former.

Mr. Waller's Speech in Parliament, at a Conference of both Houses in the
Painted Chamber, July 6. 1641.
MY LORDS,
I Am commanded by the House of Commons, to present you with these Articles
against Mr. Justice Crawley, which when your Lordships shall have been pleased
to hear read, I shall take leave (according to custom) to say something of what
I have collected from the sense of that House, concerning the Crimes therein
contained.

Here the Charge was read, containing his extrajudicial Opinions subscribed,
and judgment given for Ship Money; and afterward, a Declaration in his charge
at an Assize, That Ship Money was so Inherent a Right in the Crown, that it
would not be in the power of a Parliament to take it away.

MY LORDS, Not only my Wants, but my Affections render me less fit for this
Employment; for though it has not been my happiness to have the Law a part of
my breeding, there is no Man honors that Profession more, or has a greater
reverence toward the Grave Judges, the Oracles thereof. Out of Parliament, all
our Courts of Justice are governed or directed by them; and when a Parliament
is called, if your Lordships were not assisted by them, and the House of
Commons by other Gentlemen of that Robe, experience tells us, it might run a
hazard of being styled Parliamentum indoctorum. But as all Posessions are
obnoxious to the malice of the Professors, and by them most easily betrayed, so
(my Lords) these Articles have told you how these Brothers of the Coyf are
become fratres in malo; how these Sons of the Law have torn out the Bowels of
their Mother. But this Judge (whose charge you last heard) in one expression of
his, excels no less his Fellows, than they have done the worst of their
Predecessors, in this Conspiracy against the Commonwealth. Of the Judgment for
Ship Money, and those extrajudicial Opinions preceding the same (wherein they
are jointly concerned) you have already heard, how unjust and pernicious a
proceeding that was in so public a Cause, has been sufficiently expressed to
your Lordships; but this man, adding despair to our misery, tells us from the
Bench, that Ship Money was a Right so inherent in the Crown, that it would not
be in the power of an Act of Parliament to take it away. Herein (my Lords) he
did not only give as deep a wound to the Commonwealth as any of the rest, but
dipped his Dart in such a Poison, that so far as in him lay, it might never
receive a Cure. As by those abortive Opinions, subscribing to the Subversion of
our Propriety, before he heard what could be said for it, he prevented his own,
so by this Declaration of his, he endeavors to prevent the Judgment of your
Lordships too, and to confine the power of a Parliament, the only place where
this mischief might be redressed: Sure he is more Wise and Learned, than to
believe himself in this Opinion, or not to know how ridiculous it would appear
to a Parliament, and how dangerous to himself; and therefore, no doubt but by
saying no Parliament could abolish this Judgment, his meaning was, that this
Judgment had abolished Parliaments.

This Imposition of Ship Money springing from a pretended Necessity, was it not
enough that it was now grown Annual, but he must entail it upon the State for
ever, at once making Necessity inherent to the Crown, and Slavery to the
Subject? Necessity, which dissolving all Law, is so much more prejudicial to
His Majesty than to any of us, by how much the Law has invested his Royal State
with a greater power, and ampler fortune; for so undoubted a truth it has ever
been, that Kings as well as Subjects, are involved in the confusion which
Necessity produces, that the Heathen thought their Gods also obliged by the
same, Pareamus necessitati quam nec homines nec dii superant: This Judge then
having in his charge, at the Affize, declared the dissolution of the Law, by
this supposed Necessity, with what Conscience could he at the same Assize,
proceed to condemn and punish men, unless perhaps he meant the Law was still in
force for our Destruction, and not for our Preservation, that it should have
power to kill, but none to protect us; a thing no less horrid, than if the Sun
should burn without lighting us, or the Earth serve only to bury, and not to
feed and nourish us. But (my Lords) to demonstrate that this was a
supposititious imposed necessity, and such as they could remove when they
pleased; at the last Convention in Parliament, a price was set upon it, for
twelve Subsidies you shall reverse this Sentence: It may be said that so much
money would have removed the present Necessity, but here was a Rate set upon
future Necessity; for twelve Subsidies you shall never suffer necessity again,
you shall for ever abolish that Judgment. Here this Mystery is revealed, this
Vizor of Necessity is pulled off, and now it appears, that this Parliament of
Judges had very frankly and bountifully, presented His Majesty with twelve
Subsidies, to be levied on your Lordships, and the Commons. Certainly, there is
no Privilege which more properly belongs to a Parliament, than to open the
Purse of the Subject, and yet these Judges, who are neither capable of sitting
among us in the House of Commons, nor with your Lordships, otherwise than your
Assistants, have not only assumed to themselves this privilege of Parliament,
but presumed at once to make a present to the Crown, of all that either your
Lordships, or the Commons of England do, or shall hereafter possess.

And because this man has had the boldness to put the power of Parliament in
balance with the opinion of the Judges, I shall entreat your Lordships to
observe by way of comparison, the solemn and safe proceeding of the one, with
the precipitate dispatch of the other. In Parliament (as your Lordships know
well) no new Law can pass, or old be abrogated, till it has been thrice read
with your Lordships, thrice in the Commous House, and then it receives the
Royal Assent; so that it is like Gold seven times purified: Whereas, these
Judges by this one resolution of theirs, would persuade His Majesty, that by
naming Necessity, he might at once dissolve (at least suspend) the great
Charter 32 times confirmed by his Royal Progenitors, the Petition of Right, and
all other Laws provided for the maintenance of the Right and Propriety of the
Subject; a strange force (my Lords) in the sound of this word Necessity, that
like a Charm it should silence the Laws, while we are dispoyl'd of all we have,
for that but a part of our goods was taken is owing to the grace and goodness
of the King, for so much as concerns these Judges, we have no more left than
they perhaps may deserve to have, when your Lordships shall have passed
Judgment upon them: This for the neglect of their Oaths, and betraying that
public trust, which for the conservation of our Laws was reposed in them.

Now for the cruelty and unmercifulness of this judgment, you may please to
remember that in the old Law they were forbid to sees a Kid in his Mothers
milk; of which the received interpretation is, that we should not use that to
the destruction of any creature, which was intended for its preservation: Now
(my Lords) God and Nature has given us the Sea as our best Guard against our
Enemies, and our Ships as our greatest glory above other Nations, and how
barbarously would these Men have let in the Sea upon us, at once to wash away
our Liberties, and to overwhelm, if not our Land, all the propriety we have
therein, making the supply of our Navy, a pretense for the ruin of our Nation;
for observe I beseech you the fruit and consequence of this judgment, how this
Money has prospered, how contrary an effect it has had to the end, for which
they pretended to take it: On every County a Ship is annually imposed, and who
would not expect, but our Seas by this time should be covered with the number
of our Ships? Alas (my Lords) the daily complaints of the decay of our Navy
tell us how ill Ship Money has maintained the Sovereignty of the Sea; and by
the many Petitions which we receive from the Wives of those miserable Captives
at Algier, (being between four or five thousand of our County-Men) it does too
evidently appear that to make us Slaves at home, is not the way to keep us from
being made Slaves abroad; so far has this judgment been from relieving the
present, or preventing the future necessity, that as it changed our real
Propriety into the shadow of a Propriety, so of a feigned it has made a Real
necessity.

A little before the approach of the Gauls to Rome, while the Romans had yet
no apprehension of that danger, there was heard a voice in the Air, louder then
ordinary, The Gauls are come, which voice after they had Sacked the City, and
Besieged the Capitol, was held so ominous, that Livie relates it as a Prodigy;
This Anticipiation of necessity seems to have been no less ominous to us: These
Judges like ill boding Birds have called necessity upon the State in a time
when I dare say they thought themselves in greatest security; but if it seem
Superstitious to take this as an Omen, sure I am, we may look on it as a cause
of the unfeigned necessity we now suffer, for what regret and discontent had
this judgment bred among us? And as when the Noise and Tumult in a private
House grows so loud as to be heard into the Streets, it calls in the next
dwellers either kindly to appease, or to make their own use of domestic
strife; so in all likelihood our known discontents at home have been a
concurrent cause to Invite our Neighbors to visit us, so much to the expense
and trouble of both these Kingdoms.

And here, My Lords, I cannot but take notice of the most sad effect of this
oppression, the ill influence it has had upon the Ancient Reputation and Valor
of of the English Nation: And no wonder, for if it be true that oppression
makes a Wise Man Mad, it may well suspend the Courage of the Valiant: The same
happened to the Romans, when for renown in Arms they most excelled the rest of
the World; the story is but short, 'twas in the time of the Decemviri (and I
think the chief troubles of our State may make up that number,) The Decemviri,
My Lords, had subverted the Laws, Suspended the Courts of Justice, and (which
was the greatest grievance both to the Nobility and People) had for some years
omitted to assemble the Senate, which was their Parliament: This, says the
Historian, did not only deject the Romans, and make them despair of their
Liberty, but caused them to be less valued by their Neighbors: The Sabines
take the advantage and invade them; and now the Decemviri are forced to call
the long desired Senate whereof the People were so glad, that Hostibus belloque
gratiam habuerunt: This Assembly breaks up in discontent, nevertheless the War
proceeds; Forces are raised, led by some of the Decemviri, and with the Sabines
they meet in the Field: I know your Lordships expect the event: My Authors
words of his Country Men are these, Ne quid ductu aut auspicio Decemvirorum
prospere gereretur, vinci se patiebantur, They chose rather to suffer a present
diminution of their Honor, than by victory to confirm the Tyranny of their new
Masters: At their return from this unfortunate expedition, after some
distempers and expostulations of the people, another Senate, that is, a second
Parliament, is called, and there the Decemviri are questioned, deprived of
their authority, imprisoned, banished, and some lose their lives; and soon
after this vindication of their Liberties, the Romans by their better success,
made it appear to the World, that Liberty and Courage dwell always in the same
breast, and are never to be divorced. No doubt, my Lords, but your Justice
shall have the like effect upon this dispirited people; it is not the
restitution of our ancient Laws alone, but the restoration of our ancient
Courage which is expected from your Lordships: I need not say any thing to move
your just indignation, that this Man should so Cheaply give away that which
your Noble Ancestors with so much Courage and industry had so long maintained:
You have often been told how careful they were, though with the hazard of their
Lives and Fortunes, to derive those Rights and Liberties as entire to posterity
as they received them from their Fathers; what they did with labor you may do
with ease, what they did with danger you may do securely: the foundation of our
Laws is not shaken with the Engine of War, they are only blasted with the
breath of these men, and by your breath they may be restored.

What Judgments your Predecessors have given, and what punishments their
Predecessors have suffered for offenses of this nature, your Lordships have
already been so well informed, that I shall not trouble you with a repetition
of those precedents: Only (my Lords) something I shall take leave to observe of
the person with whose charge I have presented you, that you may the less doubt
of the wilfulness of his offense.

His education in the Inns of Court, his constant practice as a Counselor,
and his experience as a Judge (considered with the mischief he has done) makes
it appear that this Progress of his through the Law, has been like that of a
diligent Spy through a Country, into which he meant to conduct an enemy.

To let you see he did not offend for company, there is one crime so peculiar
to himself, and of such malignity, that it makes him at once incapable of your
Lordships favor, and his own subsistence incompatible with the right and
propriety of the Subject: for if you leave him in a capacity of interpreting
the Laws, has he not already declared his opinion, That your votes and
resolutions against Ship Money are void, and that it is not in the power of a
Parliament to abolish that Judgment? To him my Lords, that has thus played with
the power of Parliament, we may well apply what was once said to the Goat
browsing on the Vine. Rode, caper, vitem, tamen hinc cum stabis ad aras
In Tua quod fundi cornua possit, erit:


He has cropped and infringed the privileges of a banished Parliament, but now
it is returned, he may find it has power enough to make a Sacrifice of him, to
the better establishment of our Laws; and in truth what other satisfaction can
he make his injured Country, than to confirm by his example those Rights and
Liberties which he had ruined by his opinion?

For the proofs, my Lords, they are so manifest, that they will give you little
trouble in the disquisition; his crimes are already upon Record, the Delinquent
and the Witness is the same; having from several seats of Judicature proclaimed
himself an Enemy to our Laws and Nation, Ex ore suo judicabitur. To which
purpose I am commanded by the Knights, and Citizens, and Burgesses of the House
of Commons, to desire your Lordships that as speedy a proceeding may be had
against Mr. Justice Crawley, as the course of Parliament will permit.

Mr. Waller's Speech in the House of Commons, on Tuesday, July 4. 1643.
Being brought to the Bar, and having leave given him by the Speaker, to say
what he could for himself, before they proceeded to expel him the House.
Mr. Speaker,
I Acknowledege it a great mercy of God, and a great favor from you, that I am
once more suffered to behold this Honorable Assembly. I mean not to make use
of it to say any thing in my own defense by justification or denial of what I
have done, I have already confessed enough to make me appear, worthy not only
to be put out of this House, but out of the World too. All my humble request to
you is, that if I seem to you as unworthy to live, as I do to my self, I may
have the honor to receive my death from your own hands, and not be exposed to
a Trial by the Council of War: what ever you shall think me worthy to suffer in
a Parliamentary way, is not like to find stop any where else.

This (Sir) I hope you will be pleased for your own sakes to grant me, who am
already so miserable, that nothing can be added to my calamity, but to be made
the occasion of creating a president to your own disadvantage; besides the
right I may have to this, consider I beseech you, that the eyes of the World
are upon you; you Govern in chief, and if you should expose your own Members to
the punishment of others, it will be thought that you either want power, or
leisure to chastize them your selves: Nor let any man despise the ill
consequence of such a president as this would be, because he sees not
presently the inconveniences which may ensue: You have many Armies on foot, and
it is uncertain how long you may have occasion to use them. Soldiers and
Commanders (though I know well they of the Parliaments Army, excel no less in
Modesty than they do in Courage) are generally of a nature ready to pretend to
the utmost power of this kind, which they conceive to be due to them, and may
be too apt upon any occasion of discontent to make use of such a president as
this. In this very Parliament you have not been without some taste of the
experience hereof; it is now somewhat more than two years since you had an Army
in the North, paid and directed by your selves, and yet you may be pleased to
remember there was a considerable number of Officers in that Army, which joined
in a Petition or Remonstrance to this House, taking notice of what some of the
Members had said here, as they supposed to their disadvantage, and did little
less than require them of you; it is true, there had been some tampering with
them; but what has happened at one time, may wisely thought possible to fall
out again at another.

Sir, I presume but to point you out the danger; if it be not just, I know you
will not do me the wrong to expose me to this trial; if it be just, your Army
may another time require the same Justice of you, in their own behalf, against
some other Member, whom perhaps you would be less willing to part with.
Necessity has of late forced you into untrodden Paths; and in such a Case as
this where you have no President of your own, you may not do amiss to look
abroad upon other States and Senates, which exercise the supreme Power, as you
now do here.

I dare confidently say you shall find none either Ancient or Modern, which
ever exposed any of their own order to be Tried for his Life by the Officers of
their Armies abroad, for what he did, while he resided among them in the Senate.

Among the Romans the practice was so contrary, that some Inferior Officers in
the Army far from the City, having been Sentenced by their General, or
Commander in chief, as deserving Death by their Discipline of War, have
nevertheless (because they were Senators) Appealed thither, and the Cause has
received a new hearing in the Senate. Not to use more Words to persuade you to
take heed that you Wound not your selves thorough my sides, in violating the
Privileges belonging to your own Persons; I shall humbly desire you to
consider likewise the Nature of my offense, (not but that I should be much
ashamed to say any thing in diminution thereof: God knows it is Horrid enough,
for the Evil it might have occasiooed) but if you look near it, it may perhaps
appear to be rather a Civil than a Martial Crime, and so to have Title to a
Trial at the Common Law of the Land; there may justly be some difference put
between me and others in this business.

I have had nothing to do with the other Army, or any intention to begin the
offer of violence to any body. It was only a Civil pretense to that which I
then Foolishly conceived to be the right of the Subject. I humbly refer it to
your considerations, and to your Consciences. I know you will take care not to
shed the Blood of War in Peace, that Blood by the Law of War, which has a
right to be Tried by the Law of Peace.

For so much as concerns my self and my part in this business, (if I were
worthy to have any thing spoken, or patiently heard in my behalf) this might
truly be said, that I made not this business but found it, it was in other men's
hands long before it was brought to me, and when it came, I extended it not,
but restrained it. For the Propositions of letting in part of the Kings Army,
or offering violence to the Members oi this House, I ever disallowed and
utterly rejected them.

What it was that moved me to entertain discourse of this business so far as I
did, I will tell you ingenuously, and that rather as a warning for others, than
that it make any thing for my self; it was only an impatience of the
inconveniences of the present War, looking on things with a carnal eye, and not
minding that which chiefly (if not only) ought to have been considered, the
inestimable value of the Cause you have in hand, the Cause of God and of
Religion, and the necessities you are forced upon for the maintenance of the
same; as a just punishment for this neglect, it pleased God to desert and
suffer me with a fatal blindness, to be led on, and engaged in such Councils as
were wholly disproportioned to the rest of my life; this (Sir) my own
Conscience tells me was the cause of my failing, and not malice, or any ill
habit of mind, or disposition toward the Commonwealth, or to the Parliament:
For from whence should I have it? If you look on my Birth, you will not find it
in my Blood: I am of a Stock which has Born you better Fruit: If you look on
my Education, it has been almost from my Childhood in this House, and among
the best sort of Men; and for the whole Practice of my Life till this time, if
another were to speak for me, he might reasonably say, that neither my Actions
out of Parliament, nor in my Expressions in it, have savoured of Dis-affection
or Malice to the Liberties of the People, or Privileges of Parliament.

Thus Sir, I have set before your Eyes, both my Person and my Case, wherein I
shall make no such Defense by denying, or Extenuating any thing, I have done,
as ordinary Delinquents do, my Address to you, and all my Plea shall only be
such as Children use to their Parents, I have offended; I confess it, I never
did any thing like it before; it is a passage unsuitable to the whole Course of
my Life beside, and for the time to come, as God that can bring Light out of
Darkness, has made this business in the event useful to you, so also has he
to me: You have by it made an happy discovery of your Enemies, and of my self,
and the Evil Principles I walked by so that if you look either on what I have
been heretofore, or what I now am, and by Gods grace assisting me, shall always
continue to be, you may perhaps think me fit to be an Example of your
Compassion and Clemency.

Sir, I shall no sooner leave you, but my Life will depend on your Breath, and
not that alone, but the subsistence of some that are more Innocent. I might
therefore show you my Children, whom the rigor of your Justice would make
complete Orphans, being already Motherless. I might show you a Family, wherein
there are some unworthy to have their share in that mark of Infamy which now
threatens us: But something there is, which if I could show you, would move you
more than all this, it is my Heart, which abhors what I have done, more, and is
more severe to it self, than the severest Judge can be. A Heart (Mr. Speaker)
so awakned by this Affliction, and so entirely devoted to the Cause you
maintain, that I earnestly desire of God to incline to you, so to dispose of
me, whether for Life or for Death, as may most conduce to the Advancement
thereof.

Sir, not to trouble you any longer, if I Dye, I shall Dye Praying for you; if
I Live, I shall Live serving you, and render you back the use and Employment of
all those Days you shall add to my Life.

After this, having withdrawn himself, he was called in again, and (being by
the Speaker required thereto) gave them an exact account how he came first to
the knowledge of this business, as also what Lords were acquainted therewith,
or had engaged themselves therein.

FINIS.
The Epitaph on Mr. WALLER'S Monument in Beconsfield Churchyard in
Buckinghamshire: written by Mr. Rymer, late Historiographer-Royal.
On the WEST END.
EDMUNDI WALLER HIC JACET ID
QUANTUM MORTI CESSIT; QUI INTER
POETAS SUI TEMPORIS FACILE
PRINCEPS, LAUREAM, QUAM MERUIT
ADOLESCENS, OCTOGENARIUS HAUD
ABDICAVIT. HUIC DEBET PATRIA
LINGUA QUOD CREDAS, SI GRAECE
LATINEQUE INTERMITTERENT, MUSAE
LOQUI AMARENT ANGLICE.
On the SOUTH SIDE.
HEUS, VIATOR! TUMULATUM VIDES
EDMUNDUM WALLER QUI TANTI
NOMINIS POETA, ET IDEM AVITIS
OPIBUS, INTER PRIMOS SPECTABILIS,
MUSIS SE DEDIT, ET PATRIAE.
NONDUM OCTODECENALIS, INTER
ARDUA REGNI TRACTANTES SEDEM
HABUIT, A BURGO DE AGMONDESHAM
MISSUS. HIC VITAE CURSUS; NEC
ONERI DEFUIT SENEX; VIXITQUE
SEMPER POPULO CHARUS, PRINCIPIBUS
IN DELICIIS, ADMIRATIONI OMNIBUS.


HIC CONDITUR TUMULO SUB EODEM
RARA VIRTUTE ET MULTA PROLE
NOBILIS UXOR, MARIA EX BRESSYORUM
FAMILIA, CUM EDMUNDO WALLER,
CONJUGE CHARISSIMO: QUEM TER ET
DECIES LAETUM FECIT PATREM, V FILIIS,
FILIABUS VIII; QUOS MUNDO
DEDIT, ET IN COELUM REDIIT.
On the EAST END.
EDMUNDUS WALLER CUI HOC MARMOR
SACRUM EST, COLESHILL NASCENDI
LOCUM HABUIT; CANTABRIGIAM
STUDENDI; PATREM ROBERTUM ET
EX HAMPDENA STIRPE MATREM:
COEPIT VIVERE IIIo MARTII, A. D. MDCV.
PRIMA UXOR ANNA EDWARDI BANKS
FILIA UNICA HAERES. EX PRIMA BIS
PATER FACTUS; EX SECUNDA
TREDECIES; CUI ET DUO LUSTRA
SUPERSTES, OBIIT XXI OCTOBER.
A. D. MDC LXXXVII.
On the NORTH-SIDE.
HOC MARMORE EDMUNDO WALLER
MARIAEQUE EX SECUNDIS NUPTIIS
CONJUGI, PIENTISSIMIS PARENTIBUS,
PIISSIME PARENTAVIT EDMUNDUS
FILIUS. HONORES BENE-MERENTIBUS
EXTREMOS DEDIT QUOS IPSE FUGIT.
E L.W.I.F. H.G. EX TESTAMENTO
H. M. P. IN JUL. MDCC.

