Spiritual Armor To Defend the HEAD FROM THE SUPERFLUITY of NAUGHTINNESS.
Being a Loving and Christian TENDER, Humbly offered to the Pious and Serious
Consideration of the Ministers of the Gospel, and to all others it may Concern.

WHEREIN IS PROVED, That it is Unlawful for Women to cut their Hair polled or
shorn; and Men to wear the same to cover their Heads: Together how Men and
Women ought according to the Written Law of GOD and Nature to wear their Hair.

Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the Way, and see and ask for the old Path,
where is the good Way, Jer. 6. 16.

The Woman shall not wear that which pertains unto a Man, neither shall a Man
put on a Woman's Garment; for all that do so, are abomination to the Lord, Deuteronomy.
22. 5.

Neither shall they shave their Heads, nor suffer their Locks to grow long;
they shall only poll their heads, Ezekiel. 44. 20.

Does not even Nature it self teach you, If a Man have long Hair, it is a shame
to him? 1 Cor. 11. 14.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, and Sold by William Marshal, at the Sign of
the Bible in Newgatestreet. 1688.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE drift and intent of these Lines, is not to show the many manners and ways
the Pagans, or most part of the World, have or do wear their hair; but the main
end is, to show in what order God created Man in respect of his hair; and that
the Lord in all Ages has by his Servants called upon his redeemed ones, to
keep his Order in Nature; yea, in respect of wearing their hair, as well as in
other things, that so his Order in Nature be not broken in any thing.

And as it is oft-times the pleasure of God, to employ on the Lords Message to
his People, the weak and despised ones, according to the Prayer of the Lord
Jesus to his Father, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, Mat. 11.
25, 26.
because thou have hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, and have
revealed them unto Babes; even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight:
So that they oft-times seeing their own insufficiency for so great a Work, have
pleaded with the Lord to be excused; but because the Lord will send by whom he
will send, he commanded them not to be afraid of the faces of the Persons,
although they were great Persons, and powerful in the World, but to rest upon
Gods Promise, For I am with thee to deliver thee; therefore gird up thy loins,
and Jer. 1. 6, 7, 8, 17.
arise and speak unto them all that I command thee, lest I confound thee before
them, or break thee in pieces.

And although all extraordinary Messengers, as Prophets and Apostles, are
ceased; yet God has his ordinary Servants, whom he sends with his Message to
his People, Isai. 8. 20. 1 John 4. 1, 2.
according to his written Word, by which all Spirits or Doctrines must be
tried, in all that Men write or speak to inform the Lords People as the mind of
God: And as of old God had ordained Priests and Levites to teach the Deuteronomy. 33.
8, 11. Mal. 2. 7.
People from the written Word of the Lord, Jacob Gods Judgment, and Israel his
Law, whom the Prophets reproved for neglect of this duty; so he has ordained
Pastors and Teachers, now to teach to be instant in season and out of Ephesians. 4.
Romans 12. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3, 4.
season, to reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and Doctrine: But
when the Priests as well as the Levites neglected their Duty, to have
compassion on the Man that fell among Thieves, wounded, stripped of his
Raiment, and Luke 10. 31, 32, 33.
left half dead (in Sins and Trespasses) then by the example of the Samaritan,
other Christians Duty it is to have compassion on every poor Soul fallen into
sin: Now because the Pastors and Teachers in this Day, whose Duty in this
Treatise shall be showed, ought to have compassion on such of their Brethren as
are fallen into sin; as this sinful shame for Men to wear the long Hair of
Women in Perriwigs, but do not; then it is the Duty of others whom the Lord
Jesus bids go and do as the Samaritan did, though he be no Pastor, Priest,
nor Levite Luke 10. 37. Levit. 19. 17.
in Office; and those that so do, are the only Neighbors to those fallen into
sin, wounded in Conscience, that do pour the Oil, or Name, or Gospel of Christ;
which being Cant. 1. 3.
applied to the wounded in sin, is as Ointment poured forth; whereby the
hanging-down hands is lifted up, and Heb. 12. 12, 13.
feeble knees is strengthened.

This being the very end of this Work, in a day of so great necessity, when
sin, not only this, the shame to Nature, is suffered, but many other Evils in
the Churches in this day, for which Judgment ere long will begin at 1 Pet. 4.
17.
the House of God, as it did on the Primitive Churches, as Mr. Fuller in his
History of the Holy Wars has showed See Mr. Fullers History of the holy Wars,
p. 6. c. 6.
in these words: The Sins of the Eastern Countries, chiefly their damnable
Heresies, hastened Gods Judgments on them; and in the Western parts, Heresies as
an Angle caught single persons; when in Asia, like a Draw-Net, it took whole
Provinces: the staid Wits of Europe were not so easily removed out of the old
road and track of Religion, whilst the active and nimble Heads of the East,
were more desirous of Novelties, more desirous and cunning to invent
distinctions to cozen themselves, more fluent in Language to express their
Conceits; as always Error grows fastest in hottest Brains: Hence it was the
Melkites, Maronites, Nestorians, Euticheans, Jacobites, overspread those parts;
then it was just with God to suffer them that would not be convinced by
Christian Counsel, to be subdued by the Pagans Sword. And again, It may seem
admirable, that that senceless Religion should gain so much ground on
Christianism, especially having neither real substance in Doctrine, nor winning
Behavior in Ceremony to alure Professors; being but the scum of Judaism and
Paganism sod together, and here and there strowed over with a spice of
Christianity.

If this be not a word in season, to consider how like this Rev. 16. 1, 17.
is to the day we live in, when the last Vial of Gods wrath is poured into an
earthen Air, as Air is likened to Wind or Doctrine, how is it that Men see not
how all Doctrine Ephesians. 4. 14.
is corrupted, not only of Faith, but the Doctrine of the Moral Law? fitting
all for Judgment, the great sign of Luke 18. 8.
the latter Day approaching near, as the days of Noe, then Mat. 24. 37. 1 Pet.
3. 20. Rev. 16. 15. Mat. 24. 43.
scarce Faith found in eight Souls. Now the Kingdom of Heaven is likened to ten
Virgins, half naught; and will not the Church be awakened, Christ will come as
a Thief, Blessed is he that watches and keeps his Garment; and not be found
in as miserable condition, as the Church of Laodicea, when she boasted she was
rich Rev. 3. 17.
and wanted nothing, then was she wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and naked.
The Lord help all therefore to 1 Cor. 13. 5.
examine the state they are in, and to make their calling and election sure,
that so they may be ready when Christ comes, to enter in with Christ into the
Joy of their Lord; 2 Pet. 1. 10.
which is and shall be the Prayer of him who is thine in all Christian Duty,

Tho. Wall.

A Loving and Christian Tender, humbly offered to the Pious and Serious
Consideration of the Ministers of the Gospel, and to all others it may concern.
FOrasmuch as we are taught Eccl. 3. 1, 7.
to every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the
Heaven; so that I humbly conceive, as there is a time to keep silence, and
there is a time to speak: It is now in these last days of Apostasy, when the
Ministers of that glorious Name, or Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who are
taught by the Apostle, to be Examples to the Believers, 1 Timothy 4. 12.
in Word, in Conversation, in Charity or Love, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity;
so that among other Proofs of their Ministry, that the Ministry be not blamed,
they may approve themselves to be the Ministers of Christ by pureness, do 2
Cor. 6. 3, 6.
on the contrary, opposite to Purity or Pureness, give an evil Example to the
Believers, in walking in the shame to their Nature, either in suffering their
Locks to grow long, and othersome in wearing the Locks of Women in Perriwigs,
contrary to the express Ezekiel. 44. 20.
Word of God and light 1 Cor. 11. 14.
of Nature, whereby they have changed the natural use, into that which is
against Nature; which is a great dishonor to God our Creator, and shameful
reproach and disgrace to the Christian Religion, as shall by the help of God be
made to appear; and that this evil being winkt at by the Ministers, is the
inlet to many other evils in the Churches of God.

And although I do acknowledge my self the unfittest of any to undertake a work
of this nature, yet seeing the Ministers whose work it is, to set the Isa. 58.
1.
Trump of Gods Word to their mouths, as the Priests lips of old was to preserve
Knowledge; yet when the Priests omitted their Duty, as it is written Jer. 2. 8.
Mal. 2. 7.
The Priest said not, Where is the Lord? they that handled the Law knew me not;
the Pastors transgressed against me: So that God called Amos Amos 7. 14, 16.
a Herdsman, a gatherer of Sycamore Fruit, to drop the Word of the Lord against
the House of Isaac; even so when the Priest and Teacher of the Law in the days
of Christ, neglected to teach the weighty matters of the Law, Matthew. 23. 23.
Mercy, Judgment, and Faith; the Lord called poor Matthew. 4. 19.
Fishermen to preach the Kingdom of God; therefore let none be offended,
because God has chosen the 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29.
foolish and base things of the World, the things that are despised, even Babes
in Christ, that no flesh should glory in his presence, whenas the Learned in
this day are altogether silent, some peradventure through slavish fear, do not
reprove this sin, the shame to Nature, in Men's wearing of long Hair, lest they
should offend the Rich among them; others being themselves guilty of this sin,
in wearing long Hair, the shame to Nature, do not reprove those that do wear
long Hair; so that the work of God in this thing is wholly neglected, as in
some other things not here to mention; therefore for the honor of God, and the
love I bear to all Gods elected Children that are fallen Mat. 24. 24.
into this sin, have I made bold to show my Opinion, as one that has obtained
mercy; knowing assuredly, that all that shall read these lines, that have like
spirit with David, will not be offended, but rather with like gracious heart
will say with him, Psalm. 141. 5.
Let the Righteous smite me, and it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove
me, and it shall be an excellent Oil that shall not break my head; because to
such who have the seed of Gods Luke 8. 15. 1 John 3. 9. Job. 19. 28.
Word in their hearts, Prove. 27. 5, 6, 9.
Open rebuke is better to them than secret love, and faithful are the wounds of
a friend; whenas the kisses of an enemy are deceitful: Therefore says Solomon,
him that justifies the wicked, the people shall curse; but to them that
rebukes, shall be pleasantness; and upon him shall come Prove. 24. 24, 29.
the blessing: So then to the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this word, it is because Isa. 8. 20.
there is no light in them.

Now because the matter here to be treated of, is concerning the breach of Gods
order in Nature, for the better understanding thereof, it is good we take some
observation concerning the holy Order God created Man and Woman in, as they
were purely natural, forasmuch as that was not first which is spiritual, but
that which 1 Cor. 15. 46.
is natural.

Therefore we read God who created all things for his pleasure Rev. 4. 11.
made every thing perfectly good, Genesis 1. 31.
set in most perfect and happy order; Man, the Lord created after his own
Image; in the Image of God created he him, Male and Female created he Genesis 1 27.
them: so that Man among other Endowments in Nature, bore Gods Image in verse.
26.
Sovereignty, being Lord of the Earth Psalm. 8. 6, 7, 8.
and Sea; chief Ruler under God over all the plenty therein; so that Man of all
earthly Creatures, was made in subjection to God only; and hereupon Man is
called the Glory 1 Cor. 11. 7.
of God.

The Woman God made for Man of his own kind, given to Man by God in a
Marriage-state Genesis 22. 22, 23.
for comfort and procreation of his own kind: She also was made in, subjection
to Man, her earthly Lord and Husband; and hereupon is Woman called the 1 Cor.
11. 7.
Glory of a Man.

This being that holy Order God created Man and Woman in; the Man the Woman's 1
Cor. 11. 2.
head, the Woman in subjection to Man; the Man the Glory verse. 7.
of God; the Woman the Glory of the Man; it was, therefore the pleasure of God
to give unto Woman a sign in nature differing from Man, to teach her subjection
to Man whose Glory she is, namely long hair; and that Man was created with
short hair; is also clear; for in the Apostles reproving Men in the Church of
God at Corinth, for wearing of long hair, his Reasons by way of reproof is
grounded on Gods order in Nature; as it is written, Does not even Nature it
self teach you, if a man have long hair it is a shame to him: 1 Cor. 11. 14.
So then Adam was created so perfect in Nature, that there was not anything
about him, inwardly or outwardly, whereof he might be ashamed: And then to
Woman he says, in reproving her for wearing her Hair uncovered, saying, If a
woman have long hair, it is a glory verse. 15.
to her; showing the reason from Gods order in Nature, why Woman's long hair is
a glory to her, For her hair is given her for a covering; to wit, of her Eyes,
because it is written Genesis 20. 16.
with respect to Woman's sign of her subjection to Man her Husband, a Husband is
to his Wife a covering of the Eyes; so then we see why Woman's hair was called
long, and why the Apostle says, if a Woman have long hair it is a glory to
her; for her hair is given her for a covering, namely to cover her Eyes, to
teach her she is under the power of Man her Husband, the covering of her Eyes;
by which it is clear, Man's hair in Creation was so short, that it could not be
made to serve for a covering to cover his Eyes: Now if Man's hair had been so
long, it would have bore the name, Long-hair, and so a shame to his manly
Nature to wear, being the like badge and sign of Woman's subjection to Man her
Husband, forasmuch as Woman's hair is called long, because for length it was
given her for a covering to cover her Eyes, for the reason aforesaid.

Again, the Sin Fall did no way lessen the power the Man had over his Wife
before the Fall, neither Woman's subjection to Man her Husband; and this the
Apostle would have the Church of God to know, saying, 1 Cor. 11. 2.
The head of every man is Christ; the head of the woman is the man: So that as
before the Fall, Woman's long hair was a glory to her, so it is still, as it is
written, verse. 15.
If a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her, for her hair is given her for
a covering: So then all the alteration the Fall made in respect to Gods Order
in Nature; whereas before the Fall, Woman's long hair was the only visible sign
of her subjection to Man her Husband; now by reason of sin, and because she was
the Instrument to draw her Lord into sin with her; her glory therefore became
her shame; and therefore her hair must be decently bound up and covered: yet
the same thing Woman's long hair taught her before the Fall, the same her long
hair teaches her since: If it were not so the Apostle would not have taught,
If a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her; although she must cover it
with a vail, as the Apostle has taught, saying, Judge in your selves, is it
come by for a woman to pray unto God 1 Cor. 11. 13.
uncovered? And again, If the woman be not covered, let her also be verse. 6.
shorn: By this word, if the Woman cover not her head, and so her hair; let her
also be shorn, is clearly taught, how Man was created in respect to his hair;
for the word also Be shorn, implies, Man's hair was so, because the whole
grounds of the Apostle in all his reproofs, is taken from Gods Order in
Creation; so by this word Shorn, is showed how Man is to wear his hair: so they
that will not see this, must wink with Prove. 6. 13.
the eye, seeing the Apostle sets Man's short hair, by the word Shorn, in
opposition to Woman's long hair; which if she cover it not, then says the
Apostle, Let her also be shorn, as Man's hair is to be, But again says he, If
it be a shame for a woman to be 1 Cor. 11. 6.
shorn, as Man was created in respect of the manner of his hair, or as Man is
ever since the Creation to wear his hair, except as Figurative or Ceremonial,
(as in the Nazarites only) let her be covered.

So then, as aforesaid, as Woman's long hair before the Fall was a glory to her,
so it is still, although she must cover it: even so as Nature it self taught
Man before the Fall, that if he had long hair, it teaches him so still, that
it is a shame to him, etc. because the Men in the Church of Corinth, did not
only wear a womanish length of hair, but they also wore on their heads Women's
Vails; so that in reproving them both, the Apostle teaches, saying, Every man
praying, or prophesying with his head 1 Cor 11. 4.
covered, dishonors his head; that is, he dishonors his Head Christ: This
is not meant in wearing a Cap, or the like; for Gods Ministers of old wore such
in the Service Exodus 28. 40. Ezekiel. 44. 18.
of God, yet broke not Gods Order in Nature: So that Covering Man is forbidden
to wear on his head in the Service of God, is that which is Woman's natural
Coverings; to wit, either a womanish length of hair, or Woman's natural hair, or
Woman's vail, she covers her head, and so her hair withal; and this the
Apostle proves by an undeniable reason from Gods Order in Creation, as it is
written, 1 Cor. 11. 7.
For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, for as much as he is the image
and glory of God; but the woman is the glory of the man.

Now we have heard Man bears Gods Genesis 1. 26.
Image in Sovereignty, being head of the Woman; for the Woman was created under
obedience 1 Cor. 14. 34.
to Mani so is she the glory of the Man, and her long hair as given her for a
sign thereof. Now if Man do wear on his head long hair, Woman's glory, he
thereby says by that action, He is no longer the Woman's head; so does he
despise Gods Order in Creation, and says he bears not the Image 1 Cor. 11. 5.
of God in Sovereignty over his Wife; but makes himself equal with his Wife in
power, and thereby dishonors Christ his head and Creator, that made Man head
of the Woman, and the glory of God: and this is such a sin, that it is not to be
suffered in any true Churches verse. 16.
of GOD; because Man who is made the glory of God, in wearing Women's sign in
Nature that teaches her she is the glory of Man, breaks Gods holy Order in
Nature, which the Apostle confirms by Reason, from the State or Order of the
Man or Woman's Creation: His first Reason is, For the man is not of the woman,
but the woman of the 1 Cor. 11. 8, 9, 10.
man. Secondly, Neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for
the man: For this cause ought the Woman to have power on her head; that is, a
covering, in sign that she is under the power of her Husband; and from another
reason, because of the Angels, who being an innumerable company Heb. 12. 22.
round about the Throne of Christ in his Church, are Witnesses Heb. 1. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 21.
with the Lord, of all the charges laid on the Saints to keep, when they join
themselves to the Lord, as well his Order in Nature, as in things Spiritual; so
are we a spectacle to those Psa. 104. 4. Mark 4. 6. Psalm. 91. 11. 1 Cor. 11. 10.
glorious Flames, who have a charge to keep us in all our ways: so are they
ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be Heirs of
Salvation: For this cause the Apostle seems to require of Women modest and
submissive Attire, not only because of Men, but because of the Angels.

Moreover, if there had been no certain Rule to judge or measure, or try when
Men's hair is long by the golden Reed Revel. 21. 15.
of Gods Word, it had been a vain thing for the Apostles to reprove the Men in
the Church of God, for wearing long hair, in these words: 1 Cor. 11. 14.
Does not even nature it self teach you, if a man have long hair, it is a shame
to him? Now the Rule in Nature to judge by is, from the Order of God in Nature,
why Women's hair is called long, and so a glory to her; but the reason in Nature
why Women's hair is called long, because 1 Cor. 11. 15.
it was given her for a covering, namely to cover her eyes; because by this
sign in Nature, Woman is taught subjection to Man her Husband, the covering of
her Genesis 20. 16.
Eyes; so then it is clear from the Order of God in Nature, that that Man which
wears his hair so long, that it can by drawing it forward be made to serve to
perform the end in the sign that God gave Woman long hair for, to wit, for a
covering to cover the Eyes, is the long hair even Nature it self teaches Man
is a shame to his Nature to wear: So then as Sin is the cause of shame, Genesis 3.
7. 10. Exodus 32. 25.
and Sin pollutes and makes the persons unclean, and no unclean Epl. 5. 5. Rev.
21. 27.
person shall enter into the City of God; therefore we are taught, that the
Lord has given a Command, to measure not only the Temple of God, and the
Altar, but also the Rev. 11. 1.
Worshippers therein: Now the Worshippers are the Members; therefore they must
be hewed off from their corrupt natural Romans 11. 24.
stock, by the Axe Mat. 3. 10.
of Gods word, and cleansed by the washing of Ephesians. 5. 16.
Water by the Word, from all filthiness 2 Cor. 7. 1, 2.
of the Flesh and Spirit, before they can be laid as living 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Stones, joined together in the Lords spiritual Building: For if in the
figurative Building, no common or vile thing was used therein, but every Stone
had its glory, and every Stone had its burden, all hewed and squared fit; so
then now we are to believe, as long hair is a shame, and not a glory to Man,
that this shameful thing was cut off, by the word shorn or polled, from every
Man before he was accepted as fit Stones to be set in the Lords spiritual
Building in his Gospel Churches. Now when the Stones were fitly squared and
laid, then all things were to watch 1 Cor. 16. 23.
one over another. But when the watch and care that Members should have, one
over another was neglected in the Churches of God, in not discharging their
duty: If any one be overtaken Gal. 6. 1.
in a fault, he was to be restored in the Spirit of Meekness. This being not
done in the Church at Corinth, when Men suffered their locks to grow long, no
Man reproved his Brother; so it is in this day, which was the reason the
Apostle writ to them, and reproved them and all the Churches now in them, and
all Members that suffer like disorder in the Churches of God.

Now then if long hair in Men were not such a spot of sin in the Church of God,
as some would suppose, what need the Apostle to have used means to cleanse them
in the Church of God at Corinth from it, by the washing of Water by the word,
Ephesians. 5. 26.
I reproved them, saying, Does not even Nature it self teach you, That if a Man
have long hair, it is a shame to him: For as the Psalm. 119 9.
Psalmist says, Wherewith shall a young Man cleanse his Way? by taking heed
thereunto, according to thy Word. But who is it in this day, takes heed to his
way, in wearing long hair, the shame to Nature? Or what Congregation takes any
heed hereunto, according to Gods Word, to see this disorin Nature reformed
among them? If the breach of Gods order had not been a Sin in Men's wearing
long hair, the Church at Corinth had not been reproved. But forasmuch as it was
then, so it is now become a Church Sin; Therefore we are taught, if the
Congregation commit a Sin, they must bring their Offering, as it is written, If
the whole Congregation of Lev. 4. 19.
Israel sin through Ignorance, and the thing be hid from the Eyes of the
Assembly, and they have done somewhat against any of the Commandments of the
Lord, concerning things which should not be done, and are guilty; when the Sin
which they have sinned against it is known, then the Congregation must bring
their Sin-Offering: Even so when the Lord by his Servant John reproved Rev. 2,
3.
the five Churches in Asia, each of them for a Church-sin, in suffering sinful
Practices among them; The Lord called them to repent, to confess and forsake
their Sins by an unfeigned Repentance, else the Lord would fight against them,
and remove their Candlestick, and kill her Children with Death. Now then it is
clear, This Sin of Men's wearing long hair, and Women cutting their hair, shorn
or polled, is become a Ver. 23.
Church-sin, who then that fears the Lord among them, seeing the Fear of the
Lord is to hate and depart from Evil, can Prove. 8. 13. Prove. 13. 13, 14. Josh.
7.
have Communion with that Church, that lives but in the breach of some One
Commandment of the Lord, unless they repent and forsake the Evil? For was not
the whole Congregation punished for Achans Sin, when the Congregation was
ignorant thereof? But what Wrath may be expected on that Congregation that
knowingly -- lives in the breach, not of one, but of three Commands of God
that forbids Man in this particular thing, that Men and Women should not
break his holy Order in Nature: The first is the Moral Law, the Law written in
every Man and Woman's heart, teaching Romans 2. 15.
them that they ought, and may not do any act or thing that is against Nature;
but according to the light in Nature, and Doctrine of the Apostle Paul; for a
Man to have, that is, to wear long hair, it is a shame to him, so a breach of
the Moral Law. Secondly, That Law is broken that says a Man shall not put on a
Woman's Garment; that is, any covering, that is Women's natural covering: But
long hair is Women's natural Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
covering; therefore that Man that wears Woman's hair on his head, wears
Women's natural covering, and so lives in the breach of this Law also. Thirdly,
a third Law is, Man shall not suffer his locks to grow long; and what is meant
by long hair forbidden Man to wear, has before been Ezekiel. 44. 20.
showed, when it can be made to serve to perform the end, to wit, the end in
the sign God gave in Nature, Women long hair, namely, for a covering to cover
her Eye, to teach her subjection to Man, whose glory she is; so is he to her by
that sign a covering to her Eyes.

Now then where can it be showed, that God when he called his People out from
the World, that he accepted them into the Covenant of Grace with himself, until
they were by Repentance cleansed from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; that
2 Cor. 7. 1.
is, error in Faith, false Worship, and disorder in Nature; which is the next
thing in order to be confidered.

We read, when God called his People out of Egypt, they were to be cleansed
from the Idols of Egypt, and all the disorder in Nature they had learned among
them, before they were joined to the Lord; because the Lord is holy, and
therefore they were required to be holy in all manner of Conversation. 1 Pet.
1. 15.
Now being cleansed from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, hear what the Lord
said concerning them (after they were degenerated) Exodus 19. 5.
to put them in mind what a holy People they were, when they entered into the
Covenant of Grace with the Lord; as it is written, I remember thee, the kindness
of thy youth, the love of thine Espousal. When thou wentest after me in the
Wilderness, Jer. 2, 1, 2.
Isreal was holiness to the Lord; a holy Nation, a pec^liar Treasure to the
Lord. The manner of this Marriage-Covenant was, Thou have avouched this day the
Lord to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his Statutes, and his
Commandments Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17, 18.
and Judgments, and to hearkento his voice. And the Lord has avouched thee
this day, to be his peculiar people; as he has promised thee, and that thou
should keep all his Commandments.

Then were they charged to be Loyal to their Head and Husband, in keeping his
Commandments; as it is written, After the doings of the Land of Egypt, wherein
ye dwelt, shall ye Lev. 18. 2, 3.
not do; after the doings of the Land of Canaan, whether I bring you, shall ye
not do; neither shall ye walk in their ordinance: Ye shall do my Judgments, and
keep my Ordinances to walk therein: I am the Lord. Thus were they to keep
themselves clear from all the Idolatry of those People; and becaase they were
not to do after the manner of the People, in the breach of Gods Order Deuteronomy. 22.
5.
in Nature, as they were now cleansed, so they should walk as the Lord
commanded them, saying, A woman shall not wear that which pertains to man;
neither shall a man put on woman's garment; for all that do so, are an
abomination to the Lord.

Now will not the People of God in this day consider this, That whatsoever Man
or Woman that lives in the breach of Gods Order in Nature, even in the things
they wear, they are abomination to the Lord. What then is Woman forbidden to
wear, to wit, that pertains to Man, but that which naturally pertains to
Man? And what more naturally pertains to Man, but short hair? because even
Nature it self teaches, If a man have long hair, it is a shame to him, etc.
and that it is closely taught by the Apostle, that it is a shame for a Woman to
be shorn or shaven; as it is written, If it be a shame for a woman to be shorn
or shaven, let her be covered again: Likewise 1 Cor. 11. 6.
a Man shall not put on a Woman's garment; that is, whatsoever is Woman's natural
covering: but long hair is giver to Woman for her natural covering; therefore
long hair is called Woman's glory, but Man's shame. By all which it is clear, That
that Woman that cutteth her hair, shorn or polled, like ^. 15.
as Man is to wear his hair, as before showed; and that Man that does suffer
his locks to grow long, according to what before has been proved in long hair,
and that even Nature it self teaches what is long hair; or that Man that
wears on his head the long hair of Woman, cut from Women's head, do live in no
less sin than that they have against Gods Order in Nature, changed the Natural
use into that which is against Levit. 18. 22.
Nature; and in so doing in this particular thing, or any other thing that is
done against Nature, and daily live in, they are, as says the Scripture,
abomination to the Lord.

Now shall any Christian Man and Woman, that is put in mind, what God in his
written word, has in these things warned them of not to err, lest they incur
to themselves Gods sore displeasure? Or shall Christians account it a light
thing, to live in the known breach of Gods Law: yea, not only this Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
Law, but the Moral Law written in every Man's heart; which teaches Man that he
shall not do any act or thing that is against Nature, as aforesaid: But it is
against Nature for any Christian Man to wear long hair, in suffering his own
locks to grow long, as aforesaid; how much more is it against Nature, for a Man
to wear on his head the long locks of Women, Woman's natural covering, Woman's
glory, Woman's badge and sign of Woman's subjection to Man her Husband; a
practice never suffered in any true Church of God, because it is a sin of a high
nature; for, as aforesaid, short hair pertains to Man, and long hair
pertains to Woman. Now for a Woman to cut her hair short or shorn; short by
her ears, and on her forehead; and for a Man to cover his head with that long
hair, Woman's covering, is clearly, as aforesaid, to change the natural use,
into that which is against Nature. How can these be accounted the true Church
of God, that know not Gods Order in Nature? If they do know it, then it is nigh
to Psalm. 19. 1^. 2 Pet. 2. 10 Numb. 15. 30. Levit. 19. 2 Timothy 21.
the sin of presumption, to live knowingly in the breach of Gods Order in
Nature: How can such have any grounds to believe they can accepted of the Lord
in his service, seeing the Lord will be sanctified in all that draw near unto
him, in keeping his holy Order in Nature, as his Order in his Worship; and that
the person must first be accepted of God, before his Offering or Service can
be, as Vessels sanctified, prepared fit for the Master the Lord Jesus Christ's
use, in his service.

To add hereunto that which Mr. Henry Ainsworth has noted out of the Hebrew
Writers, on these Words: A Woman shall not wear that which pertains to man;
among other things they say, A Woman may not put on a Man's Ornament, or to poll
her head like a Man; and a Man that puts on a Women's Attire, and a Woman
that puts o^ a Man's, is to be beaten by the Magistrate. To which he also
gveth his understanding of this Precept, saying it concerns natural honesty
and seemliness, which has perpetual Equity; his proof is 1 Cor. 11. 4, 5, 6,
14, etc. It was given to prevent many evils that may arise: so that the Attire
of the Body, signifies the Ornament of the Mind, Psalm. 132. 9, 16. Rev. 3. 18.
So Men should not change their Natures to become effeminate, as the Egyptians
and Babylonians, threatened to be like Women, Isai. 19. 16. Jer. 50. 32. and 5.
30.

Secondly, Again, when the Lord after seventy years Captivity, called his
People out of Babylon to build his Temple; before the Lord would accept of them
into Covenant with himself, and to eat of the Passover, they with all other
that Ezra 6. 21. Neh. 9. 1, 2, 3.
came with them, must separate themselves from all filthiness of the Heathen of
the Land: And among the many filthinesses of the Heathen, which the Priest as
well as others were defiled, was long hair. Now because the Priests work was to
teach the Lords People the difference between the Holy and Profane, and cause
them to discern between the Unclean Ezekiel. 44. 23.
and the Clean; and this they could not do, until themselves were cleansed from
the same, namely from long hair, the shame to Man's Nature; and therefore the
Command came first to them, namely to the Priest; as it is written, Neither
shall they Ezekiel. 44. 20.
shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long; they shall only poll
their heads.

Now why the Priest might not shave their head, because Number. 6. 9. Levit. 14 8,
9. Acts 21. 24. 1 Cor. 11. 15. Judge. 13. 5. 1 Samuel 1. 11. Deuteronomy. 17. 6.
that was commanded to the Nazarite and Lipers only, in their Cleansings, as a
Ceremonial Rite, now ended by Christ: nor might they suffer their locks to grow
long, because that was an effeminate badge, a shame to Man's Nature to wear; and
also in such Men as were born Nazarites, a sign or figure for the time of their
lives only; so that they must only poll their heads; and this is natural,
agreeable to Gods Order in Nature, and agreeable in sense with the word Shorn.

Thus in the mouth of two Witnesses, every Truth is established: So then having
proved both by the Apostle and Prophets, that the manner Man was created in
respect of his hair; and that the Sons of Adam in all Ages were to wear their
hair so, is according to the word of the Lord polled or shorn, as is manifest
by the written word of God, when the Lord called his People out of Egypt, and
out of Babylon, and now since the coming of Christ in the Flesh, all that were
called to become Members of the true Church of God, were to reform their hair,
according to the word polled or shorn; that so in this thing they might be
cleansed from the filthiness of 1 Cor. 6. 11.
the Flesh, according to the Moral Law. Now if there be any other Rule
revealed, for Christians to cut and wear their hair in these last days of the
Gospel, let it be made manifest by such as do deny that their hair is not to be
reformed by the Word of the Lord, polled or shorn: But that it is so to be
reformed, is clear, else the Apostle would not have set Man's short hair by the
word Shorn, in opposition to Woman's long hair, in these words: If the woman be
not covered, let her 1 Cor. 11. 6.
also be shorn: For who does the Apostle mean by the word Also be shorn, but
that as Man is to wear his hair shorn; so that he uses the word Shorn, by way
of reproof to Woman for wearing her hair uncovered; and therefore says the
Apostle, If the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn, as Man was
created, or shaven, as were the Nazarit^s; but if it be a shame for a woman to
be sha^en or shorn, let her he covered; verse. 5.
For if the woman be not covered, it is all one as if she were shaven.

Forasmuch then as all Sin is the breach of Gods Order, either in things
Spiritual or Natural; and hereupon is that Royal Law divided into two Tables,
that makes Sin appear to be Sin: The first to make manifest, when in Worship
any thing be done contrary to the first Table of Gods Law, it is sin in matter
or form; or any act or thing he done in Nature, contrary to the second Table of
Gods Law, it is sin; so then as concerning things Natural, whatsoever Man or
Woman is forbidden to wear, to wit, that which God has given to woman as her
natural covering, Man is forbid to covet or desire; even so by the same Law,
whatsoever Woman is forbidden to wear that pertains to Man, that ^he ought not
to desire or covet: But Woman is forbidden to wear short hair, because it
pertains to Man; therefore that Woman that coveteth or desires to wear her
hair polled or shorn like unto Man, lives in the breach of the Tenth
Commandment, Thou shall not covet; is Exodus 20. 17.
guilty of the sin of Covetousness, in desiring that thing that even Nature it
self teaches, is a shame to her Nature to wear; so that it is not only a sin
against God, but a dishonor to her Head, namely her Husband; even so that Man
who desires 1 Cor. 11. 5.
or coveteth to wear his locks long, contrary to the Word of the Lord polled or
shorn, breaks Gods Order in Nature, and is guilty of the breach of the Tenth
Commandment, in covering his head with the natural sign of his Wifes subjection
to him, 1 Cor. 11. 4.
which is a sin against God, in dishonouring Christ his head, in despising the
Image of God, in which he is created head of the Woman; and says also, that he
is not the glory of God; because he, by wearing long hair, the sign of Woman's
subjection to Man, says he is no more in subjection to God than the Woman is,
and that the Woman is not in subjection to Man her head, but equal in power
with her Husband; and this is proved by the Apostle in these words: For a man
indeed ought not to cover his head (that is, with long hair, Woman's glory) 1
Cor. 11. 7.
because he is the image and glory of God: So then it is clear, that that Man
that wears long hair, the sign of Woman's subjection to Man, which is given to
Woman to teach her she is the glory of Man her Husband, says, he is neither
the Image nor glory of God: Even so that Woman that either cutteth her hair
short, polled, or shorn, with its ends hanging out short by the ears, and so
stand staring out on her forehead, says she is not the glory of the Man; or
wears her hair uucover'd, says she is not the glory of the Man, as
aforesaid: Now is this practice a light thing in Christians, let the prudent
judge.

Moreover, what a higher degree of the breach of Gods Order in Nature, is it
fit for Man to wear the very hair of Women, Women's natural covering, Woman's
glory, the very natural badge and sign of Woman's subjection to Man? Is not this
a sin of a high nature, in changing the natural use into that which is against
Nature? And what is it that defiles Man but sin? By it therefore persons are
unclean, so unfit to teach or partake of the holy thing of the Lord in his
Church: seeing then that it was not lawful for Gods People of old to suffer
their locks to grow long, much more unlawful to wear the long hair of Women,
Woman's garment, or Woman's natural covering; for all that do so, were
abomination to the Deuteronomy. 22. 4.
Lord: And that these were not admitted into the House or Temple of God of old
for this sin, and like open pollutions in Nature, is evident; for we read
Porters were set at the Gate 2 Chrn. 23. 19.
of the Lords House, that none that was unclean, or any thing might enter
therein: And is it not so commanded under the Gospel? The Porter is commanded
to watch, and says Christ the Lord, What I say unto one, I say unto all,
Watch; to see Mark 13. 34 Revel. 21. 27.
that there enter not into the City, or Gospel Church, any thing that defiles
or works abomination. Now then we have seen by the Word of the Lord, that
they do work abomination; to wit, even that Woman that wears that which
pertains to Man, to wit, short hair, etc. that Man which puts on, or
wears Woman's natural covering, namely long hair, even the long hair of Women,
because that is Woman's natural covering, as it is written, If a woman have long
hair, it is a glory to her, (not to wear for ornament) but to 1 Timothy 2. 9.
teach her, although covered, she is the glory of Man her Husband; Numb. 6. 18.
so that that Man which wears Woman's natural covering, works abomination
before the Lord; therefore such are unclean, and were not fit to touch the holy
things in the Church of God; even so it is now, for the Lord who is Levit. 22.
1, 2, 3.
holy, requires holiness in the persons of his People, because they are the
People of the Holy Ones; therefore the Lord will be sanctified in all that draw
near unto him in his service; so that it is written, Be ye clean that bear the
vessels of the Lord: 1 These. 4. 4. Isai. 52. 11. John 15. 3
And hereupon the Lord gave strict Laws upon pain of death to his People, that
none in his uncleanness should touch the holy things of the Church of God,
forasmuch as that was not only a defiling of the things themselves, but of the
Name Levit. 22. v. 15, 2. 32. Jer. 15. 19.
of God also; so that if the Priest took not away the precious from the vile;
they were not as Gods mouth, and broke Gods Law, and defiled the holy things,
for which Gods indignation was poured out against them, Ezekiel. 22. 26. 31.

Now shall any persuade themselves, that that which is a shame to Man's Nature,
and a sin against God, in such as wear long hair, or Woman's long hair, does it
not defile the Man, seeing he breaks Gods Order in Nature? If it had not been
a sin, and such a sin as was not to be suffered in any true Church of God, the
Apostle would neither have blamed the Men in the Church of God for wearing long
hair, nor have told them, That if any seem to be contentious, as to plead
against his reproof he brought against Men's wearing of long 1 Cor. 11. 16.
hair, that they had no such custom, to wit, (as they were Apostles, and had
care of all the Churches) to suffer it, namely, That Men under the profession
of Grace, should walk in the shame to Nature; a practice never suffered in any
true Church of God, in any Age of the World till this; and therefore says the
Apostle, we have no such custom to suffer it, neither the Church of God, if
they walked with God in keeping his Commandments, because God who is a God of
Order, has Col. 2. 5.
joined Order unto Faith, to be kept by all his People, being the two most
respected things in the Churches of God; and why? because without faith, none
can please God; no more can Heb. 11. 6.
the Works or Service done unto God, be accepted of the Lord, if not done
according to his appointed Order: To give an instance herein. we read the Lord
had given a plain Law concerning the carrying of the Ark, the Levites were
appointed to carry it upon their shoulders, but they must not touch it; the
P^iest 1 Chronicles. 15. 2. Numb. 4.
might only touch it: But this Order was not observed when they carried the Ark
in a Cart with Oxen: A Levite drove the Cart; when the Oxen stumbled, the
Levite put forth his hand, out of a good intent to stay the Ark from falling,
for which he was struck dead: And hereupon King David with Israel lamented*
saying, The Lord our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not
after the due order: And 1 Chronicles. 15. 13.
was not the breach of Gods Order, one of the ruins of the Primitive Church?
so how like is this day to that time, as the Apostle Jude has showed the
manner of the Apostasy how it began, even while the Apostles were living; to
wit, first Jude v. 3.
how few they were that contended for the Faith once give^ to the Saints, the
Faith of Gods Elect; so that Men spoke evil of the true Doctrine of Faith, as
it was the Faith of Jesus; so Christ was denied in the works of Faith, and was
in the name by many only professed, as it is written concerning such, But these
speak evil of those things which they know not; to wit, the Doctrine Jude v. 10.
of Faith, but what they know naturally as bruit Beasts, in those things they
corrupt themselves; so that they were v. 11.
under this, Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain; to wit, in
Self-righteousness, expected to be accepted for the work done; and these says
Jude, ran greedily after the Error of Balaam for their Rewards; so that
worldly gain was their Religion, or the chief end why they professed Christ in
name only, and that these perished in the gainsaying of Core, because they
despised Gods Order; for what was God displeased with Corah and his Company,
but because they disregarded Numb. 16.
to keep Gods Order in Service, which was the ruin of many of the Primitive
Churches; the godly that took warning by what was written for all Churches
Learning, how that the Lord made a breach on us, said David, in killing Vzza
for breaking Gods Order, although he did it with a good intent, as aforesaid;
therefore the faithful suffering Christians remembering, how ever after this,
the Prophet David upon seeking the Lord, that he would assist him, that his
steps v. 7. 23. Psalm. 119. 133.
might be ordered in his word, as it is written, Look thou upon me, and be
merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy Name: Order my
steps in thy word, and let not mine iniquity have dominion over me: For because
it is again written, The steps of a good man, are ordered by the Lord, and he
delights in his way: So that he concludes, To him that orders his
conversation aright, or that disposes his way, to wit, according Psalm. 50. 23.
to Gods word, will I show the salvation of God. So then where Gods Order is
not kept, there is no promise of a Blessing; and therefore the Apostle after he
had reproved several things in the Church of God at Corinth, and had set them
by his Counsel into a right order again, he commanded them saying, Let all
things be done decently and in order. Now then how undecent a thing it is
written, Judge in your selves, is it comely for a woman to pray unto God, to
wit, (with her hair uncovered) it is all one as if she were shorn; but if it be
a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered. Again, to Man he
says, Does not even nature it self teach you, that if a man have long hair, it
is a shame to him? Now then that which is shameful to a Man to do, is out of 1
Cor. 11. 14.
Gods Order; for Man was created so perfect in Nature, that there was not any
thing, inwardly nor outwardly, whereof he might be ashamed: So that if it be a
shame for a Man to wear long hair, we are bound to believe Man was created with
short hair, and not with long hair; no not so long as in any sense it could be
made to serve to perform the end in the sign. God in Creation gave Woman
longhair, namely, for a sign to teach her she is the glory of Man her Husband;
if them the Fall did no way abrogate Gods Order in Nature, but when Man was
restoed, together with the Woman, God giving them Faith to believe in Christ
their Redeemer in the Word Ephesians. 2. 8. Jude. v. 3. Genesis 3. 15.
of Promise, he joined thereunto his Order, that they should keep in his
Service, and that by virtue of Creation; as it is written, Let the woman learn
in sil^nce, to wit, in the Church, 1 Timothy 2. 12, 11.
with all subjection: And again, But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to
usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence: The Apostles reason is,
from Gods Order in Creation; For v. 13, 14.
Adam was first formed, then Eve: Adam was not deceived, but the woman being
deceived, was in the transgression; notwithstanding, she shall be saved in
childbearing; that is, by believing John 8. 24. Act. 4. 14.
in her Seed Christ, for her Redeemer that should be born of her, if they
continued in that Faith (That the Seed of the John 14. 21.
Woman should bruise the Serpents Head) and Charity or Love, (in keeping the
Commandments of God) to wit, his holy Order in holiness and sobriety, and that
Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with shame fac'dness and sobriety; 1 Timothy 2. 9.
not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearl, or costly Array, but, which
becomes Women prosessing Godliness, with good Works.

By this we see, that Gods Order in Nature must be kept' else Men and Women do
not walk as they have received Christ, as it is written, For though I be absent
in the flesh, yet Col. 2. 5.
I am with you in the spirit, joining and beholding your order, and the
stedfastness of your faith in Christ. Thus to keep Gods Order, is a sure way to
keep Faith steadfast; for as Faith without Works is dead, so is Faith without
Order. Seeing then Jam. 2. 26.
God has joined Order unto Faith, let no Man or Church put them asunder,
because God has joined them together: But how do the Churches in this day put
Faith and Order asunder? not here to speak of any thing but the Order of
Nature. How is Order joined unto Faith, so long as Men and Women break Gods
Order, namely, in that Women cut their hair, shorn or polled, as Men ought to
do; and Men do wear the long hair of Women on their head, to the shame of their
Nature, dishonor to God, and reproach to the Christian Religion.

For has not the Lord redeemed both Bodies and Souls of his People, and
therefore will be glorified with both; and therefore the Person must first be
accepted before his offe 3 Cor. 6. 20
ring or service can be; for so it is written, The Lord had respect unto Abel,
and to his Offering; but unto Cain and to his Genesis 4. 4. 5.
Offering he had not respect: How then' can the person of that Man^ be accepted
of the Lord in his service*, that presents his Person with Woman's long hair
on his head, Women's covering, Woman's badge and sign of Woman's subjection to Man
or his Head, whenas it is written, Every man praying or prophesying, having his
head covered, to wit, with that which 1 Cor. 11. 4. Whenas the Heathen
confessed to see their Kings dishonor was not to be suffered. Ezra 4. 14. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
is Woman's natural covering, he dishonors his head, to wit, Christ; for the
head of the man is Christ: How can that Man be so deceived in himself, as to
believe he can be accepted in the service of God, whenas at that instance of
time, in the Worship of God, he does that act or thing which is a dishonor to
Christ his head: But that Man that wears on his head a Woman's covering, as
Woman's long hair is Woman's covering, dishonors Christ his head, therefore
cannot be accepted of Christ in the worship of God; for what says the
Scripture, For them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me,
shall be lightly esteemed.

Now is not Christ despised by Men that breaks his Order in Nature? and is
not this a horrible thing, when such Men as are Ministers of the Gospel, who
represents Christ's Person in Office in his Church; who are required before they
may officiate in the Office of a Pastor, that they be blameless? Now is this to
be blameless in the service of God, to come in 1 Timothy 3. 2.
the presence of God with the forbidden thing on his head, whenas all things
that are forbidden Men are unclean to them, and makes Man unclean? Now if Men
are told, In vain do Mat. 15. 8, 9.
they worship God, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, surely in
vain does they worship God, that live in the breach of Gods Order in Nature.

From whence then comes long hair to be worn by Men, seeing it is not of God?
We have seen it sprang among the Heathens, as in Egypt, there Israel learnt it,
as also to serve their Idols; but when they came out thence, they were cleansed
Levit. 18. 2, 3.
from both, and ever after charged, as it is written, No more to do after the
manner of Egypt, wherein they dwelt, nor to do after the manner of Canaan,
whither they were going, either in Worship or in Nature, contrary to the Table
of Gods Law, which was added to the Covenant of Grace, when they came out of
Egypt, because of transgression, to make sin to appear to be sin, either in
Worship, or in Nature, as these two Scriptures show, Levit. 18. 2, 3. Dout. 22.
4.

So likewise we have seen that the Lords People being seventy years captive in
old Babylon, learnt their ways; in wearing long hair therefore, they were
corrupted, as well Priest as other, though not all; which when they came out,
they were cleansed from, as all that came with them, to enquire the way to
Sion, with their faces thitherward, saying, Come let us join our selves to the
Lord in a perpetual Covenant, Jer. 50. 5. Heb. 13. 20.
(to wit, of Faith in Christ) that shall not be forgotten; so were they, as
it is written, And the Children of Israel which were come again out of the
Captivity, and all such as had separated Ezra 6. 21.
themselves unto them from the filthiness of the Heathen of the Land, to seek
the Lord God of Israel, did eat, to wit, of the Passover: Then Israel was
cleansed, and their Vessels sanctified and made fit in holiness, for the Lords
use in his service, as it is written, Israel was holiness to the Lord; and they
Jer. 2. 2.
were command so to be, as it is written not only to them then, but to the
Gospel-Churches, now by the same word, Be ye holy, for I am holy; and therefore
they must be separated, and 1 Pet. 1. 16.
to touch no unclean thing (neither in Worship or in Nature) and then says the
Lord, I will receive you, and be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Having these Promises, says the Apostle to
the 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. 2 Cor. 11. 2. Jer. 2. 2, 3, Ezekiel. 16. 9. Exodus 19. 5.
Isai. 65. 23. 1 Cor. 7. 14.
Corinthians, whom he reproved for being degenerated, in that they did among
other things, walk in the shame to Nature, puts them in mind of their first
state, when espoused to Christ, as Israel was of old, as it is written to
Israel, I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thy Espousal;
when thou wentest after me in the wilderness. Israel was holiness to the Lord;
a holy Nation, a holy Seed, the blessed of the Lord, and their buds with them:
Even so by the same Gospel Covenant, the Corinthians and other Churches, were
put in mind how they were espoused to their Husband Christ; so were the Saints
by calling a holy Nation, a holy Seed: and hereupon 1 Pet. 2. 9. 1. Cor. 1. 2.
says the Apostle to them, when they were defiled in any thing, Let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Psalm. 93. 5.
perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Seeing then Holiness becomes the
Lords dewlling place; for where but two or three are gathered together in his
Name, he dwells Mat. 18. 20.
there; so it is clear that long hair, the shame to Nature, must not, as it had
not its original from God, abide in the City or true Church of God, who
dwells there; no more now than of old; but as wickedness, it must as by the
Wings of a Stork Zach. 5. 8. 9, 10, 11.
by the censure of Gods word, be bore up between the Heaven and the Earth, in
the face of the Congregation, and be sent from whence it took its original,
into Babylon the Land of Shinar, into its own place: And as of old with which
the spiritual Babylonians were spotted withal, so long hair was not the spots
of the Lords People of old, no more now; but Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
the spots of the Man of Sin, the bagde of spiritual Egypt and Babylon; which
is the next thing in order to prove.

We read in the Apostasy after the Apostles decease, how Rev. 6. 13. and 1. 20.
Jer. 17. 13.
many Stars or Ministers of the Churches, together with many Churches, fell
away from the heavenly Profession they once made of Christ, to an earthly,
Whose God was their belly, whose Phil. 3. 19.
glory was their shame; for they minded earthly things. Now among the many
Stars, there was one who strove for pre-eminence; 3 John. v. 9.
and God suffered it so to be, as a plague to the World, that refused his Son
for their Savior: unto whom was Luke 11. 52. Rev. 9. 1. 2 These. 2. 11.
given a Key not of true saving Knowledge, but of strong Delusion; by which he
opened a bottomless pit, out of which pit arose a great smoke as the smoke of a
Furnace, so powerful were his Error and Heresy, which he managed according to
fleshly Wisdom, which is said to come from beneath, so Jam. 3. 15.
not of God from above; therefore it is earthly, sensual, and devilish: By
reason hereof the Sun and Air, to wit, the Sunlight of the Gospel, was so
darkened from the true light, as it shined according to the teaching of Christ
and his Apostles; and also the Moral Law was corrupted from the true sense and
meaning thereof, as it had been opened and explained by Christ and his
Apostles, which may likened to the Air, or lesser light in Nature, as the
effects does prove; for as touching true Faith, the Followers, the Worshippers
of the Beast, were destitute of; so were they likened to cruel and 2 These. 3.
2. Mat. 3. 7. Rev. 9. 5.
unreasonable Creatures, a Generation of Vipers and Scorpions for cruelty, as
the Apostle has taught, The Lord deliver me from unreasonable men, for all men
have not faith: Even so the light in Nature was so darkened, in that they had
so hermaphrodited themselves into a monstrous shape, that they saw it is no
shame to wear a womanish length of hair, the shame to Man's Nature, as it is
written, And their faces were as the faces of men, and they had hair as the
hair of women: Rev. 9. 7. 8.
By this we see how the old Egypt, and old Babylon, were Types in all manner of
wickedness of the spiritual Egypt and Babylon; so that long hair had its
original out of the bottomless pit, even from Hell it self; so that in a double
respect, it was charged upon them to be abominable; first, as long hair in
Women is a sign of their subjection to their Head or Husband, so long hair in
the Subjects of Antichrist, proved them the Subjects of the Man of Sin. 2. As
the Man of Sin, together with all his Members, make one Body; so the Member of
the Beasts, as the Member of a Man, they were so deformed by, and in all
disorder in Nature, as also in Worship, that they were like to Men-monsters,
having faces as the faces of Men, and hair as the hair of Women; and that the
Nation were over spread with this unnatural guise, until the time of King Henry
the First of this Nation, as shall anon appear.

Moreover, the Lord never left himself without Witnesses in the worst of times;
namely, his sealed ones, who had ^he Rev. 7. 2.
Seal of their Election, to wit, in departing from all iniquity, as it is
written, The foundation of God stands sure: Having 2 Timothy 2. 19.
this Seal, the Lord knows them that are his; Let every one that names the
name of Jesus, depart from iniquity: These are the called, chosen, and faithful
ones, which received the love Rev. 17. 14.
of the Truth, who in that heavenly Book of the Revelation, are likened to a
Woman a wonder to the World, having the Sun for her clothing, the Moon for her
footstool, and on Rev. 12. 1, 2.
her head a Crown of twelve Stars, while she by Faith and Holiness had put on
Christ, as she had learned him of his Apostles, so was she advanced to heavenly
Dignity; her Conversation being in Heaven, so loved she no more this World,
Romans 13. 14. 2 Timothy 3. 14. Phil. 3. 20. Rev. 12. 17.
of whom herself is not, therefore the World hates her and persecuteth her,
and why, as it is written, The Dragon was wrath with the Woman, and went to
make war with the remnant of her seed which kept the Commandments, and have the
Testimony of Jesus. And again, Here is the patience of the Saints; here are
they that keep the Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus: These are they
which were not defiled with Women, for they are Virgins, abiding faithful from
the day, even as when they joined themselves to the Lord, by entering into
Covenant with the Lord Jesus; then were they said to he as a chaste Virgin,
espoused to Christ their Husband; and therefore Jer. 2. 2. 2 Cor. 11. 1, 2.
Rev. 14. 4, 5.
it is said of them again, They are Virgins; these are they that follow the Lamb
whithersover he goes; and in their mouth was found no guile; for they were
without fault before the Throne of God; to wit, in the true Church of God, in
the Kingdom of Christ's Mediatorship, where the Lord Jesus, King of Saints,
fitteth on his Throne, their King and Priest, to order it, and Rev. 15. 3. Zac.
6. 13. Isai. 9. 7.
to establish it with Judgment and Justice, from henceforth and for evermore:
And thus we see where Order is joined unto Faith, here are they that keep the
Commandments of God, and have the Faith of Jesus.

These things duly weighed, we may clearly see how that the suffering
Christians in all Ages, since the Ascension of Christ, for the space of these
sixteen hundred years, who are spoken of in that Book of Revelation, are
justified by the Spirit of Rev. 14. 5.
God, to be without fault before the Throne of God; so that if they had been
guilty, either of error in Faith, or the breach of Gods Order in Worship, or
in Nature, they would not have been proclaimed Just; for the Spirit of God, the
2 Cor. 1. 18.
faithful and true Witness that cannot lie, is not Yea and Nay, but Yea and
Amen: For when the Church or Churches of God joined Order unto Faith, then they
have this praise, I joy and rejoice to behold your Order and stedfastness Col.
2. 5.
of your Faith in Christ; but when Order is broken, we see the Church at
Corinth and others was reproved; therefore the suffering Christians were not
taxed with the breach of 1 Cor. 11.
any one of the Commandments of God, but are commended. Well done good and
faithful Servant, as aforesaid: Here are Rev. 14. 12. Mat. 25. 23. 1 Ehes. 1. 3.
they that keep the Commandment of God, and have the Faith of Jesus: Thus Order
was by them joined unto Faith; for to believe is the work of Faith, and to keep
the Commandments of God is the labor of love, keeping Gods holy Order in Grace
and Nature. Another Seal of our Election, as the Apostle has taught, saying,
Making mention of you in our prayer, remembering without ceasing your work of
faith and labor v. 4. 21.
of love and patience, I hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the fight of God our
Father, knowing Brethren beloved, your election of God. By all which we see,
that not so much as the Order of God in this one point in Nature, was broken by
the suffering Christians for these sixteen hundred years past, no not in Men's
wearing of long hair, the shame to Man's Nature: And for further confirmation
hereof, we have the Testimony of Men who have, as is judged, faithfully
collected the Truth, in what they believed and maintained to their Deaths; but
also have drawn the form of the suffering Christians, as they wear their hair,
when they suffered death. Now then let the impartial eye see the form or
effigies of the suffering Christians, in the Book of Martyrs, and elsewhere;
and then judge whether they do believe when the Christians were living, any
could have made their hair to serve for a covering of their eyes, by drawing it
forward, much less the face and all: So that long hair is not the spots of the
Lords People in the Ages past, but the spots of the Apostate Christians, as
it is showed before: Neither is it the spots of the Lords People, now if they
keep themselves in their garments or covering on their head unspotted from the
flesh; then could it not of them be said, that they have faces of men, and hair
as the hair of women; that is, so long hair, that by drawing it forward, it
could be made to serve to perform the end in the sign, for which God in
Creation, and so in Nature, gave Woman long hair for; namely, for a covering to
cover the eyes, as aforesaid: So then we see as long hair is a sign in Nature
of Woman's subjection to Man, which the Apostrate Christians were not only
polluted withal, but also from the end in the sign, as by a borrowed speech,
they were charged to be the subject of the Man of Sin, Apollion their head,
having Rev. 9. 7, 8.
faces of men, and hair as the hair of women.

And will not the Christian Churches in this day consider these things, that
long hair in Men is a sign of subjection to the Man of Sin; and therefore is so
insufferable a thing to be worn by Men in the Churches of God: And where does
the fault chiefly lie, that this disorder is suffered, that Christ is therein
dishonored in the Churches in this day, even at the Ministers door, because
they shun to declare all the Act. 20. 27. Romans 15. 4. 1 Cor. 10. 11.
Counsel of God, to warn the People concerning this Sin. For to what end did
the Lord give the Law to Israel when they came out of Egypt? and still it is
written for our Learning and Admonition, on whom the ends of the World is come:
That Deuteronomy. 22. 4.
a Woman shall not wear that which pertains to Men, one thing especially is
short hair; and neither shall a Man put on a Woman's garment or natural
covering, one thing in special is Woman's long hair, Woman's natural covering:
And to what end did the Lord give the Law, when his People came out of Babylon,
buf to teach us as them, that Men should not Ezekiel. 44. 20.
shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long, but only poll their
heads. And is it not a perpetual Rule to warn Men, they shall not break Gods
Order in this thing in Nature, and to take off all excuse that some have made,
when told of wearing long hair, by the words of the Apostle? Does not even
Nature it self teach you, if a man have long hair, it is a shame to him? Yea,
but say some, how long must Man's hair be, when 1 Cor. 11. 14.
Nature it self teaches, it is a shame to Man to wear? We see the Objection is
answered by the Lord himself, They shall only poll their heads, and not suffer
the locks to grow long. Now, as aforesaid, seeing Woman's hair is called long
when it will cover her eyes, because it will then perform the end in the sign
God gave Woman long hair for, to teach her subjection to Man her Husband, the
covering of her eyes; therefore for Man to wear that length of hair that will
perform the Female sign, to wit, that will cover the eyes, is against Man's
Nature to wear, being the sign of the Wifes subjection to Man her head. And
thus even Nature it self teaches, it is a shame for Man to have long hair; so
then the word shorn or polled, is to cut out the womanish length of hair, a
covering to her eyes, and then it will not bear the name Long hair. And thus
all the suffering Christians, both Ministers and other, by their practice
understood the word Poll or Shorn, to cut their hair short, that it could not
be made by drawing it forward to cover their eyes, is evident: If this be not
the true sense and meaning of the words, let the courteous-minded speak and
prove by Scripture, what other Rule there is then according to the word polled
or shorn, for Men to cut their hair by, and so to wear it.

If then the sin lies at the Ministers door, because they do not teach the
People their Duty in this thing, as the Minister in the Ages past did, by
example of the Prophets and Apostles: What then is the reason they do not teach
against Men's wearing of long hair, or the wearing the long hair of Women,
because they themselves are chief Trespassers in this evil thing; for if they
should teach against it, they should openly condemn themselves, although their
Consciences bears witness in them that they do evil, unless the Conscience be
so feared, as were some of the Jews, who taught others the Duty of the Moral
Law, and had not taught themselves; therefore the Apostle reproved those
Teachers by the very Heathen, as it is written, For when the Gentiles which Romans
2. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21.
have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law; these having
not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, which show the works of the Law written
in their hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the
mean while accusing or excusing one another: Behold thou art called a Jew, or
behold thou art called a Christian, and restest in the Law, and make thy
boast of God, and know his will and approvest the things that Romans 2. 29.
Rev. 2. 9. Romans 2. 17. 18, 19, 20, 21.
are more excellent, being instructed out of the Law, and art confident that
thou thy self art a guide to the blind, a light of them that are in darkness,
an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which have the form of
knowledge and truth in the Law: Thou therefore which teachcst another, teach
thou not thy self? Thou that preachest a man shall not steal, do thou steal?
Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through breaking the Law dishonourest
thou God. Now then whatsoever Man or Woman does against Nature, Jam. 2. 1 Cor.
11. 14.
is a breach of the Moral Law; but for a Man to wear his own locks long, is
against Man's Nature, therefore a breach of the tenth Commandment, which says,
Thou shall not covet, to wit, the forbidden thing; but Woman's long hair is
Woman's covering, therefore is forbidden Man to wear; therefore for a 1 Cor. 11.
13. Deuteronomy. 22. 4 Jam. 2. 10.
Man to covet that God has forbidden Man, is sin, as it is written, A man shall
not put on a woman's garment, or natural covering. Now hear what the Apostle
James says, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point,
he is guilty of all. What need had every Christian, especially every
Gospel-Minister, ^^ see-that they walk circumspectly, because they must not
teach the People in words only, but in purity in all their actions, as it is
written, Be thou an example to the believers, in word, in conversation, in
charity, or love, in 1 Timothy 4. 12.
spirit, in faith, in purity; for as dead flies cause the ointment of the
Apothecary to send forth a stinking savor; so does a little Eccl. 10. 1.
folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and honor. For are Tit. 1. 9.
not Men by the Churches of God chosen into Office, because they excel others
in the Word of God; and when they Rule well, they are worthy of double honor,
not only to be esteemed of for the Works sake, but care to be taken to maintain
1 Timothy 5. 17.
them: But when they give an evil example to the People, in wearing on their
heads the forbidden thing, the long hair of Women, Woman's natural covering,
with which, says the Apostle, indeed a man ought not to cover his head;
because it is Woman's glory, but Man's shame, they dishonor God, so it is folly
and shame to them, because Man is the Image and glory of God, but the Woman is
the glory of the Man; long hair being Woman's glory for a sign thereof, is
therefore a shame to Man's nature to wear, and more especially a shame to the
Ministers of the Gospel, that should (as it is written) approve themselves among
other things, to be the Ministers of Christ by pureness; for are they not in
the trial 2 Cor. 6. 6
of them when to be judged fit for the Ministry, to be blameless? Surely Men
cannot be blameless, when they do that 1 Timothy 3. 2.
thing that is by the Doctrine of the New Testament, a shame to Man's Nature:
yea, how do such Men abstain from all appearance of evil, that are charged to
walk in the shame to Nature? For surely had not long hair worn by Men been a 1
These. 5. 22.
sin, the Apostle would not have blamed the Church of God for suffering such an
evil practice among them: Yea' how can such Minister that give the People so
evil example, in wearing the long hair of Women on their heads, be accounted
worthy of any honor or esteem from the People, because of 2 Timothy 5. 17.
their evil practice herein? Or how are such Ministers worthy of the honor, as
to have care taken for them, in providing maintenance to keep them and their
Families? whenas in this thing in wearing long hair, it may be justly
complained of them as of old, The leader of the people cause them to err, and
Isai. 9 16. Lam. 2. 14.
they that are led by them, are destroyed. And again, Thy Prophets or Teachers
have seen vain and foolish things; for thee they have not discovered their
Iniquity, to turn away thy Captivity, but have seen for their false Burdens and
causes of Banishments. For these things, Judgment must begin at the House 1
Pet. 4. 17.
of God, if sins be suffered there; therefore it was and still is commanded all
the Lords Ministers to cry aloud, Spare not, set Isai. 58. 1.
the Trumpet to thy mouth, show the Lords people their sin and transgression.
But when the Watchmen do not discharge their Duty herein, then the Lord
discovered what a wretched condition they were in, whenas they thought
themselves in a good condition, pampering their Bodies, as it is written, Come
Isai. 56. 10, 11, 12.
ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong
drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.

But let us hear the Lords Message sent to these Belly. Gods, Whose God is
their belly, whose glory is their shame, because they seek or love earthly
things, more than the Souls good of their Flocks, as it is written, His
watchmen are all blind, they are Isai. 26. 10, 11.
all ignorant; they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down,
loving to slumber. Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough; they
are shepherds that cannot understand, they look to their to own way, every one
for his gain from his quarter.

Now if this look too like the day we are fallen into, then that we may not
judge amiss Every tres is known by its fruit; but Mat. 3.
surely that is not good fruit which is a shame to Man's nature to bring forth
or bear, but the long hair of Women is a shame to Man's nature, therefore not
good fruit for the Trees of Righteousness to bear: what then is another the
cause the Isai. 61. 3.
Minister do not reprove this sin that is an open shame? Is it because the Rich
in the Congregation are generally most guilty; Jam. 2. 2, 3, 4. Isai. 56. 11.
and they are not willing to displease them, lest they lose their gain from
their quarterly payments they receive from them; and it is because they should
lessen their Congregation: for it is to be feared many glory more in their
number, than in taking care to see their Flock walk as becomes the Gospel, 1
Cor. 1. 31.
as the Apostle has said, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord; to know
as he is holy, so his People: The Flock of Holiness are commanded to be holy in
all manner of Coversation; so ought every true Pastor to be diligent to know
the Prove. 27. 23.
state of his or rather Christ's Flock: For to what end are Men chosen to be
Ministers, but as eyes to see good things for the Peoples Souls, as they are to
provide food and clothing for their Bodies and their Families. See what the
Lord says of old, If the people of the Land take a man of their Coast, and set
him Ezekiel. 33. 2. 4.
for their watchman; if the watchman see the Sword come, and blow not the
Trumpet, and the people be not warned; is the Sword come and take away any
person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blood will I
require at the watchmans hands. To this it seems the Apostle may have
reference, with respect to his charge he had over all the Churches as
Apostolical Watchman: Whereas this care and duty is branched forth to
particular Pastors or Watchmen in their particular charge; not as Apostles,
but Watchmen over the particular Flock they are set Overseers to; as the
Elders of Ephesus had particular charge to that Church only; to whom he
advertiseth, as they had taken charge of them, they should take the Apostle for
their example, who had a care of all the Churches; so that this was his
comfort, as it is written in his words, To the Elders of the Church of God at
Ephesus; Act. 20. 16, 17.
I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men: His
reason is; For I have not shunned, to declare unto you all the Counsel of God;
take heed therefore to your v. 18.
selves, to wit, that you fulfill your Ministers, as others are commanded, Col.
4. 17.
that you have received in the Lord, that you fulfill it faithfully, in
declaring the whole Counsel of God; so that ye likewise 1 Timothy 4. 2.
may be free from the blood of all men; you have taken care and charge to feed,
to reprove, to rebuke, to see that every one do Col. 2. 5. 1 Cor. 14. 40.
their work and duty, and that order be joined unto faith; so that all things
be done decently and in order.

If then it is every true Ministers duty to declare as there is time and
opportunity, in season and out of season, the whole Counsel of God; a part of
which is to reprove that sinful shame of Men's wearing of long hair; yea, also
the long hair of Women, because it is sin; for what one sin lived in, deserves
not death, temporal and eternal? So then if the Minister do not declare the
whole Counsel of God, according to his written Word, and the People live in
sin. If any are taken away in his sin, his Blood God will require at the Watch
man's hand: By this we see why Christ said to Peter Ezekiel. 33. 6. John 20.
so often, Love thou me? feed my sheep, feed my sheep, feed my sheep: this is
the Pastors duty and love to Christ; the neglect is both a hating of Christ,
and the Souls he has taken charge of, as it is written, Be thou diligent to
know the state of thy flock, and look well to thy hards: Thou shall not hate
thy Prove. 27. 23.
Brother in thine heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not
susser sin upon him, lest thou bear sin for him: And not only concerning a
Brother is this care to be taken, but if Lev. 19. 17. Mat. 18.
the whole Church do sin in doing any thing against any of the Commandments of
the Lord, concerning things which should not be done, and are guilty, the whole
Church must repent thereof unto the Lord; and to that end are the Faithful to
Hos. 2. 1, 2. Rev. 3. 4.
plead with their Mother, as the few Names in Sardis did, having the Faithful
in Israel for their example.

Now consider, whether the sinful shame to Man's Nature, to wit, Men in wearing
long hair, yea, the long hair of Women; and Women wearing their hair shorn or
polled, be not an abomination to the Lord, whenas God created Man polled or
shorn, in respect of his hair, and commanded him so to keep and wear it: And
Woman was created with long hair, and is charged she shall not cut or wear her
hair like to Man: But on the clean contrary, Men wear Woman's long hair, and
Women wear short hair; and this is suffered in almost every Congregation that
say they are the Churches of God. Now what is this but such a sin, yea, of a
high nature, reckoned among the most grievous sins, but because it is such a sin
wherein Men and Women have changed the natural use, into that which is against
Nature? A sin of that nature, never heard of to be suffered in any true Church
of God; and that this sin is so generally spread, that it is as a Leprosse,
which if not speedily reformed and removed out of the Church, the Lord will now
as of old, Abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his Amos 6. 9. Exek. 9. 4.
Palaces for the wickedness of their inventions; as it is written, I will cast
them out of my house, I will love them no more. And to them that mourn in the
Churches, to see these as like aabominations, and have used means to have it
redressed, and it is not reformed, they are commanded to come out from among
them, and touch not the unclean thing, and the Lord will receive them, and be a
Father to them, and they shall be 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17.
his Sons and Daughters: These shall find more comfort with a dinner of herbs,
where love is to God and their Neighbor, than a stalled Ox and hatred
therewith; for of such it is written, Prove. 15. 17. Mal. 9. 3. Mat. 18.
Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and a Book of
remembrance was written for them that thought on his name: For where if but two
or three are gathered together in his Name, he will be in the midst of them to
bless them; that whosoever touches them, touches the Apple of his Exodus 20.
2. Psalm. 50. 16. Rev. 3. 4. Exodus 23. 2. Psalm. 26. 5.
Eye: To all other the Lord says, What have thou to do to take my Word into
thy mouth, that hate to be reformed. So then it is the few Names that walk
with Christ in white, for they are worthy that obey the voice of the Lord; as
it is written, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil; and with David, do
hate the Congregation of evil doors, and will not sit with the wicked; for
though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished.

By all which it appears, that as in the Apostasy after the Apostles decease,
the sin was chiefly in the Stars or Ministers, that fell from their heavenly
profession to an earthly, whereby all disorder was countenanced; so that the
godly which departed from the evil, make themselves a prey; yet the trial of
their Faith was more precious than gold: for we have seen how the suffering
Christians were as Lights in the Rev. 12. 1. Prove. 4. 18. Dan. 12. 3. Phil. 2.
15. prove. 5. 22.
World; who rather shined more unto the perfect day, when other that wandered
after the Beast, were in the Kingdom of Darkness, holden with the cords of
their own sin; so that the Sun and Air was darkened in them, that they saw it
no shame, as in the Apostasy in this day no Men see it no shame for to have
faces as the faces of men, and hair as the hair of women: However it pleased
God, by means of the godly aforementioned, to wit, the suffering Christians,
whose paths shines as aforesaid, more and more unto the perfect day; that when
the Nations were overspread in Men's wearing long hair, the shame to Nature,
Theophilus the Emperor, See Mr. Prinn uncomliness of long locks, p. 11. Mr.
Speed History of Great Britain, l. 9. c. 4. numb. 54. p. 44. 2.
as Writers say, enacted a Law that all Men should cut their hair short; and
that no Roman should suffer it to grow below his neck: The like did King Henry
the First of this Nation, who commanded that Men should cut their hair short in
this Nation; and no doubt the King himself gave his Subjects a good example,
together with the Chief Magistrates, and likewise the Teachers of the People in
that day: so that there was a general Reformation in Men's cutting and wearing
their hair polled or shorn, according to the Command of the King of Kings, as
afore-shewed; and this Reformation continued in this Nation for near five
hundred years, until Ezekiel. 44. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 6, 14.
the latter end of the Reign of King James the First; so that some yet alive
can remember, if a Malefactor was brought before a Judge at Assize, or Justices
at Sessions, if he had long hair, they commanded it to be cut off; so careful
were all Magistrates and Fathers, and Masters in Families, to see both old and
young Men, even to the Children, that they had their hair cut short: So
likewise all the Reformed Ministers and Churches were so careful, that they
would not admit a Member to be joined to them, is his hair was not according to
Gods Order, polled or shorn: So that if the Churches look not to see the Moral
Law kept, as well as the Law of Faith rightly believed, the Apostle James tells
us, What does it profit, Jam. 2. 14.
my br^thren, though a man say he has faith, and have not works; can his faith
save him. Now to respect persons in the way of Faith is a breach of the Moral
Law; how much more for a Man to do that act that is not only a shame to Man's
Nature, but a great dishonor to the Lord our Creator, before showed, in Men's
wearing long hair? Moreover, how many Commendations R^v. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5.
had the Church of God at Ephesus? and yet wanting the root Faith that works
by Love; for which the Lord threatened to remove her Candlestick, except she
repented and did her first Work. Now as Faith is to Believe, so Love is to
Obey; and hereupon Christ has taught, If a man love me, he will keep my words;
but he that lov^th me not, keeps John 14. 23. v. 24.
not my sayings. This was the great sin in the Church of the Ephesians, the
keeping of the Commands of Christ was neglected; so was she charged to have
forsaken her first Love, the Love of her Espousal, in the day they by Covenant
were Espoused or Married to Christ their head; the Agreement Ephesians. 5. 32. Deuteronomy.
26. 16, 17, 18. 2 Cor. 11. 2. Rev. 19. 7, 8, 9. Jer. 50. 5.
was, as it is written of old, Thou have avouched the Lord to be thy God, and
to walk in his way, and to keep his Statutes and Commandments, and to bearken
unto his voice; and the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar
People, as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all his
Commandments. The breach of this Covenant made in Christ, was the reason the
Church of Ephesus Candlestick was threatened to be removed, as it is written to
Israel, to wit, Judah of old, Their root shall be rottenness, and their blossom
shall go up as the dust, because they have cast away the Law of the Lord, and
despised the Word of the holy one of Israel. Isai. 5. 24.


Now then if as the Apostle has taught, Whosoever shall ^eep the whole Law,
and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. Jam. 2. 10.
And is not one point of the Law of God, that Men shall not suffer their locks
to grow long? Hear what the Scripture says, when Gods People of old were told
of their evil doings, and would not hear, then they that were yesterday Gods
Mica 2. 8.
People, are said to be rissen as an Enemy, when they refused to obey him: Now
what says Christ the Lord to such, Bring those mine enemies that would not
that I should Luke 19. 7, 14. Matthew. 21. 43. John 15. 14.
reign over them, and slay them before me; yea, the Kingdom shall be taken from
them, and given to a people bringing forth the fruit thereof: for ye are my
friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.

Now then what was the vain boasting of the Jews, in their half keeping the
Commands of God? as it is written, Hos. 12. 8.
Ephraim said, I am become rich, I have found me out substance; for in all my
labors, they shall find no iniquity in me; when at that time they were charged
to be without the true God, without teaching Priest, and without Law; even so
the Church of the Leodiceans boasted, I am rich and increased with 2 Chronicles. 15.
3.
goods, and have need of nothing: At which time he was wretched, miserable,
poor, blind, and naked, when she had only Rev. 3. 17. Zac. 11. 5. Prove. 13. 1.
the outward gifts left, as Preaching and Praying, which God gives to very
Hypocrites: But love to God in keeping his Commandments, was not by her
regarded. Hear what the Apostle says to such a Church State: Though I speak
with the tongue of Men and Angels, and have not love, I am become a 1 Cor. 13.
1, 2, 3.
sounding brass and tinkling symbal: though I have the gift of prophecy and of
under standing, all mysteries and all knowledge, and though I have all faith,
so that I could remove mountains, and have not love, I am nothing; and though I
give all my goods to feed the poor, and my body to be burned, and have not
love, it profits me nothing. So then it is not every one that says Lord,
Mat. 7. 21.
Lord, shall enter into the King dom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my
Father that is in Heaven.

Now I Will appeal to the Conscience of the Ministers in this day, whether it be
not the Will of God, that Men shall wear their hair polled or shorn; and
whether it he not against the Will of God, that Men should wear either their
own locks long, or the locks of Women: Now this having been proved so great a
sin, what have the Faithful to do, that mourn to see this abomination so
overspread in the Churches of God. to call upon their Ministers to justify the
practice of Men's weariag the long hair of Women in Periwigs, as to bear their
Testimony by preaching against it; and that all that will not be reformed,
todeal with them according to Gods holy Order, as it is written, If thy brother
sin, tell him of his fault; if Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. Gal. 6. 1, 2. Jame. 5. 16.
Lev. 19. 17. Rev. 22. 14.
he hear thee, thou have gained thy brother; if he refuse, to take one or two
and admonish him; if he hear not them, to tell it to the Church, that so the
Church may admonish him: if he refuse to hear the Church, to cast him out;
forasmuch as none have right to the Tree of Life, but those that keep the
Commandments of God: See and read the Scriptures in the Margin. But if the
Minister with the greatest part, do stand to justify this or any other evil
practice, then the sealed ones marked of God, to be saved from the destruction
when the multitude will persist Ezekiel. 9. 4. Hos. 2. 1, 2. Isai. 66. 5. John 9.
34. Mal. 3. 16.
in evil, must plead with their Mother, plead that she no longer remains the
Wise of Christ than she is obedient to all his Commands, though they are cast
out; as it is written, Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my
name sake; then these that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the
Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him,
-for them that feared the Lord and thought upon his Name; and they shall be
mine, ye they shall walk with m^ in white, for they are worthy. Rev. 2. 4.


Again, one might be astonished with Daniel for an hour, to Dan. 4. 19.
consider that ever Christians, after sixteen hundred years practice of all the
suffering Christians, and five hundred years of that time of this whole
Nations, wearing their hair according to the Word of the Lord, polled or shorn,
as the ancient Effigies of the Nobility and Gentry and others do show, that
ever Men should be so bereaved of the sense of Nature, to be drawn in by the
policy of Satan to wear long hair, ye and the Ministers of the Gospel also,
when if the eye is evil, the whole body is full of darkness.

We read in a Book published in the Year 1628. entitled, The Vnloveliness of
Love-locks; in the fifth page it is said that a late Learned Historian
informs us, that the manner of By Mr. Pinn Esquire; Mr. Purchase Pilgr. l. 8. c.
6. sect. 3.
the Virginians was to wear a long lock on the left side their heads, in
imitation of their Devil-God, whom they called Ocbeus; whence it was that a
Virginian coming into England, blamed Englishmen for not wearing a long lock
as they did, affirming our God was not the true God, because he had no Love
lock as their God has.

By this we see how the very Heathen believe they ought to be Imitaters of
their God, although it were the Devil; and therefore when Israel of old did not
walk after the Name, Manner, or Law of the Living God, the Prophet reproved
Mica 4. 5.
them in these words: All people will walk in the name of their God, and we
will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. And is not this a
shame to Christians, that ever the Words of a Heathen Idolatrous Virginian,
should dart the minds of some Englishmen, that about the beginning of the
Reign of King Charles the First, a long lock on the left side Men's heads, began
to be a great fashion; and not among ordinary Men, but the chief in the Nation
in that day, as the effigies of some do yet show; so that hence it was that the
Mr. Purchase Pilgr. l. 3. c. 6. sect. 3.
sorementioned Historian says in express terms, That our sinister and unlovely
love-locks had their original, birth, and pedigree, from the Heathenish
Idolatrous Virginians, who took their pattern from their Devil-God Ocheus, who
usually appeared to them in the shape of a Man with a long black lock on the
left side his head, hanging down to the ground.

Now what says the Scripture to the People of God? Be ye followers of God as
dear Children; be ye followers together of me, Ephesians. 5. 1. Phil. 3. 17.
and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for an example. Now then if we will
be followers of God as his Children, we must hearken to our heavenly Father
Counsel, who has given his mind (to inform the Churches) to his Apostles; and
they teach us it is the mind of God, that Men shall not wear long hair; and
therefore reproved such as did wear long 1 Cor. 11. 14.
hair. So then for Men to wear long hair, or the long hair of Women, is against
the Will and Mind of God, as has been before proved: Therefore if Men wear long
hair, they be followers of the evil One, who taught the Virgi(...) to wear long
hair; first a long lock on the left side their head, as a sign of subjection to
him; and also taught the Egyptians and Babylonians of old, and also the
spiritual Babylonians and Egyp^ians; and no doubt but the Sodomites too, for
when the Ange^^ came to Let in the form of Men, doubtless in the^o^^ Genesis 19.
4. Heb. 13. 2.
God created Man in respect of his hair, which all holy Men in all Age^
followed; to they supposed them to be Lots Brethren; and therefore as they
hated Lot, whose righteous Soul they vexed with their evil Conversation, they
hated all that went as he did; like the Men of late years, since long hair has
been so much worn in this Nation, about fifty years ago, the Christians that
walked by the Rule of Gods Word, and wore their hair agreeable thereto, were by
the rude Rabble mocked and called Roundheads, and hunted after by pursuivants;
so that on a Lords Day, where they saw Men with short hair go into a House,
then they like the Sodomites, old and young from every quarter compassed the
House to take them and abuse them; some they imprisoned, some were banished,
and some before in Queen Elizabeth's days they hanged, namely Mr. Henry Borrow,
Mr. Greenwood, Mr. Penry; See Mr. Borrow and Mr Greenwood, and Mr Penrys
Examination, and more work for the Dean, where these men's sufferings are showed
at large. Luke 8. Mat. 4. 17. Isas. 49. 15. Romans 6. 16. John 8. 44.
so that he that departed from this evil, long hair, of later years, for this
cause made themselves a Prey: But as the Seed of Gods Word is sown on many
places, some received it, as by the way side; these understood it not, for the
Fowls or evil ones steal it from them: Others receive it on stoney hearts,
these wanting love to the truth, these in time of persecution fall away: Others
receive the Word as among thorns, to wit, the care pleasures, and love of the
World choked it so, it withered away: All these began to be offended at the
Word that commanded them to wear short hair, seeing he that departed from the
evil wearing of long hair, made himself a prey; so that many of the Professors
began by little and little to let their hair grow till at last they could wear
long hair as well as any: Now what says the Scripture to them? His servants ye
are whom ye obey: And did not Christ tell the Jews, Ye are of your father the
Devil, whose work ye do? And has it not been proved it is the Work of the evil
One, to draw. Men from Gods Worth to obey his Word, from being adlmitator of
God to he an limitater of him; so that the long hair in Men, which was learned,
from him began to be so burdensome, so chargeable to keep it clean and many the
color pleased them not, and some Men's hair curled not to their minds; so that
the bread of deceit which seemed for a Prove. 20.
while sweet, but afterward their mouths were filled with gravel: so that
there was no content with Men's own long hair. And in this distress and vexation
of mind, is sat^^^^ opportunity to stir up Instruments to provoke to (...)
degree of sinning in this thing; so that whether, as Eve, the Women did
persuade their Hvsbands, that the only way was for them to shave off all their
hair, and might say, Ezekiel. 44. 20.
What although you are forbidden of God you shall not shave your heads, yet the
Doctors say it is good for your health: And thus as Adam was persuaded to take
the forbidden thing, so were Men persuaded to meddle with the forbidden thing,
notwithstanding as plain a precept is given that Men shall not suffer their
locks to grow long, and that Men shall not put on Woman's natural covering, as
has been before proved, as was to Adam that he should not eat of the forbidden
fruit; yet as the one was sin being forbidden, so was the other; as the one
was forbidden Man, so is the other; as the one was taken in the breach of
Gods Law, so is the othen; and as the breach of the Law was sin in them, so
it is now; and and as the wages of sin was death to them, so it is now in
Men that vvear Woman's long hair, Woman's natural covering; and likewise sin in
Women that cut off their hair, their effeminate glory, and badge and sign of
their subjection to Men their Husbands for Men to vvear; and the more to be
lamented, wen the Leaders of the People, that should be Guides to poor Souls
in the way of Righteousness, are the Leaders of others, in this act of
Unrighteousness.

What good will the vain boasting of these Preachers do them in the last day?
Let them hear what the Great Judge will say to them, as it is written, When
ye shall say, Lord, Mat. 7. 32.
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and
in thy name have done many wonderful works: I profess I never knew you, depart
from me ye workers of iniquity, Joh. 10. 27.
for you are not my sheep, because my sheep hear my voice and follow me;
neither have ye my seal, for every one that names the name of Jesus, having
this seal: let the^ depart from iniquity 2 Timothy 2. 19.


What then, are all gone out of the way in this particular, that are called
Christians? for whatsoever difference are among Men in other matters, they
almost all agree to suffer their own locks to grow long, or else to wear the
long hair of Women. Now to be plain with all sorts of People, that hear the
name Christians without respect of Persons or manner of their Religion, seeing
the matter here treated of is, concerning the breach of GOD's Order in Nature
only.

First, The Roman Relegion who make cutting Men's hair short, to be a part of
their Religious Order; so that as Writers Mr. Prinn Vnloveliness of Love-locks
p. 11. and his Auther. Guaquinus verum Pol. Tom. 1. p. 74.
say, Pope Benedict the Ninth enjoined all the Polonians, upon release of
Cazimiz the First their King, who had entered into Religion, to cut their hair
short above their ears, and not to suffer it to grow long; yet these People how
generally do they wear the long locks of Women in Perriwigs, and so transgress
the Law of God in Nature, and other written Laws of God, and also the Decree of
the Pope; and yet they plead for Infallibility, and that their Church cannot
Err; whenas in this particular they are but Hearers of the Word, and not Doers
of the same; all such, says the Apostle James, their Religion is in vain. Jam.
1. 22.


Secondly, There are another People that press all People that hear them, to
mind the Teachings of the Light within, because they say this Light is Christ,
and this Light every Man has: Col. 1. 16.
It is granted, that as Christ is the Eternal Word of God, by whom all things
was created, is the Light that every Man and Woman has, that is born into the
World, and this Light is but natural, as the Scripture says, The first man is
of John. 1. 9. 1 Cor. 15. 46, 47. Ephesians. 5. 14. 2 Timothy 3. 2. Jude v. 19.
the earth earthy; so that that was not first that is spiritual, but that which
is natural, and after which is spiritual; which spiritual Light all Men have
not, for all Men have not Faith, neither have all Men the Spirit of Christ, as
it is written, They separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit: Yet
these Men who Boast they have the Spirit of Christ, why then are they not led
by it? for as many as are led by the Spirit of Christ, they are the Children of
God; which Spirit teaches Romans 8. 14.
Man he shall not suffer his locks to grow long; and also the Light or Law in
Nature tells them the same; for does not 2 Cor. 11. 14.
even Nature it self teach you, that if a man have long hair, it is a shame to
him? and yet these Men either suffer their locks to grow long, or else (the
very Teachers among them) wear the long hair of Women in Perriwigs, as well as
others among them; let these Men for shame no more boast of the Light within,
seeing they know not the Teachings of the Light of Nature, unto whom it may be
justly said (as Christ said to the Jews that rejected Christ the Light of Life
without, and he written Word of God that taught them that he was Christ, the
Light of Life, John 8. 24. which if they believed not, Job. 8. 24.
they should die in their sins) the Light in them was Darkness; how great then
is that darkness in these Men that boast of the Matthew. 6. 23.
Light within, and have not the Light in Nature, to teach them it is a shame
for a Man to wear long hair; much more a shame for them to wear the long hair
of Women in Perriwigs; no nor yet the Women-Teachers among them have not so
much Light to teach that Men should not unman themselves to become effeminate,
in coveting their Glory, in wearing on their heads the long hair of Women,
Woman's natural covering; so that these have not yet the Light of Nature
teaching in this thing, but have also rejected the Word of the Jer. 8. 9.
Lord; What Wisdom is in them, as says the Lord.

Thirdly, To all other Christians who in Word do acknowledge the written Word
of God to be the Rule to walk by, both in the matter of Faith and Worship, and
also in things natural; yet in this particular they are but Hearers of the
Word, and not Doers of the same, and so deceive themselves, in that they plead
that upon some cases a Man may wear the long hair of Women in Perriwigs: Their
plea is to this effect: You know in the late Persecution how the Ministers of
the Gospel, and many other principal Men in the Congregations, have been sought
for by the Informers, to be taken and carried to Prison, so that they did wear
Perrwigs to disguise themselves; if it had not been for that, they would not
have wore them.

Ans. We are taught by the Doctrine of the Gospel, that we may not do evil that
good may come; for a good Tree Romans 3. 8.
brings nor forth corrupt Fruit, says Christ; and seeing it has pleased God
to give us an unexpected deliverance, so Luke 6. 43.
that we may say as Judah did of old, when the Lord turned again the Captivity
of Sion, we were like them that dream: Psalm. 126. 1, 2, 3. Isai. 49. 23. Rev.
12. 16, 16.
The Lord has done great things for ur, in giving us a King according to his
pomife to be a Nursing Father; so that the Earth has helped the Woman and
opened her mouth in the Kings Declaration, and swallowed up the Floods of Penal
Statutes, and whatsoever else the Dragon cast out of his mouth by his
Instruments, to carry away the Woman, the Church of Christ, either to prison,
or to banishment, or to death, so cruel and inhumane are the Laws of this
Nation against Psalm. 107. 29. Rev. 8. 1. Acts 9. 31.
her, as in an Abstract of the Penel Laws lately published does show; but
blessed be God who has given so great a Calm, after so great a Storm, to
enjoy, as the Lord Jesus has proclaimed in his Gospel, That the Tares (the
Unbelievers) and the Wheat (the godly) shall live together in the field, (which
himself has expounded to be the World) freely without Mat. 13. 30.
molestation to enjoy all their Rights and Privileges, notwithstanding the
different Persuasions in matters of their Faith and Religion, as the
Perizzites, Hittites, and others did Judge. 3. 3, 4. Mat. 8. 28.
in Canaan, when Israel had the Land in their possession; seeing every one
shall give an account for himself at the great day of Judgment; and therefore
this general Rule is given to all Christians, Love the Brotherhood, fear God,
honor the King, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Eccl. 11. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 17. 1 Timothy 2. 2.
with supplications, prayers, and intercessions, and giving of thanks be made
for all men, for Kings and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, for this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. So that seeing the cause of the
Plea for wearing of Perriwigs is removed, what is the reason both the ministers
and others do wear Perriwigs, and also many of them that wore no Perriwigs in
the heat of Persecution, do wear the long hair of Women since.

For this another pretended Plea is made, You know that many of the Ministers
are Aged, and others are tender and weak; so that they having wore Perriwigs so
long, if they should leave them off, and wear their hair according to the Word
of God, polled or shorn, it might endanger their health, if not their lives and
all.

Ans. The most Wise God when he made Man, gave him the whole Plenty of the
Earth for his Food and comfort; and Genesis 2. 17. 17.
God was pleased but to reserve one Tree, commanding him he should not eat of
the Fruit thereof: yet Man was not satisfied, but he must desire to eat of the
Fruit forbidden him, whatsoever he suffered by so doing. Even so the most Wise
God has given Man the whole plenty of the Earth, fit for Clothing or
Covering, to keep him warm; and has forbidden him but one thing, he shall not
wear to keep him warm, namely Woman's long hair, or his own locks long; yet Man
is so unsatisfied a Creature, that the one thing forbidden him, he veteth to
wear, and will wear it, notwithstanding God has Deuteronomy. 22. 5. 1 Cor. 11. 7.
Psalm. 19. 13. Romans 14. 22. Jer. 13. 23.
commanded he shall not; so that the Teachers in special cannot be igorant of
it; let them beware they be not charged with the sin of Presumption, condemning
themselves in the thing they allow, and so the saying of the Lord be not justly
charged on them, Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots?
then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. So then there is no
plea against Gods plain Law, to excuse the Breakers thereof; for if it might,
then Vzza might have hoped God would have spared his life, when out of a good
intent he put forth his hand to stay the Ark from falling: or 1 Chro. 23. 10.
King Saul might have hoped the Lord would not have rejected him from being
King, when he in the breach of Gods Command, spared the fat Cattle of Amaleck,
to offer in Sacrifices to the Lord; but he was told, Has the Lord so great
delight 1 Samuel 15. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Rev. 5. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5,
6, 7. Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Acts 2. 39. Psalm. 128. 3. Exodus 12. 26. Deuteronomy. 6. 20. Ephesians.
6. 4. Deuteronomy. 31. 12, 13, Isai. 44. 5. Exodus 15. 2.
in Burnt-Offerings, as in obeying the voice of the Lord: Even so let all
Christians beware the Lord does not reject them from being Kings and Priests
unto God, out of the Kingdom of Christ, in disobeying the Command of the Lord;
and also in training up their Children in that evil practice; whenas they are
commanded to train them up in the Commands of God, seeing Revealed things
belong to us and to our Children, so the promise of life in Christ is to us and
to our Children; for as they are Olive-plants, born in the Lords Covenant,
which is the Kingdom of God, so are they of the Kingdom of Grace; and therefore
are we commanded to take them with us to the place of Gods Worship, so when
they ask what means by this Service or Ordinance, we may teach them, bringing
them up in the Admonition of the Lord, teaching them what God has done for
them, and what he requires (as they grow in years) of them; that so in time
they may come forth in the face of the Congregation, and confess, I am the
Lords, and he is become my Salvation; he is my Fathers God, and I will exalt
him: But how is this Work advanced in Children, when they are taught to walk in
the shame to Nature? the Female Children going with their hair shorn like Boys,
and the Male Children with Girls hair on their heads. O what a kind of
Christians are these, that have changed both in themselves and their Children,
the natural use, into that which is against Nature!

Yet a word to the Female Sex only, who come into the Assembly with their hair
the most part uncovered, short o^shorn, to the shame of their Natures, as
afore-shew'd: as they may read, that that Woman that had her hair uncovered
before the Numb, 5. 18.
Lord, in the Assembly or Worship of God, were only such Women that their
Husbands accused them for being dishonest, so were tried by the Law for
Jealousy. Mr. Ains. in his Annotations on the words, Uncover the Woman's head,
notes what the manner was, as the Hebrews write, that the Priest uncovered the
Woman's hair, and untied the locks of her head to make her unseemly; hence says
the Apostle, Is it comely for a woman to 1 Cor. 11. 13. Prove. 7. 10
pray unto unto God with her head, to wit, her hair, uncovered? and Solomon
said he saw a Woman with the Attire of an Harlot; what can this be but the
Woman's laying out her hair for adorning; which the Apostle says is an act of
shamelesness and immodesty. Now the place where this Attire of an Harlot is set
forth, is on the forehead; and this is proved by a borrowed speech the Prophet
takes from the practice of common Harlots, when he charged Judah with her
imperious spiritual Whoredoms, as it is written, She had a Whores forhead, as
one not Jer. 3. 3.
ashamed: Now shall Christian Women do that act or thing that shall represent
them immodest in the face of the Church? no, since the Spouse of Christ when
suffered many slanderous abuses at the hands of false Teachers in point of
modesty, she comprehended by her complaint, all the abuses under the name of
taking her vail from her; so that the name Vail, says Mr. Ainsworth, on Song
5. 7. has its name in the original of spreading, as being spread over her head
to cover her: such Vails were worn by Women, partly for ornament, as appears
by Isai. 3. 23. partly for modesty, and in sign of subjection to Men,
especially their Husbands, 1 Cor. 11. 6, 7, 10. and a Husband is to the Wife a
covering of the eyes, Genesis 20. 16. so the taking away of her Vail, seems to
be a note of infamy, disloyalty, or dishonesty, imputed unto her, as of
Idolatry, Heresy, Schism, and the like; so she was spoiled of her good Name
and Reputation, and accounted among the light and lewd Women; for it appears
by Ezekiel. 23. 25, 26. that they used to treat dishonest Women so. By all which
it appears, it is a shame for any honest Woman to wear her hair uncovered;
nay it is commonly seen, that if a strange Man come at unawares where a modest
Woman is but a combing her hair, away she steps aside to hide her self, or else
casts something over her head to cover her hair. Now shall Women not be
ashamed to lay out their hair for adorning, and turning it up on their
foreheads like a Squirrils tail, and cut their hair short, as shorn by their
ears, and account that well-set hair, as the wanton Daughters of Sion did Iai.
23. 24.
of old? for which the Lord threatened them; that instead of well-set hair, he
would send them baldness; as came on them Lam. 1. 8. and 2. 10. 20.
with a vengeance; a warning to the Daughters of Sion. Now therefore they
should take example by the holy Women of old, who gave their brazen Looking
glasses they used to dress their Exodus 38. 8. Rev. 1. 6. Tit. 3. 5.
Bodies in, to make a Laver, wherein by Faith they saw their sins washed away
in the Blood of Christ, who has saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost; so that with Mary they should delight themselves in
choosing the better part. And,

Lastly, Will not Men and Women believe, that the most Wise God has made all
his Works so perfect in Wisdom, that they ought to be fully satisfied to let
every thing remain in that holy order, the great Creator has to admiration set
them in, in respect of every part, use, and nature, God has set every thing
belonging to Man and Woman's Body; so that hereupon the Prophet says, How
fearfully and wonderfully am I made! So Psalm. 139. 14.
that as long hair is given Woman for a sign in her according to her Sex, to
teach her subjection to Man, how dare. Man look to Godward, when he has
changed Gods Order in Nature, to take Woman's long hair and wear on his head?
and not only so, but not withstanding what God has said, that Man cannot make
one hair white or black, teaching Man thereby not to Mat. 5. 36.
presume to change his hair; if God has given him gray hairs, not to shave it
off, and to cover his head with a contrary color hair; seeing the Spirit of
God says, The beauty of old men is the Prove. 02. 29.
gray head, and the hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way
of righteousness. Now do not Men despise Gods Workmanship in nature? and is it
not a sin in them to shave their gray Prove. 16. 31.
hairs, and wear on their head some womanish youthful colored hair. Again, the
Lord has taught his People his providential care he has toward his People,
from the very natural hairs of their head, as it is written, Even the very
hairs of your Luke 12. 7.
head are numbered: Does the Lord Jesus speak of Women's long hair in Perriwigs
on Men's heads? no sure, Men were never so void of the Teaching of Nature in any
Age of the World as this; the very Locusts were not so charged, as Men may be
Rev. 9. 7, 8.
now; their hair was but as the hair of Women, but now the the Ministers of the
Gospel have faces of Men, but the very hair of Women; how can these Men in
Prayer to God draw any Petitions to God, as touching Gods providential care
from these words, All the hairs of our head are numbered; when Mat. 10. 30.
at that time they have shaved off all their own natural hair, and have on
their heads the stinking excrements of Women, without mocking of God: It must
needs be a horrid sin in Man, that does that which hinders the dictates of the
Spirit, that it cannot have free egress, to draw Arguments through the whole
Scripture, with David, as it is written, When I am old Psalm. 71. 18.
and gray headed, forget me not: For we know in Prayer when we go near to God
in that Work, we know not what to pray for, as we ought, but as the Spirit
helps our infirmities. Romans 8. 26.
What deeper sense of the promise of God is there from any Scripture to be
gathered of God, keeping his People as the apple of his eye, than that the
hairs of our head are all numbered. So that David in his great Afflictions, as
he was a figure of Psalm. 40. 12.
Christ, in his Prayer to God says, They are more than the hairs of mine head.
This may teach us how we may not wear any hair but our own natural hair, as
Gods Servants by the Spirit Genesis 42. 38. Deuteronomy. 32. Job 15. 10. 1 Samuel 12. 2. 1
King. 1. 52. 2 Samuel 14. 11.
had occasion to speak of them, with respect to the number, as also the color:
So when King Solomon would promise a firm protection to any one, according to
the Power of a King, There shall not an hair of him fall to the ground: so
David, As the Lord lives, there shall not one hair of thy Son fall to the
Earth. How can Men plead with God to remember his Promise from that Scripture,
That the Hairs of our head are all numbered, when Man has on his head a false
hair?

Again, Has not God given to Men diversities of countenances with admiration,
with comely proportion, so that one Man is the more easily known from another?
Now if a Man should put on his face, to wit, a Minister, a Vizard, a false
face, as he has on his head false hair; when he teaches the People, what Man
or Woman would endure to hear him? and is it not as lawful for a Man to wear a
false countenance, as a false hair, both being abominable? Now ye that fear
God, seriously consider these things, and remember what Christ has said, That
which is highly esteemed among men, is abominable in the sight of God.

FINIS.

