ON THE PARK AT St. JAMESE'S.
OF the first Paradise, there is nothing found,
Trees set by Heaven are vanished, and the ground,
Yet the description lasts, who knows the fate
Of lines that shall this Paradise relate?
In stead of Rivers rolling by the side
Of Edens Garden, here flows in the Tide;
The Sea that always served his Empire, now
Pays Tribute to our Princes pleasure too.
Of ancient Cities we the Founders know,
But Rivers old as Seas to which they go
Are natures bounty, it is of more renown
To make a River, than to build a Town.
For future shade young Trees upon the bank
Of the new stream appear in even rank;
The voice of Orpheus, or Amphyon's hand
In better order could not make them stand.
May they increase as fast, and spread their bows,
As the high fame of their great owner grows.
May he live long enough to see them all
Dark shadows cast, and as his Palace tall.
Me thinks I hear the love that shall be made,
The gallants dancing in the Amorous shade,
The Lovers walking by the River side,
They bath in Summer, and in Winter slide.
Me thinks I hear the Music in the Boats
And the loud Echo which returns their notes,
Whilst over head a flock of new sprung fowl
Hang in the air, and do the Sun control,
Darkning the sky they hover over, and shrowed
The wanton Saylours with a feathered Cloud;
Beneath a shoal of silver fishes glides
And plays about the gilded Barges sides;
A thousand Cupids on the billows ride,
And Sea-Nymphs enter with the swelling tide,
From Thetis sent as spies to make report
And tell the wonders of her Sovereigns Court*
All that can living feed the greedy eye,
Or dead the palate, here you may descry;
The choicest things that furnished Noah's Ark,
Or Peter's sheet, inhabiting this Park,
All with a Border of rich Fruit Trees Crowned,
Whose loaded branches hide the lofty Mound.
Such various ways the spacious Allies lead
My doubtful Muse knows not what path to tread.
Yonder the Harvest of cold months laid up
Gives a fresh coolness to the royal Cup;
Here Ice like Crystal firm, and never lost,
Tempers hot July with Decembers frost;
Winters dark prison, whence he cannot fly
Tho the warm Spring his Enemy draw ny;
Strange that extremes should thus preserve the Snow
High on the Alps, and in deep Caves below.
Here a well polished Mall gives us the joy
To see our Prince his matchless force employ;
His manly posture, and his graceful mien,
Vigor and youth in all his actions seen,
His shape so lovely, and his limbs so strong,
Confirm our hopes we shall obey him long.
No sooner has he touched the flying ball,
But it is already more than half the Mall,
And such a fury from his arm has got
As from a smoking Culverin 'twere shot.
May that ill fate my Enemies befall
To stand before his anger, or his ball.
Next this my Muse (what most delights her) sees
A living Gallery of aged Trees,
Bold Sons of Earth, that thrust their arms so high
As if once more they would invade the sky.
In such green Palaces the first Kings reigned,
Slept in their shades, and Angels entertained;
With such old Counselors they did advise,
And by frequenting sacred Groves grew wise*
Free from the impediments of light and noise,
Man thus retired, his nobler thoughts imployes.
Here Charles contrives the ordering of his States,
Here he resolves his neighboring Princes fates,
What Nation shall have peace, where War be made
Determined is in this Oraculous shade.
The World from India to the frozen North
Concerned in what this solitude brings forth
His fancy objects, from his view receives
The prospect thought, and contemplation gives.
That seat of Empire here salutes his eye
To which three Kingdoms do themselves apply,
The structure by a Prelate raised, Whitehall
Built with the Fortune of Romes Capitol,
Both disproportioned to the present State
Of their proud founders, were approved by fate.
From hence he does that Antique Pile behold,
Where royal heads receive the sacred Gold,
It gives them Crowns, and does their ashes keep,
There made like Gods, like mortals there they sleep.
When others fell, this standing did presage
The Crown should triumph over popular rage:
Hard by that house where all our ills were shaped
The auspicious Temple stood, and yet escaped:
So Snow on Etna does unmelted ly
Whence rolling flames, and scattered Cinders fly;
The distant Country in the ruin shares
What falls from Heaven the burning Mountain spares.
Next, that capacious Hall he sees, the room
Where the whole Nation does for Justice come,
Under whose large roof flourishes the Gown,
And Judges grave on high Tribunals frown.
Here, like the peoples Pastor, he does go,
His flock subjected to his view below,
On which reflecting in his mighty mind
No private passion does indulgence find;
The pleasures of his youth suspended are,
And made a sacrifice to public care;
Here free from Court compliances he walks,
And with himself, his best adviser, talks;
How peaceful Olives may his Temples shade
For mending Laws, and for restoring trade,
Or how his brows may be with Laurel charged
For Nations Conquered, and our bounds enlarged;
Of ancient prudence here he ruminates,
Of rising Kingdoms, and of falling States;
What ruling Arts gave great Augustus fame,
And how Alcides purchased such a name.
His eyes upon his Native Palace bent
Close by, suggest a greater argument:
His thoughts rise higher when he does reflect
On what the World may from that Star expect
Which at his birth appeared, to let us see
Day for his sake could with the night agree.
A Prince on whom such different lights do smile
Born the divided world to reconcile.
Whatever Heaven, or high extracted blood
Could promise, or foretell, he will make good,
Reform these Nations, and improve them more
Than this fair Park from what it was before.
Printed for Tho. Dring.


