AN HONORABLE, AND LEARNED SPEECH MADE BY Mr. WALLER in PARLIAMENT, Against the
Prelates Innovations, False Doctrine, and Discipline; reproveing the Perswation
of some Clergymen to his Majesty of Inconveniences: Who themselves,
instead of tilling the Ground, are become sowers of TARES.

With a Motion for the Fundamental, and Vital Liberties of this Nation,
which it was wont to have*

Printed for Richard Smithers, 1641.

Mr. Waller his Speech, in Parliament.
Mr. Speaker,
WE shall make it appear; the error of Divines who would that a Monarch can
be absolute, and that he can do all things ad libitum receding not only from
their Text, (though that be wandering too) but from the way their own
profession might teach them. Stare super vias antiquas, and remoove not the
ancient bounds and Landmarks, which our Fathers have set.

If to be absolute, were to be restrained by no Laws; Then can no King in
Christendom be so, for they all stand obleidged to the Laws Christian, and we
ask no more, for to this Pillar, be our Privileges fixed. Our Kings at their
Coronation, having taken a Sacred Oath, not to infring them, I am sorry these
men take no more care, for the informing of our faith of these things, which
they tell us for our souls health; whilst we know them so manifestly in the
wrong way, in that which concerns the Liberties and privileges of the
Subjects of England.

They gain preferment, and then it is no matter, though they neither believe
themselves, nor are believed by others. But since they are so ready, to let
loose the Conscience of our Kings, we are the more carefully to proceed, for
our protection against this Pulpit-law, by declaring, and reinforcing
Municipall Laws of this Kingdom.

It is worthy the observation, how now this opinion, or rather this way of
rising is even amongst themselves.

For, (Mr. Speaker) Mr. Hooker, who was no refractory man, as they term it
thinks that the first government was arbitrary, until it was found, that to
live by one man's will, becoms all men's misery* these are his words, and that
these were the original of inventing Laws.

And (Mr. Speaker,) if we look farther back, our Histories will tell us,
that the Prelates of this Kingdom, has often been the Mediators, between the
King and his Subjects, to present and pray redress of their greivances, and
had reciprocally then, as much love and reverence from the people.

But these Preachers more active then their Predecessors, and wiser then the
Laws, have found out a better form of Government.

The King must be a more absolut Monarch, then any of his Predecessors, and to
them he must owe it, though in the mean time, they hazard the hearts of his
people, and involve Him into a thousand Difficulties.

For suppose, this form of Government were inconvenient; (Mr. Speaker,) this
is but a Supposition; for this five hundred years, it has not only
maintained us in safety, but made us victorious over other Nations: But
suppose, this form of Government were inconvenient; and they have another Idea
of one more convenient; We all know, how dangerous Innovations are, though to
the better; and what hazard those Princes run, that enterprise the Change of
a long established Government.

Now, (Mr. Speaker,) of all our Kings that have gone before, and of all that
are to succeed in this happy race, why should so pious, and so good a King, be
exposed to this trouble and hazard? Besides, that King so diverted, can never
do any great matters abroad.

But, Mr. Speaker, whilst these men have thus bent their Wits, against the Law
of their Country; have they not neglected their own profession? What Tares are
grown up in the field, which they should have tilled? I leave it to a second
Consideration, not but Religion be the first thing in our purposes and desires;
But that which is first in dignity, is not always to preced in order of time;
for well-being, supposes a being; and the first impediment which men naturally,
endeavor to remoove, is the want of those things, without which they cannot
subsist. God first assigned unto Adam, maintenance of life, and added to him a
title to the rest of the Creatures, before he appointed a Law to observe.

And let me tell you, that if our Adversaries have any such design, as there
is nothing more easy, then to impose Religion on a people deprived of their
Liberties, so there is nothing more hard, then to do the same upon freemen.

And therefore (Mr. Speaker) I Conclude with this motion, that there may be an
Order presently made, that the first thing this House goes about, shall be, the
restoring of this Nation in general, to the fundamental and vital Liberties,
the prosperity of our Goods, and freedom of our Persons: And then We will
forthwith, consider of the supply desired.

And thus shall We discharge the trust reposed in us, by those that sent us
hither; And his Matie shall see, that we will make more then ordinary have to
satisfy his demands; and we shall let all those know that seek to hasten the
matter of supply, that they will so far delay it, as they give no
interruption to the Former.

FINIS.

