A Necessary TREATISE for this Age OR, A Plain discovery of that great Error of
denying Baptism with Water to the Children of Believers.

In justification of the Arguments of John Turner, for Infants Baptism,
against Robert Admond.

Together with several other useful particulars on this Subject, the Contents
whereof follow in the next Page.

Briefly, and plainly handled and discust by THOMAS WALL.

Luke 18. 16. Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for
of such is the Kingdom of God. Acts 2. 39. For the Promise is to you and your
children, etc. Acts 16. 15. And when she was Baptized and her household, etc.
London, Printed for Tho. Wall, and Barn. Frencham, and are to besold by Nath.
Crouc^, at the Cross-Keyes in Bishopsgate-street, near Leaden Hall. 1669.

The Contents.
1. A Plain discovery of that great Error of denying Infants Baptism with water
to the Children of Believers. 2. John Turners Argument for Infants Baptism
justified. 3. A desoription of the state of Infants as they come from Adams
loins. 4. What Christ's spiritual blessing was on the Infants brought to him,
the want they had of it, and benefit received by it, and by it they had right
to Baptism of water. 5. That a man's children are his household. 6. That
Believers children were Baptized by the hands of the Apostles. 7. The word
Baptism opened by context of Scripture. 8. Who are the true Administrators of
Baptism. 9. Where it ought to be done. 10. On what part of the body it ought
to be administered. 11. That the Anabaptists according to their own judgment are
not yet Baptized. 12. That the Baptism received in Apostate Churches, ought not
to be reiterated.
The Preface to the Reader, concerning the occasion of this Treatise.
I. T. that worthy Soldier of Jesus Christ, about 12 years ago, delivered his
Judgment in a Sermon from 1 Cor. 10. 1* 2. verses, Proving from thence the
lawfulness of Infants Baptism; One that heard him, took the sum of the matter
delivered in writing, and gave it to R. A. who made some Answer to J. T's.
Doctrine, and sent it to him: In answer to which writing of R* A. J. T. framed
this Argument in the beginning of this Treatise; and to the Argument R. A. made
some farther Answer. R. A. showing me the writings of both sides, I having well
considered the matter, and discerned much wait in J. T's. Argument, and R. A's.
grant to the same: And J. T. being aged, and weakened much in body, by reason of
his long (nigh 14 years) imprisonment for the Cause of Christ, and after that a
long time of sickness, was not forward to trouble himself with Controversies in
his latter days, but to employ himself in more comfortable Meditations: I
thought my self bound in duty, having received a Talent of the Lord, and ought
not to hide it in the earth, Matthew. 25. ^8, 27. the Harvest being so great, and
they that are faithful Laborers so few, and the truth of God so much in these
our days decayed, I could not forbear, but set the trump of Gods Word to my
mouth to vindicate this blessed Truth of the Lord, of the Right that the
Infants of Believers have to Baptism of water, Isa. 59. 19. though the Enemy
shall come in like a Flood for the same, but the Lord is the strength of my
Life, of whom shall I be afraid, Psalm. 27. 1. Considering, if it were possible,
to reclaim my friend R. A. from his error, I sent to him the tenor of this
ensuing Treatise, which remained with him about a year and half, expecting his
approving or disproving of the same: A friend of mine, understanding what I had
wrote ^esired to see it, much desiring me to put it to public view, for some
Reasons; First, Because the truth of Infants Baptism so plainly manifested, is
so needful to come abroad. Secondly, Because so many poisoned Books in denying
Infants Baptism, are spread abroad. Thirdly, The many thousands of people that
are led away in the error of the same; the Captain of this, and other Errors,
was one Of this Mr. Smith is more spoken in this treatis worth noting.
Smith, who Baptized himself, being once a seeming Member of a true Church in
Amsterdam, where Mr. Henry Ainsworth at that time was Teacher, but for Error
Mr. Smith was cast out which was as the Star called Wormwood, which fell upon
the third part of the Rivers, and upon the Fountains of waters, and many men
dyed of the Waters because they were made bitter, Rev. 8. 10, 11. but the
waters of Gods truths, being pure water of Life, clear as Crystal, Rev. 22. 1.
which make glad the City of God, Psalm. 46. 4. but false Shepherds and evil
Teachers do foul and muddy the waters of Gods Truth with their feet, Ezekiel. 34.
18, 19. So that bitterness springs up to trouble the faithful, Heb. 12. 15.
With their Tongues they have used deceit, Romans 3. 13. And lie in wait to
deceive, Ephesians. 4. 14. What need then has every Soul to search the Scriptures
daily, Acts 17. 11. Believing no man's Opinion of Scripture, unless it be so
understood, that the Old and New Testament may agree in one harmony together,
and then he or she shall go on in safety, which is the desire of him who is
thine in all Christian duty.

Tho. Wall.

John Turners Argument for Infants Baptism Verbatim, sent to Robert Admands.
THey that Christ blessed with a spiritual blessing, had right to Baptism of
Water.

Little Children held in Arms, had right to Baptism of Water, because Christ
blessed them with a Spiritual blessing.

R. A's. Answer to J. T's. Argument.

And grant is, That the Infants blessed by Christ, were blessed with a spiritual
blessing, with this denial,

That those Infants which Christ blessed with a Spiritual Blessing, had no
right to Baptism of Water.

Tho. Wall' s Reply to R. A' s Answer of J. TO s. Argument.

Forasmuch as you grant, that those Children held in Arms, and brought to
Christ, were blessed with a Spiritual blessing, it is then needful to examine
by the golden Reed of Gods written Word, what this spiritual blessing was, the
necessity the Children had of it, the benefit they received by it, and that by
partaking of it, they had right to Baptism of Water; so I shall begin in order
with the first particular; That is,

What this Spiritual blessing was Christ bestowed on those Infants brought to
him.

The Evangelist Luke is a true expounder what Christ Spiritual was, as it is
written, Ye are the children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God
made with our Fathers, saying unto Abraham, in thy seed shall all the kindreds
of the Earth be blessed, unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus,
sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities,
Acts 3. 25, 26. Again, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered, Romans 4. 7. And again, Blessed be the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings, in
heavenly places in Christ, in whom we have Redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins according to the Riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 1. 3, 7. by
which it is evident that Christ's spiritual blessing bestowed on those Infants
brought to him, was the pardon of their sins, and that Christ had power on
earth to forgive sins, Matthew. 9. 6. As for Temporal blessings, Christ himself
was ministered unto of their substance that followed him, Luke 8. 2, 3. and
refused to divide temporal inheritances, Luke 12. 13. 14.

Secondly, The necessity the Children brought to Christ, had of this Blessing;
Because it is written, through the offense (or fall) of one, many are dead; By
the offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to condemnation, by one m^ns
disobedience, many were made sinners, Romans 5. 15, 18, 19. In Adam all dyed, 1
Cor. 15. 22. So that by nature we were the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2, 1. 3.
As it is written, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, no not one,
Job 14. 4 So that a Woman was unclean many days because of Childbearing,
Levit. 12. both Jews and Gentiles are all under sin, as it is written, There is
none Righteous, no not one, Romans 3. 9, 10, 11, 12. David likewise complains,
Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, Psalm.
51. 8. Likewise the Prophet calls Israel, transgressors from the womb, Isa.
48. 8. Yea the wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray as soon as
they be born, speaking lies, Psalm. 58. 3. therefore I may by the testimony of
these Scriptures, conclude, by like equality, that if Levi in the loins of
Abraham, before he was born, paid Tithes when Abraham did, Heb. 7. 9, 10. we
likewise in the loins of our Father Adam, before we were born, broke Gods Law
when Adam did, Romans 5. 12. for Adam was the root of all mankind, Acts 17. 26.

Therefore it does appear, That the children brought to Christ were very
sinful, and Christ's blessing bestowed on them, was the pardon or remission of
sin; and Baptism of water is the sign of remission or forgiveness of sins, what
man of any understanding, can deny that those that Christ has blessed with a
spiritual blessing, has not right to Baptism of water.

Moreover it was foretold by the Prophet, that Christ should set up his
standard to the people, and lift up his hand to the Gentiles, and they shall
bring thy sons in their or bosom.
arms and thy daughters should be carried upon their shoulders, Isa. 49. 22.
which Scripture was fulfilled by those that came and brought their little ones
with them, which the Lord Jesus himself says were of his Kingdom, Mark 10.
14. and being before proved they were so sinful, they had great necessity of
Christ's blessing, in having their sin pardoned, for the children of Believers
are the Lords, ( Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21.) as well as their Parents; therefore are
called a chosen Generation, and a holy Nation, 1 Pet. 2. 9. If then they are
equal with their Parents in acceptance of the pardon of their sin, what reason
can be given that they shall not be equal in having the sign of remission of
sin even Baptism of water, seeing the Scripture says, that the promise is to
you and your children, Acts 2. 38, 39.

Thirdly, The benefit those children held in Arms, brought to Christ, and all
the Children of Believers have of Christ's Spiritual blessing, we have before
proved, the blessing, even the pardon of sins which Christ bestowed on little
Children: Now it follows to be manifested, the happy estate the children of
Believers have, by Gods gift unto them by the benefit of Christ's blessing.

First, They are accepted with their Parents in holy Covenant with the Lord, as
it is written, Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your God, your
Captains of your Tribes, your Elders and your Officers (with) all the men of
Israel, your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger that is in thy Camp,
from the hewer of thy wood, unto the drawer of thy water, that thou should
enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath which the Lord thy
God makes with thee this day, that he may establish thee to day, for a people
to himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he has said unto thee, and
as he has sworn unto thy Fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; Neither
with you only do I make this Covenant, and this Oath, but with him that
stands here with us this day, before the Lord our God, and also with him that
is not here with us this day, Deuteronomy. 29 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. thus we see the
little ones then present, and those not then born, when their Fathers entered
Covenant, the children entered Covenant with them, which was no other than the
Covenant God made with Abraham here renewed: If children in infancy are with
God accepted in holy Covenant, and all their sins at that time were pardoned,
Ezekiel. 16. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Romans 3. 23, 24, 25. and Baptism a sign of sin
pardoned, who can deny the children of the Covenant, who have their sins
pardoned, the Ordinance of Baptism any more than their Parents, seeing they
are equal in the Promise, Acts 2. 38, 39.

Secondly, Again the children of Believers are a part of the glory of Christ's
Kingdom, as it is written, And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his
Fathers house, the Offspring and the Issue, all vessels of small quantity,
from the vessels of Cups, even to all the Vessels of Flagons, Isa. 22. 24. and
as every Vessel in the Temple of old, figured the bodies of the Saints, both
great and small, 2 Chronicles. 36. 18. Acts 9. 15. 1 These. 4. 4. Therefore says the
Prophet, both young men and maidens, old men and children, let them praise the
name of the Lord, Psalm. 148. 12, 13. So that little children in the Temple,
cried Hosanna to the son of David, Matthew. 21. 15. the benefit of Christ's
blessing upon the children of his Kingdom did here appear, and as it was
foretold by the Prophet for the comfort of Believers, and their little ones,
saying, I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine
Offspring, and they shall spring up (as) among the grass, as Willows by the
Watercourse, Isa. 44. 3, 4. which blessing is before proved to be the pardon
of sin, and Baptism the sign of remission of sin, Acts 2. 39. who dare be so
bold as to deny those little ones who are a part of the glory of Christ's
Kingdom, as well as men of years, 2 Cor. 8. 23. Isa. 22. 24. the benefit of
that Ordinance without rebellion against the Lord, and hatred to the Infants of
Christ's Kingdom?

R. A's. Objections.

Now I shall come to examine your Objection. You say it seems to you, that
those Children blessed by Christ, were to receive it in future time, because
Matthew sets down that those little children were brought that he should put
his hands on them, and pray (to wit) for a blessing on them; yet you confess
Christ's Prayers were always heard, yet it does not follow (say you) that he
prayed for the blessing to be immediately bestowed on those Infants, nor that
they did partake of it then, before they came to years of understanding (and
this you say) you are the rather induced to think, because Isaac and Jacobs
blessings were not to be enjoyed till future times, Genesis 48. 49. and 27. 27.

T. W's Answer.

This you say, is but as you are induced to think, by paralelling the blessing
of Christ with Isaac and Jacobs, in respect of future time, to be enjoyed; your
comparison is not equal, and by it you do diminish the Prerogative of Christ;
did not, think you, all blessings of old point to Christ the substance, for the
spiritual fulfilling of them, and depended upon no other for the
accomplishment? no nor in respect of time in future, for he is over all, God
blessed for ever, Amen; for all the Promises of God in him, are yea, and for
him Amen; so that whom God does bless, he or they are blessed, as the Apostle
says, who has blessed us, Ephesians. 1. 3. its the present time; even so says
Mark, and he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them and blessed
them, Mark 10. 16. so that blessed are those whose iniquities are forgiven,
Romans 4. 7. Thus it will undoubtedly follow to men that have the least spark of
true light, that those whose sins are pardoned, ought to have the sign
Administered upon them, even Baptism of water.

Moreover take notice, was not the blessing of the High Priest of old, Number. 6.
23, 24, 25, 26, 27. then enjoyed of the children of Israel, as figuratively
pointing to Christ our High Priest, now spiritually and more fu^ly by him
fulfilled and enjoyed in his Church and Kingdom, who has an unchangable
Priesthood, wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come
unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.
24, 25.

Again, those that were blessed of old by the High Priest, had the name of the
Lord put upon them, Numb. 6. 27. and Christ our High Priest came not to destroy
the Law, but to fulfill it, Matthew. 5. 17. So then, that as those that the High
Priest blessed of old, had the name of the Lord put upon them, even so those whom
our High Priest does bless with the pardon of sins, ought to have his name put
upon them, who is both Lord and Christ, Acts 2. 36. which is now done in the
Ordinance of Baptism, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; but Christ our High Priest did bless little Children held in arms
with his spiritual blessing, the pardon of sin, therefore ought such little
children to have his Name put upon them in the Ordinance of the Baptism of
water.

R. A. Your next Argument is, If those Infants blessed by Christ were not
Baptized, then it is not likely that they had by that blessing, any right to
Baptism of water, because, if they had right to it, Christ would have had them
been Baptized.

But those Infants blessed by Christ were not Baptized, for Christ himself
Baptized not at all, John 4. 2. and what was done to the Infants, was done by
Christ himself, as appears by the Text it self, Mark 10. 13.

Therefore those Infant's blessed by Christ, had not right to Baptism of water.

T. W. his Answer*

The substance of your Argument is, That is the children had right by Christ's
blessing to Baptism of water, then would Christ have had them been Baptized.

If this be a ground of Faith, it should have bin proved by the Word of Faith,
or a true gathered consequence from the same, but that this your Argument to
prove the Children whom Christ blessed had no right to Baptism of Water, is
neither from the word of truth, nor true gathered consequence from the same, as
shall plainly appear.

We read many Disciples believed in Christ, out of which he chose Apostles,
whom be blessed, as it is written, And he lift up his hands and blessed them,
Luke 24. 50. yet we find not whether they were Baptized, any more then those
Infants which Christ likewise blessed, shall we conclude they were not
Baptized, because it is not written that Christ commanded them to be Baptized?
consider and lean not to your own understanding, Prove. 3. 5.

Again, whereas you say Christ himself Baptized not at all. I answer, It
belonged not to his Office, for John taught, Christ's Office was to Baptize with
the Holy Ghost, and with Fire, Matthew. 3. 11. and you are very bold to say, that
what was done to those Infants, was done by Christ himself, you by like grounds
might say, that what was done to the Disciples whom Christ blessed, Luke 24.
50. was done by Christ himself, and we read he Baptized not at all, so by your
grounds, neither the Infants, nor the Apostles whom Christ blessed, were at all
Baptized with water, which is dangerous to believe.

Again, you say it does not appear that all the Infants of Believers are
blessed with Christ's Spiritual blessing, as those Infants were in Mark 10. 13.

T. W. his Answer.

It is evident, that as Christ says by little Children whom he blessed with
his spiritual blessing, of such is the Kingdom of God, which is his Church,
Col. 1. 13. 1 These. 2. 12. Rev. 1. 9. and as the Church or Congregation of old
consisted of men, women, and children, Ezra 10. 1. called also a holy Nation,
Exodus 19. 6. Even so the Church under the Gospel consists of men, women, and
children, Luke 18. 16. 2 John 1. 4. Ephesians. 6. 4. Gal. 4. 28. 1 Cor. 7. 14.
being a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a holy Nation which cannot be
without children, then as the Apostle applies the spiritual blessing of Christ
to the whole Church excluding none, but says Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings; so that as the whole is visibly blessed, and the children with their
Parents are in the same, must needs therefore be blessed with them, thus I hope
your Arguments are fully answered.

Moreover though this point be sufficiently proved, yet if possible you may be
convinced, and see how you are deceived concerning the estate of the Infants of
Believers.

We read in Jeremiah 11. 16. the Lord called thy name (speaking to his beloved,
ver. 15.) a green Olive Tree, fair, and of goodly fruit, and their children are
likened to Olive Plants, Psalm. 128. and because they rejected Christ and his
servants, which were sent with the Gospel to them, they were broken off,
because of unbelief, Rom 11. Acts 13. 45, 46. and their children in infancy
were broken off with them, though ignorant of their Fathers Rebellion;
therefore seeing the condition both of Fathers and children was all one, he
said unto them, Repent and be Baptized every one of you, in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, for the remission of sins, for the Promise is to you and your
children; and now can any one believe but that the children, upon the Fathers
Repentance, are as capable to believe in the belief of their Parents, and so
grafted in the true Olive Tree, Christ, with their Parents again, as they were
of unbelief and rebellion in their Parents unbelief and rebellion? So then,
upon the Parents Repentance, who can hinder the children of those Repenting
Parents from the Ordinance of Baptism of Water with their Parents, seeing they
were cut off with them, and the Ordinance a sign of the pardon of sins.

From whence may justly be concluded, that if the Infants of Rebellions Jews
were cut or broken off in their infancy with their Parents, though ignorant of
their Parents Rebellion.

Even so both Jews and Gentiles coming to the obedience of the Faith of
Christ, though their Children in infancy be ignorant of their Fathers
obedience, must of necessity be excepted with them.

And that we may the better understand the scope of the Apostles Doctrine, the
Doctrine being, Repent and be Baptized every one of you, for the remission of
sins, the reason is, For the promise is to you and your children. Take notice
and observe, whether the Precept of Scripture is not to reach so far as the
Reasons thereunto does extend, as may be seen Deuteronomy. 7. 1. 4. Ezra 9. 2, 11, 12.
2 Chronicles. 21. 6. Now the Doctrine is, Repent and be Baptized; and the Reason is,
For the Promise is to you and your children, so that mention being made of
children in the Reason, therefore the Precept of Baptising here spoken,
implies the children also.

Otherwise how can you prove at the first celebration of the Lords Supper, that
women should be partakers thereof, seeing neither there, nor any other where in
Christ's Testament, any mention of any Woman by name were present, or partook
thereof; as concerning children you require us to show a child by name that was
Baptized; yet seeing the Reasons that are annexed to the Precept do necessarily
imply women as well as men, and there is no Prohibition to the contrary, and
cannot be denied them without great sin, Matthew. 26. 20, 26, 27, 28. Luke 22.
14, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25. Now then consider, how in this Ordinance you
will grant that women may partake thereof, though no name of any Woman that
did, is expressed, but that children may partake of the Ordinance of Baptism,
because there is no mention of any child by name that did, though there is as
good reason, and true gathered consequence from the Scripture for the one as
the other, in this all men may see you are partial, and wilfully blind.

Again, the people of your Judgment seem more unreasonable to me in this point,
of denying Infants of Believers Baptism, than the Sadduces which denied the
resurrection of the body, whom Christ put to silence by consequence from
Scripture, without the litteral words of Scripture: to say the body shall rise
again, as may be seen in Exodus 3. 6. compared with Matthew. 22. 31, 32. and as
the Text says, they were put to silence, ver. 34. and the multitude were
astonished at his Doctrine. ver. 33. Likewise there is the Doctrine of Baptism,
Heb. 6. 2. and any of understanding in Scripture know, that Doctrine is the
sense and intendment of Scripture, for the natural man reads only the Letter,
as the Eunuch did when he read in Isa. 53. 7. as it is written in Acts 8. 32.
the place of Scripture which he read was this, He was led as a sheep to the
slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before his shearers, so opened he not his
mouth: see ver. 33. and ver. 34. the Eunuch answered Philip, and said, I pray
thee of whom speaks the Prophet this, of himself or some other man, ver. 35.
Then Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same Scripture, and Preached
unto him Jesus; but had the Eunuch bin an Anabaptist in Judgment, he would not
have believed Philip, to Preach Jesus from that 53, of Isa. when the word Jesus
was not expressed by name, and though the Apostles did Baptize Believers and
their households, 1 Cor. 1. 16. Acts 16. yet you will not believe that he
Baptized Children, though the word Household, are the children, as shall in this
Treatise most plainly appear, as in Isa. 53. Jesus was intended in the Text by
the word Lamb, so that I hope, not only you (unless you shut your eyes) but
others shall see by the Holy Ghosts own exposition, according to his own
counsel, comparing spiritual things with spiritual, 1 Cor. 2. 13. knowing this
first, that no Prophesy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation, 2
Pet. 1. 20. but a public interpretation is for one Scripture to unfold
another, as when Ezra and the people returned out of Captivity, Neh. 8. 8. he
read in the Book of the Law distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to
understand the reading, so that I hope, that if the Scripture do expound the
household to be children, seeing the Apostle did Baptize households, you will
believe he did Baptize Children, and so repent of your error in denying the
same, and leave off deluding the people through your former ignorance.

Next then to observe, that little children which do partake of Christ's
spiritual blessing, have not only right to Baptism of Water, but were also
Baptized by the hands of the Apostles.

Though some will think this Argument cannot be proved, because the natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor.
2. 14. observe the Lords Covenant of old made with the faithful, and their seed
in infancy, and the words of the Covenant was, To be a God unto thee, and to
thy seed after thee, Genesis 17. 7. So that Abraham believed God, and it was
accounted to him for righteousness, and they that are of Faith, the same are
the children of Abraham, Gal. 3. 6, 7. and the children of the Promise are
counted for the se^d* but Isaac was a child of Promise in Infancy, Gal. 4. 28.
even an heir of life, 1 John 2. 25. and had the seal of Faith administered upon
him, and I hope none will be so bold to say, it was a lying sign or seal to
seal to him that he had not, but of this we shall have occasion to handle anon;
but now to prove that a man's children are his household.

We read, Genesis 45. 11. and 46. 5, 6, 7, 8. that Joseph is said to nourish his
Father and his Brethren, and all his Fathers household, according to their
Families, which is expounded, I will nourish you and your little ones, Genesis 50.
21. and it is l^^ewise said, David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men,
every man with his h^ushold, 1 Samuel 27. 3. which is expounded to be their Sons
and daughters, 1 Samuel 30. 6. If there were no more evidence than these two
Witnesses, it might suffice reasonable men, but all men have not faith, and
therefore do they muddy the water of Gods truth with their feet, Ezekiel. 34. 18,
19. but there is a pure River of water of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding
out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, Rev. 22. 1. to confirm the spirits
of the faithful from these men's abuse of Scripture.

We read in Deuteronomy. 25. If two brethren dwell together, and one of them dye and
have no child, the Wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger,
her Husbands Brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to Wife, and
perform the duty of an Husbands brother unto her, and it shall be that the
first born which she bears, shall succeed in the name of his brother which is
dead, that his name be not put out of Israel, ver. 5, 6. and in the seventh
verse, If the man like not to take his Brothers wife, see in ver. 9. then shall
his Brothers wife come unto him in the presence of the Elders, and loose his
shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall answer and say, So
shall it be done unto that man that will not build up his Brothers house; how
plainly does it appear in this place, that a man's children are his house;
Again, the Elders prayed the Lord to make Ruth like Leah and Rachel, which
built the house of Israel, Ruth 4. 11. which were their children; and again,
the Widow of Zareptha's son was called her house, read 1 Kings 17. 12, 13, 14,
15. verses. Again, a Bishop or Pastor must be one that rules well his own
house, having his children in subjection, 1 Timothy 3. 4, 5. and again Jacob went
down into Egypt, every man and his household, which were their children, Exodus
1. and where persons had no children, see what God says (promising to give
children) he makes the barren woman to keep house (or dwell in a house) and to
be a joyful mother of children, Psalm. 113. 9. which is farther confirmed in
that sense; and it came to pass because the Midwives feared God, he made them
houses, Exodus 1. 21. compared with 1 Samuel 2. 35. and the cause why Sarah gave
her Maid Hagar to Abraham, that she might be builded up* by her Genesis 16. 2. (or
obtain children); thus I hope no Conscience can doubt or scruple, or think the
contrary, but that the children is the man's house or household, and the Apostle
Baptising Believers and their household or house, did with his own hands
Baptize Believers and their children; thus your stumbling block is taken out of
the way, if God be pleased to open your eyes to see it.

R. A's. Objection.

Because you cannot see the children of the faithful bring forth the fruits of
faith, you presume to say they have not faith.

T. W. his Answer.

Might not one by your ground say, that a child of 8 days old cannot have all
the faculties of nature in him as a man (though the Holy Ghost says, a child
is born a man, John 16. 21.) in the bud or beginning, as hearing, seeing,
smelling, speaking, and the like; yet because the child cannot hear
understandingly, and see perceivingly, and smell distinguishingly, and speak
plainly as a man of years, shall one conclude he has not the faculties in him
in the bud; but little children Christ says are of the Kingdom of God. which
is the household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10. and can any be of the household of
Faith, and want Faith; therefore as the world knows not Christ, nor the
subjects of his Kingdom, 1 John 3. 1. they must needs be but as the world, to
say those have not faith which are of Christ's Kingdom, and with Nicodemus say,
how can th^se things be? John 3.

Again, we read Isaac was Circumcised at eight days old; the Apostle calls
Circumcision a seal of the righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. and the children
of Believers are as capable of Faith at eight days old now in Gospel times, as
before the Law; the Prophet speaking of Gospel times, says, their children
shall be as afore-time, Jer. 30. 20. so that as Circumcision was a sign of
Faith and holiness, Romans 4. 11. and 2. 29. Col. 2. 11. Deuteronomy. 10. 16. even so is
Baptism now, Acts 8. 37, 38. Rom 6. 3, 4.

The Covenant of the Gospel with Abraham, is the same now in substance, Gal. 3.
8. Genesis 17. 4, 5. Romans 4. 13, 16, 17. the Covenan^ with Abraham was, that the
Lord would be a God to him, and his seed after him, Genesis 17. 7. as, Blessed is
that Nation whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 33. 12. this blessedness comes on
none by the Law, Romans 4. 15. Gal. 3. 10, 11, 12. and that the Lord will be a
God to us, and we his people, is the Gospel in the substance, Heb. 8. 10. Rev.
21. 3. 2 Cor. 6. 16. and Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision, to confirm
the Promise made to the Fathers, which they believed (Christ was to come) and
we believe he is come) Luke 1. 69, 72, 73. Acts 13. 32, 33. being one faith of
Gods elect, Gal. 3. 9. Heb. 11. and we believing Gentiles, fellow Heirs, and of
the same body with the Believing Jews, therefore I may justly conclude, That
which was once commanded of God, and never repealed, ought still to be done.

But God commanded the sign or seal of faith and holiness to the faithful and
their seed, and never yet repealed, therefore ought still to be done.

But if any object that Circumcision was a seal of the Land of Canaan, the
Apostle ought to be believed before them, who says, It was a Seal of faith;
and for farther manifesting of their folly that say, It was a seal of Canaan;
for Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob were Circumcised, and they never passed it
according to the promise, nor their Generations, till they came out of Egypt,
but dwelt as strangers in it, Heb. 11. 9.

Again, as uncleanness is opposite to holiness, when the fruit of the Land of
Canaan was forbidden the children of Israel three years, it should be as
uncircumcised unto them, and not to be eaten, and in the fourth year all the
fruit thereof shall be holy, Lev. 19. 23, 24. thus we see that Circumcision is
a sign of holiness.

Again, we read that God promises to Circumcise the hearts of his people to
love him, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. which is no less than a clean heart, Psalm. 51. 10. which
is no less than putting off the body of sins by the Circumcision of Christ,
Col. 2. 11. and when men do not hear and obey the Lord, they are said to have
uncircumcised ears, Jer. 6. 10. Thus we may see plainly, that Circumcision was
a sign of holiness, and not of Canaan; and if it had been a sign of the Promise
of the Land, what need had they to Circumcise any more when they possessed the
land; thus let all men beware of these blind guides, that heed not what they
say to maintain their errors.

R. A. Again you say, If by the everlasting Covenant be meant all the children
of Believers are in the covenant of grace, and so to be baptized (you say) it
is false, for whosoever is truly in the Covenant of Grace, can never fall
finally away from it, Esaias 54. 10. Jer. 31. 3. and 9. But (say you) the
Children of Believers may and do prove wicked and be reprobates, witness
Ishmael, Esau, etc. therefore it appears, all the children of Believers are not
in the Covenant of Grace; and so none to be baptized till some declarative
sign, to know which are in the Covenant of Grace, which will not be made
manifest till they are grown up and able to make profession of Faith, and then
we have that we contend for.

Ans. It is well known, that we believe Election, and I am glad you do not deny
Election: but secret things belong to God, and revealed things to us and to our
children, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. but when the Lord made his Covenant with Abraham and
his Seed, he was commanded to administer the Seal of Faith to his children in
infancy, whether they would stand or fall, he had no Rule to question: nor you
if you were guided by that Spirit that guided him, and if he and the children
of Israel should have been of your belief, when Ishmael became a mocker, and
Esau a profane person, having both the outward Seal of Faith, they would have
circumcised no more, lest they had not Faith; because some do fall away, had
they done well think you? but having no such Rule from God, they would not
follow their own spirits as you do, like the false Prophets in Israel that had
seen nothing, Ezekiel. 13. 3. But the faithful had learned to obey, which is
better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rambs, 1 Samuel 15. 22. and
that which is highly esteemed among men is abominable in the sight of God, Luke
16. 15. And how highly esteemed is this error among the people of your
Judgment, to deny the outward Seal of the Covenant of God to the Seed of the
Faithful without warrant from his Word.

Moreover, If we should not baptize our Children, because some may fall away
and become as Ishmael and Esau, by like grounds you should not baptize elder
people, because after they fall away, as Simon Magus, Demas, and the like and
so to follow your fantasy rather than Faith, and neglect Gods Ordinance,
because we cannot enter into Gods Seat to know the heart: Let all beware of
this, as Solomon says, There is a way that seems right unto man, but the end
thereof are the ways of death, Pro. 16. 25.

Again, If one by carnal reason should follow your steps, to say that the
Children of Believers have not Faith, because the fruits of Faith does not yet
appear, they might reason against you, and say, that there is none of your
Judgment do yet believe, because it is said, These signs shall follow them that
believe; they shall cast out devils and speak with new Tongues. They shall take
up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly poison, it shall not hurt them, they
shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover, Mark 16. 17, 18. Now
consider, because that these signs do not now attend believers, since
extraordinary Officers ceased, do none believe therefore? So though the Apostle
says, That Circumcision was the Seal of Faith, and it was no lying sign, shall
any say, that Children have or had not Faith, because we cannot see the signs
of Faith. Remember what the Wiseman says. Be not over just.

Now to conclude this point, consider what God says of the Children of his
People, Even the house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel,
(which) are born (by me) from the belly, (which are) carried from the womb.
Even to old age, etc. Isa. 46. 3, 4. And again, The Lord has called me from
the womb, from the bowels of my mother has he made mention of my name, Esa.
49. 1. And in verse 5. And now, says the Lord, that formed me from the womb to
be his servant: And again, I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee, and before
thou came forth of the womb, I sanctified thee, Jer. 1. 5. And again, The
babe leaped in the womb for joy, Luke 1. 44. Thus the children of Gods people
are born unto the Lord, as it written; Thou have taken my sons and my
daughters, whom thou have born unto me: And again, Thou have stain my children,
Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. Which children are a holy seed, Ezra 9. 2. Isa. 6. 13. Jer.
2. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Mal. 2. 15. Which cannot be without Gods Spirit which
sanctifies all that have it, 1 These. 4. 7, 8. 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22. Which Spirit
is the Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4. 13. Therefore having the Spirit of Faith they
are Christ's, Romans 8. 9. (Or else none of his) now how clear a matter is this,
that Infants are the Lords and Christ, and so have his spirit? We shall
conclude with the holy Spirit, that the children of the faithful have right to
Baptism, as it is written, can any man forbid water, that these should not be
baptized which have received the holy Ghost as well as we, Acts 10. 47. Now let
none reason with Nicodemus, How can these things be? John 3. 9. But in sobriey
say with Solomon, As thou know not (what is the way of the Spirit, nor how
the bones (do grow) in the womb of her that is with child: even so thou know
not the works of God who makes all, Eccle. 11. 5.

Object. If any further object and say, that Abraham was commanded to command
his children and his household, supposing that a man's servants are his household.

Answ. Abraham was a Prophet, and at that time the Church of God was under his
government, so that as he was a Prophet and Over-see^ the Lord knew he would
feed the Church of God, as he was a Father, he would teach his Children the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. So that he and all true Pastors
that was fit according to the rule, must both rule his own children, having
them in subjection with all gravity: for if a man know not how to rule his own
house, how shall he take car^ of the Church of God? 1 Timothy 3. 4. 5.

And that a man's servants are not called his house or household, but are
distinguished by the holy Ghost called houshold-servants, Acts 10. 7. As a man's
goods are called household stuff, Nehemiah 15. 8. Thus I suppose the Objection
is fully answered.

And now my friend I shall endeavor according to that small understanding I
have, to open the signification of the word Baptism, by context of Scripture,
(which you build your Faith so much upon) and to show you how you deceive your
selves, in binding, limiting and confining the word to signify only to dip,
plung, overwhelm without warrant of the learned in the Tongues or sense of holy
Scripture.

I must acknowledge my self the unfittest of many, to intermeddle with a work
of this nature, by reason of my want of skill in the Tongues, as you likewise
acknowledge the same, yet you bring many Authors to prove the word Baptize to
signify to dip: yet you confess, they say it also signifies to wash or
sprinckle, so that by your own grant, the testimony of the Learned proves no
more for It is error to confine it as you do.
you then against you: and forasmuch as the Learned themselves, are at their
wits end concerning the signfication of some words in holy Scripture, as in Job
2. 9. Some say where it is translated Curse, other say Bless also, the word
Euriclydon, Act. 27. 14. One says it signifies a North-East wind, another a
soultery hot wind, but forasmuch as many words in Scripture are left by the
learned in the original Term, though in English Letters, as Baptize, Messiah,
and many the like. It behooves you and I, being Englishmen, not wholly to rely
upon the learned in Tongues, seeing the Jewish Rabins skillful in Tongues, did
not all of them understand the true sense or meaning of the Scripture, nor yet
to slight or lightly esteem of the worthy endeavors of the learned in
translating the Scriptures, who have dealt so honestly, where they durst not
confine the word to one sense or term, they left it to be understood by the
people of God as the Spirit of the Lord should direct them.

The word Messiah, being alleged against a Jew to prove the death of Christ,
how the Angel prophesied Messiah should be slain, Dan. 9. 26. I (says the Jew)
but Messiah signfieth any one that is anointed Governor; so that when words in
Scripture have large or diverse significations, we ought carefully and wisely to
consider the diverse use and meaning of them, to agree in a harmony of holy
Scripture. Likewise ^ell an Athiest, that God made the Heavens and the Earth,
Genesis 1. 1. He may answer as the Learned in the Tongues say, Aelohim sometimes
is used to signify Angels, Psalm. 8. 5. with Heb. 2. 7. sometimes to signify
magistrates, Psalm. 82. 1, 6. therefore he believes not any such God properly as
we profess: not having Gods Spirit to understand the sense and true intendment
thereof.

Likewise the original word for worship as the Learned do express the same
Latria and Latreuo sometimes largely used, and sometimes more strictly; so that
word worship generally comprehends the performance of all duties required in
the first Table of Gods Law, Deuteronomy. 5. 6. 15. more strictly and properly to
worship is to bow down and supplicate to God, Mat. 2. 2.

Again the original word for Church, Congregation or Assembly given in by the
learned Kahal in Hebrew, and in Greek Ecclesia, which word is used for any
Assembly, which without the help of Gods holy Spirit cannot be rightly divided,
as the gathering together in a Market is Ecclesia, where Women as well as Men
have equal privilege to speak, yet the word Ecclesia, a gathering in a Church
Assembly, where men and women have not equal privilege alike to speak, 1 Cor.
14. 34, 35. Likewise when but two or three are gathered together in Church
worship, Mat. 18. 20. they bear the name Ecclesia, and when the Church
consists of thousands they are but Ecclesia, Acts 4. 4. Acts 7. 38. Exodus 19.
1, 3, 5. 6. So when it signifies the least, we are not to despise the day of
small things, Zech. 4. 10. Luke 12. 32*

Likewise the word Savior sometimes signifies Christ, sometimes Christ's
Mini^^^rs, Obadiah, ver. 21. 1 Timothy 4. 16. sometimes civil Magistrates or
Deliverers, Neh. 9. 27. which diverse use is approved by the Scriptures by which
we ought to take the more notice of the word Baptize, which as is said before,
that the learned give in to signify to dip, wash, water, sprinckle, so that my
friend R. A. you are very bold upon you own head, and the men of your Judgment,
to bind up the word Baptize to only dip without either the learneds assent or
warrant of holy Scripture, therefore both you and all of your Judgment,
consider by what has been said, how many words in Scripture (a few before
treated on) that cannot be confined without adding or diminishing from the mind
of God (but to be understood by the directions of Gods Spirit) Rev. 22. 18.
Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Pro. 30. 6. and learn the counsel of the Holy Ghost, of these
things put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord, that they strive
not about words to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers: study to
show thy self approved unto God a workman, that needs not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of truth, 2 Timothy 2. 14, 15.

So then, forasmuch, as the holy Scriptures hold forth three several Baptisms
by the one word Baptism, I shall endeavor by the help of the Lord to lay down
some grounds according to the sense of Scripture, how we may rightly divide the
Word of Truth to understand the same, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual, 1 Cor. 2. 13. and not altogether rely on the learned in Tongues,
though in due place and right use are not in the least to be despised, but
highly esteemed, for we read the Book is given to one that is learned, Saying,
Read this, I pray thee: and he says, I cannot, for it is sealed. And the Book
is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this I pray thee: and he
says, I am not learned, Esaias 29. 12. So that great is the mystery of
godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. So that when the holy Scriptures as so made use of,
and interpreted, that no one Scripture jar against another, but agree in one
harmony; like as the Levites having Cymbals, and Psalteries, and Harps, and
with them an hundred and twenty Priests sounding with Trumpets, they made but
one sound to praise the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 5. 12. 13. so also the true Trumpets of
Gods holy Truths make but one sound, 1 These. 1. 8. Rom 15. 6. to praise the
Lord, which none can learn but the redeemed from the earth, Rev. 14. they can
tune both old and new Testament, to agree in one harmony of melody and soul
comfort, Psalm. 81. 2. Rev. 14. 2. Rev. 15. 3. never a Scripture to jar one
against another, by which learning our Lord and Master put to silence the
learned Rabbis in the Mother Tongue, Mat. 22. 41, 42, to 46. with this
learning and wisdom Stephen in disputing, the Studients were not able to resist
the wisdom of the Spirit by which he spoke, Acts 6. 9, 10. But the unlearned
and unskilful to reconcile the Scriptures to agree in one, as the Apostle
says, They that are unlearned, and unstable, wrest as they do also the other
Scriptures, unto their own destruction, 2 Peter 3. 16.

Now then the whole Scriptures are called the Word of God, 1 These. 2. 13. Luke
8. 11. Yet as it has many sentences or words, as every word of God is pure,
Prove. 30. 5. Yet it is called the word of God because it agrees in one harmony
together, as when a controversy fell out among the Church at Antioch, it was
ended in reconciling both Old and New Testaments together, As it is written, to
this agrees the words of the Prophet, Acts 15. 15. And all the Apostles
Doctrins agree with the Doctrins of the Prophets, Rev. 21. 12. 14 19. Ephesians. 2.
20. Acts 26. 22. Acts 17. 11. Romans 15. 4.

Again, the Apostle says, For there are three that bear record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one. And there are
three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood: and
these three agree in one, 1 John 5. 7. 8.

Even so there are three baptisms, the baptism of the Spirit, Mat. 3. 11. the
baptism of suffering, Mark 10. 38, 39. John 18. 11. and the baptism of Water,
Acts 10 47. Yet the Apostle says, there is but one baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5. So
that there is but one word or term for these three baptisms, and when they be
rightly understood the signification of the word baptism will agree in one; so
I shall begin with the first in order.

The signification of the word baptism is opened by the Spirit of God in the
administration thereof in the spiritual baptism, to be a pouring forth, as
says the Prophet, Until the spirit be poured on us from on high, Esa. 32. 15.
Ezekiel. 39. 29. Joel 2. 28. which was fulfilled in Acts 2. 17. 18. and 10. 45. So
that by this one Spirit, the whole Church or body of Christ, consisting of men,
women and children are baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. Being an holy
nation, by the gift and sanctification of that holy Spirit, 1 Peter 2. 9. 1
These. 4. 8. Rom 15. 16. Heb. 11. 2. And this baptism of the Spirit, is by the
Spirit of God called sprinkling, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. Heb. 9. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 2. in
the manner of Rain, Psalm. 77. 17.

Secondly, There is also the Baptism of suffering, Mark 10. 38, 39. Col. 1, 24.
which the Saints or Members of Christ's Body do partake of, Phil. 2. 17. 2 Cor.
1. 5, 6, 7. As for example, one suffers reproaches, Heb. 13. 13. others
reproaches and loss of goods, Heb. 33. 34. others banishment, Esa. 51. 14.
Rev. 1. 9. others loss of life, Rev. 1^. 11. So every one according to the
measure, the Lord is pleased they shall be exercised with, and these degrees of
suffering some more, and some less, is the word Baptism signified by, but
shall a man say, that he that suffers reproaches, and not loss of goods, is
not partaker of Baptism of suffering, or he, or they, that suffer loss of
goods and banishment, and not loss of life, is he not partaker of the baptism
of suffering, because he does not partake in the largest sense of the
signification of the word baptism in suffering, consider these things.

And thirdly, There is also the Baptism of Water which being the same word as
the two former in signification; and we see the baptism of the Spirit, is
administered by pouring or sprinkling and also in Isa. So shall he sprinkle many
Nations, Isa. 52. 15. ye we see every one has not a like measure of the
Spirit, Romans 12. 3. but to every one is given grace according to the measure of
the gift of Christ, he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
some Pastors, some Teachers, Ephesians. 4. And he that received least received one
tallent, and all the baptism of the Spirit: but shall a man say, because he
that received but one Tallent, or the least gift of the Spirit, that he is not
partaker of the spiritual baptism, because he has not ten Tallents or the
largest gift of the Spirit, he would be deceived in his understanding of the
true meaning of the word, so as the word in the two former significations is
not nor cannot be tied up to one sense according to the Scriptures, nor the
testimony of the Learned, but signifies more or less water in the
administration of the baptism of water, being performed in the order of God,
therefore it is evil to confine the word in the signification to dipping or
greatest measure of the use of water: unless the two other baptisms of the
Spirit and suffering could or ought to be confined to the greatest measure of
the Spirit and suffering; but the learned in the Tongues, as I conceive, durst
not confine the signification of the word Baptism to one sense (as you
presumptuously do) but not only to dip, but to wash, to water and sprinkle, and
did very faithfully to leave it in the term baptize, to be understood of all
Gods people, as his holy Spirit should direct them by context of Scripture
comparing spiritual things with spiritual, one Scripture unfolding another, by
harmony of agreement; and this may be observed for a general rule of Faith,
that whatsoever Doctrine, Collection, or Observation for a truth, believed out
of holy Scripture by any, If an absurdity will fall upon it, then their
supposed truth is but error, as for example, when some denied the Resurrection
of the Body, the Apostle Paul overthrew their collection by an absurdity, that
justly would fall upon it, in these words, If the dead rise not, then is not
Christ risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain, and the
like 1 Cor. 15. So likewise if according to your understanding of the word
Baptize, that it is only to be understood of the greatest measure of washing by
dipping, plunging, or overwhelming it, will then upon it, this absurdity follow
that he that has not the greatest measure of the baptism of the Spirit, as the
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, has not the baptism of the Spirit, and
then the whole Church are not baptized by one Spirit into o^e Body (for every
one had not a like measure, but had diversities of gifts) then there is
Contrary to 1 Cor. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 2.
no babes in Christ, but only those that have the greatest measure of
knowledge, contrary to the Apostles doctrine, 1 Cor. 12. 4. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13. seeing that it has the same word for the spiritual baptism as for the
water, it must needs have the like sense in signification, and if one may be
tied up to the largest sense only, there is like reason for the other, and if
not the one then not the other: thus my friend R. A. consider, how you are
deceived in your understanding of the true sense of the word Baptize, and
observe farther what signification the Spirit of God gives of the word
Baptize, Ananias said unto Paul, Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy
sins, Acts 22. 11. Which washing in sign of cleansing in the ordinance of
baptism may be done with water in a Basin, being called a washing, John 13. 5,
8. and a part being taken for the whole, as shall after more fully be proved
that baptism of water was so performed on the person, a part taken for the
whole, but since extraordinary gifts and officers are ceased, it will in the
next place be needful.

First, To know where Baptism ought to be performed.

Secondly, Who are the true Administrators thereof.

Thirdly, On what part of the Body, baptism of water, ought and is most likely
by the Scriptures, it was administered upon.

You bring many Scriptures, to show that persons that were baptized, went down
into the water, and they came up out of the water, as Mat. 3. 16. Mark 1. 5.
and they baptized in Enon, because there was much water, that thus the
Scripture says, is not denied, but that the persons were dipped these
Scriptures speak not, which if it were supposed that they were dipped; which you
gather, yet that does not prove it is not lawful to wash or sprinckle in
baptism, according to the foregoing grounds, from the signification of the word
Baptize.

But to come to my first particular, where baptism of Water ought to be
performed, it is evident where the word was preached, In those days came John
the Baptist, preaching in the Wilderness of Judea. Then went out to him
Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan. And were
baptized of him in Jordan, etc. Mat. 3. 1, 5, 6. So that it does appear, where
he taught, there he baptized, now where it says, Jerusalem and all Judea were
baptized of him, here a part is taken for the whole, as does appear in handling
the next particular; and so we may understand in the use of water: likewise
where the Eunuch was converted there he was baptized, for says he, here is
water, what does hinder me to be baptized? Acts 10. 36. Likewise when Paul
preached the word of the Lord, at midnight to the Jailer, the Text says, He
took them the same hour of the night and washed their stripes, and was
baptized, he and all his strait-way, so that there is no ground to think, that
seeing that the Apostle was so grievously wounded that they should go at
midnight, to a Pond or River, up to the middle to baptize the Jailer, and all
his, but as I said before, where the word was preached and conversion wrought,
that there the ordinance was performed by those immediately which the Lord did
send to begin that work.

Moreover consider, before the Tabernacle of old was reared up or built, Altars
were builded at several times by several persons, extraordinarily called
thereunto of God, as Noah, Abraham, Jacob, and the like: but when the
Tabernacle was builded, and the Altars appointed to be only there and it was a
sin for an^ of Gods People to offer any Sacrifice elsewhere, Levit. 17. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. so that no Minister or Priest of God then was to perform any Church
ordinance elsewhere, while the Tabernacle did continue (unless they had a call
immediately from God) so after in the Temple when it was builded, there were
all Israel to bring their Sacrifice, there were the Ministers to wait on the
Altar.

So likewise whatsoever was written before time was written for our learning,
Romans 15. 4. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, That we
Be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines, He. 13. 8, 9 We are then
still to observe the order of God, who at first sent extraordinary men to
publish his message, and perform his ordinances, as John Baptist and the
Apostles before the Church was established in Gospel order, and they performed
the ordinance of Baptism, whersoever they preached and persons believed: but
when by these wise Master builders, the Apostles, the Churches were planted,
and the Tabernacle of God was with men, Rev. 22. 3. and 13. 6. and
extraordinary Officers ceased, and ordinary Officers chosen by the Churches
only remained, [Answerable to the Priests or Ministers of old in the Tabernacle
or Temple:] where they were appointed to feed the Church of God, as it is
written in Acts 20. 28. so that since extraordinary Officers are ceased, as
Apostles and the like, and now none remain but Pastors, Teachers, Elders,
Deacons and Relievers: which have no Authority to presume to that Commission,
given only to the Apostles, Mat. 28. as go teach all Nations baptizing them,
but observe the latter words of Christ to them: ver. 20. teaching them (that
they had planted in Gospel order) to observe all things whatsoever I command
you, accordingly the Apostle Paul gave direction to the Churches* saying, As I
have received of the Lord that which I delivered unto you, 1 Cor. 11. 1. so we
ought to be followers of him as he was of Christ, accordingly he wrote to
Titus, to ordain Elders, as (says he) I have commanded thee, Titus 1. 5. and
say to Archippus, take heed to thy ministry which thou have received in the
Lord that thou fulfill it, ^ Col. 4. 16. and so God will be with his People to
the end of the world, who follow his commands from the hands of the Apostles,
but some presumed into their Commission to be Apostles, but being tried were
found liars, Rev. 2. 1. and such were False Apostles, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 13. And I fear
there are two many such false Apostles now a days.

So that I know no Rule from the written Word of God for any Officer, as Pastor
or Teacher to perform either the ordinance of Baptism or the Lords Supper out
of the Stative, Congregative, Corporative Church or Body of Christ where they
are chosen to attend.

Moreover I do not find in the written Word of God that any did perform the
ordinance of Baptism of Water, or the Lords Supper, but either they had an
extraordinary call from God, as John Baptist and the Apostles; or Ordinary,
called by the Church thereunto by Office; so that seeing extraordinary Officers
and Offices are ceased, and only the ordinary remain, I know no Rule from Gods
Word, that any Officer chosen of the Church can perform any Church Ordinance
out of the Stative Assembly or Corporation, any more than a Justice, Constable,
or Bosholder have any power by virtue of their Office to perform it out of the
limits set them, by those who chose them into Office; so that not only the
Authority is given them, but the limits is set them, how far it reaches, and
if they go beyond the bounds set them, (by a greater authority) they break
order and are transgressors and none ought to obey them, and they liable to be
punished by the King.

Even so in Christ's Kingdom and City, the Officers thereof are not to go beyond
their limits, set them by the King of Kings, and because some presumed to break
the order of God, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16. and Nadab and Abihu,
Levit. 10. and Uzah, 1 Chro. 13. 9. 10. and Vzziah, 2 Chro. 26. 18. Gods
Judgment fell upon them, for presuming to do Gods service out of Gods order;
even so in the days of the Gospel some presumed (as aforesaid) to be Apostles,
but were found liars and ministers of Satan, 2 Cor. 11. And though Uzah was a
Levite, yet he must not touch any of the holy things, which belonged only to
the sons of Aarons line, Numb. 4. 15. And the Lord smote the men of Bethshemoth
( because they looked into the holy things in the Ark) fifty thousand
threescore and ten men, Sam. 6. 19 So that let all know that as of old God was
the God of Order: he is the same in all Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14. 4.
Col. 2. 5. So that the place where Baptism ought to be performed must be in the
Stative Assembly or Church of God, in which Assembly the ordinary Officers of
Christ's true Church ought only to perform, and those who are not Officers of a
true Church, have no Rule from the Word of God, either to baptize or administer
the Lords Supper, but if any out of Office presume to do it, is accursed as
Corah, Uza and Uzziah, and as I heard some say, some of your Judgment have
taught persons must be dipped or damned, If this be so, it is very high judging,
Mat. 7. 1. We find it written, He that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved, and he that believes not, shall be damned, Mark 16. 16. The stress of
damnation is for not believing, the Holy Ghost foreseeing that in the greatest
heat of persecution, men by reading holy Scriptures may believ: and seeing none
have right to baptize, but the Ministers of a true Church, and when the Church
cannot of a Soul be fond, and die in that time, who dare say, that Soul shall
not be saved as it is written, tell me, O thou, whom my Soul loves, where thou
feedest, and where thou make thy Flock to rest at noon? For why should I be
as one that turns aside by the Flocks of thy Companions, Cant. 1. 7. Here was
no neglect of the Souls desire to give it self up in holy Covenant with Christ
and his Church, when it saw the true way of God, Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18, 19. Ruth 1.
16. and 2. 12. 2 Cor. 11. 2. Jer. 50. 5. to put in practice Gods holy
Ordinances, Mat. 7. 24. James 1, 22, 23. for the neglect of enjoying or
performing Gods holy Ordinance is a sin: but it shall not be laid to their
charge, if they want the enjoyment of Gods Ordinances, when in Gods holy Order
they cannot have it: but what will belaid to their charge, that shall run
headlong upon the Ordinances of Christ with out warrant from his Word?

Secondly, Next I shall now show on what part of the Body Baptism of Water,
ought to be administered, or is most likely by the Scriptures, it was
administered upon.

You have R. A. supposed because they went down into the Water, that therefore
they were dipped, do you think one cannot go into the water, unless he be over
the head. Consider my friend a man is said to be in the mountain, when he
stands within the limits of it, Mat. 5* 1. 2 Pet. 1. 8. Deuteronomy. 10. 1. Heb. 12.
20. Christ is said when he was teaching in a Ship, that he sat in the Sea, Mark
4. 1. So that when one is never so little in the water, it answers to the
going into the water, but it is very likely John preaching in the Wilderness
where the River was, which by reason of Ebbing and Flowing of the Water (as
Enon and Jordan were great Rivers joining to the Sea) might at sides be muddy,
and in the Wilderness having nothing conveniently to take up water, they might
that were baptized go so far as to take with the hand, clear water to cast upon
the face, or forehead; for the dumb beast will go so far into the River to
drink, as he may have clear water, much more a man being a reasonable creature,
will go so far as to have clear water to cast upon the face or forehead, lest
the eyes be filled with dirt being so tender a place, God having appointed
every ordinance for the good of his people and not for their hurt: and as I
said before how Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the Regions round about
Jordan, were baptized of John, when here a part must be taken for the whole:
Because The Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against
themselves, being baptized of John, Luke 7. 30. and these were inhabitants of
Jerusalem, John 1. 19. 24. So that here a part is taken for the whole, in like
manner we may conclude, the use of water in Baptism on a part of the Body, even
the Face or forehead which represents the whole Person.

As for example, Hagar was said to flee from the Face of her Mistress, which was
from her person, Genesis 16. 6, 8. for farther evidence see these Scriptures, Lev.
19. 23. 2 John ver. 12. 3 John 8. 14. Rev. 6. 16. and many such like
testimonies there is.

Likewise, when Israel played the Harlot, she is said to have a whores
forehead, setting forth all her abominations by the forehead. beheld of all,
and yet not ashamed, Jer. 3. 3. So the false Church has upon her forehead a
name written Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and
Abominations of the Earth, Rev. 17. 5.

Moreover the Saints are not ashamed of the profession of the Gospel, Romans 1.
16. signified as sealed on the forehead, Rev. 7. 3. departing from all iniquity
as a seal to Gods people, 2 Timothy 2. 29. So that as Baptism of Water is a
manifesting of Christ to Israel, John 1. 31. a sign of Remission of Sins by
Christ, Acts 2. 38. whereon should it be administered but on that part of the
Body, w^ic^ rep^^s^nt^th the whole man, even the face or forehead, which place
or part of man, the name of Christ is said to be, Rev. 23. 4. whose name is the
Word of God, the of Christ, Rev. 19. 13. the Covenant of the Gospel, Heb. 8.
10. where then should the sign, seal, or token be administered but to the
Covenant, and on that place where the Covenant or Name of Christ is said to be,
even on the forehead? Rev. 22. 4.

Again, Christ's Law or Covenant is also said, to be written in the mind and
heart of his people, Heb. 8. 10. and the spiritual Baptism being there, for
Christ dwells in the heart by faith, Ephesians. 3. even by the spirit of faith, 2
Cor. 4. 13. then it will necessarily follow, that as the inward baptism of Gods
spirit, is administered by God himself on that place, even the heart where his
Law or Covenant is wrote: the end of the Commandment being love out of a pure
heart and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 5. so ought the
outward baptism of water to be administered, on that place even the forehead,
where Christ's name or covenant is recorded, Rev. 22. 4.

Moreover when the Lord sent the Messenger to destroy the wicked in Jerusalem,
those that were to be preserved or saved, were marked on the forehead, Ezekiel. 9.
So likewise in Rev. 7. 3. and as Baptism is a figure of our safety, 1 Pet. 3.
21. and the forehead or face represents the whole man; why not a part taken
for the whole in this Ordinance as well as in the Spiritual Baptism, and the
mark of old, and now of the people of God, Ezekiel. 9. Rev. 7. in the forehead: a
part was taken for the whole, as may be seen in the use of water, where Christ
washed the Disciples feet, as if the whole body had been washed, John 13.
signifying a cleansing of the whole; so Baptism on the face or forehead
signifies the whole body washed in the Blood of Christ, as a cleansing from
all sins, for of old in the figures of cleansing or sanctifying, it was chiefly
by sprinkling, a part taken for the whole.

Again, If you will not grant a part to be taken for the whole, we cannot
justify the Scriptures of truth, for it was said, as Jonas was three days and
three nights in the Whales belly, Ion. 1. 17. So shall the Son of Man be three
days and three nights in the heart of the earth, Matthew. 13. 40. But we know he
lay but a part for the whole, therefore beware of following your own spirit,
and have seen nothing, as the foolish Prophets did in Israel, Prophesying out
of their own hearts, Ezekiel. 13. and your having neither the warrant of the
Learned to limit the word to one sense of Dipping, neither the Scripture for
your opinion, but take warning by the Counsel of the Holy Ghost, Cursed is he
that adds or diminishes, which must needs be in denying the sense and
meaning of the Word.

And next, I shall by the help of God show you, that you are not faithful to
practice what you seem to contend for in the administration of the Baptism of
water, and that in your own Judgment are not yet Baptized, unless you grant a
part to serve for the whole.

When Philip and the Eunuch went down into the water, I suppose you will not
deny, but so far as they both went into the water, was no part of Baptism, and
when they were both gone so far into the water as was convenient to make use of
the water, then Philip Baptized the Eunuch. Now whether Philip and the Eunuch
went but to the ankles, or midleg, or knees, or wast, before he Baptized the
Eunuch, is not mentioned in the Text, the Scripture is silent; but according to
your Judgment, that the whole body must be dipped, or else none are Baptized,
then sure you must prove that the Eunuch was born up in the arms of Philip
quite out of the water, and so dipped all the body under water, or else so far as
the Eunuch went he Baptized himself, or else Philip put the rest of the body of
the Eunuch that was out of the water in the water, and so Philip Baptized but a
part for the whole; and as I am informed by some that have seen the manner of
your Administration o^ Baptism, that the party that is to be Baptized goes
into he water with the Administrator to the Loins, and the Administrator
puts the other part of his body which is out of the water into the water,
and so you Baptize but a part for the whole, yet you plead for dipping the
whole body, and yet practice the contrary; supposing there is a m^^h in
another eye, and the beam is in your own, and keep ado with that Scripture,
Romans 6. Buried with Christ in Baptism: and that of 1 Cor. 15. 29. Baptized for
dead, or for the dead, answerable to a man's burial that is dead and put in the
ground: But if you will practice what you contend for (as I said before) the
Administrator must bear up the man that is to be Baptized quite out of the
water, and so put him into the water, as a dead man into the Grave; but did you
ever know a man that was dead bury himself to the knees or waste, and some
other bury the rest of the man's body? to see this would be a Miracle. But a man
cannot by any Rule from Gods word Baptize himself, neither a part nor whole;
but so far as you go into the water, you do Baptize your selves, and another
Baptiseth the rest; thus you must acknowledge a part is by you practiced for the
whole, or else in your own Judgment you are yet unbaptised, and yet condemn
others that believe and practice a part for the whole, on that part of the body
that represents a part for the whole, even the Forehead, or Face: And now I
will show you by the testimony of four several writers, who was the beginner of
your manner of Baptism by Dipping of himself, though before this time there
might be some that held your Judgment, but knew not of any true administrator
by succession; but one being more desperately wicked than others, would begin
to Baptize himself, and others being deceived by him, follow after; but beware
and follow not a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23. 2.

In the days of King James, or thereabouts, one Mr. Smith, who was of the
Church of England, after disliking thereof, and leaving England, in process of
time was admitted a Member of a people of our Judgment, then living in
Amsterdam, commonly, but falsely called Brownists; and in process of time was
cast out of that Church for Errors he held; and not long after he fell to deny
his Baptism in infancy, and knew not how to have a better, nor a truer
Administrator successively after your way of Dipping; at length he Baptized
himself, and then he Baptized one Helvish by name; this you may see in a Book
written by one Mr. Jessop, presented to King James: more to ^his purpose I have
seen in a book written by Mr. ^obinson living then at Leyden in Holland; also
in another Book written by one Mr. Clifton, who wrote an answer to one of Mr.
Smiths Books; and in another Book written by Mr. Henry Ainsworth, Teacher at
that time in the Church where Mr. Smith was cast out from, and as I have heard
when I lived in London, that one This of Mr. Spilsbury I speak as I was told,
the others testimony is public in Print, and such men as were worthy to be
believed*
Mr. Spilsbury should go to Holland to be Baptized of this Smith, so he brought
it into England: And if you can prove no better an Administrator, your Ministry
will be found to come out of the bottomless pit, as Romes Ministry did: And
that you may know how near kin your Baptism is to Romes, I shall lay down their
manner, as their own Writers say, It is a dipping three times in water, In the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, in Bellarm. de sac.
Bap. 1. 1. c. 25. Bellarm. de Image 1. 2. c. 29.

Again, consider my friend, suppose a man while he is an unbeliever, in the
Wars have a leg or arm shot off, and yet by Chyrurgery he is cured, that he is
as heart-whole as ever, and may probably live as long as if that had not
befallen him, and in process of time comes to be a Believer, shall not this man
be Baptized (if he was not Baptized before) because you cannot Baptize all the
whole man, having not all his Members, As many members make one body, 1 Cor.
12. and this man with his heart believes, and with his mouth confession is
made to Salvation, Romans 10. Shall not this man be Baptized think you; and here
a part must be taken for the whole, or else it is not lawful to Baptize some
Believers contrary to the Scriptures.

And again, If the Baptism be utterly denied not to be retained which we have
received in Apostate Churches, you thereby affirm all the people that are in
our known parts of the world, to be unbaptised, and you cannot prove a
succession in your way, and so no lawful ministry to Baptize a People, for no
unbaptised person may be a Minister to Baptize (but such was Mr. Smith in his
own judgment). Neither have any unbaptised people power to elect or ordain a
Minister among them; of this can no rule, president, or example be showed in
the Scripture, but all to the contrary, especially since all extraordinary
Officers have ceased; So must all the building of Christ's Church, and work of
the Ministry cease, until some second John Baptist, or new Apostles be sent
down from Heaven, etc. And they that make a new Ministry (as Jeroboam did, will
be found to be the worship of the Devil, and Ministers of Satan, 2 Chronicles. 11.
15. 2 Cor. 11. false Apostles, deceitful workmen) must also make a new Gospel,
and confirm it with new Miracles, as I have heard some say, when they could not
prove a succession of Dipping by a true Ministry, from the Apostles days, they
have thought an unbaptised person might begin the work, to Baptize by Dipping,
but for warrant hereof, no one word of God could be brought; as Israel who made
them Idols after their own understanding, Hos. 13. 1-3. When the way of man is
not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps, Jer. 10. 23.
but that we may beware of the Rocks of Popery, and quicksands of Anabaptistry
by the light of God's Word, let us consider what is the safest way to take in
this distress; when men are at their wits end, whither should we go, but to the
Lord for counsel? Isa. 42. 16, God's gracious Spirit blowing upon the sails of
our faith, we shall safely sail through all these difficulties, into a strait
way to the sincere practice of the Gospel; for he that has ascended up on
high, has not left his Church destitute of counsel, in all times and estates
whatsoever; and though the Lord, for the judgment of the world, and trial of
his servants, and manifestation of his power, bring his servants into Babylon,
yet knows he how to deliver his servants, without justifying of Antichristian
or Babylonian Assemblies, to bring his people forth to Sion, and to rear up the
decayed Tabernacles of David, which were fallen down, Amos 9. 11. without using
one stone of Babel in the work for a corner, or for a foundation: And we being
fallen into deep Apostasy in these parts of the world, let us see whether we
can find any president of such times, and see whether we can fetch any better
directions for the retaining of the Ordinance of Baptism, than your way of
Anabaptistry, or twice baptizing; for it is good for all to observe, that the
persons which John Baptist and the Apostles did baptize, were not baptized
before, as we were in the state of Apostasy.

We read, That whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
instruction, Romans 15. 4. And we find written in the time of Hezekiah, that the
Kingdom of Israel had a long time remained in Schism and Apostasy, having
forsaken the true Temple, and made to themselves new Temples, new Altars, as
the History of the Chronicles do declare, 2 Chronicles 30. neither could by any
warning be reclaimed; only such as did return, and left their false worship,
and came to the true Temple to worship God, were received and admitted to the
Passover, without either gathering, correcting or repeating the Circumcision
they had received in the times of their Apostasy. The like we read in the times
of Josiah, in 2 Chronicles. 30. and in Ezra and Nehemiah, when they had yet longer
continued in their Schism and Idolatry; and yet upon their return out of
captivity unto the Lord, the Circumcision then received was not repeated again,
Ezra 6. 21, 22. yet no doubt, to those men in those times, while they continued
in that idolatrous estate, the Circumcision then received, was no true seal of
Gods Covenant to them, being added to their false Worship, Idolatry and
Apostasy: And I think this will be granted of all hands, that God's Covenant is
no longer continued with any Church or people, than they remain in his faith
and obedience, Romans 2. 25.

But some may say, I justify the outward action of Circumcision, as it is done
in the false Church; nothing less, but condemn it altogether, as a heinous
profanation of God's holy Ordinance; yet when it is purged by sincere
repentance of the abuse thereof, it pleased God, in pardoning the faults; and
to reserve, and not repeat the outward action; which because it was vvrongly
done, it cannot be said not to be done at all, for we must put a difference
betvveen a thing not rightly done, and a thing not done at all; for the errors
and defaults of the Baptism being purged by Repentance, and done away by the
mercy of God; the Lord now beholds the rest of the action, and the thing
which in pretense they seemed to do, as his Ordinance; so that we find this way
the way of God, concerning Circumcision received in the false Church, when as
those persons that were Circumcised in that state, and after came to the true
way of God, they were not Circumcised again; the like may be said of Baptism,
seeing Circumcision was the seal of faith, and Baptism now, as is before
proved. So by like equality, as the one Seal received in Apostasy and not
repeted; so Baptism received in Apostasy, is not to be repeted; and so we have
a foundation in Gods word to build our faith upon, and not to follow your own
spirits.

Object. But if any say that Circumcision could not be repeted again, and
Baptism may, because the foreskin being once cut, could not after be cut again.

Answ. The Apostle resolves this doubt, saying, If any man called being
Circumcised, let him not become uncircumcised, 1 Cor. 7. 18. which words do
import, that there might be a gathering of the flesh again by the Art of
Chyrurgery, as diverse Histories do declare, Joseph. Antiq. Lib. 12. chap. 6.

And again, what should be more against reason, to think why the outward
Baptism delivered in a false Church, should be denied to be retained, seeing
Circumcision that was received in a false Church was not denied, when as the
Scriptures show that the state of the Romish and false Church in their
Apostasy, is like the state of Israel in their Apostasy, as these and like
Scriptures do show, Rev. 17. 1. 5* with Jer. 3. 8. Hos. 2. 2, 3. 1 These. 2. 3.

Therefore Baptism received in such estate is to be esteemed; Now as
Circumcision was in Israel in their defection, but that Circumcision was so
esteemed, and such a state and walking was only repented of. Thus if persons
will follow the president of Scripture, they shall find comfort at last; but
for persons to deny this Baptism, and own that true Baptism, for a man to
Baptize himself as Smith did, is proved by several testimonies, this will be
their reward, as says the Prophet, Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that
compass your selves about with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in
the sparks that ye have kindled, this shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall-lye
down in sorrow, Isa. 50. 11.

Thus according to my weak ability, in unfeigned love to your soul, I have
returned you some Answer to your answer to John Turners Argument for Infants
Baptism, though he himself, if he had pleased while he lived, could have given
you a more fuller Answer; But forasmuch as your desire was I should peruse the
writing between you, I was willing, for the vindication of the Truth of God in
this point, though the unfittest of many; but as many of their great abilities
brought rich things for the work of the Tabernacle, yet those of small
abilities who brought but Goats hair, being accepted of God, was not despised;
so though my abilities be but small to farther the work of the Lord, I hope it
will not altogether be despised of any that are employed in the work of the
Lords Tabernacle, the true Church of God, the stay and pillar of truth; thus
desiring the Lord to bless these my labors for the comfort of his Elect, and
the Lord alone to have the glory, honor and praise, now and for evermore, Amen.

Reader, I having no thoughts when I first wrote this Treatise, that it should
come to public view, but seeing providence has so disposed thereof, I think
good to acquaint thee, if these people which deny Infants Baptism, have
likewise deceived thee, as persuading in word or writing, that it is not lawful
to eat blood, and things strangled, which is the Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.
For thy help against that error, you may have a small Treatise where this book
is to be had, proving it lawful, by the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, to
eat blood and strangled things in these days of the Gospel. Published by the
Author of this Book.

FINIS.

