POEMS, etc. WRITTEN BY Mr. ED. WALLER of Beckonsfield, Esquire; Lately a
Member of the Honorable House of Commons.

And Printed by a Copy of his own handwriting.

All the Lyrick Poems in this Book were set by Mr. HENRY LAWS, Gent. of the
Kings Chapel, and one of his Majesty's Private Music.

Printed and Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by I. N. for Hu. Mosley, at the Princes Arms in Paul's
Churchyard, 1645.

To my Lady.
MADAM,
YOur Commands for the gathering of these sticks into a Paggot, had sooner been
obeyed, but intending to present you with my whole Vintage: I stai^d till the
latest Grapes were ripe, for here ^our Ladyship has not only all I have done,
but all I ever mean to do in this kind: Not but that I may defend the attempt
I have made upon Poetry by the examples (not to ^rouble you with History) of
many wise, and ^orthie persons of our own times: as Sr. Phi^ip Sidney, Sir Fra.
Bacon, Cardinal Person, the ablest of his Countrie-men; and the ^ormer Pope,
who they say, instead of the triple Crown, wore sometimes the Poets Ivy, as an
ornament, perhaps of lesser weight, and trouble. But Madam, these Nightingales
sung only in the Spring, it was the diversion of their youth. As Ladies learn
to sing and play when they are Children, what they forget when they are women;
The resemblance holds further: for as you quit the Lute the sooner, because the
posture is suspected to draw the body awry: so this is not always practiced
without some villainy to the mind, wresting it from present occasions, and
accustoming us to a Still somewhat removed from common use. But that you may
not think his case deplorable, who had made verses: we are told that Tully (the
greatest wit among the Romans) was once sick of this disease, and yet recovered
so well* that of almost as bad a Poet as your Servant, he became the most
perfect Orator in the world. So that not so much to have made verses, as not
to give over in time, leaves a man without excuse: the former presenting us
with an opportunity at least of doing wisely: that is to conceal those we have
made, which I shall yet do, if my humble request may be of as much force with
your Ladyship, as your Commands have been with me; Madam, I only whisper these
in your ears: if you publish them, they are your own, and therefore as you
apprehend the reproach of a Wit, and a Poet, cast them into the fire, or if
they come where green boughs are in the Chimney, with the help of your fair
friends, (for thus bound, it will be to hard a task for your hands alone) to
tearethem in pieces, wherein you shall honor me with the fate of Orpheus, for
so his Poems, whereof we only hear the form (not his limbs as the story
will have it) I suppose were scattered by the Thracian Dames. Here Madam I
might take an opportunity to Celebrate your virtues, and to instruct you how
unhappie you are, in that you know not who you are: How much you excel the
most excellent of your own: And how much you amaze the least inclined to wonder
of our Sex. But as they will be apt to take your Ladyship for a Roman name: So
would they believe that I endeavored the Character of a perfect Nymph,
worshipped an Image of my own making, and Dedicated this to the Lady of the
brain, not of the heart of your Ladyships most humble servant,

E. W.

An advertisement to the Reader.
REader. This parcel of exquisit poems, have passed up and down through many
hands amongst persons of the best quallity, in loose imperfect Manuscripts, and
there is lately obtruded to the world an adulterate Copy, surruptitiously and
illegally imprinted, to the derogation of the Author, and the abuse of the
Buyer. But in this book they apeare in their pure originalls and true genuine
colors. In so much that they fear not (as young Eaglets use to be tried
whither they are spurious, or of a right extraction) to look upon the Sun in
the Meridian, in regard Apollo himself, the grand Patron of Poets seemd not
only to cast many favorable aspects, but by his more then ordinary influence
to cooperate in their production; as will appear to the intelligent and
cleare-sighted Reader, by that constant vein of gold (the mineral which that
planet ownes more then any other) which runs through every one of them.

Thus they go abroad unsophisticated, and like the present condition of the
Author himself they are exposed to the wide world, to travel* and try their
fortunes: And I believe there is no gentle soul that pretends any thing to
knowledge and the choycest sort of invention but will give them entertainment
and welcome.

POEMS.
Of the danger his Majesty (being Prince) escaped at the rode at St. Andere.
NOw had his Highness bid farewell to Spain
And reached the sphere of his own power, the Main;
With British bounty in his ship he feasts
The Hesperian Princes, his amazed ghuests.
To find that watery wilderness exceed,
The entertainments of their great Madrid.
Healths to both Kings, attended with the rore
Of Canons, echoed from the affrighted shore.
With loud resemblance of his Thunder, prove
^acchus the seed of cloud compelling Jove;
While to his harp divine Arion sings
The loves and conquests of our Albion Kings:
"Of the fourth Edward was his noble song,
"Fierce, goodly, valiant, beautiful and young.
"He rent the Crown from vanquished Henry's head,
"Raised the white Rose, and trampled on the red:
"Till love triumphing ore the victors pride
"Brought Mars and Warwick to the conquered side.
"Neglected Warwick (whose bold hand like Fate
"Gives and resumes the scepter of our State)
"Woes for his Master, and with double shame
"Himself deluded mocks the Princely Dame
"The Lady Bona, whom just anger burns
"And foreign war with civil rage returns.
"Ah spare your swords, where beauty is to blame,
"Love gave the affront, and must repair the same,
"When France shall boast of her whose co^quering eye^
"Have made the best of English hearts their prize,
"Have power to alter the decree of fate,
"And change again the Counsels of our State.
What the Prophetic Muse intends; alone
To him that feels the secret wound is known.
With the sweet sound of this harmonious lay
About the Keele delighted Dolphins play;
Too sure a sign of seas ensuing rage
Which must anon this Royal troup engage.
To whom soft sleep seems more secure and sweet
Within the Town commanded by our fleet.
These mighty Peers placed in the gilded Barge,
Proud with the burden of so brave a charge,
With painted Oars the youth begin to sweep
Neptunes smooth face and cleave the yiedling deep,
Which soon becomes the seat of sudden war
Betwixt the wind and tide, that fiercely jarre.
As when a sort of lusty shepherds try
their force at footeball, care of victory
Makes them salute so rudely breast to breast,
That their encounters seem too rough for jest.
They ply their feet, and still the restles ball
Tossed to and fro is urged by them all:
So fares the doubtful Barge twixt tide and winds,
And like effect of their contention finds.
Yet the bold Britans still securely rowed,
Charles and his virtue was their sacred load.
Then which a greater pledge heaven could not give,
That the good boat this Tempests should out live.
But storms increase, and now no hope of grace
Among them shines, save in the Princes face.
The rest resign their courage, skill, and sight,
To danger, horror, and unwelcome night:
The gentle vessel wont with state and pride
On the smooth back of silver Thames to ride,
Wanders astonished through the angry Main,
As Titans carre did, while the golden rain
Filled the young hand of his adventurous son,
When the whole world an equal hazard run.
To this of ours, the light of whose desire
Waves threaten now as that was skard by fire.
The impatient Sea grows impotent and raves,
That (night assisting) his impetuous waves
Should find resistance from so light a thing,
These surges ruin, those our safety bring.
The oppressed vessel does the charge abide,
Only because assailed on every side.
So men with rage and passion set on fire
Trembling for haste, impeach their mad desire.
The pale Iberians had expired with fear,
But that their wonder did divert their care,
To see the Prince with danger moved no more,
Then with the pleasures of their Court before;
God-like his courage seemed, whom nor delight
Could soften, nor the face of death affright.
Next to the power of making tempests cease,
Was in that storm to have so calm a peace.
Great Maro could no greater tempest fain,
When the loud winds usurping on the Main
For angry Juno labored to destroy
The hated relics of confounded Troy:
His bold Aeneas on like billows tossed,
In a tall ship and all his countries lost,
Dissolves with fear, and both his hands upheld
Proclaims them happy whom the Greeks had quell'^
In honorable fight: Our Hero set
In a small shallop, Fortune in his debt,
So near a hope of crowns and scepters more
Then ever Priam, when he flourished, wore.
His loins yet full of ungot Princes, all
His glory in the bud, lets nothing fall
That argues fear: if any thought annoyes
The gallant youth it is loves untasted joys,
And dear remembrance of that fatal glance
For which he lately pawned his heart in France,
Where he had seen a brighter Nymph then she
That sprung out of his present foe, the Sea.
That noble ardour more then mortal fire
The Conquered Ocean could not make expire:
Nor angry Thetis raise her waves above
The Heroique Prince his courage or his love.
'Twas indignation and not fear he felt
The shirine should perish where that Image dwelt.
Ah Love forbid the noblest of thy train,
Should not survive to let her know his pain,
Who nor his peril minding, nor his flame
Is entertained with some less serious game
Among the bright nymphs of the Gallick Court,
All highly borne, obsequious to her sport.
They roses seem, which in their early pride
But half reveal and half their beauties hide.
She the glad morning, which her beams does throw.
Upon their smiling leaves, and gild them so
Like bright Aurora, whose refulgent ray
Foretells the fervor of ensuing day,
And warnes the shepherd with his flocks retreat
To leavy shadows from the threatened heat.
From Cupids string of many shafts that fled,
Winged with those plumes which noble fame had shed,
As through the wondering world she flew and told
Of his adventures haughty, brave, and bold.
Some had already touched the royal Maid,
But loves first summons seldom are obeyed.
Light was the wound, the Prince his care unknown,
She might not, would not, yet reveal her own.
His glorious name had so possessed her ears,
That with delight those antique tales she hears
Of Jason, Theseus, and such worthies old,
As with his story best resemblance hold.
And now she views as on the wall it hung,
What old Museus so divinely sung,
Which art with life and love did so inspire,
That she discernes and favors that desire.
Which there provokes the adventerous youth to swim,
And in Leanders danger pitties him,
Whose not new love alone, but fortune seeks
For from the stern of some good ship appears
A freindly light, which moderates their fears.
New courage from reviving hope they take,
And climbing over the waves that taper make,
On which the hope of all their lives depends,
As his on that fair Heroes hand extends.
The ship at anchor like a fixed rock,
Breaks the proud billows, which her large sides knock;
Whose rage restrained foming higher swells,
And from her port the weary barge repells.
Threatening to make her forced out again
Repeat the dangers of the troubled Maine.
Twice was the cable hurld in vain, the Fates
Would not be moved for our sister States.
For England is the third succesfull throw,
And then the Genius of that land they know.
Whose Prince must be (as their own books device)
Lord of the Scene where now his danger lies.
Well sung the Roman Bard, all humane things
Of dearest value hang on slender strings.
O see the then sole hope, and in design
Of heaven our joy supported by a line,
Which for that instant was heavens care above
The chain that is fixed to the throne of Jove,
On which the fabric of our world depends;
One link dissolved the whole creation ends.
Of his Majesty's receiving the news of the Duke of Buckinghams death.
SO earnest with thy God! can no new care
Nor sense of danger, interrupt thy prayer?
The sacred wrestler, till a blessing given,
Quits not his hold, but halting conquers heaven.
Nor was the stream of thy devotion stopped
When from the body such a limb was lop'd,
As to thy present state was no less maime,
Though thy wise choice has since repaired the same.
Bold Homor durst not so great virtue fain
In his best pattern for Patroclus slain.
With such amazement as weak mothers use
And frantic gesture he receives the news.
Yet fell his darling by the impartial chance
Of war imposed by royal Hectors lance.
Thine in full peace, and by a vulgar hand
Torn from thy bosom, left his high command.
The famous Painter could allow no place
For private sorrow in a Princes face.
Yet that his piece might not exceed belief,
He cast a veil upon supposed grief.
TO was want of such a president as this
Made the old heathen frame their Gods amiss.
Their Phoebus should not act a fonder part,
For the fair boy, then he did for his Heart:
Nor blame for Hyacinthus fate his own,
That kept him from wished death, had thou bin known.
Yet he that weighs with thine good David's deeds,
Shall find his passion, not his love exceeds.
He cursed the Mountains where his brave friend died,
But lets false Ziba with his heir divide:
Where thy immortal love to thy blessed friends
Like that of heaven upon the seed descends.
Such huge extremes inhabit thy great mind
God-like unmoved, and yet like woman kind.
Which of the ancient Poets had not brought
Our Charles his pedigree from heaven, and taught
How some bright dame comprest by mighty Jove,
Produced this mixed Divinity and Love.
To the King on his Navy.
Where ere thy Navy spreads her canvas wings
Homage to thee, and peace to all she brings
The French and Spaniard, when thy flaggs appear
Forget their hatred, and consent to fear.
So Jove from Ida did both hosts survey,
And when he pleased to thunder, part the fray.
Ships heretofore in seas like fishes sped
The mightiest still upon the smallest fed.
Thou on the deep imposest stricter laws,
And by that justice have removed the cause
Of those rude tempests, which for rapine sent
Too often (alas) involved the innocent.
Now shall the Ocean as thy Thames be free
From both those fates of storms and Piracy.
But we most happy, who can fear no force
But winged troops or Pegasean horse.
It Is not so hard for greedy foes to spoil
Another nation as to touch our soil.
Should natures self invade the world again,
And ore the Center spread the liquid Maine,
Thy power were safe, and her distractive hand
Would but enlarge the bounds of thy command.
Thy dreadful fleet would style thee Lord of all,
And ride in triumph ore the drowned ball.
Those towers of oak ore fertile plains might go,
And visit mountains where they once did grow.
The worlds restorer once could not endure
That finished Babel should those men secure,
Whose pride designed that fabric to have stood
Above the reach of any second flood.
To thee his chosen more indulgent he
Dares trust such power with so much piety.
Upon his Majesty's repairing of Paul's.
THat shipwrackt vessel which the Apostle bore,
Scarce suffered more upon Melita's shore,
Then did his Temple in the sea of time.
(Our Nations glory, and our Nations crime)
When the first Monarch of this happy Isle,
Moved with the ruin of so brave a pile,
This work of cost and piety begun,
To be accomplished by his glorious son,
Who all that came within the ample thought
Of his wise Sire, has to perfection brought.
He like Amphion makes those quarries leap
Into fair figures from a confused heap:
For in his art of regiment is found
A power like that of harmony in sound.
Those antique minstrills sure were Charles-like Kings,
Cities their Lutes, and Subjects hearts their strings,
On which, with so divine a hand they struck,
Consent of motion from their breath they took:
So all our minds with his, conspire, to grace
The gentiles great Apostle, and deface,
Those state obscuring sheds, that like a chain,
Seemed to confine, and fetter him again:
Which the glad Saint shakes off at his command,
As once the viper from his sacred hand.
So joys the aged oak when we divide
The creeping Ivy from his injured side.
Ambition rather would effect the fame
Of some new structure to have borne her name.
Two distant virtues in one act we find,
The modesty and greatness of his mind.
Which not content to be above the rage
And injury of all impayring age;
In its own worth secure, does higher clime,
And things half swallowed from the jaws of time,
Reduce an earnest of his grand design,
To frame no new Church, but the old refine;
Which spouse-like may with comely grace command
More then by force of argument or hand:
For doubtful reason few can apprehend,
And war brings ruin where it should amend.
But beauty with a bloodless conquest finds
A welcome sovereignty in rudest minds.
Not ought which Sheba's wondering Queen beheld
Among the works of Solomon excelled
His Ships and building, Emblems of a heart
Large both in magnanimity and art.
While the propitious heavens this work attend,
Long wanted showers, they forget to fend:
As if they meant to make it understood
Of more importance then our vital food.
The Sun which rises to salute the Quire
Already finished, setting shall admire
How private bounty could so far extend,
The KING built all but Charles the western end*
So proud a Fabric to devotion given,
At once it threatens and obliges Heaven.
Laomedon that had the Gods in pay,
Neptune with him that rules the sacred day,
Could no such structure raise, Troy wald so high,
The Atrides might as well have forced the sky.
Glad, though amazed, are our neighbor Kings,
To see such power employed in peaceful things.
They list not urge it to the dreadful field:
The task is easier to destroy, then build.
To the Queen occasioned upon sight of her Majesty's Picture.
Well fare the hand which to our humble sight
Presents that beauty, which the dazeling light
Of Royal splendour hides from weaker eyes,
And all access (save by this art) denies.
Here only we have courage to behold
This beam of glory, here we dare unfold
In numbers thus the wonders we conceive,
The gracious Image seeming to give leave,
Propitious stands vouchsafing to be seen
And by our Muse saluted* MIGHTY QUEEN.
In whom th'extreames of power and beauty move,
The Queen of Britain and the Queen of Love.
As the Bright Sun (to which we owe no sight
Of equal glory to your beauties light.)
Is wisely placed in so sublime a seat
T'extend his light and moderate his heat.
So happy it is you move in such a sphere
As your high Majesty with awful fear,
In humane breasts might qualify that fire,
Which kindled by those eyes had flamed higher.
Then when the scortched world like hazard run
By the approach of the ill guided Sun.
No other nimphs have title to men's hearts
But as their means larger hope imparts.
Your beauty more the fondest lover moves
With admiration then his private loves.
With admiration, for a pitch so high
(Save sacred Charles his) never love durst fly.
Heaven that perfer'd a scepter to your hand
Favored our freedom, more then your command.
Beauty had Crowned you, and you must have bin
The whole worlds Mistress other then a Queen.
All had bin rivalls, and you might have spared
Or killed, and tyraniz'd, without a guard.
No power atcheiv'd either by arms or birth
Equals loves Empire both in heaven and earth.
Such eyes as yours on Jove himself have thrown
As bright and feirce a lightning as his own.
Witness our Jove prevented by their flame
In his swift passage to the Hesperian dame.
When like a Lion finding in his way
To some intended spoil, a fairer pray;
The Royal youth pursuing the report
Of beauty found it in the Gallick Court.
There public care with private passion fought
A doubtful Combat in his noble thought.
Should he confess his greatness, and his love,
And the free faith of your great Brother prove,
With his Achates breaking through the cloud
Of that disguise which did their graces shrowed,
And mixing with those gallants at the Ball
Dance with the Ladies, and outshine them all;
Or on his iourny ore the mountains ride?
So when the fair Leucothoe he spide,
To check his steeds impatient Phoebus earned,
Though all the world was in his course concerned.
What may hereafter her meridian do,
Whose dawning beauty warmed his bosom so?
Not so divine a flame, since deathlesse Gods
Forbore to visit the defiled abodes
Of men, in any mortal breast did burn;
Nor shall, till Piety and they return.
The Apology of Sleep for not approaching the Lady who can do any thing but
sleep when she pleases.
MY charge it is those breaches to repair,
Which nature takes from sorrow toil and care,
Rest to the limbs, and quiet I confer
On troubled minds, but naught can add to her,
Whom heaven and her transce^dent thoughts have placed
Above those ills which wretched mortals taste.
Bright as the deathles gods, and happy she
From all that may infringe, delight is free;
Love at her royal feet his quiver lays,
And not his mother with more haste obeyes
Such real pleasures, such true joys suspense,
What dream can I present to recompense.
Should I with lightning fill her awful hands,
And make the Clouds seem, all at her commands;
Or place her in Olympus top a guest,
Among the immortalls, who with Nectar feast;
That power would seem, that entertainment short
Of the true splendour of her present Court;
Where all the joys, and all the glories are
Of three great Kingdoms severed from the care.
I that of fumes and humid vapors made,
Ascending to the seat of sense invade,
No cloud in so serene a mansion find,
To overcast her ever shining mind,
Which holds resemblance with those spotles skies,
Where flowing Nilus want of rain supplies.
That Crystal heaven where Phoebus never shrowds
His golden beams, nor wrapps his face in clouds.
But what is so hard which numbers cannot force,
So stoops the Moon, and rivers change their course.
The bold Meonian made me dare to steep
Joves dreadful tempies in the dew of sleep.
And since the Muses do invoke my power,
I shall no more decline that sacred bower;
Where Gloriana their great mistress lies,
But gently taming those victorious eyes.
Charm all her senses, till the joyful Sun
Without a Rival half his course has run:
Who while my hand that fairer light confines,
May boast himself the brightest thing that shines.
The Country to my Lady of Carlisle.
Madam,
OF all the sacred Muse inspired
Orpheus alone could with the woods comply,
Their rude inhabitants his song admired,
And natures self in those that could not lie.
Your beauty next our solitude invades
And warmes us, shining through the thickest shades.
Nor ought the tribute which the wondering Court
Pays your fair eyes, prevail with you to scorn
The answer and consent to the report
Which Echo-like the Country does return.
Mirrors are taught to flatter, but our springs
Present the impartial images of things.
A rural Judge disposed of beauties prize;
A simple shepherd was preferred to Jove:
Down to the Mountains from the partial skies
Came Juno, Pallas, and the Queen of Love,
To plead for that which was so justly given
To the bright Carlisle of the Court of heaven.
Carlisle, a name which all our woods are taught
Loud as his Amaryllis to resound:
Carlisle, a name which on the bark is wrought
Of every tree that is worthy of the wound.
From Phoebus rage our shadows and our streams
May guard us better, then from Carlisles beams.
The Countess of Carlisle in mourning.
WHen from black clouds no part of sky is clear,
But just so much as letts the Sun apear:
Heaven then would seem thy image, and reflect
Those sable vestments, and that bright aspect:
A spark of virtue by the deepest shade
Of sad adversity is fairer made.
Nor less advantage does thy beauty get,
A Venus rising from a sea of jet.
Such was the appearance of new formed light
While yet it strugled with eternal night.
Then mourn no more lest thou admit increase
Of glory by thy noble Lords decease.
We find not that the laughter-loving dame
Mourned for Anchises, it was enough she came,
To grace the mortal with her deathles bed,
And that his living eyes such beauty fed.
Had she bin there, untimely joy through all
Men's hearts difus'd, had marred the funeral.
Those eyes were made to banish grief; as well
Bright Phoebus might affect in shades to dwell,
As they to put on sorrow: nothing stands
But power to greive, exempt from thy commands.
If thou lament, thou must do so alone,
Grief in thy presence can lay hold on none.
Yet still persist the memory to love
Of that great Mercury of our mighty Jove;
Who by the power of his enchaunting tongue
Swords from the hands of threatening Monarchs wru^g.
War he prevented, or soon made it cease,
Instructing Princes in the art of peace.
Such as made Sheb' as curious Queen resort
To the large-hearted Hebrews famous Court.
Had Homer sat among his wondering ghests,
He might have learned at those stupendous feasts,
With greater bounty and more sacred state
The banquets of the gods to celebrate.
But o what elocution might he use,
What potent charms that could so soon infuse*
His absent Masters love into the heart
Of Henrietta, forcing her to part
From her loved brother, Country, and the sun,
And like Camilla ore the waves to run
Into his arms, while the Parisian dames
Mourn for their ravished glory at her flames,
No less amazed then the amazed stars
When the bold charmer of Thessalia wars
With heaven it self, and numbers does repeat
Which call descending Cynthia from her seat.
In Answer to a libell against her, etc.
What fury has provoked thy wit to dare
With Diomed to wound the queen of love?
Thy Mistress envy, or thy own despair,
Not the just Pallas in thy breast did move
So blind a rage with such a different fate:
He honor won, where thou have purchased hate.
She gave assistance to his Trojan foe,
Thou that without a rival thou may love,
Do to the beauty of this Lady owe
While after her the gazing world does move.
Can thou not be content to love alone?
Or is thy Mistress not content with one?
Have thou not read of Tagry Arthurs shield,
Which but diselos'd amazed the weaker eyes,
Of proudest foe, and won the doubtful field:
So shall thy rebel with become her prize.
Should thy Iambicks swell into a book
All were confuted with one radiant look.
Heaven he obliged, that placed her in the skies,
Rewarding Phoebus for inspiring so
His noble brain, likening to those eyes
His joyful beams. But Phoebus is thy so,
And neither aids they fancy, nor thy sight:
So ill thou rhim'st against so fair a light.
On my Lady Dorothy Sidneys Picture.
SUch was Philocleas, such Dorus's flame,
The matchless Sidney that immortal frame
Of perfect beauty on two pillars placed
Not his high fancy, could one pattern graced
With such extremes of excellence compose
Wonders so distant in one face disclose.
Such cheerful modesty, such humble State
Moves certain love, but with a doubtful fate.
As when beyond our greedy reach we see
Inviting fruit on too sublime a tree.
All the rich flowers through his Arcadia found
Amazed we see in this one garland bound.
Had but this copy which the Artist took
From the fair picture of that noble book,
Stood at Calanders, the brave friends had jar'd
And rivals made the ensuing story marred:
Just nature first instructed by his thought
In his own house thus practiced what he taught.
This glorious piece transcends what he could think:
So much his blood is nobler then his Ink.
To Vandike.
RAre Artisan, whose pencill moves
Not our delight alone, but Loves;
From thy shop of beauty we
Slaves return, that entered free.
The heedless lover does not know
Whose eyes they are that wound him so:
But confounded with thy art
Inquires her name that has his heart.
Another who did long refrain,
Feels his old wounds bleed fresh again
With dear remembrance of that face
Where now he reads new hopes of grace,
Nor scorn, nor cruelty does find,
But gladly suffers a false wind
To blow the ashes of despair
From the reviving brand of care:
Fool that forgets her stubborn look;
This softnes, from thy finger took.
Strange that thy hand should not inspire
The beauty only, but the fire;
Not the form alone and grace,
But act and power of a face.
May thou yet thy self as well
As all the world beside excel,
So youth' unfeigned truth rehearse
(That I may make it live in verse)
Why thou could not at one assay
That face to after times convey,
Which this admires: was it thy wit
To make her often before thee sit?
Confess, and we will forgive thee this;
For who would not repeat that bliss,
And frequent fight of such a Dame
Buy with the hazard of his fame.
Yet who can tax thy blameless skill,
Though thy good hand had failed still;
When Nature's self so often erers?
She for this many thousand years
Seems to have practiced with much care
To frame the race of women fair,
Yet never could a perfect birth
Produce before to grace the earth:
Which waxed old, ere it could see
Her that amazed thy art and thee.
But now it is done, o let me know
Where those immortal colors grow,
That could this deathlesse piece compose
In Lillies, or the fading rose.
No, for this theft thou have clim'd higher
Then did Prometheus for his fire.
At Pens-hurst.
While in this Park I sing, the listening Dear
Attend my passion, and forget to fear.
When to the Beeches I report my flame,
They bow their heads as if they selt the same.
To Gods appealing when I reach their bows
With loud complaints, they answer me in shows.
To thee a wild and cruel soul is given,
More deaf then trees, and prouder then the heaven*
Loves foe professed, why do thou fasly feign
Thy self a Sidney, from which noble strain
He sprung, that could so far exalt the name
Of Love, and warm our Nation with his flame,
That all we can of Love or high desire
Seems but the smoke of amorous Sidneys fire?
Nor call her Mother, who so well does prove
One breast may hold both Chastity and Love.
Never can she that so exceeds the spring
In joy and bounty, be supposed to bring
One so destructive: to no humane stock
We owe this fierce unkindnes, but the rock:
That cloven rock produced thee, by whose side
Nature to recompense the fatal pride
Of such stern beauty, placed those healing springs,
Which not more help, then that destruction brings.
Thy heart no ruder then that ragged stone
I might like Orpheus with my numerous moan
Melt to compassion, now my traitorous song
With thee conspires to do the singer wrong,
While thus I suffer not my self to lose
The memory of what augments my woes;
But with my own breath still foment the fire
Which flames as high as phansy can aspire.
This last complaint the indulgent ears does pierce
Of just Apollo president of verse,
Highly concerned that the Muse should bring
Damage to one whom he had taught to sing.
Thus he advised me, On you aged tree
Hang up thy Lute, and hie thee to the Sea,
That there with wonders thy diverted mind
Some truce at least may with affection find.
Ah cruel Nymph, from whom her humble swain
Flies for relief unto the raging maine!
And from the winds and tempests does expect
A milder fate then from her cold neglect!
Yet there he will pray that the unkind may prove
Blessed in her choice, and vows this endless love
Springs from no hope of what she can confer,
But from those gifts which heaven has heaped on her.
At Pens-hurst.
HAd Dorothea lived when Mortals made
Choice of their Deities, this sacred shade
Had held an altar to the power that gave
The peace and glory which these Allies have;
Embrodered so with flowers where she stood,
That it became a garden of a wood.
Their presence has such more then humane grace
That it can civilize the rudest place:
And beauty too and order can impart,
Where nature never intended it, nor art.
The plants acknowledge this, and her admire
No less then those of old did Orpheus Lyre.
If she sit down, with tops all toward her bowed
They round about her into Arbours crow'd.
Or if she walk, in even ranks they stand
Like some well marshalled and obsequious band.
Amphion so made stones and timber leap
Into fair figures from a confused heap.
And in the symmetry of her parts is found
A power like that of harmony in sound.
Ye lofty Beeches tell this matchless dame
That if together ye fed all one flame,
It could not equalize the hundredth part
Of what her eyes have kindled in my heart.
Go boy and carve this passion on the bark
Of yonder tree, which stands the sacred mark
Of noble Sidneys birth, when such benign,
Such more then mortall-making stars did shine,
That there they cannot but for ever prove
The monument and pledge of humble love:
His humble love, whose hope shall never rise higher,
Then for a pardon that he dares admire.
To my Lord of Leicester.
NOt that thy trees at Penhurst groan
Oppressed with their timely load,
And seem to make their silent moan,
That their great Lord is now abroad,
That to delight his taste or eye
Would spend themselves in fruit and dye.
Not that thy harmless Deer repine,
And think themselves unjustly slain
By any other hand then thine,
Whose arrows they would gladly stain.
No nor thy friends which hold too dear
That peace with France which keeps thee there.
All these are less then that great cause,
Which now exacts your presence here,
Wherein there meet the diverse laws
Of public and domestique care:
For one bright Nymph our youth contends,
And on your prudent choice depends.
Not the bright shield of Thetis son,
For which such stern debate did rise,
That the great Ajax Talamon
Refused to live without the prize;
Those Achive Peers did more engage,
Then she the Gallants of our age,
That beam of beauty which begun
To warm us so, when thou were here,
Now scorches like the raging Sun
When Sirius does first appear.
O fix this flame, and let despair
Redeem the rest from endless care.
To my young Lady Lucy Sidney.
Why came I so untimely forth
Into a world which wanting thee
Could entertain us with no worth
Or shadow of felicity?
That times should me so far remove
From that which I was borne to love?
Yet fairest blossom do not slight
That age which you must know so soon,
The rosy morn resignes her light
And milder glory to the Noon;
And then what wonders shall you do
Whose dawning beauty warmes us so?
Hope waits upon the flowery prime;
And summer though it be less gay,
Yet is not looked on as a time
Of declination or decay:
For with a full hand that does bring
All that was promised by the spring.
Of the Lady who can sleep when she pleases.
NO wonder sleep from careful Lovers flies
To bath himself in Sacharissa's eyes;
As fair Astraea once from earth to heaven
By strife and loud impiety was driven;
So with our plaints offended, and our tears,
Wise Somnus to that Paradise repaires,
Waits on her will, and wretches does forsake
To court the Nymph for whom those wretches wake
More proud then Phoebus of his throne of gold
Is the soft God, those softer limbs to hold,
Nor would exchange with Jove to hide the skies
In darkning clouds the power to close her eyes:
Eyes, which so far all other lights control:
They warm our mortal parts, but these our soul.
Let her free spirit, whose unconquered breast
Holds such deep quiet, and untroubled rest,
Know, that though Venus and her Son should spare
Her rebel heart, and never teach her care;
Yet Hymen may enforce her Vigils keep,
And for another joy suspend her sleep.
Of the misreport of her being painted.
AS when a sort of Wolves infest the night
With their wild howlings at fair Cynthia's light,
The noise may chase sweet slumber from our eyes,
But never reach the Mistress of the skies:
So with the news of Sacharissa's wrongs,
Her vexed servants blame those envious tongues,
Call love to witness that no painted fire
Can scorch men so, or kindle such desire;
While unconcerned she seems moved no more
With this new malice, then our loves before:
But from the height of her great mind looks down
On both our passions without smile or frown;
So little care of what is done below
Has the bright Dame, whom heaven affects so,
Paints her it is true, with the same hand which spreads
Like glorious colors through the flowery meads,
When lavish Nature with her best attire
Clothes the gay Spring, the season of desire.
Paints her it is true, and does her cheek adorn
With the same art wherewith she paints the morn,
With the same art, wherewith she guildeth so
Those painted clouds which form Thaumantia's bow.
Of her passing through a crowd of people.
AS in old Chaos, heaven with earth confused,
And stars with rocks together crushed and bruised,
The Sun his light no farther could extend
Then the next hill which on his shoulders leaned;
So in this throng bright Sacharissa fared,
Oppressed by those who strove to be her guard.
As ships, though never so obsequious, fall
Foul in a tempest on their Admiral;
A greater favor this disorder brought
Unto her servants, then their awful thought
Durst entertain, when thus compelled they pressed
The yielding Marble of her snowy breast,
While Love insults disguised in the cloud,
And welcome force of the unruly crowd:
So th'amorous tree, while yet the air is calm,
Just distance keeps from his desired Palm;
But when the wind her ravished branches throws
Into his arms, and mingles all their boughs,
Though loath he seems her tender leaves to press,
More loath he is the friendly storm should cease,
From whose rude bounty he the double use
At once receives, of pleasure and excuse.
Song.
SAy lovely dream, where could thou find
Shales to counterfeit that face;
Colors of this glorious kind
Come not from any mortal place.
In heaven it self thou sure were dressed
With that Angel-like disguise:
Thus deluded am I blessed,
And see my joy with closed eyes.
But ah! this image is too kind
To be other then a dream,
Cruel Sacharissa's mindo
Never put on that sweet extreme.
Fair dream, if thou intendst me grace,
Change this heavenly form of thine,
Paint despised love in thy face,
And make it to appear like mine,
Pale, wan, and meager, let it look
With a pity-moving shape,
Such as wander by the brook
Of Lethe, or from graves escape.
Then to that matchless Nymph appear,
In whose shape thou shinest so;
Softly in her sleeping ear,
With humble words express my woe.
Perhaps from greatness, state and pride,
Thus surprised she may fall;
Sleep does disproportion hide,
And death resembling equals all.
Song.
BEhold the brand of beauty tossed,
See how the motion does dilate the flame,
Delighted Love his spoils does boast,
And triumph in this game:
Fire to no place confined,
Is both our wonder, and our fear,
Moving the mind
Like lightning hurled through the air.
High heaven the glory does increase
Of all her shining Lamps this artfull way;
The Sun in figures such as these
Joys with the Moon to play;
To these sweet strains they advance,
Which do result from their own spears,
As this Nymphs dance
Moves with the numbers which she hears.
TO AMORET.
Fair, that you may truly know
What you unto Thirsis ow,
I will tell you how I do
Sacharissa love and you.
Joy salutes me when I set
My blessed eyes on Amoret,
But with wonder I am struck,
When I on the other look.
If sweet Amoret complains,
I have sense of all her pains;
But for Sacharissa, I
Do not only grieve, but die.
All that of my self is mine,
Lovely Amoret, is thine;
Sacharissa's captive fain
Would untie his iron chain,
And those scorching beams to shun,
To thy gentle shadow run;
If the soul had free election
To dispose of her affection,
I should not thus long have born
Haughty Sacharissa's scorn,
But it is sure some power above,
Which controuls our will in love,
If not Love, a strong desire
To create, and spread that fire
In my breast solicits me,
Beauteous Amoret, for thee.
It Is amazement more then love,
Which her radiant eyes do move;
If less splendor wait on thine,
Yet they so benignly shine,
I would turn my dazzled sight,
To behold their milder light;
But as hard it is to destroy
That high flame as to enjoy,
Which how easily I may do,
Heaven (as easily scaled) does know.
Amoret as sweet and good,
As the most delicious food;
Which but tasted does impart
Life and gladness to the heart;
Sacharissa's beautie's wine,
Which to madness does incline;
Such a liquor as no brain,
That is mortal, can sustain.
Scarce can I to heaven excuse
That devotion which I use
Unto that adored Dame,
For it is not unlike the same,
Which I thither ought to send,
So that if it could take end,
'Twould to heaven it self be due,
To succeed her, and not you,
Who already have of me
All that is not Idolatry;
Which though not so fierce a flame,
Is longer like to be the same:
Then smile on me, and I will prove,
Wonder is shorter lived then Love.
The story of Phoebus and Daphne applied, etc.
THirsis a youth of the inspired train,
Fair Sacharissa loved, but loved in vain;
Like Phoebus sung, the no less amorous boy;
Like Daphne, she as lovely and as coy;
With numbers, he the flying Nymph pursues,
With numbers, such as Phoebus self might use;
Such is the chase, when love and fancy leads
Ore craggy mountains, and through flowery meads,
Invoked to testify the lovers care,
Or form some image of his cruel Fair:
Urged with his fury like a wounded Deer
Over these he fled, and now approaching near,
Had reached the Nymph with his harmonious lay,
Whom all his charms could not incline to stay.
Yet what he sung in his immortal strain,
Though unsuccesfull, was not sung in vain,
All but the Nymph that should redress his wrong,
Attend his passion, and approve his song.
Like Phoebus thus acquiring unsought praise,
He caught at love, and filled his arm with bayse.
Of Mris. Arden.
BEhold and listen, while the fair
Breaks in sweet sounds the willing air,
And with her own breath fans the fire,
Which her bright eyes do fixst inspire.
What reason can that love control
Which more then one way courts the soul?
So when a flash of lightning falls
On our aboads, the danger calls
For humane aid, which hopes the flame
To conquer, though from heaven it came.
But if the wind with that conspire,
Men strive not, but deplore the fire.
On the discovery of a Ladies Painting.
PYgmalions fate reverst is mine:
His marble love took flesh and blood;
All that I worshipped is divine,
That beauty now it is understood
Appears to have no more of life,
Then that whereof he framed his wife.
As women yet, who apprehend
Some sudden cause of causeless fear,
Although that seeming cause take end,
And they behold no danger near,
A shaking through their limbs they find,
Like leaves saluted by the wind:
^o though the beauty do appear
No beauty which amazed me so,
Yet from my breast I cannot tear
The passion which from hence did grow;
Nor yet out of my phansy raze
The print of that supposed face.
A real beauty (though too near)
The fond Narcissus did admire:
I dote on that which is no where,
The sign of beauty feeds my fire.
No mortal flame was ere so cruel
As this which thus survives the fuel.
To a Lady from whom he received a silver pen.
Madam,
INtending to have tried
The silver favor which you gave,
In ink the shining point I died,
And drencht it in the sable wave:
When grieved to be so foully stained
On you it thus to me complained:
Suppose you had deserved to take
From her fair hand so fair a boon;
Yet how deserved I to take
So ill a change, who ever won
Immortal praise for what I wrought
Instructed by her noble thought?
I that expressed her commands
To mighty Lords and Princely Dames,
Always most welcome to their hands,
Proud that I would record their names,
Must now be taught an humble style
Some meaner beauty to beguile.
So I the wronged Pen to please,
Make it my humble thanks express
Unto your Ladyship in these,
And now it is forced to confess,
That your great self did nere indite,
Nor that to one more noble write,
On a bread of diverse colors woven by four Ladies.
TWice twenty slender virgin fingers twine
This curious web, where all their fancies shine:
As nature them, so they this shade have wrought,
Soft as their hands, and various as their thought:
Not Juno's bird, when his fair train dispred
He woes the female to his painted bed;
No not the Bow which so adornes the skies,
So glorious is, or boasts so many dies.
On the head of a Stag.
SO we some antique Hero's strength
Learn by his Lances weight and length,
As these vast beams express the beast,
Whose shady brows alive they dressed.
Such game, while yet the world was new,
The mighty Nimrod did pursue.
What huntsman of our feeble race,
Or dogs dare such a monster chase,
Resembling with each blow he strikes,
The charge of a whole troop of Pikes?
O fertile head, which every year
Could such a crop of wonder bear!
The teeming Earth did never bring
^o soon, so hard, so huge a thing.
Which might it never have been cast,
Each years growth added to the last,
Those lofty branches had supplied
The Earths bold sons prodigious pride;
Heaven with these engines had bin scaled,
When Mountains heaped on Mountains failed.
To a Lady in retirement.
SEes not, my Love, how time resumes
The glory which he lent these slowres?
Though none should taste these sweet perfumes,
Yet must they live but some few hours;
Time, what we forbear, devours.
Had Helen, or th'Aegyptian Queen,
Been nere so thrifty of their graces,
Those beauties must at length have been
The spoil of age, which finds out faces
In the most retired places.
Should some malignant Planet bring
A barren drought, or ceasless shower
Upon the Autumn, or the Spring,
And spare us neither fruit nor flower,
Winter would not stay an hour.
Could the resolve of loves neglect
Preserve thee from the violation
Of coming years, then more respect
Were due to so divine a fashion,
Nor would I indulge my passion.
The Misers speech in a Mask.
BAlls of this metal slack'd Atlanta's pace,
And on the amorous youth bestowed the race:
Venus the Nymphs mind measuring by her own,
Whom the rich spoils of Cities overthrown
Had prostrated to Mars, could well advise
The adventurous Lover how to gain the prize.
Nor less may Jupiter to gold ascribe;
For when he turned himself into a bribe,
Who can blame Danac, or the brazen tower,
That they withstood not the almighty shower?
Never till then did love make Jove put on
A form more bright and noble then his own;
Nor were it just, would he resume that shape,
That slack devotion should his thunder escape:
'Twas not revenge for grieved Apollo's wrong,
Those Asses ears on Mida's temples hung;
But fond repentance of his happy wish,
Because his meat grew metal like his dish;
Would Bacchus bless me so, I Would constant hold
Unto my wish, and dye creating gold.
To my Lord of Northumberland upon the death of his Lady.
TO this great loss a sea of tears is due,
But the whole debt not to be paid by you;
Charge not your self with all, nor render vain
Those showers the eyes of us your servants rain.
Shall grief contract the largeness of that heart,
In which nor sear nor anger has a part?
Virtue would blush, if Time should boast (which dry's,
Her sole child dead, the tender Mothers eyes)
Your minds relief, where reason triumphs so
Over all passions, that they nere could grow
Beyond their limits in your noble breast,
To harm another, or impeach your rest.
This we observed delighting to obey
One who did never from his great self stray,
Whose mild example seemed to engage
The obsequious seas, and teach them not to rage.
The brave Emylius his charge laid down,
(The force of Rome, and fate of Macedon)
In his lost sons did feel the cruel stroke
Of changing fortune; and thus highly spoke:
Before Romes people we did of implore,
That if the heavens had any ill in store
For your Emylius, they would power that ill
On his own house, and let you flourish still:
You on the barren Seas my Lord have spent
Whole springs, and summers to the public lent,
Suspended all the pleasures of your life,
And shortened the short joy of such a wife:
For which your country's more obliged, then
For many lives of old less happy men.
You that have sacrificed so great a part
Of youth and private bliss, ought to impart
Your sorrow too, and give your friends a right
As well in your affliction, as delight.
Then with Emylian courage bear this cross,
Since public persons only public loss
Ought to affect. And though her form and youth,
Her application to your will and truth,
That noble sweetness and that humble state,
All snatched away by such a hasty fate,
Might give excuse to any common breast
With the huge weight of so just grief oppressed;
Yet let no portion of your life be stained
With passion, but your character maintained
To the last act; it is enough her stone
May honored be with superscription
Of the sole Lady who had power to move
The great Northumberland to grieve and love.
To my Lord Admiral, of his late sickness and recovery.
With joy like ours the Thracian youth invades
Orpheus returning from the Elysian shades,
Embrace the Hero, and his stay implore,
Make it their public suite he would no more
Desert them so, and for his spouses sake
His vanished Love tempt the Lethean lake:
The Ladies too, the brightest of that time,
Ambitious all his lofty bed to clime,
Their doubtful hopes with expectation feed,
Who shall the fair Eurydice succeed:
Eurydice, for whom his numerous moan
Makes listening trees, and salvage mountains groan,
Through all the air his sounding strings dilate
Sorrow like that, which touched our hearts of late,
Your pining sickness, and your restless pain
At once the Land affecting, and the Main;
When the glad news that you were Admiral
Scarce through the Nation spread, 'twas feared by all
That our great Charles, whose wisdom shines in you,
Would be perplexed how to choose a new:
So more then private was the joy and grief,
That at the worst it gave our souls relief,
That in our age such sense of virtue lived,
They joy'd so justly, and so justly grieved.
Nature, her fairest lights eclipsed, seems
Her self to suffer in those sharp extremes,
While not from thine alone thy blood retires,
But from those cheeks which all the world admires:
The stem thus threatened and the sap in thee
Droop all the branches of that noble tree;
Their beauty they, and we our loves suspend,
Naught can our wishes save thy health intend.
As Lillies overcharged with rain, they bend
Their beauteous heads, and with high heaven contend,
Fold thee within their snowy arms, and cry,
He is too faultless, and too young to dye;
So like Immortalls round about thee they
Sit, that they fright approaching death away:
Who would not languish by so fair a train,
To be lamented, and restored again?
Or thus withheld, what hasty soul would go,
Though to the blessed? Over young Adonis so
Fair Venus mourned, and with the precious shower
Of her warm tears cherished the springing flower.
The next support fair hope of your great name,
And second pillar of that noble frame,
By loss of thee would no advantage have,
But step by step pursues thee to the grave.
And now relentless Fate about to end
The line, which backward does so far extend
That Antique stock, which still the world supplies
With bravest spirits, and with brightest eyes;
Kind Phoebus interposing bid me say,
Such storms no more shall shake that house, but they
Like Neptune and his Sea-borne Niece shall be
The shining glories of the land and Sea,
With courage guard, and beauty warm our Age,
And lovers fill with like Poetique rage.
On the friendship betwixt Sacharissa and Amoret.
TEll me, lovely loving Pair,
Why so kind, and so severe?
Why so careless of our care,
Only to your selves so dear?
By this cunning change of hearts,
You the power of Love control,
While the Boys deluded darts
Can arrive at neithers soul.
For in vain to either breast
Still beguiled Love does come,
Where he finds a forain guest,
Neither of your hearts at home;
Debtors thus with like design,
When they never mean to pay,
That they may the law decline,
To some friend make all away.
Not the silver Doves that fly,
Yoakt in Cytharea's Carre;
Not the wings that lift so high,
And convey her son so far,
Are so lovely sweet and fair,
Or do more ennoble Love,
Are so choicely matched a pair,
Or with more consent do move.
A la Malade.
AH lovely Amoret, the Care
Of all that know what is good or fair,
Is Heaven become our Rival too?
Had the rich Gifts conferred on you
So amply thence, the common end
Of giving Lovers, to pretend?
Hence to this pining Sickness (meant
To weary thee to a consent
Of leaving us) no power is given
Thy Beauties to impair, for Heaven
Solicites thee with such a care:
As Roses from their stalks we tare,
When we would still preserve them new
And fresh, as on the bush they grew.
With such a grace you entertain,
And look with such contempt on pain,
That languishing you conquer more,
And wound us deeper then before.
The lightnings which in storms appear.
Scorch more then when the skies are clear.
And as pale sickness does invade
Your frailer part, the breaches made
In that fair Lodging still more clear
Make the bright Guest your Soul appear:
So Nymphs o'r pathless Mountains born,
Their light robes by the Brambles torn
From their fair limbs, exposing new
And unknown Beauties to the view
Of following Gods, increase their flame,
And have to catch the flying Game.
Of her Chamber.
THey taste of Death that do at Heaven arrive,
But we this Paradise approach alive:
In stead of Death, the dart of Love does strike,
And renders all within these walls alike:
The high in titles, and the Shepherd here,
Forgets his greatness, and forgets his fear:
All stand amazed, and gazing on the Fair
Loose thought of what themselves or others are,
Ambition loose, and have no other scope
Save Carlisles favor to employ their hope.
The Thracian could (though all those tales were true
The bold Greeks tell) no greater wonders do;
Before his feet so Sheep and Lions lay
Fearless and wrathless, while they heard him play;
The Gay, the Wise, the Gallant, and the Grave,
Subdued alike all but one passion have.
No worthy mind but finds in hers there is
Something proportioned to the rule of his;
While she with cheerful, but impartial grace,
(Borne for no one, but to delight the race
Of men) like Phoebus so divides her light,
And warmes us that she stoops not from her height.
Of loving at first sight.
NOt caring to observe the wind,
Or the new Sea explore,
Snatched from my self, how far behind
Already I behold the shore?
May not a thousand dangers sleep
In the smooth Bosom of this deep?
No, it is so rockless, and so clear,
That the rich Bottom does appear
Paved all with precious things, not torn
From shipwrackt Vessels, but there born.
Sweetness, truth, and every grace
Which Time and Use are wont to teach,
The eye may in a moment reach,
And read distinctly in her face.
Some other Nymph with colors saint
And pencill slow may Cupid paint,
And a weak heart in time destroy;
She has a stamp and prints the Boy,
Can with a single look inflame
The coldest breast, the rudest tame.
The self banished.
IT is not that I love you less,
Then when before your feet I lay,
But to prevent the sad increase
Of hopeless love, I keep away.
In vain (alas!) for every thing
Which I have known belong to you,
Your form does to my fancy bring,
And make my old wounds bleed anew.
Who in the Spring from the new Sun
Already has a Fever got,
Too late begins those shafts to shun
Which Phoebus through his veins has shot.
Too late he would the pain assuage,
And to thick shadows does retire;
About with him he bears the rage,
And in his tainted blood the fire.
But vowed I have, and never must
Your banished servant trouble you;
For if I break, you may mistrust
The vow I made to love you too.
Of, and to the Queen.
THe Lark that shun's on lofty boughs to build
Her humble nest, lies silent in the field;
But if the promise of a cloudless day
( Aurora smiling) bids her rise and play,
Then straight she shows 'twas not for want of voice
Or power to climb she made so low a choice;
Singing she mounts, her ayerie wings are stretched
Toward heaven, as if from heaven her note she fetched.
So we retiring from the busy throng,
Use to restraine^th' ambition of our song;
But since the light which now informs our Age
Breaks from the Court indulgent to her rage,
Thither my Muse, like bold Prometheus, flies
To light her torch at Gloriana's eyes,
Those sovereign beams, which heal the wounded soul,
And all our cares, but once beheld, control:
There the poor lover that has long endured
Some proud Nymphs scorn, of his fond passion cured,
Fares like the man who first upon the ground
A gloworme spide, supposing he had found
A moving diamond, a breathing stone,
(For life it had, and like those Jewels shone)
He held it dear, till by the springing day
Informed, he threw the worthless worm away.
She saves the Lover, as we Gangrenes stay,
By cutting hope, like a lopt limb, away*
This makes her bleeding Patients to accuse
High heaven, and these expostulations use:
Could nature then no private woman grace
(Whom we might dare to love) with such a face,
Such a complexion, and so radiant eyes,
Such lovely motion, and such sharp reply's?
Beyond our reach, and yet within our sight,
What envious power has placed this glorious light?
Thus in a starry night fond Children cry
For the rich spangles that adorn the sky;
Which though they shine for ever fixed there,
With light and influence relieve us here.
All her affections are to one inclined,
Her bounty and compassion to mankind;
To whom while she so far extends her Grace,
She makes but good the promise of her face:
For Mercy has (could Mercy's self be seen)
No sweeter look, then this propitious Queen;
Such guard and comfort the distressed find
From her large power, and from her larger mind,
That whom ill Fate would ruin, it prefers,
For all the miserable are made hers.
So the fair Tree whereon the Eagle builds,
Poor sheep from tempest and their shepherd shields,
The Royal bird possesses all the boughs,
But shade and shelter to the flock allows.
Joy of our Age, and safety of the next,
For which so often thy fertile womb is vexed,
Nobly contented for the public good
To wast thy spirits, and diffuse thy blood,
What vast hopes may these Islands entertain
Where Monarchs thus descended are to reign?
Led by Commanders of so fair a line
Our seas no longer shall our power confine.
A brave Romance who would exactly frame,
First brings his Knight from some immortal Dame,
And then a weapon and a flaming shield
Bright as his mothers eyes he makes him wield:
None might the mother of Achilles be
But the fair Pearl and Glory of the Sea:
The man to whom great Maro gives such fame,
From the high bed of heavenly Venus came;
And our next Charles (whom all the stars design
Like wonders to accomplish) springs from thine.
Song.
Go lovely Rose,
Tell her that wastes her time and me,
That now she knows,
When I resemble her to thee,
How sweet and fair she seems to be.
Tell her that is young,
And shun's to have her graces spide,
That had thou sprung
In deserts where no men abide,
Thou must have uncommended died.
Small is the worth
Of beauty from the light retired:
Bid her come forth,
Suffer her self to be desired,
And not blush so to be admired.
Then dye, that she
The common fate of all things rare
May read in thee,
How small a part of time they share,
That are so wondrous sweet and fair.
Thirsis. Galatea.
AS lately I on silver Thames did ride,
Sad Galatea on the bank I spide;
Such was her look, as sorrow taught to shine,
And thus she graced me with a voice divine:
Gal. You that can tune your sounding strings so well
Of Ladies beauties, and of Love to tell,
Once change your note, and let your Lute report
The justest grief that ever touched the Court.

Th. Fair Nymph, I have in your delights no share,
Nor ought to be concerned in your care;
Yet would I sing, if I your sorrows knew,
And to my aid invoke no Muse but you.

Gal. Hear then, and let your song augment our grief,
Which is so great as not to wish relief;
She that had all which Nature gives or Chance,
Whom Fortune joined with Virtue to advance
To all the joys this Island could afford,
The greatest Mistress, and the kindest Lord;
Who with the royal mixed her noble blood,
And in high grace with Gloriana stood,
Her bounty, sweetness, beauty, goodness such,
That none ere thought her happiness too much,
So well inclined her favors to conser,
And kind to all as heaven had been to her.
The virgins part, the mother and the wife
So well she acted in this span of life,
That though few years (too few, alas!) she told
She seemed in all things, but in beauty, old.
As unripe fruit, whose verdant stalk does cleave
Close to the tree, which grieves no less to leave
The smiling pendant which adorns her so,
And until Autumn on the bough should grow:
So seemed her youthful Soul not easily forced,
Or from so fair, so sweet a seat divorced;
Her Fate at once did hasty seem and slow,
At once too cruel and unwilling too.

Th. Under how hard a law are Mortals born!
Whom now we envy, we anon must mourn:
What heaven sets highest, and seems most to prize,
Is soon removed from our wondering eyes.
But since the Sisters did so soon untwine
So fair a thread, I Will strive to piece the line:
Vouchsafe (sad Nymph) to let me know the Dame,
And to the Muses I Will commend her name:
Make the wide Country echo to your moan,
The listening trees and salvage mountains groan;
What rocks not moved, when the death is sung
Of one so good, so lovely, and so young?

Gal. 'Twas Hamilton, whom I had named before,
But naming her, grief lets me say no more.

Fabula Phoebi and Daphnes.
ARcadiae juvenis Thirsis, Phoebique sacerdos,
Ingenti frustra Galateae ardebat amore:
Haud deus ipse olim Daphne majora canebat,
Nec fuit asperior Daphne, nec pulchrior illa.
Carminibus Phoebo dignis premit ille fugacem
Per rupes, per saxa volans, per florida vates
Pascua, formosam nunc his componere Nympham,
Nunc illis erudelem insana mente solebat:
Audiit illa procul miserum, citharamque sonantem
Audiit, at nullis respexit mota querelis.
Ne tamen omnino caneret desertus, ad alta
Sidera perculsi referunt nova carmina montes:
Sic non quaesitis cumulatus laudibus olim
Elapsa, reperit Daphne sua laurea Phoebus.
The Battle of the Summer Islands.
CANTO I. What fruit they have, and how heaven smiles Upon those late
discovered Isles.
Aid me, Bellona, while the dreadful fight
Betwixt a Nation and two Whales I write;
Seas stained with goare I sing, adventurous toil,
And how these Monsters did disarme an Isle.
Bermudas walled with rocks who does not know,
That happy Island where huge Lemmons grow,
And Orange trees, which golden fruit do bear?
The Hesperian garden boasts of none so fair.
There shining Pearl, Coral, and many a pound
On the rich shore of Ambergris is found:
The lofty Cedar, which to heaven aspires,
The Prince of trees, is fuel for their fires:
The smoke by which their loaded spits do turn,
For incense might on sacred Altars burn;
Their private roofs on odorous timber born,
Such as might Palaces for Kings adorn:
The sweet Palmetta's a new Bacchus yield
With leaves as ample as the broadest shield;
Under the shadow of whose friendly boughs
They sit carousing where their liquor grows:
Figs there unplanted through the fields do grow,
Such as fierce Cato did the Romans show,
With the rare fruit inviting them to spoil
Carthage, the Mistress of so rich a spoil:
The naked rocks are not unfruitful there,
But at some constant seasons every year
Their barren tops with luscious food abound,
And with the eggs of various fowls are crowned:
Tobacco is their worst of things which they
To English landlords as their tribute pay:
Such is the mould, that the blessed tenant feeds
On precious fruits, and pays his rent in weeds:
With candid Plantines, and the ivy Pine,
On choicest Melons and sweet grapes they dine,
And with Potatoes fat their wanton swine.
Nature these Cates with such a lavish hand
Powers out among them, that our courser land
Tastes of that bounty, and does cloth return,
Which not for warmth, but ornament is worn:
For the kind spring, which but salutes us here,
Inhabits there, and courts them all the year:
Ripe fruits and blossoms on the same trees live,
At once they promise what at once they give.
So sweet the air, so moderate the clime.
None sickly lives or dies before his time.
Heaven, sure, has kept this spot of earth uncurst,
To show how all things were created first.
The tardy plants in our could orchards placed
Reserve their fruits for the next ages taste;
There a small grain in some few months will be
A firm, a lofty, and a spacious tree.
The Palma-Christi and the fair Papah,
Now but a seed, (preventing natures law)
In half the circle of the hasty year
Project a shade, and lovely fruit do wear.
And as their trees in our dull region set
But faintly grow, and no perfection get;
So in this Northern tract our hoarser throats
Utter unripe and ill constrained notes,
Where the supporter of the Poets style,
Phoebus, on them eternally does smile.
O how I long my careless limbs to lay
Under a Plantanes shade, and all the day
With amorous airs my fancy entertain,
Invoke the Muses, and improve my vain!
No passion there in my free breast should move,
None, but the sweet and best of passions, Love:
There while I sing, if gentle love be by,
That tunes my Lute, and winds the strings so high
With the sweet sound of Sacharissa's name,
I Will make the listening salvages grow tame.
But while I do these pleasing dreams indite,
I am diverted from the promised fight.
CANTO II. Of their affright, and how their foes Discovered were, this Canto
shows.
THough rocks so high about this Island rise,
That well they may the numerous Turk despise;
Yet is no humane fate exempt from fear,
Which shakes their hearts, while through the Isle they hear
A lasting noise, as horrid, and as loud
As thunder makes before it breaks the clowd:
Three days they dread this murmr, ere they know
From what blind cause the unwoted sound may grow;
At length two Monsters of unequal size,
Hard by the shore, a fisherman espies,
Two mighty Whales, which swelling seas had tossed,
And left them prisoners on the rocky coast:
One as a mountain vast, and with her came
A Cub, not much inferior to his Dam;
Here in a poole among the rocks engaged
They roared like Lions caught in toils, and raged.
The man knew what they were, who heretofore
Had seen the like lie murdered on the shore,
By the wild fury of some tempest cast,
The fate of ships, and ship-wrackt men to taste.
As careless Dames, whom wine and sleep betray
To frantic dreams, their infants overlay;
So there sometimes the raging Ocean fails,
And her own brood exposes, when the Whales
Against sharp rocks, like reeling vessels quasht,
Though huge as mountains, are in pieces dashed:
Along the shore their dreadful limbs lie scattered,
Like hills with earthquakes shaken, torn and shattered.
Hearts sure of brass they had, who tempted first
Rude Seas, that spare not what themselves have nursed.
The welcome news through all the nation spread,
To sudden joy and hope converts their dread.
What lately was their public terror, they
Behold with glad eyes as a certain prey,
Dispose already of the untaken spoil;
And as the purchase of their future toil,
These share the bones, and they divide the oil.
So was the huntsman by the Bear oppressed,
Whose hide he fold before he caught the beast.
They man their boats, and all their young men arm
With whatsoever may the monsters harm,
Pikes, Holdberts, Spits, and Darts that wound so far,
The tools of peace and instruments of war:
Now was the time for vigorous lads to show
What love or honor could invite them to:
A goodly theater, where rocks are round;
With reverent age, and lovely lasses crowned,
Such was the lake, which held this dreadful pare,
Within the bounds of noble Warwicks share;
Warwicks bold Earl, then which no title bears
A greater sound among our British Peers;
And worthy he the memory to renew,
The fate and honor to that title due,
Whose brave adventures have transferred his name,
And through the New-world spread his growing fame.
But how they fought, and what their valor gained,
Shall in another Canto be contained.
CANTO III. The bloody fight, successlesse toil, And how the fishes sacked the
Jsle.
THe boat which on the first assault did go,
Stroke with a harping-iron the younger foe;
Who when he felt his side so rudely goar'd,
Loud as the Sea that nourished him, he roared.
As a broad Breame, to please some curious taste,
While yet alive, in boiling water cast,
Vexed with unwonted heat, bounds, flings about
The scorching brass, and hurles the liquour out:
So with the barbed javeling stung, he raves
And scourges with his tail the suffering waves:
Like Fairy Talus with his iron flaile,
He threatens ruin with his ponderous tail,
Dissolving at one stroke the battered boat,
And down the men fall drenched in the moate:
With every fierce encounter they are forced
To quit their boats, and fare like men unhoist:
The bigger Whale like some huge carrack lay
Which wants Sea-roome with her foes to play,
Slowly she swims, and when provoked she would
Advance her tail, her head salutes the mud;
The shallow water does her force infringe,
And renders vain her tails impetuous swinge;
The shining steel her tender sides receave,
And there like bees they all their weapons leave.
This sees the Cub, and does himself oppose
Betwixt his cumbred mother and her foes,
With desperate courage he receives her wounds,
And men and boats his active tail confounds;
Their furies joined the Seas with billows fill,
And make a tempest, though the winds be still.
Now would the men with half their hoped pray
Be well content, and wished this Cub away;
Their wish they have, He to direct his Dam
Unto the gap, through which they thither came,
Before her swims, and quits the hostile Lake;
A prisoner there but for his Mothers sake;
She by the rocks compelled to stay behind,
Is by the vastness of her bulk confined:
They shout for joy, and now on her alone
Their fury falls, and all their Darts are thrown:
Their Lances spent, One bolder then the rest
With his broad sword provokes the sluggish beast;
Her oily side devoures both blade and heft,
And there his steel the bold Bermudian left.
Courage the rest from his example take,
And now they change the color of the Lake,
Blood flows in rivers from her wounded side,
As if they would prevent the tardie tide,
And raise the flood to that propitious height,
As might convey her from this fatal straight;
She swims in blood, and blood does spouting throw
To heaven, that heaven men's cruelties might know;
Their fixed Javelins in her side she wears,
And on her back a grove of Pikes appears:
You would have thought, had you the Monster seen
Thus dressed, she had another Island been.
Roaring she tears the air with such a noise
(As well resembled the conspiring voice
Of routed armies, when the field is won)
To reach the ears of her escaped Son:
He (though a league removed from the so)
Hasts to her aid: the pious Trojan so,
Neglecting for Creusa's life his own,
Repeats the danger of the burning town.
The men amazed blush to see the seed
Of Monsters, humane piety exceed.
Well proves this kindness what the Grecians sung,
That Loves bright Mother from the Ocean sprung.
Their courage droops, and hopeless now they wish
For composition with th'unconquer'd Fish;
So she their weapons would restore again,
Through rocks they would hew her passage to the Main:
But how instructed in each others mind,
Or what commerce can men with Monsters find?
Not daring to approach their wounded so,
Whom her courageous Son protected so,
They charge their Muskets, and with hot desire
Of fell revenge, renew the fight with fire;
Standing aloof with Lead the bruise the scales,
And tear the flesh of the incensed Whales;
But no success their fierce endeavors found,
Nor this way could they give one fatal wound.
Now to their Forts they are about to send
For the loud Engines which their Isle defend;
But what those pieces framed to batter Walls,
Would have effected on those mighty Whales,
Great Neptune will not have us know, who sends
A tide so high that it relieves his friends:
And thus they parted with exchange of harms;
Much blood the Monsters lost, and they their arms.
Upon the death of my Lady Rich.
MAy those already cursed Essexian plains,
Where hasty Death, and pining sickness raigns*
Prove all a Desert, and none there make stay
But salvage beasts, or men as wild as they:
There the fair light, which all our Island graced;
Like Hero's Taper in the windows placed,
Such fate from the malignant air did find,
As that exposed to the boystrous wind.
Ah cruel heaven to snatch so soon away
Her, for whose life had we had time to pray,
With thousand vows and tears we should have sought
That sad decree's suspension to have wrought!
But we (alas!) no whisper of her pain
Heard, till 'twas sin to wish her here again.
That horrid word at once like lightning spread,
Struck all our ears: The Lady Rich is dead.
Heart-rending news, and dreadful to those few
Who her resemble, and her steps pursue,
That Death should license have to rage among
The fair, the wise, the virtuous, and the young.
The Paphian Queen from that fierce battle born
With goared hand, and Vail so rudely torn,
Like terror did among The Immortals breed,
Taught by her wound that God desses might bleed.
All stand amazed, but beyond the rest
Th'Heroique Dame, whose happy womb she blessed,
Moved with just grief expostulates with heaven,
Urging that promise to th'obsequious given
Of longer life; for never was pious soul
More apt to obey, more worthy to control:
A skillful eye at once might read the race
Of Caledonian Monarchs in her face,
And sweet humility, her look and mind
At once were lofty, and at once were kind.
There dwelt the scorn of vice, and pity too,
For those that did what she disdained to do;
So gentle and severe, that what was bad
At once her hatred and her pardon had;
Gracious to all, but where her love was due
So fast, so faithful, loyal, and so true,
That a bold hand as soon might hope to force
The rolling lights of heaven, as change her course.
Some happy Angel that beholds her there,
Instruct us to record what she was here;
And when this cloud of sorrow's over-blown,
Through the wide world we will make her graces known:
So fresh the wound is, and the grief so vast,
That all our art and power of speech is wast;
Here passion swayes, but there the Muse shall raise
Eternal monuments of louder praise.
There, our delight complying with her fame
Shall have occasion to recite thy name,
Fair Sacharissa, and now only fair,
To sacred friendship we will an Altar rear,
Such as the Romans did erect of old,
Where on a Marble pillar shall be told
The lovely passion each to other bare,
With the resemblance of that matchless pare.
Narcissus to the thing for which he pined,
Was not more like, then yours to her fair mind;
Save that you graced the several parts of life,
A spotless Virgin, and a faultless wife;
Such was the sweet converse 'twixt her and you,
As that she holds with her associates now.
How false is Hope, and how regardless Fate,
That such a love should have so short a date!
Lately I saw her sighing part from thee:
(Alas that that the last farewell should be!)
So looked Astraea, her remove designed,
On those distressed friends she left behind.
Consent in virtue knit your hearts so fast,
That still the knot in spite of Death does last.
For as your tears and sorrow-wounded soul
Prove well that on your part this bond is whole:
So all we know of what they do above
Is that they happy are, and that they love:
Let dark oblivion, and the hollow grave
Content themselves our frailer thoughts to have;
Well chosen love is never taught to die,
But with our nobler part invades the sky;
Then grieve no more that One so heavenly shaped
The crooked hand of trembling Age escaped:
Rather since we beheld her not decay,
But that she vanished so entire away,
Her wondrous beauty and her goodness merit
We should suppose that some propitious spirit
In that celestial form frequented here,
And is not dead, but ceases to appear.
To the Queen Mother upon her landing.
GReat Queen of Europe, where thy offspring wears
All the chief Crowns, whose Princes are thy heirs;
As welcome thou to Sea-girt Britains shore,
As erst Latona (who fair Cynthia bore)
To Delos was; here shines a Nymph as bright,
By thee disclosed with like increase of light.
Why was her joy in Belgia so confined?
Or why did you so much regard the wind?
Scarce could the Ocean (though enraged) have tossed
Thy Sovereign Bark, but where the obsequious Coast
Pays tribute to thy bed: Romes conquering hand
More vanquished Nations under her command
Never reduced. Glad Berecynthia so
Among her deathless progeny did go:
A wreath of Towers adorned her reverend head,
Mother of all that on Ambrosia fed.
Thy God-like race must sway the age to come,
Asshee Olympus peopled with her womb.
Would these Commanders of mankind obey
Their honored Parent, all pretenses lay
Down at your Royal feet, compose their jars,
And on the growing Turk discharge these wars,
The Christian Knights that sacred tomb should wrest
From Pagan hands, and triumph o'r the East:
There Englands Prince, and Gallia's Daulphin might
Like young Rinaldo and Tancredo sight,
In single combat, by their swords again
The proud Argantes and fierce Sultan slain;
Again might we their glorious deeds recite,
And with your Thuscan Muse exalt the fight.
Song.
Peace babbling Muse.
I dare not sing what you indite;
Her eyes refuse
To read the passion which they write:
She strikes my Lute, but if it sound,
Threatens to hurl it on the ground;
And I no less her anger dread,
Then the poor wretch that faines him dead,
While some fierce Lion does embrace
His breathless corpse, and licks his face;
Wrapped up in silent fear he lies,
Torn all in pieces, if he cries.
Of Love.
ANger in hasty words or blows
It self discharges on our foes;
And sorrow too finds some relief
In tears which wait upon our grief;
So every passion but fond Love
Unto its own redress does move,
But that alone the wretch inclines
To what prevents his own designs,
Makes him lament, and sigh, and weep,
Disord'red tremble, fawn and creep;
Postures which render him despised,
Where he endeavors to be prized.
For women borne to be controlled
Stoop to the forward and the bold,
Affect the haughty and the proud,
The gay, the frolic, and the loud,
Who first the generous steed oppressed,
Not kneeling did salute the beast,
But with high courage, life and force
Approaching, tamed the unruly horse.
Unwisely we the wiser East
Pity, supposing them oppressed
With tyrants force, whose law is will,
By which they govern, spoil and kill;
Each Nymph but moderately fair
Commands with no less rigor here.
Should some brave Turk, that walks among
His twenty Lasses bright and young,
And beckens to the willing Dame
Preferred to quench his present flame,
Behold as many gallants here
With modest guise and silent fear
All to one femall Idol bend,
Whilst her high pride does scarce descend
To mark their follies, he would swear
That these her guard of Eunuchs were,
And that a more Majestique Queen,
Or humbler slaves, he had not seen.
All this with indignation spoke
In vain I strugled with the yoke
Of mighty Love; that conquering look.
When next beheld, like lightning struck
My blasted soul, and made me bow
Lower then those I pityed now.
So the tall Stag upon the brink
Of some smooth stream about to drink,
Surveying there his armed head,
With shame remembers that he fled
The scorned dogs, resolves to try
The combat next; but if their cry
Invades again his trembling ear,
He straight resumes his wonted fear,
Leaves the untasted Spring behind,
And winged with fear outflyes the wind.
To the mutable Fair.
HEre, Coelia, for thy sake I part
With all that grew so near my heart,
The passion that I had for thee,
The faith, the love, the constancy;
And that I may successful prove,
Transform my self to what you love.
Fool that I was, so much to prize
Those simple virtues you despise!
Fool, that with such dull arrows strove,
Or hoped to reach a flying Dove!
For you that are in motion still,
Decline our force, and mock our skill,
Who like Don Quixote do advance
Against a windmill our vain lance.
Now will I wander through the air,
Mount, make a stoop at every Fair,
And with a fancy unconfined
(As lawless as the the Sea or wind)
Pursue you wheresoere you fly,
And with your various thoughts comply.
The formal stars do travel so,
As we their names and courses know;
And he that on their changes looks,
Would think them governed by our books;
But never were the clouds reduced
To any art, the motion used
By those free vapors are so light,
So frequent, that the conquered sight
Despaires to find the rules that guide
Those gilded shadows as they slide;
And therefore of the spacious air
Joves royal Consort had the care,
And by that power did once escape
Declining bold Ixion's rape;
She with her own resemblance graced
A shining cloud, which he embraced.
Such was that Image, so it smiled
With seeming kindness, which beguiled
Your Thirsis lately, when he thought
He had his fleeting Coelia caught;
'Twas shaped like her, but for the Fair
He filled his arms with yielding air.
A fate, for which he grieves the less,
Because the Gods had like success:
For in their story, One (we see)
Pursues a Nymph and takes a tree;
A second with a Lovers have
Soon overtakes whom he had chased,
But she that did a Virgin seem,
Possessed, appears a wandering stream;
For his supposed Love a third
Lays greedy hold upon a bird,
And stands amazed to find his dear
A wild Inhabitant of the air.
To these old tales such Nymphs as you
Give credit, and still make them new;
The Amorous now like wonders find
In the swift changes of your mind.
But Coelia, if you apprehend
The Muse of your incensed friend,
Nor would that he record your blame,
And make it live; repeat the same,
Again deceive him and again,
And then he swears he will not complain:
For still to be deluded so,
Is all the pleasure Lovers know,
Who, like good Faulkners, take delight
Not in the quarrey, but the flight.
Of the taking of Sally.
OF Jason, Theseus, and such Worthies old
Light seem the tales Antiquity has told,
Such Beasts and Monsters as their force oppressed,
Some places only, and some times infest;
Sally, that scorned all power and laws of Men,
Goods with their owners hurrying to their Den.
And future ages threatening with a crude
And salvage race successively renewed,
Their Kings despising with rebellious pride,
And foes professed to all the world beside,
This pest of mankind gives our Hero fame,
And through th'obliged world dilates his name.
The Prophet once to cruel Agag said,
As thy fierce sword has Mothers childless made,
So shall the sword make thine; and with that word
He hewed the man in pieces with his sword:
Just Charles like measure has returned to these
Whose Pagan hands had stained the troubled Seas;
With ships they made the spoiled Merchants mourn,
With ships their City and themselves are torn;
One squadron of our winged Castles sent
O'rthrew their Fort, and all their Navy rent.
For not content the dangers to increase,
And act the part of tempests in the Seas,
Like hungry Wolves these Pirates from our shore
Whole flocks of sheep and ravished cattle bore.
Safely they did on other Nations prey:
Fools, to provoke the Sovereign of the Sea!
Mad Cacus so, whom like ill Fate persuades,
The Herd of fair Alcmena's seed invades,
Who for revenge, and mortals glad relief
Sacked the dark Cave, and crushed that horrid thief.
Morocco's Monarch wondering at this fact,
Save that his presence his affairs exact,
Had come in person to have seen and known
The injured worlds revenger and his own;
Hither he sends the chief among his Peers,
Who in his Bark well-chosen presents bears
To the renowned for piety and force,
Poor Captives manumis'd, and matchless horse.
To Mistress Braughton.
Fair fellow servants, May your gentle ear
Prove more propitious to my slighted care,
Then the bright Dame's we serve, for her relief
(Vexed with the long expressions of my grief)
Receive these plaints, nor will her high disdain
Forbid my humble Muse to court her train.
So in those Nations which the Sun adore
Some modest Persian, or some weak-ey'd Moore,
No higher dares advance his dazzled sight;
Then to some gilded cloud, which near the light
Of their ascending God adorns the East,
And graced with his beams outshines the rest.
Thy skillful hand contributes to our woe,
And whets those Arrows which confound us so;
A thousand Cupids in those curles do sit,
Those curious Nets your slender fingers knit:
The Graces put not more exactly on
Th'attire of Venus, when the Ball she won,
Then Sacharissa by thy care is dressed,
When all our youth prefers her to the rest.
You the soft seasons know, when best her mind
May be to pity or to love inclined,
In some well chosen hour supply his fear,
Whose hopeless love durst never tempt the ear
Of that stern Goddess; You (her priest) declare
What offerings may propitiate the Fair,
Rich orient Pearl, bright stones that never decay,
Or polished lines which longer last then they:
For if I thought she took delight in those,
To where the cheerful Morn does first disclose,
(The shady night removing with her beams)
Winged with bold Love, I Would fly to fetch such gems.
But since her eyes, her teeth, her lip excels
All that is found in Mines or fishes shells,
Her nobler part as far exceeding these,
None but immortal gifts her mind can please.
Those shining Jewels Greece and Troy bestowed,
The snowy wrists, and lovely neck did lode
Of Sparta's Queen, but when the Town was burned,
Those fading glories were to ashes turned;
Her beauty too had perished, and her fame,
Had not the Muse redeemed them from the Flame.
Puerperium.
YOu Gods that have the power
To trouble and compose
All that is beneath your bower,
Calm silence on the Seas, on earth impose.
Fair Venus, in thy soft arms
The God of rage confine;
For thy whispers are the charms
Which only can divert his fierce design.
What though he frown, and to tumult do incline?
Thou the flame
Kindled in his breast can tame
With that snow which unmelted lies on thine.
Great Goddess, give this thy sacred Island rest,
Make heaven smile,
That no storm disturb us while
Thy chief care our Halcyon builds her nest.
Great Gloriana, fair Gloriana,
Bright as high heaven is and fertile as earth,
Whose beauty relieves us
Whose royal bed gives us
Both glory and peace,
Our present joy, our hopes increase.
To Phillis.
PHillis, why should we delay
Pleasures shorter then the day?
Could we (which we never can)
Stretch our life's beyond their span,
Beauty like a shadow flies,
And our youth before us dies:
Or would youth and beauty stay,
Love has wings, and will away,
Love has swifter wings then time.
Change in love to heaven does climb;
Gods that never change their state,
Varied often their love and hate:
Phillis, to this truth we owe
All the love betwixt us two;
Let not you and I enquire,
What has bin our past desire;
On what shepherds you have smiled,
Or what nymphs I have beguiled;
Leave it to the planets too,
What we shall hereafter do;
For the joys we now may prove,
Take advice of present Love.
To Phillis.
PHillis' it was love that injured you,
And on that rock your Thirsis threw,
Who for proud Coelia could have died,
Whilst you no less accused his pride.
Fond Love his darts at random throws,
And nothing springs from what he sows*
From foes discharged as often meet
The shining points of arrows fleet
In the wide air creating fire,
As souls that join in one desire.
Love made the lovely Venus burn
In vain, and for the cold Youth mourn,
Who the pursuit of churlish beasts
Preferred to sleeping on her breasts.
Love makes so many hearts the prize
Of the bright Carlisles conquering eyes,
Which she regards no more then they
The tears of lesser beauties weigh:
So have I seen the lost clouds power
Into the Sea an useless shower;
And the vexed sailors curse the rain,
For which poor shepherds prayed in vain.
Then (Phillis) since our passions are
Governed by chance, and not the care
But sport of heaven, which takes delight
To look upon this Parthian fight
Of Love, still flying or in chase,
Never incountring face to face;
No more to Love we will sacrifice,
But to the best of Deities;
And let our hearts which Love disjoined,
By his kind Mother be combined.
Song.
While I listen to thy voice,
Chloris, I feel my life decay;
That powerful noise
Calls my fleeting soul away.
Oh, suppress that magic sound,
Which destroys without a wound.
Peace Chloris, peace, or singing dye,
That together you and I
To heaven may go:
For all we know
Of what the blessed do above,
It that they sing, and that they love.
Song.
Stay Phoebus, stay,
The world to which you fly so fast
Conveying day
From us to them, can pay your have
With no such object, nor salute your Rise
With no such wonders as de Mornay's eyes.
Well does this prove
The error of those antique books,
Which made you move
About the world; her charming looks
Would fix your beams, and make it ever day,
Did not the rolling earth snatch her away.
To Amoret.
A Moret, the milky way,
Framed of many nameless stars;
The smooth stream, where none can say
He this drop to that prefers:
Amoret, my lovely so,
Tell me where thy strength does ly,
Where the power that charms us so;
In thy soul, or in thy ey?
By that snowy neck alone,
Or thy grace in motion seen,
No such wonders could be done;
Yet thy wast is straight and clean,
As Cupids shaft, or Hermes rod,
And powerful too as either God.
To my Lord of Falkland.
BRave Holland leads, and with him Falkland goes;
Who hears this told, and does not straight suppose
We send the Graces and the Muses forth
To civilize, and to instruct the North?
Not that these ornaments make swords less sharp;
Apollo wears as well his Bow as Harp;
And though he be the Patron of that Spring
Where in calm Peace the sacred Virgins sing,
He courage had to guard th'invaded throne
Of Jove, and cast the ambitious Giants down.
Ah! (noble Friend) with what impatience all
That know thy worth, and know how prodigal
Of thy great Soul thou art, longing to twist
Bays with that Ivy which so early kissed
Thy youthful Temples, with what horror we
Think on the blind events of war, and thee
To Fate exposing that all-knowing breast
Among the throng as cheaply as the rest,
Where Oaks and brambles (if the Copse be burned)
Confounded lie to the same ashes turned!
Some happy wind over the Ocean blow
This tempest yet, which frights our Island so,
Guarded with ships, and all the Sea our own,
From heaven this mischief on our heads is thrown.
In a late Dream the Genius of this Land
Amazed I saw like the fair Hebrew stand,
When first she felt the twins begin to jar,
And found her womb the seat of civil war;
Inclined to whose relief, and with presage
Of better fortune for the present Age,
Heaven sends, quoth I, this discord for our good,
To warm perhaps, but not to waste our blood;
To raise our drooping spirits, grown the scorn
Of our proud Neighbors, who ere long shall mourn
(Though now they joy in our expected harms)
We had occasion to resume our Arms,
A Lion so with self-provoking smart,
His rebel tail scourging his nobler part,
Calls up his courage, then begins to roar,
And charge his foes, who thought him mad before.
Of a Lady who writ in praise of Mira.
While she pretends to make the graces known
Of matchless Mira, she reveals her own;
And when she would another praise indite,
Is by her glass instructed how to write.
To one married to an old man.
SInce thou would needs, bewitched with some ill charms,
Be buried in those monumentall arms,
All we can wish, is, May that earth lie light
Upon thy tender limbs, and so Good night.
For the Drinking of Healths.
LEt Brutes and Vegetals that cannot think,
So far as drought and Nature urges, drink;
A more indulgent Mistress guides our sprights,
Reason, that dares beyond our appetites,
She would our care as well as thirst redress,
And with Divinity rewards excess.
Deserted Ariadne thus supplide,
Did perjured Theseus cruelty deride,
Bacchus embraced from her exalted thought
Banished the man, her passion, and his fault.
Bacchus and Phoebus are by Jove allied,
And each by others timely heat supplied:
All that the Grapes owe to his ripening fires,
Is paid in numbers which their joyce inspires.
Wine fills the veins, and Healths are understood
To give our friends a title to our blood:
Who naming me does warm his courage so,
Shows for my sake what his bold hand would do.
To Flavia.
Song.
It Is not your Beauty can engage
My wary Heart;
The Sun in all his Pride and Rage
Has not that Art;
And yet he shines as bright as you,
If brightness could our Souls subdue.
It Is not the pretty things you say,
Or those you write,
Which can make Thirsis heart your Prey,
For that delight,
The graces of a well taught mind
In some of our own Sex we find.
No Flavia, it is your Love I fear,
Loves surest Darts
Those which so seldom fail him are
Headed with Hearts,
Their very shadow makes us yield,
Dissemble well, and win the Field.
Of my Lady Isabella playing on the Lute.
SUch moving sounds from such a careless touch,
So unconcerned her self, and we so much!
What Art is this; that with so little pains
Transports us thus, and o'r the spirit raigns?
The trembling strings about her fingers crowd,
And tell their joy for every kiss aloud;
Small force there needs to make them tremble so;
Touched by that hand, who would not tremble too?
Here Love takes stand, and while she charms the ear,
Empties his Quiver on the listening Dear:
Music so softens and disarms the mind,
That not an Arrow does resistance find;
Thus the fair Tyrant celebrates the prize,
And acts her self the triumph of her eyes.
So Nero once, with Harp in hand, surveyed
His flaming Rome, and as it burned, he played.
The fall.
SEe how the willing earth gave way
To take the impression where she lay!
See how the mould, as loath to leave
So sweet a burden, still does cleave
Close to th'Nymphs stained garment! here
The coming Spring would first appear,
And all this place with roses strew,
If busy feet would let them grow:
Here Venus smiled to see blind Chance
It self before her Son advance,
And a fair Image to present
Of what the Boy so long had meant.
'Twas such a chance as this made all
The world into this order fall;
Thus the first Lovers, on the clay
Of which they were composed, lay;
So in their prime with equal grace
Met the first Patterns of our Race;
Then blush not (Fair) or on him frown,
Or wonder how you both came down;
But touch him, and he will tremble straight,
How could he then support your weight?
How could the Youth (alas!) but bend,
When his whole heaven upon him leaned?
If ought by him amiss were done,
'T was that he let you rise so soon.
Of Silvia.
OUr sighs are heard, just Heaven declares
The sense it has of Lovers cares;
She that so far the rest out-shin'd,
Silvia the fair, while she was kind,
As if her frowns impaired her brow,
Seems only not unhandsome now:
So when the sky makes us endure
A storm, it self becomes obscure.
Hence it is that I conceal my flame,
Hiding from Flavia's self her name,
Lest she provoking Heaven should prove
How it rewards neglected Love:
Betrer a thousand such as I,
Their grief untold, should pine and die,
Then her bright Morning overcast
With sullen clouds should be defaced.
The Bud.
LAtely on yonder swelling Bush,
Big with many a coming Rose,
This early Bud began to blush,
And did but half it self disclose:
I plucked it, though no better grown,
Yet now you see how full it is blown.
Still as I did the leaves inspire,
With such a purple light they shone.
As if they had been made of fire,
And spreading so would flame anon.
All that was meant by Air or Sun
To the young Flower, my breath has done.
If our loose breath so much can do,
What may the same in forms of Love,
Of purest Love and Music too,
When Flavia it aspires to move;
When that which lifeless Buds persuades
To wax more soft, her youth invades?
To a Lady singing a Song of his composing.
CHloris, your self you so excel,
When you vouchsafe to breath my thought,
That like a Spirit with this spell
Of my own teaching I am caught.
That Eagles fate and mine are one,
Which on the shaft that made him die,
Espied a feather of his own,
Wherewith he wont to soar so high.
Had Echo with so sweet a grace
Narcissus loud complaints returned,
Not for reflection of his face,
But of his voice the Boy had mourned.
At the Marriage of the Dwarfes.
THe Sign or Chance makes others wive,
But Nature did this Match contrive;
Eve might as well have Adam fled,
As she denied her little Bed
To him, for whom Heaven seemed to frame,
And measure out this only Dame.
Thrice happy is that humble Pair
Beneath the level of all Care,
Over whose heads those Arrows fly
Of sad Distrust and Jealousy,
Secured in as high extreme,
As if the World held none but them.
To him the fairest Nymphs do show
Like moving Mountains topt with Snow;
And every man a Polypheme
Does to his Galatea seem:
None may presume her faith to prove;
He profers Death, that profers Love.
Ah (Chloris) that kind Nature thus
From all the World had severed us,
Creating for our selves us two,
As Love has me for only you!
Upon Ben: Johnson.
Mirror of Poets, Mirror of our Age,
Which her whole face beholding on thy Stage,
Pleased and displeased with her own faults, indures
A remedy like those whom Music cures:
Thou have alone those various inclinations
Which Nature gives to Ages, Sexes, Nations;
Have tracked with thy all-resembling Pen
What ever Custom has imposed on Men,
Or ill-got Habits (which distorts them so,
That scarce one Brother can the brother know)
Is representing to the wondering eyes
Of all that see or read thy Comedies;
Who ever in those Glasses look, may find
The spots returned, or graces of the mind;
And by the help of so divine an Art,
At leisure view and dress his nobler Part.
Narcissus cous'ned by that flattering Well,
And nothing could but of his beauty tell;
Had here discovering the deformed estate
Of his fond mind preserved himself with hate.
But Virtue too, as well as Vice, is clad
In flesh and blood so well, that Plato had
Beheld what his high fancy once embraced,
Virtue with colors, speech, and motion graced.
The sundry Postures of thy copious Muse
Who would express, a thousand Tongues must use;
Whose Fate's no less peculiar then thy Art;
For as thou could all Characters impart,
So none can render thine, who still escapes
Like Proteus in variety of shapes,
Who was, nor this, nor that, but all we find,
And all we can imagine in mankind.
To Master George Sands on his Translation of some part of the Bible.
HOw bold a work attempts that Pen,
Which would enrich our vulgar tongue
With the high raptures of those men,
Who here with the same Spirit sung,
Wherewith they now assist the Quire
Of Angels, who their Songs admire?
What ever those inspired Souls
Were urged to express, did shake
The aged Deep, and both the Poles,
Their numerous thunder could awake
Dull Earth, which does with Heaven consent?
To all they wrote, and all they meant.
Say (sacred Bard) what could bestow
Courage on thee to soar so high?
Tell me (brave Friend) what helped thee so
To shake off all Mortality?
To light this Torch, thou have climbed higher
Then he who stole Celestial fire.
Chloris and Hilas.
Chl. HIlas, o Hilas! why sit we mute,
Now that each Bird saluteth the Spring?
Wind up the slack'ned strings of thy Lute,
Never can thou want matter to sing:
For Love thy breast does fill with such a site,
That whatsoever is fair moves thy desire.

Hill. Sweetest, you know the sweetest of things
Of various flowers the Bees do compose,
Yet no particular taste it brings
Of Violet, Woodbine, Pink, or Rose:
So Love the resultance is of all our Graces,
Which flow from a thousand several faces.

Chl. Hilas, the Birds which chaunt it in this Grove,
Could we but know the language they use,
They would instruct us better in Love,
And reprehend thy inconstant Muse;
For Love their breasts does fill with such a fire,
That what they once do choose bounds their desire.

Hill. Chloris, this change the Birds do approve,
Which the warm Season hither does bring;
Time from your self does further remove
You, then the Winter from the gay Spring:
She that like Lightning shined while her face lasted,
The Oak now resembles which Lightning has blasted.

Under a Ladies Picture.
SUch Helen was, and who can blame the Boy
That in so bright a flame consumed his Troy?
But had like Virtue shined in that fair Greek,
The amorous Shepherd had not dared to seek,
Or hope for pity, but with silent moan
And better fate had perished alone.
In answer of Sir John Sucklins Verses.
Con. STay here fond Youth, and ask no more, be wise,
Knowing too much long since lost Paradise.

Pro. And by your knowledge we should be bereft
Of all that Paradise which yet is lost.

Con. The virtuous joys thou have, thou would, should still
Last in their pride, and would not take it ill,
If rudely from sweet Dreams, and for a toy
Thou were awaked* he wakes himself that does enjoy.

Pro. How can the joy or hope which you allow,
Be styled virtuous, and the end not so?
Talk in your sleep, and shadows still admire;
It Is true, he wakes that feels this real fire,
But to sleep better; for who ere drinks deep
Of this Nepenthe, rocks himself asleep.

Con. Fruition adds no new wealth, but destroys,
And while it pleases much, yet still it cloyes;
Who thinks he shall be happier made for that,
As reasonably might hope, he might grow fat
By eating to a Surfeit, this once past
that relishes? even kisses lose their taste.

Pro. Blessings may be repeated while they cloy;
But shall we starve, 'cause Surfeitings destroy?
And if fruition did the taste impair
Of kisses, why should yonder happy Pair,
Where joys just Hymen warrants all the night,
Consume the day too in this less delight?

Con. Urge not it is necessary, alas! we know
The homeliest thing that Mankind does is so*
The World is of a large extent we see,
And must be peopled, Children there must be,
So must Bread too: but since there are enough
Borne to that drudgery, what need we plough?

Pro. I need not plough, since what the stooping Hine
Gets of my pregnant Land, must all be mine;
But in this nobler Tillage it is not so,
For when Anchises did fair Venus know,
What intrest had poor Vulcan in the Boy,
Great-soul'd Aeneas, or the present joy?

Con. Women enjoyed, what ere tofore they have been,
Are like Romances read, or Scenes once seen:
Fruition dulls or spoils the Play much more,
Then if one read, or knew the Plot before.

Pro. Plays and Romances read and seen do fall,
(...) Opinions, yet not seen at all
Whom would they please? to an Heroic tale
Would you not listen, lest it should grow stale?

Con. It Is Expectation makes a Blessing dear:
Heaven were not Heaven, if we knew what it were.

Pro. If It were not Heaven, if we knew what it were.
'T would not be Heaven to them that now are there.

Con. As in prospects we are there pleased most,
Where something keeps the eye from being lost,
And leaves room to guess: so here restraint
Holds up delight, that with excess would faint.

Pro. Restraint preserves the pleasure we have got,
But he never has it that enjoyes it not.
In goodly prospects, who contracts the space,
Or takes not all the bounty of the place?
We wish removed what stands in our light,
And Nature blame for limiting our sight,
Where you stand wisely winking, that the view
Of the fair prospect may be always new,

Con. They who know all the wealth they have are poor,
He Is only Rich that cannot tell his store.

Pro. Not he that knows the wealth he has is poor,
But he that dares not touch, nor use his store.

To A. H. of the different success of their Loves.
THrice-happy Pair, of whom we cannot know
Which first began to love, or loves most now:
Fair course of Passion, where two Lovers start
And run together, heart still yoakt in heart!
Succesfull Youth, whom Love has taught the way
To be victorious in thy first Essay!
Sure Love's an Art best practiced at first,
And where th'experienc'd still prosper worst
I with different Fate pursued in vain
The haughty Coelia, till my just disdain
Of her neglect above that Passion born,
Did pride to pride oppose, and scorn to scorn.
Now she rolents, but all too late to move
A Heart diverted to a nobler Love:
The Scales are turned, her Kingdom weighs no more
Now, then my vows and service did before.
So in some well-wrought Hangings you may see
How Hector leads, and how the Grecians flee;
Here the fierce Mars his courage so inspires,
That with bold hands the Argive Flee the fires;
But there from Heaven the blew eyed Virgin falls,
And frighted Troy retires within her walls:
They that are foremost in that bloody place
Turn head anon, and gives the Conquerours chase.
So like the Chances are of Love and War,
That they alone in this distinguished are;
In Love the Victors from the vanquished sly,
They sly that wound, and they pursue that die.
An Apology for having loved before.
THey that never had the use
Of the Grapes surprising joyce,
To the first delicious cup
All their reason render up;
Neither do, nor care to know
Whether it be the best or no.
So they that are to Love inclined,
Swayed by Chance, not choice or art,
To the first that is fair or kind,
Make a present of their heart;
It Is not she that first we love,
But whom dying we approve,
To Man, that was in the Evening made,
Stars gave the first delight,
Admiring in the gloomy shade
Those little drops of light.
Then at Aurora, whose fair hand
Removed him from the skies,
Heegazing toward the East did stand,
She entertained his eyes.
But when the bright Sun did appear,
All those he'gan despise:
His wonder was determined there,
He could no higher rise.
He neither might, or wished to know
A more refulgent light
For that, as mine your Beauties now
Employ his utmost sight.
Palamede to Zelinde Ariana. lib. 6.
FAirest piece of well formed earth,
Urge not thus your haughty Birth,
The power which you have ore us lies
Not in your Race, but in your eyes.
None but a Prince! alas, that voice,
Confines you to a narrow choice;
Should you no honey vow to taste,
But what the Master Bees have placed
^n compass of their Cells, how small
A portion to your share would fall?
Nor all appear among those few,
Worthy the stock from whence they grew.
The sap which at the root is bred
In Trees, through all the boughs is spread.
But Virtues which in Parents shine,
Make not like Progress through the Line.
It Is not from whom, but where we live,
The place does often those Graces give.
Great Julius on the Mountains bred,
A flock perhaps or herd had led:
He that the world subdued had been
But the best Wrestler on the Green:
It Is art and Knowledge which draw forth
The hidden seeds of native worth,
They blow those sparks, and make them rise
Into such flames as touch the Skies.
To the old Hero's hence was given
A Pedigree which reached to Heaven;
Of mortal Seed they were not held,
Which other Mortals so excelled:
And Beauty too in such excess
As yours, Zelinde, claymes no less;
Smile but on me, and you shall scorn
Henceforth to be of Princes born.
I can describe the shady Grove,
Where your loved Mother slept with Jove,
And yet excuse the faultless Dame
Caught with her Spouses shape and name;
Thy matchless form will credit bring
To all the wonders I shall sing.
Loves Farewell.
I Reading the path to Nobler ends,
A long farewell to Love I gave:
^esolv'd my Country and my Friends
^ll that remained of me should have;
and this Resolve no mortal Dame,
None but those eyes could have o'rthrowne.
The Nymph, I dare, nor need not name,
^o high, so like her self alone:
Thus the Oak, which now aspires
Above the fears of private fires,
Grown, and designed for nobler use,
Not to make warm, but build the house;
Though from our meaner flames secure,
Must that which falls from heaven endure.
To Chloris.
CHloris, what eminent we know,
Must for some cause be valued so;
Things without use, though they be good,
Are not by us so understood.
The early Rose made to display
Her bushes to the youthful May,
Does yield her sweets since he is fair.
And courts her with a gentle air.
Our stars too show their excellence,
Not by their light, but influence;
When brighter Comets since still known.
Fatal to all, are liked by none:
So your admired beauty still
Is by effects made good or ill.
Madam,
AS in some climes the warmer Sun,
Makes it full Summer ere the spring's begun,
And with ripe fruit the bending boughts can load,
Before the violets dare look abroad:
So measure not by any common use,
The early love your brighter eyes produce.
When lately your fair hand, in woman's weed,
Wrapped my glad head, I wished me so indeed,
That hasty time might never make me grow,
Out of those favors you afford me now;
That I might ever such indulgence find,
And you not blush or think your self too kind,
Who now I fear while I these joys express,
Begin to think how you may make them less:
The sound of love makes your soft heart affraide,
And guard it self, though but a child invade,
And innocently at your white breast throw
A dart as white, a Ball of new fallen snow.
An Epigram On a painted Lady with ill teeth.
Were men so dull they could not see
That Lyce painted, should they flee
Like simple Birds into a Net,
So grossly woven and ill set;
Her own teeth would undo the knot,
And let all go that she had got.
Those teeth fair Lyce must not show,
If she would bite: her Lovers, though
Like Birds they stoop at seeming grapes,
Are disabus'd when first she gapes;
The rotten bones discovered there,
Show it is a painted Sepulcher.
On a Girdle.
THat which her slender waste confined,
Shall now my joyful temples bind;
No Monarch but would give his Crown
His Arms might do what this has done,
It is my Heavens extremest Sphere,
The pale which held the lovely Dear,
My joy, my grief, my hope, my Love,
Do all within this Circle move.
A narrow compass, and yet there
Dwells all that is good, and all that is fair:
Give me but what this Ribban tied,
Take all the sun goes round beside.
On Mr. John Fletchers plays.
FLetcher, to thee we do not only owe.
All these good plays but those others too,
Thy wit repeated does support the Stage,
Credits the last, and entertaines this Age,
No worthies formed by any Muse but thine
Could purchase robes, to make themselves so fine,
What brave Commander is not proud to see
Thy brave Melantius in his Gallantrie,
Our greatest Ladys love to see their scorn
Out done by thine, in what themselves have worn.
The Impatient widow ere the year be done,
Sees thy Aspasia weeping in her gown.
I never yet the Tragic strain assayed,
Detered by that inimitable Maid.
And when I venture at the Comicke style,
Thy scornful Lady, seems to mock my toil.
Thus has thy Muse at once improved and marred,
Our sport in plays by rendering it too hard.
So when a sort of lusty shepherds throw,
The bar by turns, and none the rest out go
So far but that the best are measuring casts,
There emulation, and there pastimes lasts;
But it some braunie Yeoman of the guard
Stepp in and toss the axeltrie a yard,
Or more beyond the furthest mark, the rest,
Dispairing stand, Their sport is at the best.
To Chloris upon a favor received.
CHloris, since first our calm of peace
Was frighted hence, this good we find.
Your favors with your fears increase,
And growing mischiefs make you kind.
So the fair tree which still preserves
Her fruit and state whilst no wind blows,
In storms from that uprightness swerves.
And the glad earth about her strowes
With treasure from her yiedling boughs.
The Table.
OF the danger his Majesty (being Prince) escaped at the rode at St. Andere. 1
Of His Majesty's receiving of the news of the Duke of Buckinghams death. 11 To
the King on His Navy. 13 Upon his Majesty's repairing of Paul's. 15 To the
Queen occasioned upon sight of her Majesty's Picture. 19 The apology of
sleep, for not aproaching the Lady who can do any thing but sleep when she
pleases. 23 The country to my lady of Carlisle. 26 The Countess of Carlisle in
mourning. 28 An answer to a libell against her etc. 31 On my lady Dorothy
Sidneys Picture. 33 To Vandike. 34 At Pens-Hurst. 37 At Pens-Hurst. 40 To my
Lord of Leicester. 42 To my young lady Lucy Sidney. 44 Of the lady who can
sleep when she pleases 45 Of the misreport of her being painted. 47 Of her
passing through a crowd of people. 48 A Song. Say lovely dream 50 A Song.
Behold the brand of beauty tossed, 52 To Amoret. 53 The story of Phoebus and
Daphne aplyed etc 57 Of Mistress Arden, 59 On the discovery of a ladies
painting, 60 To a lady from whom he received a silver pen. 62 On a Bread of
diverse colors woven by four Ladies. 64 On the head of a Stag. 65 To a lady in
retirement. 66 The Misers Speech in a Mask. 68 To my lord of Northumberland
upon the death of his Lady. 69 To my lord admiral of his late sickness and
recovery. 72 On the friendship betwixt Sacharissa and Amoret. 76 A la malade. 78
Of her Chamber. 80 Of loving at first sight. 81 The self banished. 83 Of and
to the Queen. 84 A Song. Go lovely Rose, 89 Thirsis. Galatea. 90 Fabula
Phoebi et Daphnis. 94 The battle of the summer Jslands, in three Cantos. 95
Upon the death of the Lady Rich. 108 To the Queen Mother upon her lauding. 113
A Song. Peace babbling muse, 115 Of Love. 116 To the mutable Fair. 119 Of the
taking of Sally. 123 To Mistress Broughton. 126 Puerperium. 129 To Phillis. 131
To Phillis. 132 A Song. While I listen to thy voice 135 A Song. Stay Phoebus
stay. 136 To Amoret. 137 To my Lora of Falkland. 138 On a Lady who writ in
praise of Mira. 141 To one Married to an old man. 141 For the drinking of
Healths. 142 To Flavia, a Song. 143 Of my Lady Isabella playing on a Lute. 145
The Fall. 146 Of Silvia. 148 The Bud, 149 To a Lady singing a Song of his
Composing. 151 At the Marriage of the Dwarfs. 152 Upon Ben. Johnson. 153 To Mr.
George Sands, on his Translation of some part of the Bible. 156 Chloris and
Hilas. 157 Under a Ladies Picture. 159 In answer of Sir John Sucklins Verses.
160 To A.H. of the different success of their Loves. 166 An Apology for having
Loved before. 168 Palamede to Zelinde. Ariana, Lib. 6. 170 Loves Farewell. 173
To Chloris. 174 Madam. As in some climes. 175 An Epigram on a painted Lady with
ill teeth. 176 On a Girdle. 177 On Mr. John Fletchers Plays. 178 To Cloris
upon a Favor received. 180
FINIS.
Mr. WALLERS Speech in Parliament against the Prelates Innovations.
Mr. Speaker,
WE shall make it appear, the errors of Divines who would that a Monarch,
can be absolute, and that he can do all things ad libitum, receding not only
from their Text, (though that be wandering too) but from the way their own
profession might teach them. Stare super vias antiquas, and remove not the
ancient bounds and Landmarks, which our Fathers have set.

If to be absolute, were to be restrained by no Laws; Then can no King in
Christendom be so, for they all stand obleidged to the Laws Christian, and we
ask no more, for to this Pillar, be our Privileges fixed. Our Kings at their
Coronation, having taken a Sacred Oath, not to infringe them, I am sorry these
men take no more care, for the informing of our Faith of these things, which
they tell us for our Souls health; whilst we know them so manifestly in the
wrong way, in that which concerns the Liberties and Privileges of the
Subjects of England.

They gain preferment, and then it is no matter, though they neither believe
themselves, nor are believed by others. But since they are so ready, to let
loose the Conscience of our Kings, we are the more carefully to proceed for
our protection against this Polpit-law, by declaring, and reinforcing
Municipall Laws of this Kingdom.

It is worthy the observation, how new this opinion, or rather this way of
rising, is even amongst themselves.

For, (Mr. Speaker) Mr. Hooker, who was no refractory man, (as they term it)
thinks that the first government was Arbitray, until it was found, that to
live by one man's will, becomes all men's misery; these are his words, and that
these were the original of inventing Laws.

And (Mr. Speaker,) if we look farther back, our Histories will tell us,
that the Prelates of this Kingdom, have often been the Mediators between the
King and his Subjects, to present and pray redress of their grievances, and
had reciprocally then, as much love and reverence from the people.

But these Preachers, more active then their Predecessors, and wiser then the
Laws, have found out a better form of Government.

The King must be a more absolute Monarch, than any of his Pedecessours, and to
them he must owe it* though in the mean time, they hazard the hearts of his
People, and involve Him into a thousand Difficulties.

For suppose, this form of Government were inconvenient; (Mr. Speaker) this is
but a Supposition; for this five hundred years it has not only maintained us
in safety, but made us victorious over other Nations: But suppose, this form of
Government were inonconvenient; and they have another Idea of one more
convenient; We all know, how dangerous Innovations are, though to the better;
and what hazard those Princes run, that enterprise the Change of a long
established Government.

Now ( Mr. Speaker) of all our Kings that have gone before, and of all that are
to succeed in this happy race, why should so pious, and so good a King, be
exposed to this trouble and hazard? Besides, that King so diverted, can never
do any great matters abroad.

But ( Mr. Speaker) whilst these men have thus bent their Wits against the Law
of their Country; have they not neglected their own profession? What tares are
grown up in the field, which they should have tilled, I leave it to a second
consideration? not but Religion be the first thing in our purposes and desires:
But that which is first in dignity, is not always to preceed in order of time,
for well-being, supposes a being; and the first impediment which men naturally,
endeavor to rem ove, is the want of those things, without which they cannot
subsist. God first assigned unto Adam, maintenance of life, and added to him a
title to the rest of the Creatures, before he appointed a Law to observe.

And let me tell you, that if our Adversaries have any such design, as there
is nothing more easy, then to impose Religion on a people deprived of their
Liberties, so there is nothing more hard, then to do the same upon Freemen.

And therefore ( Mr. Speaker) I conclude with this motion, that there may be an
Order presently made, that the first thing this House goes about, shall be the
restoring of this Nation in general, to the fundamental and vital Liberties,
the propriety of our Goods, and freedom of our Persons: And then We will
forthwith consider of the supply desired.

And thus shall We discharge the trust reposed in us by those that sent us
hither: And His Majesty shall see, that we will make more then ordinary have to
satisfy His demands; and we shall let all those know that seek to hasten the
matter of supply, that they will so far delay it, as they give no interruption
to the Former.

Mr. WALLERS Speech in Parliament, at a Conference of both Houses in the
painted Chamber. 6. July 1641.
MY LORDS.
I Am commanded by the House of Commons, to present you with these Articles
against Mr. Justice Crawley, which when your Lordships shall have been pleased
to hear read I shall take leave (according to custom) to say something of
what I have collected from the sense of that House concerning the crimes
therein contained.

Here the charge was read containing his extrajudicall opinions subscribed, and
judgment given for Ship Money, and afterward a declaration in his charge at on
assize, that Ship-mony was so inhaerent alright in the Crown, that it would not
be in the power of a Parliament to take it away.

MY LORDS, Not only my wants but my affections render me less fit for this
employment: for though it has not been my happiness to have the Law a part of
my breeding, there is no man honors that profession more, or has a greater
reverence toward the grave Judges the Oracles thereof. Out of Parliament all
our Courts of Justice are governed or directed by them, and when a Parliament
is called, if your Lordships were not assisted by them, and the House of
Commons by other Gentlemen of that Robe, experience tells us it might run a
hazard of being styled Parliamentum indoctorum. But as all professions are
obnoxious to the malice of the professors, and by them most easily betrayed, so
(my Lords) these Articles have told you how these brothers of the Coyfe are
become fratres in malo; how these sons of the Law have torn out the bowels
of their mother: But this Judge (whose charge you last heard) in one expression
of his excells no less his Fellows, then they have done the worst of their
predecessors, in this conspiracy against the Commonwealth. Of the Judgment
for Shipmoney, and those extrajudiciall opinions preceding the same (wherein
they are jointly concerned) you have already heard; how unjust and pernicious a
proceeding that was in so public a Cause, has been sufficiently expressed to
your Lordships: But this man, adding despair to our misery, tells us from the
Bench, that Ship Money was a Right so inhaerent in the Crown, that it would
not be in the power of an Act of Parliament to take it away. Herein (my Lords)
he did not only give as deep a wound to the Commonwealth as any of the rest,
but dipped his dart in such a poison, that so far as in him lay it might never
receive a cure. As by those abortive opinions subscribing to the subversion of
our propriety, before he heard what could be said for it, he prevented his
own, so by this declaration of his he endeavors to prevent the Judgment of
your Lordships too, and to confine the power of a Parliament, the only place
where this mischief might be redrest: Sure he is more wise and learned, then
to believe himself in this opinion, or not to know how ridiculous it would
appear to a Parliament, and how dangerous to himself, and therefore no doubt
but by saying no Parliament could abolish this Judgment, his meaning was that
this Judgment had abolish't Parliaments.

This imposition of Ship-mony springing from a pretended necessity, was it not
enough that it was now grown annual, but he must intayle it upon the State for
ever, at once making necessity inh^e^ent to the Crown, and slavery to the
Subject? Necessity, which dissolving all Law is so much more prejudicial to
his Majesty then to any of us, by how much the Law has invested his Royal
State with a greater power, and ampler fortune, for so undoubred a truth it has
ever been, that Kings as well as Subjects are involved in the confusion which
necessity produces, that the Heathen, thought their gods also obliged by the
same, Pareamus necessitati quam nec homines nec dii superant: This Judge then
having in his charge at the Assize declared the dissolution of the Law by this
supposed necessity, with what conscience could he at the same Assize proceed
to condeme and punish men, unless perhaps he meant the Law was still in force
for our destruction, and not for our preservation, that it should have power to
kill, but none to protect us; a thing no less horrid then if the Sun should
burn without lighting us, or the earth serve only to bury and not to feed and
nourish us But (my Lords) to demonstrate that this was a suppositious imposed
necessity, and such as they could remove when they pleased, at the last
Convention in Parliament a price was set upon it, for twelve Subsidies you
shall reverse this Sentence; It may be said that so much money would have
removed the present necessity, but here was a Rate set upon future necessity.
For twelve Subsidies you shall never suffer necssity again, you shall for ever
abolish that judgment; Here this mystery is revealed, this visour of necessity
is pulled off, and now it appears that this Parliament of Judges had very
frankly and bountifully presented his Majesty with twelve Subsidies to be
leavied on your Lordships, and the Commons: Certainly there is no privilege
which more properly belongs to a Parliament, then to open the purse of the
Subject, and yet these Judges, who are neither capable of sitting among us in
the house of Commons, nor with your Lordships, otherwise then as your
assistants, have not only assumed to themselves this privilege of Parliament,
but presumed at once to make a present to the Crown of all that either your
Lordships or the Commons of England do, of shall hereafter possess.

And because this man has had the boldness to put the power of Parliament in
balance with the opinion of the Judges, I shall entreat your Lordships to
observe by way of comparison the solemn and safe proceeding of the one, with
the precipitate dispatch of the other. In Parliament (as your Lordships know
well (no new Law can pass, or old be abrogated, till it has been thrice read
with your Lordships, thrice in the Commons House, and then it receives the
Royal Assent, so that it is like gold 7 times purified; whereas these Judges by
this one resolution of theirs, would persuade his Majesty, that by naming
necessity he might at once dissolve (at least suspend) the great Charter 32
times confirmed by his Royal Progenitors, the petition of Right, and all other
Laws provided for the maintenance of the Right and propriety of the Subject; a
strange force (my Lords) in the sound of this word necessity, that like a
Charm it should silence the Laws, while we are pispoyl'd of all we have: for
that but a part of our goods was taken, is owing to the grace and goodness of
the King; for so much as concerns these Judges, we have no more left then they
perhaps may deserve to have, when your Lordships shall have passed Judgment
upon them: This for the the neglect of their Oaths, and betraying that public
trust, which for the conservation of our Laws was reposed in them.

Now for the cruelty and unmercifulness of this judgment, you may please to
remember that in the old Law they were forbid to sees a Kid in his mothers
milk, of which the received interpretation is, that we should not use that to
the destruction of any creature which was intended for its preservation; Now
(my Lords) God and Nature has given us the Sea as our best Guard against our
Enemies, and our ships as our greatest glory above other Nations, and how
barbarously would these men have let in the sea upon us, at once to wash away
our Liberties, and to overwhelm, if not our Land, all the propriety we have
therein, making the supply of our Navy, a pretense for the ruin of our Nation;
for observe I beseech you the fruit and consequence of this judgment, how this
money has prosper'd, how contrary an effect it has had to the end for which
they pretended to take it: On every County a ship is annually imposed, and who
would not expect, but our seas by this time should be covered with the number
of our ships? Alas (my Lords) the daily Complaints of the decay of our Navy
tells us how ill ship money has maintained the Sovereignty of the sea: and by
the many petitions which we receive from the wives of those miserable Captives
at Algier (being between 4 and 5 thousand of our Countrymen) it does evidently
appear that to make us slaves at home, is not the way to keep us from being
made slaves abroad; so far has this judgment bin from reliving the present
or preventing the future necessity, that as it changed our real propriety into
the shadow of a propriety, so of a seigned it has made a Real necessity.

A little before the approach of the Gauls to Rome, while the Romans had yet
no apprehension of that danger, there was heard a voice in the Air, louder
then ordinary, The Gauls are come, which voice after they had sacked the
City, and besieged the Capitol, was held so ominous, that Livie relates it as
a Prodigy; This Anticipation of necessity seems to have been no less ominous
to us; These Judges like ill boading birds have called necessity upon the State
in a time when I dare say they thought themselves in greatest security; but if
it seem superstitions to take this as an Omen, sure I am we may look on it as a
cause of the unfeigned necessity we now suffetr for what regret and discontent
had this judgment bred among us? And as when the noise and tumult in a private
house grows so loud, as to be heard into the streets, it calls in the next
dwellers either kindly to appease, or to make their own use of the domestic
strife; so in all likelihood our known discontents at home have been a
concurrent cause to invite our Neighbors to visit us so much, to the expense
and trouble of both these Kingdoms.

And here, my Lords, I cannot but take notice of the most sad effect of this
oppression, the ill influence it has had upon the ancient reputation and valor
of the English Nation: and no wonder, for if it be true that oppression makes a
wise man mad, it may well suspend the courage of the valiant: The same happened
to the Romans when for renown in Arms they most excelled the rest of the
world; the story is but short, 'twas in the time of the Decem-viri. (and I
think the chief-troublers of our State may make up that number,) The
Decem-viri, my Lords had subverted the Laws, suspended the Courts of Justice;
and (which was the greatest grievance both to the Nobility and people) had for
some years omitted to assemble the Senate, which was their Parliament; This
says the Historian did not only deject the Romans, and make them despair of
their Liberty, but caused them to be less valued by their Neighbors: The
Sabines take the advantage and invade them; and now the Decem-viri are forced
to call the long desired Senate, whereof the peopie were so glad, that Hostibus
belloque gratiam habuerunt: This Assembly breaks up in discontent,
nevertheless the war proceeds; Forces are raised, led by some of the
Decem-viri, and with the Sabines they meet in the Field; I know your Lordships
expect the event; My Authors words of his Contrymen are these, Ne quid ductu
aut auspicio Decem-virorum prospere gereretur, vinci se patiebantur, They chose
rather to suffer a present diminution of their Honor, then by victory to
confirm the tyranny of their new Masters: At their return from this
unfortunate expedition, after some distempers and expostulations of the people,
an other Senate, that is a second Parliament, is called, and there the
Decem-viri are questioned, deprived of their Authority, imprisoned, banished,
and some loose their lives; and soon after this vindication of their Liberties,
the Romans by their better success made it appear to the world, that liberty
and courage dwell always in the same breast, and a re never to be divorced. No
doubt, my Lords, but your Justice shall have the like effect upon this
dispirited people; it is not the restitution of our ancient Laws alone, but the
restoration of our ancient courage which is expected from your Lordships: I
need not say any thing to move your just indignation that this man should so
cheaply give away that which your noble Ancestors with so much courage and
industry had so long maintained: you have often been told how careful they
were, though with the hazard of their lives and fortunes, to derive those
Rights and Liberties as entire to posterity as they received from their
Fathers: what they did with labor you may do with ease, what they did with
danger, you may do securely, the foundation of our Laws is not shaken with
the Engine of War, they are only blasted with the breath of these men, and
by your breath may be restored.

What Judgments your Predecessors have given, and what punishments their
Predecessors have suffered for offenses of this nature, your Lordships have
already been so well informed, that I shall not trouble you with a repetition
of those precedents: Only (my Lords) something I shall take leave to observe
of the person with whose charge I have presented you, that you may the less
doubt of the wilfulness of his offense.

His education in the Inns of Court, his constant practice as a Counselor,
and his experience as a Judge (considered with the mischief he has done) makes
it appear that this Progress of his through the Law, has been like that of a
diligent Spy through a Country into which he meant to conduct an enemy.

To let you see he did not offend for company, there is one crime so peculiar
to himself, and of such malignity, that it makes him at once incapable of your
Lordships favor, and his own subsistence incompatible with the right and
propriety of the Subject: for if you leave him in a capacity of interpreting
the Laws, has he not already declared his opinion, That your votes and
resolutions against Ship Money are void, and that it is not in the power of a
Parliament to abolish that Judgment? To him, my Lords, that has thus played
with the power of Parliament, we may well apply what was once said to the Goat
browsing on the Vine,

Rode, caper, vitem, tamen hinc cum stabis ad aras In Tuaquod fundi cornua
possit, erit:

He has cropped and infringed the privileges of a banished Parliament, but now
it is returned he may find it has power enough to make a Sacrifice of him, to
the better establishment of out Laws; and in truth what other satisfaction can
he make his injured Country, then to confirm by his example those Rights and
Liberties which he had ruined by his opinion?

For the proofs, my Lords, they are so manifest that they will give you little
trouble in the disquisition; his crimes are already upon Record, the Delinquent
and the Witness is the same; having from several Seats of Judicature
proclaimed himself an Enemy to our Laws and Nation, Ex ore suo judicabitur.
To which purpose I am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the
House of Commons, to desire your Lordships that as speedy a proceeding may be
had against M. Justice Crawley as the course of Parliaments will permit.

Mr. WALLERS SPEECH, In the House of Commons, the fourth of July, 1643. being
brought to the Bar, and having leave given him by the Speaker, to say what he
could for himself.
Mr. Speaker.
I Acknowledge it a great mercy of God, and a great favor from you, that I am
once more suffered to behold this Honorable Assembly, I mean not to make use
of it to say any thing in my own defense by Justification or denial of what I
have done, I have already confessed enough to make me appear, worthy not only
to be put out of this House, but out of the World too. All my humble request to
you is, that, if I seem to you as unworthy to live, as I do to my self, I
may have the Honor to receive my death from your own hands, and not be
exposed to a Trial by the Counsel of War: what ever you shall think me
worthy to suffer in a Parliamentary way, is not like to find stop any where
else.

This (Sir) I hope you will be pleased for your own sakes to grant me, who am
already so miserable, that nothing can be added to my calamity, but to be make
the occasion of creating a President to your own disadvantage; besides the
right I may have to this, consider I beseech you that the eyes of the world are
upon you govern in chief, and if you should expose your own members to the
punishment of others, it will be thought that you either want Power, or leisure
to chastise them your selves; nor let any man despise the ill consequence of
such a president as this would be, because he sees not presently the
inconveniences which may ensue: you have many Armies on Foot, and it is
uncerteine how long you may have occasion to use them. Soldiers and Commanders
(though I know well they of the Parliaments Army, excel no less in modesly
then they do in Courage) are generally of a Nature ready to pretend to the
utmost power of this kind, which they conceive to be due to them, and may be
too apt upon any occasion of discontent to make use of such a President as
this. In this very Parliament you have not bin without some taste of the
experience hereof, it is now somewhat more than two years since you had an
Army in the North, paid and directed by your selves, and yet you may be pleased
to remember there was a considerable number of Officers in that Army, which
joined in a Petition or Remonstrance to this House, taking notice of what some
of Members had said here, as they supposed to their disadvantage, and did
little lest; then require them of you; it is true, there had bin some tampering
with them, but what has happened at one time, may wisely be thought possible to
fall out again at another.

Sir, I presume but to point you out the danger; if it be not just, I know you
will not do me the wrong to expose me to this trial; if it be just your Army
may another time require the same justice of you, in their own behalf,
against some other Member, whom perhaps you would be less willing to part
with. Necessity has of late forced you into untrodden paths; and in such a case
as this where you have no president of your own, you may not do amiss to look
abroad upon other States and Senates, which exercise the Supreme Power, as you
now do here.

I dare confidently say you shall find none either Ancient or Modern, which
ever exposed any of their own order to be tried for his life by the Officers
of their Armies abroad, for what he did, while he resided among them in the
Senate.

Among the Romans the practice was so contrary, that some inferior Officers in
their Army far from the City, having been sentenced by their General or
Commander in chief, as deserving death by their Discipline of War, have
nevertheless (because they were Senators) appealed thither, and the cause has
received a new hearing in the Senate. Not to use more words to persuade you to
take heed that you wound not your selves thorough my sides in violating the
Privileges belonging to your own persons, I shall humbly desire you to
consider likewise the nature of my offense, (not but that I should be much
ashamed to say any thing in diminution thereof; God knows it is horrid enough
for the evil it might have occasioned) but if you look near it, it may
perhaps apeare to be rather a Civil then a Martial crime and so to have Title
to a Trial at the common law of the land; ther^ may justly be some difference
put between me and others in this business.

I have had nothing to do with the other Army, or any intention to begin the
offer of violence to any body, It was only a civil pretense to that which I
then foolishly conceived to be the right of the subject. I humbly refer it to
your considerations, and to your consciences. I know you will take care not to
to shed the blood of War in Peace that blood by the law of War, which has a
right to betryed by the Law of Peace.

For so much as concerns my self and my part in this business, (if I were
worthy to have any thing spoken or patiently heard in my behalf) this might
truly be said, that I made not this business, but found it, 'twas in other men's
hands long before it was brought to me, and when it came I extended it not, but
restrained it. For the Propositions of letting in part of the Kings Army, or
offering violence to the Members of this House, I ever disallowed and utterly
rejected them.

What it was that moved me to entertain discourse of this business so far as I
did, I will tell you ingeniously, and that rather as a warning for others, than
that it make any thing for my self; it was only an impatience of the
inconveniences of the present War, looking on things with a carnal eye, and
not minding that which chiefly (if not only) ought to have been considered,
the inestimable value of the Cause you have in hand, the Cause of God and of
Religion, and the necessities you are forced upon for the maintenance of the
same; as a just punishment for this neglect, it pleased God to desert and
suffer me with a fatal blindness, to be led on, and engaged in such Counsels
as were wholly disproportioned to the rest of my life; This (Sir) my own
Conscience tells me was the cause of my failing, and not malice, or any ill
habit of mind, or disposition toward the Commonwealth, or to the Parliament:
for from whence should I have it? If you look on my Birth, you will not find it
in my blood: I am of a stock which has born you better fruit, if you look on
my education, it has been almost from my childhood in this House, and among
the best sort of men; and for the whole practice of my life till this time, if
another were to speak for me, he might reasonably say, that neither my actions
out of Parliament, nor my expressions in it, have savoured of disaffection or
malice to the Liberties of the People, or Privileges of Parliament.

Thus Sir, I have set before your eyes, both my person and my case, wherein I
shall make no such defense by denying, or extenuating any thing I have done, as
ordinarily Delinquents do, my address to you, and all my Plea shall only be
such as Children use to their Parents, I have offended; I confess it, I never
did any thing like it before; it is a passage unsuitable to the whole course of
my life beside, and for the time to come, as God that can bring light out of
darkness, has made this business in the event useful to you, so also has
he to me: you have by it made an happy discovery of your Enemies, and I of my
self, and the evil principles I walked by; so that if you look either on what I
have been heretofore, or what I now am, and by Gods grace assisting me, shall
always continue to be, you may perhaps think me fit to be an example of your
compassion and clemency.

Sir, I shall no sooner leave you, but my life will depend on your breath, and
not that alone, but the subsistence of some that are more innocent. I might
therefore show you my Children, whom the rigor of your Justice would make
complete Orphans, being already Motherless. I might show you a Family, wherein
there are some unworthy to have their share in that mark of Infamy which now
threatens us: But something there is, which if I could show you, would move you
more then all this* it is my Heart, which abhors what I have done more, and is
more severe to it self, then the severest Judge can be. A heart (Mr.Speaker)
so a wakened by this affliction, and so entirely devoted to the Cause you
maintain, that I earnestly desire of God to incline you, so to dispose of me,
whether for life or death, as may most conduce to the advancement thereof.

Sir, not to trouble you any longer, if I dye, I shall dye praying for you; if
I live, I shall live serving you, and render you back the use and employment of
all those days you shall add to my life.

After this having withdrawn himself, he was called in again, and (being by
the Speaker required thereto) gave them an exact account now he came first to
the knowledge of this business; as also what Lords were acquainted therewith, or
had engaged themselves therein.

FINIS.

