THE Life of Faith. IN TWO SERMONS TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD At St. Mary's
Church there; On the 6th. of January, 1683/4. and June the 29th. following.

By John Wallis, D. D. One of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary, and
Professor of Geometry in the University of Oxford.

LONDON, Printed by James Rawlins, for Thomas Parkhurst: And are to be sold by
Amos Curteine, Bookseller in Oxford, 1684.

THE Life of Faith.
Hebr. 10.38. But the Just shall Live by Faith.


LIfe is that of which we are all Fond. And on the contrary, Death is ((...))
that which, of all, we most dread. Job 2.4.
(Skin for Skin, and all that a man has will he give for his Life.) Insomuch
that Life is commonly put for Happiness; and Death for Misery.

Behold I have set before you (says Moses) Life and Good, Death and Evil: And
again, Deuteronomy. 30.15. Ver. 19.
I have set before you Life, and Death; Blessing, and Cursing: Therefore choose
Life, that thou and thy seed may live. That is, That you may be blessed. And
Jeremy, much to the same purpose, (but more literally: Jer. 21.8.
) Behold I set before you the way of Life, and the way of Death. And, when God
at first threatened, In the day that thou eatest thereof, Genesis 2.17.
thou shall die the Death: That which we commonly call Death (though it were a
part) was but a small part, of that threatening. The whole of it, was, That he
should be miserable. And, though he did not Die the same day (as to what we
commonly call Death,) yet he did, that day, become miserable. And so had He,
and all His, continued to be; if God had not found out a way to restore us,
from that Death, to a Life of Happiness. And what that is, the Text tells us;
The Just shall live by Faith.

True it is, that Death, in the proper sense, is a great Evil; and it was so
intended by God, when he did at first threaten it, as a part of that misery,
which was to follow upon Sin.) And even the Death of a Friend, as well as our
Own, may justly be looked upon as a great Affliction.

But, thus to Die, is a much less Evil, than (as the Apostle speaks) to be Dead
while we Live. 1 Timothy 5.6.
And it is an Allay to our Sorrow, (as well in reference to our own Death, as
to that of those we Love, Joh. 11.25. Ver. 29.
) That, he who Believes in the Lord, though he be Dead, yet shall he Live:
And, whosoever lives and believes in him, shall never Die.

You easily apprehend, that, when Christ says, He shall never Die; he did not
mean it of a natural Death; For, thus, Hebr. 9.27.
It is appointed to all men, once to Die:) But thus rather, Rev. 20.6.
He that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the second Death has no
power. Or, if that expression may seem to be of a doubtful sense, (as being
involved in the obscure phrase of a mystical Prophesy;) yet, that at least is
plain, Romans 8.13.
That, If we live after the Flesh, we shall Die; but if, through the Spirit, we
mortify the deeds of the Body, we shall Live. For, to be Carnally minded, is
Death; but, to be Spiritually minded, Ver. 6.
is Life and Peace.

And this is the Life, which the Text speaks of. Which is Begun is Grace, and
Perfected in Glory. And such a Life is that, Joh. 3.15, 16.
which the Just shall Live by Faith. God so loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that who so ever Believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting Life. (That is, That he should be eternally Happy.) He that
Believes on the Son, has everlasting Life; and he that Believes not the Son,
has not Life; but the Wrath of God abides on him. For the Just shall Live by
Faith. But, if any man draw-back, Gal. 3.11. Heb. 10.38.
my Soul (says God) shall have no pleasure in him.

The first place where we meet with this, The Just shall Live by Faith, is in
Habak. 2.4. And we have it cited (as a saying very considerable) three times in
the New Testament, Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.11. and here Hebr. 10.38.

And, in all the Four places, we have the words just in the same order: (...).
Justus ex Fide vivet; (that of Faith standing in the middle of the other two
words, and capable of being referred to either) The Just, by Faith, shall Live.
And may therefore be indifferently read, The Just by Faith, or By Faith shall
live. (Justus ex Fide, or ex Fide vivet.) Nor need we be much solicitous,
whether of the ways we read it. For it may well enough have an aspect both ways.

But though, in all these places, the words ly in the same Order, yet with a
different Emphasis; according as the Context, and the Scope of the place direct.

In the first place; the Emphasis seems to ly upon the word Just, or Righteous;
Hab. 2.4.
as contradistinguished from those who are otherwise. His Soul that is lifted
up, is not upright in him; (and consequently, not pleasing to God:) But the
Just shall live by Faith. Where he shows the advantage that the Just or
Righteous have (as to the case there spoken of;) before those who are not so;
those who is heart is lifted up, or stands out, and refuses to submit it self
to God and Trust in him.

And to the same purpose, in the place before us: Heb. 10.38.
where we have a like opposition, or contradistinction, between the Just or
Faithful, and those who are not so. The Just shall live by Faith: But, if any
man draw-back (says God) my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. Where we have
(as in the other place) a Promise to the Just and Faithful; but with a direct
exclusion of those who are otherwise; who draw-back or Revolt from him, or
stand-out against him, or believe not in him. (Which come much to the same
pass. And the word (...), of a like sense, in diverse places of the New
Testament, is by Interpreters indifferently expressed by Disobedience, or
Unbelief.)

And this place (in the Epistle to the Hebrews) though it may, in some words,
seem to differ from that in Habakkuk; yet is, by Expositors, generally supposed
to have a particular respect thereunto. Nor need we (as some would persuade us)
to change the reading of the Hebrew Text, to make it agree with the Greek; but
it might well enough be so rendered as the Greek has it, though the Hebrew
were then so read as now it is. As is well showed, Dr. Pecock.
by a learned Writer of our own, in his Notes upon Maimonides's Porta Mosis.

So that, how comfortable so ever the Text may be, or the Promise therein made,
to those that are truly Righteous, and Believe in Christ: It affords small
comfort to those that are Wicked and Unbelievers, who (while they so continue)
are quite debarred from it. Much like to the Pillar of the Cloud, Exodus 14.19,
20.
which was between the Israelites and Egyptians; It gave light to the one, but
to the other was a Cloud and Darkness. Or (without such metaphor or mystical
expression,) as we are plainly told (Isai. 3.) Say ye to the Righteous, Isa.
3.10.
It shall be well with him; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings: But,
Woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with him; Ver. 11.
for the reward of his hands shall be given him.

In the other two places; Romans 1.17. and Gal. 3.11. the Emphasis seems to ly on
the word Faith, The just, shall live, by Faith; or, The just, by Faith, shall
live. (...). For, here, the main point in Question was, (in both Epistles)
concerning Justification to Life; Whether by Works, or by Faith. And the
Conclusion was, That, by the Deeds of the Law, shall no flesh be Justified in
the sight of God; (for by the Law, Romans 3.20.
comes the knowledge of sin:) But, being justified by Faith, Romans 5.1.
we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. In confirmation of
which truth, the Apostle cites this testimony, out of Habakkuk, Romans 1.17.
For it is written (says he) The Just shall live by Faith. And proves it
further, from the examples of Abraham and David. Who were Justified (he tells
us) not, by Works; but, by Faith: Romans 4.2, 5, 6.
To whom God imputed Righteousness, with works. Thus in the Epistle to the
Romans.

And, in like manner, in that to the Galatians; He argues, That Abraham's
Believing was accounted to him for Righteousness: And, That, in him, Gal.3.6, 7.
the Gentiles also are Justified by Faith: And do, thereby, become the Children
of faithful Abraham. And this he there also confirms by the same testimony:
That no man is Justified by the Law, Ver. 11.
in the sight of God, is evident (he tells us,) For the Just shall live by
Faith; or, The Just by Faith, shall live. That is, Being justified by Faith, we
shall obtain Life; or, become Happy. (Being Justified by Faith, we have Peace
with God.)

So that the stress of the Proof from this Testimony, is laid upon those words
By Faith. Not, of Works: but, by Faith.

We have now therefore dispatched these two things from these Words:

First, That this Happiness, whatever it be, belongs only to the Just, the
Righteous, the Godly Person; and to no other. That is, to those whom God, in
favor, shall repute so.

And therefore it concerns Us, if we would partake of this Happiness, to make
sure to be of this number. That we be such as whom God will account Righteous.
Otherwise, (how ever we may flatter our selves, or what ever opinion others may
conceive of us,) God tells us, His Soul shall have no pleasure in us.

Secondly, That it is by true Faith in Jesus Christ, and no other way, that we
can be reputed Just or Righteous in Gods sight. Not, for any Righteousness of
our own: not by works of Righteousness which we have done. Tit. 3.5.
Our Works perhaps may look glorious in the sight of Men; but not in the eyes
of God, (that we should, in His sight, be justified by Them.) Our Works may
serve to justify our Faith. Jam. 2.18. Ver. 22.
(We may show our Faith by our Works; and By Works is Faith made Perfect:) But
it is our Faith must justify us. Ver. 23.
Abraham believed God (as there is follows) and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness.

Romans 4.2.
If Abraham were Justified by Works (says S. Paul,) he had whereof to Glory;
but, not before God: But Abraham's Believing God (for so it follows) was
accounted to him for Righteousness. Ver. 3.


And this God would have so to be; That Himself might have all the Glory of his
Grace: And, That Man may have nothing to Glory in; nothing to boast of. Now to
him that works (as there it follows) the Reward is not reckoned of Grace,
Ver. 4.
but of Debt: But, to him that works not, Ver. 5.
but Believes on him that justifies the Ungodly; his Faith is counted to him
for Righteousness.

And David also (as he further argues) describes the Blessedness of that Man,
Ver. 6.
to whom God imputes Righteousness, without Works; (that is, not upon the
account of Works: Ver. 7.
) saying, Blessed are they, who is Iniquities are forgiven, Ver. 8.
and who is sins are covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not
Impute sin. Not, He that has no sin, (for then no man would be blessed;) but,
to whom it is not Imputed.

Who ever therefore would be thus accounted Righteous in Gods sight; must be
contented to Disclaim his Own Righteousness, as to any thing of Merit therein:
and accept of this Imputed Righteousness, on the account only of Christ's
Righteousness and Merits: to the benefit of which we are entitled by Faith in
him.

So far is the Doctrine of S. Paul, from the Popish Doctrine of Merits, and
Supererogation; as if we were able to do; no only as much as is sufficient;
but more than is necessary, to make us Just on the account of Works.

But when we thus exclude the Merits of good Works, as to our Justification: We
do not deny the Necessity of them, as to our Practice. For it is not every
Faith, (or every thing which a presumptuous wicked person shall call Faith,)
that will Justify us in the sight of God: But, such a Faith as works by Love;
Gal. 5.6. Jam. 2.22.
and By Works is Faith made perfect. Not, an Idle, Lazy Faith; But, an
Operative, a Working Faith; a Faith that purifieth the Heart. A Living, Acts
15.5.
a Lively Faith: (But, Faith without Works is Dead: Jam. 2.20.
and can, in no other sense, be called Faith; than as a Dead man, or the
Picture of a man, may be called a man.) A Faith in the Heart, which does
produce Holiness in the Life. (For, without Holiness no man shall see God. Heb.
12.14.
)

For it was never the design of S. Paul, (nor of our Church neither, when she
says, Artic. 11.
We are Justified by Faith only;) to derogate from the Necessity of Good
Works: But he does directly Assert it.

And he does (not without some Indignation) Disclaim that consequence, that
some would (slanderously) fasten upon his Doctrine of Free Grace, Romans 6.1.
and Justification by Faith only. What shall we say then? Shall we continue in
Sin, that Grace may abound! God forbid. And, as to those (for some such there
were) who (as a consequence of his Doctrine) did affirm, that he said, Let us
do evil that good may come thereof: He says, They do slanderously report it;
Romans 3.8.
and, That their condemnation is just.

But you will say, If we be Justified (as our Church tells us) by Faith only;
what need is there of Holiness, or a Godly Life?

I say; Much every way. For we must be Sanctified (as well as Justified) if
ever we be saved. And though Justification and Sanctification go allways
together; (For God Justifies none, whom he does not also Sanctify:) yet the
Notions of the one and the other, are very different. And, whatever some would
slanderously insinuate, of those who exclude Good Works from Justification; as
if they were Enemies to Good Works; and held, That by Faith a man may be saved
let his Life be never so Wicked: It will be found in experience, That they are
not less zealous of good Works, who think that Holiness belongs to
Sanctification, than those that do thus Calumniate them. And (very often) they
who talk most, of being Justified by good Works, have least of them to show.

It Is (I know) the business of the Papists, to confound the Notions of
Justification and Sanctification; to make way for their Justification by
Inherent Righteousness; that is, (if they would speak out) by Holiness. (For,
what else is Inherent Righteousness?) Now, That we are Sanctified by Holiness,
no man denies: But is it by Holiness therefore that we are Justified? or, is
not this to make Justification and Sanctification, all one.

And truly the Papists have some Reason so to do. For it is a Doctrine by which
they get Money: As being the foundation of Indulgences and Popish Pardons; upon
purchasing, out of the Popes Treasury, somewhat of the Merits of other men (who
are supposed to have had enough and to spare) for those who have none of their
own.

But, why any of Us, should be fond of that Doctrine, who have no such Bargains
to drive, (and that directly against the Doctrine of our own Church) I do not
see.

And indeed the Papists themselves (how much soever they talk of the Necessity
of good Works for Justification,) do rather hold, There is no necessity of them
at all; (either to Justification, or Salvation.) For there is no man so Wicked,
and devoyd of Holiness and Good Works: but that, by virtue of their Priests
Absolution, or at lest by the Popes Indulgence, he may go directly to Heaven,
without any thing of Holiness of Good-works (other than giving Money to a
Priest,) by their Doctrine; (without so much as touching at Purgatory by the
way.) It Is but, by way of Commutation, paying so much Money (in stead of
Holiness and a Good Life) and all is safe.

However; since it is (amongst us) agreed on all hands (for I know of no
Protestant that doubts it) that there is a Necessity of Holiness, and the
practice of Good Works and a Godly Life; (if not upon the account of
Justification, at lest upon the account of Sanctification:) Let us all make it
our business, to be Fruitful therein. Romans 6.22.
And if we cannot agree upon the punctilio, on what Account it is necessary;
Let us at lest agree upon the Practice, of Holiness and a Godly Life.

In so doing; we shall approve our selves to God, adorn his Gospel; make our
own Calling and Election sure; obtain the testimony of a good Conscience in our
own Breast; and pass the more comfortably toward the Completion of that
Happiness, which the Text promises; That the Just, shall live, by Faith.

And thus I have briefly run over the Doctrine of the Text (with some
consequents thereof) according to the Two Empases already mentioned.

There is a third (to be after mentioned) but (before I leave these, and come
to it,) I shall further amplify (by way of Application) on each of them.

And first, as to that Emphasis on the word Just; (the Just shall live by
Faith:) Which restrains the benefit of this Promise (whatever it be) to the
Just or Righteous person. Especially being attended with an Exclusive of those
that be otherwise, as here it follows, But if any man draw-back, my Soul shall
have no pleasure in him.

And therefore, if we would be entitled to be Benefit, we must make sure of
the Qualification; that we be Just and Righteous persons.

Where also we are not to consider the word Just in a strict acceptance; so
as only to denote Justice strictly taken, (as contradistinguished to Holiness,
Temperance, and other virtues;) But, as comprehensive of all that is necessary
to denominate a person, a Just or Righteous man, a Good man, a man (as here the
phrase is) in whom the Lord will have pleasure; or whom he will be well pleased
with.

For, though a Good man, a Gracious man, an Holy man, a Just or Righteous man,
a man after Gods own heart, are different Names in Scripture; yet are they but
as so many Inadequate Conceptions of the same Thing, and all denote the same
Person; and (as other concretes) are often predicated one of another, and one
put for another.

As in Mat. 1.19. Mat. 1.19.
Joseph being a Just man, and not willing to make her a public example, was
minded to put her away privily. That is, a good man, a kind man, a merciful man.

For the Moderation here intimated, (as contradistinguished to what Severity
might have been used,) was rather an act of Mercy, than of strict Justice. But
it was a just man, a good man, a virtuous man, that used this moderation.

And so is the word Just, in the Text, to be understood; as comprehensive of
all those Graces and Virtues necessary to make a good man. And here, if ever,
that saying will hold good, (...). Justice is comprehensive of all Virtue.
Theognid.


So that it is not enough here to say, I do no man wrong, or, I live honestly
among my Neighbors; (though that be Good:) But, art thou endued with all
Virtue? and, all the Graces of Gods Spirit? and do accordingly live a Godly,
Righteous, and Sober life (as our Church phraseth it,) or (as St. Paul, more
largely) Denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, live Soberly, Righteously, Tit.
2.12.
and Godly in this present World? Ver. 13.
Looking for the blessed hope and glorious appearance of the Great God, and our
Savior, Jesus Christ; Who gave himself for us, Ver. 14.
that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and Purify to himself a Peculiar
People, Zealous of Good Works?

If not: It is not the name of Christian, or a pretended Faith, that will
secure against a Wicked Life. And he that lives a Vicious, Wicked Life; whether
he pretend to be saved by Faith, or to be saved by works; he shall be saved by
Neither, while he continues so.

S. Paul reckons up a great Catalogue of such livers, 1 Cor. 6. 1 Cor 6.9.
(under the title of Unjust or Unrighteous, (...)) Know ye not that the
Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of
themselves with mankind; Nor Thieves, nor Covetous, Ver. 10.
nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God. And, if any find himself within this Catalogue (or other the like;) Let
him take heed, to make sure of what follows: Ver. 11.
Such were some of you; But ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are
Justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.
Observe; they must be Sanctified, (as well as Justified.) No Unclean thing may
enter there.

Secondly; As to that Emphasis on the words By Faith, (in contradistinction to
Works;) which S. Paul principally pursues in the business of Justification, (in
the Epistles to the Romans, and to the Galatians, where this Text is cited:)
Our Church directs in a good even way; between the Popish Doctrine of Merits,
and the loose Practice of Licentious livers. That is; We should so Practice
Good Works; as yet not to Trust in them, to be Justified by them; either in
Whole, or in Part.

As to Justification; she tells us, in the 11 th Article, Article II. (Of the
Justification of Man.) We are accounted righteous before God, only for the
merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own Works
or Deservings. Wherefore, that we are Justified by Faith only, is a most
Wholesome Doctrine, and full of Comfort; as more largely is expressed in the
Homily of Justification.
That we are Justified by Faith only; and that this is a Wholesome Doctrine,
and full of Comfort.

And, as to Good Works; she tells us, in the 12 th Article Article 12. (Of Good
Works.) Allbeit that Good Works, which are the Fruits of Faith, and Follow
After Justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the severity of Gods
Judgment; yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring
out necessarily of a true and lively Faith; in so much that, by them, a lively
Faith may be as evidently known, as a Tree discerned by the Fruit.
That, though they do not Justify, (but follow after Justification;) yet are
they pleasing and acceptable unto God; are the necessary fruit of a true and
lively Faith; and by which its known as a Tree by its Fruit.

And in the Homily or Sermon to which the Article refers, she tells us the same
more fully. That there can no man, by his own acts, works, and deeds, (seem
they never so good) be justified, and made righteous before God: But every man
of necessity is constrained to seek for another righteousness or justification,
to be received at Gods own hands: That is to say, the forgiveness of his sins
and trespasses. -- That this justification or righteousness, which we so
receive of Gods Mercy and Christ's Merits, embraced by Faith; is taken,
accepted, and allowed of God, for our Perfect and Full Justification. -- That
(all the world being wrapped in sin, by breaking of the Law,) God sent his
only Son our Savior Christ into the World, to Fulfill the Law for Us; and,
by shedding of his most precious blood, to make a Sacrifice, and Satisfaction,
or (as it may be called) Amends, to his Father, for our sins; to assuage his
Wrath and Indignation, conceived against us for the same. -- That sinners,
(when they turn again to God unfeignedly,) are washed, by this Sacrifice, from
their Sins in such sort, that there remains not any Spot of Sin, that shall
be Imputed to their Damnation. That this is that Justification or
Righteousness, which S. Paul speaks of, when he says, No man is justified by
the Works of the Law, but freely by Faith in Jesus Christ; And again he says,
We believe in Jesus Christ, that we be justified freely by the Faith of Christ,
and not by the Works of the Law; because that no man shall be justified by the
Works of the Law. That, Although this Justification be Free to Us; Yet it
comes not So freely to us, that there is no Ransom paid therefore at all. But
-- God has tempered his Justice and Mercy together; that he would neither by
his Justice condemn us to the Everlasting Captivity of the Devil, and his
Prison of Hell, remedyless for ever without Mercy; Nor, by his Mercy, deliver
us clearly, without Justice, or payment of a Just Ransom. -- And, whereas it
lay not in us that to do; He provided a Ransom for us; that was, the most
precious Body and Blood of his own most dear and best beloved Son Jesus Christ.
Who, beside this Ransom, Fullfilled the Law, for us, Perfectly.

With much more to the same purpose. Showing, That Christ Alone, has paid the
Whole Ransom, and made Full Satisfaction, to God's Justice; and, that our
Righteousness or Good Works come not in for any Share or Part thereof; as if,
by them, we should, at lest in Part, be justified.

This Doctrine, I know, is not pleasing to the Socinians, nor to the Papists.

Not to the Socinians: Because they Deny that any such Satisfaction is made to
Gods Justice at all. For, if they should allow, that, Christ alone were able to
make, a sufficient Satisfaction, for the Sins of All: they must allow him to be
more than Man. And therefore, in order to the Denying of his Divinity, they
deny his Satisfaction too.

Nor to the Papists: For, though they allow a Satisfaction to Justice; Yet they
would have this to be done, at lest in Part, by our selves: To make way for
Purgatory; and, consequently, for Popish Pardons. For, if we must pay, part of
the Debt, our selves, (Christ having not paid the Whole,) and have not paid it
in this Life; we must either pay it in Purgatory; or else (by way of
Commutation) pay Money for the Popes Pardon, to be excused from it.

But We, who are not concerned for either of these; As neither denying Christ's
Divinity; nor being obliged to maintain Purgatory: Have no reason to depart
from the Language of our own Church.

Now, to make this the more clear, our Church observes further, That there are
Three things which must go together in our Justification. Upon Gods part; his
great Mercy and Grace. Upon Christ's part; Justice; that is, the Satisfaction of
Gods Justice, or the Price of our Redemption, by offering of his Body, and
shedding of his Blood; with fullfilling the Law, perfectly and thoroughly. And,
upon Our part; true and lively Faith in the Merits of Jesus Christ; which yet
is not ours, but by Gods working in us.

So that, in our Justification, is not only Gods Mercy and Grace; but his
Justice also: Which the Apostle calls, the Justice of God: And it consists,
in Paying the Ransom, and fullfilling the Law.

And so, the Grace of God, does not shut out the Justice of God, in our
Justification; but only shuts out the Justice of Man; that is to say, the
Justice of our Works, as to be Merits of deserving our Justification. And
therefore S. Paul declares here, nothing upon the behalf of Man, concerning
his Justification, but only a true and lively Faith; which nevertheless is the
Gift of God, and not Man's only working, without God.

And yet that Faith, does not shut out Repentance, Hope, Love, Dread, and the
Fear of God, to be joined with Faith in every man that is justified: But it
shuts them out from the Office of Justifying. So that, though they be all
present together in him that is justified; yet they justify not all together.

Nor the Faith also does not shut out the Justice of our good Works, as
necessary to be done afterward, of Duty toward God; (for we are most bounden
to serve God, in doing good deeds, commanded by him in his holy Scripture, all
the days of our Life:) But it excludes them, so that we may not do them to
this intent, to be made Good by doing them.

For all the good Works that we can do, be unperfect, and therefore not able to
deserve our Justifiction: But our Justification does come freely, by the mere
Mercy of God. And of so great and free Mercy; that, whereas all the World was
not able of their selves, to pay, Any Part, toward their Ransom; it pleased
our heavenly Father of his infinite Mercy, without any our desert or
deservings, to prepare for us the most precious Jewels, of Christ's Body and
Blood; whereby our Ransom might be fully paid, the Law fullfilled, and his
Justice fully satisfied.

So that Christ is now the Righteousness of all them that truly do believe in
him. He, for them, paid the Ransom by his Death. He, for them, fullfilled the
Law, in his Life. So that now, in him, and by him, every true Christian man may
be called, a Fullfiller of the Law: For as much as that which their Infirmity
lacked, Christ's Justice has supplied.

I have recited these Words the more fully; that you may clearly see, what is
the Doctrine, and Language of the Church of England. And this, I hope, we All
take to be good Doctrine. For my part, I think it is.

I might add, if it were necessary, a great deal more: As that, where it tells
us, That Man cannot make himself righteous by his own Works; neither in Part,
nor in Whole. For that were the greatest Arrogance and Presumption of Man, that
Antichrist could set up against God; to affirm, that a man might by his own
Works, take away and purge his own Sins, and so justify himself. But
Justification is the Office of God only; and is not a thing which we Render
unto him, but which we Receive of him; -- by his free Mercy, and by the only
Merits of his most dearly beloved Son, and our only Redeemer, Savior and
Justifier, Jesus Christ.

But I leave those, who would see more of it, to seek it, in the first, second,
and third Parts of the Sermon of Salvation; the first, second, and third parts
of the Sermon of Faith; and the first, second, and third parts of the Sermon of
Good Works.

And, indeed, the nature of the thing will not bear it; that any Works of our
own should, even in part, Justify us. For Justification being an Act of God,
Remitting our Sins, for the Ransom and Satisfaction made to his Justice: It
cannot be, that any thing which we can now do, can be (any part of) such
Ransom or Satisfaction. For all that we can do, is but (part of) what is due
for the present. Luke 17.10.
(As our Savior tells us; When we have done all; we are unprofitable Servants;
we have done but what was our Duty to do.) And there is nothing of Surplusage,
which might accrue, toward Satisfaction for what is past. Like as a Tenant, who
is run deep in Arrears of Rent; cannot, by paying (part of) the Growing Rent
for the future, make Satisfaction for the Arrears already incurred. For, this
growing Rent was due also.

If it be said, (as perhaps it may,) That, on this account, we must renounce
our Faith also. For neither does Faith, Satisfy Gods Justice, or Deserve our
Justification:

I say so too; That Faith as a Grace, or Faith as a Work, does not justify us.
But only as, by it, we embrace the Righteousness of Christ; by which
Righteousness alone (so embraced) we can be Justified.

And I say so the rather; because our Church says so too; in these words: The
true understanding of this Doctrine, We be justified freely by Faith without
Works; or, that we be justified by Faith in Christ only; Is not, that this our
own Act, to Believe in Christ; or, this our Faith in Christ, which is within
us, does Justify us; (for that were to count our selves to be justified by some
Act or Virtue that is within our selves:) but the true meaning thereof, is;
That, allthough we Hear Gods Word, and Believe it; allthough we have Faith,
Hope, Charity, Repentance, Dread and Fear of God within us; and do never so
many Works thereunto; yet we must renounce the merit of all our said Virtues,
of Faith, Hope, Charity, and all other Virtues and good Deeds, which we either
have done, shall do, or can do; as things that be far too weak; and
insufficient, and unperfect, to deserve Remission of our Sins and our
Justification; and therefore we must Trust only in Gods Mercy, and that
Sacrifice which our High Priest and Savior Jesus Christ the Son of God once
offered for us on the Cross, to obtain thereby Gods Grace, and Remission of
Sins, Original and Actual. -- And, as great and as godly a Virtue as the lively
Faith is, yet it puts us from it self, and remitteth or appoints us unto
Christ, for to have, only by Him, Remission of Sins, and Justification. So
that our Faith in Christ (as it were) says unto us thus; It is not I that take
away your sins, but it is Christ only; and, to him only, I send you for that
purpose; forsaking therein all your good Virtues, Words, Thoughts, and Works,
and only putting your Trust in Christ. --

Nevertheless, because Faith does directly send us to Christ for Remission of
our Sins; and that, by Faith given us of God, we Embrace the Promise of Gods
Mercy, and of the Remission of our sins, (which thing no other of our Virtues
or Works properly does:) therefore Scripture uses to say, That Faith without
Works does Justify.

So that, according to the Doctrine of our Church, neither our other Works and
Graces; nor even Faith it self as a Work, or as an Habit or Grace in us, does
Justify us: But only as it Accepts and Embraces the Righteousness of
Christ, for which alone our Sins are Remitted, and We Justified; not for any
thing done by us. Which Accepting or Embracing the Promise of God, and
Salvation by Christ therein offered; is not so much an Act of the
Understanding, Assenting to a Truth, (for thus the Devils believe, and Wicked
men;) as, an Act of the Will, Accepting of it, and Consenting to it, and
Trusting in it; which the Devils and Wicked men have not.

This being the language of Our Church; I would not willingly depart from it:
or gratify the Papists so far, as to join with them in reproching our Church,
as Decrying good Works, because we say, We are not Justified by them.

If any shall yet say, That, when they affirm, We are not Justified by Faith
only, but by Works also; they mean not, That either the one or the other does
Merit Gods Favor and the Remission of our Sins; but only, That both Faith and
Works are necessary to the Party Justified: and, That, by Justification, they
mean, all that is required to make one a Good Man, and one qualified for Heaven
and Salvation; which cannot be without these.

I say: The meaning is good; But, so to speak, is not to speak Distinctly (and
like a Scholar) but to speak confusedly, and to Jumble together those things,
which, in themselves, are very Distinct.

For, in order to Salvation, there are many other things necessary, beside
Justification. There is Election, Regeneration, Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification, and (as the fruits hereof) a Holy Life, with Perseverance
therein to the end. Of which Divines use to speak distinctly; and consider,
separately, what belongs to each.

Election, is the Act of God; which we are not curiously to pry into: nor can
we know it otherwise, than as the Effect discovers it in time.

Justification, is an Act of God also; and (as to a person peccant) it is the
Remission of Sins; upon which we are, in Gods account, reputed as Just or
Innocent; and this only for the Satisfaction which Christ has made, not for
any Work of ours. And this Satisfaction of Christ, is (by us) embraced by Faith
(accepting this Salvation offered by Christ,) not, by any other Grace.

Adoption, is an Act of God likewise; whereby he reputes us his Children, and
Heirs of his Kingdom: which is, for the Merits of Christ, Purchasing Heaven for
us; whereby we are entitled to that Purchased Possession. Ephesians. 1.14.
And this, by us, is Accepted by Faith also.

And all those are Relative Acts, (of God toward us;) rather then Works
wrought in us.

But Regeneration and Sanctification, are Works of God, wrought in us, by his
Spirit; (and produce not one a Relative, but a Real change:) Whereby is wrought
in us a New Nature, (or as the Scripture calls it) the New Man, Ephesians. 4.24.
or the New Creature:) whereby Holiness, Gal. 6.15.
and the Graces of Gods Spirit, are Begun, and Increased gradually; till we
come to that of the perfect man; Ephesians. 4.13.
to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; to that Perfection
which we shall attain in Glory.

And the Practice of Holiness, and a Godly Life, (toward God and toward Man,)
are the Fruit and Effects of such Holiness and Sanctification; and necessary
also to Salvation.

So that Holiness and a Good Life; with the Works of Piety, Charity, and other
good Deeds; are indeed Necessary to Salvation; but belong properly to
Sanctification, rather than to Justification.

And I would Ask those Men who choose to speak otherwise; Whether they think
that, beside Justification, there is such a thing as Sanctification?

The Papist (if he would speak out) must say roundly, There is not. For, when
they say, we are justified by Inherent Righteousness; that is, by Holiness:
they leave nothing for Sanctification.

But We, who think that Justification and Sanctification (though of the same
Person) be different Notions: Why should we not rather refer Sanctify to
Sanctification.

If it be said, That the Justified and the Sanctified person, are the same: and
therefore we need not so nicely distinguish between Justification and
Sanctification.

I say; It Is true, the Persons be the same: But the Notions be different. And,
though we may truly say Justus est Sanctus, or Justificatus est Sanctificatus;
yet not, Justificatio est Sanctificatio. (He that is Justified is Sanctified;
but not, that Justification is Sanctification.) And a little Logic would teach
a Fresh-man, That Concretes may be predicated one of another, when the
Abstracts may not. We may say, that Homo est Animal, but not that Humanitas est
Animalitas: Or, that Homo est Albus, but not Humanitas est Albedo.

If, lastly, It be thought Advantageous to the Practice of Holiness and a Godly
Life, to say, that we are Justified by it.

I say; Neither is this Necessary. For this is as well done by preaching the
Necessity of Regeneration and Sanctification; as without which we cannot hope
for Salvation. And then, the Exercise of Holiness and a Godly Life, comes in
properly in its own place; as the necessary Effect of Sanctification.

And in this capacity it is that our Church (without derogating any thing from
the necessity of them) does place Good Works; as the necessary Fruits of that
Faith which Justifies; and a Pretense of Faith, without these, she esteems to
be, not Faith, but Fancy.

And therefore, though she exclude them (as has been said) from the Office of
Justifying; yet thinks them necessary to be joined with Faith in every Person
that is justified. And makes it the Office and Duty of every Christian man unto
God, -- not to pass the time of this present life unfruitfully, and idly, (not
caring how few good Works we do, to the Glory of God, and the Profit of our
Neighbors;) Much less, to live contrary to the same. -- For that Faith (she
tells us) which brings (without Repentance) either Evil Works, or no Good
Works; is not a right, pure, and lively Faith; but a dead, devilish,
counterfeit, and feigned Faith; as S. Paul and S. James call it. For even the
Devils Know, and Believe, That Christ was born of a Virgin; That he fasted
forty days and forty nights, without meat and drink; That he wrought all kind
of Miracles, declaring himself very God; They believe also, that Christ, for
our sake, suffered most painful Death, to redeem from Everlasting Death; And
that he Rose again from Death the third day: They believe, that he Ascended
into Heaven, and sits on the Right hand of the Father, and at the last end
of this World, shall come again, and Judge both the quick and the dead. These
Articles of our Faith, the Devils Believe: And so they Believe all all things
that be written in the New and Old Testament to be true: And yet, for all this
Faith, they be but Devils, remaining still in their damnable state, lacking the
very true Christian Faith. For the right and true Christian Faith is, not only
to believe that holy Scripture, and all the foresaid Articles of our Faith, are
true: But also to have a sure Trust and Confidence in Gods merciful Promises,
to be saved from everlasting Damnation by Christ: Whereof does follow, a Loving
heart to Obey his Commandments. And this true Christian Faith, neither any
Devil has: nor yet any man, which in the outward Profession of his Mouth, and
in his outward Receiving of the Sacraments, in coming to the Church, and in all
outward appearances, seems to be a Christian, and yet in his Living and Deeds
shows the contrary.

So that Our Church is far from allowing an Idle, Lasy Life; much less a Sinful
and Wicked Life, to accompany Faith: But tells us, that, where there are, Faith
is not.

There is indeed (she tells us) a Faith which in Scripture is called a Dead
faith: which brings forth no good Works; but is idle, barren and unfruitful;
which is, by S. James compared to the Faith of Devils. -- And this is not
properly called Faith: -- (as a Dead man, is not a Man.) -- But, as he thus
reads Caesar 's Commentaries, Believing the same to be True, has thereby a
Knowledge of Caesar 's Life, and notable Acts, because he believes the History
of Caesar: Yet is not properly said, That he Believes In Caesar; of whom he
looks for no help or benefit. Even so, he that Believes, That, all that is
spoken of God in the Bible, is True; and yet lives so Ungodly, that he cannot
look to enjoy the Promises and Benefits of God: Although it may be said, that
such a man has a faith and belief To the Words of God; yet it is not properly
said, That he believes In God; or, has such a Faith and Trust In God, whereby
he may surely look for grace, mercy, and everlasting life at Gods hand; but
rather for indignation and punishment, according to the merits of his wicked
life.

If then they phantasy, that they be set at liberty from doing all good works,
and may live as they list; they trifle with God, and deceive themselves. And it
is a manifest token, that they be far from having the true and lively Faith;
and also far from knowledge, what true Faith means.

For the very sure and lively Christian Faith is, not only to Believe all
things of God, which are contained in holy Scripture; but also is an earnest
Trust and Confidence in God. --

This true, lively, and unfeigned Christian Faith, is not in the Mouth and
outward Profession only; but it lives and stirs inwardly in the Heart. --
This Faith does not ly Dead in the Heart; but is Lively and Fruitful in
bringing forth Good Works. -- This true Faith, will show forth it self; and
cannot long be Idle: For, as it is written, The Just man does Live by his
Faith. --

Deceive not your selves therefore, thinking that you have Faith in God, --
When you live in Sin: For then your Ungodly and Sinful Life declares the
contrary, whatsoever you Say or Think.

With much more to the same purpose. Showing the Necessity, of Good Works, to
our Salvation; though we be not Justified by them. With many serious
Exhortations to the Preacher of them.

And this is that safe way, which (I said) our Church directs in this point. To
be Fruitful in Good Works: not, as to be Justified by them: But, as the
Necessary Fruits of that Faith by which we are Justified.

Thus have I considered the Words (The Just shall live by Faith,) according to
both these Emphases already mentioned. That on the word Just, or Righteous, as
(contradistinguished from the Wicked:) And that on the word Faith; as
contradistinguished from Works, in the point of Justification.

But (beside those Two already mentioned) there is yet a Third Emphasis, of
which these words are capable: And which, I think, is principally intended in
this place.

By Life (as is already showed) is meant Happyness, (as, on the contrary, by
Death is meant Misery.) Now the Christians Life, of Happiness, is commonly
distinguished into that of Grace, and that of Glory. That of Glory, is to be
expected hereafter; and is the Completion of our Hapyness, or (as the Apostle
calls it) the End of our Hope, 1 Pet. 1.5.
even the Salvation of our Souls. That of Grace, is the Exercise of our Faith,
here: Which the Text calls Living by Faith. Gal. 2.17.
And S. Paul, elsewhere, The Life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by the
Faith of the Son of God. And this, I think, (though not Exclusive of the Life
of Glory) is that which is here principally (and most emphatically) intended,
when he says, The Just shall live by Faith.

And this I judge, not barely from the Form of the Words themselves, (which
stand equally fair for all those Emphases already mentioned:) but from the
Scope of Content, which looks this way.

For such is the Richness of the Scripture language, That, comprehensive Words,
are improvable to different Purposes, according as a different Accent or
Emphasis may be putt upon them; and all included within the general Scope of
them.

Now, if we look back to Verse. 19. (and those that follow,) we find the Apostle
Paul, whom I take to be the Author of this Epistle, (and so does our Church of
England, as appears by the Title which our Translators prefix to it;) Or,
whoever else were the Author of it, (of which we need not here be very
solicitous;) After he had, before, cleared that Doctrine, That the Legal
Offerings and Sacrifices, were but Types of that One Oblation of Christ; And,
This, the Accomplishment of what was Presignified in Them: Makes this Use, or
Inference from that Doctrine; Having therefore Boldness to enter in the
Holiest, Heb. 10.19.
by the Blood of Jesus; Ver. 20.
By a new and living way, which he has consecrated for us; Ver. 22.
through the Vail, that is to say, this Flesh: Let us draw near, with a true
Heart, and full assurance of Faith; having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil
Conscience, and our Bodies washed with pure Water.

Where, beside the Assurance of Faith; he presses also for Holiness of Life;
both in Soul, and Body.

And that, both Singly, and Jointly; in Public, and Private. As which we are
not only to Practice Our selves, but to Promote (as we have opportunity) in
others also. For so it follows; Ver. 24.
And let us consider one another, to Provoke to Love and Good Works: Not
forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is.

And, having then intimated the Dangers which hereby they might incur; Ver. 32,
33, 34.
as Reproaches, Afflictions, Spoiling of Goods, and the like; of Themselves, and
their Friends; (being made a Gazing-stock themselves, Ver. 33.
and Companions of those that were so used; Ver. 34.
) Enduring patiently the spoiling of their goods, etc. Not only, from the
common practice of Wicked and Profane men, 2 Pet. 3.3.
who are ever prone to scoff at the Power of Godliness; (walking after their
own Lusts; 2 Timothy 3.5.
having a Form of Godliness, but Denying the Power of it:) But especially at a
Time and Place wherein it was not countenanced by the Public Authority; (the
Government being the Heathen.)

And, that therefore they had need of Patience, that, Heb. 10.36.
after they had done the Will of God, they might receive the Promise.

Their chief Reward not being in present Possession, but in Expectance only.

Yet should they not be Discouraged; For, Ver. 37.
yet a little while, and he that shall come Will come, and will not Tarry. The
Reward will certainly come, in due Season, ((...) at the appointed time,) and
not be put off beyond that: Hab. 2.3.
(...), it will not be Delayed too long, or (as in Habakkuk) (...) it will not
come too late; but, at the End, Heb. 10.37.
it shall speak, and not Ly.

And, in the mean time, The Just shall live by Faith. But, Ver. 38.
if any man draw-back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.

So that the Words are, manifestly, a Direction and Encouragement, for the
Exercise of our Faith, while we are yet but in Expectation of the Promised
Reward; which is, hereafter, to be completed. So to Live by Faith here, that we
be not Disappointed of our Hopes hereafter.

And the same he pursues in the following Chapter; Heb. 11.
Giving us Great Examples, (of Living by Faith,) and the Advantages, (of so
doing:) in Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, and
a many more; throughout the whole Eleventh Chapter.

And then Exhorts them (in the beginning of the Twelfth Chapter) That, Heb.
12.1.
being compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses they should
themselves do, as those before had done.

The great Doctrine of the Text therefore, is this, That it is our Duty, and it
is our Privilege, to Live by Faith. That is, to Live in a constant Exercise, of
that Grace, upon all occasions.

It is our Duty, which we Ought to do; And it is our Privilege, that we May do
it. It is our Duty, to Trust in God: And it is our Privilege, that we have a
God to trust in.

Nor does this Duty, and Privilege, concern these only to whom this Epistle
was particularly directed; the Christian Hebrews.

But it looks Backward; to the First Ages of the World: and Wider, than the
Jewish Nation.

I say, first, It looks Backward to the first Ages of the World. Nor only
before the Coming of Christ; but even before the Establishment of the Jewish
Church. To Abel, Heb. 11.4, 5, 7.
Enoch, Noah, (before Abraham;) and then, to Abrabraham, Ver. 8, 9, 20, 21 22.
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, (before Moses.) All which are said to Live by Faith. And
even by the same Faith, to which he does there exhort the Christian Hebrews.

It was the same Christ, the same Gospel, (though not so clearly reveiled:) and
the same Eternal Life which they expected, (though they were more in the dark,
as to the particulars; and the distinct ways and methodes of bringing it to
pass.)

Genesis 2.17.
And, as the first Threatening (In the day that thou Eatest thereof, thou shall
surely Die,) extended to Spiritual and Eternal Death, as well as the Natural;
(For we are not to suppose, that God Inflicts a greater Punishment than what he
threatened:) So the Life there Promised (by way of Insinuation, Levit. 18.5.
Ezekiel. 20.11.
) and elsewhere Expressed, (He that does them, shall Live in them;) must be
understood in a like sense; (not of Temporal Promises only, but of Spiritual
and Eternal.

And the Apostle expounds it, if the same Life (or what is equivalent) to be
obtained (by the first Covenant) upon condition of Obedience; and (by the
second Covenant) by Faith in Christ. Gal. 3.11, 12.
That no man is Justified by the Law in the sight of God, is evident; For the
Just shall live by Faith: Romans 10.5, 6.
And the Law is not of Faith; but, the Man that Does them, shall live in them.
The same Life, or Blessedness; though by different ways attainable.

And the Apostle, here, shows; That it is the same Faith, by which We believe
to the saving of our Souls; Heb. 10.39.
and by which the Elders obtained a good Report. Heb. 11.2.


And by Faith Abraham (with Isaac and Jacob, Heirs with him of the same
promise, Sojourned in the Promised Land, Ver. 8, 9.
as in a strange Country; (of which, though promised to them, they had no
other Enjoyment, than mere Strangers:) For he looked for a City, who is Builder
and Maker was God; Ver. 1$.
(another kind of City, than those on Earth. Ver. 13.
) All these Died in Faith, not having Received the Promises; (which were
therefore such as were to be enjoyed, after Death;) but seeing them afar off,
and were persuaded of them, and Embraced them, and confessed that they were
Strangers and Pilgrims upon Earth, (this being not the Country they sought
for:) For they that say such things, declare plainly, that they seek a
Country, Ver. 14.
(such a Country as yet they had not.) And truly, Ver. 15.
if they had been mindful of such a Country as that from whence they came;
they might have had opportunity to have returned; Ver. 16.
But now ('it is manifest) they desire a Better Country; that is, an Heavenly.
Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called Their God, (the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob;) For he has prepared a City for them. By all which, the
Apostle does not only Declare (that they expected an Heavenly Happiness,) but
Argues strongly, That it must needs be so.

And, by Faith, Ver. 26.
Moses (he tells us) Esteemed the Reproaches of Christ, greater Riches, than the
Treasures of Egypt: For he had respect to the Recompense of Reward; as Seeing
him that is Invisible. Ver. 27.


Ver. 35.
Others were Tortured, not accepting Deliverance; that they might obtain a
better Resurrection.

Ver. 36.
Others had Trial of (or did undergo, (...), expertisunt,) Cruel Mockings; of
Bonds and Imprisonment; Were Stoned, Ver. 37.
were Sawn asunder; were Slain with the Sword, etc. Ver. 39.
And all these having obtained a good Report through Faith ((...)) received not
the Promise, (their Faith was exercised on better Promises, than of what they
here received; Ver.4$.
) God having provided for them Better things; that they without us should not
be perfect: (the Promises to them, and those to us, being the same.)

Again; As this Duty and Privilege (of Living by Faith) extended Backwards (to
the times before Christ;) So, it extends Wider than the Nation of the Jews. (A
Blessing which the Gentiles are particularly concerned in: and which we,
January 6.
this day, celebrate; The Epiphany, or the Manifestation of Christ to the
Gentiles. Gal. 3.14.
) For the Blessing of Abraham is come upon the Gentiles also, through Jesus
Christ: that We might receive the promise of the Spirit, through Faith. And the
Scripture foreseeing ((...)) that God would Justify the Heathen through Faith;
Ver. 8.
preached before ((...) did before hand preach the Gospel) to Abraham, saying,
Ver. 7.
In thee that all Nations be blessed. So then, they which are of Faith, the
same are the Children of Abraham; They which be of Faith, Ver. 9.
are Blessed with faithful Abraham. And are therefore of the number of those
(as there it follows) who shall Live by Faith. Ver. 11.


Now, if it be asked, What it is thus to Live by Faith: It is too large a Task,
for one Sermon, to give a full account of it. For almost the whole Bible, and
the Practice of the Saints in all Ages, are but a Comment on it. I shall
therefore content my self, to give a short account of some of the chief Heads
thereof.

To Live by Faith, therefore, is, First, to Believe the Word of God; to give
Credit to the Truths of God, or things by him declared; how unlikely soever
they may seem to be, and however different from the common Sentiments of
Natural men, or what the Light of Nature alone could teach us. For, though
there be nothing in Divine Truths Contrary to what the Light of Nature (truly
understood) may teach us: Yet there may be some things much above it; which,
without Revelation, cannot be known.

Thus; By Faith we Believe, That the Worlds were made, Heb. 11.3.
by the Word of God; that things that are now seen were made, not of things
that do appear. That is, that the now visible World was not made up of such
things as we now see: or, that there was no praeexisting Matter (such as we now
see) of which it was made; but was indeed made of Nothing.

Which however contrary to the sentiments of Philosophers (Ex nihilo nihil, in
nihilum nil posse reverti,) That nothing can be made out of Nothing: Yet, when
God has told us, that it is so; we are to give full credit to it.

There is indeed nothing from the Light of Nature Contrary hereunto; why we
should Disbeleeve it, when it is Reveiled: But yet we are said to know it by
Faith, because it is Above what Nature alone could have taught.

For, when we see this glorious Fabric of the World: we might well admire it;
but could never know, whence it was, if God had not told us.

For though Naturalists have, with a great deal of Reason, talked of (a (...),
or Causa prima) a Common Maker, or First Cause; which should give Original to
all things else: Yet this was but, either from some faint Remains of an ancient
Tradition, from Adam and Noah downward to after Ages: Or, atmost be
Conjectural, and Groping in the dark; and Guessing at this, as a more likely
Supposition, than, That it had Allways been; or, should take its beginning from
a Fortuitous Concurse of Atoms.

Which yet the Wits of this Age, as they would be thought, (or the Fools
rather, Psalm. 14.1.
) would now cry-up as the more Rational: Without considering, If they must at
lest allow Eternity to Matter; why not rather, to a Wise and Knowing Agent:)
Only, because their Wickedness, has made them think it their Interest, That
there be no God (to call them to account for it:) And therefore would fain
persuade themselves, That there is none. And think there is nothing so Absurd,
which they would not rather Believe, than That there is a God.

And, what is said of the Creation of the World; may be equally applied to the
Immortality of the Soul; the Resurrection of the Body, and the Eternal state of
Bliss or Misery hereafter (according as Men have, or have not, approved
themselves to God;) and others of like nature. Of all which, what ever faint
Conjectures, or doubtful Traditions, the Heathen might have from the Light of
Nature: they were yet much in the dark, 2 Timothy 1.10.
till Immortality was brought to Light, by the Gospel.

Not that I take pleasure, to Decry, Disparage, Depreciate, or Invalidate, that
Light which Nature and Reason afford us, toward Reveiled Truths. For this, I
think, we ought rather to Cherish, to Enforce, and Improve what we can, (rather
than to Enervate or Elude;) as of great subserviency to that of Faith. For,
while we study to Elude these Arguments; we are so far doing their Work, who
would Elude the Scripture too.

For, even where we cannot (from Nature alone) conclude an absolute Certainty;
Tit. 1.11.
so as to Stop the Mouths of those that love to Cavil, 1 Cor. 11.16.
or (as the Apostle speaks) list to be Contentious: Yet, if this afford us
(from considerations Natural and Moral) Probable Arguments, and a Multitude of
them, all concurring to show, That it is not Impossible, not Improbable, but
very Likely, that these things May be so; It is a great Preparative to the
Believing of a Revelation, that says It is so.

And such Arguments, we find, the Apostles did often make use of, to very good
Purpose, and with very good Success.

A Cloud of Witnesses (though each singly may seem but Cloudy,) may afford a
considerable Light; (like the Stellae Nebulosae in the via Lactea.) And
Probable Arguments, though not singly Demonstrative; yet, where there be Many
of them, and those Concurrent, (and Nothing to the Contrary,) Experience tells
us, in affairs of all natures, create at lest Violent Presumption, and often
obtain a firm Assent. And it is seldom we have a greater Evidence, either for
Determining Civil Affairs, or for Stating the Hypotheses of Nature.

There is none of us can Doubt, but that there is such a place as Rome: though
we have not seen it, and though, of all those who have Told us so, there is no
one who might not possibly have told a Ly. But, a Concurrence of many
Probabilities, passes for a sufficient Proof.

And such Arguments, how ever we now look upon them as not Demonstrative; were
yet of such force with the Heathens (who had no better Light to Determine them)
at lest with the Wisest of them; that they judged it a matter, at lest, of
great Probability, if not of absolute Certainty, That the Souls of men are
Immortal, and, That there is a State of Rewards and Punishments after this Life.

Who shall therefore rise up in Judgment, Mat. 12.41, 42. Luke 11-31, 32.
with the men of this Generation, and Condemn them; who disbeleeve it under a
greater Light.

But, when all is done; the Fullest and Clearest Evidence, is from Revelation:
Whereby, what, to Reason, was very Probable, is, to our Faith, made Certain.

The Jews indeed had some better Knowledge of these things, than the Gentiles
had. Not only their great Rabbi's; but even Ordinary persons, and those of the
other Sex; According to that of Martha, concerning Lazarus, I know that he
shall Rise again in the Resurrection, at the last day. Joh. 11.24.
And the Sadduces (before the Resurrection of Christ, Mat. 22.23-32.
and the full Discovery of the Gospel,) expostulating with Christ, concerning
the Resurrection; is an Argument, that, though themselves did disbeleeve it, it
was an Opinion commonly received by the rest of the Jews, That the Dead should
rise again.

But They had it by Revelation; not, by Natural Light only.

Now these Great and Momentous Truths, which God has vouchsafed thus to make
known, we are to Believe by Faith.

And that not only so as to give Credit to them, as matters of News; Jam. 2.19.
for, thus, the Devils Believe; and Tremble:) But, so to Believe, as to Live
sutably; so to Live, as becomes those who Believe such things.

Secondly; As we are thus (in general) to believe the Word of God: So,
particularly, to believe the Commands of God; And, so to live, as becomes those
that believe these to be God's Commands: That is, To Obey them, and Conform our
selves unto them; however contrary to our perverse Inclinations.

If Christ command us, To Deny our selves; To take up our Cross and follow him;
Luke 9.23. Mat. 10.38. Mar. 8.34. Mat. 19.21 Mar. 10.19.
To sell all (if need be) and give to the Poor; To Leave House, or Brethren, or
Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Lands, for His sake and the Gospel;
yea, or Life it self; Joh. 12.25
To pull out a Right Eye, or Cut off a Right Hand, in case they Offend, (or
part with what is as dear to us as these:) We must Obey it.

Thus (among the many Examples in the following Chapter, Heb. 11.8.
) By Faith Abraham, being Called of God, Obeyed; and went out he knew not
whither, (forsaking his Country, and his Fathers House, Ver. 9.
in Obedience to Gods Command;) and Sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a
Strange Land.

Ver. 17.
By Faith Abraham, when he was Tried, Offered up Isaac: And, he that had
received the Promises, Offered-up his only begotten Son; Of whom it was said,
Ver. 18.
That in Isaac shall thy Seed be Called. Without disputing, How this was
consistent with the Bowels of a Father; or, How unacceptable News it would be
to Sarah, when she should hear it; or, How consistent with that great Promise
(wherein all the Nations of the Earth were concerned,) That in his Seed, (that
is, in Isaac, and what should proceed from him,) all the Nations of the Earth
should be Blessed: He presently addressed himself to this hard Task, to the
Obedience of this unexpected Command: Leaving it to God (who, he knew, was
able, Ver. 19.
) to Reconcile his own Promise, with his Command.

By Faith, Moses, Ver. 24, 25.
chose rather to suffer Affliction with the Children of God, than to enjoy the
Pleasures of Sin for a Season: Esteeming the Reproach of Christ, greater
Riches, Ver. 26.
than the Treasures of Egypt.

On the same account, the Three Children, would rather venture on a Fiery
Furnace; and Daniel, on the Lions Den; than not Obey the Commands of God. Which
here (I suppose) the Apostle intimates, when he tells us of those who (by
Faith) stopped the mouths of Lions, Ver. 33. Ver. 34.
and Quenched violence of Fire.

Others were Tortured ((...)) not accepting deliverance; Endured cruel
Mockings, and Scourgings, Ver. 35.
Ver. 36.
Bonds and Imprisonments; Were Stoned, were Sawn-asunder, were Tempted, Ver. 37.
(or Burned alive, Mr. Gataker, (in his Adversaria, Cap. 44.) thinks that, for
(...), should rather be read (...); Because Vivicumburium, or Burning alive,
being a punishment then frequently inflicted on Christians (of which in this
Catalog of sufferings there is no other mention,) he thinks it more likely that
it should thus be here mentioned (with such a Paronomasia, which the Apostle
seems to affect) than that in the Enumeration of their Torments) should be here
inserted, their being Tempted. And our Church seems to favor this Reading:
which, in the second part of that Sermon of Faith (where this place is cited at
large) has it thus; Some have been Racked, some Slain, some Stoned, some Sawn,
some Rent in pieces, some Beheaded, some Brent without mercy, and would not be
delivered, because they looked to Rise again to a better state.
) were Slain with the Sword; they wandered about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins;
in Deserts, Ver. 38.
and Mountains, in Dens and Caves of the Earth; were Destitute, Afflicted,
Tormented, etc. rather than not Obey the Commands of God. And thus, through
Faith, Ver. 39.
obtained a good Report.

Act. 19.22.
S. Paul also, as to himself, I go bound (says he) in the Spirit to Jerusalem,
not knowing the things that shall befall me there; Ver. 23.
Save that the Holy Ghost witnesses, in every City, that Bonds and Afflictions
abide me: Ver. 24.
But none of these things move me; neither count I my Life dear unto me; so
that I may Fulfill my Course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received
of the Lord Jesus. Nor would he be dissuaded (though he knew thus much) from
going thither; Act. 21.13.
Being ready (he tells us) not only to be Bound, but to Die at Jerusalem, for
the Name of the Lord Jesus. So great an Incentive there is in Faith, to the
Obedience of Gods Commands.

Thirdly; As we are thus to give heed to the Commands of God; So, to the
Threatenings of God likewise, And this is a part of our Living by Faith also.

By Faith Noah, being moved with Fear, prepared an Ark, for the Saving of his
House. Heb. 11.7.
He being warned of God, of things not yet seen, (that the World should be
destroyed by a Deluge, though as yet there appeared no Likelihood of it,) Gave
Credit to that Threatening; (while others, its like, Scoffed at it; and at Him
too, for giving Credit to it;) and accordingly (by Gods direction) took Care to
Avoid it, as to himself and his family, while others perished in it: By which
he Condemned the World, and became Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith.

And I choose to give Instances, all along, in such Examples as are here cited
in the following Chapter ( Heb. 11.) Because all that Cloud of Witnesses are
there designedly brought-in as a Confirmation of what is here asserted, That
the Just shall Live by Faith.

Thus Solomon likewise tells us to the same purpose; A Wise man Fears, Prove.
14.16.
and Departs from Evil, (Forbears the evil of Sin, and Avoids the evil of
Punishment;) But the Fool Rages and is Confident, (he runs-on without Fear or
Wit) A Prudent man Foreseeth the Evil, Prove. 22.3.
and Hides himself: But the Simple pass on and are Punished. Prove. 27.12.
(Like as it was, when Moses, from God, threatened the Plague of Hail in Egypt;
Who so feared the Lord, amongst the Servants of Pharaoh, Exodus 9.20.
made his Servants and his Cattle to flee into Houses: Ver. 21.
But who so regarded not the Word of the Lord, (as not believing it,) Left his
Servants and Cattle in the Field; which were destroyed by the Hail; which Smote
all that was in the Field, both Man and Beast.

Now Solomon's Wise man, is the Good man; and his Fool, is the Wicked man. He
that makes a Mock of Sin; Prove. 14.9.
to whom it is a Sport to do Mischief. Prove. 10.23.
Who goes on ( as Solomon speaks of the Wanton Young Man) as an Ox to the
Slaughter, Prove. 7.22.
and a Fool to the Correction of the Stocks: Ver. 23.
Till a Dart strike through his Liver; as a Bird that hastes to the Snare, and
knows not that it is for his Life.

Not, like the men of Niniveh; Mat 12.41. Luke 11.32. Jonah. 2.4. Ver. 5.
who Repented at the Preaching of Jonas: Who, when Jonah preached, Yet forty
days, and Niniveh shall be Destroyed; Believed God, and proclaimed a Fast, Ver.
8.
and that Every one should turn from the Evil of his ways; Ver. 9.
For who can tell (say they) if God will Turn and Repent, that we Perish not?

But rather, like Lot 's Sons in Law, when he warned them of the Destruction
then coming on Sodom; Genesis 19.14.
He seemed to them as one that Mocked; (and accordingly they mocked at him;
they looked upon him as one that talked idly, or but in jest;) till, in good
earnest, Ver. 24, 25.
God rained fire and brimstone on them, and destroyed them.

Much at the same rate with those Scoffers who (as S. Peter tells us) should
come in the last days; 2 Pet. 3.3.
walking after their own Lusts: Laughing at Gods Threatenings, and saying
(scoffingly) Where is the Promise of his coming? For, Ver. 5.
since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the
beginning of the Creation: (The grave Fathers, that talked of these things, be
Dead and Gone; and the World goes on, as it was wont to do, notwithstanding
their Threats.) Who if they be told, from God, by his Ministers, that, Luke
13.3, 5.
Except they Repent, they shall all likewise Perish: They look upon them (as
those did on Lot) as a company of Brainsick men, that talk idly; 2 Pet. 3.10.
1 These. 5.2. Ver. 3.
Till sudden Destruction come upon them; as a Thief in the Night (which they
did not Expect;) and, as Pain on a Woman in Travail; which they cannot Escape.

Psalm. 1.1.
Who first, Walk in the way of the Ungodly, and stand in the Way of Sinners; and
then Sit in the Seat of Scorners. Till at length (when it is too late) they
shall (with those in Wisdom) be convinced of their own Folly, and Value the
Righteous, whom before they Despised: Wisd. 5.3.
When, with Anguish of spirit, they shall say within themselves, (of him, whom
before they had in Derision, Ver. 4.
and a Proverb of Reproach,) We Fools, accounted his Life Madness; Ver. 5.
and his End without Honor. But, How is He numbered among the Children of God,
and his Lot is among the Saints! while, We have wearied our selves in the way
of Wickedness and Destruction; Ver. 7.
and have not known the Way of the Lord.

Who, when they Hear the words of the Curse; Bless themselves in their Heart,
Deuteronomy. 29.19.
saying, I shall have Peace, though I walk in the Imagination of my Heart,
adding Drunkenness to Thirst; (I shall do well enough, Ver. 20.
though I take my pleasure:) But the Lord (says Moses) will not Spare that
man, (he will show him no mercy,) His Jealousy shall Smoke against him, (who
sins thus Presumptuously, and Promises himself Peace, notwithstanding Gods
Threatenings;) And all the Curses written in this Book, Ver. 21.
shall light upon him. The Lord will Separate him unto Evil, out of all the
Cities of Israel, (he will Single him out, to make him an Example: Deuteronomy. 17.13.
) That others may Hear, and Fear, and do no more Presumptuously. These are
those who Believe not the Threatenings of God; nor fear to incur his
Displeasure.

But, Happy is the man that fears allways: That so fears, as to depart from
Evil. He that so Fears the Threatenings of God, as to Avoid his Judgments.
And thus to fear, is to Live by Faith.

Fourthly; As we are to believe the Threatenings of God: So to Believe the
Promises of God also: And so to Believe them, as to Rest upon them; to fetch
Strength and Comfort from them. And this is one great part of a Christians
Living by Faith.

And of This also, we have Examples in the Chapter following.

By Faith, Abraham, sojourned in the Land of Promise (the Promised Land,) as in
a strange Country; Heb. 11.9.
dwelling in Tabernacles as not taking up his Rest there,) with Isaac and Jacob
Heirs with him of the same Promise: Ver. 10.
Looking for a City which has Foundations, (a Firm and well Founded City,
instead of tbose Flitting Tabernacles,) who is Maker and Builder is God. And his
Trusting to these Promises made him so cheerfully to Obey those Commands.

By Faith, Sarah, received Strength, and obtained a Child, Ver. 11.
when she was past Age: Because she judged him Faithful who had Promised. By
Faith in the Promise, she was the better qualifyed, to receive the
Accomplishment of it.

By Faith, Isaac, Ver. 20.
Blessed Jacob and Esau concerning Things to come. Himself Believing the Truth
of them.

By Faith, Joseph, when he Died, Ver. 22.
made mention of the Departure of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, (as
Believing the Promise of the Land of Canaan,) and gave Commandment concerning
his Bones.

With many more, whom I forbear to mention: Who all by Faith, Trusted to the
Fullfilling of those Promises which God had made.

And here also (as we said before) we must so Believe, as to act accordingly.
And what the Hebrews say of their Language, (Verba Sensus connotant Affectum,)
is true of other Languages too: Words of Speculation, imply suitable Action.

We must so Believe the Promises of God, as to Trust in him, to Rest upon him,
to Depend on him, who has so Promised.

A Christian Faith, is not so much Fides, as Fiducia: Not barely an Act of the
Understanding, but of the Will and Affections. And it is generally agreed (by
better Critics, than those that Laugh at it,) that (...), or (...), (which are
the Scripture-phrases) is somewhat more than (...). And answers to what in the
Old Testament, is called Trusting in God, or Putting our Trust in Him. It is
not only Deo Credere; but Deo Fidere or Considere; (Deo se Credere:) To Trust
God, To Commit our selves to him; Psalm 10.14.
as the phrase is (Psalm. 10.) The Poor Commits himself to thee; or, (as the
Margin reads it, out of the Hebrew,) Leaves himself to thee. Or (to the same
purpose) Leanes upon thee (innititur Deo,) as we have it phrased elsewhere.
Prove. 16.3. Prove. 3.15.
Commit thy works unto the Lord: Trust in the Lord with all thy Heart; and
Lean not to thy own Understanding. Commit thy way unto the Lord, Psalm. 37.5.
Trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass: Or (as the Margin tells us it is
in the Hebrew) Roll thy way upon the Lord, (Devolve restuus in Deum:) and (as
there it follows) Rest on the Lord, Ver. 7.
and Wait patiently for him; (Roll thy self on the Lord, and Rest in him, and
Wait patiently: Ver. 9.
) For Evildoers shall be cut off; But those that Wait on the Lord, shall
inherit the Earth.

If any Object (as I find some have done) against this Language (as less
Significative, and Improper to express the Nature of Faith, and the Workings
thereof,) Because, to Rest in God, and Rely on him, to Depend upon him, to Lean
on him, to Commit or Leave our selves to him, to Roll our selves upon the Lord,
(and the like Scripture Expressions) are but Metaphors.

It Is true, they are so. But so is also the greatest part of Humane Discourse.
And, if we Bar Metaphors, we must Exclude the greatest part of what is Said or
Written.

Whatever Author we look into; we shall hardly find One Sentence, that has
not, in it, More Tropes than One.

Psalm. 18.2.
When the Psalmist says, The Lord is my Rock, my Fortress, my Strength in whom I
will Trust; my Bucler, my Horn of Salvation, and my High Tower: These are all
Metaphors; But their Meaning is easily understood.

And when we Trust a Friend, upon his Word, to Help us in Distress; and tell
him, We Rest upon him, We Rely upon him, we Depend on him, we Commit our
business to him, and Leave it with him; Expecting that he will not Fail us, or
Disappoint us, and suffer us to be Undone, to be Overcome, to be Run-down, to
be Ruined: These are all Metaphors; But, of frequent Use, and as Easily
Understood, and more Emphatically significative, than if we should Study for
Proper Words, (or Coin new ones, when we find none ready made to our hands,) to
signify the same, as Fully, without Trope. And, if we should, according to the
Farsy of the Age, (which affects Exotic words, of Latin or French Extraction,
rather than good old English, though to the same Sense,) instead of Resting and
Relying, make use of Acquiescence and Recumbence; the case is still the same;
At lest, the Modish and Romantic Speakers should not find fault with it.

Nor should we look upon it, as Canting, to make use of such Language as the
Wisdom of God thinks fit to Teach us in Holy Writ; and which (as is said) we do
commonly make use of (without Scruple) in all Humane Affairs.

Bur further; As Living by Faith on Gods Promises, implies a Trusting to him,
or Resting on him: So it implies also a Fetching Strength from him; and a
supply of Grace, for the performance of what Duties he requires of us.

Our Savior tells us, That, Joh. 15.4.
as the Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, (and
receive supply of Sap, Juice, and Nourishment from it:) So neither We, except
we abide in Him, (and accordingly receive Supply from him:) For, without him,
we can do Nothing. Ver. 5.


And S. Paul tells us, That the Life which he lives, he lives by the Faith of
the Son of God; Gal. 2.20.
and that it is not so much Himself that lives, as Christ lives in him.

It is of His Fullness that We receive Grace for Grace. Joh. 1.16. Joh. 7.37,
38, 39. Joh. 4.14.


It Is the Spirit which he gives us, that is the Well of Water, Springing up to
Everlasting Life. And it is, by Faith, that We Draw Water from these Wells of
Salvation. Isa. 12.3.


Romans 8.26.
When we know not what we should Pray for as we ought; It is this Spirit that
helps our Infirmities, and makes Intercession for us.

Phil. 2.13.
When we cannot, of our selves, even Think as we ought: It is God works in us,
both to Will, and to Do, of his good pleasure.

Collect for Easter Week.
Or (as our Church phraseth it) It is by his special Grace Preventing us, that
he puts into our Minds good Desires; and, by his Continual Help, we bring the
same to good Effect.

Phil. 4.13.
Or (as S. Paul of himself) I am Able to do all things, through Christ that
strengthens me.

Jam. 1.5.
Now this Strength, from God, we fetch by Faith. If any man lack Wisdom (and
the like we may say of other Supplies, Ver. 6.
) Let him ask of God, and it shall be given him: But let him ask in Faith, Jam.
4.2.
nothing wavering. Ye Have not, because Ye Ask not; Ver. 3.
and Ye Ask and Have not, because ye Ask Amiss. And it is the Prayer of
Faith, Ver. 15.
that saves the Sick; (and the like of other Mercies. Heb. 4.2.
) The Word Preached, did not Profit them (who are there spoken of) not being
mixed with Faith, in them that heard it.

And, for want of such Exercise of Faith, we may often Loose those Mercies, which
otherwise we might obtain.

And, even in Miraculous Cures, there was somewhat of Faith requisite, to put
them into a capacity of Receiving a Cure. Act. 14.9, 10.
S. Paul, at Lystra, seeing the Cripple, impotent in his feet, (and perceiving
that he had Faith to be Healed,) said to him, Luke 7.50.
Stand upright. And Christ, to Mary Magdalene; Thy Faith has saved thee. And
again, to one of the ten Lepers; Thy Faith has made thee whole. Luke 17.19.
And, to the Father of the Demoniack, Mar. 9.22.
praying him to have Compassion on them, and heal his Son; Ver. 23.
If thou can Believe, says Christ, all things are possible to him that
Believes; who thereupon replied, Lord, I Believe, Ver. 24.
help my Unbelief; and obtained the Cure.

And, contrariwise, of his own Contrymen, it is said, He did not (or, could
not do,) many mighty works there; Mat. 13.58. Mar. 6.5, 6.
Because of their Unbelief.

And, though Miracles be now ceased; yet the Effects of Faith are not. And, in
pursuance of Gods Promises, That Whatsoever we ask in Prayer, Believing, we
shall Receive; Mat. 21.22.
We may still expect a suitable Supply. Especially, if we take it with that
Limitation, that, If we Ask any thing, 1 John 5.14.
according to his Will; he Hears us: And will, accordingly, Grant us the
things we Ask (in Faith) or, at lest, what shall be Better for us. And, this is
to Live by Faith.

Now if thus (as is said) we can Live by Faith; and, while we be Faithful in
the discharge of our Duty, Trust God upon his Promises; and, from Him, Fetch a
supply of Strength, and Grace; Direction, and Consolation: This will naturally
work in us.

1. An humble Submission to his Will. The Will of the Lord be done. Not, as I
will; but, as Thou will. Act. 21.14. Mat. 26.39.


2. A quiet Contentment in every Condition. 1 Samuel 3.18.
(It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Genesis 32.10.
We are Less than the Lest of thy Mercies. Ezr. 9.10.
Thou have Punished us Less than our Iniquities deserve. Why does the living
man Complain? Lam. 3.39. Ver. 22.
It is the Lords Mercy, that we are not Consumed, because his Compassions Fail
not.

3. A Patient Waiting Gods leisure. (He that Believes, Isai. 28.16.
makes not Have. The Vision is for an Appointed Time, and, Hab. 2.3.
in the end, it will not Ly: Though it Tarry, Wait for it, It will surely come.

4. An Acquiescence in Gods Wisdom, as to Events. 1 Pet. 5.7.
(Casting our Care upon the Lord; who cares for us.) Not, by a Supine
Negligence, or Carelessness, as wholly unconcerned: But, while we are Careful
to do our Duties, leave the Care of Success to God; who has Promised, That,
Heb. 13.5.
He will not leave us, nor forsake us; And, Romans 8.28.
that All things shall work together for Good, to them that love God. So that,
if things be not just as we could wish; they will at lest by so as God sees
Better for us. And, if (singly) some things may seem, for our Hurt; yet (taken
all together) they will Work together for Good.

5. An assured Hope, that, in the End, All shall be well; how contrary so ever
things may seem at present. (As Children of faithful Abraham: Gal. 3.7, 9.
Who, against Hope, Believed in Hope, Romans 4.18.
That he might be the Father of Many Nations: Not considering his own Body,
Ver. 19.
as now dead; nor the Deadness of Sarah 's Womb; Ver. 20.
Nor Staggered at the Promise of God, through Unbelief: Ver. 21.
Being fully persuaded, that he who promised, was Able to perform.

And this, both as to the Church of God in general, (That the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it. Mat. 16.18.
)

2 Timothy 1.12.
And, as to Our selves in particular. As Knowing, whom we have Trusted; and,
that He is Able to Keep what we have Committed to him: Phil. 1.6.
That He who has Begun a good Work, will perfect it, Joh. 10.29.
unto the day of Jesus Christ: That none is able to pluck us out of our Fathers
hand: Romans 8.39.
That Nothing shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord: 2 Timothy 4.18.
That the Lord shall deliver us from Evil Work; and will preserve us to his
Heavenly Kingdom: To whom he Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

